ROB FOALE
SAUNDERSSOLUTIONSIN
VETERINARYPRACTICE
JACKIEDEMETRIOU
Series Edtor:Fred Nind
SMALLANIMAL
ONCOLOGY
Unique new case-based approach
Moden,clearly designed and illustrated
Ideally suited for CPD or as an exam revision aid
SAUNDERS
ELSEVIER
SMALL ANIMAL ONCOLOGY
SAUNDERS SOLUTIONS IN VETERINARY PRACTICE
Fred Nind, BVM&S MRCVS
Rob Foale, BSc BVetMed DSAM DipECVIM-CA MRCVS
Consultant in Small Animal Medicine, Dick White Referrals, Suffolk,
UK; Special Lecturer in Small Animal Medicine, School of Veterinary
Medicine and Science, University of Nottingham, UK
Jackie Demetriou, BVetMed CertSAS DipECVS MRCVS
Lecturer in Small Animal Surgery, The Queen's Veterinary School
Hospital, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
Sauunders
Front Matter
SMALLANIMALONCOLOGY
SAUNDERS SOLUTIONS IN VETERINARY PRACTICE
Series Editor: Fred Nind BVM&S MRCVS
Rob Foale BSc BVetMed DSAM DipECVIM-CA MRCVS Consultant in Small Animal
Medicine, Dick White Referrals, Suffolk, UK, Special Lecturer in Small Animal
Medicine, School of Veterinary Medicine and Science, University of Nottingham, UK
Jackie Demetriou BVetMed CertSAS DipECVS MRCVS Lecturer in Small Animal
Surgery, The Queen's  Veterinary School Hospital, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, UK
SAUNDERS
ELSEVIER
Edinburgh London New York Oxford Philadelphia St Louis Sydney Toronto 2010
For Elsevier:
Commissioning Editor: Robert Edwards Development Editor: Ewan Halley Project
Manager: Kerrie-Anne McKinlay Designer: Charles Gray
Illustrator: Merlyn Harvey
Copyright
SAUNDERS
ELSEVIER
 2010, Elsevier Limited. All rights reserved.
Aq   n n    q  nd si   o
any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any
853333;  e-mail: healthpermissions@elsevier.com. You may also complete you1
request on-line via the Elsevier website at http://www.elsevier.com/permissions
First published 2010
ISBN: 978-0-70202869-4
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
 r          
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress
Notice
Knowledge and best practice in this field are constantly changing. As new
research and experience broaden our knowledge, changes in practice, treatment and
drug therapy may become necessary or appropriate. Readers are advised to check the
           
manufacturer of each product to be administered, to verify the recommended dose or
formula, the method and duration of administration, and contraindications. It is the
responsibility of the practitioner, relying on their own experience and knowledge of
the patient, to make diagnoses, to determine dosages and the best treatment for each
individual patient, and to take all appropriate safety precautions. To the fullest extent
of the law, neither the Publisher nor the Authors assume any liability for any injury
and/or damage to persons or property arising out of or related to any use of the
material contained in this book.
The Publisher
your source forbooks,
ELSEVIER
journalsandmultimedia
in the health sciences
www.elsevierhealth.com
Workingtogethertogrow
librariesin developing countries
www.elsevier.com www.bookaid.org www.sabre.org
ELSEVIER
BOOKAID
Sabre Foundation
International
The
publisher's
polcy is to use
paper manufactured
from sustainable forests
Printed in China
Introduction
Saunders Solutions in Veterinary Practice series is a new range of veterinary
             a  
Readers should realize that it is not the authors’ intention to cover all that is
known about each topic. As suich the books in the Saunders Solutions series are not
standard reference works. Instead they are intended to provide practical information
real-life case studies. They cover that range of cases that fall between the boringly
routine and the referral. The books will help practitioners with a particular interest
in a topic or those preparing for a specialist qualification. The cases are arranged by
 a n s s        
surgeons will see them in practice.
It is hoped that the books will also be of interest to veterinary stuidents in the
later parts of their course and to veterinary nurses.
Continuing  professional development (CPD) is  mandatory  for  many
will provide a CPD resource which can be accessed economically, shared with
colleagues and used anywhere. They will also provide busy veterinary practitioners
     s       s
of the more gruesome contaminants found in a veterinary clinic because this is
where we hope these books will be used.
Edwards has overseen their writing and production. The series editor and the
their unfailing support and guidance during their production.
ONCOLOGY
            g
limited to older animals, but it is certainly the case that they become more common
as pets age.
have been advances in the drugs, surgical techniques and radiotherapy facilities
available for treatment. Where a diagnosis of a malignancy was once an automatic
indication for euthanasia, many of these cases can now be offered treatment which
will give a significant extension to life and that extended life will be lived with
relatively little compromise from the disease or the treatment.
The authors and editor hope that this book will help to open your eyes to what is
now possible for the treatment of these cases and inspire you to offer such treatments
to your clients.
Fred Nind
Series Editor
2010
Table of Contents
Front Matter
Copyright
Introduction
Chapter 1: How to obtain the perfect biopsy
Chapter 2: Principles of cancer surgery
Chapter 3: Principles of cancer chemotherapy
Chapter 4: Principles of cancer radiotherapy
Chapter 5: The cancer patient with sneezing and/or nasal discharge
Chapter 6: The cancer patient with halitosis and/or hypersalivation
Chapter 7: The coughing and/or dyspnoeic cancer patient
Chapter 8: The dysphagic/gagging/regurgitating cancer patient
Chapter 9: The vomiting and/or diarrhoeic cancer patient
Chapter 10: The haematochezic or dyschezic cancer patient
Chapter 11: The anaemic cancer patient
Chapter 12: The polydipsic cancer patient
Chapter 13: The haematuric/stranguric/dysuric cancer patient
Chapter 14: The lame cancer patient
Chapter 15: The cancer patient with general lumps and bumps
Multiple choice questions
MCQs - Answers
World Health Organization clinical staging scheme for lymphoma in domestic
animals
Chemotherapy protocols
Protocol for a water deprivation test
Daily calorie calculations for dogs and cats
Protocol for performing a prostatic wash
Suppliers list
Index
1
How to obtain the perfect biopsy
Obtaining a diagnosis is one of the most important steps in the management of the
clinical practice in the majority of cases as it provides a pretreatment diagnosis, helps
the clinician plan the surgery and can provide the owner with a more accurate
    s   s      s
the choice is based on a number of factors including:
· Tumour location
· Suspected tumour type
· Safety of the procedure
· The patient's clinical status
· Cost
· Equipment availability
· The suirgeon's preference.
With the exception of diagnostic cytology, all other techniques listed in Table 1.1
involve tissue sampling and histological interpretation.
Table 1.1 Biopsy techniques
Biopsy technique Advantages
Disadvantages
Indications/examples
Cytology
Non-diagnostic specimens
Bonemarrow
Simple, rapid procedure
Tissue architecture not
Lymph nodes
Minimal equipment
evaluated
Cutaneous/subcutaneous masses
Immediate results
Body cavity fluids
Minimal restraint
Impression smears
Needle core
Minimally invasive
Needle core instruments
Any extemally located mass
Rapid procedure
required
Any internal lesions (kidney, liver,
Well-preserved tissue sample
Smaller tissue sample
prostate) with the aid of
compared with incisional
ultrasound guidance or during
Can be done under sedation/local
open surgery
anaesthetic
Inexpensive
Easy procedure
Punch
Larger tissue sample
Sample obtained limited by
Superficial cutaneous lesions
Easy procedure
depth of punch
Parenchymatous organ (liver,
Superficial lesions only
spleen) biopsy during open
Invasive procedure
surgery
General anaesthetic often
required
Incisional
Larger tissue mass
Invasive procedure
When other biopsy methods have
Useful when needle core or punch
General anaesthetic mostly
been non-diagnostic
methods prove non-diagnostic
required
Ulcerated and necrotic lesions
More expensive
(e.g. oral masses)
Biospy tract may compromise
future surgery
Excisional
Canbeboth diagnostic and therapeutic
In most cases may
Reserve for 'benign' skin lesions
May be cost effective
compromise future
and tumour excision where
Diagnosis always obtained
treatment options and
treatment is not dependent on
Can evaluate completeness ofexcision
prognosis
tumour type (mammary masses,
single splenic mass, single
pulmonary mass)
CLINICAL CASE EXAMPLE 1.1 - CYTOLOGY
Signalment
5-year-old male neutered boxer dog.
Presenting signs
A 5-cm diameter subcutaneous mass located over the left hip.
Clinical history
Four months previously, the dog had presented with a 2-cm mass located in the region
of the left hip. The veterinary suirgeon had excised the mass; however, the owners
declined histopathology so the diagnosis was not determined. The mass gradually
recurred and the dog was referred for further evaluation and treatment (Fig. 1.1).
Figure 1.1
Case 1.1 The appearance of the mass before treatment
CLINICAL TIP
Bear in mind when explaining a management plan that many pet owners may not realize the
importance or relevance of obtaining a final diagnosis when excising a mass. Consider including
histopathology costs as an integral part of the surgical *package'.
Differential diagnosis
· Mast cell tumour
· Soft tissue sarcoma
· Sebaceous adenoma
· Cutaneous haemangiosarcoma.
Diagnostic options
As the mass had been previously undiagnosed and had recurred, any future treatment
would be dependent on an accurate diagnosis. If surgical excision was indicated,
definitive surgery can then be planned. An excisional biopsy in this case would not be
indicated. Options for obtaining a diagnosis, therefore, include cytological sampling,
needle-core or incisional biopsy. Using a punch biopsy may not be an appropriate
choice in this case due to the location of the mass in the deeper subcutaneous tissues.
Therefore, in this case a fine needle aspirate was opted for initially as the procedure
was the least invasive of all the biopsy options, inexpensive, easy to perform and
results were made available rapidly.
To perform a fine needle aspirate the only tools required are:
· 21-23 gauge needles
· 3-10 ml syringes
· Glass microscope slides
· Cytological stains
· A good microscope with oil immersion (Figs 1.2-1.7).
Figure 1.2
 Case 1.1 Step 1. Clip and prepare area to be aspirated. Stabilize mass with one hand
Figures 1.2-1.7 The steps involved in performing a fine needle aspirate or capillary method aspirate
on a cutaneous or subcutaneous mass
Figure 1.3
             
pressure to the syringe. The needle can be redirected within the mass but aspiration should be ceased
if fluid is observed within the hub of the needle
Figure 1.4
Case 1.1 Step 2 can be carried out alternatively using the capillary method. Here a
 needle is used without a syringe to obtain a needle core sample of cells by swiftly moving the hub of
the needle backwards and forwards within the mass
Figure1.5
Case 1.1 Step 3. Release negative pressure whilst the needle is within the mass and
remove the syringe with the needle attached. Aspirate air into the syringe and reattach needle (or for
the capillary sampling method attach a sterile, air-filled syringe)
Figure 1.6
  i     s    t  i'i 
Figure 1.7
Case 1.1 Step 5. Prepare the slide by placing another slide on top of the aspirated
 material and gently slide the two slides away in opposite directions. The slide is then air dried and
stained
CLINICAL TIP
For masses that are very vascular or that contain fluid cavities the capillary method may improve
diagnostic yield by reducing blood or fluid contamination and increasing the relative cellularity of
the sample. Similarly, the syringe method may be more suitable for solid tumours, such as a soft
tissue sarcoma.
The smears should be air dried and the sample should be thin enough to dry within
1 minute. The best cytology stains to use in clinical practice are the Romanowsky
stains (such as Wright's stain, Giemsa stain and May-Griinwald-Giemsa stain) as
these provide clear detail of both the nuclear and cytoplasmic structures. They are
relatively quick to prepare and these stains will also stain bacteria if they are present.
The ‘rapid’' stain kits such as ‘Diff-Quik' are highly useful and obviously extremely
convenient but it is important to realize that these may not always stain the granules
such a situation, Toludine blue stain will identify mast cell granules. The use of
Toludine blue may be especially useful in poorly differentiated mast cell tumours in
which the granularity can be low.
NURSING TIP
With regular use, all stains will become exhausted and so it is important to regularly replace the
stains as directed by the manufacturer. Exhausted stains will lead to poor cytological interpretation
and frustration within your clinic, so this is an important job!
Diagnosis
The specimen obtained in this case was of diagnostic quality and a diagnosis of a
mast cell tumour (Fig. 1.8) was made.
Figure 1.8
 Case 1.1 Mast cell tumour aspirate, revealing the classical 'granular’ appearance of the
cytoplasm
Mast cells tumours are classified as being a round cell tumour, which means they
exfoliate as discrete round cells with clear margins and a rounded nucleus. Other
tumours in the round cell category include lymphoma, histiocytoma, plasmacytoma
and transmissible venereal tumour (which does not occur naturally in the UK but may
theoretically be seen in imported dogs). Mast cells contain azurophilic granules in
their cytoplasm which stain a crimson-purple colour with Romanowsky stains,
therefore usually making their identification relatively straightforward but the
number of granules present in different tumours can vary considerably depending on
the tumour grade. In the hands of an experienced cytologist, aspirates can be helpful
   so   a s     
defined and uniform nuclei with a high number of granules in each cell. The more
poorly differentiated the tumour is, then the fewer the number of cytoloplasmic
granules there are, the more prominent the nucleoli are and the degree of variation in
cell size (anisocytosis) and nuclear size (ansiokaryosis) increases. The use of silver
   o  (s n)      s
help predict the grade of a tumour on aspirate samples, thereby adding further detail
and diagnostic use from a simple aspirate. However, histopathological analysis will
still be required to obtain accurate grading information.
For this case a fine needle aspirate provided an accurate diagnosis although
    s  si   s     
explained above. However, by submitting the entire tumour after excision, a tumour
grade can be assigned and the completeness of surgical excision evaluated. In this and
of thoracic radiographs, local lymph node assessment and hepatic and splenic
ultrasound examination. The mass was excised with 2-cm lateral margins and one
fascial plane deep and the wound deficit was repaired using a local transposition flap
(Figs 1.9 and 1.10).
Figure1.9
Case 1.1 The wound deficit after the mass was excised with 2-cm margins
Figure 1.10
Case 1.1 A local transposition flap has been used for reconstruction of the skin deficit
Outcome
The dog made an uneventful recovery from surgery and healed well. The
histopathology confirmed the mass to be a grade I1 (intermediately differentiated)
mast cell tumour with complete margins and there was no evidence of recurrence 2
years postoperatively.
CLINICAL CASE EXAMPLE 1.2 - NEEDLE CORE BIOPSY
Signalment
9-year-old male neutered cross breed dog.
Presenting signs
A 4 X 4 cm raised mass in the area of the right frontal sinus
Clinical history
The mass had appeared 3 months previously and gradually increased in size over this
period of time (Fig. 1.11). Initial treatment with anti-inflammatory drugs did not
result in any improvement. Radiographs revealed increased soft tissue opacity of the
right frontal sinus with evidence of bone lysis surrounding it. No evidence of
metastasis was observed on thoracic radiographs. Cytological examination of fine
needle aspirates of the mass indicated a possible diagnosis of a squamous cell
carcinoma (SCC).
Figure 1.11
 Case 1.2 The appearance of the mass in the area of the right frontal sinus following
 aseptic preparation for the needle core biopsy
Differential diagnosis
· Frontal sinus tumour
· Carcinoma
· Osteosarcoma
· Lymphoma
· Primary bone tumour
· Osteosarcoma
· Chondrosarcoma
· Soft tissue sarcoma.
Diagnostic options
Cytology had been performed with a suspected diagnosis of SCC. However, histological
confirmation of this diagnosis was necessary before aggressive surgery in this area
was contemplated so that a complete treatment plan could be formulated which might
method of obtaining a pretreatment biopsy in this case that would also allow the
obtaining of tissue from within the frontal sinus was by a needle core biopsy. The
sampling in this case was performed under general anaesthesia after an MRI was
performed on the skull.
Needle core biopsy provides a quick and easy way of obtaining a tissue sample. It
can be used on externally or internally (usually in combination with ultrasound
guidance) located masses and can be performed using local anaesthetic and sedation.
providing a cost-effective and less-invasive option to clients, compared with incisional
biopsy. As the initial incision and tract made by the instrument is small, there is little
risk of disruption of the tumour and subsequent tuimour seeding, although removal of
the biopsy tract is recommended at the definitive surgery. It is therefore important to
consider what surgical approach will be required before the biopsy is obtained to
ensure that any needle tract will be able to be easily excised at surgery. Although
designed as disposable instruiments needles can be reused after sterilization with
ethylene oxide and performing the skin incision with a scalpel blade before insertion
of the needle will delay blunting of the tip and extend the life span of the instrument.
In core biopsy the typical needle size is 18 Gauge-14 Gauge and comprises an inner
NO
Figure 1.12
Needle core biopsy technique
Figure 1.13
Case 1.2 Step 1. An initial incision is made with a number 11 blade. The needle of the
s   q  s s     s  
instrument. When discharged, the inner stylet of the needle advances rapidly to a distance usually of
1-2 cm. The outer cannula follows immediately behind the inner cannula to capture the acquired
sample and the entire instrument is withdrawn
Figures 1.13, 1.14 Needle core biopsy
Figure 1.14
Case 1.2 Step 2. After withdrawing the outer cannula the tissue specimen is gently
removed from the notch within the inner stylet with a fine gauge needle and placed into a formalin
pot. A sample can also be rolled onto a microscope slide to create an impression smear which can be
sent for cytological evaluation
CLINICAL TIP
If this technique is unfamiliar it may be useful to practice using a needle core biopsy instrument
on a piece of fruit such as an apple or kiwi before applying it to a mass.
If possible, perform several biopsies at varying levels using the same initial incision to increase the
probability of obtaining a diagnostic specimen.
Diagnosis
Histopathology on the specimens submitted in this case confirmed a diagnosis of
squamous cell carcinoma. MRl revealed the mass to be localized within the frontal
sinus without penetration into the brain and thoracic radiographs did not reveal any
evidence of metastasis. In this case, both cytology and histopathology were utilized to
obtain an accurate initial diagnosis, which was essential in this situation before
surgery was contemplated. The imaging indicated that macroscopic disease was
amenable to surgical resection with radiotherapy a potential postoperative adjunctive
therapy. The tumour was excised en bloc with surrounding tissues (including the
         s    
Figure 1.15
Case 1.2 An intraoperative photograph of the mass within the frontal sinus and
Overlyingskin
Figure 1.16
Case 1.2 A postoperative photograph after the surgery was completed
CLINCIAL CASE EXAMPLE 1.3 -PUNCH BIOPSY AND EXCISIONAL BIOPSY
Signalment
 7-year-old male entire German shepherd dog.
Presenting signs
Acute haemoa bdomen.
Clinical history
The dog presented acutely with pale mucous membranes, tachypnoea and ascites. A
peritoneal  tap  revealed  a   haemoabdomen.   Abdominal  radiographs  and
10 cm X 8 cm. No further abnormalities could be detected and thoracic radiographs
were within normal limits.
Diagnostic options
In this case a presurgical biopsy was not obtained for three reasons. Firstly this is one
example when the type of treatment would not be altered by prior knowledge of the
tumour type, i.e. a splenectomy or partial splenectomy is indicated whether the mass
is a benign or malignant lesion. Secondly the diagnostic value of a fine needle aspirate
from a spleen is low due to the effects of haemodilution. Thirdly with any suspected
case of haemangiosarcoma there is a risk of tumour seeding with aspirates or needle
core biopsy as the needle is withdrawn. Furthermore with single splenic masses that
are solitary and have not ruptured, aspiration may cause rupture of the tumour and a
haemoabdomen. For this reason an exploratory laparotomy was performed with the
view to excisional biopsy of the spleen. On exploration the liver had small (5 mm)
s  ed    s a  s   s
(Figs 1.17, 1.18).
Figure 1.17
Case 1.3 The punch biopsy is directed over the lesion and rotated until it has
  se     a  ans a a ae   
base of the sample excised using small iris scissors
Figure 1.18
Case 1.3 The deficit can be plugged with a haemostatic agent to effectively control
haemorrhage
CLINICAL TIP
Using a punch biopsy instrument is an ideal method of obtaining biopsies from the surface of the
liver and spleen intraoperatively. The sample is shorter and wider than a needle core, and
haemorrhage from the remaining deficit can be controlled using a haemostatic agent such as
commercially available collagen or gelatine.
Diagnosis
The spleen was submitted for histopathology and a diagnosis of haemangiosarcoma
made. The histopathology from the liver also confirmed metastatic spread. This case
     n     a  n
individual case in both the diagnosis and staging of disease.
Outcome
 q  n  sa o   sa  n s  
             
cycles in total. However, sadly the dog re-presented collapsed just before the fourth
treatment was due to be administered (i.e. 10 weeks postoperatively) and was found to
have developed haemoabdomen again, presumably due to haemorrhage from the
hepatic metastases. The dog was therefore euthanized.
CLINICAL CASE EXAMPLE 1.4 - INCISIONAL BIOPSY
Signalment
4-year-old female entire Labrador dog.
Presenting signs
Left rostral mandibular mass. The mass was proliferative and friable.
Clinical history
The oral mass had been noted after the dog had presented with signs of halitosis and
oral bleeding (Fig. 1.19). Radiographs of the mandible demonstrated some bone
destruction of the mandible suirrounding the left canine tooth. The left submandibular
lymph node was palpably enlarged. There was no evidence of metastasis on thoracic
radiographs.
Figure 1.19
Case 1.4 The appearance of the intraoral mass before incisional biopsy
Figures 1.19-1.21 Incisional biopsy
Differential diagnosis
· Epulis
· Fibrous
· Ossifying
· Acanthomatous
· Squamous cell carcinoma
· Malignant amelanotic melanoma
· Fibrosarcoma.
Diagnostic options
Both the local lymph node and the oral mass require investigation before surgical
options are considered. Knowing the tumour type before surgery will provide owners
S   s  n      
resection is not feasible. The local lymph node can be easily assessed by fine needle
aspiration. To obtain a diagnosis from the mass a large sample is required, as often,
oral tumours are associated with a high proportion of ulceration, necrosis and
inflammation which can penetrate deep beyond the surface. Cytology, needle core
 s    e     s   ss
incisional biopsy is recommended. Due to the denervation associated with some of
these proliferative masses a general anaesthetic for the incisional biopsy procedure is
often not necessary.
CLINICAL TIP
When performing an incisional biopsy it is important to obtain a deep wedge sample that extends
beyond any surface inflammation.
 Always bear in mind when planning the biopsy incision that the tract will have to be removed in
the final surgical procedure.
The procedure is simply carried out with a scalpel blade under aseptic conditions. If
performed in the skin it is preferable to include a portion of normal tissue in addition
to the mass that is being sampled. The subsequent deficit can be sutured or, as with
this case left to heal by secondary intention, after haemorrhage is controlled (Figs 1.20
and 1.21).
Figure 1.20
Case 1.4 The incisional biopsy obtained using a Number 10 blade. Haemorrhage was
controlled by direct pressure
Figure 1.21
Case 1.4 The incisional biopsy sample obtained from the mandibular mass
Diagnosis
The  left submandibular  lymph  node aspirates  were consistent  with reactive
inflammation. The incisional biopsy of the oral mass revealed a diagnosis of an
acanthomatous epulis. The dog was treated with a unilateral rostral mandibulectomy
and complete surgical margins were obtained.
Ouitcome
P     s      
anti-inflammatory medication, using the opioids for 48 hours and the NSAIDs for 5
days. The dog ate soft food without difficulty the night of the procedure and was
discharged with instructions to feed soft food for the next 10-14 days. The dog
remained tumour free at 2 years after the operation.
2
Principles of cancer surgery
surgery is desirable. Knowledge of the type and possible grade of the tumour will allow
the surgeon to answer the following questions:
1. Is surgery indicated?
2. Is a potential cure possible?
3. What margins of resection are required?
6. Is additional surgical planning for adequate reconstruction indicated?
7. Is this type of surgery within the surgeon's capabilities?
SURGICALMARGINS
The key to successful surgical cancer management is very much dependent, in the
majority of cases, on obtaining margins of normal tissue in addition to the main
the tumour as there are often tumour cells that infiltrate the surrounding normal
S      ,  ,     
circuimstances there is a greater likelihood of complete local excision when wider
margins are taken. The exact distance recommended depends on the tumour type,
biological behaviour and anatomical location. For example with low-or intermediate
grade mast cell tumours a margin of 2 cm laterally is recommended and results in the
complete excision of the majority of tumours. Deep margins must not be disregarded.
However, often tumours lie over naturally resistant anatomical barriers such as fascia,
ligaments and tendons which are resistant to tumour spread and therefore if a fascial
plane is included in the deep margin this would normally be sufficient as an adequate
surgical margin.
Reactive zone
Satellite
Tumour
metastases
Pseudocapsule
Skipmetastases
Figure 2.1
This diagram illustrates typical tumour anatomy of a soft-tissue sarcoma and
 demonstrates the presence of metastases outside the main tumour mass
There are four basic types of tumour resection depending upon the location of the
surgical margin:
1. Intracapsular. The mass/tumour is removed from within the capsule in pieces. This
method is only suitable for benign conditions.
2. Marginal. The tumour is removed through the reactive zone, including all or most
of the pseudocapsule. This method will not be adequate for malignant tumours as
satellite and skip metastases would remain. However, for benign masses, such as
lipomas, this type of resection woild be adequiate
3. Wide. The tumour is removed with its pseudocapsule, the reactive zone and a
              
the excision is determined preoperatively after obtaining a suitable biopsy which
would indicate the tumour type and biological behaviour. With aggressive malignant
tumours, there would still be a risk of recurrence due to skip metastasis. This type of
resection would be suitable for the majority of intermediate-grade mast cell tumours
and low-to intermediate-grade sarcomas.
4. Radical. The tumour is removed en bloc with the tissue compartment within which
it lies. This surgery is indicated for high-grade malignant tumours, particularly those
which have traversed across or through multiple fascial planes. This type of surgery
would be indicated  for  appendicular  osteosarcomas  (amputation),  phalangeal
carcinomas (amputation), thoracic wall sarcomas (rib resection).
SURGICAL TECHNIQUES
The first attempt at complete excision will always give the best results with locally
aggressive and/or malignant tumours. If an excisional biopsy has been previously
performed with tumours such as soft tissue sarcomas then the chances of complete
excision and therefore a potential cure are reduced. This is because disruption to the
ss ns on us o  sn  s sr   os
Furthermore, disturbance of normal tumour margins can make identification of
normal' versus ‘abnormal' tissue difficult and also there will be less available local
skin for adequate closure. For these reasons a second surgery normally requires even
greater margins of excision compared with the first (Fig. 2.2). The exception to this
rule is when the tumour type will not affect future treatment options (e.g. mammary
tumours, single pulmonary and splenic masses) and in these situations, excisional
biopsy is acceptable.
Figu1re2.2
 This dog has had recurrence of a mast cell tumour following excisional biopsy of the
original tumour with incomplete margins (arrow indicates previous scar) on the lateral thoracic wall.
The second surgery will be made difficult as now both the gross recurrence and previous scar will
have to be included in the second excision
Known malignant tumours should be removed with an adequate margin of normal
tissue. Recommendations are that locally aggressive tumours be removed with a
minimum of 2 cm margins in the lateral planes and one fascial plane in the deep
margin. It is not enough to just 'shell' out the tumour and then go back and remove
further tissue as this may cause seeding and lead to recurrence. Attempts must be
made to avoid disruption to the tumour and perform the excision by cutting through
normal, disease-free tissue only (Figs 2.3, 2.4).
Figure2.3
A mast cell tumour (location shown by the red arrow) previously diagnosed on aspirate
with 2-cm margins marked out with a sterile marker pen
Figure2.4
After excision with 2-cm minimum lateral margins and including the underlying fascial
 plane. Histopathology confirmed an intermediate-grade mast cell tumour with complete margins of 
excision
Tumours should always be handled carefully and if possible other means of tumour
retraction other than using the hand should be used. This can be in the form of stay
sutures, Allis tissue forceps or laparotomy sponges (Fig. 2.5). This will help to avoid
tumour cell seeding into local, surrounding tissues. Lavage of the excision site with
sterile physiological saline before closure may also be utilized to reduce the number of
tumour cells remaining in the wouind.
Figuire2.5
This is a case of a mast cell tumour excision demonstrating the use of Allis tissue
forceps for tumour handling during dissection
Bs n o ,  i   s 
procedures to avoid the risk of tumour seeding or spread include:
· Changing surgical gloves before closing normal tissues (e.g. abdominal wall closure)
· Performing ‘clean' surgeries before cancer surgery if two or more procedures are
planned under the same anaesthesia.
Some tumours exfoliate more readily than others, e.g. epithelial tumours compared
with mesenchymal cell tumours, so the risk of transferring cells from the tumour to
normal tissue will vary according to tumour type.
SURGERY ASPART OF MULTIMODAL THERAPY
multidisciplinary approach in combination with radiotherapy and/or chemotherapy.
Therefore treatment of a cancer patient should not be declined on the basis that the
tumour is not completely resectable, or indeed considered ineffective until after a
combined management protocol has been explored and offered to the owner. It is
becoming more commonplace, in fact, to preferentially select multimodal therapy over
a single treatment option, as often, this approach maximizes benefits and minimizes
side effects. This is why it is often worth discussing a case with a specialist oncologist
before any surgical procedures are undertaken so that all cases can have appropriate
treatment plans developed.
CLINICAL CASE EXAMPLE 2.1 - SURGERY AND RADIOTHERAPY
Signalment
7-year-old male neutered Hungarian viszla.
Presenting signs
Clinical history
The mass had appeared 2 months previously and had rapidly grown to 4 cm by the
time of presentation. Tru-cuit (needle core) biopsies had been taken which revealed a
diagnosis of an intermediate-grade soft-tissue sarcoma (Fig. 2.6). Thoracic
radiographs were negative for the presence of metastatic disease and local lymph
nodes were not palpable.
Figure2.6
 Case 2.1 The appearance of the soft-tissue sarcoma preoperatively
Figures 2.6-2.8 Cytoreductive surgery for a self-tissue sarcoma
Management options
At the time of presentation and after staging, it appeared that the main management
aim was local disease control. As soft-tissue sarcomas are locally aggressive, and
typically, tumour cells extend beyond the pseudocapsule, they should be removed with
2-3-cm margins of normal tissue laterally and include one fascial plane deep. To
achieve this in this area, surgical reconstruction using a local flap, such as a
thoracodorsal axial pattern flap, would have to be used to ensure a tension-free wound
closure. Using surgery alone in this way is one management option and a reasonable
choice if radiotherapy was not available. A disadvantage of this approach is that
morbidity associated with this extensive surgery (flap failure) is increased so an
alternative option would be to carry out a ‘debulk' or more conservative operation,
whereby the majority of the tumour burden is removed (cytoreductive therapy) and
the remaining microscopic disease is treated with postoperative radiotherapy. This
treatment protocol was selected in this case.
CLINICAL TIP
If cytoreductive surgery is performed with a view to postoperative radiotherapy then careful
extremely helpful for the radiotherapy planning to take detailed photographs pre-and postoperatively
(Figs 2.6, 2.7, 2.8).
Figures 2.7, Figure 2.8
Case 2.1 Cytoreductive surgery for the soft-tissue sarcoma resulted in a
tension-free primary closure that healed without complication prior to radiotherapy
Outcome
Radiotherapy was performed using 4 fractions of 9o0 cGy once a week and was
commenced 1o days after suture removal and confirmation of wound healing. The
patient was re-examined every 6 months for recurrence and remained free of
detectable disease 2 years after treatment.
CLINICAL CASE EXAMPLE 2.2 - SURGERY AND CHEMOTHERAPY
Signalment
6-year-old neutered male doberman.
Case history
Clinical signs
The dog had started to limp after returning from a walk 10 days prior to presentation
and had been prescribed a short course of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory (NSAID)
medication by the referring veterinary surgeon. However, despite this treatment the
lameness did not improve and when the course of NSAIDs was completed, the
lameness progressed rapidly such that the dog was hardly weight-bearing at
presentation and examination revealed the presence of a bony swelling on the distal
aspect of his radius. Radiographs revealed the presence of an osteolytic lesion within
the radius with an accompanying periosteal reaction, as shown in Figure 2.9.
Figure 2.9
Case 2.2 The lateral radiograph of the radius revealing the presence of a bone tumour
in the radius.
Image courtesy of Dr Martin Owen, Dick Wh ite Ref errals
Differential diagnosis
· Primary bone tumour
· Osteosarcoma
· Chondrosarcoma
· Metastatic bone tumour.
Management options
primary bone neoplasm. Because of the degree of pain he was obviously in for him to
be non-weight-bearingly lame, the decision was made not to biopsy the mass because
  n n          m 
    sa      q  
knowledge of the tumour type would influence whether or not postoperative
         a   
thoracic radiographs were obtained which revealed no gross metastatic disease, so the
to be an osteosarcoma.
Outcome
The  dog received  chemotherapy  in  the form  of  alternating carboplatin and
doxorubicin given once every 3 weeks for a total of six treatments in combination
with bisphosphonate treatment. The dog was alive and well with no evidence of
pulmonary metastasis at 12 months postsurgery.
CLINICAL TIP
The life expectancy of a dog in which an appendicular limb osteosarcoma is diagnosed is
significantly increased by the administration of postoperative chemotherapy as described above and
 therefore such treatment should always be discussed with owners if at all possible and the treatment
started approximately 2 weeks after the surgery.
OTHER PREOPERATIVE AND POSTOPERATIVE CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE
CANCERPATIENT
Although surgical techniques, including margin evaluation and preoperative planning
according to tumour type and behaviour, are important elements of oncological
surgery, there are several other additional factors that also need to be considered.
Antimicrobial prophylaxis
contaminated or contaminated. However, the decision to administer perioperative
antibiotics is also based on a number of other criteria including patient factors and
local wound factors. Patient factors such as old age, poor nutritional status and other
risk of infection. Additionally, local factors such as local wound immunity and blood
supply also have a potential impact on infection rates. For these reasons the infection
surgeries and this may influence the decision to use anti biotics perioperatively. What
is more important, however, is how to use antibiotics during surgery to afford
maximum efficacy. There is definitive evidence that antibiotics are most useful when
that giving antibiotics only after surgery not only has no effect on the prevention of
infection but actually may increase infection rates. The goals of antimicrobial
· Never use antibiotics as a substitute for good surgical practice and technique, good
hospital infection control policies and patient care.
· The timing of antibiotic administration is critical. Minimum inhibitory
concentrations of the drug must be present at the incision site for the entire duration
of the surgery. Therefore it is recommended that only intravenous drugs are used and
administered at least 30 minutes, but no greater than 60 minutes, prior to the first
incision. This is to ensuire that adequate tissue concentrations of the drug are present
at the site of the surgical wound at the point of possible wound contamination.
the individual drug. For example, for some drugs such as the beta-lactams, repeating
administration every 2-3 hours is recommended to ensure tissue concentrations of
the drug do not fall below the minimum inhibitory concentration (MlC).
· There is no evidence to suggest that continuing the use of antibiotics beyond the
surgical period is beneficial in those patients where the antibiotic is being used
prophylactically.
Nutrition and fluid therapy
            
multiple reasons which are beyond the scope of this chapter to discuss in detail. It is
also well known that if left untreated, protein-energy malnutrition is associated with
a number of complications including:
· Delayed wound healing
· Anaemia and hypoproteinaemia
· Decreased immune function
· Poor function and eventual failure of the gastrointestinal, cardiovascular and
pulmonary systems.
Due to these adverse effects it is vital that feeding the cancer patient pre-and
be given to calculation of the nutritional need of the patient, consideration of the type
of food to be given and how it will be given (enterally versus parenterally). The
jejenostomy) to assisted enteral feeding is becoming more commonplace as an
Sa d  a      n s 
   s o   n  s  s
nutrition, the administration of effective fluid therapy preoperatively, intraoperatively
and postoperatively is also important, particularly in those patients that are
compromised and have fluid deficits that require correction.
NURSING TIP
All hospitalized patients, but especially cancer patients, should have their daily calorie
requirements calculated and their dietary management planned in the light of this. All cancer patients
must receive high quality nutrition whenever possible.
ANALGESIA
        s s       
before and after surgery. If there is any question of whether or not a patient has
discomfort as a result of their tumour they should receive analgesia. Initially, a
combination therapy approach of a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) and
an opioid suich as buprenorphine, is the best recommendation. The main concern for
patients who obviously have a painful focus, such as an osteolytic bone tumour, is
that the pre-existing pain will cause the phenomenon known as ‘wind-up', by which
the perception of pain actually increases over time due to mechanisms within the
central nervous system (CNs). This, therefore, means that ensuring they are as pain-
period will reduce the wind-up effect. For surgery, analgesia needs to be planned
then being maintained in the postoperative period. In the authors' hospitals it would
be routine to provide NSAID medication along with methadone in the pre-med and for
fentanyl to be administered intraoperatively if there is indication of pain (by
increased heart rate, respiratory rate, elevated blood pressure, etc). Postoperatively,
Pd     a  s a  om s
should be hospitalized for 24-48 hours, receiving both opioid and NSAID medication
before being discharged, usually with a further 5 days of NsAID medication. The
question of which NSAID to use is difficult, as different patients show differing
responses to different drugs. However, in the light of the possible antineoplastic effects
of meloxicam, the use of this drug should always be considered, especially if the
tumour being treated is epithelial in origin.
(          ,   
system. This assesses many descriptor options within six behavioural catagories,
thereby generating a pain score based on the sum of the rank scores. This is now used
routinely within the author's hospital with assessments being made every 2-4 hours
for all surgical patients, enabling much better and more accurate analgesia
analgesic agents (such as opioids plus constant-rate infusion lignocaine or ketamine)
are used, thereby ensuring treatment toxicity is minimized whilst analgesia is
maximized and patient recovery times are optimized.
3
Principles of cancer chemotherapy
A basic understanding of the mechanisms of action and particular uses of
to our cancer patients. It is important to remember that people can suffer markedly
during chemotherapy, so from the outset we have to explain that in veterinary
medicine it is generally considered ethically unjustifiable to allow our patients to
experience such side effects, so we will attempt to make our chemotherapy side-effect-
free where possible (which should be the majority of cases). However, in order to
achieve this aim we have to use lower dosages than those used in human medicine
with the inevitable consequence that veterinary chemotherapy usuially has a lower
success rate in terms of remission rates and durations when compared to such
treatment in humans.
· Have self-sufficient growth ability
· Are insensitive to natural antigrowth signals
· Are able to evade preprogrammed cell death (apoptosis)
· Have limitless replicative potential
· Are able to promote sustained angiogenesis
· Are able to invade tissue and develop metastasis.
Tumours develop, therefore, because of an imbalance between normal cell
growth/division and natural cell death. As a result, understanding the cell cycle is
fundamental to understanding cancer biology. The cell cycle has four phases, as
shown in Figure 3.1.
Mitosis
G
G.
S-phase
Cell death
Figuure3.1
   =      =        
synthesis; G2 = second period of RNA and protein synthesis and Go = resting cells
Most normal cells are in the G. stage, obviously depending upon their location and
function, but it is important to remember that cells in G. may still act as a reservoir
from which further tumour cells may develop. In addition, the cell cycle is important
clinically because many therapeutic modalities used in oncology only affect dividing
cells, so the cell cycle specificity of various treatments may affect the choice and
efficacy of treatment used. As a general rule, chemotherapeutics are either cell cycle
specific or cell cycle nonspecific.
Chemotherapy drugs can act by damaging DNA and thus preventing cellular
replication, inducing apoptosis, or they may interfere with a specific phase of the cell
BASIC CONCEPTS OF TUMOUR GROWTH
Most tumours are detected late in the course of the disease, at which stage there are
many millions of cells making up the tumour (e.g. a mass of approximately 1-cm
diameter contains 109 cells whilst an average 20-cm mass contains 1012 cells). Tumour
     , s    
exponential cell division resulting in a rapid growth phase but as cell numbers
increase the rate of cell division starts to tail off. This means that because large
tumours contain a very high number of cells, only a small proportion of them will be
dividing when compared to when the tumour was very small, and therefore there will
be fewer cells that are susceptible to chemotherapy. Conversely, smaller tumours with
a higher  growth  fraction theoretically have  a  greater potential response to
chemotherapy because they contain a greater number of proliferating cells. This
principle is illustrated graphically in Figure 3.2.
High growth fraction and
Point of clinical detection
shortdoublingtimephase,
of the disease,where
when theoretically the
doubling time is increasing
tumour should be more
and growth fraction is
responsive tochemotherapy
reducing,thereby reducing
orradiotherapybutit isnot
sensitivityto treatment
often clinically detectable
Log no cancer cells
Time
Figure 3.2
 Rate of tumour cell growth relating to clinical detection and response to medical
management
This graph also illustrates why surgical debaulking and follow-up chemotherapy or
radiotherapy can theoretically be useful in tumours which display sensitivity to the
follow-up treatment. By reducing the number of cancer cells in the mass, the growth
  a   n        
for the adjunctive treatments to be more effective than they would otherwise be
without the surgery. Obviously, inherent tumour resistance, vascular supply and the
e on isod o s hi o d s  dn e   n  p a
it to all conditions. However, the basic theory that chemotherapy and radiotherapy
work most effectively on microscopic disease does generally apply, hence multimodal
treatment should always be indertaken if possible.
INDICATIONSFORCHEMOTHERAPY
Chemotherapy is rarely effective in veterinary medicine if used as the sole treatment
modality, except in lymphoproliferative diseases such as lymphoma. There are
therefore four main indications to use chemotherapy:
1 . In patients with a tumour with known (or strongly presumed) sensitivity to
chemotherapy, e.g. lymphoma, multiple myeloma, transmissible venereal tumour
2 .As an adjunctive treatment to surgery aiming to eradicate or reduce occult
micrometastases (e.g. in canine osteosarcoma and haemangiosarcoma)
3. In patients for whom palliative treatment for systemic or metastatic cancer is
required and for whom surgical management is not considered viable
4. To sensitize tissues to the effects of radiation therapy.
OUR GOALS: to control the cancer and prolong survival while still maintaining a
good, acceptable quality of life.
DRUGDOSAGEANDTIMING
The aim of chemotherapy is to administer the maximum possible doses at the shortest
possible dosing interval (dose intensity). Any decrease in the administered dose can
result in a significant reduction in drug efficacy, so giving optimal doses is vital. The
          
administering chemotherapy using several different drugs that have different
mechanisms of action, known as ‘combination chemotherapy'. To make this as
effective as possible without causing toxicity, several rules need to be followed:
· Administer therapies as close together as the maximal tolerable dose allows
· Do not use drugs with overlapping drug toxicities simultaneously
In a clinically detectable tumour (i.e. approx 10 cells or more) the tumour will not
S    s  s     
develop intrinsically resistant cell lines because of their inherent genetic instability,
leading to the observation that in any tumour containing > 10 cells, drug resistance
will often already have developed. This led to the development of multidrug protocols
   o s e ss s s  ne   sa
and mechanism of actions. The aims of combination chemotherapy therefore are to:
· Maximize cell kill but maintain an acceptable toxicity range
· Prevent/slow the development of new resistant lines
TOXICITY
and gastrointestinal toxicity (i.e. a 'BAG' of adverse effects).
Bone marrow toxicity
This is caused by damage to the rapidly dividing bone marrow stem cells and it occurs
because chemotherapeutics are nonselective; they have the potential to kill any
rapidly dividing cells and this includes normal bone marrow cells. Bone marrow
toxicity can be assessed by taking blood for a complete blood count (CBC) and blood
smear examination. Chemotherapy should be delayed in any patient with a neutrophil
count of < 2.5 x 10*/L or a platelet count < 50.0 x 10*/L. Possible clinical signs
associated with myelotoxicity include those related to sepsis, petechial or eccymotic
haemorrhage and pallor and weakness. However, anecdotally in the authors'
by the owners of animals with leucopaenia, whilst pyrexia is the most common
           
treatments including:
· Following careful aseptic techniques
· Minimizing trauma and controlling any bleeding if thrombocytopaenic
· Culture of urine, blood and any other exudates which may be significant
blood-product transfusions etc., as required.
Recombinant human granulocyte-monocyte colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF)
boosts endogenous production of neuitrophils but its use is not routine in veterinary
medicine, firstly because the bone marrow usuially recovers naturally within
approximately 5 days following administration of a chemotherapeutic, and secondly
because antibodies can develop to GM-CSF within a few weeks of administration.
It is obviously important to discontinue the drugs that induce bone marrow
suppression until blood counts have recovered, but then it would be usual to re-
institute the therapy, albeit at a reduced dose. Most animals with chemotherapy-
treated rapidly, and will often only have a hospitalization period of approximately 3-5
days.
Alopecia
  a s n      n  si s
hair coats, such as Afghan hounds and old English sheepdogs. The author has also
seen periorbital and facial alopecia in West Highland white terriers and Scottish
terriers given doxorubicin (Figs 3.3, 3.4). Cats can lose their whiskers, especially with
long-term vincristine therapy but more generalized alopecia is less common in cats
than in dogs. If affected, the hair coat normally regrows on completion of the
chemotherapy.
Figure3.3
A Bedlington terrier which developed generalized alopecia following doxorubicin
therapy as part of a modified Madison-Wisconsin protocol to treat mesenteric lymphoma. He went
into permanent complete remission and his hair regrew on cessation of his treatment
Figure3.4
 A West Highland white terrier which developed periorbital alopecia after receiving
doxorubicin, also as part of a Madison-Wisconsin protocol, used to treat his multicentric lymphoma
Gastrointestinal toxicity
The obvious clinical signs of gastrointestinal (GIT) toxicity are vomiting, anorexia
and diarrhoea. The development of such signs is either secondary to direct damage to
GIT epithelial cells or via efferent nervous stimulation of the chemoreceptor trigger
effect after the administration of many chemotherapeutics, but this uisuially only lasts
2436 hours. If there is a major concern regarding GIT toxicity then post-
chemotherapy administration of antiemetics may be justified, and certainly, the
author frequently recommends 5-day courses of an antiemetic (maropitant or
metoclopramide) after a patient has received doxorubicin or carboplatin.
Chemotherapy-induced diarrhoea usually responds to conservative treatment (no
food for 12-24 hours, oral rehydration fluids and a bland, easily digested diet for the
following 3-5 days). Some cases may require the use of treatments such as
metronidazole for 5-7 days. If the diarrhoea is accompanied by significant signs of
systemic illness then a blood sample for CBC analysis should be obtained to ensure that
the animal has not become neutropaenic. The faeces should also be cultured for
pathogenic bacteria with follow-up antibiosis based on the bacteriology results where
a major problem if the chemotherapy has been administered at the correct dose and
frequency and if owners have been correctly counselled and supported by the clinical
team.
Other than the ‘BAG' of side effects, there are several other major possible problems
associated with chemotherapy treatment:
1. Cardiac toxicity. This is a well-recognized possible complication of doxorubicin
therapy. Doxorubicin is known to induce dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) with high
cumulative doses and is also associated with transient arrhythmias during
administration. In human medicine the incidence of doxorubicin-associated
cardiomyopathy is quoted as being up to 1% with a total dose of 500 mg/m?, rising to
over 10% with total doses of 600 mg/m?. However, in veterinary medicine, dogs
appear to be more sensitive to the cardiac toxicity of doxorubicin compared to people
and this effect is possibly exacerbated by the fact that doxoru bicin is most commonly
used in cases of canine lymphoma and there is a predilection for this condition in
some breeds of dog that are also more prone to developing DCM. The current
recommendation therefore is to not exceed a total dose of 180 mg/m?. Some authors
have recommended using total doses of up to 240 mg/m? in small-breed dogs in
whom concurrent cardiac monitoring is performed but the safety of this has not been
clearly proven. It is therefore advisable to use doxorubicin with caution in breeds of
recommended in appropriate cases. It may also be advisable to auscultate or perform
continuous ECG monitoring whilst administering doxorubicin in patients for whom
there is any concern regarding cardiac function and the administration should not be
over a period of less than 20 minutes.
administration, due to the production of a metabolite of cyclophosphamide called
acrolein that is directly toxic to the bladder epithelium. Cyclophosphamide-induced
owners to undertake regular dipstick assessment of the animal's uirine whilst it is
receiving cyclophosphamide and if there is any indication of the presence of blood in
the urine, cyclophosphamide therapy should be stopped immediately and substituted
with an alternative alkylating agent (e.g. chlorambucil or melphalan). Treatment of
the cystitis is usually symptomatic, with antibiotics, anti-inflammatory analgesics
be beneficial. Intravesicular administration of dimethyl sulphoxide (DMSO) has been
reported to be successful in some cases and this has been used successfully in the
cyclophosphamide also appears to reduce the incidence of this problem.
(deafness). The neurological signs following the administration of 5-fluorouracil are
significant in cats so the use of this drug is contraindicated in this species.
4 . Severe cellulitis. Doxorubicin, actinomycin D, vincristine, vinblastine and
mechlorethamine are known to cause a severe localised cellulitis if extravasated
during administration. Briefly the treatment for this is:
· Stop injection if there is any suspicion at all that there has been, or may have
been extravasation
· Carefully examine the catheter and surrounding tissue, looking for perivascular
swelling/'blown vein' appearance
· If extravasation is confirmed, attempt to aspirate drug and 5 ml of blood if
possi ble back into the administration syringe
· Apply an ice pack and topical steroid cream to the affected area. The intravenous
administration of Dexrazoxane has also been recommended if doxorubicin
extravasation occuirs
           
management. The level of treatment required will depend on the amount of soft-
 sss a-a      i sap   s
remove necrotic tissue, careful daily bandage changes, reconstructive surgery and
For this reason it is mandatory that all intravenous chemotherapeutic agents are
administered through a well-placed intravenous catheter and never directly via a
needle or butterfly catheter. Placement of the catheter must follow standard aseptic
Figure3.5
 Preparation of the equipment required to place an intravenous chemotherapy catheter
Figu1re 3.6
After clipping the hair from over the vein to be used, the skin should be cleaned with
an antibacterial solution such as Hibiscrub and then surgical spirit which is allowed to dry
Figure3.7
With the animal appropriately restrained, the catheter is placed into the vein. If the
catheter appears to pass through the vein and not stay within the lumen, use of this vein should be
abandoned and an alternative vein used
Figure 3.8
Once blood has been seen in the hub of the stylette, the catheter is then carefully
advanced off the stylette
Sticky side of tape facing up,placed
underneath and wrapped over the
catheter hub before being wrapped
around theleg.therebyensuring
that the tapeiswellattached to the
catheter as well as to the leg
Figure 3.9
With the catheter fully advanced, the stylette is removed and the catheter taped in
place. Fixing the catheter in place by firstly ensuring that the tape used is adhered to the catheter as
shown above is recommended
Figures 3.10 and 3.11
Once the catheter has been secured with one or two further pieces of
tape, a T-port is attached and the catheter patency assessed by withdrawing blood. Once satisfied that
the catheter is well placed and patent, it is then thoroughly flushed using 10-ml sterile saline
Figure3.12
              s  
bandage is placed over the whole catheter to keep it clean and prevent the patient from trying to
remove it!
COMMONLY USED DRUGS IN VETERINARY CHEMOTHERAPY
The following case examples illustrate the mechanism of action and possible toxicities
of the more commonly utilized veterinary chemotherapeutics.
Case3.1
A 7-year-old neutered female boxer dog presented with generalized lymphadenopathy
identified on a routine prevaccination health check. Fine needle aspirates were
obtained from her prescapular and popliteal lymph nodes which confirmed the
diagnosis to be lymphoma. Flow cytometry confirmed the lymphoma to be B-cell in
origin whilst abdominal ultrasound revealed no abnormalities to be visible in the liver
or spleen and the thoracic radiographs were uinremarkable. She was therefore
diagnosed with grade Illa multicentric lymphoma (see Appendix 1). The owner elected
vincristine (tradename “Oncovin') and prednisolone.
         e
melphalan, lomustine and hydroxyurea). It works by binding to DNA strands by
inserting an alkyl group, thereby inhibiting protein synthesis. This class of drugs is
cell cycle nonspecific. Cyclophosphamide can be given by oral or intravenous
administration and once absorbed it is rapidly converted by the liver to active
metabolites which are then excreted in an inactive form via the urine. It can be used
in lymphomas, leukaemias, soft-tissue sarcomas and feline mammary neoplasia.
almost always in combination with other agents. The main potential toxicities seen
with cyclophosphamide are bone marrow suppression (with the nadir 7-14 days after
treatment and recovery seen 5-10 days after the nadir) and sterile haemorrhagic
cystitis (which can result either from a single dose or following long-term
         s
formation of the causal cyclophosphamide metabolite acrolein can be prevented by
the simultaneous administration of mesna, which is a uroprotective agent and the
reported to reduce the incidence of the problem. However, as the incidence of
haemorrhagic cystitis is low in veterinary medicine, the use of mesna or frusemide is
not routine. As described previously, cyclophosphamide-induced haemorrhagic
cystitis can be difficuilt to treat and although the clinical signs isually do resolve once
the cyclophosphamide treatment is stopped, this may take several months, during
which time the patient can be difficult to manage. The main differential diagnosis is
   s       
develops, or is suspected to have developed, haemorrhagic cystitis following the
and a substitute alkylating agent used instead (Fig 3.13).
2. Vincristine (Oncovin). This is classified as a plant alkaloid and like vinblastine, is
             s
microtubuiles present at mitosis to prevent the normal formation and function of the
mitotic spindle, thus arresting the cell division in metaphase. It can only be
administered by intravenous injection and following administration it is excreted via
hepatic metabolism into faeces. It is used in lymphomas, transmissible venereal
Ssso  (ss ss  a  s  se s   n a 
mast cell  tumours.  It  has  also  been  described  as useful in metastatic
haemangiosarcomas when combined with doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide in the
VAC protocol. The toxicities described with vincristine include a severe perivascular
reaction following accidental extravasation (Fig. 3.14), constipation (unusual but
possibly more likely to occur in cats) and peripheral neuropathy. It generally causes
only moderate myelosuppression, although the risk of myelosuppression may be
increased if it is administered concurrently with L-asparaginase.
S           s
receptor sites which then interact with DNA and prevent cell division. Prednisolone is
also directly toxic to lymphocytes. It is metabolized in the liver with the non-toxic
metabolites  excreted   predominately  via urine. The  toxicities described  for
prednisolone relate to its glucocorticoid action, i.e. polyuria, polydipsia and
polyphagia, iatrogenic Cushing's disease, lethargy and, more rarely, behavioural
tuimollrs.
EndoxanaTablets50mg
100Toblots
lain i5mgOriog
sed hade marl
ASTA
Figure 3.13
Cyclophosphamide can be given by oral or intravenous administration
Figuure3.14
A Staffordshire bull terrier with marked skin and subcutaneous tissue damage
following the administration of vincristine using a needle rather than an intravenous catheter. The
started to display signs of discomfort within 12 hours of the injection
Case 3.2
A 12-year-old neutered female lurcher presented with a 10-day history of progressively
worsening lethargy and inappetance. She was drinking more than normal but not
vomiting. The owner had also noticed that she was intermittently lame but had put
this change down to arthritic disease. Her complete blood count revealed a marked
          
mild non-regenerative anaemia. Abdominal ultrasound and thoracic radiographs were
unremarkable so a bone marrow aspirate was obtained and this showed that the dog
had chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL). The dog was therefore treated with a
combination of chlorambucil and prednisolone.
· Chlorambucil ('Leukeran'), like cyclophosphamide, is an alkylating agent that is
metabolized by the liver to the active form and eliminated via urine and faeces. It is
               
some lymphomas, as a substitute for cyclophosphamide and in the treatment of
its toxicities are also described as mild compared to other agents. In the authors
experience it is usually very well tolerated by both cats and dogs and can be extremely
useful in some cases of lymphoma when used with prednisolone or as a substitute
drug instead of cyclophosphamide.
Case3.3
lethargy, suspected urinary incontinence and increased thirst. Clinical examination
revealed a mild lymphadenopathy and congested scleral blood vessels. The serum
biochemistry revealed a marked hyperglobulinaemia, which when assessed further
with serum protein electrophoresis revealed a monoclonal y-globulinaemia. A bone
marrow aspirate was obtained which confirmed the presence of large numbers of
neoplastic plasma cells, thereby diagnosing him with multiple myeloma. The dog was
successfully treated by a combination of melphalan and prednisolone.
· Melphalan ('Alkeran’ tablets, melphalan injection) is a phenylalanine derivative of
nitrogen mustard that acts as an alkylating agent and is used in veterinary medicine
mainly to treat multiple myeloma, although like chlorambucil it can be used as an
(particularly after prolonged administration) manifesting as thrombocytopenia is
reported but is usually mild.
Case 3.4
right hind leg on the palmar aspect of his stifle. Clinical examination, however,
revealed that the dog had generalized lymphadenopathy and hepatosplenomegaly
Fine needle aspirates of the enlarged lymph nodes revealed that more than 5o% of the
cells present were lymphoblasts, thereby diagnosing with grade IVa multicentric
lymphoma. The dog was treated with a modified Madison-Wisconsin protocol, which
is a combination of L-asparginase, vincristine, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin and
prednisolone.
· Doxorubicin ('Adriamycin') is classified as an antitumour antibiotic and its main
mechanism of action is to form stable complexes with DNA, thereby inhibiting
further DNA synthesis. It is administered as a slow intravenous infusion over 20
minutes diluted with 0.9% sterile saline. The auithor generally injects the doxoru bicin
into the injection port of a fast-ruinning 0.9% saline drip (1o0 ml bag) but the
doxorubicin solution can also simply be added directly to the drip bag and allowed to
run in over the same 20-minute timeframe. If it is placed in the drip bag, it is
essential to remember to have at least 20 ml of sterile saline ready to flush the bag
through to make certain the optimum dose is given, but also to ensure that the
intravenous catheter is totally flushed clean before being removed. Following
administration it is metabolised predominantly by the liver, resulting in 50% of the
metabolites being excreted in the bile, buit they are also excreted via the kidneys and
can very occasionally cause a red discolouration of the urine for up to 2 days.
e          s 
         
mammary neoplasia. It can, however, cause significant toxicity reactions. Immediate
can occasionally be seen within 5 minutes of commencing administration, so it is
advisable  to  premedicate all patients receiving doxorubicin  with intravenous
gastrointestinal, alopecic and bone marrow toxicity, in particular, neutropaenia.
Gastrointestinal toxicity can be manifested as anorexia (24-48 hours post treatment),
vomiting (2-5 days post treatment) and diarrhoea (3-7 days post treatment) and is
probably the most common toxicity seen following the use of doxorubicin. If
leukopenia or thrombocytopaenia develops, patients usually have a nadir at 7-1o days
post treatment and will have recovered by day 14. As outlined earlier, cardiotoxicity
is also a significant total dose-limiting effect, hence the current recommendations to
stop doxorubicin after a total dose of 180 mg/m? in most patients (Fig. 3.15).
· L-asparaginase is a bacterially derived enzyme that degrades L-asparagine, thereby
depriving growing cells of this amino acid, and as a result, causing inhibition of
protein synthesis. However, many tumour cells are able to increase the activity of
their endogenous asparagine synthetase and thus become resistant to the antitumour
effects of L-asparaginase quite rapidly. Also, antibodies to the foreign bacterial
protein frequently develop after drug exposure leading to resistance and a significant
risk of allergic reactions after the second or third usage. If an anaphylactic reaction
occurs it will usually develop within 1 hour following administration. L-asparaginase
has also been associated with the development of acute pancreatitis in a small
number of dogs. It is given as either a subcutaneous or intramuscular injection and
the resuilting metabolites are excreted via both urine and faeces. L-asparaginase is
used to treat lymphoma and lymphoblastic leukaemias, usually in combination with
    a s s     n   
asparaginase from CHOP-based lymphoma protocols does not significantly alter the
remission rates or remission duration, so its use as a primary agent in lymphoma is
now in question. It can, however, be useful as a rescue agent or as the first drug in a
protocol in situations when immunosuppression that may be caused by other
cytotoxics would be better avoided (e.g. concurrent lymphoma and Ehrlichia
infection).
Doxorubicin
Hydrochloride
Iorinlechion
10mg
Figure 3.15
Doxorubicin is classified as an antitumour antibiotic
stopped after 6 months. The dog stayed in remission for a further 13 months before
relapsing, at which point rescue treatment was given in the form of oral lomustine
('CCNU').
· Lomustine is given orally, usually once every 3 weeks in the dog and every 3-6
weeks in the cat. It acts as an alkylating agent and has been shown to have action
against lymphoma, mast cell tumours, some brain tumours and fibrosarcomas. It is
metabolized by oxidation in the liver and the metabolites are excreted via the urine.
The main toxicity associated with the use of lomustine is neutropaenia, which can be
severe and usually manifests at 7-14 days following treatment if it develops. A small
number of animals have been reported to develop severe, potentially  fatal
hepatotoxicity after having been given lomustine. The risk of this developing
increases with increasing numbers of treatments. It is therefore recommended that
serum markers of hepatocellular damage (ALT in particular) are regularly assessed in
patients  receiving lomustine and that treatment  should be stopped if the
hepatocellular markers rise (Fig. 3.16).
omustine
dae"
Figure 3.16
Lomustine acts as an alkylating agent
Case 3.5
A  4-year-old neutered male  Labrador developed multiple raised, erythematous
cutaneous masses in the region of his left shoulder. Fine needle aspiration revealed the
masses to be mast cell tumours and histopathology confirmed them to be grade Ill. The
tumour grading and treatment was given using vinblastine and prednisolone.
· Vinblastine is the salt of an alkaloid from the periwinkle plant that is only given by
intravenous injection, usually once every 14 days. Its mechanism of action is to
interfere with microtubular assembly in a similar manner to that of vincristine. It is
also known to interfere with glutamic acid utilization, thereby preventing purine
synthesis, the citric acid cycle and urea formation. Following administration it is
metabolized by the liver and is primarily excreted in the bile. Like vincristine,
vinblastine is generally well tolerated but some dogs do develop mild neutropaenia or
anorexia and vomiting (Fig. 3.17).
Vinblastine Sulphate
ONCO-TAIN
口
Vinblastine Sulphate
Img perml Injection
10mgin
10ml
For Intravenous Use Only
Figure 3.17
Vinblastine is the salt of an alkaloid from the periwinkle plant
The dog in question initially responded well to the treatment, with the tumours
becoming non-palpable within 20 days of starting his treatment. He developed no side
effects as a result of treatment except for polydipsia and polyphagia. Sadly, however,
he represented at vinblastine injection number 6 (i.e. 12 weeks into his treatment)
with acute-onset extensive pitting oedema and ecchymotic bruising affecting his head
and neck (Fig. 3.18). He was also dyspnoeic and vomiting. In the light of his rapid
deterioration, considered most likely to be due to massive histamine release as a result
of mast cell degranulation, the owners requested that he be euthanized.
Figure 3.18
Case 3.5 The appearance of the dog with the grade ll mast cell tumour at relapse,
with marked facial oedema, oral haemorrhage and cutaneous ecchymoses. The dog was also extremely
weak and had vomited
Case 3.6
       e n i 
worsening lethargy and polydipsia. On examination it was noticed that her mucous
membranes appeared very reddened. Her complete blood couint revealed an excessive
red cell number (PCV 78%). Thoracic radiographs were unremarkable, blood gas
was low-normal. The remainder of her diagnostic evaluation was unremarkable. The
dog was therefore diagnosed as having primary polycythaemia (also termed primary
erythrocytosis). After initial treatment by phlebotomy and replacement fluid therapy,
· Hydroxyurea blocks the conversion of ribonucleotides to deoxyribonucleotides,
  an o a sn n sis  i n  
day initially before reducing the dose frequency to every other day or every third day
depending on any toxicity seen and the clinical efficacy. Following administration it
is metabolized by the liver and the metabolites excreted via the kidneys into urine. It
is usually a  well-tolerated treatment, although some patients will develop
gastrointestinal  toxicity  and  myelosuppression.  With   chronic  administration
onchodystrophy can also be seen.
side effects. Her PCV remained on the high side of normal (PCV 48-53%) and she
remained well for 21 months before she relapsed, at which point the owner elected for
euthanasia.
Case 3.7
A 9-year-old neutered male Bichon Frise presented with signs of haematuria without
stranguria and was subsequently diagnosed with a transitional cell carcinoma (TCC)
located in the body of his urinary bladder. He was taken to surgery and the mass
removed before  commencing adjunctive chemotherapy  with mitoxantrone and
piroxicam.
· Mitoxantrone is an antitumour antibiotic (i.e. similar to doxorubicin) that acts by
            
different tumours such as lymphoma and squamous cell carcinoma (scC), as well as
urinary bladder TCC and although frequently effective, the duration of many
remissions mitoxantrone generates when used alone is short. It has also been used as
a radiation sensitizer in cases of feline oral SCC. It is administered by slow
intravenous infusion diluted with 0.9% saline in the same way as for doxorubicin,
unlike doxorubicin, it does not readily cause allergic reactions, cardiomyopathy,
arrhythmias, colitis or tissue damage at the site of extravasation.
         es
chemotherapeutic but it has been shown to have an antitumour effect in cases of
canine TCC. The exact mechanism of action is uinclear but it is thought to be through
the inhibition of CoX-2 (which has been shown to be expressed in a nuimber of
tumours including human bladder carcinomas and  canine bladder tumours).
and tumour angiogenesis and studies have shown that combining piroxicam with
mitoxantrone may increase the disease-free period in dogs with urinary bladder TCC.
Piroxicam is given by mouth once a day with food and the only concern with its uise
is the (low) potential for gastric uilceration. The other issue in Europe is that it is not
licensed for use in animals, but there are other licensed NsAIDs, so its use under the
cascade system is at the risk of the prescribing clinician (Fig. 3.19).
roP
FELDEHE
CAPSULES
20-
Figure 3.19
Piroxicam is  a non-steroidal  anti-inflammatory drug rather  than a cytotoxic
chemotherapeutic
The Bichon Frise in this case remained completely well for just over 12 months
before the haematuria returned. Abdominal imaging confirmed recurrence of the
mass but this time it was located in the bladder neck. Once cytology (sample obtainec
from a uirinary sediment examination) had confirmed the mass to be a relapse of the
tumour, the owner declined further treatment and the dog was euthanized
Case 3.8
   e      
progressively worsening lameness on her right foreleg. Radiographs revealed an
   a  o   d   
lesion to be an osteosarcoma, so after a full staging process in which no gross
metastases were identified, the right foreleg was amputated and the dog then received
every 3 weeks for six treatments.
reduce the side effects associated with cisplatin in human medicine. As a heavy metal
compound, it binds within and between DNA strands and inhibits protein synthesis
(i.e. primarily canine osteosarcoma, but it also can have some activity against
squamous cell carcinoma, pulmonary carcinoma, urinary bladder transitional cell
carcinomas, anal sac carcinomas, ovarian carcinomas and mesotheliomas; the author
has also anectodally used it in some soft-tissue sarcomas with success) but it has
comparably low levels of associated renal toxicity. It is given by intravenous infusion
and after absorption its metabolites are excreted in urine, although as carboplatin has
metabolites is significantly lower. However, some of the metabolites are still cytotoxic
so appropriate care needs to be taken with regard to staff and owner exposure to
urine but this risk is substantially lower than in patients who have been give
cisplatin. The main toxicity reported is myelosuppression (nadir 11-14 days)
although the author has seen a small number of dogs who develop marked
safe for use in cats (at 200 mg/m2 as opposed to a dose of 300 mg/m2 as used in dogs)
and it is generally a very well tolerated, efficacious chemotherapeutic agent if given
properly (Fig. 3.20).
· Cisplatin could have been used, either as a sole agent or instead of carboplatin in
this case, but it was not used (a) due to the fact it is highly emetogenic and (b)
P      s      
  se  d  sa di n nfe a h s
urine in an active form, making collection of urine mandatory for 24 hours during
the treatment period. The toxicities reported with cisplatin include it being highly
commencing, although the advent of maropitant as a veterinary licensed antiemetic
has reduced this problem) and it is also markedly nephrotoxic, necessitating
administration following diuresis that continues after administration.
Carboplatin
10mg/ml
IntravenousInfusion
ForInhro
Figure 3.20
     sa    e s n
reduce the side effects associated with cisplatin in human medicine
The dog in this case was also given meloxicam as an analgesic and she remained
well for 11 months before the owner presented her due to concern that she had become
lethargic and reluctant to exercise. Thoracic radiographs revealed the presence of
multiple metastatic lesions so the owners declined further treatment and she was
euthanized.
SAFE HANDLING OF CHEMOTHERAPY INPRACTICE
Please note: The notes in the next section are intended to provide guideline advice
only. They in no way are intended to act as a definitive instruction manual as to how
to handle cytotoxics in practice. For any clinicians wishing to handle any cytotoxic
drugs the author has to recommend they contact their Health and Safety Execuitive
representative to arrange appropriate special CoSHH training. The author and
publisher in no way accept any responsibility for injury or harm that results from any
colleague using or  administering cytotoxic drugs  without  having received the
appropriate training.
The use of cytotoxic drugs in veterinary medicine has to be seen as a serious health
cumuilative muitagenic, carcinogenic and teratogenic effects so it is absolutely vital to
S   s  s         s
and their metabolites. The HsE have strict guidelines as to the handling of these
agents for human medicine and these rules apply in veterinary practice too. Therefore,
any practices in the UK planning to use chemotherapy must draw up standard
CoSHH regulations, having undertaken a thorough risk assessment for each agent for
1 of the CoSHH Approved Code of Practice.
The first thing to consider is when are we most likely to be exposed to the cytotoxic
C       s    n  a 
be:
1. If a needle is withdrawn from a pressurised vial
2. Drug transfers between various types of equipment
3. When glass ampoules have to be broken open
4. When air has to be expelled from a syringe
6. The breaking or crushing of cytotoxics in tablet form
7. The excreta (including vomit) from patients receiving cytotoxic treatments.
Exposuire is therefore most often through inhalation of aerosolized particles or
direct absorption through skin contact as well as by indirect contact from unprotected
hand-to-face contact or accidental ingestion from eating/drinking or smoking via
hand-to-mouth contact. To ensure this does not occur the following advice should be
considered:
1. Full and appropriate training as laid down in the standard operating procedures
must be given to all staff involved in the storage, handling and administration of
cytotoxic drugs and also to the staff involved in the care of the patients after they
have received their treatments
area away from other medications in a similar manner to that used for controlled
drugs. They should be kept away from areas of food/drink preparation and stored in
well-labelled, shatter-proof boxes (e.g. lockable Tupperware). Each open bottle should
be separately stored in a zip-lock bag (if multiple use is possible and anticipated) and
then kept within the container. Certain drugs need to be dated and the strength
marked on the bottle, as once reconstituted, they are only good for a certain period of
time. It is vital to read the drug inserts and manufacturers instructions regarding
storage temperature and time and also to obtain the Material Safety Data Sheet
(MSDs) from the manufacturer (which is separate to the data sheet usually found in
the drug packaging) and details all of the chemical and physical properties of the
B  s   a   os  sd    n 
boxes should be labelled with chemotherapy and/or hazard labels (Fig. 3.21).
3. Drug preparation. It is best practice to write down all drug dosage calculations
along with your workings even if it is a regular repeat administration. It is also
highly  recommended to  always double-check your dosage, preferably  with a
colleague. Once the dose has been calculated you must put on appropriate protective
clothing. This includes disposable, powder-free gloves (as powder may absorb
chemotherapeutics) worn either singly or in a double-gloved fashion, ideally a
respirator mask (although much more convenient it is not considered optimal to wear
just a surgical mask), an impermeable gown with tight-fitting cuffs (a waterproof
surgical gown would be suitable) and safety goggles. The author also wears
waterproof over-sleeves (Fig. 3.22). All safety clothing is to be worn by both the
clinician and his/her assistant. Staff members who are trying to conceive or may be
pregnant, who are breastfeeding or, who are immunosuppressed, should refrain from
handling or being involved in the administration of chemotherapy at any time.
小44
Figure3.21
The storage of chemotherapeutics in carefully labelled containers in a labelled, safe
location
Figuure3.22
The author (RF) and an assistant administering doxorubicin to a Labrador retriever
patient, illustrating the chemoprotective clothing worn, the absorbant surface just below the syringe
in case of a spillage and the use of an alcohol-soaked swab around the needle
Extreme care has to be used when reconstituting chemotherapy drugs. In theory, all
injectable cytotoxic drugs should be prepared in a class I1 biological safety vertical
laminar flow cabinet (fume cupboard) (Fig. 3.23) and it has to be recommended that
veterinary surgeons follow this practice. As very few practices other than specialist
centres have a fume cupboard, it may often be more appropriate to refer the patient
on to your local oncology specialist, who does have the appropriate facilities to
administer the treatments safely. Another alternative possibility is to see if your local
as such arrangements can be difficult and not always convenient these notes are
intended to enable you to take every precaution to prepare, administer and manage
cytotoxic drugs safely.
Figure3.23
 The author (RF) drawing up chemotherapy in a laminar flow fume cupboard of the
type required to safely handle chemotherapeutics. Note that protective clothing is still worn to
ensure protection from drug spillage
As a minimum, all clinicians reconstituting chemotherapeutics should wear a full-
   s e  s d s   ga t
more ideally a respirator. If a mask is worn the mask should be fitted snugly onto the
              
It is imperative that mixing should be done in a well-ventilated area, away from
draughts caused by vents or fans and away from where others are working. Plastic.
backed, absorbent pads should be used to protect work surfaces from contamination.
Luer-lock syringes and chemo safety pins are also recommended to reduce the chance
of disconnection and aerosolization (Fig. 3.24). A chemo pin, or closed bottle system,
is a safety device that is pushed into the top of a vial and provides additional security
against excessive pressure within the vial, generating aerosolization and inhalation
of the druig.
Figulre3.24
Chemo safety-pins, used to reconstitute and withdraw cytotoxics from their vials with
reduced risk of aerosol formation
If a chemo pin is not available, use extreme care in maintaining slight negative to
neutral pressure within the vial; never pressurize the vial. Select the syringes used to
be as close to the volume required to ensure accuracy and to reduce exposure due to
overfilling and spillage. To maintain negative pressure within the drug vial, inject a
small amount of diluent if appropriate, followed by removal of a small amount of air.
Wrap an alcohol-dampened swab around the top of the vial and needle exit site (Fig.
3.25). If needed, mix gently by swirling or rolling the vial to ensure that all the
powder is in solution. Invert the vial and withdraw the drug slowly. Make sure not to
push the ^air' out of the syringe; it will still contain small particles of the cytotoxic
dru1g·
catheter, which has to be placed perfectly and taped in well, as described earlier. It is
actually better to use a slightly smaller catheter than usually considered, as this
ensures a good blood supply around the catheter and therefore optimal transportation
of the drug through the circulation. If there is any suspicion that the catheter has not
been placed perfectly (i.e. first time stick without difficulty) which may result in
fresh cannula. Once in place, flush the catheter well with at least 5 ml and ideally 10
           
           
properly. The drug must then be administered as instructed, after which the catheter
must be flushed well again before it is removed to ensure all traces of the drug are
              s
recommended). Take care when removing the catheter to avoid splashing either you
or youir nuurse.
20
30
50
Figure 3.25
 Use of an alcohol-soaked swab to help reduce the risk of aerosol leakage when drugs
are withdrawn from their vials
            
‘Endoxana' tablets, then the tablets must be kept within their blister packaging until
they are needed. The person administering the tablets and any other assistant must
wear dispoable gloves and the medication given in as stress-free and as rapid a
manner for the patient as is possible, ensuring that the tablet has been swallowed
whole.
It is important to administer all chemotherapy in a dedicated room or area which is
quiet and is not a thoroughfare. Warning signs should be placed on the door into the
room indicating that chemotherapy is being administered and that access is restricted
lintil the treatment has been completed (Fig. 3.26).
PLEASE
DO NOTENTER,
CHEMOTHERAPYBEING
ADMINISTERED
Figure 3.26
The warning sign placed on the outside of the chemotherapy room door whilst a
treatment is being administered at the author's hospital
Place all contaminated/potentially contaminated materials (including your gloves)
in a labelled cytotoxic waste bag (Fig. 3.27).
HANDLE
HANDLE
WITH
CARE
WITH
CARL
Figure 3.27
Place contaminated/potentially contaminated materials in a labelled cytotoxic waste
bag
This bag must then itself be wrapped in a second, labelled cytotoxic bag, sealed and
stored in an appropriate, impenetrable cytotoxic waste container (Fig. 3.28).
HANDLE
WiTH
CARE
DL
/CneTOIC
Figure 3.28
 The first waste bag must be wrapped in a second, labelled cytotoxic bag, sealed and
stored in an appropriate, inpenetratable cytotoxic waste container
The waste must then be incinerated at appropriately licenced premises. Any
bedding from the patient must be handled whilst wearing gloves and should be
washed separately.
5. What to do if there is a spillage?
   s ,        
their local rules, to be used following the accidental spillage of a cytotoxic drug. The
protocol should have the following advice:
· Immediately restrict access to the area of the spill to the individual staff
member(s) assigned to manage the problem.
· The staff member cleaning the problem should put on full protective clothing as
for chemotherapy administration but with the addition of waterproof boots.
· Absorb any liquids using plastic-backed absorbable pads, such as incontinence
pads.
· Make every effort not to pierce your gloves, place any broken glass into a
puncture proof container (such as a dedicated sharps box).
incontinence pad.
· Place all contaminated material in a properly labelled waterproof bag in the same
way as you would at the end of a routine chemotherapy treatment and ensure its
correct disposal.
· Carefully rinse all contaminated surfaces with copious quantities of water
(remember to be aware of the risk of aerosolization!) then wash them with
detergent and repeat this three times.
· Once finished, dispose of all protective clothing in the same way as the
contaminated material was disposed of and then wash your hands thoroughly.
6. All practices should also have a ‘spill kit' to be used in the event of an accidental
drug spillage and this should contain (Fig. 3.29):
· Four pairs of latex gloves or two pairs of the thicker nitrile gloves
· A waterproof disposable surgical gown
· Eye protection glasses
· Respirator, or at least a face mask
· Waterproof-backed absorbant pads and disposable paper towelling
· A disposable scoop to help manage broken glass
· A puncture-proof container in which to place glass shards
· Chemo disposal bags and their labels.
7. Owner health and safety. It is imperative to remember that we have a duty of care
to prevent accidental exposure of the owners to the chemotherapy following their dog
or cat's treatment. We therefore need to colinsel owners carefully of the potential risks
          
there are children in the family or if a family member is, or could be, pregnant. The
or vomitus. It is therefore good practice to send all chemotherapy patients home with
special discharge instructions, an example of which is shown in Figure 3.30.
KENDALL
CHEMOSAFETY
Emergency Response Pack
Chemotherapy Drug
SPILL KIT
Figure 3.29
A commercially available spill kit, as used in the authors' hospitals
DISCHARGEINSTRUCTIONSFORPATIENT
?77
Date....
......
222
..was re-examined today with a view to performing her...
chemotherapy treatment
-Cinical examination revealed her to be ....
777
The complete blood count revealed anormal haemogram
- therefore administered.
222
-..mgof.
... via her right cephalic vein
without incident
X
should vomit at any time over the next 5 days,then you have lo
assume that the vomitus is cytotoxic(i.e.dangerous). Clear the area of amyone else and
put on some waterproof gloves.DO NOT TOUCH THEVOMIT WITH YOUR BARE SKIN.
Cover the vomit with as much kitchen towel as you can to absorb it.Then cover the kitchen
towel with a plastic bag and carefully turn the bag inside out so that it contains the
vomit/kitchenpapermass.Place thisbaginside anotherplasticbag forsafetyThenclean
the floor very slowly and carefully trying not to be too vigorous and produce an aerosol of
distance away from the floor. Once clean,allow to dry naturally and donot allow anyone to
touch the floor untilit is dry
-Please avoid contact with any bodily fluids （urine,faeces and saliva) from...
X
for the next 72hours,as some of the treatment can be excreted via these routes
-I suggest that you also wear a glove to handle any bags you use to pick up..
.....S
faeces for thenext5 days
X
-If someone in your family or a friend who will have contact with ...
...is,or
might be, pregnant, then please take every care to avoid contact with bodily fluids as
outlined above.Young children need to be protected in a similar manner
Pleaecan we eher again in...weekstime to give....
..her
next treatment
-Please feel free to call me if you have any questions or concerns whatsoever
Signed ....
Figure 3.30
 Discharge instructions for patient X
All of the health and safety aspects of chemotherapy administration may seem
daunting, but with practice and careful consideration, it is possible to give safe and
efficacious treatment in most practice settings. It is definitely advisable to adopt a
"better safe than sorry' approach, but as long as this is undertaken, the safety of the
patient, the veterinary staff and the owner will not be compromised. If it is not
deemed safe to administer the treatments within the practice then referral to an
oncology specialist is highly recommended.
4
Principles of cancer radiotherapy
Radiotherapy is an extremely effective treatment modality in the management of
             
lonizing radiation kills cells via the deposition of energy in, or near to, the cellular
DNA, either causing DNA damage directly or via the production of free radicals within
the cell. As with chemotherapy, however, ionizing radiation cannot differentiate
between normal cells and neoplastic cells, so any proliferating cells will be damaged.
Tumour cells are ‘selectively’ targeted by their increased growth fraction, whereas
              
important to realize that radiotherapy can cause both ‘early’ and “late' side effects in
non-cancerous tissues. Cells that divide rapidly and frequently as part of normal
physiology, such as epithelial stem cells, are likely to show the side effects of
chemotherapy, the total dose that can be given to a patient depends uipon the side
effects, but with radiotherapy it is very important to always be aware of the possible
late side effects that could occur. Early side effects can be minimized by dividing the
total dose into a number of ^fractions', administered over a period of time.
In 1975, Withers described the ‘Four Rs’ of radiotherapy (Repair, Redistribution,
Reoxygenation and Repopulation) to explain the fact that giving small doses more
frequently seemed to be more effective than giving fewer large doses. In human
medicine, most patients will receive at least 20 fractions, often given at daily intervals
  s         s    
effects (e.g. deep blistering and cutaneous burning). This approach is now being used
in canine patients in the USA, where many centres now use a Monday-Friday
depending upon the tumour type and location. In the UK, however, it has been more
 o          
hypofractionated’ regimens, where most patients receive just four or five treatments
at weekly intervals, although hyperfractionation is becoming more commonplace. The
· It is often more convenient for owners to come once a week
· It means the patients only have to receive 4 or 5 anaesthetics, rather than 18-21.
 It keeps the cost reasonable.
· The incidence of acute side effects is generally substantially lower than that seen
with hyperfractionated regimens.
               
is very low indeed, it could be argued that this is a more accepta ble form of treatment
for veterinary patients compared to hyperfractionated regimens, even though it does
go against some of the theories in the four Rs. However, in general, the survival times
reported by the US veterinary schools is superior to that reported in the UK, so there
are two sides to the argument! The newer radiation centres in the UK are moving
towards administering more hyperfractionated regimens, so it is likely that more
frequent radiation treatments will become the normality in the UK in the near future.
(brachytherapy) or by systemic or intracavitary injection of radio-isotopes such as
 a       n n  n 
of the photons involved into orthovoltage or megavoltage therapy, where an
orthovoltage machine produces X-rays with an energy of 150-500 keV, whilst a
megavoltage machine produces photons with an average energy of over 1 million
electron volts (1 MeV). The advantage of megavoltage therapy is that the beam has a
has little penetration power but can therefore be useful in the treatment of some
cutaneous tumours such as mast cell tumours.
· Oral tumours, such as oral squamous cell carcinomas (SCC), oral malignant
melanomas (MM) and fibrosarcomas (FSA). For these tumours, radiation therapy is
best used as an adjunct to surgery, although the use of radiation in malignant
melanomas sadly does not reduce the incidence of metastases in this very aggressive
tumour, even though the primary tumours themselves seem to be quite radiation
responsive. Oral SCCs in cats can, theoretically, be treated with radiotherapy, but the
location is very important because many of these tumours are sublingual and the risk
of radiation toxicity here is high.
· Nasal tumours - radiotherapy is the treatment of choice for these tumours,
    s sn      
interestingly, the addition of surgery to radiotherapy treatment for nasal tumours
probably does not enhance life expectancy. Some studies have shown that the use of
substances (e.g. cisplatin, doxorubicin) to sensitize the tumour to the radiotherapy is
also of benefit in nasal tumours in veterinary patients.
S e  e  s       s
m    o          
neurosurgery is not possible, depending on the tumour type. In particular, the author
cats and also in treating pituitary macroadenomas in Cushingoid dogs. However,
problem with the use of radiotherapy in brain conditions is the need to obtain good-
quality MRI or CT images with which the therapy can be planned beforehand, but
with the rapidly increasing availability of such facilities, this is becoming less of an
obstacle than it once was.
· Limb tumours - mast cell tumours and soft-tissue sarcomas can be treated with
radiotherapy, almost always following an attempt at surgical resection. External
beam radiotherapy can also be iseful to shrink mast cell tumours before surgery if the
              
associated sarcomas in cats, although there is considera ble risk of spinal cord necrosis
as a late side effect, so the usefulness of radiation in these cases is limited.
· Lymphoma - lymphocytes are exquisitely sensitive to radiation, so there are studies
        s  s  
However, this is rarely (if ever) used in the UK, other than for nasal lymphoma in
cats.
· Osteosarcoma - radiotherapy has been used as a palliative treatment to provide
analgesia in canine osteosarcoma.
Unfortunately, there are still only four radiotherapy centres for animals in the UK at
the time of writing. However, it is likely that there will be others developing in the
in appropriate cases, either as a first-line treatment for cases such as nasal tumours, or
as an adjunctive treatment following surgical excision of the tumour.
5
The cancer patient with sneezing and/or nasal
discharge
Nasal neoplasia accounts for 1% of tumours in dogs, is considered less common in
cats and has also been reported in rabbits. Therefore, although not particularly
common in general practice, such cases can generate a diagnostic challenge for
 sn          ss
prevalence of tumour type varies between dogs and cats (dogs: epithelial >
mesenchymal > lymphoid; cats: lymphoid > epithelial > mesenchymal; see Box 5.1)
in the majority of cases the clinical signs will be gradually progressive, meaning that
patients presenting with recurring or worsening clinical signs warrant further or
repeated evaluation. The increasing availability of advanced imaging modalities such
as MRI and CT scanning have improved our ability to make accurate and early
diagnoses, so the referral of patients to suitably equipped specialist centres with
clinical signs that may be attributable to nasal tumours should be considered if
possible.
Box 5.1 Common malignant and benign tumours of the nasal cavity
omon malign ant tumours of the nasal cavity
Ben ign tumours of the nasal cavity
Carcin oma
Fibromas
Ad enocarcin oma
Polyps
Squ amous cell c arcinoma
Low-grade mesench ymal tumours (sarc oma)
Sarcomas
Fibrosarcoma
Ch ondrosarc oma
Osteosarc oma
Lymph oma
 Melan oma
CLINICAL CASE EXAMPLE 5.1 - CANINE NASAL ADENOCARCINOMA
Signalment
9-year-old neutered male Irish setter.
Presenting signs
Right-sided  uniliateral  serosanguineous  nasal  discharge  which  progressed
to
intermittent epistaxis, and sneezing (Fig. 5.1).
Figure 5.1
Case 5.1 The dog at presentation, revealing the unilateral epistaxis
(courtesy of Nick Bac on, University of Florid a)
Case history
The relevant history in this particular case was:
· owner first noticed the dog having a runny right nostril compared to the left nostril
2 months previously
· dog then started to sneeze approximately 2 weeks later and the owner also noticed
he had started to snore when he was asleep
· the nasal discharge progressed to become thicker and then it became bloody, hence
bringing the dog for examination
Clinical examination
The examination revealed:
· Obvious haemorrhagic nasal discharge from the right nostril
· No apparent airflow down the right nostril
· No evidence of depigmentation on the nasal planum
· No enlargement of the submandibular lymph nodes
· No intraoral lesions
· Remainder of examination unremarkable
Differential diagnosis
bilateral)
 Nasal aspergillosis (can cause unilateral or bilateral discharge)
· Non-fungal rhinitis; bacterial, allergic or idiopathic (usually causes bilateral
discharge)
(s s )    
· Systemic coagulopathy (if discharge significantly/purely haemorrhagic).
Diagnostic evaluation
The dog was anaesthetized and an intraoral radiograph was suggestive of the presence
of a soft-tissue mass (Fig. 5.2). The dog was then given an MRI scan, which clearly
showed the presence of an intranasal tumour as shown in Figure 5.3.
Right
Left
Figlure5.2
Case 5.1 Intraoral radiograph, showing the loss of turbinate detail and increased
radiodensity in the right nasal chamber but no evidence of change in the left nasal chamber
Brain
Tumour
Figure 5.3
 Case 5.1 Sagittal plane T2-weighted MRI scan, revealing a large mass structure filling
the right nasal chamber and extending caudally into the rostral portion of the nasopharynx. The scan
also reveals the presence of fluid filling the frontal sinus (red arrow) due to obstruction of the
frontomaxillary opening by the tumour
A complete blood count and whole blood clotting time had been assessed and found
to be normal before the diagnostic imaging procedure, so whilst remaining under
histopathology as shown in Figure 5.4. The histopathology returned to show the mass
was an adenocarcinoma.
Figure 5.4
Case 5.1 The rigid forceps used and one of the biopsy samples obtained. The piece of
tape was the measurement of length from the medial canthus to the nostril and placement of the tape
was to ensure that the forceps were not advanced too far into the nasal cavity, thereby preventing
damage to, or penetration through, the cribiform plate
The dog underwent external beam radiotherapy using a hypofractionated course
(i.e. one treatment a week for four consecutive weeks) as described. His clinical signs
totally resolved by the third treatment and he remained clinically well for 12 months
     s       
months after the signs returned.
Theory refresher
dogs but can occur in any breed. Nasal tumours in young dogs would be considered
linusuial. Medium-to large-breed dogs are more commonly affected and there is some
    s     sd  s  
environment. The initial clinical signs usually involve intermittent unilateral nasal
  s    d   s  ( ) 
  o       
S               
would be less common as a primary presenting problem. In cases where the tumour is
located in either the frontal sinus(es) or the caudal aspect of the nasal cavity, the
presenting complaint may initially be considered as a neurological condition
(presenting with dullness, depression, head pressing or possibly seizures) but again
that the dog has developed loud snoring or a gurgling sound when asleep and sneezing
is also commonly reported. Otherwise many patients will appear normal to their
owners in the early stages of the disease.
Figure5.5
S            
tumour.
Courtesy of Dr Richard Mellanby, University of Edinburgh
CLINICAL TIP
Any patient, but particularly older dogs, presenting with unilateral nasal discharge, epistaxis or the
development of snoring noises should be considered for nasal tumour work-up.
Examination
General clinical examination in a nasal tumour patient is often unremarkable but
particular attention should be paid to careful visual examination of the nares and
palpation along the entire nasal planum, periorbital region and over the location of
the frontal sinuses. Nasal airflow should always be assessed in both nostrils (either by
placing a chilled microscope slide near the nostrils, or simply assessing whether there
is movement of strands of cotton wool) as there is frequently markedly reduced or
absent airflow on the affected side. The presence of unilateral nasal discharge or
epistaxis is highly suspicious for a nasal tumour in a middle-aged to older medium-to
large-breed dog. Other aspects of the clinical examination to evaluate include careful
palpation of the submandibular lymph node chain (local metastases are reported to
occur in only 1o% of patients at initial diagnosis but these cases need to be identified
due to the implications for further evaluation and for the treatment) and a visual oral
examination.
Diagnostic imaging
Nasal radiographs can be useful to reveal evidence of turbinate destruction and the
              
size and extent of the lesion, factors that can prove to be very important when
planning treatment (Fig. 5.6). If advanced imaging techniques are not available then
views to view the nasal cavity and also a skyline sinus view to image the frontal
Sinlis.
Figure5.6
The same spaniel as in Figure 5.5, showing the transverse MRI scan of the dog's nose,
confirming the presence of a unilateral left-sided tumour (as shown by the red arrow)
CLINICAL TIP
When obtaining nasal radiographs, it is essential to obtain an intraoral view without the
superimposition of the mandible in the image.
Biopsy
Direct visualization of a mass may also be possible using either a flexible or rigid
endoscope. Identification of a mass via any imaging modality, however, does not
definitive diagnosis. Cytological analysis of nasal wash fluid frequently fails to
produce adequate samples and therefore this technique should not be relied on as the
sole means of diagnosis and is a practice the authors now rarely use, although it can
occasionally prove to be useful. Biopsies can be obtained using flexible endoscopic
  s   ss s     s 
Volkman spoon. When obtaining biopsies it is essential to ensure the tip of the biopsy
instrument is not advanced beyond the medial canthus so as to avoid penetrating
through the cribiform plate into the cranial cavity. Obtaining these tissue samples will
result in haemorrhage that may seem significant, but this usually stops within a few
minutes. It is recommended to assess the platelet count and a whole blood clotting
time as a minimum data base before undertaking a nasal biopsy procedure.
NURSING TIP
In case there is haemorrhage when a nasal turbinate biopsy is undertaken, it is advisable to pack
the throat with a swab bandage prior to obtaining the biopsies to reduce the possibility of airway
compromise and aspiration, but remember to remove this before the animal is recovered!
Whilst attempting to obtain a diagnosis, it is important to undertake clinical
staging of the patient to determine the extent of the disease should a tumour be
diagnosed. The submandibuilar lymph nodes need to be carefully palpated and
to distinguish between a reactive lymphadenopathy and metastatic disease. Canine
nasal carcinomas are found to have metastasized to the region lymph nodes in up to
10% of cases. Thoracic radiographs should be considered but they rarely show
metastatic disease at initial presentation.
T'reatment
Once a definitive diagnosis has been reached, treatment can be planned. Currently the
remission times of 8-25 months being reported in the USA following
hyperfractionated radiotherapy. In the UK hypofractionated radiotherapy (4 x 8-9
       (      
(although hyperfractionated protocols are available) and this also provides good
palliative treatment with mean survival times of between 9 and 15 months. One study
reported 1-year survival rates of 45% and 2-year survival rates of 15%. Clinical
findings that are indicative of a poorer prognosis are the presence of facial swelling,
exophthalmos, the identification of bilateral nasal chamber involvement or invasion
of the tumour into the oral cavity (unusual). Patients with these more severe clinical
signs should still be considered eligible to receive treatment if possible but their
to be for a shorter period of time than patients with a unilateral tumour that is not
with cuirative intent is usually not possible and offers no advantages and several
considerable disadvantages compared to radiotherapy. In countries where there are no
radiotherapy facilities, then the use of chemotherapy with debaulking surgery has
been reported with reasonable results. However, the most consistent resuilts are
obtained using external beam radiotherapy so referral for this treatment should be
recommended whenever possible.
Figulre5.7
 An 8-year-old DsH cat with marked nasal swelling and deformation. An MRI scan
confirmed there to be a sinonasal tumour present  which was confirmed as a carcinoma on
histopathology
Coarse fractionation radiotherapy as used in the UK rarely causes any significant
shown in Figure 5.8. A minority of patients will experience oral side effects such as
NSAIDs. The clinical signs are also usually very well controlled and many dogs will
return to a normal quality of life whilst in remission even though the treatment is
rarely curative.
Figure5.8
'Significant' radiation-induced alopecia in a patient with a nasal carcinoma which
underwent otherwise successful hypofractionated treatment
Rabbit nasal tuimouirs
Sneezing and nasal discharges can be seen in rabbits with nasal turbinate carcinoma.
The differential diagnoses for these clinical signs include chronic upper respiratory
disease and dental disease, so a nasal tumour should be considered in patients in
whom these conditions can be ruled out. Establishing a definitive diagnosis is usually
by endoscopy and biopsy of the affected nasal tissue. The current treatment
recommendation, however, is mainly supportive therapy only, and includes providing
analgesia, antibiosis and nebulization. Laser ablation of nasal tissue has been reported
as a palliative measure and could be considered where this is available. Other
differential diagnoses include osteomyelitis due to dental disease or mandibular
osteosarcoma; these can be differentiated by radiography or computed tomography of
the head. Hemimandibulectomies have also been reported in the literature if the
diagnosis is made of a mandibular tumour.
Conclusions
  ps    nd   d a  s
shown in Figure 5.9. The basic approach is to actively pursue a diagnosis of nasal
tumour whilst ruling out the other major differential diagnoses, as listed in Box 5.1.
Patient with consistent
clinical signs
Thorough clinical
examination,including
nasalairflowassessment
and mean bloodpressure
CBCand coagulation
screen if epistaxis
present and/or biopsy
Radiographs (intra-oral
and skyline sinus), or
CT/MRI imaging if possible
No mass lesion identified
Mass lesion identified
Assess serum
Bacteriology swab
Obtain turbinate
Biopsy lesion
Inflammatory orfungal
aspergillosis
and considerfungal
biopsy for
found
disease confirmed:
titre in dogs
cytology assessment
histopathology
treat as appropriate
in cats
Tumour confirmed
Inflammatory orfungal
Refer forradiotherapy
Refer forde-baulking surgery
disease confirmed:
ifpossible as
and chemotherapyif
treat as appropriate
first-choice treatment
radiotherapynotavailable
Figure 5.9
 Diagnostic plan flowchart for patients with sneezing or nasal discharge
CLINICAL CASE EXAMPLE 5.2 -FELINE INTRANASAL LYMPHOMA
Signalment
8-year-old neutered female domestic short-haired (DsH) cat.
Presenting signs
Sneezing and nasal discharge.
Case history
The relevant history in this particular case was:
· The cat was generally well but had started to sneeze 4 weeks prior to presentation.
· The owner described the cat as having a thick, mucoid nasal discharge which was
predominately left sided.
· Since the discharge had developed, her appetite had reduced and she had become
picky and less keen to eat.
Clinical examination
The examination revealed:
 n o d  d o   p s -
· Thick mucoid nasal discharge from the left nostril
· No apparent airflow down the left nostril
· No evidence of depigmentation on the nasal planum
· No intraoral lesions
· The remainder of the examination was uinremarkable.
Differential diagnosis
· Nasal tumour
· Fungal rhinitis
· Nasopharyngeal foreign body.
Diagnostic evaluation
A sample of the nasal mucus was assessed cytologically to look for fungal hyphae but
this was negative, so the cat was anaesthetized for a more detailed examination and
diagnostic imaging. Retroflexed rhinoscopy revealed no evidence of a foreign body
within the nasopharynx. Direct rhinoscopy was difficult due to the quantity of mucus
present which proved to be tenacious despite extensive lavage. However, it was
cost constraints, no MRI was undertaken, but intraoral radiographs were obtained,
which revealed a generalized increase in opacity in the left nasal chamber. Turbinate
the diagnosis to be nasal lymphoma.
Theory refresher
Lymphoma is the most common form of nasal tumour reported in cats. In most cases
the tumour will exist as a solitary lesion buit multiorgan involvement has beer
reported in up to 20% of cases, including involvement of the brain. It is usually seen
in middle-aged to older cats (and these are usually FeLV negative) and causes similar
S            
unilateral in the early stages of the disease), sneezing, facial deformity and epistaxis.
obstruction preventing the cat from smelling and tasting food normally. Aside from
lymphoma, adenocarcinomas and sarcomas of various cell types have been reported.
Diagnostic approach
    a           
the diagnostic approach is very similar to that taken in the dog. The main differential
fact that multiorgan involvement has been reported to occur, albeit in a minority of
cases. Once this has been completed, investigation of the nasal passages themselves
should be undertaken, using intraoral radiographs, CT or MRI imaging, possibly in
             
limited width of the external nares, but a fine rigid arthroscope can often provide
s s           n
The authors do not find cytological analysis on nasal flush samples particularly useful
            
lymphoma cells are probably more likely  to exfoliate than an epithelial or
taken from biopsy samples has recently been shown to have a high degree of
correlation with the histological diagnosis, so this technique should be considered to
enable the clinician to establish whether or not a lesion appears inflammatory or
also worth considering, as some cases of fungal rhinitis may be diagnosed this way.
Should the imaging be suggestive of a mass lesion, however, then attempting to
obtain tissue for histological analysis is essential and for this the authors wouild
  (q e  r  a) s ss   s
small Volkmann spoon to gather the tissue. Several samples should be acquired having
previously undertaken a coagulation assessment (OsPT and APTT measurement) and
a complete blood count to help minimize the risk of haemorrhage.
Treatment
Should a diagnosis of nasal lymphoma be confirmed and the disease is only located
           
radiotherapy as opposed to systemic chemotherapy. However, if there is any evidence
of distant or multiorgan disease, then undertaking systemic chemotherapy has to be
radiotherapy is usually the appropriate first-line treatment in cats, as it is in dogs.
Using a coarse fractionation protocol as often used in the UK, one study has shown a
median survival time of 382 days for cats with non-lymphoid nasal tumours and a 1-
year suirvival rate of 63%. Cats also appear to tolerate this treatment well, so it should
CLINICAL CASE EXAMPLE 5.3 -A FELINE NASAL PLANUM CARCINOMA
Signalment
12-year-old neutered male DSH cat.
Presenting signs
An erosive, ulcerated lesion on the nasal planum.
Case nistory
The relevant history in this case was:
vaccination and neutering, had had no cause to go to the vet.
· Over the preceding year, the owner had noticed small, black-red-coloured scabs to be
present on the pink areas of his nose, which had gradually grown and coalesced to
the point where there was one large scab and an underlying ulcer.
· The owner did not think that there was any nasal discharge or sneezing.
Clinical examination
The clinical examination revealed:
· The cat to be in generally good condition
· Obvious darkly pigmented scab with evidence of underlying ulceration of the nasal
planum (Fig. 5.10)
· No evidence of enlargement of the submandibular lymph nodes
· No intraorallesions
· The remainder of the examination was unremarkable.
Figure 5.10
Case 5.3 The cat awaiting biopsy of the lesion
Differential diagnoses
· Nasal planum neoplasia
· Squamous cell carcinoma
· Eosinophilic granuloma
· Immune-mediated disease
· Trauma.
Diagnostic evaluation
In view of the lengthy time course over which the owner reported lesions to have been
present and the resulting likelihood of the diagnosis being a squamous cell carcinoma
(SCC), it was decided to take a deep wedge biopsy of the affected area without
undertaking any further diagnostic imaging. Due to the cat's age, a serum
biochemistry profile was undertaken to rule out pre-existing renal disease but once
this returned to be normal, the cat underwent the biopsy procedure under a brief
general anaesthetic. Histopathological evaluation from a deep punch biopsy of the
tissue confirmed the diagnosis to be an SCC with deep infiltration into the underlying
dermis. The cat was therefore treated by surgical ‘nosectomy' and was alive with no
signs of recuirrence 12 months later.
'Noesectomies' involve making a 360° skin incision around the skin just caudal to
            n
nasal planum itself and remove it. Haemostasis should be achieved using digital
pressure and swabs as required and overzealous uise of electrocautery is to be avoided.
Once the planum has been removed, the skin should be sutured to the exposed nasal
usually aids haemostasis considerably. Postoperatively the patients must wear a
Buster collar to prevent rubbing of the surgical site and early suture removal. Good
analgesia is essential and all patients should receive combined opioid and NSAID
analgesia both before, during and after surgery. The maxillary branch of the
trigeminal nerve can be blocked using either 2% lignocaine or 0.5% bupivicaine, by
instilling 0.1-0.3 ml at the intraorbital foramen as the infraorbital nerve exits the
can be established through the normal facial anatomy and the injection made
transcutaneously, as shown in Figure 5.11, or transorally
Figuure5.12
  a s    n   g
once the nasal planum has been removed. Note the use of a simple continuous suture pattern to
 oppose the skin with the nasal mucosa
Figuure5.13
Case 5.3 The appearance of the cat at the end of surgery
Figure 5.14
Case 5.3 The excised nasal planum with the tumour clearly visible
Figure 5.11
Injection site for the infraorbital foramen
NURSING TIP
Patients who have undergone nosectomy may require some encouragement to eat, so it is certainly
worth warming their food and offering the animal's favourite' food.
NURSING TIP
Although the nosectomy wound site should be left to heal if possible, some patients do experience
significant blockage of the nasal passages by blood clots and inflammatory exudate. Gentle cleaning
of the nasal orifice therefore may be required and patients should be monitored closely for this.
Theory refresher
Tumours of the nasal planum are relatively common in the cat, but are considered
unusual in the dog. In the cat, the tumours are usually found on poorly pigmented
areas of skin (and therefore can also be found on the pinnae [usually tips first] or
nictitating membrane)  in middle-aged to older  white or tortoise-shell-coloured
animals. This is thought to be due to increased exposuire to ultraviolet light in these
cases acting as a transforming trigger factor in animals with a predisposition to the
condition created by their pigmentation. Indeed, some owners will think that their cat
simply has sunburn on its nose. In dogs, SCC can develop both on the external surface
of the nostril or within the nose on the nasal mucosa (Figs 5.15-5.18).
Figures 5.15, 5.16
 A Siberian husky with a slow-growing, ulcerative and proliferative lesion on
  ss p    si a  d s d  s 
(SCC)
Figures 5.17, 5.18
 The same dog as in Figures 5.15 and 5.16 6 months following 'nosectomy'
surgery, which also involved a rostral maxillectomy due to the extensive nature of the mass. Clinically
 the dog was very well and was not exhibiting any difficulties following the surgery
Typically, these tumours are quite slow-growing and start with just a small scab
lesion(s) but they will progress over a course of usually at least several months to
become ulcerative lesions that may haemorrhage intermittently. They can also appear
proliferative. In dogs a significant number will originate intranasally. Frequently
most cats do not appear to be particularly distressed by the presence of the lesion but
 si   sa a   ad     s 
tumours are locally invasive and can become quite large, but they rarely metastasize
and if they do spread, it is usually late in the disease course, meaning that local
therefore becomes very important to try to effect a curative treatment in these
 patients.
Diagnosis
In this situation, obtaining a diagnosis by a deep wedge biopsy is the best option as it
provides not only a clear histological diagnosis but also indicates the depth that the
tuimour extends into the tissue. This is very important when deciding which treatment
modality will be most appropriate for the patient. Usually, only routine preoperative
assessments need to be carried out, as diagnostic imaging rarely provides more useful
information in the cat, but in dogs the lesions can often extend significantly caudally,
so CT or MRI scanning can be very helpfuil in this species to indicate how deep the
lesion is and therefore help plan definitive surgery. What should definitely be
considered is the sensitivity of the skin in this area and much attention should be
placed in analgesia both pre-and post-biopsy. In particular, local nerve blocks can be
5.19).
Figure 5.19
Placement of a local nerve block using bupivicaine before a biopsy procedure in a cat
with a nasal planum SCC
Treatment
The answer as to how best to treat these cases depends predominantly on the depth the
tumour extends into the underlying tissue, but also whether you are a surgeon or not!
In a case series detailing 6l feline cases (including cats with tumours on both the
nasal planum and the pinnae), surgery was found to confer the longest disease-free
period but treatment has also been described using external beam radiation therapy,
P o n  s  s    s  
and especially deep lesions because of its success in achieving clean margins and
therefore increasing the chance of a good outcome. Superficial tumours may be
treated suiccessfully with one of the other modalities listed above. A similar ouitcome
        s   s  s   s
that surgical resection of the diseased tissue provided the best outcome. Even if the
disease is found to be extensive, a more recent study has shown that dogs tolerate
            
rates and long disease-free periods. Surgery should always therefore be considered as
the treatment of choice.
Photodynamic therapy (PDT) is a technique which utilizes the properties of
photosensitive chemicals. These, when exposed to the appropriate wavelength of light,
radicals) that cause apoptosis if the photosensitizer is present within a cell. Various
photosensitizers have been found to be preferentially taken up by neoplastic tissue
can be utilized as anticancer agents when exposed to the applicable wavelength of
scar-free manner and PDT frequently produces a much more cosmetically accepta ble
result in the mind of some owners. Topical 5-aminolevuilinic acid (5-ALA) cream has
taken up and metabolized by malignant epithelial cells into a potent photosensitizer
(protoporphyrin IX), meaning that the treatment can be targeted against carcinoma
cells whilst being relatively sparing to the surrounding normal cutaneous epithelium.
    s    s     s
rate (96% response rate with a complete response seen in 85% of cases) but 57% of the
tumours recurred with a median time to recurrence of 157 days. However, repeat
                
disease-free at a median follow-up period of 1143 days. PDT therefore appears to be
safe, well tolerated, and effective in the treatment of superficial nasal planum SCCs of
cats (Fig. 5.20). It offers an alternative to surgical treatment, but it does not lead to a
durable remission or cure in all cases. Surgical management should therefore always
S   e o     s  s
remaining tumour-free at 1-year post diagnosis.
Figuure5.20
A cat receiving PDT using a 635-nm-wavelength laser diode light source following
topical 5-ALA cream application to a nasal planum SCC
Despite the apparent success of some non-surgical modalities, however, surgery
remains the mainstay for treatment of nasal planum tumours for both cats and dogs.
Owners therefore need to be carefully counselled as the surgery will significantly
affect the appearance of the animal. The complications associated with this surgery
are minor and infrequent (stenosis of the new nasal opening is the main concern), so
although many owners will seem initially reluctant to allow their cat or dog to
 p      a s  d s o
reported and illustrate how relatively unaffected the animals will appear especially
once their hair has re-grown.
In cases with superficial SCC lesions and for whom neither surgery nor an
alternative advanced treatment is an option, the topical immune response modifier
and stimulant imiquimod marketed as Aldara cream, has been reported to be effective
6
The cancer patient with halitosis and/or
hypersalivation
Hypersalivation and/or halitosis in a cancer patient are usually signs of an
intraoral neoplasm and as such, these clinical signs are frequently accompanied by a
may also be indicative of encephalopathy, especially in the cat, which can be caused
by hepatic neoplasia, or possibly by an intracranial mass. Oral cancers are considered
to be quite common in veterinary medicine, being reported to be the fourth most
tumours and 3% of all feline tumours. In dogs, the most common tumour type seen is
whereas in cats, squamous cell carcinomas are the most common, followed by
fibrosarcoma. However, many other tumour types have been reported in the literature
in every case.
CLINICAL CASE EXAMPLE 6.1 - ORAL SQUAMOUS CELL CARCINOMA IN A DOG
Signalment
7-year-old neutered male Welsh springer spaniel.
Presenting signs
A swelling identified on the lateral aspect of the rostral portion of the nasal bone and
oral haemorrhage.
Case history
The relevant history in this case was:
· Owner started to notice blood in the dog's water bowl after he had been drinking 5
weeks previously
· 1 week before presenting he had started to eat more slowly and seemed to tilt his
head to the left when prehending food
· Otherwise quite bright and alert.
Clinical examination
Physical examination revealed:
· The presence of a swelling on the lateral aspect of the right nasal bone, just rostral to
the upper canine tooth
· Oral examination revealed the presence of a gingival mass (Figs 6.1, 6.2).
Figure 6.1
Case 6.1 The dorsal appearance of the nasal bone, showing the swelling on the right
lateral aspect (red arrow)
Figure 6.2
Case 6.1 The intraoral appearance of the tumour
Differential diagnosis
· Malignant melanoma
· Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC)
· Fibrosarcoma (FSA)
· Lymphoma
· Basal cell carcinoma
· Epulis.
The submandibular lymph node was enlarged but cytological evaluation of fine
needle aspirates revealed this to be due to a reactive lymphadenopathy with no
evidence of metastatic disease. In the light of the degree of bony swelling, there was
concern that there may be significant tumour invasion into the underlying bone, so
an MRI scan was performed (Fig. 6.3). This revealed that the mass had indeed invaded
through the nasal bone into the nasal cavity and had actually crossed the midline.
Welsh Springe
Figure 6.3
 Case 6.1 T2-weighted MRI scan revealing the significant intranasal invasion of the oral
tumo ulr
It was felt that the intranasal extension of the tumouir indicated that it would not be
possible to uindertake surgery with curative intent as it would not be possible to obtain
clean margins. The oral mass, therefore, was biopsied to see whether or not
radiotherapy was a viable treatment option. The histopathology returned to show the
mass was a squamous cell carcinoma and as the owners did not want surgery anyway,
owner's concern with blood in the water bowl stopped for 7 months, but then it
returned along with right-sided unilateral serosanguineous discharge and the dog was
euthanized 2 months later.
Theory refresher
Many patients with an oral tumour will present becauise the owner has found a mass
within the mouth, but tumours located caudally within the oral cavity or sublingually
              s
Drooling saliva that may or may not be blood-tinged, worsening halitosis, dysphagia
or progressively worsening inappetance are all potentially consistent with an oral
may rise further depending on the signalment of the patient; male dogs have a greater
risk of developing an oral tumour compared to female dogs and there are certain
breeds (e.g. cocker spaniels, German shepherd dogs, German short-haired pointers,
Weimaraners, golden retrievers and boxers) that are reported to have an increased risk
of developing oral cancers. Furthermore, large-breed dogs have a higher incidence of
fibrosarcomas and non-tonsillar squamous cell carcinomas whilst small-breed dogs
show an increased incidence of malignant melanoma and tonsillar carcinoma. Benign
lesions such as papillomatosis are more common in younger dogs.
Clinical evaluation
A careful oral examination must obviously be performed, even if this requires sedation
or a brief anaesthetic to ensure all areas of the oral cavity (including underneath the
tongue and in the fauces) have been visualized and examined. In addition to a careful
oral examination, attention must be paid to careful palpation of the submandibular
lymph nodes and the general condition of the patient, as many oral tumours will have
Some studies have shown that for highly metastatic tumours such as oral melanoma,
 n        d  
palpably normal. So if a melanoma is suspected and the primary mass can be excised,
excision of the draining submandibular lymph node(s) is also useful from a staging
    s   s   
Diagnostic evaluation
      s     
implications of such differences, it is essential to make a definitive histopathological
[ ue  (d uisixa n Asdo) As Au on rod sdonq q sisou
mass, left and right inflated lateral thoracic radiographs must be obtained to rule ouit
the presence of visible metastases, as indicated in the section above. Local radiography
at the site of the lesion is also strongly recommended to investigate the degree of bony
involvement. It is important to remember, however, that an apparently normal
radiograph does not rule ouit bone invasion as there has to be up to 4o% bone lysis
before  a  lesion  will  be  visible  radiographically.  Advanced imaging techniques
(particularly CT but also MRI) are more sensitive tools to evaluate the extent of disease
and/or the presence of bone lesions and patients should be referred for such
investigations when possible or necessary. Being able to accurately plan which
treatment or treatment combinations are most appropriate for the patient before there
     s      
success and reduces stress and discomfort, whilst frequently reducing the overall cost
of the treatment required.
Once a full staging process has been completed, a biopsy procedure or specific
treatment can be planned depending on the ouitcome of these investigations. The
correct treatment may vary depending on the diagnosis and clinical stage reached, so
of most oral tumours (Figs 6.4, 6.5). If it is decided to attempt excisional biopsy, the
            
fibrous and ossifying epulides) there is a significant risk of invasion into the adjacent
jaw bone, so surgical resection should include bony margins to increase the likelihood
     n     n   s   
P          
surgery. Cats, but especially dogs, generally tolerate partial maxillectomy,
mandibulectomy or orbitectomy well and the cosmetic outcomes are good, although
this should be discussed with clients carefully beforehand.
Figuire6.4
 An acanthomatous epulis located on the caudal mandible of a dog. Clinical staging
indicated that there was no distant disease and the dog was treated with a partial mandibulectomy
with good functional results and no tumour recurrence 2 years later
Figu1re 6.5
An oral squamous cell carcinoma in a great Dane, to illustrate how similar tumours of
different cell types appear to the naked eye, hence the need for accurate histopathological diagnosis
before a definitive treatment for oral tumours is undertaken
Treatment
With regard to specific treatment, surgery is usually the most appropriate course of
action required for oral neoplasia. Exactly what surgical procedure will be required
depends upon the tumour type, the tumour size and the tumour location but it is
recommended to try to achieve 2-cm margins (including of the uinderlying bone) if the
mass is confirmed to be malignant. Local segmental excision to include the underlying
bone is indicated for all small oral tumours (except ossifying and fibromatous
epulides)  but  larger  tumours  will  require
e more extensive surgery such
as
hemimandibulectomy, hemimaxillectomy or orbitectomy procedures (Tables 6.1, 6.2).
Table 6.1 Various mandibulectomies
Mandibulectomy
procedure
Indications
Comments
Unilateral rostral
Lesions confined to rostral
Most common tumour types are squamous cell
hemimandible; not crossing midline
carcinoma and adamantinoma that do not
require removal of entire affected bone; tongue
may lag to resected side
Bilateral rostral
Bilateral rostral lesions crossing the
Tongue willbe'too long'and some cheilitis of
symphysis
chin skin willoccur; has been performed as far
back as PM4 but preferably at PM1
Vertical ramus
Low-grade bony or cartilaginous lesions
These tumours are variously called chondroma
confined to vertical ramus
rodens or multilobular osteosarcoma;
temperomandibular joint may be removed;
cosmetics and function are excellent
Complete unilateral
High-grade tumours with extensive
Usually reserved for aggressive tumours: function
involvement of horizontal ramus or
and cosmetics are good
invasion into medullary canal of ramus
Segmental
Low-grade midhorizontal ramus cancer,
Poor choice for highly malignant cancer in
preferably not into medullary cavity
medullary cavity,since growth along mandibular
artery, vein, and nerve is common
Table 6.2 Various maxillectomies
Maxillectomy procedure
Indications
Comments
Unilateral rostral
Lesions confined to hard
One-layer closure
palate on one side
Bilateral rostral
Bilateral lesions of rostral hard
Needs viable buccal mucosa on both sides for flap
palate
dosure
Lateral
Laterally placed midmaxillary
Single-layer closure if small defect, two-layer if large
lesions
Bilateral
Bilateral palatine lesions
High rate of closure dehiscence because lip flap
rarely reaches from side to side;may result in
permanent oronasal fistula
The immediate postoperative recovery for canine patients who undergo more
aggressive or extensive surgery is usually still rapid with most eating well the evening
after their surgery and it is, therefore, not usual for feeding tubes to be placed in the
dog (Figs 6.6-6.15).
Figure 6.6
One of the more common cosmetic changes in a dog who has undergone a partial
      n    o   
cause the lower canine tooth to impinge on the hard palate
Figure 6.7
A rostral maxillectomy can have a similar effect to that shown in Figure 6.6. The dog
here has an osteosarcoma affecting his rostral maxilla
Figures 6.8,6.9
 The effects of the removal of the maxilla leave the dog shown in Figure 6.7 with
 only a mild-moderate facial defect that was actually much harder to see once his hair had re-grown
Figu1re 6.10
The rostral mandible was exposed
Figures 6.10-6.15 An example of how well most dogs do after aggressive surgery. This is the oral SCC
 in a 10-year-old neutered female Collie cross, immediately before surgery.
Figures 6.11, 6.12
 The rostral mandible was then removed, along with the excess soft tissue
Figure6.13
Removal of the mandible left an obvious cosmetic defect
Figure 6.14
However, on recovery the dog looked reasonable
Figure 6.15
From some angles you would not know that she had had surgery!
NURSING TIP
Offering
warmed
foods 
often helps
following
 soft,
gently
8op
toeat
mandibulectomy/maxillectomy surgery.
CLINICAL TIP
Enteral feeding tube placement at the time of surgery should be carefully considered in cats,
 e   e   s d  e    
 postoperative complications compared to dogs.
CLINICAL TIP
 The cosmetic appearance of patients even after aggressive surgery is usually very good and owners
should be reassured of this before definitive surgery is considered.
One study has reported that 72% of the cats which underwent mandibulectomy
developed postoperative dysphagia or inappetance and 12% did not regain their
ability to eat. However, despite these difficulties, 80% of the owners reported that they
were happy with the results of the procedure. This study highlights the importance of
careful client counselling and thorough treatment planning before undertaking oral
tumour excision, especially in feline patients.
Radiotherapy, either alone or postoperatively, for incompletely excised tumours, is
an effective treatment option in tumours with sensitivity to radiation such as canine
squamous  cell
o        
hyperfractionation regimens have been reported, but in the UK currently it would be
most common to use a hypofractionated regimen, administering up to 8-9 Gy every 7
days to a total dose of 32-36 Gy. This treatment is usually tolerated extremely well
with few if any acute side effects and if a tuimour is found to have been incompletely
excised, seeking advice from a referral specialist for radiotherapy is certainly
advisable. For squamous cell carcinomas 1-year survival rates of up to 70% have been
to increase the response rate and survival times in one study and therefore
postoperative radiotherapy should certainly be considered if at all possible in cases of
oral sCC if the margins are small or not clean.
CLINICAL TIP
If the patient is operated on in practice and then referred for postoperative radiotherapy, ensure
that good-quality pretreatment photographs of the mass in situ before surgery are obtained to
 accompany the diagnostic imaging data, to enable the radio-oncologist to fully appreciate the extent
of the tumour before it was removed and therefore plan the radiotherapy accordingly.
Other treatment options
Chemotherapy has little use in helping to control local disease in oral tumours and it
only has limited use in some metastatic tumours. Partial responses have been reported
using platinum-containing drugs in canine oral malignant melanoma and also with
the use of piroxicam in oral squamous cell carcinoma. However, chemotherapy does
Prognosis
S m    e  h  m     
a cat or a dog, and the location, type, size, grading and extent of the mass. However,
· Complete resection outcomes > incomplete resection
s         
survival time approximately = fibrosarcoma survival time (depending on location).
Canine oral squamous cell carcinomas have a reasonably good prognosis if located
in the rostral oral cavity, but tonsillar and sublingual SCCs are highly metastatic and
difficult to excise completely, leading to a guarded prognosis for SCCs in these
locations. Sublingual sCC in particular can be very difficult to manage and if the
patient is inappetant due to such a tumour, then euthanasia may have to be
    s       
have 10% local recurrence and 91% 1-year survival rates with surgery alone whilst
maxillary SCCs have been reported to have 27% local recurrence and 57% 1-year
survival rates with surgery alone. However, anatomical location has a significant
bearing on all these figures, with tumours located caudally or sublingually having
significantly poorer outcomes.
The prognosis for oral fibrosarcomas is guarded when compared to SCCs due to the
locally infiltrative nature of these tumours making it so difficult to obtain completely
clean margins, meaning that local recurrence occurs more commonly. However,
combination therapy (surgery and radiotherapy) does appear to be advantageous over
surgery alone. Without radiation, local recurrence has been reported in up to 59% of
dogs compared to 32% in dogs treated with surgery and postoperative radiation.
Future treatments
A possible future treatment will be photodynamic therapy (PDT). A recent study used
PDT to treat oral SCC in 11 dogs; eight of the dogs were judged to be cured with no
tumour recurrence for at least 17 months and the cosmetic appearance following
treatment was considered superior when compared to dogs that underwent surgical
excision of their tumour. Although PDT is only available at a few university teaching
hospitals in the UK, this may become a more common treatment option in the near
future.
CLINICAL CASE EXAMPLE 6.2 - ORAL MALIGNANT MELANOMA
Signalment
9-year-old neuitered male black Labrador.
Presenting signs
A 4-week history of progressive inappetance and excessive drooling. The owners had
looked in his mouth and found a large mass on his upper jaw.
Clinical examination
Oral examination in this case was possible without sedation and revealed the presence
of a large mass emanating from the right mid-maxilla and growing laterally to the left
and ventrally. The mass had an irregular surface and was darkly pigmented (Fig
6.16).
Figure 6.16
Case 6.2 The mass within the mouth of the Labrador viewed from the left lateral
aspect as the tumour extended over the roof of the mouth. The borders of the mass are highlighted by
the white arrows
Differential diagnosis
· Malignant melanoma - this is the main differential in the light of the age and breed
of the dog and the appearance of the mass
· Squamous cell carcinoma
· Fibrosarcoma
· Lymphoma
· Basal cell carcinoma
· Epulis.
Diagnostic evaluation
As for all oral tumours, once a complete physical examination has been completed it is
of the utmost importance to carefully palpate the submandibular lymph nodes and if
they are enlarged, to obtain fine needle aspirates for cytology. Secondly, obtaining
fully inflated thoracic radiographs under general anaesthesia is essential before any
surgical procedure is performed to ensure that there are no pulmonary metastases
present.
In this case, the submandibular nodes were moderately palpable but fine needle
aspiration revealed no evidence of metastatic tumour cells and the node was deemed
to be reactive. The thoracic radiographs were inremarkable.
Treatment
In this case, no oral radiographs were undertaken as the owners declined excisional
surgery in the light of the extensive procedure required. A surgical wedge biopsy was
therefore obtained which confirmed the diagnosis to be oral malignant melanoma
The owners did, however, opt for external beam radiotherapy so he received 4 x 9 Gy
   s    a    s
tumour mass almost totally resolving within 6 weeks of treatment starting, although a
large area of ulcerated oral mucosa remained (Fig. 6.17).
Figure6.17
Case 6.2 The appearance of the oral malignant melanoma 2 weeks after the fourth
radiation therapy treatment, viewed from the right lateral aspect to show the area of ulcerated mucosa
on the hard palate (highlighted by the red arrows)
In this case, following his radiotherapy the dog required intermittent antibiosis and
NSAID therapy (meloxicam) to keep his quality of life acceptable, but in the owner's
opinion he was normal during this period when on treatment. He then became
inappetant again 7 months after his radiation therapy. Oral examination showed
moderate regrowth of his tumour and thoracic radiographs revealed the presence of
multiple pulmonary metastases, so he was euthanized.
Theory refresher
Malignant melanoma (MM) is the most common malignant oral tumour reported in
the dog. Oral MMs are reported more frequently in smaller breeds of dog and it is
generally seen in older animals, the average age of presentation being just over 11
years. They present in a similar fashion to other oral tumours but it is important to
note that in approximately 30% of cases the tumour will not appear darkly pigmented
(i.e. amelanotic), thereby making it impossible to differentiate it as a melanoma just
by visual inspection (Fig. 6.18).
Figure6.18
An oral malignant melanoma located on the hard palate of a German short-haired
     s   s g
s n    s    s 
             
Organization staging scheme for dogs with oral melanoma is based on tumour size,
                
     p     s     
cm diameter and/or the presence of lymph node metastases. Stage IV disease describes
the presence of distant metastasis. The median survival times for dogs with oral
3 months with stage I, 11 and Ill disease, respectively. Surgical excision is usually the
first-line treatment and the type of surgery undertaken obviously depends on the
location of the tumour, but the standard oncological rules apply, in that if possible a 2-
cm margin should be obtained and for a malignant melanoma of the maxilla or
mandible (Figs 6.19-6.22), the uinderlying bone has to be removed to achieve a good
localresection with a partial mandibulectomy or maxillectomy, as described in
Chapter 5.
Figu1re 6.19
The tumour is shown here in situ, originating from the right maxilla and protruding
down into the oral cavity
Figures 6.19-6.22 The surgical removal of an oral malignant melanoma.
Figure6.20
The maxilla around the tumour is isolated and incised using a bone saw
Figure6.21
The maxilla and tumour are removed and the deficit closed routinely
Figure6.22
Even immediately after surgery, the cosmetic result of a maxillactomy is usually good
As shown in the main case example, radiotherapy can be useful in the management
of oral malignant melanomas. A number of studies have shown that hypofractionated
radiotherapy can be used alone in canine cases, with response rates of up to 100%
being reported and complete remission seen in up to 7o% of cases. However, as well as
local recurrence being a problem, metastatic disease is still the cause of death in the
majority of dogs treated in this way, with median survival times of up to 7 months
reported with radiation therapy alone and 363 days in a report of combined chemo-
radiation treatment. The decision therefore, whether to use radiotherapy or surgery as
the first-line treatment, will depend on individual circumstances and treatment
availability.
Chemotherapy only has a very limited role in the management of oral MM. One
study has shown that carboplatin generated a 28% response rate (mainly partial
response defined as a reduction in tumour size by >5o%) but the median suirvival
times for this treatment alone were short at 165 days, indicating that sole-agent
           n 
second study has shown that 2/l1 dogs with oral malignant melanoma responded to a
based chemotherapy agents do appear to have some (albeit limited) activity against
trials to date have shown this to be definitely efficacious when used in this way.
The limiting factor in the survival of malignant melanoma patients is usually not
local disease control, but the problem of distant (usually pulmonary) metastatic
disease and new therapies are required to reduce the incidence of metastasis. The
future for treatment of canine oral MM, however, may lie with the recent development
of a xenogenic DNA vaccine which stimulates the production of antityrosinase
antibodies and appears to be both safe and efficacious in the treatment of canine oral
MM. This treatment is now available in the UK only via oncology specialists,
including the authors' hospital, but its development in the US and current on-going
trials have generated exciting data indicating that as part of a multimodal treatment
approach this new therapy may substantially extend the disease-free period for canine
patients with oral MM.
CLINICAL CASE EXAMPLE 6.3 - CANINE SUBLINGUAL FIBROSARCOMA
Signalment
8-year-old neuitered male Border collie.
Presenting signs
Halitosis and blood-stained saliva.
Case history
The relevant history in this case was:
· Owner had first noticed halitosis 4 weeks previously
· Noticed dog was eating more slowly than usual but was otherwise bright
· Started to notice blood-stained saliva in the water bowl so went to referring vet
thinking dog needed a dental. Referring vet found sublingual mass, so referred him
· Otherwise quite well.
Clinical examination
· Bright and alert but with halitosis!
· Mild-moderate bilateral submandibular lymph node enlargement
· Irregular, erythematous and haemorrhagic mass present on ventral aspect of tongue,
attached to the frenulum (Fig. 6.23)
· No other clinical abnormalities were noted.
Figure 6.23
Case 6.3 The appearance of the sublingual mass prior to excisional surgery
Differential diagnosis
· Squamous cell carcinoma
· Fibrosarcoma
· Malignant melanoma
· Lymphoma.
Diagnostic evaluation
· Fine needle aspiration of submandibular lymph nodes revealed no evidence of
tuimouir metastasis
· Thoracic radiographs revealed no evidence of pulmonary metastases
· Mandibular radiographs revealed no evidence of bony change
· The decision was made to undertake excisional biopsy.
Diagnosis
· Grade II sublingual fibrosarcoma.
In this particular case, the dog made a rapid recovery from surgery with no
complications (Fig. 6.24).
Figure 6.24
Case 6.3 The immediate postoperative view of the dog with the tumour excised
Theory refresher
         e s pi
lingual masses have been reported to be malignant tumours and approximately half of
these cases will be squamous cell carcinomas with a gender predisposition for females
and an increased incidence seen in poodles, Labradors and samoyeds. Other tumour
types reported in the dog include granular cell myoblastoma, malignant melanoma,
fibrosarcoma
(most 
common
in  Border   collies),  adenocarcinoma  and
haemangiosarcoma (most common in golden retrievers). Smaller-breed dogs and
especially cocker spaniels show an increased incidence of lingual plasma cell tumours.
Lingual neoplasms in the cat are most commonly SCCs and are frequently located on
the ventral surface of the tongue near the frenulum (Fig. 6.25).
Fig1ure6.25
The typical appearance of a subligual squamous cell carcinoma in a cat. The position
on the frenulum in this case made treatment practically impossible and the cat was euthanized
Diagnosis of lingual neoplasia requires incisional biopsy, which should be preceded
by  careful palpation of the submandibular lymph nodes and inflated thoracic
radiographs to rule out distant metastases before biopsy.
Should the biopsy confirm the presence of a cancerous growth, the recommended
treatment is usually surgical excision if possible. However, although partial and even
S         
approximately 50% of lingual tumours are positioned either in the midline or are
bilaterally symmetrical, thereby limiting the ability of the surgeon to achieve complete
margins without undertaking radical resection, which in turn, is associated with an
increased risk of postoperative complications. Referral to a soft-tissue surgical
specialist is therefore highly recommended for these cases.
The prognosis for cancer of the tongue depends on the type of tumour, its location,
cell myoblastomas have a good prognosis with over 80% of cases being cured with
conservative surgery achieving only close margins. As a general rule, rostrally located
tumours usually have better outcomes than tumours located more caudally due to
their relative ease of removal and possibly their earlier recognition. The histological
are reported to have statistically much better survival times following surgical
resection than grade ll or lll SCCs (median survival times 16 months, 4 months and 3
outcome for dogs with lingual fibrosarcomas, however, although the risk of metastasis
is relatively low, there is always a concern regarding local recurrence due to the
locally infiltrative natuire of sarcomas.
Feline tongue tumours are generally difficult to manage. The long-term prognosis
  s        s   
considered to be less than 25%. Their predilection site on the ventral surface coupled
with the fact that they are often sited in the midline attached to the frenulum makes
surgical excision problematical. As there is also considerable risk of acute toxicity at
this site with external beam radiation therapy, sometimes offering any treatment at
all is difficuilt. Referral to an oncology specialist is definitely recommended for these
cases but owners need to be made aware that treatment options may be limited.
Photodynamic therapy may be a future option for these tumours and there is also a
against oral scCs in cats but to the authors' knowledge there are no studies looking at
lingual ScCs in particular.
Oral mass identified
Careful,full
physical examination
Locallymphnode examination
and aspirationif enlarged
Left and right lateral
inflated thoracicradiographs
Intra-oral radiographs
CTor MRIif mass
large or possibly
involving othertissues
Biopsy
Tumour confirmed
Undertake complete
Considerreferral for
surgical excision
radiotherapyif surgery
ifpossible
notpossible
Refer forpostoperative
radiotherapyif
margins dirty
Figure 6.26
 Diagnostic plan flowchart for a patient with an oral mass
7
The coughing and/or dyspnoeic cancer patient
Coughing is a clinical sign associated with tracheal or lung pathology and therefore
is suggestive of intrathoracic neoplasia in a cancer patient, whilst dyspnoea can
indicate  pulmonary,  pleural,  mediastinal,  intra-or  extratracheal or laryngeal
patient may not simply have lung cancer but may be showing signs that could be
caused by a variety of different neoplastic processes:
· Primary lung cancer
· Metastatic (secondary) lung cancer
· Thymic cancer
· Tracheal cancer
· Laryngeal cancer
· Pleural cancer or pleural effusion caused by cancer (e.g. malignant pleural effusion,
hepatic cancer causing a coagulopathy, or a splenic tumour causing disseminated
intravascular coagulation (DIC))
· Lymphadenopathy in the tracheobronchial lymph nodes due to primary or
metastatic cancer.
CLINICAL CASE EXAMPLE 7.1 - PRIMARY BRONCHIAL CARCINOMA IN A CAT
Signalment
14-year-old neutered female domestic short-haired (DsH) cat.
Presenting signs
· 6-week history of progressive coughing
· Owner described cough as soft and slightly moist
· No weight loss noted but cat quieter than normal
Clinical examination
· Slim body condition and quiet but responsive on examination
· No dyspnoea or tachypnoea noted
. Otherwise no other abnormalities noted on examination.
Differential diagnoses
· Bronchitis
· Airway foreign body
· Pulmonary neoplasia
· Secondary metastatic disease
. Primary.
Diagnostic evaluation
In the light of her clinical history and signs it was decided to undertake thoracic
radiographs first. These revealed the presence of a single solitary mass located in the
cranial aspect of her right caudal lung lobe. No tracheobronchial lymph node
enlargement was noted and there was no pleural effusion.
Treatment
In the light of her history and clinical findings, it was decided that the mass required
surgery  without further diagnostic evaluation and underwent an intercostal
thoracotomy, during which a 2-cm diameter mass was identified within the right
caudal lung lobe and excision of the affected lobe performed. Careful visual and digital
examination of the draining lymph nodes was also undertaken but they were
considered to be normal.
The cat was managed postoperatively with opioid and NSAID analgesia and made a
Histopathology revealed the mass to be a moderately differentiated primary bronchial
carcinoma. After careful discussion with the owner, no further treatment was
uindertaken at their request. The cat remained well for 16 months with no sign of
recurrence before being lost to follow-uup.
Theory refresher
Primary lung cancer in veterinary medicine is considered rare, accounting for
approximately 1% of all canine cancer cases and less than 1% of all feline cancer
adenocarcinomas being the most common subtype reported. A precise diagnosis can
be made by subcategorizing the tumour type depending on its location of origin (e.g.
bronchial,  bronchioalveolar  or  alveolar) and by  the degree of histological
differentiation. A clinical diagnosis is usually made by identifying a large, often
  s   ss  s  s 
cancer is more often seen in older animals and whilst there has been no gender or
breed predilection shown in dogs, older female cats seem more likely to develop the
disease than male cats.
It is also unusual for coughing to be a clinical sign of lung cancer in isolation;
rather, many cancer cases which cough will also display signs such as
tachypnoea/dyspnoea, lethargy, weight loss, reduced exercise tolerance and poor
appetite. Careful questioning of the owner will also frequently establish that these
signs have been gradually worsening over several weeks prior to presentation
although sometimes the presentation can be acute in nature. Dyspnoea is usually
noticed by the owner but any preceding tachypnoea may not be recognized, so again
careful questioning to establish the rate of onset of the clinical signs is important. It is
  e          
However, it is important to remember that many lung cancers can initially be
clinically silent, or cause more unexpected clinical signs, especially if the tumour
metastasizes to an extrapulmonary site (e.g. to the brain, resulting in neurological
signs or to the digits, causing lameness). An example of an unusual manifestation of
lung cancer is hypertrophic osteopathy presenting as shifting lameness and warm
and/or swollen limbs. The identification of hypertrophic osteopathy (HO) on a
radiograph shouild certainly initiate a search for an underlying neoplastic cause,
starting with thoracic radiographs (although HO has also been reported with a variety
cancer with almost any malignant tumour having the potential to spread to the
pulmonary tissue by virtue of the anatomical nature of the vascular supply in the
with pulmonary metastasis should therefore initiate a clinical investigation as to the
location of a possible primary tumour. The tumours most often associated with
pulmonary spread are malignant melanoma, osteosarcoma, mammary carcinoma and
haemangiosarcoma (Fig. 7.1) but any malignant tumour could theoretically spread to
            
required in suich cases.
Figu1re7.1
Extensive pulmonary metastatic disease in a patient  with primary splenic
haemangiosarcoma
Diagnosis
Having obtained a careful history, the clinical investigation of a patient suspected to
have cancer of  the lower  respiratory  tract begins  with  a  thorough  physical
examination, looking in particuilar for signs of abnormal breathing along with careful
auscultation of the heart and percussion of all the lung fields, as well as a fuill systemic
          
cornerstone of diagnosis in general practice remains careful thoracic radiography and
for this, fully inflated (i.e. obtained under general anaesthesia) left and right lateral
thoracic radiographs are still considered to be the minimum standard, whilst
obtaining three views provides an optimum radiographic evaluation. Patterns
commonly seen vary from discrete nodules or individual masses to poorly defined
interstitial patterns. Consolidation of individual lung lobes can also be seen, as can
enlargement of the tracheobronchial lymph nodes if there is nodal metastasis
neoplasia:
       ne  
on the type and stage of the disease.
· Radiographs can be insensitive to detect small metastatic lesions and/or
           s -
tumour; histopathology is required to be definitive.
Where available, computed tomography (CT scanning) certainly provides a more
sensitive technique for the detection of small lesions, so patients may be considered for
P           
disease. A recent study showed that CT was able to identify enlargement of the
tracheobronchial lymph nodes due to the presence of metastatic disease in five cases
in which the lymphadenopathy had not been identified on thoracic radiography.
However, a different study revealed that although CT provides superior resolution
compared to radiography (Figs 7.2-7.4), it is still associated with a significant number
of both false-negative and false-positive findings. We have to therefore conclude that
we do not have perfect imaging modalities available. So caution must always
accompany presurgical evaluation and staging by imaging of a patient with possible
lung cancer. However, as the identification of metastatic disease has a significant
and perform the evaluations to the highest possible standards
Figures 7.2-7.4
Lateral and dorso-ventral (DV) radiographs and a transverse CT scan from a dog
with a prostatic carcinoma. The radiographs do not clearly show any metastatic lesions but CT clearly
  se a o an a  s ' s po ad  s
Images courtesy of Dr Ani Avner, Knowledge Farm Veterinary Specialist Referral Center, Israel
Identification of a malignant pleural effusion is generally considered a poor
prognostic sign as it indicates diffuse intrapleural disease, although there are reports
of successful treatments with  intrapleural chemotherapy.  The identification of
      a    s
obtained in both plain and EDTA tubes if the samples are being sent to an external
laboratory.
Treatment
The first-line treatment for localized primary lung cancer is surgical excision of the
light of this, and of the fact that radiographs do not provide a cytological or
histological diagnosis, it may be desirable in some circumstances to try to obtain a
definitive diagnosis before sending the patient to surgery. Fine needle aspiration of
the mass, either by ultrasound guidance or by blind aspiration based on the
radiographical position of the mass can be simple and useful. However, there is a risk
of iatrogenic pneumothorax and some studies have shown fine needle aspiration of
  s s       o  a 
these are more sensitive techniques than radiography in the diagnosis of pulmonary
lymphoma. However, for carcinomas, studies in human medicine have shown that the
not the tumour can be visualized, with the diagnostic sensitivity falling when the
tuimour cannot be seen. It may therefore be best to recommend firstly that a definitive
diagnosis before surgery is only sought, if for some reason, it will make a difference to
the treatment undertaken, and secondly, that thoracotomy to undertake a complete
treatment if possible. Owners, however, need to be counselled that more extensive
 s a  a  a s   q  s
investigations having been performed.
CLINICAL TIP
Surgical removal of single lung tumours is the treatment associated with the longest survival times
and should be considered if possible in all cases
           
diagnosis of a solitary lung lobe mass has been made. Other options for removal
include excision via thoracoscopy or a median sternotomy. Thoracoscopy removal
necessitates specialized equipment with specialist surgeons and anaesthetists and is
visualization, conversion to a thoracotomy is sometimes required. The use of median
tumour is extremely large or where the exact location cannot be identified on
radiographs. This approach is not recommended rouitinely due to the difficulty
associated in accessing the hilar vessels and bronchi which are situated dorsally
Moreover, lymph node biopsy is more difficult with this approach. The use of CT to
accurately identify the exact location of the tumour and the presence of enlarged local
lymph nodes and/or metastatic disease is a useful presurgical imaging tool, however
this may not be easily available.
  s        
the fourth to the sixth intercostal space is usually sufficient to allow access to the lung
lobe. Lung lobectomy can be performed either by using standard ligation techniques
 (   s   -) n s ss   s
s e  s   s s s  ds  
lobectomy closure. Before the thoracotomy is closed the area is carefully checked for
haemorrhage or leakage of air from the collapsed bronchi. This is achieved by
flooding the thoracic cavity with warm sterile saline and submerging the surgical site.
Any areas of haemorrhage or air leakages should be meticulously sutured. Local
lymph nodes should also be inspected and biopsied if enlarged. A thoracic drain is
placed after copious lavage and the thoracotomy site closed routinely.
CLINICAL TIP
This procedure requires considerable expertise from a surgical, anaesthetic and nursing aspect and
therefore referral should be seriously considered if any of these three aspects of care is compromised.
NURSING TIP
Thoracic drains require a high level of nursing and aseptic maintenance. They should be secured
well and the patient prevented from interfering with them. In general, if there are no complications
 and drainage is minimal, then the drain can be removed within 24 hours.
CLINICAL CASE EXAMPLE 7.2 - PRIMARY PULMONARY ADENOCARCINOMA IN A
DOG
Signalment
10-year-old female neutered cocker spaniel.
Presenting signs
· 3-month history of progressive coughing
· Coughing worse when lying down or on exercise
· Exercise tolerance reduced
· No weight loss but quieter than normal
Clinical examination
· Overweight and quiet
· No abnormalities on pulmonary auscuiltation or percussion
· Soft moist cough noted following walking into the consultation
· No palpable peripheral lymph nodes
· Otherwise the examination was unremarkable.
Differential diagnoses
· Chronic bronchitis
· Congestive heart failure
· Pulmonary neoplasia
· Secondary metastatic disease
· Primary.
Diagnostic evaluation
      s   r    
radiographs first. These revealed the presence of a large mass just cranial to the heart
located in the left hemithorax and a smaller, spherical lesion with a radiolucent centre
located in the left dorsocaudal lung field over rib 10 (Fig. 7.5).
Secondary
lesion
mass lesion
Figure 7.5
Case 7.2 A right lateral radiograph showing the presence of a large primary tumour and
a smaller secondary lesion in the dog
An uiltrasound-gulided fine needle aspirate was obtained from the smaller mass in
the left dorsocaudal lung field and the cytology was consistent with a bronchial
carcinoma. Careful clinical examination and an abdominal ultrasound examination
Treatment
Although a detailed consultation was undertaken with the owners, during which they
were strongly advised to consider a thoracotomy to enable removal of both the larger
and smaller lesions, the owners declined surgical management and opted for
chemotherapeutic management. The dog therefore received carboplatin at 3-weekly
intervals as a dose of 300 mg/m?. Very pleasingly the dog's cough had resolved within
two treatments and she became much livelier. The carboplatin was continued for a
further three treatments and the dog remained well throughout. Repeat thoracic
radiographs taken after the fifth and final treatment showed a considerable
improvement to the appearance of the lungs which matched her clinical improvement
(Fig. 7.6).
Figure7.6
Case 7.2 A left lateral radiograph of the dog after having received five doses of
carboplatin by slow intravenous infusion
The dog remained well for 14 months following the diagnosis, but then she
represented due to a recurrence of coughing and lethargy. Lateral and DV thoracic
radiographs revealed the presence of multiple metastases so she was euthanized.
Theory refresher
As discussed in Chapter 6, the first-line treatment recommendation for primary
pulmonary neoplasia in dogs and cats is suirgical excision if at all possible, with
chemotherapy for lung cancer considered to be a second-line treatment or as
         s
Chemotherapy cannot therefore be routinely recommended as a sole alternative to
surgery. The success of the treatment of the dog in this case example was exceptional
but it does show that occasionally, chemotherapy can be extremely useful. Carboplatin
has been uised in the authors' clinics with some success and there has also been a
study indicating that the semi-synthetic vinca alkaloid Vinorelbine has some activity
clear role for medical management in these patients remains to be seen. Intrapleural
          
reported to be a useful adjunctive treatment in some cases.
The only pulmonary neoplasm of dogs that has been reported to often respond well
to chemotherapy is pulmonary lymphomatoid granulomatosis (PLG). This is a
condition reported in several studies and seems to occuir in young to middle-aged dogs
with no breed or gender predisposition. The dogs generally present with progressive
 s    od n  s p g  a  
many weeks. Radiographic abnormalities reported include lung lobe consolidation,
pulmonary mass lesions, mixed pulmonary patterns of lobar consolidation with ill-
defined interstitial and alveolar infiltrates and abnormally large tracheobronchial
S             
analysis of transtracheal washes or transthoracic fine needle aspirate but definitive
    ss s  s    s
reported to cyclophosphamide and prednisolone with the mean duration of remission
being 21 months, although three of the seven dogs in the study did not respond at all.
A different study reported a mean survival with treatment of 12.5 months. In the light
of this good response to treatment and the risks involved in performing a thoracotomy
in a dog with diffuse pulmonary disease, it may be acceptable in some cases to use the
response to treatment as a diagnostic tool in a dog with radiographs that may be
consistent with PLG (as it would be very unusual for any other diffuse neoplastic
conditions of the canine lung to resolve/substantially improve with basic
chemotherapy).
Radiotherapy is of very limited use in canine lung cancer, as the sensitivity of the
pulmonary tissues to radiation makes it difficult to administer efficacious doses
recommended for pulmonary neoplasia in small animal patients in the UK.
Metastatic cancer is usually not treated surgically unless there is only a large, single
metastatic lesion, but there are reports to indicate that for certain cases, pulmonary
metastatectomy can augment survival times and disease-free periods. However, as
survival times are generally still poor, such invasive surgery cannot be routinely
recommended. Referral to a surgical oncology specialist is definitely recommended if a
Prognosis
of the disease and also on the tumour type, so referral to the WHO classification
 o  a    s       
papillary adenocarcinoma that had stage T1NoMo disease had the longest survival
times, with a median survival time (MST) of up to 555 days. These data are supported
             
after suirgery and their mean survival time is approximately 20 months but that this
         s    s   
diameter. Dogs with pulmonary squamous cell carcinomas also have a worse
prognosis when compared to dogs with pulmonary adenocarcinomas (mean survival
time of 8 months compared to 19 months in one study). The histological grade
certainly impacts on the outcome; dogs with low histological grade adenocarcinomas
have on average more than twice the life expectancy of dogs with high histological
grade adenocarcinomas (MsT 16 months compared to 6 months in one study).
Box 7.1 The World Health Organization classification scheme for canine primary
lung cancer
T1
zinad erassa o sunt Aq pap unons inoun Areos
T2
Multiple tumours of any size
T3
Tumour in vad ing neigh bourin g tissue
NO
No evid en ce of lymph n ode in volvemen
N1
 Neoplastic lymph node enlargement
M0
No evid en ce of metastase!
M1
Metastases present
In cats, it appears that the histological grade of the tumour is the only important
prognostic factor, with high-grade tumours having a poor survival when compared to
moderately differentiated tumours (2.5 months compared to 23 months respectively in
one study). An additional anomaly in cats is the atypical condition in which they
develop a primary pulmonary carcinoma that metastasises to the digits (and often to
other unusual sites too, such as skeletal muscles, skin and kidney) (Figs 7.7-7.9).
These patients usually present  with painful digital swellings and lameness and,
survival times of 1-2 months being reported. Primary pulmonary carcinoma therefore
needs to be considered as a possible differential diagnosis in lame cats, particularly if
multiple digital swellings are identified
Figures 7.7, 7.8
A 9-year-old domestic long-haired (DLH) cat which presented with a non-healing
wound on his face and left fore foot. On examination the non-healing wounds were found to be due
to mass lesions, aspiration of which revealed the masses to be carcinomas
Figuire7.9
A radiograph of the thorax of the cat in Figures 7.7 and 7.8 in which a single, large
mass was identified in the left caudodorsal lung field (red arrow). Aspiration of this also revealed
carcinoma cells and it was considered most likely that the pulmonary lesion was the primary with the
facial and toe lesions being secondary metastases. The cat was euthanized
The presence of metastases and/or a pleural effusion also, as seems logical, have
prognostic significance, with patients presenting with metastatic lesions and/or a
pleural effusion having significantly poorer ouitcomes with mean survival times often
being as short as 1 or 2 months. However, there are two papers that describe the use of
intracavitary chemotherapy as a way of treating animals with malignant effusions
and this is now a technique that is used regularly and successfully in the author's (RF)
clinic (Fig. 7.10). See also Clinical Case Example 7.3.
Identification of a patient with
signs of coughing or dyspnoea
Careful history and
physicalexamination
Blood gas analysis
ifappropriate
Thoracic radiography
Possible/probable
No neoplastic
neoplastic lesions present
lesions present
Repeat clinical examination
Perform otherimaging
Cats can develop primary
Consider other possible
to be certain of no primary
investigations (e.g. abdominal
pulmonary carcinomas
differential diagnoses
lesion elsewhere
ultrasound for primary lesions,
that metastasize to digits:
and investigate
CT,digit radiographyifpant
treatment unrewarding
is a cat with lameness, etc.)
Ifnon-pulmonaryprimarylesion(s)
Ifno other lesions found
found, diagnose as appropriate and
lung pathology considered
investigate lunglesions asmetastases
to be probably primary
Consider obtaining pre-surgery
Surgically excise mass
diagnosis if diagnosis would alter
and send for
treatment plan (i.e. owner will
histopathology
decline surgeryorif possiby PLG)
Considerfollow-up treatments
if possible/available
Figure 7.10
 Diagnostic plan flowchart for a patient presenting with coughing and/or dyspnoea
CLINICAL CASE EXAMPLE 7.3 - MaLIgnant pleural effusion in a dog
Signalment
 8-year-old entire female Irish setter dog.
Presenting signs
· A 5-day history of lethargy, inappetance, coughing and progressively worsening
abdominal distension.
Clinical examination
· The dog was quiet but moderately alert
· Thin body condition
· Increased breathing rate with increased respiratory effort
· Percussible fluid line and poorly audible breath souinds in the ventral third of the
thorax
· Obvious abdominal distension with a palpable fluid thrill.
Diagnostic evaluation
· Thoracic radiographs confirmed the presence of a pleural effusion but no
intrathoracic cause was noted
· Abdominal ultrasound confirmed the presence of ascites and revealed marked
bilateral ovarian enlargement, with an irregular outline to both ovaries and a
heterogeneous appearance
· Abdominocentesis and therapeutic thoracocentesis revealed the presence of a
         
7.11).
Figure 7.11
The microscopic appearance of neoplastic epithelial cells within an effusion. Note the
large nuclei with multiple nucleoli, some multi-nucleated cells and the degree of variation of the cell
and nuclear shape and size.
Courtesy of Mrs Elizabeth Villiers, Dick White Referralks
Treatment
· Once the pleural effusion had been drained the dog was taken to surgery for
irregular and friable, so the dog underwent ovariohysterectomy. In addition, small
white nodular plaques were identified on the peritoneal surface, so these were
biopsied.
ovarian carcinoma. The peritoneal nodules also returned to be consistent with a
Diagnosis
· Metastatic ovarian carcinoma with carcinomatosis and secondary malignant pleural
and abdominal effusions.
Further treatment
chest drains but once the diagnosis was made, intrapleural chemotherapy was
initiated using 300 mg/m? carboplatin, given once every 3 weeks for five treatments.
The first treatment was given through the previously placed chest drains but all
subsequent treatments were administered via a 21 gauge latex catheter with the dog
inder medetomidine and butorphanol sedation. The pleural and abdominal effusions
resolved within 5 days of starting the intrapleural chemotherapy and the dog's
demeanour improved considerably. She exhibited no side effects from the treatment
and remained well for 13 months before she represented with recuirrence of the pleural
effusion. Thoracocentesis confirmed recurrence of the carcinoma, so she was
euthanized.
Theory refresher
as not only do they significantly compromise the patient's quality of life, they
represent the possibility of serosal metastasis in every location that has contact with
 n  d  e g    's s   
  n     i n    
nature of the effusion found can vary due to the fact that malignant effusions can
develop due to a variety of (and differing combinations of) pathological mechanisms.
namely:
· Increased vascular permeability
· Obstruction of lymphatic vessel flow
· Increased hydrostatic pressure
· Reduced plasma oncotic pressuire.
Neoplastic effusions are usually modified transuidates or exidates, but it is possible
for:
· Transudates to exist if the underlying neoplastic disease causes hypoalbuminaemia
· Septic exudates to be present if an intestinal tumour results in intestinal perforation
· A chylous effusion to be caused by a tumour obstructing lymphatic return.
It is also important to remember that the number of neoplastic cells present withir
an effusion will vary and their appearance can be altered by their presence within an
effusive fluid, so working with a good clinical pathologist to diagnose these cases is
essential.
Neoplastic effusions are most commonly seen secondarily to lymphoma, metastatic
carcinomas and mesotheliomas, so the identification of potentially malignant
epithelial cells in an effusion should alert the clinician to the presence of an actively
effusion initially involves identification of the site of the primary lesion and then
secondarily assessing the patient for the presence of gross metastases (which may
themselves be the cause of the effusion). If there is no gross secondary disease and the
primary tumour can be treated successfuly (usually by excision), then this may
provide symptomatic relief, albeit temporarily. However, neoplastic effusions are
themselves a form of metastasis, so further treatment has to be recommended. There
         d  
In the author's (RF) clinic a retrospective study has shown that dogs with a
 m  a           
showed that without treatment the MST for affected dogs was 25 days compared to an
MST of 322 days with treatment. Both in the study in the author's clinic and also in
the published studies, the drugs have all been administered at the doses recommended
num ber of treatments given is dictated by how long it takes for the effusion to clear,
with the treatments being given regularly until the effusion resolves, after which, one
carboplatin is diluted with normal saline to a 5 mg/ml solution before being injected
as a bolus into the thorax via an injection cannula. This cannula is then flushed with
10 ml of sterile saline before removal. If both sides of the thorax are being treated,
then the dose is divided equally into each hemithorax. This protocol is repeated every
3 weeks until resolution of the pleural effusion is achieved, after which just one more
treatment is administered as explained above. The rationale of giving chemotherapy
in an intracavitary manner is that the exposed cell suirface layers receive a dose 1-3
logs higher than that achieved with intravenous administration.
The response to treatment seen in the Irish setter reported here was significantly
better than expected in the light of her disease burden, but illustrates the potential
benefit of this simple technique in canine medicine.
Ovarian tumours are not a common problem in dogs or cats, probably due to the
high number of female animals who uindergo ovariohysterectomy in the UK, although
they are a well-recognized problem in rabbits. Ovarian tuimours can be classified
depending on their cell of origin into one of three types, namely epithelial cell tumours
(which include carcinomas), primordial germ cell tumours (such as teratomas) and
  s  n  n  s  ss  s
epithelial cell tumour group account for approximately 50% of the canine clinical
cases reported and, of these, ovarian adenocarcinomas are often associated with
           
peritoneal implantation and the development of a malignant effusion. Sex cord
tumours are the second most common form reported in the dog and these tuimouirs
approximately 50% of cases. In cats, sex cord stromal tumours are the most common
In both dogs and cats, ovarian tumours are more commonly reported in middle-aged
to older animals but the clinical signs will vary according to the cell of origin of the
tumour. Epithelial tumours can be clinically silent until the effect of a space
occupying mass becomes evident, either due to the physical presence of the tumour
itself or due to the effects of any secondary effusions. Stromal sex cord tumours,
of vulval enlargement, vulval discharge, recurrent oestrous activity, alopecia or
are often associated with oestrogen production causing clinical signs of persistent
oestrous activity and alopecia.
The first-line treatment for ovarian neoplasia is surgical excision of the tumour and
generally ovariohysterectomy is recommended. Careful exploration of the abdomen
and especially a careful visual inspection of all the serosal surfaces is recommended at
the time of suirgery to evaluate the patient for the presence of serosal metastases. If no
metastases have developed and complete excision is possible, then the prognosis is
considered to be good. However, the presence of metastatic disease carries a guarded
            ss
possible but survival times of less than 1 year are to be expected if tumour spread is
fouind.
S'THERRESPIRATORYTRACTTUMOURS
Thymic neoplasia can cause coughing by both direct bronchial compression, or due to
aspiration pneumonia caused as a result of paraneoplastic megaoesophagus. The
             s
that there are other non-neoplastic conditions that can cause intraluminal mass
lesions or nodular changes that are visible radiographically, such as tracheal
to be uncommon. In one review of 78 cases there were 16 canine tracheal tumours,
seven feline tracheal tumours, 34 canine laryngeal tumours and 24 feline laryngeal
tumours. The review found that epithelial malignancies were most common in the
feline trachea and the canine larynx whilst osteochondroma was most common in the
canine trachea and lymphoma, the most common feline laryngeal malignancy.
airway obstruction or dysphonia.
Tracheal tumours may be able to be biopsied via either flexible or rigid endoscopy
and if possible, it is worth attempting to reach a definitive diagnosis before
   n  n      
potentially chemotherapy responsive. However, the majority of tracheal tumours will
S          a   
require removal and an end-to-end anastomosis is performed. Larger resections carry
surgery and postoperative care required for these patients, referral to a soft-tissue
S     n        
although it is important to note that benign tracheal tumours in cats are considered to
be rare. There are no large-scale studies available reporting the success of malignant
tracheal tumouir resection in small animals.
 ) s      s 
Rhabdomyomas in the dog are an exception to this and although they can often be
            
(osteosarcoma,   chondrosarcoma,  fibrosarcoma,  squamous   cell  carcinoma,
adenocarcinoma and mast cell tuimour) whilst the most common tumour of the feline
larynx is lymphoma. Secondary tumours metastasizing to the larynx (and trachea)
a laryngeal tumour, although careful consideration must be given to airway patency
laryngeal function but malignant tumours may be difficult to manage, as complete
laryngectomy (as used in human medicine) is rarely considered in veterinary
medicine.  Radiation therapy  or chemotherapy  may be possible and  effective
a guarded prognosis.
Patient presenting with progressive
change tovoice,dysphagia,coughing
orexercise intolerance
Obtainhistoryand undertakecareful
physicalexamination to tryandruleout
extra-respiratory disease
Anaesthetizeandexamine larynx
Laryngeal mass present
No laryngeal pathology
Surgical orgrab
Three-view inflated
forcep biopsy
thoracic radiographs
Ifmalignant tumour
Tracheal mass/
diagnosed,establishif
abnormality present
primary or secondary
(repeat examination,
consider abdominal
Endoscopicexamination
ultrasound)
and biopsy
Primary
Secondary
Refer for complete
Consider
tumour:
tumour:
surgical excisionif
chemotherapy
treatif
treatif
not chemotherapy
if tumour
possible
possiblebut
responsive orif
diagnosedas
prognosis
causing obstructive
lymphoma
guarded
signs
Figure 7.12
 Diagnostic plan flowchart for patients presenting with dysphonia, dysphagia and/or
coughing
8
The dysphagic/gagging/regurgitating cancer patient
Dysphagia is defined as painful or difficult swallowing and can usually be
subclassified  as oral  dysphagia, pharyngeal  dysphagia and  cricopharyngeal
dysphagia. Dysphagia, therefore, generally refers to pathology within the oral cavity
and/or the pharyngeal region. Gagging is defined as the reflex part of
swallowing/vomiting, involving elevation of the soft palate followed by reverse
peristalsis of the upper gastrointestinal tract and it is often accompanied by retching.
which is the involuntary and ineffective attempt to vomit. Regurgitation is defined as
the passive, retrograde expulsion of gastric or oesophageal contents and as such is a
sign of oesophageal disease. Cancer patients with some or all of these clinical signs
therefore could have neoplastic disease in one or more than one of several locations:
· Oral cavity
· Tonsils
· Pharynx/parapharyngeal tissues
· Oesophagus
· Mediastinum (thymus, tracheobronchial lymph nodes or heart base)
· Inner ear
· Central nervous system.
CLINICAL CASE EXAMPLE 8.1 - TONSILLAR CARCINOMA IN A DOG
Signalment
10-year-old neutered male Labrador dog.
Presenting signs
Inappetance, difficulty drinking and excessive salivation.
Case history
· No previous pertinent medical problems
· Two weeks previously, the owner noticed that the dog was starting to become
reluctant to eat and seemed to have difficulty swallowing both food and water. He
would go to his bowl and appear interested, take the food into his mouth and then
move his head forward in small jerking movements and would extend his neck. This
had progressed to him dropping food out of his mouth and then walking away
· The dog was becoming quieter than normal, reluctant to exercise and had lost
weight
· In the 5 days prior to presentation he had started to make a sound as if he was
trying to clear his throat.
Clinical examination
· The dog was quiet and not particularly responsive
· Resentment when an attempt was made to open his mouth for oral examination
· Palpable swelling in the retropharyngeal region, mainly on the left
· Normal pulmonary auscultation
· No cranial nerve abnormalities, except an inability to assess gag reflex.
Diagnostic evaluation
In this particular case, as the dog would not allow a thorough oral examination, it
was decided to lndertake a more detailed evaluation under sedation. Careful oro
pharyngeal examination revealed the presence of an ulcerated mass lesion originating
in the region of the left tonsil but extending dorsally and enlarging over the palatine
region to the right tonsillar crypt (Fig. 8.1).
Figure 8.1
    s  n      s
palatine arch
Differential diagnosis
· Tonsillar carcinoma
· Tonsillar lymphoma
· Malignant melanoma.
Further evaluation
The dog was anaesthetized and inflated thoracic radiographs were obtained. These
revealed no metastatic lesions. The lesion was then biopsied with rigid grab forceps
and haemostasis was achieved by direct pressure using sterile swabs. Prior to biopsy
the laryngeal area was packed with a swab bandage to absorb any excessive
haemorrhage. The swelling in the retropharyngeal region was assessed by ultrasound.
This revealed two large, homogeneous structures consistent in appearance with the
retropharyngeal lymph nodes. Fine needle aspirates of these were obtained for
cytology.
Diagnosis
· Tonsillar carcinoma with metastasis to the retropharyngeal lymph nodes
In the light of the diagnosis and staging of the tumour, no treatment was
recommended other than NSAIDs and antibiotics. The dog was euthanized 5 days
later.
Theory refresher
Patients presenting with dysphagia, gagging or retching firstly require a careful
history to be obtained in order to attempt to esta blish exactly what the clinical sign(s)
is (are). Oral dysphagia may present as difficulty prehending the food, or as an
abnormal movement when swallowing, such as a head tilt or a more violent ^head-
throwing' action as if to force the food down, whilst patients with pharyngeal
dysphagia often prehend their food normally but then exhibit frequent attempts to
swallow, often expressed as frequent flexing and stretching of the neck. Once the
presenting problem and history have been established, a careful clinical examination
is essential. This should include a thorough neurological evaluation to identify any
neuropathy or neuromuscuilar pathology. Careful visual examination of the oral
cavity and oro-pharynx is also required, which may necessitate the lise of sedation or
even a brief general anaesthetic as some tonsillar tumours will be painful. The aims of
 n a  s    d n s s s
treatments (i.e. Are they currently too ill for major surgery? How will post-surgical
nutrition be delivered?).
Tonsillar tumours can present with progressive dysphagia, inappetance,
oral/pharyngeal pain, cervical swelling or possi bly blood-stained hypersalivation
Diagnosis is made by direct visualization of a tonsillar mass (which often appears
reddened, ulcerated and haemorrhagic) and then incisional or excisional biopsy. In
the light of the risk of haemorrhage, excisional biopsy is isually considered to be best
practice for this condition. Unfortunately, however, the prognosis for patients with
 s n          
almost always malignant; with squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) being the most
common tumour type reported but tonsillar lymphoma has also been described. Other
malignant melanoma.
             s
study, range 2-17) and are considered highly metastatic tumours, with 10-20%
having pulmonary metastasis identified at initial presentation and 77% having
distant metastasis identified on post-mortem. No specific breeds have been identified
P  s s   s     i 
compared to rural locations. Tonsillar carcinomas display rapid growth, significant
invasion into surrounding tissues and early metastasis to regional lymph nodes and
then lungs and/or other distant organs. Treatment therefore is difficult, as although
such a procedure may also be required to achieve a definitive diagnosis), it can never
be considered to be a procedure undertaken with curative intent. The efficacy of
does appear to offer better control of local spread and increases the average survival
 a     s   a     s
10% and the mean survival time reported in one study was only 151 days. Sole-agent
          
carcinomas. In one study, various chemotherapy combination treatments were
assessed and the mean survival times were only approximately 1o0 days despite
treatment.  Combining external  beam  radiation  therapy  with  chemotherapy
  n  n        )
treatment associated with the longest life expectancy for patients with carcinoma of
    a    e  
chemotherapy. However, in many cases, advising that no further treatment would be
fair for the animal is certainly acceptable if the disease is extensive and the primary
tumour is causing significant clinical problems.
CLINICAL CASE EXAMPLE 8.2 - AN OESOPHAGEAL PLASMACYTOMA IN A DOG
Signalment
12-year-old female neutered golden retriever dog.
Case history
diarrhoea, melena and regenerative anaemia
Physical examination
· Quiet and lethargic but otherwise examination was unremarkable.
Diagnostic evaluation
· Modest hypoproteinemia (53 mmol/l)
· Regenerative anaemia (HCT 22%, reticulocyte count 287 x 10%/L)
· Coagulation times (APTT, OSPT) were within normal limits, as was her platelet
couint
· Thoracic radiography demonstrated a soft-tissue density (approximately 2 x 3 cm)
contrast studies highlighted the mass further. Abdominal ultrasound revealed no
significant abnormalities. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed a mass within
the oesophagus just caudal to the heart base, emanating from the right lateral
oesophageal wall, measured 5 cm in length and occupying approximately a third of
the oesophageal diameter. On the dorsocaudal surface there was a clearly friable area
that was haemorrhaging (Figs 8.2-8.4)
· The remainder of the upper gastrointestinal tract was unremarkable.
Figure 8.2
Case 8.2 The initial barium oesophogram
Figure 8.3
Case 8.2 The intraoesophageal mass highlighted by the arrows
9M6H
Figure 8.4
Case 8.2 The endoscopic appearance of the mass
Treatment
· The mass was removed surgically via an intercostal approach and oesophagotomy.
The patient was positioned in right lateral recumbency to facilitate an eighth
intercostal thoracotomy approach. The left caudal lung lobe was packed cranially
branches bluntly dissected free. The oesophaguis was elevated with umbilical tapes
and palpation of the oesophagus permitted localization of the intraluminal mass. The
oesophagus was incised on its lateral aspect and fluid material was aspirated from the
lumen. The mass was found to have a pedicle attachment and was dissected from the
muscularis layer with wide local margins. The defect in the muscuilaris/mucosa was
closed with single interrupted sutures of 4/0 polydioxanone The oesophagotomy site
 s     s     
polydioxanone. The thoracic wall was routinely closed and a 6.7-mm diameter
thoracic drain tube was positioned caudal to the thoracotomy wound. The pleural
space was aspirated via an underwater seal and the drain removed 12 hours later.
Diagnosis
            
totally resolved within 10 days, thereby confirming this to be due to blood loss from
the tumour. Six months after her surgery, she underwent a further oesophagoscopy
which confirmed no evidence of regrowth of the mass and the dog remained well.
Theory refresher
Patients who regurgitate can be difficult to initially identify as many owners will
perceive the clinical signs as being vomiting rather than regurgitation. Regurgitation
is a passive event during which the oesophageal contents are expelled either very soon
or possibly minutes to hours after feeding. It is usually possible to differentiate from
vomiting by the lack of strong abdominal contractions and also regurgitation should
not normally have yellow-green bile staining. Regurgitated food may have a 'sausage
Many animals may also regurgitate large volumes of viscous white froth which, if
there is significant intraoesophageal pathology, may be blood-stained. Some patients
will be quiet or dull before regurgitating, especially if they are experiencing
present with secondary inhalation pneumonia (manifested as dullness, pyrexia,
complications in that these patients will be significantly sick because of their
infection as well as from the cause of their regurgitation and their poor nutritional
status. If it proves difficult to establish from the history whether a patient is
regurgitating or vomiting, observing them attempting to eat a test meal can be
extremely liseful.
Oesophageal cancer is rare, accounting for less than 0.5% of all canine and feline
in indigenous regions (Africa, Israel, and south-east USA). Occasionally, more
unusual tumours such as osteosarcoma or plasma cell tumours have been reported
within the oesophagus. Paraoesophageal tumours of the heart base, thyroid and
unusual. In cats, squamous cell carcinomas are considered to be the most frequently
frequently in females and are most often located just caudal to the thoracic inlet.
Neoplasia can also affect the oesophagus in the form of a thymoma inducing
            
thymoma cases will present with myasthenia gravis, which may be focal, oesophageal
or generalized and patients with either form often present with clinical signs of
regurgitation, although patients with the generalized form of the disease will also
display the characteristic signs of weakness on exertion, etc.
Following the history and clinical examination, further evaluation of a patient that
           
uindertaking thoracic radiographs, initially with plain films but possibly also by
     s s    
caution in patients which have aspirated in the past, as aspiration of barium will
result in the long-term presence of the contrast agent within the bronchi. Should a
stricture or mass be identified within the oesophagus, oesophagoscopy should then be
uindertaken and grab biopsies of the mass obtained at the same time if the mass is
present within the lumen. Attempting to reach a diagnosis without resorting to
because the prognosis varies considerably depending on the tumour type. Malignant
the disease by the time they present and the surgical difficulties encountered by
indertaking  extensive  oesophageal reconstruction. In  addition,  malignant
oesophageal tumours commonly show a high incidence of metastatic disease.
However, although there are no large-scale studies describing the use of chemotherapy
as a sole-treatment modality in canine oesophageal tumours, one report describes the
use of doxorubicin following partial oesophagectomy in six dogs that had Spirocirca
lupi-associated oesophageal sarcomas and the median survival time in these dogs was
with good surgical management of these tumours but further studies in this area are
required. The use of radiotherapy is restricted to the extrathoracic oesophagus due to
the poor tolerance of the surrounding intrathoracic tissues. Referral therefore, of
s  ss    s   s
for further evaluation and excision, if possible, is highly recommended, but the
does not preclude complete suirgical excision.
Cranial mediastinal tumours may cause signs of regurgitation or gagging due to a
direct mass effect resulting in oesophageal compression, oesophageal invasion
(unusual) or due to the development of myasthenia gravis as a paraneoplastic
syndrome. Heart base tumours are rare in dogs and even more unusual in cats and it
would be considered unusual (although possible) for them to affect the oesophagus.
There is also one case report of a gastric carcinoma extending cranially along the
distal oesophagus into the cranial mediastinum causing recurrent dysphagia. The
tumour within the cranial mediastinum that most commonly affects the oesophagus,
however, is thymoma. The presence of a thymoma causing secondary oesophageal
dysfunction was first described in the dog in 1972 and since then there have been
many studies showing that thymomas can be associated with an autoimmune
paraneoplastic syndrome characterized by megaoesophagus and polymyositis. The
incidence of megaoesophagus varies depending on the report; one study showed that
47% of dogs with a thymoma had megaoesophagus, whilst a second study indicated
that 66% of cases were affected. It is therefore possible to conclude that a significant
  s   s      s  
important prognostic value, as the presence of megaoesophagus has been shown to
reduce the chances of a successful outcome.
CLINICAL CASE EXAMPLE 8.3 -A MEDIASTINAL LYMPHOMA IN A DOG
Signalment
6-year-old neutered male Labrador dog.
Presenting signs
· Progressive history over the preceding 3 weeks of gradually worsening appetite with
associated weight loss, tachypnoea and retching
Clinical examination
· Quiet and poorly responsive
· Tachypnoeic with increased respiratory effort
· No audible lung sounds in the ventral third of the thorax and thoracic percussion in
this area was dull
· Reduced thoracic compressi bility
· No other abnormalities detected.
Diagnostic evaluation
· A right lateral thoracic radiograph revealed the presence of a large cranial thoracic
mass and a DV thoracic radiograph confirmed the mass to be within the cranial
mediastinum (Fig. 8.5)
· Thoracic ultrasound confirmed the presence of a mediastinal mass
· Fine needle aspirates of the mass were highly suggestive of lymphoma (Fig. 8.6)
· A B-cell lymphoma was confirmed as the diagnosis by undertaking flow cytometric
analysis of aspirate samples.
Figure 8.5
 Case 8.3 A right lateral thoracic radiograph showing the presence of a large cranial
thoracic mass
Figure 8.6
Case 8.3 The appearance of a fine needle aspirate sample (Giemsa stain, xl00), showing
the presence of large lymphoblasts containing variable numbers of variably shaped nucleoli. Note also
the mitotic figure in the middle of the image
Treatment
· After careful discussion with his owners, the dog was started on a modified
Madison-Wisconsin  multidrug  chemotherapy  protocol  (see page  195)  which  he
received for 25 weeks.
· The dog went into complete remission (Fig. 8.7) and remained healthy for 14
months before relapsing.
· The owners declined using doxorubicin as a rescue agent on cost grounds, so the dog
was treated with oral CCNU. This generated a partial remission, in that he became
well in himself again but the mass did not totally resolve radiographically. He
remained well for just under 5 months on CCNU and then he deteriorated and was
euthanized.
Figure8.7
Case 8.3 A right lateral thoracic radiograph from the dog at week 9 of his
chemotherapy protocol, showing complete resolution of the cranial mediastinal mass
Theory refresher
Cranial mediastinal tumours are most likely to be either a thymoma or lymphoma.
Thymomas originate from the thymic epithelium, but due to the cellular nature of the
  s     n  n s
cytological differentiation between thymoma and lymphoma sometimes very difficult.
They are not considered to be common tumours and they generally occur in older
animals. No breed predilections have been proven, although medium-to large-breed
dogs may be reported disproportionately more often. There are three histological types
of thymoma (epithelial, lymphocyte-rich and clear cell) but there seems to be no
from a suirgical point of view is whether the thymoma is well-encapsulated and not
invading surrounding tissues (so-called benign' thymoma) or whether it is attached
to and invading surrounding structures such as the pericardium and cranial vena
,  ,      ( ,  
are misleading as they do not relate directly to the histological appearance of the
tumours or their behaviour and metastasis from a ‘malignant thymoma', although
reported, is rare.
         
tachypnoea and exercise intolerance frequently reported. On physical examination,
careful auscultation and percussion of the thorax may reveal reduced/absent breath
sounds in the cranioventral thorax and caudal displacement of the heart sounds.
whilst thoracic palpation frequently reveals reduced compressibility of the chest
Radiographs of the thorax reveal either a clear soft-tissue density cranial to the heart,
or possibly the presence of a pleural effusion, in which case, ultrasonography will be
useful to identify the presence of a cranial mediastinal mass.
Making a definitive diagnosis by cytology is worth attempting but can be
frustrating due to the high number of small lymphocytes that are usually found in
thymomas, creating difficulty differentiating thymoma from lymphoma (Fig. 8.8).
This can be complicated by the fact that a minority of thymomas will be
hypercalcaemic on serum biochemistry analysis, a feature more commonly associated
with lymphoma.
Figure8.8
The appearance of a fine needle aspirate from a patient with a thymoma. There is a
mixed population of lymphoid cells and scattered mast cells. Epithelial cells have not been harvested
   sn  a s     s s  s n
the lymphoid cells are mixed but mainly small.
Courtesy of Mrs Elizabeth illiers, Dick white Referrals
Although the signalment of the patient may help (lymphoma is more usually seen in
of obtaining a definitive diagnosis often need to be considered. Tru-cut biopsies are an
option but these too, do not always lead to a definitive result, especially if the mass
has a significant cystic component to its structure. Good biopsy samples are usually
obtained using thorascopic biopsy techniques but this is not readily available outside
referral centres. A recent study, however, showed that flow cytometry analysis of
aspirate samples can be extremely useful, as thymomas appear to generally have more
than 10% of their lymphocytes co-expressing CD4 and CD8 whilst almost all
writing, only the University of Cambridge veterinary diagnostic laboratory offers flow
cytometry as a routine test within the UK to the authors' knowledge but this is certain
to change over the next few years. Aspirate samples are obtained as usual but are
placed into phosphate-buffered saline rather than onto a microscope slide and
possible, cytology and flow cytometry on ultrasound-guided aspirates remains the
author's diagnostic method of choice, coupled with the iltrasonographic appearance
of the mass, as a study from 1991 suggested that lymphoma usually appears as a
homogeneous, often hypoechoic mass, whilst thymoma usually has a heterogeneous
appearance. If this does not lead to a definitive diagnosis the author recommends
and attempted excisional biopsy only if the other techniques fail to reveal the
diagnosis.
Patientpresentswithdifficultyswallowing
or suspected regurgitation
Establish whether patient is just
dysphagic,sgaggingorisregurgitating
Dysphagia/gagging
Regurgitation
Full neurological examination
Full neurological examination
Carefuloral
Sedale/GA
Thoracic+/-cervical
Bula series
Thoracic
examination
for laryngeal
radiographs.Consider
radiographsor
radiographs
forintra-oral
and pharyngeal
ultrasound of
MRI/CTofinner
+/-cervical
mass
mass
retropharyngeal area
earif inner ear
spinal views
plus fine needle
disease suspected
aspiration of any
masslesions
Mass identified
Consider advanced
Surgical
Heart base
imaging to establish
excision
mediastinal mass
mass
exact location of
imass
anyretropharyngeal
identified
Palpate and aspirate
tumour
draining lymphnodes
Ultrasound
Echocardiogram
assessment
plus aspiration
Plan surgery+l-
for cytology and
Three-view inflated
ancillary treatment
flow cytometry
Surgical
thoracicradiographs
excision
ifpossible
Biopsylexcise mass
depending on location
Diagnosislymphoma:
Thymoma
Inconclusive
Myasthenia gravis
treat medically
testing if indicated
Establish definitivel
follow-up treatment
oncehistopathology
Attempt total surgical excision.
backif possible
Obtain good biopsiesifnotpossible
snbeydosaoebou ebeuew
present +/-myasthenia treatment
Figure 8.9
    s     
regurgitation
If a definitive diagnosis cannot be reached, it may be acceptable in some situations
to see if the mass will shrink with chemotherapy. However, the authors' experience of
this is inconsistent, probably because many lymphomas do not respond quickly
enough to vincristine and L-asparaginase and the clinical deterioration in many cases
prompts surgical intervention. It is also ethically questionable to give a dog without a
S s            
some dogs will experience. Surgery therefore sometimes becomes both a diagnostic
excision and in cases where a presurgical diagnosis has been elusive, undertaking
exploratory thoracotomy becomes the only realistic option. If possible, the mass should
be excised completely, but this may be difficult in cases of undiagnosed lymphoma
biopsies should be taken to ensure that representative samples can be analysed
histopathologically.
The prognosis for benign thymomas in dogs and cats that can be excised is
 s          
Eighty-three per cent l-year survival rates have been reported for such cases in dogs
whilst one study showed that 10/12 cats had no recurrence of their tumour following
excisional surgery, although two did die in the immediate postoperative period. Cases
that present with megaoesophagus are more challenging; as it is currently not possible
to predict whether or not the oesophageal dilatation will resolve and many cases do
not. One paper suggests that removal of the thymoma led to an improved response to
considerable medical challenge and many  patients will succumb to aspiration
pneulmonia.
Thymoma in the rabbit is associated with dyspnoea, bilateral exophthalmos and
the literature. Metastasis is occasionally reported both within the thoracic cavity and
abdominal  cavity.  Diagnosis  is  by radiography, ultrasound-guided  fine needle
aspiration and MRI that reveal the presence of a cranial mediastinal mass. The
treatment of choice is surgical excision by median sternotomy. Chemotherapy and
S          
and chemotherapy has limited utility.
secondary metastasis of a uterine adenocarcinoma or lymphoma. Both of these are
considered extremely common neoplastic diseases of the rabbit.
9
The vomiting and/or diarrhoeic cancer patient
Vomiting is the active expulsion of material from within the stomach and/or upper
small intestine. Vomiting should always be differentiated from regurgitation either by
careful history evaluation or by direct observation. Vomiting usually causes a
    d ans  n  ss
pacing) and then usually proceeds to retching, whilst a regurgitating patient does not
usually exhibit these features. Vomiting also usually involves visible contraction of
the abdominal muscles whereas regurgitation usually does not. Analysis of the
vomitus itself usually reveals a pH less than 5 (regurgitated fluid should not be acidic)
linless there is bile present, in which case the pH will often be alkaline. Assessment of
the vomitus for the presence of bilirubin (either based on the yellow-green colour or
by using a simple urine dipstick) can therefore sometimes be helpful too.
Vomiting can be caused by disease in many areas of the body and therefore from an
oncological point of view, may indicate the presence of a tumour in locations other
than the stomach. It is helpful to adopt a logical body-systems-based approach to the
investigation of a vomiting cancer patient, by considering where and what type of
tumour may be present as shown in Box 9.1.
 Box 9.1 Types of tumour that could be associated with causing vomiting
Gastric tumours
Adenocarcinoma
Lymphoma
Gastrointestinal stromal tumours (GISTs)
Mast cell tumour
Extramedullary plasmacytoma
Fibrosarcoma
 Malignant histiocytosis
Histiocytic sarcoma
Intestinal tuimouirs
Lymphoma
Adenocarcinoma
GISTs
Carcinoid
 Mast cell tumour
Extramedullary plasmacytoma
Extraskeletal osteosarcoma
 Haemangiosarcoma
Abdominal tumours
Pancreatic adenocarcioma
Hepatocellular carcinoma
Hepatic lymphoma
 Biliary carcinoma
 Alimentary lymphoma
Haemangiosarcoma
Tumours causing metabolic dysfunction
Hepatocellular carcinoma
Gastrinoma
Urinary bladder transitional cell carcinoma (causing ureteric or urethral obstruction)
CNS tumours
CLINICAL CASE EXAMPLE 9.1 - GASTRIC ADENOCARCINOMA IN A DOG
Signalment
9-year-old neutered male Labrador dog.
Presenting signs
Persistent vomiting.
Case history
The relevant history in this particular case was:
· No pertinent previous history relating to the gastrointestinal system.
· The dog started to vomit intermittently 5 weeks previously but initially seemed well.
However, over the preceding 2 weeks, the vomiting had progressed from occurring
after some meals, to occurring after every meal, leading to inappetance and loss of
condition.
· Vomiting had continued despite the poor appetite, with vomitus consisting mainly
  p   d     r   s n
flecks of blood.
Clinical examination
· Quiet and disinterested in his surroundings
· Thin body condition
· Mild discomfort on palpation of cranial abdomen
· No other specific abnormalities.
Differential diagnosis
· Gastrointestinal disease
· Severe gastritis
· Foreign body
· Gastric neoplasia
· Adenocarcinoma
· Lymphoma
· Intestinal neoplasia
· Pancreatitis
· Hepatobiliary disease
· Hepatitis
· Cholangitis
· Hepatic neoplasia
· Hepatocellular carcinoma
· Lymphoma
· Metabolic disease
· Renal failure
· Electrolyte disturbances.
Diagnostic evaluation
· Serum biochemistry ruled out major metabolic disease
· Diagnostic imaging (plain thoracic and abdominal radiographs and abdominal
ultrasound) revealed no significant abnormalities
· Gastroscopy revealed the presence of an ulcerated lesion on the lesser curvature
 ) s s a  ne  n  
· Biopsies from the periphery of the ulcer revealed a gastric adenocarcinoma.
Nane
Figure 9.1
Case 9.1 A video endoscopic image from the dog, showing a large, erythematous
ulcerated area on the pyloric side of the angularis incisura
Theory refresher
Gastric cancer is thought to account for less than 1% of all malignancies and is seen
less often in cats compared to dogs. It is generally a disease seen in older dogs and the
most common form is gastric adenocarcinoma (approximately 75% of all cases)
although  leiomyosarcoma,  lymphoma,  mast  cell  tumour,  extramedullary
plasmacytoma and fibrosarcoma have all been reported. In cats, the stomach is the
least common part of the gastrointestinal tract to be affected by tumours, but, if
present, lymphoma is the most likely tumour type to be identified. The clinical
histories in affected patients can be quite vague, although as in the case example,
most cases will present with a progressively worsening history of vomiting, and
frequently, dogs with gastric tumours will present appearing generally unwell,
condition. The presence of fresh blood or ‘coffee ground’ haematemesis is only
suggestive of the presence of gastric ulceration but this raises the index of suspicion
for gastric neoplasia in an older dog.
Initial diagnostic evaluation, as in the clinical case example, can frequently appear
unremarkable. Positive contrast radiographic studies may reveal a lesion within the
gastric lumen, or be suggestive of gastric ulceration, but ultrasound may often not
reveal the presence of a lesion unless it is located within the distal third of the
stomach due to the difficulties of imaging the cranial areas of the stomach, unless it is
fluid-filled. However, ultrasound can be very useful to assess the gastric and
mesenteric lymph nodes and if these are found to be enlarged, to enable ultrasound-
guided fine needle aspiration to be performed. Many gastric tumours are diagnosed
late in the clinical stage of the disease, by which time, metastasis to the local lymph
nodes or other surrounding organs may have occuirred, so such assessment is essential
in the clinical staging of the disease. Ultrasouind can also reveal the loss of layering of
the gastric structure that may be seen with an infiltrative condition such as
lymphoma.
Flexible endoscopy is very useful to identify intraluminal lesions but it is vital that a
logical, stepwise examination technique is adopted to ensure that all the gastric
the dog will be located on the lesser curvature or within the antrum, it is important to
remember that a *J-manoelivre' must be performed to ensire that the cardiac area has
been fully examined, as it is possible for small tumours to exist just behind and above
   s        
evaluation if the endoscope is not retroflexed (Fig. 9.2).
Figure9.2
The ‘J-manoeuvre';
adapted from Veterinary Endoscopy for the Small Animal Practitioner, Timothy C McCartney, Elsevier-Saunders 2005, p. 294
If the stomach contains a significant volume of gastric juice, then this should either
be suictioned out through the endoscope, or the dog turned from one lateral
recumbency to the other to ensure that all areas of the mucosa have been visualized.
anticholinergics, as these can help reduce the volume of gastric secretions and the
degree of gastric motility, but their uise is obviously one of personal preference. The
undertake gastroscopy with the dog lying in left lateral recumbency, as this allows a
clear view of the antrum and pylorus without the risk of fluid obstruction in this area.
   s    o  s 
carefully, especially if gastric ulceration is identified. It is not advisable to attempt
   e     s     g
necrotic tissue of little or no diagnostic uise and (b) carries a greater risk of perforation
of the gastric wall. Rather, it is better to biopsy the tissue adjacent to the uilcer, as this
   t nm    s      
remember that if one lesion is found and biopsied, a complete gastric examination is
still essential in case there is more than one lesion present.
Unless the histopathology confirms the diagnosis to be lymphoma, the only
treatment commonly utilized for gastric tumours in cats and dogs is surgery, but this
needs to be performed with full owner knowledge that in many cases, even with
complete resection, the prognosis has to be considered to be guarded. Gastric
adenocarcinomas are isuially aggressive tumours that metastasize to the local lymph
nodes, liver and finally lungs if left untreated. Many cases present late in their disease
form of the disease has been identified has to be considered, so undertaking surgery
with curative intent is difficult. However, if a lesion is found to be solitary, then
      a       s
wide resection is usually required, reconstruction often entails a gastroduodenostomy
           )s
 s          n  hs
lincommon and some studies citing mean survival times as short as 2 months. No
chemotherapy has been shown to be efficacious for gastric adenocarcinomas in dogs
or cats and its lise is not recommended.
Other benign or lower-grade malignant gastric tumours may be more amenable to
surgical excision, thereby illustrating the importance of attempting to obtain a
presurgical diagnosis if possible. Leiomyomas appear to be found more frequently in
the proximal third of the stomach and can lisuially be removed via a midline
laparotomy. Partial gastrectomy has been greatly facilitated in recent years by the use
of surgical stapling equipment such as the TA-55 and TA-90 (p. 201). At the time of
surgery it is important to examine and biopsy local lymph nodes and any suspicious
areas on the surface of the liver or within the omentum.
CLINICAL CASE EXAMPLE 9.2 - DIFFUSE HEPATOCELLULAR CARCINOMA IN A DOG
Signalment
9-year-old neutered female golden retriever dog.
Presenting signs
 Persistent vomiting.
Clinical history
H h  n   s  
· 4 days prior to presentation vomiting and very dull.
Physical examination
· Quiet but responsive
· Mild jaundice
· HR 140 bpm
· No obvious liver enlargement.
Diagnostic evaluation
· ALT 446 iu/L
·ALP 250 iu/L
· TBil 45 mmol/L
· PCV 33%
· Postprandial bile acids 87 μmol/L
· Abdominal and thoracic radiographs unremarkable
· Ultrasound revealed a diffuse, heterogeneous echotexture throughout all liver lobes.
No other abnormalities noted (Fig. 9.3)
· Coagulation profile (one-stage prothrombin time, activated partial thromboplastin
  s   a       
liver was uindertaken
· Cytology revealed pleomorphic polygonal cells in a chaotic pattern. The cells had
large round nuclei with variably prominent and variable numbers of nucleoli. The
cytoplasm was sparse and grainy
· Diagnosis: diffuse hepatocellular carcinoma.
LIVER
Figure 9.3
Case 9.2 Ultrasound picture revealing the diffuse, heterogeneous echotexture identified
throughout all liver lobes
Theory refresher
This case illustrates how a tumour outside of the gastrointestinal tract (and this could
therefore also apply, especially to pancreatic tumours) can cause significant gastric
signs of disease. The exact reasons why liver disease causes vomiting often cannot be
identified, but portal hypertension, hepatic encephalopathy and an altered cytokine
environment may all play a part. This case also illustrates that diffuse hepatic disease
of tumour could cause different clinical signs in different patients.
three main forms:
1. Single,‘massive' tumour
2. Multiple nodular tumour
3. Diffuse tuimoulr.
The prognosis varies considerably between these different types. If a single massive
tumour can be excised without difficulty and there is no evidence of metastatic
although these tumours do carry a metastatic potential, the rate of tumour spread
clinically appears to be low. Massive hepatocellular carcinomas on the right-hand side
the increased risk of intraoperative vena cava trauma, but once removed, their
prognosis is the same as for massive hepatocellular carcinomas arising from the left-
hand side of the liver. However, the prognosis for both the nodular forms and the
diffuse forms is extremely guarded, as surgical excision is uisually not possible due to
the extensive nature of the disease and many hepatocellular carcinomas appear to be
             
lobe, so she was euithanized.
Other forms of hepatobiliary tumour can cause vomiting and also certainly
can develop within the biliary tree, and especially in cats, bile duct adenomas are
 s s     a e   a     
However, malignant biliary neoplasia in the form of a biliary carcinoma, which is
reported to be the most common malignant hepatobiliary tumour of cats and the
second most common hepatobiliary malignancy in dogs in some studies, cause clinical
signs due to their aggressive behaviour. Malignant biliary tumours can form within
the gall bladder, within the hepatic biliary tissue or within the extrahepatic bile ducts.
Metastasis with biliary carcinoma is frequently found at presentation with spreac
being seen both locally to the draining lymphatics and also potentially to distant sites.
many cases. The treatment for each case therefore depends upon firstly whether the
           
excision, although this may require a liver lobectomy, and the prognosis for these
cases can be considered to be good. Surgery is obviously advisable for cases of biliary
However, even in patients who have no distant disease noted on staging, survival
times of greater than 6 months following surgery are unusual, due to the development
described for this disease in cats or dogs, so the use of medical cytotoxic therapy
cannot be recommended at the time of writing.
neuroectoderm cells within the liver and are therefore not a form of carcinoma,
          
metastatic disease frequently being identified on clinical staging procedures. No
efficacious chemotherapeuitic regimens have been described for this disease in cats or
dogs, so the use of medical cytotoxic therapy cannot be recommended at the time of
Writing.
Epithelial pancreatic tumours such as pancreatic carcinoma can certainly produce
vomiting, lethargy and weight loss. These tumours can be small and difficult to
visualize on ultrasound but their aggressive behaviour frequently means that the
metastatic disease is identifiable on clinical staging. No efficacious chemotherapeutic
regimens have been described for this disease in cats or dogs, so the lise of medical
cytotoxic therapy cannot be recommended at the time of writing, meaning that
surgical excision is the only treatment advisable. If a partial pancreatectomy is to be
performed, considera ble thought has to be given as to the postoperative management,
as it is quite likely that the patient will develop pancreatitis as a result of the surgical
handling of the pancreas. Placement of a jejunostomy tube should therefore be
considered. The problem with placing a more simple gastrostomy tube is that feeding
through a G-tube is often just as likely to induce vomiting as feeding per os, but at
least if a G-tube is placed then there is a chance to feed the animal if it is inappetant
post-surgery. Elective postoperative placement of a naso-oesophageal feeding tube in
 g ssd a on  a  o si a si   
animal repositioning the tube during a vomiting or retching episode which could
include the tube passing into the trachea. Should this occur and it not be detected
before feeding then takes place, the resulting aspiration pneumonia is likely to be
disastrouis.
CLINICAL CASE EXAMPLE 9.3 -A CAT WITH INTESTINAL LYMPHOMA
Signalment
13-year-old neutered female domestic short-haired (DsH) cat.
Presenting signs
A 4-week history of gradually worsening inappetance, weight loss and diarrhoea
Clinical history
The relevant clinical history for this case was:
· Usually healthy, fully vaccinated and wormed regularly, fed premium-brand dry cat
food
· Over the preceding 4 weeks, she had become gradually more lethargic and
withdrawn. Her appetite was reduced and she was losing weight
· Her faecal consistency had been progressively worsening, from being pasty through
to very watery over the period of her illness. In the week prior to presentation the
owner described the faeces as being like 'watery paste'.
Clinical examination
· Quiet and lethargic, poor hair coat quality and poor body condition
· No palpable masses on abdominal palpation
 No palpable peripheral lymph nodes.
Determine whether thepatient
is vomiting orregurgitating
Regurgitating:
Truly vomiting
seechapter8
Undertakefullphysical examination,
especially a careful abdominal palpitation
Obtain fu serum biochemistry
and complete blood counts
Consider bile
Undertake abdominal
Consider ACTH
acidstimulation
radiographs and
stimulation test
ifhepatic
ultrasound examinaton
torule out
parameters
Addison's disease
abnormal
Fine needle aspirate
No obvious cause found:undertake
mass lesionif
upper GITendoscopy or consider
identified and
exploratorylaparotomyand
safe to do so
gastro-intestinal biopsies if
endoscopy not avallable
Solid non-lymphoid tumour
Lymphoma
(carcinoma,sarcoma,masl
pasoubep
celltumour etc.)diagnosed
Excise surgically
Excise surgically
Commence
after full staging
if single lesion
chemotherapy
formetastasis
proves negative
Consider post-operative
chemotherapyif
aeudoudde
Figure 9.4
Diagnostic plan flowchart: vomiting and regurgitation
Diagnostic evaluation
· Serum biochemistry revealed hypoalbuminaemia (19 g/L) and mild elevations in
ALT and ALP. Bile acid stimulation was normal
· FeLV/FIV negative
· Urinalysis was unremarkable
· Abdominal ultrasound revealed a complete loss of layering and thickening of the
intestinal wall within the small intestine, along with a mild mesenteric
lymphadenopathy
· Fine needle aspiration of the mesenteric lymph nodes was non-diagnostic
· Flexible endoscopy revealed a normal appearance to the gastric mucosa but the
duodenal mucosa appeared thickened, granular and pale in appearance (Fig. 9.5).
Figure 9.5
Case 9.3 The endoscopic appearance of the duodenal mucosa in the cat revealing the
irregular, almost nodular appearance of the intestinal surface.
Courtesy of Dr Alex G erman, University of Liverpoo]
Diagnosis
· Grab biopsies of the duodenal mucosa confirmed the diagnosis to be lymphoma
Treatment
· The cat was treated with a high-dose COP protocol and improved clinically within 5
her appetite improved. Her diarrhoea stopped 8 days after treatment commenced and
the cat improved considerably. Repeated ultrasound 4 weeks after the treatment had
started showed none of the abnormalities previously identified to be present, thereby
indicating that the cat had gone into complete remission
           
Theory refresher
Intestinal neoplasia accouints for up to 1o% of all canine and feline tumours reported
in the veterinary literature and as with gastric neoplasia, many different tumour types
             
adenocarcinoma.  Malignant epithelial  tumours  (adenocarcinomas)  will more
commonly arise in the small intestine of cats and the colon or rectum in dogs. Other,
           s  
adenomatous polyps (usually found in the rectum of dogs) and carcinoids, which are
tumours that histologically resemble carcinomas but actually arise from endocrine
tissue and are frequently aggressive in behaviour.
The incidence of intestinal neoplasia increases with age, with the mean reported
age for intestinal neoplasia in the cat being between 10 and 12 years whilst the mean
 e sa a p   q s  s  a    
Interestingly, most reports indicate a slight male predilection to the development of
intestinal neoplasia in both species and certain breeds appear to be over-represented in
the literature; Siamese cats seem particularly predisposed to developing intestinal
neoplasia  whilst medium-to large-breed dogs  (particularly collies and German
shepherd dogs) are reported to develop disease more frequently than small-breed
canines. With the exception of the role of FeLV and/or FIV in intestinal neoplasia in
cats, there are no known causes for intestinal neoplasia.
The clinical signs that an intestinal neoplasm can produce will vary betweer
patients and it is important to remember that the intestine has a large functional
compensatory reserve, meaning that the development of diarrhoea indicates a
sufficient degree of disease to cause breakdown in the compensatory mechanisms.
Some animals with intestinal neoplasia will exhibit concurrent vomiting; others will
display just diarrhoea along with weight loss and usually a progressively worsening
    p       s  
intestinal origin (Box 9.2).
Box 9.2 General signs of small and large intestinal diarrhoea
General signs of smal intestin al d iarrhoea
Gen eral signs of large intestinal diarrh oea
Watery diarrhoea
Mucoid diarrh oea
Large volumes passed with almost normal frequency
Usually little, if any, defec atory tenesmus
In creased frequen cy of defecation
No fresh blood seen
Fresh blood often noted
Weight loss often noted
Weight loss
einthedisez
Serum biochemistry profiles may show hypoalbuminaemia due to a protein-losing
enteropathy along with other, non-specific indicators of intestinal function such as
high serum urea if there is proximal small-intestinal haemorrhage and mild to
moderate elevations in ALP and sometimes also ALT (as a reflection of a secondary
enteropathy can be confirmed by simply ensuring that there is no excessive urinary
protein loss by assessing the urinary protein : creatinine ratio and also by undertaking
a bile acid stimulation test to ensure that the liver function is normal. With regard to
other possible biochemical abnormalities, some more unusual cases report
hypoglycaemia in cases with smooth muscle tumours, but this is uncommon.
Abdominal radiography, and especially positive contrast radiographs may help
identify the presence and location of an intestinal tumour, but ultrasound is
frequently the most useful diagnostic imaging tool to turn to for investigation of these
patients as it is highly sensitive and specific for the identification of intestinal mass
lesions. Any solid mass lesions or enlarged lymph nodes that are identified should be
considered for fine needle aspiration to investigate the possibility of primary
neoplastic or secondary metastatic disease, whilst diffuse thickening of a section of
intestinal wall along with a loss of the normal ‘layered appearance’ to the intestine is
suggestive of a diffusely infiltrative primary intestinal neoplasm. Definitive diagnosis
 s    si n   n si   o ss sn
clearly diagnostic) and again, ultrasound can be helpful to determine whether this can
be achieved with a flexible endoscope or not. In cases where the lesion(s) cannot be
reached by endoscope, obtaining biopsies either by laparoscopy or exploratory
laparotomy has to be considered. These cases present particular surgical problems, in
that they are frequently malnourished as a result of their disease and they may be
hypoalbuminaemic, thereby increasing the risk of breakdown of the surgical wound,
S   s       
therefore be given to closing these wounds properly. If a single mass lesion has been
firstly include a careful visual and digital exploration of the abdomen to ensure that
there is no other distant disease that may not have been detected by the diagnostic
  s s       n   g
undertaking impression smears (obtained from the cut surface of the tumour) or some
fine needle aspirates from several of the masses for cytological analysis can be a very
laparotomy site.
Once a diagnosis has been made, unless lymphoma has been confirmed, the
treatment of choice is almost always surgical excision if possible and if it was not
    a  p    sd    o 
the disease, the prognosis for intestinal tumours is generally considered to be better
than that for tumours of the stomach due to the relative ease with which complete
excision can be achieved with minimal morbidity for the patient. In patients where no
metastatic disease can be found and complete excision is achieved the prognosis is
reasonable. Studies have shown, for example, that for intestinal adenocarcinomas the
mean survival time is approximately 15 months with 1-and 2-year survival rates
being approximately 40% and 33% respectively. For mesenchymal tumours/GISTs the
   s    s n   
encouraging still, with 1-and 2-year survival rates of 80% and 67% being seen for
small intestinal disease and 83% and 62% for caecal tumouirs. The prognosis, however,
is considerably worse for patients in whom metastatic disease is detected, with
survival times of approximately  3 months  described for patients  with  intestinal
adenocarcinomas. Part of the reason for this poor outcome is that there are no clear
recommendations regarding the use of chemotherapy in dogs or cats in non-lymphoid
neoplasia of the intestine. There is a report of improved survival times in cats with
   s      s ss
elsewhere. Therefore, at this stage it is difficult to recommend routine adjuvant
chemotherapy following surgical excision of any tumour except lymphoma.
           
present having a single solid mass that is frequently palpable, with diffuse disease
areas of the intestinal tract. Chemotherapy is the first-line treatment of choice for an
commencing treatment may be considered if there is no evidence of distant disease in
the diagnostic staging process. However, one study in cats showed that there was no
advantage in undertaking surgical excision of a single lymphoma mass with follow-up
chemotherapy treatment compared to treatment with chemotherapy alone. The degree
of success seen with chemotherapy can vary widely and the substage of the patient
        s  
significantly poorly with alimentary lymphoma frequently do not respond well to
           
significantly affects outcome; cats with lymphocytic lymphoma appear to respond
much more favourably than cats with lymphoblastic lymphoma.
reached, the choice of protocol to ise comes down to one of personal preference based
on experience, cytotoxic drug-handling facilities and the available finance for the
many specialists will recommend using a doxorubicin-containing protocol such as
CHOP, the Madison-Wisconsin protocol or CVT-X. The reason for this is that although
there are no large-scale, randomized comparison studies comparing the response to
treatment with COP against a doxorubicin-containing pulse-therapy protocol, the
literature in general suggests that the use of a multidrug, pulse-therapy protocol
remission, that the length of first remission is longer than when compared to animals
   d  i pa  e n  do s
administered. However, doxorubicin is relatively expensive, needs to be handled with
P  a    e a  o o a  
the extensive perivascular soft-tissue damage that can resuilt. There have also been
two reports of successful treatment for feline alimentary lymphoma with just
chlorambucil and prednisolone with good su1ccess rates (average survival time of 704
days in one study) and this is also a protocol that the author now frequently utilizes
            s
between 56-80% have been reported with average first remission times of
approximately 7 months, although 2-year survival rates of up to 34% are reported in
    s  a i ss s    a
However, this study also showed that a subset of cats responded extremely well to
treatment, suggesting that average survival times may be skewed by a minority of
           o g
prognosis for alimentary lymphoma patients also appears to be dependent on whether
P              
remission generally have significantly shorter survival times. In summary therefore
  e  s    sn s s
unless the cat is significantly unwell but it is difficult to be very accurate regarding
with chemotherapy, so its use should not be discouinted.
Case presents with diarrhoea
Careful history and physical examination
Attempt to establishif predominantly
largeorsmallintestinal innature
Predominantly
Predominantly
small intestinal
large intestinal
Abdominal mass
Nomass
Rectal mass palpable via
palpable
palpable
digitalrectalexamination
Serum biochemistry.complete
blood count and faecal analysis
Abdominal imaging (ultrasound often
more sensitive thanradiographsbut
both modalities should be used)
Fine needle
Upper GITendoscopy
Colonoscopy
aspirate mass
orsurgeryand biopsy
plus biopsies
lesion found
ifsignslower
GIT in nature
Epithelial tumour
Lymphoma
(adenocarcinoma)
diagnosed
orother solid tissue
tumour diagnosed
Treatments as
perdiagnoses
as shown in
adjacent boxes
Metastasis check,
Consider surgery
then surgical
if solitary lesion,
excisionif possible
orpluschemotherapy
Figure 9.6
 Diagnostic plan flowchart: diarrhoea
10
The haematochezic or dyschezic cancer patient
Haematochezia describes the presence of what appears to be fresh blood on the
surface of, passed concurrently with, or admixed into faeces. This is obviously
different to melena, which describes dark, usually black-coloured, tarry stools caused
by the presence of digested blood within the alimentary tract. Haematochezia may or
may not be accompanied by dyschezia (which describes the difficult or painful
passing of faeces) and/or diarrhoea, but it usually indicates disease within the colon,
rectum or anus. Dyschezia commonly indicates disease within the anal or perianal
tissues, so it may be possible by careful observation of the clinical signs to narrow
down the location of the underlying pathology but as with any other suspected
condition, a thorough clinical examination and diagnostic evaluation must always be
performed to accurately locate the pathology. When considering these patients from
the point of view of possible neoplastic causes, the differential diagnosis list for a
patient with haematochezia and/or dyschezia is shown in Box 10.1.
Box 10.1 Differential neoplastic diagnoses for a dog or cat presenting with
haematochezia or dyschezia
Differential neoplastic diagnoses for a dog or cat presenting
Differential neoplastic d iagnoses for a dog or cat presenting with dysch ezia
with h aematoch ezia
Ileocaecal tumour  (carcinoma or  lymphoma  mo!
Anal sac aden ocarcinoma
commonly)
Rectal polyp
Colonic tumour (carcin oma or lymph oma most likely)
Prostatic, urin ary bladder or urethral neoplasia
Rectal polyp
Extrain testinal pelvic canal neoplasia (e.g. soft-tissue
An al sac adenoc arc inoma
with in the pelvic mu scu lature)
Perian al adenoma
CLINICAL CASE EXAMPLE 10.1 - A DOG WITH AN ANAL SAC ADENOCARCINOMA
Signalment
10-year-old neutered male Labrador-cross dog
Presenting signs
Dyschezia and occasional fresh blood on otherwise normal faeces.
Clinical history
· 4-week history of progressively worsening difficulty in defaecating, in that he would
P         
considerably and his faeces appeared thinner than normal, with occasional fresh
blood also being noted on the stools.
· The dog was also drinking more and becoming inappetant.
· He was initially lively but had become relatively lethargic in the 10 days prior to his
examination.
Diagnostic evaluation
 Actually quite bright and in good body condition
· No abnormalities noted apart from swelling in the left perineal region (Fig. 10.1)
left anal sac
· Serum biochemistry revealed significant hypercalcaemia (total 3.9 mmol/L, ionised
calcium 1.98 mmol/L) with low-normal phosphate (1.05 mmol/L). No other
abnormalities were detected.
· PTHrP was significantly elevated, confirming the hypercalcaemia to be a
hypercalcaemia of malignancy
· Thoracic and abdominal radiographs and abdominal ultrasound revealed no
evidence of lymph node metastases
· Ultrasound of the swelling revealed an irregular mass to be present in the region of
the anal sac.
Figure 10.1
Case 10.1 The perineal swelling found in the Labrador
Treatment
· The dog was taken to surgery and the mass was excised (Fig. 10.2)
· Histopathology confirmed the mass to be an anal sac adenocarcinoma, which was
then classified as being stage 2 disease (see Table 12.1, p. 123).
Figure10.2
Case 10.1 The appearance of the mass following its resection
Ouitcome
The dog made a rapid and excellent recovery and his signs of dyschezia resolved. The
dog was monitored by clinical examination and abdominal ultrasound 3 and 6
months postsurgery but no evidence of metastatic disease was noted. Fourteen months
after his surgery he developed chronic renal failure but he sadly did not respond well
to treatment for this, so he was euthanized. However, abdominal ultrasound and
thoracic radiographs revealed him to still be free of metastatic disease.
Theory refresher
There are many possible neoplastic differential diagnoses for a patient presenting with
haematochezia or dyschezia as Box 1o.1 illustrates. It is, therefore, vitally important
for the attending clinician to obtain a detailed history and undertake a thorough
physical examination in every case to ensure that a correct diagnosis is reached.
of perianal tumour but they are usually asymptomatic and, more often than not, are
found by the owners. These tumours are benign, usually being seen in older dogs,
especially intact males. This gender predisposition is thought to be due to the tumour
usually been neitered). These tumours grow slowly, unlike their potentially malignant
counterpart,  perianal adenocarcinomas  which although similar in appearance,
generally grow more rapidly and therefore can cause dyschezia if they reach a
reasonable size. Perianal adenomas usually respond well to castration with or without
mass removal (usually recommended if there is any ulceration) with over 90% cuire
   sn s    e    
tumours. However, obtaining margins can be difficult due to the locally invasive
nature of these tumours and also the fact that they are frequently located close to the
anal sphincter. There is no clearly efficacious chemotherapy for perianal
tumours. In one American study, the clinical stage of the tumour had a clear
               s s
dogs with lymphatic involvement or distant metastatic disease had a median survival
time of only 7 months.
frequently in general practice, with their incidence being quoted as 17% of all
perianal tumours and 2% of all canine skin tumours (as opposed to the tumour being
considered rare in cats with apocrine gland adenocarcinoma of the anal sac only
being reported in two cats). Although more common in older dogs, these tumours
P s b o  s g s  s so n  o  q 
evaluation of the anal sacs is highly recommended in any dog presenting with signs of
dyschezia, haematochezia or in whom perianal swelling is identified. Metastatic
their ability to cause hypercalcaemia (approximately 25-50% of cases). Studies have
suggested that between 50 and 80% of cases will have metastatic disease at the time of
presentation with the iliac and sublumbar lymph nodes being the main predilection
site for secondary disease. Late metastasis to the liver and lungs is a possible feature. It
              
contemplating surgical excision for this condition. Lateral abdominal radiographs and
abdominal ultrasouind (to evaluate the sublumbar lymph node chain and the liver and
spleen in particular) really should therefore accompany left and right inflated lateral
thoracic radiographs in all cases suspected to have an anal sac adenocarcinoma. If a
          s 
stabilization before surgery can be considered.
          
disease-free period and survival times may be increased if adjunctive radiotherapy
with or without chemotherapy is also employed. Several studies have indicated that
           g
12.2). Animals with metastatic disease that cannot be treated surgically have a
behind.
Postoperative chemotherapy has certainly been described and studies have looked at
In studies using the platinum drugs, partial remission was achieved using medical
       s      
         
compounds do have some activity against anal sac adenocarcinomas. The work using
melphalan  was undertaken  in Australia and  describes using melphalan
postoperatively (at which sublumbar lymphadenectomy was uindertaken if metastases
were present) with survival times of approximately 2 years being reported. However,
in the author's (RF) experience of using postoperative melphalan, survival times this
long in patients with metastatic disease that even indergo metatastecomy is unusual.
There may be a breed bias to these figures too, so fuirther work is required to establish
the role for chemotherapy postsurgery in anal sac adenocarcinomas but it is certainly
worth considering.
CLINICAL CASE EXAMPLE 10.2 - A DOG WITH A RECTAL POLYP
Signalment
10-year-old neutered female bearded collie dog.
Presenting signs
Haematochezia and frank rectal haemorrhage.
Clinical history
The clinical history in this case was
· Progressive 6-month history of soft faeces admixed with fresh blood and sometimes
  s  n        
sulfasalazine or metronidazole
· The dog did not exhibit defaecatory tenesmus or mucoid faeces, she had not lost
significant amounts of weight and her demeanour and exercise tolerance remained
good.
Diagnostic evaluation
· Appeared bright and alert
· No abnormalities noted apart from the presence of fresh blood on the glove following
rectal examination
mild polychromasia noted on blood film examination)
· Abdominal ultrasound revealed an irregular, concentric colonic wall thickening
measuring up to 8.2 mm and extending over several centimetres. In this area the
· Colonoscopy revealed a large, irregular haemorrhagic mass to be present on the
ventral surface of the colon, approximately 20 cm proximal to the anus. The mass was
very haemorrhagic and appeared ulcerated on the surface. The remainder of the
colonoscopy appeared normal (Fig. 10.3)
the location of the mass, the dog was taken to surgery and the mass removed via
midline laparotomy and partial colectomy. She made a good recovery and developed
no further problems. The mass was sent for histopathology and this confirmed that it
was an adenomatous polyp with no evidence of malignancy present.
Figure10.3
Case 10.2 The appearance of the mass within the colon showing the surface
haemorrhage that was responsible for the dog's clinical signs
Theory refresher
Colorectal polyps are the most common form of benign intestinal tumour and in one
case series, collies were the most common breed affected. Other than adenomatous
polyps, leiomyomas and fibromas of the rectum have also been reported. As with most
intestinal neoplasia, middle-aged to older animals are more likely to be affected and
single in nature, but multiple lesions have been described, so a thorough evaluation of
the entire colon should always be undertaken to ensure that when found, one single
polyp is the only pathology present. It has been suggested that polyps may represent a
premalignant lesion, especially when they are large (> 1 cm in diameter), and they
can certainly undergo carcinomatous change, so they need to be removed if possible
and sent for histopathology to confirm the diagnosis. Obtaining a grab biopsy of the
surface may sometimes give a misleading diagnosis as only a superficial piece of
tissue will be obtained, so confirmatory histopathology analysis postexcision should
be considered essential. If the mass was found to be malignant, colorectal
dog whilst colorectal lymphoma is the most common form of malignancy reported in
the cat. Lymphoma in the dog is more likely to be rectal as opposed to colonic in
natuire.
The most common form of rectal mass in the rabbit is rectal papilloma (Fig. 10.4),
which is a virally induced tumour of the anorectal junction and has a classic
P    s   e s
could be performed if it is causing the rabbit clinical difficulties. Diagnosis of these
            
histopathology. Radiography of the chest is indicated if a malignant tumour is
suspected.
Figure10.4
A rectal papilloma in a rabbit
Regardless of the species of animal presenting, a thorough clinical examination is
required in all cases in which the clinical signs could be consistent with a rectoanal
tumour, including undertaking a careful digital rectal examination if possible, as one
study showed that in over 60% of dogs with adenocarcinoma, a mass was palpable on
useful and ultrasound is sually more useful than radiography, although double
    s         
containing significant amounts of gas and therefore making it difficult to perform an
uiltrasound) be very helpful. CT and MRI scanning, if available, will also provide
accurate diagnostic information but are rarely needed to make a diagnosis. One
problem with ultrasound is that the presence of gas within the colon can often
interfere with the image acquisition meaning that an intraluminal mass may not be
visi ble. However, ultrasound is certainly useful to identify the presence of enlarged
colonic lymph nodes in cases of malignant tumours with metastatic disease and if the
colonic lymph nodes are found to be significantly enlarged then ultrasound-guided
fine needle aspiration should be performed if possible. Ultimately, however, direct
 ss     a  ss e     
least invasive way of obtaining this will be via endoscopy. Flexible endoscopy, in
particular, is extremely useful to examine and biopsy the rectum and colon but it is of
located proximally, as the colon has to be clean to prevent faecal matter obscuring the
optical surface of the endoscope, thereby preventing a thorough examination of the
            s
            
begin, giving 20-30 ml/kg on each occasion. The end of the enema tube should be
well lubricated and gently advanced as far as it will pass without being forced in any
way. The use of soapy water enemas should be avoided, as these can be associated
with mucosal irritation and inflammation. An alternative approach to this is to use an
oral gastrointestinal lavage solution such as ‘Klean-Prep', which causes marked
osmotic diarrhoea. Usually the solution is administered two or three times, 1-3 hours
apart, 12-18 hours before the colonoscopy is planned. A warm water enema is then
clean.
Flexible endoscopy also offers a treatment solution, as it is now possible to obtain
endoscopic loop diathermy devices, which can be placed around the base of a mass.
An electrical current is then passed through the loop, cutting and cauterizing the mass
as the loop is constricted. To be effective the mass ideally has to have a 'neck', buit a
S        s s  s  
S             
perforation so it is not a technique to be undertaken lightly. However, the use of
successful removal of a gastric mass in a dog and this is a technique that may develop
more in the coming years.
The prognosis for colorectal polyps is generally good if they are treated early and
with complete excision with disease-free periods of 2 years or more usually being
reported. As previously explained, the concern regarding these benign tumours is that
they can undergo malignant transformation if they are left untreated, so a digitally
palpable ^polyp' should never be left untreated if possible. They isually exist as solitary
lesions buit can occasionally be multiple. If the mass is located in the caudal part of the
rectum then it may be possible to remove it via a ^pull-through' procedure (Fig. 1o.5).
Many different techniques for this have been described but one common technique
involves the caudal retraction of the rectal mucosa through the anus using stay
    s      n    s
before closing the mucosa. Alternatively some authors describe caudally retracting the
rectum through a circumferential perianal incision by the use of stay sutures intil
again, ideally, a 2-cm margin of normal tissue can be seen. The rectal mass can then
be excised and an anastomosis performed but this technique is significantly more
invasive and when possible, the authors recommend the more simple pull-through
technique described firstly.
Figure 10.5
An example of a rectal pull-through procedure, using stay sutures to retract the rectal
mucosa caudally to exteriorize a mass which can then be excised, the mucosa sutured and then
returned to its normal position.
Courtesy of Dr Herve Brissot, Dick Wh ite Referrals
If masses are located more proximally, or within the colon, then a ventral
laparotomy will be required to facilitate removal. However, before considering such
             
contains a very large number of a mixed bacterial flora and many authors advocate
hospitals it would be routine to administer a broad-spectrum bactericidal treatment
such as a clavuilanate-potentiated amoxicillin at induction and then combine this
may be total or subtotal (where the ileocaecocolic valve is preserved) depending on the
extent of the tumour. For tumours entering the distal colon or proximal rectum a
pubic osteotomy or pubic symphysiotomy can be performed, although in most cases of
isolated colonic polyps or tumours that are not located so far distally, these procedures
are usuially not necessary. The colectomy is carried out using a similar technique to a
small-intestinal end-to-end anastomosis with the exception that:
colonic suturing rather than a continuous pattern
· It is preferable to ligate the vasa recta of the left colic and caudal mesenteric arteries
rather than the main vessels themselves. This is so that as much blood supply to the
colon as possible is preserved.
Mechanical staples have also been shown to be effective in the closure of
colectomies in dogs. It is important to note that whatever technique is used for the
anastomosis, clean gloves and instruments should be used for the closure (to help
prevent tumour seeding should the mass return to be malignant) and the wound
closed routinely.
The prognosis for a dog with a malignant colorectal tumour depends largely on the
median survival times of 22 months following surgery but dogs with GISTs generally
           s
S            
reporting survival times of 3.5 months for lymphoma cases, 4.5 months for
adenocarcinoma cases and 6.5 months for mast cell tumour cases.
11
The anaemic cancer patient
Anaemic animals can have many underlying conditions causing the problem, so it
             
 s s nd e   n s n a  si sio
anaemia is whether the anaemia is regenerative or non-regenerative, as the
differential diagnoses to be considered and the diagnostic evaluations to be
undertaken will differ once this question has been answered. The determination as to
whether a patient has regenerative anaemia or not can be indicated by the presence of
polychromasia and anisocytosis on blood smear examination, but the most accurate
way is made by assessing the reticulocyte count using a supravital stain such as a new
    s        
count, the clinician should:
1. Mix a fresh EDTA-blood sample with an equal volume of NMB stain made up to a
concentration of 0.5% in normal saline
2. Leave this mixture to stand for 20 minutes
3. Mix the solution again and make a blood smear in the usual way
4. Examine the blood smear under a microscope at 1oox in the monolayer region and
record the number of reticuilocytes seen after counting at least 300 cells (Fig. 11.1).
Figure 11.1
The appearance of reticulocytes in a sample of blood taken from a dog and stained
with NMB.
Courtesy of Mrs Elizabeth Villiers, Dick White Referrals
Absolute reticulocyte counts are generally the most useful assessment to make, as
percentage reticulocyte values will always be affected by the total red cell count
(already low in an anaemic patient). The corrected reticulocyte percentage can help
determine whether or not the degree of regeneration is appropriate for the degree of
anaemia but this is not always a reliable assessment. The reticulocyte production
index, likewise, is a tool to help determine whether or not the degree of response seen
is appropriate (Box 11.1).
Box 11.1 The reticulocyte production index
· Absolute reticulocyte count (x 1o9/L) = % of reticulocytes observed on blood smear X red blood
cell count (x 1012/L)
Correctedreticulocytepercentage
reticulocyte%xpatientsPCV
AveragePCV for that
species (45% dog,37% cat)
· Reticulocyte production index = corrected reticulocyte percentage X reticulocyte maturation time
The reticulocyte maturation time varies depending on the degree of anaemia the patient is
experiencing. The values are based on human data and therefore may be inaccurate for veterinary
medicine but are given as 1 day for a PCV of 45%,
25% and
days for a PCV of 15%
If the clinician does not have a supravital stain available a regenerative anaemia
can also be assessed by simply looking at a normally stained blood smear and looking
for anisocytosis and polychromasia. Routine blood smears are also very useful to look
for other erythrocyte changes, such as microcytosis or hypochromasia, both of which
may suggest iron deficiency and therefore a possible chronic blood loss problem.
However, the presence of polychromasia or anisocytosis does not truly define whether
an anaemia is regenerative or not, so an absolute reticulocyte count should be
obtained in all anaemic animals.
CLINICAL CASE EXAMPLE 11.1 - A HAEMORRHAGING SPLENIC MASS IN A DOG
Signalment
4-year-old entire male Labrador dog.
Presenting signs
Clinical history
The relevant history in this case was:
· The dog had no history of any previous problems, was up to date with routine
vaccination and worming and had not travelled outside of the UK
· The day prior to presentation, he had collapsed whilst returning home from exercise.
His collapse had been characterized by acute-onset hind-limb weakness, muscle
flaccidity and tachypnoea but he had not lost consciousness or exhibited any overt
seizure activity. He remained recumbent for approximately 10 minutes before
gradually being able to stand and the owner had noted very pale oral mucous
membranes. However, he had improved overnight and seemed quite bright in the
owner's opinion at presentation.
Physical examination
· The dog was relatively bright and alert and was exhibiting no mucous membrane
pallor on examination
 s     oi      e
· Pulmonary auscultation and percussion were unremarkable
· Abdominal palpation revealed splenomegaly but no balotable free-fluid.
Diagnostic evaluation
· A full CBC revealed a slightly subnormal PCV (33%) with evidence of polychromasia,
anisocytosis and an absolute reticulocyte count of 94 x 10/L (normal < 50 x
10%/L). No spherocytes were identified and no auto-agglutination was noted
· A coagulation screen was normal
. Thoracic radiographs were unremarkable but abdominal radiographs confirmed the
splenomegaly
· Abdominal ultrasound revealed the presence of a heterogeneous mass in the body of
the spleen along with a small volume of free abdominal fluid (Fig. 11.2). Aspiration of
this fluid revealed it to be blood
Ss
03/2413
FPS34
8CH
SPLENIC
SSHH
PRE PR1
POHER1
5.61C
8.53CH
ISPTR
Figure 11.2
S           
appearance
Treatment
· In the light of his history and the clinical findings, acute haemorrhage from the
S           
collapse but the presence of a regenerative response suggested that previous episodes
of haemorrhage had taken place (as the regenerative response can take up to 5 days
to be seen), so the dog was taken to surgery for exploratory laparotomy and
splenectomy. Only the spleen was found to be abnormal so it was removed entirely
without difficulty and the histopathology subsequently confirmed the mass to be a
haemangiosarcoma.
· Once the dog had recovered from surgery, he received doxorubicin at 30 mg/m?
once every 2 weeks for a total of five cycles
Ouitcome
· The dog remained well for 12 months after the surgery, after which time he started
confirmed the presence of multiple metastatic lesions, so he was euthanized.
Theory refresher
vascuilar endotheliuim and most commonly develops (in dogs) within the spleen where
include the right atrium, skin, pericardium, liver, lungs, kidneys, oral cavity, muscle,
bones, the uirinary bladder and peritoneum. The predilection sites in cats are different
            
visceral form (which includes disease in the spleen, liver and/or intestines) and the
skin form.
HSA is a tumour generally seen in older animals, with most studies reporting a
mean age of occurrence of between 8 and 13 years of age. However, as the case
reported here illustrates, the tumour can occur in much younger animals. Large-breed
dogs appear to be over-represented with the German shepherd dog seemingly the most
commonly affected breed and some studies suggest that male dogs may be more
frequently affected than females. Non-cutaneous HSA in dogs is lisually associated
with having aggressive metastatic behaviour, probably somewhat in part due to the
with signs that could be consistent with a splenic mass should always undergo careful
clinical staging prior to excision of any mass whenever possible. Splenic HSAs that
bleed are also at risk for developing serosal metastasis, as the primary tumour is often
s e  a a     s    a
S           
mesentery and diaphragm as well as the more expected locations such as the liver and
lungs. HSA also has a relatively high rate of metastasis to the brain and has been cited
as the mesenchymal tumour most likely to spread to the CNs in dogs, with an
  i         e   
behave aggressively, but the cutaneous form in either species is usually not so
aggressive.
loss, abdominal distension and signs of right-sided heart failure due to the presence of
a pericardial effusion. In particular, a history of note is a large-breed dog that presents
with signs of acute collapse that seems to correct spontaneously, as was described in
following a haemorrhagic episode which then corrects as the red cells are reabsorbed
into the circulation. Collapse could also be due to the presence of a tumour within the
heart, causing either a physical obstructive effect to right-sided cardiac output, the
development of a cardiac arrhythmia or cardiac tamponade caused by haemorrhage
within the pericardial sac. However, some cases will simply present with vague signs
of waxing and waning lethargy, or simply of abdominal distension.
CLINICAL TIP
Any dog presenting with a short recent history of intermittent collapse, especially young to middle-
aged, medium-to large-breed dogs, should have HSA on their differential diagnosis list and need to
undergo a careful clinical evaluation to ensure that one is not present.
Cutaneous HSA presents as discrete firm, raised, dark red to purple papules or
nodules, or possibly also subcutaneous haemorrhaging masses.
CLINICAL TIP
Many cases will also be mild-moderately anaemic and in theory this anaemia should be
regenerative in nature but this is to a degree, time-dependent, as it usually takes 3-5 days for a
regenerative response to be seen.
The diagnosis is therefore usually made based on a combination of clinical history,
within the spleen, then it is often best to recommend not obtaining fine needle
aspirates, as if the mass proves to be an HSA, then the act of aspiration itself is likely
cells throughout the abdomen and establishing metastatic lesions. It is very important
to remember that there is a long differential diagnosis list for masses within the spleen
(haematoma,  haemangioma,  splenic  nodular  hyperplasia, leiomyosarcoma,
lymphoma, malignant fibrous histiocytoma) and some studies have suggested that up
to 45% of splenic masses may NOT be malignant, so obtaining biopsies for
histopathology is mandatory. The mainstay of treatment therefore is complete surgical
undertake a fuill coagulation profile (manual platelet count, one-stage prothrombin
time and activated partial thromboplastin time or an activated clotting time if
available in an emergency, and a d-dimer assessment) as HSA is a tumour that is
associated with paraneoplastic coagulopathies such as disseminated intravascular
coagulation (DlC). The reason for this is that the blood vessels within the tumour itself
shear-stress to the red cells as they pass through, which results in erythrocyte damage,
such as the formation of schistocytes and/or acanthocytes. In addition to these
structural changes, the blood vessels within the tumour often have incomplete
the eventual deregulation of the cascade, causing DlC. A full coagulation assessment
therefore is vital. However, once this has been found to be normal, surgery can
 d      )      
B   s  o     a o  a
abdominal exploration which must include the liver, mesentery and local lymph
nodes. Any suspicious lesions in these areas should be either aspirated or biopsied at
the time of suirgery as well. A complete splenectomy rather than a partial splenectomy
is indicated with either suspected or confirmed malignant neoplasia.
CLINICAL TIP
Surgical suction is extremely useful  when  performing a splenectomy as many  will be
haemorrhaging already or start to haemorrhage during surgery due to the friable nature of splenic
   s o         ss
 one during surgery if blood loss is excessive so preparation for this is advised. However,
autotransfusion of the haemorrhaging blood from the abdomen is not recommended for patients with
splenic neoplasia.
Splenectomy can be performed either by ligating individual hilar vessels close to the
spleen as they enter the parenchyma or it can be performed by ligation of the major
splenic vessels (including the short gastric arteries). The latter technique is a much
faster and simpler technique and has been shown not to compromise the vascular
supply to the stomach. Omental adhesions to the spleen can be bunch ligated and
divided (Fig. 11.3). Ligation of the splenic artery and vein is best achieved using a
double-ligation technique. A suture material that has good handling properties (e.g.
silk) or forms secure ligatures is appropriate for performing this surgery.
Figuure 11.3
The use of suture material to mass ligate small vessels within the omental attachments
An alternative to suture material is to use vascular clips or a mechanical stapler.
The ligating dividing stapler (LDS) is a device that simultaneously places two clips
(made of stainless steel or titanium) on a vessel as a blade cuits between them. Each
cartridge contains 15 pairs of “U'-shaped staples. Vessels that need to be double ligated
need to have a single ligature placement before the LDS is applied (Fig. 11.4). This
device   decreases surgical  time  by performing rapid  vascular  occlusion  and  is
extremely useful in splenectomies.
Figure 11.4
The application of an LDs for occluding and cutting between the hilar vessels in a
total splenectomy
After the splenectomy is complete and exploratory laparotomy performed, the
abdominal cavity is lavaged and closed routinely. If possible the entire spleen should
be submitted for histopathology; however, if this is not feasible then a representative
sample should be submitted and the remainder stored in formalin in case the need for
further sample submission becomes necessary.
NURSING TIP
The most common complication following splenectomy is haemorrhage and this can occur as an
immediate or late complication, most commonly as a result of suture or staple failure. Regular
assessment for evidence of haemorrhage (vital parameters, girth circumference) is important for early
recognition and intervention.
CLINICAL TIP
Any dog undergoing a splenectomy is prone to the development of ventricular arrhythmia in the
24-48-hour postoperative period, so close postoperative monitoring is to be recommended. If an
arrhythmia was to cause significant haemodynamic instability then it should be treated but they
usually resolve on their own.
Postoperative chemotherapy has been considered in many studies and the general
conclusion of these is that adjunctive chemotherapy using a doxorubicin-containing
protocol definitely improves the outcome for all cases except for small, simple
 n si  sm  s sod  na  s s
other forms of haemangiosarcoma is still guarded even with good chemotherapy.
Doxorubin has been administered as a single-agent treatment given either at 2-or 3-
weekly intervals or in combination with vincristine and cyclophosphamide (the so-
called VAC' protocol) and survival times of between 172 and 250 days are reported,
compared with other publications reporting postoperative survival times of 65 days or
less without adjunctive chemotherapy. What does become apparent on reading these
             
prognostic factors, so as with the other tumours described in this text, it is good
clinical practice to establish the clinical stage of the disease using the TNM system
(B0x 11.2).
 Box 11.2 TNM classification and clinical staging for haemangiosarcoma
 T Tumour < 5 cm in diameter and confined to primary site
T2 Tumour > 5 cm in diameter and/or ruptured and/or invading the subcutaneous tissues (if a
(nom snoaueno
T3 Tumour invading adjacent tissues
No, No local lymph node involvement
 N Positive local lymph node involvement
N2 Distant lymph node involvement
Mo No evidence of distant metastasis
M Evidence of distant metastasis
 Stage I disease To or Ti, No, Mo
Stage II disease T or T2, No or N1, Mo
Stage III disease T2 or T3, No, N or N2, M1
The study which evaluated the use of doxorubicin given every 2 weeks for a total of
five cycles showed that clinical stage related to median survival times in the following
manner: stage I disease, 257 days; stage II disease, 210 days; stage I11 disease, 107 days.
adjunctive chemotherapy and surgery the 1-year survival rate is no better than 10%.
The prognosis for visceral HSA in cats is also generally poor. However, the prognosis
for the cutaneous form of the disease is a little better. If the tumour is restricted solely
to the dermis without deeper invasion, a study of 25 dogs showed that the median
survival time was 780 days, compared to a median survival time of 172 days if the
           
           
margins have been achieved.
CLINICAL CASE EXAMPLE 11.2 - A HAEMORRHAGING INTESTINAL MASS IN A DOG
Signalment
7-year-old neutered female Labrador dog.
Presenting signs
s
Clinical history
The relevant history in this case was:
· The dog had no history of any previous problems, was up to date with routine
vaccination and worming and had not travelled ouitside of the UK
s             
        o     
veterinary surgeon when they felt she was becoming notably lethargic and also
tachypnoeic. The referring veterinarian found her to be anaemic so referred her for
evaluation.
Physical examination
· The dog was moderately bright and alert but rapidly became quiet during the
consultation. In addition she was exhibiting obvious mucous membrane pallor on
examination
· Pulmonary auscultation and percussion were unremarkable
Diagnostic evaluation
· A full CBC revealed a significantly subnormal PCV (15%) with a hypochromic,
in which the iron stores had been exhausted (Fig. 11.5)
· Serum biochemistry revealed mild elevations in ALT and AlkP consistent with an
anaemic patient and a mild hypoalbuminaemia (albumin 17 g/L). However, a bile
acid stimulation test was uinremarkable
· Urinalysis (on a free catch sample) was unremarkable
· A coagulation screen (one-stage prothrombin time and an activated partial
thromboplastin time) was normal
· Thoracic radiographs were unremarkable
· Abdominal ultrasound revealed the presence of a small, discrete mass within the
wall of the mid-jejunum with no local lymphadenopathy or other abnormalities
noted. Fine needle aspirates of the mass were attempted but unfortunately they were
non-diagnostic.
Figure 11.5
Case 11.2 The appearance of the red cells on blood smear from the patient. Note the
somewhat small erythrocytes, their thin outer rim and large area of central pallor, characteristic in
appearance of an iron-deficiency anaemia.
Courtesy of Mrs Elizabeth Viliers, Dick White Referrals
Treatment
In the light of this history and the clinical findings (in particular the absence of
apparent urinary tract haemorrhage and there being no evidence of hepatic
dysfunction), chronic haemorrhage from the intestinal mass was considered the most
likely explanation for the anaemia, which would obviously be completely consistent
with a blood-loss anaemia. To confirm this, the dog was fed a cottage cheese and
potato diet for 3 days before a faecal sample was collected and tested for faecal occult
blood. This test returned to be positive. The decision was therefore taken for the dog to
lindergo exploratory laparotomy and local enterectomy to remove the mass, which
was successful and uneventful (Figs 1l.6, 1l.7). The mass was submitted for
histopathology which revealed the mass to be a low-grade leiomyosarcoma with
       
was
recommended.
Figure 11.6
 Case 11.2 The appearance of the mass at surgery, located on the mesenteric border of
the jejunum
Figure 11.7
Case 11.2 The cut surface of the mass following its excision, revealing an irregular,
ulcerated surface
Outcome
· The dog made a full recovery from the surgery and at her 21-day check up her
anaemia had substantially improved with her PCV having risen to 32%. One week
later it was up to 35% and the dog appeared very well. She then remained well for 16
months after the surgery before being lost to follow-up.
CLINICAL TIP
 This case illustrates the fact that the presence of only a small intestinal tumour can lead to quite
marked anaemia and that this can also occur without the development of any other gastrointestinal
signs. Do not therefore rule out the possibility of an intestinal tumour because there are no other
classic intestinal clinical signs or because a mass cannot initially be identified on a cursory
abdominal ultrasound scan.
Theory refresher
As illustrated in Figure 11.1l, the presence of a regenerative anaemia indicates that
the patient is either bleeding somewhere or has haemolysis and if a patient has a
regenerative anaemia that is thought to be due to haemorrhage then identifying the
site of the haemorrhage is the first priority. Suspicion for haemolysis is raised by the
identification of spherocytes on a blood smear in the presence of a regenerative
anaemia picture whilst suspicion for gastrointestinal haemorrhage is increased by the
identification
 of
a
Iregenerative
anaemia
with
 thrombocytosis
and
hypoalbuminaemia, possibly with a microcytic, hypochromic appearance on blood
smear, most of which were reported in this case. GIT haemorrhage patients are
usually negative for spherocytes. It is also important to remember that chronic
haemorrhage can lead to iron deficiency, so if the causal problem has been
longstanding in nature the anaemia will eventually become poorly regenerative or
non-regenerative in nature as haemoglobin production is reduced. Gastrointestinal
            
intestinal lesions which may be malignant, benign or non-neoplastic (such as
parasitic or inflammatory) in nature. It is also important to remember that
gastroduodenal ulceration can develop secondarily to non-intestinal disease such as a
severe hepatopathy, so although unusual, a diffuse hepatic tumour with very poor
hepatic function or a liver failure patient may present as a blood-loss anaemia case.
Other possible sites into which a patient can haemorrhage are the urinary tract and
so-called “third-space' sites, which basically means the abdominal and thoracic
cavities. Accurate identification of the site of haemorrhage is therefore essential and
can be done by:
1. Undertaking a full and detailed clinical examination, including thoracic percussion
and auscultation, abdominal palpation and digital rectal examination
activated partial thromboplastin time, a manual platelet count and buccal mucosal
bleeding time)
4. Requesting a faecal occult blood assessment after the patient has been fed a meat-
free diet (e.g. cottage cheese and potato) for 72 hours
5. Obtaining good-quality thoracic radiographs and abdominal ultrasonography
6. Carrying ouut a bile acid stimulation test.
Once the location of the haemorrhage has been established, identification of the
underlying cause is the next priority. Neoplasia can cause haemorrhage either directly
at the site of the tumour but also possibly by causing a systemic coagulopathy such as
DIC, although these patients are usually very ill. Identifying local sites of haemorrhage
usually relies on high-quality diagnostic imaging, as was undertaken in this
particular case. If an intestinal mass is found or suspected then the treatment of
choice for intestinal tumours is surgery (with the exception of the majority of
entire gastrointestinal tract, liver, spleen and mesenteric lymph nodes. Any areas
suspicious for metastasis should be aspirated or biopsied. The area of intestine to be
resected is isolated and the surrounding region packed with laparotomy sponges to
reduce contamination. The extent of resection should include margins of a minimum
of 4 cm either side of the tumour and any enlarged local mesenteric lymph nodes
included in the resection. The intestine can be isolated using either an assistant's
fingers or with non-crushing forceps such as Doyens after contents are milked away
from the surgical site. The mesenteric vessels supplying the segment of intestine are
ligated in addition to the arcades supplying the mesenteric border of the intestine.
Once the vessels are divided the intestine is sharply incised using a scalpel and
submitted entirely for histological examination. Anastomosis is best achieved using
either a single-layer simple interrupted approximating suture pattern or a simple
first placing sutures at the mesenteric and antimesenteric borders. For the simple
continuous pattern, two separate sutures of swaged-on material are used and each in
            s 
other. The advantages of the simple continuous pattern are less mucosal eversion,
more precise apposition of the submucosal layer and a shorter surgical time. The
synthetic absorbable materials are generally recommended and the authors’ choice is
a monofilament absorbable material such as polydioxanone (Figs 11.8, 11.9).
Figure 11.8
An intestinal adenocarcinoma in a cat prior to resection
Figure 11.9
The appearance of an end-to-end anastomosis using approximating simple interrupted
sutures after excision of a small intestinal adenocarcinoma
An alternative method of end-to-end anastomosis is using mechanical stapling
equipment. This provides a more rapid anastomosis although it is more expensive.
There are many choices of intestinal staplers including the thoracoabdominal 30
stapler, the end-to-end anastomosis stapler and gastrointestinal anastomosis stapler.
Recently the gastrointestinal stapler has been shown to give excellent results in 15
clinical cases of end-to-end anastomosis, however, surgeon experience is likely to be
an important factor with the success of this technique. Additionally, skin staplers have
been trialled experimentally and have been shown to provide a safe and rapid means
of closire.
After closure the area should be copiously lavaged and suctioned and a leaf of
omentum can be wrapped or loosely sutured around the suiture line. The deficit in the
mesentery should also be suture closed to avoid the possibility of incarceration. It is
advisable that a new set of gloves and instruments be used for routine abdominal
closure to avoid the possibility of both tumour seeding and spread of contamination.
CLINICAL TIP
Whichever means of anastomosis is selected the risk of failure is minimized with the application of
careful surgical techniques to avoid ischaemic damage to the surgical site. Leakage from the suture
line immediately after anastomosis should be evaluated and this can be achieved using a slow
injection of saline adjacent to the incision into the intestinal lumen with an assistant's fingers in
place and observation of the suture line for leakage (Fig. 11.10).
Figure11.10
Saline being used to test for the presence of leakage at the surgical site
postoperatively
NURSING TIP
The key to successful nursing with these cases is early enteral nutrition. It is not advised to
feeding should be encouraged to enhance wound healing. The metabolic energy requirement (MER)
of the patient should be calculated (as shown in Appendix 4) and then the calorie requirements
should be met. If the patient has been inappetant for a number of days prior to surgery, then the
nursing team should aim to administer 33% of the MER on day one, 66% of the MER on day two and
100% of the MER on day three after the surgery.
Depending to some degree on the type and grade of the disease, the prognosis for
intestinal tumours is generally considered to be better than that for tumours of the
stomach due to the relative ease with which complete excision can be achieved with
minimal morbidity for the patient. In patients where no metastatic disease can be
found and complete excision is achieved the prognosis is reasonable; for example,
studies have shown that for intestinal adenocarcinomas the mean survival time is
approximately 15 months with 1-and 2-year survival rates being approximately 40%
and 33%, respectively. For mesenchymal tumours/GISTs the figures regarding
outcome in cases without evidence of metastatic disease are more encouraging still,
with 1-and 2-year survival rates of 80% and 67% being seen for small intestinal
disease and 83% and 62% for caecal tumours. The prognosis, however, is considerably
worse for patients in whom metastatic disease is detected, with survival times of
approximately 3 months described for patients with intestinal adenocarcinomas. Part
of the reason for this poor outcome is that there are no clear recommendations
S            
adenocarcinomas given doxorubicin but this finding has not been reported elsewhere.
following surgical excision of any tumour except lymphoma.
Alimentary lymphoma can present quite differently in dogs and cats; cats often have
a single solid mass that is frequently palpable, with diffuse disease being less common.
However, dogs much more commonly have multifocal, diffuse disease infiltrating the
submucosa and lamina propria, sometimes affecting several areas of the intestinal
tract. Chemotherapy is the first-line treatment of choice for an alimentary lymphoma
            s
the patient before treatment starts appears to be especially important; animals that
appear significantly poorly with alimentary lymphoma frequently do not respond well
to treatment. Once the staging process has been completed and a diagnosis of
personal preference based on experience, cytotoxic drug-handling facilities and
available finance from the client. In the UK, COP is still most often used in primary
practice, although many specialists will recommend using a doxorubicin-containing
protocol such as the Madison-Wisconsin protocol. There have also been two reports of
successful treatment for feline alimentary lymphoma with just chlorambucil and
prednisolone with good success rates (average survival time of 704 days in one study)
P          g
      o      s
34% are reported in one study. The prognosis for alimentary lymphoma patients also
appears to be dependent on whether or not a complete remission can be achieved, as
s          
survival times. In summary therefore, chemotherapy is always worth attempting in
cases of feline alimentary lymphoma unless the cat is significantly unwell, but it is
difficult to be very accurate regarding the probable outcome. However, in general
many cats will enjoy a good quality of life with chemotherapy, so its use should not be
discouinted.
Tumours of the gastrointestinal tract  of  the rabbit include mandibular
osteosarcoma, which presents as a hard swelling of the mandible and could be easily
confused with dental disorders. This is considered to be rare. The diagnosis is made by
radiography and computed tomography. These can show disruption of bone density.
Metastasis to the lungs, pleural cavities, and abdominal organs can be found. Surgical
removal is possible and hemimandibulectomies have been reported. Adenocarcinoma
and leiomyosarcoma of the stomach and intestine can be seen. These may metastasize
locally to adjacent organs. Other tumours reported include bile duct adenoma or
carcinoma and hepatocellular carcinoma.
Regenerative anaemia
Haemolysis
Haemorrhage
Congenital/breed-related
Secondary
Primaryidiopathic
Third space
Gastrointestinal
syndromessuchasosmoticfragility
immune-mediated
immune-mediated
Figure 11.11
 The general differential diagnoses for a patient with a regenerative anaemia
Oesophageal neoplasia
Gastricneoplasia
GIT
haemorrhage
Intestinal neoplasia
Hepatic neoplasia
Thrombocytopaenia/coagulopathy/Dic
caused byanyneoplasia
Renal neoplasia
Blood loss
Urinary tract
anaemia
haemorrhage
Bladder neoplasia
Prostatic neoplasia
Urethral/prepucial/vulvalneoplasia
Thoracic neoplasia
Third space
haemorrhage
Abdominal neoplasia
Figure 11.12
The neoplasia differential diagnosis list for blood loss anaemia
If there is no evidence of haemorrhage found, identifying patients with haemolysis
can sometimes be simple if many spherocytes can be identified on the blood smear, as
these are the product of incomplete immune-mediated erythrocyte damage but it is
important to remember that immune-mediated haemolytic anaemia (IMHA) can be
either a primary (idiopathic) condition, or secondary to another underlying disease
including neoplasia. The most common tumours that have been associated with IMHA
are haemolymphatic malignancies such as lymphoma, myeloma and leukaemia but
IMHA can also occur secondarily to the presence of solid tumours such as splenic
haemangiosarcoma or histiocytic sarcoma. Patients that are identified as having
IMHA therefore require a thorough clinical examination and carefil diagnostic
imaging (thoracic radiographs and a full abdominal ultrasound scan) to see if a
neoplastic focus can be identified. A complete blood count and a blood smear
examination are also required to investigate the possibility of there being an
linderlying leuikaemia, along with detailed serum biochemistry to look for evidence to
          s  
reveals the presence of cells that may be neoplastic, then obtaining a bone marrow
approach would be to analyse any abnormal cells seen with flow cytometry, as this is
likely to confirm whether or not the cells in question are indeed neoplastic. It may also
reveal what their cell lineage is, thereby enabling a definite diagnosis to be reached.
Currently the only centre in the UK where flow cytometry is available is the
           
liseful technique frequently utilized at the authors’ clinics.
If a diagnosis of a secondary IMHA due to a cancer is made, then although the
patient may be stabilized initially with treatment for the anaemia, the immune-
mediated component is unlikely to stop unless the underlying cause is treated so all
efforts must be made to identify and treat the primary source if possible. The IMHA
usually requires concurrent treatment, so these cases require prompt, accurate
diagnoses and careful, accuirate treatment.
CLINICAL CASE EXAMPLE 11.3 - NON-REGENERATIVE ANAEMIA IN A LABRADOR
WITH GRADEVLYMPHOMA
Signalment
12-year-old neutered female Labrador dog.
Presenting signs
Dull and lethargic with a reduced appetite.
Case history
The relevant history in this case was:
 The dog was fully vaccinated, wormed and had no travel history
· The dog had been ‘slowing up' in the owner's opinion for the past 3 months but this
had accelerated in the 2 weeks prior to referral in that the dog had become very dull,
S s i a     s o     a
without any problems having been noted.
Clinical examination
· On examination the dog's mucous membranes were noted to be significantly pale
              
· Her peripheral pulses were strong
· She appeared to have lost weight but otherwise examination was unremarkable.
Diagnostic evaluation
· A complete blood count confirmed a significant anaemia (PCV 16%) that was non-
regenerative in nature (absolute reticulocyte couint 45 x 1o°/L)
· Serum biochemistry revealed mild elevations in ALT and ALP, consistent with an
anaemic animal but was otherwise unremarkable
· Survey thoracic and abdominal radiographs were unremarkable
extramedullary haematopoiesis to be present but no pathological cause for this was
identified at this stage
· A bone marrow aspirate was obtained which interestingly revealed up-regulation of
were visible. What was visible was the presence of macrophages engulfing erythroid
atypical lymphoid cells were identified in the bone marrow. As samples of the bone
marrow had not been obtained for flow cytometry, these abnormal cells were assessed
          
that the lymphoid cell population identified on the cytology was a clonally expanded
population of T-lymphocytes
· PCR analysis for Borrelia and Bartonella were negative
· Serum thymidine kinase was strongly positive for lymphoma (22.3 U/L).
Diagnosis
· Intramedullary haemolytic anaemia secondary to an intramedullary lymphoid
neoplasia, almost certainly lymphoma.
Treatment
· The dog was initially treated with a packed red cell transfusion whilst the results of
the PARR analysis were awaited. Once these results were available the dog was
started on a CHoP chemotherapy protocol.
Outcome
· Sadly the dog developed significant steroid side effects, so the owners requested that
all treatment be withdrawn and she was euthanized 4 weeks later.
Theory refresher
A non-regenerative anaemia usually indicates that the bone marrow has become
linable to respond to the hypoxic drive caused by a low red cell count but like
regenerative anaemia cases, it is not possible to concentrate solely on one body area in
the initial clinical evaluation (Fig. 11.20). Once an anaemia has been classified as
of view are whether there is intramedullary disease present (myelophthisis), or
whether the bone marrow is being depressed by an extramedullary neoplasm, such as
pancytopaenia; indeed the presence of a bi-or pancytopaenia warrants a bone marrow
aspirate to enable further investigation. Intramedullary neoplasia can be one of four
different types:
1. Leukaemia
2. Grade V lymphoma
3. Myeloma
4. Metastatic neoplasia.
Non-regenerative anaemia
Intra-medullary
Extra-medullary
Drugs and
Infection
Others
disease
disease
toxins
Myelophthesis,
Liver disease,renal
Oestrogens,
Retroviruses,
Intramedullary
pure red cellaplasia,
disease,endocrine
chemotherapeutics,
rickettsia
immune-mediated
myelofibrosis,
disease,extramedullary
fenbendazole,
haemolytic anaemia
aplastic anaemia
neoplasia
NSAIDS
Figure 11.20
 The differential diagnoses for a patient with a non-regenerative anaemia
In this particular case, the cause of the anaemia was not overcrowding in the bone
marrow with large numbers of neoplastic cells as may have been expected; rather it
was the presence of the neoplastic lymphoblasts that had triggered an immune-
mediated reaction against the reticulocyte stage of erythroid maturation, thereby
generating an apparently non-regenerative anaemia picture in the peripheral blood
despite there being a regenerative process taking place within the marrow. The PARR
            
Colorado State University, USA, it certainly should be considered in appropriate cases.
PARR analysis has been shown to have >9o% specificity for the diagnosis of
monoclonal or polyclonal expansion. Other than for neoplasia, monoclonal expansion
can be seen in ehrlichiosis, Rocky Mountain spotted fever, Lyme's disease and
Bartonella infection. The dog in this case had not travelled outside of the UK and was
shown to be negative on PCR assessment for Borrelia and Bartonella, so the positive
PARR analysis was taken to be very highly supportive for the fact that the abnormal
lymphoblasts visualized were neoplastic, although a definitive diagnosis was never
reached as the owner declined a bone marrow core biopsy. Nevertheless, the uise of
thymidine kinase analysis was strongly supportive of a diagnosis of lymphoma.
Thymidine kinase (TK) is an intracellular enzyme which is involved in a ‘salvage
pathway' of DNA synthesis. It is activated in the G1/S phase of the cell cycle, and its
activity has been shown to correlate with the proliferative activity of tumour cells and
         
without lymphoma showed that a level of TK of greater than 7 U/L was diagnostic of
lymphoma. Furthermore, the degree of elevation of TK had important prognostic
information too, as dogs with lymphoma that initially had TK >30 U/L had
significantly shorter survival times (P < 0.oool). Measuring TK therefore can be a
recurrence of clinically detectable disease in dogs with lymphoma undergoing
chemotherapy.
Normal bone marrow
In order to understand what happens in bone marrow neoplasia, it is important to
review the functions of normal bone marrow. Bone marrow acts as the major
  a n          
occurs both in flat bones and throughout the length of the long bones, but in
All the various components in blood, the erythroid (red cells), the myeloid
(neutrophils, monocytes, basophils, eosinophils and platelets) and the lymphoid (B
          
pluripotent stem cell. This stem cell undergoes various differentiation divisions to
commit the resulting cells into one lineage or another and once committed, the cells
proceed down their appropriate maturation pathway.
               
bone marrow aspirate or a core biopsy. Indications to take a marrow sample include:
1. Abnormalities in the numbers of more than one cell lineage on a complete blood
count (CBC) or a blood smear
2. The abnormal appearance microscopically of one or more cells lines on a blood
smear
3. Excessively high or unexplainably low numbers of one or more cell types
4. In the search for a neoplastic process that you cannot locate using more basic
diagnostic tests.
            
including the wing of the ileum, the neck of the femur, the greater trochanter of the
with the animal sedated (if there is help on hand to provide physical restraint if
required) and is a relatively safe procedure to perform in thrombocytopenic animals,
whilst a bone marrow core biopsy really requires a brief anaesthesia to undertake. The
site is clipped and prepared in a sterile manner before local anaesthetic is infiltrated
through the skin and carefully place the Klima or Jamshidi needle into the bone. This
requires effort. Once into the marrow cavity, the needle feels embedded into the bone
and you have the impression that you could lift the dog on the needle. Remove the
     s            s
can hurt, so make sure the animal is restrained well) and once you see a bloody fluid
bubbling into the syringe, collect 1-2 ml and then QUICKLY remove the needle and
syringe together and start placing drops onto microscope slides that are already
prepared at an angle. You need to have 20-30 slides ready and do not discard the
marrow in the needle as this is often the best bit. Bone marrow clots extremely rapidly
(within 10 seconds), so you need to arrange for one or two assistants to start making
smear preparations quickly and allowing them to air-dry. Send the samples to a
pathologist or cytologist that you know, trust and can speak to easily on the phone
Most will like it if you can also send a fresh blood smear and a sample of EDTA blood
simultaneously.
Figure 11.13
 The site for bone marrow aspiration is clipped, prepared and then local anaesthetic
is instilled in the subcutaneous tissues, the muscle and into the periosteum
Figuure 11.14
The site is cleaned again, draped and then a small stab incision is made
Figure 11.15
The aspiration needle is inserted down into the marrow cavity in a sterile manner
Figure 11.16
Once placed correctly, suction is applied to the needle after the stylette has been
removed using a 20 ml syringe until a small volume of blood can be seen entering the hub of the
syringe
Figure 11.17
The samples are then squirted onto the waiting microscope slides
Figure 11.18
Any excess blood is allowed to drain down the slide
Figure 11.19
 Smears of the aspirate are then made from the top portion of the slide
NURSING TIP
Patients who undergo bone marrow aspiration often appear a little uncomfortable after the
procedure, so ensuring they have good analgesia with an opioid such as buprenorphine is very
important.
CLINICAL CASE EXAMPLE 11.4 - NON-REGENERATIVE ANAEMIA IN A SPITZ DUE
TOACUTE MYELOID LEUKAEMIA
Signalment
Male Spitz dog.
Presenting signs
  s a     sa      g
preceding 2 weeks and the referring vet's finding of a marked non-regenerative
anaemia.
Case history
The relevant history in this case was:
· The dog was fully vaccinated, wormed regularly and had not travelled outside of the
UK
· The owner had noticed the dog starting to lose weight despite a normal appetite 2
weeks prior to presentation. He was also drinking more than usual
· In the week before presentation he had started to become dull and lethargic
· The owner also thought that the dog had been intermittently lame over this period.
Clinical examination
· On examination the dog was quiet and dull (Fig. 11.2l). Examination of his mucous
membranes revealed significant pallor but no evidence of petechiation or ecchymoses
were noted
· His rectal temperature was elevated at 39.8°C
· His resting HR was 92 bpm, suggesting that a degree of compensatory response had
occurred and therefore the anaemia was unlikely to be acute in nature
   a       s 
hepatomegaly palpable. No other abnormalities were noted.
Figure 11.21
Diagnostic evaluation
· Serum biochemistry revealed mild elevations in ALP and ALT and a moderate
elevation in CK
· Survey thoracic and abdominal radiographs revealed no significant abnormalities
· Abdominal ultrasound revealed his liver to be subjectively larger than normal with a
heterogeneous appearance, potentially consistent with an infiltrative disease process
· His complete blood count revealed a moderate, non-regenerative anaemia (PcV 28%,
absolute reticulocyte count 11 x 10%/L) but also a leucocytosis of 65 × 10*/L. Blood
smear examination revealed that almost all of the white cells present were markedly
abnormal in appearance (Fig. 11.22)
· Flow-cyometric analysis of the abnormal leucocytes confirmed them to be of
immature myeloid origin.
Figure 11.22
 Case 11.4 The appearance of the abnormal cells on the blood smear, as shown by
the cluster adjacent to the red arrow. The cells are generally large and abnormal in appearance, with
anisocytosis, anisokaryosis, nuclear moulding and variable numbers of nucleoli (as shown in the cell
highlighted by the yellow arrow)
Diagnosis
· Acute myeloid leukaemia.
Treatment
· In the light of the poor outcome associated with this diagnosis, the owners elected
not to treat the condition and the dog was euthanized 7 days later.
Theory refresher
Leukaemia is defined as the proliferation of neoplastic haemopoietic cells from one or
more different cell lineages within the bone marrow. This may or may not lead to the
presence of these neoplastic cells within the circulation. The more common clinical
presentation is to have a marked increase in the numbers of cells from the neoplastic
cell line within the circulation, but it is possible to have a situation where although
the bone marrow is heavily overpopulated with the abnormal cells, none leak into the
circulation. This is termed ^aleukaemic leukaemia'. A slight variation on this situation
is where only a low number of abnormal cells are found in the circulation despite the
heavy infiltration within the marrow, so-called 'subleukaemic leukaemia'.
Unfortunately there are several different ways to classify leukaemias. The simplest
way is to consider the main cell lineages and then consider the clinical course of the
disease. From this, leukaemias can be divided into several different types:
· Acuite myeloid leukaemia (AML)
 Chronic myeloid leukaemia (CML)
· Myelodysplasia
· Acute lymphoid leukaemia (ALL)
· Chronic lymphoid leukaemia (CLL)
· Plasma cell tumours (multiple myeloma).
Acute leukaemias are generally conditions characterized by  large numbers of
immature blasts within the circulation and bone marrow that clinically have a rapid
rate of onset and often short disease duration. Chronic leukaemias are usually much
slower to develop and are characterized by high numbers of mature cells within the
circulation and bone marrow. Chronic conditions carry a better prognosis as a general
rule.
Myeloid leukaemias
Acute myeloid leukaemia
               
myeloid cell series, thereby resulting in ten different subtypes) within the bone
marrow that then leak out into the circulation, causing a leukocytosis comprising
mainly of these abnormal immature myeloblasts. Their expansion in the bone marrow
is rapid, so the other cell lines are often literally squeezed out, resulting in
thrombocytopaenia and a non-regenerative anaemia, as was the case reported here.
 n s ( h   s  s   
hepatosplenomegaly, mild lymphadenopathy, haemorrhages and various ocular signs.
           
aspirates/biopsies and immunohistochemistry or flow cytometry. Flow cytometry can
be extremely useful as it can be carried out on a blood sample alone, as was proven in
this case where the use of flow cytometry negated the need to undertake a more
invasive bone marrow core biopsy.
Sd  nn s          
owner in the case reported here to take the dog home again once the diagnosis had
been reached. Treatment has been attempted using combination therapy with
vinblastine, prednisolone, cyclophosphamide and cytosine arabinoside and there is
  s            gs
arabinoside, 6-thioguanine and prednisolone, but two other dogs treated this way
were euthanized 10 days into treatment.
Chronic myeloid leukaemia
This is actually quite rare in dogs and is usually seen as an inappropriate
overproduction of mature neutrophils. It too, causes quite non-specific clinical signs
There will be markedly elevated neutrophil counts with no (or very few) abnormal
blast cells in the circulation.
The diagnosis is made by identifying the neutrophilia, ruling out all possible
infectious and inflammatory causes and obtaining a bone marrow sample. The reason
              
for AML. Treatment with hydroxyurea is reported as being quite effective in restoring
normal blood couints, although no large-scale studies have been performed into its
effectiveness. Survival times of just under 2 years have been reported.
Myelodysplastic syndrome
This is an unusual condition, the true incidence of which is unclear because many are
proba bly not diagnosed. The bone marrow becomes hyperplastic as in other leukaemic
conditions, but less than 30% of the marrow population are blasts and the affected cell
been repeatedly reported as being successfuil. In humans, treatment is focused on
causing the affected cell line to complete maturation and there are a small number of
case reports on the use of a drug called aclarubicin in dogs, which appears to be able
to cause this terminal differentiation but this treatment is not available in the UK.
Lymphoid leukaemias
Acute lymphoblastic leukaemia
Similar to AML, this is defined as a proliferation of neoplastic blasts to over 30% in the
bone marrow, but obviously this time the blasts are lymphoblasts rather than
The clinical history is usually slightly longer than in AML (usually 2-4 weeks) but
the clinical signs are similar, namely lethargy, anorexia, vomiting and diarrhoea.
lameness and PU/PD. Affected dogs usually are quite ill and are in poor condition,
            
seem quite well. In addition, dogs with ALL often only have a mild lymphadenopathy
whereas dogs with stage  V lymphoma often have a marked generalized
lymphadenopathy. Middle-aged dogs are most commonly affected and one study has
suggested that German shepherd dogs are possibly predisposed to the disease. The WBC
               
been reports of WBC counts up to 600 x 1o*/L. Definitive diagnosis again needs
            g
marrow assessment with or without immunohistochemistry or flow cytometry.
The prognosis for ALL is different from AML, but it is still guarded. If the animal is
asparaginase, that alone are not usually myelosuppressive, should be used. However,
a protocol such as the Madison-Wisconsin protocol should be considered  (see
Appendix 2). The prognosis is still guarded, however, with a mean survival time of
120 days being reported (with just prednisolone and vincristine).
Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia
As with CML, in CLL there is a hypercellular bone marrow and a leucocytosis, but this
is comprised of mature lymphocytes rather than lymphoblasts. It is an interesting
       sd  s  
generally seen in older dogs and many clinicians elect not to treat it, but to monitor
for progression into a blast crisis and only treat at that point. Treatment if required is
usually best done with chlorambucil and prednisolone.
Multiple myeloma
This is a neoplastic proliferation of B-lymphocytes that have already undergone
differentiation into plasma cells, thereby explaining why a very common feature of
the condition is a monoclonal gammaglobulinaemia, due to the excessive production
of one immunoglobulin clone. The problem with myeloma is that it is associated with
bleeding diathesis, renal dysfunction, immunodeficiencies, cytopaenias and cardiac
(   )    a    s      
of lethargy, weakness, lameness, epistaxis, PU/PD and possibly CNS deficits. Careful
ocular examination may reveal retinal haemorrhage, venous dilatation and vessel
tortuosity, retinal detachment and possibly even blindness. Severe bony infiltration
Diagnosis is based on finding two or more of the following four diagnostic criteria:
· Excessive globulin concentrations within the serum, which on plasma
electrophoresis is shown to be monoclonal
· Plasmacytosis within the bone marrow
· Osteolytic bone lesions
· The presence of globulin fractions within the urine (Bence-Jones proteinuria).
         i s
majority of dogs will respond to the alkylating agent, melphalan, and response rates
can  be increased by combining  melphalan  with prednisolone.  Careful blood
monitoring is required as melphalan is myelosuppressive, especially to the
megakaryocytes. Average survival times of 18 months are common.
12
The polydipsic cancer patient
INTRODUCTION
Polydipsia is defined as when an animal drinks in excess of 100 ml/kg/day, although
a high degree of suspicion for polydipsia can be reached when daily water intake
exceeds 80 ml/kg. Interestingly, many owners are much more aware of the polyuric
aspect of polydipsic patients, which is probably not surprising, especially if the patient
is incontinent. Because investigation of polydipsic patients encompasses many
possi ble different medical and oncological conditions, it is vital that a logical and step-
wise approach is taken with such patients. Very broadly, polydipsic patients can be
grouped in many different ways but the flow diagram in Figure 12.1 gives one
possi ble framework to investigate polydipsic patients along with the major differential
diagnoses for each group.
Polydipsic patient
Endocrine
Non-endocrine
disease
disease
Hyperadrenocorticism
Renal failure
-Pituitary
Neoplasia
.Adrenal
PTHrP-mediated
Diabetesmelitus
-Lymphoma
-Primary
-Anal sacadenocarcinoma
.Secondary
-Tumoureffect
Hyperthyroidism
Hyperviscosity
Hyperparathyroidism
Primary polycythemia
Hypoadrenocorticism
-Secondary polycythemia
Acromegaly
Multiplemyeloma
Hyperaldosteronism
Renal infection
Diabetesinsipidus
Pyometra
-Central
Hepatic disease
-Nephrogenic
Glomerular disease
Renal tubular disease
Figure 12.1
     n     
From this it will become apparent that neoplasia is a major cause of polydipsia and
polyuria. This can be due to a direct effect of the tumour via the production of non-
constitutive hormones such as parathyroid-hormone-related peptide, as can be seen in
anal sac carcinoma, or by production of excessive amounts of a constitutive hormone
such as cortisol, as seen in adrenal-dependent hyperadrenocorticism. Neoplasia can
affect plasma osmolality and viscosity (such as in multiple myeloma), cause renal
(as seen in diffuse hepatocellular carcinomas) and also possibly via mechanisms that
are, as yet, not fully understood.
CLINICAL CASE EXAMPLE 12.1 - MEDIASTINAL LYMPHOMA IN A DOG
Signalment
6-year-old neutered male boxer dog.
Presenting signs
Excessive drinking (approximately 120 ml/kg/day), dullness, lethargy and
inappetance.
Case history
The relevant history in this case was:
 The dog was fully vaccinated with no travel history and was regularly wormed
· He had become progressively polydipsic and polyuric over the preceding 3 weeks to
· He did not appear dysuric or stranguric and his urine had become very pale in
appearance
· The lethargy and inappetance were also progressive, becoming especially marked in
the 3-5 days prior to presentation. The owner commented that the dog was very
reluctant to eat and that he was unable to walk very far without appearing very out
of breath and tired
 s n (        1     
Clinical examination
· The dog appeared dull, weak and not particularly interested in his surroundings
· Thoracic auscultation revealed caudal displacement of his apex heart beat and an
absence of breath sounds in the cranioventral thorax
· Thoracic percussion revealed dull sounds in the cranioventral lung fields
. Thoracic compressibility was substantially reduced
· Abdominal palpation was unremarkable
· The remainder of the examination was tinremarkable.
Diagnostic evaluation
(e          e
but with no active sediment and no excessive protein loss (urine protein: creatinine
ratio 0.24)
· Serum biochemistry revealed hypercalcaemia (total calcium 3.6 mmol/L, ionized
calcium 1.9 mmol/L) with a low-normal phosphate (0.85 mmol/L). Renal parameters
were within normal limits
 Digital rectal examination was inremarkable
· Lateral thoracic radiographs revealed the presence of a cranial mediastinal mass
occupying a large area within the cranial thorax
· Abdominal radiographs and abdominal ultrasound were unremarkable other than
for the ultrasound revealing pyelectasia (as expected in a polydipsic animal)
· Fine needle aspirates were taken from the mediastinal mass under ultrasouind
confirmed by undertaking flow cytometry which confirmed the mass to be a T-cell
lymphoma
· PTHrP was shown to be significantly elevated, whilst PTH was subnormal thereby
confirming the hypercalcaemia to be a hypercalcaemia of malignancy caused by the
mediastinal lymphoma.
Treatment
Whilst waiting for the laboratory results, the dog was hospitalized and received
intravenous fluid therapy at four times maintenance (i.e. 8 ml/kg/hour) in an attempt
to help reduce his hypercalcaemia. Once the diagnosis was confirmed, the owner
agreed to commence chemotherapy, as the optimal  treatment for mediastinal
lymphoma remains systemic chemotherapy in most cases. A Madison-Wisconsin
protocol was used for this dog, as detailed in Appendix 2.
Ouitcome
The total and ionized calcium normalized within 72 hours of commencing treatment,
returned. The intravenous fluids were stopped as soon as the serum calcium
normalized and the dog was discharged back to the owner. The dog continued to
resolve until the prednisolone was stopped at week 5 of the protocol. Thoracic
found to be completely normal with total resolution of the lymphoma.
The dog remained well after the chemotherapy stopped and he remained well for 11
months, but then he became dull and inappetant again and this time he was also
tachypoeic. Thoracic radiographs confirmed relapse of the mediastinal mass with an
accompanying pleural effusion. Rescue treatment was instituted with single-agent
Lomustine, which was successful in producing a second remission (clear thoracic
radiographs again) but this remission only lasted for just under 3 months before he
relapsed again and he was euthanized.
Theory refresher
Lymphoma is one of the more common tumours seen in dogs, estimated to account for
      s        
middle-aged to older dogs and there appears to be no gender predisposition for the
disease. Lymphoma and lymphosarcoma are interchangeable terms, although as
lymphatic tissue is technically mesenchymal in origin, the term lymphosarcoma is
technically more correct. The neoplastic cells develop from a clonal expansion of
lymphocytes located in any of the sites within which lymphoid cells may be found. As
a result, there are many different forms of the disease and currently several different
However, in practical terms, the classification systems do not really change the initial
clinical approach to the disease, which is to:
 Establish the location(s) in which the disease exists
· Multicentric
· Alimentary
· Mediastinal/thymic
· Hepatic
· Splenic
· Central nervous system
· Cutaneous
· Other
· Establish whether or not there are any paraneoplastic syndromes present that
require concurrent treatment, or that will affect the lymphoma treatment adversely
· Decide on the best treatment option and commence therapy.
from peripheral lymph nodes, or by ultrasound-guided aspiration of internal organs. It
is highly recommended to attempt this in all cases before considering obtaining
surgical samples for histopathological diagnosis, as cytology is simpler, cheaper and
the results are availa ble more quickly. If ever there is a question over the accuracy of a
cytological result then it should be confirmed by histopathology, but cytology is
usually the method by which lymphoma is diagnosed in the authors' clinics. The
major drawback with cytological evaluation is that it does not allow an accurate
assessment of the tumour grade to be undertaken but as illustrated above, the grade
         s  
lindertaken at the same time. Flow cytometry is a technique in which cells are sorted
according to their size and then investigated to see what external molecular markers
they carry by using monoclonal antibodies that bind to cell surface molecules. Flow
there are some markers such as CD45, that clearly label a cell as being a leucocyte.
There are markers that are unique to B lymphocytes (e.g. CB21 and CD79a) or T
lymphocytes (e.g. CD3, CD4, CD8) and markers that are only found on immature cells
(e.g. CD34), thereby identifying the cell as being a blast. By using this specific
identification technique, cells can be accurately identified; both by their specific
family subtype but also by their stage of maturity and therefore are determined as
neoplastic or normal. Flow cytometry has been shown to be especially helpful in the
differentiation between thymoma and lymphoma, which cytologically can be a
challenge as the thymus contains lymphoid cells in various stages of maturation as a
natural physiological feature (see Fig. 8.8). Thymomas can also cause a dog to become
hypercalcaemic in a minority of cases (up to 30% in one series), so the identification
of hypercalcaemia in a patient with a mediastinal mass does not rule out a diagnosis
of thymoma. It has been shown that thymomas in dogs can be identified by
undertaking flow cytometry  on cells obtained by ultrasound-guided aspirates of
mediastinal masses and identifying more than 1o% of the cells as having both CD4
and CD8 staining, whereas lymphoma cases stained for these markers on less than 2%
of cells. This is why this technique was performed in this clinical case example.
  (        e   s
s n s           
stage I disease and also in obtaining lymph node tissue for biopsy if cytological
evaluation does not elucidate the diagnosis. The question of whether chemotherapy
should be administered to a patient following the diagnosis of a splenic lymphoma
excised at laparotomy to investigate splenomegaly is a slightly difficult one, but the
opinion of the authors is that splenic lymphoma should probably be considered a
manifestation of multicentric disease. Therefore, should this scenario develop, a full
investigation should be undertaken postsurgery to try to establish the exact clinical
stage of the disease but frequently the use of systemic chemotherapy will be
warranted.
If histopathology is undertaken, the classification system in Box 12.1 is the one
most frequently referred to in the UK.
 Box 12.1 World Health Organization Clinical Staging System for Lymphosarcoma
in Domestic Animals
Anatomic site
A. Generalized
B. Alimentary
C. Thymic
D. Skin
E. Leukemia (true)*
 F. Others (including solitary renal tumour)
Stage
 s e  ss    as e   nnn 
 Ia Stage I without systemic signs
 Ib Stage I with systemic signs
 II Involvement of many lymph nodes in a regional area (with or without the tonsils)
 Hla Stage II without systemic signs
 IIb Stage II with systemic signs
IHI Generalized lymph node involvement
IIla Stage III without systemic signs
IIIb Stage III with systemic signs
 IV Liver and/or spleen involvement (with or without stage Ill disease)
 IVa Stage IV without systemic signs
 V Manifestation in the blood and involvement of bone marrow and/or other organ systems (with or
without stages I to IV disease)
Va Stage V without systemic signs
Vb Stage V with systemic signs
 Only blood and bone marrow involved.
 Exclu din g bone marrow.
What the various classification systems have been useful to show is that:
· In general, B-cell lymphomas will respond better to treatment and have longer
remission durations than T-cell lymphomas
· High-histological grade tumours often respond more completely to chemotherapy
than low-grade tumours
A e s     s  e
· High-grade tumours are more frequently B-cell in origin whilst low-grade tumours
are more frequently T-cell in origin.
    n        n n
possible to have mixed B-and T-cell tumours and also occasionally lymphoma which
shows no clear B-or T-cell immunophenotyping, so-called ‘null cell lymphoma. From a
clinical point of view, dogs that appear not to have significant signs of illness
(su bstage ^a') will frequently respond better to treatment than dogs with obvious signs
does develop in B-cell patients) and the identification of hypercalcaemia used to be
or T-cell delineation that has the negative prognostic indications rather than the
parathyroid-hormone-related peptide (PTHrP) by the neoplastic cells, as documented
in the case presented. PTHrP is elevated in many tumours (with the subsequent
development of hypercalcaemia) but it is most commonly associated with lymphoma,
anal sac adenocarcinoma and multiple myeloma. The other main differential
diagnoses for hypercalcaemia in the dog and cat are given in Box 12.2.
Box 12.2 The main differential diagnoses for hypercalcaemia in the dog and cat
ommon neoplastic causes for hypercalcaemia
Non-neoplastic cau ses of hyperc alc aem ia
eoun ore no euouape piourened - usipioaqenedradq Areud
Hypoa drenocorticism
producing PTH
Renal failure (chronic or acute)
Lymph oma - producing PTHrP
Vitamin D toxic osis
An al sac adenoc arc inoma - prod ucing PTHrP
Granulomat ous inflammation (e.g.: histoplasmosis, blast omycosis, granulom
lymph ad enitis)
Multiple myeloma - producin g PTHrP
Idiopath ic
Other tumours (rare, but has been reported with many differen
carcin omas)
 Spurious
Prognosis
is often difficult to be precise when giving such information to an owner. The tumour
cell type (B or T) is important as explained previously, as is the clinical subtype
staging ('a' or “b'). The clinical staging of the multicentric form of the disease also has
some bearing, in that dogs with stage V disease often have a poorer ouitcome, but in
general, dogs with stage I-IV disease will respond in a similar way to treatment. For
animals with non-multicentric lymphoma, there are few good studies that provide
 s     s     s
However, animals with primary CNS lymphoma have been reported to respond to
external beam radiotherapy.
The choice of treatment protocol for the multicentric form of lymphoma may also
affect the prognosis in some cases. It has been shown that dogs treated with a
doxorubicin-containing protocol in general have a reduced risk of relapse and death
when compared to dogs treated with a non-doxorubicin-containing protocol.
Furthermore, multidrug protocols generally result in longer remission times and
steroids should be avoided if at all possible, as steroids appear to increase the risk of
multidrug resistance gene expression, leading to reduced suiccess rates with other
chemotherapeutic agents. However, many factors need to be considered when
choosing the correct protocol for each case, such as treatment cost, treatment
risk of toxic side effects, to name but a few. Therefore, a summary of the most
commonly used treatment choices is given below:
1. Single-agent prednisolone
· Cheap and easy
· Produces a short-term (1-2 months) remission in approximately 60% of dogs
2. COP (cyclophosphamide, vincristine and prednisolone)
· Simple, easy to give and relatively low cost
· Produces a complete remission in approximately 70% of patients
· Median survival times of approximately 6-7 months
3. Single-agent doxorubicin treatment
· Treatment once every 3 weeks for five treatments only
· Moderately expensive
· Median survival times of approximately 6-8 months
4. CHOP-based protocol
· More involved treatments
· More expensive
· Produces a complete remission in approximately 85-90% of patients
· Median survival times of approximately 12 months
· 2-year survival rates of approximately 20-25% reported.
All of these protocols are given in detail in Appendix 2.
It is therefore clear that, if at all possible, a doxorubicin-containing multidrug
protocol is the optimal choice for dogs with multicentric or visceral lymphoma and
ideally should be given as part of the first remission protocol.
Rescue treatment
As illustrated in the clinical example, it is possible in many cases to achieve a second
(and sometimes a third) remission in lymphoma cases, so having a plan for this
situation is always recommended. The majority of lymphoma cases will suffer a
disease relapse at some point in their lives, but as long as they are still in substage “a'
and also that the duration of their first remission has been satisfactory, it is usually
worth attempting rescue treatment. Owners must be aware that the chances of suiccess
are approximately half what they were for the first round of treatment at best and that
long second remission durations are sadly not isual, but if the dog is well, then it is
certainly worth considering. As with the protocols published for first-line therapy,
there are many different rescue protocols described but if the relapse occurs after the
initial treatment course has been completed, it is usually best to consider attempting a
second induction using the same protocol as was lsed initially. However, if this is not
successful, or if clinically this is not indicated (i.e. the relapse occurs whilst still
receiving the first-line treatment or the relapse occurs soon after finishing the first-
line treatment), then an alternative rescuie protocol can be considered, as listed below:
use at 30 mg/m2 once every 3 weeks for five cycles)
   ss  )  s    
2. Single-agent Lomustine (CCNU)
· Easy to give (90 mg/m? by mouth once every 3 weeks)
· Approximately 30% response rate (10% complete remission) with a median
remission duration of approximately 3 months
3. Single-agent Mitoxantrone
· Easy to give (5 mg/m2 by slow intravenous infusion once every 3 weeks)
· Approximately a 40% response rate (30% complete remission) with a remission
duration of approximately 3 months
4. MOPP (Mechlorethamine, vincristine, procarbazine and prednisolone)
· Involved, but not a complicated protocol with both home and hospital
administration of medication required
· Approximately a 65% response rate (with 30% complete remission reported) with
a remission duration of approximately 3 months
· Moderate expense
5. D-MAC (Dexamethasone, melphalan, actinomycin D and cytosine arabinoside)
· Involved, but not a complicated protocol with both home and hospital
administration of medication required
· 72% remission rate, (44% complete remission and 28% partial remission) with a
median remission duration of 61 days (range, 2-467 + days)
6. LAP (Lomustine, L-asparaginase and prednisolone)
· Involved, but not complicated protocol with both home and hospital
administration of medication required
· 87% response rate with 52% complete remission reported, with a remission
duration of approximately 2-3 months
· Moderate expense.
From this list, it becomes apparent that there is not one protocol that stands out as
being substantially more efficacious than another, so again it becomes a matter of
choosing the most appropriate protocol for  individual  cases depending on  the
Lomustine first, with MOPP as a second choice and D-MAC as a third choice but as the
data above show, any of the treatments listed above (and this is not an exhaustive list)
could be considered.
CLINICAL CASE EXAMPLE 12.2 - ANAL SAC ADENOCARCINOMA IN A DOG
Signalment
10-year-old neutered male golden retriever dog
Presenting signs
A 2-week history of being polydipsic and having a markedly reduced appetite
Case history
The relevant history in this case was:
 The dog was fully vaccinated with no travel history and was regularly wormed
the point where he had two episodes of urinary incontinence on his bed
· He did not appear dysuric or stranguric and his urine had become very pale in
appearance
· His appetite had become quite rapidly poor, in that initially he was reluctant to
finish his food but that in the 3 days prior to presentation he appeared almost totally
disinterested in food. However, he had not exhibited any vomiting, diarrhoea or
dyschezia in this period.
Clinical examination
· The dog appeared quite bright and nervous but his owners commented that he was
not as lively as usual
· Thoracic auscuiltation revealed normal lung and heart sounds and thoracic
percussion was unremarkable
· Thoracic compressibility was normal
· Abdominal palpation was unremarkable
            
measuring approximately 4 cm in diameter
 No further abnormalities were identified.
Diagnostic evaluation
· Urinalysis revealed isosthenuric urine (USG 1.011) but with no active sediment and
no excessive protein loss
calcium 2.1 mmol/L). Renal parameters were within normal limits. ALP was mildly
elevated
· Fine needle aspirates were obtained from the anal sac mass and the cytological
· Lateral thoracic radiographs revealed no abnormalities
· Abdominal radiographs were unremarkable but abdominal ultrasound revealed mild
H            
metastases were identified
· PTHrP was shown to be significantly elevated, whilst PTH was subnormal, thereby
confirming the hypercalcaemia to be a hypercalcaemia of malignancy caused by anal
sac adenocarcinoma.
Diagnosis
· Stage 3a metastatic anal sac adenocarcinoma
Treatment
Because of the finding of an enlarged medial iliac lymph node, the clinical team were
proximity to the aorta precluded fine needle aspiration. Therefore, the dog was
managed surgically by undergoing an anal saculectomy using the closed technique
and then a laparotomy to remove the enlarged medial iliac lymph node. The dog was
anaesthetized and placed in sternal recumbency with his legs positioned over the back
of the table, the tail elevated and a pad placed underneath his groin to elevate the
caudal pelvis. Gauze swabs were placed into the rectum to prevent wound
probe was inserted into the anal sac and held in place by an assistant whilst a vertical
incision was made over the sac and the suirrounding tissue (in particular the external
anal sphincter). Fibres from the external anal sphincter muscle were carefully freed
          s s n 
sharp (using metzenbaum scissors) dissection. A single absorbable suiture was ised to
ligate the anal sac duct before transection and then the surgical site was carefully and
caudal abdominal laparotomy was then performed. The medial iliac lymph node was
identified, the blood supply ligated and the node removed. Careful exploration of the
abdomen revealed no evidence of further disease, so the abdomen was closed
analgesia (methadone for 24 hours followed by buprenorphine for 24 hours) along
with oral clavulate-potentiated amoxicillin for 5 days.
CLINICAL TIP
The anal sac is generally adhered tightly to the external anal sphincter muscle, so great care must
be taken to avoid excessive trauma to this muscle, and also to the caudal rectal nerve, during
Sa a p s  as  ps nsa aa  s s  ass
 anal sphincter from the anal sac.
Follow-ulp
Immediately postoperatively the dog appeared well and defecated normally within 12
hours. Histopathological analysis of the excised tissue confirmed it to be an
adenocarcinoma of the anal sac with metastasis to the medial iliac lymph node. The
dog was then treated with carboplatin, administered as a slow intravenous infusion at
300 mg/m? once every 3 weeks for four treatments. The dog tolerated this treatment
well with no adverse side effects.
Outcome
The dog remained well for 18 months and then represented as the owner was
concerned he was losing weight, drinking more again and had a reduced appetite. On
and percuission were linremarkable. Seruim calcium assessment revealed a recuirrence
of the hypercalcaemia and thoracic radiographs revealed the presence of multiple
pulmonary metastases, so the dog was euthanized.
Theory refresher
Anal sac carcinomas are not considered to be common tumours of the dog and they
are rare tumours in the cat. However, up to 53% of cases in dogs are associated with
PHTrP-induced hypercalcaemia, so many cases will present with signs associated with
excessive serum calcium (i.e. polydipsia, polyuria, inappetance and lethargy), as in
this case. It is important to note that a significant number of cases of anal sac
adenocarcinoma will not be hypercalcaemic, but the tumour still has malignant
potential, so finding a dog with an anal sac mass and normocalcaemia does not rule
out a malignant tumour. Anal sac adenocarcinomas arise from the apocrine gland
cells that line the anal sacs and are generally seen in older dogs (mean age of 9-11
years old). Although some studies have suggested that the disease is more common in
female dogs, the most recent publication in the UK found an even male : female
occurrence rate. Some breeds appear to be more predisposed than others, with cocker
spaniels, golden retrievers and German shepherd dogs seemly over-represented.
             i
       s s    
treatment choices that should be made and also to the prognosis and outcome. A
           
S    s         h 
Nodal disease
Clinical Primary
Metastasis
stage.
tumour
draining nodes)(distant)
Stage 1
2.5cm maxNegative
Negative
diameter
Stage2
>2.5cm maxNegative
Negative
diameter
Stage 3aAny tumour
Negative
diameter
Stage 3bAny tumour
Negative
Stage 4Any tumourAny nodal diseasePresent
It is from this table that the case described here received its stage 3a designation.
The reasons that the clinical staging is so important are, firstly, because the
findings have a significant impact on the treatment that should be recommended and,
secondly, because the prognosis is also different depending on the stage of disease
identified, as shown in Table 12.2.
Table 12.2 The mean survival times for dogs with anal sac adenocarcinomas and the variability found
dependant on the clinical staging as found in one large study
Clinical stage
Mean survival time (MsT) (days)
MST range
 Stage 1
1205
690-1720
 Stage 2
722
191-1253
 Stage 3a
492
127-856
 Stage 3b
335
253-417
Stage 4
71
6-136
(adapted from Poulton and Brearley, JVIM (2007) 21(2): 274-280)
The role of suirgery in the management of anal sac adenocarcinomas is therefore of
          
primary disease and also for lymphatic secondaries. Several studies clearly show that
          
these patients, and dogs with this complication should be considered as candidates for
referral to a soft-tissue surgery specialist unless the practitioner is experienced and has
visceral organs, however, usually dictates that no further treatment is possible. The
question therefore is whether or not there is clearly a role for adjunctive treatment to
aid the surgical management of these patients. With regard to chemotherapy, it has
    q s          
some cases, thereby enabling less radical suirgery to be performed to try to reduce the
risk of external anal sphincter damage, but this response is variable. More recent work
   e    a        
shrink the nodal metastasis preoperatively. However, whether or not chemotherapy
actually clear and further work is required to clarify the role of chemotherapy in this
situation.
Electrochemotherapy has also recently been described as possibly beneficial in an
incompletely  excised  anal sac  adenocarcinoma.  Two  doses of  cisplatin  were
administered 14 days apart in combination with biphasic electrical pulses and the dog
was still in complete remission 18 months later. Newer treatments such as
electrochemotherapy certainly merit further evaluation in these cases and may
represent a further viable treatment option in the near fuiture.
 s  n si n   o s    
radiation directed at the site of the primary tumour may improve the outcome for
these patients, especially if incomplete excision of the mass occurs. Both hypo-and
has described the uise of radiotherapy with concurrent mitoxantrone administration
            s
required to establish the role of chemoradiotherapy more clearly. Radiotherapy has
also been described following excision of an anal sac carcinoma in a cat with no
significant side effects.
CLINICAL CASE EXAMPLE 12.3 -PRIMARY POLYCYTHEMIA IN A DOG
Signalment
5-year-old neutered female Welsh springer spaniel.
Presenting signs
A 4-week history of being polydipsic, polyuric and urinary incontinent.
Case history
The relevant history in this case was:
· The dog was fully vaccinated with no travel history outside of the UK
· No previous history of any medical problems
· The owner had first noted that the dog was unable to get through the night without
urinating approximately 4 weeks prior to presentation and had then realized that she
was drinking much more than she had used to. When she calculated her daily water
intake it averaged at 134 ml/kg/day
· As well as her excessive water intake, the dog had become lethargic at home and
reluctant to go for a walk. Her appetite had remained reasonable and not excessive
· She had not lost weight.
Clinical examination
· The dog appeared quiet
· Oral and ocular mucous membranes appeared redder than normal and this was most
visible on the buccal mucosa but there were no signs of dehydration
· Thoracic auscultation revealed normal lung and heart sounds and thoracic
percussion was unremarkable
· Thoracic compressibility was normal
· Abdominal palpation was unremarkable
· Digital rectal examination was unremarkable
· No further abnormalities were identified.
Diagnostic evaluation
· In the light of the history and presenting signs, polycythemia was considered a
significant possibility, so a complete blood count was undertaken first. This revealed
a marked elevation in her red cell count (PCV 77%)
· Her serum biochemistry revealed mild elevations in ALT and AsT but was otherwise
linremarkable
· Urinalysis revealed isosthenuria (UsG 1.010) with no active sediment or proteinuria
. Thoracic radiographs were unremarkable
· Abdominal ultrasound revealed no abnormalities
 The serum erythropoietin concentration was in the low-normal range, thereby
confirming that the dog had primary polycythemia.
Diagnosis
· Primary polycythemia (polycythemia vera).
Treatment
The dog was hospitalized and initially uinderwent a phlebotomy. A total of 20 ml/kg
blood (340 ml) was removed and the dog commenced intravenous fluid therapy (at 4
ml/kg/hour for 36 hours). This was successful in reducing her PCV to 63%. The dog
then started hydroxyurea at a dose of 500 mg once a day (dose equivalent of 30
mg/kg) for 10 days before the dose was reduced to 500 mg every other day. The dog
responded well to treatment, with the PCV falling to 53% over a 6-week period and the
clinical signs resolved. The dog was lost to follow-up 18 months later but at this time
she was still in remission with no clinical signs.
Theory refresher
Primary polycythemia (also known as polycythemia vera and primary erythrocytosis)
is the condition in which there is an absolute increase in the number of mature
polycythemia in which there is not an absolute increase in the red cell numbers (e.g.
severe dehydration, acute splenic contraction or body fluid shifts), a secondary
polycythemia in which there is a genuine increase in the number of red cells but as a
pulmonary disease, a left-to-right cardiac shunt), the result of excessive erythropoietin
production as a result of underlying pathology such as a renal tumour, or a true
the other possible conditions have been ruled out.
   s     s  
present with a history of polydipsia and polyuria, lethargy, weakness and sometimes
         s
frequently  described  and sometimes patients  will  present  with  evidence of  a
coagulopathy. On examination, the mucous membranes are usually brick red, the
The best diagnostic approach is to try to rule out all the other possible causes, so a full
serum biochemistry profile is to be recommended along with left and right lateral
inflated thoracic radiographs, a lateral abdominal radiograph and abdominal
be performed if there is clinical or radiographic evidence of pulmonary disease or
hypoxia. Serum erythropoietin assessment (undertaken in this instance at Cambridge
pulmonary disease has been ruled out or if a renal mass has been identified. In
Treatment involves initial stabilization of the patient, usually by phlebotomy and
fluid therapy. Removing 20 ml blood/kg and replacing this volume with ideally the
approximately 15%, as illustrated in the case here. The mainstay of medical therapy is
hydroxyurea at approximately 30 mg/kg SID for 7 days (although the recommended
dose appears to vary between reports from 20-50 mg/kg in the early stages, then
reduced to 15 mg/kg SID or EOD as maintenance once the PCV has normalized).
CLINICAL CASE EXAMPLE 12.4 - DIABETES INSIPIDUS DUE TO A PITUITARY
TUMOUR
Signalment
9-year-old neutered female boxer dog.
Presenting signs
A 10-day history of sudden-onset marked polyuria and polydipsia with urinary
incontinence.
Case history
The relevant history in this case was:
· The dog was fully vaccinated, wormed and had no travel history
· The owner initially thought she had developed urinary incontinence because she
had started to urinate indoors. The referring veterinary surgeon had dispensed some
phenylpropanolamine but this had not improved the problem. The owner then
    a         
ml/kg/day, so she was referred for further evaluation.
Clinical examination
· On examination the dog was bright, alert and in good body condition at 28 kg
· Cardiopulmonary auscultation and percussion were unremarkable
· Abdominal palpation was unremarkable
· Digital rectal examination was normal
· Neurological examination was unremarkable.
Diagnostic evaluation
· In the light of the clinical history, the first evaluation that was indertaken was a
free-catch urinalysis, which revealed a USG of 1.004 with no active sediment or
proteinuria
· Serum biochemistry (including bile acid stimulation) and a complete blood count
were unremarkable
· An ACTH stimulation test was normal
· Thoracic radiographs revealed no underlying pathology
· Abdominal ultrasound revealed no abnormalities other than for pyelectasia
potentially consistent with the dog being polydipsic. A cystocentesis sample was
· A water depravation test was undertaken (see Appendix 3), in which the dog lost 5%
of her bodyweight within 12 hours of the test starting without showing a significant
rise in her USG (which went to 1.o08). The dog was then given 2 μg of the
antidiuretic hormone analogue, desmopressin (DDAVP; 1-deamino, 9-D-arginine
S         n   (s
and the dog lost no further weight.
Diagnosis
On the basis that all non-endocrine causes of polydipsia and all endocrine causes bar
diabetes insipidus and psychogenic polydipsia were ruled out by the diagnostic
evaluation, the water depravation test and the response to exogenous DDAVP
confirmed the diagnosis to be one of central diabetes insipidus (cDI).
Treatment and initial follow-up
The dog was initially treated with DDAVP drops administered on the conjunctiva
(three drops three times a day), which worked well at first with a total resolution of
the dog's clinical signs. However, over the following 3 weeks the dog's DDAVP
requirement went up by 40% (to five drops three times a day) without generating
adequate control of the dog's polyuria so the dog represented. On examination, she
was still bright and alert but exhibited very slight anisocoria. Neurological evaluation
was otherwise still unremarkable. In the light of the history of acquired central
diabetes insipidus and the mild anisocoria, it was decided to undertake an MRI scan of
the brain to investigate the possibility of there being a tumour within the pituitary
and as shown in Figures 12.2 and 12.3 the MR1 did indeed reveal the presence of a
large pituitary mass.
(S6=O)ASSOT
RS
LAS
Figure 12.2
Case 12.4 A transverse T1 plus contrast MR1 scan from the dog, revealing the
     s     s   e  s
Figure 12.3
Case 12.4 A sagittal T1 plus contrast MRI, showing the pituitary tumour with a small
 cord of tissue from it extending ventrally and causing compression of the optic chiasm (shown by the
red arrow), thereby explaining the anisocoria seen at the second examination
Outcome
The dog was maintained on ocular DDAVP drops but also underwent external beam
radiotherapy to treat the pituitary mass. The radiotherapy was tolerated well with no
acute side effects. The diabetes insipidus did not resolve, although the ocular DDAVP
dose did stabilize the condition, meaning that the original signs of polyuria and
polydipsia were well controlled.
Theory refresher
Diabetes insipidus (Dl) is a clinical condition characterized by an often acute onset of
 )     s     d 
nephrogenic (nDl). The condition develops due to either a failure of production of
adequate quantities of antidiuretic hormone (ADH), also known as arginine-
vasopressin, from the posterior lobe of the pituitary gland (therefore termed cD), or a
failure in the action of ADH at the kidney (therefore termed nDl). The classification of
           n 
congenital or acquired. The most common form of the disease is acquired nDl. In this
case, however, the condition was an acquired cDl, which should always raise concern
in the attending clinician's mind as to the possibility of there being a space-occupying
in the supraoptic and paraventricular nuclei of the hypothalamus, from which axons
extend down into the posterior pituitary. Therefore any lesion that will disrupt or
damage this pathway could lead to the development of Dl.
In normal animals the stimulus for release of ADH is an increase in plasma
osmolality  indicating dehydration  and  this change is detected  by  specialized
           
channels known as ‘aquaporins’ in the distal convoluted tubules and the collecting
ducts, thereby allowing the re-absorption of solute-free water along the osmotic
gradient established by the solute and urea re-absorption in the more proximal renal
tubules. The action of ADH is therefore vital to normal water conservation and
balance within the body and without it the kidneys would lose large amounts of water
rapidly.
Making a diagnosis of Dl therefore firstly involves carefully eliminating all of the
  h  n s  d    s  
can be done quite simply by careful clinical examination, blood testing, urinalysis and
appropriate diagnostic imaging. One key point to remember when considering the
differential diagnoses is that really the only diseases that will cause the urine specific
gravity to fall below 1.006 are Dl and primary/psychogenic polydipsia, so if the USG
lies between 1.008 and 1.015, a diagnosis of complete D1 is unlikely. Therefore, only
once all of the other possible differentials have been ruled out should a water
depravation test be considered.
CLINICAL TIP
Water depravation tests are potentially dangerous and should never be performed until all of the
Another key indicator that a dog has Dl is the fact that affected patients often have
an insatiable desire to drink water. If this is not reported as a clinical sign it would be
compelling clinical reason not to do so. Suich a reason could be a subtle neurological
abnormality, as identified on this dog or an extremely low USG (i.e. < 1.006).
NURSING TIP
water unless undergoing a controlled water depravation test, as they can become clinically
dehydrated quickly.
Brain tumours are not considered to be common, although dogs do appear to be
aged to older animals, although they can occasionally be seen in very young animals
Numerous different types of brain tumour have been reported, including many
different primary tumours arising from different neuirological tissues and metastatic
tumours from distant sites (such as mammary carcinoma and haemangiosarcomas)
tumours reported in the dog, and occur more frequently in brachycephalic breeds
Considering that the boxer, in particular, is over-represented in the incidence figure:
for brain tumours, the finding of a pituitary tumour in the case described here was
would not be the form of pituitary neoplasia usually encountered, as the more
common form of tumour within this gland is a functional tumour of either the pars
distalis or pars intermedia of the anterior pituitary, resulting in the development of
pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism
Treatment for brain neoplasia and of pituitary neoplasia, in particular, can be with
           
human medicine but is rarely undertaken in veterinary medicine due to the technical
difficulties of the procedure. When this approach has been used in dogs with a
functional anterior pituitary tumour, the l-and 2-year survival rates reported were
84% and 80% respectively. A more commonly utilized treatment is radiation therapy
and, in particular, external beam radiotherapy in which the use of orthovoltage
radiation has been described, but the lse of a megavoltage linear accelerator is
superior. In a study from 2007 involving 46 dogs with pituitary tumours, 19 of which
received radiation treatment and 27 of which did not, the mean survival time for the
treated group was 1405 days compared to 551 days in the non-treated group and the 1-
, 2-and 3-year estimated survival rates for the treated group were 93%, 87% and 55%.
compared to 42%, 32% and 25% for the non-treated group. Several other earlier
studies support these findings and indicate that the use of radiotherapy in pituitary
associated side effects being noted and their quality of life being maintained or even
improved.
13
The haematuric/stranguric/dysuric cancer patient
Haematuria is defined as the presence of excessive numbers of erythrocytes within
the urine and therefore from a cancerous disease viewpoint, haematuria can be
caused by neoplasia existing potentially  anywhere within the urinary  tract.
can be suggestive of either an obstructive lesion or a neurological dysfunction. Cancer
causing any of these clinical signs therefore could theoretically be located in a number
of different anatomical locations and a logical step-wise approach should be taken to
CLINICAL CASE EXAMPLE 13.1 - A DOG WITH A UNILATERAL RENAL CARCINOMA
Signalment
6-year-old neutered female doberman dog.
Presenting signs
A 3-week history of passing red-coloured urine intermittently.
Case history
The relevant history in this case was:
· The dog was fully vaccinated including current rabies, having been imported from
the USA 3 years previously
with oral phenylpropanolamine and had remained stable on this medication for the
past 2 years
· The owner had noticed abnormal colouration of her urine once or twice last month
and then had started to notice that her urine was darker than normal in the majority
of her voidings when she urinated on concrete but he couldn't comment on urine
colour when she voided on grass. In the 10 days prior to presentation the urine had
become more obviously bloody and the owner said that he was now able to see that
the urine was blood stained on many suirfaces
    a  s     s   
dysuria or polyuria. However, she had lost a little weight and she was moderately
lethargic with reduced exercise tolerance.
Clinical examination
· The dog appeared quiet but alert
· Oral and ocular mucous membranes appeared slightly pale
n          e
percussion was uinremarkable
kidney
· No further abnormalities were identified.
Diagnostic evaluation
· Her serum biochemistry revealed mild elevations in ALT and ALP but was otherwise
unremarkable
· Her complete blood count revealed a mild anaemia (PCV 33%; normal 37-55%) that
appeared to be regenerative based on the presence of marked polychromasia on the
blood film
· Her urine did not appear grossly haematuric but urinalysis revealed the presence of
s e o  + + + + n  ad  d s   y
 Thoracic radiographs were unremarka ble
· Abdominal radiographs confirmed the presence of the enlarged and abnormally
shaped left kidney
· Abdominal ultrasouind showed the abnormal left kidney to be due to a mass present
on the caudal pole measuring approximately 6 × 8 cm. The cranial part of the kidney
appeared normal but the mass had no normal kidney structure identifiable. No
enlargement of the draining renal lymph nodes was noted. A small volume of
echogenic debris was visible when the urinary bladder was balloted using the
ultrasound probe, consistent in appearance with blood cells in the urine.
Diagnosis
· Primary renal tumour with no evidence of metastatic disease.
Treatment
The dog was taken to surgery for unilateral nephrectomy. Once anaesthetized the dog
was placed in dorsal recumbency and the skin was routinely prepared. A ventral
midline incision was made and the wound held open with a Balfour retractor. The
abnormal left kidney was exposed by lifting the descending colon and moving it to the
right, thereby using the mesentery attached to this to hold the small intestine towards
the right hemiabdomen. The overlying peritoneum was incised and then manually
peeled away from the kidney, using electrocautery to prevent any haemorrhage. The
perirenal fat was then reflected to expose the renal vasculature and the ureter. The
lising 3-0 silk before being transected. The ureter was then isolated and ligated close to
the urinary bladder before being transected as well and the kidney removed (Fig
13.1). The abdomen was then lavaged and closed routinely.
Resistant
Figure13.1
Case 13.1 The appearance of the abnormal left kidney following excision
Postoperatively the dog was managed with opioid analgesia (methadone for 12
 g )     (    
BID for 5 days) and she recovered well. No gross haematuria was noted but
microscopic haematuria was noted for 3 days.
Diagnosis
· A renal tubular cell carcinoma.
Theory refresher
Cancer of the kidney as a primary disease is actually rather unusual in the dog; indeed
S   s        
disease. This, therefore, leads to the necessity in any patient in whom a renal tumour
is suspected for a thorough presurgery evaluation and staging to ensure that there is
not a primary tumour elsewhere, as well as trying to establish the extent and severity
of the disease. If a primary renal tumour is suspected in a dog, then the majority will
be carcinomas (of which there are several different types), but lymphoma can also be
seen and this can be bilateral in nature. Bilateral carcinomas were only reported in 4%
The clinical signs associated with renal neoplasia can be quite non-specific and
haematuria that is noticed by the owner, as in this case, is actually not always
reported although microscopic haematuria will frequently be identified. Weight loss,
lethargy and inappetance are commonly reported, so a careful clinical examination is
required to evaluate the size and shape of both of the kidneys, as identification of a
palpable abdominal mass is often the first indication of a serious problem. Animals
with renal lymphoma will usually have obviously enlarged kidneys with an irregular
outline whereas, as in this case, unilateral renal enlargement due to a tumour may
affect only one pole of one kidney.
The clinical pathology findings are also often non-specific. The finding of
haematuria in the case reported here is reported in approximately 50% of cases,
Diagnostic imaging, and in particular ultrasound, therefore, is a very important and
liseful tool to help establish the diagnosis. Ultrasound-guided aspirates or Tru-cut
biopsies can be obtained, although in general the authors will only request an aspirate
if lymphoma is suspected. Abdominal ultrasound is also very iseful to look for local
and visceral metastasis and also to assess whether or not the tumour has broken
through the renal capsule to invade the surrounding musculature or vasculature.
H   n    s     s 
will complicate the surgery, so attempting to establish the extent of the tumour in its
locality is a very important function of the ultrasound scan. Radiographs are
carcinomas (in common with most carcinomas) certainly have the potential to
establish bony secondaries and although not common, will cause significant bone
pain which may be difficult to treat. The author (RF), however, has had some success
treating bone metastasis with a combination of meloxicam and oral bisphosphonates,
in terms of producing good short-term analgesia and restoring quality of life for a
limited period. There has been a recent case report of a dog with a transitional cell
carcinoma of one renal pelvis causing hypertrophic osteopathy and this dog presented
with haematuria and a reluctance to move. Surgical excision of the tumour led to a
resolution of all the clinical signs and no further limb pain.
Unless lymphoma is diagnosed, or there are multiple secondary tumours identified
the treatment for renal neoplasia is complete nephrectomy and the diagnosis
  s p m o          
survival time for dogs with carcinomas was 16 months (range 0-59 months), for dogs
 s o   oo )  e m  s 
nephroblastomas it was 6 months (range 0-6 months). Interestingly, although not a
common diagnosis, renal haemangiosarcoma is associated with relatively longer
survival times when compared to other visceral forms of haemangiosarcoma (median
  t    5     5      
with sirgery alone). However, in general, the problem with renal tumours is that they
course and the tumours usually show very little response to chemotherapy (unless the
diagnosis is one of lymphoma), so surgical excision is currently the only realistic
treatment for non-lymphoid renal neoplasia
Ouitcome
The dog remained well with no evidence of further disease for 19 months, when she
represented with exercise intolerance and lethargy. On examination she was
moderately  tachypneoic  and sadly  thoracic  radiographs revealed  the presence of
multiple pulmonary metastases, so she was euthanized. However, with a disease-free
 p s    e p s  a  s a  p
normal quality of life in this period.
CLINICAL CASE EXAMPLE 13.2 - A DOMESTTC LONG-HAIRED CAT WITH RENAL
LYMPHOMA
Signalment
2-year-old neutered male domestic long-haired (DLH) cat.
Presenting signs
Weight loss and inappetance
Case history
The relevant history in this case was:
castration and his routine vaccinations he had had no veterinary treatment
· He had become dull and lethargic 5 days prior to presentation and was taken to the
referring vet when he had stopped eating altogether. The owner did, however, report
that she thought he had been losing weight for approximately 2-3 weeks before this.
Clinical examination
· Nervous and difficult to examine
· Abdominal palpation revealed marked bilateral renomegaly, with the kidneys
having a palpably irregular surface, but was otherwise unremarkable
· No other abnormalities were detected.
Diagnostic evaluation
· The cat was referred for further investigations. Abdominal ultrasound confirmed the
marked enlargement of both of his kidneys and revealed both kidneys to have a thin
irregular outline with some hypoechoiec nodules present within them (Fig. 13.2). The
renal cortices had a mottled and stippled appearance and there was a small volume of
free fluid in the renal pelvis and a small amount of subcapsular fluid present
bilaterally. No other ultrasonographic abnormalities were detected
· Routine biochemistry was unremarkable and the cat was FeLV/FIV negative
· The complete blood count revealed a stress leucogram but no anaemia and a normal
platelet count
· Fine needle aspirates of one of the kidneys were obtained. This revealed clusters of
large, abnormal lymphoblastic cells exhibiting anisocytosis with variable numbers of
variably sized nucleoli, coarse chromatin and nuclear moulding.
Figure 13.2
Case 13.2 Ultrasound image of the cat's right kidney, revealing the irregular outline,
renomegaly and the presence of hypoechoic nodules and a mottled appearance to the cortex
Diagnosis
· Renal lymphoma
Treatment
· The cat was treated initially with a CHOP multidrug protocol but he suffered an
acute anaphylaxis to doxorubicin, exhibiting tachycardia, hypotension and profuse
salivation (Fig. 13.3). This was managed successfully but further doxorubicin
           
protocol for 12 months and then on an alternating cyclophosphamide/vincritisine
once every 2 weeks protocol for a further 12 months before all treatment was
withdrawn.
Figure 13.3
Case 13.2 The cat shows marked salivation and papillary dilation as a result of
doxorubicin administration. He was also significantly tachycardic (220 bpm). These clinical changes
 occurred within 5 minutes of the doxorubicin infusion being started
Ouitcome
· At the time of writing the cat is still alive and well with no evidence of lymphoma at
all 4 years after his diagnosis.
Theory refresher
Renal lymphoma is the most common renal tumour found in cats but it is not the
most common form of feline lymphoma reported. The disease presents usually in a
similar way to that seen in the cat reported here; quite non-specific signs with usually
obvious bilateral renomegaly are apparent on abdominal palpation.
CLINICAL TIP
In cats, haematuria could be missed unless the animal uses a litter tray, so renal neoplasia in
 felines is often detected when the cat presents to investigate other signs such as lethargy or
inappetance.
The diagnosis can usually be made using ultrasound-guided fine needle aspiration
but it is important to remember that this will cause some degree of renal
haemorrhage, so at least an accurate platelet count should be obtained before
aspiration is performed. The ultrasonographic appearance of the kidneys can be very
suggestive of lymphoma and a study has suggested that there is a significant
positive predictive value of hypoechoeic subcapsular thickening for lymphosarcoma
in the study was 80.9%, the negative predictive value was 66.7%. The sensitivity and
specificity  of  hypoechoiec  subcapsular  thickening  for  the  diagnosis  of renal
lymphosarcoma were 60.7% and 84.6%, respectively.
 s  n   s       
chemotherapy. By the WHO classification, renal lymphoma is stage V and so variable
responses have been reported but this case shows that it is always worth attempting
treatment if the cat is relatively well. There are no studies to show a marked difference
in efficacy between protocols, but a study from the Netherlands suggests that a COp-
  n              
dogs, with a complete remission rate of 75% being reported along with estimated 1-
         (    
respectively, and a median duration of remission was 251 days. The overall estimated
1-year survival rate in all cats with lymphoma was 48.7%, and the 2-year survival rate
was 39.9%, with a median survival of 266 days. The cat reported in this case far
exceeded what the attending clinician had expected in terms of success but the owner
was delighted!
CLINICAL CASE EXAMPLE 13.3 - TRANSITIONAL CELL CARCINOMA OF THE
URINARY BLADDER
Signalment
7-year-old neutered male Bichon Frise.
Presenting signs
Haematuria and penile haemorrhage.
Case history
The relevant history in this case was:
· The dog was fully vaccinated with no travel history and had received no other
veterinary treatment
· Three weeks prior to presentation the owner had started to notice that the dog was
licking his prepuce much more than usual. The owner then noticed the presence of
fresh blood on the hair around his prepuce but the dog displayed no dysuria
· The dog was treated by the referring veterinary surgeon with antibiotics (oral
clavulate-potentiated amoxicillin) but this generated no improvement
· The prepucial haemorrhage became progressively more frequent and then the owner
noticed that his urine had become obviously blood-stained so he was referred.
Clinical examination
· On examination the dog was bright and alert with no other clinical signs
 Abdominal palpation was uinremarkable
· Examination of the penis and prepuce revealed blood-stained hair in the peri
prepucial region but was otherwise unremarkable
· No other abnormalities were noted.
Diagnostic evaluation
· The dog was admitted for further evaluation
· A coagulation profile was within normal limits
· Serum biochemistry was unremarkable, with the exception of his albumin being
slightly subnormal at 24 g/L
· The complete blood count initially appeared normal (PCV 38%) but the blood film
bone marrow
· Plain abdominal radiographs were unremarkable
· Abdominal ultrasouind revealed a mass lesion to be present within the ventral wall of
the body of the urinary bladder. The mass had an irregular surface and measured just
             
remainder of the scan was uinremarkable
· A retrograde contrast urethrogram revealed no evidence of urethral disease
         o
revealed small clusters of malignant epithelial cell consistent with a diagnosis of a
lrinary bladder carcinoma (Fig. 13.4).
15:2736F122
UB
Figure 13.4
Case 13.3 Ultrasound image of the urinary bladder, revealing the presence of the mass
on the ventral bladder wall
Diagnosis
· Urinary bladder tumour, probably a transitional cell carcinoma.
Treatment
In the light of the history and clinical findings the dog was taken to surgery and the
mass explored. The dog was anaesthetized and positioned in dorsal recumbency and
the skin prepared routinely. A ventral midline para prepucial incision was made to
allow a midline incision through the linea alba to be performed. The bladder was
isolated within the abdomen with moistened laparotomy swabs and the bladder
the cranial, caudal and lateral aspects of the planned incision (2 cm lateral to the
mass) and the bladder drained of urine via cystocentesis using a 23-gauge needle. A
   n       n  
metzenbaum scissors. The mass was removed with a 2-cm margin (Figs 13.5, 13.6).
The surgeons then changed gloves, instruments and drapes to help prevent tumour
seeding before examining the remainder of the urinary mucosa and then closing the
bladder with a one-layer, approximating suture pattern using absorbable
monofilament suture material. The closure was then checked by instilling saline into
the bladder via a urinary catheter to cause bladder distension before lavaging the
abdomen with warm saline and performing a routine closure.
Figure 13.5
Case 13.3 The appearance of the excised tissue, with the neoplastic tissue highlighted
by the red arrow and the normal bladder tissue by the white arrow
Figure 13.6
 Case 13.3 The excised tissue in formalin, showing how it would have appeared when
in situ and illustrating why the ultrasound appearance was as it was
Postoperatively the dog was managed with a urinary catheter for 24 hours and a
combination of opioid (methadone for 12 hours, buprenorphine for 24 hours) and
NSAID (carprofen BID for 5 days) analgesia
Diagnosis
Histopathology confirmed the mass to be a transitional cell carcinoma.
Ouitcome
The dog made an excellent recovery after the surgery and the haematuria and
prepucial haemorrhage  stopped. Once  the diagnosis was confirmed  the dog
commenced chemotherapy using oral piroxicam at 0.3 mg/mg SID (2.5 mg) and
S              
of five treatments. He tolerated this treatment well. His progress was assessed by
ultrasonographic examination of his bladder every 2 months. At his re-check scan 10
months after the surgery the owner commented that she had seen further haematuria
and the scan confirmed re-growth but this time extending caudally towards the
trigone. The owner declined further surgery. The dog coped well for a further 9 weeks
before the owner described him as starting to display significant stranguria with
haematuria, so he was euthanized
Theory refresher
Cancer of the urinary bladder is not considered to be a common problem in the dog.
estimated to account for up to 2% of all canine malignancies and it is even less
is the transitional cell carcinoma (TCC). Other primary bladder tumours, such as
squamous cell carcinomas, have been reported but they are not always of epithelial
origin and they can be mesenchymal, such as leiomyosarcomas or lymphoma. In
addition, the bladder can be affected by extension of prostatic neoplasia in male
animals, and also rarely by metastasis from distant tumours such 
las
haemangiosarcoma.
In cats, bladder tumours are usually seen in middle-aged to older male animals,
whereas in dogs, females seem more prone to developing the disease. In general,
canine bladder tumours are seen in older dogs. There also appears to be significant
breed predilections for bladder tumours, with Scottish terriers being by far the most
commonly reported breed affected. Shetland sheepdogs, beagles, wirehaired fox
      o s a    
published case series.
The clinical signs seen with bladder tumours will depend to some degree on the size
and location of the tumour, but bladder tumours will cause haematuria in many
cases. What was inusual in the case described here was the penile bleeding, as this is
not usually a feature of a bladder neoplasm; rather this would usually be associated
with a penile, urethral or possibly a prostatic growth. If the tumour is located in the
the majority of tumouirs in dogs are located at the trigone, which more commonly
results in clinical signs relating to bladder outflow tract obstruction such as stranguria
and dysuria. In some cases, urinary incontinence may also be seen. In cats, the
tumour is more frequently located at the apex of the bladder which may aid surgical
excision, buit often means that the tumour will be suibstantial by the time a definitive
diagnosis has been reached as the clinical signs may be less easy for an owner to
recognize.
The diagnosis of a bladder tumour is usually initially made on the basis of
appropriate clinical signs and then good diagnostic imaging. Plain abdominal
radiographs seldom reveal the tumour, but a good contrast radiograph series can be
extremely useful, especially if ultrasound is not easily available. Firstly a plain lateral
abdominal radiograph is obtained before a urethral catheter (such as a fine Foley or a
dog urethral catheter) is placed in the distal urethra. It is sensible not to advance the
catheter all the way into the bladder, as a more distal placement will allow for a
          
urethrocystogram is then performed followed by a double-contrast film by instilling
air through the catheter. This procedure will usually highlight any filling defects and
reveal the presence of the tumour and should also indicate whether or not there is any
lirethral involvement. However, ultrasouind is often a more uiseful diagnostic tool, as
be assessed for possible metastatic disease. Local metastasis must always be checked
for, as a metastatic rate of up to 40% at the time of diagnosis has been reported.
Furthermore, in one study 56% of cases had concurrent urethral involvement and 29%
of male dogs had prostatic infiltration. Therefore the auithors would usually request an
abdominal ultrasound first and resort to a double-contrast radiograph series as a
second choice, or if urethral involvement was suspected. Radiography of the thorax to
check for distant metastasis should always be considered, especially if surgical
excision is being planned, as pulmonary metastasis has been reported in up to 17% of
canine cases and 15% of feline cases at the time of diagnosis
Once a mass has been located, obtaining an exact diagnosis can be done in several
  i      se    s
of causing tumour seeding, so should be avoided if possible. Careful urinalysis and
              
sensitivity. Therefore, the two main methods used by the authors are firstly to
undertake flexible cytoscopy and obtain grab biopsies whilst visualizing the lesion(s),
or more simply by the ise of a suction biopsy. To perform a suction biopsy, a uirinary
catheter with side holes is placed into the urethra and advanced to the lesion
Accurate location of the catheter tip can be done by ultrasound guidance. The tip of
the catheter can then be pressed downwards into the lesion by digital pressure applied
per rectum if required. A 20-ml syringe is then attached to the external portion of the
   n  s     s  s
pull the catheter out. The tip of the catheter should contain a tumour sample which is
suitable for both squash cytology and histopathology. In cases for which cytoscopy is
surgery for lesions within the urinary bladder, prostate and urethra in the authors'
hospitals.
Bladder tumour antigen testing has been described in humans, but the human
antigen detection kit has very poor specificity in the dog so its use cannot be
recommended. A veterinary version of the bladder tumour antigen (V-BTA) detection
kit has been investigated and reasonable results reported, especially when used on
centrifuged urine, therefore indicating that this variant of tumour antigen detection
may be of use in the clinical veterinary practice, especially in a branch surgery where
diagnostic imaging facilities are not available. However, it is not used in the authors'
clinics due to the availability of the other modalities discussed.
The most commonly utilized option in the treatment of bladder tumour is excisional
surgery as described, but the difficulty in dogs is firstly, that many tumours are
located in the trigone region and secondly, that many dogs seem to develop multifocal
resection is rarely possible. Palliative permanent cystostomy tube placement to relieve
urinary obstruction resulted in a median survival of 106 days in a case series of six
dogs undergoing partial cystectomy.
     n    s    s
transitional cell carcinomas exfoliate easily, so it is very easy to contaminate ^clean'
tissue with tumour cells once the tumour has been exposed and especially if it is
directly handled. A wide margin of excision is also recommended due to the risk of
seeding of the tumour along the uiroepithelium
Postoperative chemotherapy has been shown to help improve disease-free periods
and such treatment can also be considered in patients with unresectable tumours,
   n  n        s 
tube is placed. The non-steroidal anti-inflammatory COX-antagonist, piroxicam has
been shown to generate clinical benefit in TcCs in approximately 2o% of cases, with
median survival times of approximately 6 months being reported and up to 20% of
these patients living for more than 1 year. Combining piroxicam with mitoxantrone
(at 5 mg/m? by slow intravenous infusion every 3 weeks for four cycles) improves the
   q  b  a ss   a    s
low incidence of toxicity. For this reason, this chemotherapy regimen is the first-line
response rates have been described when cisplatin and piroxicam are combined, but
this treatment is associated with significant renal toxicity and cannot therefore be
recommended as a routine treatment. Carboplatin and piroxicam have also been
trialled as a combined therapy and generated remission in 40% of the dogs it was
     e   s    s
          
A           
transitional cell carcinoma, despite the response rate. Meloxicam has now been shown
to have a protective action against experimental carcinogenesis in rat bladders and
there is anecdotal evidence that it may have a clinical effect in veterinary practice but
to the authors’ knowledge at the time of writing there have been no veterinary clinical
trial results published proving clinical efficacy in dogs or cats. However, under the
current cascade regulations, as meloxicam is licensed for use in both dogs and cats but
piroxicam is not, meloxicam should be uised in preference.
Photodynamic therapy has now also been described as a treatment for TCC of the
lirinary bladder in animal models and this has now also been reported in a small series
of dogs with TCC with moderately successful results. PDT may therefore prove to be an
effective future treatment but more work is required in this area.
CLINICAL CASE EXAMPLE 13.4 - MULTIFOCAL UTERINE HAEMANGIOMA IN A
RABBIT
(Case written by Dr Livia Benato DVM, MRCVS, The R(D)SVS, University of
Edinburgh.)
Signalment
2-year-old intact female lion head rabbit.
Presenting signs
Episodes of intermittent mild haematuria.
Case history
The relevant history in this case was:
· The rabbit was fully vaccinated and no signs of previous illness were reported by the
owner
· The rabbit was presented with flaky skin, and a few episodes of intermittent mild
haematuria and soft faeces
· The owner was reluctant to proceed in the investigation and medical treatment was
started. Enrofloxacin oral solution was given once a day for 1 week to treat a possible
infection of the urogenital tract, causing the haematuria and a first injection of
ivermectin was made subcutaneously to manage the skin problem
· Although, the skin aspect improved, the haematuria started once again at the end of
the treatment with enrofloxacin and the owner asked for further evaluation.
Clinical examination
· Upon physical examination the rabbit was alert and responsive
· The cardiopulmonary auscultation was unremarkable
· The rabbit showed mild abdominal pain
· Soft masses were detected upon palpation of the caudal area of the abdomen
· In the perianal area, the fur appeared stained with blood and soft faeces
· The skin appeared flaky and crusty
· No other abnormalities were noted.
Diagnostic evaluation
· The rabbit was admitted for further investigation
· Haematology and biochemistry were unremarkable
· A urine sample was obtained by cystocentesis and tested negative for blood
· An abdominal radiographic examination was performed and no radiographic
abnormalities were found except some soft-tissuie density dorsal to the bladder
· Abdominal ultrasonography revealed a swollen and irregular uterus
· On the basis of the history and the physical examination an ovariohysterectomy
was recommended
· To investigate the skin problem a deep skin scrape was necessary and a diagnosis of
Cheyletiella spp., rabbit fur mites, was made.
Treatment
General anaesthesia was induced using a combination of medetomidine, ketamine
and butorphanol subcutaneously and, after intubation, the rabbit was maintained on
isofluorane and oxygen. An ovariohysterectomy was undertaken. The rabbit was
placed in dorsal recumbency and the abdomen was prepared for a midline incision.
Upon entering the abdomen, the vagina, the uterine horns and the oviducts were
            
ovarian vessels were ligated and transected. The uiterine arteries were individually
ligated and the double cervix was exteriorized and a single transfixing suture was
placed cranial to the vagina. The abdominal wall was closed in two layers with a
simple interrupted pattern and the skin was closed with an absorbable continuous
subcuticular suture and an 'Aberdeen' knot.
Figure13.7
          g
The uterus appears swollen and inflamed
Figure 13.8
Case 13.4 The protuberant nodules in the uterine lumen were the cause of the
haemorrhage and haematuria
treatment was continued for 7 days. The rabbit made an uncomplicated recovery and
was discharged the following day.
Diagnosis
· Multifocal uterine haemangioma.
Outcome
Two weeks after the surgery, during the follow-up, the owner reported that she had
not seen any further haematuria and that the rabbit had exhibited normal behaviour.
Also, she noticed the skin was improving and fewer crusts were present.
After a total of three injections of ivermectin, once a fortnight, the skin healed
completely.
Theory refresher
The rabbit, Oryctolagus cuniculus, is a mammal belonging to the order of lagomorphs
and is the third most popular pet in the UK.
Uterine tumours are commonly found in entire female rabbits older than 5 years of
age (up to 80%) but are rare in younger animals such as this case. The most common
type of uterine tumour is the uterine adenocarcinoma (Fig. 13.9). It is a malignant
tumour which tends to metastasize not only to the lungs but also to the adjacent
organs. Other common neoplasms are haemangiomas, haemangiosarcomas and
leiomyosarcomas.
Figure13.9
The cytological appearance of the neoplastic prostatic epithelial cells, as described
above (Giemsa stain, X 100 magnification).
Courtesy of Mrs Elizabeth Viiers
The clinical signs seen with uiterine tumours are varied but haematuria is the most
common symptom of a urogenital problem. Differentiating between these is possible
by a urinary dipstick test. In rabbit, the colour of urine can vary from pale yellow to
reddish orange due to the presence of porphyrin pigmentation and can be easily
confused with blood in urine. Again, if in doubt, a urinary dipstick test can be handy.
Other clinical signs can be anorexia, weight loss, decreased activity, decreased faecal
output, swollen mammary glands and anaemia. Also, ascites may be present in
advanced cases and dyspnoea in cases of pulmonary metastasis. Haematuria is the
    n       
important to differentiate between genital and urinary tract disease. Common
tumours of the urinary tract are renal neoplasia (renal carcinoma, renal
adenocarcinoma  and  renal  lymphosarcoma)  associated  with  nephromegaly  and
secondary renal failure. Bladder tumours have also been reported and include
leiomyomas. Benign embryonal nephroma can also be seen, but normally is
considered an incidental finding during post-mortem examination. Single or multiple
masses may affect one or both kidneys but do not lead to significant renal
impairment. If one kidney is affected then nephrectomy is curative, should this be
deemed necessary. Uterine adenocarcinoma is considered the most common tumour of
female rabbits. With abdominal palpation it is possible to localize multiple masses
affecting both of the uterine horns. This type of tumour can metastasize locally and
via the bloodstream to the lungs, brain, bone, skin, mammary glands and liver. Other
common neoplasms of the genital tract are uterine haemangioma, uiterine
haemangiosarcoma, uterine leiomyosarcoma, and squamous cell carcinoma of the
vaginal wall. Ovariohysterectomy is recommended as both treatment and prevention.
 s   s  e    
dysuria. This means that cystitis is an important differential.
In this case, the rabbit also presented with skin problems due to ectoparasites. This
is a common symptom for an immune-suppressed animal suffering from underlying
disease or stress. Although, ectoparasites are normally present in the skin of a healthy
rabbit, when skin disease is evident a full evaluation of the rabbit should be taken into
consideration.
Uterine tumours can be diagnosed by several methods. Clinical history and physical
examination are important to make a differential diagnosis list and rule out any other
diseases. Abdominal palpation, in the caudal quadrant, may reveal uterine masses. A
radiographic exam will enable a confirmation of what has already been found during
the clinical examination and, most of the time, is enough to establish a diagnosis.
Chest radiographic examination is useful in cases where pulmonary metastasis is
suspected. Ultrasonography and explorative laparotomy provide further information
about the nature of the uterine tumour. The first test is not invasive and it can be
performed  without  sedation   and  allows  a guided  needle  biopsy.  Explorative
laparotomy should be the last diagnostic test to consider. However, a thorough
examination of all the abdominal organs, in search of abnormalities or metastasis, is
possible. If indicated the surgeon can proceed immediately with surgical treatment.
the best option to remove the tumour completely, particularly if benign or at an early
stage, and to treat clinical symptoms like, for example in this case, haematuria.
most of the time, a quick recovery. In this case the skin was closed using an
absorbable continuous subcuticuilar suture to avoid contamination of the surgical
wound and to stop the rabbit removing the stitches.
To avoid complications due to the surgery, exact management of the rabbit pre-and
 m n     o e s  a
stimulants and analgesics are mandatory. In the case of an anorexic rabbit, assisted
feeding for 2 or 3 days before surgery would be considered appropriate. Following
surgery the patient should be allowed to recover in a warm and calm, stress-free
    s   s      a  
no signs of stasis of the gastric enteric tract.
If there is no evidence of metastasis, the prognosis is normally considered good with
6 months of age.
The diagnosis can be made by radiography, ultrasonography, laparoscopy and
Chemotherapy has been advocated in cases of haemangiosarcoma where surgical
resection is not possible.
CLINICAL CASE EXAMPLE 13.5-A GOLDENRETRIEVER WITH APROSTATIC
CARCINOMA
Signalment
11-year-old neuitered male golden retriever
Case history
The relevant history in this case was:
 The dog was fully vaccinated. He had osteoarthritis of both hips and was on an oral
non-steroid anti-inflammatory drug (carprofen) and oral glycosaminoglycans to treat
this. Otherwise he had received no other veterinary treatment in his life.
       s    t   e
longer to urinate than he ised to, in that he wouild stand for several seconds before
the urine flow would start. The owner also thought that this was becoming gradually
worse but put this down to an old-age change
 Over these 4 weeks the owner also described that he had become “listless
· Approximately 2 weeks prior to referral she had noticed he had started to strain to
defecate and then that his faeces appeared to be much thinner than normal; she
described them as being ‘ribbon-like'
· Two days prior to referral the dog had developed blood-stained urine and was
straining significantly to urinate.
Clinical examination
 Cardiopulmonary auscultation was unremarkable
but revealed a full urinary bladder
 No other abnormalities were noted.
Diagnostic evaluation
· The dog was admitted for further evaluation
· Serum biochemistry revealed only a mild elevation in ALP (460 iu/L; normal 10-
100) buit otherwise no abnormalities
· The complete blood count revealed no abnormalities
· Urinalysis revealed a positive (+ + + ) reading for blood and protein on the dipstick,
but there was no active sediment and cytology was unremarkable
· Plain abdominal radiographs revealed significant prostatomegaly and distension of
his urinary bladder but no sublumbar lymph node enlargement
· Thoracic radiographs revealed no significant abnormalities
· Abdominal ultrasound revealed the prostate to be irregular and asymmetrically
enlarged with a well-defined heterogeneous parenchyma. Cavitary lesions were also
noted along with some echogenic foci that caused acoustic shadowing
· Fine needle aspirates of the prostate were obtained under ultrasound guidance
These yielded moderate numbers of nucleated cells (Fig. 13.10). There were many
rafts of cohesive epithelial cells in a background of red cells with moderate numbers
of inflammatory cells. The cohesive epithelial cells were large and pleomorphic. They
had large nuclei containing coarsely clumped chromatin, often with two or three
nucleoli. There was moderate to marked anisokaryosis. Significant numbers of
binucleated and occasional multinucleated cells were seen. The cytoplasm was
basophilic and generally devoid of vacuoles, although some cells had foamy
cytoplasm. Within the cell clusters there was considerable cell crowding and
disorganisation with streaming random cell arrangements. The cells were round to
polygonal to elongated (the latter with streaked cytoplasm). There were also small
numbers of small uniform prostatic epithelial cells. The nuclei were approximately
one quarter the diameter of the large pleomorphic cells.
Figure 13.10
Case 13.5 The cytological appearance of the neoplastic prostatic epithelial cells, as
described in the text (Giemsa stain, X 100 magnification).
Courtesy of Mrs Elizabeth Viliers, Dick White Referrals
Diagnosis
Prostatic carcinoma with associated inflammation
Treatment
In the light of the aggressive nature of prostatic carcinomas, the age of the dog and
his concurrent arthritis problem, it was decided to simply treat the dog with oral
  s      (    
assess his progress.
Outcome
The dog became moderately brighter and exhibited less stranguria over the next week.
The dyschezia improved considerably on the lactulose. Six weeks later he developed
marked stranguria again and appeared very uncomfortable, so he was euthanized by
the referring vet.
Theory refresher
Prostatic tumours are actually quite rare in dogs and even less common in cats. It is
    ( e    e n ) se   s s
Flandres appears to be at an increased risk of developing the condition. Although
prostatic carcinoma can be seen in both castrated and entire dogs, there are reports
indicating that the disease is more common in castrated dogs. Furthermore, although
favour tumour progression with an increased risk of metastatic disease. It is
          n
males, not castrated ones, so an enlarged prostate gland identified on digital
           a
suspicion for the possi bility of prostatic neoplasia.
Prostatic cancers are usuially epithelial in nature (prostatic carcinoma and
transitional cell carcinoma are the two most common tumours reported), although a
recent report of a prostatic haemangiosarcoma has been published and there are
previous reports of lymphomas, squamous cell carcinomas, leiomyomas and
 as   s   s     s
the tissue that appears to be abnormal to ensure that an accurate diagnosis is made.
The clinical signs associated with prostatic carcinoma can be variable but were
and this can be accompanied by haematuria, but haematuria is not a consistent
finding in all cases. Urinary incontinence may also be seen. Concurrent bacterial
infection of the tumouir may result in clinical evidence of a urinary tract infection
patients may occasionally present exhibiting moderate to marked pain on urination or
defecation, but this is unusual. Changes to the appearance of the faeces, caused by
            
reported ‘ribbon' faeces in this case.
Dysuric,stranguric and/or
haematunicpatientpresents
Performcareful clinical examination(including
externalgenitalia)and obtain urine sample
Renal enlargement
Painful abdomen
Distended bladder
Abdominal radiographs
andultrasoundrequired
Single renal mass:
Heterogenous
Prostatic mass
Bladder mass
consider possible
pan-renal change:
identified
identified
carcinoma
consider lymphoma
Surgical excision
Fine needle aspirate
Fine needle aspirate
'Met-check
once metastasis check
kidney orbiopsy
prostate,perorm
imaging
proven negative
prostatic wash or
suctionbiopsy
Give chemotherapy if
If carcinoma confirmed,
Urinalysis+/-
ymphoma confirmed
consider treatment,but
suction biopsy
prognosis poor
ifpossible
Tumour confirmed
Exciseif possible
Excision not possible
and then administer
give chemo and consider
adjunctivechemotherapy
cystostomy tube
placement if required
Figure 13.11
Diagnostic plan flowchart for patients with haematuria, stranguria and/or dysuria
Prostatic carcinomas are usually aggressive tumours which metastasize readily,
initially to the vertebral venous sinuses and the iliac lymph nodes and also potentially
to the bladder, rectum or pelvis. In advanced cases there can be metastasis to the
lumbar vertebrae or pelvic musculature which can result in lameness, hind-limb
            s
undertake abdominal and thoracic ‘met-check' radiographs in these cases and also
undertake a thorough abdominal ultrasound examination to look for lymphatic and
visceral metastasis.
reaction on the pelvic bones, but this is not pathognomonic for the disease, as it could
   s      s   n
osteomyelitis. Radiography also cannot easily distinguish between the causes of
metastatic disease. However, ultrasound can be extremely useful as a stuidy showed
this case) were observed only in dogs with prostatic carcinoma or prostatitis. It should
then be possible to use urinalysis, fine needle aspirates or biopsy to distinguish
local lymph nodes for metastatic disease and can also be used to obtain fine needle
aspirates for cytological evaluation. There has been concern that fine needle
aspiration may lead to seeding of tumour cells along the needle track, but this is an
the disease itself and not reaching a definitive diagnosis.
Treatment for prostatic carcinoma is frequently difficult due to the aggressive
nature of the tumour, the propensity to develop bony metastases and also the fact that
many cases are diagnosed relatively late in the disease couirse. Treatment is further
           
and giving conservative treatment as described is often the correct decision. Surgical
prostatectomy has been reported but is often associated with significant complications
such as the development of urinary incontinence and as such is rarely recommended.
Surgical placement of a cystostomy tube can certainly be helpful for dogs that develop
urethral obstruction as a result of their tumour by improving their quality of life but
such a measure will only ever be a short-term palliative option. Photodynamic therapy
may hold more promise in the future as several studies have shown that several
different photosensitizers can be targeted to the prostate, but this technique is not yet
The use of cyclo-oxygenase 2 (COx-2) antagonists such as meloxicam also holds
promise, as it has been shown that normal prostatic tissue does not express Cox-2 but
up to 75% of prostatic carcinomas do express COx-2, suggesting that COx-2 may have
some function in tumorigenesis. However, the exact role and clinical usefulness of
COX-antagonists remains unclear. One small trial has also indicated that dogs with
prostatic carcinoma have a significantly longer mean life expectancy when given
14
The lame cancer patient
The identification of an animal being lame due to a neoplastic disease usually
causes owners significant distress as they face the possibility of considering
amputation of the affected limb, whilst for the veterinary surgeon some careful
diagnostic evaluation will be required for the case to ensure the tumour found is
       s     
secondary tumours present and also to consider all of the treatment options available.
It is also important to remember that lameness may indicate spinal or neurological
disease, so thorough clinical evaluation is essential to be sure that the clinical extent
of the condition has been fully established.
CLINICAL CASE EXAMPLE 14.1 - OSTEOSARCOMA IN A DOg
Signalment
7-year-old neutered female rottweiler.
Presenting signs
A 2-week history of progressively worsening right hindlimb lameness.
Case history
The relevant history in this case was:
· The dog was vaccinated, wormed and had travelled to Europe on regular holidays
with his owners
· The dog had started to limp after returning from a walk 10 days prior to
presentation and this had not improved despite a course of oral NSAIDs
· The lameness worsened suddenly after she had gone out into the garden, to the point
of being practically non-weight-bearing, so she was referred.
Clinical examination
· On examination the dog was non-weight-bearing lame on her right hind leg and the
dog resented palpation and manipulation of her right stifle
· Cardiopulmonary auscultation revealed the dog to be tachycardic but she was
otherwise unremarkable
· Abdominal palpation was unremarkable.
Diagnostic evaluation
· In the light of the clinical findings, the dog was immediately taken to radiography
and radiographs of the right hindlimb obtained. These revealed the presence of an
shown in Figure 14.1.
Figure 14.1
 Case 14.1 A lateral radiograph of the femur revealing the presence of a bone tumour
characterized by osteolysis and a large periosteal reaction on the caudal border of the femur.
Courtesy of Dr Hervé Brissot, Dick Wh ite Referrals
Differential diagnosis
· Primary bone tumour
· Osteosarcoma
· Chondrosarcoma
· Metastatic bone tumour.
Treatment
· In the light of the radiographic findings, the diagnosis was made that the dog had a
bone tumour, likely to be a primary bone neoplasm
                 
bearingly lame, the decision was made not to biopsy the mass because it was felt that
    p  n       
required amputation if any treatment was to be considered), but knowledge of the
tumour type would influence whether or not postoperative chemotherapy should be
recommended
· The popliteal lymph node was carefully examined but was found not to be palpable
· Left and right lateral inflated thoracic radiographs were obtained which revealed no
gross metastatic disease
· The dog therefore underwent a full hindlimb amputation
Outcome
The dog received chemotherapy in the form of alternating carboplatin and
doxorubicin given once every 3 weeks for a total of six treatments. The dog was alive
and well with no evidence of pulmonary metastasis at 12 months after the surgery.
Theory refresher
Osteosarcoma (OSA) is a highly malignant mesenchymal tumour originating in
primitive bone cells that has been reported to account for up to 85% of all skeletal
in particular. There is a positive correlation with the height of the animal and the
development of the disease. It is not surprising therefore to see that the breeds that
develop the disease most frequently are Saint Bernards, great Danes, dobermans, Irish
setters, rottweilers, German shepherd dogs and golden retrievers. The disease is
B       a  m  o -  a
cases). Most cases involving the appendicular skeleton develop in middle-to older-aged
dogs with an average age of 7 years (although it can certainly develop in quite young
   s     ns s  n g o  (s
years of age. There may be a slight gender predilection for males developing the
disease, but the data in some studies suggest there is no gender bias in OsA, so this
question is currently unresolved. The tumour, as in this case, most commonly develops
in the metaphyseal region of the long bones and the front limbs appear to be affected
more frequently than the hind legs.
The tumour has significant local effects, with new bone development and osteolysis
formation and often quite marked pain. It is not possi ble to definitively diagnose an
OSA on radiographs alone (although suspicion can be very high), but it is this mixed
admixed with (sometimes patchy) cortical lysis and obvious soft tissue swelling on
radiographic examinations. In addition to being locally destructive, OSA also lisuially
exhibits aggressive metastatic behaviour, with the lungs being the primary target
location for the development of secondary disease. This is why it is mandatory to
diagnostic imaging evaluation prior to undertaking any surgical treatments. Other
potential metastasis sites include other bones or any soft tissues.
Any dog therefore presenting with a non-resolving lameness that has an
accompanying soft-tissue swelling should always undergo a radiographic evaluation,
with OsA as a major concern if the dog is a large or giant breed. However, it is very
important to remember to examine the whole dog, as it is possible that the tumour
could be a secondary lesion. Bony metastases often originate from a carcinoma, so the
anal sacs need to be evaluated with a digital rectal examination as does the prostate
along with a careful palpation of the mammary glands, as part of a detailed physical
examination to try to establish whether there is disease elsewhere or not.
If the presentation of the patient is potentially consistent with a primary bone
tumour, a decision has to be made whether or not to biopsy the lesion. Although in
most scenarios it is vitally important to obtain a definitive diagnosis before
contemplating a treatment such as amputation, if the dog, as in the case reported
here, is obviously in suibstantial pain and the opinion of the attending clinician is that
amputation may actually be the best form of analgesia the dog can receive, surgical
removal of the problem with postoperative histology may be acceptable. If amputation
is a treatment option that is declined by the owners, then it is essential to obtain
is to use a Jamshidi needle device. These needles can be quite large but it is very
important to get as much tissue as it is safely possible to do, as the histological
appearance can vary within individual biopsy samples and a superficial or small
         n  s 
              
existing bone weakness and distortion.
Once the diagnosis has been confirmed, the first-line treatment is to surgically
amputate the affected limb and then to give adjunctive chemotherapy, as it is likely
that microscopic metastases will be present in virtually all cases. Limb amputation is
the most common surgical treatment for canine and feline appendicular OsA. Most
animals with OsA will have naturally shifted the majority of their weight bearing
  e              
S      s   n   
with mild to moderate degenerative joint disease in other joints can do extremely well,
as do the giant breeds of dogs. However, although the majority of owners are pleased
with the outcome the decision to amputate must be discussed carefully and owners
sensitivities towards the operation taken into account.
removal of the scapula) rather than shoulder disarticulation. The cosmetic result is
very good using this technique as there is no muscle atrophy that occurs over the
scapula associated with the latter technique. It also allows for complete removal of
local disease. For the hind limbs a coxofemoral amputation is generally recommended
for complete disease excision, however, with distal tibial tumours then a mid-shaft
femoral amputation is also acceptable, with some surgeons preferring this as it affords
some protection to male genitalia. For any amputation, electrocautery is a useful
means of controlling haemorrhage from smaller vessels. However, it should not be
used excessively and ligation techniques are necessary for larger arteries and veins. If
possible muscles should be separated at their origins or insertions. Arteries and veins
are ligated separately (and in this order) with major vessels double ligated before
division. Nerves are sharply divided after infiltration with local anaesthetic. When
closing the wound the surgeon should focus on eliminating dead space and controlling
CLINICAL TIP
Spending time on haemostasis and eliminating dead space by multilayer closure will allow quicker
healing times with fewer complications. The need for drain placement if this is done is negated.
NURSINGTIP
Placement of a comfortable bandage postoperatively helps to prevent bleeding from small vessels
 n         n  s  
NURSING TIP
they require excellent analgesia in their premedication, through surgery and in the immediate 24-48
Once the limb has been amputated and the dog has recovered, attention must turn
develops very rapidly (within as short a time as 3 months) and this is thought to be
due to the fact that microscopic metastatic disease is likely to be present in most cases
by the time they present. Many different drug regimens have been evaluated and it is
clear that the platinum drugs definitely generate substantial improvements in life
expectancy and outcome. Doxorubicin also shows activity against OsA buit with less
             
authors use an alternating carboplatin/doxorubicin protocol where the drugs are
given at 2l-day intervals for a total of six treatments. The authors generally use
carboplatin in preference to cisplatin due to its relative ease of handling, lower side
effect risk and the relatively fewer health and safety concerns regarding carboplatin.
This protocol has been reported to generate median survival times of 321 days with a
1-year survival rate of 48% and a 2-year survival rate of 18%. However, many other
carboplatin, lobaplatin, doxorubicin), the doses used and interdose intervals are all
      e     
   s s i      g s s
and 50%. Two-year survival rates with this approach are low.
the Colorado State University Animal Cancer Center (CSU ACC) in the USA and also at
several other centres around the world and this has proved to be a successful
technique in most cases but the procedure requires an experienced and dedicated
clinical team and very dedicated owners. It is a technique that can be performed for
radial, ulnar, tibial or fibular OsA and in essence the procedure involves surgically
excising the tumour and then replacing the bone deficit usually with a cortical
allograft, although the uise of metal endo-prostheses has been described, as has
pasteurizing the excised bone tumour section before re-implanting it. A review of over
200 cases at CsU from the 1990s reported that the 1-year survival rates were 60% with
the 1-year local disease-free rate being over 75%. Currently this is not a commonplace
 n n   n  n s   q    
well become a more routine procedure in this country.
If surgery is not a viable option for any reason, then external beam radiotherapy
            
         
administering up to 10 Gy per fraction. The concern regarding radiotherapy is that it
may increase bone weakness at the tumour site and therefore lead to an increased risk
of the dog developing a pathological fracture, especially if the analgesic action is
sufficient for the dog to use the leg almost normally. Analgesia can be augmented with
the NSAID meloxicam, as not only is it a highly effective non-steroidal anti-
P          
itself. In addition, the author has had some experience of using oral and injectable
thought that osteoclast activity is one of the major causes of pain in bone cancer, so
antagonizing these cells may help OSA patients (Figs 14.2, 14.3).
LA
RP
LOSSY(Q=95)
Figures 14.2, 14.3
Lateral radiograph and T1 plus contrast sagittal MRI scan of the femur of a
Gordon setter with a large osteosarcoma in the mid-section of the bone with a large resultant local
soft-tissue involvement. Note the significant extension of the tumour through the medullary cavity that
is visible on the MRI but there is no evidence of it on the radiograph. Amputation was declined, so
            
chemotherapy, oral meloxicam and the bisphosphonate ‘alendronate'. The dog became completely
sound again and remained non-lame for 6 months.
Courtesy of Dr Herve Brissot, Dick Wh ite Referrals
If amputation or limb-sparing surgery are not undertaken, however, the fact that
OSA is a painful disease must come first in the clinician's mind and at no time must
the dog be allowed to endure discomfort unnecessarily, especially in the face of a
disease that is virtually always terminal for the patient.
The importance of obtaining a bone biopsy comes when the differential diagnosis
for a bone tumour is considered. Chondrosarcomas (cs) are the second most common
primary bone tumour encountered in dogs, accounting for up to 1o% of all bone
tumour cases. Unlike OsA, Cs does not exhibit aggressive metastatic behaviour,
although it is a malignant tumour and secondary disease usuially does develop, albeit
slowly when compared to OsA. One study reported a median survival time following
S  (   s    sa      
adjunctive treatment being given. The reason for this is that a consistently efficacious
chemotherapeutic against Cs has not been reported in dogs. If Cs therefore is
diagnosed, the outlook for the patient is considerably better than if an OSA is
diagnosed.
Fibrosarcomas
(FSA)ofbonehavebeenreportedrarely,ashave
haemangiosarcomas (HsA) and the prognosis between these two tumours varies
       n     
to secondary disease within 6 months of the diagnosis, so the prognosis for this
disease is poor. FSA on the other hand, although a malignant tumour, appears slower
to metastasize. There are few good studies into its behaviour and no consistently
efficacious chemotherapy but if treated early by complete excision then there may be
a long-term disease-free period.
Primary bone cancer in cats is considered to be rare but when it occurs, up to 90%
will be potentially malignant in nature and the most frequently reported tumour type
is OsA. Interestingly, however, OsA in cats does not appear to be as aggressive as it is
in dogs, as median survival times after amputation without adjunctive chemotherapy
of between 24 and 44 months have been reported. Currently therefore, the treatment of
choice should be surgical excision.
Mandibular OsA has been reported to develop in rabbits. The tumour presents as a
hard swelling of the mandible and could therefore be easily confuised with denta.
disorders. Mandibular OsA is considered to be rare but an appropriate investigation
should always be undertaken if there is clinical suspicion of a tumour. Radiography is
obviously very useful as a diagnostic tool, but computed tomography can also be very
useful where available. Both modalities can show disruption of bone density at the site
of the primary tumour and also obviously potential metastasis to the lungs, pleural
cavities and abdominal organs. If no metastatic lesions are identified then surgical
removal is possible and hemimandibulectomies have been reported.
CLINICAL CASE EXAMPLE 14.2 - METASTATIC ANAL SAC CARCINOMA CAUSING
LAMENESS IN A DOG
Signalment
9-year-old neuitered female cocker spaniel
Presenting signs
A 3-week history of a progressively worsening lameness affecting her right hind leg.
The owner also commented that she had stopped wagging her tail and he felt she was
having to strain considera bly to pass faeces.
Case history
The relevant history in this case was:
 The dog was fully vaccinated, wormed and had not travelled ouitside of the UK
· The owner had first seen her limp possibly up to 3 months previously but this had
been intermittent and he had put it down to her having arthritis
· Approximately 6 weeks prior to examination, the dog had started to intermittently
strain more than normal to pass faeces but this had not been investigated
 n    s      s  
owner described her as also appearing weak on this leg, with it sometimes appearing
to ‘give way’ for no reason
· In the 10 days prior to presentation, the dog had appeared to lose the use of her tail
but it was not painful to touch
· The dog had started to lose a little weight and had become dull and lethargic
Clinical examination
· On examination she was quiet and obviously lame on her right hind, although she
was weight bearing
· Cardiopulmonary auscultation was unremarkable
lumbar region. There was no palpable swelling but she significantly resented digital
palpation in this area
with mild weakness in this leg and reduced perianal sensation, but no other defects
· Digital rectal examination revealed the presence of a mass within the right anal sac
Diagnostic evaluation
· Fine needle aspirates of the anal sac mass confirmed the mass to be an anal sac
carcinoma
· Thoracic radiographs were unremarkable
· Abdominal radiographs revealed an osteolytic lesion in Ls which radiographically
appeared to have almost totally destroyed the vertebral bone (Fig. 14.4)
· Abdominal ultrasound revealed mild enlargement of the right colonic and
sublumbar lymph nodes
· Ultrasound was used to obtain guided fine needle aspirates of the lesion in Ls. These
confirmed the presence of a malignant carcinoma.
Figure 14.4
Case 14.2 A right lateral abdominal radiograph revealing the metastatic lesion within
L5, as shown by the red arrow
Diagnosis
· Anal sac carcinoma with bony metastasis to the vertebrae (stage IV disease).
Treatment
· The owners understood that surgical excision of the disease was not possible and
that the efficacy of chemotherapy would be poor, so palliative treatment was
commenced with oral meloxicam, oral Tramadol and the oral bisphosphonate,
Alendronate.
Outcome
· The dog made rapid and good progress for the first 3 months of treatment, with the
lameness almost totally resolving and her tail also regained some limited movement.
Furthermore, the discomfort noted on her previous lumbar palpation appeared to be
markedly reduced. However, 5 months after treatment had commenced the owners
requested a repeat examination because they were concerned that she was
uncomfortable again and the dog certainly had palpable lumbar pain. Repeat
radiographs were obtained which showed progression of the vertebral metastasis, so
the decision was made to have the dog euthanized.
Theory refresher
A review of anal sac carcinomas has been given in Chapter 10 so this will not be
repeated here. Rather, the rationale for presenting this case was to illustrate how
multimodal analgesia can work very well in some cases as short-term palliative care
and generate an almost normal quality of life for the patient. The dog in this case was
terminally ill and in pain, so it wouild not have been wrong to advise for her to be
euithanized. However, it was decided that initially a 7-day colirse of medication shoulc
be administered to see how she was and, after the first week, it was obvious that there
had been a clinical improvement, so the course was extended under very close
supervision. The treatment restored her quality of life, albeit for a relatively short
period of time.
Meloxicam is a COX-2 selective NsAID that has both human and veterinary licences
as an anti-inflammatory analgesic and it is being investigated for  possible
antineoplastic actions, mainly against carcinomas. These were the reasons it was
chosen in this case and it was very well tolerated. However, the use of meloxicam
alone wouild probably not have been suifficient to control the discomfort in the initial
stages of the disease, hence the rationale for prescribing Tramadol. Tramadol is a
synthetic opioid μ-receptor agonist that also antagonizes monoamine and serotonin
uptake and it is thought that it is the synergy of these actions that generates the
potent analgesic action of this drug, because its efficacy at the μ-receptor is weak. It is
not licensed for use in the dog but as there is no other licensed alternative, its use was
justified under the cascade system. In human medicine it is used to treat moderate to
severe pain and in particular, neuralgia, and as it was felt that there was a significant
neurogenic component to the pain seen in this case, it appeared to be a logical choice
Doses of between 0.5-2.0 mg/kg twice a day have been recommended and it appears
to be very well tolerated by dogs. In this particular case it was used for the first 4
weeks and then discontinued because the dog appeared so comfortable.
The potential usefulness of bisphosphonates in veterinary oncology was alluded to
in Chapter 12. Bisphosphonates act by inhibiting osteoclasts and this inhibition allows
the existing bone and potentially allowing the creation of new bone. Increasing the
strength of the existing bone is thought to help to decrease the risk of fractures, and
stronger bone is less painfuil. In laboratory studies, bisphosphonates have also been
shown to have a directly toxic effect on bone cancer cells which contributes to their
death and that this action may mean that bisphosphonates have a future role in the
inhibition of metastasis. There is also evidence that they can help to antagonize
cancer growth by inhibiting angiogenesis within the tumour. Lastly, there is a small
but growing body of evidence to suggest that there can be significant improvement in
pain control when bisphosphonates are used. Further, large-scale veterinary studies
are therefore required to try to establish firstly whether or not these results are
reproducible and secondly, which form of bisphosphonate (oral or injectable) is most
efficacious, but this class of drug holds promise as an adjunctive treatment in many
different neoplastic conditions in the future.
CLINICAL CASE EXAMPLE 14.3 - SQUAMOUS CELL CARCINOMA OF THE DIGIT IN A
COLLIE-CROSS
Signalment
7-year-old neutered female collie-cross.
Presenting signs
Two-week history of mild-moderate, progressive lameness affecting her left fore leg.
The owner had also noticed that she was licking her left fore paw more than normal.
Case history
The relevant history in this case was:
     s        
and had no travel history
· The dog was walked off-lead for approximately 1 hour every day and had no history
of previous orthopaedic difficulties
· The dog had started to exhibit mild lameness in her left foreleg during her walks 2
     s      o  s  e
excessively. The owner thought she had a foreign body in the pad but on examination
found an ulcerated area on one of the toes, so presented the dog for veterinary
attention.
Clinical examination
  e    un p e  sm op a xa .
   e    o 
abdominal palpation
· Orthopaedic examination confirmed the dog to be mild-moderately lame on the left
fore leg but able to consistently bear weight. Saliva staining was also noticed on the
hair from the carpus distally
· Digital examination revealed the presence of an ulcerated lesion on the ventro-
medial aspect of digit five, which when clipped appeared erosive in nature (Figs 14.5,
14.6).
Figure 14.5
Case 14.3 The initial appearance of the lesion, illustrating the ulcerated appearance
 and the matting of the hair with an exudate
Figure 14.6
Case 14.3 The appearance of the lesion once the hair was clipped, revealing the
erosive appearance
Diagnostic evaluation
· Due to the erosive and ulcerated appearance of the lesion, the presence of a tumour
diagnostic
· The prescapular lymph node was carefully palpated and found not to be enlarged
· A dorsopalmar radiograph of the foot was obtained which showed no bony
involvement or changes in P5
· Left and right lateral inflated thoracic radiographs were unremarkable
· The dog was taken to surgery and the digit was amputated by disarticulation at the
carpometacarpal level and the wound then closed routinely (Fig. 14.7).
Figure 14.7
 Case 14.3 The digit was amputated by disarticulation at the carpometacarpal level
Diagnosis
· The whole toe was sent for histopathological analysis which confirmed the tumour
to be a squamous cell carcinoma.
Theory refresher
Digit tumours can develop on any part of the skin of the toe, but, unlike in this case,
frequently arise from the nail bed epithelium, giving rise to subungual tumours. They
are more commonly seen in older, larger-breed dogs but primary tumours in this
location are considered to be rare in cats. In one study evaluating 124 different digital
            
were pyogranulomatous inflammation, so any mass or ulcerative lesion identified on
a toe, especially if it appears to arise from the nail bed should be considered as a
            s
such as bronchial adenocarcinoma (as illustrated by the case on page 68). Affected
haemorrhage or simply because they are licking the affected foot more frequently,
            s
initial presentation. Indeed, many digit tumours have secondary bacterial infection,
therefore explaining why some cases are initially misdiagnosed as pedal dermatitis or
paronychia, depending on the location of the lesion.
The most common tumour found on the digit of a dog is squamous cell carcinoma
(SCC), followed by malignant melanoma, soft-tissue sarcoma and mast cell tumour.
The concern regarding SCCs is that again, especially if they arise from the subungual
epithelium, up to 80% will have invaded the underlying bone potentially causing bone
lysis. This was not identified in the case illustrated here but good-quality dorsopalmar
and lateral radiographs should always be obtained of a foot if a potentially neoplastic
generally considered to have a low metastatic potential at this site, especially if the
tumour is a subungual one. The location of the tumour does appear to be important
with regard to the behaviour of an ScC, as tumours that are not subungual in origin
(as in the case illustrated here) appear to have higher rates of metastatic disease and
lower survival times than when compared to dogs with subungual SCC. Careful
examination of the draining lymph nodes must therefore always be undertaken and if
they are found to be enlarged they should be aspirated. Unfortunately, melanoma of
the digit is frequently malignant, so the clinician must always be alert to this risk at
the initial examination and especially if such a diagnosis is confirmed.
The treatment of choice for digit tumours is amputation of the affected digit
including disarticulation of the proximal digit joint and submission of all the tissue
for histopathological assessment. Inflated left and right lateral radiographs must be
obtained prior to any surgery because only 13% of dogs with SCC have pulmonary
metastases but up to 32% of dogs with malignant melanoma will have developed
metastatic disease at the time of diagnosis. At the time of writing no consistently
efficacious adjunctive chemotherapy has been recommended but if a diagnosis of
malignant melanoma is reached, then xenogenic DNA vaccine therapy is certainly
worth undertaking, as discussed in Case 6.2, page 56.
   e         s
quoted in an American study showed that for subungual SCCs, 95% of dogs were alive
after 1 year and up to 75% were alive at 2 years. This figure interestingly drops for
digital SCC that is not subungal in nature, with figures of 60% and 44% for the 1-and
2-year survival times respectively. The prognosis for malignant melanoma is less
favourable than SCC, as melanoma of the digit is reported to have a median survival
time of 12 months, with the 1-and 2-year survival rates being reported as 42% and
  (  n    i  m  
subungual in nature are usually high-grade tumours that behave aggressively but
soft-tissue sarcomas (STS) of the digit have a much less aggressive nature compared to
 n d  m S      
times.
Ouitcome
The dog in this case made excellent progress and showed no signs of further disease
before it was lost to follow up 18 months after the diagnosis.
15
The cancer patient with general lumps and bumps
practice either because the owner has noticed a mass growing or becauise a mass is
    s       
 n n  si i os  s m      s
logical and step-wise approach is taken in every case to ensure that a diagnosis is
reached, if possible, before definitive surgery is attempted. If this is not undertaken for
rule is that ‘if a mass warrants removal, it warrants knowing what it is!' If the cost of
histopathology really is a concern to the owner, at the very least the attending
clinician should obtain representative tissue samples and store them in formalin for 2
years, so that if a mass recurs at or near the initial surgical site in the future, a
diagnosis can hopefully still be reached before a second surgery is undertaken that
may not be the most appropriate treatment when an adjunctive treatment may be
better.
CLINICAL CASE EXAMPLE 15.1 - CUTANEOUS HISTIOCYTOMA IN A DOG
Signalment
6-month-old entire male boxer dog.
Presenting signs
A rapidly enlarging mass on the skin of his left cheek.
Case history
The relevant history in this case was:
· The dog had been fully vaccinated and wormed
· His owners reported him to be very well with no apparent abnormalities
· They had first noticed a small mass located on the skin on the surface of his left
cheek. The mass was raised and reddened but did not seem to bother him
· The mass had doubled in size in 5 days, so he was brought to the vet.
Clinical examination
On examination he was very bright and alert. Dermatological examination revealed a
firm, raised, reddened, dome-like lesion on the left cheek measuring 1.5 cm in
diameter. The mass did not appear to be painful or to be causing him to be pruritic
and there was no enlargement of the submandibular lymph node (Fig. 15.1).
Figure 15.1
Case 15.1 The appearance of the mass at initial presentation.
Courtesy of Professor Dick White, Dick White Referrals
Diagnostic evaluation
A fine needle aspirate of the mass was obtained and this revealed clusters of medium-
sized round cells (slightly larger than neutrophils) with an obvious pale blue
cytoplasm and a low nuclear : cytoplasmic ratio, round to oval nuclei with a finely
stippled chromatin pattern. Some nuclei contained nucleoli but this was not a
consistent feature in all cells.
Diagnosis
· Cutaneous histiocytoma.
Treatment
In the light of the diagnosis and the potential for natural resolution, no further
treatment was undertaken, but the dog was examined at 7-day intervals to ensure that
there was not continual tumour growth. Although the tumour did grow a little more
     e        
shrinking and within 2 further weeks the tumour had resolved completely.
Ouitcome
No further tumours were seen on the dog.
Theory refresher
Histiocytomas are benign tumours that are almost always seen on the skin of young
P         s      
in a dog's life. In a recent UK survey of insured animals, canine cutaneous
histiocytoma was the most common single tumour type reported, with a standardized
incidence rate of 337 per 100 000 dogs per year. In other publications, histiocytomas
account for approximately 12% of all skin tumours in the dog and are therefore
considered to be common throughout the world but they are rarely seen in the cat.
There appears to be no gender predisposition but Scottish terriers, boxers, dobermans,
Labradors and cocker spaniels have been reported to have a higher incidence than
other breeds. They usually present as solitary lesions, more commonly on the head and
neck, but they can also very occasionally occur in multiple locations. They appear as
and they can become ulcerated. They are histologically fascinating, as under a
          
malignant neoplasm and yet they are benign and many, as in this case, will
spontaneously  regress.  Fine needle aspiration therefore  is  always  a  sensible
recommendation, as this is an easy cytological diagnosis and although many
          
conservatively without concern. If the mass is not ulcerated then recommending
regular re-examination and no further treatment is usually best. However, if the mass
becomes ulcerated, if the dog is troubled by the tumour, or if the cytology is uncertain
  o s      s s 
to give good results. The prognosis therefore for cutaneous histiocytomas is usually
excellent.
condition  is  caused by  collections of  proliferating histiocytes  resulting  in  the
development of multiple nodules and plaques affecting the head and face, trunk and
limbs and also possi bly erythema, swelling and depigmentation of the nasal planum or
nares. It too is seen in young dogs but a recent study suggested that the mean age of
occurrence was 4 years of age (i.e. slightly older than the peak age of occurrence for
cutaneous histiocytomas). Cutaneous histiocytosis is also a benign condition but it
S        s s 
require treatment in the form of immunosuppression, with prednisolone being the
most commonly used first-line treatment and drugs suich as azathioprine or
a combination of tetracycline and niacinamide may be effective in some cases, along
with vitamin E and essential fatty acid supplementation. Some dogs do require long
 s       sn   i 
Systemic histiocytosis is a variant on cutaneous histiocytosis, in which
lesions as previously described but in systemic histiocytosis there is systemic
involvement with nodular lesions developing in internal organs. It is therefore
different clinical manifestations of similar reactive proliferative dermal dendritic cells
with different predilection sites and as such they are often grouped together as
 sss         s  
S s s  n  n s s d  
lethargy and inappetance. The clinical examination findings will vary depending on
the organs affected. The diagnosis is made by histopathology. The clinical lesions can
wax and wane but spontaneous recovery is not common, hence treatment with
response of systemic histiocytosis to corticosteroids alone is variable but the response
is more consistent using drugs such a cyclosporine and luflenomide.
Disseminated histiocytic sarcoma (previously known as malignant histiocytosis), is
conditions described above, has a significantly different presentation and prognosis.
The disease was first reported in Bernese mountain dogs but there also appears to be
breed predispositions in the flat-coated retriever and the rottweiler and it has been
reported to occur in other breeds. The initial clinical presentation varies depending
B            
whether it has disseminated widely through the body (disseminated histiocytic
    s   n     
specific (e.g. lethargy, inappetance, weight loss, vomiting, diarrhoea or coughing).
Clinical examination can reveal lymphadenopathy and organomegaly whilst clinical
        
thrombocytopaenia, elevations in hepatobiliary markers and hypoalbuminaemia.
Diagnosis is based on histopathology (including on bone marrow biopsies). In the
disseminated form of the disease, the condition can progress extremely rapidly and is
invariably fatal, with mean survival times of approximately 3 months being reported.
The response to chemotherapy is generally not good, although one report describes the
surgical excision but the time to recurrence is often short and the prognosis guarded.
CLINICAL CASE EXAMPLE 15.2 - MAST CELL TUMOUR IN A DOG
Signalment
10-year-old neuitered female golden retriever
Presenting signs
A non-healing ulcer at the base of her tail.
Case history
The relevant history in this case was:
· Dog fully vaccinated
   p             
· Otherwise she was a healthy dog with no other previous medical problems.
Clinical examination
The tail was clipped and cleaned to reveal a large, raised ulcerated lesion as shown in
Figure 15.2. No other masses were palpable and no other abnormalities were noted.
Figure 15.2
Case 15.2 The appearance of the lesion at the base of the tail after it had been
clipped
Diagnostic evaluation
Fine needle aspirates and impression smears were obtained from the mass. These
revealed large numbers of medium to large round cells with an obvious granular
cytoplasm, the granules staining purple-red under Giemsa staining. The cells had large
nuclei with obvious nucleoli. Some of the cells had fractured in the preparation and
there were many granules obvious extracellularly.
Diagnosis
· Mast cell tumour.
Treatment
In the light of the location of the tumour, surgical excision was thought to be the most
appropriate first-line treatment with a view to submitting the mass for histopathology
for grading. The mass was excised with lateral margins of 2 cm and a deep margin of
one fascial plane, as shown in Figures 15.3 and 15.4.
Figu1re15.3
 Case 15.2 The use of a surgical marker pen to draw where the incisions will be to
achieve a 2-cm lateral margin
Figuure 15.4
Case 15.2 The tail after the mass has been excised as described and the surgeon is
 now measuring the size of the flap required to repair the deficit
The deficit then required closure, which was achieved with a rotation flap, as
shown in Figures 15.5-15.7. The reason a rotation flap was used is that this avoids
tension at the surgical repair site which is especially important in an area of skin that
is hard to immobilize. Attempting simple appositional closure at this site would have
inevitably led to postoperative dehiscence and the need for more complicated
reconstructive suurgery.
Figure 15.5
Case 15.2 A skin flap the width of the deficit that requires closure is made utilizing
skin from the lateral aspect of the right thigh
Figure 15.6
Case 15.2 The skin flap is rotated into place to repair the tail wound and stapled
routinely
Figure 15.7
Case 15.2 The deficit over the right thigh is then closed, making every effort to avoid
wound tension
Ouitcome
The histopathology returned to confirm the tumour to be a grade 1I mast cell tumour
with complete surgical margins in all planes, so no further treatment was
recommended.
Theory refresher
Mast cells are inflammatory leucocytes located within the dermis and subcutis that
play an important role in allergic responses, wound healing and in acute and chronic
inflammatory responses. As such, mast cells contain a number of different
chymase which explains why some mast cell tumours cause a local inflammatory
reaction around themselves and also why there is the potential for mast cell tumours
to cause paraneoplastic problems such as gastric ulceration  via parietal cell
stimulation. Mast cell tumours (MCT) are common, being cited as the most frequently
diagnosed cutaneous tumour of the dog and the second most frequently diagnosed
            
cutaneous tumours and there is a predilection for the disease in some breeds, such as
pugs, weimaraners, Labrador retrievers, beagles and golden retrievers, thereby
implying a genetic component to the aetiology of the disease. In cats, the Siamese
seems over-represented in the incidence reports.
MCTs are a heterogeneous group of lesions, in that they have a variety of different
presentations and that their behaviour can vary markedly from animal to animal and
also from tumour to tumour. They can look like a well-circumscribed nodule that may
or may not be erythematous or alopecic (Fig. 15.8). They can also arise from lesions
that have been present for significantly long periods of time, initially appearing like a
   s   s    o    
well as solid cutaneous masses, MCTs can also present as soft, fluctuant subcutaneous
             
aggressive McTs, however, can develop rapidly into large, ulcerated, exudative lesions
which may cause considerable morbidity for the patient.
Figure15.8
 Case 15.2 A small, well-demarcated skin lesion that was firm to touch. Fine needle
aspiration revealed the mass to be mast cell tumour
Figure15.9
A soft, fluctuant swelling on the carpus of a 2-year-old English bull terrier, fine
   s o    s    s     o 
days of prednisolone to reduce the size of the mass and then taken to surgery for excision. However,
at surgery it was not possible to remove the entire tumour despite the cytoreductive steroidal therapy.
hypofractionated external beam radiotherapy
S      n      s s
to mimic the appearance of other different cutaneous tumours that the authors have
  d ns   o ss s    
surgical excision being attempted. This argument is made stronger by the fact that
mast cells are usually easily identified by cytology; MCTs often exfoliate large nuimbers
of individual round cells that have round nuclei which often seem pale in appearance
granules  that  stain  purple-red  when using  a  Wright-Giemsa preparation  and
frequently the cells will have granules scattered in the space around them from other
mast cells that were shattered in the process of obtaining the aspirate and forming the
smears (see Fig. 15.10). Diff-Quick can be uised and will also usually show the presence
of the granules but sometimes Diff-Quick will not reveal the presence of the granules
as well as a Giemsa stain, so it is recommended that Romanowski stains are used for
this cytology whenever possible.
Figure 15.10
 A fine needle aspirate from a high-grade mast cell tumour, illustrating the individual
round cells and their highly granular cytoplasm with the magenta coloured granules characteristic of
Courtesy of Mrs Elizabeth Villiers, Dick White Referrals
The one drawback of cytology is that it cannot accurately determine the grade of
the tumour, so this is a useful technique simply to identify the tumour preoperatively.
Tumour grading can only be done by histopathology and generates three possible
outcomes; grade 1 (well differentiated), grade II (intermediately differentiated) and
Ps  si n s n si  o  )  
indicator yet available as to the tumour's behaviour; the median survival times of
dogs with grades I and 11 tumours were reported to be in excess of 1300 days in one
n n   s  p  m sd  s
Once a MCT has been identified, all thoughts turn to treatment but it is important to
remember that all MCTs have a metastatic potential and that whilst some will be
essentially benign, some will be highly malignant and most fall somewhere between
these two extremes. There is also some variation in behaviour between breeds;
behave less aggressively in these breeds. Overall, however, there have been many
studies assessing the behaviour of MCTs and their response to treatment to establish
the optimal way to approach this disease. One clear principle emerges: the best first-
line treatment for MCTs is surgical excision if at all possible. Although there are
difficulties and inconsistencies, both with the histological grading systems that are
generally utilized and between different pathologists, it appears that well-
differentiated tumours (grade I) are best managed by local excision alone and
intermediately differentiated tumours (grade Il) should be managed by local excision
             
differentiated, grade II1 tumours still require surgery as a first-line treatment,
treatment to use is also subject to debate. The concern with grade IlI MCTs is that they
have a higher metastasis rate and lower suirvival times after surgery alone when
compared to dogs with grade I or II tumours so further treatment is sensible to help
remove any metastasizing cells or secondary tumouirs. The problem comes in that no
chemotherapeutic approach to take in these cases. However, there are three
approaches the medical author (RF) usually uses in cases that require chemotherapy:
reported to generate a clinical response rate of 47%, with 33% seeing a complete
remission when used in dogs with gross disease. The median response duration has
been quoted as 154 days (range 24-645). However, this stuidy was only on 15 dogs so
it is difficult to take these figures too literally. When used postoperatively, the
B             a
survival time of 1374 days being reported.
2. Combined chlorambucil and prednisolone treatment (see Appendix 2). This is a
very recently published approach and it appeals because both of the medications used
are given per os and therefore require no hospital treatment. The combination is also
lisuially very well tolerated. In a stidy of 2l dogs with inoperable MCTs there was a
38% overall response rate (complete remission in 14%), a median progression free
interval for the responders of 533 days and median survival time for all dogs in the
study of 140 days. No toxicities were detected in any of the dogs in the study
3. Lomustine (CCNU). This has been reported to have been effective in a study of 19
       )      
duration of 109 days (range 21-254 days).
A fourth, new approach lies in the recent development of the tyrosine kinase
inhibitor, masitinib, for veterinary medicine. Tyrosine kinase is known to play a
critical role in the development of canine MCT and masitinib blocks the KIT receptor
on this enzyme and has now been shown to be safe and effective in delaying tumour
In general therefore, the authors will recommend chemotherapy for all cases with
grade Ill tumours or possibly as palliative treatment for cases with non-resectable
grade lI tumours and would utilize masitinib first, then either prednisolone and
vinblastine, or chlorambucil and prednisolone, depending on the individual animal's
situation, and reserve Lomustine for cases that do not respond to either of the first
three options.
Radiotherapy has also been cited as a useful treatment in canine MCT and has
generally been reported as adjunctive therapy to incompletely excised grade II
    o      s     m 
   s          
may prove to be difficult to resect, using the radiation to shrink the tumour mass to
facilitate easier or more complete excision. However, there is a concern that
 s  s  n        g
gastroduodenal ulceration and more concerningly, a hypotensive crisis. Therefore it is
 a    s t d  s t    sg
radiotherapy to help prevent these difficulties.
The uise of deionized water to treat incompletely excised tumours has been reported
in the literature, based on the rationale that mast cells are highly sensitive to
hypotonic shock. Its usefulness is still unclear, as although after the initial reports of
the technique were encouraging, one study showed it generated no benefits at all.
technique, so further work is required to clarify whether this technique has any merit
However, at this time the authors do not recommend its use.
diagnosis using cytology whenever possible and the authors highly recommend
excision in an attempt to establish the diagnosis. Once this has been done, the
draining lymph nodes must be carefully palpated and if enlarged, they must be
aspirated too. Abdominal ultrasound should be undertaken, as if there is a malignant
potential for the tumour then secondary disease in the abdominal lymph nodes, liver
or spleen is possible and this should be assessed before the primary tuimour is excised
considered as well. If there are considerable cost restrictions, as the majority of cases
       s    m   a   
not unreasonable to simply undertake a good surgical excision once the aspirates have
confirmed the mass to be an MCT (2-cm lateral margins and one fascial plane deep if
possible) and submit the tissue for histopathology. The exceptions to this are MCTs
found on the subungual area (the nail bed) and on mucocutaneous junctions, as
tumours in these regions frequently behave aggressively and full staging before
surgery is necessary. If after the histopathology the tumour is shown to be grade Ill
then postoperative staging is also essential.
Examination of the buffy coat is not considered necessary by the authors in canine
cases, as systemic mastocytosis is rare in the dog and therefore this test is rarely of
be considered if there is evidence suggestive of pulmonary disease on the clinical
examination (i.e. tachypnoea, dyspnoea, cyanosis despite normal lung sounds,
coughing, dull areas on thoracic percussion, etc.).
          
behaviour, there are some newer tests that are likely to become more commonplace to
  ssx   se - '    s a ss d
  s  i   s s   e   n
manner that is independent of the histological grade. The immunohistochemical
quantification of Ki-67 is an important tool in our assessment of MCTs and is worth
requesting to be assessed in cases where either the pathologist is unable to be certain
as to the grading, or if there is a clinical suspicion that the tumour may be behaving
Likewise, KIT is a stem cell factor receptor that activates tyrosine kinase usually
            
S  n         
Assessment for aberrant cytoplasmic KIT may also be a helpful marker to predict MCT
behaviour.
A common problem following MCT excision is to find that the tumour was a grade
I1 but that the margins are dirty. In this situation there are three main options:
1. Surgical excision of the original scar if possible, again attempting to obtain 2 cm
margins laterally and one fascial plane deep
2. External beam radiotherapy. This is a highly effective treatment against MCTs as
mentioned earlier and postoperative irradiation of the surgical site (once healed) is
probably very useful in cases with dirty margins, especially on distal limbs where
there may be inadequate soft tissue and skin present to facilitate a good
reconstruction following a second surgery
3. Careful monitoring with no further treatment. Many cases of grade II tumours with
S           s 
not ideal and probably should only be reserved for cases for which referral for
radiotherapy and an oncology specialist's opinion is not an option. However, this is
an option that is frequently itilized without a problem and in such cases, the patient
should be carefully examined at least once every 4 weeks for 1 year. Any recurrence of
a mass lesion shouild be aspirated as soon as possi ble to assess for the presence of mast
cells.
Multiple MCTs produce a unique challenge, as traditionally, dogs with multiple
MCTs are classified as having advanced disease because, by the WHO assessment, they
have stage Ill disease (as if they had gross metastases). However, this does not appear
to be clinically accurate, as each tumour needs to be assessed individually and in this
situation the WHO grading system is not useful. Dogs with multiple MCTs do justify
          
abdominal  ultrasound  and  thoracic  radiography  before  surgical  excision  and
submission of all the tuimours for grading. The treatment that needs to be undertaken
is surgical excision of all the lesions individually if at all possible. If all the tumours
are grade I or II and the surgery was carried out well, then the authors would not
FELINEMASTCELLTUMOURS
Feline mast cell tumours are not common tumours in cats in the UK, although
neck and usually present as papular or nodular lesions that may be hairy, alopecic or
 s    a r s  n s      
MCT in this species, namely cutaneous MCTs and visceral MCTs.
Cutaneouis MCT is the more common presentation, and in cats two different
subtypes of this tumour are reported:
1. Mastocytic MCTs, which have a histological appearance similar to that of canine
MCT's
2. Histiocytic MCTs, which have an appearance more consistent with a histiocytic
mast cell.
The majority of cats with cutaneous MCT develop the mastocytic variety and in
particular, a subtype known as ^compact mastocytic MCT'. These tumours generally
behave in a relatively benign manner, growing locally but showing little metastatic
potential. There is a second subtype of mastocytic MCTs called a ‘diffuse mastocytic
MCT' and these tumours do show relatively more aggressive behaviour with an
increased likelihood of local recurrence following excision and an increased risk of
causing metastatic disease. However, pleasingly, they are not as common as the
           
benign behaviour with many being reported to spontaneously regress, although this
can take up to 2 years. Histiocytic MCTs occur most frequently in young cats (less
              
age of 9 years old) with no breed or gender predilection. The mastocytic MCTs usually
present as solitary, firm, round, well-circumscribed, variably sized masses (0.5-3.0 cm
          
histiocytic MCTs usually present as multiple, raised, firm, round, well-demarcated
papules and nodules that are generally small (0.2-1.0 cm in diameter). It is important
to note that it is also possible to see multiple mastocytic MCTs, so the presence of
disease.
S                s
developing from this. This form is much more common in cats than it is in dogs, with
approximately 20% of all feline MCTs being splenic in origin. Visceral MCT has a
much higher metastatic potential than the cutaneous form and of these, the intestinal
form of feline MCT is the most aggressive, with metastasis to the local lymph nodes
and liver often occurring with metastasis to the spleen and less commonly the lungs,
also recorded. Patients with the visceral form usually present for investigation of non-
specific signs of illness, such as weight loss and lethargy. Cats with the splenic form
often present with vomiting and anorexia, due to the development of gastroduodenal
ulceration as a result of the release of histamine into the circulation causing
hypergastrinaemia. Cats with intestinal MCT vomit much less frequently than cats
with the splenic form and this is thought to be due to a lack of histamine granules in
the cells in this form of the disease.
The diagnostic approach to a cutaneous mass that may be an McT in a cat,
therefore, is similar to that described previously for the dog, namely firstly to
undertake a detailed clinical examination to establish whether or not there is any
evidence of local lymph node enlargement or other systemic disease. The primary
lymph node. If a solitary mass is confirmed as an MCT, then the treatment
recommendation is to excise the mass if possible but as the tumours are frequently
relatively benign, it does not seem to be as important to achieve large margins in cats
diagnosis and also if possible identify the subtype of the tumour as detailed earlier, as
            m 
histiocytic MCT, then usually no further action is required, as such a lesion may have
these tumours are also frequently benign no further treatment is required but a note of
caution must be sounded, as some of these cases will recur and it is not possible to
view these as tumours without any metastatic potential at all, as a small number will
develop distant disease. Further evaluation in terms of a staging evaluation and
S             
distant metastasis in approximately 20-30% of cases. If full diagnostic staging was not
undertaken in the preoperative assessment with abdominal ultrasound and thoracic
repeat examinations for at least 12 months following the surgery are also to be
excision if the recurrence is simply cutaneous but tumour recurrence is usually
 s           s
developing.
When a patient presents with a suspected visceral MCT, the diagnosis is still
relatively easy to obtain. A detailed abdominal ultrasound will be required, but
aspiration of an intestinal or splenic mass is possible and advisable. A middle-aged to
highly advisable to undertake a detailed abdominal ultrasound preoperatively to assess
for metastatic disease within the draining lymphatics (the mesenteric nodes, or the
gastrosplenic nodes depending on the site of the primary tumour) and the liver and
also to undertake left and right lateral inflated thoracic radiographs. It has been
estimated that up to 3o% of cats with splenic MCT will have either peritoneal or
pleural effusions, so if identified these need to be aspirated and assessed for
malignancy before surgery is performed. Cats with intestinal MCT can usually be
considered to have a poor prognosis, due to the high incidence of metastatic disease
but if there are no metastatic lesions found then undertaking excision is still
recommended. Surgery must aim to remove at least 5 cm of intestine either side of the
tumour, as it has been shown that the tumour frequently extends beyond the visible
margins.
Cats with a splenic MCT should undergo splenectomy as there are reports of
extended survivals following surgery of up to 18 months even when there is bone
marrow involvement. However, these cases obviously warrant a cautious to guarded
prognosis to be given and compared to the cutaneous form of MCT the survival times
are reduced. Between 30 and 50% of cats with visceral McT have been shown to have
bone marrow involvement resulting in a circulating mastocytosis, so unlike in dogs, it
is worth considering buffy coat assessment in cats with this form of the disease. This
does not always resolve after excision of the primary mass and the presence of mast
cells in the buffy coat does not necessarily change the treatment required, but it would
help to make the decision as to whether adjunctive treatment should be considered or
not and for some owners, whether the initial surgery should actually be performed.
However, the authors would generally still recommend surgery for these cases unless
the animal is obviously unwell
CLINICAL TIP
 If a cat presents with vomiting and is suspected to have a splenic MCT, an H2 antagonist such as
 cimetidine or ranitidine should be given before surgery to help reduce the effect of any histamine
 d    s   n   s e s 
also sensible, especially if the patient continues to vomit or has poor appetite, to help reduce the risk
 of gastroduodenal ulceration developing.
In the largest study of feline MCTs, the following staging system was used and this
is clinically useful as it helps give prognostic information (Table 15.1).
Table 15.1 Staging system for feline mast cell tumours
Tumour stage
Criteria for tumour stage
 One dermal tumour with no spread to regional lymph nodes
 One d ermal tumour with spread to regional lymph node
 Multiple dermal tumours or large infiltratin g tumours with regional lymph node involvement
Any tumour with distant metastasis or recurrence with metastasis
Su bstage a
Stage x with no evidence of systemic disease
Substage b
 Stage x with evidence of systemic disease
In this study, no figuires were available for slirvival times with stage 1 or 2 disease
because more than half the cats were alive at the time of the study being written.
However, for cats with stage 3 disease the median survival time was 582 days (range
3-994) and for stage 4 it was 283 days (range 1-375). These figures confirm the broad
theory that cats with MCT have a variable prognosis but that solitary cutaneous feline
MCTs without spread to the local lymphatics usually manifest as benign disease with a
relatively protracted course. However, multiple cutaneous tumours, recurrent tumours
and primary splenic or lymph node disease should receive a guarded prognosis due to
the relatively short median survival times associated with these forms of the disease.
The role of chemotherapy in feline MCT has not been completely clarified. There is
anecdotal evidence that some cases will respond to prednisolone but clear consensus as
to whether or not there is a consistent response to this has not been established.
However, a recent report has shown that Lomustine (CCNU) given at approximately
in 18% of cases and partial remission in 3l% of cases with a median response
duration of 168 days (with a range of 25-727 days). The authors therefore certainly
would consider adjunctive therapy using Lomustine at the above dosage at 4-6-weekly
intervals, and/or prednisolone for cases in which local excision is not possible, or in
patients in whom there is metastatic disease that cannot be treated surgically. If this
treatment is used, either as a sole treatment or as adjunctive therapy following
 n           
important. The main dose limiting toxicities of Lomustine in cats are neutropaenia
         
complete blood count must be undertaken prior to each dose.
CLINICAL CASE EXAMPLE 15.3 - MAMMARY CARCINOMA IN A FEMALE DOG
Signalment
10-year-old entire female Bassett hound.
Presenting signs
A rapidly growing mass affecting her second mammary gland on the left-hand side.
Case history
The relevant case history in this case was:
 The dog was fully vaccinated, wormed and had not travelled outside the UK
· History of recurrent otitis externa, thought to be due to atopy but no full
investigation had been undertaken in this regard
· The owner noticed a mass during regular examination at home. Initially the mass
was felt to be approximately 2 cm in diameter, firm but movable and located
underneath the skin
· Over the following 12 weeks the mass grew such that it was starting to touch the
floor and cause the dog ambulatory inconvenience, so referral advice was sought.
Clinical examination
· On examination the dog was quiet and not particularly co-operative. However, she
allowed palpation of the mass without any apparent signs of discomfort. The mass
now measured 15 cm in diameter (Fig. 15.11). The mass was firm to touch and
somewhat irregular in outline. There were no skin abrasions and there was no
discharge from the associated nipple
· Cardiopulmonary auscultation was unremarkable
· Abdominal palpation was unremarkable
structure.
Figure 15.11
Case 15.3 The appearance of the mass at initial presentation
Diagnostic evaluation
 In the light of the size of the mass and the rapidity of its development, it was felt this
             s
thoracic radiographs were obtained which revealed no evidence of metastatic disease
· Abdominal ultrasound was undertaken to assess in particular the inguinal lymph
nodes, the liver and the spleen; these were all normal.
Diagnosis
· These findings are highly suggestive of the mass being a mammary carcinoma,
stage Il1.
Treatment
to surgery and underwent a regional mastectomy, during which glands 1, 2 and 3 on
the left-hand side were all excised ‘en-bloc'
· Active suction drains were used to reduce the risk of fluid accumulation following
the excision of such a large mass. However, the postoperative recovery of the dog was
good and she was discharged 3 days later.
Outcome
 The histopathology confirmed the mass to be a high-grade complex carcinoma. The
owners declined any adjunctive treatment and the dog remained well for 8 months
and at the time of writing is still well.
Theory refresher
Mammary tumours are one of the most common tumour types encountered in clinical
practice and the most common tumour that develops in female dogs. A survey of
   s          s 
dogs whilst a survey from Sweden  (where routine ovariohysterectomy is less
commonplace compared to the UK) revealed a much higher incidence at 111 cases per
environment in the bitch plays a significant role in the initial development of
(by several mechanisms, including up regulating growth hormone concentrations in
    so   s  s   
mammary tumours in neutered bitches compared to the incidence in dogs left entire.
A study in the late 1960s showed that compared to entire bitches, the risk of a bitch
was 0.05%. Spaying before the second oestrous was associated with a risk of 8% and
   d ss s n  ps     n s r 
later life does not seem to affect the incidence of malignant mammary tumours
developing but it probably does result in a reduction in the risk of benign tumours
developing. Mammary tumours also show increased incidence with increasing age;
the average age of mammary tumour development is 10 years old, it is a rare disease
in dogs less than 4 years old and the incidence rises with increasing age. Spaying
protection for the future development of mammary neoplasia in later life but there are
obviously other factors that need to be considered when discussing whether or not to
neuter a dog and the possible benefits with regard to mammary cancer cannot be used
on its own in this regard.
Other factors that have been shown to influence the development of mammary
neoplasia include obesity in the first year of life and also somewhat uinexpectedly, the
feeding of a home-cooked diet as opposed to a commercially available one. Both of
these increase the risk of developing the disease.
Approximately half of all canine mammary masses will be malignant and of these
approximately 50% will have metastasized at the time of diagnosis. The most
frequently diagnosed tumours are of epithelial origin (i.e.: carcinomas).
Histologically, these tumours can then be subdivided into several different subtypes
  a         
carcinomas, complex carcinomas and simple carcinomas (of which there are three
types; tubulopapillary carcinoma, solid carcinoma and anaplastic carcinoma) and this
classification system is that it does not describe ‘ductular carcinoma', a term
frequently used by many pathologists. There is also a separate classification for so-
called “inflammatory carcinomas', which are poorly differentiated tumours that grow
rapidly and present with obvious cutaneous inflammation and oedema. Inflammatory
           
Figure15.12
An inflammatory carcinoma in a Labrador bitch, showing breakdown at the biopsy
  s       s
Courtesy of Professor Dick White, Dick White Referrals
Mammary tumours generally develop in older dogs as already outlined. They can be
single or multiple in nature and approximately two-thirds of tumouirs will develop in
the two most caudal mammary glands (i.e. glands 4 and 5), but tumours in these
glands do not have any different behavioural characteristics compared to tuimours in
glands 1, 2 or 3. This anatomical propensity of mammary tumours to develop in
glands 4 and 5 is thought to be due simply to the larger volume of mammary tissue in
located within the mammary tissue itself. Benign tumours are generally small and
appear to be well circumscribed but all mammary masses should be viewed with
suspicion as possible malignancies and therefore investigated as soon as possible.
          s   
made with fine needle aspirates and a recent Brazilian study indicated that cytology is
accurate in this regard in up to 92% of cases. However, cytology will not be able to
accurately subtype the tumour so histopathology will still be required and surgical
reasonable to omit fine needle aspiration in the diagnostic evaluation procedure, as
P            
approach, which is to surgically remove the mass. Before surgery is undertaken,
however, clinical staging to establish the extent of the disease is essential and use of
the TNM system provides both a logical framework to base the staging investigation
on and also important prognostic information. The TNM classification for mammary
divisions shown in Table 15.2.
Table 15.2 TNM classification for mammary tumours
T1
Tumour up to 3 cm in d iameter
T2
Tumour between 3-5 cm in diameter
Tumour greater th an 5 cm in diamete:
ND
No lymph n ode metastasis detected either by cytology or histology
N1
Lymph nod e metastasis detected either by cytology or histology
MO
 No distant metastasis detectec
M1
 Distant metastasis detected
From this, five different stages of disease can then be established (Table 15.3).
Table 15.3 Five different stages of disease, identified from the TNM classification for mammary
tumours
Stage I
TIN0MO
 Stage II 
T2N0MO
Stage III
T3N0M0
 Stage IV
AnyTN1 MO
 Stage V
AnyTN1 M1
To establish the clinical stage therefore, any dogs with mammary lumps or bumps
should undergo a thorough and detailed clinical examination, taking care to palpate
all of the mammary tissue and also the draining lymph nodes if possible. It is also
important to assess the dog for any evidence of respiratory compromise which could
indicate pulmonary metastasis or hind limb oedema, which may indicate lymphatic
between all the glands, thereby making the drainage complicated, in general, glands 1
and 2 drain cranially into the axillary lymph node whilst glands 4 and 5 drain
caudally into the superficial inguinal lymph node. Gland 3 can drain both cranially
and caudally. The axillary lymph nodes are usually easily palpable when enlarged but
       s   s  
   s s s       o 
inguinal and sub-lumbar lymph nodes along with the mesenteric nodes, liver and
spleen for the presence of metastatic disease. Good-quality, inflated thoracic
radiographs (left and right laterals as a minimum) are also to be recommended before
S            
pulmonary metastases.
Once the clinical stage of the disease has been established the decision can be made
whether or not the dog should/can undergo surgical excision of the primary tumour
with or without the draining lymph nodes if found to be enlarged but unless there is
obvious metastatic disease, suirgical removal of the tumour is the treatment of choice.
If distant metastases are diagnosed, then in the light of the poor suirvival times it is
metastases are found, which surgical procedure to undertake to remove the primary
tumour is a matter of debate. Despite its popularity in general practice, studies have
shown that undertaking a complete mastectomy (a so-called ‘mammary strip') for
         s s 
simple, local mastectomy. It is therefore most reasonable to suggest the following
approaches:
1. If the mass is less than 1 cm in diameter, firm and not adherent to the underlying
structures (i.e. most likely to be benign), then a simple local ^lumpectomy’ should be
skin incision. If the histopathology reveals the mass to be malignant, then further
more extensive surgery can be performed as detailed below.
2. If the mass is larger than 1 cm but located relatively centrally within one gland
and/or feels fixed, then that gland should be removed entirely. This is known as
mammectomy'. The surgeon should make an eliptical incision around the gland
leaving at least 2 cm margins around the mass, before removing all of the skin,
subcuitis, glanduilar tissue and any adherent suibcutis.
3. Another approach to masses larger than 1 cm or for those that feel fixed is to
   a           
removed together and glands 4 and 5 are removed together, should a mass be present
    s  s       
regional mastectomy is the treatment of choice. The surgical procedure is as for a
mammectomy except that the incisions extend over the whole length of the tissue to
be excised. If gland 5 is to be removed, then it is recommended that the superficial
inguinal lymph node be removed at the same time due to its close association with
the mammary tissule.
4. If multiple masses are present, then removing all of the mammary tissue on one
side may be indicated in a regional mastectomy (often termed a ^mammary strip'). To
do this, the superficial caudal epigastric artery and vein must be identified and
ligated, but otherwise the procedure is as described above. In the light of the length of
the incision, care should be taken to minimize blood loss using electrocautery and
closure must be tension free to help reduce the risk of dehiscence. Although unilateral
or bilateral mastectomies are frequently performed in practice, as previously
explained there have not been any studies that have shown that this radical surgery
offers any increase in survival times compared to regional mastectomy, hence the
reason for recommending this procedure only when it is truly necessary.
The question of whether or not to neuter an entire female dog at the time of
removing a mammary tumour remains somewhat unanswered. There are a few
survival times but there are more studies that suggest that ovariohysterectomy at the
time of mammary tumour removal does not improve the outcome for the dogs at all in
terms of disease-free periods, recuurrence rates or survival times. Therefore on balance,
currently the literature suggests that neutering does not appear to significantly
improve the prognosis for the dogs with regard to their cancer. It is, however, clear
            
previously. If it is decided by the surgeon that neutering the dog at the same time as
the risk of the dog developing pyometra), then the ovariohysterectomy should be
performed before the  mammectomy/mastectomy procedure  and  the  skin  and
         s g
performed carefully so as to avoid contaminating the laparotomy with tumour cells
from the mammary glands.
If malignant mammary cancer is confirmed by the histopathology, thoughts turn to
adjunctive treatments, especially when there are now several well publicized medical
no clearly efficaeouis treatments have been described. A small case series of l6 dogs in
Greece with stage Ill or stage IV disease has been published, in which eight of the dogs
 a         
cyclophosphamide (100 mg/m?) and 5-fluorouracil (150 mg/m?) once a week for 4
consecutive weeks following the same surgical procedure. The dogs in the surgery
group had a disease-free period of 2 months and a median survival time of 6 months
compared to the chemotherapy-treated group who were all alive at 2 years
P   n  s  s s  o 
there may be a role for adjunctive chemotherapy but much more work is required to
establish if such results are consistent. Likewise, electrochemotherapy using cisplatin
has produced encouraging results in a study of seven dogs with a variety of different
neoplasms including mammary carcinoma, so this may prove to be a useful tool in the
future but more studies are required to prove consistent efficacy in canine mammary
neoplasia.
Hormonal therapy with anti-oestrogens such as tamoxifen have become standard
therapy for many human mammary cancer patients with good success rates, buit
uinfortunately this success has not been seen in canine patients. A study of the
uisefulness of tamoxifen in canine mammary cancer concluded that use of this agent
could not be recommended in dogs due to the high incidence of oestrogenic side
effects, such as significant vulval swelling, vulval discharge, oestrous-like signs and
urinary incontinence and due to these side effects it was not possible to establish
whether or not tamoxifen did generate any survival benefit. Therefore, at the time of
writing there appears to be no role for adjunctive hormonal therapy for canine
mammary neoplasia. Likewise, postoperative radiotherapy is a mainstay of treatment
in human mammary neoplasia but its role in canine mammary neoplasia remains to
be clarified and therefore it is not currently recommended routinely.
The prognosis for dogs with malignant mammary neoplasia, therefore, is variable
and is dependent on many factors. Studies have shown that the main clinical factors
that indicate prognosis are:
1. Primary tumour size. Tumours of less than 3 cm have a better prognosis than dogs
with tumours greater than 3 cm diameter. One study reported a mean survival time
of 22 months for dogs with malignant tumours of less than 3 cm diameter compared
to a mean 14 month survival if the primary tumour was greater than 3 cm in
diameter had median survival times of 10 months compared to 26 months if the
primary tumour was less than 5 cm at the time of excision.
2 . Histological tumour type. Different subtypes of mammary carcinoma carry
different prognoses, with simple carcinomas having a poorer prognosis when
compared to non-invasive carcinomas. Inflammatory carcinoma is associated with a
very poor prognosis, with mean survival time as low as 25 days being reported with
simple conservative treatment. Likewise, mammary sarcomas have a guarded
prognosis with the majority of dogs dying from the disease within 1 year of
diagnosis.
3. Histological tumour grade. Low-grade tumours are associated with longer disease-
           
disease rate of 19-24% within the first 2 years post-excision, but that the
         s  s
histological grade tumours.
4. Lymph node involvement. The presence of metastatic cells within the draining
lymph nodes has been shown to be associated with significantly shorter survival
times, with recurrence rates of up to 80% within 6 months of diagnosis being
reported along with death rates of 86% within 2 years in patients with positive nodal
disease.
5. Presence of distant metastases. Metastatic lesions beyond the draining lymph nodes
are associated with poor survival. One study reported that dogs with mammary
carcinomas in whom distant metastasis were diagnosed had a median survival time
following excision of the primary tumour of only 5 months compared to a mediar
survival time of 28 months for dogs in whom no metastatic disease was identified.
It is therefore difficult to accurately predict the outcome for individual patients but
their owners can be counselled using some of the data given above to indicate the
severity of their dog's condition. These data also show the importance of undertaking
accurate clinical staging before surgery is contemplated and the value of sending all
reached in every case.
CLINICAL CASE EXAMPLE 15.4 - FELINE MAMMARY CARCINOMA
Signalment
13-year-old female neutered domestic long-haired (DLH) cat.
Presenting signs
An ulcerated mass in the cranial ventral thoracic region.
Case history
The relevant case history in this case was:
· The cat was an outdoor cat, fully vaccinated and wormed
· The owner had once previously noticed some blood on the cat's fur in the left cranial
ventral thoracic region. On further examination the blood was associated with a
mass
· The bleeding was intermittent and the cat presented to the hospital for further
investigation.
Clinical examination
· The cat was bright and alert with no other clinical signs
· Thoracic auscultation and abdominal palpation were unremarkable
· Examination of the ventral thorax revealed a mass measuring approximately 3 x 2
cm associated with the left cranial thoracic mammary gland. The mass was ulcerated
in areas and fixed to the overlying skin (Fig. 15.13).
· Local axillary lymph nodes were not palpable.
Figure 15.13
 Case 15.4 The appearance of the mammary mass at presentation and preoperatively.
Areas of ulceration are present and indicated by the red arrows
Diagnostic evaluation
· Careful palpation of the axillary and inguinal lymph nodes was performed, however,
no enlargement was found
· Thoracic radiographs (right and left lateral and ventrodorsal views) were
l1ndertaken, however, no evidence of detectable metastasis was documented
· Fine needle aspiration of the mass was performed revealing the presence of
malignant epithelial cells.
Diagnosis
· Mammary gland neoplasia, probably an adenocarcinoma.
Treatment
As the tumour was likely to be malignant a unilateral chain mastectomy was
performed which included all four mammary glands on the left side (Fig. 15.14). The
cat was positioned in dorsal recumbency and the mass was excised with 2-cm
margins. The incision was also extended caudally to include the remaining mammary
tissue on the same side. Closure was achieved using simple continuous sutures of
polyglecaprone for the subcutaneous layer and nylon skin sutures after gloves and
Figu1re15.14
Case 15.4 A unilateral chain mastectomy was performed to treat an isolated
mammary mass in the cat
Ouitcome
The cat recovered well after surgery and was discharged 48 hours later after frequent
wound checks and the administration of systemic opioid and non-steroidal anti-
inflammatory analgesics. The sutures were removed 10 days after surgery when the
wound had healed without complication. The histological diagnosis of the mass was a
tubulopapillary carcinoma. The mass appeared to have been completely removed.
However, a high level of mitosis and a moderate level of necrosis were observed
although no apparent lymphatic invasion was present in the sections examined.
Theory refresher
          
17% of all cancer found in this species. Unlike the dog, however, most mammary
tumours in the cat (85-90%) are malignant and as a breed the Siamese cat is
lymphatic invasion and a high rate of metastasis to other organs such as lungs, liver
and kidneys. Lymph node metastasis occurs in almost half of patients with malignant
disease. Most mammary tumours in cats are adenocarcinomas with subdivisions of
tubular, papillary, solid and cribriform carcinomas. Other types of carcinomas and
sarcomas are not as common, however, an important differential diagnosis is a
condition called fibroepithelial hyperplasia which is associated with oestrus in entire
which may become ulcerated and necrotic. Treatment involves ovariohysterectomy
and with this the clinical signs normally resolve over a period of a few weeks
Spontaneous resolution is also possible.
Treatment of mammary cancer in cats is surgical if there is no evidence of distant
           
preoperatively as described for  the dog.  Using  surgery in  combination  with
chemotherapy (doxorubicin) may be usefuil and provide better outcomes although
more studies need to be performed to definitively prove the efficacy of this
combination. For surgical management radical mastectomies are recommended to
reduce the chance of local recurrence in the light of the fact that the vast majority of
mammary masses are malignant, which is a different situation from that described in
the dog. If the mammary mass or masses are located on one side only then a unilateral
mastectomy is indicated. If masses are present on both sides then bilateral chain
mastectomies are advised which can be staged a few weeks apart to reduce tension at
 o s s   n       s a
excised, although there does not appear to be any benefit in removing this node
prophylactically. The inguinal lymph node is easily and often removed with the
conditions such as fi broepithelial hyperplasia.
The prognosis for cats with mammary neoplasia is almost always guarded due to
the high level of malignancy encountered in this species and the average survival time
for cats with malignant mammary cancer is 15 months, even with aggressive surgery.
The age at time of diagnosis and the breed have been shown to have no prognostic
significance at all. However, two main clinical prognostic factors have been identified
and these are:
1. Tumour size. As found in dogs, the size of the primary tumour at diagnosis has
been shown to help predict the outcome. Cats with tumours less than 2 cm diameter
at the time of surgery have had median survival times reported in excess of 3 years,
compared to tumours measuring less than 3 cm in diameter having median survival
times of just under 2 years (21 months), whilst cats with tumours measuring more
than 3 cm have median survival times of between 4 and 12 months. Large tumours
are therefore definitely associated with a poorer prognosis, supporting the fact that
early diagnosis and treatment is of paramount importance.
2 . Histological tumour grade. As intuitively expected, tumours with a lower
comprised from both mammary luminal epithelial cells and myoepithelial cells) have
significantly better survival times compared to simple mammary carcinomas, with
mean overall survival times of 32 months and 15 months respectively being reported
in a recent study.
The extent of surgery undertaken probably also has a prognostic implication, with
one study showing that more extensive surgery does improve survival time whilst
not the overall suirvival period. However, until this has been clarified the
recommendation to undertake a full mastectomy remains in the light of the high rate
of malignant tumours encountered in the cat.
CLINICAL CASE EXAMPLE 15.5 -AN INTRASCAPULAR FIBROSARCOMA IN A CAT
Signalment
6-year-old neuitered female domestic short-haired (DSH) cat.
Presenting signs
Case history
The relevant history in this case was:
· The cat was fully vaccinated (FHV, FCV, FPV, FeLV) and had received her last
booster vaccination 4 months previously. However, the cat had not travelled outside
of the UK and was not vaccinated against rabies
· The cat had no other previous medical history
Sa t d  , e g s a s ss    sao as
Ad m i h       
· The cat was otherwise bright and appeared well
· The referring veterinary surgeon had performed an incisional biopsy which had
vaccine-associated sarcoma.
Clinical examination
· General clinical examination was unremarkable but on palpation in the
intrascapular area there was a solid mass palpable that measured approximately 2 cm
in diameter
· No other abnormalities were detected.
Diagnostic evaluation
· Unfortunately, at the time of presentation there were no available MRl or CT
scanners to enable an accurate assessment of the tumour's borders
· Inflated left and right lateral and DV thoracic radiographs were within normal limits
with no evidence of metastatic disease or obvious tumour involvement with the
dorsal spinous processes.
Treatment
· In the light of the fact that the diagnosis was one of a high-grade soft-tissue sarcoma
with features consistent with a vaccine-associated sarcoma, the cat was taken to
Figures 15.15, 15.16
 Case 15.5 The dorsoventral and lateral appearance of the mass immediately
beforesurgery
Figure15.17
Case 15.5 The aim was to remove the mass en bloc with 3-cm lateral margins plus
removal of the dorsal spinous processes
Figure 15.18
Case 15.5 The mass was dissected out leaving a significant deficit
Figure 15.19
Case 15.5 Finally before closure, the dorsal spinous processes were removed to try
and ensure that all potentially contaminated tissue was removed
Ouitcome
 nnns  s  an pi p e e  io a e
analgesia for only 72 houurs
· The cat remained well for 8 months before the owner found another mass just lateral
in location to the first mass. The referring veterinary surgeon biopsied it again and
found the tumour to have recurred. The owners had declined any further work-up or
surgery, so the cat was put to sleep 6 weeks later.
Theory refresher
Vaccine-associated sarcomas are a specific subtype of soft-tissue sarcoma (STS)
recognized only in the cat. They were first reported in the USA in the early 1990s and
the resulting epidemiological  studies  showed a  strong correlation  between the
administration of inactivated vaccines, in particular the FeLV vaccine and rabies
site. However, the fact that cases are seen regularly in the UK, where rabies
vaccination is not commonplace, indicates that it may be the act of vaccination per se
this, a feature of a vaccine-associated sarcoma (VAS) is the presence of an
inflammatory cell infiltrate around the periphery of the tumour, leading to the theory
proliferation, which then eventually leads to neoplastic transformation and tumour
genesis. Histologically, VASs are also similar to the STS that arise within eyes of cats
that have been traumatized, which again supports a significant role for inflammation
in the genesis of the tumour. Furthermore, a study from UC Davis in California found
that there was evidence to suggest that certain long-acting injectable medications may
also be associated with sarcoma formation, so it may be more appropriate to call these
tumours ‘injection-site sarcomas'. However, at the time of writing, the exact aetiology
of this tumour remains unclear.
The problem with this condition in the USA was such that a Vaccine-Associated
Feline Sarcoma Task Force was established and this group has made many
The main difficulties with VAS are: their high grade, meaning they grow quickly; the
fact that they are poorly encapsulated and are highly invasive into the surrounding
tissues; and their ability to extend along fascial planes for some distance, therefore
making complete excision very difficult. Because of this, and particularly in relation
to the last point, whenever possible, pre-surgical MRI or CT scanning is to be
recommended in order to be able to do everything possible to establish the size and
location of the tumour. VASs are almost always larger than they seem merely from
right lateral views and a fully inflated DV view) are also recommended, as VAS exhibit
pulmonary metastasis in up to 20% of cases.
Any mass in the intrascapular region of a cat should be viewed with suspicion as
being a possible VAS, as it has been shown that the tumour can develop up to 10 years
after a vaccination was last given. Excisional biopsy should not be attempted, as this
an incisional biopsy or a Tru-cut biopsy should be considered and then the biopsy
 n s  s am   o n m  q os 
clearly showed that the best option for these cases was referral to a specialist surgeon
experienced in aggressive resection and reconstruction at the earliest stage possible, it
is advisable that specialist advice is taken as soon as a possible VAs has been
examined.
Aggressive surgery, aiming to excise a minimum of 2 cm lateral and deep to the
tumour margin has been recommended by the task force. However, even with this
approach, the 1-year disease-free period has been published to be only 35% with a
median survival time of 19 months. The role of adjunctive therapies is therefore
theoretically very important, but the role of chemotherapy is a little unclear.
Doxorubicin has been shown to be beneficial by substantially increasing the disease-
free interval following surgery in one study, but this finding was not reproduced in
another study. Radiotherapy has been studied in a number of projects and has beer
shown to increase the disease-free periods and survival times, but local disease control
is still a problem even with aggressive treatment combinations and there is a risk of
S         o    
specialist to see if a particular case would benefit from this treatment in their opinion
Or not.
the best possible surgery, VASs are aggressive tumours that are likely to prove to be
terminal within 2 years of initially developing.
VASs, although mesenchymal in origin, behave significantly differently from most
other soft tissue sarcomas (STSs). The term STS encompasses a large number of
heterogeneous tumours that share some common characteristics and hence can be
considered together as a group. STSs can develop in mesenchymal tissue located in
   s   s    s  n
Examples of STs include fibrosarcoma, myxosarcoma, leiomyosarcoma, peripheral
liposarcoma. The characteristics shared by these tumours include:
· They may appear or feel well encapsulated, but they have diffuse margins and grow
in a manner which is very invasive locally
· Achieving complete excision can therefore be difficult and local recurrence rates are
high
· They generally have a low metastatic potential (this is dependent to some degree on
histological grade) but if it occurs, metastasis is usually via the haematogenous route
It is because of these characteristics that tumours such as histiocytic sarcoma
CLINICAL CASE EXAMPLE 15.6 - A SOFT-TISSUE SARCOMA IN A GERMAN
SHEPHERD DOG
Signalment
 2-year-old neutered female German shepherd dog.
Presenting signs
A rapidly growing mass on the face, situated rostromedially to the medial canthus of
the left eye.
Case history
The relevant history in this case was:
· The dog was fully vaccinated and had not travelled outside of the UK
· The owner had first noticed a lump near the dog's eye 6 weeks previously and had
elected to monitor it but it grew steadily, although it did not appear to be causing the
dog any discomfort
· The dog was taken to the referring vet who initially prescribed clavulanate
potentiated amoxicillin and carprofen but this made no difference and the mass
continued to enlarge. Fine needle aspirates were then attempted but they were non-
diagnostic so the dog was referred for fuirther evaluation.
Clinical examination
· On examination the dog was very bright and alert. The only abnormality identified
was the mass near her left eye (Fig. 15.20). The mass measured 2.5 cm x 1.5 cm x 2
cm and was solid to the touch. It felt attached to the underlying tissues but was not
immovable
· The left submandibular lymph node was not palpable
· The dog exhibited epiphora from the left eye but no conjunctivitis or episcleral
congestion
Figure 15.20
 Case 15.6 The appearance of the mass after the area had been clipped, viewed from
the left lateral aspect
Diagnostic evaluation
· Fine needle aspirates with applied suction using a 5 ml syringe (as described on page
170) were obtained, which revealed the presence of a population of mesenchymal
cells. The cells were variable in size with a low-moderate amount of mild blue
cytoplasm but obvious nucleoli in variably shaped and sized nuclei were frequently
visible. Many of the cells appeared subjectively less spindloid than a normal
mesenchymal cell, having a plump and more oval appearance. This appearance was
considered consistent with either reactive fibroplasia or a mesenchymal tumour such
as a fibrosarcoma
· Left and right lateral thoracic radiographs were unremarkable
· An MRl scan was lindertaken, which revealed a solid mass to be present in the
subcutaneous tissue but with no apparent invasion into the underlying bone (Fig.
15.21)
· As the appearance of the mass was most consistent with a tumouir but the fine
needle aspirates were not definitively diagnostic, a Tru-cut biopsy was obtained
which confirmed the mass to be a fibrosarcoma.
Figure15.21
Case 15.6 The transverse appearance of the mass on MRl, revealing the presence of a
discrete hyperintense mass on the dorsolateral aspect of the nose without obvious invasion into the
underlying bone
Diagnosis
· An intermediate grade (grade II) fibrosarcoma.
Treatment
· It was decided to undertake wide surgical excision of the mass, as the proximity of
 s           a   
combination with postoperative radiotherapy would not be ideal, had a lower chance
of cure and might be associated with radiation-induced ocular damage. However,
because of the location and size of the mass there was concern that there would not
be adequate skin present in the immediate area for primary closure. Therefore an
axial pattern flap based on the cutaneous branch of the superficial temporal artery
was planned (Fig. 15.22-15.26). The mass was excised with 2 cm lateral margins and
one fascial plane deep. The flap was then created based on the landmarks of the
caudal aspect of the zygomatic arch caudally and the lateral orbital rim rostrally for
the base of the flap. The length of the flap extended to just beyond the middle of the
dorsal orbital rim of the contralateral eye. The flap was then carefully elevated and
rotated rostrally through 90o to cover the original skin deficit. The wound was closed
after a negative suction drain was placed and the dog recovered uneventfully.
Figure15.22
Case 15.6 The dog placed in sternal recumbency and a sterile marker pen indicating
the site for the incisions to form the axial pattern flap based on the cutaneous branch of the
Figure 15.23
Case 15.6 The intraoperative appearance of the dog following excision of the
primary tumour with wide margins
Figure15.24
  ss    s s  '   o  'i 
trauma and thereby not compromising the viability of the flap
Figure 15.25
Case 15.6 The advancement flap was rotated rostrally after creating a bridging
incision to cover the defect
Figu1re15.26
Case 15.6 The immediate postoperative appearance of the dog, showing good
tension-free wound closure and no compromise to the aperture of the left eye
Ouitcome
· The dog made an uneventful recovery from his surgery. The drain was removed
after 72 hours and the staples removed after 14 days. Histopathology revealed
complete excision from the sections examined. The dog was then re-examined every 2
months and at 15 months after the operation, he was still free from any signs of
tumour disease.
Theory refresher
STSs are considered to be quite common, being quoted to account for 15% of all
cutaneous tumours and 7% of all subcutaneous tumours in the dog and cat
respectively. They usually present in middle-aged to older animals as a lump that is
growing slowly and often may be mentioned by an owner as an almost incidental
finding but as in the case described here, STSs can develop in young animals and they
   r    ss     
            
mesenchymal tissue, which by definition usually comprises cells which are well
adhered together and therefore do not exfoliate easily. As a consequence, the authors
recommend that a non-suction fine needle aspiration technique is attempted initially
but if the sample quality is poor, then the needle should be placed into the mass
     s   s  s  g e o p
forcefully move and re-direct the needle several times. Release the vacuum in the
    e sd   n    
However, it is important to note that fine needle aspiration of sTSs is not always
diagnostic, with false negative results being the main concern. In order to obtain a
definitive pre-surgical diagnosis therefore, a solid tissue biopsy may be required in the
excisional biopsy, although due to the fact that the suirgical margins required at
excision are generally 3 cm, attempting an excisional biopsy is not recommended. As
explained in Chapter 1, any biopsy procedure must also take into account the fact that
the biopsy tract will need to be removed during the definitive surgery, so planning the
best approach for the biopsy with the definitive surgery in mind is essential.
Although it is true to say that there is a relatively low metastatic potential with
most STSs, diagnostic imaging for pulmonary metastasis is still to be recommended
with inflated thoracic radiographs before excisional surgery. More advanced imaging
techniques such as MRI or CT can also be extremely useful to help establish the exact
size and extent of the tumour before excision is attempted. This can be particularly
   s  s s    sn    
required. Once the full staging procedure has been completed, the first-line treatment
for STS is wide surgical excision. Because STSs are locally aggressive typically the
margins of normal tissue laterally and include one fascial plane in the deep margin.
of the tumour, if possible, should be sent for histopathological assessment, grading
and a margin report and if the margins come back as dirty or only just clean, then it is
(see page 12) and that further treatment may be necessary. Requesting a histological
       s n   
grade forms (grades I, 1I and II respectively):
and minimal tumour necrosis
· Grade II (intermediate): 10-19 mitotic figures per HPF but < 50% necrosis
   < m   s    :   
with STs. In one study, 13% of dogs with grade 1 tumours developed metastases
whereas 41% of dogs with grade Ill tumours developed metastases. Dogs with > 19
mitotic figures/hpf had a median survival time of 236 days compared with 1444 days
S           
prognostic for survival (dogs with > 10% necrosis were approximately three times
            
Because of the locally invasive nature of these tumours, it is quite common to find
that the margins after excision of the primary tumour are dirty. Options for further
    r   s      s 
not always possible, depending on the location of the scar and the amount of tissue
free for reconstruction to be performed. However, a retrospective study in the USA
showed that residual tumour was identified in nine of 41 (22%) resected STS scars
and the study concluded that if incomplete resection of STs occurs, resection of local
 a  s ss s  a    ss
following a second surgery undertaken by an oncological surgical specialist, the local
recurrence rate was only 15%o.
If a second surgery is not easily possible, external beam radiotherapy can
     s     a
relatively radio-resistant tumours and as a single treatment modality, radiotherapy is
not particularly effective, two studies at the turn of the century showed that the use of
radiotherapy in incompletely excised STS was helpful, with local control rates of
Aasnsisod s1eaA z 1e %16 0n %7z pue A1ag1nsisod 1eaA auo 1e %56 pu %0g um1aq
Referral of cases with incompletely excised STs to a radio-oncologist is therefore
     s    s     
Chemotherapy for STSs is more difficult to recommend as they are generally poorly
responsive to chemotherapy due to their slow growth rate and possibly some inherent
chemoresistance. Some studies have shown a response to doxorubicin-based protocols
and anecdotally the authors have seen some very good responses to carboplatin in
        s    n  s  g
of cases. However, an interesting recent report described the use of metronomic
administration of cyclophosphamide (given at 10 mg/m?) and piroxicam (given at 0.3
mg/kg) in dogs with incompletely excised STs. The medication was given on a daily
or every other day basis to 55 dogs and the outcomes compared to 30 dogs who
received surgery alone. The results showed that the disease-free interval (DFl) was
significantly prolonged for STSs of all sites (trunk and extremity) in treated dogs
compared with untreated control dogs. The DFI also was significantly longer in treated
dogs when tumour site (trunk and extremity) was compared. The authors therefore
concluded that further evaluation of this approach is warranted as adjunctive therapy
in dogs with incomplete resected STS and also in dogs with highly metastatic tumours
such as osteosarcoma and melanoma.
The authors would therefore generally recommend that the best treatment for STs is
wide, complete surgical excision, as described in this case. Some cases of sTs should
be referred to surgical specialists if the primary clinician is uncertain of their ability
to totally excise the mass and then close the resulting deficit. If the margins are dirty,
then a second surgery should be considered or the patient could be referred for
radiotherapy if a second surgery is not possible, with the further option of
metronomic chemotherapy also a viable option. If the tumour returns as a grade IHl
histologically, then adjunctive chemotherapy should be considered, either using
B            i
with metronomic administration of cyclophosphamide and piroxicam as detailed
a bove.
In general, the prognosis for STs depends on the histological grading and the site of
the primary, but most cases will do well with good treatment. The median suirvival
  s  s  e  s   s  s
a     s  s o a   e s
CLINICAL CASE EXAMPLE 15.7 - AN INTERSTITIAL CELL TUMOUR IN A RABBIT
S        
of Edinburgh.
Signalment
8-year-old entire rabbit.
Presenting signs
Unilateral enlargement of a testicle.
Case history
The relevant history in this case was:
· The rabbit exhibited normal behaviour
 The rabbit was feeding well and passing normal faeces
· The rabbit was presented as the owner noticed a swelling at the rear end
· He was housed alone
· He was vaccinated against myxomatosis virus.
Clinical examination
· The rabbit weighed 2.6 kilos
· The rabbit was bright and alert
· Cardiopulmonary auscultation was unremarkable
· Abdominal palpation was unremarkable
· There was a swelling of the left testicle
· The testicle was non painful and there was no apparent inflammation
· The right testicle was smaller than expected
· There was some mild perineal soiling both with urine and faeces
· No other abnormalities were noted.
Diagnostic evaluation
· The rabbit was admitted for further evaluation
· Haematology demonstrated a mild relative neutrophilia (60%) which was attributed
to a stress leucogram. No toxic activity was noted
· Biochemistry was unremarkable
· Plain radiography of the chest and abdomen were unremarkable
Presuimptive diagnosis
· Testicular neoplasm.
Treatment
Given the clinical history and the physical examination the rabbit was castrated. Both
the affected testicle and the smaller right testicle were removed (Figs 15.27, 15.28).
The rabbit was anaesthetized using buprenorphine (0.03 mg/kg) preoperatively and
sevoflurane was administered by mask as the rabbit was quite aged. The rabbit was
placed in dorsal recumbancy and the pre-scrotal and scrotal areas were carefully
           a   s
made using a scalpel and the incision extended using metzenbaum scissors. Blunt
dissection separated the tunic from the skin and the testicle was exteriorized. Further
blunt dissection freed all attachments allowing a closed castration to be performed.
Two artery forceps were placed proximal to the testicle and a crushing ligature of an
absorbable suture material (2 metric polydioxone) was applied. The sutured stump
was allowed to pass back into the wound and the scrotum was suitured using two
single cross mattress suitures. This was repeated for the other testicle, although only a
single suture was required. Intraoperatively, meloxicam (0.6 mg/kg), metoclopramide
(0.5 mg/kg), trimethoprim/sulfonamide (30 mg/kg) and warmed lactated ringers (10
ml/kg) were given subcutaneously. The animal was discharged home the same day as
theprocedure.
Figure15.27
Case 15.7 The appearance of the testicles during the consultation
Figure 15.28
 Case 15.7 After removal the difference in testicle size was clearly apparent
Diagnosis
· Histopathology confirmed the tumour to be an interstitial cell tumour.
Outcome
· The rabbit made an uneventful recovery and was seen for a postoperative check 72
hours after discharge. Sutures were removed after a further week. The rabbit was
reported to be alive and well 6 months later when vaccinated. He was subsequently
lost to follow-up.
Theory refresher
Testicular tumours have become increasingly recognized in pet rabbits as owners are
of neoplasm (seminomas, interstitial cell tumours, sertoli cell tumours and teratomas)
have been reported. Other differentials for an enlarged testicle include fight wounds,
myxomatosis, Treponema paraluiscuniculi, orchitis, epididymitis or a testicular
torsion. These can usually be ruled out on clinical history and physical examination of
a patient.
Clinical signs are usually limited to a change in the anatomy of the rabbits'
genitalia. Occasionally, increased soiling of the area may be evident due to increased
difficulty in grooming due to the testicular size. Typically the other testicle is reduced
in size. In some rabbits increased libido and aggression may be evident
can be ruled out by biopsy of the affected scrotal tissues and submitting them for
histopathology.  Medical treatment of these infections is possible, although
myxomatosis carries a poor prognosis.
Orchitis and epididymitis usually result in a painful swelling of the testicle within
the scrotum. Although medical treatment for these conditions is possible, if the rabbit
is not required for breeding then suirgical treatment (castration) may be indicated to
fight wounds is also possible. In extreme cases involving a breeding male then a fine
              
diagnosis prior to surgery. Testicular ultrasound may also demonstrate a discrete mass
within the testicle.
abdominal contents through the open inguinal canals. This is 1o0% curative.
Metastasis has not been reported. A scrotal ablation may be required to prevent further
trauma or abrasion if there has been significant enlargement. Analgesics and gut
motility stimulants  should be considered  routine  for  all rabbits undergoing
anaesthesia.
The definitive diagnosis relies on histopathology of the affected testicle. Typically, a
discrete nodule is identified on sectioning of the organ after surgery. Routine
castration should be performed to prevent testicular neoplasia in rabbits. Typically
this should be performed at 4-5 months of age to control untoward behaviour in male
rabbits.
CLINICAL CASE EXAMPLE 15.8 - A SERTOLI CELL TUMOUR IN A DOG
Signalment
13-year-old entire male dog.
Presenting signs
Non-pruritic alopecia affecting his hind legs.
Case history
The relevant history in this case was:
· The dog was fully vaccinated and had no previous medical or surgical history
· The owner had noticed a progressively worsening baldness affecting his hind legs
and tail, with his hair coat also thinning on his dorsum and flanks. The owner
reported the dog to not appear to be scratching or excessively licking the balding
areas
· The dog was otherwise quite well, although the owner described how he had aged
recently and that he had become quite slow
· The owner also commented that one testicle was much larger than the other one.
Clinical examination
· The dog was quiet but alert
· Cardiopulmonary auscultation was unremarkable
· Abdominal palpation revealed no abnormalities
· Dermatological  examination  revealed a bilaterally symmetrical,  non-pruritic
alopecia with moderate hyperpigmentation of the underlying skin affecting mainly
the caudal aspect of his hind legs and all of his tail. His hair coat was generally dry
and appeared a little unkempt
15.29, 15.30).
Figures 15.29, 15.30
Case 15.8 The appearance of the dog at presentation
Diagnostic evaluation
· Skin scrapes and tape strips were obtained from the alopecic areas but no
abnormalities were detected
· In addition to a full serum biochemistry assessment, total T4 and endogenous TSH
were measured; these were within normal limits and the dog had no significant
biochemical abnormalities
· Digital rectal examination revealed mild-moderate prostatomegaly consistent with
an elderly entire male dog but no pain or asymmetry
· His CBC revealed a mild, non-regenerative anaemia (PCV 31%)
· Abdominal ultrasound revealed no enlargement of the abdominal lymph nodes and
confirmed the generalized, homogeneous prostatomegaly
· Testicular ultrasound confirmed the presence of a mass within the right testicle.
Diagnosis
· Testicular tumour with paraneoplastic (probably endocrinological) alopecia
Treatment
The dog was castrated and the testicles submitted for histopathology. The right testicle
was confirmed to have contained a Sertoli cell tumour.
Ouitcome
Theory refresher
Tumours of the testicle are statistically the most common form of cancer affecting the
male genitalia in dogs and are considered to be rare in cats, but they are uncommonly
seen due to the fact that so many dogs are routinely castrated in the UK. It is not
           
cryporchidism, hence the reason that there is a significant health benefit for the dog
in finding the abnormally located testicle and undertaking castration in a cryptorchid
animal. As cryporchidism is an inherited condition (probably via a sex-limited
autosomal recessive trait), cryptorchid animals should undergo bilateral castration
and not simply have the abnormally located testicle removed whilst leaving the scrotal
9.5 years in one study, 1o.7 years in another) and in certain breeds such as boxers.
cairn terriers, Labrador retrievers, border collies, German shepherds and rough collies
A recent Italian study, which put the incidence of testicular tumours in a post-mortem
population as high as 27%, has suggested that the incidence of testicular seminomas
in dogs is rising, which interestingly mimics the situation in man in the second half
of the 2oth century, implying that there may be some causal environmental factors in
the development of testicuilar tumours that are as yet unidentified.
There are three main types of primary testicular tumours in the dog, reflecting three
different cells of origin. Interstitial cell tumours (ICT) arise from the interstitial cells of
Leydig, Sertoli cell tumours (SCT) arise from the sustentacular cells of Sertoli and
seminomas develop from the spermatic germinal epithelium. The recent study from
Italy mentioned previously found that 50% of the tumours identified were ICT, 42%
of dogs (31%) had more than one tumour type present at the same time.
causing pain. However, as in the case described here, any of the testicular tumours
can cause dermatological signs (bilateral, non-pruritic alopecia and hyper
be due to the fact that the tumour induces the endogenous production of female
reproductive hormones suich as oestradiol-17β as well as testosterone and other steroid
hormone compounds, so that the relative ratio of sex hormones changes, resulting in
the dermatological changes described.
Figure15.31
An old English sheepdog that presented with alopecia affecting his dorsum. His
diagnosis was of a Sertoli cell tumour and the alopecia resolved following castration.
Courtesy of Mr Sinon Tappin, Dick White Referals
affecting the bone marrow, resulting in conditions such as aplastic anaemia and
tumour, so it is essential to undertake a high quality blood couint in the diagnostic
evaluation of these patients to ensure that no such problems are developing. It also
means that a testicular tumour patient could present as a non-regenerative anaemia
patient (see Chapter 11). Measuring female hormones such as oestrogen, however, has
little role in the diagnostic evaluation of these patients.
The treatment of choice is simple castration in all cases, assuiming the patient does
not have a potentially life-threatening bone marrow problem. The metastatic rate of
behave in an aggressive manner. Metastatic disease, if it does occur, will be to the
local lymph nodes first, then usually the distant lymph nodes secondarily and then to
the lungs and other organs. It is to be recommended therefore that cases with a
testicular tumour undergo an  abdominal ultrasound examination  and  thoracic
radiographs before surgery to ensure that there is no secondary disease present.
usually cuirative. The prognosis for dogs with metastatic disease is less clear, mainly
becauise no clearly efficacious chemotherapy for  testicular tumours has been
described. Cisplatin is commonly used in human medicine and it has been described
as being successful in treating canine metastatic testicular tumours but only in a very
small number of cases. More work is therefore required to establish the best medical
options for dogs with secondary disease.
Multiple choice questions
P    r n  s      s
evaluation of fine needle aspirate biopsy samples?
a. Simple, inexpensive but samples usually inadequate to enable tumour grade to
grade c. Difficult and expensive and usually not able to establish tumour grade d.
of diagnostic quality
2. The best éall-purpose' cytological staining solutions that enable clear visualization
of cytoplasmic and nuclear detail, consistent mast cell granule staining and bacterial
identification are:
H&E stains d. Romanowski stains, such as Giemsa
3. Which of the following tumours is classified as a round cell tumour?
a . Transitional cell carcinoma b. Splenic haemangiosarcoma c . Histiocytoma d.
Peripheral nerve sheath tumour
4. AgNoR staining (which involves using silver stains to visualize the nucleolar
organizing regions within the nucleus of a cell) is potentially useful in both cytology
and histopathology to:
a .Diagnose the cell of origin of the tumour b .Determine whether or not
establish the likely response of the tumour to chemotherapy
            s
            g
signals c. To be able to promote sustained angiogenesis d. To have an increased
rate of apoptosis
6. Chemotherapy should be delayed if the circulating neutrophil count immediately
pre-treatment is found to be less than:
a.3.5 x 10%/L
b. 2.5 × 10/L
c. 1.5 x 10°/L
d. 0.5 x 10°/L
          e
develops signs of haemorrhagic cystitis, which of the following medications could be
used in its place?
a. Carboplatin b. Gemcitabine c. Melphalan d. Prednisolone
8. The preparation of cytotoxic medications within a laminar flow fume cupboard is
essential to help prevent:
a. Direct contact between the drug and the clinician's skin b. Inadequate mixing
eyes d. Inhalation of aerosolized cytotoxic particles
9. Which is the most appropriate way to initially investigate a suspected mast cell
tumour on the pinna of a dog?
a . Excisional biopsy b. Incisional biopsy c . Skin punch biopsy d . Fine needle
aspirate
10. For which of these procedures is an excisional biopsy a reasonable choice for
initial diagnosis?
a. Feline injection site sarcoma b. Splenic haemangiosarcoma c. Oral melanoma d.
Cutaneous lymphoma
11. Which of the following drugs can cause a potentially fatal pulmonary oedema in
cats such that its use in this species is contraindicated?
a. Cisplatin b. Carboplatin c. Epirubicin d. Vinblastine
12. Which of the following statements about incisional biopsy is correct?
a. It should always be carried out following a fine needle aspirate b. The definitive
surgery should aim to include the scar from the incisional biopsy c. It is not
 a s h p s p   g  si   
13. What is the main reason for changing gloves when closing an abdominal wound
after resection of a colonic adenocarcinoma?
a. To avoid contamination of the wound from the environment b. To protect the
cells from the tumour d. To prevent wound breakdown from infection
14. Which of the following biopsy techniques is most suitable for diagnosing an oral
acanthomatous epulis?
smear
15. The mechanism of action vincristine is:
DNA strands together by the insertion of an alkyl groupc .To inhibit
topoisomerase I1 d . To bind to the microtubule assembly, thereby preventing
mitosis
16. Which of the following statements regarding excision of a fibrosarcoma on the
elbow of a dog is most correct?
a. The tumour should be excised with a 3-cm margin laterally and deeply b. The
 in e      e  s  s 
c. Radiotherapy is not useful as an adjunctive treatment for microscopic disease d.
Chemotherapy is useful as a sole treatment for this tumour type
17. Which of the following is NOT a diagnostic feature of multiple myeloma in the
dog?
a . Polyclonal gamma-globulinaemia b . Bence-Jones proteinuria c . Lytic bone
lesions d. Plasma cell myelophthisis
18. Many chemotherapy drugs are metabolized to products that are themselves
owners. Cisplatin is one such drug and the major route of excretion of its metabolites
is:
a. Via the liver into bile and therefore into the faeces b. Via the liver and then on
into saliva c. Via the kidneys and therefore into urine d. The metabolites are not
excreted but accumulate in the fat of the patient
19. Which of the following describes the relative tissue penetrating power of three
different forms of external radiation beam?
a. Electron beam < orthovoltage < megavoltage b. Orthovoltage < megavoltage
    g
20. Which of these tumours can be effectively treated using a combination of surgery
and radiotherapy?
a . A rostral maxillary squamous cell carcinoma b.A bladder transitional cell
carcinoma c .A mast cell tumour located on the lateral thoracic walld .A
mammary adenocarcinoma
    a o sd     nm'i
anastomosis following resection of a mid-jejunal adenocarcinoma?
a. Inverting b. Everting c. Crushing d. Appositional
22. Which of the following best describes the prevalence of different types of nasal
tumour in the dog?
  e    e
        
mesenchymal
23. Which of the following suture materials is best used for bladder closure following
resection of a transitional cell carcinoma?
a. Silk b. Polypropylene c. Catgut d. Polydioxanone
    s        
should always be performed preoperatively to determine the tumour grade d.
Surgical staples are associated with a higher incidence of pneumothorax
compared with suture closuire methods
    s     s    
osteosarcoma?
a . Compartmental resection b. Marginal resection c . Intracapsular resection d.
Wide resection
27. Which of the following is the most commonly reported malignant oral tumour in
the dog?
28. Which of the following tumour types would be considered least likely to
metastasize to the lungs?
29. Malignant body cavity effusions can develop for several different reasons, one of
which is listed below:
Reduced hydrostatic pressure d. Increased plasma oncotic pressure
 a        s 
and alopecia?
tumours d. Metastatic haemangiosarcoma
31. The most suitable procedure to remove a mammary mass located in the second
cranial mammary gland on the right side in a cat is:
involving the first and second gland c .A bilateral chain mastectomy d .A
unilateral chain mastectomy
   s     ss     
inguinal gland of an 8-year-old entire female dog is most correct?
a. It is most likely to be malignant b. Performing ovariohysterectomy at the time
of surgery will prevent recurrence c. The prognosis following a unilateral chain
mastectomy is better compared with local mastectomy d. A fine needle aspirate is
not necessary as the results will not influence the extent of the surgery
33. The best biopsy method for diagnosing a transitional cell carcinoma in a bladder
is:
a. A catheter suction biopsy b. Fine needle aspirate by ultrasound guidance c.A
tru-cut biopsy by ultrasound guidance d. An incisional biopsy
34. Which of these oral tumours is associated with the most favourable prognosis
following aggressive surgery?
a. A caudal mandibular osteosarcoma b.A caudal maxillary fibrosarcoma c.A
rostral mandibular squamous cell carcinoma d. A rostral maxillary melanoma
35. If a cancer patient presents with dysphagia as a significant clinical sign, where is
the disease unlikely to be?
a. Oral cavity b. Oesophagus c. Stomach d. Inner ear
36. The fine needle aspirate shown below was taken from a soft 2-cm diameter
  s            
the diagnosis?
a. Lymphosarcoma b. Histiocytoma c. Mast cell tumour d. Haemangiosarcoma
37. Which of the following antibiotic protocols is best practice when used for removal
of a large ulcerated infected mast cell tumour on the flank of a dog?
a. Suibcuitaneous administration of amoxicillin clavuilanate at the time of the first
incision b. Intravenous administration of cephazolin 30 minutes prior to the first
incision c. Intravenous administration of amoxicillin clavulanate at the time of
the first incision d. Subcutaneous administration of cephazolin at the time of
wouind closure
38. Apart from thoracic radiographs, which of the following is a suitable staging
procedure for a 3-cm anal sac adenocarcinoma?
a . Buffy coat analysis b . Fine needle aspirate of contralateral anal sac c.
Ultrasound examination of medial iliac lymph nodes d. Ultrasound examination
of descending colon
39. Which of the following statements regarding mast cell tumours is correct?
lateral margins and include one fascial layer deep b . Chemotherapy is
recommended as adjunctive treatment with all incompletely excised intermediate
prone to muiltiple mast cell tumours have a poor prognosis
40. Which of the following statements regarding soft-tissue sarcomas is correct?
mass b. Clinical behaviour and prognosis is dependent on the grade of the tumour
c. Distant metastases are a common finding with these tumours d. They exfoliate
tumour cells readily on fine needle aspirates
in the dog?
a . Hyperparathyroidism b . Anal sac adenocarcinoma c . Gastric carcinoma d.
Multicentric lymphoma
Se         s
always require extensive abdominal surgery to remove them c . Their presence
 s        ni ss 
they can undergo malignant transformation
43. Which of the following treatments is generally considered to be the optimal
therapy for nasal tumours in the dog?
a. External beam radiotherapy with a megavoltage linear accelerator b. Systemic
chemotherapy with doxorubicin c. Surgical excision via a dorsal rhinotomy d.
Endoscopically guided suction debaulking
44. A dog presents with significantly enlarged submandibular and prescapular lymph
nodes, from which the following fine needle aspirate was obtained (Giemsa stain.
x100 magnification). What is the diagnosis?
a . Malignant histiocytosis b. Metastatic oral melanoma c. Metastatic mast cell
tumour d. Multicentric lymphoma
45. Which of the following chemotherapeutic protocols is generally associated with
the longest first remission rates, remission times and lowest relapse rates when used
to treat canine lymphoma?
a. CHOP
b. High-dose COP
46. Which of the following statements regarding kidney tumours in dogs is true?
a. Primary renal tumours are most likely to be mesenchymal in nature b. Renal
tumours are more likely to be metastatic lesions rather than primary renal
      i s   
usually bilateral
47. Which of the following statements regarding kidney tumours in cats is true?
a . Renal tumours are more likely to be metastatic lesions rather than primary
renal tumours in this species b. Primary renal tumours are usually associated with
tumour type than carcinoma d. Renal tumours in cats are usually benign
a . Surgical resection of the tumour followed by external beam radiotherapy b.
Surgical resection of the tumour followed by sole agent piroxicam treatment c.
Surgical  resection  of the  tumour  followed  by  combined piroxicam  and
mitoxantrone treatment d. Piroxicam treatment alone
49. Which of the following are all common clinical signs cauised by the presence of a
prostatic carcinoma in the dog?
a. Defaecatory tenesmus, stranguria and lumbar pain b. Polyuria, haematuria and
vomiting c . Urinary incontinence, tail paralysis and abdominal distension d.
Stanguria, vomiting and pollakiuria
50. Which of the following locations in the gastrointestinal tract is the most common
location for an adenocarcinoma in the cat?
a. Oesophagus b. Stomach c. Small intestine d. Large intestine
51. Which of the following locations in the gastrointestinal tract is the most common
location for an adenocarcinoma in the dog?
a. Oesophagus b. Stomach c. Small 1ntestine d. Large 1ntestine
52. Which of the following tumours is considered the most commonly diagnosed
hepatobiliary cancer in the cat?
a .Bile  duct   adenoma b .Biliary carcinoma c .Hepatic carcinoid d.
Haemangiosarcoma
53. What is a commonly encountered complication associated with splenectomy for
removal of a splenic haemangiosarcoma?
a. Thromboembolic disease b. Haemorrhage c. Septicaemia d. Peritonitis
54. Which of these neoplastic conditions of the oral cavity has the worst reported
median survival time in the dog?
a . Gingival squamous cell carcinoma b . Maxillary fibrosarcoma c . Tonsillar
squamous cell carcinoma d. Mandibular acanthomatous epulis
55. Which of the following statements concerning excision of soft-tissue sarcomas is
correct?
a. They should be excised in the reactive zone just outside the pseudocapsule so
that any skip metastases are included b. They should be excised within their
pseudocapsule and then further tissue removed c. They should always be excised
    s  i s     
pseudocapsule kept intact
56. Which of the following statements regarding cutaneous histiocytomas in the dog
are true?
         es
 n       n  
in nature and can sometimes spontaneously resolve b.They have a potent
malignant potential and need to be treated aggressively with surgery and
guarded due to their malignant potentiald. They are also common cutaneous
tumours in cats
   n a   s d p    m s
             
elbow?
a . Omocervicalb . Superficial  temporal c . Cranial superficial epigastric d.
Thoracodorsal
58. Which of the following oral tumours is most likely to be associated with local
recurrence following aggressive surgical resection?
a . Squamous cell carcinoma of the rostral mandible b . Malignant melanoma
teeth d. Acanthomatous epulis of the caudal mandible
59. What is the approximate median survival time for gastric carcinoma following
surgery?
a. 6 months b. 12 months c. 18 months d. 24 months
    s n n       
a . Thoracic radiographs and ultrasound of liver and spleen b. Palpation and
   n       n   
ileum d. Buffy coat in combination with ultrasound of sublumbar lymph nodes
61. Bladder tuimours are most common in which breed of dog?
a. Scottish terriers b. Golden retrievers c. Boxers d. Poodles
62. Although a number of cases of cutaneous histiocytosis will show spontaneous
regression, a significant number require medical treatment. What is the
recommended medication type for this condition?
a. Systemic chemotherapy with e.g. doxorubicin b. COx-2 selective non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs e.g. meloxicam c. Immunosuppressant with e.g. steroids
63. Disseminated histiocytic sarcoma (often termed ‘malignant histiocytosis') is more
commonly diagnosed in which of the following breeds of dog?
white terrier
64. Which of the following forms of feline mast cell tumour is most likely to behave in
an aggressive manner?
a . Compact cutaneous mastocytic mast cell tumour b .Diffuse cutaneous
mastocytic mast cell tumour c. Cutaneous histiocytic mast cell tumour d. Visceral
mast cell tumour
            
trule?
a . Neutering a bitch before her first season offers no protection against the
development of malignant mammary tumours in the future b. Neutering a bitch
after she is allowed to have one litter of puppies offers significant protection
against the development of malignant mammary tumours in the future c.
Neutering a bitch before she has her first season is associated with a significantly
lower rate of malignant mammary cancer development d . Most mammary
tumours in the bitch are benign in nature
66. Which of the following malignant mammary tumours has the highest malignant
potential?
Inflammatory carcinoma
67. The following picture is of a cluster of neoplastic cells obtained from a canine
patient. Which tumour type do the cells represent?
a. A malignant epithelial tumour b. A benign epithelial tumour c. A mesenchymal
tumour d. A round cell tumour
68. Which of the following chemotherapeutics is most likely to be associated with
a. Vincristine b. L-asparaginase c. Mitoxantrone d. Prednisolone
following types of dog?
a. Middle-aged to older dolycephalic dogs b. Young dolycephalic dogs c . Young
brachycephalic dogs d. Middle-aged to older brachycephalic dogs
  s e       e  
myeloid leukaemia is:
a. 3 days b. 3 weeks c. 3 months d. 3 years
71. Which of the following would be an unusual presenting sign for a rabbit with a
uiterine adenocarcinoma?
a. Haematuria b. Weight loss c. Decreased faecal output d. Coughing
72. Which breed of dog appears to have a higher than normal incidence of prostatic
carcinoma?
a. German shepherd dog b. Boxer c. Bouvier de Flandres d. Irish wolfhouind
a. Osteosarcoma of the appendicular limb is most commonly seen in middle-aged
P      e    
commonly seen in young large-breed dogs c. Osteosarcoma of the rib is most
commonly seen in older large-breed dogs d. Osteosarcoma of the rib is not a
malignant tumour
74. Which of the following treatments relating to osteosarcoma in the cat are most
true?
malignant disease but with a much slower metastatic potential than in dogs c.
Ps a e g      
   n sn          s  
         s    
              s
management of?
a . Injection site sarcoma b.Mammary adenocarcinoma c . Oral melanoma d.
Multicentric lymphoma
77. Which of the following malignant digital tumours occur most frequently in the
dog?
a . Osteosarcoma, mast cell tumour, cutaneous lymphoma b .Squamous cell
carcinoma, malignant melanoma, soft-tissle sarcoma c. Osteosarcoma, squamous
cell carcinoma, malignant melanoma d. Cutaneous lymphoma, mast cell tumour.
soft-tissue sarcoma
78. Which of the following suture materials is recommended for closuire of an end-to-
a. Polypropylene b. Monofilament nylon c. Polyglecaprone d. Polydioxanone
79. Which of the following statements regarding injection-site sarcomas in the cat is
correct?
a. Their behaviour is similar to a low grade soft-tissue sarcoma and should be
excised with 2-cm margins b. They should be removed with a minimum of 2-cm
margins following diagnosis by needle core or incisional biopsy c. Their behaviour
is similar to a high-grade soft-tissue sarcoma and diagnosis should be made by
excisional biopsy d. Prognosis is usually good following marginal excision
a. Chemotherapy b. Cryosurgery c. Radiotherapy d. Surgery
      s     
doxorubicin use in the dog?
a. Hepatotoxicity b. Nephrotoxicity c. Cardiotoxicity d. Neurotoxicity
          
lomustine (CCNU) use on the dog?
a . Lymphoid neoplasia b . Epithelial neoplasia c . Mesenchymal neoplasia d.
Meylofibrosis
84. Which of the following statements regarding the general presenting signs of
diarrhoea originating in the large bowel (colon) is most true?
a. Reduced defecatory frequency, haematochezia and mucus are usually reported
b. Increased defecatory frequency, haematochezia and mucus are usually reported
         e
85. Which of the following features of a small intestinal adenocarcinoma has the
most important prognostic significance in the dog?
a. The size of the primary tumour b. The location within the small intestine c. The
presence or absence of lymphatic metastasis d. Whether or not the tumour is
cauising the dog to vomit
86. Which of the following assessments is the most important to make in order to
a. The reticulocyte percentage b. The absolute reticulocyte count c. The degree of
polychromasia d. The degree of erythroid anisocytosis
87. Which of the following mesenchymal tumours is most frequently associated with
metastatic disease to the brain in the dog?
a.Oral
fibrosarcoma b . Cutaneous
haemangiosarcoma c. Splenic
haemangiosarcoma d. Liposarcoma
P              s
prevalent in the dog?
a. Seminoma b. Sertoli cell tumour c. Interstitial cell tumour d. Teratoma
89. The biggest clinical concern regarding injection site sarcomas in the cat is:
      i   
excision difficult c. The reduced immune response of the cat making them more
these patients considering the proximity of the tumour to the spinal cord
90. Cisplatin is an extremely useful chemotherapeutic used in a variety of different
diseases. Which of the following points regarding its use is NOT true?
a. Its metabolites are excreted renally and reach high concentrations in the urine,
meaning that urine should be collected and handled as cytotoxic waste for the first
24 hours after administration b. It is highly emetogenic, necessitating the use of
       n     s
carboplatin and therefore intravenous fluids are not required when it is given to
patients d. Its use cannot be recommended in the cat due to the development of
91. The approximate average disease-free period for a dog with a transitional cell
a. 19 days b. 190 days c. 290 days d. 390 days
  n  n  s    e  
to amputation alone is:
a. A four-fold increase b. A three-fold increase c. A two-fold increase d. No increase
in suirvival time is seen
the cat is most true?
survival times regardless of the treatment undertaken and as suich is considered a
     e       
aggressive malignant neoplasm that frequently metastasizes despite amputation
and adjunctive chemotherapy, leading to similar survival times to that reported in
      n    ei s
amputation suirvival times are frequently considerably longer than those reported
     a os     
disease is identified d. Appendicular limb osteosarcoma has not been reported in
the cat
melanoma is:
a . The rapid recurrence of the primary tumour resulting in inappetance and
cachexia b. The very poor sensitivity of the tumour to radiotherapy c. The high
seen with the chemotherapeutics available for treatment
95. Which of the following pulmonary neoplastic diseases frequently responds well to
chemotherapy?
Pulmonary lymphomatoid granulomatosis
96. Intraplueral chemotherapy has been described as a useful and efficacious
treatment for which of the following conditions?
a . Primary bronchial carcinoma b . Malignant pleural effusions c . Thymic
lymphoma d. Unresecta ble lung tumours
97. Which of the following colorectal tumour types would usually be associated with
the longest survival times following surgical excision?
a . Canine colonic gastrointestinal stromal tumour (GIST) b . Canine colonic
adenocarcinoma c . Feline colonic adenocarcinoma d. Feline colonic mast cell
tumour
to be malignant when assessed histopathologically?
a. 25%
b. 45%
C. 65%
d. 85%
9 9.Which hormone is primarily responsible for causing hypercalcaemia of
malignancy in cases such as lymphoma or an anal sac adenocarcinoma?
d. Parathyroid hormone related peptide (PTHrP)
100. A mass has been found by the owner on the right foreleg of a 6-year-old male
Labrador dog. The mass measures approximately 2 cm in diameter, feels fixed to the
deep tissues and is only a little movable. Fine needle aspirates of the mass are
obtained. The sample was poorly cellular but a small number of cells with the
appearance shown below were identified. What is the most likely diagnosis from the
list below?
a . Mast cell tumour b .Histiocytoma c .Soft-tissue
sarcoma d . Cuitaneolis
lymphoma
MCQs - Answers
1. A 2. D
3. C
4. C
5. D
6.B
7.C
8. D
9. D
10. B
11. A 12. B
13. C
14. C
15. D
16. B
17. A 18. C
19. A 20. A 21. D
22.B
23. A 24. B
25. A 26. C
27.D
28. D
29. B
30. A 31. D
32.D
33. A 34. C
35. C
36. C
37.B
38. C
39. A 40. B
41. C
42. D
43. A 44. D
45. A 46. B
47.C
48. C
49. A 50. C
51.D
52.B
53.B
54.C
55. D
56. A 57. D
58.C
59. A 60. B
61. A 62. C
63. C
64. D
65. C
66. D
67. A 68. B
69. A 70. B
71.D
72.C
73. A 74. B
75.D
76. C
77.B
78. D
79. B
80. C
81.C
82. A 83. A 84. B
85.C
86.B
87.C
88. C
89. A 90. C
91.C
92. B
93. C
94. C
95.D
96. B
97. A 98. B
99. D
100. C
APPENDIX1
World Health Organization clinical staging scheme for
lymphoma in domestic animals This classification
system divides lymphoma firstly according to the
anatomical location of the disease and then secondly
by the extent of the disease, as shown below: A
Generalized
 B Alimentary
C Thymic
D Skin
E True leukaemia
F Other sites
      s    s e    a 
and bone marrow) Stage I1 Disease affecting a regional group of lymph nodes, usually
only on one side of the diaphragm Stage Ill Generalized lymph node involvement
Stage IV Disease affecting the liver and/or spleen with or without stage Ill disease
Stage V Disease affecting the bone marrow and/or other organs not listed above
In addition to the I-V staging system, the stage can be subclassified as either ‘a'
or b', in which animals with no clinical signs of illness are subclassified as being in
group 'a' and those animals who have systemic signs of illness are in sub-group “b'.
APPENDIX 2
Chemotherapy protocols
MODIFIED MADISON-WISCONSIN CHEMOTHERAPY PROTOCOL
Week 1:
Vincristine 0.7 mg/m2 i.v.
 L-asparaginase 400 iu/kg i.m.
 Predn isolone 2 mg/kg SID p.o.
Week 2:
Cyclophosphamide 250 mg/m2 i.v. or p.0.
 Predn isolone 1.5 mg/kg SID p.o.
Week 3:
Vin cristine 0.7 mg/m2 i.v.
 Predn isolone 1.0 mg/kg SID p.0.
Week 4:
 Doxorubic in 30 mg/m2 i.v.
Predn isolone 0.5 mg/kg SID p.0.
Week 5:
No treatment an d wean off prednisolone
Week 6:
Vin cristine 0.7 mg/m2 i.v.
Week 7:
Cyclophosphamide 250 mg/m2 i.v. or p.0.
Week 8:
Vincristine 0.7 mg/m2 i.v.
Week 9:
 Doxoru bic in 30 mg/m2 iv.
For weeks 10-25, the above protocol is repeated (without the l-asparaginase or
prednisolone) with a 14-day gap between each treatment. Total treatment time 25
weeks.
  ae   ane q  ni aa r   s s
week induction protocol, which is then used again should a relapse occur.
HIGH-DOSE COP PROTOCOL
Week 1:
Vin eristine 0.7 mg/m2 iv.
Cyclophosphamide 300 mg/m2
 Predn isolone 2 mg/kg SID
Week 2:
Vin cristine 0.7 mg/m2 i.v.
 Predn isolone 2mg/kg SID
Week 3:
Vin cristine 0.7 mg/m2 i.v.
Predn isolone 1 mg/kg SID
Week 4:
Vin cristine 0.7 mg/m2 i.v.
Cyclophosphamide 300 mg/m2
Predn isolone 0.5 mg/kg EOD
Week 7:
Vin cristine 0.7 mg/m2 i.v.
Cyclophosphamide 300 mg/m2
Predn isolone 0.5 mg/kg EOD
This is continued for 6 months, after which time the treatment interval moves
from 3 weeks to 4 weeks.
MOPP CHEMOTHERAPY PROTOCOL
· Mechlorethamine 3 mg/m? by i.v. injection on days 1 and 7
· Vincristine 0.7 mg/m2 by i.v. injection on days 1 and 7
· Procarbazine 50 mg/m2 by mouth once a day on days 1-14
· Prednisolone 30 mg/m? by mouth once a day on days 1-14
· No treatment is then given between days 15 and 28 and the protocol is repeated at
week 4
D-MAC CHEMOTHERAPY PROTOCOL
Day 1:
Dexamethasone 1 mg/kg p.o., s.c. or i.v.
Actinomycin D 0.75 mg/m2 i.v.
Cytosine arabinoside 300 mg/m? as a slow 4-hour intravenous infusion or s.c.
Day 8:
Dexamethasone 1 mg/kg p.o., s.c. or i.v.
Melphalan 20 mg/m? p.0.
This cycle is then repeated continuously every 2 weeks until either a remission or
stable disease is achieved. If there is evidence of bone marrow suppression, especially
in the form of thrombocytopaenia, then chlorambucil can be used instead of the
melphalan at a dose of 20 mg/m2.
If the dog does achieve a complete remission, then it is recommended after 5-8
cycles to swap onto a maintenance ‘LMP' protocol, which is: · Chlorambucil 20 mg/m2
 p.o. once every other week · Methotrexate 2.5-5.0 mg/m? p.o. twice a week
· Prednisolone 20 mg/m2 every other day
VINBLASTINE AND PREDNISOLONE CHEMOTHERAPY FOR MAST CELL TUMOURS
Week 1:
Vinblastie 2 mg/m2 iv.
 Prednisolone 40 mg/m2 once daily by mouth
Week 2:
Continue prednisolone 4 0 mg/m2 on ce daily by mouth
Week 3:
Vinblastine 2 mg/m2 i.v.
 Reduce predn isolone to 20 mg/m2 on ce daily by mouth
Week 4:
Continue prednisolone at 20 mg/m2 once daly by mouth
Week 5:
Vinblast ine 2 mg/m2 i.v.
 Reduce predn isolone to 20 mg/m2 every other day
Week 6:
Ae p tano Aiaaa zu,su oz ie a oosupand anup
Week 7:
Vinblastine 2 mg/m2 i.v.
Aep raqo fraa zu/su oz ie auosupand anujon
Week 8:
Continue prednisolone at 20 mg/m2 every other day
Week 9:
Vinblastine 2 mg/m2 i.v.
 Wean off prednisolone altogether
Week 11:
Vinblastine 2 mg/m2 iv.
Week 13:
Vinblastine 2 mg/m2 i.v.
Week 15:
Vinblastine 2 mg/m2 i.v.
An alternative approach is to give the vinblastine at weekly intervals for the first
four injections.
CHEMOTHERAPY FOR MAST CELL
TUMOURS
Week 1 & 2:
Chlor ambucil 4-5 mg/m2 every other day by mouth
 Predn isolone 40 mg/m2 once daily by mouth
Week 3 & 4:
nou Aq Aep ra qo Araa zu/su s-t lonque no[u 
Predn isolone 20 mg/m2 once daly by mouth
Week 5 onward s:
Chlorambucil 4-5 mg/m2 every other day by mouth
Predn isolone 20 mg/m2 every other day by mouth
Treat for 6 months and then wean off the prednisolone and stop the chlorambucil.
DOXORUBICIN AND CARBOPLATIN CHEMOTHERAPY FOR OSTEOSARCOMA
Week 1:
 Carboplatin 300 mg/m2 by intravenous infusion over 20 minutes
Week 4:
sanu oz Jaao uois nyu snouaanu Aq zu/sw oe unqno xo
Week 7:
sanuu oz Jaao uoisnju snouaaenu Aq zu/su ooe ue[doqre
Week 10:
sanuu oz Jaao uos nju snouaaeiu Aq zu/su oe upqnIoxo
Week 13:
Carboplatin 300 mg/m2 by in travenous infusion over 20 minutes
Week 16:
Doxorubicin 30 mg/m2 by intravenous infu sion over 20 min utes
The authors recommend chlorpheniramine is administered intravenously prior to
any administration of doxorubicin to reduce the possible risk of acute anaphylaxis
cauised by mast cell degranulation.
CYCLOPHOSPHAMIDE AND PIROXICAM CHEMOTHERAPY FOR INCOMPLETELY
EXCISED SOFT-TISSUE SARCOMAS
· Cyclophosphamide 10 mg/m? given either once a day or once every other day by
mouth · Piroxicam 0.3 mg/kg given once a day by mouth
Continue treatment for at least 6 months, aiming for the treatment to be
continuous for the duration of the remission achieved.
5-FLUOROURACIL AND CYCLOPHOSPHAMIDE CHEMOTHERAPY FOR MAMMARY
CARCINOMA
Week 1:
 5-Fluorouracl 150 mg/m2
Cvclophosphamide 1 00 mg/m2
 Given one after the other by in traven ous injection
Week 2:
5-Fluorouracil 150 mg/m2
Cycloph osphamide 1 00 mg/m2
 Given one after the other by in traven ous injection
Week 3:
5-Fluorouracil 150 mg/m2
Cycloph osphamid e 1 00 mg/m2
 Given one after the other by in traven ous injection
Week 4:
 5-Fluorouracil 150 mg/m2
 Cycloph osphamide 1 00 mg/m2
 Given one after the other by intraven ous injection
This protocol should be commenced 1 week after the surgery to remove the
primary tumour.
MITOXANTRONE AND PIROXICAM CHEMOTHERAPY FOR TRANSITIONAL CELL
CARCINOMAS OF THE URINARY BLADDER
Week 1:
Mitoxan trone 5 mg/m2 by intravenous infu sion over 20 min utes
ynou Aq Aep e aouo sy/su e'o ie wesixnd pre1s
Week 4:
Mitoxan trone 5 mg/m2 by intravenous infu sion over 20 minutes
 Continue piroxicam at 0.3 mg/kg once a day by mouth
Week 7:
 Mitoxan trone 5 mg/m2 by intravenous infu sion over 20 minutes
 Continue piroxicam at 0.3 mg/kg once a day by mouth
Week 10:
 Mitoxan trone 5 mg/m2 by intravenous infu sion over 20 minutes
Continue piroxicam at 0.3 mg/kg once a day by mouth
Week 13:
sanuu oz Jaao nois nyu snouaae nu Aq zu/su g auon uexon
 Con tinue piroxicam at 0.3 mg/kg once a day by mouth for as lon g as the dog remain s in remission
APPENDIX3
Protocol for a water deprivation test
1. Fast the patient for 12 hours and then place an intravenous catheter 2. Completely
empty the urinary bladder (ideally by means of an indwelling catheter), measure the
specific gravity (UsG) of the urine and weigh the patient a. If the facilities are
available to measure osmolality, then urine osmolality and plasma osmolality should
 m             
measulrement is referred to
S  t          e
withdraw water availability from the patient 5. Empty the urinary bladder every 1-2
hours, measure the USG and then weigh the patient after the bladder has been
emptied 6. Continue the test until either: a. The USG measurement rises to within the
normal range If the USG rises to 1.015 or greater, then a diagnosis of diabetes
insipidus is highly unlikely
b. The patient loses 5% of their bodyweight
7. If a 5% bodyweight loss is realized with little or no elevation in the UsG, then the
diabetes insipidus, the injectable form of the vasopressin analogue, DDAVP is
administered by intramuscular injection. In cases of nephrogenic Dl, there will be
little or no response to this treatment and the UsG will remain extremely low and the
In most cases of central diabetes insipidus, however, the USG/urine osmolality should
rise significantly within 2-4 hours of the DDAVP injection
APPENDIX4
Daily calorie calculations for dogs and cats
In a normal animal, there are energy stores within the body in three main forms:
· Hepatic glycogen
· Triglycerides within adipocytes
· Amino acids.
If an animal begins to starve then the hepatic glycogen is used first, the
triglycerides second and then the proteins used thirdly and the metabolism is reduced
form of catabolism develops in which there is:
· Early use of the hepatic glycogen
· A higher requirement for amino acids
             
demand increases. This causes an elevation in the concentrations of stress hormones
such as cortisol and catecholamines, which result in an increased metabolic rate.
Sick animals therefore need special attention to their diet and this is especially
the case for cancer patients. All hospitalized patients should have their daily calorie
requirements calculated and this can be done as follows:
· Dog
· [(30 x body weight in kg) + 70] × illness factor
The illness factor varies between 1.2 and 1.7, but for most hospitalized patients,
the illness factor can be taken as being a factor of 1.4
· Cat
· 50 x body weight in kg
            
from this, as all reputable food manufacturers publish the calorie content per gram of
their foods, a very accurate feeding plan can be established.
  d n s    s   
potential health benefits of different food types. In veterinary nutrition, it also makes
sense for foods fed to cancer patients to be of the highest quality and biological value.
However, there are few good veterinary scientific publications to show the health
benefits of one particular diet type against another, or comparing home cooked food,
or raw diets with commercially available diets. Studies have certainly supported a
Furthermore, there is evidence to show that feeding a canine lymphoma patient a
high fat, high protein, low carbohydrate diet can increase the chances of a patient
going into remission and also help to increase the length of that remission. This is
thought to be because lymphoma cells preferentially utilize glucose and then produce
ATP in order to metabolize the lactate which is then potentially re-used by the
lymphoma cells, leading ultimately to cancer cachexia. Feeding a high fat diet may
help to reduce the metabolic rate of the cancer cells by ^starving’ the cancer cells of
       s   
whilst hospitalized is one of the most important jobs of the attending veterinary
APPENDIX5
Protocol for performing a prostatic wash
Under acepromazine and butorphanol sedation or a brief general anaesthetic, a
lubricated, sterile dog urinary catheter should be placed into the urethra and advanced
slowly in a retrograde fashion. The clinician then performs a digital rectal
  s        
over the mid-line of the prostate (i.e. along the line of the urethra). When the tip of
the catheter is at the tip of his/her finger, the advancement is stopped. 10 ml of saline
is introduced into the catheter and the tip of the catheter pushed a little ventrally. The
prostate is massaged before the saline is withdrawn back into a syringe and the
sample submitted for cytology.
APPENDIX 6
Suppliers list
CHEMOTHERAPY
Hospira, Queensway, Leamington Spa, Warwickshire, CV31 3RW
Unidrug Distribution Group, Amber Park, Berristow Lane, South Normanton,
Derbyshire, DE55 2FH
Flow cytometry
Central Diagnostic Services, The Queen's Veterinary School Hospital, The University
of Cambridge, Madingley Road, Cambridge, CB3 OE5 Tel: 01223 337625
SURGICAL STAPLING DEVICES
Direct Medical Services, Suite 19, Newal's Corner, 2 Bath Road, Hounslow, Middlesex,
TW3 3HJ
Index
Note: Page numbers in bold refer to tables and page numbers in italics refer to
figures.
A
acanthomatous epulis
diagnosis of, 10
oral, 51
acrolein, 24
actinomycin D toxicity, 22
acute lymphoid leukaemia, 113
acute myeloid leukaemia, 112-15
case history in, 112
clinical examination in, 112-13, 113
description of, 114
diagnosis of, 113
diagnostic evaluation of, 113, 113
presenting signs of, 112
theory of, 113-15
treatment of, 113
adenocarcinomas
anal sac See anal sac adenocarcinoma
apocrine gland, 93-4
bronchial, 63
canine nasal, 37-43, 38-42
biopsy of, 40-1
case history of, 37
clinical examination of, 37
diagnostic evaluation of, 37-8, 38, 39
diagnostic imaging of, 40, 40
differential diagnosis of, 37
examination of, 39-40
presenting signs of, 37, 38
treatment of, 41-2
colorectal, 95
gastric See gastric adenocarcinoma
intestinal, 89, 106
lingual, 60
perianal, 93
pulmonary See pulmonary adenocarcinoma
uterine, 137, 137
adenomas
bile duct, 87, 107
perianal, 93
adenomatous polyps, 89
Adriamycin See doxorubicin
AgNOR staining, 4
Alendronate, metastatic anal sac carcinoma cauising lameness, 147
aleukaemic leukaemia, 113
Allis tissue forceps, 12-13, 13
alopecia, chemotherapy toxicity, 20, 20, 21
5-aminolevulinic acid (5-ALA) cream, feline nasal planum carcinoma, 48
amputation
in digit tumours, 150
in osteosarcoma, 144
anaemia, 98-115, 108
non-regenerative in acute myeloid leukaemia See acuite myeloid leukaemia
non-regenerative in lymphoma See lymphomas, non-regenerative anaemia in
analgesia
in feline nasal planum carcinoma, 45
in metastatic anal sac carcinoma causing lameness, 147
in osteosarcoma, 145
in surgery, 17
anal sac adenocarcinoma
presenting with dyschezia, 92-4
clinical history of, 92
diagnostic evaluation of, 92, 93
outcome of, 92-3
presenting signs of, 92
theory of, 93-4
treatment of, 92, 93
presenting with polydipsia, 121-4
case history of, 121
clinical examination of, 121
diagnosis of, 121
diagnostic evaluation of, 121
follow-up of, 122
outcome of, 122
presenting signs of, 121
prognosis of, 123, 123
theory of, 122-4
TNM staging of, 123
treatment of, 122
anal sac carcinoma, 94
metastatic, causing lameness, 146-8
case history of, 146
clinical examination of, 146-7
diagnosis of, 147
diagnostic evaluation of, 147, 147
outcome of, 147
presenting signs of, 146
theory of, 147-8
treatment of, 147
anal saculectomy, 122
anal sphincter muscles, 122
anastomosis, end-to-end, 105, 106
anisocytosis, 4, 98
anisokaryosis, 4
anorexia, chemotherapy toxicity, 20, 26
antibiotics
perioperative, 16
prophylactic in rectal polyps surgery, 97
anticholinergics, pre-gastroscopy, 85
antidiuretic hormone (ADH), 126-7
antiemetics, chemotherapy toxicity, 21
antigen testing, urinary bladder tumours, 134-5
antimicrobial prophylaxis, 16
anti-oestrogens, mammary tumours, 164-5
apocrine gland adenocarcinomas, 93-4
aquaporins, 126
azathioprine, cutaneous histiocytosis, 152
azurophilic granules, 4
B
barium studies, 0esophageal tumours, 78
B-cell lymphoma, 119
bile duct adenomas, 87, 107
biliary tree neoplasia, 87
biopsy, 1-10
cytology, 1-5, 2, 2-5
excisional, 2, 7-8, 8
in feline intranasal lymphoma, 44
in feline nasal planum carcinoma, 47
in gastric tumours, 85
incisional, 2, 8-10, 9
in intestinal lymphoma, 90
in nasal adenocarcinoma, 40-1
needle core, 2, 5-7, 5-7
in oral malignant melanoma, 57
in oral squamous cell carcinoma, 51
in osteosarcoma, 143-4, 146
punch, 2, 7-8, 8
in rectal polyps, 95, 96
in soft-tissue sarcoma, 173
in sublingual fibrosarcoma, 60
techniques, 2
in thymomas, 80
in tonsillar carcinoma, 75
in urinary bladder tumours, 134
in vaccine-associated sarcomas, 169
bisphosphonate treatment
of bone metastases, 130
of bone tumours, 15
of metastatic anal sac carcinoma causing lameness, 147-8
of osteosarcoma, 145
bladder, urinary See urinary bladder
blood smears, 98
in acute myeloid leukaemia, 113, 113
in haemorrhaging intestinal mass, 103, 103
spherocytes on, 104
bone
marrow See bone marrow
metastases, 130, 141, 143
tuimour see specific tumouirs
tumour excision, 15, 15
bone marrow
aspirate, 109, 110-11, 110-12
chemotherapy toxicity, 20
normal, 110-12
suppression, cyclophosphamide toxicity, 24
brain tumours
incidence of, 127
radiotherapy for, 36
bronchial carcinoma, 62-5
clinical examination of, 62
diagnosis of, 63-4, 64
diagnostic evaluation of, 62
differential diagnoses of, 62
presenting signs of, 62
theory of, 63, 63
treatment of, 62, 64-5
bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) in bronchial carcinoma, 65
bronchoscopy in bronchial carcinoma, 65
buprenorphine as an analgesic, 17
C
calorie calculations, daily, 199
carboplatin
in anal sac adenocarcinoma, 94, 122, 123
in bone tumours, 15
general description of, 29, 29
in malignant pleural effusion, 70, 71
in oral malignant melanoma, 58-9
in 0steosarcomas, 29, 143, 144, 145, 196
in pulmonary adenocarcinomas, 66, 67
in soft-tissue sarcomas, 174
in urinary bladder tumours, 135
carcinoids
hepatic, 87
intestinal, 89
cardiac toxicity, chemotherapy, 21, 26
castration
in interstitial cell tumour, 175, 176
in perianal adenoma, 93
in prostatic carcinoma, 139
in testicular tumours, 178
cats
cutaneous mast cell tumouir in See mast cell tumours, cutaneous, feline
daily calorie calculation for, 199
intranasal lymphoma in See feline intranasal lymphoma
nasal planum carcinoma in See feline nasal planum carcinoma see also specific
tumours
cellulitis, chemotherapy toxicity, 22
chemo pin, 31
chemo safety pins, 31, 31
chemotherapy
in acute lymphoblastic leukaemia, 115
administration of, 22, 22-3
in alimentary lymphomas, 106-7
in anal sac adenocarcinoma, 94, 123
basic concepts of tumour growth and, 18-19, 19
in canine nasal adenocarcinoma, 41-2
combination, 19
commonly used drugs in, 23-9, 24, 26-9
in cutaneous mast cell tumour, 157, 160-1
drug dosage and timing of, 19-20
in feline intranasal lymphoma, 44
in gastric tumours, 85
in haemangiosarcoma, 102
in hepatocellular carcinoma, 86
indications for, 19
in intestina1 lymphoma, 89, 90-1
in lymphomas, 80, 118, 120
in malignant pleural effusion, 70, 71
in mammary carcinoma, 167
in mediastinal tumours, 79, 80, 82, 117
in oesophageal tumours, 78
in oral malignant melanoma, 58-9
in oral squamous cell carcinoma, 55
in osteosarcoma, 143, 144
principles of, 18-34
protocols for, 195-7
in pulmonary adenocarcinoma, 66, 67, 69
in renallymphoma, 131, 132
safe handling in practice of, 29-34, 30-4
in soft-tissue sarcoma, 174
surgery and, 14-15, 15
in thymomas, 80
in tonsillar carcinoma, 76
toxicity of, 20-2, 20-3
in urinary bladder tumours, 133, 135
in vaccine-associated sarcomas, 170
Cheyletiella spp., 136
chlorambucil
in alimentary lymphomas, 107
in chronic lymphocytic leukaemia, 25, 115
in cutaneous mast cell tumour, 157
 general description of, 25
in intestinal lymphoma, 91
in mast cell tumouirs, 196
chlorpheniramine with doxorubicin, 26
chondrosarcomas, 146
CHOP protocol
in intestinal lymphoma, 90
in lymphomas, 120
in renal lymphoma, 131
chronic lymphocytic leukaemia, chemotherapy for, 25
chronic lymphoid leukaemia, 113
chronic myeloid leukaemia, 113, 114
cimetidine, pre-splenectomy, 160
cisplatin
in anal sac adenocarcinoma, 94, 123
general description of, 29
in malignant pleural effusion, 71
in oral malignant melanoma, 59
in osteosarcoma, 29, 145
in tonsillar carcinoma, 76
toxicity of, 21-2
c-kit, 158
colectomy for rectal polyps, 97
colonography for rectal polyps, 96
colonoscopy for rectal polyps, 95, 95
colorectal adenocarcinoma, 95
combination chemotherapy, 19
complete blood count (CBC), 20
Composite Measure Pain Score (CMPS), 17
computed tomography (CT) scanning
in bronchial carcinoma, 64, 64
in feline nasal planum carcinoma, 47
in nasal adenocarcinoma, 40
in oral squamous cell carcinoma, 51
in osteosarcoma, 146
in rectal polyps, 96
in soft-tissue sarcoma, 173
in vaccine-associated sarcomas, 169
COP protocol, 195
in alimentary lymphomas, 106
in intestinal lymphoma, 89, 90-1
in lymphomas, 24-5, 120
in renal lymphoma, 131, 132
corticosteroids for systemic histiocytosis, 153
coughing, 62-73
COX-2 inhibition
piroxicam, 28
in prostatic carcinoma, 141
cranial mediastinal tumours, 78, 79-82
cryosurgery for cutaneous histiocytoma, 152
cryptorchidism, 177
cutaneous histiocytoma, 151-3
case history of, 151
clinical examination of, 151
diagnosis of, 151
diagnostic evaluation of, 151
outcome of, 151
presenting signs of, 151
theory of, 151-3
treatment of, 151
cutaneous histiocytosis, 152
CVT-X protocol, 90
cyclophosphamide
in acute myeloid leukaemia, 114
general description of, 24
in lymphomas, 24, 24
in mammary tumours, 164, 197
in pulmonary adenocarcinoma, 67
in soft-tissue sarcomas, 174, 196-7
toxicity of, 21
cyclosporine
in cutaneous histiocytosis, 152
in systemic histiocytosis, 153
cystectomy for urinary bladder tumours, 135
cystitis, haemorrhagic See haemorrhagic cystitis
cystogram for urinary bladder tumours, 134
cystostomy tube
in prostatic carcinoma, 141
in urinary bladder tumours, 135
cytology, 1-5, 2, 2-5
for cutaneous histiocytoma, 152
for cutaneous mast cell tumour, 156, 156, 157
for feline intranasal lymphoma, 44
for intestinal lymphoma, 90
for lymphomas, 118
for mammary tumours, 163
for prostatic carcinoma, 139, 139
for pulmonary adenocarcinoma, 66, 67
for soft-tissue sarcoma, 173
for thymomas, 80
for urinary bladder tumours, 132, 134
cytoreductive surgery for soft tissue sarcoma, 13, 14, 14
cytoscopy in urinary bladder tumours, 134
cytosine arabinoside in acute myeloid leukaemia, 114
cytotoxic agents
administration of, 32, 32-3
exposure to, 30
preparation of, 30-2, 31-2
safe handling of, 29-34, 30-4
spillages of, 33, 33
storage of, 30, 30
D
daily calorie calculations, 199
DDAVP (desmopressin), 125-6
deionized water in cutaneous mast cell tumour, 157
desmopressin (DDAVP), 125-6
diabetes insipidus due to pituitary tumour, 125-7
case history of, 125
clinical examination of, 125
diagnosis of, 125
diagnostic evaluation of, 125
outcome of, 126
presenting signs of, 125
theory of, 126-7
treatment and initial follow-up of, 125-6
diarrhoea, 83-91
chemotherapy-induced, 21, 26
diagnostic plan flowchart for, 91
large intestinal, 89
small intestinal, 89
Diff-Quik, 3, 156
digits, squamous cell carcinoma, 148-50
case history of, 148
clinical examination of, 148, 148, 149
diagnosis of, 149
diagnostic evaluation of, 148-9, 149
presenting signs of, 148
prognosis of, 150
theory of, 149-50
dilating cardiomyopathy, 21
dimethyl sulphoxide in haemorrhagic cystitis, 21
discharge, nasal, 37-48 See also nasal tumours
discharge instructions in chemotherapy, 34, 34
disseminated histiocytic sarcoma, 153
disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), 101
D-MAC protocol, 121, 195-6
s8op
cutaneous mast cell tumours in See mast cell tumours, cutaneous, canine
daily calorie calculation for, 199
mammary carcinoma in See mammary carcinoma, canine
nasal adenocarcinoma in See adenocarcinomas, canine nasal see also specific
tumours
dosage of cytotoxic drugs, 19-20, 30
doxorubicin
in bone tumours, 15
cardiac toxicity of, 21
general description of, 25-6, 26
in haemangiosarcoma, 102
in haemorrhaging splenic mass, 99
in intestinal lymphoma, 90-1
in lymphomas, 25-6, 80, 120
in mammary carcinoma, 167
in mediastinal lymphoma, 117
in oesophageal tumours, 78
in oste0sarcoma, 29, 143, 144, 145, 196
in soft-tissue sarcoma, 174
in tonsillar carcinoma, 76
toxicity of, 21, 22
in vaccine-associated sarcomas, 170
drug administration
of chemotherapy, 22, 22-3
of injectable cytotoxic agents, 32-3
ductular carcinoma, 162
dyschezia, 92-7, 93
dysphagia, 74-82
dyspnoea, 62-73
dysuria, 128-41, 140
E
ectoparasites, 136, 137
electrocautery in limb amputation, 144
electrochemotherapy in anal sac adenocarcinoma, 123
embryonal nephroma, benign, 137
endoscopy
in gastric tumours, 85
in intestinal lymphoma, 90
in oesophageal plasmacytoma, 76
in rectal polyps, 96
end-to-end anastomosis, 105, 106
enteral feeding, 16
in haemorrhaging intestinal mass, 106
in oral squamous cell carcinoma, 52
epididymitis, 176
epistaxis See nasal tumours
epithelial pancreatic tumours, 87
erythrocytosis, primary, 27-8, 124-5
erythrophagocytosis, 109
excisional biopsy, 2, 7-8, 8
exophthalmos in canine nasal adenocarcinoma, 40, 41
external beam radiation, 35-6
F
fatty acid supplementation in cutaneous histiocytosis, 152
feline cutaneous mast cell tumour See mast cell tumours, cutaneous, feline
feline intranasal lymphoma, 43-4
case history of, 43
clinical examination of, 43
diagnostic approach to, 43-4
diagnostic evaluation of, 43
differential diagnosis of, 43
presenting signs of, 43
treatment of, 43-4
feline nasal planum carcinoma, 44-8, 44-8
case history of, 44
clinical examination of, 44, 44
diagnosis of, 47, 47
diagnostic evaluation of, 45-6, 45-6
differential diagnosis of, 44
presenting signs of, 44
theory of, 46-7, 46-7
treatment of, 47-8, 48
fentanyl as an analgesic, 17
fibroepithelial hyperplasia, 167
fibromas, rectal, 95
fibrosarcomas, 170-2, 171-2
bone, 146
gastric, 84
intracapsular See intracapsular fi brosarcoma
radiotherapy for, 36
sublingual See sublingual fibrosarcoma
fine needle aspiration (FNA)
in bronchial carcinoma, 65
in cutaneous histiocytoma, 152
in cutaneous mast cell tumour, 153, 157
in haemangiosarcoma, 100
in intestinal lymphoma, 89
in mammary carcinoma, 166
in mediastinal lymphoma, 79
in metastatic anal sac carcinoma causing lameness, 147
in prostatic carcinoma, 139, 139, 141
in pulmonary adenocarcinoma, 66
in renal lymphoma, 131
in soft-tissue sarcoma, 171, 173
in thymomas, 80, 80
in urinary bladder tumours, 134
flap failure, 13
flow cytometry analysis
in lymphomas, 118
in thymomas, 80
fluid therapy, 16
5-fluorouracil
in mammary tumours, 164, 197
toxicity of, 21-2
fume cupboard, 31, 31
fungal rhinitis, 44
G
gagging, 74-82
gastrectomy, partial, gastric tumours, 85
gastric adenocarcinoma, 83-6, 107
case history of, 83
clinical examination of, 83
diagnostic evaluation of, 83-4, 84
differential diagnosis of, 83
presenting signs of, 83
theory of, 84-6, 85
treatment of, 85
gastroduodenal ulceration, 104
gastrointestinal haemorrhage, 104-6
causes, 104-5
treatment, 105, 105-6
gastrointestinal lavage, rectal polyps, 96
gastrointestinal stromal tumours (GISTs), 89, 106
 gastrointestinal tract, chemotherapy toxicity, 20-2, 22-3, 26, 28
gastroscopy
forceps, 44
gastric tumours, 85
Giemsa stain, cuitaneous mast cell tumour, 156
glossectomy, sublingual fibrosarcoma, 60
Gompertzian growth kinetics, 18
granular cell myoblastomas, lingual, 60
H
haemangioma, multifocal uterine, 135-8
case history of, 135-6
clinical examination of, 136
diagnosis of, 136
diagnostic evaluation of, 136
outcome of, 137
presenting signs of, 135
theory of, 137-8
treatment of, 136, 136
haemangiosarcoma (HSA)
bone, 146
common sites for, 100
diagnosis of, 8, 100
lingual, 60
lung metastases, 63, 63
presenting signs of, 100
prostatic, 139
renal, 130
splenic, 100-2
staging of, 102
treatment of, 101, 101-2
haematemesis, 84
haematochezia, 92-7, 93
haematuria, 128-41, 140
haemolysis, 104
haemorrhage
cystitis See haemorrhagic cystitis
gastrointestinal See gastrointestinal haemorrhage
intestinal mass See intestinal mass, haemorrhaging
post-splenectomy, 102
splenic mass See splenic mass, haemorrhaging
urinary tract, 104
haemorrhagic cystitis
chemotherapy toxicity, 21
cyclophosphamide toxicity, 24
halitosis, 49-61 See also intraoral tumours
heart base tumours, 78
hepatic carcinoids, 87
hepatocellular carcinoma, 86-7, 107
clinical history of, 86
diagnostic evaluation of, 86, 86
physical examination of, 86
presenting signs of, 86
prognosis for, 86
theory of, 86-7
hepatoid tumours, 93
histiocytoma, cutaneous See cutaneous histiocytoma
histiocytosis
cutaneous, 152
malignant, 153
systemic, 152-3
hormonal therapy, mammary tumours, 164-5
human granulocyte-monocyte colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), recombinant, 20
hydroxyurea
in chronic myeloid leukaemia, 114
general description of, 28
in primary polycythaemia, 28, 124
hypercalcaemia
in anal sac adenocarcinoma, 122
in anal sac carcinoma, 94
differential diagnosis of, 119
in lymphoma, 119
in mediastinal lymphoma, 117, 118
hyperoestrogenism, 177-8
hypersalivation, 49-61 See also intraoral tumours
hypertrophic osteopathy, bronchial carcinoma, 63
hypochromasia, 98
immune-mediated haemolytic anaemia (IMHA), 107-8
incisional biopsy, 2, 8-10, 9
inflammatory carcinomas, 162, 162
infraorbital foramen, 45
injectable drug administration, cytotoxic agents, 32-3
interstitial cell tumour, 174-6, 177
case history of, 174
clinical examination of, 174
diagnosis of, 175
diagnostic evaluation of, 174
outcome of, 175
presenting signs of, 174
theory of, 175-6
treatment of, 175, 175
intestinal adenocarcinoma, 106
intestinal lymphoma, 87-91
clinical examination of, 87-8
clinical history of, 87
diagnosis of, 88
diagnostic evaluation of, 88, 88
presenting signs of, 87
prognosis for, 90
theory of, 89-91
treatment of, 89
intestinal mass, haemorrhaging, 102-8
clinical history of, 103
diagnostic evaluation of, 103, 103
outcome of, 103-4
physical examination of, 103
presenting signs of, 102
prognosis for, 106
theory of, 104-8
treatment of, 103, 104
intestinal resection, 105, 105-6
intracapsular fibrosarcoma, 167-70
case history of, 167-8
clinical examination of, 168
diagnostic evaluation of, 168
outcome of, 169
presenting signs of, 167
theory of, 169-70
treatment of, 168, 168-9
intracapsular tumour resection, 11
intraoral tumours, 49-61
malignant melanoma See oral malignant melanoma
oral squamous cell carcinoma See oral squamous cell carcinoma
radiotherapy, 36
sublingual fibrosarcoma See sublingual fibrosarcoma
ionizing radiation, 35
iron deficiency, 98, 104
J
Jamshidi needle device, 143-4
J-manoeuvre, 85, 85
K
Ki-67, 158
KIT, 158
Klean-Prep, 96
L
lameness, 142-50
laparoscopy, intestinal lymphoma, 90
laparotomy
in anal sac adenocarcinoma, 122
in gastrointestinal haemorrhage, 105
in haemangiosarcoma, 102
in intestinal lymphoma, 90
in multifocal uterine haemangioma, 138
in rectal polyps, 97
LAP protocol, 121
laryngeal tumours, 72
L-asparaginase
in acute lymphoblastic leukaemia, 114-15
general description of, 26
in lymphomas, 26, 80
leiomyomas
bladder, 137
gastric, 85
intestinal, 89
oesophageal, 78
prostatic, 139
rectal, 95
leiomyosarcomas
gastric, 84, 107
intestinal, 102-8
 prostatic, 139
leukaemia
acute lymphoid, 113, 114-15
acute myeloid See acuite myeloid leukaemia
aleukaemic, 113
chronic lymphoid, 113, 115
chronic myeloid, 113, 114
classification of, 113-14
definition of, 113
multiple myeloma, 113, 115
myelodysplasia, 113, 114
subleukaemic, 113
Leukeran See chlorambucil
leukopenia, chemotherapy-induced, 20, 26
ligating dividing stapler (LDS), 101, 101
limb amputation, osteosarcoma, 144
limb-sparing surgery, osteosarcoma, 145
limb tumours, radiotherapy, 36
lingual tumours, 60 See also sublingual fibrosarcoma
lobaplatin, 145
lobectomy in bronchial carcinoma, 64-5
local nerve blocks in feline nasal planum carcinoma, 47, 47
Lomustine
in cutaneous mast cell tumour, 157, 160-1
general description of, 26-7, 27
in lymphoma, 26-7, 120
in mediastinal lymphoma, 117
Luer-lock syringes, 31
luflenomide, 153
lumpectomy, mammary tumours, 164
lung cancer See bronchial carcinoma; pulmonary adenocarcinoma
lymph node metastases
anal sac adenocarcinoma, 122
anal sac carcinoma, 94
biliary carcinoma, 87
bronchial carcinoma, 64
canine nasal adenocarcinoma, 41
cutaneous mast cell tumour, 157
gastric tumours, 84
mammary tumours, 165, 166
rectal polyps, 96
tonsillar carcinoma, 75
urinary bladder tumours, 134
lymphomas
alimentary, 106
B-cell, 119
chemotherapy for, 23-5, 24, 25-7
classification of, 118-19, 119
diagnosis of, 118
feline intranasal See feline intranasal lymphoma
gastric, 84, 85
intestinal See intestinal lymphoma
laryngeal, 72
mediastinal See mediastinal lymphoma
non-regenerative anaemia in, 108-12
case history of, 109
clinical examination of, 109
diagnosis of, 109
diagnostic evaluation of, 109
normal bone marrow, 110-12
outcome of, 109
presenting signs of, 109
theory of, 109-10
treatment of, 109
null cell, 119
prognosis for, 119-20
prostatic, 139
pulmonary, 65
radiotherapy for, 36
renal See renal lymphoma
splenic, 118
staging of, 194
T-cell, 119
tonsillar, 75
lymphosarcoma, 117 See also lymphomas
M
Madison-Wisconsin multidrug chemotherapy protocol, 195
for acuite lymphoblastic leukaemia, 115
for alimentary lymphomas, 106
for intestinal lymphomas, 90
for mediastinal lymphomas, 79, 117
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
in feline nasal planum carcinoma, 47
in nasal adenocarcinoma, 40, 40
in oral squamous cell carcinoma, 49, 50, 51
in rectal polyps, 96
in soft-tissue sarcoma, 171, 171, 173
in vaccine-associated sarcomas, 169
malignant histiocytosis, 153
malignant melanomas
digits, 149-50
lung metastases, 63
oral See oral malignant melanoma
radiotherapy for, 36
tonsillar, 75
malnutrition, 16
mammary carcinoma
canine, 161-5
case history of, 161
clinical examination of, 161, 161
diagnosis of, 161
diagnostic evaluation of, 161
outcome of, 161
presenting signs of, 161
theory of, 162-5
treatment of, 161
chemotherapy protocol for, 197
feline, 165-7
case history of, 165
clinical examination of, 165-6, 166
diagnosis of, 166
diagnostic evaluation of, 166
outcome of, 166
presenting signs of, 165
prognosis of, 167
theory of, 166-7
treatment of, 166, 166
lung metastases, 63
prognosis for, 165
subtypes of, 162
TNM staging of, 163, 163
mammary strip, 164
mammectomy, mammary tumours, 164
mandi bulectomies
oral malignant melanoma, 58, 58
oral squamous cell carcinoma, 52, 52-5, 53-5
marginal tumour resection, 11
margins, surgical, 11
masitinib, 157
mast cells, 154-5
mast cell tumours
chemotherapy for, 27, 27, 196
cutaneous
canine, 153-8
appearance of, 155
clinical examination of, 153, 153
diagnosis of, 153
diagnostic evaluation of, 153
grading of, 156
multiple, 158
outcome of, 154
presenting signs of, 153
theory of, 154-8
treatment of, 154, 154, 155, 156-7
feline, 158-61
diagnostic approach to, 159
histiocytic, 158-9
mastocytic, 158-9
prognosis for, 160
staging of, 160, 160
treatment of, 159-61
types of, 158-9
visceral, 159
diagnosis of, 4, 4
digits, 149, 150
excision of, 12, 13
gastric, 84
radiotherapy for, 36
splenic, 159-60
surgical margins in, 11
mastectomy, mammary tumours, 161, 163-4, 166, 166, 167
maxillectomy
oral malignant melanoma, 58, 58
oral squamous cell carcinoma, 52-5, 53, 53-4
mechanical stapling devices, 105
mechlorethamine toxicity, 22
median sternotomy
in bronchial carcinoma, 65
in mediastinal tumours, 82
mediastinal lymphoma
presenting with polydipsia, 116-21
case history of, 116
clinical examination of, 116
diagnostic evaluation of, 117
outcome of, 117
presenting signs of, 116
prognosis for, 119-20
rescue treatment of, 120-1
theory of, 117-19
treatment of, 117
presenting with retching, inappetence and weight loss, 78-82
clinical examination of, 78
diagnostic evaluation of, 79, 79
presenting signs of, 78
theory of, 79-82, 80
treatment of, 79, 79, 80-2
megaoesophagus, 78
meloxicam
in bone metastases, 130
in metastatic anal sac carcinoma causing lameness, 147
in osteosarcoma, 145
in prostatic carcinoma, 139, 141
in urinary bladder tumours, 135
melphalan
in anal sac adenocarcinoma, 94
general description of, 25
in multiple myeloma, 25, 115
mesenchymal tumours, intestinal, 106
metabolic energy requirement (MER), 106
metastatic disease
anal sac carcinoma, 94
biliary carcinoma, 87
bronchial carcinoma, 63, 63
cutaneous mast cell tumour, 156, 157
digit tumours, 149
gastric tumours, 85
haemangiosarcoma, 100
intestinal lymphoma, 89-90
lymph nodes See lymph node metastases
malignant pleural effusion, 70, 71
mediastinal tumours, 82
oesophageal tumours, 78
oral malignant melanoma, 59
osteosarcoma, 143
prostatic carcinoma, 140-1
pulmonary adenocarcinoma, 67, 68, 68
rectal polyps, 96
renal tumours, 129, 130
soft-tissue sarcoma, 173
testicular tumours, 178
tonsillar carcinoma, 75
urinary bladder tumours, 134
methadone, 17
microcytosis, 98
Mitoxantrone, 120
general description of, 28
in malignant pleural effusion, 71
in pulmonary adenocarcinoma, 67
in transitional cell carcinoma, 28
in urinary bladder tumours, 133, 135, 197
molecular markers for lymphomas, 118
MOPP protocol, 120-1, 195
multimodal therapy, 13
multiple myeloma See plasma cell tumours
myasthenia gravis, 78
myelodysplasia, 113, 114
myelosuppression
carboplatin toxicity, 29
hydroxyurea toxicity, 28
melphalan toxicity, 25
mitoxantrone toxicity, 28
myoblastoma, lingual granular cell, 60
myxomatosis, 175-6
N
nadir, chemotherapy toxicity, 26
nasal planum carcinoma, feline See feline nasal planum carcinoma
nasal tumours, 37-48
adenocarcinoma See adenocarcinomas, canine nasal
canine, 37-42
common benign and malignant, 40
feline intranasal lymphoma See feline intranasal lymphoma
planum carcinoma See feline nasal planum carcinoma
rabbit, 42-3
radiotherapy for, 36
nasal turbinate carcinoma, 42-3
needle core biopsy, 2, 5-7, 5-7
nephrectomy, renal carcinoma, 129, 130
nephroblastomas, 130
nephrotoxicity, chemotherapy, 29
neurotoxicity, chemotherapy, 21-2
neutropaenia, lomustine toxicity, 26-7
niacinamide, cutaneous histiocytosis, 152
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), 17
nosectomies, feline nasal planum carcinoma, 45-6, 45-6
nuclear organizing regions, 4
null cell lymphoma, 119
nutrition, 16
0
obesity, mammary tumours, 162
oesophageal plasmacytoma, 76-8
case history of, 76
diagnosis of, 77
diagnostic evaluation of, 76, 76-7
physical examination in, 76
theory of, 77-8
treatment of, 77
oesophagectomy, oesophageal tumours, 78
oesophagoscopy, 0esophageal tumours, 78
oesophagotomy, oesophageal plasmacytoma, 77
Oncovin See vincristine
onychodystrophy, hydroxyurea toxicity, 28
opioid analgesia, 17
oral cancer See intraoral tumours; specific types
oral malignant melanoma, 56-9
clinical examination in, 56, 56
diagnostic evaluation of, 56-7
differential diagnosis of, 56
lingual, 60
presenting signs of, 56
prognosis for, 59
staging of, 57
theory of, 57-9, 58
treatment of, 57, 57, 58-9, 58-9
vaccine for, 59
oral squamous cell carcinoma, 49-56
case history of, 49
clinical evaluation of, 50-1
clinical examination in, 49, 50
diagnostic evaluation of, 51, 51
differential diagnosis of, 49, 50
future treatments for, 56
presenting signs of, 49
prognosis for, 55-6
theory of, 50
treatment of, 52-3, 52-5, 53-5
orchitis, 176
osteoblasts, 148
osteochondroma, tracheal, 72
osteoclasts, 145, 148
osteosarcomas, 142-6
case history of, 142
chemotherapy for, 28-9, 196
clinical examination in, 142
diagnostic evaluation of, 142, 143
differential diagnosis of, 142
local effects of, 143
lung metastases from, 63
mandibular, 107, 146
oesophageal, 77
outcome for, 143
presenting signs of, 142
radiotherapy for, 36
theory of, 143-6
treatment of, 15, 15, 142, 145
ovarian tumours, 71-2
ovariohysterectomy
fibroepithelial hyperplasia, 167
mammary tumours and, 162
multifocal uterine haemangioma, 136, 136, 137, 138
at time of mammary tumour removal, 164, 167
pain scoring, 17
pancreatectomy, pancreatic tumours, 87
pancreatic tumours, 87
pancreatitis, L-asparaginase toxicity, 26
papilloma, rectal, 95
parathyroid-hormone-related peptide (PTHrP), 119
PARR analysis, non-regenerative anaemia in lymphoma, 109, 110
perianal adenoma, 93
photodynamic therapy (PDT)
feline nasal planum carcinoma, 48, 48
oral squamous cell carcinoma, 56
sublingual fibrosarcoma, 61
urinary bladder tumours, 135
Piriton, 26
piroxicam
 general description of, 28
in oral malignant melanoma, 59
in soft-tissue sarcomas, 196-7
in transitional cell carcinoma, 28
in urinary bladder tumours, 133, 135, 197
pituitary tumours
diabetes insipidus due to See diabetes insipidus due to pituitary tumour
incidence of, 127
radiotherapy for, 36
plasma cell tumours, 113
chemotherapy for, 25
lingual, 60
oesophageal, 77
plasmacytoma
extramedullary, 84
gastric, 84
oesophageal See oesophageal plasmacytoma
pleural effusion
malignant, 64, 70-2
clinical examination in, 70
diagnosis of, 70
diagnostic evaluation of, 70, 70
further treatment of, 70
presenting signs of, 70
theory of, 70-2
treatment of, 70
in pulmonary adenocarcinoma, 69
pneumonia, inhalation, 77
 pneumothorax, iatrogenic, 65
polychromasia, 98
polycythaemia, primary, 27-8, 124-5
polycythaemia vera, 27-8, 124-5
polydipsia, 116-27
prednisolone
in acute myeloid leukaemia, 114
in alimentary lymphomas, 107
in chronic lymphocytic leukaemia, 115
in cutaneous histiocytosis, 152
in cutaneous mast cell tumour, 157, 160
general description of, 25
in intestinal lymphoma, 91
in lymphoma, 25, 120
in mast cell tumours, 27, 196
in pulmonary adenocarcinoma, 67
preparation, cytotoxic drugs, 30-2, 31-2
progesterone, mammary tumours, 162
prostaglandin E2, 28
prostatectomy, prostatic carcinoma, 141
prostatic carcinoma, 138-41
case history of, 138
clinical examination in, 138
diagnosis of, 139
diagnostic evaluation of, 138-9, 139
outcome of, 139
theory of, 139-41
treatment of, 139
prostatic wash, 200
prostheses in osteosarcoma, 145
protein-energy malnutrition, 16
pulmonary adenocarcinoma, 66-9
classification of, 67-8, 68
clinical examination in, 66
diagnostic evaluation of, 66, 66
differential diagnoses of, 66
presenting signs of, 66
prognosis for, 67-9
theory of, 67
treatment of, 66, 67
pulmonary lymphomatoid granulomatosis (PLG), 67
punch biopsy, 2, 7-8, 8
pyrexia, chemotherapy toxicity, 20
R
rabbits
dyspnoea, 82
gastrointestinal tumours, 107
multifocal uterine haemangioma See haemangioma, multifocal uterine
nasal tumours, 42-3
rectal papilloma, 95
thymoma, 82
radical tumour resection, 11
radiography
in anal sac carcinoma, 94
in bronchial carcinoma, 64, 64
in intestinal lymphoma, 89
in mediastinal lymphoma, 79, 79
in metastatic anal sac carcinoma causing lameness, 147
in multifocal uterine haemangioma, 137
in nasal adenocarcinoma, 40, 40
in oesophageal plasmacytoma, 76, 76-7
in oral squamous cell carcinoma, 51
in osteosarcoma, 143, 146
in primary polycythaemia, 125
in prostatic carcinoma, 141
in pulmonary adenocarcinoma, 67
in renal carcinoma, 130
in soft-tissue sarcoma, 173
in vaccine-associated sarcomas, 169
radiotherapy
for anal sac adenocarcinoma, 94, 123-4
for brain tumours, 127
for canine nasal adenocarcinoma, 41, 41
for cutaneous mast cell tumour, 157, 158
delivery of, 35-6
for diabetes insipidus due to pituitary tumour, 126
for feline intranasal lymphoma, 44
four R's of, 35
hypo-fractionated regimens, 35
for mammary tumours, 165
for mediastinal tumours, 82
for oesophageal tumours, 78
for oral malignant melanoma, 57, 57, 58
for oral squamous cell carcinoma, 49, 55
for osteosarcoma, 145
principles of, 35-6
for pulmonary adenocarcinoma, 67
side effects of, 42
for soft-tissue sarcoma, 171, 173-4
for sublingual fibrosarcoma, 60
and surgery, 13-14, 14
for tonsillar carcinoma, 76
for vaccine-associated sarcomas, 170
ranitidine, 160
rapid stains, 3
recombinant human granulocyte-monocyte colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), 20
rectal papilloma, 95
rectal polyps, 94-7
clinical history of, 94
diagnostic evaluation of, 94-5, 95, 96
presenting signs of, 94
prognosis for, 96
theory of, 95, 95-7, 96
treatment of, 96, 96-7
rectal pull-through procedure, 96, 96
red cell count, 98
regurgitation, 74-82, 88
renal carcinoma, 128-30
case history of, 128
clinical examination in, 128
diagnosis of, 129
diagnostic evaluation of, 128-9
outcome of, 130
presenting signs of, 128
theory of, 129-30
treatment of, 129, 129
renal lymphoma, 129, 130-2
case history of, 130
clinical examination in, 130
diagnosis of, 131
diagnostic evaluation of, 130-1, 131
outcome of, 131
presenting signs of, 130
theory of, 131-2
treatment of, 131, 131
reticulocyte count, 98, 99
reticulocyte production index, 98, 99
rhabdomyomas, laryngeal, 72
rhinitis, fungal, 44
rhinoscopy, feline intranasal lymphoma, 43-4
Romanowsky stains, 3, 4, 156
S
safety
clothing for cytotoxic drugs, 30-1, 31, 31
cytotoxic drugs handling, 29-34, 30-4
sarcomas
disseminated histiocytic, 153
oesophageal, 77, 78
renal, 130
soft tissue See soft-tissue sarcomas
surgery and radiotherapy for, 13, 14, 36
vaccine-associated, 36, 168, 169-70
satellite metastasis, 11, 12
seminomas, 177
Sertoli cell tumour, 176-8
case history of, 176
clinical examination in, 176, 177
diagnosis of, 176
diagnostic evaluation of, 176
outcome of, 176
presenting signs of, 176
theory of, 177-8
treatment of, 176
sex cord tumours, 71-2
silver staining, 4
skip metastasis, 11, 12, 173
sneezing, 37-48 See also nasal tumours
soft-tissue sarcomas, 13, 14, 170-4
case history of, 170
chemotherapy protocol for, 196-7
clinical examination in, 170, 170-1
diagnosis of, 171
diagnostic evaluation of, 171, 171
digits, 149
outcome of, 172
presenting signs of, 170
prognosis for, 174
radiotherapy for, 36
theory of, 172-4
treatment of, 171-2, 171-2, 173-4
vaccine-associated See vaccine-associated sarcomas
spaying See ovariohysterectomy
spherocytes, 104
Spirocerca lupi infestation, 77, 78
splenectomy
complications, 102
in haemangiosarcoma, 101, 101-2
in haemorrhaging splenic mass, 99
in splenic mast cell tumour, 160
splenic lymphoma, 118
splenic mass, haemorrhaging, 98-102
clinical history of, 98
diagnostic evaluation of, 99, 99
outcome of, 99
physical examination in, 98-9
presenting signs of, 98
theory of, 100-2
treatment of, 99
splenic mast cell tumours, 159-60
squamous cell carcinoma
diagnosis of, 7
digit See digits, squamous cell carcinoma
feline nasal planum See feline nasal planum carcinoma
oesophageal, 77-8
oral See oral squamous cell carcinoma
prostatic, 139
pulmonary, 68
radiotherapy for, 36
tonsillar, 75
urinary bladder, 134
storage, cytotoxic drugs, 30, 30
stranguria, 128-41, 140
stromal sex cord tumours, 72
subleukaemic leukaemia, 113
sublingual fibrosarcoma, 59-61
case history of, 59
clinical examination in, 59, 60
diagnosis of, 59, 60
diagnostic evaluation of, 59
differential diagnosis of, 59
presenting signs of, 59
prognosis of, 60
theory of, 60-1, 61
treatment of, 60-1
surgery principles, 11-17
analgesia, 17
antimicrobial prophylaxis, 16
nutrition and fluid therapy, 16
preoperative and postoperative considerations, 16
surgery and chemotherapy, 14-15, 15, 18-19
surgery and radiotherapy, 13-14, 14, 18-19
surgery as part of multimodal therapy, 13
surgical margins, 11
techniques, 11-13, 12, 13
swallowing difficulty, 7482
systemic histiocytosis, 152-3
T
tamoxifen, mammary tumours, 164-5
T-cell lymphoma, 119
testicular tumours, 174-8
tetracycline, cutaneous histiocytosis, 152
6-thioguanine, acute myeloid leukaemia, 114
thoracic drains, bronchial carcinoma, 65
thoracoscopy, bronchial carcinoma, 65
thoracotomy
in bronchial carcinoma, 62, 65
in oesophageal plasmacytoma, 77
in pulmonary adenocarcinoma, 66, 67
thrombocytopenia, chemotherapy-induced, 26
thymidine kinase (TK), 110
thymomas, 78, 79-82
benign, 80
diagnosis of, 80, 80, 118
histological types of, 79
malignant, 80
presenting signs of, 72, 80
prognosis for, 82
treatment of, 80-2
TNM staging
anal sac adenocarcinoma, 123
haemangiosarcoma, 102
mammary tumours, 163, 163
Toludine blue stain, 3-4
tongue cancer, 60 See also sublingual fibrosarcoma
tonsillar carcinoma, 746
case history of, 74
clinical examination of, 74
diagnosis of, 75
diagnostic evaluation of, 74, 75
differential diagnosis of, 74
further evaluation of, 745
presenting signs of, 74
theory of, 75-6
tonsillectomy, tonsillar carcinoma, 75-6
tracheal tumours, 72-3
training in cytotoxic drugs handling, 30
Tramadol, metastatic anal sac carcinoma causing lameness, 147-8
transitional cell carcinoma (TcC)
chemotherapy for, 28
prostatic, 139
urinary bladder, 132-5
case history of, 132
chemotherapy protocol for, 197
clinical examination in, 132
diagnosis of, 133
diagnostic evaluation of, 132, 132
outcome of, 133
presenting signs of, 132
theory of, 133-5
treatment of, 133, 133
Treponema, 175-6
tumour debaulking, 18, 41-2
tumour excision/resection
in anal sac adenocarcinoma, 92, 94, 122-3
in biliary adenomas, 87
in brain tumours, 127
in bronchial carcinoma, 64-5
in cutaneous histiocytoma, 152
in cutaneous mast cell tumour, 154, 154, 155, 156, 158, 159-60
in feline nasal planum carcinoma, 47-8
in gastric tumours, 85
in hepatocellular carcinoma, 86
in intestinal lymphoma, 90
in intracapsular fibrosarcoma, 168, 168-9
in mammary tumours, 163-4, 166, 166
in mediastinal tumours, 80-1, 82
in multifocal uterine haemangioma, 138
in oesophageal plasmacytoma, 77
in oral malignant melanoma, 57-8, 58
in oral squamous cell carcinoma, 52-3, 52-5, 53-5
in perianal adenocarcinoma, 92, 93
in prostatic carcinoma, 141
in pulmonary adenocarcinoma, 67
in renal carcinoma, 130
in soft-tissue sarcoma, 171-2, 171-2, 173
in sublingual fibrosarcoma, 60-1
types of, 11
in urinary bladder tumours, 133, 133, 135
in vaccine-associated sarcomas, 169-70see also specific procedures
tuimouirs
basic concepts of growth, 18-19, 19
excision See tumour excision/resection
handling of excised, 12-13
resection See tumour excision/resection see also specific tumours
tyrosine kinase, 157
U
ultrasonography
in anal sac carcinoma, 94
in cutaneous mast cell tumour, 157
in gastric tumours, 84-5
in hepatocellular carcinoma, 86, 86
in intestinal lymphoma, 89
in mediastinal lymphoma, 79
in metastatic anal sac carcinoma causing lameness, 147
in multifocal uterine haemangioma, 137
in oesophageal plasmacytoma, 76
in primary polycythaemia, 125
in prostatic carcinoma, 141
in rectal polyps, 94, 96
in renal carcinoma, 129-30
in renal lymphoma, 130
in urinary bladder tumours, 132, 132, 134
urethrocystogram, urinary bladder tumours, 134
urinary bladder
squamous cell carcinoma, 134
transitional cell carcinoma See transitional cell carcinoma (TCC), urinary bladder
tumour antigen testing, 134-5
tumours in rabbits, 137
urinary tract haemorrhage, 104
literine adenocarcinoma, 137, 137
uterine haemangioma See haemangioma, multifocal uterine
V
vaccine-associated sarcomas, 168, 169-70
diagnosis of, 169
features of, 169
prognosis for, 170
radiotherapy for, 36
treatment of, 169-70
vaccines
digit malignant melanoma, 150
oral malignant melanoma, 59
VAC protocol, 25, 102
ventricular arrhythmia, 102
vinblastine
in acute myeloid leukaemia, 114
in cutaneous mast cell tumour, 157
general description of, 27, 27
in mast cell tumours, 27, 196
toxicity of, 22
vincristine
in acute lymphoblastic leukaemia, 11415
general description of, 24-5
in lymphomas, 24, 24-5, 80
toxicity of, 21-2
Vinorelbine, pulmonary adenocarcinoma, 67
vitamin E, cutaneous histiocytosis, 152
Volkmann spoon, 44
vomiting, 83-91, 84
chemotherapy toxicity, 26, 29
diagnostic plan flowchart, 88
W
water deprivation test, 125, 127, 198
wide tumour resection, 11
wind-up effect, 17, 144
Wright-Giemsa stain, cutaneous mast cell tumour, 155-6, 156
Z
zoledronic acid, sublingual fibrosarcoma, 61