MARJORIECHANDLER
SAUNDERSSOLUTIONSIN
VETERINARYPRACTICE
Series Ed tor Fred Nind
SMALLANIMAL
GASTROENTEROLOGY
Unique new case-based approach
Modem,clearly designed and illustrated
Ideally suited for CPD or as an oxam revision ald
SAUNDERS
FLSEVIER
Saunders Solutions in
Veterinary Practice
Small Animal Gastroenterology
M.L. Chandler, DVM, MS, MACVSc, DACVN, DACVIM, DECVIM-CA,
MRCVS
Senior Lecturer in Small Animal Medicine and Clinical Nutrition
Saunders
Front Matter
SAUNDERS SOLUTIONS IN VETERINARY PRACTICE
Small Animal Gastroenterology
Series Editor: Fred Nind BVM&S, MRCVS
M. L. Chandler
DVM, MS, MACVSc, DACVN, DACVIM, DECVIM-CA, MRCVS
SAUNDERS
ELSEVIER
Senior Lecturer in Small Animal Medicine and Clinical Nutrition
Edinburgh London New York Oxford Philadelphia St Louis Sydney Toronto 2011
Commissioning Editor: Robert Edwards Development Editor: Catherine Jackson
Project Manager: Maria Bernard
Designer/Design Direction: Charles Gray Illustration Manager: Gillian Richards
Illustrator: Samantha Elmhurst
Copyright
SAUNDERS
ELSEVIER
 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Aq o  n  sn   q r nd s go d on
any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any
information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the
publisher. Details on how to seek permission, further information about the
Publisher's permissions policies and our arrangements with organizations such as
the Copyright Clearance Center and the Copyright Licensing Agency, can be found at
our website: www.elsevier.com/permissions.
This book and the individual contributions contained in it are protected under
copyright by the Publisher (other than as may be noted herein).
ISBN 978 0 7020 2910 3
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Notices
Knowledge and best practice in this field are constantly changing. As new research and
experience broaden our understanding. changes in research methods, professional practices, or
medical treatment may become necessary.
Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own experience and knowledge in
evaluating and using any information, methods, compounds, or experiments described herein. In
 using such information or methods they should be mindful of their own safety and the safety of
others, including parties for whom they have a professional responsibility.
With respect to any drug or pharmaceutical products identified, readers are advised to check
the most current information provided (i) on procedures featured or (ii) by the manufacturer of
each product to be administered, to verify the recommended dose or formula, the method and
 duration of administration, and contraindications. It is the responsibility of practitioners, relying on
their own experience and knowledge of their patients, to make diagnoses, to determine dosages and
the best treatment for each individual patient, and to take all appropriate safety precautions.
To the fullest extent of the law, neither the Publisher nor the authors, contributors, or editors,
assume any liability for any injury and/or damage to persons or property as a matter of products
liability, negligence or otherwise, or from any use or operation of any methods, products,
instructions, or ideas contained in the material herein.
your source forbooks,
ELSEVIER
journals andmultimedio
in the health sciences
www.elsevierhealth.com
Workingtogethertogrow
The
librariesin developing countries
publisher's
policy is to use
www.elsevier.com|www.bookaid.org|www.sabre.org
papermanufactured
from sustainable forests
ELSEVIER
BOOKAID
Sabre Foundation
International
Printed in China
Case study contributors
 Ms Nicki Reed, BVM & S, Cert VR, DSAM(Feline), DECVIM-CA, MRCVS.
Lecturer in Companion Animal Medicine
University of Edinburgh Hospital for Small Animals
 Easter Bush Veterinary Centre
Roslin
Midlothian
EH25 9RG
Wrote:
Chapter 22 Hepatic lipidosis in a cat
Chapter 28 Feline exocrine pancreatic insufficiency
Chapter 36 Feline constipation and megacolon
, Ms Carolina Urraca del Junco, DVM, Cert VDI, MRCVS, RCVS Trust
Diagnostic Imaging Resident
Royal (Dick) School of Veterinary Studies
Easter Bush Veterinary Hospital
Easter Bush
Roslin
Midlothian
EH25 9RG
Wrote:
Chapter 33 Intestinal leiomyoma in a dog
Co-wrote:
Chapter 20 Linear foreign body in a cat
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank
Jim Archambeault, my husband, for his support and love and his tolerance of lost weekends.
Nicki Reed for contributing three excellent feline cases.
              
continued support, helpfulness and insights into often perplexing cases. I would especially like to thank
those who assisted with the figures in the book: Carolina Urraca del Junco (who also enthusiastically
provided case material), Tobias Schwarz, Donald Yool, Elspeth Milne, Marcel Kovalik, Alison Ridyard,
Geoff Culshaw and Danielle Gunn-Moore.
Our residents, for their hard work and enthusiasm.
mentor, for teaching, inspiring and encouraging me during my residency and beyond.
The referring veterinary surgeons for sending us these cases and the patients themselves, who
often teach and surprise us in so many ways.
Introduction
Saunders Solutions in Veterinary Practice series is a new range of veterinary text
books covering all the main disciplines of companion animal practice.
Readers should realise that it is not the authors’ intention to cover all that is
              
reference works. Instead they are intended to provide practical information on the
more frequently encountered conditions in an easily accessible form based on real life
case studies. They cover that range of cases that fall between the boringly routine and
the referral. The books will help practitioners with a particular interest in a topic or
           
sign rather than by the underlying pathology as this is how veterinary surgeons will
see them in practice.
Each case also includes descriptions of underlying pathology and details of the
nursing required both in the veterinary clinic and at home. It is hoped that the books
will also, therefore, be of interest to veterinary stuidents in the later parts of their
course and to veterinary nurses.
    )   
veterinarians and a recommended practice for others. The Soluitions series will
provide a CPD resource which can be accessed economically, shared with colleagues
access to authoritative information on the diagnosis and treatment of interesting and
            s 
gruesome contaminants found in a veterinary clinic because this is where we hope
these books will be uised
  s a  s  a s  n s g
the series editor and the individual authors are grateful for their foresight in
commissioning the series and their unfailing support and guidance during their
production.
Gastroenterology
Gastroenterological disorders can be nearly as distressing for an owner as for the
animal suffering the disease. Although straightforward cases may recover quickly
with simple management changes, the range of GI cases includes patients whose
signs may persist for months or even years and the cause of which may be devilishly
hard to elucidate. That range also includes diseases which can be terminal and
disease which can be fatal remarkably quickly. This book should help you navigate
disorders, inderstand the sometimes complex aetiopathogenesis and earn the
significant gratitude of those owners who no longer have to clear up diarrhoea or
vomit from their living room carpet.
Author's note
Gastrointestinal disorders are among the most common presenting complaints in
small animal practice. The clinical signs may be due to disorders of the
gastrointestinal tract itself such as inflammation, obstruction or neoplasia, or may be
secondary to disorders of other organs, such as in cases of hypoadrenocorticism or
animals with portosystemic shunts.
Because of the wide variety of potential aetiologies and the complexity of some
cases, a problem-orientated approach is helpful and has been used in the cases
presented in this book. In problem-orientated medicine, differential diagnoses are
developed for each of the clinical problems. This approach aids the clinician in
prioritizing diagnostic tests and decreases the likelihood of problems being missed.
 o     s      
the problem. The areas include swallowing disorders and regurgitation, vomiting.
small intestinal diarrhoea, haematochezia and melaena and colonic disorders.
Obviously there is overlap among the areas, as patients often present with more than
one problem. In these, the cases are uinder the predominantly presenting complaint
The book does not include every possible type of gastrointestinal case, but attempts to
present a range of common and uncommon, simple and complex cases.
For cases, there is also a discussion of the pathophysiology, treatment, outcome and
Table of Contents
Front Matter
Copyright
Case study contributors
Acknowledgements
Introduction
Author's note
Section 1: Dysphagia and Disorders of Swallowing
Chapter 1: Swallowing and regurgitation
Chapter 2: Idiopathic megaoesophagus in a dog
Chapter 3: Myasthenia gravis in a dog
Chapter 4: Oesophageal stricture in a cat
Chapter 5: Phenobarbitone responsive retching in a dog
Chapter 6: Oesophageal foreign body in a dog
Chapter 7: Persistent right aortic arch in a dog
Chapter 8: Feline dysautonomia
Section 2: Vomiting
Chapter 9: Gastrointestinal physiology - the normal stomach and small intestines
Chapter 10: Vomiting
Chapter 1l: A foreign body in the small intestine of a dog
Chapter 12: Chronic partial gastric dilatation in a dog
Chapter 13: Pancreatitis and alimentary lymphoma in a dog
Chapter 14: Hypoadrenocorticism in a dog
Chapter 15: Lymphocytic inflammatory bowel disease/alimentary lymphoma in
a cat
Chapter 16: Ingestion of glue by a dog
Chapter 17: Lead ingestion in a puppy
Chapter 18: Gastric adenocarcinoma in a dog
Chapter 19: Pancreatitis in a cat
Chapter 20: Linear foreign body in a cat
Chapter 21: Porto-systemic shunt in a dog
Chapter 22: Hepatic lipidosis in a cat
Section 3: Diarrhoea
Chapter 23: Intestinal disorders: Diarrhoea
Chapter 24: Small intestinal diarrhoea
Chapter 25: Protein losing enteropathy in a dog
Chapter 26: Inflammatory bowel disease and adverse reaction to food in a dog
Chapter 27: Intussusception in a cat
Chapter 28: Feline exocrine pancreatic insufficiency
Chapter 29: Parvovirus infection in a dog
4: Haematochezia and Melaena
Chapter 30: Introduction to haematochezia and melaena
Chapter 31: Haemorrhagic gastroenteritis in a dog
Chapter 32: Colonic vascular ectasia in a dog
Chapter 33: Intestinal leiomyoma in a dog
Chapter 34: Corticosteroid induced gastrointestinal ulceration in a dog
5: The Colon and Colonic Disorders
Chapter 35: Introduction to the colon and colonic disorders
Chapter 36: Feline constipation and megacolon
Chapter 37: Tritrichomonas infection in two kittens
Chapter 38: Colorectal neoplasia in a dog
Chapter 39: Colonic inflammatory bowel disease in a cat
Multiple choice questions
Multiple choice answers
Abbreviations list
Estimating the degree of dehydration
Urgent vs non-urgent gastrointestinal cases
Body condition scores
Reference ranges for haematology and serum chemistry values for adult cats and
s8op
Resources for tests for gastrointestinal disorders
Obtaining cisapride
Canine inflammatory bowel disease activity index (CIBDAI)
Feeding tubes
Medications used in the treatment of gastrointestinal disorders
Medications used in the treatment of feline hepatic lipidosis
Recommended reading
Index
Section 1
Dysphagia and Disorders of
Swallowing
Swallowing and regurgitation
The oesophagus and swallowing
The oesophagus is divided into the cervical, thoracic and abdominal parts
The cervical oesophagus runs ventral and to the left of the trachea, and thoracic
oesophagus runs to the left of the trachea until the tracheal bifurcation, where it is
dorsal to it, and then moves to the right of the aortic arch. There is a short abdominal
muscularis in the dog is striated throughout the oesophagus; whereas in the cat the
of smooth muscle until the final 2 to 3 cm which is entirely smooth muscle.
         
pressure zone between the oesophagus and the stomach so that gastric contents are
less likely to be refluxed into the oesophagus. The type of food eaten affects the GES
pressure. Protein meals increase the pressure, likely due to an increase in gastrin. Fat
decreases GEs pressure due to cholecystokinin stimulation and also inhibition of
gastrin mediated pressure increases.
The GEs relaxes transiently to allow for eructation of gas; during this relaxation
fluid may also be refluxed into the oesophagus. This is a normal event, but in some
dogs it may occur excessively or the rate of clearance of the acid from the oesophagus
may be delayed, resulting in oesophagitis.
Swallowing involves three coordinated phases: oropharyngeal, oesophageal and
contractions that push the food from the base of the tongue to the laryngopharynx
and into the oesophagus. In the oesophagus, the bolus is initially carried by the
does not result in the bolus reaching the stomach, a secondary peristaltic wave is
initiated by local oesophageal distension. The swallowing reflex in the dog requires
sensation of the bolus within the oesophagus. Oesophageal peristaltic speed is faster in
         s m s    n   
2 cm/second in the cat.
Dysphagia
Dysphagia means difficuilty in swallowing and may be due to either functional
disorders or physical obstruction disorders. The disorders may be oral, pharyngeal or
oesophageal.
Reguirgitation
Regurgitation is expulsion of food or saliva from the pharynx or oesophagus and most
often is caused by oesophageal disease.
that present with both problems. Regurgitation is generally a passive action with no
              
pharynx, which may be confused with an active action.
Regurgitated food is undigested and may be cylindrical in shape from having been
formed in the oesophagus. The pH should not be acidic, although as gastric contents
are not always acidic this may not be a useful way to distinguish between
has been gastro-oesophageal reflux prior to regurgitation. Regurgitation may occur
immediately after eating or may occur several hours later, especially if the disorder is
in the lower cervical or thoracic part of the oesophagus.
a      s    s
attempts may be seen. Aspiration pneumonia is a serious risk in animals that are
s   e s   s   
distress or fever. Some animals with oesophageal disorders may also show nasal
discharge due to ingesta entering through the nasopharyngeal opening.
In addition to aspiration pneumonia, common sequelae to chronic regurgitation are
weight loss or poor growth as the animal is unable to assimilate sufficient nutrients.
Diagnosis of regurgitation
While oesophageal disorders may be suspected based on clinical signs, diagnosis
usually  requires  radiological  studies  and  endoscopy.  Haematology  and  serum
  s        
dehydration present due to insufficient fluid intake.
Radiography
The normal oesophagus is collapsed except during swallowing, so it not visualized on
plain radiographs as it is of a similar density to the adjacent structures in the neck
and mediastinum. The canine oesophagus has parallel longitudinal lines in the
mucosa (Fig 1.1) whereas the caudal feline oesophagus has more oblique mucosal
folds (Fig 1.2).
Fig1.1
Normal canine oesophagus
Fig1.2
Normal feline oesophagus
If air is seen in the oesophagus, it may be due to aerophagia, megaoesophagus,
oesophagus may be due to obstruction or food retention, or, less likely, oesophagitis.
Positive contrast  studies utilizing fluoroscopy may be required  to confirm
oesophageal dysfuinction and to evaluate oesophageal motility. Positive contrast
studies are indicated when there is acute gagging, retching or acute or chronic
regurgitation, dysphagia or known swallowing of a foreign body.
Clinical tips
Swallowing contrast studies
Ideally the patient should not be fed for 4 to 6 hours prior to the examination. If fluoroscopy is
available, it should be performed prior to the administration of the contrast agent to ensure that the
patient is in the correct position to clearly see the oesophagus. Plain radiographs are also usually
taken at this time. It is recommended to use no sedation if possible, as sedation increases the risk of
aspiration pneumonia and may affect oesophageal motility. A small dose of acetylpromazine (o.o1
mg/kg slow iv or im) may be useful in some cases and should not affect motility. Liquid barium may
be administered slowly orally or mixed with food to assess swallowing of solids. Barium injected into
marshmallows has also been suggested to assess intramural oesophageal disease that cannot be
detected with a liquid swallow. (This is unlikely to be useful in cats.) Iodine-containing contrast
solutions are recommended over barium if a perforation is possible as they cause less tissue reaction.
Enlargement of the proximal oesophagus with normal function of the distal
oesophagus suggests a vascular ring anomaly or oesophageal stricture. Other causes of
diagnosis of generalized megaoesophagus is confirmed, diagnostic testing should be
performed to establish an underlying aetiology if possible.
A normal dog or cat restrained immediately in lateral recumbency after oral barium
may retain some of it in the cauidal cervical and cranial thoracic areas of the
oesophagus (Fig 1.3), but reverse peristalsis should not occur (i.e. food moving
backwards up the oesophagus or from the stomach back into the oesophagus). The
first phase of swallowing usually can be seen to move the bolus and barium into the
oesophagus, with a second phase sometimes needed to move it all the way into the
stomach. Linear streaking of the oesophagus with barium after swallowing is normal.
Fig 1.3
 Normal oesophagram showing streaking of barium in the oesophagus
(courtesy of Dr Tobias Schwarz)
Endoscopy of the oesophagus can be used to rule out underlying causes of
     o   os
although it can be difficult to assess the size of the oesophagus in an animal under
oesophageal folds (Fig 1.4).
Fig 1.4
Endoscopic view of normal feline oesophagus
(courtesy of Prof Dan ielle Gunn-Moore)
Other tests should be done to look for underlying causes if generalized
biochemical panel, urinalysis, blood lead level, creatine kinase concentration,
acetylcholine  receptor antibody  test  (evaluation  for myasthenia gravis)  and
evaluation of adrenal and thyroid gland function. Additional diagnostic procedures
that may be performed based on the animal's signalment, history and neurological
examination, include an EMG study, nerve conduction velocities and muscle biopsies
2
Idiopathic megaoesophagus in a dog
Initial presentation
Vomiting and regurgitation every 1 to 3 days for at least 6 months; concurrent weight loss and
recent (2 to 3 weeks) cough
Case history
The dog had been obtained from a rescue centre 6 months earlier. The owner said that
he was de-wormed regularly with a product from the grocery store and had been
vaccinated at the time they obtained him.
He was usually bringing up food that appeared undigested and did not contain bile,
although occasionally he also did bring up digested food and bile. There was no
abdominal effort and he would bring up the food from minutes to about an hour after
eating. It was determined that he was usually regurgitating, although sometimes there
was an episode of true vomiting.
He was coughing occasionally during the previous 2 weeks and his exercise
tolerance had decreased. The dog's stools had been normal and his water intake and
urine output had not changed. The owner estimated that the dog had lost about 8 kg
over the last couple of weeks.
His usual diet was a mixture of dry and canned dog food and he was normally fed
twice a day. He was not fed table scraps and did not scavenge. His appetite had
His prior treatment included oral cimetidine and metoclopramide, which the owner
thought may have slightly helped decrease the frequency of the vomiting or
regurgitation.
Physical examination
The dog was bright and responsive. He had a body condition score (BCS) of 2/9. His
mucous membranes were pink and his capillary refill time was less than 2 seconds.
Thoracic auscultation revealed normal heart and lung sounds, with a heart rate of 90
beats per minute (bpm) and a respiratory rate of 36 breaths per minute. There was no
evidence of pain on abdominal palpation. Rectal temperature was 38.8° C.
appeared to form a normal bolus and could initiate swallowing without a problem.
This made a pharyngeal disorder less likely to be the cause of the regurgitation.
Clinical tip
Differentiating vomiting from regurgitation can be a challenge and in some cases both are
occurring. The time after eating does not always provide a clue, as some animals may vomit
 n  'o m a Asa o   e 
after eating (Table 2.1).
 Table 2.1 Differentiating regurgitation from vomiting
Clinical sign 
Vomiting
Regurgitation/oesophageal disord ers
 Abd ominal effort 
None
 Present
Time of food ejection after eating
Immediate to delayed, possibly for hours
 Delayed, possibly for hours, but may alsohappen immed iately
Appearance of food
 Undigested
Partly digested, may have ble present
 pH of contents
Sh ould not be acid ic
Ac id pH implies vomiting, but alkalin e material may also be vomited
Problem list and discussion of problems
. Vomiting
· Regurgitation
· Weight loss
The dog's primary problem appeared to be regurgitation, although he also appeared
to vomit occasionally as well. The weight loss was likely due to inadequate
assimilation of food due to the regurgitating.
Differential diagnosis
For the regurgitation
· Oesophagitis
• Megaoesophagus, which can be idiopathic or due to an underlying cause
• Oesophageal obstructive disorders, e.g. stricture, neoplasia, foreign body
· Hiatal hernia
· Vascular ring anomalies - unlikely due to the dog's age (usually present in puppies)
· Granulomas due to Spirocerca lupi: unlikely as this parasite is not endemic in the UK and he had
not travelled out of the UK
· Oesophageal diverticula
For the vomiting
· Disorders of the stomach
· foreign body
* gastritis
* ulceration
* chronic partial dilation-volvulus
+ neoplasia
· Disorders of the small intestine
· foreign body
· inflammatory bowel disease
* neoplasia
· parasites
• intussusception
• Disorders of the large intestine (unlikely as there were no signs consistent with colonic disorders)
* colitis
· obstipation
* Systemic disorders
· Pancreatopathy
• Hypoadrenocorticism
· Diabetes mellitus
· Liver disorders
* Peritonitis
· Renal disease/uraemia (unlikely)
· Dietary causes
· Adverse reaction to food (allergy or intolerance)
 Dietary indiscretion
Case work-up
Minimum data base
Haematology, serum chemistry and routine urinalysis were performed. Haematology
of 0.334 1/1 (reference range 0.37 to 0.55 1/l) and an elevation in mature neuitrophils to
18.5 x 10*/1 (reference range 3.6-12 x 10%/l). Serum chemistry results were
unremarkable other than a slightly low albumin of 22 g/l (reference range 26-35 g/l).
Urinalysis was unremarkable. The urine specific gravity was 1.038; chemical strip
results were within normal limits and the sediment was not active.
Faecal analysis showed a positive egg count for ascarids, so a course of oral
fenbendazole (50 mg/kg po q 24 hours for 3 days) was initiated.
Imaging
Thoracic radiography showed the presence of a marked megaoesophagus with ventral
deviation of the trachea and a marked tracheal stripe sign (Fig 2.1). There was an
increase in pulmonary opacity with an interstitial-alveolar pattern over the cardiac
apex and cranial to the heart on the lateral radiograph, which was consistent with
aspiration pneumonia.
Fig 2.1
Radiograph of thorax showing dilated oesophagus
(courtesy of Dr Tobias Schwarz)
Diagnosis
   o    o
underlying cause or may be idiopathic; differential diagnoses for the more common
underlying causes include:
· Myasthenia gravis
· Polymyopathy
· Dysautonomia
· Oesophageal obstructive disorders (foreign body, stricture, neoplasia, extra-
oesophageal compression)
· Lead toxicity
· Hypoadrenocorticism
· Hypothyroidism (possibly)
Further testing
This dog had no other signs consistent with a polymyopathy or dysautonomia.
Further diagnostic tests included serum creatinine kinase and AsT concentrations,
which were within the reference range and also made a myopathy less likely.
not consistent with dysautonomia.
Clinical tip
Pilocarpine response test
In an animal suspected to have dysautonomia, if the pupils are affected, one drop of dilute
pilocarpine ophthalmic solution (o.o5%) should be placed in one eye and the diameter of the pupil
sh on puodsau Anensn lou lm siop leou ison ‘nou l 1o sanuu Sl Aaaa paaasqo
concentration and those that do show only minimal response at 60 minutes. Miosis of the treated eye
demonstrates denervation supersensitivity as expected with dysautonomia. However, not all affected
dogs will respond to the dilute pilocarpine, which could be a function of the time required for
  a  r n n  a 'oi n s 
toxicity, which could cause many of the signs of dysautonomia. An anticholinergic drug would block
the response of the pupil to pilocarpine (see Chapter 8).
Blood lead concentration was within the normal reference range at 0.o2 μmol/1.
Values greater than 1.21 μmol/1 indicate probable toxicity.
cortisol of 89 mmol/l and a post-stimulation test of 321 mmol/l; which rules out
atypical hypoadrenocorticism (i.e. hypoadrenocorticism where only the corticosteroid
concentrations are insufficient and mineralocorticoid concentrations are sufficient to
maintain normal seruim potassium and sodium concentrations).
considered normal. A value greater than 0.6 nmol/1 is diagnostic of myasthenia
S   a   s   e o s
The dog's total serum thyroxine concentration was just below the reference range at
12.9 nmol/l (reference range 13-52 nmol/l) and his TsH concentration was 0.13
ng/ml, with a reference range of less than 0.41 ng/ml. This most likely indicated a
mild euthyroid sick condition in this dog rather than true hypothyroidism.
Endoscopy
At endoscopy, the oesophagus was found to be very large, flaccid and contained
fermenting food and fluid within the folds. There was evidence of mild oesophagitis at
the distal aspect of the oesophagus. There was also evidence of gastritis and
inflammation of the duodenum. Histopathology of the gastric and duodenal mucosa
Discuission
The cause of this dog's vomiting was likely the mild inflammatory condition of his
stomach and small intestine. This was treated successfully with metronidazole at 10
The regurgitation was probably an unrelated condition. Reflux oesophagitis may
cause regurgitation and even some dilation of the oesophagus, but not to the degree of
dilation present in this dog. Underlying conditions were ruled out as far as possible,
leaving the diagnosis as a probable idiopathic megaoesophagus.
Treatment for idiopathic megaoesophagus
Medical
and water from elevated containers to allow the aid of gravity for swallowing (Fig 2.2)
  s    q o s ao    e  
some do better with ‘meatballs’ of dog food, so the diet has to be tailored for the
individual.
Fig2.2
Example of feeding a dog from a height.
Many promotility drugs have been tried unsuccessfully in an attempt to improve
   o on     
theoretically be beneficial; however, these have not shown any benefit and could be
detrimental in dogs with inhalation pneumonia or reflux oesophagitis. This dog
appeared to have both those conditions.
Surgical
          
for achalasia; however, dogs which had surgery had a worse outcome than those
without surgery, so this is not recommended.
Epidemiology
inherited in the wirehaired fox terrier by simple autosomal recessive gene and in
miniature schnauzers by simple autosomal dominant of a 60% penetrance autosomal
recessive pattern. A breed predisposition exists in the German shepherd dog, Great
Dane, Irish Setter and Chinese Shar Pei and it likely has a hereditable basis in these
dogs also.
Pathophysiology
Idiopathic megaoesophagus is likely due to a lesion in the afferent limb of the
swallowing reflex resulting in a loss of peristaltic function in the oesophageal body.
Sensory stimulus from the presence of food or liquid in the oesophagus is necessary to
stimulate the oesophageal phase of swallowing and it is this sensory reinforcement of
the swallowing reflex that appears to be affected.
Prognosis
irreversible damage to the oesophagus. Many of the dogs will eventually die from
         s
malnutrition.
3
Myasthenia gravis in a dog
Initial presentation
Regurgitation, cough and weakness/exercise intolerance
Signalment: 2-year-old neutered male collie crossbred dog, body weight 19.8 kg
Case history
The dog had become progressively less exercise tolerant over the 2 months prior to
presentation. He had also initially begun to regurgitate his food and then began to
regurgitate water. The regurgitation usually occurred within a few minutes after
eating, but occasionally he brought up foam without having eaten anything. The food
that he regurgitated was formed and undigested. He was stil interested in eating and
the owners had started feeding him very small amounts, as any larger amounts were
regurgitated.
He had become progressively less able to go for walks and would sit or lie down after
several minutes of walking. He remained conscious during these times and he would
lsually be willing to walk again after a short rest. He had begun to cough during the
previous week and his breathing was laboured. His faeces were formed and were
passed normally and his urination was normal.
The dog had been in the owners' possession about a year and was current on
vaccinations and de-worming.
Physical examination
The dog was quiet but responsive and preferred to lie on the consulting room floor
during the examination. He was reluctant to walk when taken outside and his gait
was abnormal (Fig 3.1). His body condition score was 4/9. Mucus membranes were
pink and capillary refill time was less than 2 seconds. Pulse quality was good.
Fig 3.1
Dog with myasthenia gravis showing weakness and abnormal stance
Thoracic auscultation revealed normal heart sounds but crackles over the left lung
fields. Heart rate was 140 beats per minute (bpm) and the respiratory rate was 60
breaths per minute with some inspiratory effort.
P  d      n  a 
palpation. His rectal temperature was 39.1° C.
Problem list and discussion of problems
· Regurgitation
· Weakness and exercise intolerance
· Cough
Regurgitation in this dog may have been due to:
· Megaoesophagus
· Oesophageal stricture
· Oesophagitis
· Oesophageal dysmotility
· Hiatal hernia
· An oesophageal foreign body was less likely because of the duration of the problem.
Weakness and exercise intolerance can by caused by many systemic disorders,
including (but not limited to) cardiopulmonary diseases, metabolic disorders such as
hypothyroidismor hypoadrenocorticism,  neurological disorders  such 
as
polyneuropathies or myasthenia gravis, myopathies or pain due to other disorders.
Coughing can be due to upper respiratory disorders, lower respiratory disorders or
cardiac disorders. As this dog had crackles on auscultation, a lower respiratory (lung)
disorder was suspected. Crackles are discontinuous, non-musical sounds produced
when airway pressures fluctuate or when air rushes through fluid-or mucus-filled
alveoli, but can sometimes also be heard when there is fluid in the oesophagus.
Case work-up
Minimum data base
Haematology, serum chemistry and routine urinalysis were performed. The
haematology results showed an increase in neutrophils with a slight left shift,
unremarkable, as was the urinalysis. Basal serum cortisol was 132 nmol/l (reference
range 20-230 nmol/1).
Clinical tip on uise of basal seruim cortisol
A　serum basal cortisol concentration of 7o nmol/l or greater effectively rules out
hypoadrenocorticism. If the value is less than 70 nmol/l, an ACTH stimulation test should be
performed to definitively rule out or diagnose this disorder.
Imaging
Clinical tip on imaging in regurgitating cases
Plain thoracic radiographs help rule out megaoesophagus and screen for cardiopulmonary
sdau Adossoon ssn poo sop ym paxju ueq Susn Apms isenuoo aanisod v 'siapnosip
determine if there are oesophageal motility disorders or a hiatal hernia, but in cases like this dog.
which have a cough, the risk of furthering an aspiration pneumonia is present.
Thoracic radiographs showed the presence of a large oesophagus and a bronchial
alveolar pattern especially affecting the left cranioventral lung lobes, consistent with
aspiration pneumonia (Figs 3.2 and 3.3).
Figs3.2
Figs 3.2 and 3.3
Lateral and ventrodorsal thoracic radiographs showing enlarged oesophagus
(courtesy of Dr Tobias Schwarz)
Neurological examination
A neurological examination was largely unremarkable, although after walking for a
couple of minutes the dog developed a stiff, choppy and hunched gait. He then lay
down and developed tremors of the hind legs and was unable to rise for a short period.
Once given time to recover, the dog could walk and then this pattern would reoccur.
        s   s s s
performed.
The response to this test was dramatic, in that the dog immediately stood up and
was willing to trot down the corridor. This response is consistent with a presumptive
diagnosis of myasthenia gravis.
Clinical tip on tensilon test
 The edrophonium chloride (Tensilon) response test is used to diagnose myasthenia gravis. The dog
or cat is exercised (if necessary) until they sit or lie down or the gait becomes abnormal. A dose of
0.1 to 0.2 mg/kg of edrophonium chloride is administered intravenously. A positive test results in
temporary improvement of locomotor signs within minutes. Oesophageal musculature does not
improve with edrophonium. There are false positive and false negatives with this test, as well as
equivocal results, so it should be used as an adjunct test and not for definitive diagnosis.
          n  n
antibodies that react with alpha-bungarotoxin extracted ACh receptors; this test is
highly specific, although about 15% of suspected myasthenics are seronegative (see
Appendix 6).
Nursing aspects
As with other cases of megaoesophagus, this dog was fed frequent small meals from a height.
Different patients do better on different types of food and this dog regurgitated less when fed
meatballs of canned food. Water was also offered from a height.
For the aspiration pneumonia, in addition to antibiotic treatment (below), nebulization and
coupage were carried out four times a day to help relieve pulmonary congestion.
Medical trea tment
Pyridostigmine at 15 mg po q 8 hours was started. Some dogs with severe
megaoesophagus are unable to take oral medications and treatment needs to initially
be with injectable neostigmine (0.04 mg/kg im q 6 hours); however, this dog managed
with the medication hidden in his dogfood meatballs.
Treatment for  the aspiration pneumonia  included antibiotic  therapy  with
marbofloxacin (2 mg/kg po q 24 hours), clavulanate potentiated amoxicillin (15
  ( g  o  )   (s h  od 
for aspiration pneumonia usually involves the use of multiple antibiotics to provide
four quadrant' bacterial cover (i.e. Gram-negative and Gram-positive, aerobic and
anaerobic bacteria).
Follow-up
A serum acetylcholine (ACh) receptor antibody test was submitted and these results
came back with a high value of 2.8 nmol/l, confirming the diagnosis of myasthenia
gravis. A value of greater than 0.6 nmol/l is consistent with myasthenia gravis.
The dog was seen 2 weeks later, when his gait was nearly normal and the cough
was no longer present. He still occasionally had regurgitating episodes, but the
frequency was decreased.
Discussion and epidemiology
Acquired canine myasthenia gravis is an autoimmune disease  in which
autoantibodies  are  directed  against  muscle  postsynaptic  nicotinic  acetylcholine
receptors (Fig 3.4). In some cases there is a concurrent thymoma which is the
Nerve
Muscle cell
Neuromuscularjunction
Myasthenia
Normal nerve
gravis
transmission
Nerve ending
Acetylcholine
Antibody
Acetylcholine
against
receptor
receptor
Muscle cell
Muscle cell
Fig 3.4
Anti-cholinesterase receptor and effects of antibodies against the receptor
Acquired myasthenia gravis is probably the most common neuromuscular disorder
diagnosed in the dog. Studies have identified a high relative risk for acquired
myasthenia gravis in the Akita, Scottish terrier, German shorthaired pointer and
Chihuahua breeds of dogs and in Abyssinian and Somali cats. Familial myasthenia
gravis has also been identified in Newfoundlands and Great Danes.
The typical signs include muscle weakness which can be generalized as in this case,
focal, for example affecting only the oesophagus or the facial, pharyngeal or laryngeal
areas, or can be acute, fulminant, and generalized which results in a very rapid onset
of tetraparesis and dyspnoea. About 90% of the dogs with the generalized form have
megaoesophagus. Acquired canine myasthenia gravis has a high mortality rate
(approximately 50%) and according to one specialist in the field, this is due in part to
a misdiagnosis of vomiting when actually the dog is regurgitating due to oesophageal
dilatation. This delayed recognition of regurgitation usually involves inappropriate
therapy with an increased risk of developing an aspiration pneumonia which in itself
may be life threatening.
Treatment  with  anti-cholinesterase  drugs like pyridostigmine prolongs  the
interaction of ACh with the receptors. The dose should begin low and be increased to
effect. Oesophageal motility is minimally affected by this treatment. Some studies
recommend using prednisolone, although this should not be initiated concurrently
with anti-cholinesterase medications as it can exacerbate the weakness and should
not be used in the presence of pneumonia. Low-dose alternate day oral prednisone
therapy (o.5 mg/kg every other day) is suggested when anti-cholinesterase drugs are
not effective
Myasthenic female dogs and cats should be spayed as soon as possible after the signs
of myasthenia gravis are under control as heat cycles and pregnancy can exacerbate
the disorder. Vaccinations may exacerbate the clinical signs. It is generally best to
avoid the use of drugs that may affect neuiromuscular transmission such as ampicillin
aminoglycosides, anti-arrhythmic agents, phenothiazines, anaesthetics, narcotics and
muscle relaxants. Also, organophosphate dips may result in a cholinergic crisis since
they could be additive with pyridostigmine.
Prognosis
          
being diagnosed, although overall the prognosis is guarded as about 50% die or
indergo euthanasia. Those that die usually have succumbed to aspiration pneuimonia.
In this case the initial response was good and the early prognosis was cautiously
optimistic (Fig 3.5).
Fig3.5
4
Oesophageal stricture in a cat
Initial presentation
Regurgitation
Signalment: 9-year-old male neutered Siamese cat, body weight 3.5 kg
Case history
The cat had been healthy until 3 weeks prior to admission, when he had been
anaesthetized for a routine dental cleaning. Since then he had been regurgitating food
and froth, but not bile. The regurgitated food appeared undigested. He was also
retching.
He was de-wormed regularly and vaccinated yearly. He had arthritis and he was
treated with meloxicam for this condition. He was an indoor and outdoor cat, but had
no known exposure to toxins. He was fed canned cat food and chicken, but had a poor
appetite during the 3 weeks prior to presentation. He was able to prehend and swallow
his food and could drink water, although he may have been drinking less than usual.
His stools were normal in appearance and he was able to urinate and defecate
normally. He was on no other medications or supplements.
Physical examination
The cat was bright and responsive. His body condition score was 4/9 and he was
estimated to be about 5% dehydrated. Mucus membrane colour was pink and capillary
refill time was less than 2 seconds.
Thoracic auiscultation revealed normal heart and lung sounds, with a heart rate of
190 beats per minute (bpm) and a respiratory rate of 30 breaths per minute. There was
no evidence of abnormalities or pain on abdominal palpation. Rectal temperature was
38.0° C.
Problem list and discussion of problems
· Regurgitation
Regurgitation usually indicates an oesophageal disorder.
Differential diagnosis
Oesophagitis
· Obstructive oesophageal disorders
· foreign body
· stricture
· neoplasia
: peri-oesophageal masses
Oesophageal neuromuscular disorders
· Megaoesophagus, including systemic disorders affecting swallowing, such as myasthenia gravis and
dysautonomia
 Oesophageal motility abnormalities
Case work-up
The cat was admitted to the hospital for investigative procedures and rehydration
with crystalloid fluids administered intravenously.
Minimum data base
Haematology and serum chemistry were performed and results were all within the
reference ranges.
Imaging
Plain radiographs of the cat's thorax were unremarkable. While a barium swallowing
study could have been performed to further evaluate the oesophageal function, this
test carries the risk of aspiration of the barium and in this case it was elected to
perform endoscopy rather than the swallowing study.
Clinical tip
While thoracic radiographs are useful to evaluate the lungs and many other oesophageal disorders,
strictures may not be visible on a plain radiograph and even liquid barium may pass through a
stricture rapidly enough that it is not detected. Barium mixed with food may allow visualization of a
narrowed area of the oesophagus at the point of the stricture, but may or may not show multiple
areas of strictures if the food is regurgitated when it reaches the first area of stricture. Barium
swallow studies, whether liquid or liquid mixed with food, do carry a risk of aspiration pneumonia,
especially if the patient must be put in lateral recumbency to obtain the radiograph.
Endoscopy
A severe concentric stricture extending throughout most of the thoracic oesophagus
was found (Fig 4.1). The width of the narrowed oesophagus was about 3 to 4 mm.
Gentle dilation with a balloon catheter was performed, stretching the affected part of
the oesophagus to about 1 cm. After dilation with the balloon, a couple of tears were
noted in the mucosa and a severe oesophagitis was noted to be present (Fig 4.2). A
gastric ulcer was also found in the cardia of the stomach.
Fig 4.1
Endoscopic view of oesophageal stricture
Fig4.2
Endoscopic view of oesophageal stricture after dilation, showing mucosal tearing and
Oesophagitis
Nursing tips
The main areas of nursing support for this case were analgesia and nutrition. Observation of
difficulty or pain while swallowing would indicate that more attention be paid to analgesia. Generally
nutritional support with liquid foods is initially indicated after balloon dilation or in other cases of
severe oesophagitis. If the patient becomes able to eat food with a more solid or semi-solid
consistency, they should be fed these foods. The presence of food in the oesophagus may decrease the
risk of re-stricturing. If the animal is unable to take any nutrition orally a gastrostomy tube may need
to be placed; however, fasting or *oesophageal rest’ is not indicated otherwise. There are already
saliva and other secretions in the oesophagus so it does not 'rest'.
Follow-uup
Probably due to the extent and severity of the oesophageal stricture in this cat, the
strictures reformed and his oesophagus was repeatedly balloon dilated on about a
weekly basis 11 more times (Fig 4.3). After the 12th balloon dilation, he was able to
eat soft foods successfully and has done well, although continues to need to eat soft
food.
Fig4.3
Endoscopic view of re-stricturing of oesophagus after dilation
Medical therapy
Post-dilation treatment in this cat was mostly for the oesophagitis and the gastric
lulcer.
The goals of therapy for oesophageal strictures were to decrease any ongoing reflux
as the damage to the oesophageal mucosa can decrease the tone of the lower
oesophageal sphincter, worsening the condition, to resolve the inflammation and to
decrease the risk of repeat stricture formation.
Gastric acid inhibitors such as ranitidine were used as they decrease the output of
gastric acid and pepsin. Human patients with oesophagitis report a decrease in
symptoms when administered histamine H, receptor antagonists. These medications
are adequate for mild to moderate oesophagitis, but may not be sufficiently effective
for severe oesophagitis. Proton pump inhibitors such as omeprazole produce greater
and more long lasting suppression of gastric acid than do the H2 antagonists and are
frequently used  for human oesophagitis patients. Abrupt discontinuation of
omeprazole is more likely to be associated with a relapse of the condition in humans;
while this has not been studied in dogs or cats, a cautious approach to
discontinuation of the drug may be indicated.
Sucralfate has a mucosal protective effect on the oesophageal mucosa. While it has
been stated that it is only effective in an acid environment (i.e. during active reflux),
others have indicated that it may be effective in a neutral pH environment as well as
an acidic one.
Injection of corticosteroids into the dilated area via the endoscope is also
was not available. Some clinicians use systemic corticosteroid administration after
balloon dilation, although there is no evidence that this is effective.
Some clinicians also use antibiotic therapy in cases of oesophagitis; however, there
are also no studies showing any added benefit for them. If aspiration pneumonia is
present, appropriate antibiotics should be used and possibly if systemic corticosteroids
are used prophylactic anti biotics should also be uised.
Colchicine (0.03 mg/kg po q 48 hour) was used in this cat to attempt to decrease
fibrosis and re-stricturing. The usefulness of this drug in these cases has not been
studied. Colchicine inhibits collagen synthesis. Potential side effects of colchicine
include vomiting, diarrhoea and abdominal pain.
this cat. Initially liquid foods were fed and when these were tolerated, feeding with
very soft food was started.
Surgical therapy
Surgical techniques for the treatment of fibrous oesophageal strictures have been
described, but the outcome is likely to be less suiccessfuil than balloon dilation in cases
        s 
oesophageal strictures, many animals do well after balloon dilation; in one study 88%
of patients had a successful ouitcome.
Case discussion
Balloon dilation is the current treatment of choice for oesophageal strictures
Although many animals require repeated dilation before the oesophagus remains large
enough for them to eat without regurgitating, repeating the procedure 12 times is
stricture.
Pathogenesis
Severe oesophagitis and oesophageal strictures after anaesthesia are generally due to
gastro-oesophageal reflux. Factors affecting the risk of oesophagitis include the tone of
the lower oesophageal sphincter, the volume of gastric contents refluxed, the content
of the refluxed material, how long it is present within the oesophagus and the healing
ability of the oesophagus.
anaesthesia are associated with increased risk of gastro-oesophageal reflux. A pre-
anaesthetic fast longer than 24 houirs is also associated with an increased frequency of
reflux, likely due to the more acidic nature of the contents. Alkaline reflux with a pH
greater the 7.5 can also cause oesophagitis; however, it is thought to usually be less
severe than that caused by acidic reflux.
scarring and stricture are more likely. Strictures are most likely with circumferential
injury and inflammation or that affecting opposing sides of the oesophagus.
Inflammation stimulates lymphocytes, fibroblast and macrophage activity and
formation of collagen. The initial response occurs immediately and collagen formation
            s  s s s
weeks after the injury.
Prognosis
Since the development of balloon di lation, the prognosis for patients with oesophageal
strictures has improved. In one study a successful outcome occurred in 88% of
patients treated with balloon dilation, with most animals able to eat canned, mashed
or dry food without regurgitation.
5
Phenobarbitone responsive retching in a dog
Initial presentation
Gagging, retching and vomiting for 10 days
Signalment: 6-year-old neutered male Jack Russell terrier x poodle, body weight 6.6 kg
Case history
This dog had been referred for a suspected upper respiratory disorder or oesophageal
foreign body based on his clinical signs and diet. He had been keen to eat, although
according to the owner it appeared painful for him to eat and his food intake was
decreasing. He was able to prehend and swallow food, but vomited 5 to 30 minutes
after eating. Active abdominal contractions were present prior to and during the
vomiting; the vomitus contained bile, digested and undigested food. The frequency of
the episodes was increasing to several times per day.
His faeces were normal and he was defecating, drinking and urinating normally. He
was fed dry food mixed with some canned food, plus table scraps including pork bones
and chews. His vaccinations and de-worming programme were up to date.
He had lost weight and was becoming tired more quickly on his walks.
Physical examination
The dog was dull but responsive and his body condition score was 4/9. Mucus
membranes were pink but tacky and he was estimated to be about 6% dehydrated. His
capillary refill time was less than 2 seconds. Oral examination revealed
hypersalivation, halitosis and mild gingival tartar.
He was trembling and palpation of the ventral neck resulted in a marked pain
reaction, with spasms of the neck, bruxism and vocalization. The submandibular
salivary glands were mildly enlarged and very firm.
Thoracic auscultation revealed normal heart and lung sounds, with a heart rate of
S  d s       (    
temperature was 36.7° C.
Problem list and discuission of problems
· Vomiting with severe gagging and retching
Differential diagnosis
Differential diagnoses for the vomiting with gagging and retching may include some of the
following categories of disorders.
· Oral/pharyngeal/oesophageal disorders are included in this case as the vomiting was accompanied
by signs possibly relating to the upper alimentary tract. In some cases, patients with these disorders
will also vomit.
· salivary gland necrosis
· oesophagitis
· foreign body within the pharynx, oesophagus or trachea
: gastro-oesophageal reflux
• Disorders of the stomach
· foreign body
· gastritis
· ulceration
* chronic partial dilation-volvulus
 neoplasia
· Disorders of the small intestine
· foreign body
· inflammatory bowel disease
· neoplasia
• intussusception (unlikely due to age and signs)
· Dietary causes
 dietary sensitivity
 dietary indiscretion
Case work-up
The dog was admitted to the hospital and administered intravenous crystalloid fluids
to correct the dehydration.
Minimum data base
Haematology, serum chemistry and routine urinalysis were performed.
x 10*/l (reference range 3.6-12.0 x 10°/l) and a monocytosis (2.1 x 10%/l; reference
range 0-1.5 x 10/l), consistent with inflammation or infection.
         s
3.1 mmol/l (reference range 3.6-5.6 mmol/l) was also noted and corrected with the
addition of potassium chloride to the intravenous fluids.
Urinalysis showed a high specific gravity of 1.041, again consistent with
dehydration and showing good renal concentrating ability; the rest of the urinalysis
was linremarkable.
Imaging and histopathology of the biopsy
Thoracic  and  abdominal  radiography  showed  no  abnormalities.  Abdominal
uiltrasouind showed no abnormalities
oesophagus near the lower oesophageal sphincter (Fig 5.1). No foreign bodes or
masses were observed. The gastric and duodenal mucosa appeared normal and
tisslle.
Fig 5.1
Endoscopic view of distal oesophagus showing oesophagitis
Surgical biopsies were taken of one of the enlarged salivary glands. Histopathology
of this gland showed some evidence of necrosis.
Diagnosis
The results for this case rule out many causes of gagging and vomiting and are most
consistent with salivary gland necrosis, also termed phenobarbitone responsive
           
This dog also had evidence of oesophagitis
Pathophysiology and epidemiology
This disorder is poorly understood but is thought to be a form of limbic epilepsy. While
it has been reported in a wide variety of dogs, young-to middle-aged Jack Russell
terriers and wirehaired fox terriers appear to be predisposed.
Medical treatment
Treatment with phenobarbitone at 2 mg/kg twice a day orally was initiated. The dog
responded within 48 hours with a resolution of the bruxism, oesophageal spasms,
hypersalivation and vomiting.
Treatment for the concurrent oesophagitis was also started using ranitidine (2
mg/kg po q 12 hours), sucralfate (1 ml po q 8 hours) and buprenorphine (20 μg/kg iv
q6 hours).
Follow-up
P n         ns s  s
improvement and serum phenobarbitone concentration assay, which was 23 μg/ml.
While this is on the low end of the therapeutic range for idiopathic epilepsy, it was
serum phenobarbitone concentrations is 15-45 μg/ml; however, some neurologists feel
that values below 20 μg/ml may not control clinical signs and with values over 40
 s    g   s  (  a  ) s
monitoring of liver parameters was also recommended, as for any dog on
phenobarbitone.
Clinical tip on serum phenobarbitone concentrations
The most useful single sample is the trough phenobarbitone concentration, i.e. immediately before
 a dose is due. If it is not practical to collect a sample at this time then try to take subsequent samples
at the same time in the dosing cycle. Some authors advocate the use of peak phenobarbitone levels
(2-4 hours post-pill) as well as trough levels (prior to dosing) to check the maximal serum
concentration. A study has suggested that in most cases this is not necessary.
Prognosis
The prognosis in cases which respond to therapy is excellent. In most reported cases it
has been possible to slowly wean the dogs off the phenobarbitone starting from 3
months post-diagnosis with cessation of medication within 6 months from diagnosis.
6
Oesophageal foreign body in a dog
Initial presentation
Dysphagia, regurgitation
Signalment: 8-month-old entire male Labrador retriever, body weight 20 kg
Case history
The dog had been regurgitating for about 2 days. He was still interested in eating, but
appeared to be uncomfortable when trying to swallow. After swallowing, undigested
food was frequently regurgitated, usually within 5 minutes. He was able to swallow
water, although occasionally appeared to also regurgitate water. His faeces had been
normal, although he had not passed any faeces for 1 day before admission.
Prior to this he had been a healthy puppy, had received his initial course of
vaccinations and had been de-wormed twice with fenbendazole. His regular diet was a
premium quality puppy food and he was given treats of human food. The owners were
suspicious that the dog could have eaten a bone that he scavenged from the rubbish.
Physical examination
At presentation, the dog was quiet but alert. He had a body condition score of 5/9 and
was estimated to be about 6% dehydrated. His mucous membranes were pink and
slightly tacky; his capillary refill time was about 3 seconds. Halitosis was noted during
the oral examination and there was evidence of dried saliva around his mouth. A gag
reflex was present, the dog could move his tongue normally and the oral cavity
appeared normal.
Thoracic auscultation and abdominal palpation revealed no abnormalities and his
lymph nodes were of normal size. His rectal temperature was 38° C, respiratory rate 40
breaths per minute and heart rate was 80 beats per minute.
Problem list and discussion of problems
  n   s n     
swallow appeared to be due to oesophageal dysphagia and was thought to be related to
the cause of the regurgitation. There was also evidence of drooling, with the dried
saliva present around his mouth. The dehydration was thought to be secondary to his
swallowing problems.
Differential diagnosis
Causes of regurgitation include:
· Pharyngeal disorders
 pharyngeal obstructive disorders, such as foreign bodies, tonsillar neoplasia or retropharyngeal
lymphadenopathy
* pharyngeal neuromuscular disorders, such as myasthenia gravis, cranial nerve (Ix, X) neuropathies,
brain stem or cerebellar disorders, cricopharyngeal achalasia, botulism, rabies (although rabies is
unlikely in the UK)
· Oesophageal disorders
· oesophagitis
 oesophageal obstructive disorders, such as foreign bodies, stricture, neoplasia, vascular ring
anomalies, perioesophageal masses
: Oesophageal neuromuscular disorders, such as megaoesophagus or motility disorders
· oesophageal diverticula
· hiatal hernia
Differential diagnoses for halitosis include:
· Diet related cases, such as food remaining in the mouth, pharynx or oesophagus, and coprophagia
* Cheilitis
· Oral cavity or pharyngeal disorders such as foreign bodies or inflammatory lesions
· Nasal cavity or sinus disorders with inflammation or necrosis
· Dental disease
· Oesophageal diseases with food remaining in the oesophagus
· Malassimilation
 Systemic disorders such as uraemia or liver disease
Drooling can be due to excessive saliva production or failure to adequately swallow
saliva. Some dogs also drool in anticipation of feeding and some cats while purring.
With the concurrent history of regurgitation, the drooling in this dog was thought to
be due to a swallowing problem or oesophageal discomfort.
Case work-ulp
Initial treatment included administration of intravenous crystalloid fluid therapy to
correct the estimated 6% dehydra tion.
Minimuim data base
Haematology showed a packed cell volume of 0.516 1/1 (reference range 0.39-0.55 1/l).
While this is within the reference range, it is higher than expected for a Labrador
retriever and the increase was likely due to dehydration. Serum chemistry results
including electrolyte values, were within the reference ranges except for urea which
was just above the upper end of the reference range at 8.1 mmol/l (reference range
1.7-7.4 mmol/l). The serum creatinine was within the reference range at 111 μmol/l
(reference range 40-i132 μmol/l).  Elevations in urea can be due to
haemoconcentration from dehydration, but can also occur due to renal causes or from
bleeding into or from the gastrointestinal tract.
The urine specific gravity of this dog was 1.047, indicating good urine
concentrating ability and consistent with dehydration, and as the serum creatinine
was not elevated, renal or post-renal cauises of the elevated urea were linlikely
Imaging
caudal oesophagus at the level of the diaphragmatic hiatus (Figs 6.1 and 6.2) and
evidence  of aspiration   pneumonia and  no evidence of   mediastinitis  or
pneumomediastinum, so the foreign body did not appear to have penetrated the
oesophaguis.
Figs6.1
Figs 6.1 and 6.2
Lateral and ventrodorsal thoracic radiographs showing radiopaque foreign body
indistaloesophagus
(courtesy of Dr Tobias Schwarz)
Diagnosis and treatment
Endoscopy
After re-hydration the dog was anaesthetized and oesophagoscopy was performed. A
bone foreign body was visualized (Fig. 6.3).The foreign body was removed using
retrieval forceps (Fig 6.4). The oesophageal wall showed ulcerations and mucosal
tearing from the presence of the bone (Fig 6.5).
Fig6.3
Endoscopic view of bone stuck in the oesophagus
Fig6.4
 Retrieval forceps used to remove oesophageal foreign bodies
Fig6.5
 Endoscopic view of the oesophagus after removal of the bone, showing trauma and tearing
of oesophageal mucosa
(courtesy of Alison Ridyard)
Medical management
After removal of the bone, the dog was treated with sucralfate suspension (4 ml po q 8
hours), ranitidine (2 mg/kg po q 12 hours) for its antacid and promotility effects and
clavulanate-potentiated amoxicillin (15 mg/kg po q 12 hours). He was continued on
intravenous fluids at a maintenance rate. At 24 hours post-procedure the dog was
offered water and then later a liquid food, which he was able to swallow without
discomfort or regurgitation.
Outcome
The dog was discharged 48 houirs after removal of the bone, with instructions to
continue the medications and feed soft food for a week. At a re-visit 2 weeks later, the
dog was eating well and was able to swallow comfortably with no regurgitation.
Discussion and epidemiology
Oesophageal foreign bodies are a frequent clinical problem in dogs and cats. They are
more common in dogs than in cats, possibly because of the more discriminating
eating habits of cats. Small breeds of dogs, especially West Highland white terriers and
Yorkshire terriers are predisposed, although Bernese mountain dogs were over-
represented in one study.
  s  s n    o   
fragments, such as found in this dog, and fish hooks. Other foreign bodies found in
dogs include coins and hard food (e.g. uncooked or partially cooked potatoes, hard
fruits), whereas toys or other play objects are more commonly found in cats. Many
other objects have been found, including fabric, magnets, sticks, needles and just
about anything an animal can attempt to swallow. Dental chews are increasingly
being recognized for their potential to cause oesophageal obstruction.
Many foreign bodies are regurgitated or pass into the stomach or intestines, but
A     n s  s   
or sharp points and the duration of obstruction. The most common locations are
within the thoracic inlet, the base of the heart or the diaphragmatic hiatus, as these
are the areas of least distensibility within the oesophagus. The pressure of the object
can lead to pressure necrosis of the oesophageal wall, causing perforation or
subsequent stricture.
    s      n    
or rubbish ingestion. The onset of clinical signs depends upon the severity of
oesophageal obstruction. Animals with complete oesophageal obstruction are often
         e 
presented within days to weeks after the initial ingestion of the foreign body. Clinical
signs include regurgitation, excessive salivation, odynophagia, anorexia, dysphagia,
retching and respiratory distress.
Bone foreign bodies can occasionally be palpated if they become lodged in the
cervical oesophagus, but definitive diagnosis requires radiography. Radiodense
          
radiolucent foreign bodies will require administration of contrast agents. lodine
contrast agents should be used instead of barium if oesophageal perforation is
The most important differential diagnoses would include oesophageal stricture
conditions can be differentiated with radiography and/or endoscopy.
Oesophageal foreign bodies should be removed promptly. The longer the foreign
S           
should be the initial approach to treating an oesophageal foreign body although
fluoroscopic-guided retrieval has been described. A rigid endoscope is most useful in
retrieving large foreign bodies, particularly bones or bone fragments. Large grasping
forceps are passed through the rigid endoscope to retrieve the foreign body. Large
foreign bodies that cannot be safely removed through the mouth can occasionally be
managed with a flexible fibreoptic endoscope and basket, tripod or snare retrieval
study, removal of oesophageal foreign bodies using an endoscope was successful in
90.2% of the dogs.
Careful assessment should be made of the damage to the oesophagus via the
endoscope after foreign body removal. Survey radiographs should also be taken after
removal to check for pneumothorax or pneumomediastinum secondary to oesophageal
perforation.
Affected animals may be fasted for 24 hours after foreign body removal. Longer
periods of fasting may be required if the oesophagus is necrotic, in which case,
placement of a gastrostomy tube at the time of endoscopy facilitates feeding bypassing
the oesophagus.
Nursing tip on feeding post-oesophageal foreign body removal
Patients who have had an oesophageal foreign body removed are likely to initially have a painful
oesophagitis. Liquid foods or canned food which has been made more liquid in a blender may be
easier to swallow. If water is added to a canned food, the caloric content should be determined to
     ns  i   aa     s  s r as 
been eating adequately for the past 3 days or longer, the amount of food initially fed should not be
 more than one-third of the resting energy requirement per day. The amount can be gradually
increased over 3 days. If the patient is reluctant to eat or swallows with difficulty, reassessment of the
oesophagus and possibly the use of more analgesia may be necessary.
Specific therapy for oesophagitis should include oral sucralfate suspensions (0.5-1.0
g po q 8 hours). Suspensions of sucralfate are more therapeutic than intact tablets.
clinicians in those animals at risk for oesophageal stricture; however, there is no
evidence that oral administration of glucocorticoids is of any benefit. In animals
which have formed an oesophageal stricture, local oesophageal injections of
corticosteroid (e.g. triamcinolone) via an endoscope after balloon dilation have shown
some benefit and possibly this would be beneficial in animals at risk for oesophageal
stricture, although it could also possibly delay healing. The risk of stricture is greatest
          
antibiotics should be considered in animals with severe ulceration and/or small
perforations.
Minor oesophageal tears or lacerations less than 1 cm in length can usually be
managed conservatively. Surgery is indicated if endoscopy fails or if there is evidence
of larger oesophageal perforation. Gastrotomy is preferred to oesophagotomy for distal
oesophageal foreign bodies because of the poorer healing properties of the oesophagus
and the potential for stricture formation. However, oesophagotomy is indicated in
those cases where the foreign body could not be removed through gastrotomy. Surgery
is also indicated to repair oesophageal perforation.
Prognosis
especially if they are removed immediately, and one study reported 92% of dogs had
which have a better prognosis). A worse prognosis is associated with foreign bodies
that are large, have sharp points or are retained for a prolonged period of time.
Immediate complications include complete obstruction or laceration, or aspiration
pneumonia from the regurgitation. Late complications, which can occur a week or
more after foreign body removal, include perforation, haemothorax, fistulation and
diverticula, segmental hypomotility, or stricture forma tion.
7
Persistent right aortic arch in a dog
Initial presentation
Regurgitating, especially food, since weaning
Signalment: 3-month-old uncastrated male Border collie, body weight 11 kg
Case history
The puppy had been obtained from a farm about a month prior to presentation. Since
then he had regurgitated frequently (several times a day), especially food but also
occasionally water. The food he brought up was undigested with no bile present and
occurred within minutes after eating, but recently it had occurred as long as an hour
after meals. There was sometimes some retching after he regurgitated. He had no
problem picking up his food and his initial swallowing appeared normal. He had been
very bright, but was in poor body condition.
His initial diet was a dry puppy food, free choice. The owners had tried adding
water to the food, but this did not improve the clinical signs. When they first obtained
him he had a good appetite, but during the week previous to admission he had been
less interested in eating. The owners had been trying to tempt him to eat with a
variety of foods. His faeces had usually been normal, although since the change in
diet, they occasionally were soft.
Physical examination
The puppy was very bright and responsive, but not well grown. He was thin, with a
body condi tion score of 2/9. His mucus membranes were pink and capillary refill time
was less than 2 seconds. On oral examination his tonsils were slightly enlarged.
Thoracic auscultation revealed normal heart and lung sounds, with a heart rate of
140 beats per minute (bpm) and a respiratory rate of 24 breaths per minute. There was
no evidence of pain on abdominal palpation and the only abnormality found was
increased gas in the small intestines. Rectal temperature was 38.6° C.
Problem list and differential diagnoses
Regurgitation was the puppy's primary problem. Differential diagnoses for
regurgitation for this puppy included:
· Megaoesophagus
· Oesophageal stricture
· Oesophagitis
· Vascular ring anomaly (e.g. persistent right aortic arch (PRAA))
· Hiatal hernia
· Oesophageal dysmotility.
   s    s    
duration of the clinical signs. Immune-mediated disorders (e.g. myasthenia gravis)
Diagnostic aids
Diagnostic techniques that were indicated in this puppy included plain thoracic
         
contrast study using barium mixed with dog food would also help localize and
characterize oesophageal disorders such as strictures, PRAA and dysmotility.
Oesophageal endoscopy would also be useful to visualize the mucosa of the
oesophagus.
Case work-up
Minimum data base
The dog was admitted to the hospital and a minimum data base including
these tests were inremarkable.
Imaging
Plain films indicated the possibility of a megaoesophagus in the cranial thoracic area.
A positive contrast study with a barium meal revealed oesophageal constriction at the
base of the heart and marked oesophageal dilatation extending cranially from that
constricted area (Figs 7.1 and 7.2).
Figs 7.1
Figs 7.1 and 7.2
 Lateral and ventrodorsal thoracic radiographs with contrast, showing enlarged
oesophagus up to the level of the heart
(courtesy of Dr Geoff Culsh aw)
Endoscopy
Oesophageal endoscopy showed a pinched area of the oesophagus and also
inflammation of the oesophageal mucosa.
Diagnosis
A diagnosis of vascular ring anomaly and oesophagitis was made.
Treatment - surgical
The treatment consisted of transecting the bands forming the vascular ring. In this
case a left thoracotomy was performed and a persistent right ligamentum arteriosum
was identified, dissected and divided. A thoracostomy tube was placed for immediate
post-operative management.
Treatment - medical
Treatment for the oesophagitis included omeprazole (1 mg/kg po q 24 hours) and
sucralfate suspension (1.5 ml po q 8 hours given 1 hour before feeding or other
medications).
Clinical tip on sucralfate
Sucralfate binds to ulcerated mucosa forming a protective covering and stimulates repair
mechanisms partially via stimulation of prostaglandin-mediated pathways. It has few side effects
(constipation is reported in people but rarely seen in cats or dogs), but it can potentially affect the
bioavailability of other medications and should probably be given separately. It may work best in the
acid environment of the stomach, but does also work in a neutral pH and is therefore also indicated
for use in oesophageal erosions or ulcers.
Nursing care
 A liquid food was fed to try to ensure that adequate nutrition was maintained. The puppy's caloric
requirements were determined and food provided in four meals per day. The initial amount of food
on the first day provided one-third of his energy requirements and was increased to full feeding by
   s  m   e       
for nutritional support would have been placement of a gastrostomy tube.
Clinical tips on nutrition in puppies
times resting energy requirements (RER). They also have higher protein requirements of 22 to 32% of
dry matter and increased calcium requirements of 0.7 to 1.7% dry matter; these concentrations would
be provided in a good puppy food
   n  x   n Pa s      a s 
X 110.75 = 443 kcal. At 3 months of age he needs three times RER or about 1330 kcal. His initial
feeding should be for his existing body weight, with increased amounts over time to increase his body
condition score.
A typical puppy food contains around 3.8 kcal/g, so this puppy would need about 350 g of food
per day.
Follow-ulp
The puppy was seen again 2 weeks after the surgery. He was still regurgitating, but it
had decreased to once or twice per week. The puppy was still very bright and his body
 s sm m   h         
gruel.
Discussion and epidemiology
Regurgitation after weaning is typical in patients with vascular ring anomalies.
Nearly all affected dogs show signs before the age of 6 months. Vascular ring
anomalies can be difficult to distinguish from idiopathic megaoesophagus, but
contrast study with the vascular ring anomalies usually shows a pinching of the
contrast just cranial to the heart base, whereas in idiopathic megaoesophagus there is
usually oesophageal dilation caudal to the heart. Endoscopy will also show an area of
with regurgitation are at risk for aspiration pneumonia and should be monitored for
in many patients with oesophageal disorders.
The most common vascular ring anomaly is the persistent right aortic arch (PRAA).
In normal embryonic development, the aortic arch develops from the left fourth aortic
arch and left dorsal aortic root and the adult aortic arch is to the left of the
oesophagus. There are other variations of abnormal development, for example
 s
(Fig 7.3).
Oesophagus
Ligamentum
Aortic arch
arteriosum-
Main
pulmonary
artery
Oesophagus
Ligamentum
Aortic arch
arteriosum-
Main
pulmonary
artery-
Fig 7.3
The normal heart and a heart with persistent right aortic arch
The presence of oesophagitis in this case may have been due to the prolonged
presence of food material irritating the oesophagus.
It is likely that vascular ring anomalies have an inherited basis, as there are breed
and greyhounds. The disorders are much less common in cats, but have been reported.
Prognosis
It is estimated that only 1o% of affected dogs will develop completely normal
oesophageal function after surgery and up to 50% of affected dogs will continue to
show occasional signs of regurgitation. Permanent oesophageal dilation cranial to the
constriction is common due to irreversible degenerative changes. As many as 4o% of
these cases have been reported to have a short survival time due to malnourishment
and/or aspiration pneumonia. This puppy's initial improvement in signs and body
condition was encouraging, although he was still at risk for aspiration pneumonia.
8
Feline dysautonomia
Initial presentation
Chronic dysphagia, vomiting, constipation, weight loss
  a   s     s
Case history
The cat had a 5-week history of vomiting frothy fluid and partially digested food three
to four times a day. He appeared interested in eating, but had difficulty swallowing
faeces were very dry. He had difficulty passing faeces and sometimes retched when
attempting to defecate. His owners felt that the cat was drinking less and he was
producing very small amounts of urine. He had also been sneezing and they said he
often had a crusty discharge at his nostrils. The owners thought that he had lost about
1 kg in weight during this time.
The owners had owned the cat since he was a kitten. He lived with one other
linrelated cat that was healthy and they had both been de-wormed and vaccinated
approximately 3 months earlier. His previous diet was a combination of a commercial
dry cat food and a commercial canned cat food, but he had recently only been able to
swallow small amounts of the canned commercial food. To encourage him to try to
eat, the owners had also been giving him small bits of canned tuna.
Previous diagnostic tests had been performed to check for toxoplasmosis, feline
immunodeficiency virus and feline leukaemia virus (FeLV); the results of all of these
tests were negative.
Physical examination
The cat was quiet but responsive. He had evidence of weight loss, his body condition
score was 3/9 and he had poor muscle mass. The mucous membranes of his mouth
were dry and pink and capillary refill time was <2 seconds. His heart rate was 120
S           
temperature was 37.9° C and systolic blood pressure was low normal at 140 mmHg.
The thorax was normal on auscultation and compression. Palpation of the abdomen
revealed a full bladder from which urine was easily expressed.
He had bilaterally dilated pupils which were not responsive to light and his third
eyelids were elevated. He did respond to a menace test, although the response was
decreased. He had normal postural reactions in all limbs and normal patellar reflexes.
A Schirmer tear test showed bilaterally decreased tear production; the right eye was 10
mm and the left was 8 mm (reference range greater than 15 mm in 1 minute).
Problem list and discussion of problems
The cat's problems included dysphagia, vomiting, constipation with tenesmus and
non-responsive dilated pupils with decreased tear production. As he was unable to
initiate swallowing, the dysphagia, appeared to be primarily oropharyngeal, although,
as he had also regurgitated, a more general acquired neuromuscuilar disorder was
likely.
Differential diagnosis
Differential diagnoses lists for the problems in this cat include the following.
Dysphagia and regurgitation
· Cranial nerve neuropathies, e.g. nerves VIl, IX and/or XII
· Inflammation, e.g. caustic agents, infections, immune-mediated disorders
· Pharyngitis/oesophagitis
: Oropharyngeal/oesophageal neoplasia
· Retropharyngeal disorders, e.g polyps, lymphadenopathy, haematoma, abscess, tumour
· Neuromuscular disorders, e.g. myasthenia gravis, dysautonomia, rabies, botulism
: Oropharyngeal/oesophageal foreign body
· Megaoesophagus (for the regurgitation, not for dysphagia).
Vomiting
· Adverse reactions to food
enteritis
· Constipation
· Intussusception
• Parasites, e.g. Ollulanus triceps, ascarids, Physaloptera
· Systemic disorders and disorders of other organs, e.g. uraemia, liver disease, congestive heart
failure, pancreatopathy, metabolic disorders (diabetes mellitus, electrolyte imbalances)
Constipation/tenesmus
 Ingestion of indigestible material, e.g. cloth, hair
* Lack of exercise
• Painful defecation, e.g. trauma, pelvic fracture, inflammatory musculoskeletal disorders 
· Obstruction, e.g. tumour, stricture
· Neurological disease, e.g. dysautonomia, idiopathic megacolon, sacral spinal nerve, pudendal nerve
 or perineal nerve disorder
· Dehydration
Dilated, non-responsive pupils
• Disorder of the visual pathways (likely to cause blindness)
· Disorders of the parasympathetic fibres that innervate the muscle fibres of the iris (oculomotor, CN
II)
* Iris atrophy (unlikely in this young cat)
· Fluoroquinolone induced retinal degeneration - causes blindness but loss of pupillary light reflex
can be an early sign (no history of its use in this cat)
· Anti-cholinergic drug toxicity
· Hypertension (although retinas appeared normal)
· Feline infectious peritonitis (previous negative test)
: Cryptococcosis
· Toxoplasmosis (unlikely as the serum test titres too low in this cat)
· Lymphoma
 Cuterebra migration (unlikely in the UK)
· Lead toxicity (no history consistent with lead ingestion)
· Spastic pupil syndrome has also been reported in FeLV+ cats due to ciliary ganglion lesions (FeLV
negative on test)
Decreased Schirmer tear test (decreased tear production)
· Lesions of the afferent arm of the tearing reflex
· loss of sensation from the cornea, conjunctive
· trigeminal nerve disorder
• Lesions of the efferent arm of the tearing reflex
· disorder of parasympathetic nerve supply to the lacrimal gland
· facial nerve disorder
* severe otitis media or middle ear neoplasia
· keratoconjunctivitis sicca
Case work-up
        s   
Minimum data base
Haematology and serum chemistry results were unremarkable other than parameters
elevated by dehydration, e.g. albumin was 41 g/l (reference range 28-39 g/l).
Urinalysis showed a urine specific gravity of 1.051, also consistent with
dehydration. No abnormalities were noted on the chemical strip and the sediment
showed some epithelial cells and white blood cells.
Pilocarpine test
Pharmacological testing is helpful for ruling out other potential diagnoses and a
pilocarpine test performed in this cat showed a positive result (Figs 8.1 and 8.2).
Fig 8.1
The patient prior to pilocarpine showing dilated pupils
(courtesy of Dr Danielle Gunn-Moore)
Fig 8.2
The patient after pilocarpine administration to one eye, showing constriction of the pupil
of the treated eye
(courtesy of Dr Danielle Gunn-Moore)
Clinical tip on pilocarpine test
Place one drop of diluted pilocarpine ophthalmic solution (o.o5%) in one eye and observe the
diameter of the pupil every 15 minutes for 1 hour. Most normal animals will not respond to this
concentration or only show a minimal response at 60 minutes. Miosis of the treated eye demonstrates
the denervation supersensitivity which occurs with dysautonomia. Toxicity with an anti-cholinergic
drug would block the response of the pupil to pilocarpine.
Imaging
Thoracic radiography showed no abnormalities in this cat. Aspiration pneumonia can
 s   n sos  n  m 
dysautonomia. Abdominal ultrasound showed intestinal ileus, moderate gastric
dilation, a large full bladder and a colon containing some faecal material.
Treatment and ouitcome
    s  s     
effects in the colon as well as the stomach and small intestine, at an initial dose of 0.1
mg/kg po q 12 hours. This dose was increased gradually to 0.5 mg/kg to produce a soft
but not diarrhoeic stool. The cholinergic drug bethanechol (1 mg po q 12 hours) was
initiated to aid bladder emptying and for the first 2 days his bladder was expressed 2
  t  s o  e sa     p  s t 
hours.
The cat was brighter after rehydration and the first day in hospital on medications.
He urinated a small amount on his own without his bladder being expressed. He did
not pass faeces until the third day and they were still fairly firm, so the dose of
cisapride was increased.
  (      ss  e  
liquid nutritional supplement was provided, initially at one-third resting energy
requirement (RER), with the intent to increase to fill RER over 3 days. After 2 weeks
the cat was discharged with the owners to feed using the feeding tube. He was
continued on the cisapride, bethanechol and ocuilar lubricants. The cat was willing to
eat small amounts of soft food and the owners were able to feed him successfully using
the oesophageal feeding tube
Fig8.3
d    s   d 
Nursing tip
Daily RER for this cat was 3.75 kgo.75 x 70 = 188 kcal. The nutritional supplement contained 1
kcal/ml. On the first day the caloric goal was 63 kcal or ml, divided into six 10-ml increments. The
feedings must be delivered slowly as with the distal end of the tube in the oesophagus it is not
possible to check by aspirating on the tube how much remains in the stomach from the previous
meal. Any evidence of refluxing or vomiting means that feeding should be stopped and either no food
or smaller amounts of food should be fed during the next feeding period.
Nursing tips on cat care
 o s A P  A aq se os sn os ' n e si  a a
cleaned off of them. As this cat was not emptying his bladder fully, gentle manual expression of the
urine was done several times a day. If urine accumulates in the bladder, there is an increased risk of
urinary tract infections and of development of a flaccid, atonic bladder which cannot contract and
empty efficiently.
With cats (or dogs) that have dry eyes, a mucus thread or discharge tends to form in the medial
canthus of their eyes - this should be gently removed and a lubricant applied to the eye. If dry eyes
are not lubricated, the animals are at risk of forming cormeal ulcers.
The oesophageal tube was removed at a 3 week re-check.
At re-checks over the following 4 months, his demeanour and appetite improved,
although he remained more comfortable eating canned rather than dry cat food. His
pupillary response improved, but was not normal.
Discuission
   n     s 
of autonomic function and the clinical signs reflect this failure. Typical signs include
dysphagia, vomiting, regurgitation, dysuria, diarrhoea or constipation, dry mucous
membranes (eyes, nose and mouith), loss of pupillary light reflexes, third eyelid
elevation and bradycardia or a lack of increased heart rate with sympathetic
stimulation. A dilated anal sphincter is sometimes found, although this is skeletal
muscle so the cause of this is not known. Diagnosis is based on typical signs and the
At post-mortem, there are no consistent gross pathological findings. Most animals
       s       
appear abnormal and may be reduced in density.
The cause of dysautonomia is unclear. Clostridial toxins have been implicated as the
cause in horses. There is evidence that equine dysautonomia is associated with an
infection with Clostridium botulinum type C.
A study has been done to investigate the presence of C. botulinum type C neurotoxin
in the food, ileal content, faeces and serum of cats with dysautonomia. The toxin was
detected directly in four of eight affected cats and after enrichment in seven of them
It was also detected in their dried food. No toxin was detected in healthy control cats
or in their tinned food. The levels of IgA antibodies to the toxin and to surface
antigens of C. botulinum type C in the faeces of the affected cats 14 weeks after the
outbreak were significantly higher than in the faeces of the control cats. From this
study, it appears that the botulinum neurotoxin is a factor in the aetiology of
other factors.
Treatment primarily involves supportive care. Prokinetic drugs such as cisapride
may improve gastrointestinal tract motility, including the colon. Metoclopramide may
also be used, but is only effective for gastric emptying and duodenal motility.
Cholinergic drugs such as bethanechol may help to prevent constipation and urinary
retention. Bethanechol should be used with cauition as it can cauise bradycardia and
arrhythmias and many of these cats present with bradycardia.
Parasympathomimetics are sometimes used to stimulate  oronasal secretions.
Although not used in this case, 1% pilocarpine (one drop in both eyes q 6 hours) may
improve lacrimation. Ocular lubricants are also indicated for cats with dry eyes.
Supportive care also includes: rehydration, emptying of the bladder and colon if
and possibly physical therapy involving flexing and extending joints and massage of
muscles. Nursing care can make the difference in the outcome of these cases.
Epidemiology
Feline dysautonomia (also referred to as Key-Gaskell syndrome) was first reported in
the United Kingdom in 1982. Initially it was rarely reported outside the UK; however,
cases have been more recently reported in other countries, including the United States.
where it is seen more in the Midwestern states. Where multiple cats in a household are
affected, they are often related. The cases often seem to present in outbreaks, with
          
these outbreaks. While there is a wide range of ages reported in affected cats, most
commonly they are young adults.
  ss        s   
in 1 week. Two of these cats died and one was euthanased. In the two apparently
unaffected cats, abnormal oesophageal motility was demonstrated by fluoroscopy,
higher and more variable heart rates (mean 165 bpm) than the non-survivors (mean
121bpm).
In dogs, being from a rural area and spending >50% of time outdoors have been
outdoors or indoors has not been studied in cats.
Prognosis
Prognosis is generally thought to be poor, with a mortality rate estimated by some
studies to be about 60%, although with dedicated nursing care it may be lower. Many
signs, although they may still have an acceptable quality of life. Although severely
            
begins several months after the onset of clinical signs and complete reversal of signs
may take up to a year or more.
Section 2
Vomiting
9
Gastrointestinal physiology - the normal stomach and
small intestines
The stomach
The stomach lies to the left of the median plane of the body. When empty, it is within
the costal arch and a normal empty stomach cannot be palpated during physical
examination. Even when full, the examiner may need to hook his or her fingers
linderneath the costal arch to feel a normal stomach.
The stomach is divided anatomically into five regions: cardia, fundus, body, antrum
and pylorus (Fig 9.1). Physiologically, the stomach has a proximal part which stores
food temporarily and a distal part which regulates the release of hydrochloric acid,
grinds food particles and controls the emptying of the stomach. The fundus of the
stomach dilates in response to the entry of food in receptive relaxation which results
in a decrease in fundic motor activity and pressure. As dogs tend to eat large meals as
   s  s s        
stomach is likely to be of greater importance to dogs.
Oesophagus
Fundus
Cardia
Longitudinal-
layer
(outer)
Pyloric
sphincter
Three layers
Duodenum
Circular layer
ofsmooth
Lesser
(middle)
muscle
curvature
Obliquelayer
(inner)
Body
Greatercurvature
Pyloric
orifice
Pylorus
Gastric folds
Fig 9.1
Anatomy of the stomach
The stomach contributes to the initial stages of digestion by secreting hydrochloric
acid and pepsinogen. Muscles of the antrum grind food particles and peristaltic waves
move from the body of the stomach to the antrum towards a usually partially closed
pylorus. A strong retrograde wave then moves the food back into the proximal antrum
resulting in grinding into particles small enough to be allowed through the pylorus.
The pylorus and the antrum function as a unit to regulate the emptying of solid
food. In dogs the particles of food are usually less than 2 mm in size before they move
through the pylorus. Large indigestible particles of food do not leave the stomach until
the interdigestive period (after digestion is complete). In fasted dogs an interdigestive
motor complex (migrating motor complex) moves through the stomach and intestines
to clear these larger particles (and sometimes also foreign bodies) into the intestines.
This is also called a “housekeeping wave'. The electrical impulse in cats differs from
that of dogs; the wave is stimulated by a migrating spike complex, which likely serves
the same function in the cat.
Small intestine and pancreas
Most of the enzymatic digestion of food occurs within the small intestine. The small
intestine is divided into the duodenum, jejunum and ileum, although no anatomic
distinction divides one section from another. The small intestine is 1.80 to 4.80 m long
            e     
duodenal flexure (Fig 9.3).
Dog(Canis familiaris)
Cat (Felis catus)
Body length:90 cm
Bodylength:50cm
Comparative imageof thegastrointestinal tract of thedog andcat
Fig 9.2
The small intestine of the dog and cat
Oesophagus
Stomach
Rightlobeof
thepancreas
Left lobe of
the pancreas
Duodenum-
Transverse
colon
Caecum
Descending
lleum
colon
Jejunum
Fig 9.3
Relationship of the pancreas to the stomach, duodenum and colon
Like the oesophagus and the stomach, the intestine contains mucosal, submucosal
and muscle layers (Fig 9.4). The mucosa consists of a single layer of epithelial cells
with the lamina propria below it. Scattered throughout the epithelial cells are mucus-
producing goblet cells. The luminal surface consists of a brush border made up of
microvilli (Fig 9.5). The microvilli increase the surface area for digestion and
absorption. They possess special mechanisms for transporting monosaccharides and
amino enzymes and contain enzymes to digest disaccharides, oligosaccharides and
some small peptides. The brush border also contains proteins that bind many other
substances sulch as calcium, iron and cobalamin.
Serosa
Submucosa
Mucosa
Lumen
Circular
muscle
Longitudinal
muscle
Fig 9.4
 Layers of the small intestine
Microvilli
Villus
Absorptive
cells
Blood
capillaries
Gobletcell
Lacteal-
esoonwqns
Microstructure of the small intestinal wall
Fig 9.5
Microvilli of the small intestine
Among the villi are the crypts of Lieberkuhn which contain immature or stem cells
which move up the villi as they mature into fully differentiated villus epithelial cells.
Migration takes about 2 days and the cells are mature when about one-half to one-
third of the migration is complete. Increased bacterial numbers, physical trauma or
chemical trauma may shorten the epithelial cell survival time and lead to villus
atrophy. Drugs that interfere with cell replication (e.g. many chemotherapeutic drugs)
prevent normal cell renewal, as does fasting. A deficiency of either vitamin B12
(cobalamin) or folate will also result in mucosal atrophy. Maintenance of the mucosal
layer is vital for the barrier function of the intestine which prevents systemic spread
of bacteria or other deleterious agents from within the intestine. The health of the
barrier  is stimulated  by  enteral feeding,  especially by  the dietary  component
glutamine.
Motility of the small intestine mixes and slows the passage of contents and also
moves them aborally. Rhythmic contractions slow the movement, while peristalsis
propels the contents aborally so that there is coordination of “breaking and
accelerating' effects (Fig 9.6). The transit time of food in the small intestine in dogs
appears to be about 1 to 2 hours and in the cat about 2 to 3 hours.
Segmentation
Peristalsis
Foodbolus
Fig9.6
 Intestinal motility showing the effects of segmentation and peristalsis
         
carbohydrates, proteins and lipids, and brush border enzymes of the small intestine
by diet, disease and age. As animals mature, the amount of lactase is decreased, so
that adult animals may not tolerate the disaccharide lactose in milk. When the diet is
changed, it takes about 2 days for the enzymes to adapt (while the epithelial cells
             
cause can result in a loss of enzyme activity and resulting diarrhoea. In animals with
large numbers of intestinal bacteria, bile salts may be deconjugated in large enough
amounts to damage the microvilli. Fasting also decreases brush border enzymes so a
of fluid and electrolytes. As much as 8 to 10 1 of fluid may move in and out of the
intestine daily in a 20 kg animal. If absorption is compromised or secretion is
excessive, diarrhoea may occur.
10
Vomiting
Pathophysiology of vomiting
Vomiting is a reflux of food and fluid from the stomach. It is a reflex act that involves
prodromal signs of nausea, which may include anxiety, salivation, lip licking and
restlessness.
Prior to vomiting, reverse peristalsis moves intestinal contents into the stomach and
the animal begins to retch. There are then gastric antral and retrograde antral
contractions with relaxation of the body of the stomach. The gastro-oesophageal and
contraction of the abdominal muscles and the diaphragmatic muscles.
Vomiting is a reflex act resulting from stimulation of the vomiting centre in the
brain stem (Fig 10.1). The vomiting centre receives afferent input from peripheral
receptors in the viscera from the chemoreceptor trigger zone (CRTZ) in the floor of the
            
centres of the brain such as the cerebral cortex. The peripheral visceral receptors are
located throughout organs in the body, especially in the duodenum, sometimes
referred to as ‘the organ of vomition or nausea'. Distension or irritation of the
intestinal mucosa may stimulate the vomiting centre and inflammation of other
             
from these organs in the vagal and sympathetic nerves.
Higher centres
Vestibular
Medulla
Gastrointestinal
Cerebellum
tract
Solitary tract nucleus
The vomiting centre
Chemoreceptortriggerzone
Fig 10.1
 The vomiting centre
The CRTZ is on the floor of the fourth ventricle and mediates vomiting from toxins
such as those present in uraemia and also vomiting associated with some drugs, e.g.
apomorphine or xylazine.
The vestibular apparatus mediates vomiting due to motion sickness or vestibular
disease. Stimulation of the higher centres such as the cerebral cortex from acute stress
may result in vomiting, although this may be more common in human beings than in
animals.
Diagnosis of vomiting
Several questions need to be answered early in the approach to vomiting cases. First,
is it vomiting or regurgitation? Second, is the vomiting due to gastrointestinal (GI)
disorders or due to disorders of other body systems? The signalment, history and
physical examination often provide clues to these answers.
Signalment and history
The patient's ‘signalment' is the age, breed and sex. Knowing these factors often
increases (or decreases) the index of suspicion for some disorders and helps the
clinician order the differential diagnoses list.
      s     
timing with regards to eating and the time of day the vomiting most often occurs.
Vomiting more than 12 hours after eating indicates delayed gastric emptying.
red blood or digested blood 'coffee grounds', is useful.
    s a  e    
    s  o   a  
Vomiting is the forceful ejection of gastric contents from the stomach, while
          
Regurgitation is described as a passive event; however, gagging may be present which
can result in retching. With regurgitation, the animal should not show nausea, but
drooling can be present if swallowing is impaired. Regurgitated food isuially does not
contain bile and should not have an acidic pH (unless refluxed from the stomach into
 e  ,  s    s   
vomited food. Regurgitated food often appears undigested and may have the shape of
Vomiting is usually accompanied by signs of nausea and a forceful ejection of food,
with an abdominal effort present. The pH of vomitus may be acid, but can be alkaline,
especially if duodenal contents are present. Expectoration - the ejection of material
 n     o s -  p  a an o
differentiated from vomiting and regurgitation. Expectoration and regurgitation are
Environmental history should provide information regarding access to toxins such
as lead, houseplants, cleaners, floor finishes, deodorants and organophosphates. The
S   s       s
e.g. non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, corticosteroids, digitalis and some
antibiotics. Asking questions regarding playing with toys, sticks, stones and string are
retrievers.
During the history taking, particular attention should be paid to the diet, including
information about scavenging, treats, snacks and food provided by neighbours or
children. When questioned carefully, many owners provide evidence of a dietary
influence on the patient's vomiting. A review of all body systems is always necessary.
posturing that may reflect abdominal pain.
Physical examination
A complete physical examination is always necessary, including a thorough
abdominal palpation. Examination of the teeth can sometimes indicate if a dog is a
rock chewer and could have swallowed a stone. The uinderside of the tongue should be
examined for string or other linear foreign bodies. The neurological status should be
a n     ns     ss
dehydration). A rectal examination may reveal diarrhoea, melaena or haematochezia.
Work-ulp
If the vomiting is chronic and the animal is not ill and is eating well, a l-month
dietary trial with a restricted novel protein may be tried. Either a homemade or a
S              
vomiting, a late night snack or meal may reduce the vomiting. Some of these dogs are
also helped by an evening dose of oral metoclopramide, although motility modifying
drugs such as metoclopramide should not be used prior to ruling out foreign bodies.
Ideally all animals at least have a minimum data base performed.
Minimum data base and other laboratory data
In most cases of chronic vomiting, further work-up is necessary. Causes of vomiting
may be divided into those which are directly caused by GI disorders and those that are
caused by disorders of other body systems. The minimum data base aids in deciding if
a primary Gl disorder or a non-Gl disorder causes the vomiting. The initial diagnostic
there is any indication of dehydration, parenteral fluids should be administered, as
oral rehydration may not be effective.
Haematology is useful for detection of infection, toxaemia, eosinophilia associated
with eosinophilic gastritis, parasitism, mastocytosis or hypoadrenocorticism, lead
toxicosis, blood loss and determination of hydration status. A buffy coat smear may
show mast cells in cases of mastocytosis, but normal animals may also have mast cells
Serum chemistry provides information about possible protein-losing enteropathies,
azotaemia, liver disease, hypoadrenocorticism, dia betes mellitus, hydration status and
electrolyte concentrations. A serum basal cortisol of greater than 7o μmol/l (or 2
neither sensitive nor specific) of pancreatitis in canine patients. In acute pancreatitis,
serum trypsin-like immunoreactivity (TLl) will be increased and may aid in the
immunoreactivity (cPLI and FPLI, respectively) are more highly sensitive and specific
tests for pancreatitis than total serum lipase.
Puppies and kittens with congenital porto-systemic shunts (CPss) may present with
GI signs. Some of the clinicopathological changes associated with CPsS include
microcytosis, decreased albumin and increased liver enzymes, although values of
these parameters within the reference ranges does not rule out CPss. A bile acid
stimulation test should be performed whenever there is a possibility of CPss. (Copper
In older cats, a serum total T4 (thyroxine) should be taken to rule out
hyperthyroidism. Over 50% of cats with hyperthyroidism may present with vomiting.
Determination of serum total carbon dioxide (Tco2) can be useful. An increase in
Alkalosis in a vomiting small animal patient (who has not been administered
           
duodenal obstruction. Look for a foreign body!
Urinalysis provides information about renal and liver diseases, ketoacidosis.
glucosuria and hydration. If possible, at least two drops of urine should be collected
whenever initial serum chemistry is performed for chemical strip analysis and urine
      o   o     
sediment examination.
Faecal examination for ascarids may be helpful, especially in puppies and kittens.
De-worming with an effective agent suich as fenbendazole wouild be recommended in
some cases, even if parasite ova are not detected, as some parasites shed eggs only
(   )  n    ss so 
and is best diagnosed by a Baermann examination of the vomitus rather than faecal
examination.
Further tests uiseful in some cases
Serum lead concentrations should be measured if there is a history consistent with
lead ingestion, e.g. remodelling of an older house or neurological or behaviour signs
S          
and a thoracic radiograph, as this disease may present as vomiting in the cat.
Imaging
Survey (plain) radiographs of the abdomen are essential for any animal with chronic
vomiting. They are used to look for radio-opaque foreign bodies, intestinal dilation,
gastric size, position and content, liver and kidney size, uterine size (i.e. for
pyometra), abdominal masses and bowel perforations. In cats, congestive heart failure
can also cause partial anorexia and vomiting, so thoracic radiographs should be taken
if the clinical examination indicates cardiac abnormalities.
Contrast radiography
Liquid gastrograms with barium or with iodinated compounds if a perforation is
bodies, identifying the size and shape of the stomach and estimating the size of the
liver. If enough barium is used, mucosal detail can be evaluated. Liquids and solids
gastric motility disorders.
Barium mixed with a meal gives some indication of gastric emptying, which should
begin within 30 minutes of ingestion. The barium may separate from the meal and be
emptied separately as a liquid.
Barium impregnated polyethylene spheres (BIPs) are used to detect motility
disorders and obstructions of the GI tract. There are 30 1.5-mm and 9 5-mm BIPS
packaged in gelatin capsules (Fig 10.2). The small BIPs mimic the action of food
particles; when mixed with food they can be used to estimate the Gl transit time of
10.3). Determination of functional (i.e. functional ileus) vs. physical obstruction is
made by a combination of history, clinical signs, laboratory findings, radiographic
appearance and the BIPS radiographic pattern. Performing surgery or endoscopy after
using BIPs is preferable to doing these procedures after barium has been used.
Fig10.2
Barium impregnated polyethylene spheres (BIPS)
Fig10.3
 BIPS used to show an obstructive pattern where they have bunched together and are not
being emptied from the stomach
Ultrasouund
Ultrasound is more sensitive than radiography for examining masses, intestinal mural
thickenings, Gl infiltrative diseases and mesenteric lymphadenopathy. The pancreas,
liver, kidneys, prostate and uterus can be more fully evaluated by ultrasound than
with radiography. In the hands of a good ultrasonographer, this technique is one of
the best methods of diagnosing pancreatitis.
Intussusceptions can sometimes be clearly observed and intestinal peristalsis can be
assessed. The organs can be seen through ascitic fluid, but gas, ingesta and faeces can
obscure the view. Ultrasouind guided fine needle aspirates or larger needle biopsies can
sometimes provide iseful information and may be preferred to surgically obtained
samples in some animals (e.g. with severe hypoalbuminaemia).
Endoscopy
Endoscopy is not appropriate for every animal with Gl disease. The more clinically ill
patients, with severe signs (e.g. intractable vomiting or haematoemesis), weight loss,
anorexia or ultrasonographic signs of infiltrative disease are  candidates  for
endoscopy.
Endoscopic examination and biopsy of the stomach, duodenum and sometimes
colon and ileum (Fig 10.4) is an aid in diagnosing inflammatory bowel disease (a
common cause of vomiting in dogs and cats). It also aids in the diagnosis of some
gastritis, pyloric stenosis and some foreign bodies. Some alimentary lymphomas
require full thickness biopsy for diagnosis. Foreign bodies may sometimes be removed
uising the endoscope and forceps or snares.
Fig10.4
 Use of endoscopy to take intestinal biopsies to aid in the diagnosis of vomiting in a cat
Exploratory celiotomy
Exploratory surgery is necessary for the diagnosis of mural diseases (e.g. where
mucosal biopsies obtained with an endoscope are not deep enough), for small bowel
lesions distal to the reach of the endoscope and for removal of many gastric and nearly
all small bowel foreign bodies. Surgery is necessary for the definitive diagnosis and
treatment of pyloric stenosis. It is very helpful for the diagnosis of pancreatitis
especially in the cat. It allows visualization and biopsies of multiple organs, including
the stomach, small intestine, liver and pancreas. No vomiting (or diarrhoeic) animal
should undergo an exploratory surgery without biopsy of the stomach and intestines;
   m d  xa   o 
absurd diagnostic approach.
11
A foreign body in the small intestine of a dog
Initial presentation
Vomiting and poor appetite
Signalment: 5-year-old male English springer spaniel, body weight 19.9 kg
Case history
The dog had been healthy until 2 weeks prior to admission. He was de-wormed
regularly with fenbendazole and vaccinated yearly. Two weeks prior to admission he
 a     s     s 
vomiting 2 to 3 times per day and the vomitus included food and bile but no blood.
The dog's stools had been normal. The owner estimated that the dog had lost about 1
to 2 kg over this time period. The dog's water intake and urine output had not
changed, but his exercise tolerance had decreased.
His usual diet was a mixture of dry and canned dog food and recently the owners
had been hand feeding him with chicken and ham to encourage food intake. He was
normally fed twice a day.
Physical examination
The dog was dull but responsive. His body condition score was 4/9. There was
evidence of recent weight loss, with signs of muscle and fat loss over the lumbar and
flank areas. Mucous membranes were pink but slightly tacky; capillary refill time was
less than 2 seconds. Peripheral lymph nodes felt normal.
Thoracic auiscultation revealed normal heart and lung souinds, with a heart rate of
140 beats per minute and a respiratory rate of 24 breaths per minute.
There was no evidence of pain on abdominal palpation and the only abnormality
found was increased gas in the small intestines. Rectal temperature was 39.1° C.
His prior treatment included clavulanate-potentiated amoxicillin, ranitidine and
sucralfate (doses unknown), with no improvement in clinical signs. He was on no
other medications or supplements.
Problem list and discussion of problems
. Vomiting
· Tacky mucous membrane
· Poor appetite
· Weight loss
· Increased intestinal gas
· Raised body temperature
Differential diagnosis
Vomiting is the primary complaint and the other problems were thought to be related to the
vomiting. The differential diagnoses for the vomiting in this dog include:
• Disorders of the stomach
· foreign body
* gastritis
· ulceration
· chronic partial dilation-volvulus
· neoplasia
· Disorders of the small intestine
· foreign body
· inflammatory bowel disease
· neoplasia
* parasites
· intussusception (unlikely)
· Disorders of the large intestine
* colitis
· obstipation
· Systemic disorders
 pancreatopathy
: hypoadrenocorticism
 diabetes mellitus
· liver disorders
* peritonitis
* renal disease/uraemia (unlikely)
· Dietary causes
· dietary sensitivity
 dietary indiscretion
 n   o   n s  s  () s s
still a possibility. He did not have any other signs of renal disease, so uraemia was an
unlikely cause of the vomiting.
The slightly tacky membranes were likely indicative of mild dehydration. The dog
had not drunk water that morning, had a 2-hour journey to the clinic and was also
probably losing fluid in his vomitus.
Case work-up
The dog was admitted to the hospital and administered intravenous crystalloid fluids
containing potassium, at a rate to correct 6% dehydration.
Minimum data base
Haematology, serum chemistry and routine urinalysis were performed. Haematology
results were unremarkable, although a packed cell volume of 0.47 l/l (reference range
  s s    s       oo
li kely be due to haemoconcentration.
Serum chemistry showed an increase in liver enzymes, with  alanine
aminotransferase (ALT) at 1100 IU/l (reference range 21-102 IU/l) and alkaline
phosphatase at 114 IU/ (reference range 20-60 1U/l). Serum chloride and sodium
were decreased at 84 mmol/1 (reference range 99-115 mmol/l) and 137 mmol/l
(reference range 139-154 mmol/l), respectively, and potassium was at the bottom end
of the reference range at 3.6 mmol/1 (reference range 3.6-5.6 mmol/l). A basal cortisol
was performed and was within the reference range at 97 nmol/l (reference range 20
230 nmol/l). If basal cortisol is greater than 70 nmol/l, hypoadrenocorticism is
unlikely.
Serum amylase and lipase were not elevated, making a pancreatopathy less likely.
although a test for canine pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity was not performed.
Urinalysis was unremarkable. The urine specific gravity was 1.048, consistent with
good renal concentrating ability and also with the mild dehydration detected
clinically.
Serum albumin, urea and creatinine can also be increased due to dehydration,
although they were within the reference ranges in this dog.
Imaging
Barium impregnated polyethylene spheres (BIPs) were administered to the dog as an
intestinal obstruction was considered to be likely. BIPs aid in diagnosing partial
              
obstruction.
Ventrodorsal and lateral abdominal radiographs were taken about 8 hours later.
These showed bunching of the BIPS and very large gas filled loops of small intestine
(Figs 11.1 and 11.2). Some areas of the intestine were greater than twice the height of
the vertebral body of L5 in width. This pattern is highly suggestive of small intestinal
obstruction, so the dog was sent for an exploratory laparotomy.
Figs11.1
Figs 11.1 and 11.2
 Lateral and ventrodorsal radiographs showing grouping of BIPs and grossly
dilated intestines characteristic of intestinal obstruction
(courtesy of Dr Tobias Schwarz)
Sulrgery
At surgery the intestines were dilated with gas and a foreign body was located within
the jejunum (Fig 11.3). A peach stone was removed from the mid-jejunal area. Closure
was routine and omentum was wrapped around the enterotomy site. Recovery was
uneventful and a postoperative antibiotic  (clavulanate-potentiated amoxicillin,
initially at 20 mg/kg iv q 8 hours for the first day, then 19 mg/kg po q 12 hours for 4
days) was administered. Buprenorphine (20 μg/kg iv q 6 hours) was used for
postoperative analgesia for the first day.
Fig 11.3
 Small intestinal foreign body
(courtesy of Dr Donald Yool)
Follow-uup
Five days postsurgery the serum chemistry values had improved with the ALT
decreased to 290 1U/l and the AP decreased to 244 1U/l. Electrolytes were within the
reference ranges. The dog had begun to eat, rectal temperature was normal; he was
not vomiting and was discharged with no further medical treatment.
Discuussion
The radiographs were highly suggestive of the presence of an intestinal foreign body
in this dog. The use of the BIPs added to the interpretation of the radiographs,
although it would likely to have been possible to make the diagnosis withouit them.
Peach pits are a fairly common canine intestinal foreign body and are not usually
clearly radiopaque on plain films.
The low serum sodium and chloride and borderline potassium are consistent with
intestinal obstruction and may be due to loss in the vomitus and/or sequestration
within the intestines. Due to the dilation of the bowel cranial to the obstruction and
the congestion of mesenteric blood vessels (Fig 11.4), after about 24 hours of
obstruction the intestinal mucosa cranial to the obstruction secretes instead of
a bsorbing fluids, although it is still able to a bsorb nutrients.
Foreign
body
Dilated loopsof
bowel cranial to
Congested mesenteric
the obstruction-
bloodvessels
Dilated loop
Foreign
ofbowel
object
Fig 11.4
An intestinal foreign body causes dilatation of the bowel cranial to the obstruction,
sometimes termed a ‘stagnant' loop of bowel
 s    s   q   a r sis
effectively in dogs with intestinal obstruction than do crystalloid fluids, although
there is no evidence that the use of colloids increases survival rates.
Bacterial numbers increase in obstructed intestinal segments and can result in
endotoxic shock. This dog did not appear to be in shock, but he did have an elevated
body temperature. The use of antibiotics is indicated in obstructed animals to decrease
         
endotoxaemia.
Epidemiology
In one study, English bull terriers, springer spaniels, Staffordshire bull terriers, Border
collies and Jack Russell   terriers  were over-represented  in presenting for
gastrointestinal foreign bodies. In dogs, 63% of obstructions occurred in the jejunum
Prognosis
A longer duration of clinical signs, the presence of a linear foreign body and multiple
intestinal procedures are associated with significantly increased mortality. Neither the
been shown to have a significant influence on survival. In a study in cats, those
without preoperative perforation from a foreign body have an 85% chance of survival
while those with preoperative perforation have only a 50% chance of survival.
12
Chronic partial gastric dilatation in a dog
Initial presentation
Vomiting
Signalment: 8-year-old male entire Labrador, body weight 24 kg
Case history
The dog's previous history included arthritis, for which he was fed a diet designed for
A p    n  s  s
medication, meloxicam. He had been off the meloxicam for 3 weeks at admission.
The dog had become lethargic during the past month and was vomiting food and
brown foam several times a day. He was also occasionally retching. His faeces were
S   ,         a  s
during the last week. In this position the dog's head is down and front legs stretch
forward. This usually occurs during episodes of abdominal pain. Prior to this he had
had intermittent episodes of vomiting and diarrhoea every few weeks. He had lost
about 3 kg during the past month.
  n  s       
more laboured and he was not as willing to exercise as he previously had been.
The dog was de-wormed regularly with fenbendazole, although the owner reported
that he was 3 weeks overdue for de-worming. He was vaccinated yearly.
His current medication was cimetidine (200 mg po q 8 hours), which had not
improved his condition.
Physical examina tion
The dog was bright and responsive. His body condition score was 4/9. Hydration
appeared to be adequate. Mucous membrane colour was pink and capillary refill time
was less than 2 seconds. Peripheral lymph nodes were unremarkable.
Thoracic auscultation revealed normal heart and lung sounds, with a heart rate of
100 beats per minute. The respiratory rate could not be counted as the dog was
panting. There was evidence of mild to moderate pain or discomfort on abdominal
palpation. While this caused difficulty in performing a thorough abdominal palpation,
no other abnormalities were detected. Rectal temperature was 38.9° C.
Problem list and discussion of problems
. Vomiting
· Diarrhoea
· Decreased exercise tolerance
· Abdominal discomfort
· Possibly respiratory distress
Differential diagnosis
Vomiting was the dog's main problem and it was the one initially addressed. Differential diagnoses
for vomiting in this dog include the following disorders:
· Disorders of the stomach
· foreign body
· gastritis
· ulceration
* chronic partial dilatation-volvulus
* neoplasia
· Disorders of the small intestine
· foreign body
· inflammatory bowel disease
· neoplasia
* parasites
• intussusception (less likely due to the dog's age)
· Disorders of the large intestine
* colitis
· obstipation
* Systemic disorders
* pancreatopathy
· hypoadrenocorticism
· diabetes mellitus
· liver disorders
* peritonitis
* renal disease/uraemia (unlikely)
· Dietary causes
* adverse reaction to food (allergy or intolerance)
· dietary indiscretion
Most dogs with intussusception are less than 1 year of age, although it was still a
possibility. He did not have any other signs of renal disease such as polyuria or
polydipsia, so uraemia was an unlikely cause of the vomiting.
Case work-up
The dog was admitted to the hospital for diagnostic investigation
Minimum data base
Haematology, serum chemistry and routine urinalysis were performed. Haematology
results were unremarkable. Serum chemistry results including amylase, lipase and
basal cortisol were within the reference range other than a mild elevation in bile acid
concentrations to 19.4 μmol/1 (fasting reference range 0-7 μmol/l).
A canine pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity test was within the reference ranges,
as were serum trypsin-like immunoreactivity and folate. Serum cobalamin was
        
Urinalysis, including chemical strip and sediment, was unremarkable. The urine
specific gravity was 1.037.
Imaging
Abdominal ultrasound  showed  decreased  gastric motility  and  the  pylorus  and
duodenum were shifted further towards the midline than normal. All other abdominal
organs were considered normal. Contrast radiography was recommended.
Abdominal radiographs showed gas within the gastric fundus, which in the
ventrodorsal (VD) view extended across the pylorus. Some gas was also seen in the
proximal descending duodenum. The small intestines contained fluid and gas, but
appeared to be normal in diameter.
Liquid barium was given to enhance visualization of the gastrointestinal tract. At 5
minutes post barium, a mixture of barium and particulate material was seen within
the gas-filled fundus, with most of the barium pooling within the antrum, which
appear rounded, dilated and medially displaced. On the VD view the angle between the
fundus and the antrum was more acute than normal with the antrum moved toward
the midline (Fig 12.1). On both views the pyloric region of the stomach appeared to
terminate abruptly (Fig 12.2), with a narrow band of contrast present for several
centimetres before the barium began to fill the duodenum.
Fig12.1
Ventrodorsal abdominal radiograph with barium contrast showing the abnormal (medial)
displacement of the pylorus
(courtesy of Dr Tobias Schwarz)
Fig 12.2
Lateral abdominal radiograph with barium contrast showing the narrow band of contrast
present for several centimetres before the barium began to fill the duodenum
(courtesy of Dr Tobias Schwarz
At 30 minutes post barium, most of the barium had passed into the lower small
intestine; however, the antrum still appeared to have an abnormal location.
S            
predominantly in the antrum and pylorus. The antrum appeared less rounded and had
a less acuite angle with the lesser curvature than previously. The filling of the proximal
duodenum remained incomplete with a narrow band of contrast in it.
Gastrointestinal endoscopy was attempted. The endoscopist had unusual difficulty
passing the endoscope through the lower oesophageal sphincter into the stomach. The
endoscopic view of the stomach was initially abnormal with the landmarks of the
          ss  s
the endoscopy the stomach changed shape and landmarks appeared in the correct
stomach and duodenum.
Case assessment
From the history, imaging and endoscopy it appeared that the dog had a chronic
dynamic partial gastric torsion which was occurring intermittently. Exploratory
surgery was scheduled.
Surgical management
At surgery a partial gastric torsion was identified. A belt loop gastropexy was
performed to prevent reoccurrence or progression to gastric dilatation volvulus (Fig
12.3). Further full thickness biopsies were taken of the stomach and jejunum.
Fig 12.3
Belt loop gastropexy in place (arrow)
(courtesy of Dr Donald Yool)
Histopathology
Histopathology of the biopsies showed that the stomach and duodenum were normal.
The histopathology of the jejunum was diagnosed as mild, diffuse, chronic jejunitis.
Follow-up
The dog recovered well from the surgery and at 1 month was exercising at nearly
normal levels. He was eating well and not vomiting.
Medical management
While the suirgery should prevent the stomach from torsing, some cases do continue to
have episodes of gastric dilatation. Recommendations for these cases include the
frequent feeding of small, low carbohydrate, low fat, high protein meals and the use of
mg/kg po q 8 hours, in between meals). In dogs, erythromycin at these low doses
stimulates motilin release and promotes the interdigestive “housekeeping’ wave,
promoting emptying of solids. Products containing peppermint have a mild prokinetic
effect and may be useful. Anti-foaming agents such as dimethacone or simethacone
have been shown to be of benefit in some animals.
Case discussion and epidemiology
Dogs with chronic gastric distension and radiographic evidence of a twisted stomach
may have a chronic intermittent form of gastric volvulus which usually corrects
spontaneously. The radiographic appearance is of the pylorus moving too close to the
   s       s   s   s
dilatation volvulus with torsion (Fig 12.4). The cause is unknown, but may be due to
an impaired ability to eructate and possibly delayed gastric emptying.
Oesophagus
Fundus
Body
Pyloric
antrum-
Pylorus-
Omentum
Sequenceofgastricdilation with torsion
Clockwise rotation as viewed from a ventral position.
Thepyloric antrum is
The pylorus crosses
displaceddownward.
the midline,passes
underneath the
distendedproximal
partofstomach,and
movesupwardalong
theleftabdominal wall.
The gastric fundus
The continuing gastric
movesventrallyand
dilationdisplacesthe
becomeslocated in
greater curvature
theventralabdomen
Fig 12.4
  n  n    sss s  o   
pylorus to be closed off and resulting in increased gas and fluid in the stomach
Eructation should be initiated by gaseous distension of the stomach (especially the
cardia) and is mediated by receptors in the cardia and vagal afferents to the brain.
The response is a reduction in the pressure at the cardia and lower oesophageal
junction to less than that of the rest of the stomach so that the gas can escape.
Defective eructation could be due to a defect in the junction sphincter in the reflex,
      n   n s     
cardia. The gastric cardia may be damaged by over-distension, so that dogs which
have had gastric dilatation may be prone to recurrent episodes.
Gastric gas is usually from swallowed air, the reactions of gastric acid with
secretions containing bicarbonate or from bacterial fermentation. Rapid eating and
drinking increases the amount of swallowed air; nervous, excited or dysphagic (e.g.
oesophageal motility disorders) animals are more likely to swallow air. Animals with
respiratory distress or hyperventilation also tend to swallow air.
      s  s    
dilatation; however, this has not been proven and gastric dilatation volvulus has been
reported in dogs fed fresh meat, soy-based or cereal-based diets. The intake of a large
amount of food rapidly will cause gastric dilatation and the stomach takes longer to
of dilatation be fed several smaller meals per day instead of one large one.
sex predilection has been recognized.
Prognosis
Resolution of most of the clinical signs often follows gastropexy and management of
gastric dilatation. Some animals continue to bloat, but with gastropexy the stomach
should not be able to twist, so that overall the prognosis is good.
13
Pancreatitis and alimentary lymphoma in a dog
Initial presentation
Vomiting
Signalment: 5-year-old male entire Beagle, body weight 12 kg
Case history
The dog presented with a week long history of vomiting and decreased appetite. The
vomitus contained food and bile and occurred at least once a day. The frequency of
vomiting had increased over the past month. He had had a similar episode 5 months
earlier  which  had responded to  treatment  with  oral  electrolyte  solutions  and
antibiotics.
The owners thought that he had lost weight, but were unsure of how much. He was
lethargic, although the owners reported that he was usually a quiet dog. His stools had
been soft and somewhat dark in colour during the last couple of weeks, although also
scant as he had not been eating well.
The dog had last been de-wormed 3 months previously, but had not been vaccinated
snacks and treats of human food. He was being tempted to eat small amounts of
chicken and ham at presentation. He was on no current medication.
Physical examination
The dog's demeanour was dull but responsive. He was estimated to be about 6%
muscle loss over his epaxial, lumbar and temporal muscles. Mucous membrane colour
was pink and capillary refill time was less than 2 seconds. Peripheral lymph nodes
were unremarkable.
Thoracic auscultation revealed normal heart and lung sounds, with a heart rate of
of mild to moderate pain on palpation of the cranial abdomen. Rectal temperature was
decreased at 36.7° C.
Problem list and discussion of problems
. Vomiting
· Abdominal discomfort
· Low rectal temperature
Differential diagnosis
Vomiting was the dog's main problem and it was the one initially addressed. Differential diagnoses
for vomiting in this dog include the following disorders:
· Disorders of the stomach
* foreign body
* gastritis
· ulceration
• chronic partial dilatation-volvulus
+ neoplasia
· Disorders of the small intestine
· foreign body
· inflammatory bowel disease (IBD)
* neoplasia
* parasites
* intussusception (unlikely)
• Disorders of the large intestine
* colitis
* Systemic disorders
 pancreatopathy
· hypoadrenocorticism
· diabetes mellitus
· liver disorders
* peritonitis
* renal disease/uraemia (unlikely)
· Dietary causes
* adverse reaction to food (allergy or intolerance)
· dietary indiscretion
Most dogs with intussusception are less than 1 year of age, although it was still a possibility in a
dog of this age. He did not have any other signs of renal disease, so uraemia was an unlikely cause of
the vomiting.
Differential diagnoses for cranial abdominal pain in this dog included:
· Pancreatitis
• Gastritis
· Hepatopathy
· Peritonitis
· Pyelonephritis was unlikely as the pain was cranial and not over the area of the kidneys
 Occasionally back pain and abdominal pain may be difficult to differentiate, but this dog showed
very localized pain which appeared unlikely to be coming from the spine or epaxial muscles
Low rectal temperature may be due to decreased ambient temperature, (which was not the case
here) shock or other disorders of peripheral circulation, hypothyroidism, or to placement of the
thermometer within a faecal ball in the rectum. One of the latter two differential diagnoses was
thought to be most likely in this case.
Case work-ulp
The dog was admitted to the hospital for diagnostic investigation and fluid therapy to
correct the dehydration.
Minimum data base
Haematology, serum chemistry and routine urinalysis were performed. Haematology
results showed an elevation in white blood cell with a neutrophil couint of 23.5 x
10°/1 (reference range 3.6-12.0 x 10%/l), band or meta neutrophils of 1.4 x 10°/1
(reference range 0 for this laboratory) and monocytes of 2.24 x 10°/1 9 (reference
range 0-1.5 × 10*/l). His packed cell volume (PCV) was 0.54 1/l, within the reference
Clinical tip on PCVs
While the upper end of the range of PcV for most laboratories is above 0.50 l/l, the upper end of
the reference range is more typically seen in greyhounds and other sighthounds. When values above
0.50 l/l are seen in other breeds, haemoconcentration should be considered, which is often due to
dehydration. Values above 0.60 1/l may even be due to secondary polycythaemia or polycythaemia
vera.
Serum chemistry results showed a decreased albumin of 21.9 g/ (reference range
26-35 g/l) and a globulin in the low end of the reference range at 19 g/1 (reference
range 18-37 g/l). Serum urea was mildly increased at 7.6 mmol/1 (reference range
1.7-7.4 mmol/) and sodium was decreased at 135 mmol/1 (reference range 139-154
mmol/l) with potassium within the reference range at 4.0 mmol/l. Cholesterol was
decreased at 3.1 mmol/1 (3.8-7.0 mmol/l) and triglycerides were within the reference
range at 0.73 mmol/l (range 0.57-1.14 mmol/l). Lipase was extremely increased at
2330 IU/1 (reference range 13-200 1U/l), although amylase was within the reference
to confirm this and was also highly elevated at 998 mmol/1 (reference range less than
200 mmol/).
Basal serum cortisol ruled out hypoadrenocorticism with a value of 202 nmol/l.
        
range 15-48 nmol/l).
Urinalysis was unremarkable on chemical strip and sediment and the specific
gravity of urine was 1.047.
Clinical tip
Serum amylase and lipase may reflect pancreatitis in the dog, although specificity of these tests is
only about 50%. Serum amylase is particularly undiagnostic, as noticed in this case where the value
was within the reference range in a severe case of pancreatitis. Serum amylase and lipase should be
   a     n s    
immunoreactivity (cPLl) test is not immediately available. There is also an in-house qualitative kit
form of the cPLI test. The sensitivity of the laboratory-based cPLI is above 80% and it is also highly
specific.
Imaging
accumulation and a corrugated appearance to the duodenum. The small intestine was
considered to be otherwise normal in width and layering. There was no evidence of
peristalsis in the proximal small intestine.
Diagnosis
From the history, clinicopathological parameters and ultrasound results, a diagnosis
of pancreatitis was made.
Medical treatment
Initial treatment included intravenous balanced crystalloid fluid therapy at a rate
calculated to correct dehydration within 24 hours, intravenous clavulanate-
potentiated amoxicillin (20 mg/kg iv q 8 hours), buprenorphine (20 μg/kg q 6 hours)
for analgesia, ranitidine (2 mg/kg subcutaneous q 12 hours), metoclopramide in a
 (s n n s  n o n ns  )  a 
sucralfate (1.5 ml per os (po) q 8 hours). The sucralfate had to be discontinued as the
dog could not take anything po without vomiting.
The total T4 was decreased in this dog, which could have been due to
hypothyroidism or to the euthyroid sick syndrome. It was planned to investigate this
further after treatment of the more severe disorders. While the dog was lethargic and
had a low rectal temperature, he did not have alopecia, high cholesterol,
hypertriglyceridaemia or (even after rehydration) anaemia.
Clinical tip on anti-emetics
Oral or subcutaneously administered metoclopramide has a relatively short half life and it is more
efficacious if given as a constant rate infusion. It may adversely affect pancreatic blood flow as it is a
 Maropitant, a neurokinin 1 antagonist with broad spectrum actions, may have been a better choice in
this dog, although it was not yet available at the time this case presented. It does not have the
 promotility effects of metoclopramide, which were desired in this case. Another anti-emetic that may
be useful in pancreatitis is dolasetron which is a 5HT antagonist and a very potent anti-emetic (but
which was also not available at the time of this case).
Clinical tip on antibiotic use in pancreatitis
There is much debate about whether or not to use antibiotics in cases of canine pancreatitis. In
 humans, infection is a common complication of pancreatitis, although there is limited evidence that
human patients treated with prophylactic antibiotics have a better outcome. While most clinicians
treat cats with pancreatitis with antibiotics, the decision is more difficult in dogs, as infection is
thought to be less likely. In this case (rightly or wrongly) the decision was made to use an antibiotic,
due to the presence of a left shift or increase in band neutrophils.
Nursing aspects of feeding in cases of pancreatitis
It has previously been recommended to withhold food from patients with pancreatitis, which is
 sensible in patients that are vomiting. In humans there is no evidence that withholding nutritional
supplementation is beneficial and even some that it may be detrimental. Current thinking is to
o sn  'sp t o h  Ao  p  ae m siop  Ao po om
not control vomiting. then parenteral support (e.g. partial parenteral nutrition via a peripheral vein)
or enteral support via a jejunostomy tube are recommended. Parenteral nutrition has the advantage of
not requiring anaesthesia for placement as does a jejunostomy tube. In dogs that are not vomiting.
small amounts of low fat and moderate carbohydrate foods may be offered in small frequent meals.
There is no scientific evidence that a high fat meal causes pancreatitis, but there is anecdotal
evidence that the dogs appear to do better if offered low-fat foods during recovery. Feeding low-fat
food also appears to cause resolution of signs in some chronic low-grade cases of pancreatopathy.
After 2 days of treatment, the dog's clinical signs had waxed and waned, but overall
had failed to respond and he was still depressed and vomiting. Repeat haematology
elevated, serum lipase to 875 IU/l (reference range 13-200 1U/l), but a fall in the
albumin to 15.8 g/l (reference range 27-35 g/l) and also a decrease in globulin to 17.8
g/l (reference range 18-37 g/l). Serum urea was now within the reference range at 5.4
mol/1 (reference range 1.7-7.4 mol/l) and PCV had decreased to 0.48 1/1. Urine protein
to creatinine ratio was 0.3, effectively ruling out a protein losing nephropathy. Liver
function tests other than albumin (e.g. serum bile acids and bilirubin) as well as liver
enzymes were within reference ranges, making a hepatopathy unlikely.
Clinical tip on the clinicopathological effect of dehydration
Dehydration affects many clinicopathological parameters, notably increasing PCV, haemoglobin,
urea, creatinine (prerenal azotemia), albumin, globulins and sodium. This can increase some
parameters above the reference range, such as urea and creatinine; however, it can also mask low
values for others, such as proteins and Pcv. These parameters, especially if in the lower end of the
reference range, should be re-evaluated after rehydration.
A gastrointestinal disorder in addition to the pancreatitis was suspected and
gastrointestinal endoscopy was performed.
Endoscopy
At endoscopy, the stomach had thickening of the rugal folds (Fig 13.1) and the small
intestinal mucosa was very roughened and abnormal in appearance with some
bleeding present (Fig 13.2). Mucosal biopsies were taken of the stomach and small
intestine.
Fig 13.1
 Endoscopic view of the stomach, showing lack of distension and a roughened appearance
of the rugal folds
Fig13.2
 Endoscopic view of roughened small intestinal mucosa, with bleeding present
Histopathology
Histopathology of the stomach showed oedema and congestion of the lamina propria,
some focal haemorrhage and areas of erosions with underlying inflammation. In the
gastric cardia, biopsies showed extensive fibrosis and atrophy of the gastric glands.
This was interpreted as moderate to severe inflammatory gastritis.
The duodenum had severe diffuse and nodular infiltration of the lamina propria
with immature, noncleaved lymphocytes. There was widespread villus blunting and
atrophy. This was interpreted as alimentary lymphoma.
Follow-uup
As these owners did not want to pursue therapy, the dog underwent euthanasia. A
necropsy confirmed extensive infiltration of small lymphocytes within the villi,
lamina propria and extending below the villi and into the submucosa in some areas.
The mesenteric lymph nodes also showed effacement in flat fields of small
lymphocytes. The subcapsular sinus of the lymph nodes was also heavily infiltrated
with small lymphocytes.
The thyroid glands had atrophied follicles with nearly complete absence of colloid,
but no inflammatory cells present. It appeared that the dog was hypothyroid due to
idiopathic follicular atrophy rather than active lymphoid thyroiditis; in this diagnosis
it is unclear whether the follicular atrophy is a distinct syndrome or the final result of
previous lymphoid thyroiditis.
Case discussion and epidemiology
This case demonstrates the pitfall of assuming that there is only one aetiology for a
patient's clinical signs, in that he had more than one cause for his vomiting. As
neither pancreatitis nor hypothyroidism are known risk factors for intestinal
lymphoma, it is likely these diseases occurred independently in this unlucky dog. His
pancreatitis was resolving and the hypothyroidism was treatable, so the final
diagnosis is the intestinal lymphoma
Alimentary lymphoma constitutes 7% of canine lymphoma cases and can occur
diffusely as in this dog or in a more localized form. Signs usually include anorexia,
vomiting, diarrhoea, weight loss and pyrexia; several of which were present in this
case. The main differential is IBD and often full thickness biopsies, sometimes using
immunohistochemistry, are necessary to differentiate between the two.
and assessment of T-cell clonality by PCR. Primary canine gastrointestinal lymphoma
is usually of T-cell phenotype. Hypoproteinaemia and hyperbilrubinaemia are more
common in lymphoma than in IBD, but this is not consistent. It also appears that some
There appears to be no age or sex predilection for the disorder. In one study, about
half (23) of 44 dogs with gastrointestinal lymphoma were female, with 11 intact and
12 neutered: 21 of the dogs were male, with 12 intact and nine neuitered. Sixteen
Dreeds as well as individuals of mixed breeding were represented. The Boxer and the
Chinese Shar-Pei were the most commonly represented breeds with six individuals
Treatment for focal lymphoma is usually by surgical resection, but this is not
possible in the more generalized or diffuse form that this dog had. Dogs with this form
           
Chemotherapy with cyclophosphamide, vincristine and prednisolone (and sometimes
doxorubricin) has been tried in dogs with diffuse alimentary lymphoma, but this form
of lymphoma is more refractory to treatment than other forms in the dog. Response
rates of 30% to 60% with a medium remission time of 4 to 8 months have been
reported.
14
Hypoadrenocorticism in a dog
Initial presentation
Vomiting, weakness and lethargy
    s     is
Case history
The dog had become lethargic during the past month and was vomiting digested food
3 to 4 times a week. Her exercise tolerance had decreased over the last 1 to 2 months.
Her stools varied between normal and soft. The owner was unsure if the dog's
drinking and urination patterns had changed.
The dog was de-wormed regularly with fenbendazole and she was vaccinated
yearly.
Her usual diet was a high quality dry food and she was also given snacks and treats
regularly. She was on no medications or supplements.
Physical examination
The dog was very depressed at presentation. Her body condition score was 4/9 with
evidence of recent weight loss. Her mucous membranes were tacky; capillary refill
time was 3 seconds. Peripheral pulse quality was weak, but there was a pulse for every
heart beat. There was a slight loss of skin elasticity. Based on these findings, she was
estimated to be approximately 7% dehydrated.
Peripheral lymph nodes were unremarkable. Thoracic auscultation revealed normal
heart and lung sounds, with a heart rate of 56 beats per minute (bpm). This heart rate
was thought to be too slow for the degree of dehydration. She had a respiratory rate of
Problem list and discussion of problems
. Vomiting
· Decreased exercise tolerance
· Slow heart rate, especially for hypovolaemia
Differential diagnosis
Differential diagnoses for vomiting in this dog include the following disorders:
· Disorders of the stomach
· foreign body
* gastritis
· ulceration
· chronic partial dilatation-volvulus
* neoplasia
· Disorders of the small intestine
· foreign body
· inflammatory bowel disease
· neoplasia
* parasites
• intussusception (unlikely)
• Disorders of the large intestine
* colitis
* obstipation
· Systemic disorders
* pancreatopathy
· hypoadrenocorticism
 diabetes mellitus
· liver disorders
* peritonitis
* renal disease/uraemia (unlikely)
· Dietary causes
· adverse reaction to food (allergy or intolerance)
· dietary indiscretion
Most dogs with intussusception are less than 1 year of age, although it is still a possible diagnosis
in a dog of this age.
Differential diagnoses for decreased exercise tolerance in this dog include:
· Cardiovascular disease
• Neuromuscular disorders such as myasthenia gravis, peripheral neuropathies, brain or spinal cord
disease, myopathies
· Respiratory disorders
· Electrolyte disorders, e.g. hypo-or hyperkalaemia, hypo-or hypernatraemia, hypocalcaemia
· Endocrine diseases such as diabetes mellitus, hypothyroidism, hypoglycaemia, hypoadrenocorticism
· Infectious disease
• Anaemia
· Nutritional deficiencies or malassimilation of nutrients
· Neoplasia
• Medications or toxins; however, the dog had no history of ingestion of these
· Pain - although there was no evidence of pain on physical examination, this can be subtle
A heart rate of 56 bpm is considered bradycardic for a medium sized dog and the
degree of hypovolaemia would be expected to have increased the rate. Possible causes
for the bradycardia include:
· increased vagal tone
· hypothyroidism
· sinus node disease (sick sinus syndrome)
· sinus block due to atrial disease
· atrial standstill (e.g. due to hyperkalaemia) or an atrioventricular heart block
Very fit dogs sometimes have a slow heart rate, but this dog did not appear fit and
also had not been exercising normally for the past month or longer.
Case work-up
The dog was admitted to the hospital for diagnostic investigation and treatment of her
dehydration. Intravenous balanced electrolyte crystalloid fluids were initially started
at 85 ml/hour, calculated to correct her dehydration over 24 hours.
Nursing tip on intravenous fluid therapy
Fluid therapy needs to take into account the amount needed for maintaining normal hydration and
replenishing the amount lost. Maintenance fluids are usually calculated at 40 to 60 ml/kg per 24
 hours or 1.6 to 2.5 ml/kg/hour. In this 17 kg dog, that was approximately 34 ml/hour. To replete the
amount of fluid deficit, the dog's body weight is multiplied times the estimated amount of
dehydration, e.g. 17 x 0.07 = 1.19 kg or 1.19 1 in 24 hours. This is 1190 ml in 24 hours 0r about 50
ml/hour. Adding the 34 ml plus 50 ml is 84 ml/hour. The pet's hydration should be assessed several
times during fluid administration as sometimes hydration improves before this total amount is given.
 If the pet is vomiting or has diarrhoea, sometimes additional fluid needs to be given to make up these
ongoing losses.
Minimum data base
Haematology, serum chemistry and routine urinalysis were performed. Haematology
results showed an increased packed cell volume (PcV) of 0.56 l/l (reference range
0.37-0.55 1/1).
Clinical tip on PCVs
While the upper end of the range of PcV for most laboratories is above 0.50 l/l, the upper end of
the reference range is more typically seen in greyhounds and other sighthounds. When values above
0.50 l/l are seen in other breeds, haemoconcentration should be considered, which is often due to
dehydration. Values above 0.60 l/l may even be due to polycythaemia.
Serum chemistry results including basal cortisol were performed and showed a
marked hyperkalaemia of 6.1 mmol/l (reference range 3.6-5.6 mmol/l), a
hyponatraemia of 131 mmol/l (reference range 135-154 mmol/), an increased
albumin of 38 g/l (reference range 26-35 g/l), increased calcium of 3.2 mmol/l
          
mmol/l) with a creatinine at the high end of the reference range at 13l μmol/l (40-
132 μmol/l) and a decreased glucose of 2.7 mmol/1 (reference range 3.0-5.0 mmol/l).
Basal serum cortisol was decreased at less than 13.5 nmol/l (reference range 20-230
nmol/l; lowest detectable amount at 13.5 nmol/l).
Clinical tip on use of basal cortisol
While an adrenocorticotrophin hormone (ACTH) stimulation test is the definitive diagnostic test
for hypoadrenocorticism, a serum basal cortisol concentration of greater than 70 ng/l effectively
rules out hypoadrenocorticism. This test should probably be run in any dog with unexplained
 gastrointestinal signs or weakness, regardless of the electrolyte concentrations.
Clinical tip on sodium: potassium ratios
Sodium to potassium ratios of less than 27 have been used to diagnose hypoadrenocorticism, but
other differential diagnoses for hyponatraemia with concurrent hyperkalaemia should include (as
well as hypoadrenocorticism): renal failure, chylothorax and gastrointestinal tract disorders. The
ACTH stimulation test is the gold standard for definitive diagnosis of hypoadrenocorticism.
Only a very small amount of urine was obtained by cystocentesis. The urine specific
gravity was 1.019, which was inappropriately low for the degree of dehydration. The
chemical strip showed a pH of 5.5 with no blood, bilirubin or glucose.
As these results are consistent with, but not diagnostic for hypoadrenocorticism and
there was evidence of hypoglycaemia, the fluids were changed to 0.9% saline with 5%
glucose and the rate was increased to 100 ml/hour.
Imaging
Thoracic radiographs showed microcardia and a small vena cava, consistent with
dehydration (Figs 14.1 and 14.2). Abdominal ultrasound showed very small adrenal
glands bilaterally (Figs 14.3 and 14.4).
Figs14.1
Figs 14.1 and 14.2
 Lateral and ventrodorsal thoracic radiographs showing the decreased heart
and vessel size consistent with dehydration
(courtesy of Dr Tobias Schwarz)
LADRENAL
Figs 14.3
RIGHTADRENAL
1L0.22
Figs 14.3 and 14.4
 Ultrasound pictures of the left and right adrenal glands, both of which are
decreased in size
(courtesy of Carolina Urraca delJunco)
Electrocardiogram
The dog started to deteriorate with a slower heart rate of 46 bpm prior to the results
being available. An electrocardiogram (ECG) was performed which showed a heart
rate of 48 bpm, spiked T waves and an absence of P waves, consistent with the
hyperkalaemia (Fig 14.5).
Fig 14.5
ECG showing bradycardia (heart rate 48 bpm), flattened P waves and spiked T waves
typical of atrial standstill with hyperkalaemia
(courtesy of Geoff Culshaw)
ACTH stimulation test
An ACTH stimulation test was performed. Seruim results of the post-ACTH stimulation
test were less than 13.5 ng/, confirming the diagnosis of hypoadrenocorticism.
Initial treatment
The fluid rate was increased to 850 ml/hour for an hour (50 ml/kg/hour) using
normal (o.9%) saline, and intravenous hydrocortisone sodium succinate was
administered at 10 mg/kg every 6 hours.
Follow-uup
The dog responded very well to treatment and the following day was brighter and
interested in eating. She was started on oral fludrocortisone at 0.2 mg (total dose) po q
24 hours and an initial dose of prednisolone at a physiological dose of 0.15 mg/kg po q
24 hours.
Outcome
The prednisolone was discontinued 1 week later; however, the owners kept a supply in
case the dog suffered a stressful incident. Haematological and serum chemistry
parameters returned to within the reference range other than a tendency to have
 s          s 
below the reference range.
She has continued to do well several months after diagnosis and her prognosis for a
normal life is good, although she will need lifelong medication
Case discuission
         
glucocorticoids. Aldosterone normally  promotes sodium retention  and water
reabsorption as well as potassium excretion, especially in the renal tubules. The
aldosterone deficiency leads to the electrolyte imbalances of increased potassium and
decreased sodium, causing the clinical signs of impaired cardiac conduction and
bradycardia, lethargy and nausea. Glucocorticoid deficiency causes loss of appetite,
vomiting, diarrhoea and lethargy.
An atypical form of hypoadrenocorticism also occurs in which there is only a
glucocorticoid deficiency and no change in the serum electrolyte concentrations.
These dogs may still show gastrointestinal signs and weakness.
Because hypoadrenocorticism can occur with or without electrolyte changes, this
diagnosis should be considered in the differential diagnoses for any dog with any
combination of weakness, gastrointestinal signs (vomiting or diarrhoea) or
S  s e     a n  g
disease.
          n       
stimulation test should be performed.
Concurrent hypovolaemia affects many of the parameters measured, in that
   n s    a   a
concentrating ability secondary to chronic sodium loss reducing the renal medullary
concentration gradient.
The weakness may also be exacerbated by hypoglycaemia due to the lack of
glucocorticoids, so the blood glucose should always be checked and treated if
             
hyperadrenocorticism; the cause of this is not yet known.
Medical management
Hyperkalaemia can be life-threatening and should be treated with aggressive fluid
therapy with normal saline (0.9% sodium chloride). If hypoglycaemia occurs, either
5% glucose should be provided intravenously or a slow bolus of 50% glucose at 1
ml/kg should be given intravenously
Glucocorticoid therapy should be administered early in the treatment. If there is a
strong suspicion of hypoadrenocorticism, it should be given as soon as the ACTH
      s         s
potentially fatal crisis, dexamethasone may be given prior to the test as it will not
interfere with the assay, although it will affect the test resuilts.
Mineralocorticoid treatment is not necessary in a crisis situation, although it will be
        
mineralocorticoid as well as glucocorticoid activities, although prednisolone sodium
For longer term uise, fludrocortisone acetate per os at an initial dose of 15 μg/kg q 24
pivalate is available in some countries. The dose of fludrocortisone often needs to be
    s         
daily dosing.
Glucocorticoid (e.g. prednisolone) therapy is usually not needed on a daily basis in
  s       a  s
prednisolone tablets to be given at a dose of 0.1 to 0.2 mg/kg/day if the dog appears to
show clinical signs.
Salt supplementation may help the initial hyponatraemia, especially early in the
Epidemiology
reported in Great Danes, Portuguese water dogs, Rottweilers, standard poodles, West
Highland white terriers, soft coated wheaten terriers, Nova Scotia duck tolling
retrievers and bearded collies. It occurs most often in young to middle aged dogs (e.g.
    )    (    (   
to have a higher risk than spayed female dogs.
Prognosis
Hyporadrenocorticism can be life-threatening if not rapidly recognized and treated.
The disorder requires lifelong management.  Nevertheless,  with good client
compliance, the prognosis is excellent. In one study, 100% of 98 treated dogs survived
to discharge.
15
Lymphocytic inflammatory bowel disease/alimentary
lymphoma in a cat
Initial presentation
 2 months of intermittent vomiting, with recent increase in frequency
Signalment: 9-year-old neutered male domestic shorthaired cat; body weight 3.9 kg
Case history
The cat presented with a 2-month history of vomiting and an increasingly poor
appetite. The vomiting had been occurring initially two to three times per week, but
during the 2 weeks prior to admission was occurring up to four times per day. The
vomitus generally consisted of partially digested food, sometimes with bile present.
There had been no diarrhoea, although the amount of faeces had decreased as the
cat's appetite decreased.
His previous diet was a commercial dry food supplemented once a day with canned
food. During the time his appetite was decreasing the owner had been tempting him
with cooked chicken and ham.
His vaccinations were up to date and he had been treated for parasites 3 months
prior to presentation. He had not travelled outside of the UK.
Physical examination
    s       n  d 
body condition score was 3/9. His mucous membranes were pink but slightly dry and
capillary refill time was <2.5 seconds. Thoracic auscultation was unremarkable and
lymph nodes were within normal limits. On abdominal palpation diffusely thickened
loops of bowel were felt. His temperature was 38.7° C, respiratory rate was 30 breaths
per minute and his heart rate was 187 beats per minute. His coat was uinkempt in
appearance.
Problem list
· Chronic vomiting
Differential diagnosis
· Dietary sensitivity (allergy or intolerance)
· Dietary indiscretion
• Stomach
' gastritis
· gastric ulcers
· inflammatory bowel disease
· foreign body
* parasites
* neoplasia
· Small intestinal disease
· infectious, e.g. bacteria, viral, fungal
* gastrointestinal (Gl) parasites
· inflammatory bowel disease
· infiltrative neoplasia, e.g. lymphoma, mastocytosis
* high partial obstruction, e.g. intussusception, foreign body
· Systemic disease
 uraemia
· liver failure
* sepsis
· congestive heart failure
 acidosis
· hypoadrenocorticism
· ketoacidotic diabetes mellitus
* hyperparathyroidism
* gastrinoma
· Neurological diseases (no other signs consistent with these in this cat)
* dysautonomia
+ vestibular disease
· CNS disease
· Drugs, toxins (no known history of drug or toxin exposure)
Case work-ulp
Minimum data base
Haematology, serum chemistry, urinalysis and faecal examination were preformed.
Haematology results were within the reference ranges. Serum chemistry showed a
mild decrease in albumin to 24 g/l (reference range 28-39 g/l), and mild
hyperglycaemia of 6.7 mmol/1 (reference range 3.0-5.0 mmol/l), which was thought
to be likely due to stress. Serum total thyroxin was within the reference range at 17.5
nmol/1 (reference range 13-48 nmol/l).
The serum cobalamin concentration was decreased to 177 ng/ (reference range
251-908 ng/l) and folate was decreased to 6.4 μg/ml (reference range 9.7-21.6 μg/l).
Clinical tip: folate and cobalamin (vitamin Bi2)
Cobalamin is absorbed in the ileal part of the small intestine. It requires prior binding with
intrinsic factor, which comes from the pancreas in cats and the stomach and pancreas in dogs.
Deficiency may be caused by poor absorption due to intestinal disease, exocrine pancreatic
insufficiency, excessive bacteria in the upper small intestine utilizing the vitamin, or a deficiency in
 n  e ( n s) ia e o  e  i
possible; however, this is unlikely in cats as they cannot successfully be vegetarians.
Unlike most other B vitamins, cobalamin is stored in the body. In healthy cats the half life is 11 to
14 days and in cats with Gl disease it is only 4.5 to 5.5 days. Clinical signs of cobalamin deficiency in
humans include anaemia, thrombocytopenia, neuropathies and digestion abnormalities. In cats (and
 asdsa  psaans aaq s ll aamou aasap lam se no ae sis p a (sio 
treatment of intestinal disorders is improved with cobalamin repletion. A high serum concentration
of cobalamin does not appear to have clinical significance and may occur with supplementation. The
recommended dose for supplementation in humans exceeds the amounts needed to reach serum
reference ranges and there is a consideration that there may be positive pharmacological effects.
Folate is absorbed only in the proximal intestine. A deficiency usually indicates small intestinal
disease and if it is accompanied by a cobalamin deficiency it likely indicates widespread disease. A
high serum folate can be caused by bacterial production, although serum concentrations of this
vitamin are sensitive to food intake and a high dietary intake can also increase the serum
concentration (Fig 15.1).
Site of cobalamin
absorption
Site of folate
absorption
Increased
Decreased
serum folate
serum folate
Exocrine pancreatic
Severe mucosal
insufficiency
disease of
proximalbowel
Vitamin
supplementation
Phenytoin?
Sulfasalazine?
Bacterialproduction
Sulfonamides?
Increased
serum cobalamin
Decreased
Vitamin
serum cobalamin
supplementation
Severe mucosal
disease of
distalbowel
Exocrine pancreatic
insufficiency
Absorption defect
Giant Schnauzers,
Shar Peis,Border
collies)
Pancreatitis (cats)
Fig 15.1
Intestinal absorption of cobalamin and folate
Serum titres for Toxoplasma gondii were zero for IgM and 1o0 for IgG, inconsistent
with the presence of this organism. Blood test results for feline leukaemia virus (FeLV)
and feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV) were also negative.
Urinalysis showed a urine specific gravity of 1.026. The chemical strip analysis
results were within reference ranges and the urine sediment was inactive. Urine
protein to creatinine ratio was within the reference range ( <0.4) at 0.12.
Clinical tip
While a urine specific gravity of 1.026 is within the reference range for cats (1.015-1.050) it is
lower than is expected for most healthy cats. This parameter should be repeated and if it is
consistently below 1.030 (especially if the cat mostly eats dry food), the cause should be explored.
 Early chronic kidney disease may present with only an inappropriate low urine specific gravity.
Faeces were submitted for parasitology and culture of enteropathogens; both of
these results were negative.
Imaging
Abdominal radiographs showed no abnormalities.
Abdominal ultrasound showed a diffusely irregular appearance and thickening to
normal intestinal layering was present in some areas (Figs 15.2-15.5). Peristalsis
appeared to be decreased. The mesenteric lymph nodes appeared prominent.
正
1L0.42cm
Fig 15.2
1L0.51om
Figs 15.2 and 15.3
 Sagittal and transverse ultrasound pictures of the small intestine, showing
thickening and loss of normal layering
(courtesy of Carolina Urraca del Junco)
Mucosal
interface
Mucosa
Submucosa
Muscularis
propria
Subserosa,
serosa and its
interface with
the mesentary
Fig 15.4
Mucosal
interface
Mucosa
Submucosa
Muscularis
propria
Subserosa,
serosa and its
interface with
the mesentary
Figs 15.4 and 15.5
Sagittal and transverse drawings of the ultrasonographic appearance of the
normal intestine showing layering
The right kidney had an irregular outline with a hyperechoic wedge-shaped lesion
consistent with infarction.
Endoscopy and histopathology
At gastroduodenal endoscopy, there was digested blood present in the duodenum and
the mucosa appeared much more roughened and hyperaemic than normal (Figs 15.6
and 15.7). Biopsies were taken of the gastric and duodenal mucosa.
Fig 15.6
Endoscopic picture of a normal feline cranial small intestine
Fig15.7
infiltration
Results of the histopathology of the gastric mucosa showed a moderate increase in
lymphocytes and plasmacytes, which could be consistent with inflammatory bowel
disease. The duodenal mucosa showed increased numbers of lymphocytes (Fig 15.8)
severe lymphocytic inflammatory bowel disease could not be ruled out. The owners
declined laparotomy in their cat for the purpose of obtaining full thickness intestinal
samples and a more definitive diagnosis.
Fig15.8
Histopathology of the duodenal mucosa showed increased numbers of lymphocytes
Clinical tip
Gastric mucosal samples obtained via the endoscope may be useful for diagnosis of lymphoma in
the stomach, but are not often adequate for differentiating between inflammatory bowel disease and
lymphoma in the small intestine. The most common sites of Gl lymphoma in the cat are the jejunum
and ileum; areas which may require surgery (or laparoscopy) for obtaining intestinal samples.
Intestinal lymphoma may also involve the deeper areas of the intestinal wall which may not be
accessible by endoscopic biopsy instrumentation.
Treatment and outcome
This cat was treated with oral chemotherapy with chlorambucil at 2 mg (total dose)
po q 48 hours combined with prednisolone at 10 mg po q 24 hours and was provided
with nutritional support (see below).
Cobalamin was administered subcutaneously at 250 μg once a week for 8 weeks and
 pn  s a  ( d)  o e ps sm e p
Nursing aspects
This cat had had an insufficient caloric intake for at least a month. As he presented with a much
diminished appetite, nutritional supplementation was vital. Animals with GI disease require enteral
nutritional support if possible, as the intestine is nourished by the luminal presence of nutrients,
especially glutamate in the small intestine.
 The estimation of caloric requirements for hospitalized patients is based upon the resting energy
requirement, which is in kcal 70 X body weight in kilogramso.75. The presenting weight is used
initially, rather than the optimal weight. In this cat, this value was:
70 x 3.90.75 = 70 x 2.77 = 194 kcal
The estimated amount to initiate feeding was decreased to one-third of this amount, or 65 kcal to
decrease the risk of the re-feeding syndrome. The key tips for nutritional supplementation of sick
animals are to feed early and to try to not feed too much.
As this cat was vomiting, the provision of oral or gastric nutrition could have been difficult.
Constant rate intravenous metoclopramide was administered with his intravenous fluids at a rate of 1
mg/kg/24 hours.
The initial feeding attempted was the use of a complete and balanced liquid food containing 1
kcal/ml. This was administered by gentle oral administration at 8 ml given eight times per day. This
 was not completely successful, as the cat would often only tolerate about 5 ml, which provided 40
kcal per day. While not ideal, this is still satisfactory for initial feeding. The cat was also offered
chicken and white fish and on the second day began to eat several grams per day, adding about 30 to
50 kcal to his intake.
A naso-oesophageal tube could have been placed to feed the cat; however, there was a risk of
vomiting the tube and having it displaced into the trachea. If the cat had not started eating. placement
of a jejunostomy tube and/or intravenous parenteral nutrition would have been indicated.
By the end of the first week, the cat was eating a complete canned food in adequate
amounts and had only vomited on days 4 and 6. He was discharged on oral
medications, with repeat visits for evaluation and cobalamin administration.
He gained 0.6 kg over the 2 months following diagnosis and the owner reported that
he vomited only once or twice a week and was much brighter and more active. His
lrine specific gravity did not increase above 1.o30; however, he did not become
the tentative diagnosis of intestinal lymphoma
Discussion and epidemiology
shifted from the mediastinal form to the Gl form, which most often affects the small
intestine. Cats with Gl lymphoma have a lower incidence of FeLV (15%) infection
            
S s e  s   n      s
PCR testing).
evidence of a breed predilection, but male cats are slightly more likely to develop the
in about 30%, so absence of GI signs does not rule out the disease. Cats with low-grade
lymphoma are likely to have palpably thickened loops of bowel.
Some cases show a non-regenerative anaemia consistent with anaemia of chronic
disease or bone marrow infiltration of the tumour in cases with FeLV. Mild to
moderate hypoalbuminaemia is often present; however, this is common with many
diseases of the small intestine. In some cases liver involvement in the neoplasia results
in increased liver enzymes.
Low serum cobalamin and folate are present in many cases, but again, this is true of
many small intestinal diseases where absorption is decreased.
The increased intestinal wall thickness is characteristic, but does not differentiate
wall layering is usually more pronounced with lymphoma than other inflammatory
bowel disease. The increase in mediastinal lymph node size is a non-specific finding
common in many abdominal disorders.
Histology of GI biopsies is needed for a definitive diagnosis, but even then the
diagnosis can be difficult. There are three grades of Gl lymphoma:
· Low -- lymphocytic or small cell
· Intermediate
· High - lymphoblastic, immunoblastic or large cell
It can be extremely difficult, even with histopathology, to differentiate low grade
small cell lymphoma from lymphocytic inflammatory bowel disease. Many clinicians
B a ss     s  (od    )!
immunoreactivity to help differentiate between the disorders. A predominance of one
type of cell is more likely to be tumour and a mixed population more likely to be IBD.
                
response to therapy or survival time in cats.
Treatment discuission
Various chemotherapy protocols have been used for Gl lymphoma; these include
various combinations of cyclophosphamide, vincristine, prednisolone, -asparaginase,
doxorubicin and methotrexate. Remission rates with these protocols are difficult to
interpret as many studies do no include the histological grade of the disease and
remission rates are better for low grade small cell lymphoma.
            
the less aggressive chemotherapy protocol of chlorambucil and prednisolone with less
S          s    
treatment in these cases, with a median survival time of T7 months. Cats which
achieve complete remission have better survival times. It may be that some of the cats
treated for small cell lymphoma have a form of inflammatory bowel disease; however.
16
Ingestion of glue by a dog
Initial presentation
Vomiting and decreased appetite
Signalment: 15-month-old neutered female Bassett Fauve de Bretagne (Fig 16.1), body weight 9.1 kg
Fig 16.1
Bassett Fauve de Bretagne dog at presentation
Case history
The dog had been healthy up until 2 days prior to examination when she was thought
to have been playing with a tube of glue. The owner reported that the dog had chewed
off the cap and may have eaten some of the glue. Since then she had vomited twice,
starting soon after access to the glue. She then had shown a decrease in appetite. The
vomitus contained mostly a green fluid and foam. The owner reported that the dog
had also passed a small amount of dark faeces.
The dog was de-wormed regularly with fenbendazole and she had received her
vaccinations as a puppy. Her regular diet was a commercial dry dog food
supplemented with treats.
Physical examination
The dog was quiet but responsive. Her body condition score was 5/9. The mucous
membranes were slightly tacky but the colour was pink and capillary refill time was
less than 2 seconds. Peripheral lymph nodes were unremarkable.
Thoracic auscultation revealed normal heart and lung sounds, with a heart rate of
100 beats per minute. On abdominal palpation, a firm distended stomach was felt and
the dog was uncomfortable during palpation. Respiratory rate was 24 breaths per
Problem list and discussion of problems
· Vomiting and poor appetite
The dog's poor appetite was thought to be related to the vomiting and separate
differential diagnoses were not considered.
Differential diagnosis
Differentials for acute vomiting in this dog included:
· Disorders of the stomach
* foreign body
' gastritis
· ulceration
· chronic partial dilatation-volvulus
* neoplasia
· Disorders of the small intestine
· foreign body
· inflammatory bowel disease
· neoplasia
* parasites
· intussusception (unlikely)
· Disorders of the large intestine
· colitis
· obstipation
· Systemic disorders
' pancreatopathy
· hypoadrenocorticism
· diabetes mellitus
· liver disorders
 peritonitis
* renal disease/uraemia (unlikely)
· Dietary causes
* adverse reaction to food (allergy or intolerance)
 dietary indiscretion
Because of the history of potentially having ingested glue and the fact that the dog
Case work-up
The dog was admitted to the hospital for diagnostic investigation.
Minimum data base
Haematology and serum chemistry  were performed and the results were
 -   e         
which was likely due to haemoconcentration from mild dehydration.
Imaging
Abdominal radiographs showed a much distended rounded appearance to the stomach
in both ventrodorsal and lateral views (Figs 16.2 and 16.3).
Figs 16.2
Figs 16.2 and 16.3
 Lateral and ventrodorsal abdominal radiographs of patient showing stomach
 distended with a heterogeneous appearing mass
(courtesy of Dr Donald Yool)
Abdominal ultrasound showed the pyloric antrum and pylorus filled with
hyperechoic material. The material was not moving despite the presence of peristalsis
The duodenum was empty and the mass appeared to be causing a pyloric obstruction.
Case assessment
Initial case management included administration of intravenous fluids to maintain
hydration and provide venous access. As there was the presence of a foreign mass,
surgical exploration was performed.
Surgical management
At surgery a large gastrotomy was performed and a dense mass filling the stomach
was removed (Fig 16.4). An area of severe gastric ulceration was identified in the
gastric mucosa, but the tissue appeared viable and resection was not needed. A
and volvulus from the mechanical stretching of the stomach by the mass.
Fig16.4
 The mass of glue which was removed from stomach of the patient
(courtesy of Dr Donald Yool)
Gastric biopsies of the ulcerated area and of a non-ulcerated area of the stomach
were submitted for histopathology. There was mucosal loss with severe focal gastric
ulceration and submucosal oedema. Moderate acute gastritis with large numbers of
Helicobacter-like organisms were identified deep within the gastric glands in a non-
lilcerated area of the stomach.
Clinical tip: Helicobacter species
    '       a     
heilmannii (Gastrospirillum hominis), H. salomonis and H. bizzozeronii have been themost common.
Experimentally, infection can be established in both dogs and cats and a lymphoid follicular gastritis
can be produced. However, in these experimental studies, clinical signs are absent or very mild.
ulceration appears to be very rare in dogs and cats. The role of Helicobacter species in clinical cases
of chronic gastritis is unknown, as is the optimal treatment. In approximately 25% of cases in which
Helicobacter is identified, it appears to be the cause of or related to the clinical signs and should be
treated. When the organisms are deep in the gastric glands (as in this case), rather than located more
superficially, it is more likely that they are involved in the pathophysiology of vomiting.
There are several treatment protocols for Helicobacter infection, including 2 weeks of omeprazole
0.7 mg/kg po q 24 hours (or an H2 blocker such as ranitidine), amoxicillin at 10 to 20 mg/kg po q 8
azithromycin at 10 to 20 mg/kg po q 24 hours in dogs and 5 mg/kg po q 24 hours in cats or
clarithromycin at 7.5 mg/kg po q 12 hours. Relapses have been seen. One study revealed that 70% of
 t   a  a    a     s
Vomiting decreased significantly in dogs in which the Helicobacter was cleared.
Follow-up and medical management
The dog recovered well after surgery, although she vomited once. Postoperative
medical treatment included the anti-emetic maropitant at 1 mg/kg subcutaneously q
24 hours, omeprazole (1 mg/kg q 24 hours po), sucralfate (500 mg q 8 hours po) for
their gastroprotectant effects and tramadol (2 mg/kg q 12 hours; initially
intravenously, then po) for analgesia. Treatment for the Helicobacter species found in
the gastric biopsy samples was clavulanate-potentiated amoxicillin (15 mg/kg po q 12
 h  (  h   )   (
Case discussion and epidemiology
enteritis; however, expanding glues are associated with gastric obstruction with a
foreign body. Gorilla glue is a urethane polymer and polymeric isocyanate liquid
    m          
activated from a liquid to a solid mass in the stomach when ingested, which probably
takes about 20 minutes. It will incorporate food in the stomach into the mass.
               
report, eight of 10 cases of polyurethane glue ingestion required surgical removal of
           s 
minutes in one reported case) and include vomiting, possibly haematemesis, anorexia,
lethargy, abdominal distension, abdominal pain and secondary tachypnoea. Gastric
hyperaemia and ulceration have been reported, as was present in this case, and in one
reported case, gastric perforation occurred.
The radiographic appearance (see Fig 16.2) is fairly distinct, with the presence of a
distended, stomach filled with a mottled radiopaque substance. Radiographic evidence
may be present 4 hours after ingestion, although is more obvious in radiographs taken
at 24 hours.
Becauise of the solid nature of the mass, induction of emesis shouild not be
considered; it is also ill advised as having the glue expand within the oesophagus
administration of charcoal is also not advised as it would be incorporated in the mass
rather than preventing absorption of the glue (which is unlikely anyway).
Prognosis
If the glue mass is removed without delay and if gastric perforation does not take
place, the prognosis for recovery should be good.
17
Lead ingestion in a puppy
Initial presentation
Vomiting and seizures
Signalment: 5-month-old entire male West Highland white terrier, body weight 3.1 kg
Case history
The puppy had been vomiting bile and occasionally digested food once a day for 4
weeks. Two weeks prior to consultation he had a seizure which was described as
beginning with barking and running around the room before becoming recumbent,
10 minutes. There had been no further seizures.
reportedly more flatulent. His stools were reported as normal in consistency, but only
passed every other day. The puppy's drinking and urination were unchanged.
The puppy did play with toys and the owner did not know if he could have ingested
any of them.
The owner had owned the patient and his litter mate since they were 12 weeks old
and the other puppy appeared healthy. The affected puppy was smaller than his
littermate. Both puppies were fully vaccinated and had been de-wormed with
fenbendazole several weeks prior to presentation. Both puppies were fed a commercial
puppy food supplemented with commercial ‘puppy milk', chicken and rice. They had
not travelled out of the United Kingdom.
Physical examination
The puppy was alert and responsive, but quieter than normal for a 6-month-old terrier
puppy. His body condition score was 4/9. His mucous membranes were pink and
moist with a capillary refill time of <2 seconds. His heart rate was 152 beats per
minute with matched good quality pulses. Respiratory rate was 28 breaths per minute
and thoracic auscultation revealed no abnormalities. Abdominal palpation was
unremarkable, as were his peripheral lymph nodes. Rectal temperature was 38.6° C.
Problem list and discussion of problems
· Seizure
. Vomiting
Differential diagnosis
Differential diagnoses for vomiting
· Disorders of the stomach
· foreign body
* gastritis
• ulceration
· chronic partial dilatation-volvulus
* neoplasia (unlikely at this age)
• Disorders of the small intestine
· foreign body
· inflammatory bowel disease
· neoplasia (again, unlikely at this age)
* parasites
• intussusception
· Disorders of the large intestine
* obstipation
· Systemic disorders
* pancreatopathy
· hypoadrenocorticism
* diabetes mellitus
* portosystemic shunt (Pss) and other liver disorders
* renal disease/uraemia (unlikely, no concurrent signs)
· Toxins
· NSAIDS
· lead
* mercury
· organochlorines. organophosphates, carbamates
* toxic plants, e.g. philodendron, diffenbachia, daffodil bulbs
· Dietary causes
 adverse reaction to food (allergy or intolerance)
· dietary indiscretion
Differential diagnoses for seizures
 Intracranial disorders
 congenital and hereditary disorders, e.g. brain malformations, Chiari-like malformations of the
foramen magnum, hydrocephalus, inborn errors of metabolism (the puppy was probably too normal
after the seizure for these differential diagnoses to be highly likely)
· inflammation, e.g. encephalitis, vascular disease, granulomatous meningioencephalopathy (GME),
 neoplasia, abscess/granuloma (other than a resolving vascular disorder or GME), the puppy was too
normal after the seizure for most of these differential diagnoses
a mos e ne peis ues se 'anaissod - Asdalida .
· intracranial haemorrhage -- possible if resolving
 Extracranial (systemic) disorders affecting the brain
· Infectious agents, e.g. distemper, Parvovirus, Anaplasma/Ehrlichia, rabies, bacterial, tetanus; there
was no evidence of these in the history or at physical examination
· Metabolic disease - many of these are possible as other than hypothyroidism, sometimes the signs
are intermittent
· hypoglycaemia
• congenital hypothyroidism (usually presents as cretinism in puppies)
· hypocalcaemia
· hypernatraemia
· Toxins
·lead
· organophosphate
* metaldehyde
· Hepatic encephalopathy, e.g. with portosystemic shunt (PSS)
· Parasites - Toxoplasma, migrating larvae of Cuterebra (unlikely in the UK) or Toxocara
(   )  o     
together made Pss or toxins the most likely cause, although the possibility of two
separate unrelated problems had to be considered.
Case work-l1p
Minimum data base
A minimum data base of haematology, serum chemistry and urinalysis was obtained.
The packed cell volume was 0.34 1/1 (reference range 0.37-0.55 1/l), with a decreased
mean corpuscular volume (MCV) of 55 fl (reference range 60-77 fl) and decreased
mean cell haemoglobulin concentration (MCHC) of 31% (reference range 32-36%).
The blood smear was also consistent with a mild microcytic hypochromic anaemia.
Moderate numbers of polychromatophils and normoblasts (nucleated red blood cells
(nRBCs)) were seen and some basophilic stippling was present on some of the
polychromatophils (Fig 17.1).
Fig 17.1
 Basophilic stippling in red blood cells from lead toxicity
(courtesy of Prof Elspeth Milne)
Clinical tip on microcytosis
Microcytosis demonstrated by smear and reduced MCV may be caused by chronic blood loss,
anaemia of chronic disease or chronic inflammation, or Psss. It is also seen in healthy Japanese Akita
dogs. Hypochromia is most often seen in iron deficiency anaemias.
Basophilic stippling is neither specific nor sensitive for lead toxicity as it can also occur in
regenerative anaemias. The presence of the combination of basophilic stippling and normoblasts
(nRBCs) did indicate that blood lead concentration should be determined.
Serum chemistry showed an elevated alkaline phosphatase (AP) of 134 IU/l (adult
reference range 20-60 IU/); however, for a puppy of this age this is within
expectations of two to three times adult ranges. The inorganic phosphate was also
           s
range for a growing puppy.
A bile acid stimulation test was performed as PsS was high on the differential
diagnoses lists for both problems. The pre-prandial serum bile acid concentration was
  s d    a  )  6
concentration was 28.2 μmol/l. Generally, post-prandial values over 30 μmol/l are
suggestive of Pss, but a lower value cannot completely rule it ouut
Urinalysis revealed a urine specific gravity of 1.030, pH of 5.8, with negative results
on other chemical strip parameters. A few white blood cells and epithelial cells were
seen on the urine sediment. The finding of urate crystals would indicate a possible
PSS, but again, the absence of this finding cannot rule it out.
Imaging
Abdominal radiographs were taken, primarily to look for evidence of a foreign body,
and no abnormalities were detected on these other than the presence of a moderately
small sized liver.
Abdominal ultrasound confirmed the small liver size, but no shunting vessel was
found. The rest of the abdominal organs appeared normal.
Blood lead concentration
21.9 μmol/l with a reference range of <2.9 μumol/1. As no lead foreign bodies were
found on abdominal radiographs, another source of lead ingestion had to be explored
was 3.77 μmol/l, which is above the reference range but as he was not symptomatic,
he was not treated. The owner was also tested and her blood lead concentrations were
not elevated. As only the dogs were affected, it was likely that there was an
environmental contamination, e.g. in the garden or from a food container, rather
than the in-house water supply.
Treatment and outcome
Treatment used in this case was chelation of the lead with calcium edetate at 25
mg/kg by subcutaneous injection every 6 hours for 5 days. The 250 mg/ml calcium
              
injection. The dog was monitored in hospital during the treatment and tolerated it
well. His blood lead concentration 1 week after chelation finished was 4.59 μmol/l. He
did not show any further clinical signs after chelation treatment and no further
treatment was used.
Clinical tip on calcium edetate treatment
In animals with chronic lead toxicity, treatment may result in a post-chelation rebound effect,
where blood lead concentration increases, due to redistribution of the lead from bone and tissue. In
cases where the blood lead concentration increases, it is necessary to ensure that the patient is not
Hnsi a  s  a    ss o e   on sox 
(Gl) tract has been removed by excretion, which sometimes can be aided by the use of a magnesium
 or sodium sulphate cathartic or by endoscopy or surgery.
Discussion
Pathophysiology of lead toxicity
              
gastric contents results in ionization of the lead, which is then absorbed from the
duodenum, although most of it is passed in the faeces. Lead shot embedded in muscles
is not commonly a cause of lead toxicity as it is not well absorbed, although if lead is
in the joints it can be released into the body.
Lead is carried on the red blood cells and the unbound form is distributed widely
throughout the tissues of the body. It is stored in bone, where it can replace calcium in
repair or lactation.
Lead in the blood is filtered through the kidneys and can accumulate in the renal
tu bular epithelium.
        n    
interferes with haem synthesis, affects the stability of the red blood cell membrane
causing increased fragility, shortens red blood cell life span and causes decreased
oxygen carrying capacity.
The Gl signs may be caused by alteration of the smooth muscle contractions.
It also causes neuronal damage, decreased cerebral blood flow, cerebral oedema,
demyelination and decreased nerve conduction.
Clinical signs and laboratory findings
The GI signs seen with lead toxicity most commonly include vomiting, diarrhoea.
abdominal discomfort and anorexia. Megaoesophagus may also occur. Neurological
signs include ataxia, tremors, agitation, hysteria, seizures and blindness. Dogs have
also been reported to develop aggression, dementia, pica and may even progress to
 n  p   o  d    e  
more in older than in younger animals.
about half of the blood smears of affected animals, occurring more often in dogs than
blood smears from affected dogs. An increase in white blood cells and an increase in
Radiography may show a lead foreign body within the GI tract. In chronic cases of
lead toxicity, lead lines, which are linear opacities in the epiphysis of the long bones,
are seen in lead toxicosis of humans but are not commonly found in dogs and cats.
Diagnosis
The neuirological and Gl signs associated with lead toxicity are non-specific and have
present, so blood lead concentrations should be checked in patients with the clinical
signs. However, the blood lead concentrations can fluctuate and are often not
consistent with the severity of clinical signs. Blood lead concentrations of 1.45 to 1.7
     s  x g   (i ) 
     
Medical treatment
When necessary, supportive treatment such as diazepam or barbiturates may be
needed for control of seizures. Attempts should be made to find and remove the souirce
of lead and it may be necessary to have the water supply checked.
If lead is present in the Gl tract, removal is necessary prior to chelation therapy as
calcium edetate increases the absorption of lead from the Gl tract. Sulphate
             
the lead as lead sulphate which is poorly absorbed. Larger lead objects may require
removal by surgery or endoscopy.
     s       s s 
urine. Most chelators are nephrotoxic, so renal parameters should be checked prior to
use and monitored during use. Chelation of animals without signs, such as the litter
mate of this puppy, is not recommended as the chelation may increase the blood lead
concentration and result in clinical signs. When the source is removed, these animals
will slowly eliminate the lead.
Calcium edetate was used as the chelator in this case, after dilution to a 10 mg/ml
solution in 5% glucose. Sodium EDTA should not be used as it may cauise
hypocalcaemia. As the blood lead concentrations may increase during chelation,
initial monitoring shouild  be done  by  clinical signs  instead of blood lead
concentration. The most serious potential side effect of calcium edetate is a reversible
nephrotoxicity. GI side effects may also been seen and reportedly these may be reduced
by oral zinc supplementation, although no exact dose is available
British anti-lewisite or dimercaprol is sometimes used as an adjunct therapy with
calcium edetate to increase urinary and biliary excretion of lead. It is nephrotoxic and
S    o       
Penicillamine may be used orally as a chelator but it will also bind zinc, iron and
S              
to cause nephrotoxicity than the other chelators and does not bind with the
nutritionally essential minerals. It probably does not increase the absorption of lead
from the intestine and has a lower incidence of Gl side effects. However, the drug is
not widely available in the United Kingdom.
Following chelation, blood lead concentrations may rebound within 2 to 3 weeks
due to redistribution of lead from bone and tissue. If this is not associated with
clinical signs, further chelation therapy is not required. The animal's environment
Epidemiology
            
barrier permeability and up to five times greater absorption rates following ingestion.
Usually the affected animals are less than 5 years of age and about a third of them
are less then 1 year old. The more commonly affected gender is male and, for reasons
that are unclear, poodles are one of the most commonly affected breeds
Although lead is less commonly used than in previous decades as sources of lead are
lead-based paints which were used before 1959 and may cause exposure during
remodelling of buildings. Other sources include putty, caulking material, roofing
materials, batteries, lubrication grease, fishing sinkers, lead shot, linoleum,
improperly fired ceramic bowls, artists’ paints, curtain weights, golf balls, wine cork
covers, lead arsenate pesticides and soft water in lead pipes. One dog developed signs
after licking water dripping from a tap which contained lead. Lead intoxication from
             
increased acidity. Lead contamination of soil can also be a source of exposure.
When lead poisoning is diagnosed in a patient where there is not an obvious source
(e.g. lead foreign body in the GI tract), the owner should still be informed about the
public health risks for human exposure. Children, like puppies and kittens, are at
increased risk for lead poisoning. Local agencies should be contacted to check the
water supply and investigate the souirce of contamination.
Prognosis
In animals showing mild to moderate signs that are treated appropriately, the
prognosis is good as long as the source of lead is removed. In animals with severe
18
Gastric adenocarcinoma in a dog
Initial presentation
Vomiting
Signalment: 11-year-old male entire Border collie, body weight 22.1 kg
Case history
The dog had been vomiting intermittently for about 8 months. For the previous 2
months the frequency of vomiting had increased to at least once a day, usually in the
morning. The vomiting occuirred either before or after eating. The vomitus usually
contained food and bile, but no blood. He was also reported to recently be gulping,
retching and drooling. His appetite was still fair, although he was sometimes less
interested in food than previously. His faeces were normal in appearance and
 a      e     
treatment with furosemide (2 mg/kg po q 12 hours) and enalapril (0.45 mg/kg po q 12
hours). His urination and drinking were increased due to the diuretic treatment. His
by the medication.
He was vaccinated yearly, but had not been treated for endoparasites for a couple of
years. He was fed three times a day on a diet which included dry dog food as well as
fried chicken, pasta, tuna and rice.
Physical examination
S            
auscultation revealed a IV/VI left apex parasystolic heart murmur, with normal lung
sounds. Heart rate was 132 beats per minute and he was intermittently panting. His
pulse quality was good. The mucous membranes were pink and slightly tacky with a
capillary refill time of <2 seconds. He was estimated to be about 6% dehydrated.
Abdominal palpation revealed no abnormalities, although the dog swallowed several
times during palpation. Rectal temperature was 38.5° C.
Clinical tip on abdominal palpation
 In some cases, dogs with abdominal discomfort will not tense their abdomen during palpation, but
careful observation of the head and face may show swallowing. a sharp intake of breath (catching
 breath) or turning of the head. This should be gently repeated to check that it is a consistent finding.
 It is also valuable to observe the dog's head during palpation as an otherwise gentle dog may nip if a
sensitive area is palpated!
Problem list and discussion of problems
. Vomiting
Differential diagnosis
Differential diagnoses for vomiting in this dog included:
· Disorders of the stomach
· foreign body
* gastritis
· ulceration
* chronic partial dilation-volvulus
· neoplasia
· Disorders of the small intestine
· foreign body
* inflammatory bowel disease
· neoplasia
* parasites
• intussusception (unlikely)
• Disorders of the large intestine
* colitis
· obstipation
* neoplasia
· Systemic disorders
* pancreatopathy
 hypoadrenocorticism
· diabetes mellitus
· liver disorders
* peritonitis
* renal disease/uraemia (unlikely)
· Dietary causes
· dietary sensitivity
· dietary indiscretion
Most dogs (80%) with intussusception are less than 1 year of age, although it was
still a possibility. He did not have any other signs of renal disease, so uraemia was an
unlikely cause of the vomiting.
Case work-up
to the aetiology of the vomiting. However, as he showed abdominal discomfort, an
          s
Minimum data base
A minimum data base of haematology, serum chemistry and urinalysis was obtained.
Haematology showed a packed cell volume at the high end of the reference range at
55% (reference range 39-55%). While still in the reference range, this high value is
uncommon in breeds other than sighthounds and was likely due to dehydration
caused by the vomiting plus diuretic treatment. The other haematological parameters
were within the reference ranges.
Serum chemistry parameters were within the reference range other than a serum
creatinine of 162 μmol/1 (reference range 40-132 μmol/l), a urea of 9.4 mmol/l
(reference range 1.7-7.4 mmol/l) and lipase of 296 1U/1 (reference range 13-200 IU/l).
A SNAP cPL (qualitative canine pancreatic specific lipase test) was negative.
Clinical tip
While an elevated serum lipase can be consistent with pancreatitis in dogs, it is neither sensitive
nor specific. As lipase is excreted through the kidneys a decrease in glomerular filtration with
increased urea and creatinine will also increase lipase. In this case the SNAP cPL (canine pancreatic
specific lipase) also confirmed that pancreatitis was unlikely to be the cause of the dog's vomiting.
  T   s < Se To  e  a   S  d S T dNs 
 quantitative test.) This value is considered to be consistent with pancreatitis. The correlation of the
SNAP cPL to the Spec cPL is about 95%.
Urinalysis showed a urine specific gravity of 1.038, consistent with the dog's ability
to concentrate urine when dehydrated, which was also being affected by the use of
furosemide (and may have reflected a missed furosemide dose the morning of urine
collection). The urine chemical strip results were unremarkable, with a pH of 7.4, and
only a few struvite crystals seen on sediment.
Clinical tip
Struvite crystals are normal in dog urine and should not be interpreted as an indication that
uroliths (stones) are present. If uroliths are present, then the crystals can be an indicator of the type
of stone, but the presence of crystals without stones is not an indication for treatment.
Imaging
A barium impregnated polyethylene spheres (BIPs) study was performed to detect any
possible foreign body. A radiograph taken 14 hours after administration showed that
all the BIPs had moved out of the stomach into intestines, showing that no
obstruction was present (Fig 18.1).
Fig 18.1
Lateral abdominal radiograph showing normal movement of BIPs ruling out a complete
 gastric obstruction
(courtesy of Dr Tobias Schwarz)
Clinical tip
 BIPS are barium impregnated polyethylene spheres packaged with 9 or 10 large (5 mm) BIPS and
 30 small (1.5 mm) BIPs. The small ones are meant to mimic the action of small food particles and
move through the intestinal tract similarly to food. The large BIPS are similar to non-digestible
 particles which are only moved into the duodenum during the fasting period from the migrating
motility or *housekeeper wave’ of contractility. If there is an obstruction present, the BIPS will bunch
 proximal to it. They do not show gut wall thickness, mucosal detail or outline foreign bodies.
Endoscopy
Gastroduodenoscopy was performed. A large raised mass with a crater ulcer was
present at the lesser curvature of the stomach (Fig 18.2). The mucosa around the mass
was inflamed, thickened and firm and the mass bled easily when biopsied. The
proximal small intestine appeared normal.
Fig18.2
Endoscopic view of raised ulcerated lesion on lesser curvature of the stomach
As neoplasia was suspected, thoracic radiographs were taken. There was no
evidence of pulmonary tumour metastasis present on the radiographs.
Histopathology of the samples of the gastric mass was described as gastric
ulceration with associated intense granulation reaction. As there was a suspicion of
neoplasia, a laparotomy was performed and a surgical biopsy was taken. The
histopathology of this biopsy sample was interpreted as gastric adenocarcinoma.
Treatment and ouitcome
S          
case the surgeons determined that the extent of the tumour was too great to excise.
Chemotherapy for gastric adenocarcinomas is generally unrewarding. In humans
with some types of gastric tumours, tumour growth is enhanced by histamine and
histamine 2-receptor blockers such as ranitidine or cimetidine may inhibit tumour
growth.
Clinical tip on gastrointestinal tumour biopsy
These cancers often cause an inflammatory reaction and biopsies taken only from the mucosa may
be interpreted as inflammatory or, if the tumour is affecting the submucosa or muscularis, the mucosa
may appear fairly normal. The gastric wall will often feel rigid and stiff and be difficult to distend. If
    a do    ss  s d  
appearance of the stomach, a full thickness sample obtained by surgery may be required. As the
stomach wall is abnormal, this must be done with care and skill, as dehiscence is possible when
working with diseased tissue.
Prior to obtaining the second biopsy results this dog was treated with palliative care
ising ranitidine and sucralfate. As no further treatment was available, the owners
elected to euthanize the dog.
Epidemiology
The prevalence of gastric cancer is thought to be low in dogs and cats, accounting for
less than 1% of canine tumours. Of the gastric tumours, malignant adenocarcinoma is
the most common in dogs and comprises 47 to 72% of gastric malignancies. Many
British clinicians believe that the prevalence may be higher in the United Kingdom,
although that has not been documented. While gastric adenocarcinomas or adenomas
are the most common gastric tumour in dogs, leiomyomas and lymphosarcoma, as
well as leiomyosarcoma, polyps, fibromas, fibrosarcomas, squamous cell carcinomas
and plasmacytomas also occuir. Some of these tumours have a better outcome than
gastric adenocarcinomas, so the tumour type should be characterized. Primary gastric
adenocarcinomas are frequently located on the incisura angularis of the lesser
curvature (as was this one) or the pyloric antrum of the stomach, although gastric
uilcers from other causes may occuir here as well. There are three morphological
patterns of distribution of gastric carcinomas: diffusely infiltrating non-ulcerating
lesions that involve most of the stomach that cause a tough, rigid (leather bottle)
appearance, localized, raised thickened plaques usually containing a raised central
ulcer (as in this case) and raised, polypoid, sessile lesions projecting into the lumen of
the stomach.
As with many tumours, primary gastric tumours occur more frequently in older
               
at 11 to 12 years of age, similar to this patient. Male dogs are affected more frequently
than female dogs and a higher risk has been suggested for Rough collies, Staffordshire
terriers and Belgian shepherd dogs.
nodes, liver and lungs. Before surgical treatment is undertaken, the lungs should be
checked for evidence of metastasis.
In humans, diet is thought to influence the development of gastric tumours. The
prevalence of the tumours in dogs is so low that dietary influences would be difficult
to study. Gastric tumours in humans are also related to the presence of Helicobacter
spp., but no association with this has been made in dogs.
Prognosis
dogs in which surgery can be performed, most patients are dead within 6 months due
to recurrent or metastatic cancer.
19
Pancreatitis in a cat
Initial presentation
Vomiting, poor appetite and lethargy
Signalment: 14-year-old male neutered Burmese cat, body weight 4.4 kg
Case history
The cat had been vomiting for 2 days and was refusing to eat. The owner had tried to
encourage him to eat, but he refused any type of food. He was very lethargic and the
owner thought that he had been urinating larger volumes than usual because the
litter box was very wet and she had observed this cat in the litter box frequently.
The owner had owned the cat since he was a kitten. He lived with a littermate
sibling, who was clinically healthy. Both the cats had been vaccinated approximately
18 months earlier, but had not been treated for endoparasites for several years. They
were both primarily indoor cats, although occasionally had access to a fenced garden.
Neither cat hunted nor scavenged food. They did play with toys, although the patient
had arthritis in both elbows, which decreased his mobility. His previous diet was a
combination of a commercial dry cat food and a commercial canned cat food.
Physical examination
Physical examination revealed the cat to be quiet and dull, but responsive. He was in
slightly overweight body condition (body condition score 6/9). His oral mucous
membranes were mildly jaundiced and tacky, with a capillary refill time of 2 seconds.
The sclera was mildly jaundiced bilaterally with no other ocular changes noted.
Examination of the oral cavity, ears and nose showed no abnormalities. All peripheral
lymph nodes were within normal limits. Auscultation of the lung fields as well as
compression and percussion of the thorax were normal. The respiratory rate was
elevated at 60 breaths per minute. Cardiac auscultation revealed a heart rate of 180
beats per minute with matched pulses. Rectal temperature was 39.1° C. Abdominal
palpation indicated marked cranial abdominal pain. The reminder of the physical
examination was unremarkable.
Problem list and discussion of problems
The cat's problems included vomiting, poor appetite and lethargy. The poor appetite
and lethargy were thought to be related to the cause of the vomiting. He also was
suspected to have polyuria, although it was possible that the other cat in the
household had increased urine output. He was also jaundiced.
Differential diagnosis
Differential diagnoses for vomiting
· Dietary sensitivity (allergy or intolerance)
· Dietary indiscretion
· Stomach
' gastritis
· gastric ulcers
* inflammatory bowel disease
· foreign body
* parasites
* neoplasia
· Small intestinal disease
· infectious, e.g. bacterial, viral, fungal
* gastrointestinal parasites
· inflammatory bowel disease
· infiltrative neoplasia, e.g. lymphoma, mastocytosis
· high partial obstruction, e.g. intussusception, foreign body
· Systemic disease
· uraemia
· liver failure
· sepsis
· congestive heart failure
 acidosis
· hypoadrenocorticism
· ketoacidotic diabetes mellitus
* hyperparathyroidism
* gastrinoma
• Neurological diseases (no other signs consistent with these in this cat)
· dysautonomia
* vestibular disease
· CNS disease
• Drugs, toxins (no known history of drug or toxin exposure)
Differential diagnoses for polyuria
· Diabetes mellitus
• Acromegaly (usually concurrent with diabetes mellitus in cats)
· Chronic kidney disease (sometimes acute renal failure) - the signs were too acute for chronic,
 unless the owner had not observed a gradual increase in urine output
* Pyelonephritis
• Electrolyte imbalances, e.g. hypercalcaemia, hypokalaemia, hyperkalaemia
· Hyperthyroidism
* Liver disorders
· Polycythaemia
• Drugs (no history of or known access to drugs or medications)
Other causes of polyuria/polydipsia, which are uncommon to extremely rare in cats, include:
• Hyperadrenocorticism
· Primary hyperaldosteronism
· Hypoadrenocorticism
· Tubular disorders (e.g. renal glucosuria)
· Central diabetes insipidus
· Psychogenic polydipsia
Differential diagnoses for jaundice
These include pre-hepatic disorder, hepatic disorders and post-hepatic disorders.
· Pre-hepatic jaundice is caused by intra-or extravascular haemolysis
· Hepatic causes of jaundice are due to liver disease, e.g.
* cholangiohepatitis complex
· hepatic lipidosis
· diffuse neoplasia
· feline infectious peritonitis
· toxins, e.g. paracetamol (acetaminophen)
* cirrhosis
· idiopathic drug reactions
· Post-hepatic causes of jaundice are caused by biliary obstruction or rupture, e.g.
* pancreatitis
· enteritis
* biliary neoplasia
* calculus
 ruptured bile duct or gallbladder
Case work-up
Intravenous fluid therapy with crystalloids at a rate to correct 8% dehydration was
initiated.
Minimum data base
Haematology revealed a mild leukocytosis due to mild neutrophilia (13.52 x 10°/l;
reference range: 2.5-12.5 x 10%/l), a left shift, with 1.5 x 10*/1 band neutrophils and
moderate monocytosis (3.07 x 10*/l; reference range: 0.15-1.7 x 10%/l). A mild
normocytic, normochromic anaemia was present (PcV: 0.237 1/l; reference range
0.30-0.45 l/l). A blood smear analysis revealed the presence of toxic neutrophils and
reactive lymphocytes.
39 g/l) and hyperbilirubinaemia (20 μmol/l; reference range 0-15 μmol/l), elevated
alanine aminotransferase (ALT) of 104 IU/l (reference range 6-83 1U/l) and moderate
hypokalaemia (2.0 mmol/l; reference range 2.9-4.2 mmol/). Alkaline phosphatase
(ALP) was within the reference range at 35 IU/1 (reference range 10-100 IU/l). Serum
      )   
umol/1 (reference range 159-295 μmol//).
(          s
and triglycerides were increased at 3.3 mmol/1 (reference range 0.57-1.14 mmol/l)
Urinalysis revealed a urine specific gravity (USG) of 1.014 and dip stick analysis
was 1 + positive for protein, 2+ positive for blood, bilirubin and leukocytes and 3+
positive for glucose. Ketone bodies were not detected. Sediment examination showed
the presence of occasional red blood cells, numerous white blood cells and bacteria
(cocci) and a sample submitted for bacterial culture was later fouind to be positive for
Staphylococcus.
The cat was diagnosed at this point with diabetes mellitus and a urinary tract
infection. The azotaemia present was thought to be due either to pre-renal causes
Imaging
Abdominal ultrasonography revealed an enlarged hypoechoic pancreas surrounded by
a small amount of free abdominal fluid (Fig 19.1). The duodenum appeared
corrugated (Fig 19.2), which is often seen with pancreatitis. The liver appeared
hyperechoic, but was homogenous and normal in size. There was loss of demarcation
between cortex and medulla of both kidneys (Fig 19.3). The right kidney was of
similar appearance and contained a small cyst within the cortex. A large amount of
sediment was seen in the irinary bladder.
PANCREASL
1L1.61
Fig 19.1
(courtesy of Carolina Urraca delJunco)
DUODENUM
PANCREAS
Fig 19.2
 Ultrasound picture of duodenum showing corrugated appearance due to pancreatitis
(courtesy of Carolina Urraca del Junco)
LTKIDNEY
1L.0
Fig 19.3
Ultrasound of kidney showing decreased corticomedullary junction
(courtesy of Carolina Urraca del Junco)
clinically most significant finding and was consistent with pancreatitis, with evidence
of chronic kidney disease or renal age related changes. The changes in the liver may
have been due to a degree of hepatic lipidosis, which is often seen with diabetes
mellitus. The small cyst in the right kidney was thought to be an incidental finding.
Further testing
Serum was submitted for a feline pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity (fPLl) test and
cobalamin concentrations. The fPLI was increased at 16.9 μg/1 (reference range 0.1-
3.5 μg/l), consistent with a diagnosis of pancreatitis. Serum cobalamin concentration
was within the reference range at 946 ng/1 (reference range 290-1499 ng/l).
The elevated fPLI plus the ultrasonographic changes in the pancreas confirmed an
additional diagnosis of pancreatitis. The jaundice was thought to be post-hepatic in
origin and due to the pancreatitis.
Clinical tip on serum cobalamin in cats
Cobalamin is absorbed in the ileal part of the small intestine and requires prior binding with
intrinsic factor, which comes from only the pancreas in cats, while in dogs it comes from both the
stomach and pancreas. Because of this, cats with pancreatitis are at risk for hypocobalaminia. Other
causes of cobalamin deficiency include poor absorption due to intestinal disease, exocrine pancreatic
insufficiency, excessive bacteria in the upper small intestine utilizing the vitamin or a deficiency in
intrinsic factor.
Treatment and outcome
The cat was stabilized with intravenous fluids (O.9% saline supplemented with
  s         s
buprenorphine (initially at 20 μg/kg iv q 8 hours, later 10 μg/kg iv q 8 hours).
Maropitant was administered as an anti-emetic (1 mg/kg sc q 24 hours) and
ranitidine (2 mg/kg sq q 12 hours) was used as an antacid and promotility agent.
             
po q 12 hours) and clindamycin (5.5 mg/kg po q 12 hours) were administered. He also
Se  s   s
Clinical tip on maropitant use in cats
While maropitant is not approved in cats (at the time of writing), studies have shown that at 1.0
mg/kg it is highly effective in preventing motion-induced emesis in cats. These studies indicate that
n      e e n    
 properties in cats.
The cat responded very well to this treatment. His demeanour improved and there
was no longer evidence of abdominal pain. He accepted syringe feeding very well and
no further vomiting was noted.
Repeat measurements of electrolytes were performed and showed improvement and
resolution of the hypokalaemia. Blood glucose levels ranged from 10.9 to 18.5 mmol/1.
The cat was discharged on 1 IU of Caninsulin sq q 12 hours, a high protein, low
carbohydrate diet and 2 weeks worth of the antibiotics. At a re-visit 1 week later, his
blood glucose was 11.2 mmol/l and other haematological and most serum chemistry
parameters had improved, although a moderate azotaemia was still present, with a
lirea of 14 mmol/1 and a creatinine of 132 μmol/1. His USG was 1.016, there were no
ketones present and the sediment was “inactive'. A repeated urine culture was
negative.
Nursing tip on examination of urine sediment
 To check urine sediment, centrifuge the urine sample for 3 to 5 minutes at 2000 to 3000 rpm.
 Remove all but a small volume (0.25-0.5 ml) with a pipette or by pouring off the fluid on top. Re-
suspend the sediment in the remaining supernatant by gently tapping the tube with your finger.
Overzealous shaking may break cells and casts. Transfer a drop of the re-suspended sediment to a
 microscope slide and cover it with a cover slip. Decrease the microscope light intensity by lowering
       s       
objective and then record the average number of elements (e.g. cells, crystals, casts, bacteria) per
several high-power fields. Use of stains on wet preparations is by personal preference. Air-dried urine
sediment slides may be stained for additional microscopic evaluation.
Urine collected by cystocentesis normally contains only a few cells and sometimes some struvite or
oxalate crystals. When there is nothing abnormal in the sediment it is sometimes termed “inactive'.
Cells seen in healthy animals include zero to three white blood cells and zero to three red blood
cells per high powered field and a small number of epithelial cells. A few struvite or oxalate crystals
may also be seen in the urine of healthy animals and entire male animals may have some sperm in
their urine. Abnormal findings include seeing more white or red blood cells, more than two hyaline
      i        d 
crystals.
The cat was monitored every 2 to 3 weeks for the next 6 months. His insulin
requirements decreased over time and at the 6 month re-visit appointment he no
longer required insulin injections. He was relatively healthy without recurrence of
pancreatitis or diabetes mellitus (Fig 19.4) until 18 years of age when he was
euthanized due to the effects of chronic kidney disease (CKD) and debilitating
arthritis.
Fig19.4
The patient at 16 years of age (2 years after diagnosis)
Nursing tip on nutrition
This cat's dietary requirements were complicated. High protein diets have been recommended for
cats with diabetes, however, as high protein diets are generally high in phosphate and he may have
had early chronic kidney disease (CKD), this possibly had to be used with caution. Monitoring his
serum phosphorus would be a good indicator for adjusting the diet or addition of a phosphate binder
to his diet.
 A low fat diet was indicated as he was overweight and extra body weight contributes to insulin
resistance and aggravates arthritis. Losing weight is extremely difficult on a high fat diet. With the
possibility of early CKD, the use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NAIDs) is also
questionable, so he was treated with glucosamine and omega-3 fatty acids. Omega-3 fatty acids have
 sq aq on radde ose p ssn no aop aa a asaap c sop a  os a
other inflammatory states. Glucosamine has been reported to increase insulin resistance; however,
this is usually not a clinical problem as the doses used in the rodent trial showing this were much
higher than used clinically.
Discussion and epidemiology
This cat's combination of urinary tract infection and pancreatitis may have
predisposed him to developing diabetes mellitus. He was also overweight, which
increases the risk, and a Burmese cat. Buirmese cats in the United Kingdom, New
            
other breeds. The development of diabetes mellitus implies that there was possibly
Pancreatic inflammation is a not an uncommon finding in cats, with significant
pancreatic lesions seen in 1.5 to 3.5% of cats at necropsy.
Pancreatitis often occurs in conjunction with diseases of other organs in cats
including the liver, kidney, intestine, endocrine pancreas and lungs. In most cases of
pancreatitis in cats, an underlying cause or instigating event cannot be determined,
leading to classification as idiopathic. Abdominal trauma, infectious diseases
o  o      o
administration have been associated with feline pancreatitis, but appear to account
S      s    s 
Potential risk factors for pancreatitis in dogs, such as obesity, dietary indiscretion, a
high fat meal, high fat diets and pre-existing endocrine diseases (diabetes mellitus,
hyperadrenocorticism, hypothyroidism and hyperlipidaemia) do not appear to be risk
factors in cats. It is not known whether dietary factors, e.g. a high fat diet, predispose
to pancreatitis in cats.
Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) may be an important risk factor for the
development of pancreatitis (and inflammatory liver disease) in cats, although there
was no evidence of that in this cat, other than the vomiting, which is the most
common clinical sign of IBD in affected cats. Vomiting can raise intraduodenal
pressure and predispose to reflux of enteric contents into the pancreatic duct. Cats
              
because the feline sphincter of Oddi is a common channel for the pancreatic and
  n         a 
bacteria in the proximal duodenum than dogs (10 vs. 104 organisms/ml).
      r    s
for histopathology are required for accurate classification and this cat, like many
patients with pancreatitis, was not a good candidate for anaesthesia. Both acute and
diabetes mellitus in cats, as in this cat. Some cases of acute pancreatitis are associated
with severe clinical syndromes including shock, disseminated intravascular
coagulation and multi-organ failure, which he fortunately did not appear to develop.
         
    (a o n sa ) sd  t  a   
some authors suggest that cats older than 7 years are more likely to be affected.
Lethargy (86-100%) and partial to complete anorexia (95-97%) are the most
common clinical signs in cats diagnosed with pancreatitis. All other clinical signs
occur only sporadically. Classic signs of pancreatitis, such as vomiting and abdominal
cats compared to 90% of dogs, abdominal pain occurs in 25 to 52% of cats compared
to 58% of dogs, diarrhoea in 15% of cats compared to 33% in dogs and fever in 7% of
cats compared to 32% in dogs. Other reported clinical findings in affected cats include
dehydration (92%), tachypnoea (74%), hypothermia (68%), tachycardia (48%) and
dyspnoea (20%). Almost one-quarter (23%) of cats with pancreatitis have a palpable
abdominal mass that may or may not appear painful and can be easily misdiagnosed
as a lesion of other intra-abdominal structures such as intestinal tract or mesenteric
lymph nodes. Tachypnoea or dyspnoea may occur due to pain, but pleural effusion
cats and should not be overlooked as possible causes. In one study of 2l cats with
pancreatitis, 66% had complicating conditions
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of pancreatitis in cats can be challenging. Haematologic abnormalities
are uncommon and non-specific and may include a mild anaemia that may be non-
regenerative and a leukocytosis, possibly with a left-shift or toxic white cells. Other
abnormalities include mild to moderate elevations in ALT, ALP and bilirubin and may
reflect concurrent hepatic disease (hepatic lipidosis or cholangiohepatitis) or biliary
stasis. Azotemia may be pre-renal, secondary to dehydration, in many cases, although
uinderlying chronic kidney disease should also be considered. Hyperglycaemia is
Changes on abdominal radiographs are often subtle and subjective. Decreased
contrast in the anterior abdomen, dilated and gas filled small intestines and
transposition of the duodenum, stomach and colon are commonly reported.
hyperechoic mesentery, with or without dilated pancreatic ducts. Ascites is
occasionally observed.  The sensitivity of ultrasound is obviously operator and
equipment dependent, with reported sensitivities ranging from 35% to 75%. These
results underscore the point that a normal ultrasound does not rule out pancreatitis.
The clinician should also consider differential diagnoses aside from pancreatitis,
including pancreatic  neoplasia and  pancreatic oedema  (associated   with
Serum lipase and amylase activities are nearly useless in the diagnosis of
pancreatitis in cats, with serum concentrations being neither specific nor sensitive.
     e  o  s  s
  s           r
pancreatitis and is the test of choice for diagnosis. As it stays elevated while there is
ongoing inflammation, it appears to be useful for both acute and chronic pancreatitis.
The theoretical ‘gold standard’ for diagnosing pancreatitis is pancreatic biopsy for
    s   i   s 
pancreatitis, with variable amounts of pancreatic acinar cell necrosis and
inflammation. Chronic pancreatitis is characterized by interstitial fibrosis with acinar
distribution and pancreatic biopsies should always be procured during laparotomy
even if the gross appearance of the organ is normal. Unfortunately, the lack of
pancreatic inflammation on a single biopsy does not rule out pancreatitis
conclusively.
Therapy
The old concept of nil per os or withholding food from patients with pancreatitis has
little evidence for effectiveness and in humans is thought to possibly have negative
recommended, although anorexia is a common problem. In cats that are not vomiting
 1 i    g      s g
alternative. There is no evidence that feeding a low fat diet is beneficial in cats with
pancreatitis, so most liquid diets formulated for cats can be used. Anti-emetics are also
liseful and may also decrease the nausea associated with pancreatitis in cats that are
not eating even though they are not vomiting. In cats that are vomiting, ideally a
jejunostomy tuibe woild be placed for nuitritional slipport; however, due to the
anaesthesia required for this procedure this is often not feasible.
Abdominal pain may be present in cats with pancreatitis even if the cat is not
showing obvious signs. Cats often mask signs of pain. Routine analgesia is
recommended, as the previous concerns that morphine and related drugs may
exacerbate pancreatitis have been discouinted.
          
macroglobulin, a scavenger protein for activated proteases, which is depleted in
pancreatitis. While in humans, the use of plasma has not shown improved survival,
          n   s 
or whole blood (after blood typing the cat and using matched blood) may be used if it
Isnot.
            s
infectious agents cause pancreatitis, however, many clinicians believe in using
antibiotics, especially in cats. One rationale is the potential for bacterial infection of
the biliary system and pancreatic duct because of the direct communication of the
common bile duct and pancreatic duct in the cats. Some clinicians also feel that
corticosteroids are useful in cats with chronic (but not necessarily acute) pancreatitis,
but this is also controversial, especially in a case with concurrent diabetes mellitus.
Prognosis
The prognosis for cats with pancreatitis depends upon the severity of the disease and
the extent of any pancreatic necrosis, the complications and the presence of
concurrent disease. Some chronic cases are subclinical and may flare up from time to
time. Some patients with chronic disease may develop diabetes mellitus, as did this
although the incidence of these sequelae has not been reported. In cats which develop
diabetes mellitus, a percentage of them are able to eventually maintain their blood
glucose without insuilin, a state termed diabetic remission. Some of these will relapse
and need insulin, but may be able to achieve another remission with insulin therapy
and careful monitoring.
20
Linear foreign body in a cat
Case co-written by Carolina Urraca del Junco
Initial presentation
Vomiting
Signalment: 9-month-old neutered male domestic shorthaired cat body weight 3.3 kg
Case history
The cat had been vomiting for 5 days. The vomitus initially had contained food and
s      sm      
weight. There had been no diarrhoea, although he had not passed faeces for 2 days.
He had been given his vaccinations as a kitten and had last been de-wormed 4
months previous to presentation. He had not been given any treatments for
ectoparasites. His usual diet was canned cat food, plus cooked ham, chicken and tuna.
Previous treatment had included intravenous fluids, maropitant, clavulanate.
potentiated amoxicillin and ranitidine. After this treatment, he had initially vomited
less and  was brighter. A feline pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity  test for
pancreatopathy had been negative. He then vomited a large amount of greenish bile-
stained fluid several times and became lethargic and was referred to a specialist
centre.
Clinical tip on histaminergic H, blockers
Ranitidine, unlike cimetidine,  has a gastrointestinal
1  promotility effect   by  inhibiting
acetylcholinesterase inhibitors and is used in some cases for this effect. It also is reported to produce
Cimetidine is the only H2 blocker which inhibits the P450 enzymes in the liver, causing the
metabolism of other drugs to be decreased. Cimetidine induced leukopaenias and thrombocytopaenia
have also been reported.
Clinical tip on maropitant use in cats
While maropitant is not approved in cats (at the time of writing), studies have shown that at 1.0
mg/kg it is highly effective in preventing motion-induced emesis in cats. These studies indicate that
the NK-1 receptor antagonist maropitant is well tolerated, safe and has excellent anti-emetic
properties in cats.
Physical examination
On physical examination the cat was quiet but alert. He was in slightly thin body
condition (body condition score 4/9) and appeared well hydrated. His mucous
membranes were pink and his capillary refill time was less than 2 seconds. Thoracic
auscultation revealed a heart rate of 185 beats per minute with matched pulses. Heart
and lung sounds and percussion and compression of the thorax were unremarkable.
The cat appeared to be uncomfortable on abdominal palpation. His respiratory rate
was normal at 32 breaths per minute. Rectal temperature was 38.9° C.
Problem list and discussion of problems
The cat's primary problem was vomiting: the decreased appetite, weight loss and
abdominal discomfort were thought to be related to the vomiting.
Differential diagnosis
Differential diagnoses for vomiting in this cat included:
 Disorders of the stomach
· foreign body
' gastritis
 ulceration
· chronic partial dilation-volvulus
* neoplasia
· Disorders of the small intestine
· foreign body
· inflammatory bowel disease
· neoplasia
* parasites
· intussusception
• Disorders of the large intestine (although there was no history consistent with large intestine
disorders)
* colitis
· obstipation
· Systemic disorders
 pancreatopathy
· hypoadrenocorticism
* diabetes mellitus
· liver disorders
* peritonitis
* renal disease/uraemia (unlikely)
· Dietary causes
· dietary sensitivity
 dietary indiscretion
Case work-uup
As this cat was clinically unwell, a dietary food trial was not appropriate.
Minimum data base
Haematology results were within the reference ranges. Serum chemistry results
showed decreased potassium of 3.0 mmol/1 (reference range 3.5-5.8 mmol/l). Other
serum chemistry parameters were within the reference ranges. Urine was not
obtained at admission. Intravenous fluid therapy at a rate of 2 ml/kg/hour, with
potassium added at 12 mmol/l of fluids, was initiated.
Nursing tip on intravenous fluids therapy and potassium supplementation
Moderate or severe hypokalaemia ( ≤3.0 mmol/l) requires parenteral administration of potassium
chloride (KCl) for correction. It is usually recommended that the rate of administration does not
exceed 0.5 mmol/kg body weight per hour (1 mEquiv of KCl = 1 mmol KCl). Potassium
supplementation is contraindicated in oliguric or anuric states as the kidneys are unable to excrete it.
Guidelines for estimating the dose of KCl to add to intravenous fluids are listed in Table 20.l.
Remember that Ringer's solution and lactated Ringer's contain 4 mmol/l of KCl.
Table 2o.1 Amount of potassium chloride (KCl) to add to crystalloid fluids based on the serum
 potassium (K+) concentration of the patient. Remember to subtract the amount already in the fluids.
Serum K  of the patient in mmol/l
nmol KCl to add per 250 mlof fluids
imol KCl to add per litre of flu ids
>3.5
5
20
3.0-3.5
7
28
2.5-3.0
10
40
2.0-2.5
15
60
2.0
20
Imaging
Abdominal radiographs showed a small intestinal corrugation cranial to the urinary
bladder, at the level of the 5th to 6th lumbar vertebrae. There was an abnormal
plicated appearance to the small intestine ventral to the descending colon, cranial to
and overlying the bladder shadow (L4-6 level) and a small focus of gas within the
small intestinal lumen suggested a linear foreign body (Fig 20.1).
Fig 20.1
Lateral abdominal radiograph showing small intestine bunched mid-abdomen
(courtesy of Carolina Urraca del Junco)
Abdominal ultrasound also showed plication of the descending duodenum with a
linear foreign body evident in the lumen of the duodenum (Fig 20.2). The small
intestinal motility appeared to be increased.
PLICATED DUODENUM
LINEARFOREIGNBODY
Fig 20.2
Ultrasound picture showing the plication of the small intestine around a linear foreign
body
(courtesy of Carolina Urraca del Junco
Treatment
Surgical treatment
           sa  i
foreign body. At surgery, the linear foreign body (thread) was removed by one
gastrotomy and four enterotomies. During these procedures, one area of the jejunum
perforated at the mesenteric border where the thread had been cutting into the
mucosa. The distal two enterotomy sites were excised with adjacent intestine and an
end-to-end anastomosis was performed. A more proximal area which appeared to have
applied.
Follow-up medical treatment
Immediate postoperative  treatment  included intravenous clavulanate-potentiated
amoxicillin (20 mg/kg iv q 8 hours), analgesia with buprenorphine (20 μg/kg iv q 8
hours), ranitidine (2 mg/kg SQ q 12 hours) for its antacid and promotility effects and
intravenous fluids.
Outcome
At 24 hours postoperatively the cat became lethargic, pyrexic and had vomited. A
mucosa along much of his intestinal tract. However, by 4 days post surgery, he was
S o    a    a    
faeces until 5 days post-surgery, but they were normal at that time. His treatments
were changed to oral medications and he was discharged on 1 week of oral ranitidine
(2 mg/kg po q 12 hours) and clavulanate potentiated amoxicillin (15 mg/kg po q 12
hours). He has continued to do well.
Disculssion
Often, linear foreign bodies such as pieces of string, cord or fabric will pass through
an obstruction and potentially a perforation will result. Linear foreign bodies most
often lodge in the oral cavity or in the pylorus. The free end may eventually come lose
from the oral cavity or pylorus and travel to the small intestine. Within the intestine
    n     s     
S         n   ss
the wall of the intestinal loops and eventually multiple perforations and peritonitis
Occl1rs.
              
fascination with string and similar objects. Clinical signs include anorexia, vomiting
and abdominal pain, as in this young cat and sometimes diarrhoea. If the obstruction
   ss  s  sn   s   s   
subtle and last for weeks before diagnosis. On palpation of the abdomen, bunched
loops of bowel may be felt.
survey radiographs the affected loops of intestine appear gathered or clumped and
the intestine. Linear foreign bodies can be difficult to identify on uiltrasound, but the
      s       
     s       n  s
actulallyvisible.
 q  n  an   i q    a ss s 
and allowed to pass through the intestines, which will usually take 1 to 3 days. This
               s
out of 24 cats were successfully managed conservatively, with passage of the linear
 a      s      
successfully via conservative treatment had a shorter duration of clinical signs before
presentation, decreased incidence of abdominal pain, less palpable intestinal plication
and less severe haematological abnormali ties.
Surgery is indicated if there is plication of the intestines or any other indication
that the foreign body is not moving through the intestines without damage. At
Perforated areas of the intestine are repaired and treatment with broad spectrum
antibiotics is indicated.
Prognosis
   s   s   o s o 
enterotomies) was necessary in 96.9% of the cases and most (83.9%) of the cats so
treated did well. Approximately 50% of the cats with linear foreign body-induced
bowel lacerations recovered.
21
Porto-systemic shunt in a dog
Initial presentation
Vomiting and diarrhoea
Patient details: 14-month-old female entire Cairn terrier, body weight 5.7 kg
Case history
The dog had a history of vomiting digested food about an hour after eating. The
vomiting had been occurring for about a month. Because she did play with sticks the
owners had been concerned about a possible gastrointestinal foreign body.
She had also had intermittent diarrhoea for the past 6 months. Her stools were
occasionally soft, with no blood or mucous present and no straining to defecate. This
was thought to most likely be diarrhoea of small intestinal origin.
The owners also reported weight loss over the past several months and episodes of
prandially. The dog was fed a canned specialty puppy food twice a day. She had
always been a picky eater and the owners often encouraged her to eat with treats and
human food.
The owners did not report that the dog had polydipsia or polyuria, but she had been
difficult to house train. She had been an active puppy, but had been quieter during the
last couple of months. The dog was de-wormed regularly with fenbendazole and had
been vaccinated as a puppy.
She had been to the veterinary surgery previously for the vomiting and had been
administered intravenous fluids. She responded to this treatment temporarily, but the
vomiting reoccurred the next day after she went home.
Physical examination
On physical examination the dog was alert but quiet. She was in thin body condition
with a body condition score of 2/9, but appeared to be adequately hydrated. Oral
examination identified an undershot jaw with laterally displaced upper canines. The
tongue showed evidence of previous trauma with a V-shaped split to the tongue tip
and an erythematous, horseshoe-shaped scar. Her mucous membranes were pink and
moist and her capillary refill time was 2 seconds.
Thoracic auscultation was unremarkable. On abdominal palpation the liver could
not be identified, but the caudal pole of the left kidney could be palpated easily. Her
small intestines were easily palpated and felt normal. She did not show any evidence
of discomfort during palpation. Her heart rate was 120 beats per minute, respiratory
rate 24 breaths per minute and rectal temperature was 38.7° C.
Problem list and discussion of problems
. Vomiting
· Diarrhoea
· Decreased exercise tolerance
· Episodes of abnormal behaviour.
The decreased exercise tolerance was thought to be related to the other disorders
and was not addressed separately.
Differential diagnosis
For the vomiting
· Disorders of the stomach
· foreign body
' gastritis
· ulceration
· chronic partial dilatation-volvulus (less likely due to the breed and body shape of the dog)
· neoplasia (less likely, although lymphoma can occur in younger animals)
· Disorders of the small intestine
· foreign body
* parasites
· intussusception
The small intestinal disease differentials below were possible but less likely due to the dog's young
age:
· inflammatory bowel disease
· neoplasia
· Disorders of the large intestine
* colitis
* Systemic disorders
· liver disorders, including porto-systemic shunt
* pancreatopathy
The differentials below were possible but less likely due to the dog's age:
· hypoadrenocorticism
 diabetes mellitus
* renal disease/uraemia
· Dietary causes
* adverse reaction to food (allergy or intolerance)
· dietary indiscretion
For the chronic small intestinal diarrhoea
· Dietary
• adverse reaction to food: intolerance or allergy
* gluttony - unlikely in this picky dog
· changes of diet
· Gastric disorders, rapid gastric emptying
· Small intestinal disease
· infectious, e.g. bacteria, viral, fungal
* partial obstruction, e.g. intussusception, foreign body
* gastrointestinal parasites
• brush border defects
· Less likely small intestinal disorders due to her age and clinical presentation:
· inflammatory bowel disease
* infiltrative neoplasia (e.g. lymphoma, mastocytosis)
· lymphangiectasia
· Pancreatic disease
· chronic pancreatitis
· exocrine pancreatic insufficiency
 pancreatic neoplasia (less likely due to age)
· Liver disease
* porto-systemic shunt
 bile duct obstruction
· liver failure
· Kidney disease
· Miscellaneous
* congestive heart failure - no signs consistent with this
· immunodeficiencies
· hypoadrenocorticism (less likely at this young age)
As the dog showed no other neurological signs, the abnormal behaviours were most likely to be
cerebral in origin, either from the cerebrum itself or extracranial disorders affecting brain function. A
behavioural problem was also possible but less likely.
For the abnormal behaviours
 Primary brain disorders include:
· congenital diseases such as malformation of the brain or Chiari-like malformation
* hydrocephalus
· inborn errors of metabolism
· granulomatous meningoencephalomyelitis
· intracranial or brain tumours
· epilepsy
 Systemic disorders affecting brain function include:
· Porto-systemic shunts (Pss) causing signs of hepatic encephalopathy (HE)
· hypoglycaemia
 toxins
 nutritional deficiencies or imbalances
Case work-up
The dog was admitted to the hospital for diagnostic investigation.
Minimum data base
Haematology, serum chemistry and routine urinalysis were performed. Results of
routine haematology showed a slightly decreased packed cell volume (PcV) of 0.35 l/l
         o  )i
volume (MCV) of 52% (reference range 60-77%). The red blood cell couint was within
the norm at 5.6 x 10i2/1 (reference range 5.5-8.5 x 10i2/l) and haemoglobin was
slightly low at 11.8 g/dl (reference range 12-18 g/dl).
Clinical tip on haematology
When the PCV is decreased, check the cell size,i.e. the mean corpuscular volume (MCV).
Microcytosis can decrease the PCV while the number of red blood cells stays within the reference
            
 sequestration (as occurs with Pss or anaemia of chronic inflammation) and in some normal Akita
dogs.
Serum biochemistry    results  showed  a  moderate increase  in  alanine
aminotransferase of 233 IU/1 (reference range 21-102 IU/) and in alkaline
phosphatase (ALP) of 116 IU/1 (reference range 20-60 IU/l). The fasting bile acids
were markedly increased at 243 μmol/1 (reference range 0-7 μmol/l) and post-prandial
bile acids rose to 52l μmol/l. Serum albumin was at the lower end of the reference
range at 22.3 g/l (reference range 26-35 g/l) and urea was also at the lower end of the
reference range at 1.9 mmol/1 (range 1.7-7.4 mmol/l).
Basal serum cortisol concentration was assessed to screen for hypoadrenocorticism
and was within the reference range at 221 nmol/1 (reference range 20-230 nmol/l). A
coagulation profile was performed in case liver biopsies were required; the
prothrombin time, activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) and fibrinogen were
all within reference ranges.
Clinical tip on coagulation profiles in dogs with porto-systemic shunts
While this dog's coagulation profile was within the reference range, serious post-operative
haemorrhage has been reported in dogs after closure of congenital porto-systemic shunts (Pss). Dogs
with Pss often have lower platelet counts, lower activity of clotting factors I1, V, Vll and X, and
 increased factor VIll and APTT compared to healthy dogs. Surgical attenuation of the shunt results in
increased frequency of abnormalities in coagulation times and factors immediately after surgery and
there may be a risk of bleeding. Haemostasis does become normal in dogs where there is complete
 attenuation of shunting, in contrast to dogs with persistent shunting.
of 6.5 and the sediment showed urate crystals.
Imaging
Abdominal radiographs showed a small liver size and the kidneys appeared to be large.
Abdominal ultrasonography supported the liver being small in size. The hepatic
veins were small and a single extrahepatic Pss was identified, curving round the
caudal pole of the right kidney and coursing craniodorsally to enter the caudal vena
cava close to the entry site of the right renal vein (Fig 21.1). Doppler ultrasound was
used to confirm the presence of blood flow within the shunt (Fig 21.2). The kidneys
were both enlarged at 6 cm and small calculi were identified within the urinary
bladder; as there were urate crystals present in the urinalysis, these were presumed to
be ammonium uirate in origin.
GOELIACA
CVC
EHPSS
1L0.79
Fig 21.1
Ultrasound picture showing a large extrahepatic portocaval shunt (coelic a, coelic artery;
EH PSS, extrahepatic porto-systemic shunt; CVC, caudal vena cava)
(courtesy of Carolina Urraca del Junco)
cm/s
Fig 21.2
systemic shunt
(courtesy of Carolina Urraca del Junco)
Clinical tip on imaging for Pss
 Computed tomography can be useful to better determine the location of a shunting vessel, but was
 not used in this case. Transplenic portal scintigraphy has also been used as a diagnostic aid in some
 saai s se Aans on od paad aq on ood a al sans Ae 'sas
information about the location of the shunting vessel so they can plan their surgical approach.
Case assessment
From the history, clinicopathological results and imaging a diagnosis of extrahepatic
PSS was made.
Clinical tips
Microcytosis can lower the PcV as the smaller cells result in a lower percentage of the blood
being cellular. Causes of microcytosis include iron deficiency and Pss. The reason for the
microcytosis in animals with Pss is thought to be due to iron sequestration or ineffective iron
transport, which have been proposed as the causes of iron deficient erythropoiesis.
 d  s     a    on      s
ammonia is not being efficiently converted to urea within the liver. Hypoglycaemia can be seen in
some cases and should be addressed therapeutically.
Urate crystals are found in many dogs with Pss due to hyperammonaemia and a decreased ability
 of the liver to convert uric acid to allantoin.
The presence of urate crystalluria is never normal and should prompt the clinician to look for Pss
or other hepatic disorders. Some Dalmatian dogs also have urate crystals in their urine due to an
inborn metabolic defect and they may form urate uroliths.
Many animals with PSs also have a low urine specific gravity and may present for
polyuria/polydipsia. This poor urine concentrating ability may be due in part to decreased medullary
tonicity from the low urea, increased adrenocorticotrophin hormone (ACTH) secretion and
       ss     o   
antidiuretic hormone from the pituitary for reasons that are not fully elucidated.
Nursing tip
As high protein diets can worsen clinical signs, animals with suspected Pss should be fed protein
restricted diets, e.g. 15 to 20% protein on a dry matter basis or 2 g of protein/kg/day to decrease
ammonia formation from colonic bacteria. If a puppy is still growing, commercial low protein diets 
designed to decrease the risk of HE may be too low in protein to support growth (22% protein on a
dry matter basis). In that case, supplement the diet with cottage cheese at 100 g per 400 g of canned
dog food. Cottage cheese is high in branched chain amino acids and has less tendency to cause
encephalopathic problems than meat proteins. Vegetable proteins or soy proteins are also less likely
to cause problems than meat proteins and can be used. These patients should also be fed small meals
 frequently, as that decreases the risk of hypoglycaemia.
Initial (pre-surgical) medical management
Initial medical treatment to decrease signs of HE were started as soon as the diagnosis
was made. This included dietary management as mentioned above plus oral lactulose
syrup (1 ml po q 12 hours). The dose was adjusted so that the faeces were soft but
formed, as an overdose can cause diarrhoea. Metronidazole was started at 7 mg/kg po
q 12 houurs.
Clinical tip on HE treatment
 Lactulose decreases intestinal transit time and acidifies colonic content which aids in trapping
ammonia in the colon and decreasing absorption. In cases with severe signs of HE, lactulose enemas
may be helpful. Oral antibiotics such as metronidazole, ampicillin or neomycin may be given to
decrease intestinal urease-producing bacteria, although low dosages are recommended, e.g. 7 mg/kg
metronidazole po q 12 hours.
One-third of animals do well with medical management alone, especially dogs which are older at
diagnosis; however, over half of dogs treated with medical management alone undergo euthanasia
within the first year after diagnosis.
This patient was sent home for 3 weeks on a low protein diet with cottage cheese
  o  o   s   o     s
hours) to stabilize her HE and improve her body condition prior to surgery. She was
then readmitted for placement of an ameroid constrictor on the shunting vessel and
liver biopsy.
Surgical treatment
outcome. There are several methods of occluding the shunt, including gradual
occlusion with ameroid constrictors, cellophane banding, embolism with coils and
suture ligation. The traditional surgical treatment involved placement of a ligature
around the anomalous vessel, which is gradually tightened during the surgical
procedure while measuiring portal pressuire and observing the splanchnic viscera. If
the ligature is placed too tight, there is a significant risk of inducing portal
          s 
partial shunt attenuation. Partial PsS attenuation is associated with an increased risk
              
Therefore, gradual rather than acute occlusion of Pss is advocated as a suirgical
technique. Theoretically, this allows development of the portal circuilation and hepatio
architecture in response to the increased vascular supply, while reducing
perioperative complications associated with portal hypertension.
           
used for gradual Pss attenuation, although actually it produces a delayed acute
reduction in blood flow associated with vascular thrombosis rather than the gradual
          
constrictor placement in dogs with single extrahepatic Pss is much better than in
dogs with intrahepatic Pss.
Fig 21.3
Ameroid constrictor
(courtesy of Dr Donald Yool)
Fig 21.4
(courtesy of Dr Donald Yool)
Post-operative care
Post-operative care included monitoring  for hypothermia,  hypoglycaemia and
especially for signs of portal hypertension. Occlusion of the shunting vessels forces
blood through the liver, opening previously closed vessels and some cases do not
tolerate this very well. Signs of portal hypertension include an increasing abdominal
effusion. If evidence of portal hypertension had been present, treatment with
intravenous colloids would have been tried, although many of these dogs need to
return to surgery to have the constriction lessened or removed.
Medical management was continued after surgery for 7 weeks; once serum bile acid
concentrations were within the reference range, indicating improved liver function,
the dietary protein was gradually increased.
Nursing tips on diet after surgery for Pss
The adult canine requirement for protein is not high (18% dry matter basis), so it may be
satisfactory for the dog to remain on a moderately restricted protein diet. Especially in dogs which
continue to have some shunting of the vessel a moderately restricted protein diet may be beneficial
Follow-uip
The dog recovered well from the surgery, although she was rather lethargic for the
with hepatic compromise.
The histopathology results for the liver biopsy taken at surgery showed periportal
  n   a    g
PSS and correlated well with the clinical and surgical findings. The degree of
a bnormality was thought to explain the poor body condition and neuirological signs.
At the 7 week recheck the dog was very bright and there had been no further
episodes of vomiting, diarrhoea or neurological problems. Haematological and serum
chemistry parameters were within the reference ranges and at ultrasound scan the
ameroid constrictor was still in place and occluding the vessel. The urate cystic
diet was continued while the lactulose and ampicillin were discontinued
Pathophysiology
In the embryonic dog, the ductus venosus carries oxygenated placental blood to the
circulation, bypassing the hepatic circulation. This vessel normally closes within the
first 1 to 2 weeks after birth. Abnormal patency of this vessel or other abnormal
vasculature formation connecting the portal venous system to the systemic circulation
result in the signs seen in Pss. Congenital shunts are generally one vessel, whereas
multiple.
Common types of shunts include intrahepatic portocaval shunts and extrahepatic
portocaval (Fig 21.5) or portal-azygos shunts.
Liver
Vena cava
Liver
Vena cava
Extrahepatic
porto-systemic
shunt
Heart
Heart
Portal
Portal
vein
vein
Gastrointestinal tract
Gastrointestinal tract
Extrahepaticporto-systemicshunt
Normal liver
Fig 21.5
A liver with an extrahepatic porto-systemic shunt and a normal liver.
The degree of change in the hepatic histology is probably a function of the amount
of portal blood that is diverted from the liver and may vary between liver lobes
depending of the site of the shunt vessel, particularly with intrahepatic shunting
associated with a persistent ductus venosus. Typical histopathologic changes in the
liver include arteriolar hyperplasia, loss of portal vein profiles and hepatocellular
atrophy with increased lipogranuloma formation. Similar histopathological changes
can also be found in cases of hepatic microvascular dysplasia, only in those cases no
system, especially in encephalopathic animals.
Since the liver relies on a substantial amount of nourishment from the portal
circulation, decreased blood flow and subsequent decreased nourishment results in
hepatic atrophy. Decreased insulin supply due to the shunting may also contribute to
           s
liver further reduces hepatic function.
Gastrointestinal signs are seen in about 30% of dogs with PSS and include
vomiting, diarrhoea and anorexia. Other signs often seen include poor growth and
abnormal neuirological behaviours, as in this case. High portal pressure is not usually
a feature of Pss, so abdominal effusion does not usually develop inless the seruim
albumin is very low and a transudate forms due to decreased oncotic pressure.
An increase in plasma cortisol is common in dogs with Pss and may account for the
elevations in ALP levels and hepatic hydropic degeneration as well as the
polydipsia/polyuria. Increased plasma cortisol is thought to be due to dysregulation of
with correction of the shunt.
Epidemiology
Congenital Pss has been reported in 0.18% of all dogs and 0.05% of mixed-breed dogs.
The proportion of diagnoses of congenital Pss has increased from 5 in 10,000 dogs in
1980 to 5 in 1000 dogs in 2001. In one study, the greatest numbers of shunts were
P          
terriers (1.6%) and Pugs (1.3%). In another study of 242 cases from Australia, breeds
that were significantly over-represented included the Maltese terriers, Silky terrier,
Australian cattle dog, Bichon Frise, Shih Tzu, miniature schnauzer, Border collie, Jack
Russell terrier, Irish wolfhound and Himalayan cat. Bichon frises with shunts were
significantly more likely to be female than male.
         e  i
shunts are inherited as an autosomal trait with variable expression. Familial lines
with increased incidence of Pss have been reported in miniature schnauzers, Irish
wolfhounds and old English sheepdogs. Multiple extrahepatic PSSs have been found in
     n     s  s
Irish wolfhound, old English sheepdog, golden and Labrador retrievers and Samoyed
and in medium-sized breeds suich as Australian shepherd dogs and Australian cattle
dogs.
the signs are subtle and the cases are not brought in for veterinary attention until they
are older. Intrahepatic PsS may occur more commonly in male dogs than in female
dogs.
Prognosis
Nearly one in five dogs has a seizure after shunt ligation, for reasons not yet well
understood. Treatment has been tried with intravenous phenobarbitone or continuous
infusion of propofol (0.025-1 mg/kg/minute) for 12 to 24 hours. Prognosis is poor for
animals with seizures post-operatively.
In one study of dogs treated for single extrahepatic shunts with an ameroid
constrictor post-operative mortality rate was 7.1%. Predictive factors for post-
operative death included high  preoperative   WBC count and post-operative
complications suich as seizuring. In another study using silk ligatures to close the
shunting extrahepatic vessel, short-term and long-term mortality were 27% and 2.9%,
respectively. Clinical recurrence occurred in 10% of dogs. The degree of closure was
significantly associated with mortality, but not with clinical recurrence. The
preoperative size of the liver (in relation to the dog's weight) also appears to be an
indicator of prognosis, with the greater the liver size, the better the prognosis.
   ss   s    nd o
pressure after complete occlusion and high portal pressuire difference (post-occlusion
minuis baseline).
In a study of 168 dogs with single extrahepatic shunts treated by placement of an
ameroid constrictor, there was a low prevalence of post-operative complications
(10%); the most common complications were seizures, ascites and haemoabdomen.
The prophylactic use of an anticonvulsant drug, such as potassium bromide, is
recommended by some clinicians in dogs undergoing PsS surgery. Twenty-one
percent of dogs had continued porto-systemic shunting, usually associated with the
         
shunting were clinically normal. The long-term outcome was classified as excellent in
80% of dogs, good in 14% and poor in 6%.
22
Hepatic lipidosis in a cat
Case contributed by Nicki Reed
Initial presentation
Anorexia, weight loss, vomiting, lethargy, gulping
Case history
The cat presented with an eight-day history of anorexia and rapid weight loss. The cat
had also become very dull and lethargic and did not always appear to be aware of his
surroundings. He had vomited brown fluid twice in the 24 hours prior to presentation.
In addition, the owners reported that the cat seemed to make exaggerated
swallowing/gulping motions. The cat's defecation appeared normal.
In the 3 days prior to presentation the cat had become progressively quieter and less
interactive with the owner. The owner felt the cat seemed weak, particularly on its
hind limbs. No seizures were reported.
The cat had initially been presented to the referring veterinary surgeon 4 days
previously who, unable to find anything specific wrong with the cat, had
administered dexamethasone and long-acting penicillin (doses not known). When no
blood sample obtained, but the results had not been received when referral was
deemed necessary.
The cat had been in the owner's possession since he was a kitten, was fully
vaccinated (including against feline leukaemia virus) and wormed every 6 months
with a combination of pyrantel and praziquantel.
He was the only cat in the household and had outdoor access via a cat flap. He was
fed a complete dried diet ad lib. The cat had always eaten well and had been
overweight at 7 kg when last weighed 3 months prior to presentation. The cat's
A n   d a       
anorexic 8 days before presentation
Although water was always available, the cat was rarely seen to drink and the
             
developed the habit of drinking out of the toilet. A litter tray was offered in the house,
but was rarely used. In the week prior to presentation the cat had become reluctant to
go outside and had used the litter tray daily. The owner did not notice any
abnormalities in the cat's urine.
Physical examination
The cat appeared obtunded (reduced mental awareness) but was still responsive. His
body condition score was still reasonable (body condition score 4/9), but the cat
weighed 5.8 kg, indicating a 17% body weight loss. The oral cavity and muzzle
appeared moist.
His mucous membranes appeared slightly icteric and the capillary refill time was
prolonged at approximately 3 seconds. There was marked gingivitis, with osteoclastic
        o  
estimated 7% dehydration.
His submandibular lymph nodes were palpably enlarged, but the pre-scapular and
popliteal lymph nodes felt normal. Thoracic auscultation was unremarkable (heart
rate was 188 beats per minute and respiratory rate was 24 breaths per minute). On
abdominal palpation the liver was palpably enlarged and renal palpation elicited an
apparently painful response. The bladder was small and the intestines felt empty.
With the exception of weakness and altered mentation, no neurological deficits
were detected, although a full neurological examination was not possible. The cat was
Druised around its previous venepuncture site.
Problem list and disclission of problems
polydipsia, vomiting, exaggerated swallowing/ptyalism, altered mentation, weakness,
lethargy, dental disease, dehydration, icterus, hepatomegaly, renal pain and bruising.
Whilst some of these problems are non-specific, such as lethargy, others, such as
dehydration and weakness, are likely to be a consequence of the disease process.
Differential diagnosis
  ss         l
icterus, ptyalism, altered mentation, renal pain and ecchymoses. For the most significant problems in
this cat these include:
• Anorexia
· oral disease
· oesophagitis
* pancreatitis
* neoplasia
· hepatic disease
· renal disease
· unpalatable diet
· anosmia
· Weight loss
· secondary to anorexia
* hyperthyroidism
• diabetes mellitus
· liver disease
· renal disease
* intestinal malassimilation (malabsorption, maldigestion)
* neoplasia
· Vomiting
* gastrointestinal disease
· hepatic disease
* renal disease
· pancreatitis
* diabetes mellitus (ketoacidosis)
* neoplasia
· CNS disease
• drugs (e.g. antibiotic, corticosteroids, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs)
· Hepatomegaly
· hepatic lipidosis (HL)
· cholangiohepatitis
· hepatic neoplasia
· hepatic cysts
· lymphoma
• feline infectious peritonitis
• Icterus
* pre-hepatic causes, i.e. haemolysis
· hepatic disease (e.g. HL, cholangiohepatitis, feline infectious peritonitis)
* post-hepatic biliary obstruction (e.g. bile duct carcinoma, pancreatitis)
* Ptyalism
· dental disease
· oral ulceration
· oesophagitis
* nausea
· hepatoencephalopathy
· Altered mentation
* hepatoencephalopathy
· hypoglycaemia
- thiamine deficiency
* post-ictal
* meningitis
· encephalitis
* space-occupying brain lesion
· head trauma
• Renal pain
* pyelonephritis
* nephrolithiasis
* hydronephrosis
• feline infectious peritonitis
· lymphoma or other tumour
* Bruising/ecchymoses
: thrombocytopenia
· thrombocytopathia
* acquired coagulopathy (e.g. rodenticide poisoning, liver disease, vitamin K malabsorption)
· hereditary coagulopathy (e.g. haemophilias, unlikely in this neutered cat with no previous history
of bleeding)
· disseminated intravascular coagulopathy
· vasculitis
Case work-up
Blood was obtained by venepuncture from the medial saphenous vein for
haematology, serum chemistry and a coagulation profile, and a urinalysis was
performed.
Minimum data base
Routine haematology results were within the reference range. Serum biochemistry
results showed elevations in alanine aminotransferase to 551 1U/1 (reference range 6-
83 IU/l), alkaline phosphatase to 360 IU/1 (reference range 10-100 IU/l) total bilirubin
to 20.6 μmol/ (reference range 0-6.8 μmol/) and bile acids to 26.8 μmol/1 (reference
range 0-7 μmol/l). Gamma glutamyl transferase (GGT) was not elevated (4.8 IU/l;
reference range 1-5 IU/I).
Clinical tips on diagnosing HL
These are typical findings in HL, but can also occur with other liver or pancreatic disorders. Serum
GGT is elevated with necroinflammatory diseases e.g. cholangitis, therefore a serum (
GGT
concentration within the reference range can serve as a useful indicator of HL. An elevated GGT does
not, however, rule out HL, as HL may be present concurrently with inflammatory liver disease.
As these patients can have coagulation abnormalities, blood should ideally be obtained from a
peripheral vein, rather than the jugular vein, until the coagulation status has been ascertained.
Similarly, cystocentesis is best avoided until the coagulation status has been ascertained.
Total proteins were elevated, with albumin at the top end of the reference range at
38.4 g/l (reference range 28-39 g/l) and globulin above the reference range at 56.7 g/l
(reference range 25-50 g/l). The high value for the albumin was attributed to
dehydration  with hyperglobulinaemia possibly  relating to the dental disease or
another inflammatory condition. Urea was elevated at 16.7 mmol/1 (reference range
2.8-9.8 mmol/l) and creatinine was elevated at 210 μmol/1 (reference range 40-177
μmol/l), which could reflect dehydration, renal disease or, much less likely, a post-
renal cause of azotaemia. Potassium was low at 3.5 mmol/l (reference range 4-5
elevated at 15.9 mmol/ (reference range 3-5 mmol//), which was attributed to stress
from the illness, but could also have been due to diabetes mellitus or renal tubular
disorders.
In the coagulation profile, prothrombin time was 16 seconds (reference range 5-12
seconds) and activated partial thromboplastin was 25 seconds (reference range 10-20
seconds) and fibrinogen was at the low end of the reference range at 2.1 g/l (reference
range 2-4 g/l). As the liver is responsible for synthesis of the majority of the clotting
factors, prolonged clotting times were likely due to hepatic dysfunction.
Urinalysis showed a urine specific gravity of 1.o025, which was considered
inappropriately low for a dehydrated cat. Dipstick analysis revealed 2+ glucose, trace
ketones, 1 + blood, pH 7.0 and 2+ bilirubin. Sediment analysis showed an average of
6 WBC per high powered field (normal < 3), 4 red blood cells per high powered field
(normal < 3) and numerous lipid droplets (Fig 22.1). Occasional granular casts were
also observed. Urine culture was negative.
0.0
Fig 22.1
Lipid droplets in the urine
Blood pressuire measurement
The systolic blood pressure in this cat was low normal at 115 mmHg.
Clinical tip
Anorexic, dehydrated cats can be fragile patients. Assessment of blood pressure can be useful to
guide fluid therapy, with shock doses (50 ml/kg/hour) potentially required in collapsed, hypotensive
patients.
Imaging
Ultrasonography  showed an enlarged hyperechoic liver and also reduced renal
corticomedullary definition with widened renal pelves, consistent with pyelonephritis.
Liver tissue histopathology
A fine-needle aspirate of the liver was obtained under ultrasound guidance. The
sample obtained from this cat was supportive of a diagnosis of HL (Fig 22.2).
HEPATOC
Fig 22.2
 Hepatocytes showing increased lipid accumulation due to hepatic lipidosis
Clinical tip
A sample of liver tissue is required to confirm the presence of HL. Fine-needle aspiration is a
reasonably safe option, particularly with ultrasound guidance. If more than 50% of the hepatocytes
show vacuolation, then HL is likely to be present. Confirmation that the vacuoles are filled with fat
and not glycogen, requires staining with an appropriate stain such as oil red O, but this is rarely
 ss   a   ss   s   s  
inflammatory disease, a biopsy (Tru-Cut or surgical) is a better option for confirmation. The potential
complications such as haemorrhage, hypotension, bile peritonitis and inadequate sampling should be
borne in mind if this procedure is performed.
Medical treatment options
As the severity of HL can vary from mild, subclinical disease to severe, life-threatening
metabolic abnormalities, the treatments administered require to be individualized to
the case, although nutritional support is a key factor for all cases of HL. Any specific
treatments for the underlying disease, e.g. antibiotics, analgesics or insulin, should
obviously be provided.
Nursing aspects of nutritional support
In milder cases of HL where an underlying disease is identified that should respond rapidly to
sa aq  na iin e s no so ad go s ns so a
However, it may cause food aversions and continued anorexia. Placement of feeding tubes should
therefore be considered sooner rather than later (see Appendix 9). The calorie requirements of the
cat should be calculated in order that the appropriate quantity of food is fed. A balanced feline diet
should be fed, although consideration should also be given to underlying disease conditions e.g.
moderately restricted, high quality protein content in renal disease or if hepatic encephalopathy is
present.
The nutritional requirements are based on resting energy requirements (RER), which may be
calculated as follows Bw, Body weight:
R
RER(kcal)=30×BW(kg）+70
The calorie requirement should be split into four to six feeds per day, with a maximum of 50 ml at
 any feed (allow for fluid flushing the tube!).
Only one-third of the calorie requirement should be fed on the first day, two-thirds on the second
day and the full amount not fed until the third day. This reduces the risk of re-feeding syndrome and
GI upset. Re-feeding syndrome arises when there is an increase of insulin released in response to
food. This causes intracellular movements of potassium and phosphate and a shift from a catabolic
state to an anabolic state with increased utilization of glucose and thiamine.
Fluid therapy
The majority of cats with HL are dehydrated; therefore rehydration with crystalloids is
indicated. As cats with compromised liver function may have difficulty metabolizing
lactate, the author's preferred initial choice is normal saline. In addition, this is a
useful fluid for enabling supplementation with other therapies as required. In severe
cases, consideration should be given to placement of a multi-lumen catheter to
facilitate blood collection and fluid administration, but peripheral catheters are
adequate in the initial stages and may be preferable until the coagulation status of the
cat is known.
Electrolytes
          s s 
measured electrolytes where possible. If unable to measure potassium, then a
maintenance' dose of 20 mmol potassium chloride should be added per litre of fluids.
Phosphate may also be low and should be supplemented as potassium phosphate, with
the  amount  of  potassium provided  subtracted  from  any  potassium  chloride
assessment, their values are prone to fall rapidly, particularly when feeding is re-
introduced. Regular assessment should therefore be performed (at least daily) and
changes to supplementation made as required. Magnesiuim is harder to measure, buit is
worth checking as supplementation may be required, particularly if potassium values
are difficult to maintain in the normal range.
Vitamin supplementation
A high percentage of cats with HL have coagulation abnormalities, therefore
supplementation with Vitamin K is likely to be beneficial, particularly if clotting times
cannot be obtained rapidly. Water soluble multivitamin preparations should be added
to the intravenous fluids, although this is not likely to give adequate levels of
         n  
supplementation may be required  in  cats  that  show  continued  weakness or
required. Vitamin E could be considered for its antioxidant properties.
Anti-emetics
Many cats with HL have underlying conditions that may make them vomit or feel
nauseous. In addition, with some gastrointestinal conditions, or if hypokalaemia is
present, ileus may be a feature which can contribute to anorexia. Maropitant,
metoclopramide or ranitidine may all be considered. (See tip on maropitant in Ch 19).
S-adenosyl methionine
      n
administration may be difficult in extremely sick animals, in which case
consideration can be given to using intravenous N-acetylcysteine, which is also a
glutathione precursor.
Taurine and L-carnitine
Taurine and -carnitine supplementation may be beneficial, although consideration
must be given as to how many medications the cat can tolerate.
Clinical tips on treatment of HL
Dextrose or glucose containing solutions are inappropriate fluid solutions:
· They may potentiate hepatic triglyceride accumulation and inhibit fatty acid oxidation.
· They stimulate release of insulin, which will cause intracellular movement of potassium and
phosphate.
· They do not provide anywhere near the calorie requirement for maintenance. The calorie content
of 5% dextrose is 170 kcal/l, therefore a 5 kg cat would require 1 to 1.5 1l/day to meet its
maintenance energy requirement.
Follow-up
The cat was given intravenous fluids supplemented with B vitamins, a naso-
oesophageal tube was placed and feeding initiated, and vitamin K was administered
for 3 days. Intravenous antibiotics were also started, a subcutaneous injection of
cobalamin given and SAMe and i-carnitine administered orally. After 48 hours
stabilization, when coagulation times were normalized, the cat was anaesthetized
with alphaxalone/sevofluorane. A jugular catheter was placed to facilitate monitoring
(Fig 22.3) and an oesophagostomy tube placed to facilitate feeding. The cat was
hospitalized for 10 days, at which point he was consuming 80% of his caloric
requirements voluntarily. He was discharged home on oral SAMe (200 mg per cat po q
24 hours) and antibiotics (clavulanate-potentiated amoxicillin at 15 mg/kg po q 12
hours), which were continued for a further 5 weeks. At that point repeat biochemistry
indicated all liver parameters within reference ranges. Dental surgery was performed 2
months later to decrease the risk of HL recuirrence.
Fig22.3
Jugular catheter in place for blood sampling and intravenous access for fluids or
medications. Jugular catheters may also be used for parenteral nutrition.
Disculssion
Hepatic lipidosis is a complex metabolic condition arising following inadequate food
where there is no underlying medical condition (e.g. a cat that gets shut in a garage
for a week) or ‘stressed', which is secondary to an underlying medical disease.
Mobilization of fat from adipocytes leads to deposition of fat within the hepatocytes,
 s               
to their unique nutritional requirements and obligate carnivore status. Any cat that
has not eaten for more than 3 days should be considered at risk of developing HL, with
obese cats being at an increased risk compared to lean cats due to the greater amount
of fat that can be mobilized.
The serum chemistry findings of elevated liver parameters other than GGT, the
large, hyperechoic liver on ultrasound and the vacuolated hepatocytes obtained on a
fine-needle aspirate confirmed the diagnosis of HL in this case. The presumptive
uinderlying cause was thought to be pyelonephritis. The ultrasonographic findings
were consistent with this, despite the negative urine culture. This was attributed to
the cat having received antibiotics prior to culture and the dental disease was
considered a potential source for haematogenous infection. The bruising was
consistent with the finding of prolonged clotting times and the altered mentation was
have helped to suipport this assuimption.
While this cat was not anaemic, anaemia is frequently present in cases of HL. The
anaemia may be due to blood loss secondary to coagulopathies, haemolysis due to
oxidative stress on the red blood cells, in which case Heinz bodies may be seen or non-
regenerative from underlying disease processes. Abnormalities in clotting times have
Deen identified in 45% of cats with HL.
Pathogenesis
acids from protein, particularly arginine, taurine and methionine. When deprived of
protein (starvation), cats are unable to down-regulate the aminotransferases involved
would normally enter the irea cycle. However, arginine is required for the urea cycle
which can contribute to hepatoencephalopathy. Taurine is required for conjugation of
bile acids. Its deficiency leads to a build up of bile acids. Methionine is involved in
many metabolic pathways, including the synthesis of SAMe. This is a precuirsor for the
      r   
detoxifying agent within the liver.
Vitamin deficiencies are also of importance. The water-soluble B vitamins are not
stored to any great extent and rapidly become depleted in anorexic cats. Deficiency of
vitamin B, (thiamine) can lead to neurological signs such as altered mentation,
          
important co-factors for metabolic pathways in the liver including metabolism of
SAMe. The fat soluble vitamins are affected by lack of bile acids contributing to
malabsorption as well as inadequate intake. As already mentioned, vitamin K
    i       
oxidative damage.
Sick animals have higher circulating levels of the stress hormones cortisol,
adrenaline and growth hormone, which in turn stimulate hormone sensitive lipase
This hormone initiates mobilization of lipids out of adipocytes into the circulation.
From the circulation the lipid is taken up into the hepatocytes of the liver, where its
metabolism is compromised due to lack of -carnitine. In cases of HL up to 5o% of the
weight of the liver may be due to fat. The swollen hepatocytes can in turn cause
obstruction of bile canaliculi.
Epidemiology
Overweight or obese cats are at greater risk of developing HL due to the increased
quantity of lipid that can be mobilized at times of starvation. As such, there is no
breed or sex predisposition. The same factors that predispose to obesity may therefore
predispose to HL, namely, high carbohydrate diet, lack of exercise, neuter status and
middle age.
Prognosis
with intensive management is generally good. Recovery rates are quoted as 60 to 85%
depending on the severity of the condition. Owners should, however, be warned of the
            s
period may be required.
Section 3
Diarrhoea
23
Intestinal disorders
Diarrhoea
       n   s  s i
or those that cause larger faecal volume. Larger faecal volume is usually due to
increased water or nutrients which have not been assimilated and can be affected by
the amount of fibre in the diet. Faecal water content increases when there is increased
secretion or decreased absorption of fluid. The water content of faeces which appear
normal is 60 to 80%; in unformed and watery faeces the water content is 70 to 90%.
In a normal 20 kg dog, 2.5 1 of fluids enter the duodenum and over 98% of this is
normal, so the volume of fluid entering the colon must exceed this capacity before
diarrhoea is seen. If there is colonic disease, however, only small changes in the
absorptive capacity may result in diarrhoea.
Animals with diarrhoea may become faecally incontinent or be unable to retain
faeces; however, these two conditions do not necessarily occur concurrently. Animals
may be incontinent without diarrhoea or have diarrhoea without incontinence.
Other signs of intestinal disease include the appearance in the stool of bright red
blood, melena, mucus and malassimilated nutrients (e.g. steatorrhoea). Patients may
show dyschesia (discomfort on passing stools) or tenesmus (straining to pass stools).
Abdominal pain, bloating, increased eructation, borborygmi or flatulence, salivation
and anorexia may occur. Intestinal diseases can occur without diarrhoea and should
Classification of diarrhoea
Diarrhoea is often classified as originating from the large or small intestine and as
acute or chronic (see below) which helps the clinician decide upon the appropriate
understanding of the cause of the diarrhoea. The usual pathophysiological
classifications include osmotic diarrhoea, secretory diarrhoea, diarrhoea resulting
from increased permeability and diarrhoea resulting from deranged motility. More
Osmotic diarrhoea is caused by an increase in unabsorbed solutes in the faeces
cauising an increase in faecal water content. With the increased solutes, water diffuses
across the duodenal mucosa and sodium diffuses with the water, causing even more
water to be drawn into the lumen. Causes of osmotic diarrhoea include overeating,
malassimilation. Malassimilation may be due to maldigestion, for example, with
intestinal mucosal or intramural disease. Lactose intolerance due to lactase deficiency
may also cause osmotic diarrhoea due to the unabsorbed lactose in the intestines.
than the absorption and can occur either due to an increase in secretion or a decrease
in absorption, or both. Causes of secretory diarrhoea include bacterial enterotoxins,
deconjugated bile acids, hydroxyl fatty acids, gastrointestinal hormones, cholinergic
agonists and enteric system neuropeptides.
Bacteria that can produce enterotoxins include Escherichia coli, Clostridium
Klebsiella pneumoniae and Yersinia enterocolitica.
Diarrhoea from increased permeability is caused by a defect in the intestinal
permeability which cauises electrolytes which have been absorbed to flow back into
the intestinal lumen. This results in a decrease of absorption of water from the bowel.
 If the intestinal barrier is further damaged, albumin and other plasma proteins may
leak into the intestinal lumen and with enough damage blood may also be lost. Causes
of increased intestinal permeability include mucosal inflammation, erosion or
compromised blood or lymphatic circulation. Mucosal inflammation is present in
chronic inflammatory bowel disease, gluten enteropathy and milk protein intolerance.
Deranged intestinal motility may be primary or occur secondarily to other intestinal
disorders. A more rapid intestinal transit time can be caused by either decreased
hookworm infections, canine dysautonomia and some types of colitis.
Diagnosis
Diarrhoea is a clinical sign and not a final diagnosis. In order to treat a patient
effectively for diarrhoea, the underlying cause must be found.
Many dogs and cats with acute diarrhoea do not require full investigation as their
diarrhoea is most likely to be dietary induced and will be self-limiting. These patients
Where diarrhoea persists for more than 2 weeks (i.e. is chronic) and is unresponsive
   n s   s        
require further investigation.
 i  n   sn   e as
with the patient's signalment, a detailed history and full physical examination.
Young patients are more likely to have nutritional, parasitic or microbial causes of
diarrhoea. There are also some breed predispositions to certain types of diarrhoea, for
  s s        e    o
chance of getting an infectious disease.
Assessment shouild be made of the diet and any changes in the diet and any history
of scavenging or hunting or being give treats or snacks or anything other than pet
food. Adverse reactions to food are a common cauise of diarrhoea and may still occulr
even when the diet has been fed for a long time. Any change in appetite should be
noted, as a poor appetite may signify severe disease.
The duration of diarrhoea and the frequency of abnormal or normal appearing
stools should be noted, as well as the character of the stools. Many animals will show
progressively worsening diarrhoea during the day, as during the night more water is
absorbed from the faeces and increased activity promotes gastrointestinal (GI)
motility. These signs are also important in differentiating small intestinal diarrhoea
from large intestinal diarrhoea (see Table 23.1).
Vaccine history and worming status
· Are there other pets or persons in the household with diarrhoea or has the animal
been exposed to other animals (e.g. boarding, playing in the park)?
· Previous history of GI signs
· Presence of vomiting (see section on vomiting for more information)
· Presence of weight loss
As mentioned above, diarrhoea is often classified into small bowel or large bowel
disorders. Table 23.1 indicates the parameters which are used to make this distinction.
Table 23.1 Differentiating diarrhoea caused by small bowel disorders from that caused by large bowel
disorders
Symptom
Small bowel
Large bowel
Faecal volume
Large
 Small
Faecal frequency
Increased four-fold
Increased eight-fold
Haematochezia
 Non e or ch an ged blood
 None or fresh blood
Faecalmucus
No
 Often present
 Steatorrh oea
 Possible
No
Tenesmus
No
Frequent
Dysch ezia
No
Frequent
Flatus/borborygmi
Present
Present
Vomiting
Possible
 Possible
Weight loss
Common
Rare
Many patients exhibit symptoms which fall into both categories. This may be due to
small bowel disorders affecting the large bowel or that disease involves both regions of
the intestine. Up to 30% of dogs with chronic diarrhoea have diffuse disease of the GI
tract. Many dogs with colitis or enteritis will vomit, but may or may not have gastric
Physical examination
The physical examination should be used to examine the Gl tract and to look for
   ssss        is
possible to evaluate attitude and postures. Animals with a painful abdomen may
demonstrate a hunched posture (Fig 23.1) and cats with hyperthyroidism may be
hyperactive and difficult to examine.
Fig23.1
Dog showing a hunched posture due to abdominal pain
In particular the clinician should palpate the abdomen for evidence of abnormal
intestines, ‘mass' lesions, pain or fluid/gas accumulations (Fig 23.2). The perineum
should be examined for the presence of faeces and for evidence of perineal hernias.
Fig23.2
Abdominal palpation of a cat
The physical examination is critical for determining the severity of the patient's
disease; warning signs for severe disease include fever, depression, anorexia, weight
loss, weakness, dehydration, pale or discoloured mucous membranes and abdominal
pain, masses or effusions.
After the history and physical examination it should be possible for the clinician to
determine if there is likely to be systemic disease or primary Gl disease - if the latter it
is likely to be associated with the small or large bowel or both.
24
Small intestinal diarrhoea
  n   n        
volumes of faeces produced without evidence of tenesmus or dyschezia and there is no
bright red blood or mucus present on the stools. Weight loss may accompany
diarrhoea of small intestinal origin.
Some of the differential diagnoses of small intestinal diarrhoea include:
· Dietary
· food poisoning
· adverse reaction to food (allergy or food intolerance)
· dietary indiscretion (e.g. raiding the rubbish bin)
· sudden change of diet
· Gastric
· dumping syndrome, where too much food is presented to the duodenum rapidly
· Small intestinal diseases
coli enterotoxins).
° parasites (e.g. Giardia, strongyloides, ascarids, hookworms)
· inflammatory bowel disease
· infiltrative neoplasia (e.g. lymphoma, mastocytosis)
· lymphangiectasia
· brush border enzyme defects
· antibiotic responsive diarrhoea (ARD) (or antibiotic responsive enteritis)
° partial obstruction (e.g. intussusception, neoplasia, foreign body)
· extraluminal obstruction
· ischaemic disease (infarction, torsions)
· haemorrhagic gastroenteritis
· Secondary systemic disorders
' pancreatitis
· exocrine pancreatic insufficiency (EPl)
· Liver disease, including biliary diseases and porto-systemic shunts, intrahepatic
cholestasis or bile duct obstruction
· Kidney disease
· Hyperthyroidism in cats
· Hypoadrenocorticism
· Congestive heart failure
· Feline viruses (feline infectious peritonitus (FIP), feline leukaemia virus (FeLV))
· Miscellaneous causes
· toxaemia (e.g. pyometra, peritonitis)
 s  s-o )   
organophosphates)
· APUDomas (e.g. gastrinoma)
Further investigation of chronic small intestinal diarrhoea
Dietary trial
If there are no abnormalities detected during the physical examination and the animal
is bright and eating well, feeding an exclusion diet with a novel protein source or a
hydrolyzed protein source for 2 to 6 weeks may be tried prior to further testing. In cats
with diarrhoea, many respond to a restricted novel protein diet within a week. If the
previous food or snacks should be tried to prove that dietary sensitivity is the cause of
the diarrhoea. Many owners are understandably reluctant to try this challenge and a
new diet may be designed uising the trial food. The owners should understand that the
animal may become sensitized to the new diet and again develop diarrhoea.
Minimum data base
therapy and an appropriate de-worming programme, a minimum data base of
haematology, serum biochemistry including basal cortisol and urinalysis should be
            
concentration should be included. These tests evaluate the patient for systemic
diseases such as kidney disease, hepatopathies, hypoadrenocorticism, hyperthyroidism
and viral diseases. A low albumin may be present in hepatopathies or protein losing
enteropathy or nephropathy. If low protein is combined with low serum cholesterol
         
with eosinophilic gastroenteritis, parasitism and hypoadrenocorticism. The minimum
data base also aids in assessing hydration status and electrolytes which will guide the
clinician in the choice of fluid therapy.
Faecal tests
Further testing may include faecal analysis for parasites and enteropathogenic
bacteria, e.g. Salmonella, Campylobacter
and Yersinia.Diarrhoeadueto
            
isolated from the faeces of healthy animals. Salmonella can also be present in the
faeces of animals without clinical signs and should probably not be treated unless
serious or systemic signs are present as treatment may prolong the carrier state.
Toxin producing Clostridium difficile may cauise acute or chronic diarrhoea. Faecal
cuiltures for C. difficile are of no value because it is fouind in faeces from healthy
enterotoxigenic clostridia is best supported by a positive enterotoxin assay.
A fresh saline smear may detect Giardia trophozoites, although zinc sulphate
cannot be confirmed a therapeutic trial with fenbendazole may be indicated.
Faecal alpha-1-antiprotease
Faecal alpha-l-antiprotease has been measured in the USA as an indicator of
gastrointestinal (Gl) protein loss and is useful to determine that intestinal loss is the
calise of hypoproteinaemia.
Trypsin-like immunoreactivity and pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity
If EPI is a possibility, a trypsin-like immunoreactivity (TLI) test should be done. This
is the test of choice for EPl, in which the serum concentration is decreased. The TLI
test may be also useful as an adjunctive test in some cases of acute pancreatitis where
             
There are species specific PLI tests for dogs and cats and an in-house serum SNAP cPLI
test for dogs (Fig 24.1).
Fig24.1
The SNAP? cPL test used for in-house screening for pancreatitis
Folate and cobalamin (vitamin B12)
Serum folate and cobalamin (vitamin Bi2) may be decreased in small intestinal disease
due to poor absorption. In some cases where there are excessive bacteria in the
proximal small intestine the cobalamin may be low due to bacterial consumption and
the folate increased due to bacterial production. Excessive bacteria in the intestine has
been termed small intestinal bacterial overgrowth (SIBO), a disease process
documented in people with > 105 colony forming units (CFU) per mililitre of fasting
duodenal intestinal fluid. The accuracy of the term SIBO in small animal patients is
dubious. In many dogs with bacterial disorders of the small intestines, it is probably
an incorrect description. Studies have shown that clinically normal dogs can have
> 108 CFU/ml of bacteria in the upper small intestine and this number is clearly in
excess of what was initially accepted as being definitive for SIBO ( > 105 CFU/ml).
The terms antibiotic responsive enteropathy (ARE) or antibiotic responsive
diarrhoea (ARD) are now more commonly used. The terms ARE or ARD seem to be
         s     
patient has small intestinal disease which responds to the administration of
antibiotics.
Histopathology and cytology of the intestinal mucosa are extremely insensitive at
detecting ARE. Serum cobalamin and folate concentrations have been used for
diagnosis and finding both a low serum cobalamin and an increased serum folate
concentration had been considered to be relatively specific for ARE.
Dietary  folate supplementation  contributes  to  increased blood  folate  values.
Measuring serum cobalamin and folate concentrations is relatively insensitive at
detecting ARE or SIBO. There are many dogs with chronic GI disease that respond to
antibiotic administration but which have normal cobalamin and/or normal folate
concentrations. However, they should be measured in animals suspected to have
intestinal disease as hypocobalaminaemia or low serum folate should be treated.
In cats, low serum cobalamin may occur with EPl, intestinal disease (e.g. IBD or
LSA), hepatobiliary disease or pancreatic disease. Cats appear to be highly susceptible
to cobalamin deficiency as it has a short half-life in this species (12.75 days in healthy
cats, 5 days in cats with intestinal disease).
Serum lead concentrations should be determined if there is a history consistent with
exposure to lead (e.g. remodelling an older house, lead pipes), especially if central
nervous system or behaviour changes are present. Serum organophosphate
concentrations should be determined if there has been possible access to these toxins.
Gastrointestinal permeability testing with inert sugar analysis
During some intestinal diseases the mucosal cells are destroyed, decreasing the
number of cellular small pores and increasing the number of large pores between the
cells, thereby changing the ratio of the two types (Fig 24.2). By using oral
administration of sugars of different sizes which move through the different types of
pores and measuring the urine recovery of the sugars, a ratio of the recovered sugars
in intestinal permeability.
Tightjunction
-Mucosal
cell
Paracellular
Transcellular
uptake
uptake
Fig 24.2
 Testing of intestinal permeability testing is based on the difference between uptake of
sugars via the transcellular route and via the paracellular route
Imaging
Radiography
S           
diarrhoea, contrast studies may help in some cases. Abdominal radiography can aid in
contrast study uising barium suspension or barium impregnated polyethylene spheres),
assessment of ileus and diagnosis of an intussusception.
Radiography also helps assess liver and kidney size, presence of abdominal fluid,
organ torsions, peritonitis and sometimes pancreatitis.
Ultrasonography
Abdominal ultrasound is more sensitive than radiography for the detection of masses.
assessing the pancreas and liver parenchyma, mesenteric lymph nodes and intestinal
wall thickness and irregularity.
In some cases ultrasonography can provide additional information, in particular to
evaluate the Gl peristalsis, and also can allow the identification of the cause of the
Ultrasonographic examination of the small intestine includes evaluation of wall
thickness and layering, evaluation of luminal contents and measurement of peristaltic
function. In the normal dog, the gastric wall is 3 to 5 mm thick when the stomach is
moderately distended and may be slightly thicker when the stomach is not distended.
The normal thickness of the small and large bowel wall is 2 to 3 mm when measured
during bowel relaxation.
Pathologic thickening should be suspected when wall thickness exceeds 6 to 7 mm
in the stomach and 5 mm in the bowel.
Ultrasonography allows differentiation of the layers of the intestine, which
identified (see Figs 15.4-15.5). These include the muicosal surface (hyperechoic),
mucosa (hypoechoic), submucosa (hyperechoic), muscularis (hypoechoic) and serosa
(hyperechoic). The submucosa and subserosa-serosa are hyperechoic because of the
presence of relatively more fibrous connective tissue. Examination of the layers of the
stomach and bowel may be helpful in determining the severity and location of
pathologic processes.
Evaluation of intestinal motility should be included in the examination. The mean
five per minuite.
In some cases of intestinal neoplasia, a focal thickening of the intestinal wall can be
        n  
accumulation. In the area of wall thickening, the normal layered pattern of the
intestinal wall is usually absent. Intestinal lymphomas are often characterized by a
diffuse neoplastic infiltration of the wall rather than a focal mass.
Endoscopy and intestinal biopsy
S    n      
patients. The investigation of small bowel diarrhoea, protein losing enteropathies.
chronic vomiting (intermittent or persistent) and melaena are the major indications
disorders with endoscopy. The diffuse nature of many intestinal causes of small bowel
diarrhoea and protein losing enteropathies means that duodenoscopy may enable a
diagnosis to be obtained without recourse to surgery.
Endoscopy allows the clinician to assess the mucosal colour, presence of
             n
endoscope or the biopsy forceps and, along with granularity (sometimes referred to as
a cobble-stone appearance), is a good indicator of increased cellularity, although
differentiation between  inflammation and neoplasia cannot be made  without
histopathology. Gross abnormalities suich as uindigested food, large amounts of fluid,
 r          
the duodenum enables detection of alterations of distensibility and mucosal
irregularities.
should be part of the endoscopic procedures in dogs and cats with diarrhoea. The
             
so focal lesions in the jejunum may not be accessible. For these lesions and for full-
thickness biopsies, an exploratory laparotomy or laparoscopy is required.
Exploratory laparotomy
If the patient is a good surgical risk, surgical exploration of the abdomen provides a
good, although invasive, method of examining the abdominal organs, obtaining full
thickness intestinal biopsies and potentially treating some intestinal disorders such as
focal tumours, intussusception and foreign bodies. In diarrhoea cases, biopsies of the
Investigation of acuite diarrhoea
The majority of cases of acute diarrhoea are dietary induced and self-limiting. Dietary
carbohydrate foods to which the animal is not accustomed, ingestion of spoiled foods
or carcasses or ingestion of a food to which the animal is allergic or intolerant.
of acute diarrhoea. Ingestion of toxins, exacerbation of hypoadrenocorticism,
pancreatitis, ischaemic disease or haemorrhagic gastroenteritis can cause the acute
onset of diarrhoea.
Differential diagnosis of infectious cauises of diarrhoea in dogs and cats include
· Parvovirus, Coronavirus
· Salmonellosis
· Campylobacter infection
· Yersinia spp. (uncommon)
· Clostridium perfringens
·E.coli
Tests for these are the same as for chronic diarrhoea (see page 116).
            
they may or may not vomit. The diarrhoea may be soft to liquid in consistency.
       )    s
supportive. If the animal is vomiting or dehydration is present intravenous or
  g   q m s    og P  ( P
digestible, low fat diet fed frequently and in small amounts. Anti-emetics (e.g-
loperamide or diphenoxylate) may be used if an infectious cause is not suspected;
these are relatively contraindicated with infectious diarrhoea as they may prolong the
presence of the bacteria within the intestinal tract. Antibiotics should be given if there
is a known bacterial cause of the diarrhoea and are contraindicated for acute
diarrhoea cases otherwise. Spasmolytics are also contraindicated as they decrease
intestinal segmentation. The use of probiotics or prebiotics may have some beneficial
effects in the treatment of diarrhoea.
25
Protein losing enteropathy in a dog
Initial presentation
Diarrhoea and weight loss
Signalment: 9-year-old neutered male Jack Russell terrier, body weight 5.3 kg
Case history
The dog presented with a 3-month history of diarrhoea, which had initially been
intermittent, but had become more persistent during the previous month. The faeces
were described as soft to watery, containing no blood or mucus. He produced large
volumes two to four times a day. He did not strain to defecate. He had lost about 0.5
kg during the previous month. He rarely vomited, but his appetite had decreased. His
exercise tolerance was decreased and the owners thought he had become a bit quieter
and less active in the house.
He had previously been a healthy dog and was fully vaccinated yearly. He had been
treated for internal parasites with a commercial product (unknown type) about 4
months prior to consultation. His usual diet was a commercial dry dog food and
during the month prior to his consultation the owners had been adding canned tuna
and other foods to encouirage him to eat.
Physical examination
On physical examination the dog was quiet but alert and responsive. His body
condition score was 4/9, with evidence of recent weight loss.
His mucous membranes were pink with a capillary refill time of < 2 seconds and his
hydration appeared adequate. His abdomen was slightly distended and had a fluid
thrill. On abdominal palpation, the intestines felt thickened and ‘ropey'. Thoracic
auscultation and percussion revealed dullness in the ventral thorax and muffled heart
sounds. His heart rate was 106 beats per minute. Peripheral pulse quality was
adequate and pulses were matched with the heart rate. The respiratory rate was
moderately elevated at 48 breaths per minute, with an increased inspiratory effort.
Rectal temperature was 37.9° C and soft faeces were present on the thermometer.
Problem list and discussion of problems
The dog's primary problem was diarrhoea, which was thought to be small intestinal in
origin due to the presence of weight loss, the lack of blood or mucus in the faeces and
to the lack of tenesmus during defecation. There was an increase in frequency of
defecation, which is commonly seen in diarrhoea of large intestinal origin, but can
also be seen when the storage capacity of the colon is overwhelmed by the volume of
faeces. Another problem was the apparent presence of fluid in the abdomen.
Differential diagnosis
Differential lists for the diarrhoea (small intestinal):
· Dietary
ssoxa e a pasap sa ainadde sbop a se a - Aoe 
* changes of diet - possible with a variety of food being fed; however, the diarrhoea started prior to
the variations in diet
* adverse reaction to food: intolerance or allergy
· Gastric disorders
· rapid gastric emptying
* Small intestinal disease
· infectious (e.g. bacteria, virus, fungus)
: gastrointestinal parasites
· infiltrative neoplasia (e.g. lymphoma, mastocytosis)
* partial obstruction (e.g. intussusception, foreign body)
· lymphangiectasia
· brush border defects
· inflammatory bowel disease (IBD)
· Pancreatic disease
· chronic pancreatitis
 exocrine pancreatic insufficiency
* pancreatic neoplasia
· Liver disease
 bile duct obstruction
- liver failure
· Kidney disease - unlikely as he did not have polyuria/polydipsia (pu/pd), although glomerular
disorders may present without pu/pd
· Miscellaneous
· congestive heart failure - no other signs consistent with this
· immunodeficiencies (e.g. IgA deficiency)
· hypoadrenocorticism
Another problem in this case was the increased fluid palpated in the abdomen (and suspected in
the thorax). Differential diagnoses for ascites rely on first determining the type of fluid:
· Transudate
· Modified transudate
· Exudate
· Chyle
· Pseudochyle
· Blood
Case work-up
Minimum data base
Routine haematology revealed a moderate leucocytosis with a total WBC count of 23
X10°/1 (reference range 6.0-15.0 x 10/l), due predominantly to a mature
neutrophilia of 20 X 10/1 (reference range 3.6-12.0 X 10/l). Lymphopenia was
present with a lymphocyte count of 0.46 x 10% /1 (reference range 0.7-4.8 x 10%/l).
Serum chemistry results showed panhypoproteinaemia with a total serum protein
concentration of 28 g/l (reference range 58-75 g/l), due to a decreased albumin
concentration of 13.7 g/l (reference range 26-35 g/l) and decreased globulin
          
concentration was decreased to 2.0 mmol/1 (reference range 2.3-3.0 mmol/l), likely
due to the decrease in the albumin bound fraction of calcium.
Clinical tip on hypocalcaemia with hypoalbuminaemia
Normally about 40% of the total serum calcium is bound to albumin, with about 10% chelated to
anions and about 50% ionized and unbound. The ionized fraction is the biologically active fraction.
With decreased albumin, the bound fraction is decreased, but the ionized fraction is often within the
reference range and therefore clinical signs of hypocalcaemia are usually not seen. Ionized calcium
can be measured to ensure that it is within the reference range.
The total calcium can also be ‘corrected’ for hypoalbuminaemia and while the accuracy of this
calculation is questionable, it is useful as an estimation. The SI units must first be converted to
conventional units, e.g. for this case:
2mmollcalcium×4=8mg/dl
13.7g/lalbuminx10=1.37g/dl
Correctedcalcium(mg/dl)=calcium(mg/dl)
-albumin（g/dl)+3.5
=8-1.37+3.5=10.13mg/dlcalcium
To convert this back to SI units, divide by 4, e.g. 10.13/4 = 2.54 mmol/l, which is within the
reference range.
Serum cholesterol concentration was decreased to 1.7 mmol/1 (reference range 3.8-
7.0 mmol/l). Serum liver enzyme concentrations were moderately increased, with an
 t       )     
(reference range 21-102 IU/l).
Serum cobalamin concentration was decreased at 112 ng/l (reference range 215-
908 ng/l) as was serum folate at 4.5 μg/1 (reference range 7.7-24.4 μg/l).
Urinalysis results were unremarkable, with a urine specific gravity of 1.040. Urine
      
Faecal analysis was negative for parasites and also negative on culture for
enteropathogenic bacteria.
Imaging
Abdominal ultrasound revealed changes (speckling and increased thickness) in the
small intestinal mucosa, consistent with lymphangiectasia and a protein losing
enteropathy. Free fluid was noted within the pleural and peritoneal spaces.
   sa     s    sa s
pleural space. Analysis of this was consistent with a pure transudate.
Clinical tip on fluid analysis
 The type of fluid present in an effusion gives an indication of the source. Modified transudates,
transudates and exudates are distinguished by the specific gravity, total protein, number of nucleated
cells, the cell type and the presence of bacteria (see Table 25.1).
Tabe 25.1 Determination of the type of fluid present in an effusion
Transudate
Modified transudate
Exudate
Specific gravity
<1.017
1.017-1.025
>1.025
Total protein (g/)
<25
25-50
Nucleated cells per microlitre
<1,000
500-1,000
>5,000
Predominant cell type
Mononuclear,mesothelial
Lymphocytes,monocytes,
Neutrophils,mononuclear,RBCs
mesothlialsuthils
Bacteria
Absent
Absent
Variable
With an albumin concentration of < 15 g/l in this dog, the pure transudate found in
the abdomen was consistent with decreased oncotic pressure as the cause for the
effusion.
Endoscopy
        sa ss
duodenal mucosa was
S  grossly abnormal  with a  very irregular, cobble-stone
appearance (Fig. 25.1).
Fig 25.1
Endoscopic of the small intestine in a dog with severe protein losing enteropathy. There
is loss of the normal mucosa with haemorrhage and inflammation present
Histopathology of gastric mucosa was interpreted as within normal limits. The
histopathological analysis of the duodenal mucosa revealed moderate infiltration of
the lamina propria with inflammatory cells, mostly lymphocytes and plasmacytes and
distension of the lacteals.
Diagnosis
A diagnosis of protein losing enteropathy due to lymphocytic plasmacytic IBD and
lymphangiectasia was made. The term protein losing enteropathy is a description of
the pathology and is not a final diagnosis. Where there is low protein thought to be
due to gastrointestinal loss, the underlying cause should be determined.
Clinical tip
A scoring index for canine IBD (the canine IBD activity index or CIBDAI) has been developed. The
canine IBD activity index includes:
A. attitude/activity
B. appetite
C. vomiting
 D. stool consistency
E. stool frequency
F. weight loss
These six variables are scored 0 to 3:
0 = normal
1 = mild change
 2 = moderate change
 3 = severe change
The summary of these six variables gives the total composite CIBDAI score, which is interpreted as:
0 to 3 = clinically insignificant disease
4 to 5 = mild IBD
6 to 8 = moderate IBD
9 or greater = severe IBD
The canine IBD index for this dog was calculated as:
Attitude and activity =2
Appetite=2
Vomiting=1
Stool consistency=3
Weight loss=2
for a score of 10, which is severe IBD
Treatment and outcome
An elimination diet of home cooked chicken and rice was initiated, along with
metronidazole at 10 mg/kg po q 12 hours, prednisolone at 5 mg (1 mg/kg) po q 12
hours and weekly subcutaneous cobalamin injections at 125 mg per week.
One month later, the dog was re-admitted to the hospital. He had continued to have
diarrhoea and weight loss. He had begun to vomit two to three times per day and was
dull. On physical examination, he showed discomfort on palpation of the cranial
abdomen. A Snap cPL (canine pancreatic specific lipase) test was positive and a
quantitative Spec cPL was 600 μg/l (reference range <200), consistent with a
concurrent diagnosis of pancreatitis. His serum albumin and globulin concentrations
28-37g/1).
He was treated with intravenous fluids, analgesia (buprenorphine at 0.o2 mg/kg iv
q 8 hours) and an anti-emetic (maropitant at 1 mg/kg sq q 24 hours) for 3 days. He
began to eat small amounts by the second day, but was still dull and was developing
ascites.
          
nutritionally and was continued for 3 days.
Clinical tip on parenteral nutrition
Parenteral nutrition in  veterinary  patients  involves supporting the  patient's  nutritional
requirements via the parenteral route. Compounding (correctly mixing together the ingredients in the
a n  ds  a i ss d     s 
practices, however, there are three-in-one products containing glucose, amino acids and lipids which
 are suitable for most patients on a short-term basis (e.g. 3-7 days). Solutions with an osmolarity of
 greater than 650 mOsm/l should be administered via a central line, i.e. a long catheter placed in the
jugular vein or threaded up the saphenous vein to the vena cava. Solutions of 400 to 650 mOsm/l
may be administered via a standard catheter in a peripheral vein using a 1.2 micron in-line filter.
When using a central line, the nutritional goal is to meet but not exceed the patient's resting energy
requirement, as calculated by body wto.75 x 70 = daily kcal. Peripheral parenteral nutrition is an
excellent way to provide partial nutrition for several days and either peripheral or central can be
combined with partial enteral nutrition.
Further medical support included azathioprine at 2 mg/kg po q 24 hours, ranitidine
at 2 mg/kg po q 8 hours and budesonide at 1 mg po q 24 hours. Budesonide is a locally
acting corticosteroid which has high first-pass metabolism in the liver and therefore
has minimal systemic side effects compared to other corticosteroids. Prednisolone was
continued at a reduced dose of 1 mg/kg po q 24 hours. The dose was reduced as
corticosteroids may be associated with an increased risk of pancreatitis. As the
restricted protein home-cooked diet had not improved his clinical signs, he was
changed to a canned low fat diet to decrease the risk of recurrent pancreatitis. Weekly
subcutaneously injections of 250 μg cobalamin were given.
Clinical tip on cobalamin
Many cats and dogs with small intestinal disease are deficient in cobalamin (vitamin Bi2) and it is
often necessary to supplement this parenterally. Weekly subcutaneous injections of cobalamin at 250
to 5oo pg per patient are efficient in repleting serum cobalamin concentrations. Adequate serum
cobalamin may be necessary for repair of the inflamed bowel.
The dog responded very well to the change in medication and the treatment with
parenteral nutrition. His serum albumin concentration increased to 20.8 g/ and his
serum globulin concentration increased to 19.2 g/l. His ascites resolved with the
increase in serum protein concentrations. His appetite improved and his faecal
consistency improved to a soft formed consistency.
Over the next 2 months (month 3 after diagnosis), the dog continued to improve in
his appetite, stool quality and exercise tolerance. His weight increased to 5.65 kg. The
jugular vein where the central line catheter had been placed did not fill when occluded
and the presence of a thrombus was suspected. His serum proteins had improved, with
an albumin concentration of 26.1 g/l and serum globulin concentration of 16.0 g/l.
Nursing aspects of jugular catheters
The main issues with indwelling catheters are the accumulation of thrombus and the risk of
infection. Thrombus formation starts the moment you puncture the endothelium of the vein and
forms a sleeve around the catheter that either breaks and sloughs off or plugs the end. Thrombosis
also starts away from the insertion site because the catheter tip irritates the vessel wall.
Bacteria can be carried in during venepuncture or can be introduced to the catheter during
injections, line changes or by having hair contaminating the hub at the time of iv line connection.
Thrombi favour the accumulation of bacteria, which form biofilm that itself favours thrombosis. To
reduce these sources of damage to the vessel and catheter, you can
 1 use minimally traumatic venepuncture technique
 2 use soft catheters
 3 use sterile technique meticulously for every catheter placement and every subsequent use of the
catheter.
It is often recommended to leave jugular catheters in for no longer than 3 days; however, if you
are diligent with the care (and lucky), you can extend the catheter life for much longer than 3 days. If
 the clinical staff is not careful and meticulous, then even 3 days can be too long.
One month later (month 4 after diagnosis) the prednisolone dose was decreased to
0.8 mg/kg po q 24 hours while maintaining the other medications and diet. A month
after that he was seen for a revisit appointment. After decreasing the prednisolone
dose the owners reported that the dog's appetite had decreased, he had become more
lethargic and his faeces had become softer. He had also lost 0.3 kg in body weight. The
day.
A month after the increase in the prednisolone dose the dog was seen for a revisit
appointment and the owner reported that he was brighter, exercising well and his
stool quality had improved again. His weight had increased to 5.7 kg. His serum
          
g/1.
A month later the prednisolone dose was decreased to 0.5 mg/kg po q 24 hours and
the dog remained fairly stable on this (plus the other medications and diet) for a
further 5 months. When he was seen at that time, he was showing signs of
corticosteroid side effects, with mild abdominal distension, a sparse hair coat and
  n     s    
lirinate and drink more than prior to corticosteroid administration, but not
5.5kg.
At this visit his haematology showed a mild neutrophilia 19.6 x 1o°/l (reference
range 3.6-12.0 x 10°/l), likely due to the corticosteroid administration. Serum
albumin concentration was 16.9 g/l and serum globulin concentration was 14.9 g/l.
Abdominal ultrasouind showed an increase in the small intestinal wall thickness to 6.8
mm (previously 6.0 mm), suggesting that potentially the inflammation had increased.
The prednisolone dose frequency was decreased to 0.5 mg/kg po q 48 hours. At a
      s   (e   i 
decreased, he had became lethargic, his faeces were softer and he had lost a further
small amount (o.2 kg) of weight. The prednisolone dose was again increased so that
he received 1 mg/kg one day alternating with 0.5 mg/kg po every other day. Four
months later (month 15) the dose was again decreased to 0.5 mg/kg po per day.
Ihe dog was maintained on these medications and diet for a further 6 months (to
month 2l after diagnosis) with a relatively good quality of life. Further attempts to
At the 21 month revisit, the dog was found to again have diarrhoea, weight loss and
a variable appetite. On physical examination a 3/6 systolic murmur was detected over
the tricuspid valve. His serum albuimin concentration was still decreased at 19.6 g/l.
Ihere were decreases in his seruim concentration of calcium (2.0 mmol/l; reference
magnesium (0.55 mmol/l; reference range 0.69-1.18 mmol/l) and potassium 3.2
mmol/l; reference range 3.6-5.6 mmol/).
Echocardiography confirmed the presence of mild pulmonary hypertension; which
may have been due to pulmonary thromboembolism. None of the chambers of the
heart were enlarged and there was no evidence of hypertrophy.
  s          
Ouitcome
The dog did not respond well to treatment at this time and remained thin and
lethargic. Unfortunately at the next visit 2 weeks later to the hospital the dog had a
cardiac arrest and died. Post mortem revealed a very large thrombus filling the right
ventricle and pulmonary artery, which were highly likely to be the cause of death.
Disculssion
            
gastrointestinal tract, which, if severe enough, causes a decrease in the plasma
albumin and globulins. When serum albumin concentration is decreased, there is an
increased risk of ascites and pleuiral fluid accumuilation due to the loss of oncotic
pressure. Causes of PLE include IBD (lymphocytic-plasmacytic, eosinophilic or
granulomatous), neoplasia, foreign bodies, intussusception, lymphangiectasia,
immune-mediated and allergic diseases.
Inflammation of the bowel increases the permeability, causing loss of proteins from
the plasma and interstitium. In this dog's case, there was also evidence of
lymphangiectasia, which in adult animals is usually associated with obstructive
lesions in the lymphatic vessels. The lymphatic stasis causes lymphatic hypertension,
which causes interstitial fluid to leak into the abdomen and into the intestinal lumen.
often have a low lymphocyte count, although this finding is not very specific as stress
or illness often cauises lymphopenia.
Treatment of inflammatory bowel disease in small animals is somewhat empirical
as there is a poor understanding of the underlying cause of the disorder, which may
indeed be a collection of disorders with a commonality of histopathological changes
The mainstays of treatment include dietary therapy, corticosteroids, azathioprine
ciclosporin, antibiotics (e.g. tylosin or metronidazole) and possibly pre-or probiotics,
enough to decrease the dog's quality of life, other medications (e.g. azathioprine or
ciclosporin) shouild be added to try to decrease the corticosteroid dose without losing
remission of disease.
As in this case, hypocalcaemia has been reported in protein losing enteropathies
which can be due to the low albumin; however, these changes can also occuir due to
malabsorption of vitamin D. Unabsorbed fatty acids can also bind dietary calcium to
form insoluble salts which are not absorbed. Treatment with the calcitriol form of
Epidemiology
can occur  in younger dogs.  Breed related immunoproliferative enteropathy is
recognized in Basenjis and breed related protein losing enteropathies have been
reported in soft coated wheaten terriers and Lundenhounds. Sharpei dogs also have an
increased risk for inflammatory enteritis, likely related to IgG or IgA deficiencies.
Many German shepherd dogs also have IgA deficiency which likely plays a role in
chronic enteropathies. Anecdotally, some clinicians do believe that Jack Russell
terriers may also be at risk for enteritis.
Prognosis
Inflammatory bowel disease can be difficult to control; in one study only 26% of dogs
with IBD were considered to be in remission at a 6 month follow-up check. The
presence of hypoalbuminaemia is a negative prognostic indicator and an elevated
canine pancreatic lipase concentration is also associated with a negative outcome.
 n s a   d a so  id  
guarded and most require long-term therapy. The prognosis for lymphangiectasia is
also gularded.
As with other causes of protein loss, there can be loss of antithrombin, which has a
similar molecular weight to albumin. This loss, along with vascular damage from
immune complexes, may predispose these cases to the formation of thrombi. In this
dog's case, he had an additional risk factor due to the formation of a large thrombus
in his jugular vein, which could have seeded other thrombi.
26
Inflammatory bowel disease and adverse reaction to
food in a dog
Initial presentation
 Six months of soft to watery diarrhoea and weight loss and episodes of vomiting
Signalment: 4-year-old entire male Sharpei, body weight 15.5 kg
Case history
The dog presented with a chronic, 6-month history of diarrhoea and weight loss. He
was producing large volumes of soft faeces, with no increase in frequency of
defecation, no blood or mucus in the faeces and no tenesmus while defecating. There
had been episodes of vomiting occurring nearly every day. The dog usually vomited
digested food and bile and this often occurred soon after eating. The owner reported
that the dog had become quieter than he had been previously.
Clinical tip
The presence of weight loss, large volumes of faeces and lack of tenesmus, mucus or
haematochezia indicate diarrhoea of small intestinal origin. Localizing the source of the diarrhoea
aids the clinician in making a differential diagnoses list and deciding upon diagnostic techniques.
Clinical tip
The presence of digested food and bile in the vomited material indicates that it is likely to be true
vomiting rather than regurgitation. The length of time after eating that an event takes place does not
necessarily indicate whether it is vomiting or regurgitation.
The dog had been fed a variety of diets in an attempt to control the gastrointestinal
signs, including a highly digestible diet for gastrointestinal disorders and a premium
dry dog food.
The current diet being fed was a commercial dry diet based on lamb and rice. The
dog had a good appetite while on this food, but there was no improvement in the
diarrhoea or vomiting. In addition to eating dog food, the dog also scavenged from
rubbish and was fed treats of human food.
His vaccinations were upto date and he had been treated for parasites 6 months
prior to presentation. He had not travelled outside of the UK.
The diagnostic tests and treatments from the previous veterinary surgeon included:
· Faecal examination for parasites: negative
· Treatment with sulfasalazine and metronidazole for 1 week (doses not reported)
· Dietary therapy: a dry veterinary diet designed for intestinal disease for 2 weeks,
then a dry commercial premium dog food for 2 weeks
There had been an initial improvement on these treatments and then the diarrhoea
reoccurred 2 months later. He was treated again with sulfasalazine, metronidazole
(doses not reported) and prednisolone at 0.6 mg/kg, with no improvement.
Clinical tip
Sulfasalazine is used for large intestinal diarrhoea so would not be expected to improve the signs
 in this dog. Metronidazole does help in some cases of diarrhoea. Prednisolone should probably not
be used without a confirmed diagnosis; if it was being used for presumptive inflammatory bowel
disease, the dose was too low as it is between the physiological dose for dogs (0.15-0.25 mg/kg/day)
and the anti-inflammatory dose for dogs (0.5-1 mg/kg/day).
Clinical tip
While the diets that were used in this case are highly digestible they do include several protein
sources and are not appropriate as elimination diets. The first ingredient in the lamb and rice diet
was wheat, showing that it is necessary to read the labels. The diets at the time of this case contained
the following main ingredients:
a Veterinary intestinal diet: maize, gluten meal, chicken and turkey meal
b Premium dry diet: chicken, rice, maize, poultry meal, gluten meal, wheat, fish oil, egg
c Lamb and rice based diet: wheat, lamb, rice, bran
On physical examination the dog was quiet and alert and his hydration was
adequate. His body condition score was 3/9, with evidence of muscle loss. His mucous
membranes were pink and capillary refill time was <2.5 seconds. His temperature,
pulse and respiration parameters were within normal limits, thoracic auscultation
was unremarkable and lymph nodes were within normal limits. On abdominal
palpation there were thickened loops of small intestines which felt fluid filled. He had
a dry dull hair coat.
Problem list and discussion of problems
· Chronic small intestinal diarrhoea
· Weight loss with good appetite
· Occasional vomiting
Differential diagnosis
Chronic small intestinal diarrhoea
· Dietary
* gluttony - the dog did have a good appetite but this is unlikely to cause chronic diarrhoea
· changes of diet - possible with scavenging and snacks
· adverse reaction to food: intolerance or allergy
· Gastric disorders
· rapid gastric emptying
· Small intestinal disease
· infectious, e.g. bacterial, viral, fungal
· gastrointestinal parasites
· inflammatory bowel disease
· infiltrative neoplasia, e.g. lymphoma, mastocytosis
* partial obstruction, e.g. intussusception, foreign body
· brush border defects
· lymphangiectasia
· Pancreatic disease
* chronic pancreatitis
· exocrine pancreatic insufficiency
 pancreatic neoplasia
· Liver disease
· bile duct obstruction
· liver failure
· Kidney disease - unlikely as he did not have polyuria/polydipsia (pu/pd), although glomerular
 disorders may present without pu/pd
· Miscellaneous
· congestive heart failure - no signs consistent with this
· immunodeficiencies - e.g IgA deficiency, which has been reported in the Sharpei dog
· hypoadrenocorticism
Weight loss with good appetite
· Dietary
* unbalanced or poor quality diet
· insufficient food provided
* Malassimilation
· intestinal disorders as above for diarrhoea
* exocrine pancreatic insufficiency
• liver failure
· Nutrient loss
· diabetes mellitus (unlikely as not pu/pd)
* protein losing enteropathy
 protein losing nephropathy
· Increased nutrient requirements
* fever (not present)
* hyperthyroidism (unlikely)
Occasional vomiting
· Dietary, small intestinal, liver and pancreatic disorders as above
* Stomach
· gastritis
 gastric ulcers
 inflammatory bowel disease
· foreign body
* parasites
· Systemic disease
 uraemia
· liver failure
· sepsis
· congestive heart failure
· acidosis
· hypoadrenocorticism
· ketoacidotic diabetes mellitus
· hyperparathyroidism
* gastrinomas
· Neurological diseases (no other signs consistent with these in this dog)
: dysautonomia
 vestibular disease
· CNS disease
 Drugs, toxins (no known history outside of medications provided by referring veterinary surgeon)
Case work-up
Minimum data base
Haematology, serum chemistry and urinalysis were performed. The most significant
findings were a hypoalbuminaemia of 15.2 g/l (reference range 26-35 g/l) and
     1       
peripheral eosinophilia of 1.7 × 10°/1 (reference range 0-1 × 10%/). His urine had a
specific gravity of 1.040 with a pH of 6.5. The urine protein to creatinine ratio was 0.8
(slightly elevated above the reference range of 0.5) and there were calcium oxalate
crystals present in the sediment.
Low albumin may be caused by intestinal loss, urinary loss, decreased liver
production due to liver disease, third spacing, a shift from the vascular space into the
interstitial space or decreased liver production during an acute phase reaction from
inflammation. With a concurrent decrease in globulins and only a mild increase in
urine protein and a history of diarrhoea, intestinal loss was the most likely diagnosis
in this dog.
 (        
diseases (eosinophilic inflammatory bowel disease, eosinophilic pneumonitis,
eosinophilic granulomatous disease, eosinophilic leukaemia) and is also sometimes
seen with mast cell tumours, carcinoma and hypoadrenocorticism.
Faeces were submitted for parasitology and culture of enteropathogens; both of
these resuilts were negative.
Clinical tip
Many intestinal parasites shed eggs only intermittently, so a negative faecal examination does not
rule out parasites. Doing three faecal examinations from three different stool samples has been
recommended especially in cases with gastrointestinal signs, de-worming is usually recommended.
Adrenocorticotrophin hormone stimulation test
An adrenocorticotrophin hormone (ACTH) stimulation test was performed and the
results were within the reference range (pre-ACTH stimulation of 223 mmol/l
increasing to a post-stimulation of 443 mmol/l), ruling out hypoadrenocorticism.
Endoscopy
Endoscopy showed an increased duodenal granularity, hyperaemia and friability (Fig
26.1). Results of the histopathology of the gastric and small intestinal biopsies showed
an increased in filtration of eosinophils, consistent with eosinophilic inflammatory
bowel disease.
Fig 26.1
Endoscopy picture of the small intestine of a dog with eosinophilic inflammatory bowel
disease. There is roughening of the mucosa with small pinpoint haemorrhagic areas
Clinical tip on inflammatory bowel disease scoring
A scoring index for canine inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) (the canine IBD activity index or
CIBDAI) has been developed. The canine IBD activity index includes:
A. attitude/activity
B. appetite
C. vomiting
D. stool consistency
E. stool frequency
F. weight loss
These six variables are scored 0 to 3:
0 = normal
1 = mild change
 2 = moderate change
3 = severe change
 The summary of these six variables gives the total composite CIBDAI score, which is interpreted as:
0 to 3 = clinically insignificant disease
4 to 5 = mild IBD
6 to 8 = moderate IBD
9 or greater = severe IBD
The CIBDAI has shown correlation with the acute phase protein reactant C reactive protein and
severity of histology changes. Following treatment for IBD both the CIBDAI and serum C reactive
protein decreased.
To calculate the CIBDAI score in this dog the following were used: a mild decrease in
his activity (1), no change in his appetite (0), a moderate change in his faecal quality
(2) moderate amount of vomiting (2) and moderate weight loss (2), for a score of 7 or
moderate IBD.
Treatment and outcome
This dog was initially treated with prednisolone at 2 mg/kg po q 24 hours,
subcutaneous cobalamin injections of 500 μg per week for 4 weeks and fenbendazole
at 50 mg/kg po q 24 hours for 3 days. The owner did not wish to change the food, so
he continued to feed the commercial lamb and rice diet.
At 19 days, there was no response to treatment and the dog had vomited after being
fed pancakes. Prednisolone was continued and the dog was changed on to a single
novel protein, gluten-free, highly digestible diet.
At 37 days, the dog was still occasionally vomiting and the stools were loose. The
At the day 42 check up, the owner had been giving prednisolone, but had added
potatoes, gravy, bread and poultry to the diet and there was no improvement in the
S t  o     sa  d  ss 
At the day 56 check up, the owner reported that he had complied with the dietary
and medication therapies. The dog had gained 1 kg and his stools were soft but
formed. The prednisolone dose was decreased to 1.25 mg/kg po q 24 hours and a
therapeutic plan was made to decrease the dose about 20% every 3 weeks, uintil the
dose was less than 0.5 mg/kg q 24 hours, when it was to be changed to an every other
day regime.
At the day 120 check up, the owner reported that he had stopped giving
prednisolone. The dog had gained 2.5 kg and the stools were still soft to firm and he
was much brighter and more active. The serum albumin and globulins were within
the reference range.
Discussion
This dog did not improve until wheat products were eliminated from the diet and the
medical treatment (prednisolone) did not work without dietary intervention.
Because of the response to an elimination diet, it is highly likely that this dog had
an adverse reaction to food. In order to determine what ingredient caused the reaction
and to confirm that the response was due to an adverse reaction to food, a food
challenge would have been necessary.
Clinical tip
Elimination-challenge dietary trials confirm or rule out adverse reactions to food, but do not
establish an immune mediated basis (hypersensitivity) for the reaction. It is however, probably not
important to establish an immune mediated basis as it does not change the management of the case.
The elimination trial involves putting the patient on a restricted diet of a single protein source and
a single carbohydrate source. The diet used should contain ingredients to which the animal has not
previously been exposed. There is no universal “hypoallergenic diet' containing intact proteins, as
 s   q snad s     an n sd s
often recommended; however, 20% of the dogs having no signs when fed a homemade diet show signs
when fed a canned diet with the same constituents. Another option is to use a commercial diet with
hydrolyzed protein. Supplements with n-3 or n-6 fatty acids should not be given, as they may cause
allergic reactions in animals that are allergic to fish.
In a study on food sensitive cats with gastrointestinal signs there was an immediate cessation of
vomiting and a decrease in diarrhoea within 3 to 4 days, in most of the cats after feeding a novel
protein diet. Most of these cats also showed a recrudescence of signs after 3 to 5 days of an antigenic
challenge.
After a 2-week period with no clinical signs, a small amount of a second protein source (e.g. one-
half to two tablespoons of powdered milk) to which the animal has been previously exposed can be
added to the controlled diet and fed for 3 days - or less if signs are observed. This procedure is
 repeated weekly until a suspect food appears to cause the signs. After the suspect food is identified,
remove that protein source from the diet and observe for evidence of resolution of signs. After 1 to 2
weeks of no signs, challenge the animal with the suspect food again.
This owner, as are many, was reluctant to challenge the animal after the resolution
S          e   s 
The diet fed in cases like this should be palatable, complete and balanced. Use of a
high quality commercial gluten free, moderate to low fat, lactose free diet with limited
antigens and few additives may work well in these cases. In some cases it is difficult to
find a protein source which has not been fed; in these cases use of a hydrolyzed
protein diet or one which has not been fed for the previous 6 months may be tried.
While many of these patients are underweight, as was this one, excess dietary fat
shouild be avoided during small intestinal malassimilation as malabsorbed fatty acids
and bile acids can cause secretory diarrhoea
It may have been possible to manage this case with dietary therapy alone; however,
immune suppressive drugs such as prednisolone.
The lack of owner compliance with diet and medications in this case complicated
the management and prolonged the time to recovery. Many medications are not given
according to directions and clinicians must be sensitive to the owners’ ability and
willingness to administer medications and control the diet. Asking clients in a non.
judgmental manner if they are having any problems giving the prescribed medication
 n n  sse o   s s  ss   e 
difficulties clients may have in giving medications to pets. If a client does not admit to
    e o   n   s  s
Prognosis
In one retrospective study, only 26% of 80 cases of IBD were considered to be in
remission at a 6-month follow-up. Many of the dogs (about 50%) showed intermittent
signs of disease and most of these (65%) were still on treatment. The presence of
hypoalbuminaemia  is a  negative prognostic indicator  and  an  elevated  canine
27
Intussusception in a cat
Initial presentation
Diarrhoea and poor appetite
   o       s
Case history
The cat lived at a rescue centre and was brought in with a 3-day history of poor
appetite and having watery diarrhoea. She had been at the rescue centre for about a
month and had not been vaccinated or de-wormed during that time as she was
pregnant when admitted there. She was nursing two 3-week-old kittens at admission
        sa    
There was no blood or mucus present in the cat's diarrhoea. It was not known how
frequently she was defecating, but she had not been observed to be straining to
defecate. The staff at the rescue centre did not believe that she had been vomiting, but
were unsure about that part of the history. She did not appear to be drinking or
lirinating more than previously.
Her previous history was not known as she had come to the rescue centre as a stray
cat.
Physical examination
The cat was bright and alert. There was evidence of recent weight loss and she was
estimated to be about 6% dehydrated. Her body condition score was 3/9. Her mucous
membranes were pink with a capillary refill time of <2 seconds. Her heart rate was
 a           s 
were increased ronchii heard, but no other abnormal lung sounds. It was thought that
She had large mammary glands, appropriate for lactation, but there was no heat or
abnormal swelling in them. A firm structure was palpated within her abdomen, which
was thought to be possibly faeces within the colon, an intussusception or a uterine
disorder.
Problem list and discussion of problems
The cat's problems included diarrhoea, poor appetite, which was thought to be related
to the diarrhoea and the firm structure palpated within the abdomen.
Differential diagnosis
For the diarrhoea
The diarrhoea was thought to be small bowel in origin; differentials include:
· Intestinal disorders
· inflammatory bowel disease, e.g plasmacytic/lymphocytic, eosinophilic, other
• infectious (viral, bacterial [enterotoxins], fungal - although fungal unlikely in the UK)
· intussusception
* parasites, e.g. Giardia, cryptosporidium, Strongyloides, ascarids, hookworms, Toxoplasma gondii
 neoplasia, e.g. lymphoma, mastocytosis
 lymphangiectasia (uncommon in cats)
· ileus, e.g. hypokalaemia, enteritis, dysautonomia
· antibiotic responsive diarrhoea
· Pancreatic disorders
· pancreatic exocrine insufficiency
* chronic pancreatitis
· Liver disorders
· liver failure
· intrahepatic cholestasis
• bile duct obstruction
· Kidney disease and uraemia
· Hyperthyroidism
· Congestive heart failure
* Hypoadrenocorticism (uncommon in cats)
For the firm structure
· Intussusception
· Uterine disorder, e.g. infection, retained kitten or placenta
· Colonic disorder or retained faeces
Case work-up
Minimum data base
Intravenous fluids at a rate to correct 6% dehydration were initiated. Haematology
showed a neutrophilia of 16.3 x 10%/1 (reference range 2.5-12.8 x 10*/) and
monocytes of 2.14 x 10°/1 (reference range: 0.07-0.85 x 10°/l) thought to have been
consistent with an inflammatory process. Serum chemistry parameters were within
the reference ranges. Tests for feline leukaemia virus and feline immunodeficiency
virus were negative using a SNAP ComborM test.
Imaging
Thoracic radiographs showed no abnormalities. Abdominal ultrasound showed a 6-cm
long section of small intestine in the mid-cranial abdomen with the characteristic
multiple layering of an intussusception (Figs 27.1 and 27.2). At the tip of the
intussusceptum there was a round septated hypoechoic to anechoic structure present
within the intussuiscipiens which was suspected to be an abscess.
NTESTINE
Fig 27.1
INTESTINE
Figs 27.1 and 27.2
 Transverse and sagittal ultrasound pictures of an intussusception in a cat
showing the ‘doughnut' appearance in the transverse, and the double layering of the intestine in the
sagittal
(courtesy of Carolina Urraca del Junco)
Treatment and outcome
Presurgical medical management
The cat was started on intravenous clavulanate-potentiated amoxicillin (20 mg/kg q 8
    a      o n 
enough for anaesthesia and surgery.
Clinical tip
 Medical management of intussusception is generally not possible, so the primary treatment is
surgical.  Surgical management of intussusception  involves  reduction and/or  resection  and
anastomosis. Upon identifying the intussusception, it is isolated and packed off from the peritoneal
  ds    n   si  sod a 
intussuscipiens. The ensheathing layer is gently compressed over the apex of the intussusceptum
while gentle traction is placed on the ileum. In relatively acute cases, reduction is usually
accomplished and bowel viability is closely scrutinized. When mature adhesions have formed
between the invaginated and ensheathing layers, as in this cat, reduction is usually not possible and
resection and anastomosis are performed.
In some cases, following reduction and/or resection and anastomosis of the intussusception, a
bowel plication or enteropexy technique is performed.
Surgical treatment
In this case, surgery proceeded with a routine midline incision through the linea alba
located a jejuno-jejunal intussusception. The intussusception proved to be non-
reducible, as the serosa started to tear when reduction was attempted. The affected
piece of bowel was resected with an oblique cut made on the oral side and a straight
cut on the aboral side. The oral side of the intestine was spatulated and an end-to-end
anastomosis was performed. A rouitine ovariohysterectomy was performed at the same
surgery. The excised loop of intestine was submitted to histopathology to look for an
underlying cauise.
The histopathology of the biopsy of the resected intestine was described as
appearing to be a classic intussusception with a necrotic intussuscepted portion of
bowel surrounded by degenerating compressed proximal bowel. There were many
bacterial colonies present thought to be commensal bacteria proliferating in the
the invaginated part of the intestine that was thought to have been a scarred or
healing segment that could have been predisposed to abnormal peristalsis and be the
cauise of the intussusception.
Postoperative care
After surgery the cat was continued on intravenous fluids, antibiotics and analgesia
with morphine. Her rectal temperature increased that night to 40.3? C, but decreased
the next morning to 39.0° C without intervention. Enrofloxacin (5 mg/kg iv q 24
hours) was added to her antibiotic treatments.
Clinical tip on use of enrofloxacin in cats
In cats, use of enrofloxacin has caused rare incidences of ocular toxicity characterized by
mydriasis, retinal degeneration and blindness. These effects were generally seen at higher dosage
ranges (>15 mg/kg) and have necessitated a reduction in dosage recommendations in cats to a
maximum of 5 mg/kg/day. Other rare adverse effects seen in cats may include: vomiting. anorexia.
elevated hepatic enzymes, diarrhoea, ataxia, seizures, depression/lethargy, vocalization and
aggression.
After 2 days, the cat was bright and had a good appetite. She was initially offered
one-third of her resting energy requirement (RER) of food. Initially it was planned to
increase her feed to 1o0% of resting energy requirement by day 3, but after the first
day of feeding she had diarrhoea again, so she was kept at one-third of RER. The
diarrhoea resolved 3 days later.
Ouitcome
Prior to discharging the cat back to the rescue centre, she was de-wormed with 5 days
of fenbendazole at 50 mg/kg/day po. At her re-visit appointment 5 days later she was
very bright and eating well and the diarrhoea had resolved.
Discussion and epidemiology
So    o  n     o s  s
study suggested that in cats, intussusception has a bimodal age distribution and half
of 20 cases were seen in cats less than 1 year of age and nearly half were over 9 years
of age. In the older cats it was often associated with alimentary lymphoma or
inflammatory bowel disease. In dogs, 8o% of the cases of intussusception are in
patients less than 1 year of age. Generally there is no increased risk for any breed
reported, although in one study over-represented breeds included Siamese and
Burmese cats. There is no increased risk reported with gender or neuitering.
The exact biomechanical cause of the condition is unknown and it has not been
reproduced experimentally. It appears that there is a focal area with inhibited normal
propulsive and segmental motility. When a wave of peristalsis moves over the affected
area, a proximal bowel segment invaginates (becoming the intussusceptum) into a
distal section of bowel (the intussuscipiens). Three layers of bowel wall are essentially
(Fig 27.3).
Obstruction of the small
intestine caused by the
Congested mesenteric
telescoping ofa segment of
blood vessels
intestine into an adjacent
segment
A loopofbowel within an
adjacent segment of intestine
The mesentery and
blood vessels supporting
the invaginating segment
ofbowel are included in
the intussusception
Ingesta
Apex
Intussusceptum-theinvaginated segment
Intussuscipiens-the envelopingreceiving sheath
Fig 27.3
llustration of an intussusception showing the invaginated intussusceptum and  the
invaginating intussuscipiens
Heavy intestinal parasitism with ascarids or coccidia as well as severe enteritis are
possible predisposing causes and as a rescue cat, the chances of parasitism in this case
were thought to be high. Other causes include intestinal viral infection, linear foreign
bodies, intestinal tumours and adhesions. Intussusceptions are also seen with
increasing frequency after laparotomy on elective or non-elective intra-abdominal
procedures.
intussusceptions in dogs  occur  at  the ileocecocolic junction  but jejuno-jejunal
reported. In one study the location was most commonly jejuno-jejunal in cats.
     s  e 
sporadic vomiting, inappetence or bloody stools. If jejuno-jejunal intussusceptions like
this one do not cause a complete obstruction, it is possible for them to be chronic and
have subtle clinical signs. With more complete obstructions, fluid and electrolyte
imbalances occur with the distension of the intestines and the nuimber of bacteria
proximal  to  the obstruction increases dramatically resulting  in  potential
endotoxaemia.
Ultrasonography aids in the diagnosis of intussusception of the intestine. The
          
  '     s   ,  s s
concentric layers of bowel wall within the intussuscepted segment (Fig 27.1). On
longitudinal scan, an intussusception has the appearance of a thickened segment of
bowel with an excessive number of layers that alternate in echogenicity (Fig 27.2). It
should be noted that other gastrointestinal disorders can also cause ^target’ or ^buill's
the lesion must be examined in a longitudinal plane as well.
In most cases, the obstruction is incomplete and a chronic course of poor appetite.
diarrhoea or bloody tenesmus is seen for several weeks.
In the majority of reported feline intussusception cases, resection and anastomosis
of the intestine was necessary. Enteroplication of the intestines after surgery for
intussusception used to be routinely recommended, although one study found no
was not done and it is not without potential complications.
Although the invaginated bowel may become devitalized, perforation resulting in
peritonitis is relatively rare because the outer ensheathing layer retains its viability
and fibrinous adhesions seal the proximal border of the intussusception. Occasionally
spontaneous recovery occurs when the nonviable intussusceptum is sloughed and
patency of the intestinal lumen is re-established.
Prognosis
Prognosis for a suiccessful outcome after surgery is good; with over 80% of reported
cases doing well, although the number of cases reported is low.
28
Feline exocrine pancreatic insufficiency
Case contributed by Nicki Reed
Initial presentation
Weight loss, diarrhoea, steatorrhoea and vomiting
Signalment: 7-year-old, male neutered domestic shorthaired cat, body weight 3.33 kg
Case history
This cat presented for investigation of weight loss, diarrhoea, steatorrhoea and
vomiting, which were accompanied by a good appetite.
The cat had been acquired 5 years previously and lived indoors. He had received
core vaccinations and regular boosters, but no endo-or ectoparasiticides. His episodes
of diarrhoea had occurred since acquisition. The diarrhoea was usually semi-formed
and brown and would usually resolve without treatment after 2 to 3 days. The
episodes occurred approximately six to eight times per year. The nature of the
diarrhoea had changed approximately 3 months prior to presentation. The faeces were
described as voluminous, greasy and malodorous and had also previously been white
in colour. During defecation the cat did not strain and there was no blood or mucus in
the faeces.
Occasional episodes of vomiting (one to three times per year) were also reported.
The vomitus generally comprised semi-digested food. In the 3 months prior to
presentation the cat's appetite had increased. He was eating a 450 g tin of commercial
canned cat food and approximately 50 g of dried biscuits per day.
The cat had always been overweight (previously 6 kg) but there had been a steady
weight loss since his last vaccination 8 months previously.
Physical examination
The cat was in poor body condition (body condition score 2/9), but otherwise bright
  s o  n   sa  s m 
intestines felt fluid filled, but the cat did not appear uncomfortable during palpation.
Thoracic auscultation was unremarkable. His heart rate was 160 beats per minute
with matched good quality pulses, respiratory rate 28 breaths per minute and rectal
temperature 37.9? C. There was faecal soiling around the perineum.
Problem list and discussion of problems
The primary problems were weight loss and diarrhoea, but the presence of a good
appetite helped to narrow the differential diagnoses list and the vomiting and weight
loss were thought to be related to the diarrhoea in this case. The clinical signs were
consistent with diarrhoea due to small intestinal disease.
Differential diagnosis
Differential diagnoses for diarrhoea in this cat include:
· Maldigestion
· exocrine pancreatic insufficiency (EPl)
· Malabsorption
· inflammatory bowel disease (lymphocytic-plasmacytic, eosinophilic, granulomatous)
* lymphoma
 Metabolic disorders
* hyperthyroidism
· diabetes mellitus
· Gastrointestinal parasites
· Pancreatitis
* Lymphocytic cholangitis
The presence of steatorrhoeic, malodorous faeces suggested a maldigestion problem was most
likely.
Case work-up
Routine haematology, serum biochemistry and urinalysis were performed as a
minimum data base. Total thyroxine was also measured to screen  for
hyperthyroidism. Results were all within the reference range, with the exception of
alanine aminotransferase (ALT), which was markedly elevated at 865 IU/l (reference
range 20-75 IU/) and alkaline phosphatase which was elevated at 124 1U/1 (reference
   1a   1m s   s   
be negative.
More specific investigations for the gastrointestinal tract were performed. Feline
measured to assess for malabsorption of these vitamins. Folate and fPLI were both
1499 ng/l) and fTLI was also low at 9.2 μg/1 (reference range 12.0-82.0 μg/l).
Abdominal ultrasonography was performed, primarily to evaluate the liver and
pancreas. The liver appeared grossly normal and although the pancreas was identified,
it appeared small. In light of the raised liver enzymes, a liver biopsy was felt to be
useful; however, prior to this being performed an assessment was made of clotting
times. Whilst the activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) was normal, the
          
seconds). The liver biopsy was thus deferred
Diagnosis
The history, clinical examination findings and the sub-normal fTLI were supportive of
           
EPI in cats and prolongation of the PT is attributed to Vitamin K deficiency.
Treatment options
Pancreatic enzyme replacement
A number of commercial pancreatic enzyme replacement products are available in
powder or capsule form. Supplementation should be in a non enteric-coated
formulation, as enteric coating has been shown to reduce the amount of available
enzyme in the duodenum. The amount administered should relate to the amount of
food fed, rather than the body weight of the animal and should be provided with each
meal fed. Palatability appears to be more problematic with cats than with dogs.
sprinkled on each meal of canned food and he was willing to eat the supplemented
food.
A number of cats have refused to eat food containing enzyme replacement powder
alternative if it can be sourced. Bovine pancreas is not covered by the Specified Bovine
Offal Order of 1995 and therefore may be used. Pig pancreas may be more appropriate
Informed written consent should be obtained from owners, as the risk of contracting
food poisoning organisms such as Salmonella, Escherichia coli and Toxoplasma
         s 
of pancreas should be mixed with each meal. Although no published data exist
regarding the duration of efficacy following freezing, in the author's experience,
pancreas that has been frozen for up to 8 months still appears to retain its enzymatic
function.
Cobalamin
Replacement of pancreatic enzymes does not address the lack of intrinsic factor (see
Clinical Tip in Ch 5). Cobalamin replacement is therefore required on a permanent
basis and as the lack of intrinsic factor prevents absorption from the ileum this must
be replaced parenterally. Variable doses have been reported. This cat was given 250 μg
at 179 μg/, so the dose was increased to 500 μg subcutaneously weekly. His serum
later, so the frequency of the injections was decreased to monthly. Many owners can
be taught to do these injections at home, in the same way diabetic owners will
administer insuilin
Folate
Cobalamin deficiency can affect the intestinal villi, leading to malabsorption, which
may cause folate deficiency. Folate levels should therefore be assessed and
supplemented orally if found to be low (400 μg/day), although in this cat they were
within the reference range at diagnosis
Vitamin K
If a prolonged PT (and/or APTT) is identified, as in this cat, where the PT was
             
prevent potential bleeding problems. Vitamin K, was administered subcutaneously
using a fine gauge needle to minimize the risk of haematoma formation, at a dose of
2.5 mg/kg. Oral supplementation was not initially used at it may be less satisfactory
was within the reference range within 24 hours. As in most cases, once enzyme
Diet
If the above management strategies had not been fully effective, then consideration
would have been given to dietary manipulation. Whilst use of a low fat diet has been
proposed, there is little evidence to support that this is necessary. Inflammatory bowel
disease is often associated with pancreatitis. This may arise from bacteria being
S            
lymphocytic plasmacytic infiltrate of the pancreas in association with lymphocytic
plasmacytic infiltrate of the intestine (and liver). The combination of pancreatitis,
inflammatory bowel disease and hepatopathy is sometimes termed triaditis. Cats with
EPI may therefore benefit from management of inflammatory bowel disease with a
Discuission
EPI is a functional disorder of the pancreas, whereby inadequate production of
digestive enzymes results in signs of maldigestion. The primary digestive enzymes
involved are trypsin for the digestion of proteins, amylase for the digestion of
carbohydrates and lipase for the digestion of fats. Deficiency of these enzymes gives
rise to maldigestion of food, production of voluminous fatty stools and suibsequent
weightloss.
Pn   e      n   s i
glands responsible for the production of digestive enzymes. It is proposed that in some
           
attributed to destruction from chronic pancreatitis and the history of this case is
suggestive of bouts of pancreatitis (with likely concurrent cholangitis).
monoglycerides and fatty acids, resuilting in the production of steatorrhoea. It is the
rancid fat in the faeces that gives rise to their malodorous nature. In addition,
absorption of fat-soluble vitamins (A, D, E and K) may be compromised. Vitamin K is
the shortest half-life, therefore the extrinsic clotting cascade, as measured by the PT, is
affected before the intrinsic clotting cascade, as measured by the APTT (Fig 28.1).
XII
X
VIlI
Intrinsic Clotting Cascade
Extrinsic Clotting Cascade
Evaluated byaPTT
Evaluated by PT
Vitamin K Dependent
Common Clotting Cascade
Clotting factors, Il,Vll,IX and X
EvaluatedbyPTand aPTT
Fig 28.1
The clotting cascade
Cobalamin absorption requires intrinsic factor. In dogs, intrinsic factor is produced
partially by the stomach, whereas in cats it is produced exclusively by the pancreas. In
addition to deficiency of digestive enzymes, cats with EPl are also deficient in
intrinsic factor, which in turn leads to an inability to absorb adequate cobalamin.
Cobalamin deficiency may be found in association with canine EPl, and may be
worth checking in poorly responsive patients, as deficiency of cobalamin can lead to
villous atrophy and malabsorption.
Epidemiology
               
German shepherd dogs and Rough collies, but may be under-recognized in cats. One
study gave an incidence of only 11 cases out of 180,648 submissions (0.006%),
although this was a post-mortem based study. The majority of cats with EPl are
middle aged to older, which reflects the underlying pathogenesis of chronic
Prognosis
Although this is a lifelong condition, the prognosis for control is usually reasonable,
provided the cat tolerates the enzyme replacement. Typical of many cats, this cat
responded rapidly to treatment (Fig 28.2). Owners should be advised of the potential
for the cat to develop diabetes mellitus as both conditions share the same aetiology,
i.e. recurrent/chronic pancreatitis. Diabetes mellitus would appear to be the more
common outcome with chronic pancreatitis and whilst it is possible for the cat to
develop both conditions, this rarely appears to happen. The reason why some cats
appear to have damage to the exocrine pancreas more than the endocrine pancreas is
not known.
Fig28.2
The cat after 6 weeks of treatment showing weight gain and improvement in coat
condition
Nursing aspects
Cats with EPl develop a greasy coat as a result of fat malabsorption and cobalamin deficiency. In
addition, their coats may become soiled with faecal matter, particularly if longhaired. Bathing with an
anti-seborrhoeic shampoo may be beneficial until clinical signs are controlled.
Clinical tips on treatment of feline EPI
Regular monitoring of cobalamin and  folate levels with appropriate supplementation is
recommended. Measurement of cobalamin by competitive chemiluminescent enzyme immunoassay
appears to be more reliable than measurement by radioimmunoassay, therefore checking which
method the laboratory uses may be worthwhile.
· If pig pancreas can be sourced, then approximately one-third of a pig pancreas is an appropriate
 portion per meal. Wrapping each pancreas in cling film prior to freezing means an individual
pancreas can be removed from the freezer for defrosting each day.
· Feline TLI can be increased by renal disease or feeding. therefore this should be borne in mind if a
low normal value is obtained in a cat with typical clinical signs. Re-evaluation of a fasted sample
 should be performed if there is strong clinical suspicion. Values <8 μg/L has a reported specificity
0f 85 to 100%.
29
Parvovirus infection in a dog
Initial presentation
Acute haemorrhagic diarrhoea and vomiting with some streaks of blood in vomitus
Signalment: 5-month-old entire male Rottweiler puppy, body weight 20.0 kg
Case history
presentation he had become dull. He had started to retch and then to vomit bile
stained fluid. This progressed to vomiting blood stained fluid and the presence of
appearing blood (melaena) and some bright red blood present. There was no mucus in
         s       
onset of the vomiting and was also not drinking.
He had been de-wormed with  febantel and  praziquantel  1 month prior  to
presentation. He had been vaccinated against parvovirus, adenovirus, parainfluenza
and distemper once after the owner obtained him from the breeder at 6 weeks of age.
He had not received a booster vaccination. His usual diet was a commercial dry puppy
food.
Physical examination
On presentation the puppy was extremely depressed. He had a body condition score of
4/9. His mucous membranes were slightly dry and pale pink, with a capillary refill
time of 3 seconds. A skin tent was present. He was drooling, which was thought likely
to be due to nausea. His heart rate was 90 beats per minute with somewhat weak
peripheral pulses. Respiratory rate was 40 breaths per minute and rectal temperature
was 39.6° C. There were bloody faeces present on the thermometer.
Problem list discuission of problems
The puppy's main problems were acute haemorrhagic diarrhoea and vomiting. While
there was some fresh blood present in the faeces, the diarrhoea was thought to be
primarily small intestinal in origin. The vomiting and diarrhoea were combined for
the differential lists in this puppy as the concurrent onset suggested a single disorder.
Differential diagnosis
Potential causes of acute vomiting and haemorrhagic diarrhoea in this puppy included:
• Parvovirus infection
· Intussusception or intestinal volvulus
· Hookworms
· Caustic agents
· Medications (e.g. corticosteroids, NSAIDs)
· Haemorrhagic gastroenteritis
· Severe acute pancreatitis
· Neoplasia and exocrine pancreatic insufficiency are unlikely due to his young age
Clinical tip on haemorrhagic diarrhoea
Haemorrhagic diarrhoea has a characteristic odour - once smelled, not easily forgotten. This odour
is associated with other causes of haemorrhagic diarrhoea and is not specific for parvovirus enteritis
Case work-up
Emergency diagnostic tests and treatment
The puppy was admitted for diagnostic tests and treatment and was housed in an
isolation unit to prevent spread of a possibly contagious disease to other animals.
Nursing tip for infectious diseases
With cases of possibly infectious disease, patients should be kept in an area separate from other
patients, especially those patients that may be immunocompromised (e.g. on corticosteroids or
chemotherapeutic agents, elderly or young patients). Gloves and protective clothing should be worn
to handle the patient and the same materials should not be worn when handling other patients.
 Scrupulous washing of hands and a dip bath or covers for shoes should also be used. When possible,
different staff members should handle a potentially infected case than those handling other patients,
especially immunocompromised patients. A thermometer should be kept for use in the potentially
infected patient only and a cover used on the thermometer. Stethoscopes and any other equipment
used should be cleaned after use or kept only for that patient.
d  '    Si    a   Ss
kennel cleaning should be done with bleach at 1 : 32 dilution (half cup bleach per gallon water).
Also note that hand sanitizers are probably not viricidal since they are alcohol-based.
The puppy was estimated to be approximately 8% dehydrated. A balanced
intravenous crystalloid fluid therapy (lactated Ringers) was initiated at 116 ml/hour.
Clinical tip
Calculation of intravenous fluid amounts
Fluid therapy is calculated based on the amounts needed for maintenance, rehydration and to
replace ongoing losses. Maintenance requirements are 40 to 60 ml/kg/24 hour. In this puppy, they
were calculated as: 20 kg × 60 ml/kg = 1200 ml/24 hour or 50 ml/hour. The upper end of the
 maintenance requirement was used in this dog as he was a puppy and they have a larger percentage
of body weight as fluid compared to increased body fat in adult animals. Usually the lower end is
used for large breed dogs.
To correct his hydration over 24 hours, his body weight times his percent dehydration was used:
20 kg x 0.08% = 1.6 1 (1600 ml)/24 hours or 66 ml/hour. This was added to the maintenance
amount so that the initial fluid rate was 1l6 ml/hour. The dehydration could also have been
corrected in a shorter time period, e.g. 10 to 12 hours with a faster fluid rate (210 ml/hour for 10
hours or 183 ml/hour for 12 hours).
Estimates of the amount of fluid lost in vomiting or diarrhoea may be added to the maintenance
plus rehydration rates. The hydration status should be re-evaluated frequently (hourly while on the
fast rates) to determine if the rate should be changed and to assess for overhydration.
Clinical tip
Choice of fluids
For rehydration a crystalloid fluid containing some electrolytes is usually appropriate. With
dehydration due to diarrhoea and most cases of vomiting (other than those caused by upper
gastrointestinal tract obstruction), the patient is in a state of metabolic acidosis due to decreased
tissue perfusion. Buffered crystalloid intravenous solutions such as lactated Ringers are more
alkalinizing than 0.9% sodium chloride and may help correct the acidosis, although reperfusion of
the tissues is the most crucial part of the treatment.
Emergency minimum data base
Haematology showed a marked neutropenia of 0.06 x 10*/l (reference range 3.0-
12.0), a lymphopenia of 0.4 x 10*/1 (reference range 0.5-4.99). His packed cell volume
(PCV) was 0.322 1/1, at the bottom end of the reference range used (0.32-0.55 1/l);
however, he was dehydrated so the true value of his PcV would likely have been lower
upon rehydration. Haemorrhagic diarrhoea can result in a rapid decrease in PCV.
An in-house electrolyte analysis showed a decreased serum potassium concentration
of 2.9 mmol/l, reference ranges 3.6-5.6 mmol/l, with the serum sodium and chloride
within the reference ranges. A decreased serum potassium concentration is common
in gastrointestinal disorders and can result in further gastrointestinal ileus. Treatment
was potassium chloride added at 15 mEquiv/l of fluid.
Clinical tip on potassium supplementation
For maintenance fluids, the rates of potassium supplementation based on serum concentrations are:
 Serum con cen tration
mEquiv KCl to add per litre
< 2.0 mEquiv/
80
2.1-2.5 mEquiv/l
60
2.6-3.0 mEquiv/l
40
3.1-3.5 mEquiv/l
20
As this puppy's fluid rate was over twice maintenance, his added amount of potassium was
decreased proportionally. There are 4 mEquiv/l of KCl in lactated Ringers, so the addition of 15
mEquiv brought the amount in his fluids to 19 mEquiv/l (run at over twice maintenance), which is
approximately equivalent to adding 40 mEquiv/l as required by his serum potassium of 2.9 mEquiv/l.
Additional medical treatment
In addition to rehydration and correction of hypokalaemia, his treatment included
intravenous ampicillin (20 μg/kg q 8 hours), metronidazole (10 mg/kg slow iv q 12
hours), ranitidine (2 mg/kg sq q 12 hours), buprenorphine (0.02 mg/kg sq q 8 hours)
and constant rate metoclopramide (1 mg/kg over 24 hours in the iv fluids).
Antibiotics are indicated in cases with diarrhoea when there is blood present in the
diarrhoea, as there is an increased risk of bacterial translocation across the intestinal
wall and sepsis.
Clinical tip on antibiotic use in parvovirus
While ampicillin was used in this case and is recommended by some clinicians, others believe that
trimethoprim sulfa drugs are a better broad spectrum choice as ampicillin may have a negative effect
on the normal gut flora and cause an overgrowth of bacteria such as Salmonella.
Nursing tip
Blood glucose should have been checked on this puppy! Puppies are at risk for hypoglycaemia,
especially with anorexia and gastrointestinal disease.
Clinical tip on anti-emetic drugs
Maropitant may have been a good additional choice of anti-emetic for this puppy, but was not yet
available when the puppy was presented. When metoclopramide is used for severe vomiting, a
constant rate infusion is better than SQ administration as the half-life is not long enough for
consistent efficacy. Metoclopramide and ranitidine both have promotility effects, which were
important in this case as ileus was present.
Nursing tip
Intravenous catheters should be well bandaged to keep them clean, especially in cases with
vomiting and diarrhoea. They should be checked and flushed several times a day for patency. Catheter
infections are a common cause of pyrexia so good hygiene is imperative. A rise in rectal temperature
in patients with intravenous catheters is often associated with inflammation at the catheter site.
A faecal SNAprM Parvo test was performed and was positive. As the signalment and
clinical signs were also consistent in this puppy, a diagnosis of parvovirus
gastroenteritis was made.
Clinical tip on parvovirus testing
 The ELISA faecal SNApm Parvo test is the most common in house test for parvovirus. The test does
have some limitations. Recent vaccination with a live vaccine may interfere with the test results
causing false positive readings. This interference usually occurs 5 to 12 days after vaccination so if a
 positive faecal ELISA SNApv test is obtained within this period after vaccination, additional tests may
be recommended. The test is highly sensitive (100%) and specific (99.9%).
   s       e sa  
blood and was vomiting.
A full haematology and serum chemistry was performed at a veterinary laboratory.
Haematology showed a decreased PCV of 0.30 1/1 (reference range 0.35-0.55 1/l).
White blood cell couints had improved, buit were still decreased with a neuitrophil count
of 2.1 x 10°/1 (reference range 3-12 x 10°/l) and a lymphocyte count of 0.47 x 10/l
(reference range 0.7-4.8 x 10°/l).
The puppy's ALP was increased to 422 IU/l. The reference range for ALP for this
    s --o  's e n n    sn l
expected to be increased, but usually in the range of two to three times the adult range
(i.e. probably not much greater than 180 IU/l). Gastrointestinal disease can also
increase ALP, so there was likely an increase due to illness in this puppy. Serum
phosphorus was also increased to 2.4 mmol/l, with the adult canine reference range
for this laboratory being 0.4 to 2.0 mmol/1. He was, however, within the reference
range for a growing puppy at 6 months of age, which is about 1.65 to 2.84 mmol/l.
Serum glucose was within the reference range at 5.0 mmol/1 (reference range 3.0-5.0
mmol/l).
n  s  s s     s
The reference ranges for several clinicopathological parameters are different in young growing
animals compared to adults and most laboratory reference ranges are those for adults. See Appendix
 5 for a table of some juvenile blood values.
supplementation and all other electrolytes were also within the reference ranges.
Serum albumin concentration was decreased at 17.6 g/l (reference range 26-35 g/l)
as was the globulin concentration of 17.5 g/l (18-37 g/). Serum albumin is decreased
in young puppies, but by the age of 4 months should be within adult reference ranges.
The decrease in this puppy is likely due to intestinal loses.
Outcome and further treatment
The puppy gradually improved over the next several days. He was first offered ice
cubes to lick and then small amounts of water. By the fourth day he was eating small
amounts of cooked  chicken.  An oral balanced  electrolyte  solution  containing
s  s s n    o  
Over the next few days his lymphocyte and neutrophil counts improved and serum
albumin and globulins increased.
Nursing tip on nutrition of vomiting patient
 If a patient that has been vomiting is offered water or food too soon, they may start vomiting again.
After 12 to 24 hours of no vomiting, allowing them to lick ice cubes is a good way to gently start
them back on oral intake, as they can only swallow very small amounts at a time. Use of oral fluids
that contain glutamate may provide some nutrition for the cells lining the intestinal tract, which have
usually been depleted during severe diarrhoea. The first foods offered need to be highly digestible
and low in fat, as the intestinal tract needs some time to adjust and re-develop digestive enzymes.
   s n l ani A e a a sad p   sndnd a
the rest of their lives.
Partial parenteral nutrition has been used successfully in puppies with parvovirus and provides
good short-term nutritional support. This may be administered through a peripheral vein and can be
utilized in a practice setting.
It has been shown that early enteral nutrition in dogs with parvovirus results in an earlier clinical
improvement and possibly an improved gut barrier function. Some people have recommended enteral
feeding by naso-oesophageal tube, but this should be well monitored to make sure the dog does not
vomit the tube and cause feeding in to the trachea.
Recombinant feline interferon (type omega) has also been recommended for use in
dogs with parvovirus and one study showed an improvement in clinical signs and
decreased mortality rates when this was administered at 2.5 million units/kg
intravenously once a day for 3 days.
for about another week, although the vomiting stopped and he was eating well.
Discussion and epidemiology
Canine parvovirus is widespread in the dog population and most dogs are exposed to
the virus either by vaccination or from contact with other dogs or dog faeces. The
virus can survive for about 5 to 7 months in faeces and contact with infected faeces is
the most common route of infection.
The incubation time is 3 to 8 days and shedding of the virus may occur prior to the
onset of clinical signs. Following ingestion of the virus, it replicates in the lymphoid
tissue of the oropharynx and then spreads to the bloodstream. The virus is deposited in
the rapidly dividing cells of the body, including the bone marrow and the epithelial
cells of the intestinal tract. The replication of virus in the lymphopoietic system and
bone marrow results in the lymphopenia and neutrophilia usually seen. The presence
of the replicating virus in the intestinal cells (Fig 29.1) causes depletion of the
intestinal villi and epithelial necrosis, resulting in the typical severe haemorrhagic
diarrhoea. Intestinal bacteria such as Clostridium perfringens and Escherichia coli
may translocate across the compromised intestine into the body and can cause sepsis
and death.
Virus particle
Thevirustypically
affectsthe small
intestine
Mitochondria
Nucleus
Golgiapparatus
品
Parvovirus infecting an intestinal epithelial cell
Fig 29.1
 Illustration of parvovirus infecting an epithelial cell.
Rottweilers, Labrador retrievers and Doberman pinschers appear to be predisposed
to the infection. Most cases occur in dogs less than 1 year of age and most often in
dogs from 6 to 18 weeks of age.
While this dog had been vaccinated, vaccine “breaks' (disease in the face of
vaccination) can occur. This is sometimes due to the effect of antibodies from the
beengiven.
A first parvovirus vaccination should be given between 6 and 9 weeks of age and a
second parvovirus vaccination should be given 3 to 4 weeks later. There is some
debate about whether the second vaccine should be given at 10 or 12 weeks of age. If
it is delayed until 12 weeks, this may mean keeping puppies away from other dogs
         s      
interact with other dogs for socialization purposes. However, maternal antibodies are
more likely to interfere with vaccines in puppies less than 12 weeks of age. In breeds
or individuals at risk, another vaccination at 14 to 16 weeks of age is appropriate. A
booster should be given 1 year later and then subsequent booster vaccinations every 3
years.
A diet supplemented with antioxidants, e.g. vitamins E and C, β-carotene and
selenium was shown in one study to result in an increased response to parvovirus
(and distemper) vaccination in puppies.
New strains of parvovirus (CPV-2a, 2b, 2c) have emerged since the original (CPV-2)
strain was identified in 1978. Novel CPV variants have also emerged in cats and dogs.
Vaccines against the original strain can confer protection against the new strains, but
disease outbreaks have been reported. Generally dogs with partial immunity from
vaccination have a less severe form of the disease.
Prognosis
   m            
rate without treatment has been estimated to be as high as 91%, but with aggressive
supportive therapy decreases to 5 to 20%. Deaths are now less common than when the
disease first arose in the 1970s. The improvement in mortality may be due to
improved immunity, decreased virulence and/or improved treatment.
Haematochezia and Melaena
30
Introduction to haematochezia and melaena
Blood may be present in diarrhoea of either large or small intestinal origin;
however, sometimes the passing of blood is the predominant presenting clinical
feature. Melaena refers to a dark tarry appearance to the stool which is caused by the
presence of digested blood. The dark colour is due to the oxidation of haemoglobin and
the tarry appearance is due to bacterial breakdown of haemoglobin. In dogs 300 to 500
mg/kg of haemoglobin must be present in the upper gastrointestinal (Gl) tract before
melaena is visually present, so its absence does not rule out GI bleeding.
In humans, blood must be present in the Gl tract for at least 8 hours to turn a black
colour, so a slow colonic transit time can cause melaenic stools from bleeding from a
colonic area. Generally though, melaena is due to bleeding from the proximal Gl tract
or swallowed blood from a nasal, oral, oesophageal, pharyngeal or respiratory tract
lesion. The use of salicylates, bismuth or charcoal can colouir the faeces black as well.
Haematochezia is the presence of bright red blood in the faeces. If fresh blood is
present on the outside of the faeces it is more likely to be from the distal colon or
rectuim.
Confirming the presence of melaena should be performed using a faecal occult blood
test after the patient has been fed a meat-free diet for 3 days. In patients with
lindiagnosed anaemia, a faecal occult blood test should also be performed, as smaller
amounts of GI bleeding can result in an apparently normal coloured stool.
Differential diagnoses for melaena include:
· Swallowed blood, e.g. from oro-nasal lesions
· Oesophageal disorders, e.g. ulcers, erosions, neoplasia
· Gastric causes, e.g. erosions or ulcers, severe gastritis, sharp foreign bodies,
neoplasia, drugs (NsAIDs, corticosteroids, iron overdose)
· Small intestinal disorders, e.g. ulcers, severe inflammation, neoplasia, foreign
bodies, hookworms
· GI ischaemia, e.g. due to shock, intussusception, volvulus
· Liver disease
· Pancreatitis (severe acute)
· Kidney disease causing uraemia
Differential diagnoses for haematochezia include:
· Colitis or proctitis
· Colonic or rectal tumour/polyp, stricture, infarct or foreign body
· Caecal inversion
· Colonic vascular ectasia
? 1leocaecal intussuisception
· Parasites, e.g. hookworms
· Small intestinal bleeding with rapid transit time (i.e. insufficient time for oxidation
of haemoglobin)
Diagnosing the cause of GI bleeding
The patient should be examined for evidence of non-GI tract bleeding such as a cough
resulting in haemoptysis or epistaxis. The mouith and pharynx should be examined for
with gastric bleeding.
Haematology may reveal anaemia. When chronic, an anaemia due to GI bleeding
may become microcytic, hypochromic and non-regenerative. Even occult bleeding can
cause a rapid drop in the packed cell volume and severe bleeding can cause a dramatic
decrease within hours. The blood urea nitrogen may increase due to digestion of
blood. A platelet count, buccal mucosal bleeding time and coagulation panel should be
performed to check for primary or secondary bleeding disorders. Unlike most other
increased packed cell voluime. This is likely because the fluid losses are more
pronounced than the loss of red blood cells, although the diarrhoea often appears
Procedures to localize the bleeding may include ultrasound, endoscopy and
exploratory surgery.
31
Haemorrhagic gastroenteritis in a dog
Initial presentation
Acute onset of haemorrhagic diarrhoea and vomiting
Signalment: 2-year-old neutered female German shorthaired pointer, body weight 29.1 kg
Case history
The dog had an acute onset of haemorrhagic diarrhoea and vomiting starting the
evening before presentation. On the evening of presentation she was lethargic and
was not willing to eat. The diarrhoea was liquid and contained large amounts of frank
blood. There was a little tenesmus, but she was producing a large volume of diarrhoeic
fluid. The vomitus initially contained digested food and then only bile tinged fluid.
The dog was last vaccinated 4 months earlier and had been dewormed with
fenbendazole 2 months prior to presentation. Her usual diet was a mixture of
commercial dry complete dog food and commercial canned food and she received
treats. She also scavenged and the owners said that it was possible but unlikely that
she could have eaten something from the rubbish.
Physical examination
 a   a     s   
good body condition (body condition score 5/9). Mucous membranes were moist, but
hyperaemic, with a relatively slow capillary refill time (CRT) at 3 seconds. Thoracic
auscultation revealed no abnormalities other than an increased heart rate of 200 beats
per minute. Her respiratory rate was 16 breaths per minute. Peripheral pulse quality
was poor, with weak thready pulses. Her peripheral lymph nodes appeared normal.
She appeared uncomfortable on palpation of her small intestines and the colon felt
enlarged and doughy. Rectal temperature was normal at 38.2? C, but there were dark
bloody faeces present on the thermometer.
Problem list and discussion of problems
The dog's problems included:
· Haemorrhagic diarrhoea
. Vomiting
· Decreased appetite
· Lethargy
· Tachycardia
The major problems for this dog were the profound haemorrhagic diarrhoea and the
vomiting. Lethargy, decreased appetite and probably tachycardia were likely to be
secondary to the underlying disorder. As the onset was acute, more chronic disorders
were not on the original differential diagnoses lists.
Differential diagnosis
For the acute haemorrhagic diarrhoea
· Idiopathic haemorrhagic gastroenteritis (HGE)
· Infectious causes: Parvovirus, Salmonella, Clostridium perfringens
· Amanita mushroom toxicity
• Warfarin toxicity
· Hypoadrenocorticism
* Intestinal volvulus
· Intussusception
* Shock
For acute onset vomiting
 Disorders of the stomach
· foreign body
 gastritis
 ulceration
· Disorders of the small intestine
· foreign body
· intussusception
· intestinal volvulus
· idiopathic HGE
· infectious diseases as for the diarrhoea (above)
· Disorders of the large intestine
· colitis
· Systemic disorders
 pancreatopathy
* hypoadrenocorticism
* peritonitis
· Dietary causes
· dietary sensitivity
· dietary indiscretion
Case work-up
The high heart rate and weak thready pulses were consistent with the onset of shock.
Treatment was initiated with shock doses of intravenous crystalloid fluids (60
ml/kg/hour) for the first hour. This was decreased to 30 ml/kg/hour after the first 30
minutes as her CRT and pulses improved.
Emergency minimum data base
As the dog presented as an emergency after regular opening hours, full laboratory
evaluation was not possible. A packed cell volume (PcV) run in house was 0.60 l/l
        o  
            
 11 5 1 s  1)  1 1   
(reference range 2.5-9.6 mmol/l) and creatinine was 147 μmol/1 (reference range 40-
132 μmol/l). Other parameters measured included serum alanine aminotransferase,
calcium, glucose, phosphorus and total bilirubin. The electrolytes sodium, potassium
and chloride were all at the higher end of the reference range. She did not urinate that
evening so a urinalysis was not performed. Faeces were collected for testing the
following day.
Clinical tip on dehydration effects on haematology and serum chemistry
parameters
Dehydration resulting in haemoconcentration can affect many parameters on the haematology and
 serum chemistry results, including increasing the PCV, white cell count, albumin, globulins, urea,
creatinine and sodium. These should be re-assessed after the patient is rehydrated. Abnormal values
may have been masked, e.g. a low albumin, and pre-renal azotaemia (an increase in serum urea and
creatinine due to decreased renal perfusion) may be improved.
The dog was maintained on intravenous fluids and administered the gut protectants
sucralfate at 5 ml po q 8 hours and ranitidine at 2 mg/kg sq q 8 hours. For analgesia
she was given buprenorphine at 20 μg/kg slowly iv q 8 hours and maropitant (1
mg/kg sq q 24 hours) was used as an anti-emetic. She was also given metronidazole at
10 mg/kg slowly iv q 12 hours.
Clinical tip on use of antibiotics in haemorrhagic diarrhoea
Many cases of diarrhoea are not responsive to antibiotics and their use is often not indicated. In
cases where there is melaena or haematochezia, the use of antibiotics is indicated, because bacterial
translocation from the intestine into the system is possible. Further, as Clostridium perfringens may
be part of the aetiology of HGE, antibiotics may help in treatment.
The following day the dog was brighter and had gained 2.8 kg from fluid
replacement (weight 31.9 kg). She still had diarrhoea containing blood, but had not
vomited since being administered maropitant.
Minimuim data base
Full haematology and serum chemistry  were performed. The PCV following
rehydration had decreased to 0.42 1/1 (reference range 0.37-0.55 1/l). Serum creatinine
and urea were within the reference ranges at 75 μmol/1 and 4.1 μmol/l, respectively.
Serum albumin and globulins had dropped below the reference ranges to 19.3g/l
(reference range 26-35 g/l) and 13.7 g/l (reference range 18-37 g/l). Calcium had also
decreased to 2.02 mmol/1 (reference range 2.3-3.0 mmol/l), likely due to the decrease
in albumin and concurrent decrease in albumin bound calcium.
Urine was negative for all parameters other than bilirubin (+1) on a chemical
strip, with a pH of 6.5. The urine specific gravity was 1.015 and the sediment was not
       a      g
rehydration causing a diuresis.
Faecal analysis
Faecal analysis for parasites including Giardia was negative. Faecal culture was
positive for Clostridium perfringens, but the faeces were negative for the Clostridium
perfringens toxin test. A faecal IDEXX SNAP? test for parvovirus was negative.
Clinical tip on parvovirus testing
The ELISA faecal SNAP@ Parvo test is the most common in-house test for parvovirus. The test does
have some limitations. Recent vaccination with a live vaccine may interfere with the test results
causing false positive readings. This interference usually occurs 5 to12 days after vaccination so if a
 positive faecal ELISA SNAP test is obtained within this period after vaccination, additional tests may
be recommended. The dog could also be infected but no longer shedding virus in its stool or the
virus particles may be so thoroughly coated with antibodies that they cannot react with the chemicals
of the test. The test is highly sensitive (100% sensitivity) and specific (99.9% specificity).
Adrenocorticotrophin hormone stimulation test
An adrenocorticotrophin hormone (ACTH) stimulation test was performed, which
ruled out hypoadrenocorticism with values within the reference ranges, i.e. a basal
value of 70.1 nmol/l and a post-stimulation value of 262 nmol/l (reference range for
basal 20-230 nmol/l; a basal value of 70 nmol/l or more effectively rules out
hypoadrenocorticism).
Outcome
The dog's clinical signs improved progressively over the next 2 days, with a decrease
in the amount of faecal blood and an improved consistency (to soft but formed) of the
faeces. The dog did not have any further vomiting. She was offered small amounts of a
low fat, highly digestible canned food in small amounts and was willing to eat.
Nursing tip on nutrition
Dogs which have had gastrointestinal disorders and have not been eating need to be re-introduced
 to food very gradually. The brush border enzymes of the small intestines have often been decreased
in severe intestinal disease and the ability to digest a large amount of carbohydrates is often
decreased. Fats can also be difficult for these patients to digest. Offering small amounts of a highly
digestible food is indicated. The initial food offered to a patient which has not been eating should be
at one-third of resting energy requirement (RER). In this dog, that would be:
=13.4x70=939kcal
One-third of that is 313 kcal/day; this could be divided into four to six meals or roughly 50 to 80
kcal per meal
Discuission
HGE usually presents as a peracute or acute condition, as in this case, with the patient
suddenly developing profoundly haemorrhagic diarrhoea and possibly haematemesis.
The faeces are often said to look like dark raspberry jam. Very large amounts of fresh
blood are passed in the diarrhoea and sometimes in the vomitus, so the animal rapidly
becomes hypovolaemic, shocked and collapsed. Even though the blood loss is
dramatic, there is usually an increase in the PCV (e.g. above 50% or 0.50 l/l) along
with normal or low total serum proteins (albumin and globulins). The discord
between the increased PcV and low or normal serum proteins is suspected to be due to
plasma protein loss. The intercellular junctions are leaky allowing loss of protein
electrolytes and fluid, but the spaces are not big enough to allow red blood cells to leak
through; thus the loss of proteins, electrolytes and fluid exceeds cellular loss.
The aetiology is not known although viral infection and endotoxin have been
implicated. Most patients are young adults and although most recover, there is a risk
of relapse in about 15% of cases. Most often small breeds of dogs are affected.
infections, internal parasites, coagulopathies, hypoadrenocorticism, disseminated
intravascuilar coagulation or neoplasia.
Treatment
The mainstay of treatment is aggressive supportive care with intravenous crystalloid
fluids (40-90 ml/kg). Colloids may need to be added if plasma proteins are very low
and oncotic pressure needs to be supported.
Broad spectrum antibiotic cover should be provided, as these patients are at risk for
intestinal bacterial translocation and Clostridium perfringens may be part of the
aetiology. Gastroprotectant drugs are indicated, as are parenteral anti-emetic drugs.
Avoid the use of anticholinergic agents as they suppress gut motility and could
transit time which may encourage bacterial overgrowth.
Prognosis
S oe            s 
study of 15 dogs showed a good recovery in all 15 cases with fluid therapy, antibiotics
and dietary management.
32
Colonic vascular ectasia in a dog
Initial presentation
Collapse and haematochezia
Signalment: 5-year-old neutered male Bichon Frise, body weight 8.5 kg
Case history
The dog had presented to the referring veterinary surgeon 1 month previously with a
history of having collapsed. Clinical examination at that time had been unremarkable.
The only abnormal finding was highly regenerative anaemia, with a packed cell
volume (PcV) of 0.22 l/l (reference range 0.37-0.55 l/l) and a reticulocyte count of
335 x 10%/l (reference range >60 x 10%/l, indicates a regenerative anaemia).
Empiric treatment had been prednisolone and ferrous sulphate (doses not known).
Since then the dog had been increasingly lethargic and his appetite had been poor.
His faeces were of normal consistency, but frequently were dark in colour and also
contained bright red blood (haematochezia) and some mucus. The owners reported
that he had lost about 0.5 kg during this time.
He was de-wormed every 6 months and his vaccinations were current. His regular
diet was a commercial dry dog food.
Physical examination
The dog was responsive but lethargic and quiet. His body condition score was 4/9
   e s   ss     g
slightly dry. His capillary refill time was <3 seconds. Abdominal palpation and
thoracic auiscultation were unremarkable other than a Hl/V1 left sided systolic
murmur. His heart rate was 142 beats per minute (bpm) and pulse quality was
bounding. His respiratory rate was 32 breaths per minute. His rectal temperature was
38.7° C and there was evidence of blood on the thermometer.
Problem list and discussion of problems
The primary problems in this dog were the pale mucous membranes and the evidence
of melaena and haematochezia. The murmur was possibly due to the anaemia. As he
was known to have a regenerative anaemia, this was the likely reason for his pale
mucous membranes. Major categories for regenerative anaemia are blood loss and
haemolysis; as he had evidence of gastrointestinal blood loss this was presumed to be
the likely cause of the anaemia.
Differential diagnosis
Differential diagnoses for the melaena and haematochezia causing anaemia in this dog include:
· Swallowed blood from oral, nasal, pharyngeal or respiratory system disorders (melaena)
· Oesophageal disorders, e.g. ulcer or neoplasia
· Coagulopathies, e.g. vitamin K deficiency, thrombocytopenia, von Willebrand's disease
· Drugs, e.g. NSAIDs, corticosteroids (no history of drug administration prior to first episode)
· Toxins, e.g. caustic agents, heavy metals, Amanita (magic) mushrooms
· Internal parasite, e.g. hook worms
· Neoplasia, e.g. adenocarcinoma, mast cell tumour, gastrointestinal lymphoma, multiple myeloma,
gastrinoma
· Inflammatory bowel disease with ulceration
· Pancreatitis
* Hepatopathy
· Sharp or penetrating foreign body
· Uraemia (no evidence in previous serum chemistry)
· Pancreatitis
 Vascular disorders, e.g. colonic vascular ectasia
Case work-up
Minimum data base
An in-house PCV was performed, which was 0.11 (reference range 0.37-0.55 1/l). The
dog was blood typed as dog erythrocyte antigen (DEA) 1.1 negative and transfused
with 250 ml of fresh whole blood from a DEA 1.1 negative donor. Routine
haematology from a pre-transfusion sample confirmed the PCV. There was a
         
23-36%), although the blood was normocytic with a mean corpuscular volume of 68 fl
count of 17% (reference range >1%). His platelet count was within the reference
range, as were coagulation parameters (activated partial thromboplastin time and
prothrombin time). Serum chemistry results were within the reference range other
than a slightly decreased albumin of 23.6 g/l (reference range 26-35 g/l) which may
have been due to an intestinal disorder causing malabsorption or from the blood loss.
After transfusion his PCV increased to 0.27 l/l and the murmur disappeared. His
heart rate deceased to 60 bpm, although an ECG showed no abnormalities other than a
wandering pacemaker (not considered to be pathological).
         s
highly positive for faecal occilt blood.
Imaging
Radiography and abdominal ultrasonography showed no abnormalities other than
food present in the stomach after 12 hours of fasting, indicative of delayed gastric
emptying.
Endoscopy
On endoscopy, the gastric and duodenal mucosa appeared grossly normal. The colon
had numerous areas of raised, tortuous, dilated blood vessels which were diffusely
from the duodenum was consistent with mild, chronic duodenitis. Histology of the
sample from the colon was interpreted as moderate chronic active colitis.
Fig32.1
Endoscopic view of colon showing abnormal vessels
Diagnosis
The severity of the dog's signs and the severity of the gross appearance of the colon,
along with the lack of response to corticosteroids, were not consistent with
inflammatory bowel disease. A diagnosis of colonic vascular ectasia was made from
the characteristic gross morphologic abnormalities visualized during colonoscopy.
Treatment and outcome
Palliative therapy with tylosin in addition to the prednisolone was initially tried in
this case, but with no success. As the lesions were diffusely distributed throughout the
colon, laser coagulation or partial colonic resection were not feasible options. A
subtotal colectomy was discussed with the owners. This surgery in dogs is not as
successful as it is in cats with dilated idiopathic megacolon as reservoir faecal
incontinence is a common complication in dogs. Further medical management with
hormone therapy was discussed; however, the dog had another severe bleeding
episode and unfortunately the owners chose to have him undergo euthanasia.
Discuission
Colonic vascular ectasia, also known as angiodysplasia, is the presence of dilated
arteries, veins and lymphatic vessels lined with a single layer of endothelial cells
within the mucosa and submucosa of the colon. Haemorrhage is caused by disruptior
of the blood vessels, which often results in chronic haematochezia and an iron
also be present if the lesions extend into the small intestine or if the transit time in the
colon is slow enough to allow digestion of the haemoglobin
constipation could lead to submucosal venous occlusion and dilation. However, it has
case nor most of the reported cases had a history of constipation or tenesmus.
            
endoscopy and the characteristic appearance. The lesions are not usually visible from
the serosal surface and would be missed at exploratory laparotomy.
Subtotal colectomy and partial colectomy (aided by intra-operative endoscopy to
locate the lesions in one case) have been uised suiccessfully to treat the disorder
Successful use of oral oestrogen-progesterone therapy has been used in humans
with the condition and has been reported in two canine cases. In humans, this
therapy does not lead to regression of the lesions, but it was associated with a
reduction in the number of blood transfusions necessary to maintain stable to normal
well understood, but  theories include an induction of squamous metaplasia.
restoration of the continuity of the endothelium of abnormal vessels, primary effects
reported canine cases, while the lesions persisted as in humans, the haematochezia
resolved and no further transfusions were necessary. The dose used was 2 pg/kg
ethinyl oestradiol po q 24 hours and 23 μg/kg of norethindrone acetate po q 24 hours.
Ferrous sulphate at 18 mg/kg po q 24 hours was also administered.
The potential risk of the oestrogen-progesterone therapy is bone marrow toxicity
          
pyometra, although the doses used in these two dogs appeared to be low enough to
avoid these side effects.
Prognosis
There have been insufficient cases reported to predict the prognosis for these cases
 n ass     s  s   sn
limited numbers, medical management has also been successful for cases in which
surgery was not possible. It is likely that many of these cases die or are euthanized
without a diagnosis.
33
Intestinal leiomyoma in a dog
Case contributed by Carolina Urraca del Junco
 Initial presentation
Intermittent melaena
Case history
The dog presented to the hospital for investigation of 2 to 3 weeks of intermittent
melaena, lethargy and pale mucous membranes. His faeces were formed, but varied in
colour from dark brown to tarry and black. There was no bright red blood or mucus
present in the faeces and the dog did not have an increase in urgency of defecation.
The dog's appetite had recently decreased, although he was still eating. He was
thought to have lost weight, although the amount was not known. He had not been
vomiting.
The dog's usual diet was a high quality commercial dry dog food. He was not fed
scraps or extra treats and did not have a history of scavenging. He was current on his
vaccinations and had been de-wormed 5 months prior to presentation.
Physical examination
On presentation, the dog was quiet, but alert and responsive. His body condi tion score
was 5/9. His oral mucous membranes were very pale, but capillary refill time was
normal. His mucous membranes were moist and he appeared to be well hydrated. His
heart rate was mildly elevated at 134 beats per minute and his respiratory rate was
also slightly elevated at 36 breaths per minute. The rectal temperature was within
normal limits at 38.2° C. Auscultation of the thorax and abdominal palpation were
unremarkable and his peripheral lymph nodes felt normal.
Problem list and discussion of problems
The dog's main problems were the lethargy, pale mucous membranes and intermittent
melaena. Pale mucous membranes can be caused by either poor perfusion or anaemia.
The dog had no evidence of cardiovascular disorders and was well hydrated. The
lethargy and likely anaemia (confirmed by packed cell volume (PcV)) were thought to
be due to intestinal blood loss resulting in the melaena.
Differential diagnosis
Differential diagnoses for melaena in this case included:
· Swallowed blood from oral, nasal, pharyngeal or respiratory system disorders (melaena)
· Oesophageal disorders, e.g. ulcer or neoplasia
· Internal parasites, e.g. hook worms
· Gastrointestinal neoplasia, e.g. adenocarcinoma, mast cell tumour, gastrointestinal lymphoma,
multiple myeloma, gastrinoma, leiomyoma, leiomyosarcoma
· Inflammatory bowel disease with ulceration
· Vascular disorders, e.g. colonic vascular ectasia, although it would have to be in the proximal
colon as there was no haematochezia
Other less likely differential diagnoses include:
· Hepatopathy (no other consistent clinical signs)
· Uraemia (no polyuria present)
· Pancreatitis (unlikely with no vomiting or evidence of abdominal pain)
· Coagulopathies, e.g. vitamin K deficiency, thrombocytopenia, von Willebrand's disease (less likely
(na e as sod o P a a no ss o 
· Drugs, e.g. NSAIDs, corticosteroids (no history of drug administration)
Toxins, e.g. caustic agents, heavy metals, Amanita (magic) mushrooms (no known history of
ingestion of toxins)
Casework-up
Minimuim data base
Routine haematology revealed a severe anaemia with a PCV of 0.11 l/1 (reference
range 0.39-0.55 1/l, with moderate red blood cell regeneration (corrected reticulocyte
    (    3     
range 60-77 fl) and low mean cell haemoglobin concentration (MCHC) of 30.2%
(reference range 32-36%). The microcytosis and hypochromia were consistent with
iron deficiency anaemia. Blood smear evaluation revealed marked microcytic
hypochromic anaemia with moderate numbers of polychromatophils and small
numbers of normoblasts. There was a moderate RBC anisocytosis and mild
neutrophilia and a mild monocytosis, with a few reactive lymphocytes.
As the dog had a history of melaena, the regenerative anaemia was thought to be
likely to be secondary to gastrointestinal blood loss, although haemolysis was possible
were also not consistent with immune mediated haemolysis. The haematological
parameters were consistent with an iron deficiency anaemia, also likely due to
gastrointestinal blood loss.
The dog was dog erythrocyte antigen (DEA) 1.1 blood type positive on an in-house
test, which also showed no evidence of auto-agglutination (Fig 33.1).
Rapid Vet-H
(Canine DEA 1.1)
221410
Dog
late.
DEA1.1
Positive
Control
DEA 1.1
Negative
Control
Patient
Test
dmslaboratories,inc.
2Durts
Fig 33.1
 In-house blood typing showing a DEA 1.1 positive sample.
Serum biochemistry revealed mild hypoproteinaemia with a total protein of 46.4 g/l
(reference range 58-73 g/l) due to decreased albumin of 20.4 g/l (reference range 26
35 g/l) and globulins at the low end of the reference range at 20 g/l (reference range
18-37 g/l). Decreased albumin can be caused by ongoing intestinal loss, urinary loss,
third spacing or decreased hepatic production due to liver disorders or decreased
production during an acute phase protein reaction (albumin is considered a ‘negative'
acuite phase protein).
Urinalysis was unremarkable with a urine specific gravity of 1.032. Faecal analysis
was negative for parasites and for enteropathogens.
The microcytic, hypochromic, mildly regenerative anaemia, reduced total protein
and albumin, with globulins in the lower part of the reference range, suggested
chronic blood loss.
Imaging
Right lateral and ventrodorsal thoracic and abdominal radiographs were obtained. In
the thoracic radiographs, several well-defined 1-to 2-mm opaque nodules
characteristic of pleural plaques were identified within the lung fields ( Fig 33.2). The
cardiac silhouette was within normal limits. There was no evidence of thoracic
metastatic disease. Both shoulders showed evidence of degenerative joint disease.
Abdominal radiographs revealed a faeces-filled normal size colon (Fig 33.3). The
transverse colon was partially displaced dorsally by a poorly marginated soft tissu1e
mass.
Fig33.2
Lateral thoracic radiograph showing nodules characteristic of pleural plaques
(courtesy of Carolina Urraca del Junco).
Fig33.3
Lateral abdominal radiograph showing full colon
(courtesy of Carolina Urraca del Junco).
Ultrasonography of the abdomen showed a midline mass identified caudal to the
stomach, in the ventral abdomen, with normal jejunal loops entering both ends. The
mass was well vascularized and protruded into the intestinal lumen, with evidence of
luminal dilatation and a partial loss of wall layering. At the centre of the mass, there
was a rounded vascularized outpouching of intestinal wall tissue, which appeared to
connect to the intraluminal tissue. This outpouching showed no evidence of intestinal
wall layering (Fig 33.4). The location of the mass was consistent in location with the
radiographically identified soft tissue mass. The duodenum, ileum and the large
intestines were within normal limits and the remainder of the ultrasound
examination was uinremarkable.
m203927
L4.6
2L5.18cm
SI MASS
Fig 33.4
 Ultrasound picture of jejunal mass with an outpouching of intestinal wall
(courtesy of Carolina Urraca del Junco).
     s n     s
Adenocarcinoma, leiomyoma, leiomyosarcoma, other sarcomas, metastatic disease
involving the jejunum and lymphoma were considered to be the most likely
differential diagnoses.
Surgical treatment
After imaging, the dog received a blood transfusion with one unit of DEA 1.1 positive
blood and underwent enterectomy to remove the mass, which measured 4 cm in
diameter and was localized within the jejunum. The appearance of regional lymph
nodes and other abdominal organs was unremarkable. A jejunal end-to-end
anastomosis was performed using surgical staples and the ventral midline incision
was closed routinely.
Histopathology
The solid mass identified on ultrasound as expanding eccentrically from the jejunal
lumen consisted of irregular swathes, whorls and streams of intensely eosinophilic
bundles of uniform fibres, consistent with smooth muscle. These smooth muscle cells
contained occasional ellipsoidal pale nuclei, with a finely stippled chromatin pattern.
No mitotic figures were noted in the examined sections and no inflammatory cells
were seen within the mass.
The solid mass was found to infiltrate the submucosa and mucosa and extend in an
annular fashion around the lumen. Normal mucosa was partially replaced with
whorls and streams of eosinophilic tissue and there was an oedematous inflammatory
reaction at the mucosal suirface. Dystrophic calcification was identified on one section
at a junction between normal and abnormal mucosa (Fig 33.5).
Fig33.5
(courtesy of Carolina Urraca del Junco).
The appearance of well-differentiated smooth muscle cells and the absence of
mitotic figures were consistent with a diagnosis of a benign leiomyoma, likely
originating from the jejunal muscularis propria. As this was a solitary mass, the long-
term prognosis was considered as very good.
Ouitcome
One week after surgery, the dog was discharged with instructions to restrict exercise
until removal of skin staples. A 10-day course of clavulanate-potentiated amoxicillin
(250 mg po q 12 hours) was prescribed.
In addition, iron supplementation (ferrous fumerate) was started at 200 mg po q 24
until erythrocyte parameters were back within the reference range.
Six months later the dog had good exercise tolerance, had gained weight and was
no longer anaemic.
Discussion and epidemiology
Melaena and microcytic, normochromic or hypochromic anaemia are common
findings in cases with gastrointestinal ulceration due to tumours. Leiomyomas and
leiomyosarcomas, in particular, may cause especially dramatic bleeding due to their
propensity to ulcerate. Other signs of these intestinal tumours may include
obstruction, vomiting, anorexia, diarrhoea, abdominal pain and weight loss.
Hypoglycaemia associated with intra-abdominal leiomyoma has been reported. This
was thought to be potentially due to an increase in insulin-like growth factor
produced by the tumour. Leiomyomas are usually slow growing tumours and they
may reach a large size before clinical signs are seen.
Intestinal tract neoplasia may be diffuse or nodular, with a variable incidence of
           
if the intestinal tract is abnormal, surgical biopsies should be taken from the tract
itself and not just from the enlarged lymph nodes. Benign tumours are characterized
             
Leiomyoma is a benign tumour of smooth muscle origin and it is less common thar
leiomyosarcoma.
Several ultrasonographic features of gastrointestinal smooth muscle tumours are
helpful  in differentiating  them  from  other  types  of  gastrointestinal  neoplasia.
Leiomyosarcomas and leiomyomas are often large (over 3 cm) intramural lesions
growing out of the serosa as large eccentric or extraluminal masses. Uncommonly, as
hypoechoic foci within the mass may correlate with the areas of central degeneration
and necrosis frequently found in these lesions.
in humans show median ages of 30 to 35 years and these tumours are very rare in the
stomach and intestines. In dogs, by contrast, benign leiomyomas occur most
commonly in the stomach of geriatric dogs, while a higher incidence of malignant
           
caecuim.
The signalment of this case, a 12-year-old male dog, is in keeping with published
data - most leiomyomas occur in older male dogs. In one study, 82% of leiomyomas
  (  ) s  e     s  n 
Only 31% of the cases had associated clinical signs. In another study, the mean age for
dogs with small intestinal smooth muscle tumours (9.1 ± 2.3 years) was lower than
for dogs with caecal tumours (1o.7 ± 1.9 years). In contrast to dogs with intestinal
tumours, which all showed clinical signs in this study, four dogs with caecal tumours
showed no clinical signs at all and the mass was an incidental finding. In dogs with
intestinal tumours, weight loss was observed more often, whereas intestinal
perforation and peritonitis were observed more commonly in dogs with caecal
tumours. In general the caecal tumours showed higher scores for necrosis and
bleeding. No breed predilection has been reported.
In humans, many of these tumours were formerly diagnosed as smooth muscle
tumours but have been reclassified as gastrointestinal stromal tumours. Apart from
the surgical therapy in humans, an additional medical treatment under investigation
Prognosis
An increased tumour diameter has been observed to be an important negative
prognostic indicator and castrated or spayed dogs have been reported to have better
survival statistics than intact dogs. In one study, in the 42 dogs with small intestinal
tumours that were surgically-treated, the overall 1-and 2-year suirvival times were
63% and 52%, respectively. For the 19 dogs with caecal tumours that were surgically
treated, the respective survival times were 84% and 66%. Of the surgically treated
dogs, nine (of 42) with a small intestinal tumour and one (of 19) with a caecal
tumour, died within 15 days because of surgery or tumour-related complications. For
the remaining dogs with small intestinal tumours, the 1-and 2-year recurrence free
period was 80% and 67% whereas, for the dogs with the caecal tumours, this was 83%
and 62%, respectively.
No significant influence on prognosis after surgical removal has been identified
based on tumour type or histological characteristics. Even dogs with tumours with
very malignant histological appearance have a relatively good prognosis for long-term
survival if complete excision of the tumour is accomplished.
34
Corticosteroid induced gastrointestinal ulceration in a
dog
Initial presentation
Weakness, lethargy, muscle wasting, soft dark faeces
Signalment: 7-year-old neutered female Labrador retriever, body weight 21.8 kg
Case history
This dog had a history of immune mediated thrombocytopenia the previous year,
which had responded to oral methylprednisolone. Two months prior to admission her
platelet count had dropped to 136 × 10%/1 (reference range 200-500 x 10°/l) and the
referring veterinary surgery had again initiated oral methylprednisolone at 1.5 mg/kg
body weight divided into two treatments per day. She had been maintained on this
dose. Serum chemistry performed by the referring veterinary surgery had documented
increased alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and alkaline phosphatase (AP), although
the values were not recorded.
The owner was concerned that the dog was very lethargic and had very poor
exercise tolerance. She reported that the dog had increased urination and thirst and a
 s ss          
diarrhoea with soft, dark faeces.
The dog's usual diet was a low calorie dry food and she was normally fed twice a
S n          s
but these had not been administered during the previous 2 months. She was on no
other medications or supplements. She was cirrent on her vaccinations but had not
been de-wormed for about a year.
Physical examination
The dog was quiet but responsive. Her body condition score was approximately 5/9,
although this was hard to determine as she had moderate muscle wasting with
retention of body fat.
pale pink and her membranes were tacky. She was estimated to be about 6%
dehydrated.
Thoracic auscultation revealed normal heart and lung sounds, with a heart rate of
76 beats per minute and a respiratory rate of 14 breaths per minute. There was no
evidence of pain on abdominal palpation, but the abdomen was pendulous and felt
soft. Her rectal temperature was 38.4° C. Her coat was dry and showed evidence of
seborrhoea.
Problem list and discussion of problems
The dog's problems included:
· Lethargy and poor exercise tolerance
· Pale, tacky mucous membranes
· Muscle wasting
· Pendulous abdomen
· Possible polyuria and polydipsia
· Elevated liver enzymes
Differential diagnosis
Many of this dog's problems may have been due to the administration of corticosteroids, but they
were still explored as this assumption can result in missing a disorder.
Lethargy and exercise intolerance have many differential diagnoses, but for this dog the list
included anaemia, hepatopathy, electrolyte disturbances, hypoglycaemia, corticosteroid induced
myopathy, cardiopulmonary disorders and renal disease.
The slightly tacky membranes were likely indicative of mild dehydration due to the
polyuria.
The pale mucous membranes may have been due to poor perfusion or anaemia. The
heart sounds were regular and on palpation her pulses felt normal, making anaemia
the more likely diagnosis. Anaemia may be divided into non-regenerative or
regenerative, which is determined by performing a reticulocyte count. Non-
haemolysis. Gastrointestinal blood loss is always a potential problem in animals on
corticosteroid treatment.
             
caused by myopathies or weight loss due to illness, where muscle loss can be more
prominent than fat loss.
             
corticosteroids, which cause muscle weakness and abdominal deposition of fat. Other
The polyuria and polydipsia are common side effects of corticosteroids, but other
common or concurrent disorders like renal disease, urinary tract infection, endocrine
disorders or electrolyte disturbances were also included in the differential diagnoses
list.
The elevation in liver enzymes may be due to corticosteroids or primary or
secondary liver disorders.
            s
Usually the stools are described as being dark and tarry. The black colour is a result of
the oxidation of haemoglobin and the tarry appearance is from the bacterial
Dreakdown of haemoglobin. Generally melaena is thought to be from bleeding from
              
lesions). Blood must be present in the gastrointestinal tract for several hours (8 hours
in humans) before the colour turns black, so a rapid transit time of blood may not
show melaena and a very slow transit time may show as melaenic faeces from a bleed
in the lower gastrointestinal tract.
Clinical tips for diagnosing gastrointestinal bleeding
 tract before melaena is seen, so gastrointestinal bleeding without the overt presence of melaena is
very possible. A faecal occult blood test is useful to rule out melaena.
With chronic gastrointestinal bleeding. iron is lost from the body and an iron deficient anaemia
           
             s
The serum urea nitrogen to creatinine ratio increases with upper gastrointestinal bleeding due to
 the absorption of blood protein. An increased serum urea with a creatinine within the reference
range (or other similar disproportionate changes) should prompt the clinician to check for
 gastrointestinal bleeding. The use of diuretics can also cause this change.
Faecal occult blood tests using orthotolidine or guaiac tablets are qualitative and only moderately
sensitive. It is recommended to feed a meat-free diet (e.g. cottage cheese and rice) for 3 days prior to
collecting the faecal sample as the myoglobin from meat in the diet may interfere with the test,
causing a false positive.
Case work-up
The dog was admitted to the hospital and rehydrated with intravenous crystalloid
fluids.
Minimum data base
Haematology, serum chemistry and routine urinalysis were performed. Haematology
showed a regenerative anaemia with a PcV of 0.277 1/1 (reference range 0.39-0.55)
and an uncorrected reticulocyte count of 2%. The reticulocyte corrected to 1.23% as
determined by correction for her PCV and indicated a mild degree of regeneration. The
platelet count was within the reference range at 218 x 109 (reference range 200-500
× 109/1).
Clinical tip on correcting reticulocyte counts
Reticulocyte counts are necessary for an objective assessment of the degree of RBC regeneration,
but the count should be assessed with consideration of the degree of anaemia. One way to *correct'
the reticulocyte count is with the following formula:
Corrected reticulocyte percent =
[reticulocyte count(%)xFCV]/
veraye PCV for species(45%) for dogs]
Results:
1 to 4%: Slight regeneration
5 to 20%: Moderate regeneration
> 20%: Marked regeneration
Another way to assess the degree of regeneration is to multiply the % reticulocytes X RBC X 10.
This is greater than 60,000 cells/μl in regenerative anaemias.
Serum chemistry confirmed the elevation in liver enzymes, with AP of 1454 1U/l
(reference range 20-60 IU/l) and ALT of 815 IU/1 (reference range 21-102 IU/l).
Serum fasting bile acid concentration was also increased to 43.9 μmol/l (reference
range 0-7 μmol/l) and serum bilirubin was increased to 10.9 mmol/1 (reference range
0-6./ mmol/1)
Total calcium was decreased to 1.9 mmol/1 (reference range 2.3-3.0 mmol/l) with
          n   
true albumin value may have been lower than this as haemoconcentration could have
lipase were within the reference ranges, a canine-specific lipase test was submitted.
This result, which was available about 2 weeks later, was 271 μg/l (reference range 0-
200 μg/l), indicating a mild to moderate pancreatopathy. Clotting times (activated
partial thromboplastin time and prothrombin time) were within the reference ranges.
Urinalysis was unremarkable other than a urine specific gravity of 1.0l1, which
 o  1m   sa a      5
been affected by the administration of corticosteroids, but could also have been caused
by renal disease or other disorders affecting urine concentrating ability. Urine culture
was negative.
Coombs test
A Coombs test, which was run to help rule out immune mediated haemolysis, was
negative, although corticosteroid administration can cause false negative results. The
increase in bilirubin can be consistent with haemolysis, but also with liver disorders.
There was no haemoglobinuria, which can occur with haemolysis, but haemolysis
was still a possi bility.
Faecal analysis
Faecal analysis for parasites was negative and faecal cuilture for enteropathogens was
also negative. A faecal occult blood test was performed after feeding the dog cottage
cheese and rice for 3 days and this was positive for occult blood. A positive faecal
occult blood test is indicative of either gastrointestinal bleeding or swallowed blood.
As there was no evidence of nasal or oropharyngeal bleeding in this dog.
gastrointestinal blood loss was most likely.
Differentials for a positive faecal occult blood in this dog included:
· Clotting disorders, although this dog had normal coagulation parameters and
platelet couint, a platelet function disorder was possi ble.
· Gastrointestinal ulcers, which can be caused by drugs, especially non-steroidal anti-
inflammatory or corticosteroid administration, inflammation, neoplasia such as
adenocarcinoma or lymphoma, sharp foreign bodies, gastrointestinal ischaemia (e.g.
volvulus, shock), abnormal vasculature.
· Gastrointestinal parasites may also cause Gl blood loss and although the faecal
parasitology was negative, she was treated with 3 days of fenbendazole at 50
mg/kg/day po.
Imaging
Abdominal ultrasound examination showed a large hyperechoic homogeneous liver,
an enlarged right pancreatic lobe and free peritoneal fluid (Figs 34.1 and 34.2). The
adrenals were both small (Fig 34.3). The stomach appeared hypomotile. A sample of
the fluid was obtained and a Tru-Cut liver biopsy was taken.
LIVER
SPLEEN
STOMAC
Fig 34.1
 Ultrasound picture of the liver and spleen, showing a mottled hyperechoic appearance to
the liver
(courtesy of Carolina Urraca del Junco).
PANCREASR
1L165
Fig 34.2
 Ultrasound picture of the pancreas, showing an enlarged right pancreatic lobe (R =
right)
(courtesy of Carolina Urraca del Junco).
LADRENAL
L0370
Fig 34.3
Ultrasound picture of the left adrenal gland, which is very small in size (as was the right
adrenalgland)
(courtesy of Carolina Urraca del Junco).
Abdominal fluid and liver biopsy analysis
The abdominal fluid had a low specific gravity of 1.015, low protein content of 2.4 g/l
and moderate cellularity with a count of 6.1 x 10*/l. Neutrophils were predominant,
comprising 80% of the cells, with 20% macrophages and the rest lymphocytes and
mesothelial cells. The neutrophils were hypersegmented. The poor correlation of the
cellularity and the low protein content made it impossible to classify the fluid into a
          s
growth.
Table 34.1  Clinical tip: determining the type of ascites
Specific gravity
Nucleated cell count
Protein
Predominant cell type
Common cause
Transudate
<1.017
<1,000 cells/ul
<2.5g
Mesothelial/macrophage;
Hypoalbuminaemia; portal
up to 60% neutrophils
hypertension
Modified
<5,000cells/l
>2.5g
Mesothelial/macrophage;
Portal hypertension
transudate
up to 60% neutrophils
(pre-hepatic,hepatic or
post-hepatic);heart failure
Exudate
>1.017
>5,000 cellsμl
>2.5g
Neutrophils/macrophage;
Many, e.g. peritonitis,
>60% neutrophils
trauma, neoplasia,
chylous effusions, blood
The liver biopsy results showed severe diffuse, midzonal to periportal hepatocellular
swelling and clearing consistent with a corticosteroid hepatopathy.
Gastrointestinal endoscopy
At endoscopy the lower oesophagus was found to be inflamed (Fig 34.4) and there
were multiple areas of ulceration within the stomach (Fig 34.5), duodenum and ileum
(Fig 34.6). Histopathology of pinch biopsies of the stomach, duodenum, ileum and
colon all showed signs of inflammation.
Fig 34.4
Endoscopic picture of oesophagitis, showing reddening of the distal oesophagus at the
junction with the gastro-oesophageal sphincter.
Fig34.5
Endoscopic picture of pinpoint ulcers in the cardia of the stomach. The retroflexed
endoscope can be seen in the lower left of the picture.
Fig34.6
Endoscopic picture of linear ulcers in the ilium.
Clinical tip on corticosteroids
While corticosteroids are an appropriate treatment for many disorders, they can also affect and
confound many diagnostic tests (e.g. liver enzymes, serum bile acids concentration, Coombs, serum
o s  a as      ns  
(pu/pd), muscle wasting. vomiting and GI ulceration.
Clinical tip on GI histopathology vs. gross appearance
It is not uncommon for gastrointestinal histopathology to appear to be inconsistent with what is
seen grossly at endoscopy; the information from both techniques needs to be combined as they look
at different aspects of diseases
Clinical tip on thrombocytopenia
Many dogs with immune mediated thrombocytopenia do not achieve a platelet count within the
 reference range. They should be monitored and if the platelet count is continuing to fall after they
are off medication, diagnostic and therapeutic interventions may be necessary. The treatment goal is
to prevent clinical signs of thrombocytopenia, not achieve a number within the reference range.
Medical treatment options
Two aspects of the treatment of the case were addressed: the oesophagitis and gastric
bleeding, and the hepatopathy.
The oesophagitis and gastric bleeding were treated with ranitidine (2 mg/kg po q 12
hours) for its antacid and promotility effects and liquid sucralfate (3 ml po q 8 hours)
for its ulcer binding and prostaglandin secretion effects. A short course of clavulanate-
can predispose to bacterial translocation.
The dose of oral methylprednisolone was decreased over about a 1-month period
while monitoring the platelet count, which continued to be stable. As soon as the dose
was approximately 0.5 mg/kg, every other day dosing was administered, as this
allowed the animal to have a ‘recovery' day from the effects and usually markedly
decreases the side effects. The hepatopathy was treated with ursodeoxycholic acid (10
       p  t  o 
capsules twice a day po for their positive effects on the hepatocytes.
Ouutcome
The dog recovered very well, with the PcV rising to 0.33 l/1 and the liver enzymes
dropping to approximately half the values at presentation within 6 weeks. The owner
Discussion
Drugs are a very important cause of gastrointestinal ulceration in the dog. While there
is some controversy whether all corticosteroids are severely ulcerogenic, most
clinicians agree that high doses of dexamethasone have the potential for significant
gastric erosion. Prednisolone by itself is not generally severely ulcerogenic unless it is
s mu 6s n g o (p 7i< ) ssp   
Dreeds of dogs are more at risk. Any dog which becomes anaemic, has melaena or an
increased serum urea, should be investigated for potential gastrointestinal bleeding,
especially if it is on corticosteroid treatment.
Prognosis
The prognosis for dogs with gastrointestinal ulceration depends upon the severity of
the ulcers. Some cases can rapidly develop perforating ulcers which can cause a fatal
peritonitis and some resolve with cessation of the inciting drug. In any patient on
corticosteroids or non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medications gastrointestinal signs,
pale mucous membranes or a decrease in PCV should be addressed promptly.
The Colon and Colonic
Disorders
35
Introduction to the colon and colonic disorders
The large intestine comprises the caecum, colon, rectum and anus (Fig 35.1). The
primary role of the colon is the resorption of water and electrolytes. Colonic bacteria
break down fermentable fibre to produce short chain fatty acids - acetate, butyrate
and proprionate. Butyrate is an essential energy source for colonocytes.
Transverse
Segmentation
Ascending
Descending
Reduced peristalsis
lleum
Caecum
Mucus
Lubricates
Bicarbonate buffers
Inflammation
Tenesmus
Urgency
Mucus
Occasionallyblood
Rectum
Storage of faeces
Anus
Fig 35.1
Illustration of the large intestine, which comprises the caecum, colon, rectum and anus.
Diarrhoea associated with the colon occuirs when there is interference with water or
electrolyte resorption, abnormal motility or presence of abnormal luminal substrate
following pancreatic, hepatic or small intestinal disease.
Diseases of the colon include:
· Diarrhoea
· Constipation and megacolon
· Neoplasia
· Rectal disease; neoplasia, strictures, foreign bodies
· Colonic vascular dysplasia
· Typhilitis - rare
Causes of large bowel diarrhoea include:
· Inflammatory disease
· acute non-specific colitis
· chronic colitis, non-specific colitis, inflammatory bowel disease
· infectious colitis (bacteria as for small intestinal disorders)
· parasites, e.g. Trichuris, Coccidia
· Obstructive disease
· intraluminal obstruction, e.g. tumour, constipation, foreign body, intussusception,
stricture
· extraluminal obstruction (hernia, masses, adhesions)
· Ischaemic disease - infarct, intussusception
· Neoplasia
· adenocarcinoma
· lymphoma
· benign polyps
· Non-inflammatory disease
· motility disorders, e.g. irritable bowel syndrome (IBS)
· congenital malformations
· Systemic disorders
· toxaemias (e.g. pyometra, peritonitis)
· raemia
· pancreatitis
· Dietary causes
· food poisoning
· intolerance or allergy
· foreign material (bones, hair, plastic)
 Secondary to unabsorbed nutrients from small intestinal diarrhoea
Clinical signs of large intestinal disease include:
· Chronic or acute diarrhoea
· Tenesmus
· Dyschezia
· Haematochezia
· Mucus production
· Abdominal pain
· Intermittent vomiting (20% of cases)
Investigation of large intestinal disorders
An initial minimum data base, especially faecal testing, as for small intestinal
diarrhoea (see page 116) may be helpful in chronic cases. In cats, a fresh saline faecal
preparation should be examined for Tritrichomonas foetus under the microscope and
a sample sent for PCR test.
Imaging
bowel thickening or focal masses, mesenteric lymphadenopathy (usually a non-
specific finding) and intussusceptions. Computerized tomography is also useful for
localizing and assessing focal or generalized bowel thickening.
Colonoscopy and biopsy
Colonoscopy allows for visualization of the colonic mucosa (if preparation is
adequate) (Fig 35.2) and observation of intraluminal masses, mucosal texture and
colour. Submucosal vessels should be visible; if they are not visible, it indicates
Fig35.2
Colonoscopy allows visualization of the colonic mucosa.
Biopsy may confirm the presence of inflammatory or neoplastic cells. Often in cases
of large bowel diarrhoea the histology of the colonic biopsy shows little or no
inflammation. These cases may be analogous to the human condition of IBS.
Irritable bowel syndrome
Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is thought have an underlying motility disorder and
possibly the patient has an increased sense of colorectal pain. The patient presents
with diarrhoea or constipation, often intermittent, and may also show vomiting,
abdominal pain, borborygmi and flatulence. No pathological lesion is found at
colonoscopy or on histopathology of colonic mucosa. It may be associated with stress
and is sometimes detected in working dogs. There is no definitive diagnostic test for
IBS, it is diagnosed by exclusion of other disorders.
Dietary management with increased soluble fibre helps some cases. Motility
modifying drugs such as loperamide, buscopan and mebeverine may also be tried.
Constipation
Constipation may be defined as infrequent or difficult passage of faeces. This may be
an acute or chronic problem, but there is no permanent loss of function, whereas with
obstipation the constipation is refractory and no longer responds to medication.
Megacolon, which literally translates as huge colon, is often a clinical finding in
association with obstipation. Colonic impaction is the presence of hard faeces within
S          n   a
obstipation or megacolon, but does not necessarily mean loss of function.
The clinical signs may include tenesmus, dyschezia, small volume and increased
frequency of defaecation. Blood may appear on the surface of faeces.
The aetiology of constipation is extensive and not confined to disorders of the colon.
It is therefore very important to examine the patient thoroughly as part of the
investigation of this disorder.
Causes of constipation include:
· Lack of exercise, e.g. obesity, orthopaedic disease, hospitalization
· Painful defecation, e.g. orthopaedic disease, perianal disease
· Mechanical obstruction
· colorectal mass
· congenital anorectal lesions
· healed pelvic fracture with stenosis
· intrapelvic mass
· perineal hernia
· enlarged prostate
· pseudocoprostasis
· rectal diverticulum
· strictures
· Neurological disease
· dysautonomia
· idiopathic megacolon (most common cause of obstipation in cats)
· paraplegia
· sacral spinal cord deformity (e.g. in some Manx cats)
hypoparathyroidism
Treating the impaction may involve giving enemas, oral laxatives, mineral oils and,
if necessary, manual removal of faecal material inder general anaesthesia. Most cases
should receive intravenous fluids prior to starting other treatments.
The prognosis is guarded as the problem may recur, especially if the underlying
problem has not been resolved. Failure to correct the constipation may lead to the
development of megacolon.
Megacolon
Congenital and acquired cases of megacolon occur (Fig 35.3). Acquired cases of
dilated megacolon are often the end stage condition of idiopathic colonic dysfunction.
There is an abnormality of smooth muscle function in cats with idiopathic dilated
megacolon.
Descending
colon
Transverse
colon
Descending
colon
Rectum
Small
Ascending
intestine
colon
Dilated
Massofimpacted faeces
descending colon
in the descending colon
D
Fig 35.3
(a) Normal colon. (b) Megacolon.
Hypertrophic megacolon may occur due to obstructions such as pelvic fracture and
Congenital cases are thought to be associated with failure of adequate myenteric
plexus development.
S         s  ss
Dehydration may occur. Radiographs usually show an enlarged colon, with distension
occurring throughout the colon. A healed pelvic fracture with malunion or other
obstruction may be seen with hypertrophic megacolon. The diagnosis is based on
history, clinical findings and radiography.
D           s
hydration, removal of impacted faeces, increased dietary fibre (early in disease) to
increase faecal bulk and stimulate motility, laxatives and colonic prokinetic agents
such as cisapride (where available), prucalopride and tegaserod.
Colonic neoplasia
The most common tumours seen in the large intestine include lymphomas,
adenocarcinomas and rectal adenomatous polyps.
    s      
radiography or CT scan, ultrasound of the more proximal colon) and colonoscopy and
biopsy with histopathology.
      s      
surgically accessible, it may be resected. Piroxicam either as a rectal suppository or
orally or other non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs may decrease the clinical signs
of rectal adenocarcinomas and adenomas.
Rectal diseases
Rectal stricture
   s          
often not determined but may be the result of previous trauma or associated with
neoplasia.
Patients present with haematochezia and dyschezia. They may become constipated
due to avoiding painful defecation.
a           
o  oss        d n 
with histopathology are essential to rule out neoplasia.
Treatment involves surgical correction where possible. Stretching may also be
considered in those cases unsuitable for surgery.
36
Feline constipation and megacolon
Case contributed by Nicki Reed
Initial presentation
Tenesmus, haematochezia and abdominal distension
Signalment: 8-year-old, female neutered Devon Rex cat, body weight 2.5 kg
Case history
The cat was presented for tenesmus, haematochezia and abdominal distension,
    t    n    s
had intermittent episodes of constipation, manifested as straining to pass hard faeces
which were occasionally coated with fresh blood or mucus. The episodes had initially
occurred two or three times per year, but for the past 6 months had been occurring
monthly. During these episodes the cat would defecate outside the litter tray and she
appeared to have abdominal bloating. Symptomatic treatment with laxatives generally
improved the condition within 1 to 2 days.
Occasional episodes of small volume diarrhoea were reported (once to twice a year).
At the time of presentation, she had passed no faeces for 4 days and had had a poor
appetite for 2 days.
one other unrelated Devon Rex cat. She was vaccinated against feline herpesvirus-1,
calicivirus and feline parvovirus and de-wormed every 6 months with praziquantel
and pyrantel. The cat was fed a proprietary canned cat food.
She was thought to have previously been used for breeding and was reported to
have had surgery for an intussusception at 2 years of age.
Physical examination
The cat appeared slightly thin (body condition score 3/9) and had a distended
abdomen (Fig 36.1). Her hydration appeared adequate and mucous membrane colour
was pink with a capillary refill time of 2 seconds. Thoracic auscultation revealed a
Grade I to Il/VI systolic murmur, with point of maximal intensity at the left sternal
border. No pulse deficits or arrhythmias were detected. Respiratory rate was mildly
increased at 30 breaths per minute, attributed to stress, as no abnormal lung sounds
were detected. Abdominal palpation revealed a large colon, filled with hard faeces and
a moderately distended bladder.
Fig36.1
 Dorsal view of the cat showing distended abdomen.
Problem list and discussion of problems
The cat's primary problem was thought to be constipation, based on the history and
physical examination findings.
Differential diagnosis
Differential diagnoses for constipation include:
 a  sg  t a  A 
· Environmental causes, e.g. decreased exercise, litter box problems (dirty, change in type of litter or
location of box; competition from other cats; inability to use the box due to arthritis or other
locomotor disorders), stress
 Traumatic disorders, e.g. fractured pelvis; fractured or dislocated hip; bite wound; abscess;
abdominal bruising; saccro-coccygeal luxation (tail-pull - unlikely as there was no history of trauma
in this cat and the problem was chronic)
  l o     l s  a 's  -
tumour; pelvic fracture malunion; perineal hernia; rectal diverticulum; pseudocoprostasis
· Neuromuscular disorders, e.g. spinal cord disease; congenital spinal cord anomaly (Manx cats);
paraplegia/paralysis; central nervous system dysfunction; dysautonomia (Key-Gaskell syndrome);
idiopathic megacolon
· Pharmacological causes, e.g. opioids; diuretics, anticholinergics; antihistamines; barium sulphate
With the chronic history and the lack of clinical signs consistent with most of the other possible
differential diagnoses for constipation, the most likely cause in this cat was thought to be idiopathic
megacolon, although other neurological causes and neoplasia could not be ruled out
Case work-up
A neurological examination was performed with no abnormalities detected. A rectal
examination showed no evidence of herniation, anal sac disease, strictures or foreign
bodies. A few small pieces of hard dry faeces were present in the rectum.
Minimum database
Routine haematology showed a moderate neutrophilia (26.2 x 10°/; reference range
2.5-12.8 x 10*/l). This most likely represented a non-specific inflammatory response.
Serum chemistry parameters were within the reference ranges.
Imaging
Abdominal radiography showed impaction of the transverse and descending colon
with faeces (Fig 36.2). In addition, ventral spondylopathy was present at the
lumbosacral junction. Two views were taken to fully evaluate narrowing of the pelvic
canal.
Fig36.2
Lateral abdominal radiograph showing impaction of the transverse and descending colon
with faeces at initial presentation.
Further investigations that couild have been beneficial include urinalysis for
assessment of hydration, ultrasonography if intraluminal or extraluminal masses were
suspected, colonoscopy if intraluminal disease is suispected and barium enema if a
stenotic lesion was suspected. If the neurological examination had been abnormal,
further evaluation with MRI may have been useful.
Diagnosis
            
initially be made, as it was not known whether the condition was refractory to
therapy. Initial management was commenced with manual evacuation of faeces with
the cat anaesthetized and a warm water enema was given.
Oral therapy with lactulose (initial dose 0.5 ml po q 8 hours) and cisapride (1.5
mg/kg po q 12 hours) was then started and the owner advised to feed a low residue
diet. The clinical signs improved initially, although the frequency of defecation
remained decreased, occurring only every second day.
Follow-ulp
Over the following 18 months the cat required increasing doses of lactulose and
cisapride and micro-enemas with sodium alkylsulphoacetate on three occasions. The
cat subsequently presented after having not defecated for 4 days. She also again had a
poor appetite and was lethargic. Further radiographs were obtained which showed a
grossly dilated impacted colon (Fig 36.3) and as the condition was no longer
responding to management a diagnosis of idiopathic megacolon was made.
Fig 36.3
Lateral abdominal radiograph showing a grossly dilated impacted colon at revisit.
Treatment options
The most appropriate treatment depended on the underlying cause of constipation and
the severity of the problem. Potential therapy includes:
· Ensure adequate hydration and correct electrolyte imbalance if present
· Evacuation of faeces (enemas)
· Dietary alteration and bulking agents
· Laxatives
· Prokinetics
· Surgery
Evacuation of faeces
When the cat was anaesthetized, an endotracheal tube was in position in case colonic
manipulation induced vomiting. A combination of digital evacuation and enemas was
warm water enema was used in this cat, although a variety of enema agents are
available:
· Warm water or saline (5-10 ml/kg)
· Mineral oil, e.g. liquid paraffin (5-10 ml/cat)
· Lactulose (5-10 ml/cat)
· Sodium citrate + sodium alkylsulphoacetate
· Dioctyl sodium sulphate
Clinical tip on enemas in cats
Enema should be given slowly as rapid administration can induce vomiting. In addition, rapid
administration reduces the ability to soften the stool and can increase the risk of colonic perforation.
Enemas containing sodium phosphate should not be given to cats; they can cause
            
increase the absorption of mineral oil therefore these two products should not be used together.
Dietary changes
Alterations in diet consist primarily of feeding increased fibre or low residue diets.
Bulking agents consist primarily of poorly digested celluloses and polysaccharides
(insoluble fibre). The insoluble fibre draws water into the colon and stimulates colonic
motility and thus defecation. Either proprietary high-fibre diets can be used or
bulking agents such as sterculia may be added to the diet. Cats should be adequately
  e  se  s  s   a 
cases. In cats with megacolon, increasing dietary fibre may be contraindicated, as the
fibre is incapable of inducing colonic motility and may contribute to obstipation
Highly digestible/low residue diets are more appropriate in these circumstances as the
faecal volume is reduced.
Laxatives
Emollient
Emollient laxatives are detergents that improve the mixing of lipids (oils) with water.
water, hence softening the stool.
· Docusate plus dantron
Clinical experience with oral emollient laxatives is limited and efficacy not yet
proven. Hepatotoxicity and carcinogenicity have been reported in people resulting in
one of these products only being licensed for use in the terminally ill. Long-term use
should therefore be avoided.
Lubricant
Lubricant laxatives reduce water absorption and facilitate passage of the faeces
Effects are generally mild, but they may be useful in mild cases of constipation.
· White paraffin
· Liquid paraffin (5-10 ml/cat per os)
Care should be taken if giving liquid paraffin orally, as it can be aspirated into the
lungs. Chronic use of mineral oil laxatives can result in decreased absorption of fat-
soluble vitamins.
Hyperosmotic
  n s d  ss  s s  
their concentrated nature, draw fluid into the lumen of the colon. The most commonly
l1sed is lactulose (o.5 ml/kg po q 8-12 hours), which also undergoes fermentation in
the colon to produce organic acids. The organic acids stimulate fluid secretion in the
colon. The magnesium salts are less well tolerated in cats than they are in humans and
should NOT be used in cats with renal failure (due to impaired magnesium excretion).
Polyethylene glycol is used commonly in the human field; however, the large volume
required with some products makes them unfeasible to administer to cats. Further,
polyethylene glycol is contraindicated in cases of mechanical or functional bowel
obstruction (i.e. most cases of feline megacolon) and there are some concerns that
polyethylene glycol can cause renal failure, therefore this author would caution
against its use.
Stimulant
Stimulant laxatives cause secretion of fluid from the cells lining the colon and also
stimulate the nerves that cause contraction of the smooth muscle. This latter effect
may damage the nerves if used long-term, therefore continuous daily use is not
recommended.
· Senna
· Castor oil
· Bisacodyl 5 mg po q 24 hours
Prokinetics
Prokinetic drugs act to improve the contractions of the bowel, thereby propelling
receptors, therefore some prokinetic drugs are more effective in the stomach than the
colon. Cisapride belongs to the group of drugs known as benzamide prokinetics and is
particuilarly effective in the colon of cats because of its action on the 5HT4 receptors
that are present there. Although it is not readily available in the United Kingdom, it
         
drugs in this group (renzapride, prucalopride, mosapride) are being developed, as well
as non-benzamide prokinetics (tegaserod). The latter was licensed in the USA, but has
been recently withdrawn due to concerns abouit cardiac side effects and is therefore
The Hz antagonists ranitidine and nizatidine have some prokinetic effect, although
they are not as potent as cisapride. Their mode of action is via inhibition of
acetylcholinesterase, resulting in accumulation of acetylcholine at the neuromuscular
junction and potentiation of the action potential. Efficacy has been demonstrated in
vitro, but not in vivo and related H2 antagonists cimetidine and famotidine do not
share this prokinetic effect.
· Cisapride 0.1-1.0 mg/kg po q 8-12 hours
· Ranitidine 1.0-2.0 mg/kg po q 8-12 hours
· Nizatidine 2.5-5.0 mg/kg po q 24 hours
Surgery
Although mild cases of constipation will respond to medical management, cases of
  o  r  s     d
and non-functional colon. This procedure is known as a sub-total colectomy and may
be performed with or without preservation of the ileo-caeco-colic valve (Fig 36.4). The
advantages and disadvantages of each procedure are given in Table 36.1.
Transverse colon
Ascending colon
Level of transaction
to preserve ileo-colic
valve
Caecum-
Descending colon
Level of transaction
to include ileo-colic
valve-
Level of transaction
of distal colon
Pubic bone
Rectum
Fig 36.4
Illustration of the locations of the surgical options for colectomy.
Table 36.1
 Advantages and disadvantages of sub-total colectomy
Surgical
Ad vantages
Disad van tages
proc edure
 lleo-colic
 Red uced risk of colon ic bacteria refluxing into smallintestine and causing
May be recurren ce of constipation in the segment of colon
valve
diarrhoea
not removed. The bowel at the site of repair may be under
 preserved
greater ten sion
 lleo-colic
 More colon is removed, therefore it is less likely to have recurren ce of
There may be a greater risk of smallintestinal diarrhoea as a
valve
constipation
result of colon ic bacteria migrating to the small intestine
removed
Some surgeons feel it is an easier proc edure to perform, as the area where the
two ends of bowel are joined is un der less tension 
Both
 The vast majority of cases have permanent resolution of constipation problems,
 Surgical:
procedures
thereby improving the cat's quality of lfe and removing the necessity for
Anaesthetic risk
 perman ent medic ation
Wound in fection s, breakdown
Blood loss 
 Periton itis 
Postoperative:
Rec urrenc e of constipation
Diarrh oea
Increased frequency of defaec ation
Clinical TIP on constipation in cats
Owners of constipated cats may occasionally perceive the problem to be diarrhoea, rather than
constipation. Faecal concretions within the colon are irritating to the mucosa causing secretion of
fluid which can leak past the impacted faeces.
Nursing aspects
Standard enema pumps may be too wide bore to effectively introduce into a constipated cat. Use of
a dog urinary catheter and syringe may facilitate introduction of enema solutions more proximally
into the colon, enabling break-up of faecal material.
Many cats when hospitalized will become constipated. Reasons for this may include drugs (e.g.
opioids), unfamiliar litter substrate (especially if normally outdoor cats), anxiety and lack of exercise.
Trying a variety of litters, providing privacy and allowing the cats to exercise, particularly after
feeding, may encourage defaecation.
Lack of water intake may be a feature in a number of cats that become constipated and cats are
often reported to drink little at home. Reasons for this may be the water bowl is beside the food
 bowl, the bowl is an inappropriate size, the cat cannot see the water level or the cat prefers running
water. Moving the water bowl away from the food bowl and trying larger bowls of a different
substance may encourage drinking, as can use of a water fountain.
Follow-up
With  a  diagnosis  of idiopathic  megacolon  no  longer  responsive  to  medical
management the cat underwent surgery for a sub-total colectomy. Histopathological
findings were consistent with idiopathic megacolon. Following surgery her
demeanour and appetite improved, although she had a tendency to pass diarrhoeic
faeces. The cat has remained well for 6 years post-surgery and has been maintained on
a highly digestible diet.
Pathophysiology
The colon has two main functions: absorption of water and electrolytes and storage of
faeces. The wall of the colon is made up of two types of smooth muscle: the concentric
circular muscle on the luminal aspect and the longitudinal muscle on the serosal
aspect. The muscuilar layers receive stimulation from the intrinsic nerves whose cell
bodies lie in the submucosal (Auerbach's) and myenteric plexuses (Fig 36.5). These
          ,  
minute. The contractions are initiated by a ‘pacemaker located at the junction of the
transverse and descending colon. The slow wave contractions mix the digesta. When
the colon becomes distended  with digesta more coordinated contractions
(segmentation and peristalsis) are initiated, which pushes the digesta aborally
the pelvic and pudendal nerves (Fig 36.6). The extrinsic nerve supply can also have an
(sympathetic - adrenergic).
Mucous
membrane
Muscularis
mucosa
Sub-mucosal
plexus
Circular
muscle
layer
Mysenteric
plexus
Longitudinal
muscle
layer
Serosa
Fig 36.5
Illustration of the muscular layers of the colonic wall.
Afferent input
Saccralnerves
Generated by
movementof
faeces in rectum
Pelvicnerve
Peristaltic contraction
ofrectum and
relaxation of
internal sphincter
Pudendalnerve
Voluntary control
ofdefaecation
Rectum
Anus
Fig 36.6
 Illustration of the nerve supply to the colon.
The cause of megacolon is not well understood. It is typically recognized in middle-
aged to older cats, with a history of progressively worsening constipation. Proposed
mechanisms have included abnormalities with the nervous supply to the lower colon
(intrinsic or extrinsic), an abnormal neuromuscular junction or abnormal smooth
muscle. No anatomical abnormalities have been demonstrated with histopathological
examination, but the contractile ability of the smooth muscle has been shown to be
altered. It is not known whether this altered contractility is the cause of megacolon or
simply an effect of prolonged stretch.
Two forms of megacolon are described - dilated and hypertrophic. Idiopathic
megacolon is a dilated form of megacolon, with permanent loss of function.
Hypertrophic megacolon may arise when the colon dilates proximal to an obstruction
(e.g. fractured pelvis) and may be reversible if the obstruction is relieved in sufficient
time (<6 months). If the underlying cauisal agent is not addressed, hypertrophic
megacolon will progress to irreversible dilated megacolon.
Epidemiology
Constipation may be observed in cats of any age, breed or sex. The literature suggests
that it tends to be a problem of middle-aged cats, with male cats more commonly
affected (70% cf 30% females). Domestic shorthaired cats (46%), domestic longhair
cats (14%) and Siamese cats (11%) have been most commonly reported as being
affected, but breed prevalence was not taken into account to establish whether these
breeds are truly over-represented (Siamese) or under-represented (DsH). In addition.
the literature focuses on cases of obstipation or megacolon and therefore the true
incidence of constipation in the feline population is not known.
Prognosis
Although medical management is successful initially, the condition is often
progressive therefore owners should be warned that their cat may become refractory
to medical management and that surgery may well become necessary. In some cases
the condition may lead to premature euthanasia of an animal, either because the
owner does not wish surgery or because following surgery the cat develops intractable
diarrhoea or recuirrence of megacolon.
37
Tritrichomonas infection in two kittens
Initial presentation
Profuse watery diarrhoea
Signalment: Two 6-month-old littermate male entire Siamese kittens, body weights 3.18 kg and 3.4
kg
Case history
The kittens had been obtained from a breeder 2 months earlier and both had had
diarrhoea since then. The kittens had a profuse, watery diarrhoea containing mucus.
They showed an increased urgency to defecate and increased frequency of defecation.
They were eating a high quality commercial kitten food and both were still eating
well and had not shown any vomiting. They had been fully vaccinated and de-wormed
with fenbendazole. They were indoor cats with occasional supervised access to a
fenced garden.
Physical examination
The kittens were both bright and in good body condition (BCS 5/9). Mucous
membranes were pink and moist and CRT was <2 seconds. Auscultation and
compression of the thorax of both were normal. Abdominal palpation was mostly
unremarkable, although their colons felt fluid filled. There was inflammation of the
perianal area of one kitten. The rectal temperatures, heart rates and respiratory rates
were within normal limits and the pulse quality was good in both kittens.
Problem list and discuission of problems
· Diarrhoea of large intestinal origin
Differential diagnosis
Differential diagnoses for chronic large intestinal diarrhoea in these kittens included:
· Inflammatory diseases
· chronic colitis
· inflammatory bowel disease
· infectious colitis, e.g. Salmonella spp., Campylobacter spp., Clostridium perfringens
· parasites, e.g. Tritrichomonas foetus, Giardia, Cryptosporidium, coccidia
· Dietary
· food poisoning
· dietary intolerance or allergy
· Toxins, including toxic plants
· Congenital malforma tions
· Small intestinal malabsorption and the production of secretagogues such as
unconjugated bile acids and hydroxylated fatty acids
· Other causes such as obstruction, ischaemia or neoplasia were less likely to involve
two kittens. Infections and environmental (diet, toxin) factors were the most likely
cauises of the diarrhoea.
Case work-up
Minimum data base
Haematology and serum  chemistry  were  performed and the results were
inremarkable. Serum feline trypsin like immunoreactivity (TLI), cobalamin and folate
of the diarrhoea. Screening tests for FeLV and FIV were negative. Routine urinalysis
was unremarkable in both kittens.
Imaging
Abdominal ultrasound showed mildly enlarged mesenteric lymph nodes but no other
abnormalities. Intestinal wall layering and thickness were within normal limits.
Faecal tests
Faecal flotation (performed on three samples) showed no parasitic ova and faecal
preparations were negative for Giardia and Cryptosporidium.
A fresh faecal smear was collected by inserting a swab into the anus of each of the
kittens. The faeces and mucus obtained was diluted with an equal volume of normal
saline and examined under the microscope. Large numbers of motile spindle shaped
trophozoites were observed (Fig 37.1), which had flagellae and moved with a jerky
infection, a sample of faeces from each kitten was submitted for T. foetus polymerase
chain reaction (PCR), which was positive in both kittens.
Fig37.1
Microphotograph of Tritrichomonas foetus
(courtesy of Dr An dy Sparkes)
Treatment and outcome
The kittens were treated with ronidazole at 30 mg/kg q 12 hours po for 14 days. Both
kittens improved on the treatment. Their diarrhoea completely resolved and they
showed no adverse side effects from the treatment.
Discussion and epidemiology
T. foetus is a flagellated protozoan parasite that causes large bowel diarrhoea in
infected cats. Clinical signs vary among cats, but often include increased frequency of
defecation, passing of semi-formed to liquid diarrhoea often described as foul-smelling
and containing mucus and blood, and flatulence. The anus may become inflamed due
well otherwise and do not isually show significant weight loss.
The protozoal induced diarrhoea appears to be more common in younger cats (often
less than a year of age), cats from households containing pedigree cats or other multi-
cat households and young cats from rescue centres. It has been reported that the
Siamese and Bengal breeds of cats may have an increased risk and purebred cats in
these cats, although the high density management likely increases the risk of
infection.
    n         
The distribution of the organism is not completely understood yet, but it has been
reported in the USA, UK and Germany and there are indications that it is also present
in other European countries, China and South America.
  s    s   ss  i
presence of typical motile trophozoites. If any mucus has been passed with the faeces
this should be included in the smear as it is the most likely place to find the
  s       s      ss
short tails and an undulating membrane that runs over the length of the body. They
are descri bed as having a jerky, forward motion. Examination of multiple smears and
multiple faecal samples will improve the rate of detection of the organism. Rectal
swabs, as lsed in this case, can also be examined for the organism. A cotton swab is
inserted into the anus and rotated over the colonic mucosa. It is then withdrawn and
The organism should to be distinguished from Giardia. With Giardia infection the
trophozoites tend to be far fewer in number, they are binucleate with a concave
same forward motion as T. foetus. If a cat has had recent antibiotic therapy, the
diagnosis more difficult. In such cases, more sensitive diagnostic techniques may be
preferable.
Two other diagnostic tests are available which are both more sensitive and specific
for this organism than examination of fresh faeces. The first test is PCR (polymerase
chain reaction) which can detect the presence of the genetic material of the organism
This is a highly sensitive test. In the USA, samples can be suibmitted to the College of
Veterinary Medicine, North Caroline State University for this test. Information on this
is available in Appendix 6. The PCR test is available in the UK from Capital
Diagnostics in Edinburgh (phone 0131 535 3145). See Appendix 6 for further
information about testing for T. foetus.
Treatment
Treatment with ronidazole at 30 to 50 mg/kg has been shown to resolve the diarrhoea
and eradicate infection (on the basis of the PCR test). However, ronidazole is not
licensed for use in cats and although it appears to be relatively safe from limited
studies, it should be used with cauition and only with informed and signed owner
consent. Neuirotoxic side effects have been reported with ronidazole, including
cases, the signs stopped when the drug was withdrawn. Metronidazole has also been
used, but has shown poor efficacy. Tinidazole has been trialled as it is thought to
possibly have less risk of neuirotoxicosis compared to ronidazole. While tinidazole
decreased the detection and shedding of T. foetus, it appeared to be less efficacious
than ronidazole.
Prognosis
The clinical prognosis for most infected cats is good, although many owners report
subsequent infrequent and short-duration relapses of diarrhoea. It is not known if
these relapses correspond with faecal shedding of T. foetus. As the diarrhoea does
        s     
treat all affected cats with ronidazole. Using a simple, highly digestible diet frequently
results in improved faecal consistency and this alone may allow sufficient control of
clinical signs in some cats.
38
Colorectal neoplasia in a dog
Initial presentation
Haematochezia, diarrhoea and faecal tenesmus
     s    n 
Case history
The dog had initially begun to have diarrhoea 4 months prior to presentation. The
diarrhoea had become progressively more haemorrhagic and increased in frequency
and urgency to defecate. At presentation the dog strained to defecate almost
continuously when taken on walks. He produced small amounts of soft to liquid faeces
and large amounts of blood when defecating. The dog only rarely vomited. The owner
said the dog had lost about 7 kg during the last 4 months.
His current diet was a restricted protein dry diet, with no snacks or treats. The dog's
vaccinations were current and he had recently been treated with 50 mg/kg
fenbendazole for 5 days.
He was on meloxicam for discomfort due to hip dysplasia. This had been stopped for
a month 2 months earlier and there had been no resolution of clinical signs of
diarrhoea or haematochezia. Other than the hip dysplasia, he had been a healthy dog
until the onset of the diarrhoea.
Physical examination
The dog was bright, alert and responsive (Fig 38.1) although he was quite thin (body
condition score 3/9) with muscle loss over the lumbar area (Fig 38.2). His mucous
membranes were pink and moist with a capillary refill time of <2 seconds and
hydration appeared adequate. No abnormalities were noted on thoracic auscultation.
His heart rate was 82 beats per minute with good matched pulses and respiratory rate
was 32 breaths per minute. Peripheral lymph nodes were normal in size. Due to the
history of haematochezia, taking the rectal temperature was delayed until analgesia
(e.g. topical lignocaine) could be used. When taken later it was 38.2? C.
Fig38.1
 Dog showing bright and alert attitude
Fig38.2
Dog showing loss of muscle mass
On abdominal palpation several large firm masses were identified. One of these was
especially prominent in the caudal abdomen and was felt to be at least 4 to 5 cm in
diameter. The masses were not attached to the body wall and could be moved fairly
freely. A tubular mass was present in the ventral abdomen, which was thought to be
   n n         s
appeared uncomfortable during abdominal palpation.
Problem list and discussion of problems
The dog's primary problems were haematochezia and tenesmus consistent with large
intestinal disease. The frequency and urgency of the diarrhoea was also consistent
with disease of the colon and/or rectum, although weight loss is less common in large
intestinal disease.
Differential diagnosis
A differential list for the haematochezia, diarrhoea and tenesmus includes disorders of the colon
and rectum. There was no melaena and no evidence of bleeding anywhere else (e.g. haematuria,
epistaxis). Generally differential diagnoses lists should be made for each problem; in this case it was
thought that the problems were likely to be related. The differential diagnoses include:
· Colitis
· Vascular dysplasia
· Intussusception
· Foreign body
• Aneurysm
· Infarction
· Neoplasia
· Parasites (hookworms, whipworms)
· Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) use
Severe acute pancreatitis can cause melaena and haematochezia, but this dog was
too bright to have severe acute pancreatitis. The dog had been given an adequate dose
of fenbendazole, making gastrointestinal parasites less likely. While he had previously
been on meloxicam, there had been a period of about a month where it had not been
given and there had been no change in clinical signs.
The other problem was the presence of masses or thickened areas found during
palpation of the abdomen. The most likely causes of these were thought to be
neoplasia, lymph node enlargement or intussusception(s).
Case work-up
Minimum data base
Haematology, serum chemistry and urinalysis parameters were unremarkable. Faecal
Imaging
On abdominal ultrasound, there was gross enlargement of medial iliac lymph nodes,
with a highly heterogeneous hypoechoic internal appearance. The largest lymph node
was 8 x 4 x 4 cm. The cranial mesenteric node close to the greater curvature was
grossly enlarged at 6 x 4 cm and the hepatic or pancreaticoduodenal node was also
enlarged at 3 x 2 cm. A 1-cm round hypoechoic nodule was also found in the colonic
wall at the level of the medial iliac lymph nodes and a much larger colonic tumour a
      s         
long and was hypoechoic, involving mucosa, with loss of layering and an irregular
luminal interface (Fig 38.3).
PROSTATE
NOTOO
COLONIC MASS
LYMPHNODE
Fig 38.3
 Ultrasound of the colonic mass
(courtesy of Carolina Urraca del Junco)
Thoracic films were taken to check for metastasis and the pulmonary fields
appeared normal.
Lymph node cytology
A fine needle aspiration of the iliac lymph node was obtained; cytology of this was
interpreted as lymphoma.
Endoscopy
At colonoscopy, a large, irregular, mass was found in the colorectal area
approximately 2-3 cm from the anus (Fig. 38.4). It extended about 4 cm proximally
and filled about 90% of the lumen. Proximal to this mass the colonic muicosa appeared
swollen and irregular (Fig 38.5). Multiple biopsies were taken of the mass and of the
colonic mucosa proximal to the mass to a distance of about 35 cm from the anus,
where faecal material prevented further colonoscopy.
Fig38.4
Endoscopic picture of colorectal mass
Fig38.5
Endoscopic picture of colonic mucosa proximal to the mass
Histopathology
Histopathology of the mass was described as extensive necrotizing inflammatory
reactions and the mucosa of the colon proximal to the mass was described as
containing a mixed inflammatory cell population. Tumours often have a superficial
layer of inflammation and this can be all that is obtained from a mucosal biopsy, so
there may have been lymphoma underlying the mass or there may have been
concurrent inflammatory bowel disease. Often full thickness biopsies can provide
further information; however, as the lymph nodes of this dog were diagnostic of
lymphoma, this was not pursued, as addressing the lymphoma was required regardless
of the intestinal disease. The prognosis was affected by the presence or absence of
alimentary lymphoma and an argument can be made for pursuing the exact
diagnosis.
Treatment and outcome
As lymphoma was known to be present in the abdominal lymph nodes of this dog and
suspected in the large intestine, a chemotherapy protocol was planned. This was
initiated using prednisolone only, at 1 mg/kg twice a day, for 5 days. Aggressive
chemotherapy in intestinal lymphoma can result in lysis of the lymphocytes to a
degree that the intestine perforates.
The dog coped well with the prednisolone and after 2 days the abdominal lymph
nodes felt smaller. He continued to have haematochezia, although it (subjectively)
appeared to be less severe. He did continue to strain to defecate. On the fifth day, the
prednisolone was decreased to 1 mg/kg once a day and vincristine was administered
intravenously as the initiation of a chemotherapy protocol (by an Oncology Service)
including  vincristine,  cyclophosphamide, prednisolone and  doxorubicin (CHOP
protocol).
In addition to the chemotherapy, the dog was treated for the Clostridium
perfringens with metronidazole at 400 mg po q 12 hours for 3 weeks. His diarrhoea
resolved within a week of initiation of this treatment and the haematochezia
decreased with the chemotherapy.
At 1 month after diagnosis the dog was reported to have gained 1 kg in weight.
There was no organomegaly present, although there was a persistent caudal
was described as partial remission. At 4 months after diagnosis the dog was doing
Discuission and epidemiology
Colorectal tumours are uncommon in dogs. The most common tumours in this
location are adenomas or adenocarcinomas, which often have a more rounded
appearance than this tumour (Fig 38.6) and are often found as a focal growth which
does not metastasize. Adenomas and adenocarcinomas are most often tumours of
older dogs. If not surgically resectable, the clinical signs from adenomas and
adenocarcinomas often improve with the use of NSAIDs, such as piroxicam given as
rectal suppositories or per os.
Fig38.6
 Endoscopic picture of a colonic adenoma
Alimentary lymphoma accounts for about 5% of cases of lymphoma and is often
more difficult to diagnose than the more common multicentric form. In this dog, the
presence of a colorectal lymphoma was not definitively proven, although he had
lymph node involvement. This could either be a spread of the colorectal tumour or the
dog may have had two diseases. In one study, the median age for Gl lymphoma was
about 8 years, with a spread of about 3 to 13 years, so this dog was a fairly young
victim of the disease. Six of 30 dogs in that study had enlarged lymph nodes.
Ss            s
have shown more male than female dogs affected.
Prednisolone was used in this dog prior to the initiation of a chemotherapy
protocol.  Most oncologists have recommended against using glucocorticoids  for
          o 
diagnosed, the rapid lymphocytolytic effects of glucocorticoids may have masked the
diagnosis. Another reason for avoiding corticosteroid USC is the potential of
multidrug resistance (MDR). MDR is a common cause for chemotherapeutic failure in
canine lymphoma. It involves P-glycoprotein, a transmembrane protein which acts as
from the tumour cells. Other mechanisms of resistance to multiple agents have been
discovered and MDR now refers to a phenotype of simultaneous resistance to
chemotherapeutic agents which differ in structure and also includes the aptly named
P-glycoprotein expression may be tissue and species dependent. There is still some
suggestion that pretreatment with glucocorticoids may adversely affect the success of
treatment with a multidrug chemotherapy protocol; the answer is not definitive. In
(134 days) compared to those that did not receive glucocorticoids (267 days).
have resulted in excessive cytolysis and intestinal breakdown, so a more gradual
approach was uused.
Prognosis
In one study the overall median survival time of dogs with Gl lymphoma was 13 days;
however, two dogs were alive at 31 and 84 months and both of these dogs had colonic
or rectal neoplasia. Overall, alimentary lymphoma provides a fair prognosis for short
    s      
39
Colonic inflammatory bowel disease in a cat
Initial presentation
Diarrhoea, decreased appetite and weight loss
Signalment: 11-year-old, male neutered, domestic shorthaired cat, body weight 3.8 kg
Case history
The cat had a l-month history of decreased appetite and weight loss, along with
increasingly softer faeces. There was some increase in the frequency of defecation and
The consistency of the faeces was described as ‘cow-pat', i.e. soft but formed. He
sometimes vomited, although the owners reported that this had been occurring for
years.
The cat had been vaccinated within the past year, but had not been de-wormed for
several years. His usual diet was a commercial canned cat food, fed two to three times
per day. During the past month the owner had also been feeding him cooked ham and
canned tuna to encourage his appetite.
Physical examination
Physical examination revealed the cat to be bright, alert and responsive. He was in
slightly thin body condition (body condition score 4/9) and appeared well hydrated.
His mucous membranes were pink with a capillary refill time of less than 2 seconds.
Oral examination showed that most of his teeth were missing but was otherwise
lnremarkable.
Thoracic auscultation revealed a heart rate of 2oo beats per minute with matched
pulses. Heart and lung sounds and percussion and compression of the thorax were
inremarkable. The respiratory rate was normal at 32 breaths per minute. Abdominal
palpation was not resented. There was possible abdominal lymph node enlargement
Rectal temperature was 38.3° C. The remainder of the physical examination was
linremarkable.
Problem list and discussion of problems
· Diarrhoea
· Weight loss
· Decreased appetite
The diagnostic approach to diarrhoea usually begins with determining if the cause
is large or small intestinal in origin. The diarrhoea in this case appeared to have a
large intestine component due to the increased frequency and the presence of fresh
blood and mucus. However, concurrent involvement of the small intestine could not
weight loss were thought to be related to the diarrhoea. Differential diagnoses for
decreased appetite include those which cause the animal to be unable to eat (can't eat)
and those in which the animal does not want to eat (won't eat); in this case the cat
was able to eat so the decreased appetite was likely due to illness.
Differential diagnosis
Large intestinal diarrhoea
· Inflammatory conditions
· non-specific colitis
chronic
 inflammatory
 colitis, e.g. plasmacytic/lymphocytic, eosinophilic, granulomatous,
suppurative
· Infectious causes
*FIP
* feline leukaemia virus (FeLV)
· Salmonella
· Campylobacter
· Clostridium perfringens
· Parasitic
· whipworms
. hookworms
· Giardia
· Tritrichomonas foetus
· Toxoplasma gondii
· Diet related
· dietary sensitivity (allergy or intolerance)
· fibre responsive diarrhoea
• Neoplasia, e.g lymphoma, adenocarcinoma, others
* Systemic disorders
· Uraemia
* toxicities
* pancreatopathy
· Secretagogues, e.g. unconjugated bile acids, hydroxylated fatty acids secondary to small intestinal
disorders
Small intestinal diarrhoea
• Diet related
* dietary sensitivity
· food poisoning
· sudden change of diet
· Small intestinal disease
• inflammatory bowel disease, e.g. plasmacytic/lymphocytic, eosinophilic, other
• infectious (viral, bacterial enterotoxins, fungal - although fungal disorders of the small intestine
are unlikely in the UK)
* parasites, e.g. Giardia, cryptosporida, Strongyloides, ascarids, hookworms, Toxoplasma gondii
* neoplasia, e.g. lymphoma, mastocytosis
* lymphangiectasia (uncommon in cats)
* ileus, e.g. hypokalaemia, enteritis, dysautonomia
· antibiotic responsive diarrhoea
· Pancreatic disorders
* pancreatic exocrine insufficiency
· Chronic pancreatitis
· Liver disorders
· liver failure
· intrahepatic cholestasis
* bile duct obstruction
· Kidney disease and uraemia
· Hyperthyroidism
· Congestive heart failure
 Hypoadrenocorticism (uncommon in cats)
Case work-up
A 4-to 6-week dietary trial with a highly digestible restricted novel protein or
hydrolyzed diet is appropriate in some cases of diarrhoea. With cases of colitis, the
addition of mixed soluble and insoluble fibre sources may also be of benefit. The use of
cats. In this case, however, as the cat was not eating well and had been losing weight,
prompt investigation rather than waiting for the results of a dietary trial was
indicated.
Minimum data base
Routine haematology was performed and revealed a moderate mature neutrophilia
(21.7 x 10*/l; reference range: 2.5-12.8 x 10*/l) and a mild monocytosis (1.06 x
10*/l; reference range: 0.07-0.85 x 10*/l). Blood smear analysis confirmed these
stimulation.
Serum biochemistry results revealed a marginal increase in urea (9.9 mmol/l;
reference range: 2.8-9.8) and bile acids (7.2 mmol/l; reference range 0-7) and a
marginal hypophosphataemia  (1.39 mmol/l; reference range: 1.42.5).  Mild
hypoalbuminaemia (24.0 g/l; reference range: 28-39) was also present.
Clinical tip on decreased serum albumin
Decreased serum albumin can be due to decreased production by the liver, increased loss via the
intestines or kidneys or a 'third space shift' (e.g. into an obstructed loop of intestine, the pleural
space or the peritoneal space). Production may also be decreased in inflammatory states, as it is a
 negative acute phase protein and decreases whereas production of some of the other proteins
increases. After checking for urinary loss (a urine protein to creatinine ratio), further diagnostics
involve looking for evidence of hepatic or gastrointestinal disorders or inappropriate fluid
accumulation.
To assess the pancreas, serum samples were submitted for measurement of feline
         
found to be within the reference range (fPL: 1.2 pg/; reference range: 0.1-3.5; TLI:
22.5 μg/l; reference range: 12-82).
Both serum folate (4.2 μg/l; reference range: 9.5-20.2 μg/l) and serum cobalamin
(186.0 ng/l; reference range: 270-1000 ng/l) concentrations were decreased and
supplementation was initiated.
Clinical tip on serum folate and cobalamin
Cobalamin is absorbed in the ileal part of the small intestine. It requires prior binding with
intrinsic factor, which comes from the pancreas in cats (and the stomach and pancreas in dogs).
 Deficiency may be caused by poor absorption due to intestinal disease or exocrine pancreatic
insufficiency, excessive bacteria in the upper small intestine utilizing the vitamin or a deficiency in 
intrinsic factor. In humans who are vegetarians (especially elderly humans), a dietary deficiency is
 possible; however, this is unlikely in cats as they cannot successfully be vegetarians.
Unlike most other B vitamins, cobalamin is stored in the body. In healthy cats the half-life is ll to
14 days and in cats with gastrointestinal disease it is only 4.5 to 5.5 days. Clinical signs of cobalamin
deficiency in humans include anaemia, thrombocytopenia, neuropathies and digestion abnormalities.
In cats (and dogs) the clinical signs are not as well described; however, it has been suggested that
response to treatment of intestinal disorders is improved with cobalamin repletion. A high serum
             n
supplementation. The recommended dose for treatment of gastrointestinal disease in humans exceeds
the recommended daily amounts and there is a consideration that there may be positive
pharmacological effects.
Folate is absorbed only in the proximal intestine. A deficiency usually indicates small intestinal
disease and if it is accompanied by a cobalamin deficiency it likely indicates widespread disease. A
 n s s      q  n s 
vitamin can also be increased by dietary intake.
Serum T4 was at the low end of the reference range at 15.3 nmol/1 (reference range:
15-48 nmol/l). An feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV)/FeLV ELISA was performed
which was negative for FeLV but positive for FIV antibodies.
Toxoplasma serology showed a negative IgM titre (< 20) and an IgG titre of 200,
which is most consistent with previous exposure to Toxoplasma gondi rather than
active infection.
Clinical tip on toxoplasmosis titres
Toxoplasmosis titres can be positive in healthy animals and the IgM titres correspond best with
clinical toxoplasmosis as this antibody class is rarely detected in the serum of healthy animals. In an
animal with clinical signs, demonstration of an IgM antibody titre of > 1 : 64 or a four-fold or greater
increase in paired (2 to 3 weeks apart) IgG titres is likely to indicate disease. The absence of the titre
increases does not rule out toxoplasmosis as some cats and dogs with the disease will undergo an
 e  a)         s s 
supportive (although not definitive of diagnosis) if there is a suspicion of disease.
Urinalysis showed a urine specific gravity of 1.048, indicating good urine
concentrating ability. The chemistry strip was unremarkable, and the urine sediment
was inactive. Urine protein to creatinine ratio was 0.13 (reference range <0.4 for
Tests for intestinal parasites, including Giardia and Tritrichomonas, were negative.
Faecal culture for enteropathogenic bacteria (Salmonella, Campylobacter, Yersinia)
was negative. In cases of suspected Clostridium perfringens induced colitis, an
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay should be performed to identify CPE A and CPE
B in faeces after a faecal bacterial culture is performed.
Imaging
Abdominal ultrasonography was performed with the cat sedated. This revealed
enlarged, hyperechoic and irregularly outlined colonic and jejunal lymph nodes (Fig
marked thickening of the mucosa with loss of normal wall layering in the transverse
and ascending colon (Fig 39.2).
Fig 39.1
 Ultrasound picture of enlarged, hyperechoic and irregularly outlined colonic and jejunal
lymph nodes
(courtesy of Carolina Urraca del Junco)
Fig 39.2
Ultrasound picture of colon showing marked thickening of the mucosa with loss of
normal wall layering
(courtesy of Carolina Urraca delJunco)
Clinical tip on ultrasound of the intestine
Ultrasound imaging of the small intestine is very useful in defining small intestinal masses and
interrogation of the wall layers of the bowel. The most prominent wall layer of the bowel is the
mucosal layer and this is universally very hypoechoic. On ultrasound exams the normal width of the
small intestinal wall is up to 5 mm and in the cat it is closer to 4 mm. Bowel wall width changes are
often accompanied with an increase in the size of one or more layers of the small intestine.
Disruption of the normal layering pattern of the intestinal wall can also be seen in some disorders.
At gastroduodenoscopy, the stomach and small intestine appeared grossly normal.
At colonoscopy, the colonic mucosa appeared thickened and the submucosal vessels
could not be clearly seen (Fig 39.3); however, there were no obvious mass lesions or
ulcerated areas. Biopsy samples were collected from the stomach, duodenum and
colon. While the cat was anaesthetized for endoscopy, fine needle aspirates of an
enlarged mesenteric lymph node and the thickened colonic wall were also taken under
liltrasound guidance and submitted for cytological evaluation.
Fig39.3
Endoscopic picture of colonic mucosa showing thickening and loss of visualization of
submucosal vessels
           s
colonic wall cytology was, unfortunately, non-diagnostic.
Histopathological examination of the gastric mucosal biopsies revealed the presence
of some Helicobacter-like spiral organisms at the surface of the gastric mucosa. There
was no associated gastric inflammation and it was therefore considered an incidental
finding.
Clinical tip on gastric Helicobacter
A causal role of Helicobacter in chronic gastritis and vomiting in dogs and cats has not been
established, although there are cases in which treatment improves the clinical condition. As in this
case the spiral bacteria present were only on the surface of the mucosa and there was no gastric
inflammation or clinical signs; treatment was not warranted. Where there are clinical signs, evidence
of inflammation and the organisms are located within the gastric pits or submucosally, treatment is
probably indicated.
The small intestinal mucosal biopsies revealed evidence of mild, diffuse chronic
enteritis. Histopathology of the colonic mucosal biopsies showed severe, multifocal,
granulomatous ulcerative colitis (Fig 39.4). There was no evidence of any aetiological
agents and Ziehl-Neelsen stains of the colonic biopsies for the presence of acid fast
(i.e. mycobacterial) organisms were negative.
Fig 39.4
Histopathology of the colon showing severe, multifocal, granulomatous ulcerative colitis
(courtesy of Professor Elspeth Milne)
Treatment and outcome
This cat was diagnosed with a granulomatous ulcerated from of colonic inflammatory
bowel disease, complicated by a positive FIV status. The FIV may either have caused or
contributed to the cat's clinical condition. The enteritis in the small intestine was
thought to be of less significance, although may have contributed to decreased
nutrient absorption.
Initial treatment included:
· Prednisolone: 5 mg po q 24 hours
· Marbofloxacin: 7.5 mg po q 24 hours
· Folic acid: 2.5 mg po q 24 hours
· A novel restricted protein, highly digestible canned diet
Clinical tip on fluoroquinolone use in cats
 In some cats given enrofloxacin, retinal degeneration leading to partial, temporary or total
blindness has occurred. This reaction is not common even with very high doses, but there is no way
to predict which cats will react. This reaction has only been reported with enrofloxacin and not with
other fluoroquinolones, as it is theorized that the biochemical structure of enrofloxacin leads to
           s  n
enrofloxacin in cats, marbofloxacin was initiated in this cat prior to the results of the periodic acid-
Schiff tests in the chance that similar pathophysiology to the histiocytic colitis of Boxer dogs might
be present.
At the time of discharge the cat was very bright, with a good appetite, having
gained 500 g since admission and with only intermittently soft stools.
Two weeks later the owners reported that the cat had done very well; his faecal
quality was improving and he had gained some weight. After the marbofloxacin was
stopped, the cat immediately showed signs of diarrhoea again and it was re-instituted
  a a  s        
marbofloxacin.
Pathophysiology and prognosis
In general, the more common forms of inflammatory bowel disease, with infiltration
of lymphocytes and plasmacytes or even eosinophils, carry a relatively good prognosis
for improvement in clinical signs.
Granulomatous colitis or enteritis, however, has a more guarded prognosis
Granulomatous colitis is characterized by the presence of aggregates of histiocytes in
the lamina propria. In this cat the infiltration of the mucosa and lamina propria was
described as predominantly large macrophage like cells, which may have been a
histiocytic type of cell. The presence of underlying infectious causes (e.g.
infections, although the latter are uncommon in the UK) should be ruled out before
Metronidazole is commonly used in feline chronic colitis, as it has multiple effects:
antibiotic, antiprotozoal and inhibition of some aspects of cell mediated immunity.
An ulcerative histiocytic colitis has been reported in young Boxer dogs, which
presents with thickened colonic mucosa and haemorrhage. This disorder shows a
cellular infiltrate of plasma cells, lymphocytes and periodic acid-Schiff positive
macrophages. The presence of the periodic acid-Schiff positive macrophages is a
An infectious aetiology is suspected for this histiocytic disorder and treatment of
cases early in the course of disease with enrofloxacin has been suiccessful. Treatment
is lifelong in these cases.
Cats with FIV show a significant incidence of dental disease (50-52% of
seropositive cats) and most of the teeth in this cat had been lost or removed. A
significant number (15-20%) of seropositive cats show chronic enteritis or
enterocolitis. Clinical signs include anorexia, chronic diarrhoea, dehydration and
weight loss. The diarrhoea may be persistent and, as in this cat, intestinal thickening
Multiple choice questions
1 In cases suspected of having regurgitation
a the pH of the food brought up is always acidic b episodes always occur within an
hour after eating c the disorder is generally located in the oesophagus d the food
brought up usually contains bile
2 In a dog which is suspected of regurgitating, which of the following imaging
a CT of the thorax b Fluoroscopy of the thorax c Radiographs of the thorax d
Ultrasound of the thorax
3 Acquired myasthenia gravis in dogs is an
a idiopathic disorder with no known cause b immune mediated disorder with
antibodies against  ACh molecules c immune mediated disorder  with antibodies
against ACh receptors d infectious disease caused by Bartonella spp.
4 The prognosis for a dog diagnosed with acquired myasthenia gravis is
Jo %0g 1noqe Auo se papieng q 1eaA e 1oy Suia1 sop jo %01 Auo qim 1ood Aiaa b
the dogs survive c excellent with nearly 1o0% of dogs responding well d unknown as
insufficient case num bers have been examined
6 Oesophageal strictures are usually best treated using
a balloon dilation, with repeated procedures if needed b solely medical management
with antacid drugs c high dose oral corticosteroids to decrease inflammation d
7 In a regurgitating 4-month-old puppy, a barium swallow shows abrupt
discontinuation of the barium just cranial to the base of the heart with gross
dilatation of the oesophagus cranial to that area. The most likely diagnosis is
a oesophageal foreign body b idiopathic megaoesophagus c oesophageal stricture d
persistent right aortic arch
             g
surgery?
a 80% have good swallowing function after the surgery b The megaoesophagus will
still be present but most dogs won't regurgitate c About half the dogs will continue to
9 There is evidence that dysautonomia in cats
a may have an aetiology related to botulinum type C neurotoxin b is likely to be
caused by an autoimmune response c may be related to a viral infection that is spread
via faeces d is due to a congenital disorder as it occurs mostly in related cats
10 Diagnoses of feline dysautonomia is based primarily on
a clinical signs b imaging results c a specific blood test d the response to treatment
11 Treatment of feline dysauitonomia
a is usually unrewarding as nearly all affected cats die b includes use of interferon for
the viral component of the disease c is based on supportive, nutritional and nursing
care d is primarily based on antibiotics effective against anaerobic bacteria
  si q s        s 
   p   sa i s ap    
13 Large rocks or bones can enter the small intestine of a dog from the stomach
a by moving through the pylorus with food particles b by exerting pressure on the
pylorus so that it opens c due to “housekeeping waves' which open the pylorus during
fasting d by entering the duodenum with liquids during drinking
14 Dogs that chronically vomit bile in the early hours of the morning are likely to
have
a bilious vomiting syndrome and may respond to a late night snack b irritable bowel
syndrome which will respond to probiotics c a motility disorder involving gastric
emptying of food d alimentary lymphoma and need chemotherapy
a food sensitivity b persistent right aortic arch c dysautonomia d porto-systemic
shunt
16 Meta bolic alkalosis in a dog or cat which is vomiting is usually associated with
a a pyloric  or duodenal  foreign body b gastrointestinal  parasites c Helicobacter
infection d pyometra
a looking for intestinal mucosal disorders b outlining the gastric shadow c checking
for an intestinal obstruction d checking for megaoesophagus
18 The ^organ of vomition' is the
a oesophagus b stomach c duodenum d colon
19 The chemoreceptor trigger zone is in
a the floor of the fourth ventricle b the cerebrum c the vestibular apparatus d the
duodenum
20 Endotoxic shock may occur in animals with intestinal obstruction with a foreign
body due to the
a presence of bacteria within the foreign body b consequences of dehydration due to
vomiting c increased numbers of bacteria within the stagnant loop of intestine d
body's response to the dilated intestine distal to the foreign body
21 A gastrointestinal barium contrast study is performed in a 10-year-old dog that has
been vomiting intermittently for four months. On a ventrodorsal view, the pylorus is
positioned more medially than normal and there is a decreased amount of contrast
seen in the duodenum. While not absolutely diagnostic, this pattern is most
suggestive of
a linear foreign body obstruction b partial gastric dilatation and volvulus c mucosal
22 Which of the following drugs has a pro-motility intestinal effect at low doses in the
fasting dog?
a Amoxicillin b Clindamycin c Erythromycin d Enrofloxacin
23 Bradycardia is most likely to occur in dogs with hypoadrenocorticism due to
24 A definitive diagnosis of hypoadrenocorticism should be made based on the results
of which test(s)?
a Basal cortisol b Electrolyte imbalance c Low dose dexamethasone suppression test d
ACTH stimulation test
25 The intravenous fluid of choice for correcting dehydration in a patient with
hypoadrenocorticism is
 a 0.9% saline b 0.18% saline with 4% glucose c Lactated ringers d hypertonic saline
26 Cats with pancreatitis may have low serum cobalamin concentrations because
a ileal absorption is decreased due to ileus b there is a dietary deficiency due to
anorexia c they lack the enzyme necessary for absorption d they have decreased
intrinsic factor
27 Folate is absorbed primarily in the
a stomach b proximal intestine c distal jejunum and ileum d colon
2 8 Differentiating  feline low grade  small cell  lymphoma  from  lymphocytic
inflammatory bowel disease
a is based on the endoscopic appearance of the small intestineb is based on
ultrasonographic measurement of intestinal wall thickness c is always possible based
on cytology d can be difficult even with histopathology
29 In a dog suspected of having eaten Gorilla glue, which is the best treatment?
a The initial treatment should be inducing emesis b The dog should be treated with
prokinetic drugs c The dog should be treated with activated charcoal d The glue mass
should be removed suurgically
30 Basophilic stippling of red blood cells on a haematoxylin and eosin stained blood
smear from a dog
a can occur with any regenerative anaemia b is suiggestive of possible lead toxicity c
is suggestive of possible zinc toxicity d is suggestive of porto-systemic shunting
              
dogs of which breed?
a Akita b Beagle c Poodle d Rottweiler
32 If ingested and absorbed, lead may be stored in the
a liver b bone c brain d prostate
3 3 The potentially most serious side effect of treating lead toxicity with calcium
edentate is reversible
a nephrotoxicity b liver failure c retinal damage d osteoporosis
34 The most common gastric tumour in dogs is
a lymphoma b leiomyosarcoma c adenocarcinoma d fibroma
3 5 The cat breed at highest risk for developing diabetes mellitus in the United
Kingdom is the
a Burmese b Persian c Siamese d Ragdoll
  n e n sd  i  n s  s s  s
been ill for a week is
a lipase b amylase c trypsin-like immunoreactivity d feline pancreatic specific lipase
37 In cats, which is the most common sign of pancreatitis?
a Anorexia b Vomiting c Diarrhoea d Fever
bodies
a are less serious as they rarely cause obstruction b cause more electrolyte imbalance
c are more likely to perforate the intestine d are usually located within the stomach
39 The urinary crystal or urolith caused by porto-systemic shunts is
a calcium oxalate b cystine c struvite d urate
40 The ductus venosus uisuially closes
a before birth b within a week or two after birth c at 4 months of age d at 9 months of
age
shunts is the
a Affenpinscher b Beagle c Chow d Yorkshire terrier
42 Diets with a high meat protein content are contraindicated for dogs with porto-
systemic shunting due to the increased risk of
43 A good source of supplemental protein for a growing puppy with a porto-systemic
shunt is
a cottage cheese b turkey c salmon d ham
a has an anti biotic effect in the colon b increases intestinal transit time c acidifies
colonic contents thereby trapping ammonia d decreases bile acid concentration
45 A cat predisposed to hepatic lipidosis would be one which
a is fat and then becomes anorexic b is thin and then becomes anorexic c is on a high
fat diet d is on a high protein diet
46 Which of the following abnormalities on serum chemistry would indicate that a
cat may have hepatic lipidosis rather than cholangitis?
a Elevated AP and GGT
b Decreased AP and GGT
c Normal AP and increased GGT
d Elevated AP with normal GGT
a If the faeces colour is normal, there is no bleeding b Dark faecal colour can only be
caused by GI bleeding c Melaena in faeces is caused by oxidation of haemoglobin d
Haematochezia is often caused by ingested blood
4 8 Acute haemorrhagic  gastroenteritis usually  differs from other  forms  of
gastrointestinal bleeding in that
a the PCV increases b the PCV decreases c the PCV is not affected d the albumin
increases
49 Colonic vascular dysplasia is diagnosed
a based on haematology and serum chemistry b by a typical appearance of the colon
appearance
50 Irritable bowel syndrome in dogs is diagnosed by the
     s      os 
histopathology of the colon d exclusion of other disorders and response to treatment
51 The most common colorectal tumours in the dog are
a adenoma/adenocarcinoma b fibroma c lymphoma d sarcoma
52 In cats with Tritrichomonas foetus
a diagnosis is made by routine faecal examination b diagnosis is made by zinc
flotation of faeces c the organisms are too small to be seen by light microscopy d
53 Histiocytic colitis in Boxer dogs responds to
a amoxicillin b enrofloxacin c clindamycin d metronidazole
54 What is the most common cause of EPl in cats?
a Pancreatic acinar atrophy b Exocrine pancreatic hypoplasia c Chronic pancreatitis
d Pancreatic neoplasia
Multiple choice answers
1 In cases suspected of having regurgitation,
c the disorder is generally located in the oesophagus
2 In a dog which is suspected of regurgitating, which of the following imaging
procedures should be performed first to help confirm the diagnosis?
c radiographs of the thorax
3 Acquired myasthenia gravis in dogs is an
c immune mediated disorder with antibodies against ACh receptors
4 The prognosis for a dog diagnosed with acquired myasthenia gravis is
b guarded as only about 50% of the dogs survive
5 In cases of idiopathic megaoesophagus, the most common cause of death is
d aspiration pneumonia
 n    ss  s
a balloon dilation, with repeated procedures if needed
discontinuation of the barium just cranial to the base of the heart with gross
d persistent right aortic arch
8 What is the prognosis for dogs with persistent right aortic arch which have
surgery?
c about half the dogs will continue to regurgitate
9 There is evidence that dysautonomia in cats
   o       
10 Diagnoses of feline dysautonomia is based primarily on
a clinical signs
11 Treatment of feline dysauitonomia
c is based on supportive, nutritional and nursing care
12 The pilocarpine test used to aid in a diagnosis of dysautonomia is based on
b miosis of the treated eye due to denervation supersensitivity
c due to housekeeping waves' which open the pylorus during fasting
14 Dogs that chronically vomit bile in the early hours of the morning are likely to
have
a bilious vomiting syndrome and may respond to a late night snack
d porto-systemic shunt
16 Metabolic alkalosis in a dog or cat which is vomiting is usually associated with
a a pyloric or duodenal foreign body
17 Barium impregnated polyethylene spheres (BIPS) are most useful for
c checking for an intestinal obstruction
18 The ‘organ of vomition' is the
c duodenim
19 The chemoreceptor trigger zone is in
a the floor of the fourth ventricle
20 Endotoxic shock may occur in animals with intestinal obstruction with a foreign
body due to the
c increased num bers of bacteria within the stagnant loop of intestine
21 A gastrointestinal barium contrast study is performed in a 10-year-old dog that has
been vomiting intermittently for fouir months. On a ventrodorsal view, the pylorus is
positioned more medially than normal and there is a decreased amount of contrast
seen in the duodenum. While not absolutely diagnostic, this pattern is most
suggestive of
b partial gastric dilatation and volvulus
22 Which of the following drugs has a pro-motility intestinal effect at low doses in the
fasting dog?
c Erythromycin
23 Bradycardia is most likely to occur in dogs with hypoadrenocorticism due to
a hyperkalaemia
24 A definitive diagnosis of hypoadrenocorticism should be made based on the results
of which test(s)?
d ACTH stimulation test
25 The intravenous fluid of choice for correcting dehydration in a patient with
hypoadrenocorticism is
a 0.9% saline
26 Cats with pancreatitis may have low serum cobalamin concentrations because
d they have decreased intrinsic factor
27 Folate is absorbed primarily in the
b proximal intestine
2 8 Differentiating  feline  low   grade  small  cell  lymphoma  from  lymphocytic
inflammatory bowel disease
d can be difficult even with histopathology
29 In a dog suspected of having eaten Gorilla glue, which is the best treatment?
d The glue mass should be removed suirgically
30 Basophilic stippling of red blood cells on an haematoxylin and eosin stained blood
smear from a dog
b is suggestive of possible lead toxicity
S p        (     
dogs of which breed?
a Akita
32 If ingested and absorbed, lead may be stored in the
b bone
3 3 The potentially most serious side effect of treating lead toxicity with calcium
edentate is reversible
a nephrotoxicity
34 The most common gastric tumour in dogs is
c adenocarcinoma
3 5 The cat breed at highest risk for developing diabetes mellitus in the United
Kingdom is the
a Burmese
been ill for a week is
d feline pancreatic specific lipase
37 In cats, which is the most common sign of pancreatitis?
a Anorexia
3 8 Compared to round (e.g. ball or rock) foreign bodies, linear intestinal foreign
bodies
c are more likely to perforate the intestine
39 The urinary crystal or urolith caused by porto-systemic shunts is
d urate
40 The ductus venosus usually closes
b within a week or two after birth
4 1 A breed commonly recognized to have congenital extrahepatic porto-systemic
shunts is the
d Yorkshire terrier
            
systemic shunting due to the increased risk of
a hepatic encephalopathy
43 A good source of supplemental protein for a growing puppy with a porto-systemic
shunt is
a cottage cheese
44 Lactulose is used to treat patients with porto-systemic shunting because it
c acidifies colonic contents thereby trapping ammonia
45 A cat predisposed to hepatic lipidosis would be one which
a is fat and then becomes anorexic
46 Which of the following abnormalities on serum chemistry would indicate that a
cat may have hepatic lipidosis rather than cholangitis?
d elevated AP with normal GGT
47 Regarding gastrointestinal bleeding, which of the following is most correct?
c melaena in faeces is caused by oxidation of haemoglobin
4 8 Acute haemorrhagic gastroenteritis usually  differs  from other  forms  of
gastrointestinal bleeding in that
a the PCV increases
49 Colonic vascular dysplasia is diagnosed
       e  qg
50 Irrita ble bowel syndrome in dogs is diagnosed by
d exclusion of other disorders and response to treatment
51 The most common colorectal tumours in the dog are
a adenoma/adenocarcinoma
52 In cats with Tritrichomonas foetus
d trophozoites can sometimes be seen in a fresh wet faecal preparation
53 Histiocytic colitis in Boxer dogs responds to
b enrofloxacin
54 What is the most common cause of EPI in cats?
c Chronic pancreatitis
APPENDIX 1 Abbreviations list
AchR
anticholinesterase receptor
ACTH
adrenocorticotrophin hormone
Ad lib
ad libitum (i.e. free choice)
ALT
alanine aminotransferase
AP
alkaline phosphatase
APTT
activated partial thromboplastin time
ARD
antibiotic responsive diarrhoea
ARE
antibiotic responsive enteropathy
BCS
body condition score
BIPS
barium impregnated polyethylene spheres
bpm
beats per minute
CFU
colony forming units
CI
contraindicated
CK
creatinine kinase
CKD
chronic kidney disease
cPLI
canine pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity
CRT
capillary refill time
CRTZ
chemoreceptor trigger zone
CT
computed tomography
DEA
dog erythrocyte antigen
dL
decilitre
DSH
domestic short hair (cat)
EDTA
ethylenediaminetetra-acetic acid
FeLV
feline leukaemia virus
EPI
exocrine pancreatic insufficiency
FIP
feline infectious peritonitus
FIV
feline immunodeficiency virus
fPLI
feline pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity
g
gram
GABA
gamma-Aminobutyric acid
GGT
gamma (Y) glutamyltransferase
GI
gastrointestinal
H2
histamine (type 2) (e.g. for receptors)
Hb
haemo globin
HL
hepatic lipidosis
KCI
potassium chloride
kg
kilogram
IBD
inflammatory bowel disease
lumbar, e.g. lumbar vertebra (other than in imaging pictures,
where L refers to left)
LSA
lymphoma
MCHC
mean cell haemoglobin concentration
MCV
mean corpuscular volume
mg
milligram
min
minute
ml
millilitre
MRI
magnetic resonance imaging
NSAID
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug
ng/l
nanograms/litre
nRBC
nucleated red blood cell
OZ
Jounce
PCR
polymerase chain reaction
PCV
packed cell volume
PLE
protein losing enteropathy
PLI
pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity
po
per os
PRAA
persistent right aortic arch
PSS
porto-systemic shunt
PT
prothrombin time
pu/pd
polyuria/polydipsia
b
every (used for frequency of dosing of medications)
R
right
RER
resting energy requirement
SAMe
S-adenosyl methionine
sec
second
Si
small intestine
SIBO
small intestinal bacterial overgrowth
T4
thyroxine
TLI
trypsin-like immunoreactivity
μg
microgram
UK
United Kingdom
ul
microlitre
USA
United States of America
WBC
white blood cell
wt
weight
APPENDIX2
Estimating the degree of dehydration
d   s  s   a   
mucous membrane dryness, skin turgor, the degree of sunken eyes and mentation.
          a  sn  g
evaluating for the approximate time required for the skin to return to its normal
position. Ideally, the same individual should perform this test each time using the
same location on the patient's body to eliminate some of the subjectivity of the test.
Skin tenting is affected by the amount of subcutaneous fat - very thin animals will
tent more than fat ones.
Nauseous animals may be salivating and this can affect the detection of dry oral
mucous membranes. Nervous or affectionate cats and some breeds of dogs may alsc
salivate.
These estimations are rarely exact, so the patient should be evaluated frequently
during iv fluid therapy to ensure adequate hydration and prevent overhydration.
Estimated degree of dehydrationSigns
<5%
 No clinical abn ormalities detectable, but possibly a history of vomiting/diarrhoea or decreased fluid intake
5-6%
Mild skin tenting (can vary with age and body condition) and ± dry mucous membranes
7-8%
Tenting of skin, prolonged capilaryrefil time (CRT), dry mucousmembranes, sight enophthamo
9-12%
Aouaqunsa peiuaa u Aia 'i aos 'asnd yeam pidet 'saa sreadde aap 'sa nea snosnu Aap 'pauan suean is 
13-15%
 Severe life threatening dehydration, marked shock, lateral recumbency, may die
         s  
            
The CRT should return to 1.5-2 seconds and the mucous membranes should be moist
and pink (unless other conditions affect the membrane colour).
and pulmonary oedema during intravenous fluid therapy. All patients receiving iv
fluid therapy should be monitored for signs of overhydration (anxiety, tachycardia,
harsh lung sounds).
APPENDIX3
Urgent vs non-urgent gastrointestinal cases It can be
difficult to decide the appropriate intervention and
when to perform surgery on gastrointestinal cases. The
guidelines below are only guidelines and a decision
must be made on each case individually. The lists are
not inclusive of all disorders.
I Regurgitation
A Many  cases of chronic regurgitation  are  treated medically  without  surgical
or due to an underlying cause 3 oesophageal dysmotility
B The regurgitation case needing the most urgent intervention is oesophageal
obstruction with a foreign body. These may often be removed with endoscopic
C Oesophageal strictures also require intervention, but again endoscopic guided
balloon dilation is the preferred method.
D Cases of regurgitation which will likely require surgery after stabilization include:
1 hiatal hernia 2 vascular ring anomalies 3 some oesophageal diverticula
II Vomiting
(may also have diarrhoea) A Many causes of vomiting can be treated without surgery
    s    e   i 
and chronic pancreatitis (without abscess or biliary obstruction) 2 acute or chronic
gastroenteritis 3  parvovirus   infection 4   parasites 5  acute   liver   disease 6
indiscretion 8 adverse reactions to food 9 colitis 10 diabetic ketoacidosis 11 uraemia
12 hypoadrenocorticism 13 vestibuilar disorders
 r       s l i
gastric-dilatation  volvulus 2 intestinal  volvulus 3 acute  peritonitis 4 incarcerated
bowel 5 diaphragmatic hernia with stomach or strangulated intestine 6 linear foreign
C Critical cases that require slrgery as soon as they are stabilized: 1 gastric dilation
without volvulus 2 gastric obstruction, e.g. pyloric stenosis or foreign body 3 distal or
partial  intestinal obstruction 4 obstructed or ruptured biliary  tree 5 pyometra 6
pancreatic mass/abscess 7 intussuisception
IHI Small intestinal diarrhoea
(see also vomiting cases above as many present with either or both clinical signs) A
Cases which are treated medically include: 1 enteritis 2 inflammatory bowel disease 3
food responsive disorders (adverse reactions to food) 4 parasites 5 infectious diarrhoea
6 antibiotic responsive diarrhoea 7 parvovirus infection 8 parasites 9 acute liver
disease 1 0 gastrointestinal ulceration (without perforation) 1 1 toxin ingestion or
dietary indiscretion 12 diabetic ketoacidosis 13 uraemia 14 hypoadrenocorticism 15
vestibular disorders
           
surgery include: 1 any case with a perforated intestine 2 mesenteric torsions 3
C Cases that require surgery as soon as they are stabilized include: 1 intussusception 2
intestinal masses/focal tumouurs
IV Generally not irgent, but suurgery often indicated for
1 some porto-systemic shunts
V Colonic disorders
             
3 irritable bowel syndrome 4 colonic  vascular dysplasia if generalized5 non
resectable tumours
B May require surgery as soon as the case is stabilized include: 1 obstructive colitis
(e.g. granulomatous)
C Generally not urgent, but may require surgery:1 obstipation (may require
V1 Exploratory celiotomy for diagnostic purposes
  I    o  ssn   i 
mural diseases (e.g. where mucosal biopsies obtained with an endoscope are not deep
enough) 2 small bowel lesions distal to the reach of the endoscope or if endoscopy is
APPENDIX4
Body condition scores
S       (    
Several BCS systems have been proposed with 3, 5, 6 or 9 points - the 9-point system
has been used in this book. The BCS system was developed and validated to provide a
             
cats using dual energy X-ray absorptiometry and was shown to provide a reasonable
estimate of body fat. Using BCS charts and showing the owner how to palpate the ribs
of their pet can be useful in convincing them of their pet's body condition. Ideal BCs
for dogs is 4 to 5 depending upon breed and is 5 for cats. The BCS systems can be used
to estimate percentage of body fat as in the table over leaf.
%
9pt
body
Body condition scoring
Dogs
Cats
scale
fat
Emaciated.
Ribs and bony prominences are visible from a distance.
1
≤5
No palpable body fat.Obvious abdominal tuckand loss
ofmusclemass.
Very thin.
2
6-9
Ribs and bony prominencesvisible.Minimal loss of
muscle mass,no palpable fat.
Thin.
10-14
Ribs easily palpable,tops of lumbar vertebrae are visible.
Obvious waist and abdominal tuck.
Minimal fat covering.
Lean.
15-19
Ribs eaily palpable,waist visible from above.Abdominal
tuck present.Abdominal fat pad is absent in cats.
Ideal.
5
20-24
Ribs palpable without excess fat covering.Waist and abdominal
tuck present in dogs. Cats have a waist and a minimal fat pad.
Slightly overweight.
6
25-29
Ribs have slight excess fat covering.Waistis discernible from
above,but not obvious.Abdominal tuck still present in dogs.
Abdominal fat pad is apparent,but not obvious in cats.
Overweight.
Difficult to palpate ribs.
7
30-34
Dogs:fat deposits over lumbar area and tail base.
Abdominal tuck may be present,but waist is absent.
Cats:moderate abdominal fat pad and rounding of the abdomen.
Obese.
Ribs not palpable and abdomen may be rounded.
8
35-39
Dogs:heavy fat deposits overlumbar and base of tail.
No abdominal tuckorwaist.
Cats:prominent abdominal fat pad and lumbar fat deposits.
Morbidly obese.
Dogs:large fat depositsover thorax,tail base and spine
40-45+
with abdominal distension.
Cats:heavy fat deposits over lumbar area,face and limbs.
Large abdominal fat pad and rounded abdomen.
APPENDIX 5
Reference ranges for haematology and serum chemistry
values for adult cats and dogs
            
chemistry was the University of Edinburgh Veterinary Pathology Unit although some
emergency cases also had in-house laboratory parameters measured.
Parameter
Unit
Dog
Cat
Parameter
Unit
Dog
Cat
Haematology
Creatinine
umoll
40-132
40-177
RBC
X101/
5.5-8.5
5.5-10.0
Fibrinogen
16
2.0-4.0
2.0-4.0
WBC
×10/
6.0-15.0
7.0-20.0
Fructosamine
μmoll
49-225
100-350
Neutrophils (segmented)
X10/
3.6-12.0
2.5-12.8
Glucose
mmolI
3.0-5.0
3.3-5.0
Neutrophils (bands)
×10°/
0-0
0-0
Lead (blood)
0.5-2.4
0-1.21
Lymphocytes
×10/
0.7-4.8
1.5-7.0
Lipase
IU/
13-200
8-0
Monocytes
x10/
0.0-1.5
0.07-0.85
Totalprotein
16
E2-85
69-79
Eosinophils
x10/
0.0-1.0
0.0-1.0
Urea
mmoll
1.7-7.4
2.8-9.8
Basophils
×10/
0.0-1.0
0.0-1.0
Enzymes
PCV
0.39-0.55
0.24-0.45
AP
IU/
20-60
10-100
Hb
IP/6
12.0-18.0
8.0-14.0
ALT
IU/
21-102
8-9
MCV
f
60-77
28-55
AST
IU/
15-65
15-50
MCHC
%
32-36
30-36
CK
IU/
50-200
50-200
Platelets
x10/
200-500
009-008
GGT
IU/
2-8
1-5
Prothrombin time
sec
5-12
5-12
Minerals/traceelements
APTT
sec
10-20
10-20
Calcium
mmolI
2.3-3.0
2.1-2.9
Serum chemistry
Magnesium
mmoll
0.69-1.18
0.82-1.23
Albumin
1/6
26-35
28-39
Inorganic phosphate
mmo/l
0.9-2.0
1.4-2.5
Amylase
IU/I
225-990
525-960
Sodium
mmoll
139-154
145-156
Bile acids (fasting)
umoll
0-7
0-7
Potassium
mmoll
3.6-5.6
4.0-5.0
Bilirubin (total)
umoli
0-6.8
0-6.8
VitamIns(fromTexasGl Lab)
Chloride
mmol/1
99-115
117-140
Cobalamin
ng/l
251-908
290-1500
Cholesterol
mmoll
3.8-7.0
2.0-3.4
Folate
μg/
7.7-24.4
9.7-21.6
Cortisol
nmoll
20-230
10-250
Abbreviations:ALTalanine aminotransferase;AP,alkaline phosphatase;APTT,activated partial thromboplastin time;AST,aspartate
aminotransferase; CK, creatine kinase; GGT, -glutamyl transferase; Hb, haemoglobin; MCHC, mean cell haemoglobin
concentration; MCV, mean corpuscular volume; PCV, packed cell volume.
Laboratory values for kittens and puppies
are some important differences that should be taken into consideration.
Haematology
The packed cell volume (PcV) of kittens and puppies is lower than that of adult cats
around 4 to 5 weeks of age. The values increase to adult ranges when they are around
3-4 months old. The white blood cell count of puppies and kittens may be in the high
adult range or slightly higher at 3 months of age and then should be within the adult
reference range.
Serum chemistry
               
about 0.5 mmol/ higher than the top of the adult reference range.
Total serum alkaline phosphatase (AP) is often two to three times the aduilt
reference range during growth due to the bone isoenzyme
  t       a  s   s
months of age. Serum albumin concentration should reach adult concentrations by
a bout 2 months of age. Seruim globulin concentration increases more slowly.
The concentration of serum creatinine, which is derived from muscle tissue, is
lisually low in puppies and kittens. Fasted puppies and kittens may have lower blood
lirea nitrogen than adults, although diet can affect this parameter.
APPENDIX6
Resources for tests for gastrointestinal disorders
GI Laboratory
The Gl Lab at Texas A&M University is an excellent resource, although some samples
cannot be  shipped  successfully  from overseas. Contact details are: e-mail:
gilab@cvm.tamul.edu
Shipping address:
Gastrointestinal Laboratory 4474 TAMU
College of Veterinary Medicine Texas A&M University College Station, TX 77843-
4474
Tel: (979) 862 2861; Mon-Fri 8:00 Am to 5:00 pm (Centra1 Time, USA) Fax: (979) 862
2864
pancreatic function testing (i.e. to diagnose EPl) · Serum Cobalamin (Vitamin Bi2)
and Folate: Test of small intestinal function (not species specific) · Pancreatic Lipase
Immunoreactivity (PLI): Test for diagnosis of pancreatitis in dogs and cats (species
specific) · Faecal Alpha,-Proteinase Inhibitor: Test for protein-losing enteropathy -
dogs and cats · Serum Bile Acids: Test for hepatic function - dogs, cats and other
       n   a
Tritrichomonas foetus: PCR testing · Campylobacter spp.: PCR test for differentiation
and species specific identification of Campylobacter jejuni, C. upsaliensis, C. coli, C.
helveticus
· Canine schistosomiasis: PCR test for Heterobilharzia americana
· Enterotoxigenic Clostridium perfringens: PCR test for the gene encoding C.
perfringens enterotoxin · Thyroid hormones and cortisols: Total T4, TSH, free T4 by
equilibrium dialysis, cortisols · Serum gastrin
IDEXX Laboratories
IDEXX, as well as a full service veterinary laboratory, IDEXX offers the Spec cPL and
Spec fPL for quantitative specific pancreatic lipase in dogs and cats for diagnosis of
pancreatitis. They also have a range of in house tests available, e.g. SNAP tests for
Giardia and Parvovirus. Their contact details in the UK are: IDEXX Laboratories Ltd
Milton Court
Churchfield Road
Chalfont St Peter
Buckinghamshire SL9 9EW
United Kingdom
Tel: + 44 (0)175 389 1660
Fax: + 44 (0)175 389 1520
Myasthenia gravis
The ^gold standard’ for the diagnosis of acquired MG in both dogs and cats is the
documentation  of  antibodies  against Ach  receptors  by  immunoprecipitation
radioimmunoassay. This test is available through the Comparative Neuromuscular
Laboratory, 
University of California,   SanDiego; Available 
 at:
http://medicine.ucsd.edu/vet_neuromuscular; E-mail: musclelab@ucsd.edu).
Tritrichomonas foetus
Caroline State University for this test. Information on this is available at:
www.cvm.ncsul.edu/mbs/gookin_jody.htm
In the UK the PCR test is available from Capital Diagnostics in Edinburgh (+ 44
(0)131 535 3145).
The organism can also be cultured from faecal samples using a system developed
for diagnosis in cattle. The ^In Pouch tm TF' test (BioMed Diagnostics, Oregon, USA)
e     d sd        
with 0.05 g of faeces (about half the size of a small pea). The pouches are incubated at
every 2 days for 12 days. This test is more sensitive than direct examination of faeces
and helpful for detecting infections where direct smears are negative. Giardia and
other similar organisms will not grow in this specific culture medium. In the UK, this
system is available from Capital Diagnostics in Edinburgh ( + 44 (0)131 535 3145).
Most tests in this book were run at the: Veterinary Pathology Unit Easter Bush
Midlothian EH25 9RG
United Kingdom
Tel: + 44 (0)131 650 6403
E-mail: vpu.enquiries@ed.ac.uk
APPENDIX 7
Obtaining cisapride
Since withdrawal of cisapride from the human market, it has become
increasingly difficult, but not impossible to obtain this drug. The drug may still be
imported from abroad, on a named patient basis as follows:· Obtain a Special
Treatment Certificate (STC) from the Veterinary Medicines Directorate
Directorate, Woodham Lane, New Haw, Addlestone, Surrey, KT15 3LS (01932 336911).
 Repeat applications can be made online
· Further information available at: www.vmd.gov.uk
   S  S   q    a e
Weybridge, Surrey, KT13 8DB; Available at: www.idispharma.com
· The brand name is Gasprid and it comes as 10 mg tablets made by a Polish company
Teva Polska. Polfa Kutno, uil. Sienkiewicza 25, 99-300 Kutno, Tel: + 48 24 355 01 00,
Fax: + 48 24 355 03 50; Available at: www.teva.pl/u235/navi/90
· The 10 mg tablets may be reformulated into a more cat-friendly size (e.g. 2.5 mg
capsules) by Nova Laboratories Ltd, Martin House, Gloucester Crescent, Wigston,
Leicester LE18 4YL; Available at: www.novalabs.co.uk
 Cisapride suspension has a shelf life of 28 days
from
www.diamondbackdrugs.com), but currently European sources must be used in the
first instance.
APPENDIX 8
Canine inflammatory bowel disease activity index
(CIBDAI) An index to estimate the severity of
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) in dogs has been
developed to help in the management of patients and
to aid in collaborative multicentre studies. An index for
feline IBD is also being developed. The current criteria
for assessment of canine inflammatory bowel disease
activity index are below: A attitude/activity B appetite
C vomiting
D stool consistency
E stool frequency
F weight loss
These six variables are scored 0 to 3: 0 = normal 1 = mild change
2 = moderate change
3 = severe change
The summary of these six variables gives the total composite CIBDAI score, which
is interpreted as: 0-3 = clinically insignificant disease 4-5 = mild IBD
6-8 = moderate IBD
9 or greater = severe IBD
APPENDIX 9
Feeding tubes
Feed ing tube
Advantages
Disadvantages
Naso- oesoph ageal
Easy to place
Contraindicated with nasal, facial, oesophageal disease or
Minimal equ ipment
frequent vomiting
Not contrain dicated with 
Tubes easily bec ome blocked
coagulopathy
 Short-term (3-5 days)
Oesophagost omy
Larger bore, therefore feed ing easier
 Requires gen eral an aesthetic
 Moderately easy to place
 Contrain dicated with coagulopathy, vomiting, oesophageal
Can be used for >l week
disease
Gastrostomy (peg)
Larger bore, therefore feed in g easier
Requires gen eral an aesthetic
Not likely to bec ome d islod ged with
Contrain dic ated with coagulopathy
vomiting
Higher level of skill and equipment
 Medications can be given through
sep Z Jo wnu u e s u Aes snn
the tube
APPENDIX 10 Medications used in the treatment of gastrointestinal disorders
These lists of medications are not complete and while sometimes or often used, many of the
medications are not licensed for use in cats and dogs
Medication
Dose
Comments
Anti-emetics (check for obstruction before using as they may mask
signs)
1-2 mg/kg/24
D, dopaminergic antagonist.
hr CRI or 0.2-
Metoclopramide
Upper GI prokinetic, short half life
0.5 mg/kg im,
when given orally or sq
od 10 bs
0.1-0.3 mg/kg
im, iv q 12 hr orD, dopaminergic antagonist
Domperidone
1-2 mg/animal
Not commonly used
po
0.5-1.0 mg/kg
No known prokinetic effect.
24 hr sq or 2
Maropitant
Blocks NK-1 receptors in the
mg/kg po q 24
medullary vomiting centre
hr
0.2-0.4 mg/kg
Alpha2 agonist. Affects CRTZ and
Chlorpromazine
sq q 8 hr
emetic centre
0.5-1.0 mg/kg
Affects CRTZ, vagal afferent
Ondansetron
po q 12-24 hr
neurones
Dogs: As a
promotility
agent: 0.5
mg/kg q 8 hr
Not a true anti-emetic, but
For
promotility effect may decrease
oesophagitis:
vomiting by enhancing gastric
0.25 mg/kg po qll
8-12 hr
emptying and intestinal transit.
Also used for reflux oesophagitis
Cats: For
and constipation/megacolon (cats)
chronic
No longer commercially available
Cisapride
constipation
e.g
must be obtained from a
megacolon):
compounding pharmacy or
In combination
imported
with a stool
Contraindications:
softener (e.g.
hypersensitivity, GI
lactulose) 0.1-1
perforation/obstruction,
mg/kg q 8-12
haemorrhage
hr po or 5 mg
per cat (total
dose) po q 8-12
hr
Drugs for diarrhoea
0.1-0.2 mg/kg
Diphenoxylate
Narcotic analgesic
po q 8 hr
0.1-0.2 mg/kg
Loperamide
Narcotic analgesic
po q 8 hr
Antibiotics sometimes used for bacteria induced diarrhoea and
other GI disorders
10-20 mg/kg iv
Ampicillin
Anaerobic infections
q 6-8 hr, sq, po
22-44 mg/kg q
Cephalathin
Gram-negative organisms
po 6-8 hr
4-12 mg/kg po
As part of treatment for
Clarithromycin
q 12 hr
Helicobacter spp.
8.75 mg/kg iv q
8 hr
Clavulanate-
8.75 mg/kg im
As part of treatment for
potentiated
or sc of 24 hr
Helicobacter spp.
amoxicillin
12.5 mg/kg po q
8-12 hr
Gram-negative organisms and
3-5 mg/kg po q Boxer histiocytic colitis.
Enrofloxacin
12 hr
Caution with use in cats due to
potential blindness
10 mg/kg po q 8
Campylobacter only, may cause
Erythromycin
hr
diarrhoea
0.1-50 mg/kg
ow dose to promote fasting
Erythromycin
po q 8 hr
motility, mimics motilin in dogs
2.2 mg/kg sc,
For sepsis only, nephrotoxic,
Gentamicin
iv, q 8 hr
ototoxic
10-20 mg/kg po
Aids in some cases of
Tylosin
q 12 hr
colitis/enteritis
BD, anaerobic bacteria, Giardia.
7-15 mg/kg po
Metronidazole
Teratogenic and may be
q 8-12 hr
carcinogenic.
Immunosuppressive or anti-inflammatory drugs
0.5-3 mg/kg po
Taper higher doses over several
q 12-48 hr
Prednisolone
months (e.g. 20% decrease q 2-3
depending upon
weeks)
condition
Contraindicated or caution with
drugs that inhibit cytochrome
Dogs (older
P450 enzymes, e.g. cimetidine. CI
than 6 months):
Ciclosporin
with hyperkalaemia Potential
5 mg/kg po q 12
nephrotoxicity, especially if used
24 hr
with other potentially nephrotoxic
drugs
2 mg/kg po q 24
hr until
Bone marrow suppression is the
Azathioprine
remission then
most serious potential adverse
0.5-2 mg/kg po
reaction, monitor haematology
q 48 hr
10-20 mg/kg po
Local colonic NSAIDs. Less risk
Olsalazine
q 12 hr
of KCS cf sulfasalazine
Dogs: 15-30
mg/kg po q 8-
12 hr (max 6
Sulfasalazine
Local NSAIDs. Risk of KCS
g/day)
Cats: 1-20
mg/kg po q 8-
12 hr
H, receptor blockers (used to decrease gastric acidity)
Dogs: 5-10
Slows metabolism of other drugs
mg/kg iv, im,
by binding to hepatic microsomal
po q 8 hr
cytochrome P450 and may
Cimetidine
Cats: 2.5-5.0
increase their plasma
mg/kg iv, im,
concentrations. No known
po q 12 hr
promotility effect
2 mg/kg sc, iv
Some prokinetic effect via
Ranitidine
or slow iv 8-12
muscarinic AchR
hr
Does not have the interaction of
0.5-1.0 mg/kg
Famotidine
cimetidine, may or may not have
po q 12-24 hr
prokinetic effects
Cytoprotective drugs
Dogs: 500
Aluminium ion binds to
mg/dog po q 6
proteinaceous exudates forming a
8 hr for dogs up
barrier over ulcerated areas.
to 20 kg, 1-2
Promotes bicarbonate and
g/dog po q 6-8
Sucralfate
prostaglandin E production which
hr for dogs >20
aids mucosal defense and repair.
kg
May decrease bioavailability of
Cats: 250
other drugs, especially
mg/cat po q 8-
etracyclines
12 hr
Dogs: 2-7.5
Aids in protection of the GI ulcers
ug/kg po q 8-12
due to NSAIDs. Side effects
Misoprostol
hr
include diarrhoea, vomiting,
Cats: 5 μg/kg
po q 8 hr
abortion
APPENDIX 11 Medications used in the treatment of feline hepatic lipidosis
Medication
Dose
Comments
Depends on
degree of
Lactate-containing fluids (e.g.
dehydration,
0.9% NaCl
Hartmann's) should be avoided, as
concurrent
lactate requires hepatic metabolism
cardiac
disease, etc
Depends on
Hypokalaemia may develop with re-
Potassium
degree of
feeding. Monitor daily for first 72
chloride
hypokalaemia.
hr. Do not exceed 0.5 mmol/kg/hr
0.01-0.06
Hypophosphataemia may develop
mmol/kg/hr
with re-feeding. Supplementation
Potassium
Give as
indicated if <0.7mmol/l. Re-
phosphate
constant rate
evaluate after 6 hr. Will precipitate
infusion in
with Ca-containing fluids
NaCl
0.3-0.5
Hypomagnesaemia may develop
mmol/kg/day
with re-feeding and may contribute
Magnesium
Give as
to hypokalaemia. Monitor q 12-24
sulphate
constant rate
ar. Will precipitate with calcium
infusion in
containing fluids
NaCl
Anaphylaxis may be seen with
Thiamine
50-100
injectable preparations - use oral
(Vitamin B)
mg/cat/day
instead
Liver cobalamin stores may be
Cobalamin
1 mg/cat sq q
depleted in the face of normal serum
(Vitamin B,2)
7-14 days
cobalamin
1-2 ml per
Multivitamin
500 ml bag of
Protect from light once added to bag
preparations
fluids
Give orally or by subcutaneous
0.5-1.0 mg/kginjection using a 25 G needle.
Vitamin K,
q 12 hr for 3
Vitamin K required for clotting
doses
factors II, VII, IX and X
0.5-1.0 mg/kg
Maropitant
Not licensed for use in cats
q 24 hr
Central anti-emetic effect in cats
1 mg/kg/24 hr
questionable due to lack of
MetoclopramideConstant rate
dopaminergic receptors, but
infusion
peripheral prokinetic effects
Not licensed for use in cats, but
2 mg/kg q 8-
Ranitidine
preferred over cimetidine due to
12 hr
prokinetic effect
Antioxidant often depleted with
Vitamin E
10 IU/kg/day
anorexia or malabsorption
250-500
Promotes utilization of fatty acids
-carnitine
mg/cat/day
by mitochondria
250-500
High dietary requirement, as used
Taurine
mg/cat/day
for bile acid conjugation
Higher dose required if enteric
coated tablets are crushed for
20-40
s-adenosyl
administration via feeding tube.
mg/kg/day
methionine
Precursor for L-carnitine and
90 mg/cat/day
glutathione; antioxidant and
hepatoprotective properties
140 mg/kg;
Subsequent doses may be given
N-acetyl
dilute 1:4 with
after 8-12 hr at 70 mg/kg. Precursor
cysteine
NaCl and give
for glutathione
over 20 min
Abbreviations: AchR, anticholinesterase receptor; Ca, calcium; cf, compared to; CI,
contraindicated; CRI, constant rate infusion; CRTZ, chemoreceptor trigger zone; g, gram;
ga, gauge; GI, gastrointestinal; hr, hour; iv, intravenous; KCs, keratoconjunctivitis sicca;
kg, kilogram; mg, milligram; min, minute; NaCl, sodium chloride; NSAIDs, non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs; po, per os; sc, subcutaneously; μg, microgram.
Recommended reading
Swallowing and regurgitation
ergens AE. Diseases of the esophagus. In: Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC, editors. Textbook of Veterinary
Internal Medicine. 7th edn. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders; 2010:1487-1499.
Chirurgicale de 1'Animal de Compagnie. 1994;29(1):25-43.
rombeck DR, Guilford WG. Pharynx and esophagus: normal structure and function. In: Guilford WG,
atrous BJ. The esophagus. In: Thrall DE, editor. Textbook of Veterinary Diagnostic Radiology. 4th edn.
Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders; 2002:329-348.
Idiopathic megaoesophagus in a dog
aynor AR, Shofer Fs, Washabau RJ. Risk factors for acquired megaesophagus in dogs. Journal of the
American Veterinary Medical Association. 1997;211(11):1406-1411.
uilford WG. Megaesophagus in the dog and cat. Seminars in Veterinary Medicine and Surgery (Small
Animal). 1990;5(1):37-45.
uilford WG, Stombeck DR. Diseases of swallowing. In: Guilford WG, Center SA, Strombeck DR, Williams
DA, Meyers DJ, editors. Stombeck's Small Animal Gastroenterology. 3rd edn. Philadelphia, PA: WB
Saunders; 1996:211-238.
ogan DA, Johnson LR, Sturges BK, et al. Etiology and clinical outcome in dogs with aspiration
pneumonia:  8 cases  (2004-2006). Journal of  American  Veterinary  Medical  Association.
2008;233(11):1748-1755.
ears EA, Jenkins CC. Canine and feline megaesophagus. Compendium for Continuing Education.
1997;19(3):313-325.
'ahl JM, Clark LA, Tsai KL, Murphy KE. A review of hereditary diseases of the German Shepherd Dog.
Journal of Veterinary Behavior. 2008;3(4):177.
   5  o   so pi   ra s
Veterinary Radiology and Ultrasound. 2002;43(6):545-549.
Myasthenia gravis in a dog
                s
     ss  o s  s   
Veterinary Clinics of North America Small Animal  Practice. Neuromuscular Diseases, 32.
Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders; 2002:189-206.
lelton GD, Lindstrom JM. Spontaneous remission in canine myasthenia gravis: implications for assessing
human MG therapies. Neurology. 2001;57:2139-2141.
relton GD, Willard MD, Cardinet GH, Lindstrom J. Acquired myasthenia gravis. Selective involvement of
esophageal, pharyngeal and facial muscles. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine. 1990;4:281-
284.
  s    s s  s '   s
Small Animal Practice. 1996;37:179-183.
Oesophageal stricture in a cat
damama-Moraitou KK, Rallis TS, Prassinos NN, Galatos AD. Benign esophageal stricture in the dog and
cat: a retrospective study of 20 cases. Canadian Journal of Veterinary Research. 2002:66(1):55-59.
lazer A, Walters P. Esophagitis and esophageal strictures. Compendium for Contining Education for the
Practicing Veterinarian. 2008;30(5):281-292.
eib MS, Dinnel H, Ward DL, et al. Endoscopic balloon dilation of benign esophageal strictures in dogs
and cats. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine. 2001;15(6):547-552
ellon R, Willard M. Esophagitis and esophageal strictures. Veterinary Clinics of North America Small
Animal Practice. 2003;33(5):934-967.
Phenobarbitone response regurgitation in a dog
    s s      ss   ' 
Medical Association. 2000;216:872-874.
        r  s
S           s  s  
Ass0ciation. 1979;15:37-50.
cooks DG, Hottinger HA, Dunstan Rw. Canine necrotizing sialometaplasia: a case report and review of
the literature. Journal of the American Animal Hospital. 1995;31:21-25.
hapman BL, Malik R. Phenobarbitone-responsive hypersialism in two dogs. Journal of Small Animal
Practice. 1992;33:549-552.
Dok MM, Guilford WG. Necrotizing sialoadenitis in a wire-haired fox terrier. New Zealand Veterinary
Journal. 1992;40:69-72.
elly DF, Lucke VM, Denny HR, Lane JG. Histology of salivary gland infarction in the dog. Veterinary
Pathol0gy. 1979:16:438-443.
evitski RE, Trepanier LA. Effect of timing of blood collection on serum phenobarbital concentrations in
dogs with epilepsy. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association. 2000;217(2):200-204.
awby DI, Bauer Ms, Lloyd-Bauer PM. Vasculitis and necrosis of the mandibular salivary glands and
chroeder H, Berry WL. Salivary gland necrosis in dogs: as retrospective study of 19 cases. Journal of
Small Animal Practice. 1998;39:121-125.
unusual form of limbic epilepsy? Journal of Small Animal Practice. 2000;41:416-421.
Oesophageal foreign body in a dog
irrows CF. Gastrointestinal disorders, part 2 Esophagus. In: Schaer M, editor. Clinical Medicine of the
Dog and Cat. London: Manson Publishing Ltd; 2010:328-341.
complications and follow-up of 102 dogs. Journal of Small Animal Practice. 2009;50(12):649-654.
uilford WG. Disease of swallowing. In: Guilford WG, Center SA, Strombeck DR, Williams DA, Meyer DJ,
editors. Strombeck's Small Animal Gastroenterology. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders; 1996:211-238.
eib M, Sartor LL. Esophageal foreign body obstruction caused by a dental chew treat in 31 dogs (2000-
2006). Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association. 2008;232(7):1021-1025.
ithi C, Neiger R. Esophageal foreign bodies in dogs: 51 cases (1992-1997). The European Journal of
Comparative Gastroenterology. 1998;3:7-11.
Persistent right aortic arch in a dog
ngeroth JM, Fossum Tw. Late-onset regurgitation associated with persistent right aortic arch in two
dogs. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association. 1987;191:981-983.
uilford WG, Stombeck DR. Diseases of swallowing. In: Guilford WG, Center SA, Strombeck DR, Williams
Saunders; 1996:211-238.
   n    n        
in Greyhounds. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association. 2004;224(7):1120-1122
oughin CA, Marino DJ. Delayed primary surgical treatment in a dog with a persistent right aortic arch.
Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association. 2008;44(5):258-261.
arch in dogs  (1980-1995). Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association.
1997;210(12):1761-1763.
atterson DF. Hereditary congenital heart defects  in dogs. Journal of Small Animal Practice.
1989;30(3):153-160. 165
nires PK, Liu W. Persistent right aortic arch in dogs: a long term follow-up after surgical correction.
Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association. 198l;17:773-776.
Veterinarian. 1989;11(1):36-48.
Feline dysauitonomia
ave TA, Knottenbelt C, Mellor DJ, et al. Outbreak of dysautonomia (Key-Gaskell syndrome) in a closed
colony of pet cats. Veterinary Record. 2003;153(13):387-392.
dney ATN, Gaskell CJ, Sharp NJH Feline dysautonomia - an emerging disease. Waltham Symposium No 6
(eds) Journal of Small Animal Practice 1987;28:333-415.
              
Clostridium botulinum type C/D. Veterinary Record. 2004;155(4):111-115.
larp NJ. Feline dysautonomia. Seminars in  Veterinary Medicine and Surgery (Small Animal).
1990;5(1):67-71.
Gastrointestinal physiology - the normal stomach and small intestines
askell IE, Johnson JV. Digestion and absorption. In: Burger I, editor. The Waltham Book of Companion
Animal Nutrition. Oxford: Pergamon Press; 1993:25-44.
laux CG, Steiner JM, Williams DA. Metabolism of amino acids in cats with severe cobalamin deficiency.
American Journal of Veterinary Research. 2001;62:1852-1858.
rombeck DR. Small and large intestine. In: Guilford WG, Center SA, Strombeck DR, Williams DA, Meyer
DJ, editors. Strombeck's Small Animal Gastroenterology. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders; 1996:318-
350.
rombeck DR, Guilford WG. Gastric structure and function. In: Guilford WG, Center SA, Strombeck DR,
Williams DA, Meyer DJ, editors. Strombeck's Small Animal Gastroenterology. Philadelphia, PA: WB
Saunders; 1996:239-255.
Vomiting
len FJ, Guilford WG. Assessment of gastrointestinal motility. In: Bonagura JD, editor. Kirk's Current
Veterinary Therapy XIll. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders; 2000:611-613.
uilford WG. Approach to clinical problems in gastroenterology. In: Guilford WG, Center SA, Strombeck
DR, Williams DA, Meyer DJ, editors. Strombeck's Small Animal Gastroenterology. 3rd edn.
Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders; 1996:50-76.
uilford WG, Jones BR, Markwell PJ, et al. Food sensitivity in cats with chronic idiopathic
gastrointestinal problems. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine. 2001;15:7-23.
lilford WG, Strombeck DR. Vomiting: pathophysiology and pharmacological control. In: Guilford WG,
Center SA, Strombeck DR, Williams DA, Meyer DJ, editors. Strombeck's Small Animal
Gastroenterology. 3rd edn. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders; 1996:256-260.
all JA. Clinical approach to chronic vomiting. In: August JR, editor. Consultations in Feline Medicine.
3rd edn. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders; 1997:61-67.
   s n       
Education for the Practicing Veterinarian. 1994;16(12):1555-1564.
cosek R, Pechman RD, Taboada J. Using radiographs to diagnose the cause of vomiting in a dog.
Veterinary Medicine. 2000;95(9):688-690.
A foreign body in the small intestine of a dog
uilford WG, Strombeck DR. Intestinal obstruction, pseudo-obstruction, and foreign bodies. In: Guilford
WG, Center SA, Strombeck DR, Williams DA, Meyers DJ, editors. Strombeck's Small Animal
Gastroenterology. 3rd edn. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders; 1996:487-582.
ayes G. Gastrointestinal foreign bodies in dogs and cats: a retrospective study of 208 cases. Journal of
Smal1 Animal Practice. 2009;50(11):576-583.
naiken L. Determining the type of intestinal obstruction. Veterinary Medicine. 1997;92(11):950-951.
yrrell D, Beck C. Survey of the use of radiography vs. ultrasonography in the investigation of
2006;47(4):404-408.
Chronic partial gastric dilatation in a dog
rockman DJ, Holt DE, Washabau RJ. Pathogenesis of acute canine gastric dilatation-volvulus syndrome:
is there a unifying hypothesis?  Compendium for Continuing Education for the Practicing.
Veterinarian. 2000;22(12):1108-1114.
syndrome in dogs: a practitioner/owner case-control study. Journal of the American  Animal
Hospital Association. 1997;33:197.
lickman LT, Glickman NW, Schellenberg DB, et al. Non-dietary risk factors for gastric dilatation-volvulus
in large and  giant breed dogs. Journal of the American Veterinary  Medical Association.
2000;217:1492.
lickman LT, Lantz GC, Schellenberg DB, Glickman NW. A prospective study of survival and recurrence
     e n    n  
Animal Hospital Association. T998;34:253.
uilford WG. Gastric dilatation, gastric dilatation-volvulus, and chronic gastric volvulus. In: Guilford WG,
'ard MP, Patronek GJ, Glickman LT. Benefits of prophylactic gastropexy for dogs at risk of gastric
dilatation-volvulus. Preventative Veterinary Medicine. 2003;60(4):319-329.
Pancreatitis and alimentary lymphoma in a dog
oyle KA, Steinberg H. Characterization of lymphocytes in canine gastrointestinal lymphoma. Veterinary
Pathol0gy. 2004;41(2):141-146.
tinger SN. Principles of treatment for canine lymphoma. Clinical Techniques in Small Animal Practice.
2003;18(2):92-97.
uilford WG, Stombech DR. Neoplasms of the gastrointestinal tract, APUD tumors, endocrinopathies and
the gastrointestinal tract. In: Guilford WG, Center SA, Strombeck DR, Williams DA, Meyers DJ,
editors. Strombeck's Small Animal Gastroenterology. 3rd edn. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders;
1996:519-531.
           
2004;45(7):610-612.
  o       o  n      
Veterinary Medical Science. 2004;66(5):577-580.
   s    r  s    
Therapy XIV. Philadelphia: Saunders Elsevier; 2009:534-537.
Hypoadrenocorticism in a dog
dler JA, Drobatz KJ, Hess Rs. Abnormalities of serum electrolyte concentrations in dogs with
hypoadrenocorticism. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine. 2007;21(6):1168-1173.
oysen SR. Fluid and electrolyte therapy in endocrine disorders: diabetes mellitus and
hypoadrenocorticism. Clinical Techniques in Small Animal Practice. 2008;38(3):699-717. xiii-xiv
2007;22(1):32-35.
ertage M. Hypoadrenocorticism. In: Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC, editors. Textbook of Veterinary Internal
Medicine. 6th edn. Philadelphia: Elsevier Saunders; 2005:1612-1621.
nnon EM, Boyle TE, Hutchins RG, et al. Use of basal serum or plasma cortisol concentrations to rule
out a diagnosis of hypoadrenocorticism in dogs: 123 cases (2000-2005). Journal of the American
Veterinary Medical Association. 2007;231(3):413-416.
eeking S. Treatment of acute adrenal insufficiency. Clinical Techniques in Small Animal Practice.
2007;22(1):36-39.
ielsen L, Bell R, Zoia A, et al. Low ratios of sodium to potassium in the serum of 238 dogs. Veterinary
Record. 2008;162(14):431-435.
glucocorticoid-deficient hypoadrenocorticism in dogs: 46 cases (1985-2005). Journal of the
American Veterinary Medical Association. 2007;230(8):1190-1194.
arreras JK, Goldschmidty M, Lamb M, et al. Feline epitheliotropic intestinal malignant lymphoma: 10
cases (1997-2000). Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine. 2003;17(3):326-331.
arsten EA, Williard GK. Gastrointestinal lymphoma and inflammatory bowel disease. In: August JR,
editor. Consultations in Feline Internal Medicine. 4th edn. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders;
2001:499-505.
vans SE, Bonczynski JJ, Broussard JD, et al. Comparison of endoscopic and full-thickness biopsy
specimen for diagnosis of inflammatory bowel disease and alimentary tract lymphoma in cats.
Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association. 2006;229(9):1447-1450.
ondacaro JV, Richter KP, Carpenter JL, et al. Feline gastrointestinal lymphoma: 76 cases (1988-1996).
European Journal of Comparative Gastroenterology. 1999;4(2):5-11.
rover S. Gastrointestinal lymphoma in cats. Compendium for Continuing Education for the Practicing
Veterinarian. 2005;27(10):741-750.
ohlman LM, Higginbotham ML, Welles EG, Johnson CM. Immunophenotypic and histologic classification
of 50 cases of feline gastrointestinal lymphoma. Veterinary Pathology. 2009;46(2):259-268.
2003;33(5):1083-1098.
mpson Kw, Fyfe J, Cornetta A, et al. Subnormal concentrations of serum cobalamin (vitamin Bi2) in cats
with gastrointestinal disease. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine. 2001;15(1):26-32.
einer JM, 20o9. Cobalamin deficiency in dogs & cats: why should we care? Proceedings of the ACVIM
Forum, 2-6 June, 2009. Montreal, Canada, p. 504-506.
alli VE, Jacobs RM, Norris A,et al. The histologic classification of 602 cases of feline
lymphoproliferative disease using the National Cancer Institute working formulation. Journal of
Veterinary Diagnostic Investigation. 2000;12(4):295-306.
Ingestion of glue by a dog
ailey T. The expanding threat of polyurethane adhesive ingestion. Veterinary Technician June.
2004:427-428.
ope RB. Four new small animal toxicoses. Australian Veterinary Practice. 2004;34(3):121-123.
orstman CL, Eubig PA, Cornell KK, Khan SA, Seicer BA. Gastric outflow obstruction after ingestion of
wood glue in a dog. Journal of the Animal Hospital Association. 2003;39(1):47-51.
eib MS, Duncan RB. Diagnosing gastric Helicobacter infections in dogs and cats. Compendium for
Continuing Education for the Practising Veterinarian. 2005;27(3):221-228.
eib MS, Duncan RB, Ward DL. Triple antimicrobial therapy and acid suppression in dogs with chronic
  a        
1192.
ibich C, Mrvos R, Krenzelok EP. Beware of Gorilla Glue ingestions. Veterinary and Human Toxicology
2004;463:153-154.
Lead ingestion in a puppy
waltney-Brant SM. Chapter 28 Lead toxicosis in small animals. In: Bonagura JD, Twedt DC, editors. Kirk's
Current Veterinary Therapy XIV. St Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier; 2009:127-130.
arin C. What's your diagnosis? Journal of Small Animal Practice. 2006;47(7):413-415.
organ RV, Moore FM, Pearce LK, Rossi T. Clinical and laboratory findings in small companion animals
with lead poisoning: 347 cases (1977-1986). Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
Ass0ciation. 1991;199(1):93-97.
organ RV, Moore FM, Pearce LK, Rossi T. Demographic data and treatment of small companion animals
with lead poisoning 347 cases (1977-1986). Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
Ass0ciation. 1991;199(1):98-102.
amsey DT, Casteel SW, Faggella AM, et al. Use of orally administered succimer (meso-2,3-
dimercaptosuccinic acid) for treatment of lead poisoning in dogs. Journal of the American
Veterinary Medical Association. 1996;208(3):371-375.
Gastric adenocarcinoma in a dog
uilford WG. Neoplasms of the gastrointestinal tract, APUD tumors, endocrinopathies and the
S a a           
Strombeck's Small Animal Gastroenterology. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders; 1996:519-531.
nillips Bs. Tumors of the intestinal tract. In: Withrow SJ, MacEwen EG, editors. Small Animal Clinical
Oncology. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders; 2001:335-346.
mpson KW. Diseases of the stomach. In: Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC, editors. Textbook of Veterinary
Internal Medicine. St Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders; 2005:1310-1331.
illivan M, Lee R, Fisher EW, et al. A study of 3l cases of gastric carcinoma in dogs. Veterinary Record.
1987;120(4):79-83.
Pancreatitis in a cat
kol KG, Washabau RJ. Acute pancreatitis in cats with hepatic lipidosis. Journal of Veterinary Internal
Medicine. 1993;7:205-209.
    s  e  s       
retrospective study of 40 cases (1976-1989). Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine. 1993;7:25-33.
einer JM, Medinger TL, Williams DA. Development and validation of a radioimmunoassay for feline
trypsin-like immunoreactivity. American Journal of Veterinary Research. 1996;57:1417-1420.
illiams DA. The pancreas. In: Guilford WG, Center SA, Strombeck DR, Williams DA, Meyer DJ, editors.
Strombeck's Small Animal Gastroenterology. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders; 1996:381-410.
illiams DA. Feline exocrine pancreatic disease. In: Kirk RW, Bonagura JD, editors. Current Veterinary
Therapy XIV. Philadelphia: Saunders Elsevier; 2009:538-543.
Linear foreign body in a cat
            
in the cat. Veterinary Surgery. 1987;16(2):135-138.
Practice. 2002;4:861-880.
larke JO, Dorman DC. Toxicities from newer over-the-counter drugs. In: Bonagura JE, editor. Kirk's
Current Veterinary Therapy XIlf. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders; 2000:227-231.
elts JF, Fox R, Burk RL. Thread and sewing needles as gastrointestinal foreign bodies in the cat: a review
of 64 cases. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association. 1984;184(1):56-59.
uilford WG, Strombeck DR. Intestinal Obstruction, pseudo-obstruction and foreign bodies. In: Guilford
WG, Center SA, Strombeck DR, Williams DA, Meyer DJ, editors. Strombeck's Small Animal
Gastroenterology. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders; 1996:487-502.
ickman MA, Cox SR, Mahabir S, et al. Safety, pharmacokinetics and use of the novel NK-1 receptor
antagonist maropitant (CereniaTM) for the prevention of emesis and motion sickness in cats. Journal
of Veterinary Pharmacology and Therapeutics. 2008;31(3):220-229
acPhail C. Gastrointestinal obstruction. Clinical Techniques in Small Animal Practice. 2002;17(4):178-
183.
Portosystemic shunt in a dog
            
Veterinary Journal. 2004;52(4):154-162.
oran IP, Barr FJ, Moore AH, et al. Liver size, bodyweight, and tolerance to acute complete occlusion of
congenital extrahepatic portosystemic shunts in dogs. Veterinary Surgery. 2008;37(7):656-662.
ummeling A, van Sluijs FJ, Rothuizen J. Prognostic implications of the degree of shunt narrowing and of
the  portal  vein diameter  in dogs  with  congenital  portosystemic shunts. Veterinary  Surgery.
2004;33(1):17-24.
atthews KG, Bunch S. Vascular liver diseases. In: Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC, editors. Textbook of
Veterinary Medicine. 6th edn. Philadelphia, PA: Saunder Elsevier; 2005:1453-1463.
ehl ML, Kyles AE, Hardie EM, et al. Evaluation of ameroid ring constrictors for treatment for single
extrahepatic portosystemic shunts in dogs: 168 cases (1995-2001). Journal of the American
Veterinary Medical Association. 2005;226(12):2020-2030.
obias K. Portosystemic shunts. In: Bonagura JD, Twedt DC, editors. Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy
XIV. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders Elsevier; 2009:581-586.
wingenberger A. CT diagnosis of portosystemic shunts. Veterinary Clinics of North American Small
Animal Practice. 2009;39(4):783-792.
Hepatic lipidosis in a cat
enter SA. Feline hepatic lipidosis. Veterinary Clinics of North America. 2005;35(1):225-269.
XIV. St. Louis, Missouri, MO: Elsevier Saunders; 2008:570-575.
an E. Oesophageal and gastric feeding tubes in ICU patients. Clinical Techniques in Small Animal
Practice. 2004;19(1):22-31.
oran DL. The carnivore connection to nutrition in cats. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
Ass0ciation. 2004;221(11):1559-1567.
Intestinal disorders: diarrhoea
S               
Veterinary Medicine. 1991;86:892-899.
eib M, Matz M. Diseases of the intestines. In: Leib MS, Monroe WE, editors. Practical Small Animal
Internal Medicine. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders; 1997:685-760.
eib MS, Monroe WE, Codner EC. Performing rigid or flexible colonoscopy in dogs with chronic large
bowel diarrhea. Veterinary Medicine. 1991;86:900-912.
enninck D, Nyland T, LY K, et al. Ultrasonographic evaluation of gastrointestinal diseases in small
animals. Veterinary Radiology. 1990;31:134-141.
Current Veterinary Therapy X1. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders; 1992:602-604.
illiams  DA.  New  tests of pancreatic  and  small  intestinal  function. Compendium  for  Continuing
Education Practicing Veterinarian. 1987;9:1167-1175
Small intestinal diarrhoea
uilford WG, Strombeck DR. Classification, pathophysiology, and symptomatic treatment of diarrheal
diseases. In: Guilford WG, Center SA, Strombeck DR, Williams DA, Meyers DJ, editors. Strombeck's
Small Animal Gastroenterology. 3rd edn. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders; 1996:351-366.
all EJ, German AJ. Diseases of the small intestine. In: Ettinger SJ, Feldman Ed, editors. Textbook of
Veterinary Internal Medicine. 6th edn. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders; 2005:1332-1377.
eib M, Matz M. Diseases of the intestines. In: Leib MS, Monroe WE, editors. Practical Small Animal
Internal Medicine. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders; 1997:685-760.
Protein losing enteropathy in a dog
raven M, Simpson JW, Ridyard AE, Chandler ML. Canine inflammatory bowel disease: retrospective
analysis of diagnoses and outcome in 80 cases (l995-2002). Journal of Small Animal Practice
2004;45:336-342.
ogle JE, Bissett SA. Mucosal immunity and chronic idiopathic enteropathies in dogs. Compendium for
Continuing Education for the Practicing Veterinarian. 2007;29(5):290-302.
uilford WG. Idiopathic inflammatory bowel disease. In: Guilford WG, Center SA, Strombeck DR, Williams
1996:451-486.
athrani A, Steiner JM, Suchodolski J, et al. Elevated canine pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity
concentration in dogs with inflammatory bowel disease is associated with a negative outcome.
Journal of Small Animal Practice. 2009;50(3):126-132.
A            
Therapy XIV. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders Elsevier; 2009:512-514.
eterson PB, Willard MD. Protein-losing enteropathies. Veterinary Clinics of North American Small
Animal Practice. 2003;33(5):1061-1082.
Inflammatory bowel disease and adverse reaction to food in a dog
dams VJ, Campbell RC, Waldner CL, et al. Evaluation of client compliance with short-term
administration of antimicrobials to dogs. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association
2005;226(4):567-574.
              
Compendium of Continuing Education for the Practicing Veterinarian. 1995;17:637-659.
raven M, Simpson JW, Ridyard AE, Chandler ML. Canine inflammatory bowel disease: retrospective
analysis of diagnoses and outcome in 80 cases (1995-2002). Journal of Small Animal Practice.
2004;45:336-342.
uilford WG. Adverse reactions to food. In: Guilford WG, Center SA, Strombeck DR, Williams DA, Meyer
DJ, editors. Strombeck's Small Animal Gastroenterology. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders; 1996:436-
450.
S  s      s     
DA, Meyer DJ, editors. Strombeck's Small Animal Gastroenterology. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders;
1996:451-486.
uilford WG, Jones BR, Markwell PJ, et al. Food sensitivity in cats with chronic idiopathic
gastrointestinal problems. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine. 2001;15:7-13.
oore LE. Protein-losing enteropathy. In: Bonagura JE, Twedt DC, editors. Kirk's Current Veterinary
app T, Griffin C, Rosenkrantz W, et al. Comparison of a commercial limited-antigen diet versus home-
prepared  diets in  the  diagnosis  of canine  adverse  food  reaction. Veterinary Therapeutics.
2002;3(3):244-251.
Intussusception in a cat
pplewhite AA, Hawthorne JC, Cornell KK. Complications of enteroplication for the prevention of
intussusception recurrence in dogs: 35 cases (1989-1999). Journal of the American Veterinary
Medical Ass0ciation. 2001;219(10):1415-1418.
ellenger CR, Beck JA. Intussusception in 12 cats. Journal of Small Animal Practice. 1994;35(6):295-298.
irkitt JM, Drobatz KJ, Saunders HM, Washabau RJ. Signalment, history, and outcome of cats with
          
Medical Ass0ciation. 2009;234(6):771-776.
uilford WG. Idiopathic inflammatory bowel disease. In: Guilford WG, Center SA, Strombeck DR, Williams
DA, Meyer DJ, editors. Strombeck's Small Animal Gastroenterology. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders;
1996:451-486.
atsikas MN, Papazoglou LG, Papaioannou NG. Ultrasonographic findings of intestinal intussusception in
           o  
feline and two canine cases. Journal of Small Animal Practice. 2008;49(12):651-654.
Feline exocrine pancreatic insufficiency
uFort RM, Matros L. Acquired Coagulopathies. In: Ettinger SJ, Feldmann EC, editors. Textbook of
Veterinary Internal Medicine. 6th edn. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders; 2005:1933-1937.
fe J. Feline intrinsic factor (IF) is pancreatic in origin and mediates ileal cobalamin (CBL) absorption.
olzworth J, Coffin DL. Pancreatic insufficiency and diabetes mellitus in a cat. Cornell Veterinarian.
1953;45:502-512.
oskins JD, Turk JR, Turk MA. Feline pancreatic insufficiency. Veterinary Medicine Small Animal Clinics.
1982;77:1745-1748.
erry LA, Williams DA, Pidgeon GL, Boosinger TR. Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency with associated
coagulopathy in a cat. Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association. 1991;27:109-114.
eed N, Gunn-Moore DG, Simpson K. Cobalamin, folate and inorganic phosphate abnormalities in ill cats.
Journal of Feline Medicine and Surgery. 2007;9:278-288.
mpson Kw, Fyfe J, Cornetta A, et al. Subnormal concentrations of serum cobalamin (vitamin Bi2) in cats
with gastrointestinal disease. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine. 200l;15:26-32.
einer JM, Williams DA. Feline exocrine pancreatic disorders: insufficiency, neoplasia and uncommon
conditions. Compendium for Continuing Education for the Practicing Veterinarian. 1997;19:836-
847.
einer JM, Williams DA. Feline exocrine pancreatic disorders. Veterinary Clinics of North America Small
Animal Practice. 1999;29:551-575.
einer JM, Williams DA. Serum feline trypsin-like immunoreactivity in cats with exocrine pancreatic
insufficiency. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine. 2000;14:627-629.
enzyme preparations. Journal of Veterinary Medicine Series A. 1987;34:728-733
estermarck E, Wiberg M, Steiner JM, Williams DA. Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency in dogs and cats.
 In: Ettinger SJ, Feldmann EC, editors. Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine. 6th edn. St. Louis,
MO: Elsevier Saunders; 2005:1492-1495.
            s
Veterinary Therapy XI1. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders; 1995:732-735.
Parvovirus infection in a dog
avies M. Canine parvovirus strains identified from clinically ill dogs in the United Kingdom. Veterinary
Rec0rd. 2008;163:543-545.
avis-Wurzler GM. Current vaccination strategies in puppies and kittens. Veterinary Clinics of North
America: Small Animal. 2006;36:607-640
uilford WG, Strombeck DR. Gastrointestinal tract infections, parasites and toxicoses. In: Guilford WG,
Center SA, Strombeck DR, Williams DA, Meyer DJ, editors. Strombeck's Small Animal
Gastroenterology. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders; 1996:411-432.
Smal1 Animal. 2008;8:837-850.
ohour AJ, Leisewitz AL, Jacobson LS, et al. Effect of early enteral nutrition on intestinal permeability,
intestinal protein loss, and outcome in dogs with severe parvoviral enteritis. Journal of Veterinary
Internal Medicine. 2003;7(6):791-798.
cittie J. Canine parvovirus enteritis: a review of diagnosis, management and prevention. Journal of
Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care. 2004;14(3):167-176.
Introduiction to haematochezia and melaena
uilford WG. Approach to clinical problems in gastroenterology. In: Guilford WG, Center SA, Strombeck
DR, Williams DA, Meyer DJ, editors. Strombeck's Small Animal Gastroenterology. Philadelphia, PA:
WB Saunders; 1996:50-76.
Haemorrhagic gastroenteritis in a dog
uilford WG, Strombeck DR. Acute hemorrhagic enteropathy (Hemorrhagic gastroenteritis: HGE). In:
Guilford WG, Center SA, Strombeck DR, Williams DA, Meyer DJ, editors. Strombeck's Small Animal
Gastroenterology. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders; 1996:433-435
all EJ, German AJ. Diseases of the small intestine. In: Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC, editors. Textbook of
Veterinary Internal Medicine. 6th edn. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2006:1332-1377.
asaki J, Gorvo M, Asahina M, et al. Hemorrhagic enteritis associated with Clostridium perfringens type A
in a dog. Veterinary Medicine and Science. 1999;61(2):175-177.
)ielman BL, Garvey MS. Hemorrhagic gastroenteritis in 15 dogs. Journal of the American Animal
Hospital Association.. 1993;29(4):341-344.
Colonic vascular ectasia in a dog
augherty MA, Leib Ms, Lanz O, Duncan RB. Diagnosis and surgical management of vascular ectasia in a
oldman CK, Parnell NK, Holland CH. Hormone therapy for treatment of colonic vascular ectasia in 2
dogs. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine. 2008;22:1048-1051.
ogers KS, Butler LM, Edwards JF, et al. Rectal hemorrhage associated with vascular ectasia in a young
dog. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association. 1992;200:1349-1351.
an Cutsem E, Rutgeerts P, Vantrappen G. Treatment of bleeding gastrointestinal vascular malformation
with 0estrogen-progesterone. The Lancet. 1990;335:953-955.
Intestinal leiomyoma in a dog
orst D, Lasota J, Miettinen M. Gastrointestinal stromal tumors and leiomyomas in the dog: a
histopathologic,  immunohistochemical,  and molecular genetic study of 50 cases. Veterinary
Pathology. 2003;40(1):42-54.
uilford WG. Adverse reactions to food. In: Guilford WG, Center SA, Strombeck DR, Williams DA, Meyer
          
450.
aas CPHJ, 2oo8. A new look at intestinal smooth muscle tumours: clinical, histologic and
immunohistochemical aspects for reclassification. Proceedings of 18th ECVIM-CA Congress. 4-6
September 2008, Ghent, Belgium.
aas CPHJ, ter Haar G, van der Gaag I, Kirpensteijn J. Reclassification of small intestinal and cecal
smooth muscle tumors in 72 dogs: clinical, histologic, and immunohistochemical evaluation.
Veterinary Surgery. 2007;36(4):302-313.
dog. Veterinary Radiology and Ultrasound. 1994;35(5):391-397.
enninck DG. Ultrasonographic characterization of gastrointestinal tumours. Veterinary Clinics of North
America. 1998;28:777-797.
owers BE, Hoopes PJ, Ehrhart EJ. Tumor diagnosis, grading and staging. Seminars in Veterinary
Medicine and Surgery. 1995;10:158-167.
Corticosteroid induced gastrointestinal ulceration in a dog
determine the safety of short-term concurrent administration of meloxicam and dexamethasone in
healthy dogs. American Journal of Veterinary Research. 2003;64(11):1369-1375.
rawford LM, Wilson RD. Melena associated with dexamethasone therapy in the dog. Journal of Small
Animal Practice. 1982;23:91-97.
uilford WG, Strombeck DR. Chronic gastric disease. In: Guilford WG, Center SA, Strombeck DR, Williams
DA, Meyers DJ, editors. Strombeck's Small Animal Gastroenterology. 3rd edn. Philadelphia, PA: WB
Saunders; 1996:275-302.
oreland KJ. Ulcer disease of the upper gastrointestinal tract in small animals: Pathophysiology,
1988;10(11):1265-1279.
ohrer CR, Hill RC, Fischer A, et al. Gastric hemorrhage in dogs given high doses of methylprednisolone
sodium succinate. American Journal of Veterinary Research. 1999;60(8):977-981.
Introduction to the colon and colonic disorders
eib MS, Codner EC, Monroe WE. A diagnostic approach to chronic large bowel diarrhea in dogs.
Veterinary Medicine. 1991;86:892-899.
eib Ms, Monroe WE, Codner EC. Performing rigid or flexible colonoscopy in dogs with chronic large
bowel diarrhea. Veterinary Medicine. 1991;86:900-912.
arnell NK. Chronic colitis. In: Bonagura JD, Twedt DC, editors. Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XIV.
Missouri: Saunders Elsevier; 2009:515-520.
'ashabau RJ, Holt DE. Feline constipation and idiopathic megacolon. In: Bonagura J, editor. Kirk's
Current Veterinary Therapy X111. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders; 2000:648-652.
'ashabau RJ, Holt DE. Diseases of the Large Intestine. In: Ettinger SJ, Feldmann EC, editors. Textbook of
Veterinary Internal Medicine. 6th edn. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders; 2005:1401-1406.
'ebb CB. Anal-rectal disease. In: Bonagura JD, Twedt DC, editors. Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XIV.
St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier; 2009:531-533.
Feline constipation and megacolon
avenport DJ, Remillard RL, Simpson Kw, Pidgeon GL. Constipation/megacolon. In: Hand M, Thatcher C,
Remillard R, Roudebush P, editors. Small Animal Clinical Nutrition. 4th edn. MO: Mark Morris
Institute; 2000:778-882.
'ashabau RJ, Holt DE. Feline constipation and idiopathic megacolon. In: Bonagura J, editor. Kirk's
Current Veterinary Therapy X111. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders; 2000:648-652.
ashabau RJ, Holt DE. Diseases of the large intestine. In: Ettinger SJ, Feldmann EC, editors. Textbook of
Veterinary Internal Medicine. 6th edn. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders; 2005:1401-1406.
Tritrichomonas in two kittens
oster DM, Gookin Jl, Poore MF, et al. Outcome of cats with diarrhea and Tritrichomonas foetus
infection. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association. 2004;225:888-889.
S  n   n         
of the American Veterinary Medical Association. 1999;215:1450-1454.
ookin JL, Copple CN, Papich MG, et al. Efficacy of ronidazole for treatment of feline Tritrichomonas
foetus infection. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine. 2006;20(3):536-543.
ookin JL, Staufer SH, Coccaro MR, et al. Efficacy of tinidazole for treatment of cats experimentally
infected with Tritrichomonas foetus. American Journal of Veterinary Research. 2007;68(10):1085-
1088.
                
Giardia infection. Journal of Clinical Microbiology. 2004;42(6):2207-2710.
unn-Moore DA, McCann TM, Reed N, et al. Prevalence of Tritrichomonas foetus infection in cats with
diarrhoea in the UK. Journal of Feline Medicine and Surgery. 2007;9:214-218.
ardell EJ, Sparkes AH. Chronic diarrhoea associated with Tritrichomonas foetus in a British cat. The
Veterinary Rec0rd. 2006;158:765-766.
osado TW, Specht A, Marks SL. Neurotoxicosis in 4 cats receiving ronidazole. Journal of Veterinary
Internal Medicine. 2007;21(2):328-331
Colorectal neoplasia in a dog
ank JD, Reimer SB, Kass PH, Kiupel M. Clinical Outcomes of 30 Cases (1997-2004) of Canine
Gastrointestinal Lymphoma. Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association. 2007;43:313-321.
uilford WG. Neoplasms of the gastrointestinal tract, APUD tumors, endocrinopathies and the
             s
Strombeck's Small Animal Gastroenterology. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders; 1996:519-531.
olt PE, Lucke VM. Rectal neoplasia in the dog: a clinicopathological review of 31 cases. Veterinary
Rec0rd. 1985;116(15):400-405.
nottenbelt CM, Simpson JW, Tasker S, et al. Preliminary clinical observations on the use of piroxicam in
the management of rectal tubulopapillary polyps. Journal of Small Animal Practice. 2000;41(9):393-
397.
2004;45(7):610-612.
ealey KL, Bentjen SA, Gay JM, Hosick HL. Dexamethasone treatment of a canine, but not human, tumour
cell line increases chemoresistance independent of P-glycoprotein and multidrug resistance-related
Colonic inflammatory bowel disease in a cat
lilford WG. Idiopathic inflammatory bowel disease. In: Guilford WG, Center SA, Strombeck DR, Williams
DA, Meyer DJ, editors. Strombeck's Small Animal Gastroenterology. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders;
1996:451-486.
uilford  WG, Jones BR, Markwell PJ, et al. Food sensitivity in cats with chronic idiopathic
gastrointestinal problems. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine. 2001;15:7-13.
            g
Therapy XIV. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders Elsevier; 2009:512-514.
arnell NK. Chronic colitis. In: Bonagura JE, Twedt DC, editors. Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XIV.
Philadelphia, PA: Saunders Elsevier; 2009:515-520.
Reference ranges for haematology and serum chemistry values for adult cats and dogs
handler ML. Pediatric normal blood values. In: Kirk R, Bonagura JD, editors. Current Veterinary
Therapy. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders; 1992:981-984.
Index
Notes: Page numbers in bold, refer to figures, tables and boxes.
Readers are advised to refer to specific breeds for real-life studies related to each
condition within this book.
A
Abdominal fluid analysis, 168
Abdominal palpation, 81b
colorectal neoplasia, canine, 189
constipation, feline, 178
diarrhoea, 115
exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, feline, 138
gastric adenocarcinoma, canine, 81
hepatic lipidosis, feline, 104
small intestine foreign bodies, 47
Abdominal radiography chronic partial gastric dilatation, 52
constipation, feline, 179, 179f
glue ingestion, canine, 73, 73f
intestinal leiomyoma, canine, 161-162, 162f
lead ingestion, 78
linear foreign bodies, feline, 93, 94f
lymphocytic inflammatory bowel disease, feline, 68
oesophageal foreign bodies, 22-23
pancreatitis, feline, 90
Abdominal ultrasound chronic partial gastric dilatation, 52
colorectal neoplasia, canine, 190, 190f
corticosteroid-induced gastrointestinal ulceration, canine, 167, 168f
exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, feline, 139
glue ingestion, canine, 73
hypoadrenocorticism, 63, 64f
inflammatory bowel disease, feline, 196, 196f
lead ingestion, 78
linear foreign bodies, feline, 93, 94f
lymphocytic inflammatory bowel disease, feline, 68, 68f-69f
pancreatitis/alimentary lymphoma, canine, 58
pancreatitis, feline, 87, 87f, 90
porto-systemic shunts, canine, 98-99, 98f
Tritrichomonas, feline, 186
Acetylcholine receptor antibodies, idiopathic megaoesophagus, 8, 12
Acromegaly, polyuria, 86
ACTH stimulation test See Adrenocorticotrophin hormone (ACTH) stimulation test
Activated partial thromboplastin time, hepatic lipidosis, feline, 106, 140
Acute diarrhoea, 119-120
Acute pancreatitis, 89-90
haematochezia, 190
Adenocarcinoma, 176, 192
Adenomas, 192
S-Adenosyl methionine, hepatic lipidosis, feline, 108
Adrenocorticotrophin hormone (ACTH) stimulation test haemorrhagic gastroenteritis,
canine, 155
hypoadrenocorticism, 64
idiopathic megaoesophagus, 8
inflammatory bowel disease, canine, 130
Aerophagia, 4
Age range, alimentary lymphoma, feline, 70
Air, oesophagus, 4
Akita, canine myasthenia gravis, 12-13
Alanine transferase (ALT), small intestine foreign body, 48
Albumin, serum haemorrhagic gastroenteritis, canine, 154
hepatic lipidosis, feline, 106
intestinal leiomyoma, canine, 161
parvovirus infection, canine, 145
protein losing enteropathy, 122
Aldosterone, 64
deficiency See Hypoadrenocorticism, canine
Alimentary lymphoma, canine, 56-60
colorectal neoplasia, 192
diagnosis, 59
endoscopy, 59, 59f
epidemiology, 60
euthanasia, 59-60
follow-up, 59
histopathology, 59
Alimentary lymphoma, feline, 66-71
age range, 70
epidemiology, 70-71
lymphocytic inflammatory bowel disease vs., 71
non-regenerative anaemia, 70
treatment, 70-71
Alkaline phosphatase lead ingestion, 78
 puppy reference range
parvovirus infection, canine, 145
small intestine foreign body, 48
Ameroid ring constrictors, canine porto-systemic shunts, 100-101, 100f
Amoxicillin clavulanate-potentiated See Clavulanate-potentiated amoxicillin
Helicobacter, 74
Ampicillin
parvovirus infection, canine, 144-145
porto-systemic shunts, canine, 100b
Amylase
pancreatitis/alimentary lymphoma, canine, 57b
pancreatitis, feline, 90
vomiting, 44
Anaemia
gastrointestinal bleeding, 151-152
non-regenerative, 70
normochromic, 163see also specific types
Analgesia, pancreatitis, feline, 91
Angiodysplasia See Colonic vascular ectasia, canine
Anorexia, feline, 105
Anorexia, pancreatitis, feline, 90
Antibiotic responsive enteropathy (ARE), 117
Antibiotics haemorrhagic diarrhoea, 154b
haemorrhagic gastroenteritis, canine, 156
oesophageal stricture, 16
pancreatitis, canine, 58b
pancreatitis, feline, 91
parvovirus infection, canine, 144b
Anti-cholinesterase receptor antibodies, canine myasthenia gravis, 12, 13f
Anti-emetic drugs, 58b
hepatic lipidosis, feline, 108
parvovirus infection, canine, 144bsee also specific types
Antrum, stomach, 37
Anuria, dehydration, 210
Anus, 173
anatomy, 174f
ARE (antibiotic responsive enteropathy), 117
Ascites
causes, 168t
Aspiration pneumonia, canine myasthenia gravis, 12
Atropine, gastro-oesophageal reflux, 17
Auscultation, thoracic See Thoracic auscultation
Azathioprine, protein losing enteropathy, 125
B
Bacterial infections
acute diarrhoea, 119
diarrhoea, 113
small intestine diarrhoea, 117
Balloon catheter dilatation, 15-16, 15f-16f
Barium contrast meals
chronic partial gastric dilatation, 52, 52f-53f
persistent right aortic arch, 27, 27f
vomiting, 44
Barium impregnated polyethylene spheres (BIPS), 83b
gastric adenocarcinoma, canine, 82-83, 83f
small intestine foreign body, 48-49
vomiting, 44-45, 45f
Barium swallow, 14b
oesophageal stricture, 14
Basal serum cortisol, 11b, 63b
canine myasthenia gravis, 11
hypoadrenocorticism, 62-63, 65 See also Cortisol
Basophilic stippling, 78b
Bassett Fauvre de Bretagne, 73f
BCS See Body condition score (BCS)
Beagle, pancreatitis/alimentary lymphoma, 56b
Belt loop gastropexy, chronic partial gastric dilatation, 53, 53f
Benzamide prokinetics, 181
Bernese mountain dogs, 0esophageal foreign bodies, 23-24
Bethanechol, dysautonomia, feline, 32-34
Bile acid stimulation test, lead ingestion, 78
Biopsies
gastric adenocarcinoma, canine, 83b
intestinal, small intestine diarrhoea, 119
large intestine disorders, 173-174
liver, canine corticosteroid-induced gastrointestinal ulceration, 168
pancreatitis, feline, 90
phenobarbitone response regurgitation, 19
small intestine diarrhoea, 119
BIPS See Barium impregnated polyethylene spheres (BIPS)
Blood glucose
hepatic lipidosis, feline, 106
parvovirus infection, canine, 144b
Blood lead concentration, lead ingestion, 78
Blood pressure measurement
cats, 106b
Blood urea nitrogen (BUN), gastrointestinal bleeding, 151-152
Body condition score (BCS)
canine myasthenia gravis, 10
chronic partial gastric dilatation, 51
colonic vascular ectasia, canine, 157
colorectal neoplasia, canine, 189
constipation, feline, 178
corticosteroid-induced gastrointestinal ulceration, canine, 165
dysautonomia, feline, 30
exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, feline, 138
gastric adenocarcinoma, canine, 81
glue ingestion, canine, 72
haemorrhagic gastroenteritis, canine, 153
hepatic lipidosis, feline, 104
hypoadrenocorticism, 61
inflammatory bowel disease, feline, 193
intestinal leiomyoma, canine, 160
intussusception, feline, 133
lead ingestion, 76
linear foreign bodies, feline, 92
oesophageal foreign bodies, 21
pancreatitis/alimentary lymphoma, canine, 56
pancreatitis, feline, 85
parvovirus infection, canine, 142
phenobarbitone response regurgitation, 18
porto-systemic shunt, canine, 96
protein losing enteropathy, canine, 121
small intestine foreign body, 47
Tritrichomonas, feline, 186
Body, stomach, 37, 38f
Border collies
gastric adenocarcinoma, 85b
small intestine foreign body, 50
Boston terriers, persistent right aortic arch, 29
Bradycardia, hypoadrenocorticism, 62
Breed predisposition, idiopathic megaoesophagus, 9
British anti-lewisite, lead ingestion, 79
Bruising, feline, 105
Brush border, microvilli, 37, 41f
Budesonide, protein losing enteropathy, 125
Bulking agents, feline constipation, 180-181
BUN (blood urea nitrogen), gastrointestinal bleeding, 151-152
Buprenorphine
linear foreign bodies, feline, 94
oesophageal stricture, 16
pancreatitis, canine, 58
 pancreatitis, feline, 88
parvovirus infection, canine, 144-145
protein losing enteropathy, 124
Burmese cat, pancreatitis, 85b, 89
C
Caecum, 40f, 173
anatomy, 174f
Cairn terrier, porto-systemic shunt, 96b, 102
Calcium edetate, 78b
lead ingestion, 78-79
Calcium ions, lead ingestion, 79
Calcium, serum
corticosteroid-induced gastrointestinal ulceration, canine, 167
protein losing enteropathy, 122
Campylobacter, small intestine diarrhoea, 117
Canine inflammatory bowel disease activity index (CIBDA1), 124b, 131b, 220
Canine pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity test, chronic partial gastric dilatation, 52
Capillary refill time, corticosteroid-induced gastrointestinal ulceration, canine, 165
Cardia, stomach, 37, 38f
L-Carnitine, hepatic lipidosis, feline, 108
Cat care, nursing tips, 33b
Cats
diarrhoea, 115f
dry eyes, 33b
grooming, 33b
oesophagus, 4f
small intestine, 37
Caudal oesophagus, 3
Central nervous system disease
feline, 105
vomiting, 130
Cervical oesophagus, 3
Chelation therapy, lead ingestion, 79
Chemoreceptor trigger zone (CRTZ), 42
Chemotherapy
alimentary lymphoma, canine, 60
colorectal neoplasia, canine, 191
gastric adenocarcinoma, canine, 83
Chihuahua, canine myasthenia gravis, 12-13
Chlorambucil, alimentary lymphoma, feline, 70
Chloride, serum, small intestine foreign body, 48-50
Cholesterol
pancreatitis, feline, 86
protein losing enteropathy, 122
Chronic kidney disease, polyuria, 86
Chronic pancreatitis, 89-90
small intestine diarrhoea, 194
Chronic partial gastric dilatation, canine, 51-55
case history, 51
case work-up, 52-53
differential diagnosis, 51b-52b
epidemiology, 53-55
follow-up, 53
histopathology, 53
imaging, 52-53, 52f-53f
medical management, 53
minimum data base, 52
physical examination, 51
prognosis, 55
surgical management, 53, 53f
Chronic small intestine diarrhoea, differential diagnosis, 97
CIBDAI (canine inflammatory bowel disease activity index), 124b, 131b, 220
Cimetidine, 92b
Cisapride, 181, 219
chronic partial gastric dilatation, 53
constipation, feline, 180
dysautonomia, feline, 32
Clavulanate-potentiated amoxicillin
canine myasthenia gravis, 12
intestinal leiomyoma, canine, 163
intussusception, feline, 134-135
linear foreign bodies, feline, 94
oesophageal foreign bodies, 23
pancreatitis, canine, 58
pancreatitis, feline, 88
Clindamycin
canine myasthenia gravis, 12
pancreatitis, feline, 88
Clostridium botulinum type C, feline dysautonomia, 33
Clostridium difficile, small intestine diarrhoea, 117
Clotting cascade, 140f
exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, feline, 140-141
Coagulation profiles
hepatic lipidosis, feline, 106
porto-systemic shunts, canine, 98, 98b
Coat care, exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, feline, 141b
Cobalamin (vitamin Bi2), 67b, 195b
absorption, intrinsic factor, 141
alimentary lymphoma, feline, 70
in cats, 88b
exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, feline, 139, 141
hepatic lipidosis, feline, 108
inflammatory bowel disease, canine, 131
inflammatory bowel disease, feline, 195, 197
intestinal absorption, 67f
lymphocytic inflammatory bowel disease, 67
pancreatitis, feline, 87
protein losing enteropathy, 122, 125
small intestine diarrhoea, 117-118
small intestine diarrhoea, feline, 118
Cobalamin (vitamin Bi2) deficiency, 125b
hepatic lipidosis, feline, 109
mucosal atrophy, 37-40
Cocker spaniel, hypoadrenocorticism, 61b
Colchicine, 0esophageal stricture, 16
Colectomy, sub-total See Sub-total colectomy
Colon, 173-177
anatomy, 174f
nerve supply, 183-184, 185f
wall structure, 183-184, 184f
Colon-associated diarrhoea, 173
Colon disorders, 173-177, 212see also specific diseases/disorders
Colonic impaction, feline, diagnosis, 180
Colonic neoplasia, 176-177
diagnosis, 176
treatment, 176see also specific disorders
Colonic vascular ectasia, canine, 157-159
case history, 157
case work-up, 158-159
diagnosis, 158-159
differential diagnosis, 157b-158b
endoscopy, 158, 158f
imaging, 158
minimum data base, 158
outcome, 158-159
physical examination, 157
problem discussion, 157-158
problem list, 157-158
prognosis, 159
treatment, 158-159
Colonoscopy
inflammatory bowel disease, feline, 196, 196f
large intestine disorders, 173-174, 175f
Colorectal neoplasia, canine, 189-192
case history, 189
case work-up, 190-192
differential diagnosis, 189b-190b
endoscopy, 191, 191f-192f
epidemiology, 192
histopathology, 191
imaging, 190, 190f
lymph node cytology, 191
minimum data base, 190
outcome, 191-192
physical examination, 189
 problem discussion, 189-190
problem list, 189-190
prognosis, 192
treatment, 191-192
Congenital disorders
large intestine diarrhoea, 186
megacolon, 175, 176f
seizures, 77
Congenital porto-systemic shunts (CPsS), vomiting, 44
Congestive heart failure
diarrhoea, 134
small intestine diarrhoea, 194
Constipation, 175
megacolon, 175
Constipation, feline, 178-185
case history, 178
case work-up, 179-185
diagnosis, 180
differential diagnosis, 31, 178b-179b
epidemiology, 185
follow-up, 180
imaging, 179, 179f
minimum data base, 179
physical examination, 178
problem discussion, 178-179
problem list, 178-179
prognosis, 185
treatment, 180-183
diet, 180-181
enemas, 180
laxatives, 181
prokinetic drugs, 181
surgery, 182-183 See also Megacolon, feline
Contrast radiography
vomiting, 44-45 See also Barium contrast meals
Coombs test, 167
Corticosteroid-induced gastrointestinal ulceration, canine, 165-170
abdominal fluid analysis, 168
case history, 165
case work-up, 166-170
Coombs test, 167
differential diagnosis, 165b-166b
faecal analysis, 167
gastrointestinal endoscopy, 169-170, 169b, 169f
imaging, 167, 168f
liver biopsy, 168
medical treatment, 170
minimum data base, 166-167
outcome, 170
physical examination, 165
problem discussion, 165-166
problem list, 165-166
prognosis, 170
Corticosteroids
diagnostic tests, effects on, 169b
oesophageal foreign bodies, 25
oesophageal stricture, 16
Cortisol
pancreati tis/alimentary lymphoma, canine, 57
porto-systemic shunts, canine, 98, 102 See also Basal serum cortisol
Coughing
canine myasthenia gravis, 10-11
idiopathic megaoesophagus, 6
CPSS (congenital porto-systemic shunts), vomiting, 44
Creatine kinase, idiopathic megaoesophagus, 8
Creatinine
hepatic lipidosis, feline, 106
oesophageal foreign bodies, 22
CRTZ (chemoreceptor trigger zone), 42
Crypts of Lieberkuhn, 37-40
Crystalloid fluid therapy, pancreatitis, canine, 58
Cyclophosphamide, canine alimentary lymphoma, 60
Cytology, small intestine diarrhoea, 118
D
Dehydration
anuria, 210
clinicopathology, 59b
haematology effects, 154b
hypoproteinaemia, 210
 measurement, 210
nausea, 210
oliguria, 210
salivation, 210
serum chemistry effects, 154b
skin tenting, 210
urination, 210
Deranged intestinal mobility, diarrhoea, 114
Descending colon, 40f
Diabetes melli tus, polyuria, 86
Diarrhoea, 113-115
acute, 119-120
age-relation, 114
bacterial infections, 113
blood in, 113
cat, 115f
classification, 113-114
colon-associated, 173
definition, 113
deranged intestinal mobility, 114
diagnosis, 114-115
diet, 114
differential diagnosis, 114t, 133-134, 138b
dog, 115f
duration, 114
haemorrhagic See Haemorrhagic diarrhoea
increased permeability, 113-114
large intestine disorders, 173
osmotic, 113
physical examination, 115
porto-systemic shunt, 96
secretory, 113
self-limiting, 114
small intestinal See Small intestinal diarrhoea
Diazepam, lead ingestion, 79
Diet
acute diarrhoea, 119
acute onset vomiting, 154
chronic partial gastric dilatation, 55
chronic small intestine diarrhoea, 97
constipation, feline, 178, 180-181
diarrhoea, 114
elevated feeding See Elevated feeding
elimination See Elimination diets
exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, feline, 140
idiopathic megaoesophagus, 6
irritable bowel syndrome management, 175
large intestine diarrhoea, 173, 186, 193-194
pancreatitis, feline, 91
persistent right aortic arch, 26
porto-systemic shunts, canine, 101b
small intestine diarrhoea, 116, 121, 130, 194
vomiting, 18, 43, 52, 72, 77, 82, 85, 97, 130
vomiting, feline, 93
weight loss, 129
Dietary indiscretion, acute diarrhoea, 119-120
Dietary trials
inflammatory bowel disease, feline, 194
small intestine diarrhoea, 116
vomiting, 43
Dilated megacolon, 184
Dilated, non-responsive pupils, 31
Dimercaprol, lead ingestion, 79
Diphenoxylate, acute diarrhoea, 119-120
Dirofilaria immitis, vomiting, 44
Doberman pinschers, parvovirus infection, 146
Docusate plus dantron, 181
Dogs
diarrhoea, 115f
dry eyes, 33b
oesophagus, 4f
small intestine, 37
Dolasetron, 58b
Doppler ultrasound, canine porto-systemic shunts, 98-99, 99f
Doxorubicin, canine alimentary lymphoma, 60
Drooling, regurgitation, 22
Drugs
polyuria, 86
vomiting, 86, 130
Dry eyes
cats, 33b
dogs, 33b
Ductus venosus, 101
Duodenum, 37, 38f, 40f
Dysautonomia, canine, 34
Dysautonomia, feline, 30-34
case history, 30
differential diagnosis, 30b-31b
epidemiology, 34
imaging, 32
minimum data base, 31-32
outcome, 32-33
physical examination, 30, 33
pilocarpine test, 32, 32b, 32f
post-mortem, 33
problem list, 30-31
prognosis, 34
treatment, 32-33
Dysphagia, 3
differential diagnosis, 31
regurgitation, 3-4
E
Ecchymoses, feline, 105
Edrophonium response test, 11, 11b
Electrocardiography (ECG), hypoadrenocorticism, 63, 64f
Electrolyte(s)
hepatic lipidosis, feline, 108
hypoadrenocorticism, 65
intestines, 41
Electrolyte analysis, parvovirus infection, canine, 144
Elevated feeding
canine myasthenia gravis, 12b
idiopathic megaoesophagus, 9, 9f
Elimination diets, 129b
inflammatory bowel disease, canine, 132b
protein losing enteropathy, 124
ELISA faecal SNAP(r) Parvo test, 155b
Emollient laxatives, 181
Endoscopy
alimentary lymphoma, canine, 59, 59f
colonic vascular ectasia, canine, 158, 158f
colorectal neoplasia, canine, 191, 191f-192f
gastric adenocarcinoma, canine, 83, 83f
gastrointestinal See Gastrointestinal endoscopy
inflammatory bowel disease, canine, 130-131, 131f
inflammatory bowel disease, feline, 196f
lymphocytic inflammatory bowel disease, feline, 68-69
oesophageal stricture, 14
oesophagus, 5, 5f
persistent right aortic arch, 26
phenobarbitone response regurgitation, 19, 19f
protein losing enteropathy, canine, 123-124
small intestine diarrhoea, 119
vascular ring anomalies, 28
vomiting, 45, 45f
Endotoxic shock, small intestine foreign body, 50
Enemas, cats, 180, 180b, 183b
English bull terriers, small intestine foreign body, 50
Enrofloxacin
in cats, 135b
feline intussusception, 135
Enterectomy, canine intestinal leiomyoma, 162
Enteritis, 40-41
Environmental history
feline constipation, 178
vomiting, 43
Enzyme secretion, pancreas, 40-41
Eosinophilia, canine inflammatory bowel disease, 130
Epilepsy, seizures, 77
Eructation, chronic partial gastric dilatation, 55
Erythromycin, chronic partial gastric dilatation, 53
Euthanasia, canine
alimentary lymphoma, 59-60
colonic vascular ectasia, 158-159
Exercise intolerance, canine myasthenia gravis, 10
Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, canine, 140-141
Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, feline, 138-141
case history, 138
case work-up, 139-140
coat care, 141b
cobalamin, 139, 141
diagnosis, 139
diet, 140
differential diagnosis, 138b
epidemiology, 141
folate, 139, 141
 pancreatic enzyme replacement, 139, 141
physical examination, 138
problem discussion, 138
problem list, 138
prognosis, 141
vitamin K, 140
Exploratory celiotomy, 212
vomiting, 45-46
Exploratory laparotomy, small intestine diarrhoea, 119
Extrahepatic porto-azygos shunts, 101, 102f
Extrahepatic porto-caval shunts, 101
F
Faecal alpha-antiprotease, small intestine diarrhoea, 117
Faecal analysis
corticosteroid-induced gastrointestinal ulceration, canine, 167
haemorrhagic gastroenteritis, canine, 155
idiopathic megaoesophagus, 7
small intestine diarrhoea, 117
Tritrichomonas, feline, 187
vomiting, 44see also specific tests
Faecal flotation, Tritrichomonas, feline, 187
Faecal occult blood test, 151
Faecal samples, canine colonic vascular ectasia, 158
Faecal smears, feline Tritrichomonas, 187
Faecal SNAP(tm) Parvo test, canine parvovirus infection, 145, 145b
Fasting, oesophageal foreign bodies, 2425
Feeding care
canine pancreatitis, 58b
oesophageal foreign bodies, 24b
Feeding, elevated See Elevated feeding
Feeding frequency, chronic partial gastric dilatation, 53
Feeding tubes, 221
Feline dysautonomia See Dysautonomia, feline
Feline pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity (fPLI)
exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, feline, 139
inflammatory bowel disease, feline, 194-195
pancreatitis, feline, 87, 90
Feline trypsin-like immunoassay (fTLI), exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, 139
Fen bendazole
inflammatory bowel disease, canine, 131
intussusception, feline, 135
Fibrinogen, feline hepatic lipidosis, 106
Fludrocortisone acetate, hypoadrenocorticism, 65
Fluid replacement therapy, 62b
choice of fluids, 143b
colloids, small intestine foreign body, 50
crystalloids
calculations, 143b
dysautonomia, feline, 32
parvovirus infection, canine, 143
glue ingestion, canine, 73
hepatic lipidosis, feline, 108-109
hyperkalaemia, 65
hypoadrenocorticism, 64
intussusception, feline, 134
linear foreign bodies, feline, 93b, 93t
pancreatitis, feline, 88
potassium supplementation, 144b
protein losing enteropathy, 124
Fluid secretion, intestines, 41
Fluoroquinone, cats, 197b
Folate, 67b, 195b
exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, feline, 139, 141
inflammatory bowel disease, feline, 195, 197
intestinal absorption, 67f
small intestine diarrhoea, 117-118
Folate deficiency
lymphocytic inflammatory bowel disease, 67
mucosal atrophy, 37-40
Folate supplementation, small intestine diarrhoea, 118
Foreign body, small intestine, canine, 47-50
case history, 47
case work-up, 48
differential diagnosis, 47b-48b
epidemiology, 50
follow-up, 48
imaging, 48, 49f
intussusception, 48
minimum data base, 48
physical examination, 47
prognosis, 50
surgery, 48, 49f
fPLI See Feline pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity (fPLI)
fTLI (feline trypsin-like immunoassay), exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, 139
Fundus, stomach, 37, 38f
G
Gait, canine myasthenia gravis, 10-11
Gastric acid inhibitors, oesophageal stricture, 16
Gastric adenocarcinoma, canine, 81-84
biopsy, 83b
case history, 81
case work-up, 82-84
differential diagnosis, 81b-82b
endoscopy, 83, 83f
epidemiology, 84
histopathology, 83
imaging, 82-83, 83f
minimum data base, 82
outcome, 83-84
physical examination, 81
prognosis, 84
treatment, 83-84
Gastric dilatation, chronic partial See Chronic partial gastric dilatation, canine
Gastric dilation with torsion, 54f
Gastric gas, chronic partial gastric dilatation, 55
Gastric volvulus, 54f
radiography, 53-55
Gastroduodenoscopy
chronic partial gastric dilatation, 53
corticosteroid-induced gastrointestinal ulceration, canine, 169-170, 169b, 169f
gastric adenocarcinoma, canine, 83, 83f
inflammatory bowel disease, feline, 196
protein losing enteropathy, 123, 123f
Gastrointestinal bleeding, 151-152
cause diagnosis, 151-152
diagnosis, 166b See also Haematochezia See also Melaena
Gastrointestinal disease, urgent vs. non-urgent, 211-212
Gastrointestinal permeability testing, small intestine diarrhoea, 118, 118f
Gastrointestinal physiology, 37-41
Gastro-oesophageal reflux
atropine, 17
oesophageal stricture, 16-17
xylazine, 17
Gastro-oesophageal sphincter (GES), 3
Gastropexy, canine glue ingestion, 73
Gastroscopy, oesophageal stricture, 15b
Gastrostomy, 221f
canine glue ingestion, 73
German shepherd dogs
idiopathic megaoesophagus, 6b
persistent right aortic arch, 29
protein losing enteropathy, 127
German shorthaired pointer
haemorrhagic gastroenteritis, 153b
myasthenia gravis, 12-13
Giardia, 117
Globin, feline hepatic lipidosis, 106
Globulins, canine intestinal leiomyoma, 161
Glucocorticoids
deficiency See Hypoadrenocorticism, canine
hypoadrenocorticism, 65
Glue ingestion, canine, 72-75
case assessment, 73-74
case history, 72
case work-up, 73-74
differential diagnosis, 72b
epidemiology, 74-75
follow-up, 74
imaging, 73, 73f
medical management, 74
minimum data base, 73
physical examination, 72
problem discussion, 72-73
problem list, 72-73
Gorilla glue, 74
Granulomatous colitis, 197-198
Great Dane
myasthenia gravis, 12-13
persistent right aortic arch, 29
Greyhounds, persistent right aortic arch, 29
Grooming, cats, 33b
H
Haematochezia, 151-152
acute pancreatitis, 190
definition, 151
differential diagnosis, 151
Haematology
canine myasthenia gravis, 11
chronic partial gastric dilatation, 52
colonic vascular ectasia, canine, 158
colorectal neoplasia, canine, 190
corticosteroid-induced gastrointestinal ulceration, canine, 166-167
dehydration effects, 154b
dysautonomia, feline, 31-32
exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, feline, 139
gastric adenocarcinoma, canine, 82
gastrointestinal bleeding, 151-152
glue ingestion, canine, 73
hepatic lipidosis, feline, 106
hypoadrenocorticism, 62
idiopathic megaoesophagus, 7
inflammatory bowel disease, canine, 130
inflammatory bowel disease, feline, 194
intestinal leiomyoma, canine, 161
intussusception, feline, 134
lead ingestion, 77-79
lymphocytic inflammatory bowel disease, 67
oesophageal foreign bodies, 22
pancreatitis/alimentary lymphoma, canine, 57
pancreatitis, feline, 86
parvovirus infection, canine, 144-145
phenobarbitone response regurgitation, 19
porto-systemic shunts, canine, 98
protein losing enteropathy, 122
small intestine diarrhoea, 116-117
small intestine foreign body, 48
Tritrichomonas, feline, 186
vomiting, 43-44
young animals, 145b
Haemoglobin concentration, canine intestinal leiomyoma, 161
Haemorrhagic diarrhoea, 142b-143b
acute, 153b-154b
differential diagnosis, 142b
Haemorrhagic gastroenteritis, canine, 153-156
adrenocorticotrophic hormone stimulation test, 155
case history, 153
case work-up, 154-155
differential diagnosis, 153b-154b
faecal analysis, 155
hypovolaemia, 155
minimum data base, 154-155
outcome, 155
physical examination, 153
problem discussion, 153-154
problem list, 153-154
prognosis, 156
treatment, 156
Halitosis, 0esophageal foreign bodies, 21-22
Helicobacter, 74, 74b, 197b
anti body therapy, 74
Hepatic encephalopathy, 97
seizures, 77
Hepatic lipidosis, feline, 104-110
S-adenosyl methionine, 108
anti-emetics, 108
blood pressure measurement, 106
L-carnitine, 108
case history, 104
case work-up, 106-108
diagnosis, 106b
differential diagnosis, 105b
electrolytes, 108
epidemiology, 110
fluid replacement therapy, 107-108
follow-up, 108-109
imaging, 107
liver tissue histopathology, 107, 107b, 107f
medical treatment, 107-108, 108b
minimum data base, 106
nutritional support, 107b
pathogenesis, 109-110
physical examination, 104-105
 problem discussion, 105
problem list, 105
prognosis, 110
taurine, 108
vitamin supplementation, 108
Hepatomegaly, causes, 105
Hereditary disorders, seizures, 77
High protein diets, porto-systemic shunts, canine, 99b
Histamine H2 receptor antagonists, 92b, 181
oesophageal stricture, 16
Histopathology
gastric adenocarcinoma, canine, 83
inflammatory bowel disease, feline, 196-197, 197f
intestinal leiomyoma, canine, 162-163, 163f
lymphocytic inflammatory bowel disease, feline, 68-69, 69f
porto-systemic shunts, canine, 101
small intestine diarrhoea, 118
Hydrochloric acid, stomach, 37
Hydrocortisone sodium suiccinate, hypoadrenocorticism, 64
Hygiene, infectious diseases, 143b
Hyperkalaemia
hypoadrenocorticism, 62-63
management, 65
Hyperosmotic laxatives, 181
Hyperthyroidism
diarrhoea, 134
polyuria, 86
small intestine diarrhoea, 194
Hypertrophic megacolon, 175, 184
Hypoadrenocorticism, canine, 61-65
ACTH stimulation test, 64
case history, 61
case work-up, 62-64
diarrhoea, 134
differential diagnosis, 61b-62b
ECG, 63, 64f
epidemiology, 65
follow-up, 64
imaging, 63, 63f-64f
medical management, 65
minimum data base, 62-63
outcome, 64
physical examination, 61
problem discussion, 61-62
 problem list, 61-62
prognosis, 65
small intestine diarrhoea, 194
Hypoalbuminaemia, 194b
Hypoalbuminaemia, inflammatory bowel disease
canine, 130
feline, 194
Hypocalcaemia
with hypoalbuminaemia, 122b
protein losing enteropathy, 122, 127
Hypochromic anaemia, canine intestinal leiomyoma, 161, 163
Hypoglobulinaemia, canine inflammatory bowel disease, 130
Hypokalaemia, feline, 93b
hepatic lipidosis, 106
Hypophosphataemia, inflammatory bowel disease, feline, 194
Hypoproteinaemia, dehydration, 210
Hypovolaemia
haemorrhagic gastroenteritis, canine, 155
hypoadrenocorticism, 65
IBD See Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD)
Icterus, causes, 105
Idiopathic megacolon, 184
Idiopathic megaoesophagus, canine, 6-9
case history, 6
case work-up, 7-8
diagnosis, 8-9
discussion of problems, 6-7
endoscopy, 8-9
epidemiology, 9
imaging, 8
initial presentation, 6b
pathophysiology, 9
physical examination, 6
problem list, 6-7
prognosis, 9
treatment, 9
Ileum, 37, 40f
Imaging
colonic vascular ectasia, canine, 158
colorectal neoplasia, canine, 190, 190f
constipation, feline, 179, 179f
corticosteroid-induced gastrointestinal ulceration, canine, 167, 168f
gastric adenocarcinoma, canine, 82-83, 83f
glue ingestion, dog, 73, 73f
hepatic lipidosis, feline, 107
hypoadrenocorticism, 63, 63f-64f
inflammatory bowel disease, feline, 195-197, 196f
intestinal leiomyoma, canine, 161-162, 162f
intussusception, feline, 134, 134f
large intestine disorders, 173
lead ingestion, canine, 78
linear foreign bodies, feline, 93-95, 94f
lymphocytic inflammatory bowel disease, feline, 68, 68f-69f
pancreatitis, canine, 58
pancreatitis, feline, 87, 87f
porto-systemic shunts, canine, 98-99, 98f-99f, 99b
protein losing enteropathy, canine, 123
regurgitation, 11b
small intestine diarrhoea, 118-119
Tritrichomonas, feline, 186
vomiting, 44 See also Endoscopy See also Radiography See also Ultrasound
Immune mediated thrombocytopenia, 170b
Increased permeability, diarrhoea, 113-114
Incubation time, parvovirus infection, canine, 146
Infections
bacterial See Bacterial infections
large intestine diarrhoea, 193-194
parasitic See Parasitic infections
seizures, 77
Infectious diseases, 143b
Inflammation
large intestine diarrhoea, 173, 186, 193
seizures, 77
Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD)
treatment, 126-127
vomiting, 97
Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), canine, 128-132
adrenocorticotrophin hormone stimulation test, 130
case history, 128-129
case work-up, 130-131
differential diagnosis, 129b-130b
endoscopy, 130-131, 131f
minimum data base, 130
outcome, 131
problem discussion, 129-130
problem list, 129-130
prognosis, 132
scoring, 131b
treatment, 131
Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), feline, 193-198
case history, 193
case work-up, 194-198
differential diagnosis, 193b-194b
endoscopy, 196f
histopathology, 196-197, 197f
imaging, 195-197, 196f
lymphocytic See Lymphocytic inflammatory bowel disease, feline
minimum data base, 194195
outcome, 197
pancreatitis, 89
pathophysiology, 197-198
physical examination, 193
 problem discussion, 193-194
problem list, 193-194
prognosis, 197-198
treatment, 197
Insulin, porto-systemic shunts, canine, 101
Intestinal biopsy, small intestine diarrhoea, 119
Intestinal disorders, diarrhoea, 133-134
Intestinal leiomyoma, canine, 160-164
case history, 160
case work-up, 161-163
differential diagnosis, 160b-161b
epidemiology, 163-164
histopathology, 162-163, 163f
imaging, 161-162, 162f
minimum data base, 161
outcome, 163
physical examination, 160
problem discussion, 160-161
problem list, 160-161
prognosis, 164
surgical treatment, 162
Intestinal mobility, small intestine diarrhoea, 119
Intestinal parasites See Parasitic infections
Intestines
electrolytes, 41
fluid secretion, 41
large, 174f See also Small intestine and colon
Intracranial disorders, seizures, 77
Intracranial haemorrhage, seizures, 77
Intrahepatic porto-caval shunts, 101
Intravenous catheters, 145b
Intravenous fluid therapy See Fluid replacement therapy
Intravenous plasma, canine pancreatitis, 91
Intrinsic factor, cobalamin absorption, 141
Intussusception
canine, 135-137
small intestine foreign body, 48
ultrasound, 45
vomiting, 45
Intussusception, feline, 133-137
case history, 133
case work-up, 134-135
differential diagnosis, 133b-134b
epidemiology, 135-137
imaging, 134, 134f
medical management, 134-135, 135b
minimum data base, 134
outcome, 134-135
physical examination, 133
postoperative care, 135
prevalence, 135-137
problem discussion, 133-134
problem list, 133-134
prognosis, 137
surgical treatment, 135
treatment, 134-135
Irish Setters, persistent right aortic arch, 29
Iron supplementation, intestinal leiomyoma, canine, 163
Irritable bowel syndrome, 174-175
Ischaemic disease, large intestine diarrhoea, 173
Isolation, infectious diseases, 143b
Jack Russell terriers
protein losing enteropathy, 121b
small intestine foreign body, 50
Jaundice
differential diagnosis, 86
hepatic causes, 86
pancreatitis, feline, 85
Jejunum, 37, 40f
Jugular catheters, 125b
protein losing enteropathy, 125
K
Key-Gaskell syndrome See Dysauitonomia, feline
Kidney disease
chronic small intestine diarrhoea, 97
diarrhoea, 134
small intestine diarrhoea, 122, 129, 194
L
Labrador
chronic partial gastric dilatation, 51
corticosteroid-induced gastrointestinal ulceration, 165b
oesophageal foreign bodies, 21b
parvovirus infection, 146
Lactose intolerance, 40-41
Lactulose, 181
constipation, feline, 180
porto-systemic shunts, canine, 100b
Large intestine, anatomy, 174f
Large intestine disorders
acute onset vomiting, 153-154
biopsies, 173-174
colonoscopy, 173-174, 175f
diarrhoea, 173
differential diagnosis, 186, 193b-194b
imaging, 173
investigation, 173-177
vomiting, 52, 56, 62, 72, 76, 82, 97
feline, 93see also specific anatomical structures
Lateral abdominal radiographs, small intestine foreign body, 48, 49f
Laxatives
constipation, feline, 181
emollient, 181
hyperosmotic, 181
lubricant, 181
stimulant, 181
Lead ingestion, canine, 76-80
blood lead concentration, 78
case history, 76
clinical signs, 79
diagnosis, 79
differential diagnosis, 76-77
epidemiology, 80
imaging, 78
laboratory findings, 79
medical treatment, 79-80
minimum data base, 77-78
outcome, 78
pathophysiology, 78-79
physical examination, 76
prognosis, 80
treatment, 78
vomiting, 44
Lead, small intestine diarrhoea, 118
Leiomyomas, 84
canine See Intestinal leiomyoma, canine
Lethargy, feline pancreatitis, 90
Life cycle, feline Tritrichomonas, 187
Linear foreign body, feline, 92-95
case history, 92
case work-up, 93-94
differential diagnosis, 92b-93b
imaging, 93-95, 94f
medical treatment, 94
minimum data base, 93
outcome, 94
physical examination, 92
problem definition, 92-93
problem list, 92-93
prognosis, 95
surgical treatment, 94-95
Lipase, 82b
corticosteroid-induced gastrointestinal ulceration, canine, 167
deficiency, feline exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, 140-141
gastric adenocarcinoma, canine, 82
pancreatitis/alimentary lymphoma, canine, 57, 57b
pancreatitis, feline, 90
vomiting, 44
Liquid food, persistent right aortic arch, 27b
Liquid paraffin, 181
Liver biopsy, canine corticosteroid-induced gastrointestinal ulceration, 168
Liver diseases/disorders
chronic small intestine diarrhoea, 97
diarrhoea, 134
polyuria, 86
small intestine diarrhoea, 116, 122, 129, 194
Liver enzymes
corticosteroid-induced gastrointestinal ulceration, canine, 166
protein losing enteropathy, 122
Liver failure, chronic small intestine diarrhoea, 97
Liver, tissue histopathology, feline hepatic lipidosis, 107, 107b, 107f
Loperamide, acuite diarrhoea, 119-120
Low protein diet, feline porto-systemic shunts, 100b
Lubricant laxatives, 181
Lymphadenopathy, canine intestinal leiomyoma, 163
Lymph node cytology, canine colorectal neoplasia, 191
Lymphocytes, lymphocytic inflammatory bowel disease, feline, 68-69
Lymphocytic cholangitis, feline, 138
Lymphocytic inflammatory bowel disease, feline, 66-71
alimentary lymphoma vs., feline, 71
case history, 66
differential diagnosis, 66b-67b
endoscopy, 68-69
histopathology, 68-69, 69f
imaging, 68, 68f-69f
minimum data base, 67-68
physical condition, 66
treatment, 70
Lymphoma
alimentary See Alimentary lymphoma, canine; Alimentary lymphoma, feline
colonic neoplasia, 176
Lymphosarcoma, 84
M
Magnesium supplementation, hepatic lipidosis, feline, 108
Malassimilation, weight loss, 130
Maldigestion, diarrhoea, 138
Marbofloxacin
canine myasthenia gravis, 12
inflammatory bowel disease, feline, 197
Maropitant, 58b
cats, 92b
glue ingestion, canine, 74
pancreatitis, feline, 88
parvovirus infection, canine, 144b
protein losing enteropathy, 124
Mean corpuscular volume, intestinal leiomyoma, canine, 161
Megacolon, 175-176
congenital causes, 175, 176f
constipation, 175
dilated, 184
hypertrophic, 175, 184
idiopathic, 184
management, 176
Megacolon, feline, 178-185
follow-up, 183
 pathophysiology, 183-184
Megaoesophagus
air in oesophagus, 4
idiopathic See Idiopathic megaoesophagus, canine
testing, 5
Melaena, 151-152
acute pancreatitis, 190
corticosteroid-induced gastrointestinal ulceration, canine, 166
definition, 151
differential diagnosis, 151
intestinal leiomyoma, canine, 163
Metabolic diseases/disorders
acute diarrhoea, 119
diarrhoea, 138
seizures, 77
Methionine, functions, 109
Methylprednisolone, corticosteroid-induced gastrointestinal ulceration, canine, 170
Metoclopramide, 58b
chronic partial gastric dilatation, 53
pancreatitis, canine, 58
parvovirus infection, canine, 144-145, 144b
vomiting, 43
Metronidazole
Helicobacter, 74
inflammatory bowel disease, canine, 129
parvovirus infection, canine, 144-145
porto-systemic shunts, canine, 100b
Tritrichomonas, feline, 188
Microcytic anaemia, canine intestinal leiomyoma, 163
Microcytic haemolytic anaemia, lead ingestion, 77-78, 77f
Microcytosis, 78b, 99b
canine intestinal leiomyoma, 161
Microvilli, 41f
brush border, 37, 41f
Mineralocorticoids, hypoadrenocorticism, 65
Monocytosis, feline inflammatory bowel disease, 194
Mortality, canine myasthenia gravis, 13
Motility, small intestine, 40
Mucosal layer, small intestine, 37, 40f
Mucus membranes, canine corticosteroid-induced gastrointestinal ulceration, 166
Multidrug resistance associated protein (MRP), canine colorectal neoplasia, 192
Multidrug resistance (MDR), canine colorectal neoplasia, 192
Muscle layer, small intestine, 37, 40f
Muscle wasting, canine corticosteroid-induced gastrointestinal ulceration, 166
Muscle weakness, canine myasthenia gravis, 13
Myasthenia gravis, canine, 10-13
acquired, 12
case history, 10
case work-up, 11-12
epidemiology, 12-13
follow-up, 12
imaging, 11
medical treatment, 12
minimum data base, 11
neurological examination, 11-12
physical examination, 10
prognosis, 13
Myotomy, idiopathic megaoesophagus, 9
N
Naso-oesophageal feeding tubes, 221f
Nausea
dehydration, 210
vomiting, 43
Neomycin, canine porto-systemic shunts, 100b
Neoplasia
large intestine diarrhoea, 173, 194see also specific types
Nerve supply, colon, 183-184, 185f
Neurological disease, vomiting, 66-67, 86, 130
Neuromuscular disorders, feline constipation, 179
Neutrophilia
constipation, feline, 179
inflammatory bowel disease, feline, 194
Neutrophils, canine corticosteroid-induced gastrointestinal ulceration, 168
Newfoundland, myasthenia gravis, 12-13
Nizatidine, 181
Non-inflammatory disease, large intestine diarrhoea, 173
Non-regenerative anaemia, feline alimentary lymphoma, 70
Normochromic anaemia, canine intestinal leiomyoma, 163
Nursing tips
cat care, 33b
nutrition, 155b
Nutrient loss, weight loss, 130
Nuitrition
feline hepatic lipidosis, 107b
nursing tip, 155b
pancreatitis, feline, 89b
puppies, 28b
0
Objects, oesophageal foreign bodies, 24
Obstructive disease
constipation, feline, 179
large intestine diarrhoea, 173
Oesophageal disorders, vomiting, 18
Oesophageal feeding tube, feline dysautonomia, 32, 33f
Oesophageal foreign bodies, canine, 21-25
case history, 21
case work-up, 22
diagnosis, 23
differential diagnosis, 24
endoscopy, 23, 23f
epidemiology, 23-25
fasting, 2425
feeding tips, 24b
imaging, 22-23
initial presentation, 21b
medical management, 23
minimum data base, 22-23
outcome, 23
physical examination, 21
prognosis, 25
removal, 24
surgery, 25
treatment, 23
Oesophageal muscularis, 3
Oesophageal neuromuscular disorders, differential diagnosis, 14
Oesophageal obstruction, air in oesophagus, 4
Oesophageal stricture, feline, 1417
case history, 14
case work-up, 14
differential diagnosis, 14b
endoscopy, 15, 15f
follow-up, 15-16
imaging, 14
initial presentation, 14b
medical therapy, 16
minimum data base, 14-16
pathogenesis, 16-17
physical examination, 14
prognosis, 17
surgery, 16
Oesophagitis
air in oesophagus, 4
differential diagnosis, 14
persistent right aortic arch, 28
Oesophagostomy, 221f
Oesophagus, 3, 38f, 40f
cat, 4f 
dog, 4f
endoscopy, 5, 5f
Oestrogen-progesterone therapy, canine colonic vascular ectasia, 159
Oliguria, dehydration, 210
Omeprazole
glue ingestion, canine, 74
Helicobacter, 74
oesophageal stricture, 16
persistent right aortic arch, 27-28
Osmotic diarrhoea, 113
P
Packed cell volume (PCV), 57b, 62b, 98b
haemorrhagic gastroenteritis, canine, 154
pancreati tis/alimentary lymphoma, canine, 57
porto-systemic shunts, canine, 98
Pale mucus membranes, canine corticosteroid-induced gastrointestinal ulceration,
166
Palliative therapy, canine colonic vascular ectasia, 158-159
Palpation, oesophageal foreign bodies, 24
Pancreas, 37-41, 40f
enzyme secretion, 40-41
Pancreatic disease
chronic small intestine diarrhoea, 97
diarrhoea, 134
small intestine diarrhoea, 122, 129, 194
Pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity (PLI) test, small intestine diarrhoea, 117
Pancreatitis
acute See Acute pancreatitis
chronic See Chronic pancreatitis
Pancreatitis, canine, 56-60
antibiotics, 58b
case history, 56
case work-up, 57-58
diagnosis, 58-60
differential diagnosis, 56b-57b
endoscopy, 59
feeding care, 58b
imaging, 58
medical treatment, 58-59
minimum data base, 57
physical examination, 56
Pancreatitis, feline, 85-91
aetiology, 89
case history, 85
case work-up, 86-89
diagnosis, 90
diarrhoea, 138
differential diagnosis, 85-86
epidemiology, 89-91
imaging, 87, 87f
minimum data base, 86-87
nutrition, 89b
outcome, 88-89
physical examination, 85
prognosis, 91
treatment, 88-89, 91
Parasitic infections, 130b
diarrhoea, 138
inflammatory bowel disease, feline, 195
intussusception, feline, 137
large intestine diarrhoea, 194
seizures, 77
small intestine diarrhoea, 117
Parasympathomimetics, feline dysautonomia, 34
Parenteral nutrition, 124b
protein losing enteropathy, 124
Partial colectomy, canine colonic vascular ectasia, 159
Partial gastric dilatation, chronic See Chronic partial gastric dilatation, canine
Partial parenteral nutrition, 146b
Parvovirus infection, canine, 142-147, 147f
anti-emetic drugs, 144b
blood glucose, 144b
case history, 142
case work-up, 143-146
differential diagnosis, 142b
emergency diagnostic tests, 143
emergency treatment, 143
epidemiology, 146-147
faecal SNAP(tm) Parvo test, 145, 145b
follow-up, 145-146
medical treatment, 144-145
minimum data base, 144
outcomes, 145-146
physical examination, 142
problem discussion, 142-143
problem list, 142-143
prognosis, 147
PCV See Packed cell volume (PCV)
Pepsinogen, stomach, 37
Peristalsis, 41f
Persistent right aortic arch, canine, 26-29, 28f
case history, 26
case work-up, 26-27
diagnosis, 27-28
differential diagnoses, 26
endoscopy, 27
epidemiology, 28-29
follow-up, 28
imaging, 27, 27f
initial presentation, 26b
medical treatment, 27-28
minimum data base, 26-27
physical examination, 26
problem list, 26
prognosis, 29
surgical treatment, 27
P-glycoprotein, canine colorectal neoplasia, 192
Pharmacological causes, feline constipation, 179
Phenobarbitone response regurgitation, canine, 18-20
case history, 18
case work-up, 19
diagnosis, 19-20
differential diagnosis, 18b
epidemiology, 19
follow-up, 19
imaging, 19
initial presentation, 18b
medical treatment, 19
minimum data base, 19
pathophysiology, 19
physical examination, 18
problem discussion, 18
problem list, 18
prognosis, 20
serum concentrations, 20b
Phosphate supplementation, feline hepatic lipidosis, 108
Pilocarpine response test, idiopathic megaoesophagus, 8b
Plasmacytes, feline lymphocytic inflammatory bowel disease, 68-69
PLI (pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity) test, small intestine diarrhoea, 117
Polycythaemia, polyuria, 86
Polydipsia, canine corticosteroid-induced gastrointestinal ulceration, 166
Polyethylene glycol, 181
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
alimentary lymphoma, canine, 60
Tritrichomonas, feline, 188
Polyuria
corticosteroid-induced gastrointestinal ulceration, canine, 166
differential diagnosis, 86
Porto-systemic shunts, canine, 96-103
case assessment, 99
case history, 96
case work-up, 98-103
epidemiology, 102
follow-up, 101
imaging, 98-99, 98f-99f, 99b
medical management, 100, 100b
minimum data base, 98
pathophysiology, 101-102
physical examination, 96
post-operative care, 101, 101b
problem discussion, 96-97
problem list, 96-97
prognosis, 102-103
surgical treatment, 100-101, 100f
Post-hepatic jaundice, 86
Potassium
parvovirus infection, canine, 145
small intestine foreign body, 48
Potassium supplementation
hepatic lipidosis, feline, 108
intravenous fluids, 144b
Prednisolone
alimentary lymphoma, canine, 60
alimentary lymphoma, feline, 70
colorectal neoplasia, canine, 191-192
inflammatory bowel disease, canine, 129, 131
inflammatory bowel disease, feline, 197
protein losing enteropathy, 125-126
Pre-hepatic jaundice, 86
Primary brain disorders, abnormal behaviour, 97
Prokinetic drugs, feline constipation, 181
Protein deprivation, feline hepatic lipidosis, 109
Protein losing enteropathy, canine, 121-127
case history, 121
case work-up, 122-126
definition, 126
differential diagnosis, 121b-122b
endoscopy, 123-124
epidemiology, 127
imaging, 123
minimum data base, 122-123
outcome, 124-126
physical examination, 121
problem discussion, 121-122
problem list, 121-122
prognosis, 127
treatment, 124-126
Prothrombin time, feline exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, 139
Proton pump inhibitors, 0esophageal stricture, 16
Ptyalism, causes, 105
Pyelonephritis, polyuria, 86
Pyloric orifice, stomach, 38f
Pyloric sphincter, stomach, 38f
Pylorus, stomach, 37, 38f
Pyridostigmine, canine myasthenia gravis, 12-13
R
Radiography
abdominal See Abdominal radiography
colonic vascular ectasia, canine, 158
contrast, vomiting, 44-45
gastric volvulus, 53-55
glue ingestion, canine, 75
large intestine disorders, 173
lead ingestion, 79
oesophageal foreign bodies, 24
small intestine diarrhoea, 118
thoracic see Thoracic radiography See also Barium contrast meals
Ranitidine, 92b, 181
corticosteroid-induced gastrointestinal ulceration, canine, 170
linear foreign bodies, feline, 94
oesophageal foreign bodies, 23
oesophageal stricture, 16
pancreatitis, canine, 58
pancreatitis, feline, 88
 parvovirus infection, canine, 144-145
protein losing enteropathy, 125
Recombinant feline interferon omega, canine parvovirus infection, 146
Rectal diseases, 177
Rectal stricture, 177
Rectum, 173
anatomy, 174f
Reflux oesophagitis, idiopathic megaoesophagus, 9
Regurgitation, 3-5, 211-212
diagnosis, 4-5
differential diagnosis, 26
cat, 31
dysphagia, 3-4
imaging, 11b
oesophageal stricture, 14
radiography, 4-5
vomiting vs., 3, 6b, 7t, 42-43, 128b
Renal pain, causes, 105
Reticulocyte count, 167b
canine corticosteroid-induced gastrointestinal ulceration, 166-167
Ronidazole, feline Tritrichomonas, 187-188
Rottweiler, parvovirus infection, 142b, 146
S
Salivation, dehydration, 210
Salmonella, small intestine diarrhoea, 117
Salt supplementation, hypoadrenocorticism, 65
Schirmer tear test, 31
Scottish terrier, myasthenia gravis, 12-13
Secretagogues, large intestine diarrhoea, 194
Secretory diarrhoea, 113
Segmentation, 41f
Seizures, differential diagnosis, 77
Self-limiting diarrhoea, 114
Serosa layer, small intestine, 40f
Serum chemistry
canine myasthenia gravis, 11
chronic partial gastric dilatation, 52
colonic vascular ectasia, canine, 158
colorectal neoplasia, canine, 190
corticosteroid-induced gastrointestinal ulceration, canine, 166-167
dehydration effects, 154b
dysautonomia, feline, 31-32
exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, feline, 139
gastric adenocarcinoma, canine, 82
glue ingestion, canine, 73
hepatic lipidosis, feline, 106, 109
hypoadrenocorticism, 62
inflammatory bowel disease, canine, 130
inflammatory bowel disease, feline, 194
intestinal leiomyoma, canine, 161
intussusception, feline, 134
lead ingestion, 77-78
oesophageal foreign bodies, 22
pancreatitis/alimentary lymphoma, canine, 57
pancreatitis, feline, 86
parvovirus infection, canine, 145
phenobarbitone response regurgitation, 19
porto-systemic shunts, canine, 98
protein losing enteropathy, 122
small intestine diarrhoea, 116-117
small intestine foreign body, 48
Tritrichomonas, feline, 186
vomiting, 44
young animals, 145b
Serum proteins
feline hepatic lipidosis, 106see also specific proteins
Shar Pei, inflammatory bowel disease, 128b
Shorthaired cat
hepatic lipidosis, 104b
lymphocytic inflammatory bowel disease/alimentary lymphoma, 66b
Siamese cat
Tritrichomonas, 186b
SIBO (small intestinal bacterial overgrowth), 117
Skin tenting, dehydration, 210
Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth (SIBO), 117
Small intestinal diarrhoea, 116-120, 211-212
acute, 119-120
cobalamin, 117-118
diagnosis, 128b
dietary trials, 116
differential diagnosis, 121b-122b, 129b-130b, 193b-194b
endoscopy, 119
exploratory laparotomy, 119
faecal alpha-antiprotease, 117
faecal tests, 117
folate, 117-118
gastrointestinal permeability testing, 118, 118f
imaging, 118-119see also specific methods
intestinal biopsy, 119
minimum data base, 116-117
radiography, 118
ultrasonography, 118-119
Small intestine, 37-41
anatomy, 40f
cat, 37
dog, 37
layers of, 40f
motility, 40
ultrasound, 69f
Small intestine diseases/disorders
acute onset vomiting, 154
chronic small intestine diarrhoea, 97
differential diagnosis, small intestine foreign body, 47
small intestine diarrhoea, 116, 122, 129, 194
vomiting, 18, 51-52, 56, 62, 66, 72, 76, 82, 85-86, 97
vomiting, feline, 93see also specific diseases/disorders
Small intestine malabsorption, large intestine diarrhoea, 186
SNAP Combo(tm) test, feline intussusception, 134
SNAP cPL (canine pancreatic specific lipase), 82b
protein losing enteropathy, 124
small intestine diarrhoea, 117, 117f
Sodium:potassium ratios, 63b
Sodium, small intestine foreign body, 48-50
Starvation
hepatic lipidosis, feline, 109
porto-systemic shunts, canine, 101
Stimulant laxatives, 181
Stomach, 37
anatomy, 38f, 40f
Stomach disorders
acute onset vomiting, 153-154
chronic small intestine diarrhoea, 97
differential diagnosis, small intestine foreign body, 47
small intestine diarrhoea, 116, 121, 129
vomiting, 18, 51, 56, 62, 66, 72, 76, 81, 85, 97, 130
feline, 93
Stress hormone, hepatic lipidosis, feline, 109-110
Struvite crystals, 82b
canine gastric adenocarcinoma, 82
Submandibular lymph nodes, feline hepatic lipidosis, 104
Submucosal layer, small intestine, 37, 40f
Sub-total colectomy
advantages/disadvantages, 183t
colonic vascular ectasia, canine, 158-159
constipation, feline, 182-183, 182f
Succimer, lead ingestion, 79-80
Sucralfate, 27b
corticosteroid-induced gastrointestinal ulceration, canine, 170
glue ingestion, canine, 74
oesophageal foreign bodies, 23, 25
oesophageal stricture, 16
pancreatitis, canine, 58
persistent right aortic arch, 27-28
Sulfasalazine
applications, 129b
inflammatory bowel disease, canine, 129
Supportive care
dysautonomia, feline, 33-34
haemorrhagic gastroenteritis, canine, 156
Surgery, feline constipation, 182-183
Swallowing, 3-5
cat, 3
dog, 3
Swallowing contrast studies, 4b, 5, 5f
Systemic disorders
abnormal behaviour, 97
acute onset vomiting, 154
large intestine diarrhoea, 173, 194
seizures, 77
small intestine diarrhoea, 116
vomiting, 52, 56-57, 62, 66, 72, 76, 82, 86, 97, 130
feline, 93
T
Taurine
functions, 109
hepatic lipidosis, feline, 108
Tenesmus, differential diagnosis, 31
Thiamine (vitamin B,), feline hepatic lipidosis, 108-109
Thoracic auscultation
canine myasthenia gravis, 10
chronic partial gastric dilatation, 51
constipation, feline, 178
corticosteroid-induced gastrointestinal ulceration, canine, 165
gastric adenocarcinoma, canine, 81
glue ingestion, canine, 72
hepatic lipidosis, feline, 104
hypoadrenocorticism, 61
inflammatory bowel disease, feline, 193
oesophageal foreign bodies, 21
oesophageal stricture, 14
pancreati tis/alimentary lymphoma, canine, 56
persistent right aortic arch, 26
porto-systemic shunt, 96
small intestine foreign body, 47
Thoracic oesophagus, 3
Thoracic radiography
canine myasthenia gravis, 11, 12f
clinical tips, 14b
dysautonomia, feline, 32
gastric adenocarcinoma, canine, 83
hypoadrenocorticism, 63, 63f
idiopathic megaoesophagus, 8, 8f
intestinal leiomyoma, canine, 161-162, 162f
intussusception, feline, 134, 134f
oesophageal foreign bodies, 22-23, 22f
oesophageal stricture, 14
persistent right aortic arch, 26
phenobarbitone response regurgitation, 19
Thrombocytopenia, immune mediated, 170b
Thyroxine (T4)
idiopathic megaoesophagus, 8
inflammatory bowel disease, feline, 195
pancreatitis/alimentary lymphoma, canine, 57
vomiting, feline, 44
TLI See Trypsin-like immunoreactivity (TLI) test
Total carbon dioxide (Tco2), vomiting, 44
Toxins
large intestine diarrhoea, 186
seizures, 77
vomiting, 77, 86, 130
Toxoplasma, 195b
feline inflammatory bowel disease, 195
Transverse colon, 40f
Trauma
constipation, feline, 178-179
glue ingestion, canine, 74
Tritrichomonas, feline, 186188
case history, 186
case work-up, 186-187
clinical signs, 187
differential diagnosis, 186
epidemiology, 187-188
faecal tests, 187
imaging, 186
life cycle, 187
minimum data base, 186
outcome, 187
physical examination, 186
prevalence, 187
 problem discussion, 186
 problem list, 186
prognosis, 188
treatment, 187-188
Trypsin-like immunoreactivity (TL1) test
inflammatory bowel disease, feline, 194-195
small intestine diarrhoea, 117
vomiting, 44
Tylosin, canine colonic vascular ectasia, 158-159
U
Ultrasound
abdominal See Abdominal ultrasound
clinical tips, 196b
hepatic lipidosis, feline, 107
intestinal leiomyoma, canine, 162-163, 162f
intestinal wall examination, 118-119
intussusception, 45
intussusception, feline, 137
large intestine disorders, 173
small intestine diarrhoea, 118-119
vomiting, 45
Uraemia
large intestine diarrhoea, 194
small intestine diarrhoea, 194
Urate crystals, porto-systemic shunts, canine, 99b
Urea
hepatic lipidosis, feline, 106
nitrogen:creatinine ratio, gastrointestinal bleeding, 166b
porto-systemic shunts, canine, 99b
Urinalysis
canine myasthenia gravis, 11
chronic partial gastric dilatation, 52
colorectal neoplasia, canine, 190
constipation, feline, 179
corticosteroid-induced gastrointestinal ulceration, canine, 166-167
dysautonomia, feline, 32
exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, feline, 139
gastric adenocarcinoma, canine, 82
hepatic lipidosis, feline, 106, 106f
hypoadrenocorticism, 62
idiopathic megaoesophagus, 7
inflammatory bowel disease, canine, 130
inflammatory bowel disease, feline, 195
intestinal leiomyoma, canine, 161
lead ingestion, 77-78
lymphocytic inflammatory bowel disease, 68
pancreatitis/alimentary lymphoma, canine, 57
pancreatitis, feline, 87
phenobarbitone response regurgitation, 19
porto-systemic shunts, canine, 98
protein losing enteropathy, 122
small intestine diarrhoea, 116-117
small intestine foreign body, 48
Tritrichomonas, feline, 186
vomiting, 44
Urination, dehydration, 210
Urine sediment, 88b
Urine specific gravity
cats, 68b
oesophageal foreign bodies, 22
porto-systemic shunts, canine, 99b
V
Vaccinations
canine myasthenia gravis, 13
parvovirus, 146
Vascular ring anomalies, 28
Ventrodorsal abdominal radiographs, small intestine foreign body, 48, 49f
Vincristine
alimentary lymphoma, canine, 60
colorectal neoplasia, canine, 191
Viral infections, acute diarrhoea, 119
Vitamin deficiencies, hepatic lipidosis, feline, 109
Vitamin supplementation, hepatic lipidosis, feline, 108
Vitamin B, (thiamine)
deficiency, feline hepatic lipidosis, 109
feline hepatic lipidosis, 108
Vitamin Bg (pyridoxine) deficiency, feline hepatic lipidosis, 109
Vitamin Bi2 See Cobalamin (vitamin B12)
Vitamin D, lead ingestion, 79
Vitamin E deficiency, feline hepatic lipidosis, 109
Vitamin K
exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, feline, 140
hepatic lipidosis, feline, 108-109
Vitamin K deficiency, feline hepatic lipidosis, 109
Vomiting, 42-46, 211
acute onset, differential diagnosis, 153b-154b
cat, causes, 105
contrast radiography, 44-45
definition, 42
diagnosis, 42
diet, 43
differential diagnosis, 18b, 51b-52b, 72b, 76-77, 85-86, 97, 130, 142b
cats, 31
dysautonomia, feline, 30
endoscopy, 45, 45f
environmental history, 43
exploratory celiotomy, 45-46
history, 42-43
imaging, 44
intussusception, 45
laboratory data, 43-44
minimum data base, 43-44
nausea, 43
nutrition, 146b
pathophysiology, 42
physical examination, 43
regurgitation vs., 3, 6b, 7t, 42-43, 128b
signalment, 42-43
ultrasound, 45
work-up, 43-46
Vomiting centre, 42, 43f
W
Wall structure, colon, 183-184, 184f
Weakness, canine myasthenia gravis, 10
Weight loss
causes, 105
differential diagnosis, 130
dysautonomia, feline, 30
West Highland white terriers
lead ingestion, 76b
oesophageal foreign bodies, 23-24
White paraffin, 181
X
Xylazine, gastro-oesophageal reflux, 17
Y
Yorkshire terriers
oesophageal foreign bodies, 23-24
porto-systemic shunts, 102