LESALONGLEY
SAUNDERS SOLUTIONS IN
IETERINARYPRACTICE
Series Editor:Fred Nind
SMALLANIMAL
EXOTICPETMEDICINE
Unique new case-based approach
Modem,clearly designed and illustrated
Ideally suited for CPD or as an exam revislon aid
SAUNDERS
BLSEMIER
Saunders Solutions in
Veterinary Practice
Small Animal Exotic Pet Medicine
Lesa Longley
MA BVM&S DZooMed (Mammalian) MRCVS, RCVS Recognised
Specialist in Zoo & Wildlife Medicine, College of Medicine &
Veterinary Medicine, University of Edinburgh, UK
Series Editor: Fred Nind
Saunders
Front Matter
SAUNDERS SOLUTIONSIN VETERINARY PRACTICE
Small Animal Exotic Pet Medicine
Series Editor: Fred Nind BVM&S, MRCVS
Lesa Longley
MA BVM&S DZooMed (Mammalian) MRCVS
RCVS Recognised Specialist in Zoo & Wildlife Medicine College of Medicine &
Veterinary Medicine University of Edinburgh
UK
SAUNDERS
ELSEVIER
Edinburgh London New York Oxford Philadelphia St Louis Sydney Toronto 2010
Commissioning Editor: Robert Edwards Development Editor: Ewan Halley Project
Manager: Priya Dauntess Designer/Design Direction: Charles Gray Illustrator: Merlyn
Harvey
Copyright
SAUNDERS
ELSEVIER
 2010, Elsevier Limited. All rights reserved.
Aq o  n  sn   q r nd si g d o
any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any
information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the
phone: (+1) 215 239 3804 (US) or (+44) 1865 843830 (UK); fax: (+44) 1865
853333;  e-mail: healthpermissions@elsevier.com. You may also complete your
request on-line via the Elsevier website at http://www.elsevier.com/permissions.
First published 2010
ISBN: 978-0-70202985-1
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Notice
Knowledge and best practice in this field are constantly changing. As new research and
  a    'd  s  o  na
necessary or appropriate. Readers are advised to check the most current information provided (i) on
procedures featured or (ii) by the manufacturer of each product to be administered, to verify the
recommended dose or formula, the method and duration of administration, and contraindications. It
is the responsibility of the practitioner, relying on their own experience and knowledge of the
patient, to make diagnoses, to determine dosages and the best treatment for each individual patient,
and to take all appropriate safety precautions. To the fullest extent of the law, neither the Publisher
nor the Authors assume any liability for any injury and/or damage to persons or property arising
out or related to any use of the material contained in this book.
The Publisher
your source forbooks,
ELSEVIER
journals and multimedia
in the health sciences
www.elsevierheolth.com
Workingtogethertogrow
The
libraries in developing countries
publisher's
policy is to use
www.elsevier.comwww.bookaid.orgwww.sabre.org
paper manufactured
from sustainable forests
ELSEVIER
BOOKAID
SabreFoundation
Printed in China
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank friends and family who have encouraged me along my journey to becoming
 an exotics clinician, and to those veterinary surgeons and clients that have assisted me on the way. In
Thank you all for your support.
Lesa Longley
Introduction
Saunders Solutions in Veterinary Practice series is a new range of veterinary
textbooks which will grow into a mini-library over the next few years, covering all
the main disciplines of companion animal practice.
Readers shouild realize that it is not the authors’ intention to cover all that is
known about each topic. As such the books in the Solutions Series are not standard
reference works. Instead they are intended to provide practical information on the
case studies. They cover that range of cases that fall between the boringly routine and
              
s    sn    e   
sign rather than by the underlying pathology, as this is how veterinary surgeons will
see them in practice.
nursing required, both in the veterinary clinic and at home. It is hoped that the books
will also, therefore, be of interest to veterinary students in the later parts of their
course and to veterinary nurses.
veterinarians and a recommended practice for others. 'The Sauinders Series will
and used anywhere. It will also provide busy veterinary practitioners with quick
access to auithoritative information on the diagnosis and treatment of interesting and
challenging cases. The robust cover has been made resistant to some of the more
these books will be uised.
Joyce Rodenhuis, Mary Seager and Robert Edwards were the inspiration for the
Series and both the Series editor and the individual authors are grateful for their
      ss  s  sg
during their production.
SIMIALL AINIIVIAL EXUIIL PEI MEDILIINE
There is a tendency for practitioners to panic when presented with so called éexotic'
animals, and it can indeed feel challenging to be faced with a species that you have
will reassure you that by going back to the basics of obtaining a good history,
applying the skills of observation and clinical examination that you would use in a
more familiar species and the judicious use of clinical aids are all that you need to
reach a diagnosis in the vast majority of cases.
We also hope that the book will persuade you that an animal obtained by the
owner for little or no money is not valueless to them and that many owners of ^exotic
pets will be just as willing to work hard and pay your fees to get a sick one back to
health, as any cat or dog owner.
The warm glow of satisfaction when an éexotic' case gets better is an experience
to be savoured and the author and I hope that this book will help share it.
Fred Nind
Series Editor
Table of Contents
Front Matter
Copyright
Acknowledgements
Introduction
Chapter 1: The exotic pet consultation
Section 1: Mammals
Chapter 2: Mammals - an introduction
Chapter 3: Post-spay complications in a rabbit
Chapter 4: Spinal fracture in a rabbit
Chapter 5: Ferret with abdominal mass
Chapter 6: Urolithiasis in a chinchilla
Chapter 7: Cheilitis in a guinea pig
Chapter 8: Skin neoplasia in a hamster
Section 2: Birds
Chapter 9: Birds - an introduction
Chapter 10: Regurgitation in a cockato0
Chapter 1l: Harris' hawk with bumblefoot
Chapter 12: Tibiotarsal fracture in a dove
Chapter 13: Feather plucking in a parrot
Chapter 14: Stomatitis in a Harris' hawk
Section 3: Reptiles
Chapter 15: Reptiles - an introduction
Chapter 16: Gastrointestinal foreign body in a tortoise
Chapter 17: Bearded dragon with hepatic disease
Chapter 18: Osteomyelitis in a Hermann's tortoise
Chapter 19: Dystocia in a snake
Chapter 20: Dysecdysis in a leopard gecko
Chapter 21: Aural abscesses in a map turtle
Chapter 22: Hypocalcaemia in a green iguana
Section 4: Amphibians
Chapter 23: Amphibians - an introduction
Chapter 24: Trauma in an amphibian
Section 5: Fish
Chapter 25: Fish - an introduction
Chapter 26: Enucleation of an eye in a goldfish
MCQs
MCQs - Answers
Appendix 1: Critical care
Appendix 2: Zoonoses
Appendix 3: Suppliers
Further reading
Index
The exotic pet consultation
Introduction
Exotic pets are different from the more usual domestic pet, not just in their
appearance but also in their husbandry requirements. While most owners know the
basics of how to keep a dog or cat well fed, many novel/exotic pet owners can be
misguided as to the dietary needs of their animal. Many exotic pet species -
particularly reptiles - originate from tropical climes with very specific environmental
requirements, and, when kept in more temperate regions, necessitate close attention to
husbandry details in order to be maintained in good health. For this reason, it is
imperative for the exotic pet veterinary practitioner to meticulously investigate the
husbandry details of the animal. Many owners are closely bonded with their pets and
willing to have extensive veterinary treatments if the animal becomes ill (Fig. 1.1).
The history of the problem as noted by the owner should also be assessed
comprehensively.
Figure 1.1
Many owners are closely bonded with their pets, and willing to have extensive
veterinary treatments if the animal becomes ill.
For many of these unusual pets, the clinical examination may be reduced compared
with that of other species. Some, such as the Roborovsky hamster, may just be too
small to assess in detail. Others, such as tortoises, may have a shell encasing the main
body cavity, precluding palpation.
            s
clinician should be able to quickly assess the patient for frequent pathologies. Often,
the veterinary clinician identifies a disease process that is not directly related to the
problem for which the animal was presented. On some occasions, the animal is
      a  e        
ideal opportunity for the clinician to assess the animal and its living conditions for
     n       s s
           s
eminently preferable to treatment - and many veterinary practices promote ‘well-
animal' checks of exotic species (Fig. 1.2).
Figure 1.2
Well-animal veterinary health checks are particularly useful for birds such as this
rainbow lorikeet (Trichoglossus haematodus), since many birds hide signs of illness until pathology is
severe.
History Taking
As there are many differences in husbandry requirements and predispositions for
disease within taxonomic groups, suggested questions are listed in the introductory
sections throughouit the book.
In general, topics to cover include:
· Period of ownership
· Diet: what is offered by the owner and what is eaten by the animal, including any
supplements
· Enclosure: size, structure, any supplemental heating and/or lighting, substrate
· Handling/training
· Breeding: behaviour and/or production
· Previous medical problems: minor issues may have previously been treated by the
owner
· Current problem: date of onset, progression, whether intermittent or continuous
· Any other changes in the animal: thirst/appetite, urine/faecal output, behaviour
· In-contact animals: including any problems noted in them.
Clinical Examination
Ideally, adapt the normal small animal examination to these pets. The author adopts
the approach of starting with the head and working caudally, although it is equally
feasible to assess by body system.
It is important to note that many of these animals will not be accustomed to
handling, and the procedure will be stressful. Prepare all equipment before restraining
the animal - including any equipment necessary for laboratory sampling - to
minimize the period of handling.
   n          
individual. This will be especially important if further investigation or treatment is
 s         
potentially fatal in an extremely inwell animal.
This should be followed by a more intensive assessment of the problem(s) noted
             
animal in more detail. For example, an ocular problem in a gecko may be associated
          e    
determine if dysecdysis has resulted in other problems such as missing digits (after
Figure 1.3
  s s         s
this leopard gecko (Eublepharis macularius). Care should be taken not to overly stress debilitated
animals such as this emaciated specimen
Formation of Differential Diagnoses
Although not always a clear-cut part of the consultation with the client, the veterinary
clinician should formulate a list of possible differential diagnoses for the presenting
signs. During the consultation, this may be a brief list of common problems that may
that are shown not to have these diagnoses. This list will enable the clinician to design
a plan and discuss reasoning for investigations and potential treatments.
Investigations
Each case will require specific investigations. As alluded to above, some laboratory
samples may be taken during the initial examination. For example, swabs may be
taken from lesions for microscopic and bacteriological assessment.
At other times, it will be necessary to use chemical restraint on the patient in order
to investigate further. For example, many exotic pets require sedation or anaesthesia
prior to phlebotomy or radiography. These requirements will vary greatly between
species, e.g. many reptiles can be blood sampled and imaged conscious, while birds
sometimes be performed under analgesia and local anaesthesia, all species require
general anaesthesia for more invasive surgery.
Discussion with Owner
The risks of chemical restraint and any procedures to be performed should be
discussed with the owner so that they may give informed consent. These risks will
vary between species and between animals. The use of off-label drugs should also be
Often, exotic pets are prey species and hide signs of illness - or show only very
subtle signs - until they are extremely ill. The owner should not be given unrealistic
            
experienced, they should be able to identify those cases that are likely to respond to
treatment.
The owner should be given a clear indication of the prognosis for the animal, along
with an accurate estimation of the fees likely to be incurred in the processes of
investigation and treatment. Most exotic pets are not insured and many conditions
           
reptiles - treatment may be prolonged and therefore expensive.
In some cases, the owner may not be willing or able to afford further investigation
and expensive treatment. In these instances, the clinician should be able to provide
good husbandry advice for the animal and potentially medication based on likely
clinician shouild impress upon the client the need for animal welfare, and persuade
them to permit euthanasia of the pet.
Section 1
Mammals
2
Mammals - an introduction
Small mammals are commonly kept as pets. Various species may be presented to the
veterinary clinician, often with diverse husbandry requirements and disease
predispositions. Presenting signs may be subtle and vague. This chapter will aim to
discuss some basic biology and husbandry for these species, as well as providing the
clinician with an outline on basic techniques to assess and treat the animals. The
ensuing chapters will demonstrate approaches to an assortment of cases.
Taxonomy
Taxonomic classification of mammals commonly seen as pets is given in Table 2.1.
Table 2.1 Taxonomic classification of mammals commonly seen as pets
Order
Suborder
Family
Subfamily
Species
Lagomorpha
Leporidae
Rabbit (Oryctolagus cuniculus)
Rodentia
Sciurognathi
Sciuridae(squirrel-
Siberian chipmunk(Tamias sibincus)
like rodents)
Prairie dog (Cynomys ludovicianus)
Murinae
Mouse (Musmuscufus)
like rodents)
Rat (Rattus norvegicus)
Cncetinae
Hamster (e.g. golden hamster,Mesocricetus auratus)
Gerbillinae
Gerbil (e.g. Mongolian gerbil, Meriones unguiculatus)
Hystricognathi
Cavidae
Guinea pig (Cavia porcelfus)
(cavy-like
Chinchillidae
Chinchilla(Chinchilla laniger)
rodents)
Octodontidae
Degu (Octodon cegus)
Insectivora
Erinaceidae
Erinaceinae
African pygmy hedgehog (Ate/enx a/biventris)
Diprotodontia (in
Petauridae
Sugar glider (Petaurus breviceps)
the Marsupialia)
Carnivora
Mustelidae
Mustelinae
Ferret (Mustela putorius furo)
Primates
Haplorhini
Callitrichidae
Common marmoset（Calithrix jacchus)
Cebidae
Common squirrel monkey (Simia sciureus)
Biology
This is a brief synopsis for common pet species. Further information may be found in
Table 2.2, specific case reports later in the text or in references listed in the Further
reading section.
     s    
Rectal
Heart
Average
lenxas
Litter
Weaning
temperature
rate
Respiratory
Species
Longevity
weight
maturity
Sexing
Gestation
size
age
6。)
(/min)
rate(/min)
Rabbit
5-10years
1-10kg
4-8
M:greater ano-genital
28-32days
4-12
6weeks
38.5-40.0
180-30030-60
spuadap)
monthsF
distance,round preputil
on breed)
before M)
Chiomunk
4-6years
72-120g
M:onger ano-genital
31-32days
3-5
42days
75
(<12years
distance,obvious prepue
reported)
Prairie dog
10years
0.5-2.2kg
2-3years
M:scrotalsaceasilyvisible,
2-10
6weeks
35.3-39.0
83-318
(average
(M>F)
longer ano-genital distance
5)
Mouse
1.5-2.5
20-40g
6-7weeks
M:longer ano-genital
19-21 days
6-12
21days
37.5
500-600100-250
distance
F:separate vaginal and
urethral orifices
2.5-3.5
225-500g
6-8weeks
M:testiclesusually visble in
20-22days
6-16
21 days
Rat
38
260-45070-150
years
(Mlarger)
juveniles
F: separate vaginal and
urethral orifices
1-3years
Syrian
6-8weeks
Syrian:
Syrian:21-2837.6
280-41233-135
(depending
85-150g
(7-14
distance
15-18days
5-9
sKep
(sedsuo
Chinese
weeks forF:separate vaginal and
Chinese:
Chinese:
Chinese:21
27-35g
Chinese)
urethral orifices
21days
siep
Russian
Russian:
Russian:
Russian:
605-00
18days
16-18days
Gerbil
3-4years
70-120g
10-12
M:longer ano-genital
24-26days
3-7
20-26days
37-38.5
300-40090-140
weeks
(27-48
F:separate vaginal and
daysif
urethral orifices
lactating)
Guinea pig4-8years
F:750 g-1kgF:4-6
M:protrudepensby presing59-72days
1-6
3weeks
37.2-39.5
190-30090-150
M:1-1.2kg
weeks
either side of genital
M:9-10
buuado
weeks
F:shallow vaginal groove
between urethra and anus
Chinchilla
8-10years
6009-00
6-9
M: longer ano-genital
111days
1-6
6weeks
37-38
100-15045-80
(F larger)
months
distance than F, testesin
inguinal canal (no true
scrotum)
F:cone-shaped urogenital
papila (with urethra) similar
appearance to prepuce,
waginal cosuremembrane
Degu
7years
M:intra-abdominal testes,
sep06
1-10
4weeks
greater ano-genital distance
African
3-5 years
F:250-400g2months
M:prepuce
onmidl-abdomen,34-37 days
1-7
4-6weeks
36.1-37.2
pygmy
(<10 yearsM:500-600g
testes in para-anal recess
(average
hedgehog
incaptivity)
(can palpate in
reproductively active M)
F:urogenital opening few
mm cranial to anus
Sugar
12-14years
95-160g
F:8-12
M:mid-ventral pedunculated
16days
1-2
70 days （leave 32(body
(captivity)
(
months
scrotum and bifurcated
(before
pouch).
temperature)
M:12-14
penis
fetusin
independent
months
F:pouch(contains two teats)
pouch)
at 16weeks
Ferret
5-15years
M:1-2kg
8-12
M: testicdes in scrotum in
42 days
7-14
6weeks
37.840.0
200-40033-36
Klensn)
F:500-900g
months
breeding season
<10 years)
(December-July), longer
ano-genital distance with
obviousprepuce
Common
15-20years 350-400g
M:15-24
M:greater ano-genital
130-150
1-4
2-3months
39-40
200-35050-70
months
distance, testes in scrotum
days
(average
F:14-24
亿
months
M,mae;F,female
Leporidae (rabbit)
Rabbits are highly social, and should be kept with a companion (preferably both
neutered). They dig burrows in the wild. An exercise area should be provided. Wood
shavings and hay or straw are commonly used as substrates. Outdoor hutches should
be secure. Indoor rabbits can be litter-trained; care should be taken to ensure cables
and houseplants are protected from chewing. Chewable toys can be offered, e.g.
cardboard boxes. Scent is an important sense to rabbits. As a prey species, fear elicits
either immobility or a flight response. Thumping of the hindlegs is an alarm call.
This species is herbivorous, adapted to a low-quality, high-fibre diet - eating grass
and weeds in the wild. Captive animals should be fed similarly, usually on a diet of
good quality meadow hay supplemented with leafy green vegetables and wild plants
mixes where selective feeding is possible. Water is usually provided in a sipper bottle,
as the dewlap may get wet and skin infection could result if a bowl is used.
The dental formula is: incisors 2/1, canines 0/0, premolars 3/2, molars 3/3. All teeth
are continuously growing (hypsodontic, with open roots). Rabbits cannot vomit.
Gastrointestinal transit time is rapid in these hindgut fermenters, with bacterial
fermentation in the caecum. Indigestible fibre stimulates gastrointestinal motility. The
colon separates fibrous from non-fibrous particles; the former are excreted as hard
faecal pellets. Soft mucus-covered caecal pellets are expelled separately and eaten
(caecotrophy), allowing absorption of nutrients and bacterial fermentation products,
Sciuridae (chipmunk, prairie dog)
Chipmunks
are omnivorous, eating seeds, buds, leaves and flowers in the wild. Captive animals
are fed a commercial mix supplemented with fresh or dried fruit, vegetables and
occasional nuts. These little rodents are escape artists, and their enclosure needs to be
                
testes descend in mature males during the breeding season (January-September).
Prairie dogs
are social animals. They should be provided with tunnels and deep bedding (such as
                s
an open inguinal canal (as in guinea pigs), and the testes may be retracted intra-
abdominally.
Muridae (mouise, rat, hamster, gerbil)
group is: incisors 1/1, canines 0/0, premolars 0/0, molars 3/3. The incisors are
hypsodontic, while the molars are brachyodontic (permanently rooted).
Mice
are omnivorous or herbivorous. Pet animals are usually fed a commercial rodent diet
supplemented with a small amount of fresh food, fruit and vegetables. They are
housed in either a wire cage with a solid plastic bottom, or a plastic enclosure with a
mesh roof. Sawdust or wood shavings are utilized as substrate, with shredded
newspaper or commercial rodent bedding in the nest box. Cardboard boxes and paper
to tear, drainpipes and wheels are useful enrichment. Cage hygiene is important.
Rats
have a similar diet and housing requirement to mice. Fur yellowing is normal in aged
animals.
Hamsters
have large cheek pouches for food storage. They are omnivorous and hoard food.
Commercial hamster mixes are available for captive animals. They have bilateral
pigmented sebaceous glands on their flanks; these are used for territorial marking and
mating behaviour. Common species kept as pets include Syrian (Mesocricetus
S  s     
roborovskii) hamsters. These animals are escape artists, and enclosures should be
or hay should be provided in the nest box. Exercise wheels are ised at night.
Gerbils
have a large ventral scent gland on the mid-abdomen, used for territorial marking.
   a sn n s o  d a n  
desert adapted species. Commercial rodent mix can be supplemented with fresh fruit
and vegetables, hay, and occasional treats of raisins. Gerbils are highly social and
should be maintained in a group (ideally same sex), usually in a glass or plastic tank.
The ^gerbillarium' should have a deep (15 cm) substrate of sawdust, wood shavings or
peat and hay. Sand should be avoided, as rostral abrasions are common.
Caviidae (guinea pig)
other Hystricognathi, they have large tympanic bullae. Digestion is mainly by caecal
fermentation. They should be fed a diet of hay, fresh vegetables, and some commercial
mix. Guinea pigs have a daily requirement for vitamin C, approximately 30 mg/kg per
day (higher levels are required during pregnancy, lactation and illness). The dental
formula for hystricognaths is: incisors 1/1, canines 0/0, premolars 1/1, molars 3/3. All
teeth are continuously growing (hypsodont).
They are usually housed in a hutch with a large run area. They are a sociable
species and usually kept in single-sex groups (castrated if male to reduce aggression),
pairs or harems. At least one hide area should be provided per guinea pig. The flooring
should be smooth, with a substrate of wood shavings or shredded paper.
in females, except during oestrus and parturition. Both sexes have a pair of inguinal
nipples.
Chinchillidae (chinchilla)
Chinchillas have very dense fur, with up to 9o hairs per follicle. They are hindgut
fermenters. They should be fed mainly hay with a small amount of commercial pellets;
fruit and green vegetables can be given as occasional treats.
This species is lsually housed in pairs, single-sex groups or a harem (one male with
up to five females). Enclosures should be multilevel to permit horizontal and vertical
activity. The enclosure is usually composed of wire mesh (15 x 15 mm) with wooden
shelves and nest box. Dust baths should be provided for 10 minutes daily. Originating
from the Andes, chinchillas are adapted to low humidity and cooler temperatures.
Octodontidae (degu)
Degus are native to Chile, and susceptible to heat stress (in environmental
temperatures greater than 30°C). They are used in sleep biology and jet-lag studies, but
very few medical data are published on this species. Degus are hindgut fermenters.
Tail slip is common if they are incorrectly restrained.
Bs e p x    s      
P s  s          
enclosure is similar to that for chinchillas, although they should be provided with
bedding for digging and storing food. They will use an exercise wheel, and may use a
dust bath.
Erinaceidae (African pygmy hedgehog)
 a   (     
central Africa. They are nocturnal and solitary. Novel objects may result in ‘anting' or
'anointing' behaviour, where the hedgehog hypersalivates to create a foam which it
          s    
hedgehog (Erinaceus europaeus), they do not hibernate.
The dental formula for hedgehogs is: incisors 3/2, canines 1/1, premolars 3/2,
     sg  s   
high-protein and low-fat diet. Captive animals are fed cat food or insectivore diet,
vegeta bles, insects and a vitamin/mineral supplement.
Their enclosure should have smooth walls, deep (10 cm) bedding and a hide box
The ambient temperature should be 2430'C, often requiring some form of
supplemental heating. The hedgehogs like to dig and use exercise wheels, and may
swim or bathe in shallow water.
Petauridae (sugar glider)
Sugar gliders are nocturnal and arboreal. The gliding membrane (patagium) stretches
from the fifth digit of the forepaws to the ankles, and they can glide up to 50 m. For
this reason, large areas should be made available for exercise. The enclosure should be
a minimuim of 2 m wide x 2 m long x 1.8 m high, with branches at either end to
allow gliding. Supplemental heating is usually required to prevent the animals
entering a state of torpor. They are sociable and kept in groups. Scent marking allows
group members to recognize each other. Males develop a scent gland on their
forehead, and have anal glands and scent glands on their chest; females have scent
glands within their pouch but scent mark with urine.
In the wild, the diet of the sugar glider varies seasonally - being mainly gum/sap
the year. Sugar gliders have specialized incisors for gouging bark. Several ‘recipes'
have been developed for the sugar glider diet, usually a mix of insectivore/carnivore
diet and Leadbeater's Mixture (a honey, protein, vitamin and mineral supplement
mix). Sugar gliders should be fed in the evening.
       e  s   
tracts, the cloaca. Assessment of core body temperature via a cloacal probe is less
reliable than rectal probes in other species.
Mustelidae (ferret)
Some ferrets are kept as working animals (particularly in the UK) and others purely as
pets. They are carnivorous, and are fed on either whole carcasses (e.g. pigeon or
being approximately 3 hours.
The heart is relatively caudal (at the level of the sixth to eighth ribs). Ferrets should
be vaccinated against canine distemper virus. Dental disease is common and the teeth
should be brushed if possible
               s 
substrate is isually wood shavings. Most animals like to sleep in a towel or blanket, in
a hammock or a box.
Callitrichidae and Cebidae (common marmoset, squirrel monkey)
Non-human primates are rarely kept as pets, many species require a licence to be kept
as such legally in the UK. Callitrichids (marmosets and tamarins) are the most
common species seen.  Zoonotic diseases should be considered  when handling
primates.
a large proportion of fruit, but commercial kibble diets are available for most species.
Besides the primate's daily requirement for vitamin C, New World primates
(particularly callitrichids) require vitamin D3 so should be exposed to ultraviolet light
(UV-B) to enable calcium and phosphorus metabolism. Where invertebrates are fed,
these should be gut-loaded with calcium supplement.
History
Some pertinent topics to discuss with owners during the initial consultation with an
exotic pet mammal are listed in Box 2.1. Although the basic outline is very similar to
that for other companion animals, it is noteworthy that greater emphasis is paid to
husbandry conditions (including housing and diet). This is to gain an understanding
of any factors that may predispose disease in the animal. Unfortunately husbandry.
related disease is common in exotic pets.
BOX 2.1 Suggested topics to cover during history taking for small mammals
· Species (±breed)
·Age
· Gender
· Source, e.g. petshop, breeder
· Period in owner's possession (if this is relatively short, husbandry details from the previous carer
may be important)
· Vaccination history (rabbits, ferrets)
· Reproductive history
· Housing: size, construction materials, location, substrate, cleaning regime
· Diet: what food is offered and what is eaten, water provision
· Previous medical history (including any treatments)
· Current problem: time period, outline of clinical signs noted by owner
• Current physiology: appetite, thirst, faecal and urine output (including number/size of faecal
pellets, frequency/volume of urine, and description of both)
 Question owner further about the pet's current health: any other clinical signs of disease or
changes in behaviour (these may be subtle)
· Companion animals in same enclosure/airspace/indirect contact: any health problems (current or
previous).
Husbandry conditions can vary widely between species and owners. For example
some rabbits are houised indoors, while others are outdoors. Size of enclosure and any
furniture present will have a significant bearing on the animal's activity and fitness.
Inadequacies may potentially predispose to disease; for example, poor ventilation may
be associated with a build-up of ammonia, respiratory irritation, and thus an
increased risk of respiratory disease in rodents.
Unlike other companion animals, diets may also be extremely varied and the
 s         
their suitability for the species in question. For most exotic pet mammals, it can be
difficult to ascertain how much food is being eaten, and less observant owners may
not notice reduced appetite in their pet for some time.
It is useful to ask the owner how habituated the pet is to handling, as this will affect
how the animal reacts to restraint for clinical examination.
Clinical Examination
Handling/restraint
Rabbit
Rabbits can be nervous, particularly if not habituated to handling, and are susceptible
to spinal fractures. They should therefore be handled gently but firmly. Most rabbits
can be picked up with one hand under the thorax and the other under the abdomen or
hindquarters. Fractious individuals can be picked up by the scruff and the body
weight supported under the hindquarters. For medication of restless rabbits, it can be
useful to wrap the patient in a towel (the “burrito' wrap) with the head left exposed.
When restrained on a table, a hand covering the rabbit's eyes will reduce stimulus,
and a hand over the lumbar region will reduce the risk of jumping and spinal trauma
(Fig. 2.la). To examine the ventral body surface, the rabbit is supported under the
thorax and held vertically against the handler's chest, again supporting the lumbar
region (Fig. 2.1b).
(a)
b)
Figure 2.1
 Restraint of a rabbit (Oryctolagus cuniculus): (a) on the table for dorsal examination,
and (b) for ventral examination.
Chipmunk
Habituated animals may be cupped in your hands. Others may be restrained around
their thoracic girdle. Some may require general anaesthesia with an inhalant agent to
permit a full clinical examination.
Prairie dog
Tame individuals can be picked up by supporting the thorax and hindquarters. A
towel may be used to assist restraint of other animals, to protect the handler from bites
and scratches.
Mouse
Grasp the mouse at the base of the tail, and allow it to grip onto a cage bar or your
clothing. Alternatively, the mouse may be grasped by the scruff of the neck.
Rat
Rats rarely bite. Hold the rat around the thoracic girdle; a thumb can be placed under
one mandible to restrain the head. Support the abdomen in larger animals.
Hamster, gerbil, degu
Cup these small animals in your hands. Individuals not used to handling may be
scruffed. Hamsters have ample skin over the back and shoulders, and a large pinch
should be taken to prevent the animal from turning its head. Degloving tail injuries
may occur in gerbils and degus that are incorrectly handled.
Guinea pig
   d         s
individual in a box or enclosure. Part of the clinical examination may be performed
with the animal restrained on a table, with one hand over the head and the other over
either the head or the thoracic girdle. When lifting guinea pigs, they should be
supported under and/or around the thorax and under the abdomen (Fig. 2.2).
Figure 2.2
 Handling a guinea pig (Cavia porcellus).
Chinchilla
This species should be held around the shouilders to restrain. When lifting chinchillas.
, r q    h  s n n  a 
slip' is possible (particularly if the animal is not habituated to handling or the
African pygmy hedgehog
African pygmy hedgehogs should be handled using protective gloves. The spines will
at best be uincomfortable to handle, and at worst may inocuilate the handler with
          s
necessary to perform a full clinical assessment.
Sugar glider
Sugar gliders are notoriously difficult to catch, and towels or small nets may be useful.
Once captured, the animal can be restrained by taking hold of the skin on the scruff. If
it cannot be securely restrained by hand, anaesthesia may be induced with gaseous
agents to permit examination.
Ferret
Most pet ferrets are well used to being handled. New pets may be more likely to bite.
        s nsn s  s 
It is not imperative to support the hindlegs, but animals may prefer support caudally
on a table or arm during examination. Scruffing the animal will usually elicit a
Non-human primates
The species, size and demeanour of the primate will dictate whether conscious
restraint for examination is possible. Small, less aggressive animals such as common
marmosets may be handled using a towel (Fig. 2.3). Larger or less tractable non-
human primates will often require sedation or anaesthesia before handling, with
drugs administered either by injection (for sedatives or anaesthetics) while restrained
in a net or using a squeeze cage, or in an induction chamber (for administration of
gaseous anaesthetics to smaller individuals).
Figure2.3
 Restraint of a common marmoset (Callithrix jacchus) using a towel.
Clinical examination (Box 2.2)
Initially observe the patient from a distance, including assessment of demeanour,
locomotion, and respiratory pattern/noise. Check the transport container for evidence
of urination or faeces. Then restrain the animal for examination from head to tail.
This may be limited in small species or those susceptible to stress, when handling time
should be minimized.
          s
membranes; dentition (only incisors are visible during conscious examination of
rabbits and most rodents), use an otoscope or speculum to check cheek teeth in
rabbits, guinea pigs and chinchillas (the author usually does this at the end of the
clinical examination as it is relatively stressful for the animal); auscultate the thorax,
palpate and auscultate the abdomen; look over and palpate the skin and feet (common
conditions include pododermatitis and overgrown nails); and check the perineal
region for soiling. Take the rectal temperature in larger species (rabbit, guinea pig,
chinchilla, non-human primate and ferret). Assess the animal's body condition (e.g.
using a point scale system) and always weigh on small digital scales; this is vital to
monitor weight and for accurate drug dosing.
BOX 2.2 Checklist for clinical examination
· Confirm species/breed and sex
· Weigh (using digital scales)
· Head: eyes, ears (use otoscope in larger species), nares, oral cavity (including otoscopic
 examination in rabbit, chinchilla, guinea pig and degu), observe and palpate for symmetry
· Thorax: auscultate lungs and heart, ± percuss (to assess for fluid presence) or compress thoracic
cavity (to assess compliance)
· Abdomen:
· Gastrointestinal tract: palpate, auscultate (herbivores), ± percuss (assess for tympany)
· Urinary tract: palpate (e.g. for bladder stones)
· Reproductive tract: palpate for pregnancy or abnormalities (e.g. uterine masses)
 External genitalia/reproductive system: discharges, swellings, wounds, mammary gland
swelling/discharge
· Skin: palpate for masses, assess for lesions or discharges (e.g. alopecia, crusts, wounds), check feet
for pododermatitis
· Musculoskeletal: observe locomotion, palpate and examine limbs
· Nervous system: observe demeanour, perform further neurological tests if warranted (e.g. if head
tilt, facial asymmetry or ataxia present)
· Body temperature: routinely taken in larger species, but may be traumatic in conscious small
rodents; rectal or aural thermometer.
Investigation
Phlebotomy
Anaesthesia or sedation may be required to perform phlebotomy (Table 2.3) in many
of these species. Restraint for jugular access in particular can be stressful. The risk of
anaesthesia should be balanced against the potential gains of obtaining blood for
analysis. In ill animals, anaesthesia is usually performed using inhalant agents such
as isoflurane or sevoflurane.
Table 2.3 Preferred sites for phlebotomy in small mammals
ite
Comment
Species
Lateral tal
Warm tail bef ore acc ess
Rat
artery
Cephalic vein
Small volume only, easily accessible
Rabbits, prairie dog, rodents, African pygmy
hedgeh og
Lateral
Small vessel, mobile, but easily accessible
Any (but limited use in tiny species)
saphenous
vein
Ju gular vein
Stressful anaesth esia requ ired in species oth er than the rabbit and some ferrets
Rabbit, prairie dog, gu inea pig, chin ch illa, ferret
Afric an pygmy hedgehog
An ter ior venl a
Anaesthesia requ ired
Rat, guinea pig, African pygmy hedgehog, ferret
cava
Marginal
Use a smal syrin ge (may collapse the vein with excessive suction). Use 25 gauge needle.
Rabbit.
auricular vein
Reports exist of vascular damage and necrosis
Femoral vein
Anaesthesia requ ired. Apply pressure for a few min utes afterwards to prevent
Rodents, su gar glider, non-human primates
haematoma formation
Ventral
Warm tail bef ore acc ess
Mou se, sugar glider
coccygeal
artery
Use an insulin syringe with a swaged-on needle for small veins to reduce the risk of
collapsing the vein due to excessive suction. Venepuncture is difficult in guinea pigs,
particularly the jugular vein, which is usually buried under a thick layer of fat.
In laboratory rodents, blood may be collected from the orbital venous plexus or via
cardiac puncture. These routes are not recommended in pet species unless the animal
    e    e  e  
problem).
Small mammals have approximately 7 ml of blood per 100 g of body weight. It is
safe to sample 7-10% of this from a healthy individual. Thus 0.5-0.7 ml of blood can
be withdrawn from a 100 g animal. 1ll animals will have less capacity for blood
regeneration, and may already be anaemic; in these individuals, a smaller sample
should be taken. Similarly, animals require time to regenerate blood constituents and
large samples should not be repeated frequently (as a guide, a healthy mammal will
take approximately 2 weeks to regenerate a 10% blood loss).
Radiography
As usual, two orthogonal views should be taken when radiographing a body part.
Most commonly, this is a lateral view (usually a right lateral by convention) and a
ventro-dorsal (or dorso-ventral) view. Other views may be indicated at other times; for
example, several skull radiographs are taken to assess dental disease. In some
instances, the body part may be anatomically inaccessible to a true lateral view, such
as the proximal hindlimb in small animals, and an oblique view is taken. It may also
be usefuil to take oblique views to assess a particuilar area or elucidate a specific lesion
It is usually possible to take more than one image of a small species on a single
small size of many patients, the entire body is often radiographed on one view. This is
liseful to give the practitioner an overview of the animal, but may not provide
optimum settings for imaging individual body regions. The uise of special films such
as mammography or dental film may be indicated to provide higher resolution in
imaging very small animals. Digital radiography will permit post-exposure alteration
of the image.
Sampling
Many samples can be collected from small mammals as in other pets for laboratory
analysis.
Urine can be collected via cystocentesis or catheterization in larger species, or free
catch (e.g. natural voiding on an upside-down incontinence pad, or after gentle
recommended in rodent species.
Endotracheal washes and bronchoalveolar lavage can be performed in many species
uinder general anaesthesia. These will produce samples that can be analysed
cytologically and bacteriologically.
Other samples that may be sent for bacteriology include swabs from infected
than purulent material from the centre of the abscess, which may be sterile.
Cytology may be performed on fine needle aspirates (FNAs) from masses. In some
           s  sn
scrapes are useful for diagnosis of ectoparasites; anaesthesia may be necessary to
perform the scraping.
Treatment
Basic procedures
Drug administration
The most basic of routes for administration of drugs, fluids or nutritional support is
the oral route. Although references exist for medication in feed or drinking water,
dosing is very variable with this technique and the author does not recommend it.
Animals may drink less than expected if they dislike the taste of the medication (or
like it too much and drink more), or their thirst may be affected by their illness.
However, the in-feed or in-water route may be useful for medicating large groups of
animals where it will not be possible to dose animals individually.
           
linhabituated animals, this may be more stressful for both owner and animal.
Subcuitaneous injections are often used to administer medication in small
mammals. In most species, the scruff of the neck dorsally between the scapulae is
commonly used. In guinea pigs, there is a thickened mantle of skin in this region, and
      a      n   
the patagium (or wing membrane) should be avoided as the blood supply - and
S   s   a   -    
administered subcutaneously are relatively slowly absorbed, but in some species this
may be the only route accessible.
Intramuscular injections may be ised for certain medications, including sedative or
anaesthetic drugs where more rapid absorption is required. Muscle groups are small in
these species, and the total volume injected should be small to avoid muscle damage
   s  n     s o     
hamster). The lumbar or quadriceps muscles are used routinely in most species.
Patient size permitting, the author prefers to inject into the lumbar muscles in
injection.
P  s  n   - s n - s 
the left (so the bladder is less likely to be penetrated). A small needle is inserted at a
            
injection reveals any fluid or other material, the needle is withdrawn and the
with this route, and it is often used for administration of anaesthetic agents in
research rodents.
It is relatively straightforward to insert and maintain an intravenous catheter in
larger species such as rabbits (e.g. marginal auricular vein, cephalic vein, or lateral
access can be difficult in small mammals. The lateral tail vein may be accessed in
           
intravenous route provides direct access to the circulation and is optimum for
administration of fluids and medication to debilitated animals.
For animals where veins cannot be readily accessed, the intraosseous route is used.
Commonly the proximal femur or tibia is used. Specialist intraosseouis needles are
available, but often prohibitively expensive for small mammal clients. An alternative
is to use small hypodermic needles; sterile fine gauge orthopaedic wire may be
inserted into the needle as a stylet to reduce the risk of the needle becoming blocked.
Tape and/or suiture material may be used to retain intraosseous needles in place.
CLINICAL TIP
· Fluids should always be warmed to body temperature before administration. Cool fluids will
rapidly result in hypothermia in small animals.
· Fluid therapy:
• Remember to add losses due to dehydration/diarrhoea, etc.
· If possible, administer by continuous rate infusion (CRl); otherwise, divide the total volume
into two or three treatments per day.
Assist-feeding
Some animals  benefit from hand-feeding,  particularly  if they have locomotor
difficulty. This may be more readily accepted from a bonded owner than a veterinary
nurse in a stressful hospital situation.
For patients more reluctant to feed, various convalescent diets are available for
syringe-feeding. The diet should be selected based on the species, ensuring a close
match to the animal's normal diet. For example, commercial herbivore or carnivore
diets are available in powder form that can be mixed with water and administered
 s   s m  n   ss   
allow the patient to swallow.
If patients are unwilling or unable to take food directly from the oral cavity, a naso-
        n   
administration of nutrition to the oesophagus and thence the stomach, which reduces
handling time and stress to the patient.
CLINICAL TIPS
· Note that rabbits do not usually cough when a tube enters their trachea.
· Radiography should be performed to check positioning of a naso-oesophageal tube.
· Alternatively, an endoscope orally may be used to visualize the tube in the oesophagus (rather than
in the trachea).
Anaesthesia
Pre-anaesthesia
Evaluate the patient as described above. This will include a detailed history and as
thorough a clinical examination as is possible (this may be limited by the size of some
small mammals).
If the patient is severely debilitated and/or has been chronically unwell, it may
benefit  from  stabilization before anaesthesia is induced.  Often this  includes
rehydration (orally or by injection), warming (e.g. in an incubator) and nutritional
support (e.g. by assist-feeding).
Pre-medication
Most small rodents are not pre-medicated if gaseous agents are to be used for
induction of anaesthesia. However, in species such as guinea pigs and chinchillas,
pre-medication may be useful to reduce stress (Table 2.4).
Table 2.4  Commonly used pre-medicants in small mammals
Drug
Dose(mg/kg)
Route
Species
Acepromazine +butorphanol
1.7+1.7
PO
Sugar glider(sedation and analgesia)
Acepromazine
0.25-1.0
IM/SC/V
Rabbit
0.5-1.0
IM
Prairie dog,mouse,rat,hamster, guinea pig,chinchilla
0.1-0.5
SC/M
Ferret
0.5-1.0
PO/SC/IM
Non-human primates
Fentany/fluanisone
0.2-0.5m/kg
IM
Rabbit
(Hypnorm@,Janssen)
0.5-1.0ml/kg
IM/IP
Gerbil
0.3ml/kg
IM
Ferret
0.3ml/kg
SC/M
Non-human primates
Ketamine
5-20
IM
Non-human primates
Medetomidine
0.1-0.5
IM/SC
Rabbit
0.5
IM
Prairie dog
0.1
SC
Mouse,rat,hamster,gerbil,guinea pig
0.08-0.20
SCAM
Ferret
0.2
IM
African pygmy hedgehog
Midazolam
0.5-2.0
IM/TV/IP
Rabbit
1.0-2.0
IM
Rodents
0.3-1.0
SC/M
Ferret
0.1-0.5
IM/TV
Non-human primates
IM,intramuscular;IP,intraperitoneal;V,intravenousPO,perioral,SC,subcutaneous.
Inhalation agents
Most volatile anaesthetic agents may be used in small mammals. Isoflurane or
sevoflurane are used for preference, as they are rapidly excreted and therefore
recovery is rapid. Sevoflurane is less irritant to the respiratory passages and less likely
to result in discomfort or breath-holding. Sevoflurane is administered to effect and
usually requires higher concentrations than isoflurane (Table 2.5).
Table 2.5 Isoflurane use in small mammals
Concentration(%)
Drug
Induction
Maintenance
Species
Isoflurane
3-5
1.5-1.75
Rabbit
(after pre-
medication)
4-5
1.75-2.5
Prairie dog
2-5
0.25-4.0
Rodents
5
2-3
Ferret
5
1-3
Sugar glider
3-5
0.5-3
African pygmy
hedgehog
E-O
Non-human
4
primates
Many species are induced in a chamber, particularly the small rodents. Larger
animals such as ferrets may be restrained while a facemask is applied, but this may be
stressful. The main advantage of induction using a mask is easier monitoring of the
patient. Maintenance of anaesthesia in small mammals is usually with volatile agents.
In small species, a closely fitting facemask is applied. Where possible, the animal is
intu bated.
Oxygen should always be provided to anaesthetized patients, even in animals where
an injectable anaesthetic regime has been used to induce anaesthesia and no volatile
agent is required.
Injectable agents
These are not commonly used solely, but are usefuil in conjunction with gaseous
agents. Injectable agents are especially useful for prolonged or painful procedures, as
an agent with analgesic properties can be included in the protocol (Table 2.6). These
regimes are also used where provision of gaseous agents may be impaired, for example
during dental procedures. Oxygen should always be provided where possible.
Table 2.6 Commonly used injectable anaesthetic protocols in small mammals
Drug
Dose(mg/kg)
Route Species
Acepromazine
0.4-0.5+40-50IM
Prairie dog
+ketamine
0.5-0.75 +40
IM
Chinchilla
Medetomidine
0.5+10-20
IM
Prairie dog
+ketamine
1.0+50-75
IM/IP
Mouse
0.5+75
IM/P
0.5+40
IMIP
Guinea pig
0.06+5.0
IM/IP
Chinchilla
005+800
IM
Ferret
0.1+5.0
IM
African pygmy
hedgehog
0.1+10.0-15.0IM
Non-human
primates （light
anaesthesia)
Medetomidine
0.1+5.0+0.5
IM
Rabbit
+ketamine +
0.08+5.00+
IM
Ferret
butorphanol
0.10
Fentaryl/
0.2-0.3ml/kg+
+WI
Rabbit
fluanisone,
0.5-2.0
IV
followed by
midazolam
Fentanyl
0.4ml/kg+5
IP
Mouse
fluanisone,
0.4ml/kg +2.5
IP
Rat
followed by
1mVkg+2.5
IM
Guinea pig
diazepam
Monitoring anaesthesia
As with other animals, body systems should be monitored throughout anaesthesia.
The respiratory system can be assessed using a stethoscope (bell or, in larger
animals, oesophageal). The chest and/or anaesthetic reservoir bag are observed for
movement. Capnography is useful, although care should be taken not to increase
resistance in the anaesthetic circuit for small animals by using an in-line sampler.
The cardiovascular system is usually monitored by palpating a pulse (e.g. the
femoral artery in most species, and also the central auricular artery in rabbits), and a
stethoscope (as above). An electrocardiogram (ECG) and pulse oximeter (e.g. on the
ear or tongue) may be useful.
A rectal (or aural in larger species) thermometer is used to assess body temperature.
This is vital in smaller animals, as they are at an increased risk of hypothermia during
anaesthesia.
Several reflexes can be checked to assess depth of anaesthesia. These include the toe
or tail pinch, corneal reflex, palpebral reflex (unreliable in rabbits), and jaw tone.
Muscular reactions to any surgical stimuli should also be monitored.
Peri-anaesthetic care
 sn        s 
(e.g. a hot-air blanket, heat pad or hot water bottle), minimal surgical clip, reduced
wetting of the patient during preparation, and insulation (e.g. using bubble-wrap).
The animal can be recovered in an incubator after the procedure. Care should be taken
S           n 
recovered from anaesthesia.
Many animals benefit from fluids at the time of anaesthesia, particularly when
injectable anaesthetic agents have been utilized that may affect renal function. After
recovery, the animal's food and water intake, and urine and faecal output should be
monitored. If food and water intake are reduced, assist-feeding and rehydration
           
reduced. Pain will prolong recovery, and analgesia should be administered if a painful
procedure has been performed.
Surgery
            n
procedure. As mentioned above, care should be taken not to cool the animal by
excessive use of surgical preparation fluids.
Tissues should be handled gently, particularly the gastrointestinal tract in
herbivores that are susceptible to ileus. Attention should be paid to haemostasis, as an
apparently small volume of blood may be a significant volume to the small patient.
           
lisually closed using absorbable suture material in an intradermal pattern. If a pattern
with exposed knots is required (e.g. to relieve skin tension), consideration should be
given to the use of some sort of protection to prevent trauma - such as a buster collar
on rabbits, or a bandage covering the wound (although this too may be chewed).
Eithanasia
This is usually achieved by overdosing anaesthesia. Use the intravenous route if you
can gain access, for example the marginal auricular vein in rabbits. For most small
species anaesthesia is induced with a volatile anaesthetic agent as outlined above,
followed by intracardiac pentobarbitone.
3
Post-spay complications in a rabbit
INITIAL PRESENTATION
 e      
Introduction
Surgical  procedures  involving the abdominal  cavity  of  rabbits  are  historically
associated with many potential complications, including wound breakdown and
(   s   ( x r s
(Box 3.2) in the general population far outweigh these risks, they should nonetheless
be discussed with clients before the procedure is performed on their pet. This case
outlines the strong interplay between medical therapy and nursing care, and surgical
treatment of complications after spaying in one individual.
BOX 3.2 Reasons for spaying female rabbits
· Prevent unwanted pregnancies (permitting neutered does to live with uncastrated bucks)
· Prevent pseudopregnancy
· Reduce territorial aggression
· Reduce incidence of or treat uterine neoplasia (commonly adenocarcinoma)
· Prevent or treat other uterine pathologies such as pyometra, uterine aneurysm and hydrometra.
 BOX 3.1 Potential complications after abdominal surgery in rabbits
· Wound dehiscence, e.g. after self-trauma or excessive activity, resulting in herniation if linea alba
closure dehisces
• Seroma formation
· Haemorrhage - with haematoma formation or bruising
· Infection: of wound, peritonitis
• Gastrointestinal ileus (particularly if gastrointestinal tract is handled roughly or excessively)
· Adhesions
· Reaction to suture material (particularly if catgut is utilized)
· Hepatic lipidosis (associated with fasting of obese individuals during the procedure and recovery
period).
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
A 10-month-old female English rabbit (Oryctolagus cuniculus) was presented with inappetance,
lethargy, and reduced faecal output 3 days after ovariohysterectomy.
Husbandry
The rabbit was obtained from a local rescue centre 2 months prior to being presented
for neutering. The patient's sibling was obtained and spayed at the same time (with
no problems noted). The rabbits were fed on a diet of hay, commercial extruded
concentrate pellets for rabbits, and mixed fresh vegetables. They had been housed
indoors initially, but had access to the owners' garden after being vaccinated against
myxomatosis and viral haemorrhagic disease.
Case History
The ovariohysterectomy was routine, using poliglecaprone 25 (Monocryl@, Ethicon,
Livingstone, UK) suture material for ligatures, polydioxanone (PDs?, Ethicon) for the
muscle layer, and poliglecaprone 25 for the subcutaneous and intradermal layers. The
rabbit was overweight (body condition score 3/5), with excessive intra-abdominal fat,
making the procedure technically more difficult. (Dietary advice was given to the
owner at discharge, advising a reduction in the quantity of concentrate pellets being
offered.) She was discharged 2 days after surgery, by which point she was eating and
passing normal faeces, and the wound had a normal appearance. Analgesia was
continued (meloxicam at 0.3 mg/kg PO q24hr, off-label use) for 3 days.
A day later (3 days after surgery), the rabbit re-presented at the clinic (Box 3.3). She
had not eaten and had been quiet at home. Faecal output was reduced and the rabbit
appeared to have abdominal discomfort.
BOX 3.3 Signs of pain in rabbits
Clinical signs of pain are usually vague in rabbits, often being a subtle change from normal
behaviour. Normal grooming ceases and some individuals show aggression. Signs may include
reluctance to move, anorexia and changes in physiological parameters (heart rate, respiratory rate
and body temperature). Abdominal pain may be evidenced by a crouched posture and tooth grinding.
Some rabbits may be restless, intermittently jumping and circling. Those with urinary tract pain may
show signs of dysuria.
Clinical Examination
The rabbit's weight had reduced slightly (from 2.93 kg pre-surgery to 2.6 kg 3 days
after surgery). Auscultation of the abdomen showed reduced gut sounds on the left-
hand side, and a large mass was palpated in the caudal abdomen. The rabbit was
   s          a
moderate tachypnoea was present (respiratory rate 100 breaths/minute, normal range
32-60).
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSES
 The differentials for reduced appetite and faecal output were:
· Pain/discomfort after surgery
· Peritonitis (infectious or sterile)
• Wound infection
• Other gastrointestinal disease: including infection, intussusception, foreign body (uncommon)
· Metabolic dysfunction, e.g. hepatic lipidosis
· Wound dehiscence, possibly with herniation of abdominal contents. (Remember that the linea alba
may be compromised with or without loss of integrity of the skin wound.)
Case Work-Up
Trial with supportive care
Gastrointestinal ileus is extremely common after a stressor such as surgery.
Prevention is preferable to cure, and it is advisable to administer prokinetics and
assist feed rabbits after surgery until appetite and faecal output return to normal (as
was done in this case). Re-instigation or continuance of prokinetics, assist feeding.
and fluid therapy (see Nursing aspects box below) are indicated in a rabbit with
reduced appetite and/or faecal output. An improvement should be seen within 24-48
hours. In the case of this patient, fluids were administered intravenously (Fig. 3.1).
Figure 3.1
 Rabbit receiving intravenous fluids. The catheter is placed in the marginal auricular
vein.
Blood analysis
Since this rabbit did not respond to supportive care, a blood sample was taken from
the jugular vein (conscious) for a health check (Box 3.4, Fig. 3.2). Haematology and
biochemistry results were unremarkable.
BOX 3.4 Phlebotomy sites in rabbits
· Jugular vein
· Marginal auricular vein
· Lateral saphenous vein
· Cephalic vein.
Figure3.2
 Positioning for jugular phlebotomy in a rabbit. The rabbit is restrained similarly to a
cat, with the neck extended. This position will affect the rabbit's breathing (mis-aligning the trachea
from the nasal passages), and should not be maintained for prolonged periods.
The followingprocedures
s were  then completed  under  sedation   with
fentanyl/fluanisone (0.3 ml/kg IM Hypnorm?, VetPharma Ltd, Leeds, UK).
Abdominal radiography
Lateral and ventro-dorsal views were taken of the abdomen (Fig. 3.3). These showed
some gas building up in the gastrointestinal tract, particularly the caecum
supporting the diagnosis of hypomotility.
(a)
[b]
Figure 3.3
(a) Lateral and (b) ventro-dorsal radiographs of the abdomen. Note the gas present in
the gastrointestinal tract.
Abdominal uiltrasound
Flocculant free fluid was present within the peritoneal cavity. This was aspirated, and
an in-house Romanowsky stain demonstrated many inflammatory cells (neutrophils
and lymphocytes), some erythrocytes, but no bacteria (ruling out the differential of
infected peritonitis). Creatinine in the fluid was 326 μmol/l, suggesting that some
l1rine may be present (normal creatinine levels in blood are 44.2-229 μmol/l, and this
rabbit's blood value had been 166 μmol/l). The left renal pelvis and ureter were
dilated. Attempts to follow the left ureter caudally were not successfull beyond a mass-
like structure.
Based on the ultrasound findings, it was decided to further investigate with an
         
before the rabbit was intubated and maintained on isoflurane carried in oxygen.
Hartmann's solution was administered intravenously at 4 ml/kg per hour. Rectal
temperature was monitored throughout the procedure, and supplemental heating
provided using a forced warm air blanket and warming of fluids prior to
administration.
Exploratory coeliotomy
Flocculant straw-coloured fluid was present in the peritoneal cavity. Several adhesions
were located that had formed at surgical sites of suture placement (Fig. 3.4a). The left
ureter entered one of these sites. The suture in the region did not encircle the ureter,
but it was not possible to dissect the ureter from the adhesion (Fig. 3.4b). A unilateral
nephrectomy was performed (similar to the procedure in other small animals).
b
Figure 3.4
      
Diagnosis
Adhesions had formed throughout the abdomen, likely in response to the presence of
suture material. Obstruction of the left ureter had occurred secondary to physical
pressure  from  one of these adhesions. This resulted in  hydroureter  and
hydronephrosis.
Anatomy and Physiology Refresher
In the entire doe (Fig. 3.5), the ovaries lie in the dorsal abdomen with the left ovary
just caudal to the left kidney (the right ovary is at the same level in the body, so not
usually in contact with the more cranial right kidney). The fallopian tube transports
ova from each ovary to each uterine horn. Often, there is a large amount of fat in the
broad and suspensory ligaments. The cervix is bicornuate. The vaginal body is flaccid,
and fills with urine during micturition. The cervical body is usually transfixed during
ovariohysterectomy, ensuring the ureters and uterine artery (that also supplies the
bladder) are not included in the ligature. Damage to the ureters or uterine artery is
more likely if a vaginal ligature is placed, but this reduces the risk of future cervical
stump neoplasia.
Ovary
Oviduct
Uterine horn
Urinarybladder
Left and right
cervices
Urinary duct
Figure 3.5
Anatomy of the urogenital tract in the doe.
Aetiopathogenesis of Adhesions and lleus after Abdominal Surgery in Rabbits
Catgut is associated with an increased risk of adhesion formation in rabbits, as it
requires the immune response of phagocytosis to degrade it. Multifilament suture
materials permit ‘wicking' of infection through tissues. Multifilament materials and
any suture on a threaded needle will also result in more tissue trauma, when
compared with monofilament material on a swaged needle. Infection and suiture
reactions are therefore more likely when multifilament suture is used in the abdomen.
Rabbits are susceptible to gastrointestinal ileus and adhesion formation after
surgery. Desiccation of tissues and rough handling (including use of gauze swabs)
predispose patients to such problems.
Treatment
During recovery from anaesthesia, the rabbit was monitored for thermoregulation
(heat was initially supplemented using a forced warm air blanket) and signs of pain.
Analgesia was provided with buprenorphine (which initially also partially reversed
the effects of fentanyl used in anaesthesia) at 20 μg/kg q8hr SC for the first 48 hours
and then 10 μg/kg q8hr SC for the following 3 days and meloxicam (0.6 mg/kg q24hr
PO for 10 days).
Pending culture results of the peritoneal fluid, cephalexin (20 mg/kg q24hr SC) and
enrofloxacin (10 mg/kg ql2hr PO) were administered. No significant growth was
cultured from the fluid, and antibiotics were ceased.
Assist-feeding and prokinetics were also continued. Fluids were administered
intravenously initially and then subcutaneously when the rabbit became more active
and a drip line could no longer be easily maintained.
Case Management
NURSING ASPECTS
* Supportive care is vital in any inappetant rabbit, particularly when faecal production is reduced.
· Assist-feeding is easily performed in most rabbits (Fig. 3.6). Products such as Oxbow Critical Care
for Herbivores? are excellent replacement foods, and can be syringed slowly into the mouth of
conscious rabbits. The syringe tip is placed laterally between the incisors and premolars, and the
plunger slowly depressed. If a rabbit is not obviously swallowing, the procedure should be
abandoned and consideration given to the use of a nasogastric feeding tube.
• Prokinetics should be administered until faecal output (size and number) is normal. For example,
metoclopramide (0.5 mg/kg SC/PO q6-12hr), ranitidine (2 mg/kg SC/PO q12hr), or cisapride (0.5
mg/kg PO q8-12hr).
·If dehydration is suspected, fluids should be administered (usually subcutaneously
or
intravenously, depending on the severity of dehydration). This is important if gastrointestinal
contents have become dry.
• Monitor body temperature (normal range 38.5-40.0'C), and supplement heating or cool the rabbit
as appropriate.
· With urogenital disease or after urinary tract surgery, monitor water intake (including water drunk
and fluids administered) and urinary output.
Figure3.6
Assist-feeding a rabbit (using a catheter-tip syringe to allow administration of more
aa rd p s a aq n a  pnnd si d ss a (se si
and food injected slowly into the mouth to permit swallowing.
CLINICAL TIPS
· Monitor urine output by using incontinence pads in the kennel, weighing before use and after they
have been urinated on (1 ml urine weighs 1 g).
· Ensure rabbits have water supplied in a familiar container, e.g. sipper bottle and/or bowl. They
may not recognize or use an unfamiliar vessel.
· Intravenous catheters can be placed in several sites, e.g. marginal auricular vein, saphenous vein
and cephalic vein. The last two sites are well tolerated by most rabbits. The auricular vein is usually
not accessible in breeds with short ears, e.g. the Netherland dwarf. Use of the auricular vein may be
associated with disruption of the blood supply to the ear and resultant partial ear necrosis (the
author has not personally encountered this problem)
Follow-Up
The rabbit started eating some vegetables and passing a few small faecal pellets within
48 hours of nephrectomy surgery. Urine was passed the same day as surgery. Fluid
administration was stopped when the rabbit began drinking from her sipper bottle.
Repetition of haematology showed a mild neutrophilia 5 days after surgery (5.9 X
10°/l, reference range 1.5-6.6 x 10*/1 (30-50% of total white cell count)). Ultrasound
at this point demonstrated normal gastrointestinal moti lity, and a 2 cm diameter mass
at the cervical stump (this was palpable before surgery, and had been visualized
S p   ain      s  s 
present sui bcutaneously at the incision site.
 sm  o n s   o o e    i 
Urine analysis did not show any erythrocytes present, and it was assumed the
colouration was due to dietary pigments. Urine concentrating ability was maintained
(specific gravity 1.037, reference range 1.003-1.036, although mineral deposits affect
the measurement).
The skin wound healed in 2 weeks. Gastrointestinal function (as assessed by
prokinetics were continued on a reducing dose for 3 weeks after surgery.
Although the rabbit initially lost weight (down to a low of 2.3 kg), this improved
with supplemental feeding and tempting with good quality hay and fresh vegetables
reaching the pre-surgery level a couple of months after surgery.
Prevention
· Gentle tissue handling of both the skin and internal organs will reduce postoperative
discomfort. Use of analgesics should be routine in rabbit surgery, preferably using a
multimodal approach (e.g. using both opioids and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
· Skin wounds in rabbits should be closed using a buried suture pattern, e.g.
continuous intradermal suitures, to reduce self-trama and wound dehiscence.
Minimizing excessive activity will reduce stresses on suiture lines.
for the site) on a swaged needle will reduce tissue trauma and reaction to ligature and
sutuire placement.
· Synthetic monofilament suture materials should be used in preference to catgut. For
example, polyglyconate (Maxon?, Ethicon) is degraded and removed by hydrolysis.
· Flushing the abdomen with copious quantities of warm saline before closure will
remove blood clots or potential contamination, reducing the risk of adhesion
formation around such material.
· It has been suggested that the calcium channel blocker verapamil (o.2 mg/kg PO/IV
q8hr for nine doses) in the immediate postoperative period will reduce the formation
of adhesions.
· Gastrointestinal support should routinely include prokinetics and assist-feeding until
the patient is self-feeding and passing normal faeces after the procedure. A good
quality diet, including meadow hay and leafy green vegeta bles, should also be offered
to encourage self-feeding.
Prognosis
The prognosis for this rabbit was guarded at the time of renal surgery. Despite the use
of narrow gauge monofilament synthetic suture materials, a reaction occurred that
resulted in adhesions forming throughout the abdomen. The owner was warned that
these may result in either gastrointestinal and/or urinary pathology in the future. As
it was not possible to remove the distal portion of the left ureter, the patient is also
predisposed to urinary tract infection (although no clinical signs have been noted in
18 months following the procedure).
Acknowledgements
Thanks to the imaging department at the Royal (Dick) School of Veterinary Studies,
Edinburgh, for ultrasonography in this case. The nephrectomy was performed by
Donald Yool.
4
Spinal fracture in a rabbit
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Acute onset hindlimb paralysis in a rabbit.
Introduction
It is common knowledge among veterinary practitioners that rabbits are susceptible to
spinal injuries, often associated with handling incidents. Thankfully, training
veterinary undergraduates in careful and appropriate handling of rabbits has ensured
that this is now relatively uncommon in veterinary practices. This case outlines an
unfortunate incident in a teaching hospital where the rabbit sustained a spinal
fracture during clinical examination. Good client relations were paramount to a
satisfactory outcome from this accident.
CASE PRESENTINGSIGNS
A 7-year-old male entire Netherland dwarf cross-breed rabbit (Oryctolagus cuniculus) became
acutely paralysed on both hindlimbs after handling for clinical examination and nail clipping.
Husbandry
The rabbit was housed with another male entire rabbit, and had been in the owner's
possession for 6 years. The hutch was in a shed, with access through the day to an
exercise pen. The substrate was wood shavings. Several other rabbits were housed in
separate hutches in the same air space. The diet offered including ad libitum hay,
muesli-type commercial rabbit food, and fresh vegetables. Water was offered in a
sipper bottle.
Case History
The rabbit presented at the clinic for a routine myxomatosis vaccination. The clinical
examination detected overgrown nails, and consent was given for these to be
trimmed. A qualified veterinary nurse restrained the rabbit while a veterinary student
trimmed the nails. Although the initial examination did not reveal any locomotor
deficiencies, it was noted that the rabbit was not placing his hindlimbs appropriately
when returned to the carrier after the nail trim.
Clinical Examination
Examination at this point showed:
· No hindlimb movement
· No deep pain was present in either hindlimb
· A dorsal swelling was palpated in the thoraco-lumbar region of the spine.
A spinal fracture was suspected.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSES
The differentials for hindlimb paralysis are:
· Trauma: spinal fracture or luxation, intervertebral disc rupture
· Limb deformities, e.g bilateral fractures, septic arthritis, splay leg
· Spondylosis or spondylitis, osteoarthritis
· Degenerative disc disease
· Spinal neoplasia
* Localized spinal abscess
· Infectious or inflammatory central nervous system disease, e.g. encephalitozoonosis, toxoplasmosis,
neosporosis, meningitis/encephalitis
- Floppy bunny syndrome′ (flaccid paralysis, of unknown aetiology)
· Congenital neurological dysfunction.
 It is necessary to differentiate paralysis from paresis or reluctance to move. Aetiologies may vary
for general muscular weakness:
· Central nervous system (CNs) infection (see above)
 CNS
disease, e.g. brain abscess or tumour, viral haemorrhagic disease (VHD), trauma,
encephalitozoonosis
· Metabolic disease (resulting in ataxia or muscular weakness), e.g. hepatic lipidosis or hypokalaemia
 Terminal disease, e.g. septicaemia, renal or hepatic failure, cardiovascular disease, starvation,
intestinal obstruction, VHD, predator attack
· Cardiovascular disease
 Congenital  or acquired  skeletal abnormalities, e.g. splay leg (developmental condition),
spondylosis, kyphosis, lordosis
· Nutritional causes, e.g. hypovitaminosis E, hypovitaminosis A
· Severe ulcerative pododermatitis.
Because of the nature of this case and the clinical findings, the main differentials considered were
associated with acute trauma.
Case Work-Up
Neurological examination
This is performed similarly to other small mammals, although the flighty nature of
some rabbits and their reluctance to be manipulated in certain ways reduces the
comprehensiveness of the examination. For example, tests such as the wheelbarrow
test (postural reaction test for strength and coordination of the forelimbs) are resented
by rabbits and difficult to perform. It is also important to consider the potential for
 n ss   s  s e  d n 
spinal cord damage.
This patient had bilateral hindlimb paralysis, lacked deep pain in either hindlimb,
and had no anal tone. The panniculus reflex was present cranial to the level of the
fifth lumbar vertebra, where it abruptly ceased.
Medical treatment and reassessment
Although the benefits of administering steroids in cases of spinal injury are debatable,
it may be useful if given within an 8 hour period in acute cases. Alternatively or in
conjunction, strict cage rest may reduce further trauma and damage. If either of these
  sss   ss     i
repetition of the neurological assessment to check for any improvement. If none is
noted, consideration should be given to imaging modalities to investigate further, or
the animal euthanized.
Diagnosis
Acute injury causing vertebral fracture and spinal cord compression (see below for
radiographs).
Anatomy and Physiology Refresher
The skeleton in the rabbit is similar to other mammals (Fig. 4.1), with 8 cervical, 12
thoracic, 7 lumbar, 4 sacral and 6 caudal vertebrae. Bone density in rabbits is
relatively low, and accounts for only 6% of body mass. There is no cauda equina in
rabbits; thus any injury along the vertebral column will affect the spinal cord and
result in upper and lower motor neuron damage.
Vertebrae
Skull
Cervical
Thoracic
Lumbar
SacralCoccygeal
Mandible-
Tympanic
Scapula
bulla
Patella
Humerus
Rib
Femur
Radius
Cartilage
Tibia
Ulna
Pelvis
Figure 4.1
Vertebrae in the rabbit, showing the normal curvature.
Aetiopathogenesis of Spinal Fractures in Rabbits
Fracture or luxation/subluxation of lumbar vertebrae is common in pet rabbits. It is
usually associated with trauma sustained by the spine during incorrect handling. The
spine may twist around the lumbosacral junction if the rabbit is held with the heavy
hindquarters unsupported, resulting in fractures. Rabbits unused to being handled
may struggle during restraint and kick out with the hindlimbs. The fracture is
commonly in the lumbosacral region (L6-L7).
Clinical signs of spinal trauma often include loss of the panniculus reflex, and urine
CLINICALTIP
Note that the withdrawal reflex is local and its presence does not denote an intact spinal cord.
Treatment and Ouitcome
Dexamethasone was administered (30 mg/kg IV) within 1 hour of the incident. The
rabbit was hospitalized in a small kennel, and provided with food and water.
Repeating the neurological assessment 1 hour and 4 hours later did not show any
improvement. There continued to be no deep pain in either hindlimb, no anal tone,
and the rabbit was urinary incontinent. The lack of deep pain sensation 4 hours after
the incident carried a poor prognosis, and, after discussion with the owner, the rabbit
was euthanized.
Postmortem plain radiographs were taken (Fig. 4.2), confirming the diagnosis of
spinal fracture. They showed a fracture of the fifth lumbar vertebra, with obvious
deformity of the spinal column that would have resulted in severe spinal cord damage.
(q
Figure 4.2
Plain radiographs of the spine: (a) ventro-dorsal and (b) right lateral views. Note the
fracture of the fifth lumbar vertebra and resulting narrowing of the spinal column.
Other Investigation Options
Radiography
Plain radiographs may detect an obvious abnormality in bony structures, e.g.
vertebral  fracture. Contrast medium (i.e.  a myelogram)  may be required to
demonstrate a subtle lesion or one involving soft tissues only, e.g. intervertebral disc
herniation, spinal neoplasia or spinal abscesses.
In this case, radiographs were not taken as results would not have affected the
outcome - the history and clinical findings were highly suggestive of a vertebral
fracture with spinal cord compressions, and the owner did not wish to pursue surgical
treatment.
Cerebrospinal fluid analysis
If a myelogram is to be performed, CSF should be analysed (cytology and protein
content) to assess for infection or inflammatory processes. A sample may also be
obtained without the need for a contrast study if infection or inflammation is
considered more likely than anatomical deformity. The usual sites for access are via
puncture of the lumbosacral or cisterna magna epidural spaces. It is advisable to
analyse the CSF (Box 4.1, Fig. 4.3) before injection of contrast material (Box 4.2) if
meningitis is suspected, as the contrast material may exacerbate clinical signs.
BOX 4.1 Obtaining a CSF sample
· General anaesthesia. Place in lateral recumbency. Clip and aseptically prepare the site
· Atlanto-occipital approach:
· Flex head (preferably intubated to ensure airway maintained)
· Site location is half way between the cranial margins of the wings of the atlas (C2 vertebra) and
a point 2 mm caudal to the occipital protuberance
· Insert 38 mm 22 gauge spinal needle, at a 90? angle to the vertebral column
· Lumbar approach:
• Flex the trunk
· Site location is the cranial edge of the dorsal spinous process of the L6 vertebra
· Insert 38 mm 22 gauge spinal needle, directed cranially at a 45° angle
· Advance needle slowly. A ‘pop’ is felt as the needle penetrates the dura and subarachnoid
membranes
· Remove the stylet from the needle and check for CsF in the hub
· Collect the CsF sample from the hub of the needle into a sterile plastic container
· Analyse within 30-60 minutes.
A
To ensure true lateral recumbency use foam wedges to
separate contralateral limbs and raise the rostral skull
Clippatchfor
Clip patch
atlanto-occipital
forlumbar
approach
approach
BThe spine should be flexed in the region for access
i.e.cervical or lumbar area
Figure 4.3
 Sites of puncture for CsF sampling (A) lumbar and (B) atlanto-occipital.
BOX 4.2 Myelography
• L6-L7 intervertebral space:
· 32-38 mm 23 gauge needle
* Use 0.4 ml/kg of iodine-based contrast medium
* This will usually extend contrast from L7 to T2
 Cisternal puncture can be used to assess the cervical/thoracic spinal column.
Culture
         n    
sensitivity testing on samples such as urine, blood and CsF.
Encephalitozoonosis testing
Detection of the protozoa in urine will confirm infection, but excretion is transient.
Serology may demonstrate exposure to Encephalitozoon cuniculi, but a rising titre
Other imaging modalities
Computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) may be used to
assess bone or soft tissue abnormalities. These techniques are currently more
expensive than radiography and not readily available to all practitioners, but are
useful options to investigate disease affecting the CNS.
Treatment Options and Management
NURSING ASPECTS
· Many patients with hindlimb paralysis will continue to eat and drink, providing appropriate food
 s p aa os -ss n  si nnd a  s e s  
other ill rabbits (see Chapter 3 for technique).
· The rabbit will be unable to move away after urination or defaecation (including passage of
caecotrophs), and perineal soiling will result. Although handling should be minimized, the patient
faecal matting of fur). After cleaning, the skin and fur should be dried thoroughly using a
combination of towel, hairdryer on a cool/warm seting, and a comb or brush. If skin lesions are
present or urine scalding severe, a topical antibiotic (e.g. fusidic acid or silver sulfadiazine) or
barrier (e.g. petroleum jelly) ointment should be applied.
· As with other species suffering from paralysis, physiotherapy should be performed for a few
   ss       n   s ss 
joints and encouraging stimulation of major muscle groups. As motor function returns,
physiotherapy can be more active, for example assisted locomotion. Swimming (providing support
using hands and/or an inflatable jacket) can be beneficial, although it should be introduced
 gradually so as not to stress the patient.
· Manual expression of the bladder may be required, three or four times daily. Diazepam (0.25-0.5
mg/kg PO) may assist with relaxation of the external urethral sphincter. Over-distension of the
 bladder wall and urinary tract infection may result in bladder wall damage.
· The rabbit should be rotated every 4-6 hours to prevent the formation of pressure sores.
CLINICAL TIPS
·- When handling rabbits, ensure that the thoraco-lumbar spine is always supported. If the rabbit is
restrained on a table, a hand should be gently but securely placed over the spine to prevent sudden
movements (Fig. 2.1a). If turned upside down, the rabbit should be firmly held and the spine
supported (Fig. 2.1b).
· It is possible for rabbits to fracture their spine while thumping a hindleg in a carrier or other
enclosure with a hard substrate. This is usually in response to some fright or other stimulus, so
 stresses should be minimized, particularly in an environment strange to the rabbit.
· Good client communication is paramount to a satisfactory outcome after an incident such as this.
Forewarning of the possibility of an injury is the first step, and a caring and empathic attitude if an
injury occurs is the second. The veterinary surgeon should be considerate to the client's financial
standpoint if investigation and treatment are expensive. (The owner in this case continues to be a
loyal client at the practice.)
Other Treatment Options
Cage rest
If the spinal lesion is stable, it is advisable to restrict exercise for 6-8 weeks. Nursing
should be continued during this time (see above).
Analgesia
The requirement for analgesics depends on the severity of the condition. Non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs, e.g. meloxicam) are commonly used in rabbits.
Opioids such as buprenorphine may be useful in acute cases or as part of a
multimodal regime after surgery.
Surgery
As with other small mammals, surgical repair of vertebral fractures is possible. It
should be borne in mind that low bone density will affect the choice of implant, as will
the small size of some patients. Patients without deep pain will generally not be
considered for surgical treatment owing to the poor prognosis for return of
neurological function.
Support harnesses
Although a selection of hindlimb supports such as carts have been used in various
species of pet mammals, the author does not see the use of these as a humane
treatment option in the long term for animals with continuing hindlimb paralysis.
Physiotherapy
Active and passive physiotherapy will be useful for a return to normal function. If
available, hydrotherapy can be beneficial in aiding recovery.
Euthanasia
In cases of severe neurological dysfunction, particularly if owner considerations
(including financial ones) preclude any investigation or treatment, euthanasia may
be the treatment of choice.
Prevention
It is liseful to assess rabbits visually before handling, and to ask the owner if it is
accustomed to handling. If the animal is obviously nervous or not regularly handled,
     ns      a  e i 
twists or jumps suddenly.
Practise handling calm rabbits when possible, for example any that are at the
in the veterinary clinician for dealing with more difficult patients.
CLINICAL TIPS
· It is extremely useful to utilize an experienced veterinary nurse to restrain rabbits for clinical
examination.
· Although owners may pick up their rabbits regularly, they will not be accustomed to restraint for
clinical examination (e.g. for oral or ventral abdomen examination).
Prognosis
The prognosis (see Box 4.3) will depend on the severity of spinal cord damage,
stability of the vertebral column, demeanour of the patient and capabilities for
restricting movement during the fracture healing period (6-8 weeks).
BOX 4.3 Ethics
The rabbit's welfare should be considered a priority when dealing with neurological cases. The
 prognosis as determined by you, the veterinary clinician will have a significant influence on this. It is
important to re-evaluate cases regularly, and to consider euthanasia in cases that are deemed to have
an extremely poor prognosis early on, or in those that do not improve with treatment and time.
A similar case presented after spinal fracture in the owner's home (Fig. 4.4). This
rabbit retained some hindlimb movement, and deep pain was present. Strict cage rest
over a period of 8 weeks resulted in recovery.
Figuure4.4
A case of spinal fracture in a dwarf lop rabbit. This individual had some hindlimb
movement.
5
Ferret with abdominal mass
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Weight loss in a ferret.
Introduction
This case embodies a frequent presentation in ferrets of weight loss, along with the
common finding of an abdominal mass. The aim is to discuss possible investigations
and outline treatment options for common conditions. (See Box 5.1 for a brief guide to
ferrets in various parts of the world.)
BOX 5.1 Ferrets around the world
· In the UK, ferrets are kept for two reasons. Some are purely pet animals, some are used for working
(ferreting utilizes the animals to hunt wild rabbits), and some are a combination of the two.
• Across the rest of Europe and in Russia, ferrets are variously kept as pets, for fur and for hunting.
· Pet ferrets are popular in Japan.
• Although banned in certain states in the USA, in others, ferrets are extremely popular as pets. They
have also been used for medical research and the fur trade for many years.
· New Zealand has banned the keeping of pet ferrets since 2005.
· The black-footed ferret (Mustela nigripes) was rated extinct in the wild, but animals bred in
captivity have been locally re-introduced in efforts to save the species.
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
Chronic weight loss in an adult male neutered ferret (Mustela putorius furo)
Husbandry
The current owner had rescued the ferret 2 years prior to presentation. The animal
had previously been castrated. He was housed with another ferret in an outdoor hutch
on two levels. The animals had intermittent free-range access to a room in the owner's
house. The substrate was straw, with fleece material for bedding. During colder
weather, the hutch was covered to protect the animals from inclement conditions.
Cleaning was performed weekly.
The ferrets were on a commercial dry ferret diet, supplemented with occasional egg
and cooked meat. They were offered water in a water bottle, which was changed daily.
Neither ferret had been vaccinated. There was potential for access to wild mink
owing to the rural location of the hutch.
Case History
The ferret's appetite had been reduced over the month prior to presentation,
particuilarly with regard to the kibble, although he was still consuming small amounts
of commercial cat food and cooked meat. Although the ferret had never been obese,
his body condition had deteriorated markedly over the same time period. Historically.
the ferret lost some body weight over the winter, but not to the extent seen this time.
              o
  e y   's s   g a
and urinated frequently, this was considered normal for the individual.
The companion ferret and other pets in the household did not show any signs of
illness.
Clinical Examination
A clinical examination was performed, with the following findings:
· The ferret was bright, alert and responsive
· Mucous membranes were pink and moist, and capillary refill time was less than 2
seconds
· Teeth were in good condition, although a small chip was present on one canine
· No abnormalities were detected on thoracic auscuiltation. The heart rate was 360
beats per minute (normal range in an adult ferret is 180-250)
· Superficial lymph nodes were normal on palpation
· The intestines were thickened on palpation, and a mass was detected in the mid-
cranial abdomen.
DIFFERENTIALDIAGNOSES
The differentials for anorexia are wide, with almost any illness resulting in this clinical sign. In
many ferrets, only subtle signs of illness will be seen with chronic gastroenteritis.
The differentials for an abdominal mass (often with weight loss) in a ferret are:
· Splenomegaly:
· Idiopathic hypersplenism
· Neoplasia (see below)
· Infection (e.g. Aleutian disease (see below), fungal disease)
· Cardiac disease
• Endocrine disease (e.g. hyperadrenocorticism)
· Anaesthesia
   () (   a s 
• Neoplasia (often occurs secondary to inflammatory disease):
· Lymphoma (see Box 5.2)
· Adrenal gland, e.g. adrenocortical adenoma, adenocarcinoma, teratoma. This case did not show
 sd 'ado a) s  pe lo m as sis sn a po A
behavioural changes). Adrenal enlargement may be non-neoplastic, e.g. hyperplasia
· Hepatic, e.g. lymphoma, haemangiosarcoma, adenocarcinoma, hepatocellular adenoma,
metastases
· Splenic, e.g. lymphosarcoma, haemangioma, haemangiosarcoma
· Pancreatic, adenocarcinoma, insulinoma (although insulinomas are often small and the clinical
signs of weakness and seizures do not correlate with this case)
· Gastrointestinal, e.g. adenocarcinoma
· Bladder, e.g. transitional cell carcinoma
· Reproductive tract, ovarian (e.g. leiomyoma, teratoma), uterine (e.g. leiomyoma, adenoma,
fibrosarcoma), prostate (e.g. seminoma, carcinoma)
· Abscess (bacterial infection)
 Aleutian disease (viral): mass could be due to splenomegaly, mesenteric lymphadenopathy,
hepatomegaly; disease also results in chronic wasting, diarrhoea, lethargy, anorexia and polydipsia
· Thickened intestines may be palpated, e.g. intestinal lymphoma, eosinophilic granulomatous disease
(uncommon), proliferative bowel disease (rare, caused by Lawsonia intracellularis, mostly animals
<1.5 years old)
· Several conditions will result in mesenteric lymphadenopathy that may be palpable, e.g. intestinal
lymphoma, inflammatory bowel disease, eosinophilic granulomatous disease (eosinophilic
infiltration and granulomas of the abdominal lymphatics and organs), proliferative bowel disease,
systemic infection, tuberculosis
 Renomegaly: renal cysts, acute renal failure, hydronephrosis (e.g. associated with urolithiasis
 obstructing kidney, ureteral or urethral blockage)
· Urolithiasis: uroliths in bladder, or distended bladder associated with uroliths blocking urethra
Granulomas: tuberculosis (Mycobacterium bovis), non-tuberculous mycobacteria (e.g. M.
genavense)
· Mycotic disease (usually causes lung pathology, but may affect abdominal organs) - blastomycosis
(splenomegaly), coccidiomycosis (various organs), histoplasmosis (splenomegaly)
• Gastric bloat (rare): thought to be associated with bacterial overgrowth
• Prostatic disease (hobs), e.g. prostatomegaly with secondary urethral obstruction, prostatic abscess
(may be in association with transitional cell tumours of the bladder)
· Pregnant (jills)
· Pyometra (jills).
(b)
(a)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.1
(a-d) Radiographs showing a peanut foreign body in a ferret, and surgical removal.
BOX 5.2 Lymphoma in ferrets
 Often arises in the mesenteric lymph nodes, but may arise in gastrointestinal mucosa
01
metastasize there from elsewhere.
· Several types: lymphosarcoma (solid tissue tumours in organs or lymph nodes), lymphocytic
leukaemia (neoplastic cells in both bone marrow and peripheral blood, acute or chronic forms)
• Adults: commonest, lymphocytic form, prolonged disease with better survival times than the
lymphoblastic form
• Juveniles: lymphoblastic form, often with bone marrow infiltration and leukaemia
· Immunoblastic polymorphous form: all ages can be affected, short survival time
· Other forms, e.g. cutaneous (survival times <3-4 years), mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue
lymphomas.
· Several chemotherapy protocols exist for treatment of lymphoma in ferrets. Surgery, such as
removal of focal lesions, may be used as an adjunct.
The differentials for diarrhoea include:
· Canine distemper virus (CDV): resulting in diarrhoea and anorexia (other signs include vomiting.
respiratory and nervous signs)
· Gastrointestinal infection, e.g. salmonellosis, colibacillosis, bacterial overgrowth, enterotoxaemia,
coronavirus (epizootic catarrhal enteritis, ECE), rotavirus (severe disease in kits 2-6 weeks old),
Campylobacter spp
· Bacterial enteropathies often occur secondary to other disease, e.g. dietary indiscretion or sudden
 diet change, viral or inflammatory or neoplastic gastrointestinal disease
· Inflammatory bowel disease: may relate to dietary intolerance, hypersensitivity reaction or other
immune abnormality
 Toxicoses: many ingested toxins cause gastrointestinal signs (e.g. methylxanthines in chocolate,
nicotine in cigarettes)
• Endoparasitism (uncommon):
· Protozoa, e.g. Toxoplasma gondi (signs may include diarrhoea, lethargy and anorexia),
Cryptosporidium parvum (may be asymptomatic), coccidiosis (Isospora and Eimeria, usually
 asymptomatic), Giardia spp
• Helminths (may see diarrhoea with roundworms, threadworms)
• Cestodes (may result in diarrhoea)
· Human influenza virus: sometimes associated with a transient diarrhoea (along with respiratory
disease).
 The differentials for weight loss include:
· Chronic disease, e.g. pneumonia
· Cardiovascular disease, e.g. dilated cardiomyopathy may result in lethargy and weight loss
· Aleutian disease
· Dental disease
· Neoplasia
· Renal disease, pyelonephritis
· Inflammatory bowel disease
• Helicobacter mustelae, with gastritis and ulceration
· Enteritis, bacterial overgrowth
·ECE
· Tuberculosis
· Mycotic disease, e.g. blastomycosis
· Megaoesophagus (poor prognosis)
· Rarely, eosinophilic granulomatous disease, proliferative bowel disease or endoparasites may result
in weight loss without loss of appetite.
Case Work-Up
Supportive care
Owing to the animal's poor condition and the chronicity of the disease, it was deemed
appropriate to admit him for nutritional support over 48 hours before further
investigation under sedation was performed. A convalescent carnivore diet was
administered orally via syringe and offered ad libitum in a bowl during this
stabilization period.
Ultrasound
The ferret was sedated with midazolam (1 mg/kg IM), resulting in moderate sedation
within 5 minutes.
Physical abdominal examination revealed one large (1 x 2.5 cm) mass caudal to
the right kidney, and several smaller (2-9 mm diameter) masses near the main mass
supply, precluding the possibility of fine needle aspiration under ultrasound guidance
(due to the risks of haemorrhage). The aorta passed close to one of the masses and the
        s    
invasion from the mass. It was not clear whether the masses originated from the
pancreas or mesenteric lymph nodes.
The gall bladder was almost empty, with hyperechoic contents. A cyst measuring 3
mm diameter was located in a liver lobe. The portal vein was prominent but there was
glands were identified, and both they and the kidneys had a normal ultrasonographic
appearance.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSES FOR LIVER CHANGES SEEN ON ULTRASOUND
· Hepatic lipidosis: often occurs with sudden weight loss or with chronic gastrointestinal disease.
· Biliary cysts or cystadenomas
· Hepatic neoplasia: primary or metastatic
· Hepatitis is usually secondary to gastrointestinal disease in ferrets, e.g. lymphocytic hepatitis
(common), suppurative hepatitis (uncommon).
Blood sample
As insulinomas are common in ferrets, a small sample was taken from the cephalic
vein for glucose assessment. The blood glucose was normal at 1o.1 mmol/l (reference
range in a fasted ferret is 5-6.7 mmol/l, < 11.1 mmol/1 if the individual is unfasted;
insulinoma is suspected with hypoglycaemia, i.e. < 3.9 mmol/l).
After these results and due to the guarded prognosis, the owner elected not to
proceed with further investigations.
Further Investigations Possible
Blood sample
ss        d  s 
ferrets, this may be achieved conscious. In other individuals, sedation or anaesthesia
is used to assist restraint; drugs may affect blood values (e.g. isoflurane will reduce the
Aleutian disease is diagnosed on the finding of hypergammaglobulinaemia and by
serology.
Faecal analysis
Wet preparations and flotations can be performed to check for endoparasites. Culture
blood may be lisefuil.
Urine analysis
If urinary tract disease is suspected, urine should be analysed for abnormalities by
microscopy, refractometry, biochemistry and culture.
Radiography
Since the ultrasound images suggested that neoplasia was high on the list of
differential diagnoses, it would be useful to assess for metastatic spread (i.e.
radiograph the thorax).
Exploratory coeliotomy
This would enable direct visualization of the masses, as well as incisional or
excisional biopsy. Exploration of other abdominal organs could also be carried out.
Samples (fine needle aspirate or biopsy) from masses or abnormal organs should be
submitted for cytology/histology and culture. Acid-fast stains should be included to
rule out mycobacterial disease.
Diagnosis
Neoplasia of abdominal organ(s) was suspected.
Anatomy and Physiology Refresher (Figs 5.2, 5.3)
Ferrets are carnivorous, and have a short digestive tract. The simple stomach is
followed by the small intestine (182-198 cm long), colon and rectum. The ferret liver
is relatively large, has six lobes, and normally lies within the curvature of the
diaphragm.
Liver-
Stomach
Duodenum
Spleen
Pancreas-
-Kidneys
Small
intestines
Descending
colon
Urinary
bladder
Figulre5.2
Ventral view of a ferret's gastrointestinal tract.
Liver
StomachSpleenKidneysOvary
Uterus
Descending
colon
Small
Lungs
Heart
Diaphragm
intestine
Bladder
Pelvis
Figure 5.3
Lateral view of a ferret's gastrointestinal tract.
The pancreas has two arms with the midpoint near the gastric pylorus. The right
arm lies alongside the duodenum. The pancreas shares a common opening into the
duodenum with the bile duct. The spleen is crescent shaped, and lies in the left
hypogastric area parallel to the greater curvature of the stomach. The gastrosplenic
ligament attaches the spleen to the stomach and liver. The spleen can be large in
normal adults.
The kidneys are retroperitoneal, with the right more cranial than the left. The
adrenal glands lie at the cranial poles of the kidneys. The left gland is near to the
a bdominal aorta, while the right gland is adjacent to the caudal vena cava.
Aetiopathogenesis of Abdominal Neoplasia
Several aetiologies have been proposed for development of neoplasia in ferrets. These
include genetics, tumour suppression genes, early neuitering, photo-period
particularly those maintained for breeding), diet (processed foods), viruses,
endocrinopathies (e.g. diabetes mellitus, pseudohypoparathyroidism, hyperthyroidism
and hypothyroidism). Chemicals and other environmental conditions may also be
involved.
Gastrointestinal  tract  neoplasms  include  biliary  cystadenoma/cholangioma
cholangiocarcinoma, hepatocellular carcinoma and hepatoma. Malignant lymphoma
(Box 5.2) is the most common neoplasm of the gastrointestinal tract. Palpation,
radiography and ultrasound are used to detect the presence of a mass; biopsy with
histology will permit a diagnosis to be made. Primary gastrointestinal neoplasms are
usually malignant; for example, adenocarcinomas are usually locally aggressive and
metastasize to local lymph nodes.
Adrenocortical neoplasms are uisually functional, and associated with a wide range
            
iltrasonography and steroid hormonal assays, but is confirmed only by histology of
excised adrenal tissue. Surgical removal is currently the preferred treatment option,
although research shows depot gonadotrophin-releasing hormone (GnRH) agonists
such as deslorelin have promise for medical therapy.
Insulinomas usually present as small nodules, and inlike the disease in dogs and
cats are less malignant in ferrets. Blood glucose and insulin levels are used to diagnose
the disease, and surgical excision usually results in a prolonged disease-free state.
Endothelial neoplasms may be seen in various abdominal organs (including the
liver, spleen and pancreas), lymph nodes or free-floating in the abdomen. Malignancy
is reported histologically, but metastases are rare.
Abdominal haemangiosarcomas carry a guarded prognosis. They grow aggressively
and may rupture (seeding the abdomen with metastatic tumours or causing a fatal
haemorrhage). Early surgical excision may be curative if a single site is affected.
Transitional cell carcinoma (TcC) may arise in the kidney; metastasis is rare and
unilateral nephrectomy may be curative. TCC in the bladder carries a poorer
been used to treat some bladder tumours. Renal carcinomas and adenomas are
linilateral and usually incidental findings at postmortem examination.
Epidemiology
Most neoplasms (53% reported) in ferrets relate to the endocrine system, with
second most common (25%). The most common haematopoietic neoplasm reported is
lymphoma, which is also the most common malignancy. Gastrointestinal tract
neoplasms are frequent; 50% affect the intestines, with stomach, liver, colon and oral
cavity neoplasms less likely. The liver is commonly a site for metastatic spread. Many
individuals are affected by multiple tumour types.
Treatment
Owing to the guarded prognosis and risks associated with exploratory surgery, the
in his condition. Nutritional support was provided using the convalescent diet
Treatment Options and Management
Supportive care
Animals suffering from weight loss should be provided with nutritional support (see
below). If diarrhoea has also resulted in dehydration, fluid therapy should be
commenced (see below).
Medication
If an infection is suspected, it can be prudent to commence antibiotic therapy before
culture results are available. Metronidazole and amoxicillin are common first choices
for ferrets with diarrhoea. Protectant drugs may be useful, e.g. ranitidine, cimetidine,
famotidine, omeprazole, sucralfate or kaolin/pectin. Motility modifiers such as
metoclopramide may be used if an obstruction is not suspected.
Chemotherapy
The use of chemotherapeutic protocols may be useful for certain cases  (e.g.
lymphoma).
Surgery
Surgical excision is possible for some abdominal neoplasms.
NURSING ASPECTS
· Nutritional support:
· Offer the ferret a selection of foods, including its normal diet, to encourage self-feeding. As
with cats, it may help to moisten the food and/or warm it.
· Milk ± added cream (to increase milk fat) can be useful to assist with weight gain, although it
will cause diarrhoea. Some human baby diets are accepted. There are several carnivore
convalescent diets on the market that can be offered and/or syringe-fed to ferrets.
· The microflora in the ferret gastrointestinal tract is simple, and not involved in digestion. It is
therefore uncommon to cause diarrhoea with long-term administration of broad-spectrum
antibiotics.
• Fluid therapy:
· In mild/moderate cases of dehydration, warmed oral and subcutaneous fluids may be sufficient.
Oral electrolyte solutions can be given.
· In ferrets with severe dehydration, the intravenous (or intraosseous) route is necessary. The
lateral saphenous or cephalic veins are commonly used for catheter placement.
· Fluid volumes should include replacement of losses and maintenance requirements, and are
calculated as for dogs and cats.
· Hospitalize ill ferrets. Provide supplemental heating, particularly for those with weight loss and
low energy reserves (monitoring rectal temperature), as well as a suitable sleeping area (e.g. a soft
blanket or towel).
CLINICAL TIPS
Phlehotomv in ferrets
· Jugular vein
· Sedation or anaesthesia may be necessary
· Short 22-26 gauge needle
· Restrain as for cats with head extended and raise vein at base of neck.
· Lateral saphenous vein and cephalic vein
· Useful for small blood sample or catheter placement.
· Cranial vena cava
· Anaesthesia, dorsal recumbency
· Insert 25 gauge 25 mm hypodermic needle at 30-45° angle into thoracic inlet between
manubrium and first rib, directing needle towards opposite hindleg.
Follow-Up
The ferret presented at the clinic 2 weeks later. Further weight loss was noted (weight
was now 439 g), but the animal had been eating and active until the previous 24
hours. He had become acutely anorexic and lethargic, and was not reacting to stimuli.
His mucous membranes were pale, and an acute haemorrhage from one of the masses
was suspected. The owner elected for euthanasia of the ferret at this stage (without
postmortem examination).
           
pentobarbitone was injected into the cranial vena cava to complete the euthanasia.
Prevention
Avoidance of the factors listed above for generation of neoplasia is advisable. Early
identification and treatment of gastrointestinal disease may also prevent progression
to a neoplastic condition.
Prognosis
The prognosis for abdominal neoplasia depends on the type of tumour (e.g. whether it
is susceptable to chemotherapy, whether it has or may metastasize) and the location
 isso   a gn (ns sa n isn  
some tumours. Chemotherapy is an option for other conditions such as lymphoma.
Remission periods will vary between chemotherapy protocols and individual response.
6
Urolithiasis in a chinchilla
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Pollakiuria, dysuria and haematuria in a chinchilla.
Introduction
Captive chinchillas should be maintained on a high-fibre diet. Commercial mixes for
chinchillas may be low in fibre - often resulting in dental disease - and other
       a     sg
animals, treats should be quantified, as a small amount may be a considerable portion
of the diet and result in nutritional imbalance. This case describes a condition that
likely developed in response to an aberration of mineral content from the ideal diet.
BOX 6.1 Ecology of chinchillas
· Originally from the Andes mountains in South America
· Normal habitat: grassy plains. Live in burrows or rock crevices. Crepuscular activity
· Activity: agile jumpers. Defence includes urine spraying and release of fur if bitten
· Free-ranging diet: predominantly grasses, bushes, leaves and twigs. Perform caecotrophy
· Social groups. Communicate using vocalizations
· Approximately 60 hairs per follicle, and historically popular in the fur trade
· Susceptible to heat stress
· Average weight: 600-750 g
· Reproduction: gestation 1l1 days. Usually two in a litter. Precocial young
 Longevity: up to 15 years (longest recorded lifespan in captivity 27 years)
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
     n      
haematuria.
Husbandry
The owner had another chinchilla, but they were housed separately and allowed to
mix daily only under direct supervision. The chinchilla's enclosure was constructed of
wire mesh and measured approximately 1 m wide x 1 m deep x 1.5 m high. Two
wooden shelves were provided along with a small wooden nest box. He had access to a
dust bath daily for 15 minutes.
The diet mainly comprised Timothy grass hay and proprietary grass-based
chinchilla pellets. A small amount of treats including apples, rosehips and green
vegetables was given twice weekly. Water provided was human-grade mineral water.
The owner weighed the chinchilla weekly.
Case History
The chinchilla had previously been seen at the clinic after trauma resulted in a
superficial leg wound. This healed uneventfuly. The companion chinchilla had no
previous medical history. Both animals had been in the owner's possession for more
than 1 year.
 s             
to presentation:
· Difficulty passing urine
· Small amounts of urine were passed, containing some blood
· Otherwise no problems were noted. The chinchilla was active, eating, drinking and
passing faeces as normal.
Figure 6.1
The chinchilla was behaving relatively normally on presentation.
Clinical Examination
The chinchilla was well habituated to restraint and a full clinical examination was
possi ble. Findings included:
· Bright, alert and reactive
· Good body condition, with a weight of 670 g
· No skin lesions detected
· Normal locomotion
· Thoracic auscultation normal
· Resented abdominal palpation slightly; the owner suggested this was normal for this
animal. The bladder appeared comfortable
· No preputial damage or haemorrhage detected.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSES
The clinical signs were suggestive of urinary tract disease. The differentials for haematuria were:
· Cystitis
• Urolithiasis
· Bladder neoplasia
· Renal infarcts
· Trauma to the distal urinary tract, for example attack on the prepuce from the con-specific animal
 Disseminated intravascular coagulation
· In a female, reproductive tract disease - pyometra, uterine hyperplasia or neoplasia.
Case Work-Up
Urinalysis
A free-flow urine sample was collected and analysed. Using a refractometer, the urine
           
identified, and the pH was 8.5. On microscopic examination, red blood cells were
evident. Bacteria were suspected to be contaminants owing to the method of urine
collection, as no white blood cells were seen. No crystals or renal casts were detected.
Ultrasound
Abdominal ultrasound was performed with the chinchilla conscious. A mineralized
urolith measuring approximately 5 mm in diameter was detected in the bladder.
Cystitis was also present. Both kidneys had a normal shape, internal structure, opacity
and size (approximately 1.9 cm in length).
Other possible investigations
These could include evaluation of blood chemistry, such as blood urea nitrogen
(BUN), creatinine, calcium, phosphorus, albumin and total protein. It is useful in
cases of urinary tract disease to determine whether azotaemia is present. Haematology
may be useful, for example to determine whether renal disease or the urinary blood
loss was causing anaemia.
Another imaging modality that could be of use to investigate the urinary tract
would be radiography. Plain radiographs would detect a radiodense urolith. Contrast
studies can be performed as in other species, for example a retrograde cystogram or an
intravenous urogram (IVU).
    n        s
uiltrasound-guided cystocentesis (a difficult technique with the small size of a
chinchilla's bladder).
Diagnosis
A urolith was detected using ultrasound. The resultant cystitis explained the clinical
signs such as reduced appetite and lethargy.
Mineralized stones are relatively easy to detect on radiography or ultrasound.
Ultrasound is a more sensitive tool for assessment of kidney structure, although
Urine analysis is rarely reported in chinchillas, but comparison with published
and rats naturally have proteinuria.)
Anatomy and Physiology Refresher
The penis is obvious just cranial to the anus, and can be everted 1-2 cm manually. An
os penis is present in chinchillas. Males do not have a true scrotum and the testes are
found within the inguinal canal or abdomen, with the caudal epididymis dropping
    n   s    s   
midline. The urinary bladder can be relatively small in chinchillas, and usually
contains alkaline urine. In females, the external urethra is separate to the vagina. The
slit-like vulva lies between the urinary papilla and anus, and is closed by a membrane
except during oestrus and parturition.
Free-ranging chinchillas are reported to rarely drink. They obtain most of their
water from plants, and from licking dewdrops.
Aetiopathogenesis of Urolithiasis
In another hystricognathi - the guinea pig - calculi are regularly associated with
formed from calcium carbonate, and diets high in calcium and oxalate are a risk
factor. Calculi may form in the kidneys, ureters, bladder or urethra.
Clinical signs associated with urinary tract disease may be quite specific for this
body system, including polydipsia, polyuria or anuria, isosthenuria, stranguria,
dysuria and haematuria. The animal may vocalize during attempts to urinate. In
other cases there may be quite vague signs of illness, such as reduced appetite or
complete anorexia, cachexia and dehydration. Signs associated with discomfort may
include a hunched posture, or sensitivity to palpation or movement of the dorsum or
spine.
Epidemiology
Although relatively common in lagomorphs and guinea pigs, urolithiasis is
infrequently reported in chinchillas.
Treatment
Anaesthesia
Acepromazine (0.75 mg/kg) and ketamine (40 mg/kg) were administered IM to
induce anaesthesia. After 5 minutes, this resulted in a surgical depth of anaesthesia
for approximately 45 minutes. During this period, oxygen was administered via a
close-fitting facemask. At the end of this period, anaesthesia was maintained with
isoflurane (1-3%) until the end of surgery. Glycopyrrolate (0.02 mg/kg SC) was
Anaesthesia was monitored using ECG pads on the patient's feet. The heart rate
varied between 120 and 250/min and the respiratory rate between 36 and 44/min
lsing the toe pinch reflex.
Surgery
Owing to the small size of the patient, an operating microscope was used for
remove the urolith. The bladder was gently elevated using stay sutures during the
procedure. The bladder wall appeared thickened and inflamed. Unfortunately, the
bladder was too small to safely take a sample of the wall for culture prior to closuire
(5/0 USP, 1 metric). The same suture material and pattern were used to close the
muscle and subcuticular layers. An intradermal pattern was placed in the skin, with a
Figure6.2
Abdominal wound postoperatively, with intradermal sutures.
Perioperative supportive care
The chinchilla's rectal temperature dropped to 34.3°C, and a forced warm air blanket
was utilized to try to increase this (normal range 38-39*C). The chinchilla was
recovered in an incubator - with an environmental temperature of approximately
35°C - with supplemental oxygen. The patient was moving around well after 20
minuutes.
A period of apnoea during the recovery period was treated by administration of
doxapram intravenously (1 mg/kg, into the lateral auricular vein) and intermittent
positive pressure ventilation (IPPV) via the facemask.
Fluids were administered at the end of surgery (20 ml of warmed Hartmann's
solution SC). Prokinetics - metoclopramide (0.5 mg/kg PO or SC q12hr) and cisapride
(0.5 mg/kg PO ql2hr, no longer available in the UK) - were administered
postoperatively for 24 hours until the patient was passing normal droppings.
     q    a 
24 hours) and meloxicam (0.3 mg/kg PO q24hr). Antibiosis was commenced with
trimethoprim potentiated sulphonamide (30 mg/kg PO q12hr).
Treatment Options and Management
Diet
Dietary modifications were made to reduce the formation of further calculi, aiming to
reduce high urinary calcium and oxalate levels. The owner was advised to avoid
alfalfa-based pellets and hay that are high in calcium. Kale, spinach, celery, parsley
and strawberries are high in oxalates, so should be given in small quantities only. A
Timothy hay-based diet is relatively low in calcium and high in fibre, and should
reduce urolith formation.
Supportive care
This was similar to that given for other illnesses in small rodents. Gastrointestinal
support  may  include assist-feeding,  prokinetics such as metoclopramide and
ranitidine, and appetite stimulants such as diazepam (0.2-0.3 mg/kg PO or SC q12hr)
or vitamin B complex (5-10 mg/kg SC or IM). Some authors may use steroids
(prednisolone at 0.5-1.0 mg/kg PO q12-24hr) as an appetite stimulant and anti-
inflammatory, but caution should be exercised over such drugs that may cause
imm unosuppression.
NURSING ASPECTS
· It is vital to monitor small patients postoperatively.
• To assess the urinary system, the chinchilla's daily water intake and urine output were measured. If
there is concern over the volume of urine production in cases of urinary tract disease, incontinence
pads may be weighed before and after use (1 ml urine weighs approximately 1 g).
· Faecal output was assessed by checking consistency, size and number of pellets produced.
· It can be difficult to ascertain food intake accurately. Some foods such as pellets can be weighed
daily, but often the animal needs to be observed for periods to verify whether it is eating loose food
 such as hay.
CLINICAL TIP
Although beneficial to the maintenance of healthy fur, it is advisable not to allow access to sand
baths to prevent irritation to the fresh coeliotomy wound. After 7-10 days, the wound was healed and
access permitted.
Other Treatment Options
If uroliths are present elsewhere in the urinary tract - such as the ureters or urethra -
they are often milked into the bladder before surgical removal. It can be helpful to pass
a small urinary catheter to prevent small stones migrating into the urethra during the
cystotomy.
In animals with acidic urine, dissolution therapy may inhibit calcium stone
crystallization in the urine. Potassium citrate (150 mg/kg divided ql2hr) binds
  s         
activity and alkalinizing the urine. Although most herbivores have alkaline urine, the
citrate may help inhibit calculi formation following suirgical removal of a stone
protein diet, phosphate binders, and vitamin and iron supplementation (to support red
Potentially nephrotoxic medications should be avoided. These include NSAIDs and
aminoglycosides. (A low-dose NSAID was administered in this case as hydration
 sa - sisn  o sq - sp p  po a on p
suspected. Ideally, blood chemistry wouild have been performed to assess for azotaemia
Follow-Up
Although initially haematuria was still present, this was to be expected with the
degree of cystitis noted at surgery. The haematuria gradually reduced and resolved
over 2 weeks. The dysuria and pollakiuria stopped within 2 days of surgery.
         
· Size = 3.4 x 3.3 x 3.2 mm
· Weight = 0.05 g
· Composition = 100% calcium carbonate.
0
2
Figure 6.3
Urolith removed via cystotomy (cm scale).
Prevention
The previous diet of the chinchilla was assessed, and modified slightly to reduce the
mineral content. Timothy hay is a good quality grass-based hay that is relatively low
in calcium, and should form the majority of the animal's diet. Significantly, the owner
was advised to provide the chinchilla with non-mineral water, as this was thought to
be a potential predisposing factor in the formation of the urolith.
Prognosis
The chinchilla fared well after surgery. However, it is not possible to completely
remove minerals from the animal's diet and there is a risk of recurrence of the
urolithiasis.
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank the imaging and surgical departments at the Royal (Dick) School
of Veterinary Studies for their assistance with this case, in particular Regine Hagen
for ultrasonography and Donald Yool for surgical expertise.
7
Cheilitis in a guinea pig
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Crusting on the lips in a guinea pig.
Introduction
     r       s 
stressors. Careful attention should be paid to husbandry conditions both to reduce
various diseases and also to optimize the environment during recovery.
BOX 7.1 Ecology of guinea pigs
· Originally from the Andes, guinea pigs are domesticated descendants of wild cavies. Therefore they
do not exist naturally in the wild
· Normal habitat of cavies: grassy plains. Seek shelter in burrows, crevices or tunnels in vegetation.
Crepuscular activity
· Social groups, usually consisting of several sows, one boar and offspring. Communicate primarily
using vocalization
· Susceptible to heat stress
· Average weight: 0.7-1.2 kg
· Length: 20-25 cm
· Free-ranging diet: predominantly grasses. Perform caecotrophy
young. Pelvic symphysis usually fuses at 9-12 months of age in the female, and dystocia is likely if
the initial pregnancy occurs after this
( ti d    s sa    a 
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
 A 15-month-old female entire guinea pig (Cavia porcellus) presented with crusting around the lips
(cheilitis) and reduced appetite.
Husbandry
   -   -      s   
 s m  a s   n  m  
animals were moved to an indoor enclosure to protect them from inclement weather.
They had sawdust as the substrate in the main enclosure, with some straw in the
bedding area.
They were fed on hay and proprietary guinea pig concentrate pellets, along with
offered in a water bottle. No specific vitamin C supplement was given.
Case History
The guinea pig presented in the autumn (late September). Both guinea pigs had been
seen 4 months previously with ectoparasites (lice), which had been treated with
topical application of fipronil, off licence. For the week prior to the current
presentation, the owner had noticed crusts around the lips of this guinea pig. The
lesions appeared to wax and wane. Her appetite was slightly reduced.
Clinical Examination
The guinea pig (Fig. 7.1) was examined with the following findings:
· Good body condition, weighing 724 g
· Auscultation of chest and abdominal palpation revealed no abnormalities
· Skeleto-muscular assessment - no sign of lameness or limb discomfort
· General coat condition good, with no evidence of the previous ectoparasites
. Crusting around lips, particularly at commissures.
Figure 7.1
Guinea pig on presentation with crusting around lips.
The companion animal had some lesions, but these were much less severe.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSES
The differential causes for these crusting lesions were:
· Secondary to a diet of abrasive and acidic food
• Bacterial infection, which may be primary or secondary
• Fungal infection: dermatophytosis mostly affects the nose, face and ears, and results in alopecia and
scaling. Other fungal infections, such as Cryptococcus neoformans, Candida albicans and Malassezia
 ovale, may result in ulcerative dermatitis
· Poxvirus
• Nutritional deficiency, for example hypovitaminosis C
· Ectoparasite lesions are common: sarcoptic mange (Trixacarus caviae) lesions are usually over the
 dorsal neck and thorax, but may become disseminated. Demodex caviae typically results in lesions on
the head, forelegs and trunk. The fur mite Chirodiscoides caviae usually affects the dorsum
· Stress, such as old age, concurrent disease or hypovitaminosis C, may affect skin and coat condition
* Neoplasia (not common at this site in guinea pigs)
· Trauma, such as from the animal's enclosure, resulting in cuts that scabbed over during healing.
Case Work-Up
The initial diagnosis was based on clinical signs, although this did not identify the
aetiology of the lesions. The lesions were cleaned with dilute chlorhexidine (Fig. 7.2).
This revealed inflammation around the lips. Ulceration was present at the
commissures of the mouith.
Figure 7.2
Guinea pig after cleaning crusts with dilute chlorhexidine.
Diagnosis
The guinea pig was suffering from cheilitis.
Anatomy and Physiology Refresher
The oral cavity is small in guinea pigs, with a small rostral opening. The labio-nasal
sulcus (or philtrum) allows the upper lip to be mobile between left and right, aiding
food prehension. The lower lip is not divided.
Guinea pigs have an absolute requirement - as do primates - for daily vitamin C as
they lack the enzyme -gluconolactone oxidase, which is involved in vitamin C
synthesis from glucose (see Box 7.2). Adult guinea pigs require 10 mg vitamin C/kg
BOX 7.2 Hypovitaminosis C (scurvy) in guinea pigs
 Although most proprietary foods for guinea pigs are manufactured to contain vitamin C, it is
rapidly degraded (particularly if improperly stored, e.g. > 22*C) and the diet fed may be deficient.
Fresh vegetables, particularly leafy greens, peppers, broccoli and tomatoes, are a good source of
 a c n  Aq As 'sid a   a ndns  ase si n  
water (at 1 g vitamin C per litre of water). The vitamin is degraded (oxidized) by contact with metal,
 so should not be offered in a metal water bowl. Oxidization will also occur rapidly in direct sunlight
or if organic material is present (such as dirt in the water). The supplemented water should therefore
be changed daily.
· Vitamin C is required throughout the body for the formation of collagen, and a deficiency rapidly
(within 4 days) results in pathology. The epiphyseal region of long bones and the costochondral
junctions may appear enlarged on radiographs. A reduction in blood vessel integrity may result in
haemorrhage, e.g. into joints - particularly the stifles - skeletal muscle, gingivae, intestine and
 subcutaneous tissues.
· Clinical signs of hypovitaminosis C in guinea pigs include anorexia, hypersalivation, lameness or a
 stiff gait or paresis, unkempt coat, and lethargy. Because of joint pain, animals may vocalize when
handled. Swellings at costochondral junctions and joints may be palpated. Pathological fractures may
occur. Immunosuppression may result in diarrhoea, oculo-nasal discharge, and bacterial infections.
Aetiopathogenesis of Cheilitis
The differentials for causing this condition are listed above. Damage to the
integument locally results in ulceration and exudates, and thence crust formation.
Inflammation will be present.
Epidemiology
Owing to common aetiologies of this condition involving either husbandry and/or
infectious agents, in general, animals housed together in the same conditions will all
develop cheilitis. However, it may be that one animal is more susceptible than others -
as noted in this instance - and shows more severe lesions.
Treatment
Conservative
Initially, conservative treatment was instigated. The owner was advised to supplement
dietary vitamin C by adding it to drinking water daily, at an increased dose of 50-100
mg/kg/d. The lesions were cleaned with dilute antiseptic (chlorhexidine) daily.
Medication
At the revisit 1 week later, the cheilitis had improved a little. The nasal planum was
clear - although a mild inflammation was still present - but the lips were still affected
mg/kg PO BID) and an anti-inflammatory (meloxicam at 0.3 mg/kg PO SID) were
given at this point.
Treatment Options
For some cases, it can be useful to apply water-resistant muco-protectant ointments
(such as petroleum jelly). If lesions are severe and appetite is reduced due to
discomfort, analgesia may be required until the condition has healed.
NURSING ASPECTS
· If the guinea pig does not eat readily soon after recovering from anaesthesia, assist-feeding is
advisable to reduce the occurrence of ileus. This should be continued until the appetite is more
a on nnd a nn o A s no Aaa e b 'r
· If faecal output is reduced, prokinetics such as metoclopramide should also be administered (0.5
mg/kg PO or SC q12hr).
CLINICAL TIP
Although many guinea pigs with cheilitis do not appear to be in major discomfort - with no effect
on appetite - some may become anorexic. Analgesia in the form of NSAIDs, such as meloxicam (0.3-
0.6 mg/kg PO or SC q24hr) is useful for these cases.
Follow-Up
         
intermittent increases in severity - and major crusts recurred 2 months later. At this
point, it was decided to investigate further in an attempt to identify the aetiology of
the lesions.
Biopsies
After a pre-medicant injection of buprenorphine (0.05 mg/kg SC), the guinea pig was
anaesthetized with sevoflurane - using a chamber for induction and a small facemask
for maintenance of anaesthesia. Incisional biopsies were taken from the lesions on the
lips and philtrum. Samples of the crusts were also taken for bacterial and fungal
culture.
The lesions resolved with topical cleaning, systemic antibiotic therapy and
improved husbandry.
PERIOPERATIVE CARE
· Pre-emptive analgesia was provided by the buprenorphine pre-medication. Meloxicam was also
 administered in the perioperative period.
· Metoclopramide (0.5 mg/kg SC) was given to stimulate gastrointestinal motility, and reduce the risk
of ileus.
· The guinea pig was syringe-fed on recovery from anaesthesia (again to reduce the risk of post-
anaesthetic ileus).
Diagnostic Results
The histological diagnosis was of dermatitis with both bacterial and fungal elements
identified. Colonies of bacteria were seen, and suspected to be the most likely
aetiological agent. There was no evidence of an immune-based reaction or viral
aetiology.
S           
antibiotics, including sulphonamide co-trimoxazole.
Prevention
Husbandry conditions should be optimized, including provision of sufficient vitamin
C in the diet. Good hygiene in the enclosure - including food and water containers -
will reduce the risk of infection. New animals should be quarantined for a period,
enabling monitoring for disease before mixing with others.
Prognosis
This condition is usually not life-threatening, although it may be extremely
uncomfortable for the individual animal. In many cases, lesions are self-limiting and
no treatment is required. If stressors are involved, these may predispose to other
conditions or make the animal susceptible to more serious infections
8
Skin neoplasia in a hamster
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Skin lesion in a Syrian hamster.
Introduction
Historically, owners of small rodents have been reluctant to consult veterinary
clinicians for treatment of illnesses in their pets. However, there is often a close bond
between owner and pet, particularly if a child is the predominant carer, and the
veterinary clinician will now regularly be called upon to treat these animals. It is
important to provide an attentive and professional service, as this is an opportunity to
imprint the importance of animal welfare and veterinary care of pets in the child's
formative years.
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
An 18-month-old male Syrian hamster (Mesocricetus auratus) (see Box 8.1) presented as a second
opinion case with a non-healing lesion on the lateral body wall.
BOX 8.1  Ecology of Syrian hamsters
· Hamsters are members of the Muridae family, with 12 species of hamster in the sub-family
Cricetinae
· Syrian hamsters are also known as golden hamsters
 Range in the wild: small area of north-western Syria. Classified as Endangered (at risk of
extinction) by the IUCN
· Normal habitat: arid or semi-arid areas, from rocky mountain slopes and steppe to cultivated
fields. Nocturnal/crepuscular (more nocturnal in captivity). Excavate a burrow < 2 m long
( e  n 1 ) S  sm s  Anto -
· Average weight: 100-125 g
• Length: 13-13.5 cm, tail 1.5 cm
· Free-ranging diet: herbivorous - mainly seeds and nuts. Sometimes take insects such as ants, flies,
cockroaches and wasps. Perform caecotrophy
· Reproduction: hamsters become sexually mature soon after weaning, between 56 and 70 days old.
Male and female meet briefly to copulate. Usually breed only once annually in the wild (although
can breed year round in captivity). Gestation 15-18 days. Litter of 8-10 pups on average (can be
up to 20) Altricial young, being born hairless and blind, are cared for by the female. Weaned
around 3 weeks of age
· Longevity: 2-3 years
· Hibernate if environmental temperature < 5*C
• Use incisors and fore-feet for self-grooming
· Use scent glands to mark territory
· Can hoard up to half the animal's body weight in food within the cheek pouches
· Extensively used in research, particularly using the cheek pouches that are immunologically
privileged sites.
Husbandry
The hamster was housed in a commercial hamster cage approximately 80 X 40 x 30
cm, comprising coated metal bars with a plastic base and tubing. A running wheel
was provided. Newspaper covered the floor of the cage, with shredded paper as a
burrowing substrate. The plastic hide contained cloth-based nesting material. The
hamster used a glass jar on its side - containing soiled bedding - as a latrine. The
hamster was handled daily, with extra exercise in a plastic hamster exercise ball twice
a week. There were no other pets in the houisehold.
A commercial rodent mix was provided as the main proportion of the diet. Small
amounts of fresh fruit and vegetables - including apple and broccoli - were offered
from time to time. Water was provided in a sipper bottle. Fresh food and water were
provided daily, and the cage was cleaned out once a week.
NURSING ASPECT
·• Do not use cotton wool or synthetic fibres as nesting material for hamsters. The fibres may wrap
around limbs, causing constrictions, or become impacted in cheek pouches.
Case History
      od s   sd sa s s
possession for 15 months. The owner noticed a mass on the hamster's flank 1 month
before presentation. The hamster had been seen by another veterinary clinician for
treatment, but no improvement was seen after a course of enrofloxacin.
 No previous history of medical problems
· Hamster bright, active and eating well. Normal urine and faeces passed
S            s e
but it had increased in size since noted and the surface had become irregular and
moist. No pruritus noted.
Clinical Examination
       s   s
possible. Findings included:
· Good body condition, weighing 110 g
· Incisors normal length and shape
 No sign of respiratory disease - no oculo-nasal discharges, and thoracic auscultation
(using an infant-size stethoscope) was unremarkable
· No abnormalities detected on abdominal palpation
· Locomotion normal
· Single large (approximately 2 cm diameter) flattened ulcerated skin mass on left
body wall (Fig. 8.1). Not palpably extending into tissues underlying the skin.
Figure 8.1
Large ulcerated mass on the Syrian hamster's flank.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSES
The differentials for the skin lesion were:
· Infection: bacterial, fungal (typically dermatophytosis will produce dry lesions), viral
• Neoplasia: benign or malignant. Hamster polyomavirus infection may result in skin tumours
· Trauma: resulting in wounds, often become secondarily infected resulting in pyoderma and
abscessation
· Sebaceous scent glands: which may become inflamed after rubbing on abrasive cage equipment or
if housed on wood shavings
· Ectoparasites: pruritus is rare but may result in self-trauma and open lesions that are susceptible to
 secondary bacterial infection
· Contact dermatitis: from cedar or pine wood shavings. A granulomatous inflammatory response may
occur (usually on the face or feet).
Case Work-Up
The non-healing nature of the lesion - despite broad-spectrum antibiosis - was
suspicious for neoplasia. However, infection unresponsive to the antibiotic used
(enrofloxacin) was also possible.
General anaesthesia
Anaesthesia was induced using isoflurane in an induction chamber (Fig. 8.2) and
maintained via a small facemask. Surgical depth was monitored using the toe pinch
reflex. Respiratory rate and depth, and heart rate and rhythm were also monitored
using a stethoscope during anaesthesia.
Figure8.2
 Induction of general anaesthesia in a chamber.
Radiography
Lateral (Fig. 8.3a) and ventro-dorsal (Fig. 8.3b) body radiographs were taken to assess
for the presence of systemic disease. No abnormalities were detected.
(a)
(b)
Figure 8.3
 Positioning for (a) lateral and (b) ventro-dorsal radiographs of the hamster
Abdominal ultrasound may have been used to detect visceral metastases or other
pathology. This would require a high-frequency probe owing to the small size of the
patient; a stand-off may also be useful in this instance.
An impression smear from the mass could have been examined cytologically.
Equally, cuilture could have been performed from a superficial swab of the moist area.
Diagnosis
Skin neoplasia (see details below in Laboratory investigations).
Anatomy and Physiology Refresher
S           s     
The flank glands are situated in the costo-vertebral region. They comprise sebaceous
glands, short sparse hairs and pigment cells. The gland size and pigmentation
increases with age, particularly in males.
Aetiopathogenesis of Skin Neoplasia
Neoplasms of the skin can be associated with viral agents or may occur
spontaneously.
Hamster polyomavirus (HaPV) may result in a subclinical infection in some
animals. In other cases, cutaneous neoplasms - epithelioma or trichoepithelioma - or
multicentric lymphoma may result. In colonies with endemic infection, cutaneous
lymphocytes are the neoplastic cells involved. The lesions are wart-like, but may
debilitating.
Melanomas (melanotic or amelanotic) and melanocytomas are often found on the
widely. Epitheliotropic lymphoma results in pruritus and exfoliative erythroderma.
Systemic illness results in lethargy, anorexia and weight loss.
Epidemiology
Melanomas and melanocytomas are the most common skin neoplasms in hamsters.
Males appear to have a higher incidence of these neoplasms. Epitheliotropic
lymphoma is the second most common skin neoplasm. Less common neoplasias
include carcinoma and pilomatrixoma.
The hamster polyomavirus is spread in urine, is highly resistant to disinfection, and
epizootics cause high mortality.
Treatment
Anaesthesia
This was performed as for the investigation above.
Surgery
A large area of skin was clipped around the lesion and prepared for surgery. It is
evaporation is a risk. The mass was excised using an elliptical incision. The mass did
not grossly extend into the underlying muscle layer, and the skin and subcutaneous
layers only were removed. The wound was closed in two layers using polyglecaprone
25, with a continuous pattern (3/0 USP, 3 metric) in the subcutaneous layer and an
intradermal pattern (4/0 USP, 2 metric) in the skin (Fig. 8.4).
Figure 8.4
Postoperative photograph showing intradermal suture closure of the skin.
Perioperative supportive care
 pi      o n   d sa 
hours perioperatively) and meloxicam (at 0.6 mg/kg SC at the time of surgery). The
check that he was eating. During this period (lasting a couple of hours) the patient
was houised in an incubator lintil he was moving arouind well.
Laboratory investigations
The mass was submitted for culture and histology. A poorly differentiated carcinoma
was diagnosed. Staphylococcus intermedius was cultured, thought to be a secondary
infection in the ulcerated tumour.
CLINICAL TIPS
· It is important to closely monitor rodents after surgery.
· They will often chew sutures and open wounds. Appropriate choice of suture pattern (usually
intradermal) in the skin and analgesia will reduce this problem. In some cases, mild sedation can be
given for a short period.
· To avoid hypoglycaemia, it is vital that small animals begin eating soon after recovery from
 anaesthesia. Assist-feeding should be provided if necessary.
· To avoid hypothermia, recovery is best performed in an incubator. A heat mat or other
supplemental heating should also be provided during surgery.
Treatment Options and Management
Medication
Analgesia was continued using meloxicam (0.3 mg/kg PO q24hr for 5 days after
surgery).
Husbandry
The hamster was bedded on newspaper with a small amount of soft shredded paper
(kitchen towel) for 1 week after surgery, to prevent irritation of the wound. In order to
minimize the risk of wound dehiscence during this period, handling was restricted
and exercise reduced (by removing the exercise wheel and avoiding use of the exercise
ball).
Other Treatment Options
Surgery
If local infiltration of neoplasia occurs, more extensive surgery may be required. With
small animals such as rodents, the clinician should carefully gauge any stresses,
possible side-effects (such as wound dehiscence after self-trauma), and the animal's
P           i
when performing intricate surgery on small patients.
Supportive care
If the hamster had not started to self-feed shortly after surgery, assist-feeding would
have been performed (using baby food). In some cases, analgesia may be required for
Follow-Up
The hamster recovered well from surgery, and was self-feeding within 2 hours. No
self-trauma was observed following surgery or after ceasing opioid analgesia. The
patient was discharged the following day.
Reassessment 10 days after surgery showed the skin wound to be healing well.
Although slightly subdued for 2 days after surgery, the hamster had been behaving
normally during the previous week.
Prevention
In cases of neoplasia due to viral infection, biosecurity and isolation from other
hamsters will prevent disease.
Prognosis
Histology showed clear margins around the tumour. However, a guarded prognosis
was given with this malignant tumour and the owner advised to monitor closely for
recuirrence.
Section 2
Birds
9
Birds - an introduction
Introduction
Birds such as parrots and canaries have been kept as pets for many centuries, for their
beauty, song and mimicry. Raptors are more usually kept for hunting. It is impossible
to provide details of all species (there are around 10 0oo), but the rudimentary
principles of captive avian husbandry will be covered. This chapter will also outline
clinical assessment and elementary investigations.
Taxonomy
Taxonomic classification of birds in the superorder Neognathae is given in Table 9.1.
Table 9.1 Taxonomic classification of birds in the superorder Neognathae*
Order
Types ofbird
Family
Subfamily
Species examples
Columbiformes
Pigeons
Columbidae
Rock dove, feral pigeon or racing pigeon (Cokumba livia)
Falconiformes
s
Cathartidae
New World vultures, e.g. black vulture (Cathartes atratus)
hawks,
Sagittaridae
Secretary bird (Sagittanius serpentarlus)
eagles, and
Pandionidae
Osprey (Pandion haliaetus)
falcons
Falconidae
Falcons, e.g. common kestrel (Fakco tinnuncukus), peregrine
falcon (F. peregrinus)
Accipitridae
golden eagle (Aquwa chrysaetos), red kite (Miwus mivus)
Passeriformes
Passerines
82families
e.g.hill mynah (Gracula religiosa), canary (Seninus canania),
zebra finch (Poephila guttata)
Psittaciformes
Parrots
Psittacidae
Psittacinae
True parrots, e.g. blue-and-yellow macaw (Ara ararauna),
budgerigar (Melopsittacus undulatus), African grey parrot
(Psittacus erithacus), rosy-faced lovebird (Agapornis rose/coMs)
Lorinae
Lories and lorikeets,e.g.rainbow lorikeet(Trichogkossus
haematodus)
Nestorinae
Keas
Strigopinae
Owlparrot
Cacatuinae
Cockatoos, e.g. sulphur-crested cockatoo (Cacatua galenita),
galah or rose-breasted cockatoo (Eokophus roseicapllus)
Nymphicinae
Cockatiel (Nymph/cus ho/landicus)
Micropsittinae
Fig and pygmy parrots
Strigifomes
Owls
Strigidae
Eagle owl (Bubo bubo), snowy owl (Nyctea scandliaca)
Tytonidae
Barn and bay owls, e.g. barn ow (Tyto a/ba)
The other taxonomic superorder of birds is the Palaeognathae, which includes ratites such as ostriches and emus.
Biology
Basic  internal  anatomy  for  birds-including
 gastrointestinal,
respiratory
and
cardiovascular - is given in Figs 9.1-9.3.
Oesophagus
Trachea
Crop
Lung
Heart
Spleen
Liver-
Proventriculus
Kidney
Ventriculus
Pancreas
Intestines
Duodenum
Cloaca
Figure 9.1
Ventro-dorsal view of internal organs.
Oesophagus
Lungs
Spleen
GonadKidney
Trachea
-Vent
Cloaca
Crop
Intestines
Aorta
Ventriculus
Pulmonary
artery
Heart
Proventriculus Liver Pancreas
dooleuapona
Figure 9.2
 Lateral view of internal organs.
Nares (into
Infraorbital
sinus
nasal cavity)
Pneumatized
humerus
Glottis
Lung
Air sacs
Cranialthoracic
Choana
Caudal thoracic
Trachea
Abdominal
Cervical
air sac
Clavicular
air sac
Kee
Figure 9.3
Air sacs in birds.
Psittaciformes
African grey parrot (Psittacus erithacus)
These parrots originate from sub-Saharan Africa, and are commonly seen as pet birds.
They often respond to attention and stimulation by forming a close bond with owners.
Cages marketed for parrots are often too small for anything more than temporary
accommodation at night. Ideally, an outdoor aviary should be provided to permit free
              
weather conditions. If an ouitdoor enclosure is not a viable option, exercise may be
provided in a secure room indoors. The enclosure should be made of non-toxic
materials, avoiding heavy metals such as zinc and lead, and sited away from souirces
of toxic fumes such as polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE, from heated non-stick cooking
materials).
Various perches should be provided in the enclosure, and toys added (and changed
regularly to retain interest). Parrots are sociable, and should be paired with a
conspecific if possible. If parrots are left alone, a radio can be switched on to provide
some stimulation. Full spectrum UV lighting should be provided for African greys
housed indoors, to help prevent behavioural problems and hypocalcaemia
  s  s        
these foodstuffs in captivity results in malnutrition due to differing energy
requirements (lower in captive animals). It is advisable to feed a proprietary pelleted
diet, supplemented with fresh fruits and vegetables (1o% of the diet), and some
sprouted pulses (Box 9.1). Grit may help with digestion. Vitamin and mineral
supplements may be additionally required, particularly for breeding birds (Box 9.2).
Fresh water should be provided in a bowl for drinking; many birds also appreciate a
shallow water container for bathing.
BOX 9.2 Hypocalcaemia
 This is extremely common in African grey parrots. It is often associated with malnutrition and a
 lack of access to UV light. Clinical signs typically include ataxia and seizures.
BOX 9.1 Toxic foods for parrots
These include avocado, caffeine (in tea or coffee), alcohol, chocolate and salty foods.
Budgerigar (Melopsittacus undulatus) and cockatiel (Nymphicus hollandicus)
These two species both originate from Australia. Budgies congregate in large flocks
over semi-arid plains. Cockatiels are small members of the cockatoo family, and are
also a social species.
In captivity, both are ideally housed in an outdoor aviary enabling flight. It should
be made of strong wire mesh, with a sheltered sleeping area. As with all outdoor
enclosures, construction should be solid to prevent predator access, and a double entry
door is advisable to prevent escapes. If housed indoors, accommodation should permit
exercise through daily flight. Perches and toys are provided as for other parrots.
Adult male budgerigars of most colour varieties have a blue cere while adult females
have a pink/brown cere. Adult male cockatiels have bright red/orange cheek patches.
and females retain horizontal bars on their tails; some features of sexual dimorphism
will not be visible in certain varieties (such as cheek patches in the lutino).
Captive diets may include small seed mixes, although commercial formulated pellets
are better balanced. Fresh green food (e.g. chickweed, dandelion or lettuce leaves),
small amounts of fruit, and cuttlefish bone should be provided. Vitamin and mineral
supplementation is advised if the bird is on a seed diet (Box 9.3).
BOX 9.3 1odine deficiency
 This is common in budgerigars fed on all seed diets, resulting in thyroid pathology. Providing an
iodine supplement, e.g. an iodine block, prevents the condition.
Blue-and-yellow macaw (Ara ararauna)
This bird originates from South and Central America. Its large size (up to 1.3 kg in
weight) means accommodation should also be spacious. Providing there is sufficient
interaction, macaws will bond closely to their owners. Dietary requirements are
similar to the African grey parrot.
Passeriformes
Canary (Serinus canaria)
These small birds (10-40 g) originated from the Canary Islands. Housing is similar to
budgerigars.
Free-ranging individuals eat various seeds. Captive diets should avoid larger fatty
        s   
mineral supplementation is necessary with seed diets. Balanced proprietary pelleted
diets are available. Fresh green food, small amounts of fruit, cuttlefish, and grit (to aid
digestion and provide minerals) shouild also be offered.
Zebra finch (Poephila guttata)
This small (10-20 g) bird originates in Australia. The species breeds readily in
captivity and many colour forms exist. Free-ranging birds eat grass seeds, and
individuals in captivity often receive a mainly seed-based diet, although extruded
pellets provide a more balanced diet.
Greater hill mynah (Gracuila religiosa)
This bird is a member of the starling family, and originates from the hill regions of
South Asia. It is medium-sized, with a body weight of 180-250 g. This species is a
good mimic and therefore a popular pet.
insectivore diets are available, and fruit can be added to this. The species is susceptible
to iron overload disorders (haemochromatosis). Citrus fruits should be fed at a
different time to foods high in iron (e.g. meat-based products), as vitamin C increases
iron uptake.
Falconiformes
This order includes hawks, falcons, eagles and vultures. These species are chiefly
diurnal. Most are solitary except during the breeding season, although Harris' hawks
        ( )
demonstration flying, clearing airfields and rubbish dumps of other birds, pest control
and breeding for conservation or commercial reasons.
Birds are either kept tethered or housed in an aviary (Box 9.4). Tethered birds are
attached to a perch by a leash (Box 9.5) during the flying season (typically winter for
hunting and summer for birds used in public demonstrations), and normally moved to
an aviary during the close season for moulting. Some birds may be free-lofted' (being
housed in and flown from aviaries), in particular vultures that may find tethering
         a    si
should be hygienically maintained to reduce the risk of disease.
BOX 9.4 Perches for raptors
· Bow perches are used for hawks, buzzards and eagles.
· Falcons are maintained on block perches.
BOX 9.5 Falconry equipment
· Jesses: leather thongs around tibiotarsi for restraint (Fig. 9.4)
· Aylmeri: popular type of jess, bracelet joined by riveted brass ring
· Swivel: rotating metal joint between jesses and leash
· Leash: attaches between swivel and perch or gauntlet
· Gauntlet: leather glove worn on falconer's left hand (or right hand if left-handed)
· Hood: a close-fitting leather cap, blindfolds and calms birds
· Lure: imitation bird on a line, used to exercise and train falcons.
Figure 9.4
 Falconry equipment on the legs of a peregrine-saker hybrid. Aylmeri wrap around the
tibiotarsus, to which jesses are attached.
Although all are carnivorous, the food eaten depends on the species (and may
include vertebrates, invertebrates and carrion). Falconiformes have a crop, and cast
(regurgitate) indigestible material including fur and feathers. Water should be
provided, usually in a large shallow bowl that permits drinking and bathing. Sexual
dimorphism may be obvious, with differences seen in size (e.g. peregrine males are
smaller), colour and markings (e.g. common kestrels).
Harris' hawk (Parabuteo unicinctus)
This species comes from the southern USA, and Central and South America. Harris'
hawks are commonly kept for hunting owing to their social hunting behaviour. Males
may reach 880 g and females 1.2 kg.
Strigiformes
This order includes owl species, which are, for the most part, nocturnal. Owls are
solitary or form loose pairs, except during the breeding season. Flying is limited with
owls, and most captive birds are maintained for personal pleasure or line' breeding of
colour variants. Owls are usually ‘free-lofted', as in general they find tethering
stressful.
These carnivorous birds are usually fed once daily (as are falconiformes). They do
not possess a crop, and, as bones are not digested, cast material includes fur, feathers
and bones from prey. Sexual dimorphism is slight in the main, although obvious in
some species such as the snowy owl (Fig. 9.5).
(b)
Figure 9.5
Snowy owl. (a) The female has brown flecks on her ventral feathers whereas (b) the
male is white.
Barn owl (Tyto alba)
This species is distributed worldwide (aside from polar and desert regions), with
several subspecies identified. Females of the European subspecies (Tyto alba alba)
usually have more spotting over ventral feathers than the male, whose underparts are
white. They feed predominantly on small vertebrates, particularly rodents.
Eagle owl (Bubo bubo)
This large bird may reach 3 kg (males) to 4.2 kg (females). They originate from
Eurasia. Prey items in the wild include animals up to 1o kg, including foxes and
young deer.
Colum biformes
Racing pigeon (Columba livia)
livia) from Asia and the Mediterranean. Pigeons may be kept for several reasons -
exhibition, racing, performance flying, or for meat. The racing season in central
Europe generally runs from April until September.
Most commonly, pigeons are group-housed in lofts, usually with facilities to
(including temperature, humidity and ventilation) in lofts are paramount to good
health of the birds. As with other bird accommodation, good hygiene should be
maintained by regular cleaning and disinfection.
Dietary requirements vary depending on the use of the pigeon and season, for
example differing between rearing, racing, moulting and resting periods. Proprietary
mixes are available, as are nutritional supplements.
History
Although a full clinical examination is possible on most medium-to large-sized birds,
it is still important to take a full history (see Box 9.6). Husbandry changes or
inadequacies commonly contribute to disease. In addition, companion birds are often
BOX 9.6 Suggested topics to cover during history taking for birds
· Species
·Age
· Gender
· Source, e.g. petshop or breeder, imported, captive-bred or wild-caught, relevant paperwork (e.g.
CITES)
· Period in owner's possession (if this is relatively short, husbandry details from the previous carer
may be important)
· Reproductive history
 Housing (cage/room/flight/aviary): size, construction materials, location, substrate, cleaning
regime, indoors/outdoors, free flight
· Exposure to potential toxins, e.g. cigarette smoke, household chemicals
· UV-B access: either exposure to sunlight or the use of UV bulbs, including when the bulbs were last
changed. (UV meters may be used to assess UV output in older bulbs or tubes, as visible light is still
· Day to night cycle, use of black-out' cover at night
· Presence of nest boxes/nest material
• Perches: number, material and size
· Toys: description, rotation or continuous presence in enclosure
· Diet: what food is offered (including supplements) and what is eaten, frequency of feeding
· Water provision: for drinking (any supplements), bathing/spraying (to encourage preening. any
'tonics' in the water), and swimming (in waterbirds)
· Moulting: frequency, date of last moult, any problems noted
· Wing clip (current or previous)
· Handling frequency and any training given
• Previous medical history (including any treatments)
· Current problem: time period, outline of clinical signs and progression noted by owner
· Current physiology: appetite and thirst; faecal, urine and urates output (including number/size,
frequency/volume and description)
 Question owner further about the pet's current health: any other clinical signs of disease or
changes in behaviour (these may be subtle until disease is severe)
• Companion animals in the same enclosure/airspace/indirect contact: any health problems (current
or previous).
For raptors, it is important to ask relevant questions pertinent to the bird's working
or training history. Some birds will be “free-lofted' in an open aviary, or tethered. If
tethered, the bird will wear ‘equipment' (usually leather) on its legs to attach to the
bow or block perch. The substrate of perches is very important for raptors as many
succumb to bumblefoot due to inappropriate or unhygienic substrate. Raptors will
produce a pellet ('cast') after feeding, containing indigestible material (feathers and
fur in Falconiformes, also bone in owls).
Clinical Examination
It is important to initially observe the bird without restraint if possible. While taking
the history, the patient's demeanour can be assessed. Look for any dyspnoea, or
obvious neurological or motor deficits (Box 9.7). Birds typically hide illness,
particularly prey species such as passerines and psittacines, and do not show clinical
      s      i ss
environment such as the veterinary clinic on first presentation. The patient may relax
after some time in the clinic, and begin to display clinical signs.
BOX 9.7 Psittacosis
· This zoonotic disease is common in pet parrots, and is caused by Chlamydophila psittaci.
· Clinical signs in birds can be vague, but often involve the respiratory system.
· Infection in humans (chlamydophilosis or ornithosis) usually causes flu-like symptoms, but may be
chronic and severe in immunocompromised individuals (including the young and elderly).
· New birds should be tested for infection. Usually a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is performed
on a pooled faecal sample to check for Chlamydophila antigen, although shedding is intermittent and
a negative result does not guarantee that the bird is free of infection. Positive birds may be re-
infected or the organism may re-activate after treatment.
· PPE (personal protective equipment) such as examination gloves, a facemask and goggles should be
worn in suspicious cases. Owners should be informed of the potential for human infection. Good
personal hygiene is important when dealing with any animal that may be carrying a zoonotic
infection.
 ean aa pos on a u sa e aise aq oi si siod sie Adan fe -
positive bird should be quarantined and treated separately. Doxycycline (e.g. 75 mg/kg IM q5d for
six doses, then q4d for three doses is suggested for many parrots) or enrofloxacin (e.g. 15 mg/kg IM
or PO ql2hr for 45 days) are the antibiotics of choice. Medication is ideally administered on an
individual bird basis, although chlortetracycline in food (2500-5000 mg/kg in feed for 45 days) may
be useful in large collections.
Small passerines and psittacines such as budgerigars may be grasped without any
 q  s si   s   pm dd  e  
its head between the clinician's first and second fingers, and the palm and thumb
surrounding the body to restrain the wings (Fig. 9.6a). Care should be taken not to put
excessive pressure around the thoracic region; restricting keel movement will also
restrict breathing (potentially fatally).
b
Figure9.6
 Handling birds. (a) Passerines and small psittacines may be restrained either with the
 naked hand or using a thin paper towel. Avoid putting excess pressure around the thoracic region that
may restrict breathing movements. (b) Medium or large psittacines should be restrained using a towel.
Ensure the beak is controlled. (c) Raptors should be cast using a towel. Ensure the feet are controlled.
It is useful to employ a towel to restrain larger psittacines such as Amazon parrots
             
handler to feel the bird and apply adequate (and not excessive) pressure, and, once
restrained, the bird may be distracted by allowing it to chew on a loose corner of
towel. Towels also hide the hand and reduce the risk of a “hand phobia' developing in
the pet parrot. The handler should beware of attack from the beak, since most parrots
are capable of inflicting deep and painful bites. The bird is approached from behind,
and the head restrained just below the mandible using an incomplete circle formed
   a            
examination, the handler grasps around the tarsometatarsal region to restrain the
feet. Although injury is possible from the claws, it is not usually serious from most
example to assess each wing.
   a     n  a sa 
examination may be performed while the bird is on the gauntlet. However, the bird
must be ^cast' using a towel to complete a fuill clinical examination (Fig. 9.6c). Raptors
will be quieter if they are hooded during casting, but the hood should be removed to
permit examination of the head. As with parrots, the bird is approached from behind.
The main difference with raptors is that, in general, the clinician should be aware of
  s            
eagles may cause injury to handlers). The towel is used to cover the wings to restrain
them, before the tarsometatarsal or tibiotarsal regions are grasped through the towel
to restrain the feet. After grasping, it is usually possible to restrain both feet with one
hand, while using the other hand to support the body against the handler's chest and
hold the towel edges loosely wrapped around the bird.
Birds may become warm during restraint, particularly if a towel is used. The
procedure should therefore be as brief as possible to prevent hyperthermia. Collect all
examination and sampling equipment prior to handling to minimize the time of the
procedure. In birds with obvious existing respiratory problems, it may be preferable to
chamber).
Investigation
Phlebotomy
Although venous access is usually possible in conscious birds, restraint for the
or sedate the bird to reduce the stresses of physical restraint. Avian blood vessels are
fragile and susceptible to laceration and subsequent haemorrhage; a small needle
(usually 25 gauge) is used and pressure is applied for a few minutes after the
procedure to ensuire haemostasis.
               
waterfowl); both of these are ideal sites for placement of intravenous catheters (Fig
9.8).
Figu1re9.7
Jugular phlebotomy in a green-winged macaw.
Figure9.8
 Intravenous catheter placed in the superficial plantar metatarsal vein of a male eclectus
parrot (Eclectus roratus).
Blood volume in a healthy bird is approximately 10% of body weight (i.e. 100
ml/kg). Up to 10% of the blood volume (i.e. 10 ml/kg, or 1 ml/100 g) may be sampled
at one time. In ill birds, the volume should be smaller, and it can be helpful to
maintain circulatory volume with replacement fluids after phlebotomy. For a
haematology and biochemistry panel, blood is usually collected into ethylenediamine
tetraacetic acid (EDTA) and heparin tubes, and a fresh smear prepared.
Haematological analysis may be performed on the heparin sample, which is useful if
only a very small volume is taken. Blood smears are used to assess for haemoparasites
as well as the morpholog of leucocytes. An estimated and differential white cell count
can also be performed on the smear.
Radiography
General anaesthesia is routinely used for restraint of birds during radiography.
taken. In these instances, the bird is placed on a perch in a radiolucent box and a
horizontal beam used to obtain a lateral radiograph. Obviously image quality will be
The most common radiographic views taken of birds are lateral and ventro-dorsal
images of the body. For the lateral view, the legs are pulled caudally so they do not
overlie the middle of the coelomic cavity. If the caudal coelomic cavity is the focus of
interest, the legs can be restrained more cranially in the lateral position. For the
ventro-dorsal view, the bird is placed in dorsal recuimbency with the wings extended
     s   s )  
caudally. The wings may be folded around each other (at the elbows and carpi) to
retain them in a dorsal position in many deeply anaesthetized birds, although this
  ans un s  p s a o anss o snd oo
anaesthetic becomes light and the bird struggles.
Care should be taken during any positioning that undue pressure is not placed on
any body parts that may result in injury (the wings are particularly susceptible to
damage). The preferred position of the anaesthetized bird for ease of breathing is
lateral recumbency, enabling ease of keel movement (that may be restricted in ventral
(that occurs during dorsal recumbency). Periods in other positions should be
minimized.
For examination of more peripheral body parts, adhesive paper tape is used to
osod o Apo a hons o isn aq Ae sequs
Sampling
Faecal analysis is frequently performed in birds. In all species, but particularly those
housed outdoors that may be exposed to faeces from wild birds, faecal examination
should be performed regularly to assess for endoparasites. Culture may be of interest in
cases of suspected gastrointestinal bacterial or fungal (yeast) infection. Some
gastrointestinal microflora; although results are very dependent on the bird's current
diet, this test can be a screening tool to investigate dysbiosis or yeast infections.
Other samples may be analysed microscopically. As with other species, impression
smears from lesions or fine needle aspirates (using ultrasound to guide the needle into
deeper lesions) may be assessed. Crop washes are regularly performed (using sterile
saline) to investigate upper gastrointestinal tract disease. Tracheal washes and bone
marrow aspirates may also be executed to obtain samples. Tissue samples are
frequently obtained via endoscopy or surgery, and submitted for culture or histology.
BOX 9.8 Endoscopy
· Endoscopy is an extremely useful tool in avian medicine.
• Many systems may be assessed, including:
· Both upper and lower gastrointestinal tracts
• Upper airways: often as far as the tracheal bifurcation and syrinx
· Lower airways: air sacs and the caudal lung regions can be assessed from the coelomic cavity
· Coelomic organs, such as the liver, serosal surfaces of the gastrointestinal tracts, pancreas,
kidneys and ureters, gonads and reproductive tract
 The cloaca, involving terminations from the gastrointestinal, reproductive and urinary tracts.
· General anaesthesia is usually required, in part to protect the equipment from trauma!
Treatment
Basic procedures
Drug administration
Topical ointments and creams are rarely used in birds, as they may damage the
plumage or be toxic if ingested.
The oral route is by far the easiest route to administer fluids or medication to birds
(Box 9.9). Some supplements or drugs may be taken in food or water, but many birds
will refuse such items owing to the difference in taste. For some pet birds, particularly
those that were reared on egg food, food (with or without drugs as appropriate)
offered on a spoon may be voluntarily taken. Small volumes may be syringed directly
into the oral cavity, taking care not to allow the bird to chew and ingest the tip of the
syringe.
BOX 9.9 Fluids
· Large volumes should be warmed prior to administration.
· Typical volumes administered by gavage are < 20 ml/kg.
  s s   s  s a  
 (  ss     s  s     )
advised. If a plastic tube is used, a gag should be used to hold the mouth open. An
assistant restrains the conscious bird while the clinician passes the tube caudo-
laterally in the oral cavity, avoiding the central glottis at the base of the tongue. The
tip of the tube is palpated in the crop or oesophagus at the base of the neck before the
medication is administered.
needle is inserted in the caudal third of the muscle, directed cranially. The plunger
should be withdrawn to ensure a blood vessel has not been inadvertently entered
before the medication is injected. In larger birds, the iliotibialis lateralis (not advised
for nephrotoxic agents due to the renal portal system Box 9.10) or biceps femoris
muscles may be used.
BOX 9.10 Renal portal system
· A dual afferent blood supply exists to the kidneys.
· As with mammals, the renal arteries (cranial, middle and caudal) supply the kidneys. Birds and
reptiles also possess a renal portal vein.
· The renal portal system may drain the drug directly to the kidneys when medication is injected into
  as o s id od ' s n q a po nd po a
significant renal metabolism are not injected in this region.
Although commonly employed in other species, the subcutaneous route is difficult
to use in birds. Avian skin is thin and there is a relatively small potential
subcutaneous space. Sites for injection (in order of preference) include the precrural
fold or inguinal region, the dorsal neck or interscapular areas, the lateral flank, over
the pectoral muscles, the axillary region, or in the propatagial skin fold of the wing.
The intracoelomic route is not used for fluid administration in birds (Box 9.11).
BOX 9.11 Warning
· Do not administer fluids by intracoelomic injection in birds. The air sacs fill most of the cavity
between organs, and injection of fluids will effectively drown the bird as the respiratory tract is
flooded.
· Small volumes of medication (such as antimicrobials for treating air sacculitis) may be deliberately
injected into the air sacs to provide local treatment.
In small birds venous access may be technically difficult, and the jugular vein is
litilized for intravenous injections. However, it is easier to maintain an intravenous
catheter in vessels such as the ulnar, brachial or superficial plantar metatarsal veins.
       s       
suture material to the skin; for the latter site, adhesive tape around the leg will secure
the catheter.
Injection of medications or fluid intraosseously is equivalent to entry to the
circulation via intravenous administration (Fig. 9.9). General anaesthesia is usually
    n     s  s
Commonly, the distal ulna or proximal tibiotarsal bones are uised. The joint is flexed
before a needle is inserted into the bone. A bung or administration set is attached
before securing the needle to the limb. Fluids or medication may be administered in
boluses or via CRI (continuous rate infusion).
Intravenous(jugular vein)
Subcutaneous
(dorsalneckorinterscapular)
Subcutaneous (propatagial fold)
Intraosseous (distal ulna)
Subcutaneous
Intravenous
(axilla)
(supericialulnar vein)
Intraosseous
(praximaltibiotarsus)
Intravenous
(superficial plantar
Subcutaneous
metatarsal vein)
Intramuscular
(precrural fold)
Figure 9.9
Injection sites in birds.
The respiratory tract may be entered by intratracheal administration (e.g. saline
ised for sampling from a tracheal wash) or nebulization. The latter is frequently
utilized to administer medications deep into the airways.
Assist-feeding
As described in the section above, some birds will take food offered in a spoon. For
others, gavage-feeding is the easiest route for providing nutritional support (Fig.
9.10). Avian convalescent diets are available, providing easily digestible sources of
nutrition. In general, adult crop capacity is approximately 3% of the bird's body
weight (e.g. 9 ml in a 300 g bird). Most will require 30-60 ml/kg per day, although
this should be altered depending on body condition, and weight loss or gain. The total
daily dose should be divided into three or four doses.
Cropfeedingtube
Palpate tip of
tube in crop
Figure 9.10
Gavage in birds.
A duodenostomy feeding tube may be placed in cases requiring more intensive
nutritional support, or an oesophagostomy tube used where chronic support is
envisaged. Care should be taken to prevent the patient from traumatizing the wound
or tube.
Anaesthesia
Pre-anaesthesia
It is imperative to make a judgement on whether the avian patient is sufficiently
healthy to undergo general anaesthesia. This judgement will be based on the animal's
history, clinical findings, and the clinician's experience. If in any doubt, ill birds not
requiring a  life-saving procedure under anaesthesia should be  stabilized before
anaesthesia is induced. Alternatively, consider whether the procedure could more
safely be completed under sedation and/or analgesia.
Severely dyspnoeic birds should be placed into an oxygenated chamber. Dehydrated
or collapsed birds may benefit from fluids (preferably intravenous or intraosseous, but
the oral or subcutaneous routes may be accessed with less stress). Those in poor body
condition may be hypoglycaemic or have other metabolic derangements that require
nutritional support.
Birds may regurgitate if they have food material or liquid in their crops. Fasting
periods vary between species and between individuals (as animals with a slowed
  e  s d    s   si 
anaesthesia is urgent, it may be emptied by suction before induction. Small birds
(< 100 g) should not be fasted due to the risks of hypoglycaemia; conversely raptors
are usually fasted for at least 12 hours (permitting egestion of casting material before
anaesthesia is induced).
Pre-medication
Typically, no pre-medication is administered before a short non-painful procedure
requiring anaesthesia in a bird (such as phlebotomy or radiography). However, there
are several reasons for pre-medicating certain cases. These include provision of
analgesia, sedation reducing the stresses of handling and induction, and lowering the
requirement of general anaesthetic agents (and thus their side-effects). Some of these
benefits will also result in a smoother recovery period.
It is usual to combine agents to produce a smooth sedation and provide analgesia. A
frequently used combination is butorphanol with midazolam (Table 9.2).
Table 9.2 Commonly used pre-medicants in birds
Dose
Drug
(mg/kg)
Route
Comment
Butorphanol
1.0-4.0IM,IVSedative,analgesic;
2-3 hours duration
Diazepam
0.2-0.5IM,V
Aqueous solution can
be administered IM
or IV;propylene
glycol solution is IV
only. Tranquillization
Midazolam
0.25-0.5IM,IV
Sedative, anti-anxiety
Ketamine
2.5-20
IM
Low doses used for
sedation
IM, intramuscular;IV,intravenous
Inhalation agents
Most birds are restrained in a towel for mask induction of anaesthesia using one of
the agents listed below (Table 9.3, Box 9.12). The mask should be close fitting to
reduce environmental contamination; where the mask is of an inappropriate size, an
examination glove may be placed over the end and a small hole incised to contain the
breaths) prior to introducing the anaesthetic agent. After induction, most avian
patients are easily intubated for maintenance on gaseous agents (Box 9.13).
Table 9.3 Gaseous anaesthetic agents used in birds
Concentration(%)
Drug
Induction
Maintenance
Comment
Isofl urane
4-5
2.5-3.0
Indu ction in
2-3minutes
Sevoflurane
7-8
Smoother
induction
of respiratory
tract irnitation
Note: Lower concentrations will be required if pre-medication
has been administered.
BOX 9.12 Halothane
· The use of halothane is contraindicated in birds due to the ease of overdosage.
 Side-effects include myocardial depression and sensitization to catecholamine-induced cardiac
arrhythmias.
 Cardiac and respiratory arrest are simultaneous with this agent.
BOX 9.13 Intubation in birds
 so o  ons  a) a    
continuous provision of gases (oxygen and anaesthetic agents) and permits ease of Ippv (intermittent
positive pressure ventilation). This is especially important if positioning of the patient compromises
keel movement or the air sacs are compressed.
• The glottis lies midline in the oral cavity at the base of the tongue. Tongue anatomy varies between
avian species, being large and fleshy in psittacines but long and thin in raptors.
· The tracheal lumen is relatively large in birds, e.g. a 3 mm endotracheal tube (ETT) may be used in
a 300 g parrot. Avian tracheal cartilage rings are complete, and so an uncuffed ETT should be used.
 Once placed, the ETT is secured to the lower beak using adhesive tape (Fig. 9.11).
· Since the diameter of the tracheal lumen narrows towards the syrinx, ETTs should not be advanced
too deeply. Damage to the trachea may result in stricture formation
Figure9.11
Anaesthetized Harris' hawk, intubated. Note the adhesive tape around the lower beak
to secure the endotracheal tube.
Injectable agents
Injectable anaesthetic agents are rarely used to anaesthetize birds in veterinary
clinics, although they still have some use for field anaesthesia. Some diving species
(such as ducks) may breath-hold during induction with gaseous agents, and injectable
anaesthetics (or pre-medication with sedative agents) may smooth anaesthetic
induction in these birds (Table 9.4).
Table 9.4 Commonly used injectable anaesthetic protocols in birds
Dose
Drug
(mg/kg)
Route
Species
Etomidate
1.0-2.0
IV
Use with a
benzodiazepine
Ketamine
50-100
IM
Safe, but rough
induction and
recovery if sole
Ketamine+
10-40+
SC,IM
Anaesthesia
midazolam
0.2-2.0
Propofol
<14
Induction,dose to
effect; can
administer
incremental
bolusestoprolong
anaesthesia.
IntubateandIPvV
IM, intramuscular; IV, intravenous; SC, subcutaneous.
Ketamine at high doses will safely produce anaesthesia, although induction and
recovery are rough and effects are variable in different species. Propofol may be used
to induce anaesthesia, although the resulting respiratory depression necessitates
anaesthesia. Some clinicians have used etomidate to anaesthetize critical patients.
Administration is intravenous and effects are short-lived. It must be combined with a
benzodiazepine to reduce tremors.
Monitoring anaesthesia
Unsurprisingly, the best pieces of monitoring equipment are the anaesthetist's eyes,
ears and fingers. Respiratory rate and depth can be directly visualized, heart rate and
membrane colour visualized (easiest on a section of everted vent), and capillary refill
time assessed by digital compression of mucous membranes.
Respiratory monitors modified for small patients may be lsed to assess respiratory
rate. Doppler probes or electrocardiograms permit hands-free monitoring of heart rate.
can be monitored indirectly using an inflatable paediatric cuff around the wing, a
sphygmomanometer and Doppler probe on the ulnar artery. Capnography may be used
to measure exhaled carbon dioxide, using side-stream sampling, although correlation
with arterial carbon dioxide levels may be poor particularly in small (<100 g)
      d      s
birds.
Peri-anaesthetic care
    s     s   s 
body temperature.  Insulating materials such as bubble-wrap are useful, and
supplemental heating (e.g. using heat pads or warm-air blankets) should be provided
prolonged, for example if injectable sedatives were used or the anaesthetic period has
been long, place the bird in an incubator after the procedure. Oxygen supplementation
Fluids are administered to most patients undergoing anaesthesia for longer than 20
minutes. A bolus of 1o-20 ml/kg is usually sufficient, but a CRI will be more
appropriate for longer procedures. If possible, blood pressure should be monitored
during anaesthesia and fluids administered to maintain circulatory pressure.
The time period without food should be minimized, particularly in small birds that
may succumb to hypoglycaemia after relatively short periods of fasting. If small birds
are not self-feeding within 1-2 hours, they should be assist-fed (e.g. by crop-gavage).
Analgesics should be given to patients undergoing a painful procedure or those with
any condition likely to cause discomfort. Agents used may include any or a
combination of opioids, local anaesthetics, and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
agents (NSAIDs). Butorphanol has been demonstrated in several species to be an
and bupivacaine may be administered concomitantly  (at 1 mg/kg of each
administered locally) to provide local anaesthesia. Meloxicam (at 0.2 mg/kg q24hr) is
a commonly utilized NSAID.
Surgery
Taper-point needles are preferred for most avian skin and soft tissues, while cutting
needles may be used in thicker skin (such as over the legs and feet) and tendons. Do
not use catgut, as a granulomatous reaction results. Polyglactin 910 also results in an
inflammatory response. Monofilament sutures are preferred, and polydioxanone
         s  
Birds rarely remove sutures, although the risk is increased if the wound is
lincomfortable (so provide analgesia as ouitlined above)
Magnification is recommended for avian surgery, as are microsurgical instruments.
Bipolar electrosurgery is extremely useful, for both incisions and haemostasis. The use
of retractors will improve visualization of the surgical field. Transparent drapes will
permit better visualization of the patient by the anaesthetist during surgery.
Routine approaches to the coelomic cavity in birds include left lateral, central
midline, flaps (extending the ventral midline incision with parasternal and/or
parapubic incisions), and the transverse abdominal approach. The surgeon should be
aware that respiratory changes will occur once the air sacs have been penetrated
            
anaesthesia.
Euuthanasia
For most birds, anaesthesia is induced with volatile agents before injecting an
overdose of barbiturates. If possible, pentobarbitone is injected intravenously. If this is
both these routes will result in carcase changes that may affect postmortem analysis).
10
Regurgitation in a cockatoo
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Regurgitation and haematochezia in a bare-eyed cockatoo (or little corella).
Introduction
   s     s      s
regardless of whether the disease process is acute or chronic. Supportive care is vital
            
investigation to diagnose the underlying condition.
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
A 15-year-old male little corella (Cacatua sanguinea) (Box 10.1) presented with acute onset
regurgitation, haematochezia/melena, lethargy and inappetence.
BOX 10.1  Ecology of cockatoos
· The bare-eyed cockatoo (also known as the little corella) belongs to the sub-family Cacatuinae,
the white cockatoos.
· They are native to Australia. In the wild, they congregate in flocks of up to several thousand
birds. They are diurnal, roosting overnight in trees and foraging in daylight. They chew bark off
the trees in which they perch.
 s e sa a  s p n sas  ss  a a 
the ground.
· Although experienced breeders may be able to differentiate sexes by size of head/body, they are
generally considered sexually monomorphic. As such, sex determination requires either DNA
sampling (from blood or feather pulp) or surgical sexing by endoscopy.
• In the wild, they may bathe in the rain (hanging upside down or flying around) or flutter in wet
leaves of trees.
· One individual was reported to have lived 46.9 years in captivity.
· Housing in captivity usually comprises either an aviary or a large cage with regular exercise in a
larger space such as a room.
· Diets offered to captive parrots are often seed-based, but this may lead to malnutrition. It is
usually more appropriate to base the diet on a formulated pellet feed with additional fresh fruit
and vegetables.
Husbandry
The cockatoo had been rescued by the current owner while still a juvenile. Historically
it had chronic feather damage associated with parental mutilation when a chick. The
diet was mainly seed-based but with fresh fruits added. The cockatoo was caged on its
own, but shared airspace with other parrots (there had been no new additions in the
previous 6 months).
Case History
On the day prior to presentation, the cockatoo regurgitated once. Frank blood had
been present in the faeces. On the day of examination, the faeces was almost black
(Box 10.2). The owner reported him to be lethargic and inappetent (Box 10.3).
BOX 10.2 Components of normal bird droppings
· Urine: clear liquid
· Urates: white/off-white insoluble, uric acid is the major nitrogenous waste in birds
· Faeces: colour and consistency will vary depending on species and diet fed, usually dark green or
brown.
BOX 10.3 When should you investigate an ill bird?
Many factors will assist with this decision.
· Client financial considerations are often important, although many pet birds are now insured.
· As prey species, parrots often conceal signs of illness until they are severely compromised. For this
reason, it is usually advisable to investigate any ill health and obtain a diagnosis to enable
appropriate treatment to commence as soon as possible.
· In some instances, the bird will be severely compromised (e.g. in collapsed individuals) and
supportive care should be given to stabilize the patient before further investigation. Excessive
handling (even for a thorough examination) in these birds may well result in more rapid demise than
if the pathology was permitted to run its course. Owners should be warned of the risks associated
with handling such individuals.
Clinical Examination
Some weight loss was noted since the previous examination (weighing 586 g.
(    )    s     
was slightly overgrown, although not sufficiently so as to result in difficulty
prehending food. Some ^clicks’ were auscultated over the ventral abdominal region but
as there was no evidence of dyspnoea it was suspected these related to organomegaly
rather than respiratory disease. As with many avian patients, it was difficult to assess
demeanour during the consultation - during this time the cockatoo appeared bright,
alert and responsive. After admittance and settling into the hospital, he did become
more quiet and lethargic.
CLINICAL TIPS
Assessment of bird demeanour
· If a client advises that their pet bird is quiet or subdued at home, believe them!
· It is in a bird's best interests to hide signs of illness, and many will rally to create a false
      n   s
· If possible, it is useful to visit the bird in its home environment to observe natural and relaxed
behaviour - this will give a truer impression of the bird's demeanour.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSES
Lethargy is a vague clinical sign and can be attributed to general ill health in a bird.
The differentials for vomiting or regurgitation are:
· Ingestion of irritants (e.g. certain houseplants) or rancid food
· Gastrointestinal infection (more likely upper tract): bacteria, fungal/yeast (e.g. candidiasis [Candida
albicans], megabacteriosis [Macrorhabdus ornithogaster]), protozoa (trichomoniasis)
· Diseases affecting gastrointestinal motility: toxicity (e.g. lead, zinc), proventricular dilatation
disease (PDD, caused by avian bornavirus)
• Foreign body in gastrointestinal tract (GIT), particularly upper GIT (crop or in oesophagus at
thoracic inlet)
· Other causes of gastrointestinal obstruction, e.g. neoplasia
• Acute metabolic disease, including causes of dehydration or polydipsia
· Renal failure
* Hepatopathy
· Pancreatitis
· Septicaemia
* Motion sickness
* Goitre (in budgerigars with iodine deficiency).
Blood in droppings may originate from urine, faeces, the reproductive tract or the cloaca.
Haematuria is produced in renal disease, commonly with toxicity or neoplasia; if seen transiently
after restraint, haematuria may relate to fragile blood vessels associated with hepatic or
gastrointestinal disease. If blood is present in the droppings separate from the faeces or urine, it
originates from either the reproductive tract or cloaca.
The differentials for blood in faeces (fresh or changed) mainly pertain to hepatic 
or
 gastrointestinal disease, and include:
· Severe bacterial or viral gastroenteritis
· Severe parasite infection: protozoa (e.g. Giardia), nematodes (unusual, more commonly seen in
birds in outside aviaries with contamination from wild birds)
· Heavy metal toxicity (lead, zinc) may result in frank blood or haemoglobinuria
· Coagulopathy, e.g. associated with hepatopathy
· Haemorrhage from gastrointestinal neoplasia, including papillomas (in South American psittacines
- diagnosed by cloacal examination)
• Intestinal haemorrhage associated with a foreign body, e.g. with necrosis or rupture
• Reproductive disease or cloacitis may cause haematochezia
 Blood in faeces may originate from meat products in the diet of some birds
 Melena is commonly seen in cases of advanced hepatic disease, gastrointestinal ulceration or
 starvation. Less common causes include gastric and hepatic adenocarcinoma or pancreatitis.
Case Work-Up
It is important to identify and correct the underlying cause of the clinical signs to
enable long-term trea tment.
Supportive care
In an acute episode where finances are of concern, it can be beneficial to offer nursing
care in the first instance. This will involve hospitalization in a warm environment, to
reduce the energy requirements of the ill bird. The use of incubators or brooders (Fig.
10.1) is recommended in this case, although the uise of an airing cupboard in the
owner's home will suffice if hospitalization is not possible.
TLC-4M
(al
(b)
Figure 10.1
Various (a) brooders and (b) incubators are available, providing a convenient way of
ensuring ill birds are maintained in a warm environment.
Fluids should be administered to replace fluids lost in regurgitation and also
maintenance requirements. Ideally, these should be administered parenterally
(SC/IV/IO [intraosseous]) to rehydrate the bird before the gavage route is utilized (as
oral fluids may be regurgitated). It can be useful to flush the crop, particularly if
in a form that is high in energy and easily digestible, gavage-feeding small amounts of
         s   
good quality foods, including those they are accustomed to receiving and recognize.
Medical treatment
If regurgitation persists, a gastrointestinal motility modifier may be trialled if an
obstruction is not suspected, for example metoclopramide (o.5 mg/kg PO/IM q8-
12hr). Again, the metoclopramide should initially be administered parenterally.
Bacterial or yeast infections commonly occur in birds secondarily to other disease,
be analysed using in-house stains to assess for excessive quantities of bacteria or
treat these and assess the response before more expensive investigations are
performed.
CLINICAL TIP
Metoclopramide may cause seizures in macaws.
Lateral and ventro-dorsal radiographs (performed under anaesthesia with isoflurane)
Material present within the body cavity reduced the air sac space (Fig. 10.2).
Contrast studies with barium may be useful to outline the gastrointestinal tract
(barium sulphate may also provide some medical benefit as a protectant and anti-
inflammatory).
(a)
(b)
Figure 10.2
(a) Lateral and (b) ventro-dorsal radiographs showing soft tissue/fluid density in
abdominal region of coelomic cavity.
Blood sample
A general health profile was performed, with haematology and biochemistry (Table
10.1). This showed signs of:
· Dehydration (elevated haematocrit and uric acid)
· Tissue damage (elevated lactate dehydrogenase)
· Mild anaemia (with some hypochromic red blood cells)
· Changes in white cells suggestive of infection (leucocytosis with a marked
heterophilia, monocytosis (with some atypical monocytes) and moderate
lymphopenia).
Table 10.1 Blood results (with reference ranges for comparison)
Result
Ref eren ce ran ge
Haemoglobin *
12.4 g/d1
14.4-19.2
Haematocrit *
0.33 1/1
0.45-0.62
 Red blood cells*
2.26 x 1012/l
2.44-3.23
MCV
146.0 fl
166.5-209.0
MCHC
37.6 g/d1
27.9-35.3
MCH
54.9 Pg
50.1-68.5
White blood cells*
22.9 x 109/
1.5-10.3
Heteroph ils*
95%; 21.76 × 109/1
1.47-10.33
Lymphoc ytes*
2%; 0.46 × 109/1
0.00-3.40
 Eosin oph ils
0 x 109/
0.00-0.69
Monocytes
3%; 0.69 x 109/1
0.00-0.52
Basophils
0 x 109/1
0.00-2.02
Thrombocytes
18 × 109/1
0-24
Fibrin ogen
1.00 g/dl
Total protein'
26.3 g/
28-43
Albumin
11.8 g/
9-15
Globulin
14.5 g/l
12-36
 Calcium
2.20 mmol/l
1.90-2.20
AST
104 U/I
32-180
CK
VnZ61
27-253
Uric acid
456 μmol/
190-327
LDH*
Vn L46
130-353
Zinc
29 μg/ 
0-200
Lead 
0.29 μmol/1 
0-1.21
AST = aspartate aminotransferase; CK = creatinine kinase; LDH = lactate dehydrogenase; MCV
mean corpuscular volume; MCHC = mean corpuscular haemoglobin concentration; MCH = mean
corpuscular haemoglobin
*Abnormal values outside reference range.
Lead and zinc levels were both within normal limits.
Crop swab
Cytology showed clumps of bacteria of various types, and no evidence of parasites.
Culture was performed on a swab and a crop wash. Esherichia coli was cultured; this
was sensitive to amoxicillin/clavulanate, co-trimoxazole, cephalexin, gentamicin and
ciprofloxacin, but resistant to tetracycline. An inidentified Gram-negative bacillus
was also cultured; this was sensitive to tetracycline, amoxicillin/clavulanate,
If regurgitated material had been produced, it would have been useful to analyse
this by cytology and culture also.
Faecal analysis
Reshaping of the beak
This was performed using a slow-speed burr, taking care to dampen the beak to
prevent overheating and discomfort.
Treatment and Progress
Medication and supportive care
Metoclopramide was administered, initially subcutaneously and then orally
Antibiotics (amoxicillin clavulanate at 125 mg/kg ql2hr PO) were instigated. An
easily assimilated avian recovery diet was gavage-fed (10 ml TID). Vitamin K1
injection may be useful in cases of melena where a coagulopathy is suspected.
 s  s        
more normal in colouration. He was then discharged. A gastrointestinal infection was
suspected and   treatment continued  with  gastrointestinal  motility   modifier
haematochezia was noted in the patient, he began to eat some food, and his
demeanour improved a little. However, he was still lethargic and began passing
lindigested seeds in his faeces so fuirther investigation was warranted.
Further Investigation
Ultrasound
The abdominal region was examined by ultrasound in the conscious bird. (This will
stress some individuals, either resulting in the need for anaesthesia or a reduction in
the period of restraint and thus the range of examination possible.) Assessment of the
S     s          
were partially visualized. The ventriculus was briefly visualized and was of normal
 s   sa       
mainly gas and some motility was present. No significant abnormalities were
detected, but coelomic structures were incompletely visualized using ultrasound (as is
often the case when intestinal gas is present).
Endoscopy
It was elected to perform endoscopy to permit direct visualization of the intra-
coelomic organs. The cockatoo was anaesthetized and placed in right lateral
recumbency to allow coelomic endoscopy. This showed the gastrointestinal tract to be
enlarged and distended, precluding complete assessment of the cavity. The gonads,
kidneys, lungs, air sacs and heart had a normal appearance.
CLINICAL TIPS
Anaesthesia
 Induction: isoflurane via a closely fitting facemask
· Intubation: 3 mm diameter endotracheal tube
· Maintenance: isoflurane (3%).
Peri-anaesthetic monitoring and supportive care
· Oesophageal stethoscope
· ECG leads attached: one either side of the heart on the ventral wing and one on the left lateral
thigh
administered through out procedure (4 ml/kg per hour)
· Supplemental heating: heat pad under bird.
CLINICAL TIPS
Endoscopy of the coelomic cavity
· Place anaesthetized bird in right lateral recumbency (Fig. 10.3a). (This allows visualization of the
left-hand side of the coelomic cavity - if the right side needs to be examined, the bird can be moved
to left lateral recumbency and the procedure repeated.)
· Secure both wings dorsal to the body and extend the uppermost leg caudally.
· Identify the area (incision site is between the last two ribs, ventral to the uncinate process) and
surgically prepare the site (Fig. 10.3b). Often this does not require much/any plucking of feathers.
Minimize the use of antiseptic liquids, particularly alcohol-based ones, which will contribute to
cooling and potential hypothermia. It can be helpful to use paper adhesive tape to secure adjacent
feathers down to reduce their chance of contaminating the site.
• A small incision is made in the skin using a scalpel blade. Small scissors or forceps are used for
blunt dissection through the muscle layers. The rigid endoscope (usually a 2.7 mm scope with a
sheath) is then inserted into the coelomic cavity (entering with a 'pop' as the peritoneal membrane is
breached).
· After internal assessment is complete, the skin wound is usually closed with a single suture.
· Coelioscopy is contraindicated in cases of coelomitis, ascites or organomegaly.
(a)
(b)
Figure10.3
saan oq wim 'apis puu-an uo Adoosoaoo o ans (a) pe sisod (e)
extended, the incision site will enter the caudal thoracic air sac.
Diagnosis
Based on the endoscopic and other findings, the main differential diagnoses were
proventricular dilatation disease, other neurogenic causes of gastrointestinal
hypomotility or dilation, or neoplasia of the gastrointestinal tract.
Anatomy and Physiology Refresher
The oral cavity leads to the oesophagus, which lies on the right-hand side of the neck.
The crop is a dilation of the oesophagus at the base of the neck (the crop is not present
in all avian species), which functions to store food when the stomach is full. The
ventriculus (gizzard). Ingesta moves forward and back between the two parts of the
stomach during digestion, with food that does not require grinding bypassing the
ventriculus. The rest of the avian gastrointestinal tract includes the small intestine
Aetiopathogenesis of Gastrointestinal Neoplasia
As in human medicine, lifestyle and environment are thought to play a role in the
S   s        s
Where viruses are associated (e.g. papillomas in South American psittacines are
thought to be caused by herpesvirus), contact with affected individuals is a source of
infection.
Treatment of This Case
After discussion of the results with the owner, it was elected to euthanize the
cockatoo.
As the owner wished to bury the bird, a cosmetic necropsy only was performed.
removing the gastrointestinal tract for histology. A fibrosarcoma was evident in the
ventriculus (Fig. 10.4), with mucosal ulceration (the likely origin of blood in the
faeces). The distal intestine also showed mucosal atrophy and dilation. The
both of which are characteristic for PDD.
Figure 10.4
Fibrosarcoma of ventriculus at postmortem.
Other Treatment Options
Although unlikely to affect the ultimate prognosis in cases of neoplasia, improving
husbandry conditions and diet may assist with quality of life. Controlling secondary
infections will also help. Immunomodulatory medications or herbal remedies have
been suggested to be useful therapies in some cases. Some tumours may be surgically
resectable (although thought should be given to the gastrointestinal function after
removal of large portions).
NURSING ASPECTS
Crop-feeding
• Restrain the bird in a soft towel, extending the head and neck to straighten the oesophagus.
· Use a gag to keep the beak open, or use a metal crop-feeding tube (soft tubes may be bitten).
· Insert the tube into the mouth and pass down the oesophagus on the right-hand side of the neck.
· Check positioning by palpating the tip of the tube in the crop and the trachea separately.
· Instil fluid/food slowly, checking for regurgitation. If any reflux is seen, aspirate any material in the
mouth and allow the bird to swallow or spit out excess material.
Prevention
contagious disease (e.g. papillomas) will reduce neoplastic disease. However, for most
neoplasms we do not know the aetiology and prevention is not possi ble.
Prognosis
The prognosis for birds with regurgitation depends very much on the aetiology. Many
of the infectious agents are treatable. Heavy metal toxicities respond well to removal
of ingested metal along with chelation therapy. Proventricular dilatation disease
            s
term to control of gastrointestinal infection with antibiotics, nutritional support, and
the NSAID celecoxib.
          
guarded. Some 3-4% of submissions  from psittacines for histopathology are
papillomas, squamous cell carcinomas, fibrosarcomas, infiltrative adenocarcinomas,
leiomyomas and leiomyosarcomas, melanomas and lymphoma. Approximately half of
alimentary tract neoplasms in psittacines are malignant.
11
Harris' hawk with bumblefoot
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Bilateral foot lesions in a Harris' hawk.
Introduction
This case outlines the combination of husbandry factors and veterinary treatment of
skin lesions in raptors. Unless hygiene issues are addressed, lesions may become
chronic. Regular assessment is necessary to monitor for progression to more severe
pathology.
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
A 7-year-old male Harris’ hawk (Parabuteo unicinctus) presented with skin lesions on both feet.
Husbandry
The Harris' hawk (Box 11.1) was bred in captivity in the UK, and had been in the
current owner's possession for 1 month. He was housed in a covered aviary with three
    a       ss
necessary. The bird was not tethered, but did wear leather leg equipment (aylmeri and
jesses, Fig. 9.4). The diet comprised various whole carcases, including day-old chicks,
rabbit and quail. Water was provided in a wide shallow bath (changed regularly). The
owner was an experienced falconer who owned and worked other raptors besides this
Harris' hawk.
BOX 11.1 Ecology of Harris' hawks
· Range in the wild covers south-west USA and as far south as Chile and Argentina in South America
· Normal habitat: sparse woodland, semi-desert, some marshes
· Average weight: male, 700 g; female, 1 kg (i.e. sexual dimorphism)
 One female may mate with more than one male
·• Birds are flown at a slightly light weight to encourage them to return to the owner for feeding.
Birds coming into moult are allowed to put on weight to cope with metabolic demands
• Popular birds for falconers as hunt in packs of 2-6 (most raptors are solitary hunters). Larger prey
taken if group-hunting (e.g. jackrabbits)
· Free-ranging diet: birds, lizards, mammals, and large insects
· Relatively easy to train.
Case History
During catch-up for a training session, the owner noticed some lesions on the hawk's
feet. No change in appetite, demeanour, or perching or flying abilities had been noted.
The owner thought there might have been some trauma from the enclosure, as the
bird had been noted grasping the nylon netting of the aviary roof.
Clinical Examination
contact. A full clinical examination was performed conscious:
· Good body condition for flying (pectoral muscles present but keel easily palpable),
weighing 700 g
· No abnormalities on auscultation or palpation
· Skin lesions: smoothing of dermal papillae on plantar surface of feet, some
superficial cracks and inflammation in skin
· Right foot: same as left foot, also minor lesions on 3rd digit (Fig. 11.1a).
· Left foot: 1st and 2nd digits affected, distal phalanges (Fig. 11.1b)
(al
(b)
Figure 11.1
Grade 2 bumblefoot lesions in the Harris' hawk (Parabuteo unicinctus). (a) Right foot,
(b) left foot.
CLINICAL TIPS
Physical examination of raptors
s si   e d a pd pi e  a    -
 on the owner's fist (using a falconer's glove and leg equipment) (Fig. 11.2a). It is helpful if the bird
is hooded for this procedure, although this should be removed for examination of the head and oral
cavity (Fig. 11.2a).
· Further examination, including detailed assessment of the feet, is best performed with the bird
a ensau on Apoq au punoe paddem si lamon e pue puaq oy pauoodde si pina au 'iseo,
 ae  sn       on s a s  a s
birds may require general anaesthesia to relax the foot muscles and permit a full examination of the
feet (Fig. 11.2b).
(a)
(b)
Figure 11.2
 Restraint and examination of raptors (a) on the fist (scops owl, Otus spp) and (b) cast
with a towel (steppe eagle hybrid, Aquila nipalensis hybrid).
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSES
The differentials for foot lesions in raptors are:
• Bumblefoot, including corns
• Talon disorders: injuries, abnormal growth
· Toe injuries
· Wounds
• Dislocations
· Fractures
• Soft tissue injuries, e.g. tendon
· Abscesses: often on the dorsal aspect of the foot
 Avipox virus (dry form): papules/vesicles/crusts, often with secondary bacterial, fungal
or
 Chlamydophila infections
· Constriction injuries, e.g. from thin jesses or pox scabs
· Haematomas: after fighting with quarry
• Self-mutilation
· Tendon sheath infections
• Septic arthritis
· Frostbite: in tropical species housed in very cold conditions
· Erysipelothrix rhusiopathiae infection
 Cutaneous mycobacteriosis.
Case Work-Up
Other Possible Investigations
Radiography
It is advisable to radiograph the raptor's feet to assess for bone involvement in the
condition.
Culture
Where possible, swabs should be taken from exudates for microbiology (bacteriology
and mycology) and cytology. If organisms are cultured, sensitivity testing should be
performed.
Blood sampling
In some cases, haematology and biochemistry may be performed to assess for systemic
signs of infection or concomitant disease processes.
Ultrasound
In some cases it may be useful to use ultrasouind to assess soft tissues inderlying the
skin or lesion. A stand-off will be required to optimize image quality. Doppler
ultrasound probes can also be utilized to monitor blood supply to the digits if vascular
compromise is suspected (Fig. 11.3).
Figure 11.3
Assessment of the blood supply to the foot of a hawk eagle (Hieraaetus spp) using a
 Doppler probe after tibiotarsal fracture.
Diagnosis
The clinical findings were consistent with grade 2 bilateral bumblefoot lesions.
Anatomy and Physiology Refresher
Birds of prey have an anisodactyl arrangement of digits. The first digit (or hallux)
faces backwards and the other three forwards. This enables them to perch and hold
prey.
Scales on the distal leg are dermo-epidermal modifications. These are larger on the
dorsal foot, and smaller on the lateral and palmar surfaces. Skin on the plantar surface
of the foot has a rough surface, with dermal papillae that protect the foot (Fig. 11.4).
The toe pads are local skin modifications, with a cushioning layer of connective
tissue; these are closely adhered to underlying bone.
Figure 11.4
 Normal healthy skin on the foot of a gyr-peregrine falcon hybrid (Falco rusticolus/F.
peregrinus). Note the rough surface with papillae that help cushion the foot.
Aetiopathogenesis of Bumblefoot
Bumblefoot is a multifactorial disease. Several factors interact to affect the integrity of
the skin and deeper tissues of the foot.
· Husbandry issues most commonly contribute to the condition:
· Hard abrasive or inappropriately shaped perches result in damage to the foot
to the feet. Overweight birds will also put more pressuire on the feet
   a   s ) s  e
result in easily damaged skin
· Overgrown talons will affect weight bearing, with more pressure on the
metatarsal pad making it susceptible to damage. The talons may also puncture the
plantar surface of the foot, as may foreign bodies present within the environment.
· Anything affecting balance and perching capabilities of the contralateral foot may
predispose pathology in the other foot as weight distribution becomes asymmetrical.
For example, an injury affecting one foot or leg will force the bird to use the other in
preference. For this reason, it is usual to bandage both feet even if pathology is
unilateral.
Characteristics  of  the  condition  include superficial  abrasions  and ulceration,
progressing to cellulitis or abscessation of the plantar epithelium of the foot (Box
11.2). Without treatment, the pathology further develops to involve other tissues
locally, including tendons, joints and bones. In some cases, systemic disease may be
seen, for example amyloidosis, valvular endocarditis, and infection in distant joints.
BOX 11.2 Grading bumblefoot lesions (Remple 1993)
Prognosis deteriorates with each grade.
 sn    d  id      
 Grade 2 - Infection without gross swelling.
Grade 3 - Infection without apparent involvement of deep structures. Hot, painful, swollen.
 Grade 4 - Infection of deep structures, e.g. tenosynovitis, arthritis, osteomyelitis.
Grade 5 - End-stage, loss of function of foot.
Epidemiology
The most common sites for lesions are the pads, particularly the large metatarsal pad,
the pads under the middle phalangeal joint of 2nd/3rd/4th digits, and the distal digital
pads of 1st/2nd digits.
Species differences exist with the disease, such that broadwings (accipiters, red-
tailed hawks and Harris' hawks) usually respond better to treatment that falcons.
Treatment
There were two main approaches necessary for treatment of this case.
Husbandry changes
The owner was advised to improve perch hygiene. This involved spraying the perches
daily with dilute disinfectant (e.g. quaternary ammonium compounds).
CLINICAL TIP
It can be useful in some cases to tether a bird to retain it on the perch for longer periods if the
surrounding environment is less clean. However, this will reduce exercise capabilities and may affect
 blood flow to the lesions, predisposing progression of pathology. It is usual to continue flying birds,
but to a lure rather than hunting (as the latter will involve trauma to the feet during catching).
Medical therapy
skin commensal bacteria (Boxes 11.3 and 11.4). Topical antibiotic ointment was used
to soften the skin and prevent further cracks forming as well as providing local
antibiosis.
BOX 11.3 Aims of therapy
· Reduce inflammation and swelling
• Remove necrotic tissue, usually by surgical debridement
· Provide drainage where infection is present
· Remove pathogens
• Protect the lesion from further infection
· Use of bandages to protect the foot (and the contralateral foot) from further insult.
BOX 11.4 Summary of treatment options
• Husbandry/management changes, correcting any predisposing factors:
* Optimize diet
· Provide suitable perches
* Maintain hygiene of perches
· Keep at flying weight
· Increase exercise
· Topical ointments massaged into foot
· Systemic antibiotics
· Bandages
· Surgical debridement
· Euthanasia.
As the surface of the skin was breached, systemic antibiotic was also administered
(marbofloxacin at 10 mg/kg PO q24hr). Inflammation was treated with a systemic
NSAID (meloxicam at 0.1 mg/kg PO q24hr).
Treatment Options and Management
There was some difficulty in keeping the bird's feet clean without dressings. This may
have been a combination of dirty perches and prey/food items being caught in the
skin and talons. A new lesion developed at the base of one talon (3rd digit of left foot
on medial surface).
In this case, initial therapy did not resolve the lesions. It was considered that further
trauma was occurring from the perches, and a decision was taken to bandage the feet.
This has its drawbacks, reducing the frequency of topical cleaning and medication, as
well as precluding daily inspection of the lesions.
The systemic antibiotic was changed to amoxicillin clavulanate (125 mg/kg PO
q12hr). If possible, antibiosis should be based on culture and sensitivity results.
The perch was changed to a rubber bow perch, as it was difficult to maintain good
hygiene on the artificial turf perch. Food items were presented in smaller pieces to
reduce the necessity of the bird grasping to tear it apart.
NURSING ASPECTS
Bandaging
· Raptors will usually leave bandages alone.
· As there is very little soft tissue overlying vital structures such as blood vessels and bone in the
 distal limb, care should be taken to ensure dressings are not applied too tightly.
· In cases with severe bumblefoot lesions, including those where surgery has been necessary, ball
bandages are often used to enclose the foot and provide protection from further pressure.
· If a corn or similar lesion is present, a doughnut-shaped ring of foam or other support material
may be used to support surrounding tissues while releasing pressure on the lesion.
· In lower grade cases such as this, the aim is for a light dressing that will provide some cushioning,
 and protect the foot from dirt and further minor trauma.
· For this case, the bandage consisted of: a non-adhesive dressing, synthetic padding material, and
non-adhesive elastic wrap. This thin dressing permitted normal perching.
· If a single foot is affected, the contralateral should also have a light bandage to protect it from
pressure due to the extra load bearing as weight is shifted from the affected foot.
CLINICAL TIPS
· It is vital to correct husbandry, particularly hygiene, to prevent recurrence or progression of
bumblefoot lesions.
· Wear gloves when examining raptors' feet. Many infections are associated with Staphylococcus spp
that may originate from the owner's hands.
Other Treatment Options
Diet
The diet should be assessed. Multivitamin and mineral supplementation is advisable
during treatment of lesions.
Perches
Artificial turf should be used to cover all perching surfaces. The turf can be wrapped
in soft leather, towels, or non-adhesive elastic wrap bandaging material if the bird's
feet are painful. These coverings can be easily removed for cleaning.
Body condition and exercise
If the bird is not already at its flying weight, it should be reduced to this level to
minimize pressure on the feet. To this end and to increase blood circulation through
exercise, trained birds should still be flown.
Topical ointments
Massaging ointments into the feet helps improve the local circulation. Preparations
   s         
particularly where the skin integrity has been breached. Povidone-iodine will harden
skin during the healing process. Some practitioners advocate the topical use of
antibiotics  (e.g. piperacillin  or fusidic acid) in combination  with DMSO
(dimethylsulphoxide) to increase their uptake
Antibiotics
Suggested options include marbofloxacin, amoxicillin clavulanate, or lincomycin
These should be continued for at least 1 week (often a longer course is required).
Analgesia
a          o  
sulrgery.
Bandaging
cases, they are employed to protect a wound from contamination and relieve pressure
from the plantar surface by providing support around the foot. In the latter cases, soft
materials such as foam or neoprene are used. Hydrogels and collagen ointments are
often used underneath bandage materials to promote healing. In infected lesions, daily
Debridement
If the skin has been breached, debridement should be performed. In most cases, this
will necessitate surgery under anaesthesia. A small Volkmann's curette is used. The
wound should be irrigated. If closure is possi ble without tension, a simple interrupted
is advisable to allow closure of the resulting wound by secondary intention, or to delay
closuire until the infection has been cleared and surrounding tissues are well
vascularized and viable. Initially after surgery, the bird is housed on a soft padded
surface (e.g. thick foam pads covered with artificial turf). The foot is always dressed
after surgery (as is the contralateral foot), and systemic antibiotics administered for at
least 2 weeks (or until first intention healing has occurred). Sutures are removed after
21 days, over a period of a few days to allow for gradual return to fuill skin strength at
the wound site. Dressings are changed every 2-3 days, and removed after a month.
Antibiotic-impregnated polymethylmethacrylate beads may be surgically inserted to
provide long-term local anti biosis. These are principally used for cases where tendons
and joints are affected. Antibiotics commonly used include piperacillin, ceftazidime
and amikacin. The beads are usually removed after 7-10 days.
Euthanasia
In cases where foot function has been lost (e.g. such that the bird is unable to perch,
or cannot grasp food), euthanasia is recommended. This is often the best option if
systemic infection and pain cannot be controlled in cases with osteomyelitis.
Follow-Up
As the inflammation reduced and the bird was perching without apparent difficulty.
the NSAlD was discontinued after a few weeks. Antibiotics were continued for a total
of 12 weeks.
At one point during treatment, purulent material was present in one of the lesions.
It would have been useful to culture this, but the other treatments resolved this in a
few days.
Bandages were changed every 3-5 days, depending on how the lesions appeared at
each check. After a few weeks, the owner was able to perform this at home and
veterinary visits were less frequent. Dressings were removed after 1o weeks. The
topical treatments were continued until all cracks had closed over.
S            
While healing was continuing, perch hygiene was important.
Prevention
Good husbandry conditions, especially perch choice and hygiene, are important in
prevention of development of bumblefoot lesions. Regular assessment of raptor feet
should be performed by the owner, preferably wearing gloves to prevent transfer of
bacteria from the person's skin to the bird's skin.
Prognosis
Healing is often prolonged even in low-grade buimblefoot lesions. This is due to
the site. Recovery commonly takes 2-6 months.
CLINICAL TIP
Environmental conditions play a massive role in the condition and must be addressed to ensure a
 good outcome and prevention of recurrence.
Systemic conditions may adversely affect the healing process, for example
aspergillosis, hepatic lipidosis and chronic renal disease. Conversely, bumblefoot is a
chronic inflammatory condition treatment of which requires prolonged management,
and the disease may predispose pathology such as amyloidosis, aspergillosis and
clostridial enterotoxaemia.
Reference
emple JD. Raptor bumblefoot: a new treatment technique. In: Redig PT, Cooper JE, editors. Raptor
Biomedicine HI. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press; 1993:154-160.
12
Tibiotarsal fracture in a dove
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Acute onset unilateral lameness in a Socorro dove.
Introduction
The avian skeleton is light but strong. Fractures frequently result if a bird sustains
trauma. However, bone healing is rapid and most cases heal well if appropriately
supported.
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
A 6-month-old Socorro dove (Zenaida graysoni) presented with suspected tibiotarsal fracture.
Husbandry
The dove was part of a breeding colony held in a zoological collection as part of an
indoor aviary at the time of the incident. The aviary was approximately 2 x 2 x 3 m,
and comprised solid walls with a wire mesh front. Several natural branches were
present for enrichment and perching. The diet provided was a proprietary pigeon seed
mix supplemented with chopped fruit and greens.
BOX 12.1 Ecology of Socorro doves
· Socorro doves originate from the island of Socorro in the Revillagigedo Islands, Mexico. Previously
they were common in forest areas higher than 500 m above sea level.
· Socorro doves are frugivores, with free-ranging birds depending on ferns and euphorbias.
 s s o ' le q xa a    's a si a a -
human predation and grazing of the bird's food sources by sheep may have also contributed to their
decline. The IUCN now describes Socorro doves as Extinct in the Wild.
· The species are predominantly solitary, with pairs forming for breeding. Young are chased away as
soon as they can fend for themselves, and the male and female separate outside the breeding season.
· Ex situ breeding programmes are expected to provide stock for reintroduction after cats and sheep
have been eradicated from the island.
Case History
The bird was noted to be 10/1oths lame on its left leg late one evening. A brief
conscious examination revealed a palpable fracture in the tibiotarsus. Analgesia was
provided using meloxicam (0.1 mg/kg PO). No other signs of illness were noted.
Clinical Examination
Reassessment of the bird the following day was performed:
    d p        e
coverage)
· Plumage in good condition
· Oral examination, palpation of abdominal region, auscultation of air sacs - no
abnormalities detected
· Orthopaedic examination:
· Nails appropriate length, no foot lesions
· Left leg: non-weight bearing, bruising evident mid-tibiotarsus, skin intact,
tibiotarsus unstable (suspected fracture site), deep pain present
· No abnormalities on right leg or either wing.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSES
Although it may not be possible to easily differentiate lameness from ataxia in a small bird, the
The differentials for lameness are:
· Trauma resulting in fracture, dislocation, or soft tissue injury
 s  (n   s   ss s   -
weakness, ataxia or seizures and predispose to injuries after falling
· Metabolic bone disease (MBD) or neoplasia will also result in bone weakness and predispose to
pathological fractures
· Overgrown claws
· Infection, e.g. bumblefoot, septic arthritis
· Arthritis, e.g. older bird, after traumatic injury
· Neoplasia (particularly budgerigars): renal (e.g. adenocarcinomas, embryonal nephromas), gonadal
(e.g. ovarian or testicular tumours) or adrenal. Neoplasms act as a space-occupying lesion, pressing
 on the sciatic or pudendal nerves that run between these organs and the bony synsacrum
· Other causes of organomegaly (commonly renomegaly) pressing on sciatic nerve intra-coelomically
· Intra-articular gout
· Bruising in the pelvic regions after or during egg laying (females)
* Spinal pathology.
 The differentials for ataxia are:
· Infectious diseases:
· Viruses, e.g. paramyxoviruses (there are at least nine known serotypes), polyomavirus, central
lesions with proventricular dilatation disease (PDD, mostly affecting psittacines), togaviruses (e.g.
West Nile virus), influenza A, reovirus
• Bacteria, e.g. Chlamydophila psittaci (especially chronic infections), granulomas or abscesses
(with Listeria monocytogenes and Mycobacterium spp), septic arthritis (e.g. at joints between
notarium and synsacrum, with abscess compressing spinal cord), encephalitis (with
Staphylococcus aureus, Enterococcus spp, Pasteurella spp, Klebsiella spp)
 x   i    oa a  -
neuropathies), mycotoxins in food
· Parasites, e.g. CNs infection with Filaroides spp and Sarcocystis spp, cerebrospinal Baylisascaris
procyonis (in North America)
· Toxicity: heavy metal toxicity
· Metabolic disease: hypocalcaemia, hepatic encephalopathy, renal disease, hypoglycaemia
Malnutrition, e.g. hypovitaminosis E/selenium,  hypovitaminosis  B2 (riboflavin deficiency),
hypovitaminosis Bl (uncommon)
· Trauma (as above)
· Neoplasia, e.g. peripheral neuropathy (including aetiologies outlined above, and also schwannomas
and
malignant
schwannomas),
 central
nervous
 system
1  pathology
(e.g.
astrocytomas,
oligodendrogliomas, teratomas, lymphosarcomas and meningiomas)
· Congenital defects (uncommon).
Case Work-Up
The dove was anaesthetized with isoflurane (see box on page 91).
Radiographs
Lateral and ventro-dorsal views of the body (Fig. 12.1) were taken to assess for any
concomitant illness - no evidence was seen. Further views with the X-ray beam
collimated on the left leg confirmed the presence of a mid-shaft transverse fracture of
the left tibiotarsus (Fig. 12.2).
(a)
(b)
Figure 12.1
(a) Lateral and (b) ventro-dorsal radiographs of the Socorro dove's body, with no
obvious systemic disease. Note the (normal) presence of radio-dense grit in the ventriculus.
(a)
(b)
Figure 12.2
(a) Lateral and (b) cranio-caudal views of the left leg, showing a transverse fracture in
the mid-shaft of the tibiotarsus. Soft tissue swelling is also present at the site.
CLINICAL TIPS
Anaesthesia
· Birds are usually restrained in a small towel and anaesthesia induced with isoflurane (3-4%) using
a close-fitting facemask.
· If possible, an endotracheal tube is then inserted to maintain anaesthesia. This permits intermittent
positive pressure ventilation (Ippv) to ensure pulmonary perfusion is maintained. Care should be
taken during IPpV not to over-inflate and rupture the delicate avian air sacs.
· During recovery, oxygen is administered until the bird is breathing normally. Extubation is
performed once the bird is voluntarily moving. such as lifting its head.
CLINICAL TIPS
Monitoring anaesthesia
The depth of anaesthesia is assessed by testing the bird's reflexes:
· Withdrawal: toe pinch or muscle tone (e.g. in wing); lost at surgical depth of anaesthesia
· Corneal reflex: should remain present during anaesthesia, but movement of the nictitans membrane
over the cornea will be slowed at deeper levels of anaesthesia
· Response to stimulation of cere and peri-cloacal skin: responses lost at a light-to-medium plane of
anaesthesia.
Respiratory system:
· Respiratory rate and character are monitored
· Capnography: an indirect measure of arterial carbon dioxide
• Blood gas analysis: gold standard for assessment of respiratory function, small patient size and
financial considerations preclude common use.
Cardiovascular system:
· Capillary refill time (should be < 1 second) can be assessed on non-pigmented skin on the feet, or
 on the basilic or ulnar veins at the medial elbow
· Mucous membrane colour is not a reliable assessment of peripheral oxygenation
· Heart rate can be assessed by a variety of methods:
· Palpation of a pulse, e.g. the brachial artery in the axillary region; this also gives an assessment
of peripheral circulation. (Peripheral circulation is better assessed by checking capillary refill
time on featherless areas such as non-pigmented skin on the feet.)
· Bell stethoscope - positioned over the heart (over the pectoral muscles)
· Oesophageal stethoscope (in larger birds).
· ECG - pads are placed across the heart, e.g. one on either wing and one on the left lateral thigh;
self-adhesive pads are preferred to clips as they will damage delicate avian skin less.
Monitor body temperature with a cloacal or oesophageal probe.
Other Investigations Possible
Blood sample
It would be useful to perform haematology and biochemistry to assess for systemic
illness, including metabolic derangements that may have resulted in ataxia and
predisposed the injury.
Diagnosis
Simple closed mid-shaft fracture of left tibiotarsus.
Anatomy and Physiology Refresher
Although most meduillary cavities in growing birds contain active bone marrow, some
adult avian bones contain air (i.e. are pneumatized) to further reduce weight and
increase flight capabilities. The femur is pneumatized in many species. The tibia and
proximal row of tarsal bones are fused to form the tibiotarsus. The proximolateral
fibula is short, associated with a reduction in rotational ability. The distal row of
tarsal bones is combined with the second, third and fourth metatarsal bones to form
the tarsometatarsus. The first metatarsal bone remains separate. The main muscles of
the leg are close to the body, with long tendons of insertion distally.
The hindlimbs of birds are modified for bipedal locomotion, perching, leaping for
takeoff and absorbing shock during landing. The tibiotarsus is the major weight-
bearing long bone.
The cranial tibial muscle (which flexes the hock joint) originates from the lateral
femoral condyle and the lateral cnemial crest on the tibiotarsus (Fig. 12.3). Fibularis
longus and cranial tibial muscles are cranial on the bone, gastrocnemius caudally --
leaving the medial and distal bone surfaces exposed. The cranial tibial artery lies over
the distal tibiotarsus on the flexor surface at the hock joint, and the medial metatarsal
vein emerges cranial to the plantar tendons at the hock.
Stifle
Gastrocnemius
muscle
Cranial tibial muscle
Tibiotarsus
Ansa
Tibial cartilage
Superficial
plantar vein
Digits{
Figure 12.3
Avian leg anatomy, including craniomedial surgical approach.
Avian bones heal rapidly. In most cases with appropriate stabilization, healing will
Aetiopathogenesis of Tibiotarsal Fractures
fractures, usually after external trauma. The weakest point is just distal to the fibular
crest, approximately one-third of the bone's length below the stifle joint, and this is a
common site for fractures. Fractures frequently occur after bating accidents in raptors
fracture in the distal third of the tibiotarsus may result if identity rings are caught on
protruding enclosure materials.
lisually closed. Tibiotarsal fractures are prone to rotational stresses from soft tissuies.
Repair should usually involve internal fixation as well as anti-rotational stabilization.
Problems that may be associated with tibiotarsal fractures (particularly wild birds)
include nerve damage, accompanying spinal injury, and bumblefoot development on
the contralateral foot due to uneven weight bearing during the healing process.
Bruises are common after trauma that results in avian bone fractures. If the
cutaneous vasculature has been disrupted by trauma, dry gangrene may ensue.
Epidemiology
Tibiotarsal fractures in the proximal one-third are frequently seen following bating.
These fractures are generally low energy, and typically result in transverse fractures.
Wild birds usually suffer high-energy fractures that are often comminuted. In
psittacines, mid-diaphyseal or distal tibiotarsal fractures are usually seen. Trauma will
be more likely if enclosures have protruding wires or other materials.
Treatment
Surgery
Under the same anaesthetic as for radiography, the Socorro dove was transported to
theatre and prepared for surgery. A craniomedial approach to the left leg permitted
access to the fracture. An intramedullary pin was placed in the left tibiotarsus using a
      d      n
more difficulty.) Polydioxanone, 1.5 metric (4/0 UsP), was used to suture muscles in a
continuous pattern. The skin was closed with poliglecaprone 25 suture, 1.5 metric
(4/0 USP), using a continuous pattern.
CLINICAL TIPS
Avian suurgery
· Pluck feathers rather than cutting them.
· Do not over-wet patients during skin preparation, as small patients will be susceptible to
hypothermia.
· Use transparent (e.g. sterile plastic) drapes to allow the anaesthetist to monitor respiratory
movements.
· Provide adequate analgesia, e.g. use local anaesthetic such as lidocaine (at l-3 mg/kg
topically/IM/SC, calculate dose accurately to avoid toxicity), as well as an NSAID such as carprofen
A / c0'o-lo'o ) auqdouadnq s ns pio1do ue pe (1z1-8b A1/s//0d 8y/ t-7 1e)
q8hr).
CLINICAL TIPS
Tiblotarsal fracture repair
· Rigid stabilization is necessary for rapid bone healing. with rotational alignment important.
* Use an IM pin with a diameter 50-65% of the marrow cavity (Figs 12.4, 12.5).
* In preference, use positive profile threaded pins for the external fixator.
• The end of the IM pin protruding from the stifle can be attached to the external fixator (i.e. it
becomes a 'tie-in fixator').
S    s       e
Figure 12.4
Placement of intramedullary pin.
(a)
(q)
Figure 12.5
Postoperative radiographs. (a) Lateral and (b) cranio-caudal
Supportive care and medication
An intravenous catheter was placed in the right superficial plantar metatarsal vein,
and Hartmann's solution administered (at 10 ml/kg per hour) throughout the
procedure.
Antibiosis was administered preoperatively with amoxicillin clavulanate (125
mg/kg IM), and continued orally (same dose ql2hr) for 1 week after surgery.
Meloxicam (0.1 mg/kg) and butorphanol (0.5 mg/kg) were administered
intramuscuilarly to provide analgesia. Meloxicam was continued orally (same dose
q24hr) for 1 week.
The bird was assist-fed a convalescent formula once it had fully recovered from
anaesthesia.
A light dressing was placed on the leg to cover the wound for 24 hours
postoperatively to limit postoperative swelling. The leg remained bruised for several
days; this is normal for birds, and the green colouration is quite apparent due to their
thin skin.
Exercise was restricted for 3 weeks after surgery. The dove was assessed daily by
keepers, and weekly by the veterinary practitioner (Box 12.2).
BOX 12.2 Potential postoperative complications
· Abrasion of the foot in the injured limb: prevent by protecting with a dressing
· Bumblefoot in the contralateral limb: prevent by protecting with a dressing.
Other Treatment Options
Alternative surgical options
The use of external fixation will prevent rotation. If an external fixator is used solely
for the repair, three pins should be used above and below the fracture site for
maximum stability; each pin should penetrate both cortices. In some cases, it may be
appropriate to use external fixation in combination with an intramedullary pin (i.e. a
tie-in' fixator).
The most proximal and distal pins with external fixators should be sufficiently far
from the ends of the bone to avoid iatrogenic damage. For example, the distal pin
should be 2-3 mm proximal to the condyles to avoid entering the intercondylar sulcus
or causing trauma to the tendon of the long digital extensor in the supratendinal
ridge. The proximal pin is inserted from craniolaterally, just distal to the tibial plateau
and cranial to the fibula, and directed caudomedially to avoid neurovascular bundles
(which lie medially and laterally on the proximal tibiotarsus).
Some surgeons prefer type 11 external fixators. This is certainly the treatment of
choice for severely comminuted fractures. Whenever external fixation is used, pins
should be removed in a staged fashion to permit gradual increases in stressors on the
healing bone.
Other surgical  techniques described  for fracture  repair in birds include
intramedullary polydioxanone rods, shuttle pins, plates and screws.
Non-surgical support
   s s    s  n s s 
for fractures distal to the hock, using adhesive tape suich as zinc oxide tape. This is less
likely to be effective for the tibiotarsus due to movement possible within overlying soft
tissues, particularly rotation associated with tension from digital flexor muscles.
Nutritional supplementation
If there is any doubt over the diet of the bird, supplemental minerals (particularly
calcium and phosphorus) should be administered during the healing process.
NURSING ASPECTS
· If a bird is lame, extra pressure is placed on the contralateral foot. This predisposes to bumblefoot
(see the Harris' hawk case in Ch. 1l). For this reason, soft perches are provided and/or the
 o Aa u n q si  a p n nnd cn pq si n l
feet.
· The bird's bandaged limbs should be checked daily for development of any pressure sores, and the
feet for bumblefoot lesions.
Follow-Up
S            s   
were moving. A common complication of limb fractures in birds is devitalization or
denervation.
Four days after surgery, a degree of rotation of the foot was present. This is a
potential complication when a single intramedullary pin is used to repair a fracture.
The limb was temporarily splinted, with a bandage including joints proximal (stifle)
and distal (tibiotarsal-tarsometatarsal) to the fracture. Restriction of joint movement
for prolonged periods of time will result in loss of function. This bandage was removed
a few days later, by which time there was more rotational sta bility at the fracture site.
Three weeks after surgery, the leg was re-radiographed under general anaesthesia
     n   s    
growth was evident. The intramedullary pin was removed. Meloxicam was
administered at the time of the procedure. Mobility in the limb was reasonable,
reduction in movement of the tibiotarsal-tarsometatarsal joint. There was a mild
deemed to be clinically significant in this individual, but could well be in a working
prone to bumblefoot lesions if uneven weight bearing is present.
(b)
Figu1re 12.6
 Follow-up radiographs showing callus formation at the fracture site. (a) Lateral and
(b) cranio-caudal.
Prevention
Provision of an appropriate diet and aviary conditions permitting regular exercise
should prevent formation of weak bones. The enclosure should also be checked for any
potential sources of traumatic injuries. In the case of raptors, perching should be
provided in a safe manner, without inappropriately long tethers.
Prognosis
As avian bone healing is rapid, the prognosis is excellent, providing accurate
apposition of the fracture ends can be achieved. The necessity for surgery is dependent
on the species, the fracture, and the proposed use of the individual bird.
If the fracture site had been open, the risk of infection and osteomyelitis is high.
These cases carry a more guarded prognosis.
13
Feather plucking in a parrot
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Acute onset feather plucking in an Amazon parrot.
Introduction
    (   s )   
veterinary clinic for routine vaccinations, thus giving the veterinary practitioner an
opportunity to perform a full health assessment (including history and clinical
examination). On the other hand, avian pets are often not seen at the clinic until
significant signs of illness are noted. It is wise to nurture avian clients and encourage
'well-bird checks'. If clients present a new bird, take the opportunity to obtain a
detailed history and perform a full physical examination.
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
A 1-year-old orange-winged Amazon parrot (Amazona amazonica) (Fig. 13.1, Box 13.1l) was
 presented for nail clipping. It became evident during the consultation that the bird had been plucking
feathers for the previous 2 weeks.
Figure 13.1
Orange-winged Amazon parrot.
BOX 13.11
 Ecology of Amazon parrots
are located in Columbia, Trinidad and Tobago, with their range extending south to Peru and
 central Brazil. They reside in forest and semi-open country.
• Amazons are sexually monomorphic. Gender identification is by DNA analysis of blood or feather
 pulp, or visualization of the gonads via coelioscopy.
• There are about 30 subspecies of Amazon parrot.
· They are generally quiet, feeding in treetops.
· The diet in the wild consists of various seeds and fruits, including fruit from palm trees and
sometimes cocoa.
· Flocks accumulate for night roosting. Mated pairs usually pair for life, and stay close together.
· Although the species are not endangered in the wild, it is persecuted as an agricultural pest and
captured for the pet trade. Some are hunted by locals as a food source. Orange-winged Amazons
are listed on CITES Appendix II, restricting trade.
Husbandry
The parrot had been in the owner's possession for 8 months. It was housed indoors in
a large (1 m x 1.5 m x 2 m) metal cage, with free flight permitted in the living room
for a total of 2 hours daily. A number of perches were present in the cage; all were
round wooden dowel rods. Commercial parrot toys were provided on a rotational
basis, of both plastic and wooden construction. The floor of the cage was lined with
newspaper, which was changed daily.
The diet mainly comprised a dried seed and nut mix, sold for parrots. The bird also
ate a small selection of fruit from time to time, including oranges and grapes. Fresh
water was provided daily in a metal bowl.
A friend of the owner had been caring for the parrot 3 weeks previously, for a period
of 1 week, while the owner was on holiday. The bird had remained in the owner's
home for the duration, but there had been some change in daily routine associated
with the visiting carer.
The owner did not possess nor had come into contact with other birds. The carer did
not have contact with other birds.
Case History
The owner noticed the Amazon's claws becoming overgrown, and presented it for a
nail trim. During the consultation, a history was taken and the bird examined. It
transpired that the bird had started to pluck feathers from its sternal region 2 weeks
previously (after the owner returned from holiday). The owner was persuaded to
permit further investigation of the feather plucking problem.
Clinical Examination
Examination showed:
· Bird bright and alert
· Weight 480 g, overweight (keel not palpable due to fat layer overlying, usual weight
range for the species is 440-470 g)
· Auscultation of air sacs was unremarkable
· Feather loss over the ventral sternum and axillary regions, with wings and legs
unaffected
· Feathers present on sternum showed some dystrophy
· No locomotory problems detected.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSES
There are two main groups of aetiologies for feather plucking in birds - medical diseases and
behavioural problems. It may be possible to suspect one or the other during the initial consultation,
history taking and physical examination. However, in many cases, behavioural disease is diagnosed
after ruling out medical problems. As this can be expensive for the owner, the list of differential
diagnoses and investigations required should be discussed in full at the outset.
The medical differentials for feather plucking were:
• Malnutrition ('stress' marks (horizontal bars or weaknesses) are usually present on the feathers,
associated with interrupted feather growth): general malnutrition or specific (e.g. omega-3 fatty acid
deficiency, excess salt)
· Systemic disease, e.g. hepatic disease
: Chlamydophilosis
• Air sacculitis
 Toxins, e.g. nicotine exposure (other signs may include excitability, vomiting, diarrhoea, and
seizures), heavy metal toxicosis
· Environmental factors, e.g. low humidity, inappropriate photoperiod, noxious aerosols
• Metabolic disease, e.g. hypocalcaemia (principally grey parrots)
· Allergy, e.g. inhaled, contact, food (e.g. peanuts, sunflower seeds), insect hypersensitivity
· Endoparasites, e.g. giardiasis (common in cockatiels)
• Pain, e.g. over an arthritic joint
· Infectious causes of feather dystrophy (may present similarly to self-feather plucking, but the head
may also be involved): psittacine beak and feather disease (PBFD, circovirus), polyomavirus (in older
(o    s sa o , ( s  s
· Reproductive disease, e.g. ectopic egg, egg-related peritonitis
· Dermatitis, e.g. skin irritation, skin desiccation, folliculitis (bacterial or fungal), polyfolliculosis in
lovebirds (usually ventral neck or dorsum, may be infectious aetiology (e.g. polyomavirus) or
secondary to self-trauma)
· Uropygial gland infection
· Pancreatitis
.'Colie'
· Genetic, e.g. feather deformities (e.g. “feather duster disease' in budgerigars)
· Neoplasia
 Hypothyroidism (few documented cases; 'normal' avian total thyroxine levels vary with species and
season, so diagnosis is difficult)
· Ectoparasites (rare): mites and lice (highly host-specific).
 The behavioural differentials for feather plucking were:
· Inadequate socialization (especially hand-reared birds)
· Failure to learn normal preening behaviours (again, especially hand-reared birds)
· Inappropriate daily routine, resulting in bird being 'overtired’ (e.g. prolonged daylight period)
· Boredom
· Iatrogenic, e.g. after poor wing trim
· Reproduction-related, e.g. nesting frustration
· Fear/panic after a traumatic episode, cage-mate aggression.
Case Work-Up
History
Similar to other dermatological investigations, a detailed history should be obtained to
gain as much information about the feather plucking bird's current and previous
 Signalment: age, species, reproductive history, source
· Gender: some species are sexually dimorphic, in monomorphic species sexing is
performed on DNA analysis of blood/feather samples or by endoscopy; reproductive
history (particularly egg laying in females)
· Environment, e.g. cage, perches, toys, other pets (particularly other birds), exposure
to potential toxins (e.g. smokers, air fresheners or other sprays, cooking fumes or
open fires), heating, access to UV light (e.g. outside or artificial light indoors),
hygiene routine
· Diet: it is important to determine what is eaten (rather than just what food is
offered)
· Daily routine: including time in cage, free movement indoors or outside,
interactions with owners and other birds, photoperiod (is a black-out sheet used at
night?)
· Moulting history
· Wing clipping (current or historical)
· Owner relationship/bond
· Ascertain whether the presented bird is actually self-plucking/chewing or whether
another bird may be the culprit
· Plucking/chewing pattern, e.g. description of plucking activity, timing (in day,
when owner present/absent), period of plucking, initial area affected and any
progression
· Any other previous or current medical problems and treatments.
Clinical Examination
A full clinical examination should be performed when any bird is examined (unless
restraint will result in undue stress).
· Observe the bird's behaviour and demeanour during the history taking part of the
consultation
· General examination (see Birds - an introduction)
· Dermatological assessment:
· Skin: colour, scale, lesions (e.g. wounds or tears), masses, erythema, folliculitis
· Feathers: general feather condition, powder down, currently moulting, blood
feathers, colour, dystrophy, damage, feather or follicle loss, ectoparasites.
CLINICAL TIPS
Restraint of a medium-sized parrot:
· Prepare all potential equipment and sampling materials beforehand to minimize the period of
restraint.
· Use a soft towel to handle the bird (restraint with bare hands will result in the bird associating
hands with an unpleasant experience, and future attacks on hands).
· Grasp the bird's head from caudally, with the thumb and first finger in a C-shape around the neck
supporting the mandible.
· Wrap the towel loosely around the bird's body to control the wings.
· It is useful for the restraining assistant to grasp the bird's distal limbs to prevent the bird grasping
the clinician during examination of the body.
Investigations
Anaesthesia was induced and maintained with isoflurane administered via a
facemask. As a short procedure time was predicted (<15 minutes), the bird was not
intubated (although an endotracheal tube was on hand).
Blood sample
Haematology and clinical chemistries were performed. The results were generally
unremarkable. A mild relative heterophilia was noted (15.0 x 10%/l, reference range
1.55-12.07 x 10*/l), without toxic changes on smear examination.
CLINICAL TIPS
Phlebotomy
• Phlebotomy was performed from the right jugular vein (Fig. 13.2).
· The bird weighed 400 g and so its blood volume (5-13% of a normal bird's body weight) was
 approximately 40 ml.
• In a healthy bird, up to 8% of the blood volume may be sampled. In this case, a sample of 2.5 ml
was sufficient for the testing required.
Figure 13.2
 Phlebotomy from the right jugular vein in a green-winged macaw (Ara chloroptera).
Feather pulp analysis
moderate growth of Staphylococcus sp, sensitive to several antibiotics.
Other investigations that may be indicated
· Dermatological investigations:
· Microscopy on skin scrape, acetate strip, or feather digest
· Skin biopsy for histopathology
· Intradermal skin testing
· Other blood tests: zinc level, viral tests (e.g. circovirus (PBFD) and polyomavirus)
· Sexing (by blood, feather pulp, or coelioscopy)
· Faecal analysis for endoparasites: wet preparation and Gram-stain
· Skin and feather pulp cytology
· Radiography: body (e.g. include liver) and focal area where feather loss is present
· Skin biopsy
· Coelioscopy
· Trial therapy (e.g. antibiotics, simplified organic diet)
· If husbandry, clinical examination and laboratory tests are all normal, behavioural
problems shouild be considered. History details may allude to behaviouiral issues.
Diagnosis
Bacterial folliculitis associated with Staphylococcus sp. The infection was suspected to
be associated with malnutrition, and stress due to the change in routine.
Anatomy and Physiology Refresher
Avian skin is very thin, and lightly attached to underlying muscle but strongly
attached to bone. Birds do not have sweat glands. The epidermis is thicker around the
beak and on the feet. The dermis comprises connective tissue, feather follicles, nerves
and blood vessels.  Loose connective tissue and adipose tissue make up the
subcuitaneous layer; this layer is thin and hence the skin is very inelastic.
Feathers (Fig. 13.3) are derived from follicles in the dermis, and are composed of
S   s     s   s  
follicle degenerates when the feather matures. Immature ‘blood' feathers will
haemorrhage if broken. Feathers are set into feather tracts, the pterylae. Feather types
vary, with the main contour feather having a hollow shaft and a feather vane of stiff
filaments (barbs, with finer barbules) that interlock. Preening realigns the barbules,
zipping them together.
Main shaft
Barb
Vane
Rachis
Calamus
(contains feather pulp
in growing feathers)
Distal barbule
Proximal barbule
Figure 13.3
Anatomy of a feather.
Feathers are replaced at each moult. Triggers for moulting include nutrition (low-
protein diets inhibit moulting), reproduction, season, temperature and photoperiod.
Newly emerging feathers are highly vascular. Most species gradually lose their
feathers so they are never unable to fly. (Ducks and geese are temporarily flightless, as
they lose all contour feathers simultaneously.)
Aetiopathogenesis of Feather Plucking
As evidenced in the differential diagnosis box above, there are many causes of feather
plucking in birds. In some cases, the aetiology is multifactorial. There may be several
standardized and methodical approach is required to the investigation of feather
plucking. Medical causes are investigated and obvious husbandry problems corrected
initially; if no causes can be found or no improvement is seen on treatment,
behavioural disease is then assessed. In some cases, normal preening may become
prolonged and exaggerated, resulting in feather mutilation.
Epidemiology
Many psittacines are affected by feather plucking. Grey parrots, cockatoos and Hahn's
macaws appear to be over-represented. Since other aetiologies include husbandry
factors, captive birds with an inappropriate environment and diet are predisposed to
the problem.
Treatment
The bacteria isolated from feather pulp in this case were sensitive to several
antibiotics, including amoxicillin clavulanate. The bird received a 3 week course of
amoxicillin clavulanate (125 mg/kg q12hr BID).
Some changes were made to the parrot's environment. The owner was advised to
clean food and water bowls daily using a mild disinfectant, rinsing well afterwards.
The bird was sprayed daily with water to encourage normal preening. The parrot's
food was gradually changed to a more balanced diet (consisting of a proprietary
extruded pellet diet supplemented with fresh fruit and vegetables). The owner
instigated a regular training regime, teaching basic commands such as 'step up' and
'step down'.
CLINICAL TIPS
Dietary changes in parrots
am paas Jo poad e aa Ana slo Ae oa -
· Gradually introduce new foods. In the first instance, they may not be recognized by the bird as
food.
• It may help to pass through a transition diet, e.g. from sunflower seed to soaked and sprouted
sunflower seed to soaked and sprouted pulses.
· Eat (or pretend to eat) the food in the bird's presence. This is more effective if the parrot is trained
or bonded to the owner.
· Offer the new food solely in the morning, giving a later feed of the previous diet. As the bird
accepts the new diet, increase the morning feed and phase out the second feed.
 au na Ae 1 'poo mau a azioa nou saop pa a J 'od a aas no o ·
preference.
· Be patient and persistent.
Treatment Options and Management
              
attack against feather plucking. Unfortunately, it is common that another aetiology is
also present, and the case should be regularly re-evaluated to monitor: (a) owner
compliance with prescribed medications and husbandry changes and (b) patient
progress. Difficulties with making an accurate diagnosis should be discussed with the
changes or treatment will lapse.
If the owner does not wish to pursue investigation, it is reasonable to trial therapy
against common causes of feather plucking; these commonly involve husbandry
optimization. If investigation does not reveal any specific medical aetiology or if no
response is seen with therapy, behaviouiral cauises should be considered. If the
condition recuirs, it is beneficial to re-evaluate the case.
    d     s 
plucking is not due to malnutrition, it will be beneficial for the bird to improve the
diet. The veterinary clinician should therefore seize the opportunity of the
consultation to advise the client on good husbandry conditions. In the best-case
scenario, this will result in the bird having better living conditions, being healthier,
and the owner becoming committed to preventative healthcare.
Alternative therapies  that have been suggested include herbal  therapy or
aromatherapy, acupuncture, nutraceuticals (e.g. aloe vera, and omega-3 fatty acids)
Pycnogenol, bilberry and citrus bioflavonoids).
Treatment of Other Causes of Feather Plucking
Feather picking associated with reproductive problems is usually treated with a
combination  of  pharmacological   treatment,  behaviour  counselling,  and
environmental changes (aimed at reducing reproductive drive and hormone levels).
If a behavioural problem is diagnosed (or suspected), the bird's living situation and
         
Rotation of toys and other stimulation in the environment (e.g. human company,
radio or TV, or a companion bird in some instances) are useful in improving the
animal's condition.
Several texts are available on training and behavioural modification in birds. In
some cases, it can be beneficial to use a drug to modify the bird's behaviour during
this training period. The author does not advocate long-term use of behavioural
modification drugs, as many have adverse side-effects. Similarly, buster collars may be
useful in the short term to prevent self-trauma, but should not be seen as a cure for the
problem. Behavioural modification drugs are best used during the period of
environmental and behavioural changes (Table 13.1).
Table 13.1 Some behavioural modification drugs (to be used in conjunction with behavioural training)
Drug
Dose
Side-effects
Clomipramine
0.5-1.0 mg/kg q8-24hr
Regurgitation, drowsiness, tran sient ataxia, arrh ythmias
Diazepam
0.5 mg/kg q8-12hr
Sedation, chronic hepatic damage
Flu oxetine
 1 mg/kg q24hr
 None reported
Haloperid ol
0.15-0.20 mg/kg ql 2hr
 Anorexia, depression or excitability/agitation
Leuprolid e acetate
0.25-0.75 mg/kg qmonth
 Noreported side-effects
 Medroxyprogesterone acetate*
 5-25 mg/kg q4-6weeks
Hepatic damage, diabetes mellitus, obesity
* For reproductive aetiologies.
CLINICAL TIPS
· It is important that the owner does not reward the parrot by giving it attention when it feather
picks, reinforcing the abnormal behaviour.
Follow-Up
The parrot's self-trauma reduced after a period of 2 weeks. At the following moult,
feathers grew without dystrophy.
Initially, the Amazon refused the pelleted bird food, but gradually started to accept
the new food after 1 month. It continues to be selective about which fruit and
vegetables will be eaten.
Prevention
Good husbandry and biosecurity will prevent access to most infectious and non-
infectious aetiologies for feather plucking. Appropriate socialization and owner
interaction will reduce the risk of behavioural causes.
Prognosis
   s       s   
prolonged or intermittent therapy is required to control the disease. Chronic cases
often respond poorly even when the inci ting cause is treated.
14
Stomatitis in a Harris' hawk
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Reduced appetite and oral lesions in a Harris' hawk.
Introduction
Clinical signs are often not pathognomonic in veterinary medicine, with similar signs
often emanating from several aetiologies. This case highlights the need for laboratory
investigation to make a diagnosis before treatment can proceed.
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
The 4-year-old female Harris' hawk (Parabuteo unicinctus) presented with reduced appetite, which
was suspected to be due to oral lesions that the owner had seen.
Husbandry
The Harris' hawk was tethered on a bow perch outdoors during the day, and housed
in a bay overnight. A sand substrate was provided; this was spot-cleaned daily and
replaced twice yearly. The bow perch was covered with leather padding. A shallow
water bowl was provided for drinking and bathing. The bird was moved to an aviary
during moulting. The aviary had solid timber walls, and was part-covered with
netting across part of the roof and along one side; a sheltered area was included at one
The bird was flown on 5 days each week. She was weighed daily. The diet consisted
mainly of day-old chicks, with occasional quail and rabbit. The quantity fed once
daily varied depending on the morning weight, keeping the bird slightly lighter
moulting. Adult female Harris' hawks usually weigh 825-1200 g (see Harris' hawk
ecology in Ch. 11).
Case History
The Harris' hawk had been flying well through the season, and her appetite was
usually good. The owner had noticed some changes over the previous week:
 Appetite reduced; willing to eat, but slower and not finishing the food offered
· Weight reduction which the owner thought correlated with the reduced appetite
· Cream/yellow material had been seen in the oral cavity
· Still willing to fly
· Normal appearance to mutes (droppings) and casting (regurgitated indigestible part
of diet).
Clinical Examination
After observation of the bird on the owner's fist, the Harris’ hawk was cast with a
towel for examination. Clinical findings were as follows:
· Moderate body condition, keel palpable but not prominent, weight 950 g
 No oculo-nasal discharges externally
· Oral examination revealed caseous off-white material covering the tongue,
s    s  s s a   n
movement of the tongue
· Integument and feathers unremarkable
· Auscultation dorsally and ventrally unremarkable
· Coelomic palpation unremarkable
· No lameness noted when perching on the fist, and no limb laxities or fractures
palpated
· No bumblefoot lesions present.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSES
The differentials for white/cream caseous oropharyngeal lesions in a raptor were:
· Candidiasis (Candida albicans): often pinpoint lesions
Trichomoniasis (Trichomonas spp): usually causes a diphtheritic membrane covering the
oropharynx (called 'canker' by pigeon owners and “frounce' by falconers)
· Capillariasis (Capillaria spp)
· Bacterial stomatitis, e.g. Pseudomonas spp, Pasteurella spp
· Viral infection, e.g. avian pox virus (wet version, particularly seen at the commissures of the beak),
owl herpesvirus
• Fungal infection, e.g. Aspergillus
· Hypovitaminosis A, may predispose to other conditions: for example abscesses particularly in
parrots, candidiasis, and trichomoniasis
 Infection may be secondary to trauma
· Insectivorous birds may suffer from infection with the Syngamus trachea nematode
· Visceral gout
· Neoplasia
· Exudate from sinusitis (e.g. due to mycoplasma infection).
Case Work-Up
Examination under general anaesthesia
This allowed a comprehensive assessment of the oral cavity (Fig. 14.la) including the
base of the tongue, as well as permitting sample collection for further tests.
Anaesthesia was induced via a close-fitting facemask. The hawk was not intubated for
two reasons: the procedure was rapid, and there was a risk of introducing infection
into the lower respiratory tract if an endotracheal tube was passed via the oral cavity.
The lesions extended over the tongue, making it slightly rigid, and laterally in the
oropharynx (Fig. 14.1b). Lesions did not extend into the oesophagus.
(q)
al
Figure 14.1
(a) Normal raptor oral cavity (in a common buzzard, Buteo buteo). (b) Harris' hawk
(Parabuteo unicinctus) with oral lesions, predominantly over the tongue.
NURSING ASPECT
Fasting before anaesthesia
· Raptors should be fasted before general anaesthesia, to reduce the risk of regurgitation and
 aspiration.
· In general it is safe to anaesthetize after the bird has passed casting material (usually about 12
hours after eating).
· Alternatively, food without casting (e.g. muscle only with feathers and bones removed from
carcase) can be given; this will pass through the gastrointestinal tract more rapidly.
Sample collection
Swabs from the oral lesions were taken for cytology and bacteriology. Microscopy was
performed on both a fresh wet preparation (to look for the motile protozoa
Trichomonas) and Gram-staining (to assess for bacteria and yeast). Gout crystals are
also identifiable using light microscopy. In cases of hypovitaminosis A, squamous
metaplasia of epithelial cells is seen.
In this case, large numbers of round and budding cells that stained purple-blue with
Gram-stain were seen on microscopy - diagnosing yeast infection. Candida sp was
also cultured (on Sabouraud's agar at 37°C for 48 hours), producing typical shiny
white round colonies 3-5 mm in diameter. In some candidiasis infections,
pseudohyphae can form on tissue.
Possible Further Investigations
Polymerase chain reaction
This will be necessary to diagnose viral infection such as poxvirus
Cytology
Further investigation of the gastrointestinal tract for infection would include cytology
Haematology and biochemistry
(such as lymphocytosis with toxic change seen in white blood cells) may be present
Radiography
(especially with Trichomonas spp). Skull radiography may be indicated to assess the
extent of pathology.
Endoscopy
Rigid endoscopy may be indicated to assess the extent of lesions in the gastrointestinal
tract. Examination should include the choanal slit, cervical and thoracic oesophagus,
crop and proventriculus.
Diagnosis
Oral candidiasis.
Anatomy and Physiology Refresher
The hard palate is split by the choane, linking the nasal cavity to the oropharynx. The
raptor tongue is relatively long and triangular in shape. The healthy raptor grasps
food with its feet and tears sections off with its beak for swallowing. The salivary
glands produce sticky mucus for lubrication of food. Tongue/palate papillae and
rostro-caudal movement of the tongue, followed by raising of the head, result in
          s
gastrointestinal tract.
The oesophagus lies on the right side of the neck. It is thin-walled with longitudinal
folds. Mucous glands are present. Oesophageal muscle is all smooth muscle. The crop
(ingluvies) is a dilation of the oesophagus at the base of the neck, just cranial to the
thoracic inlet. The crop stores food when the stomach is full. Owls do not possess a
crop.
The stomach consists of the proventriculus and ventriculus. There is little difference
in the two compartments in carnivorous birds. Intestinal reflux (egestion or casting)
enables Falconiformes (diurnal birds of prey) and Strigiformes (owls) to void
indigestible food from the ventriculus, occurring approximately 12 hours after
feeding. Strigiformes egest bone as well as feathers and fur. Falconiformes will hold
food for longer (since they have a crop) and digest bones, so the casting contains only
feathers and fur.
all similar, being thin walled and narrow. The large intestines comprise a short
which the rectum empties), urodeum (ureters and genital ducts empty into this) and
proctodeum (which empties into the vent).
Aetiopathogenesis of Candidiasis
Candida albicans is the most common species of Candida implicated in candidiasis.
Other species that may cause disease include C. parapsilosis, C. krusei  and C.
tropicalis.
tract (including the oral cavity) in raptors. In the healthy bird, host defence
mechanisms and bacterial flora control the number of Candida. The yeast is an
opportunistic pathogen, resulting in disease in cases where prolonged antibiotics or
nutritional deficiencies result in an imbalance of normal gut flora. Thus, the source of
infection    is  endogenous,  with  pathology   being   secondary   to 　 stress,
immunosuppression, malnutrition, poor hygiene, debilitation or in birds treatment,
with antibiotics. Infection may also originate from foodstuffs. Food storage and
preparation should be evaluated, especially for hand-reared chicks. Candidiasis is
to raptors.
like lesions are common on the mucosa of the tongue, pharynx and crop. A deeper
infection of the gastrointestinal tract (where pseudohyphae have penetrated the wall)
may occur alone or in conjunction with upper tract lesions. Malabsorption occurs if
candidiasis extends along the gastrointestinal tract.
pseudomembranous patches. A diphtheritic membrane of mycelial growth may
may develop under the tongue, and in the oral cavity and crop. The disease progresses
to stomati tis and palpable ingluvitis (crop thickening).
a        s
oropharyngeal swelling, vomiting, regurgitation, weight loss and lethargy.
         
if the more distal gastrointestinal tract is affected, resulting in abnormal mutes.
Candidiasis often results in the gastrointestinal wall, commonly the crop, becoming
thickened with white material (like a Turkish towel). The disease is also known as
soor' or ^thrush' by falconers in the UK.
Epidemiology
Candidiasis is most common in immunosuppressed birds. Young raptors (above all in
            g
vulnerable to candidiasis.
Treatment
Debridement
The oral lesions were gently debrided using cotton buds. Candidiasis lesions are
usually easily removed (in contrast to Trichomonas  and Capillaria lesions that
typically haemorrhage). The owner continued to clean the oral cavity with dilute
disinfectant (chlorhexidine) daily ising cotton buds.
Antifungal
Nystatin was administered (at 300 000 IU/kg orally q12hr) for 7 days. This antifungal
is not absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract, making it an excellent choice for
infections localized to the gut. The drug is fungistatic, and must contact the organism
(so it is ineffective if administered by gavage tube past the oral lesions). For lesions
localized to the oral cavity, topical application of the drug may well be effective.
Oral discomfort was suspected due to the bird's reduced appetite. Thus, a 3 day
course of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID, meloxicam at 0.1 mg/kg
orally once daily) was also prescribed. The owner was advised to hand-feed the hawk
with small pieces of food.
CLINICAL TIPS
NSAIDs in birds
· Avian species are susceptible to side-effects including reduced renal perfusion resulting in renal
failure.
* Ensure birds are well hydrated when using NSAIDs.
· It is also important to calculate the dose based on an accurate body weight.
Other Treatment Options
Antifungals
   s  on     s o
mg/kg orally q12hr for 5 days), or topical miconazole gel. Fluconazole (5-15 mg/kg
orally q12hr) or ketoconazole (10-30 mg/kg orally q12hr) are recommended in
systemic cases.
CLINICAL TIP
 Resistance may be present or develop to antifungal therapy. It may therefore become necessary to
alter the drug used.
Probiotics
These may be helpful in re-establishing a normal gastrointestinal microflora
Other treatments
Oral chlorhexidine (2.5-5 ml/itre) in drinking water for 3 weeks is iseful for control
in flock situations, but does not eliminate infections. Apple cider vinegar may also be
added to drinking water; this acidifier may be sufficient to treat mild cases of
candidiasis.
Other conditions
If predisposing conditions exist, including husbandry and nutrition problems, these
should be identified and corrected.
NURSING ASPECTS
Gavage-feeding
· If a raptor is unable to feed, it can readily be gavage-fed.
· The bird is cast using a towel, and restrained by an assistant who also grasps the legs to control the
feet.
· The head is grasped and the beak opened. A gag is placed in the mouth (or a finger at the
commissure) before a feeding tube is passed laterally down the oesophagus to the level of the crop.
If a metal crop tube is used, a gag is not always required, but the oropharynx should be visualized to
ensure that the larynx is not entered. Check positioning by palpating the trachea and tube separately
in the neck.
* A total of 30-60 ml/kg per day of food or fluid is administered, usually divided into two or three
doses.
· Nutritional support can be provided for raptors using convalescent canine/feline diets. If the bird
is dehydrated or has been anorectic for some time, fluids (e.g. water or electrolyte solutions) should
be administered in the first instance. In cases with severe dehydration, rehydration should be
provided via the subcutaneous, intravenous or intraosseous routes.
· Care should be taken if oral infections are present, as the gavage tube could transfer them
mechanically into the more distal gastrointestinal tract.
· While most birds have a dilation in the oesophagus (the crop) for temporary storage of food,
certain species including owls do not.
Follow-Up
that stage, the hawk was eating relatively well when hand-fed, and maintaining her
body weight.
The Harris' hawk was re-examined after 1 week. Although the oral cavity was not
completely healed, the cream material on the tongue and oral mucous membranes had
Prevention
Optimization of husbandry conditions, including diet and hygiene, are the principal
factors to consider for prevention of candidiasis.
Prognosis
   s  e   
may develop. Supportive care is vital if the patient is severely debilitated at
presentation due to chronic and/or systemic infection. Underlying factors need to be
addressed to aid treatment and prevent future recurrences.
Section 3
Reptiles
15
Reptiles - an introduction
Reptiles are among some of the more unusual pets seen in veterinary practice (Fig.
15.1). An approach similar to that for other pets may be taken with regard to their
clinical history and examination, although species-specifics must be known in order
to interpret findings pertinent to husbandry conditions. The metabolic rate is in
general slower with these ectothermic animals than with mammals, and hence disease
processes tend to be more prolonged with reptiles. Investigative techniques and some
basic husbandry requirements for selected species will be outlined in this chapter.
SlomachPancreasGall bladderLiver
Colon
Carapace
Lung-
Testis
Vas deferens
Oesophagus
Kidney
Small
Right and
-Ureter
intestine
leftlungs
Trachea
Coprodeum
Urodeum-Cloaca
Stomach
Proctodeum
Spleen
Plastron
Thyroid HeartSmall
UrinaryPelvis
Vent
ai
intestinebladder
Trachea
Parathyroids
Thymus
Right and
Oesophagus
left atria
Heart
Lung
Ventricle
Liver
Stomach
Gallbladder
Spleen
(some species)
-Left ovary
Pancreas
Colon
Small
Left oviduct
intestine
Rectum
Kidney-
Cloaca
Ureter-
Urinary bladder
Vent
b
Extent oflung
Extenl ofairsac
Right
Left
Airsac
Right
adrenal Left
adrenal
Left
Right
Coelomic
Oesophagus
Praximallung
Stomach
lestis
gland
testis gland
kidneykidney
fat pads
Ureters
Precardial
Heart
Liver
Gall
Spleen
Pancreas
Small
Colon
Vas
fatpad
bladder
intestine
deferens
Cloaca
Vent
Figure 15.1
Basic internal anatomy for (a) chelonia, (b) lizards, (c) snakes.
Taxonomy
Taxonomic classification of reptiles with some examples of those that may be seen as
pets are given in Table 15.1.
Table 15.1 
 Taxonomic classification of reptiles, with some examples of those that may be seen as pets
or in collections
Order
Suborder
Family
Selected species
Testudines
Cryptodira
Chelydridae (snapping turtles)
Snapping turtle (Chelydra sepentina)
(Chelonia,
(hidden-
Platysternidae (big-headed turtle)
Testudinata)
Cheloniidae (sea turtles)
Dermochelyidae (leatherback sea turtle)
Carettochelyidae (pig-nosed turtle)
Pig-nosed turtle (Carettochehs inscuipta)
Trionydhidae (softshell turtles)
Spiny softshell (Apalone spinifera)
Dermatemydidae (Central American river
turtle)
Kinostemidae (American mud and musk
turtles)
Emydidae (pond turtles)
Map turtles (Graptemys spp), pondsliders
(Trachemys scripta spp)
Geoemydidae (Eurasian pond and river
Three-striped box turtle (Cuora
turtles, neotropical wood turtles)
trifasciata)
Testudinidae (tortoises)
Hinge-backed tortcise (genus Kiniys),
Hermann's tortoise （Testudo hermann),
Spur-thighed tortoise (Testudo graeca)
Chelidae (American side-necked turtles)
Mata-mata (Chelus fimbriatus)
Pleurodira
(side-
Pelomedusidae (African side-necked turtles)
Podocnemididae (American side-necked river
turtles and Madagascan big-headed turtle)
Squamata
Lizards
Iguanidae (iguanas)
Green iguana (iguana iguana)
Agamidae (chisel-teeth lizards)
Australian frilled lizard (Chlamydosaurus
kingin), Egyptian spiny-tailed lizard
(Uromastyx aegyptius)
Chamaeleonidae (chameleons)
Jackson's chameleon (Chamae/eo
Jackson/), veiled chameleon
(Ccalyptratus)
Eublepharidae (eyelid geckos)
Leopard gecko (Eublephans macu/anus)
Gekkonidae (geckos)
Day geckos (genus Phe/suma), tokay
(Gekko gecko)
Diplodactylidae (Southwest Pacific geckos)
Pygopodidae (flap-footed lizards)
Dibamidae (blind lizards)
Mexican blind lizard (Ane/tropsfs
papllosus)
Xantusidae (night lizards)
Lacertidae (wall and sand lizards)
European green lizard (Lacerta winidis)
Teiidae (whiptails and racerunners)
Common tegu (Tup/nambis teguixin)
Gymnophthalmidae (microteid lizards)
Scincidae (skinks)
Blue-tongued skinks (genus Tmiqua).
Solomon Islands prehensile-tailed skink
(Coruda zebrata)
Cordylidae (girdled lizards)
Gerrhosauridae (plated lizards)
Dwarf plated lizard (Cordyiosaurus
subtesse/latus)
Anguidae (anguids)
Scheltopusik (Ophisaurus apodlus),
slowworm (Anguis fragiis)
Xenosauridae (xenosaurs)
Helodermatidae (beaded lizards)
Gila monster (Heloderma suspectum),
Mexican beaded lizard (H. homidum):
the only venomous lizards
Lanthanotidae(Borneanearlessmonitor)
Varanidae (monitor lizards)
Nile monitor (Varanus niloticus)
Worm-
Amphisbaenidae
lizards
Trogonophidae
Bipedidae
Rhineuridae
Snakes
Blindsnakes (Scolecophidians):
Anomalepididae (early blindsnakes)
Typhlopidae (blindsnakes)
Leptotyphlopidae (threadsnakes or
womsnakes)
'True snakes'(Althinophidians):
Anomochilidae (dwarf pipesnakes)
Uropeltidae (shield-tailed snakes)
Cylindrophiidae (Asian pipesnakes)
Anilidae (red pipesnake)
Xenopeltidae (Asian sunbeam snakes)
Loxocemidae (neotropical sunbeam snake)
Pythonidae (pythons)
Indian or Burmese python (Python
mo/urus), reticulated python
(Pretculatus)
Boidae (boas)
Boa constrictor (Boa cornstnictor)
Bolyeridae(Mascarene or split-jawed
boas)
Tropidophidae (dwarf boas)
Advanced snakes (Caenophidians)
Acrochordidae (filesnakes)
Viperidae (vipers and pitvipers)
Diamond-backed rattlesnakes(Crotauis
adamanteus, C. atrox), European adder
(Vpera berus), Gaboon viper (B/tis
gabon/ca), puff adder (B. arietans)
Atractaspididae (stiletto snakes and their
allies)
Colubridae (colubrids)
American gartersnakes (Thamnophis
spp).grass snake (Natrix natrix),
milksnake (Lamprope/tis triangulfum)
Elapidae (cobras and their allies)
Spitting cobras (Naja nignicoMis,
N.mossambica,Hemachatus
haemachatus),black mamba
(Dendroaspis polylepis), king cobra
(Ophiophagus hannah)
Rhynchocephalia
Sphenodontidae
Tuatara (Sphenodon pumctatus,
S.gunthen)
Crocodylia
Aligatoridae (alligators)
Dwarf caiman (Paleosuchus pa/pebrosus)
Crocodylidae (crocodiles)
Dwarf crocodile (Osteolaemus tetrasp/s)
Gavialidae (gharial)
Biology
It is impossible to detail husbandry requirements for the huge range of reptile species
that may be seen by the veterinary clinician in practice. The reader is referred to other
texts for further information. Husbandry advice for some common species is listed
below.
metabolism. Carnivorous species can obtain minerals from digestion of bone in their
diet.
As reptiles are ectothermic (relying on environmental temperature to control their
body temperature), most require supplemental heating in their captivity enclosure. A
temperature range should be provided across the enclosure, to allow the animal to
varies between species. Many heating sources can be thermostatically controlled, but
the environmental temperature should still be monitored using a digital maximum-
should be protected to prevent accidental burns. In species that hibernate, care should
also be taken to control and monitor the environmental temperature during this
period.
Most reptiles carry potentially zoonotic pathogens, such as Salmonella spp, in their
gastrointestinal tract. Although these rarely cause disease in humans, general hygiene
precautions should be observed when handling reptiles or cleaning their enclosure, in
          
Enclosuires should be spot-cleaned daily, and intermittently disinfection should be
carried ouit and the substrate changed
Sexing of reptiles depends on the species concerned. In general, adult male tortoises
have a longer tail than females; males may also have a concave plastron. Male
dimorphic, with males having more prominent pre-femoral pores (such as bearded
dragons) or various facial adaptations (such as crests or horns in chameleons, or the
characteristics do not enable gender identification, probing the hemipenes in situ
caudal to the cloaca may be used to sex lizards and snakes. An alternative is
Chelonia
This group is divided into tortoises (terrestrial species), turtles (aquatic marine
species) and terrapins (aquatic freshwater species). Owing to space restrictions,
smaller species are most commonly kept as pets. Most chelonian species prefer to be
enough with several hide areas.
Although low numbers of some endoparasites appear to assist with digestion, large
numbers are usually associated with disease. Faeces should be examined for parasites
annulally.
Hibernation
Many species of chelonia (and some other reptiles) will hibernate in the wild for
S     n         
period to a maximuim of T2 weeks, otherwise, metabolic reserves will become
dangerously low during hibernation and it may be difficult for the tortoise to eat
sufficiently during the warmer months in preparation for hibernation. Tortoises
should be fasted for 1 month before hibernation to allow the gastrointestinal tract to
         
the lungs, resulting in dyspnoea. During this pre-hibernation time, the tortoise should
be bathed to encourage drinking. Water is stored in the urinary bladder for
reabsorption during hibernation.
BOX 15.1 Important note
tortoise (Geochelone sulcata) do not hibernate. They should be over-wintered, ensuring sufficient
Traditional hibernaculums include boxes insulated with straw, but these are
susceptible to environmental temperature changes. Some animals housed in gardens
may dig into soil as their free-ranging counterparts do, but monitoring is nigh on
impossible in this situation. Often, owners do not actually know where the tortoise
has buried itself, and owners digging in gardens during spring have caused traumatic
injuries to hidden pets. A safer alternative is to build an indoor insulated terrarium
with thermostatically controlled heating coils underneath protective matting, covered
air does not become excessively dry.
Hibernation is induced below 15°C, and maintained between 2 and 9C.
Temperatures below 0°C will result in pathology such as blindness. The environmental
temperature should be measured constantly, for example using a maximum-
minimum digital thermometer. Tortoises should be checked daily and weighed weekly
during hibernation. If a tortoise urinates during hibernation, it should be awakened
and ‘over-wintered' (i.e. kept awake and maintained in conditions similar to the
warmer months). Similarly if a tortoise loses >5-10% of its body weight during
hibernation (or > 1% in a week), it should be awakened.
Tortoises should begin eating within a couple of days of wakening from
hibernation. Bathing in shallow warm water will encourage the tortoise to drink and
urinate. Often they will pass a large amount of urates at this stage. If they do not start
to eat within a week, tortoises are deemed to have ‘post-hibernation anorexia', and
hibernation, called aestivation.
Hermann's tortoise (Testudo hermanni)
  d a o ss pn ' n a  s ss s
cm in length. Their diet should mostly consist of weeds such as dandelions (both
leaves and flowers), plantain, sow thistle and sedum. They will also favour flowers
             s
the diet. Mineral supplementation in the form of a proprietary powder is usually added
two or three times weekly. Food is placed onto a smooth surface (e.g. a piece of slate)
to reduce the risk of ingestion of substrate material and resulting gastrointestinal
           
submerge their beak to drink), with weekly bathing in shallow warm water to
Hermann's tortoises require a large (e.g. 90 x 30 cm for a small juvenile) well-
ventilated pen with solid sides, usually made of wood or plastic. A background heat
  a         a   a 
enclosure, not underneath). The environmental temperature should be measured
using a digital maximum-minimum thermometer aiming for a daytime range of 20
30°C, dropping by 15*C overnight. A basking area (with a temperature up to 40°C)
with a spot bulb should be positioned near the feeding area. UV-B lighting should be
heat). These should be positioned approximately 30 cm above the tortoise to ensure
sufficient UV reaches the animal. UV lights usually require changing every 6-12
months as UV output declines (note that output of visual light remains for
in pens.
Hides should be provided, for example a cardboard box, plant pot, or hollow log. A
suitable substrate would be a soil/sand mix, along with an area of large pebbles or
stones. Tortoises are usually solitary, except during the breeding season (when
sexually active males will pursue females).
Horsfields tortoise (Testudo horsfieldi)
These tortoises come from Eastern Europe, growing up to 20 cm in length. Their
Red-foot tortoise (Geochelone carbonaria) and yellow-foot tortoise (G. denticuilata)
These South American species do not hibernate. Their natural habitat is dense humid
  n          s 
damp substrate, resulting in focal areas of elevated humidity. The daytime
temperature should be 25-27"C. Red-foots grow up to 45 cm in length, and yellow-
foots up to 70 cm. Large enclosures (4 x 4 m for a pair) are therefore required.
Red-and yellow-foot tortoises are omnivorous. They will eat ripe fruits (40-70%),
flowers and green leaves (20%), as well as a small amount (one meal per week) of
animal protein (moist low-fat cat food).
Red-eared terrapin (Trachemys scripta elegans)
This species is semi-aquatic and can grow up to 20 cm in length. They are found in
freshwater in South and Central America. Their enclosure should include an aquatic
area for swimming, as well as a land area for basking and resting. Plants (both real
and plastic) can provide hide areas. Water filtration is useful to maintain water
quality, which should be checked regularly. Water changes and tank disinfection
should also be performed regularly. Water temperature should be maintained at 24
26°C ( > 20*C overnight), usually requiring a water heater. A spot bulb should provide
a basking temperature of 32*C. UV-B should be provided as for tortoises.
These animals are omnivorous. Captive diets should be 70-80% animal matter (e.g.
low-fat dried cat, dog or trout pellets, bloodworms, earthworms, small fish, and
commercial terrapin diets), and 20-30% leafy green vegetables and aquatic plants
           p  
to the main enclosure to reduce water soiling.
Spur-thighed tortoises (Testudo graeca subspecies, T. ibera)
These hail from the Mediterranean, Asia and North Africa. Some subspecies do not
hibernate. As with other Testudo species, the diet is predominantly weeds and flowers.
The enclosure and environmental requirements are also similar to those for
Hermann's tortoises.
Leopard tortoise (Geochelone pardalis)
These large tortoises, growing to over 70 cm in length and weighing up to 20 kg, are
from the grasslands of sub-Saharan Africa. The enclosure should reflect the size of the
tortoise. Heating should resuilt in a background temperature over 25"C (> 22"C
overnight), with a basking spot of 40'C. As with other Geochelone species, leopard
     n      
  sa s     sss   s ss
species.
African spuirred tortoise (Geochelone sulcata)
These originate from sub-Saharan Africa, in arid savannahs and acacia scrublands.
They may reach 83 cm in length and 105 kg body weight. Captivity requirements are
similar to those for leopard tortoises, with a high-fibre diet and facilities for over-
wintering.
Lizards
Lizards are common pets, with many species frequently seen in veterinary practice.
           
question. Enclosure design, and temperature and humidity requirements will vary
between species. In general, supplemental heating and UV-B light is necessary. The
substrate for most lizards may be newspaper, artificial turf or other proprietary
substrate material.   Wood  chip  substrates are commonly  associated  with
should be fed salad or fruit, and gut-loaded with a proprietary product (high calcium
content) for 24 hours prior to being fed to the lizard. Insects, and vegetation for
herbivorous species, should be dusted with mineral supplement before being offered to
the reptile.
Leopard gecko (Eublepharis macularius)
These geckos are common pets, originating from north-west India, south-west
             
Leopard geckos are usually housed alone, although adults may be paired. Vivaria are
usually wooden or fibreglass, with a glass aspect for viewing. A visual barrier at the
lizard's ground level will reduce stress. Ideally, the vivarium should be 0.6 m wide X
1.2 m long x 0.6 m deep. Ventilation should be provided. The cool end should be 25°C,
with a hot spot at the other end of 32'C. Although this species is predominantly
be provided. It is important to provide hides, and one should contain a damp substrate
(e.g. moss or absorbent kitchen paper) to increase humidity and assist ecdysis.
Leopard geckos are insectivorous, and are fed on crickets and locusts in captivity.
Although they will also take waxworms and mealworms, these invertebrates should be
fed in limited quantities only.
Green iguana (Iguana iguana)
This lizard comes from tropical rainforests in Central and South America, and grows
up to 2 m in length. As an arboreal species, their enclosure should be vertically
 a s              
for climbing and basking. Background heating is provided, with a lower daytime
temperature of 25*C and a basking spot of 40*C. The humidity should be high (80
90%), maintained by regular spraying or misting and placement of the water bowl at
the warmer end of the vivarium. A UV-B light should be provided over a basking
 s n  e  d r  sn s
houised alone.
Green iguanas are herbivorous, with their diet comprising 90% vegetables (mostly
leafy greens) and 1o% fruits. They will also eat flowers. Food should be supplemented
with a vitamin and mineral powder twice a week. A large container of water will
Bearded dragon (Pogona vitticeps)
This eastern Australian species grows up to 50 cm long. The vivarium should be at
      n     x    
the main part of the diet in adults. All food should be supplemented with a calcium
powder. The water bowl should be large enough for the animal to submerge.
      )  
Along with gastrointestinal disease, the infection may also predispose the bearded
dragon to other infections. Transmission is faeco-oral, and may occur via fomites, so
good hygiene is required to reduce spread.
Veiled chameleon (Chamaeleo calyptratus)
and Saudi Arabia. Free-ranging animals are mostly arboreal, and captive specimens
should be provided with plenty of climbing and perching facilities. A large vivarium is
required for this species, at least 1 m long x 1 m wide x 1.5 m high. Mesh-sided
enclosures are preferable, as chameleons may become stressed and attack their
reflection in glass. For this reason, chameleons are usually housed alone. Mesh
be provided at one end of the enclosure, with a cool temperature of 24°C at the other
end. UV-B light should be provided.
(such as crickets and locusts) and 20% plants in their diet. Live food should be gut-
      s    
drink predominantly from water droplets on plants, usually obtained by regular
  s     s      
60%.
Water dragons (Physignathus spp)
The most common species in captivity is Physignathus cocincinus (the Chinese, Thai
    s   e    ( a  
   (s )    s  s 
mechanism. A large vivarium, usually constructed of wood or fibreglass, should be
provided (at least 2 m long X 1 m wide x 2 m high). The cool end should be
maintained at 29°C, with a basking area of 35°C at the other end. A high humidity
(80-90%), hides, branches for climbing, and UV-B lighting should be provided.
    s      
predominantly fed on crickets and locusts (gut-loaded and dusted with a calcium
supplement). The water container should be deep enough for the lizard to submerge
completely.
Snakes
preventing escape. However, snakes are susceptible to respiratory disease and
ventilation is important with housing, and should not be compromised while
providing secure accommodation. Hides will provide security for the animal. As with
lizards, non-ingestable substrates should be used. Snake vivaria should be cleaned and
such as mites (Ophionyssus natricis). As snakes obtain most minerals from their diet,
 s r  n  m  n     
provided.
Corn snake (Elaphe guttata)
    'e n   n n     s 
vivarium should be 0.6 x 1.2 m (x 0.6 m high). The cool end should be 25°C, with a
basking area of 32°C.
As with most snakes, they are carnivorous. Young corn snakes are fed on pinkies
(newborn mice without any fur) and fuzzies (mice with some fur), progressing to
adult mice and large rats when fuilly grown. Aduilts are uisually fed once weekly. Food
water bowl should be provided, deep enough to permit submerging.
Garter snake (Thamnophis spp)
These species also come from North America, residing in the vicinity of woodlands,
marshes and rivers. They will grow up to 1.3 m long. The vivarium should be 0.6 m in
length x 0.3 m x 0.3 m. Provision of hide areas for snakes will reduce stress. The
temperature should range from a cool of 25°C to a basking hot spot of 32*C.
The free-ranging diet will consist of fish (they are good swimmers), amphibians,
and invertebrates, with occasional young birds or mammals. Captive diets are
vitamin Bl (resuilting in neurological disease in the garter snake), and a supplement
should be added. Water for drinking should be deep enough for the snake to submerge.
Hognose snake (Heterodon nasicus)
Western hognose snakes originate from North America and Mexico, and may reach 75
cm in length. Housing and diet is similar to that required for the corn snake.
Royal python (Python regius)
This snake is from Central and Western Africa, and may reach 1.5 m in length. Diet
and husbandry requirements are similar to corn snakes, although royal pythons
require a slightly warmer basking spot of 35°C.
History
The most important component of reptile history taking is their husbandry (Box 15.2).
Since most reptilian pets will be maintained in a climate different from their normal
environmental range, the owner needs to simulate normal conditions. This will
usually involve supplemental heating and lighting. It is vital that conditions are
monitored, for example that a thermometer is used to measuire temperature rather
than relying on a thermostat attached to a heater, and preferably that records are kept
of these conditions. Poor husbandry conditions result in stress, and this often
contributes to invasion by secondary infectious agen ts.
BOX 15.2 Suggested topics to cover during history taking for reptiles
· Species
·Age
· Gender
· Source, e.g. petshop or breeder, imported, captive-bred or wild-caught, relevant paperwork (e.g.
CITES)
• Period in owner's possession (if this is relatively short, husbandry details from the previous carer
may be important)
· Reproductive history
  s n s  i  
· Supplemental heating source, method of maintenance (e.g. thermostat) and monitoring (e.g. digital
 thermometer) of environmental temperature in enclosure. Temperature range in enclosure during
day and night
· UV-B provision, including when bulbs were last changed and day to night cycle. (UV meters may be
used to assess UV output in older bulbs or tubes, as visible light is still produced when UV
production has waned.)
·• Relative humidity in enclosure, including method of monitoring
• Presence of hides or shelters (particularly for outdoor animals), and other enclosure furniture (e.g.
branches for arboreal species)
· Hibernation history (in appropriate species): including details of period of time, description of
hibernaculum, monitoring during hibernation, any period of post-hibernation anorexia
• Diet: what food is offered (including supplements) and what is eaten, frequency of feeding. For
insectivorous species, whether insects are fed or gut-loaded before offering to the reptile.
· Water provision: including for drinking, bathing (particularly in tortoises that prefer to drink when
they have access to shallow water), and swimming (in aquatic or semi-aquatic species). Water quality
checks for aquatic or semi-aquatic species
· Ecdysis: frequency, date of last shed, any dysecdysis noted
· Handling frequency and periods, including periods the reptile spends outside the enclosure
·• Previous medical history (including any treatments)
· Current problem: time period, outline of clinical signs and progression noted by owner
· Current physiology appetite, thirst, faecal, urine and urates output (including number/size,
frequency/volume, and description)
· Question owner further about the pet's current health: any other clinical signs of disease or
changes in behaviour (these may be subtle)
· Companion animals in same enclosure/airspace/indirect contact: any health problems (current or
previous).
It is extremely useful if owners also maintain records of the reptile's appetite, faecal
production, and shedding. The frequencies of these along with any problems or
changes noted offer a valuable resource for assessment of animal health. The source
and storage conditions of food should be ascertained. It is preferable to feed some
species such as terrapins outside their normal enclosure, owing to the potential for
food remnants to deteriorate water quality.
It is useful to ascertain direct or indirect contact with other reptiles owing to the
risk of disease transmission. Many infectious agents can be spread between animals
S             s 
remain dormant within animals until immune compromise results in a susceptible
animal. It can be extremely difficult to clear some infections from a collection, with
some (in particular viral infections such as ophidian paramyxovirus (OPMV))
requiring cuilling of animals to clear a collection.
Biosecurity measures are therefore vital, as prevention of an agent entering a
collection is much preferred to dealing with the condition. It is advisa ble to instigate a
quarantine policy (for example 90 days for snakes, and at least 30 days for other
reptile species) for new stock in a collection, with appropriate testing performed
during this period. Testing may include faecal parasitology for all reptiles, and other
infectious agent testing dependent on the species (suich as herpesvirus and
mycoplasma for chelonia, and OPMV and inclusion body disease for susceptible snake
species). Herpetologists may have difficulty in selling animals if they have a history of
certain diseases in their collection.
Clinical Examinatior
Handling/restraint
Chelonia and lizards are usually transported to the veterinary clinic in a rigid box. It
geckos. Snakes and some lizards are best transported in cloth bags (e.g. a pillow-case
or duvet cover) with a knot tied to contain them. Reptiles should be kept warm during
transport, for example by placing a warm water bottle within or under the container
(ensuring it is not so hot as to cause burns). Insulated boxes, for example polystyrene,
are useful for long journeys.
Examination gloves shouild be worn when handling reptiles. The risks of
           
low, particularly when good hygiene procedures are followed (i.e. hand-washing).
Other zoonotic risks include pentastomiasis and mycobacterial infections. The risk of
transferring viral infections between reptiles via the handler's hands is high. It is
simpler to change examination gloves than to thoroughly disinfect your hands after
each patient.
Chelonia
Most terrestrial chelonia (tortoises) are not aggressive, and are easily handled.
However, care should be taken not to allow the handler's fingers to become trapped in
                
carapace securely (Fig. 15.2). More than one handler may be required for larger
specimens. For more aggressive species, such as many terrapins and turtles, the caudal
carapace shouild be grasped to minimize the risk of being bitten.
D
Figure 15.2
(a) The hamburger' grip can be used to pick up most tortoises. (b) Gently restrain the
forelimbs for examination of the head.
         s   
performed. In these circumstances, ketamine or ketamine combinations are commonly
injected intramuscularly (for example into the cranial muscle mass of the forelimbs
when they are withdrawn).
Lizards
d p s  a o  sds n   ps 
geckos). The tail should not be grabbed. Sudden grasping movements should be
avoided, as this may also initiate loss of the tail. It is useful to warn owners that
autotomy may occur during handling of such species, particularly if an animal is not
habituated to restraint. Tail regrowth takes several months and the new tail is visibly
different, usually with smaller scales and different colouration (Fig. 22.1). The new
For most lizards, one hand is used to restrain the forelimbs by holding around the
pectoral girdle, and the other hand restrains the hindlimbs by holding around the
pelvic girdle (Fig. 15.3).
Figure15.3
Restraint of a lizard, holding the forelimbs and hindlimbs close to the body.
Small lizards are held in one hand, gently but securely. Many geckos have fragile
before catching and restraining in a small net for examination.
       sn  s   s 
scratching with their claws and whipping their tail. Rarely, lizards may bite. It is
beneficial to restrain larger animals using a towel wrapped over the reptile, moving
the towel to enable a gradual examination.
The only venomous species of lizard belong to the family Helodermatidae. The
venom from these species (Heloderma horridum, the beaded lizard, and Heloderma
suspectum, the Gila monster) flows in grooves along the teeth, and is transmitted to
the victim by chewing. Only experienced handlers should restrain these species, and
safety protocols should be in place in case of envenomation.
Snakes
The head is isually grasped from outside the transport bag before the rest of the body
is unwrapped. If the snake is in a box, a towel can be ised to restrain it for capture.
Snakes have only a single occiput, and dislocation of the head from the neck is
possible with inappropriate restraint. The neck is held with three fingers and the
thumb, while the first finger rests on top of the head to stabilize the joint. The body of
the snake is supported halfway along (Fig. 15.4). Most snakes will move around
somewhat when restrained, and this should be allowed providing the head is secure.
Figure15.4
Restraint of a snake, demonstrating support of the head and the body.
Multiple handlers may be required to restrain larger specimens (>2 m long),
Herpetologists may keep venomous species (national legislation, such as the
with the heloderm lizards, handlers should be experienced and safety protocols in
place before dealing with these species. Snake hooks and tongs, and plastic tubes are
liseful for restraint of aggressive or venomous species. Hooks are particularly useful
for capture and restraint of agile or dangerous (aggressive or venomous) individuals.
Tongs are used to hold the snake before it can be grasped behind the head. Plastic
tubes can be designed with holes along the length for access to inject sedative or
S       a   s   s 
The snake is encouraged to enter the tube partway, so its caudal body can be held
along with the tube.
Crocodilians
Small individuals are restrained as for lizards. Animals may bite, scratch, or writhe
with their tail. Care should be taken to hold or tape the mouth closed.
Examination
If possible, the animal is initially observed within its normal enclosure or the
transport container, to gauge locomotion and demeanour. Any obvious external
abnormalities can be noted for further evaluation during restraint (Box 15.3).
Chelonia and lizards should be able to hold their body above ground level, particularly
during locomotion. Respiratory movements can be observed and any obvious noises
should be noted.
BOX 15.3 Checklist for clinical examination
· Confirm species/breed and sex: many chelonia and lizards are sexually dimorphic when mature,
 some snakes are but many require probing of the hemipenes to determine the gender
· Weigh (using digital scales)
· Assess body condition (see below for details)
· Measure: total length, snout-to-vent length (SVL) in lizards/snakes/crocodilians, straight carapace
length (SCL) in chelonia
· Head: eyes, ears (tuatara do not have external ears), nares, heat sensor pits (present in some snakes
such as vipers), rostrum (abrasions are common in stressed lizards) or beak (overgrowth may be
 seen in tortoises with a variety of conditions), oral cavity (including assessment for stomatitis and
periodontitis), observe and palpate for symmetry
 (s   sas  sd  ' e s a o o  -
compress thoracic cavity (to assess compliance)
· Caudal coelomic cavity:
• Gastrointestinal tract: palpate
· Urinary tract: palpate (e.g. for bladder stones)
· Reproductive tract: palpate for pregnancy (eggs or fetuses) or abnormalities
· Skin: palpate for masses, assess for lesions (e.g. alopecia, crusts, wounds) or discharges,
 ectoparasites (commonly in skin folds around the eyes and mouth), evidence of dysecdysis (e.g.
retained shed especially around toes/eyes/mouth, partial digit loss due to avascular necrosis)
• Musculoskeletal: observe locomotion, palpate and examine limbs, assess muscles for tone and
tetany (commonly seen with nutritional or metabolic disease, or toxins), assess strength in snakes by
testing whether it can support part of the body
· Nervous system: observe demeanour, perform further neurological tests if warranted (e.g. if head 
tilt, facial asymmetry or ataxia present), check if righting reflex present.
different internal anatomy. The lungs lie in a cranio-dorsal position. Chelonia have a
fibrous septum horizontal (a pleuroperitoneal membrane) below the lungs, connected
to the limbs which thus effect breathing movements when moved in and ouit of the
shell. Crocodilia have a muscular septum that is similar to the mammalian
diaphragm. In chelonia and most lizards, the heart lies in the midline quite cranially
             
serpentine heart is approximately a third of the way along the body. In Crocodilia the
heart lies caudal to the forelimbs by approximately 11 scale rows, in the ventral
midline.
Auscuiltation is limited in reptiles due to the difficulty with sound transmission
between the scales and stethoscope. In chelonia, a damp towel may be placed between
the stethoscope and shell, but normal lung sounds are usually not heard. Doppler blood
The coelomic cavity can be relatively easily palpated in lizards and snakes. In
snakes, palpation is performed ventrally between the ribs. In chelonia, the pre-femoral
fossae are also useful for ultrasound probe placement to assess coelomic organs.
Transillumination may be iseful in small individuals of lizards such as leopard geckos
and snakes such as albino animals. The cloaca may be carefully probed digitally in
larger animals.
Body condition assessment
Thin chelonia will feel light for their size, feel empty on palpation of the coelomic
cavity via the pre-femoral fossa, and will often have reduced muscle mass of their
limbs. The ^Jackson's ratio’ may be useful for some species (such as Mediterranean
spur-thighed, Testudo graeca, and Hermann's, Testudo hermanni, tortoises).
Some geckos store fat in their tail (e.g. the leopard gecko, Eublepharis macularius),
and body condition is readily noted by observing the diameter of the tail near the
base. Many lizards store fat in bilateral intracoelomic fat pads, resulting in a distended
coelomic cavity in obese individuials.
Thin snakes appear triangular in cross-section, with prominent ribs and spinal
processes. Overweight snakes deposit fat in the caudal third of the coelomic cavity,
resulting in an enlarged body region cranial to the cloaca.
Sexing
Chelonia
The males have concave plastrons and longer tails in many species of tortoise. Females
  s    s   s   s
tortoises, and red-eared sliders, Trachemys scripta elegans), while females are smaller
in African spurred tortoises (Geochelone sulcata). Some aquatic species (such as the
red-eared slider) have longer nails on the forefeet of males.
Lizards
Sexual dimorphism exists in some species (Fig. 17.1). For example, secretory glands on
the ventral thigh or precloacal region are larger in the males of many lizards
(iguanids and agamids), male Jackson's chameleons (Chamaeleo jacksonii) have
horns on their head. Hemipenes may be detected using ultrasound, for example in
monitors (Varanus spp) and inland bearded dragons (Pogona vitticeps). Some species
can be probed, for example green iguanas (Iguana iguana).
Snakes
Sexual dimorphism is subtler in snakes, with many having broader and longer tails
(due to the presence of the hemipenes at the base). The spurs that remain as hindlimb
vestiges near the vent are larger in male boids (pythons and boas). Most commonly,
snakes are sexed by probing the hemipenes (a lubricated probe is gently passed into
the vent and directed caudally, passing six to ten scale lengths into males and two to
six in females). The hemipenes may be everted either side of the vent by rolling
cranially; however, this procedure may damage the organs
Coelioscopy may be used to sex reptiles.
BOX 15.4 Probing snakes and lizards to determine sex
* Lubricate a blunt-ended probe (using a non-spermicidal lubricant).
· Insert the probe into the cloaca. Direct it caudally in the region of a hemipene (i.e. at the lateral
edges of the cloaca, as there are two hemipenes).
· In males, the probe will be able to pass further caudally (e.g. eight scale lengths in many snakes)
than in females.
· If only a short distance is probed, check the other side as hemipenal plugs may form from time to
time and restrict passage of the probe.
Investigation
Phlebotomy
Sedation or general anaesthesia may be necessary for phlebotomy in some reptiles
(Table 15.2), but in most individuals venepuncture can be performed using conscious
restraint. The skin should be prepared as for a surgical procedure, particularly at
contaminated sites such as the tail. A surgical cut-down is usually required for
placement of an intravenouis catheter.
Table 15.2 Preferred sites for phlebotomy in reptiles
Site
Comment
Species
Brach ial
At flexor surface of elbow
Larger chelon ia;
 plexus
some lizards
Cardiocentes
Locate heart and steady with gentle pressure cranilly and caud ally In sert needle into ventricular region. Avoid
 Snakes
multiple needle sticks, as this increases the risk of detrimental card iac damage
Cephalic vein
Cut-down procedure required, can place in-dwellin g cath eter
Larger lizards
Dorsa.
 Often contam inated by urates and faecal material
Chelon ia
coccygealvein
Ju gular vein
Extend neck of chelonia and raise vein with pressure at base of neck. Cut-down procedure in lizards and snakes; can
Chelon ia, lizards,
place in-dwelling catheter
 snakes
Palatine vein
Med ial surface of palatine dental arcade; anaesthetized animals
Lar ge snakes
Sub-c arapacial
U seful where jugular venepun cture not possible (e.g. in small specimen s or larger ones); sample may be contam inated by
 Chelon ia
sinus
lymph. Midline below cranial carapace; use a long needle
Ventral
A surgical approach may be required (risk severe haemorrhage if lacerate vein and cann ot compress); can place in-
Lizards
abdomin al
dwelling catheter (thou gh difficult to maintain as ventrum contacts substrate)
vein
Ventral
Can be difficult to get sample from small snakes. Ventral midline or lateral approach in lizards; long needle required
Lizards, sn akes
coccygeal
vein*
*Samples from small Crocodilia are obtained as from lizards.
Haematology is performed on a sample preserved in anticoagulant, usually calcium
EDTA (although this may haemolyse blood from some species, including many
chelonians, in which lithium heparin is the preferred anticoagulant). A freshly
prepared blood smear is useful to assess erythrocyte and leucocyte morphology, and to
check for haemoparasites. Biochemical analyses are performed on either plasma or
serum samples. In very small animals, a basic profile including estimated total and
differential white cell count, packed-cell volume (PcV) and total solids can be
performed on a blood smear and haematocrit tube sample. Samples containing lymph
will be diluited, affecting test resuilts
Blood results vary greatly between species, between sexes, and seasonally. The
reader is referred to other texts and specialist laboratories for reference ranges.
Radiography
It is often possible to radiograph lizards and chelonia without chemical restraint,
although adhesive tape is lseful to extend limbs. Chelonia may be balanced on an
upside down mug or bowl to prevent significant movement during horizontal beam
radiography (Fig. 15.5). Small-to medium-sized lizards often respond well to the vago-
vagal response, using bandage over cotton wool balls to put pressure over the eyes.
Larger, livelier animals may require some sedation to aid positioning. Similarly,
chelonia often require sedation to allow positioning for radiography of the limbs.
to permit positioning for two orthogonal views.
(b)
(a)
(c)
Figure 15.5
(a-c) Reptiles positioned for radiography, including horizontal beam positioning of a
tortoise (b, c).
The main difference between radiography of mammals and reptiles relates to their
anatomy. Owing to the lack of diaphragm, lateral views should be taken with a
horizontal X-ray beam (otherwise the organs fall onto the lungs and give an abnormal
and non-diagnostic appearance). For lizards and snakes, a dorso-ventral view (using a
vertical X-ray beam) and lateral view (using a horizontal beam) are taken routinely.
For chelonia, these are supplemented with a cranio-caudal view (using the horizontal
beam again). For localized assessments views may vary, but the aim is always to have
two orthogonal views of the site.
Markers (e.g. metal strips on the film corresponding to tape on the animal) shouild
be used to identify the location along the length of a snake's body for film
interpretation after processing.
Other imaging modalities
Ultrasonography is particularly useful for assessing the coelomic cavity in reptiles
Coupling gel should be applied several minutes before the procedure is performed, to
increase contact time and reduce air pockets that will affect the quality of the
ultrasound image.
Reproductive assessment is  easily performed  using  ultrasound,  enabling
visualization of ovaries, follicles, eggs, and fetuses within the reproductive tract.
Ultrasound-guided fine needle aspirates may be performed to obtain samples from
abnormal structures for cytology or culture. Some echocardiography has been
performed in reptiles; however, reference values are still limited. Masses on peripheral
body parts may also be beneficially examined by ultrasound.
Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) may be used in
reptiles. Chemical immobilization is required to prevent excessive movement during
the procedure. The interpretation of images from reptiles is in its infancy, but the
application of general anatomical and medical knowledge aids in understanding.
Sampling
Many samples from reptiles may usefully be analysed. As for blood samples, it is
advisable to use a laboratory that specializes in exotic pets; they are more likely to
samples.
           
animals. Parasitology may detect protozoa, parasitic ova and larvae. Other
information may be gained from the sample, for example the presence of bacterial
sample is usually mixed with gastrointestinal excretions due to the common chamber
(the cloaca) between the renal and gastrointestinal tracts.
or from fine needle aspirates. Cavity washes (e.g. cloacal, gastric, tracheal or lung
washes) may also be examined microscopically or cultured; usually sterile isotonic
fluid is utilized. Bone marrow or cerebrospinal fluid samples may be obtained for
             s
suspected toxins or infectious agents; the specialist laboratory should be contacted to
obtain details of the best sample and storage conditions for the suspected condition.
Treatment
Basic procedures
Drug administration
Topical medication may be applied to treat ocuilar or skin disease.
Oral administration is relatively easy in most reptiles. It is usefuil to utilize a mouth
gag to prevent damage to the oral structures and to the syringe or tube being used for
administration. Gavage is commonly used to administer fluids and nutritional
supplementation, as well as medications. The tube should be pre-measured to the level
of the stomach. Bathing reptiles in shallow warm liquids (mostly water) will
encourage drinking and also passage of urine/urates/faeces. Pharyngostomy tubes are
placed under general anaesthesia, and allow ease of long-term treatments.
Reptilian skin is relatively inelastic, and only small volumes may be injected
subcuitaneously. This rouite is contraindicated in lizard species such as geckos that
have thin, fragile skin.
The intramuscular route is often employed to administer medications such as
antibiotics and anaesthetics. In chelonia and lizards the triceps or quadriceps muscle
groups are utilized. In snakes and larger lizards the epaxial muscles may also be used.
As described above, intravenous access may be difficult (particularly for prolonged
administrations). This route is commonly used for administration of anaesthetics, and
placement of a catheter permits prolonged administration of fluids and other
medications.
large volumes are injected, it is important to ensure they are pre-warmed to the
animal's POTR. In chelonia, the pre-femoral fossa is accessed after tilting the body
away from the site. A ventro-caudal lateral approach is used for lizards. In snakes the
left caudal flank is used. In all species cauido-ventral placement of needles should
reduce the risk of lung or air sac penetration, although positioning should be checked
by withdrawing the syringe plunger before injection to ensure other coelomic organs
have not been entered.
In tortoises, the epicoelomic route may be used for relatively rapid absorption. This
placed in the cancellous bone of the caudal plastro-carapacial pillar. In lizards the
distal humerus, proximal tibia or distal femur are ised.
Nebuilization is a technique frequently used in cases with respiratory tract disease.
Saline will reduce viscous secretions and moisten the airways. Antimicrobial agents
can be targeted to the respiratory tract.
Other routes of medication include intra-lesional, intra-articular and  sub-
spectacular  injections,   cloacal and  nasal flushing.  Antibiotic-impregnated
polymethylmethacrylate beads may be implanted into lesions.
Assist-feeding
S   s   n     
human baby foods may be used, but most reptiles require long-term support and diets
more closely allied to their natural diet should be given. Proprietary convalescent
herbivore and carnivore diets are available
Although some reptiles become habituated, most (particularly snakes) are secretive
feeders and do not respond well to hand-feeding. It can be helpful to warm prey items
for carnivores and move it to simulate a live animal; this may stimulate a strike
response and swallowing by an ill patient. Debilitated tortoises may take food
tolerated.
in the oral cavity (taking care not to damage any teeth). For more chronic conditions.
food or medication is better administered via an oesophagostomy tube.
Anaesthesia
Pre-anaesthesia
Before sedation or anaesthesia, the reptile should be clinically assessed. This includes
assessment of the animal's husbandry, to identify any factors that may increase the
risk of disease or debilitation, as well as a clinical examination to assess for current
pathology. The patient should be weighed on digital scales, in order to permit accurate
drug dosing.
Severely debilitated animals should be stabilized before induction of anaesthesia.
         
provision.  All reptiles should be housed appropriately during their stay at the
veterinary clinic. This usually involves provision of a secure enclosure with
supplemental heating, often with UV-B lighting. The environmental temperature
should be assessed using a digital thermometer, maintaining the temperature within
the species' POTR.
Carnivorous species such as snakes should be fasted before elective procedures to
reduce the risk of regurgitation. The period of fast depends on the normal
 gastrointestinal transit time.
Pre-medication
Commonly uised pre-medicants in reptiles are given in Table 15.3.
Table 15.3 Commonly used pre-medicants in reptiles
Drug
Dose (mg/kg)
Route
Comment
Buprenorphine
0.02-0.20
SC, IM
Analgesic, may cause sedation
Butorphanol
0.4-2.0
SC,IM, IV
Analgesic, may cause sedation in some lizard species
Midazolam
IM
Minimal sedation if used alone
Ketamine
Dose-dependent sedative effects, pre-medication doses
5-20
IM
Chelonia
5-10
Lizards, snakes
Acepromazine
0.05-0.50
IM
Can be used with ketamine
Butorphanol +midazolam
0.4 +2.0
IM
Tiletamine +zolazepam
4-10
IM
Sedation for non-invasive procedures
IM, intramuscular;IV,intravenous; SC, subcutaneous
Inhalation agents
Volatile agents are often used to induce anaesthesia in lizards (using an induction
chamber or closely fitting facemask), usually after pre-medication to reduce breath
holding.
Anaesthesia is generally maintained using volatile agents once the patient is
intubated. Apnoea is common, and IPPV is performed at 2-4 breaths/minute during
anaesthesia.
Injectable agents
Chelonia
Injectable agents (Table 15.4) are used to induce anaesthesia. Options include
propofol, alfaxalone, ketamine, or ketamine with medetomidine. Intravenous access is
commonly via the jugular vein.
Table 15.4 Commonly used injectable anaesthetic protocols in reptiles
Drug
Dose (mg/kg)
Comment
Route
Species
Alphaxalone
10-15
V
Chelonia
10
Lizards
Ketamine
<90
Anaesthesia
IM
Chelonia
<60
Deep sedation
Snakes
Ketamine+medetomidine
5 + 0.05-0.10
Supplement oxygen; assist ventilation
AIWI
Chelonia
Propofol
3-15
A
Chelonia
3-5
10mg/kg ifnotpre-medicated
Lizards
5-10
Snakes
Lizards
Similar injectable agents (Table 15.4) are used as in chelonia, including propofol or
alfaxalone. The most easily accessible vein is usually the ventral coccygeal; care
should be taken in species that may autotomize their tail if this vein is accessed for
induction. Pre-medications may include butorphanol or ketamine
Snakes
Intravenous access is difficult in snakes, but if the ventral coccygeal vein is accessible
propofol is the induction agent of choice (Table 15.4). Alternatively, ketamine can be
used to sedate before volatile agents are used to induce anaesthesia, or higher doses of
ketamine administered to induce anaesthesia outright. In some snakes (not venomous
species!), conscious intubation may be performed and IPpV with a volatile agent used
to induce anaesthesia.
Monitoring anaesthesia
Voluntary respiratory efforts may be observed by watching the movement of the
animal's thoracic cavity or of the reservoir bag on the anaesthetic circuit. Since most
reptiles will be manually ventilated, this rate should also be recorded on the
anaesthetic sheet (preferably using a different symbol from voluntary breaths).
The heart rate is usually monitored using a Doppler probe over the heart or a large
artery such as the carotid (Fig. 15.6). An oesophageal stethoscope may be used in
larger animals. In snakes, the heartbeat may be visible. ECG leads (Fig. 15.7) may be
attached to the patient, although reptilian skin has poor conductivity and contact is
better if ECG clips are attached to needles inserted through the animal's skin.
Figure15.6
 Doppler probe used to monitor pulse on carotid artery.
Figure15.7
ECG attached to a bearded dragon (Pogona vitticeps).
Reflexes to monitor include the toe or tail pinch, and jaw tone. In snakes, muscle
tone in the tail is lost last when anaesthesia is induced, and regained first before
cranial musculature on recovery.
Peri-anaesthetic care
During anaesthesia, provision of supplemental heating is necessary (within the
species' POTR).
          
supplemented excessively during recovery. In general, the patient is disconnected from
continuled using a manulal resuscitator.
Fluids are usually administered peri-anaesthetically. This is particularly important
when procedures under anaesthesia are prolonged, and/or when injectable agents are
used that may be renally excreted.
Surgery
To aid healing, skin incisions should be made between scales where possible. Access to
the coelomic cavity is usually via a paramedian incision (avoiding the ventral midline
abdominal vein) in lizards, ventrolaterally (between the first two rows of scales on the
side) in snakes, and via a plastronotomy in chelonia (although a pre-femoral
The coelomic membrane and body wall are typically thin with little suture-holding
strength, and wound closure relies on skin sutures. Reptiles uncommonly interfere
wounds. If an appositional pattern is used as in other species, the wound edges will
invert. Wound healing is prolonged, requiring 4-6 weeks for skin healing in most
cases; hence non-absorbable suture materials (e.g. polypropylene, nylon, or skin
reactions or acting as a permanent foreign body. The owner should be warned that
dysecdysis is likely at the wound site, although this should resolve after a few sheds.
Bone incisions may take a year to heal. Where chelonia undergo shell repair,
healing may take years to complete. Plastronotomies in chelonia are commonly closed
using fibreglass sheets and resin.
A good anatomical knowledge is necessary for coeliotomies, particularly in snakes
incisions may be required, for example to perform surgery on a female snake's
reproductive tract. Internal organs in reptiles are delicate, and manipulation is often
easiest using stay sutures. Stainless steel surgical clips are preferred by many surgeons
for internal sutures and ligatures, alternatives include rapidly absorbed materials like
poliglecaprone 25.
Analgesia should be provided for any animal undergoing a painful procedure.
Euithanasia
           
intracardiac in snakes). In some animals, this will not be possible, and the
intracoelomic or intrahepatic routes are used. It may be useful to sedate or
heartbeat using a Doppler probe or an ECG.
16
Gastrointestinal foreign body in a tortoise
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Inappetence, reduced faecal output, hindlimb paresis in a Hermann's tortoise.
Introduction
Pet chelonia often roam in large outdoor areas, which include access to various
substrates. Ingestion of foreign material may or may not lead to gastrointestinal
obstruction. A major concern in chelonia is the decision over whether medical therapy
will result in a cure, or if surgical intervention (usually necessitating a trans-plastron
coeliotomy) is required.
CASE PRESENTINGSIGNS
      n    
reduced faecal output and hindlimb paresis.
Husbandry
This captive-bred tortoise had been in the current owner's possession since
approximately 1 year old. He was housed on his own for most of the year in an indoor
enclosure, with supplemental heating (bulb) and lighting (including UV-B), although
he did roam one of the rooms periodically. During the summer months, he was
permitted outdoor access in the owner's garden - usually supervised. His diet
comprised various weeds and vegetables (including clover, dandelions, cabbage, and
cuttlefish). He had grown from 150 g to 1.28 kg over 6 years, and had never been
hibernated.
Case History
During one of the tortoise's outdoor excursions, 4 weeks prior to presentation at the
veterinary practice, the owner temporarily left him unattended and returned to find
        s     g
presentation:
· Inappetence
· Reduced use of hindlimbs.
Clinical Examination
As tortoise clinical examinations are restricted due to anatomical constraints, findings
were brief:
· Not raising plastron above ground when walking
· Body condition good, weighing 1.28 kg. Muscle mass good, with no generalized
weakness noted
    s     
growth seen in many pet tortoises with excessive nutritional intake
· Oral mucous membranes were pink and moist (no sign of dehydration)
· No masses or foreign bodies were detected in the coelomic cavity via palpation in
the prefemoral region.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSES
Inappetence is a common presenting sign for many illnesses in reptiles, and further investigations
are required to determine the disease process(es) occurring.
The differentials for reduced faecal output were:
* Secondary to reduced food intake (gastrointestinal transit time may be < 20 days in chelonia)
* Systemic illness, e.g. dehydration, hypocalcaemia
 Obstruction in gastrointestinal tract, e.g. cloacolith/faecolith (often associated with dehydration),
intussusception (possibly secondary to  other disease, e.g. foreign body), foreign body,
endoparasitism (e.g. ascarids such as Augusticaecum sp), neoplasia, volvulus
 Space-occupying lesion compressing gastrointestinal tract, e.g. cystic calculi, reproduction in
 ) o (siss -so o-ad is ) a
hepatomegaly), pelvic fracture, neoplasia, granuloma
· Poor husbandry, e.g. low environmental temperature
The differentials for hindlimb paresis were:
· Inappropriate husbandry, particularly inadequate environmental temperature
• Nutritional or renal secondary hyperparathyroidism (also known as metabolic bone disease, MBD),
hypocalcaemia
s-a   'ins a ssd zi  rs  ss ss .
starvation
· Renomegaly
• Articular gout/pseudogout
· Toxicity, e.g. ivermectin, pesticides
• Infection, e.g. abscess, cellulitis, or osteomyelitis (usually bacterial)
* Cystic calculi
· In a female, egg retention or after oviposition
* Neoplasia, in nervous or musculoskeletal systems
· Neurological, e.g. infection (bacterial, fungal, parasitic), spinal cord lesion (trauma, pathological
 after vertebral body collapse in MBD)
· Musculoskeletal disease (common in males if they fall of the female's carapace after mating):
tendon or ligament damage, fracture (traumatic or pathological) - less likely in this case as bilateral
 paresis noted
· Less commonly, flaccid paresis may result from: shock, drowning, hyperthermia or bloat.
Case Work-Up
Radiography
Three views were taken of the conscious tortoise - dorso-ventral (Fig. 16.1) using a
vertical beam, and cranio-caudal and lateral using a horizontal beam. These
orthogonal views outlined the presence of foreign material within the gastrointestinal
tract. The object was less dense than bone buit more radiodense than soft tissue, and its
shape was consistent with a piece of gravel. The absence of gas near the mass
suggested that it was not completely obstructing the gastrointestinal tract. No
musculoskeletal pathology was detected on the radiographs.
Figure16.1
Dorso-ventral radiograph of the tortoise, showing radiodense foreign body within the
Haematology and biochemistry
Financial consideration may preclude blood analysis in practice, and the clinician
should be aware that analysis is not sensitive in reptiles. In this case, results showed
mild dehydration (haematocrit and total protein were slightly elevated). There was no
evidence of systemic infection (total white cell count normal, and no ‘toxic’ or
(including renal parameters (uric acid), hepatic enzymes (AsT, LDH, CK), and ionized
          
reducing the likelihood of metabolic bone disease or other metabolic derangement
(Table 16.1).
Table 16.1 Hermann tortoise blood results (with reference ranges for comparison)
Parameter
Unlt
Result
Reference range
Total proteln
16
53.6*
Albumin
15
13-16
Globulin
g-l
19.8
14-29
Glucose
mmoll
2.33*
4.3-10.7
Calclum
mmoll
2.87
1.65-3.3
lonlzed calclum
mmoll
2.01
>1.0
Phosphorus
mmoll
1.55
0.48-1.81
AST
U/I
70
0-210
CK
U/I
100
0-620
Urlc acld
umol
250
124-466
LDH
U/I
197
0OE-0
Sodlum
mmoll
139.3
123-145
Potasslum
mmoll
8.18
Haemoglobln
IP/6
11.6
3.9-12.6
Haematocnt
0.45*
0.15-0.43
Red blood cells
×102/
1.02
0.35-1.11
MCV
fl
358.2
357.5-436.4
MCHC
IP/0
32.2
25.7-33.3
MCH
X10A
113.7
94.3-140.2
White blood cells
X10A
0.8
0.1-3.1
Heterophils
X10A
0.30
0.00-1.91
Monocytes
X10/
0.02
0.00-0.10
Basophlls
X10A
0.03
600-000
Thrombocytes
X10A
8*
1-5
*Abnommal values outside reference range.
AsT = aspartate aminotransferase; CK= creatinine kinase;
LDH = lactate dehydrogeniase; MCV = mean corpuscular
volume; McHc=mean corpuscular haemoglobin
concentration: MCH = mean corpuscular haemoglobin
Other diagnostic tests which could have been performed
Cloacal swabs or wash for microscopy/culture (for endoparasites, enteric infection),
ultrasound, coelioscopy.
The history was suggestive of a gastrointestinal foreign body, although other
pathological processes could also be concurrent. The diagnosis was supported by the
positive radiographic findings.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis in this case was that of gastrointestinal foreign body. The clinical signs
of inappetence and  hindlimb paresis were attributed  to intestinal  discomfort.
Dehydration likely developed with the reduced appetite.
Radiodense foreign bodies are relatively easy to detect on radiography. Obstruction
is often accompanied by an enlargement of the intestinal diameter. Obstructive ileus
polyethylene spheres, BIPS) may be required to outline a non-radiodense object. Other
Anatomy and Physiology Refresher
Gastrointestinal tract
The chelonian oesophagus passes on the left-hand side of the neck (Fig. 16.2). The
pylorus centrally or to the right. Thick folds at the cardia in Testudo spp act like a
sphincter; there may be a muscular sphincter at the pylorus. The small intestine is not
well divided into sections, and lies cauidally in the coelom. There is a muscuilar valve
of the cloaca, and thence material is voided via the vent. Various membranes and
trapped in this region owing to gravity).
Trachea
Parathyroids
Oesophagus
Thyroid
Lungs
Heart
Liver-
Stomach
Large
Spleen
colon
Small
intestines
Cranial duodenal
Vent
Aeuun
flexure(covered
bladder
by liver)
Figure 16.2
The ventral view of viscera within the chelonian coelomic cavity.
Nutrition
Mediterranean tortoises such as this Hermann's require a diet high in slowly
digestable carbohydrate and fibre, along with appropriate vitamins and minerals. The
energy density in the diet of free-ranging animals is fairly low, and they are browsers
of herbaceous plants. It can be difficult to mimic this diet in captivity, and
deficiencies or excesses may lead to disease in the gastrointestinal tract as well as
systemically (e.g. in bone growth and shell formation).
Free-ranging animals have been reported to ingest bones and soil, presuimably for
dietary
 supplementation, e.g. of calcium and sodium. Some animals appear
predisposed to this activity, possibly relating to nutritional imbalances.
Aetiopathogenesis and Epidemiology
Predisposing factors include:
during normal feeding.
n     a s     s
nutrition with mineral deficiencies may be predisposed to pica. Although female
chelonia are more likely to require higher levels of minerals suich as calcium (for
reproduction), no sex predi lection for ingestion of foreign items has been reported.
· Dehydration due to lack of water source/bathing or low environmental humidity.
Common foreign bodies ingested are small stones/gravel, pieces of metal, pottery,
woody material, and coal. Where metal objects are detected, blood should be assayed
for toxic heavy metals such as lead and zinc. Sand impaction after substrate ingestion
has been reported in Aldabran (Dipsochelys elephantina) and Galapagos (Chelonoidis
nigra) tortoises. Female tortoises may be more likely to ingest white material during
predisposed to ingestion of gravel substrate, e.g. red-eared sliders (Trachemys scripta).
An intussusception may form after foreign body obstruction in the intestinal tract,
and in some cases this may slough and be passed. It should be remembered that a
  n         n
radiography.
Intestinal intussusception results in some cases, and volvulus has also been reported
with foreign material in the intestines.
animal extending the hindlegs and elevating the plastron caudally) and
haematochezia. Dehydration, weight loss, cachexia and generalized debility worsen
with chronicity. Anaemia and leucocytosis may be present on haematology; hepatic
and muscle enzymes may be elevated, and electrolyte abnormalities seen on serum
biochemistry - although none of these changes were present in this case.
Metal or mineral materials are easily visualized on plain radiographs. Contrast
studies may be required to outline rubber or plastic materials - repeating exposures
gastrointestinal transit time. Other imaging modalities such as ultrasound, CT and
MRI may be uiseful.
Treatment
The tortoise was in good body condition, and reacted normally to examination. After
discussing options with the owner, medical therapy was embarked upon.
Fluids
Several routes of fluid administration are used in tortoises, and systemic and oral
rehydration is advocated in cases of intestinal obstruction. Intracoelomic fluids were
administered (Box 16.1), at a rate of 15 ml/kg of warmed Jarchow's solution (this is
an isotonic solution, comprising a 1 : 1 : 1 mix of sterile saline, water for injection,
and Hartmann's solution). Nutritional support was given in the form of a
dextrose/amino acid solution (Critical Care Formula?, Vetark, Winchester) at 15
ml/kg via gavage tube (Box 16.2).
BOX 16.1 Technique
Intracoelomic injection in a tortoise
• Patient restrained in dorsal recumbency with right side slightly elevated - allowing viscera to drop
away from the body wall under gravity. Right hindlimb pulled caudally
· Skin in right prefemoral fossa is surgically prepared
· Needle is inserted at 30-45? angle, and aspirated to check not in intestinal lumen (ventrally) or
lung (dorsally)
• Fluids should always be warmed before administration.
Advantages
 Rapid absorption of fluids.
Disadvantages
· Risk of accidental visceral penetration and subsequent adhesion (or drowning if lung punctured).
BOX 16.2 Technique
Gavage feeding a tortoise
· An assistant holds the patient, restraining the forelimbs (Fig. 15.2b).
· Hold the head bilaterally caudal to the skull.
· Use a finger (or wooden gag) to depress the mandible. A finger from the hand restraining the head
do   da  a a   p    q 
· Pre-measure the length of the rubber tubing (metal crop tubes may also be used) (Fig. 16.3) to mid-
way along the plastron (i.e. at the level of the stomach), and lubricate the tip. Insert the tube
laterally into the mouth and pass smoothly into the oesophagus to the appropriate distance.
· Inject the contents of the syringe steadily, stopping if regurgitation is seen.
· Hold the tortoise upright for 30-60 seconds after the procedure to minimize regurgitation.
• Always pre-warm fluids (e.g. water, electrolyte solution, puréed food) before administration.
· < 15 ml/kg can be administered at a time.
Advantages
· Large volumes can be administered rapidly, including nutritionally rich fluids.
• Some owners may be able to perform this technique for nursing at home.
* Good technique for rehydration in mild-moderate illness.
Disadvantages
· Require functioning gastrointestinal tract for absorption. Insuficient as sole method of rehydration
in debilitated animals.
• Usually not possible in un-sedated large animals, or in certain species (e.g. sulcata or leopard
tortoises) that are resistant to oral examination.
· Risk of mandibular or maxillary damage in animals with metabolic bone disease
Figure 16.3
Measurement of the tube to the location of the stomach before gavage in a tortoise.
The owner bathed the tortoise once daily for 10-20 minutes in shallow tepid water,
to stimulate drinking and defaecation, and possibly peristalsis. This also allows water
absorption via the cloaca. Any faeces passed were examined for the presence of the
foreign body.
Prokinetics
Metoclopramide was administered (1 mg/kg PO q24hr) to stimulate gastrointestinal
motility (although the effectiveness of motility agents in tortoises is not proven).
Other aspects of management
It is important to address underlying causes and optimize husbandry conditions in
sick reptiles. In this case, the owner was advised to keep the tortoise within the
vivarium, where the environmental temperature could be controlled and maintained
at the species' preferred optimal temperature range (POTR). This was particularly
nutrition of high fibre content and low energy density (predominantly weeds such as
dandelions, clover, vetch and plantain) was advised, to stimulate normal
gastrointestinal function. The tortoise was no longer permitted access to gravel
substrate.
NURSING ASPECTS
Supportive care of this tortoise was the cornerstone of successful treatment. Although the owner
was able to administer some medication, gavage feeding was not easy in this strong animal. Some
patients may benefit from a period of hospitalization for this, or placement of an oesophagostomy
feeding tube (Box 16.3) to permit easier administration of fluids and medication.
 BOX 16.3 Technique
Oesophagostomy tube placement in a tortoise
· Deep sedation (e.g. medetomidine, ± ketamine) or brief general anaesthesia (e.g. propofol,
alfaxalone) is usually required, unless the animal is severely debilitated, along with appropriate
analgesia (e.g. local anaesthetic injected at the skin incision site).
• Pre-measure and mark a soft, long feeding tube from the neck to the stomach (half-way down the
plastron), and pre-fill with water (noting the volume required for future flushing).
· Aseptically prepare the skin on the lateral neck.
the skin on the caudo-lateral neck. Make a small incision through both skin and oesophagus to
allow the tip of the forceps to exit.
o peo a jo ino nu lnd pe aq aa a yo dn a dse .
· Re-position the forceps grasp, and redirect the tube into the oesophagus towards the stomach.
Advance the tube to the pre-measured mark.
· Use a finger-trap suture to attach the tube to the skin on the neck (Fig. 16.4).
· Visualizing with an auroscope or rigid endoscope in the proximal oesophagus can check
positioning proximally, and a radiograph can ascertain whether the tip of the tube lies in the distal
oesophagus.
Advantages
· Ease of administration of oral fluids and medications, making nursing much easier and less
stressful for the patient.
· Can be left in situ for several weeks.
· Patient can eat around tube.
Disadvantages
 Risk of abscess formation at skin incision site (rare).
Figure 16.4
Oesophagostomy tube placed in a tortoise.
CLINICAL TIPS
· The owner should be made aware at the outset that treatment of reptiles is often prolonged.
Alteration of the patient's condition may necessitate a change of treatment. It is advisable to explain
this and to discuss possible treatments and outcomes at the initial consultation, and to impress on
the owner the requirement for regular monitoring.
• Involve the owner in nursing care if possible. Many are able to gavage-feed tortoises (particularly
placid species such as Testudo species) once the technique has been demonstrated. Daily bathing in
shallow tepid water is an excellent method of rehydration, as tortoises will absorb water via their
cloaca.
Other Treatment Options
Analgesia
If discomfort is suspected, some cases respond well to analgesia. However, little work
on analgesics in chelonia has been reported. Opioids such as butorphanol (o.2-1.0
mg/kg IM ql2hr) may be useful. NSAIDs have also been anecdotally reported (e.g.
carprofen 2-4 mg/kg IM/SC/PO q24-72hr, meloxicam 0.2 mg/kg PO/SC q24hr), but,
as in other species, care should be taken in cases of gastrointestinal disease since
ulceration may be induced.
Gastric protectants
Although their effects are not proven in reptiles, an antacid such as cimetidine (4
mg/kg P0/IM q8-12hr) or protective barrier such as sucralfate (0.5-1.0 g/kg PO q6-
12hr) may be helpful if gastrointestinal damage is present.
Other medication
S   s         
colon. Lactulose is an orally administered osmotic laxative, and may help. If
endoparasites are present (detected on faecal microscopy), they should be treated with
appropriate anthelmintics. If faeces are not passed, a cloacal wash can be used to
obtain a sample for analysis - cloacal washing with warm water is also a method of
rehydration. Oral lactulose (0.5 ml/kg q24hr), administered by gavage or
oesophagostomy tube, may assist with rehydration of gastrointestinal contents by
osmotic diuresis.
Endoscopic retrieval
Usually this is only possible if the object(s) is still within the oesophagus or stomach,
but more difficult if it is further distal in the gastrointestinal tract.
Exploratory coeliotomy with enterotomy
described above, or if imaging suggests complete gastrointestinal obstruction (e.g. no
           
animals, a trans-plastron approach must be used (Box 16.4). Possible complications
include bladder rupture and pericardial trauma (during osteotomy), haemorrhage,
poor healing (often associated with inappropriate environmental condi tions), wound
dehiscence (of the enterotomy site as well as the shell), infection (including
osteomyelitis of the plastron), postoperative ileus, adhesion formation. In large
chelonia, a prefemoral approach to the coelomic cavity may be possible, through the
skin and abdominal musculature, and is associated with fewer complications. Closure
of enterotomy incisions is via a routine two-layer continuous suture pattern, and the
BOX 16.4 Technique
Trans-plastron coeliotomy
 s  i  ao    s   a
• Aseptic preparation of plastron.
· Osteotomy in plastron using oscillating sagittal saw or high-speed circulating disc. Bevelled edges
to ensure can lift flap up. Incisions in abdominal scutes: lateral incisions central to lateral (bone is
thicker more laterally); caudal incision near caudal margin with femoral scutes; cranial incision just
caudal to humeral scutes (heart lies at cross-section of humeral and abdominal scutes).
· Elevate flap caudally, separating abdominal musculature and ventral abdominal veins from
plastron. Retain integrity of veins if possible (though often need to ligate one to increase access).
 Incise coelomic membrane to access coelomic cavity.
* Closure: continuous absorbable suture in coelomic membrane; plastron flap secured with epoxy
resin (Fig. 16.5) or acrylic.
Advantages
* Good access to coelomic cavity.
Disadvantages
· Coelomic viscera compress lungs when in dorsal recumbency.
· Osteotomy required for access, with risk of vascular damage (to heart and bilateral ventral
abdominal veins). Complications may occur with healing of plastron, e.g. associated with infection,
or damage to plastron hinges in some species.
Figure16.5
Fibre-glass may be used to close a plastronotomy wound.
 n s m  d s    a
Preoperative fluids, antibiotics (e.g. parenteral metronidazole and ceftazidime, or oral
aminoglycosides such as neomycin or paromomycin)  and analgesia should be
administered as required.
Follow-Up
The tortoise was re-examined periodically over the following few months. He did not
lose any weight or body condition, and remained strong and active throughout. His
appetite improved but was variable over this time, in part due to seasonal sexual
activity. If he did not eat for more than a few days, supportive care with oral and
intracoelomic fluids was repeated. Metoclopramide was intermittently administered
orally, but was associated with a fall in appetite (probably because of the medication
flavour). Repeat radiographs every 4-8 weeks continued to show no evidence of ileus
or obstruction. The piece of gravel was passed in normal faeces 5 months after initial
presentation (Fig. 16.6).
Figure 16.6
 Piece of gravel passed after 5 months (cm scale).
Prevention
Removing materials that may result in obstruction from tortoise enclosures, along
with continuous close supervision when in an outdoor area that has not been made
'tortoise-safe', can prevent futuire episodes.
Prognosis
Where chelonia with gastrointestinal foreign bodies can be medically managed until
the object(s) is passed, the prognosis is good. If coeliotomy is required to remove the
object(s), this is associated with an increased risk of complications and the prognosis
is less good. If metal material is ingested, rapid retrieval is advised if heavy metal
toxicity is diagnosed or suspected.
17
Bearded dragon with hepatic disease
INITIAL PRESENTATION
 Reduced appetite in a bearded dragon.
Introduction
Reptiles often present with vague clinical signs that may have many differential
diagnoses, often with multifactorial aetiologies. As ectotherms, their metabolism is
slower than mammals and, as such, progression of disease (and resolution of
problems) is more prolonged. This case took several months to resolve, requiring great
commitment from the owner.
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
A 1-year-old male bearded dragon (Pogona vitticeps, Box 17.2) presented with a 2 week history of
reduced appetite and dysecdysis, and 1 day of dyschezia.
BOX 17.2  Ecology of bearded dragons
· Central bearded dragons originate from Central Australia.
• Their native habitat is semi-arid or arid woodland, and rocky desert.
· They are mostly arboreal, and spend a large amount of time basking on branches or rocks.
• Head bobbing and colour change of the beard' (throat frill) are used for communication.
· Free-ranging bearded dragons are omnivorous. They mainly eat invertebrates, but may also
consume small vertebrates. As they mature, they eat more plant material (e.g. green leaves, fruits,
vegetables and flowers).
· Most water intake is via their food.
d sa o s a a e po s  ie e p si A pxas 
clutch. Males develop prominent pre-femoral pores and bilateral swellings over the hemipenes
caudal to the cloaca (Fig. 17.1).
(a)
(b)
Figure 17.1
(a) Cloacal region of a female bearded dragon. (b) Male bearded dragon with
 prominent pre-femoral pores and hemipenal bulges.
Husbandry
The bearded dragon was housed in a large glass vivarium (1.4 x 0.6 x 0.8 m). The
substrate was sand, although linoleum was used in the feeding area to reduce the risk
a hide area (synthetic material) and wooden branches for climbing (sited near the
basking lamp).
A ceramic bulb, attached to a thermostat, provided supplemental heating. A digital
thermometer was used to monitor temperature variations, and showed an ambient
temperature in the enclosure of 21°℃ with a basking temperature under the bulb of
35-41°C. A UV striplight was provided (Box 17.1), positioned approximately 30 cm
above the substrate. The light cycle was routinely 12 hours/day.
BOX 17.1 UV lighting for reptiles
· Most reptiles require access to ultraviolet light in the UV-B range, specifically 290-315 nm
n       ss s si    
bones in their prey, and some herbivores may also absorb vitamin D from their diet.)
· Artificial UV lights for captive reptiles are usually in the form of a striplight or bulb, some of
which also produce heat. These lights produce both visible light and light in the UV range.
· UV production wanes with the age of artificial lights, and it is recommended to replace most every
 6-12 months. More accurately, a UV meter can be utilized to gauge UV output and determine when
replacement is necessary.
· The lights are usually positioned approximately 12 inches (30 cm) above the reptile. Further away
o  ns  sn   s s  a  a n  a   l
damage.
The bearded dragon was fed on invertebrates (locusts and silk worms) and fresh
vegetables (kale, butternut squash and spring greens). Invertebrates were fed on fruit
and vegetables, and dusted with a calcium supplement daily. Vitamin supplements
were added to food twice weekly. A shallow water bowl was provided but the animal
was not seen drinking from it.
Case History
The owner acquired the bearded dragon from a petshop at approximately 1 month of
age. Ecdysis occurred roughly every 10 weeks. Urine/urates/faeces were regularly
passed every other day. Endoparasites (oxyurids) had previously been detected and
treated (with fenbendazole) in the individual. There had been no recent changes in
husbandry.
The current presenting complaints were:
· Reduced appetite for 2 weeks
· Dysecdysis, with intermittent shedding (skin lost piecemeal)
· Straining to pass faeces for 24 hours.
Clinical Examination
Initial examination on presentation revealed:
· Good body condition (weight 540 g)
· Abdominal palpation: no abnormalities palpated, bilateral abdominal fat pads
present (normal)
· Oral examination: no abnormalities detected
· No cirrent dysecdysis.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSES
The differentials for reduced appetite are varied, but may commonly include the following in
reptiles:
· Husbandry problems, e.g. inappropriate temperature (too hot or too cool), light or relative
humidity
· Gastrointestinal obstruction, endoparasites, or enteritis
· Stomatitis, dental disease (common in captive bearded dragons), or other lesions resulting in oral
discomfort
· Offering an inappropriate diet, e.g. herbivorous diet to a carnivore, feeding terrestrial species in a
high location
· Hepatic disease, e.g. hepatic lipidosis
· Nutritional disease, e.g. hypocalcaemia, hypovitaminosis A
· Physiologically normal anorexia, e.g. males of certain species in the breeding season, gravid
females, hibernation or aestivation, snakes during shedding
• Post-hibernation anorexia (chelonia)
· Respiratory disease, e.g. upper respiratory tract infection, rhinitis/sinusitis, pneumonia
· Metabolic disease
• Intra-or inter-specific aggression
• Viral infections, e.g. herpesvirus (chelonia), paramyxovirus (snakes)
· Sensual
 deprivation, e.g. blind (e.g. cataracts, corneal lipidosis), loss of smell (e.g. upper
respiratory tract [URT] infection]
· Postoperative or post-traumatic 'stress'
 Psychological, e.g. excess noise, excessive handling (particularly shy specimens), disruptive light
patterns, maladaption syndrome in wild-caught individuals, lack of a hide box for visual security
· Terminal neoplasia.
The differentials for dysecdysis are
· Husbandry problems affecting the process of ecdysis
• Excessive environmental temperature
· Low relative humidity
• Lack of rough surfaces to abrade skin
· Poor conditions such as overcrowding may result in immunosuppression, predisposing
individuals to infection
· Dehydration
• Ectoparasites, e.g. mites, ticks
* Malnutrition, e.g. hypovitaminosis A (chameleons)
• Dermatitis, bacterial or fungal infection
* Scarring, e.g. from burns or other wounds.
The differentials for dyschezia are
• Constipation (cloacolith or faecolith): owing to reduced gastrointestinal motility in association
with hypocalcaemia (husbandry causes), dehydration, or an inappropriate diet
• Enteritis, e.g. endoparasitism, bacterial enteritis
• Poor husbandry, e.g. chronic low environmental temperature
* Gastrointestinal obstruction: foreign body (often substrate ingestion) or gastrolith, intussusception
* Cystic calculi
· Dystocia (females)
· Organomegaly resulting in a space-occupying lesion in the coelomic cavity, e.g. renomegaly with
nephritis, abscess(es), neoplasia
• Narrow pelvic canal after trauma or MBD (metabolic bone disease)
· Lethargy.
Case Work-Up
Radiographs
Two projections were taken, a dorso-ventral view using a vertical beam and a lateral
view using a horizontal beam (Fig. 17.2). Gas was present within the gastrointestinal
tract, but there was no evidence of foreign bodies or other obstruction. There was a
suspicion of respiratory disease, with patchy lung fields present (although no
respiratory signs had been noted). Increased abdominal volume suggested the presence
of faeces, a mass lesion or effusion. A lack of serosal detail precluded a clear picture of
the gastrointestinal tract, and may have reflected the presence of fluid or
inflammation.
(a)
(b)
Figure 17.2
(a) Lateral and (b) dorso-ventral radiographs of the bearded dragon. In the mid-
coelomic cavity, the gas-filled stomach is visible, also seen as a gas-filled dome on the lateral view.
The fat bodies appear hazy and further coelomic structures cannot be easily identified. The lung fields
appear mildly patchy with uneven borders and the size of the lung fields appears reduced.
Blood sampling
The most reliable site for phlebotomy in most lizards is the ventral coccygeal vein (Fig.
17.3). Serial blood samples were taken to aid in making a diagnosis and to monitor
the disease process (Table 17.1).
Figure 17.3
Venepuncture in the ventral coccygeal vein in a bearded dragon, in this case to inject
anaesthetic agent.
Table 17.1 Serial blood sample results. (Not all parameters were tested at each time point).
Reference
Initlal
1year
Parameter
UnIts
range
presentatlon
1month
2months
3months
6months
9months
9months
Total proteln
58-LE
63.3
62.7
89
62.2
0
878*
Albumln
13-46
41.0
40.1
48.1*
47.7*
49.4*
一
542*
Globuin
10-44
22.3
22.6
20.3
14.5
17.6
Glucose
mmoll
6.5-23.1
8.26
8.25
9.69
一
10.12
Calklum (total)
mmolI
1.78-14.00
3.11
3.24
3.74
3.29
3.97
一
4.67
Phosphorus
mmoll
0.87-4.88
1.22
1.23
1.97
1.24
1.73
2.39
248
283
μmoll
0-6.84
446
125
470
89
wnipos
mmoll
137-186
148.8
149.6
151.8
159.5
Potasslum
mmol
1.3-6.3
7.64*
0.63*
5.39
一
0.45*
Amylase
UA
1170
CK(creatnine
8220*
1701
906
2000
1488
一
217
kinase)
ALP (alkallne
15-447
795*
phosphatase)
ALT (alanlne
LA
4-20
9
amln otran sferase)
AST (aspartate
UI
26-0
56
52
36
35
50
17
transferase)
GGT
U/
0-81
transferase)
LCH (lactate
L/I
35-628
2063*
1691*
1542*
1859*
925*
dehydrogenase)
Bille adds
50
3
Chclesterol
mmcA
4.14-23.31
5.74
Total blrubin
μmol
2.2
Tlgycerldes
mndA
1.05-5.19
0.42*
一
Icternc
Icteric
Icteric
Icteric
Icteric
Icteric
Icternic
Haemoglobin
IP6
6.7-12.0
12.8
12.8*
12.6*
12.8*
14.0*
一
15.1*
Haematocnlt
0t0-610
0.37
LE'O
0.42*
6E'0
0.40
0.47*
Red blood cells
x10121
0.68-1.21
1.44*
1.42*
1.35*
1.36*
1.55*
1.61*
236.4397.1
256.9
260.6
311.1
286.8
258.1
MCV(mean
291.9
corpuscular
volume)
MC HC (mean cell
23.9-44.7
34.6
30.0
32.8
35.0
32.1
haamogbobln
concentratlon)
MCH(mean
p9
80.6-139.7
88.9
90.1
EE6
94.1
E06
corpuscular
haemogbobin?
White blbod cels
×10%1
2.0-230
3.0
5.3
7.5
2.3
2.0
5.1
Heterophik
x10°%1
0.35-4.99
1.5
1.54
1.13
0.32*
0.40
一
1.84
Lymphoytes
x104
0.57-17.00
0.12*
3.18
4.95
1.24
1.34
1.63
Eosinicphis
x10%
0.06-0.27
0.21
0.00
800
0.00*
0.02*
0.05*
Monogytes
x10%1
0.03-2.72
600
0.00
0.15
0.00*
0.00*
一
0.26
Azurophils
x10%
0.04-1.84
0.63
0.21
0.53
0.05
0.02*
0.77
Bascphilis
x10%
0.05-1.01
0.45
0.68
0.69
0.22
0.56
Thrombocytes
x10%
13
28
17
19
Commenton
Red cells appearApproxmately75%Approxmately
ApproximatelyRed cels sight
Approxlma tely
normal. sllght
red cellscon tain
Bood smear
90% red cells
pel %0S
50% red
lymph openla
Induslon similar
contaln
cells con taln
polychromasla
cells con taln
some
to Pirhemocyton/
Induslons,
Induslons,
Approxmately
Induslons,
heterophlls
rldovrus/
otherwise
90% red ells
otherwlse
partlally
degenerate
theyappear
they appear
shaw
Jeadde rau
degranulated
crganelle,
nomal.
otherwse they
Heterophlls
appear nomal.
show part
Aocydiou
Abopydiou
Abioppqdiou
WBCmorphology
uoneinueibap
appears
appears
appears nomal
ncrmal
*Values outslde the referen ce ran ge.
ALP = alkaline phosphatase: ALT = alanlne aminct ransferase; AST = aspartate amlnctransferase: GGT = -gutamyl transferase (or gamma-glu tamyl transferase LDH = lactate
dehydrogenase; CK = creatinine kinase; GLDH= glutamate dehydrogenase
Many enzymes found in reptilian livers are found in other tissues, including ALP
ALT, AST, GGT and LDH. These are thus non-specific assays for hepatic damage.
Simultaneously elevated CK usually indicates the alterations are due to muscular
damage. GLDH (glutamate dehydrogenase) is a specific test for hepatic disease, but is
not sensitive. As little hepatocellular damage occurs in hepatic lipidosis, the enzyme
levels often remain normal in this condition. Bile acids may be a lseful indicator of
liver function, but the major bile acid varies with reptile taxonomic order and normal
values are not reported for most species. Cholesterol and triglycerides may be elevated
in hepatic lipidosis;
DotH
vitellogenesis (females) and pre-hibernation (chelonia).
In this bearded dragon, CK was elevated on one occasion, likely associated with the
trauma of restraint and phlebotomy. LDH was elevated when CK was within the
normal range over a prolonged period, suggesting the presence of hepatic disease. An
improvement was seen over time during treatment, although a normal level was not
recorded (suggesting there was still some degree of hepatic change even over 1 year
after treatment commenced).
Total protein levels often decrease with chronic hepatic disease (and other diseases).
In this case, the values remained within the reference range except on one occasion,
where dehydration likely resulted in hyperproteinaemia. Similarly, one would expect
hypoalbuminaemia with chronic hepatic disease, but hyperalbuminaemia will be seen
with dehydration.
Potassium fluctuated in the early course of treatment. Hyperkalaemia is usually the
    s      s 
inadequate dietary intake (e.g. with anorexia) or excessive gastrointestinal loss (e.g.
with diarrhoea), but can be associated with severe alkalosis.
Changes in the haematological picture, including elevations in the haematocrit,
above). Red blood cells and haemoglobin levels usually decrease with chronic disease.
Anaemia in chronic hepatopathy may mask fluid deficits. Hyperuricaemia may be
seen during severe dehydration, but production in the liver is reduced with hepatic
disease; these factors probably cancelled each other out and resulted in a normal uric
acid level in this case.
A heterophilia and monocytosis (including azurophilia) are usually present if acute
hepatic inflammation or necrosis exists. However, chronic cases may show minimal
changes in the haematological parameters; the latter is likely in this case. Some
heterophil degranuilation was noted at the start of treatment but this resolved over
time, suggesting that any inflammation or necrosis was settling. Although the total
white cell count remained within the normal range, relative reductions were seen
periodically with individual cell lines (i.e. heteropenia, lymphopenia, eosinopenia
and monocytopenia); these may have related to immunosuppression associated with
chronic disease.
Ultrasound
The abdominal region was initially scanned with the patient conscious. The liver was
enlarged and hyperechoic. Tubular structures within the liver parenchyma did not
     e  a     s
tortuous neck; this suggested some biliary tract stasis was present. The stomach was
mainly empty and its continuation into the duodenum could be demonstrated. A
rounded, fluid-filled structure was visible superficially in the cranial abdomen; this
may have been an accuimuilation of abdominal fluid between the liver lobes.
A repeat examination was performed later in the day after the bearded dragon had
passed faeces. The gall bladder was hardly visible, but some of the hyperechoic
material remained. Administration of propofol (15 mg/kg IV, into the ventral
coccygeal vein) produced sufficient sedation to enable a fine needle aspirate (FNA) to
be taken of the liver. Aspiration of the abdominal fluid was not possible under the
sedation.
Cytology of liver FNA
Medium-sized hepatocytes had moderate amounts of basophilic cytoplasm containing
multiple small vacuoles, considered an excessive amount. The hepatocytes had
indistinct cell boundaries and a central to eccentric nucleus with smooth chromatin.
The background contained numerous variably sized fat globules throughout, as well
as moderate numbers of red blood cells, nude nuclei cells and cell debris. There were
also small numbers of segmented heterophils and scattered groups of normal-looking
thrombocytes.
             
biopsy was suggested to determine the severity of the disease (but the owner declined)
(Fig. 17.4).
Figure 17.4
Yellow appearance to liver seen at exploratory coeliotomy in a bearded dragon. This
Other Possible Investigations
Contrast radiographs can be taken (after barium or iodine-based contrast has been
administered by gavage) to assess the gastrointestinal tract more fully. Coelioscopy or
These techniques will enable direct visualization of organs, and sampling for further
tests such as histology and culture.
  sd   s s     
been reported for many reptiles.
The respiratory tract can be further assessed using endoscopy and/or performing a
lung wash (obtaining samples for cytology and culture).
If dysecdysis is considered a major problem, investigation should include a full
assessment of husbandry conditions. The integument should be thoroughly checked
for ectoparasites. Any moist lesions should be cultured. Virology testing, using
lesions.
Diagnosis
· Hepatic lipidosis
· Gastrointestinal malabsorption may have been present secondary to the previous
endoparasitism noted, or associated with the hepatic disease.
Anatomy and Physiology Refresher
s  s s          s
to that in mammals. For this reason, lateral radiographs should be taken using a
horizontal X-ray beam (local radiological safety requirements permitting), as tilting
the lizard on its side will alter the anatomical positioning of the internal organs.
The lungs lie dorsally and in the cranial portion of the coelomic cavity. The heart in
   s           
monitor lizards).
The liver is ventro-caudal to the lungs, and the rest of the intestinal tract lies caudal
to the liver. Reptile livers are similar to mammalian organs, usually with a gall
metabolism, and production of uric acid and clotting factors. The gastrointestinal
stomach on the left of the body, and the gastrointestinal tract proceeds into the short
small intestine and large intestine. Bearded dragons have bilateral intracoelomic fat
bodies as an energy store.
The kidneys are found dorsally in the coelomic space (Fig. 17.5), and in many
Urinary bladder (not)
present inallspecies)
Urinary tract
Kidneys
Oviduct/vas deferens
Oesophagus
Lungs
Urethra
Gonads.
gng
LiverSpleen Stomach
Trachea
Heart
Primary bronchus
Small intestines
Cloaca
Gastrointestinal tract
Figure 17.5
Lateral view of lizard anatomy (coelomic cavity) - compare with lateral radiograph
on page 141.
CLINICAL TIP
The skin and mucous membranes of bearded dragons are normally yellow-orange in colour.
However, prehepatic or hepatic icterus may result in jaundice, with further yellowing of the
membranes.
Aetiopathogenesis of Hepatic Lipidosis
Hepatic lipidosis is a metabolic derangement, associated with a variety of factors
)   x   s  s  i  h s)s
waxworm-based), or in animals that become obese due to inactivity. The disease is
usually chronic, and onset of clinical signs is usually gradual (although signs may
      sd a oss s n e 
breeding). Other disease problems, such as dietary imbalances, toxins, or any causes
of anorexia may secondarily lead to hepatic lipidosis.
BOX 17.3 Causes of hepatic lipidosis in reptiles
· Obesity
· Excessively fatty diet
· Inactivity
* Non-breeding females
 Secondary to other illness, e.g. dietary imbalance (impaired metabolism of carbohydrate and
volatile fatty acids), toxins, anorexia.
BOX 17.4 Definition of hepatic lipidosis
· Small fat droplets that are normally found in cytoplasm are associated with fatty change', and are
not necessarily hepatic lipidosis per se.
 Hepatic lipidosis is defined as *excessive accumulation of lipid within hepatocytes'
CLINICAL TIPS
m P a Aa snd d a    c S  ras Aa i 1
Gradual changes may otherwise be missed until the animal is severely ill.
The liver is usually swollen with rounded edges. Other organ changes may be seen
on imaging the coelomic cavity, potentially those with pathologies that predisposed
the hepatic lipidosis.
Blood analysis may be useful in diagnosing hepatic disease, but is currently
insensitive and non-specific. Radiography may permit crude assessment of liver size
and shape, but ultrasound is more accurate (e.g. detecting a generalized hyperechoic
appearance in severe cases of hepatic lipidosis). Other modalities that can be used to
image the liver include endoscopy, computed tomography (CT) and magnetic
coelioscopy, or coeliotomy) provides the best tool for diagnosing and monitoring
hepatic disease, permitting histology and culture of liver tissue.
Epidemiology
Hepatic disease, particularly hepatic lipidosis, is common in captive reptiles. Adult to
aged non-breeding females appear to be predisposed, presumably associated with
obesity in captivity due to a lack of breeding after cycles of lipogenesis.
Treatment
Supportive care
Any ill reptile should be maintained in an appropriate environment. Therefore any
that the species-specific preferred optimum temperature range (POTR) is provided,
enabling the animal to select a preferred body temperature (PBT). During
hospitalization, the reptile was housed in a vivarium with supplemental heating at
the species' POTR and UV-B lighting. For bearded dragons the background
temperature should be 24-29*C during the day, and maintained above 13'C overnight.
A daytime basking spot of 35-41°C should be provided.
The bearded dragon was bathed in shallow warm water for 10-15 minutes twice
 s n n    s  s 
solutions may be used for this bath, although care should be taken to rinse solution
Nutritional support
This involved administration of vegetable baby food (organic and dairy-free) and
crushed invertebrates (a total of 10 ml/kg was administered by gavage tube q8hr).
Gavage-feeding was demonstrated to the owner, who continued this at home for a
period of weeks. The bearded dragon was also offered various fresh chopped vegetables
and live foods to tempt him to self-feed.
NURSING ASPECTS
 Do not leave live invertebrates in the vivarium unsupervised with debilitated reptiles. The
invertebrates may attack the reptile, resulting in skin lesions.
NURSING ASPECTS
Gavage-feeding lizards
· Commercial tubes are available, or a piece of giving set tubing may be used. A soft tube can be
used providing a gag is employed to prevent the animal biting through the tube. Lubricate the tube.
particularly in dehydrated animals.
· Use a wooden tongue depressor wrapped in non-adhesive elastic wrap as a mouth gag. This enables
the mouth to be held open without damaging the teeth.
· Pre-measure the tube to the mid-body level.
· Pass the tube laterally in the oropharynx to avoid the glottis that lies midline at the base of the
tongue.
· If resistance is felt, withdraw the tube, re-lubricate, and re-insert.
Medication
An anabolic steroid injection was administered (nandrolone, see below), as an
in the form of a nutritional supplement containing S-adenosylmethionine (SAMe) and
vitamin K1 (at the same dose as that used for cats), and lactulose (o.5 ml/kg PO
q24h). Metoclopramide (0.05 mg/kg PO q24hr) was given as a gastrointestinal
prokinetic until faecal frequency and consistency were more normal. Antibiotics were
also dispensed: enrofloxacin (5 mg/kg PO q24hr for 6 weeks) and metronidazole (40
mg/kg PO q24hr for 1 week).
Husbandry
Optimization of husbandry conditions, including the environment and diet, are
important constituents of treatment for this condition. This should also reduce
recurrence of problems. Temperature ranges were monitored closely and recorded.
Invertebrates containing higher levels of fat (e.g. mealworms) were avoided in the
diet.
Treatment Options and Management
Fluid therapy
The route of fluid administration depends on how ill the animal is. Oral fluids can be
 o    n  p s     
Intravenous, intracoelomic or intraosseous fluids should be given in severe cases.
Avoid solutions containing lactate.
Nutritional support
Administration of convalescent diets may be done via gavage-feeding in the short
term. For longer term nutritional support, use of an oesophagostomy tuibe should be
considered.
Other medications
P s          s
dosing 250 mg/kg carnitine daily when assist-feeding reptiles.
Choline is thought to promote conversion of hepatic fat to phospholipids, which are
rapidly transferred into blood, and is also involved in lipoprotein synthesis.
Methionine is a precursor of choline. Some reports suggest adding choline at 40-50
mg/kg to feeds daily.
Thyroxine (20 mg/kg P0 q48hr) and the anabolic steroid nandrolone (0.5-5 mg/kg
IM q7-28 days) may improve hepatic metabolism of fat, reduce catabolism, and
improve appetite.
NURSING ASPECTS
· Fluid therapy:
· Oral fluids may be used in mildly ( <5%) dehydrated animals with a functional gastrointestinal
tract. Owing to the poor blood supply, absorption from the subcutaneous site is slow.
· Patients with moderate to severe dehydration should be given fluids intracoelomically,
intravenously, or intraosseously.
* Warm fluids to 30-35*C before administration.
· Isotonic crystalloids are used to replace fluid loss. Avoid fluid types with lactate in animals
with hepatic disease.
· Nutritional support:
· Consider the animal's energy and nutritional needs.
· Consider natural dietary preference, e.g. omnivorous.
• Use natural foods if possible over artificial substitutes, especially for long-term cases.
Follow-Up
his appetite, weight and demeanour were extremely variable, and the owner assist-fed
him most days. After that period, the animal's appetite improved and he maintained
his body condition. At times, the owner was able to administer the nutritional
supplements on food.
Blood testing was performed at regular intervals to assess progress, but as discussed
above these are not very sensitive or specific in reptiles. It would have been useful to
monitor progress using sequential assessment of liver architecture, utilizing cytology
on FNAs or histology on biopsy samples. However, the costs associated with the
laboratory fees and the risks associated with anaesthesia precluded this option.
Prevention
Avoidance of the risk factors listed above will reduce the occurrence or recuirrence of
hepatic lipidosis. As with many diseases of pet reptiles, husbandry problems must be
corrected to allow a clire to be effected.
Prognosis
Although the liver is capable of regeneration from quite severe insults, recovery is
prolonged. Reptile metabolism is also much slower than that of mammals, and is
dependent on environmental temperature, so a return to normal function will take
comparatively longer. Treatment should not be stopped too soon.
18
Osteomyelitis in a Hermann's tortoise
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Nail loss in a Hermann's tortoise.
Introduction
Reptilian metabolism is slower than that of mammals.  Pathological processes
therefore usually develop (and heal) much more slowly, resulting in a longer course of
the disease and treatment. An accurate diagnosis aids greatly in selection of
treatment, which is often of necessity protracted.
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
A 53-year-old male Hermann's tortoise (Testudo hermanni) (Box 18.1) presented with loss of nails
(onychomadesis) from both forefeet.
BOX 18.1  Ecology of Hermann's tortoises
· Hermann's tortoises have a wide distribution throughout the Mediterranean and Eastern Europe.
· They are generally solitary, except during the breeding season.
· The IUCN has identified Hermann's tortoises as Lower Risk/Near Threatened, although the
Western subspecies Testudo hermanni ssp hermanni is classed as Endangered. Hermann's are listed
with other Testudinae on CITES Appendix I, restricting their trade.
· They live in evergreen Mediterranean oak forest (though this habitat is now rare), coarse arid
scrub and hillsides.
· In captivity, the species tolerates an arid to moderately damp environment, but requires plenty of
warmth and sun. Heating and UV-B lighting should be supplemented in more temperate climes.
· Their free-ranging diet is herbaceous and succulent plants.
· Captive individuals should be fed a wide range of weeds and green vegetation. Edible plants
include: dandelion, sow thistle, plantains, vetch, mallows, clovers, grapevine leaves, succulents
a (aaeia pe Aaqdse) dds snqnr 'dds snosi (dds bnaa ao pue dds as aia)
nettles and bindweeds. When available, edible flowers from the above plants as well as
honeysuckle are appreciated. Although fruits are well accepted, only small quantities ( < 5% of the
diet) should be allowed. Salads are a poor substitute for the free-ranging diet. Animal protein (e.g.
dog/cat food) should not be fed.
· Tortoises may live up to 1o0 years.
Husbandry
The tortoise had been in the owner's family in Scotland for over three decades. During
the previous 20 years, he had been housed in an outdoor pen during the day and in a
greenhouse overnight. At the time of presentation, he was housed mainly indoors,
roaming in the house during the day and returned to a plastic container measuring
approximately 1 x 0.25 m overnight. The substrate in the indoor enclosure was a
mixture of newspaper and towel. An outdoor pen was used for daytime housing
during good weather.
A heat lamp was present, but used only intermittently. The owner did not measure
the environmental temperature. No supplemental UV lighting was provided.
The tortoise's diet was mainly mixed salad (lettuce, tomatoes and cucumber) and
fruit (pears and satsuma oranges), and he also had access to various weeds (e.g.
dandelions) in his outdoor pen. Water was provided in a shallow bowl, and the
tortoise was bathed weekly to encourage drinking.
The tortoise had previously been hibernated, but not during recent years.
Case History
Two years prior to presentation, the tortoise had sustained trauma to both forefeet
from rough substrate, resulting in small abrasions that were treated with topical
More recently, the tortoise had lost some nails from the forefeet. The owner did not
notice any other abnormalities. No changes were noted in appetite or activity.
Clinical Examination
Mediterranean species of tortoise are relatively easy to examine conscious, and the
tortoise received a full clinical examination. Findings were as follows:
· Bright, alert and reactive
· Good body condition with well-muscled limbs and no evidence of oedema. Weight
1.95 kg, with a straight carapacial length (SCL) of 18 cm
· No ocular, nasal or oral lesions. Mucous membranes pink, with no evidence of
stomatitis
· Carapace and plastron unremarkable
· Limb examination:
· No obvious lameness
· Forelimbs: firm swellings of both feet, loss of all nails, skin smoothed with some
scale loss, some inflammation and erythema ventrally on distal limbs, feet swollen
and firm
· Hindlimbs: obvious stifles, possibly abnormally swollen. Nails present and no
swellings on feet.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSES
The differentials for limb swelling were:
· Infection - abscess or osteomyelitis, aetiological agents may include bacteria (including
mycobacteria) and fungi
· Granuloma
· Intra-articular gout
· Trauma, e.g. fracture, dislocation, soft tissue injury
· Haematoma
• Parasitic cysts
· Neoplasia (may be associated with pathological fracture)
· Scar tissue.
Initial Case Work-Up
Blood sample
Since two limbs were affected and systemic disease is common in ageing tortoises,
18.2). The sample also gave information regarding some of the differential diagnoses
listed above (Table 18.1):
· One would expect to see changes in the white cell picture if local or systemic
infection were present.
· Hyperuricaemia would be present in cases of gout.
· Elevated creatinine kinase may be seen in cases of trauma, although possibly not in
chronic disease.
BOX 18.2 Phlebotomy in tortoises
Jugular vein
· The jugular vein should be accessed if possible (Fig. 18.1). It is less likely to be diluted by lymph
than other commonly used sites such as the dorsal coccygeal vein (which is difficult to obtain a
large sample from) and the sub-carapacial (or subvertebral) venous sinus, and a sufficiently large
volume should be readily obtainable.
· An assistant holds the tortoise, including gentle restraint on the forelimbs to keep them away from
the neck area during the procedure.
· The phlebotomist grasps the head - the author prefers to extend the neck by grasping behind the
 head laterally (caudal to the tympanic membranes), but then holds the head dorsally and ventrally
during venepuncture.
· The skin on the lateral neck is surgically prepared.
· The assistant puts pressure at the base of the neck to raise the vein.
· The vein runs superficially in a line from the tympanic membrane to the base of the neck.
· A 23-25 gauge hypodermic needle is inserted at a shallow angle. A 2 ml syringe is sufficient for
most tortoises, although care should be taken not to collapse the vein with excess suction.
· Pressure is applied to the site for a few minutes after sampling to reduce the risk of haematoma
 formation. If the tortoise is strong and the neck cannot be extended for this period of time, use a
large ball of cotton wool inserted between the neck and limb to provide pressure.
Figuure18.1
Venous access to the jugular vein in a tortoise (here, to induce general anaesthesia
using alfaxalone).
Table 18.1 Hermann's tortoise blood results (with reference ranges for comparison)
Parameter
Unit
Result
Reference range
Biochemistry
Total protein
55.8*
23-44
Albumin
23.2*
13-16
Globulin
32.6*
14-29
Glucose
mmo/
2.7*
4.3-10.7
Calcium
mmol
2.45
1.653.3
Phosphorus
mmo/1
1.81
0.48-1.81
AST
L/
78
0-210
CK
L/1
18
0-620
Uric acid
umol
428
124466
LDH
L/I
471
0OE-0
wnpos
mmol
133.7
123-145
Potassium
mmo/
8.8*
E'5-9'5
Haematology
Haemoglobin
IP/6
88
3.9-12.6
Haematogit
0.30
0.15-0.43
Red blood cells
x10
1.00
0.35-1.11
MCV
fl
-00E
357.5-436.4
MCHC
IP/6
29.3
25.7-33.3
MCH
x10
88*
94.3-140.2
White blood cells
x10
3.6*
0.1-3.1
Heterophils
x10
2.38*
0.00-1.91
Lymphocytes
X10°A
1.08
0.01-1.45
Monocytes
x10°A
0
0.00-0.10
Azurophils
x10/
0.07
Basophils
x10/
0
0.00-0.09
Throm bocytes
x10°/
2
1-5
* Abnormal values outside reference range.
Hyperproteinaemia (in particular hyperalbuminaemia) is often seen in dehydrated
tortoises (usually in association with haematological changes such as elevated
haematocrit), or in females associated with normal reproductive activity (e.g.
vitellogenesis). Hyperglobulinaemia may reflect chronic inflammatory activity. The
mild hypoglycaemia may have reflected a reduction in food intake during the autumn
months (the sample was taken in October). Other reasons for reduced blood glucose
include anorexia, malnutrition, septicaemia and hepatopathy. The hyperkalaemia is
commonly artefactual:
in samples posted
 to external
laboratories for analysis,
associated with haemolysis during the delay in processing. Elevations in potassium
may be seen in cases with renal failure (usually with concuirrent hyperuricaemia).
Red  cells  showed
marked anisocytosis,  poikilocytosis,
 polychromasia
and
hypochromia. Several red cells also showed multiple inclusions that may have been
atypical basophilic stippling. Although anaemia was not present, these red cell
changes suggest chronicity in the disease with a regenerative response (which occurs
slower in reptiles (up to 4 months) than in birds or mammals (within 1 week)).
Leucocytosis  with  heterophilia  commonly  suggests  infection  or  inflammation,
although the smear report did not show the presence of any toxic changes in white
blood cells. Other differentials for heterophilia are trauma, stress and neoplasia.
Radiography
The tortoise was amenable to positioning and the sites of interest on the limbs were
distal, so radiography was performed conscious. Initially dorso-ventral radiographs
were taken of the distal limbs (Fig. 18.5a,b).
bones. There was also destruction of the left distal ulna. The destruction was more
extensive in the left foot, with almost complete loss of the digits, radial aspect of the
carpal bones and distal ulna. In the right foot, the destruction mainly affected digits
II-V, and some focal lesions were visible in the carpal bones. Despite concerns over
stifle swellings, no obvious destructive changes were identified on radiographs of the
hindlimbs. Bone density in the tortoise was good (i.e. there was no evidence of
metabolic bone disease).
Fine needle aspirate (FNA)
After surgical preparation of the skin, an FNA was taken from the left foot of the
tortoise. A small amount of haemorrhagic material was obtained, and sent for culture
(aerobic and anaerobic bacteriology, and fungal culture). The owner was warned that
this small sample may not be representative of the lesion, and that more invasive
Culture
  p          
cultured.
Initial Treatment
Initial blood analysis suggested dehydration may be present, and the owner was
advised to bathe the tortoise in shallow warm water daily for 10 minutes to encourage
drinking. The owner was also advised regarding suitable nutrition, encouraging the
tortoise to feed, and to monitor his appetite closely to avoid any further deterioration
in glucose levels. The owner moved the tortoise indoors, but despite advice to do so did
not supply constant supplemental heating (over central heating in the owner's house)
or UV light for the tortoise.
NURSING ASPECT
UV-B and heating for tortoises
 Unless tortoises are maintained in an appropriately warm environmental temperature, their
metabolism will slow. This affects all body processes, including muscular activity, gastrointestinal
activity and the immune system.
· UV lighting is necessary for calcium metabolism and also is beneficial in stimulating chelonian
appetite.
NURSING ASPECTS
Bathing tortoises
· It is useful to bathe tortoises in shallow warm water to encourage them to drink, and also to void
urine/urates/faeces.
· Electrolyte solutions can be used to bathe tortoises, but the animal should be rinsed off afterwards
to remove any substances that may promote bacterial or fungal growth on the skin and shell.
· The water should be sufficiently warm to prevent cooling of the animal when it is removed from its
enclosure's preferred optimum temperature range (POTR). If possible, the bath should be placed
within the enclosure to prevent rapid cooling of the water, or a heated plant propagator may be
used.
· The water should be deep enough for the tortoise to drink. To do this, they partially immerse their
 head and suck water through the sides of their mouth. Thus, the water is usually up to the level of
the plastron-carapace junction.
· Debilitated animals should be monitored continuously during bathing to prevent drowning.
Further Investigation and Treatment
A diagnosis had not yet been reached, and the owner agreed to further investigation
of the lesions. The tortoise was anaesthetized (see below) for the following procedures.
CLINICAL TIPS
Tortoise anaesthesia
· Although gaseous anaesthetic agents may be used to maintain anaesthesia, they cannot be utilized
to induce chelonia (i.e. tortoises, turtles and terrapins) as they will breathhold for a considerable
period of time.
· Several injectable agents can be used to induce anaesthesia in tortoises. This case was anaesthetized
using propofol.
• Prepare the skin and inject propofol intravenously (typically into the jugular vein) to effect, usually
 5-15 mg/kg. In this case, 8 mg/kg was sufficient to enable intubation.
• Once the tortoise is relaxed sufficiently, the mouth is opened to visualize the glottis. In this case, a
 2 mm endotracheal tube (ETT) was used to intubate the tortoise. The ETT is secured to the jaw using
adhesive tape (Fig. 18.2).
· The tortoise was then maintained on oxygen, adding 2% isoflurane after approximately 20 minutes
when the propofol had been metabolized.
• It is useful to ventilate tortoises, either manually or using a mechanical ventilator, to ensure
 sufficient gases (oxygen and anaesthetic agents) are administered to the lungs.
· Monitoring tortoise anaesthesia:
· Muscle tone is used to assess depth of anaesthesia, e.g. jaw tone, limb extension
· Respiratory rate: observing limb movement during each breath. Note that apnoea (loss of
spontaneous breathing) is common during reptile anaesthesia.
• Heart rate: using a Doppler probe on the heart (at the thoracic inlet at the base of the neck).
Figure 18.2
 Intubated tortoise, showing tape to secure the endotracheal tube and wooden tongue
 depressor to stabilize the tube and connector to the anaesthetic circuit. The heart rate is being
 monitored using a Doppler probe.
Surgical biopsy
Although the skin changes and most prominent swelling were on the ventral surface
wound dehiscence due to trauma postoperatively. Initial attempts to obtain a larger
FNA using a 14 gauge needle were unsuccessful, as the tissue within the lesion was
extremely hard. A small incision was made dorsally over the carpal joint, and tissue
   e  ss      o ss
18.3a).
b
Figure 18.3
   ( s g  s d d ()
bead.
As the tissue appeared to be bony and decalcification thought necessary, impression
smears were prepared for cytology as well as samples preserved in formalin for
histology.
Bead implanta tion
Although it is preferable to await culture results before choosing an antibiotic, it was
considered worthwhile to implant antibiotic-impregnated methylmethacrylate beads
at the time of the procedure (in case the owner declined a further anaesthetic).
Tobramycin beads were inserted into the biopsy site before closure (Fig. 18.3b).
Systemic antibiotics were not administered at this time due to their unlikely
penetration of the lesion.
The skin was closed using polydioxanone in a horizontal mattress pattern. (The
suitures were removed 6 weeks after placement, allowing time for the skin to heal.)
CLINICAL TIPS
Antibiotic-impregnated beads
· Antibiotic is mixed into a polymethylmethacrylate bone cement matrix, and shaped into *beads' of
suitable sizes before setting. Beads can be sterilized using ethylene oxide gas.
· The implantation of antibiotic-impregnated beads is the preferred treatment by some clinicians for
osteomyelitis or septic arthritis.
· There is good drug delivery locally and a low risk of systemic toxicity.
· It is preferable for antibiotic choice to be based on culture and sensitivity, and that devitalized or
infected tissue (including bone) is removed before insertion of the beads. Aminoglycosides and
clindamycin are common choices of antibiotic.
· The beads are prepared in a sterile manner, or can be gas-sterilized.
· Small beads have a greater surface area to volume ratio, and will thus release antibiotic more
rapidly than larger beads.
· If placed in a joint, the beads should be removed (to limit further degenerative joint disease) when
a cure is detected radiographically. There is no need to remove beads placed in bone.
Pathology
The cytology samples were non-diagnostic, with only red blood cells present. Chronic
pyogranulomatous inflammation was demonstrated on histology, probably due to an
infectious organism.
Special stains were used in an attempt to identify the causal agent, including
organisms), Ziehl-Neelsen (an acid-fast stain, for mycobacteria) and Gram (to
identify bacteria). These stains were negative for fungi and mycobacteria. Small
numbers of Gram-positive coccobacilli were seen.
Culture
Bacterial and fungal culture were performed, and demonstrated mixed bacterial
growth. As acid-fast (Ziehl-Neelsen) staining was negative, mycobacterial culture was
not performed.
CLINICAL TIPS
Sample collection for culture
· To enhance positive culture results, it is important to sample from the inner lining of any fibrous
abscess capsule present.
· Samples from the centre of the lesions are often negative, as this region has outgrown the blood
supply.
Other Investigations Possible
Other radiographs
It is advisable to take radiographs from two views, to fully assess lesions present. This
was not performed in this case as sedation would have been required to obtain the
orthogonal views (e.g. oblique or cranio-caudal), and sufficient information was
gained from the dorso-ventral views to proceed with other investigations.
It would be iseful to take full body radiographs to assess for any other signs of
illness. Usually three views are taken: dorso-ventral using a vertical X-ray beam, and
cranio-caudal and lateral using a horizontal x-ray beam.
Other imaging techniques
CT and MRI may have been useful to image the extent of the lesions more fully.
Diagnosis
Bilateral forelimb osteomyelitis.
Anatomy and Physiology Refresher
Limb anatomy (Fig. 18.4) in chelonia is similar to that of mammals. Limb girdles are
modified, and lie inside the ribs.
Phalanges
Carpal
bones
Radius
Ulna
Humerus
Coracoid
Scapula
Figure 18.4
Normal anatomy of the forelimb of a tortoise.
The skin of terrestrial tortoises is thick and scaled, having evolved to resist
abrasions and arid climates. There is an outer epidermis, which forms scales, and a
deeper dermis, which supports and nourishes the epidermis. Skin shedding (ecdysis) is
uncoordinated and continues through life; often only skin from the neck and proximal
limbs is shed.
Although fabled as slow, chelonian locomotion can be surprisingly rapid. Tortoises
use their forelimbs to ambulate, in respiratory movements, and to steady food while
tearing portions to swallow.
Aetiopathogenesis of Osteomyelitis in Tortoises
Heterophils fuinction differently to mammalian white blood cells and reptile pus is
and well encapsulated. Inciting causes include bacteria, fungi, parasites and foreign
trauma, bites and scratches commonly permit entry of agents, immunocompromised
animals are more susceptible to disease. Haematogenous spread is possible, resulting
 o  s    s   i d  
infiltrates bone.
            s i
the infection originated as an abscess, a mass or swelling may be noticed. Other signs
are dependent on the location of the abscess, for example a lung abscess producing
seen. Haematology and clinical chemistry is often unremarkable, although some
animals develop a leucocytosis.
It can be difficult to differentiate osteoarthritis, osteoarthrosis and osteomyelitis
often resembles mammalian bone neoplasia. Local anatomy becomes enlarged and
distorted, and corticomedullary definition is lost. After treatment a lytic area may
remain without necessarily showing the presence or recurrence of infection or
sequestrum formation. In cases of septic arthritis, the joint appears swollen;
radiographically articular bone surfaces are lytic and there is an increase in soft tissue
density within the joint space.
Histologically, it can also be difficult to differentiate between osteoarthritis and
ribs concomitantly.
In this case, superficial skin lesions on the limbs appeared to have invaded the
tissues and resulted in deeper infection. It is extremely difficuilt to treat infection once
it has entered bone, as antibiotic penetration to bone is poor.
Chronic lesions often have associated inflammatory or granulomatous tissue whose
presence may result in clinical signs. This tissue will also affect penetration of the
Ideally, any infection in reptiles is excised surgically. This is often not possible
where bones are involved, but limb amputation is an option. Alternative treatments
include the use of antibiotics locally (e.g. using antibiotic-impregnated materials), or
long-term (weeks or months) systemically. The latter option may not completely
resolve the infection, but may prevent any further progression.
Epidemiology
husbandry results in immunosuppression.
Treatment
Postoperatively, the tortoise's feet were bathed daily in dilute povidone-iodine
solution to reduce local bacterial load.
Husbandry conditions were discussed again with the owner. A UV light was to be
purchased now that the tortoise was housed indoors over the winter. The
environmental temperature was to be monitored using a digital thermometer. If
necessary, supplemental heating was to be obtained so that the tortoise's POTR could
            
ceramic heat bulbs and heat mats (although mats should be positioned on the side of
enclosures and not underneath for  tortoises). Dietary modifications suggested
a s       a   
aid immune function.
of penetration of the lesions. Although the period of antibiotic release from the beads
will be finite (but varies from months to years), they are often left in situ without
causing any problems.
CLINICAL TIPS
 Amikacin and enrofloxacin are commonly ineffective at treating abscesses in reptiles
 Chloramphenicol has good penetration of tissues, and is effective in anaerobic and acidic
conditions. Use of this drug should be based on culture results, as it has a limited spectrum of
activity.
· Systemic antibiotics should be continued for at least 14 days.
 Daily cleaning of postoperative abscesses or wounds should be carried out by the owner.
Owing to the suspected infectious aetiology of the condition, it was advised not to
hibernate the tortoise as immunosuppression at that time may permit recurrence or
progression of the disease. It was also suggested that the tortoise be protected from
possible contamination, for example keeping off any soil substrate during the summer
when any skin lesions were present.
Other Treatment Options and Management
Other suirgical options
Debridement of the infected area is advocated. Ideally, if an abscess is present, the
surrounding fibrous capsule should be excised; this is difficult when bone is involved
in the infection. Necrotic and degenerate material should be removed, including
 sn   r      s   i
again removes the infected material. The limb is usually amputated quite proximally,
as more distal amputations may result in wound dehiscence due to use of the stump. It
is useful to attach a plastic ball (e.g. half a ping pong ball) or toy wheel to the plastron
forelimb was more severely affected than the right in this case, the potential for the
right to progress was a consideration.
Laser ablation of the wound bed after debridement may help sterilize any infective
d        n    
daily. Iodine-based disinfectants will also be effective against remaining bacteria.
Supportive care
If a tortoise is anorexic due to any illness, consideration should be given to placement
of an oesophagostomy tube for assisted-feeding (see page 135). This also enables easy
Follow-Up
The tortoise's appetite and demeanour were generally good, although variable. This is
often the case with captive tortoises, which are incredibly susceptible to
environmental changes such as temperature variability, or the presence or absence of
ultraviolet light.
One of the large skin scales at the biopsy site became necrotic and sloughed
Otherwise, the skin healed well.
Repeat radiographs
Radiographs were performed 3 months after initial presentation (Fig. 18.5c,d). There
the left ulna were more marked and extensive. The radius appeared intact. Similarly,
the changes in the right forefoot had extended, affecting mostly the digits and
metacarpals. Digits III-V were almost completely lost.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 18.5
Dorso-ventral radiographs of the tortoise's feet. (a,b) Right and left feet at initial
presentation - note the osteomyelitis present in both distal forelimbs. (c,d) Right and left feet at 3
months later - extension of destructive lesions in both forefeet. (e) At 4 months later - some
remodelling of the bones in the left foot.
destructive bone lesions in both forefeet. At this point, no lameness was present and
the tortoise was eating well.
Radiographs 4 months later (i.e. 7 months after initial presentation and bead
          s s
 n  n   a  n   ssd  
lytic lesion margins appearing slightly less acute. However, no further progression of
Skin on both feet was no longer inflamed, thought to be due to the cuirrent substrate of
grass and rubber matting. There had been no change in size or firmness of the feet
In summary, the extensive lytic lesions in the forefeet had initially progressed before
osteomyelitis or osteoarthritis, most likely septic in aetiology. Reptiles show less
proliferative reaction to septic bone lesions than mammals. Lack of progression over
          
fungal infection. Follow-up radiographs were advised, with increased remodelling
occulrred.
The condition appeared to have stabilized, and no further treatment was advised at
     o    s  s 
particular assessing for any reduction in use of the forelimbs that may be associated
with discomfort or any new lesions on the limbs, as well as the animal's general
re-implant fresh antibiotic beads).
Prevention
Appropriate selection of substrate for tortoises may help prevent lesions, for example
avoidance of sharp stones that may cut into the skin, or exposure to excessively wet
habitat that may soften the skin and render it more susceptible to trauma. However
tortoises are adapted to most substrates and it is usually a case of regular examination
by owners to detect and treat any minor lesions before deeper infection occurs.
Underlying systemic illness may predispose progression of minor superficial lesions
           
minimize the risks of immuinosuppression and systemic illness
Prognosis
In the short term, skin wounds (e.g. after surgery) in reptiles heal slowly, generally
over 6-8 weeks. Scar tissue usually shrinks over time, although dysecdysis may occur
in the meantime.
The long-term prognosis for this case was guarded. In some cases of infection in
reptiles, the nidus of infection becomes walled off and no further problems are noted.
However, there is the potential for infection to recur locally or for new lesions to
develop at distant sites after haematogenous spread, particularly if the animal
becomes immunosuppressed (e.g. during hibernation or with other disease).
The tortoise represented 18 months later with a large abscess in the distal left
forelimb. Radiography (Fig. 18.6) showed the bone lesions to be inactive, but further
soft tissue damage had occurred. The owner declined further surgery (e.g. repeated
debridement or amputation) and the tortoise was euthanized.
司
(b)
Figure 18.6
(a) Radiography of the right forefoot 18 months later - note the large soft tissue mass
(abscess) and inactive bone lesions (evidenced by rounding of bone edges). (b) Radiography of the
left foot 18 months later - note the presence of spherical antibiotic beads in this foot
19
Dystocia in a snake
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Inappetence and condition loss in a corn snake.
Introduction
Although many herpetologists keep snakes for breeding, it is not uncommon for
owners to retain a single animal of one species. Unlike some other taxonomic groups,
female snakes may undergo reproductive activity and produce (infertile) eggs without
necessarily contacting a male. Similarly, mating with a fertile male does not always
ensure reproductive success. The cues for such activity are often environmental.
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
A 5-year-old corn snake (Elaphe guttata) (Box 19.1), suspected to be female - although there was
 no previous history of reproductive activity - was presented with a month-long history of anorexia,
reduced faecal production and condition loss.
BOX 19.1  Ecology of corn snakes
· Belong to Colubridae snake family, in the subfamily Colubrinae. Elaphe spp are rat snakes
· Range in the wild covers much of the USA and northern Mexico
Normal habitat: overgrown fields, wooded groves and forest openings, rocky hillsides,
meadowlands, common in disused farm buildings. Readily climb trees. Very secretive
• Usually attain 60 cm in length within the first year of life, and 1.2-1.8 m when fully grown
· Hibernate during the winter in colder regions. In more temperate areas, brumate (during cold
periods they shelter in rock crevices and logs, and emerge to heat up in the sun on warm days)
· Free-ranging diet: lizards and tree frogs as young hatchlings, mainly small mammals (mice, rats,
birds and bats) when adult. Kill by constriction
Reproduction: sexual maturity at around 60o days of age. Breeding season March-May.
of eggs is 60-65 days at around 28*C
(a  A  a o   d    s a d 
and frequently bred. Non-venomous. Live 15-20 years (up to 23 in captivity).
Husbandry
The snake was housed in a vivarium approximately 150 cm long × 60 cm wide x 60
and a partially meshed ceiling to provide ventilation. The substrate was bark
          sa   s
rear wall of the vivarium, connected to a thermostat. Although stimulation of
reproductive activity was not intended, a period of cooling had occurred over the
  n  s s   s   s n
present at one end of the vivarium, created by a ceramic bulb. The environmental
      p  n  a s
28°C during the day (dropping to 24°C overnight).
S a o p a p s e s i aia sm n p 
over the winter months; UV lighting was provided by a striplight (changed 4 months
prior to presentation). A small hide box was present. The snake was generally handled
daily for approximately 5 minutes, although handling had been reduced since signs of
illness were noted.
A water bowl large enough for the snake to bathe in was provided, with the water
changed daily. The animal was typically fed on two or three whole mice once a week,
although, more recently, smaller mice had been offered to tempt the snake to eat.
Case History
Although it is not uncommon for snakes to be inappetent for short periods of time, the
owner was concerned about the length of the current period of anorexia combined
gavage for 2 weeks prior to presentation. Although ecdysis was regular (every 6
weeks), the previous shed contained tears. Clinical signs reported included:
· Anorexia of approximately 2 month's duration
· Condition loss, including a 4% loss in body weight (from 810 g to 776 g)
· Reduced amount of faeces passed (typically weekly, but now only once every 2-3
weeks).
Clinical Examination
Corn snakes are relatively easy to handle, and a complete clinical examination was
possible. The findings were:
· Moderate body condition, weighing 776 g. Dorsal spinous processes of vertebrae
readily palpated. Moderate muscle strength (no paresis noted)
· No stomatitis or other oral lesions that would result in discomfort and reduced
appetite
 No signs of dyspnoea or respiratory secretions
 Some dysecdysis, with patchy/piecemeal shedding. (Snakes should shed their
complete skin-including spectacles - in one piece.)
· No apparent dehydration. (It is difficult to clinically assess dehydration in snakes,
        n     
membranes.)
· Gender determined as female by probing (probe passed to a depth of only three scales
caudal to the cloaca).
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSES
As discussed in other cases, anorexia is a common presenting sign in reptiles, with many possible
aetiologies. The main differentials considered for anorexia in this case were:
· Systemic disease, e.g. septicaemia.
· Gastrointestinal disease: infections (e.g. bacteria, protozoa (e.g. Cryptosporidium), nematodes),
neoplasia, constipation (often associated with dehydration), inappropriate diet (e.g. feeding prey
items that are too large)
· Metabolic disease, e.g. hypocalcaemia (often due to nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism)
resulting in paresis and delayed gastrointestinal motility
· Urogenital disease, e.g. renal failure
· Hepatic disease, e.g. hepatic lipidosis
· Normal reproductive behaviour: anorexia may be normal in gravid females, although this period is
usually only for the final 15-20 days of gestation in corn snakes
the coelomic cavity by the reproductive tract), e.g. follicular stasis or egg retention (due to dystocia
or reproductive stasis)
· Respiratory tract disease: snakes with upper or lower respiratory tract infections are often anorexic,
although clinical signs of respiratory difficulty are usually present (e.g. nasal discharge or open-
mouth breathing)
· Behavioural causes of anorexia: intra-or inter-specific aggression when reptiles are housed together,
psychological (e.g. associated with excessive noise or irregular light patterns)
· Neurological, e.g. loss of vision (e.g. due to spectacular abscesses) or smell (e.g. due to rhinitis)
· Other space-occupying lesions, e.g. neoplasia.
Case Work-Up
The history did not suggest obvious husbandry or dietary inadequacies that may have
predisposed to disease. Apart from the obvious loss of body condition, the physical
examination did not reveal any significant findings.
Haematology and biochemistry
A blood sample was taken by cardiocentesis to perform a general health profile,
investigating for signs of generalized infection or inflammation as well as renal or
hepatic disease (Table 19.1). Although a few parameters were outside the normal
ranges reported for corn snakes, none were significantly abnormal. A relative
heteropenia was present, but the total white cell count was within normal limits and
white cell morphology was normal on microscopy. Often poikilocytosis is noted with
anorexia, but was not present in this case. Elevations in calcium and phosphorus are
sometimes associated with reproductive activity.
Table 19.1 Corn snake blood results (with reference ranges for comparison)
Parameter
Unit
Result
Reference range
Total protein
V6
80
46-84
Albumin
32.9
18-34
Globulin
V6
47.1
33.57
Glucose
mmol
1.17*
1.7-4.8
Calcium
mmoll
7.5
Phosphorus
mmol1
2.37*
0.61-1.94
AST
41
9-224
CK
590
77-2460
Uric acid
μmol/l
557
77-1184
LDH
U/
331
48-444
Sodium
mmol1
171.9
147-183
Potassium
mmoll
2.44
1.9-13.2
Haemoglobin
IP/6
9.6*
9.7-13.5
Haematocit
/1
0.26
0.21-0.52
Red blood cells
x1012月
0.91
0.62-1.86
MCV
fl
285.7
170.6-403.8
MCHC
IP/6
36.9
32.1-39.8
MCH
x10/
105.5*
110.2-143
White blood cells
x10/
6
1.0-31.4
Heterophils
x10/
(%)20
0.14-8.35
Lymphocytes
×10/
4.86 (81%)
0.41-22.90
Eosinophils
x10/
0=
0.08-0.15
Monocytes
x10%/
0*
0.04-2.2
Azurophils
x10%
0.9
5-800
Basophils
x10/
0*
0.05-1.44
Thrombocytes
x10/
17
* Abnormal values outside reference range.
Radiography
The snake was anaesthetized (via conscious intubation and IPpV with isoflurane) in
order to facilitate positioning for lateral and dorso-ventral radiographs. The heart,
lungs and trachea had a normal appearance. There were no obvious skeletal
abnormalities. The radiographs  demonstrated at  least 13 oval well-defined
homogeneous soft tisse opacities roughly midline throughout the caudal third of the
coelomic cavity (Fig. 19.1), suspected to be either faecal material within the
gastrointestinal tract or eggs within the reproductive tract. A less likely differential
was multiple soft tissue tumours.
Figure 19.1
Dorsoventral and lateral radiographs of the snake showing multiple soft tissue density
masses within the coelomic cavity.
Ultrasound
Ultrasonography revealed numerous echodense masses in the coelomic cavity, within
a fluid-filled viscus. Each mass was ovoid, approximately 2.5 cm in length, with a
thick hyperechoic rim and mottled heterogeneous centre. It was not possible to
determine from ultrasound which organ(s) contained the masses, although they did
not appear to be free-floating within the coelomic cavity. The structure and location
of the masses was consistent with a diagnosis of egg retention.
Other Possible Investigations
Faecal analysis
Where gastrointestinal disease is suspected, it is usefuil to perform faecal analysis to
check for endoparasitism or bacterial infection.
Gastric lavage
If a single mid-body swelling is detected on clinical examination or ultrasonography,
gastric hypertrophy due to cryptosporidiosis should be suspected. This organism is
     o  s      
        s  s
Contrast radiography
A barium study after oral administration would outline material within the
gastrointestinal tract, helping to differentiate gastrointestinal from reproductive tract
week in a snake of this size), the delay in diagnosis was not deemed appropriate.
Coelioscopy
Endoscopy is usefuil to investigate a localized problem, and may enable sample
collection from abnormal structures for further analysis, such as culture or histology.
However, this is a difficult procedure to perform in snakes, as limited gas dilation and
Respiratory tract sampling
If lower respiratory tract disease is suspected, a lung wash is routinely performed
(using sterile saline) to obtain samples of material in the airways for culture and
Virology
Inclusion body disease (IBD) may be seen in Boidae (boid) species of snakes, and may
virus isolation or histopathology of oesophageal tonsils or coelomic organs such as
liver, kidney and spleen
Diagnosis
Egg retention was diagnosed using a combination of imaging techniques. It is
difficult to differentiate between tracts within the coelomic cavity due to the linear
            g
location of lesions.
Anatomy and Physiology Refresher
The reproductive tract (Fig. 19.2) in snakes lies predominantly in the caudal third of
the coelomic cavity, with the gonads most cranially (near the spleen, pancreas and
gall bladder). The right gonad is more cranial than the left, which is cranial to the
kidneys. Male snakes have two hemipenes that may be everted during copulation
      n          
oviducts are thin-walled in snakes.
Left lung
Heart
Thyroid
Trachea
Oesophagus
Right lung
Liver
Stomach
Gall bladder Spleen
Pancreas
air sac
Right ovary
Adrenal
Right
Right
Right
Kidneys
glands
Left
Oviducts
Left
Left
Left ovary
(smallerthan
the right)
>Ureters
Rectum
Vent
Figure 19.2
 Reproductive anatomy in a typical snake.
Sexual dimorphism is not universal in snakes. The easiest method of gender
             
hemipenes (see page 122-123).
Rat snakes are among the species that have ‘associated cycles' of reproduction. A
cool winter period (4-6 weeks) of dormancy or hibernation is required for breeding
hibernation, with a gradual increase in day length on emergence. Secretion of sex
 p  s ss ae a  s p ss
development. The gonads regress during the inactive season. Most snakes, including
corn snakes, are egg-layers. The normal gestation period (for eggs in the oviduct) in
corn snakes is 30-45 days. Colubrid species can be induced to lay multiple cluutches of
     a n  q a s e  sa
are initially raised on crickets before progressing to pinkies (newborn mice).
Aetiopathogenesis of Dystocia
Inappropriate husbandry conditions may predispose to reproductive disease. Animals
not in peak body condition before hibernation or reproductive activity may have
difficulty in sustaining egg development and parturition. Many gravid reptiles spend
more time basking before laying their eggs. Lack of an appropriate oviposition site
may result in dystocia. The incidence of dystocia increases with subsequent clutches
produced in the same year.
Epidemiology
Although social isolation prevents breeding, in many animals it does not stop
reproductive activity. Environmental cues such as lighting and temperature changes
often stimulate reproductive activity - such as a reduction in day length and
temperature over winter months in corn snakes. Animals with a history of dystocia
are more likely to retain eggs in the future. This is likely to be due to the continued
presence of factors resulting in the initial problem.
Treatment
Medical therapy
There was no evidence of obstructive dystocia from the investigations performed.
Therefore in the first instance, supportive care was given to assist with passage of the
eggs. The snake was hospitalized in a vivarium with supplemental heating to provide
the POTR (preferred optimal temperature range) for the species. Fluids (warmed
Hartmann's solution 30 ml/kg administered SC and intracoelomic [ICo]) and
administered. A warm water enema was administered to rehydrate cloacal material.
Salpingitis commonly results  in dystocia, and antibiosis was commenced
(enrofloxacin at 10 mg/kg PO SID for a 3 week course).
NURSING ASPECTS
· Although it is tempting to provide nutrition daily to underweight snakes, there is a balance between
e aaissanxa on anp ssans anp susne pue odns surond
· In larger snakes such as this corn snake, normal feeding is once a week. It is therefore acceptable to
reduce assist-feeding to once or twice weekly.
· Severely dehydrated animals are likely to require more intensive fluid therapy, sometimes requiring
intravenous fluids via CRl (continuous rate infusion). Dehydration should be corrected before food
is administered.
Calcium gluconate (20 mg/kg SC) was given prior to oxytocin (10 IU/kg IM,
repeated three times with 90 minutes between injections).
BOX 19.2 Oxytocin in reptiles
· For best results, oxytocin should be administered within the first 48 hours of dystocia.
• Although very effective ( > 90%) in chelonia, oxytocin in less effective in lizards, and even less so
in snakes ( < 50% even in the early stages of dystocia).
   r  a   s     -
reptiles. However, this hormone is usually unavailable.
 'ao sa 'adnu peinpo se eioisp aaonnsqo go saseo ul pasn aq nou pious uoxo .
haemorrhage may result (potentially fatally).
 Pre-treatment with propranolol (at 1 μg/kg) may increase the effectiveness of parturition-inducing
drugs in reptiles.
A nesting area was advised, to encourage normal nesting behaviour and egg laying.
The nest box was lined with moist sphagnum moss as substrate (an alternative is
dampened vermiculite). Disturbance and handling should be minimized during the
nesting time.
Follow-Up
Eight eggs were passed in the week following administration of oxytocin. However,
the snake remained anorexic over the following month (despite continued supportive
care with gavage-feeding every third day) and no further eggs were passed.
Further Treatment
Exploratory coeliotomy
Prophylactic antibiosis was given (enrofloxacin, at 10 mg/kg IM at the time of
surgery (see Box 19.3 for anaesthetic regime), continuing once daily PO for a week). A
paramedian incision was made in the region of one of the masses located on
liltrasound. The incision was ventro-lateral, between the first two rows of scales on
the side (enabling closure without a suture line on the ventrum which contacts the
substrate).
BOX 19.3 Anaesthesia of the corn snake
· Pre-medication was administered using butorphanol (2 mg/kg IM), also providing some analgesia,
and ketamine (10 mg/kg IM).
· The snake was restrained manually. A gag was used to open the mouth and a 2 mm endotracheal
tube (ETT) was inserted in the trachea of the mildly sedated snake.
· IPpV (intermittent positive pressure ventilation) was used to induce anaesthesia with isoflurane.
· After induction, a mechanical ventilator was used to maintain anaesthesia. Four breaths a minute at
a pressure of 9.0 cmHzO were sufficient to maintain a surgical depth of anaesthesia.
· The snake was placed on a heat pad to maintain body temperature during surgery, and warmed
fluids were utilized for lavage.
· After surgery, the snake was disconnected from the anaesthetic circuit and returned to the vivarium.
The ETT was left in place and IPPV performed using a small resuscitator device (Fig. 19.4). The ETT
was removed once the patient was spontaneously breathing on a regular basis.
Figure 19.4
Resuscitator devices; can be used to administer room air in IPPV.
The oviducts were obvious on entry into the coelomic cavity, and found to contain
several egg-shaped structures. There was no evidence of adhesions or coelomitis. After
discussion with the owner, it was elected to perform a salpingectomy (Fig. 19.3)
rather than a salpingotomy (i.e. caesarean section) due to the chronic history of
reproductive problems and as the animal was not required for future breeding. The
oviducts were followed and removed to their cranial and caudal ends. Blood vessels
supplying the oviducts are large and numerous, and must be ligated. The uise of
stainless steel vascular clips for rapid haemostasis reduced surgical time compared
with ligatures with suture material (another rapid alternative is the use of lasers).
Caudally, the oviducts were ligated close to their insertion into the cloaca before being
removed. The procedure necessitated extension of the skin incision for approximately
a third of the length of the snake.
Figure 19.3
 Intraoperative view of the salpingectomy.
(i.e. ovariosalpingectomy). Otherwise future folliculogenesis, ovulation and egg
coelomitis will occur in some reptiles. The ovaries were not obvious during the
coeliotomy of this case, and therefore a salpingectomy only was performed.
Closure of the coeliotomy incision was in two layers. The muscular wall of the
coelomic cavity is thin, but can usually be closed with a simple continuous pattern
ising absorbable suture material. Horizontal mattress sutures of non-absorbable
material (nylon) were used to close the skin, causing a deliberate eversion of the skin
to prevent the edges rolling inwards.
CLINICAL TIP
If a unilateral salpingectomy (with or without ipsilateral ovariectomy) is performed, reproduction
is possible from the contralateral side of the reproductive tract.
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
· The snake should be maintained in a vivarium within the species-specific POTR. Attention should
be paid to other husbandry requirements such as optimizing ventilation, good hygiene, and
nutritional support as required.
· Until the skin incision has healed, the snake should be maintained on a newspaper substrate. This
prevents the possibility of substrate material abrading or entering the wound, and is also easily
cleaned (replaced) daily.
Laboratory investigations
It would have been useful to assess the excised oviductal material for evidence of
infection (by culture) or other pathology (by histology). Further laboratory
investigations were declined in this case.
Other Treatment Options
Medical
Other hormonal options for treatment of dystocia are described in Box 19.2
Manipulation of retained eggs
may result in rupture or prolapse.
Percuitaneouus ovocentesis
A sterile needle may be inserted through the ventrum of the snake to aspirate egg
contents. This procedure carries a risk of coelomitis if egg contents contaminate the
coelomic cavity. Once drained, the egg often collapses and the snake can expel it more
easily. If not passed within 48 hours, the remainder of the egg should be surgically
removed to reduce the risk of infection or coelomitis from residual yolk leakage. This
technique is not useful in cases of prolonged dystocia, as the egg contents solidify with
time and cannot be aspirated.
Salpingotomy
 a  d  s    s   s
this technique is that eggs may be milked along the oviduct and fewer (and shorter)
coeliotomy incisions will be necessary, although it may be less traumatic to make an
incision over each egg. The oviduct is usually closed with a simple continuous
pattern. The main disadvantage of this treatment is the risk of dystocia at future
gestations.
Follow-Up after Surgery
The snake re-presented 4 weeks after surgery. After shedding, a small area of the
wound had appeared inflamed. Antibiotic ointment (silver sulfadiazine) was applied
to the lesion to reduce the risk of infection, and suture removal (normally performed
approximately 6 weeks after surgery) was postponed. Skin sutures were removed 8
weeks after surgery. By this stage, the snake was active and her appetite was
improving.
Prevention
Attention to husbandry details such as appropriate temperature, humidity, and nest
site provision are necessary to prevent egg retention in snakes. Prompt diagnosis of
the problem and instigation of medical therapy may preclude the necessity for surgical
intervention. Removal of reproductive tissue (bilateral ovariosalpingectomy) will
prevent future reproductive disease.
Prognosis
Scarring of the skin after surgery is likely to result in dysecdysis - sometimes
reduce with each shed. Although uncommon, the owner was also warned of the
possibility of future follicles forming on the ovaries, being released into the coelomic
cavity, and resulting in egg coelomitis.
  o      
performed to treat dystocia, future breeding is still likely. Many animals will breed
within a year of medical or surgical treatment for dystocia, and some will produce
clutches within 1-2 months.
20
Dysecdysis in a leopard gecko
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Retained skin after shedding in a leopard gecko.
Introduction
It is vital to assess the pet's husbandry in cases such as this. Frequently, chronic
suboptimal conditions present with lesions that are not immediately life-threatening.
However, they may indicate underlying problems that may predispose to stress,
immunosuppression and potentially increased susceptibility to infectious agents.
Alternatively, the individual may suffer from chronic metabolic problems.
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
 A 3-year-old male leopard gecko (Eublepharis macularius) (Box 20.1) presented with retained skin
after shedding (i.e. dysecdysis), which involved the digits, eyes and lips.
BOX 20.1  Ecology of leopard geckos
  1 d e  P s   e
· Terrestrial species. Crepuscular (primarily active at dawn and dusk)
• Normal habitat: rocky, dry grassland and desert regions. Spend daytime hidden under rocks or in
dry burrows
· Require a hide area for security. This area should be moist to assist ecdysis. Rubbing against
rough surfaces also helps to remove old skin
· Temperature range: 25-30*C
· Relative humidity: 30-40%, although humid microhabitats are required to assist shedding
· Snout to tail tip length: < 25 cm
· Free-ranging diet: mainly invertebrates, but will also take small vertebrates
 se ie        
produced at low and high temperatures, and males at intermediate temperatures)
· Longevity: up to 12 years in captivity
Husbandry
   e n  e   s   s
approximately 60 cm long X 30 cm wide X 30 cm high, with a ventilated lid. The
substrate - calcium sand - was spot-cleaned daily and completely replaced every 3
months, at which point the vivarium was disinfected with dilute bleach and rinsed
with tap water. Supplemental heating was provided by a heat mat along the back wall
on the outside of the tank and a small ceramic heat bulb at one end. The heat mat was
switched on 24 hours per day, while the lamp was on for approximately 10 hours each
day. A UV light was provided, but switched on for only 6 hours daily (Fig. 20.1). A
plastic mould provided a hide area.
Figure20.1
Measuring the UV output from a light source using a meter.
The temperature was monitored using an alcohol thermometer - positioned at the
end with the heat bulb - and typically read 31°C during the day.
The geckos were fed on a selection of invertebrates, mainly small crickets and
mealworms. The invertebrates were fed on various fruit and vegetables, and dusted
with mineral supplement before feeding to the geckos.
Case History
The owner had noticed problems with the animal's skin over the previous week, since
the last shed:
· Tags of skin around digits (Fig. 20.2)
· Eye lids appeared stuck together
2 months
 sd a q  l o e
· Appetite reduced over the past week, with the gecko appearing to have difficulty
locating food
· Not known when last urine/faeces/urates were passed.
Figure 20.2
Leopard gecko with dysecdysis, showing retained skin on digits.
Clinical Examination
The gecko was quite habituated to handling, but the small size of this species limits
clinical examination to a degree. Findings included:
· Good body condition, evidenced by a substantial fat deposit at the base of the tail
· Alert demeanour. Mobility good and supporting weight well on all four limbs
· Bilateral eyes shut, with cream/brown material between the eyelids (similar to Fig.
20.3)
· Evidence of retained skin at commissures of jaw (similar to Fig. 20.3)
· Tags of skin covering all four feet ('glove' like) (Fig. 20.2). Missing distal tips of
several digits
· Abdominal palpation revealed no obvious abnormalities
· No evidence of respiratory disease (e.g. open-mouth or noisy breathing, or nasal or
oral discharges).
(b)
Figure 20.3
(a) African fat-tailed gecko (Hemitheconyx caudicinctus) with retained shed in eye
and at lip commissure. (b) Animal after retained skin removed.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSES
The differentials for dysecdysis with retained skin were:
· Poor husbandry, e.g. too hot, low relative humidity, lack of abrasive surfaces
· Malnutrition: hypoproteinaemia and hypovitaminosis A
· Dehydration
· Dermatitis
· Ectoparasites, e.g. mites and ticks
· Wounds or old scars: often result in dysecdysis for several cycles
· Seasonal influences, e.g. daylight length, temperature and/or relative humidity
  q  e s p  ns   
snakes, particularly older corn snakes).
NURSING ASPECTS
Condition assessment in leopard geckos
+ Leopard geckos store fat reserves at the base of their tail.
· It is therefore relatively simple to ascertain body condition in these animals by assessing the width
 of the tail proximally.
· Underweight animals will have a thin tapering tail, and often the pelvic bones are prominent.
· Animals in good body condition will have a slightly rounded tail base.
· Overweight animals have an extremely round tail base.
· Muscle development can also be assessed by checking the amount of muscle in the limbs. The
bones will be quite obvious and easily palpated in malnourished or unfit animals.
Case Work-Up
Husbandry
Assessment of the leopard gecko's husbandry suggested a lack of microclimate area
with an elevated relative humidity - typically a hide area with moist substrate -
which is necessary to assist ecdysis.
 It was difficult to assess whether temperature problems were present. It is preferable
to monitor the environmental temperature at both the cool and warm ends of the
vivarium, using digital maximum-minimum thermometers. The cool end should be
approximately 25°C, with a basking area of 32°C at the other end. Overnight, the
temperature should not drop below 25°C.
The gecko's diet was good, with adequate supplementation. The water bowl in the
enclosure was examined, finding no ectoparasites such as mites.
Other Possible Investigations
Skin
to evaluate bacteria and/or Giemsa-style stain to assess cells present - may also be
beneficial, particularly if an infection is suspected.
Blood
It is sometimes useful to perform haematology, particularly if ectoparasites are present
that may resuilt in anaemia. Serum protein may be reduced if skin lesions result in
exudates and fluid loss.
Culture
material may be contaminated from the environment it can still be useful to perform,
as heavy growth of a micro-organism will be significant.
Skin biopsy
procedure. A sample may be sent for culture. Histology may identify bacterial or
fungal conditions, such as mycobacteriosis or dermatophilosis, better than culture
S           s
diagnosis is based on virology on a biopsy sample.
Imaging
Radiography and ultrasonography may identify systemic disease problems underlying
or in association with the dysecdysis.
Diagnosis
fully determined with the investigations performed, but husbandry deficits were
suspected to be the most likely cause.
Dysecdysis is the abnormal shedding of skin in reptiles. While retained slough is the
  so o s   s  ) 
  n         s  s 
those with a low calciuim to phosphorus ratio).
Anatomy and Physiology Refresher
The skin of reptiles performs several functions. These include protection, water and
D precursor) and camouflage. The epidermis and dermis make up the scales (and
scutes in chelonia) (Fig. 20.4). The epidermis is composed primarily of three keratin
layers, with an inderlying layer for production. The dermis includes connective
tissue, nerves, blood vessels and pigment cells.
B-keratinMesoskeratin
o-keratin
Hinge region
Epidermis-
Dermis
Connective tissuesensory
structures and vasculartissues
Figure 20.4
Normal reptile skin anatomy.
body should occur over a relatively short period of time and on a regular basis. The
S         
Release of lymphatic fluids and proteolytic enzymes between the new and old layers
creates a cleavage plane. The process usually occurs over about 2 weeks.
The eyelid geckos (Eublepharidae family) have movable eyelids rather than the
transparent spectacles that most geckos possess. Eublepharidae also lack climbing pads
on their feet.
Aetiopathogenesis of Dysecdysis
The definition of dysecdysis is impaired shedding of the outer epidermal layers. Signs
     s      
keratin in slough, and/or retention of slough over extremities such as the digits and
tail tip.
Retained skin around distal extremities may contract and result in tissue swelling.
leading to gradual ischaemic necrosis. Leopard geckos and skinks are especially
susceptible to this problem. The extremities are often lost. Periocular retained skin
leads to conjunctivitis.
relative humidity in the environment therefore frequently causes dysecdysis through
       (       
water provision is inappropriate).
Snakes suffering from dysecdysis can be encouraged to move through a damp towel
(i.e. moist abrasive surface) to aid shedding. Species such as snakes and species of
         s    
retained spectacles when dysecdysis occuirs.
Epidemiology
            s
infection for other animals.
Treatment
Ocular
It was possible to remove some of the retained skin from the eyelids. The eyes were
flushed with sterile saline using an intravenous catheter with the stylet removed to
remove more of the debris.
Rehydration
The leopard gecko was bathed in shallow warm water to aid rehydration, including of
the retained skin. Gentle tension was then applied to the retained skin using forceps to
remove it. Some areas were still quite firmly adhered to the underlying skin - these
were left in situ at this time.
The animal was discharged with instructions for the owner to continue bathing for
15 minutes twice daily. Artificial tears were applied several times daily to soften the
retained periocular skin.
Treatment Options and Management
Husbandry
  s        
requirement was provision of a hide area creating a humid microclimate. It is useful
to monitor the relative humidity (aiming for 30-40% in the general enclosure).
Digital hygrometers are available for this purpose.
  sa n       
owner was advised to use a digital maximum-minimum thermometer.
 io  se ' io Aa s a da o an  si 1
bulbs will diminish over time. Some will produce UV for a longer period of time, but a
UV meter is required to measure this.
It is advisable to increase relative humidity in cases of dysecdysis, for example by
misting the vivarium, providing large shallow trays of water for evaporative loss into
the environment and for bathing. Addition of a small hide enclosure with a
microclimate of increased humidity - created by lining a plastic food container (with
a doorway cut out) with moistened sphagnum moss or cotton wool - will assist
normal shedding.
Nutritional support
Since the gecko had not been feeding well, it was prudent to provide additional
nutrition. Gavage-feeding was continued until the gecko was showing more interest
in food.
CLINICAL TIPS
Nutritional support
· Leopard geckos are predominantly insectivorous, and any nutritional aid administered should aim
to replicate this.
· For short-term use, baby food formulas may be used. A meat-containing dairy-free variety should be
selected.
· For longer term support, proprietary carnivore diets are available. Alternatively, invertebrates can
be mashed and administered.
· A volume of approximately 5 ml/kg may be administered at each gavage, and this may be repeated
two or three times daily (depending on the animal's requirements). If dehydration is present, the
food may be diluted to provide additional fluid.
utilized to prevent damage to the animal's teeth or the gavage tube during the procedure.
Other Treatment Options
Diet
If the reptile is not eating, for example if vision is affected by periocular dysecdysis,
assist-feeding may be required for longer periods. In some cases, an oesophagostomy
tube can be placed for this purpose.
Ocular
On some occasions, ocular infections will develop. Topical antibiosis should be
administered, preferably based on culture and sensitivity results.
Follow-Up
The gecko re-presented 1 week later. At this stage, it was possible to easily remove the
remaining retained skin. The eyes were wide open and the gecko's appetite had
improved.
Prevention
Attention  to appropriate husbandry  requirements  will avoid most  aetiologies.
Quarantine and good hygiene will reduce the risk of infectious agents.
Prognosis
With appropriate treatment, the prognosis for dysecdysis is good. However, lost
extremities such as digits will not re-grow.
21
Aural abscesses in a map turtle
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Head swellings on a map turtle.
Introduction
Exotic pet - particularly reptilian - anatomy may vary significantly from commonly
treated mammalian pets. This case discusses the anatomy of the reptilian ear,
describing a common condition that is often associated with poor husbandry
anatomy and husbandry in order to best treat exotic pets.
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
A juvenile male map turtle (Graptemys species) (Box 21.1) presented with bilateral swellings on its
head.
BOX 21.1  Ecology of map turtles
• Range in the wild covers North America from Texas to Canada
· Normal habitat: semi-aquatic, freshwater (ponds, river-bottoms and lakes). Prefer large aquatic
 bodies, with areas of fallen trees or other debris for basking. Several animals may congregate to
bask
 n  s    =      =     
2.5 kg
· Sexual dimorphism: female much larger than male. Carapace more oval in males, who also have
longer fore claws and a longer thicker tail (to contain the phallus)
· Reproduction: mating in deep waters, nesting (May-July) in unshaded sites with sandy soil.
n xs    =  s  =  
• Free-ranging diet: omnivorous, mainly feeding in water. Invertebrates such as aquatic insects.
snails, crayfish and smaller crustaceans, also dead fish and plant material. The smaller male eats
mainly insects, while the female consumes more molluscs and crustaceans. Older animals eat more
plant material ( < 50% diet)
* Captive diet: animal material (70%) - rehydrated low-fat dried cat/dog/trout pellets, small raw
fish, bloodworms, earthworms; fresh food (30%) - leafy green vegetables and aquatic plants
· Longevity: over 30 years
* Dormant: November-April.
Husbandry
The client had owned the map turtle for 3 months, and housed it with a similar-sized
con-specific. The enclosure was approximately 30 x 60 cm; it was constructed of a
glass bottom and walls, and a plastic lid with ventilation slits. The water area had a
gentle slope to permit easy access, and a maximum depth of 1o cm. An internal
canister filter was present. A proportion of the water was changed weekly, equivalent
            
was carried out.
A basking area was provided, comprising a “land’' area with a substrate of soil and
over this area produced a basking temperature of 32'C. A small underwater heater
resulted in a water temperature (measured with a digital thermometer) of 24°C,
dropping to 20*C overnight. A wire enclosure around the heater ensured that the
     e sa      h   o s
enclosure, sited approximately 30 cm above the surface of the substrate.
The map turtles' diet consisted of cat kibble (soaked in water), bloodworms and a
small amount of spring greens. They were fed in their enclosure.
Case History
Two weeks prior to presentation, the owner had noticed swellings on the turtle's head.
These had gradually increased in size. No other changes in behaviour, appetite or
faecal output were noted. There had been no changes in husbandry since the turtle
the previous enclosure or diet.
Clinical Examination
The map turtle was examined; findings included:
· Bright, alert and reactive
· Good body condition, weighing 100 g
up on all four limbs. No limb swellings or discomfort were detected
· Shell quality was firm. No skin lesions were present
· A firm swelling was present laterally on either side of the map turtle's head, caudal
to the eyes. The swelling on the right protruded approximately 4 mm while that on
the left extended approximately 3 mm (Fig. 21.1)
· No oral abnormalities were detected.
Figure 21.1
Map turtle with bilateral cephalic swellings in the region of the tympanic membranes.
DIFFERENTIALDIAGNOSES
The differentials for cephalic swelling(s) were:
· Abscess of middle ear(s)
 Other infection: abscess, granuloma, fibriscess (granulomatous abscess); cellulitis; mycobacteria;
viral (such as papillomas)
• Trauma: with haematoma formation, soft tissue damage or fractures
· Oedema
· Neoplasia (unlikely since bilateral)
· Foreign bodies (unlikely since bilateral)
· Parasites: cutaneous (such as ticks), subcutaneous (such as filarial worms, botfly)
· Sebaceous cysts.
Case Work-Up
History and clinical examination
The most important aspects of investigation of this case were the above findings
upon (see below). The localization of the swellings on the lateral head just caudal to
the eyes is the position of the ear in chelonia. Bilateral symmetrical lesions are most
likely related to this anatomical structure.
Other possible investigations that were not performed in this case
Imaging, such as radiography or ultrasound, would have been useful to rule out
also be uiseful to investigate head lesions in small animals.
A fine needle aspirate may have been useful to ascertain the contents of the
as blood, serous exudates, or pus, and also help to rule out neoplasia as a differential.
Diagnosis
Bilateral aural abscessation: suspected on history and clinical examination, and
proven on surgical exploration.
Anatomy and Physiology Refresher
Chelonia, including terrapins such as the map turtle, do not have an external ear. The
tympanic membrane is the outer limit of the middle ear. It lies level with the skin of
the head and is covered by modified skin.
The eustachian tube is short and open. It leads to the pharynx from the middle ear,
and thus the tube and middle ear are lined with mucous membrane. The entrance to
the eustachian tube is visible in the pharynx, located just caudal to the mandible
The middle ear contains one bone - the columella - that is rod-shaped. This
connects to the tympanic membrane and the mandible (to the quadrate bone).
Hearing relies on vibrations from the air or ground passing through this system -
tympanic membrane to columella to perilymphatic fluid - to stimulate nerve impulses.
Aetiopathogenesis of Aural Abscesses in Chelonia
Abscesses in reptiles commonly involve Gram-negative bacteria (such as Pseudomonas
         
       
involved. Infective material generates an inflammatory response. This results in fibrin
contained within the fibrin milieu a chronic infection may ensue. Thus reptilian
abscesses are solid, and treatment is ideally by surgical excision (since lancing will not
result in drainage as it does in mammals with liquid pus).
The columella and tympanic cavity are large. Aural abscesses are common at this
site. Aquatic chelonia such as terrapins, including map turtles, are particularly
       s  
conditions such as malnutrition or suboptimal environmental temperatures. Aural
abscesses have also been associated with environmental pollutants in free-ranging
chelonia.
Epidemiology
Groups of animals housed in the same environment are likely to suiccumb to disease,
due to the effects of inappropriate husbandry conditions on the immune system and
the involvement of poor hygiene. Without improvements in husbandry, the condition
may reculr.
Treatment
General anaesthesia
Propofol (at 10 mg/kg) was injected into the sub-carapacial sinus to induce
o   n   s      g
intravenous cannula - with the stylet removed - attached to an endotracheal tube
connector (Fig. 21.2). A short cannula is used to reduce the risk of intubating one
bronchus (as the trachea bifurcates quite rostrally in chelonia). The tube and circuit
were made rigid by attaching them to a wooden tongue depressor along the ventral
surface of the patient's neck, thus preventing kinking and potential obstruction of the
airway. Anaesthesia was maintained using isoflurane (at 2-3%), with intermittent
positive pressure ventilation (IPPV) being performed.
Figure 21.2
Anaesthetized map turtle intubated with an intravenous cannula.
CLINICAL TIPS
IPpV in chelonia
 Many anaesthetic agents suppress respiration, often resulting in bradypnoea or apnoea. IPpV is
useful to ensure adequate ventilation occurs, maintaining the supply of oxygen and anaesthetic gases.
· IPpV may be performed by the anaesthetist or using a mechanical ventilator.
· Tidal volume is larger in reptiles compared with mammals, but reptiles have a lower respiratory
rate.
· The airway pressure should peak at 8-l0 cm HzO in chelonia. The patient should be observed,
 ensuring that body movements - i.e. small outward leg movements with the increase in intracoelomic
pressure during inspiration - are similar to those occurring in consciously breathing animals.
· Inspiration should proceed over 1-2 seconds.
· IPpV is usually administered at 4-8 breaths/minute.
NURSING ASPECTS
· Aquatic reptiles should not be permitted to return to their usual environment - with access to deep
water - until fully recovered from anaesthesia.
· Until then they should be kept in a moist environment, e.g. on damp paper towels and sprayed with
water.
Surgery
The map turtle was placed in sternal recumbency, permitting positioning of the head
and neck laterally to allow access to each tympanic membrane in turn. The ventral
portion of the tympanic membrane was removed by excising a semi-circular section of
skin (Fig. 21.3). Abscessated material was removed using fine-tipped forceps and a
small curette. The middle ear was then flushed with dilute povidone-iodine and sterile
saline. A small catheter was passed into the eustachian tube, and flushed, to ensure
patency.
Figure 21.3
Map turtle after surgery, showing semi-circular excision of tympanic membrane.
Medication
Fluids were given postoperatively (5 ml/kg of warmed Hartmann's solution
administered intracoelomically). Analgesia was administered at the time of surgery
(buprenorphine at 0.05 mg/kg and meloxicam at 0.1 mg/kg IM). Systemic antibiosis
was given in the form of enrofloxacin (at 5 mg/kg IM).
CLINICAL TIPS
Injections in chelonia
· When administering injections to chelonia, the skin should be thoroughly cleaned beforehand to
reduce the risk of abscess formation.
· Intramuscular enrofloxacin injections are painful. Tissue necrosis and sterile abscesses may form. If 
administered subcutaneously, skin discolouration or necrosis may occur.
Treatment Options and Management
Medication
Analgesia was continued postoperatively with meloxicam (at 0.1 mg/kg PO q24hr for
a further 3 days). Enrofloxacin was continued for 2 weeks (at 5 mg/kg PO q48hr). The
bilateral skin wounds were flushed with dilute povidone-iodine once daily for 1 week.
Hygiene
The filtration system must be maintained. This will help ensure good hygiene in the
water. The filter should be regularly cleaned, as well as performing regular water
changes. Although internal canister filters usually suffice for smaller turtles, external
ones are advisable for adult map turtles, due to the large amount of waste produced.
Water quality is improved if the turtles are fed in a separate tank, but this can be
stressful for some individuals. Check water quality regularly using a test kit, assessing
 n      s     
treatments can be used to neutralize toxic chemicals - suich as chlorine and
chloramine that are frequently used in public water supplies - in the water.
Most excreta are passed in the water, but the land area should also be kept clean. An
animal safe disinfectant should be used in the enclosure.
Husbandry
The environmental temperatures for this patient were adequate (with  water
temperature 24-26°C and a basking area of 32*C). The importance of monitoring -
and recording - temperatures was impressed upon the owner.
Water quality should be checked regularly using a test kit. The filter should also be
cleaned regularly.
CLINICAL TIPS
Water quality
· A good quality test kit should be used to assess for nitrogenous waste products - ammonia, nitrite
and nitrate - that are toxic.
· Other parameters that can be measured include temperature, pH and chlorine/chloramine (to
ensure suitable water supply).
· Water should be routinely tested weekly (more frequently if a problem is present).
· Ammonia is oxidized by bacteria to nitrite, and thence to nitrate. The latter is the least toxic.
· Water temperature should be relatively constant.
· Ammonia and nitrite should not be detected if filtration is fully functional.
· Regular water changes should prevent significant accumulation of nitrate.
Diet
The diet for this patient was satisfactory. However, growing reptiles should be
supplemented with minerals such as calcium and phosphorus; this is usually
accomplished by the addition of powdered supplements to feed, although for aquatic
animals they should be trained to take this dusted food above water.
As the map turtles age, they should be offered a higher proportion of vegetable
matter in their diet. The addition of aquatic plants to the environment may help; this
will be easier in a larger enclosure (that will be required as the animals increase in
size).
It is preferable to feed the map turtles in a separate enclosure, minimizing the
presence of decomposing food that contributes to poor water quality.
Other Treatment Options
Surgery
In some cases, it may be possible to remove the abscess material without excising any
overlying skin or tympanic membrane. In these cases, a semi-circular incision is made
            s
abscesses, a complete circular area of skin and tympanic membrane needs to be
excised to access and remove the abscess contents.
It is preferable to remove the abscess plug in one piece using a curette, as it can be
difficult to ensure all infective material - particularly that within the eustachian tube
- is removed if done piecemeal. If all such material has been removed, the skin may be
sutured closed. However, it can be difficult to be certain that none remains and for
most cases the middle ear is left open.
If the eustachian tube is not clear of infective material, the abscess will rapidly
recur. The cavity should be flushed daily with antiseptic (such as chlorhexidine or
povidone-iodine) until healing is progressing. Topical antibiotics may be useful in
some cases.
Supportive care
If the animal is not self-feeding, assist-feeding may be required. It can be difficult to
maintain an oesophagostomy tube in aquatic species, as leakage at the skin incision
commonly progresses to subcutaneous abscess formation.
If discomfort is noted - displayed, for example, by lethargy or other abnormal
behaviour - further analgesia should be provided.
Deterioration
If the animal becomes systemically unwell, a blood sample should be taken to assess
haematological and biochemical parameters. If septicaemia is suspected, blood cuiltuire
can be performed.
Follow-Up
The map turtle was reassessed at 1 week after surgery. It had been feeding well and
behaving normally. The wounds had begun to dry. At 2 weeks after surgery, the skin
had contracted significantly over the sites and granulation tissue was visi ble.
Prevention
Optimal husbandry conditions - in particular good water hygiene, nutrition and
sufficiently high environmental temperatures - are paramount to prevention of this
condition. Ensuring aquatic animals are not exposed to toxins and pollutants is also
advisable.
Prognosis
The prognosis for a full recovery in this case was good, providing the minor
husbandry problems were addressed. In more debilitated animals, the prognosis may
be poorer due to the likely presence of concomitant disease.
22
Hypocalcaemia in a green iguana
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Collapse and tremors in a green iguana.
Introduction
Green iguanas are common reptile pets (Box 22.1). Destined to become large ( < 2 m in
length) powerful animals, many owners struggle to provide an appropriate
environment for them as they mature. This may lead to husbandry deficiencies as in
this case and potentially fatal disease.
BOX 22.1 Ecology of green iguanas
e      s        
populations exist in the USA in south Florida, Hawaii and the Rio Grande Valley of Texas
· Tail: undergoes autotomy, re-grown tail will contain cartilaginous vertebrae. Will swim, using
lateral tail movement for propulsion. Use tail to 'whip', protecting from predators; also use teeth and
claws for protection
· Normal habitat: arboreal species - they are agile climbers using their long claws for grip. Rubbing
against rough surfaces also helps to remove old skin during ecdysis. Diurnal
· Temperature range: 25*C (cool end) to 40*C (basking) during the daytime, and 20*C overnight
· Relative humidity: high
· Average adult weight: 5 kg (up to 10 kg)
• Snout to tail tip length: 1 m (maximum 2 m)
· Skin: scales are small and granular. Dorsal crest along full length of body and tail
· Free-ranging diet: herbivorous, feeding on leaves, flowers, fruit and growing shoots of many plant
 species. Occasionally consume invertebrates (usually as a by-product of eating plant material).
Juveniles more likely to consume invertebrates
· Gender determination: sexual dimorphism. Males have well-developed dewlaps, used to regulate
body temperature and for courtship and displays. Males also have prominent femoral pores on their
ventral thighs. Hemipenal bulges present caudal to the cloaca in males. Adult males are highly
territorial, particularly during the breeding season
· Reproduction: oviparous (egg-laying). Clutch of up to 40 eggs, laid in a nesting burrow.
Temperature-dependent sex determination. Incubation 10-15 weeks. Young animals often remain in a
group
 As e  s  s  nd  p -
· Lateral nasal gland to excrete excess potassium and sodium chloride salts
· Popular pet. Also a food source - for both meat and eggs - in Latin America. Listed on CITES
Appendix II.
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
 A 17-year-old female green iguana (Iguana iguana) presented with collapse and tremors.
Husbandry
The iguana's enclosure was a converted wooden cupboard measuring 1 m high x 1 m
deep x 2 m wide; the front doors had been replaced by glass sliding doors. The
substrate was newspaper. A hide box - made of cardboard - was present in the centre
of the enclosure. Artificial plants were present. Several logs permitted the iguana to
climb.
Supplemental heating was provided by two ceramic heat bulbs at one end of the
enclosure. They were connected to a thermostat, set at 27-29*C. The owner did not
measure the environmental temperature within the iguana's enclosure. A UV
             s
highest branch), which had been replaced a few months previously.
The enclosure was spot-cleaned daily, with change of the newspaper substrate, and
completely cleaned out and disinfected once every 3 months. A pet-safe disinfectant
was used, and the enclosure and furniture (such as branches) rinsed well with water
after cleaning.
The iguana was fed on a mixture of fresh and tinned vegetables and fruit. These
included tinned mixed fruit, tinned mixed vegetables, fresh leafy greens, mixed salad
leaves and spinach. A mineral supplement was added to the food once weekly. A
shallow water bowl was provided for drinking and bathing.
Most of the time, the iguana was retained in the enclosure, but she was taken into
the owner's living space occasionally for 1-2 hours at a time.
CLINICAL TIPS
· It is important to use a safe substrate for lizards - either those that cannot be eaten or those that
will not cause a gastrointestinal obstruction.
· Newspaper and Astroturf are safe to use.
· Wood chip-based substrates often result in blockages if eaten.
Case History
           a 
her from a local petshop. Several years previously, the iguana had been radiographed,
showing the presence of poor bone density. The iguana did not have UV access for a
prolonged period while still a growing juvenile. She had laid a clutch of eggs in the
past; no problems were noted. Until 6 months previously, the iguana was housed with
an adult male green iguana (which had died of unknown disease at that point).
The iguana was presented with an acute history of collapse, initially seen 2 hours
prior to presentation. However, during the consultation it became clear that some
other clinical signs had been present during the previous 48 hours.
· Previous 2 hours:
· Collapse
· Tremors/'shaking'
· Intermittent stiffness of head and neck
· Previous 2 days:
· Fell off log
· Change in skin colouration, from brown to orange
· Reduced appetite
· Lethargy.
There was no history of access to potential toxins.
Clinical Examination
A brief clinical assessment was performed to reduce the stress of restraint to the
· Body condition: thin. Animal small for her age. Weight = 1.31 kg
· Mucous membranes pink, but saliva quite viscous (suggested dehydration)
· Evidence of previous autotomy, with tail regrowth (obvious change to skin scales
part-way down the tail, with smaller scales distal to the site of tail loss) (Fig. 22.1)
 No signs of respiratory disease
· Mandibular shortening and widening (likely associated with metabolic bone disease
occurring as a growing individual)
S      s       es
diagnosed (rather than ataxia)
· Both eyes half-shut (Fig. 22.1)
· Intermittent body tremors noted, also localized muscle fasciculations of the limbs
· Episode of rigid neck extension during clinical examination.
Figure 22.1
closed eyes, and re-grown distal tail after autotomy.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSES
The differentials for paresis, weakness and flaccidity were:
· Hypocalcaemia
· Hypoglycaemia
• Central nervous system trauma
· Spinal trauma, often a sequel to secondary hyperparathyroidism (metabolic bone disease) if
vertebral bodies collapse
• Other spinal pathology, such as spinal abscess
· Toxins, such as pesticides
· Septicaemia: usually with bacterial aetiology
· Renomegaly: resulting in pressure on the sciatic nerves
* Peripheral neuropathies, such as in hypothyroidism
• Central nervous system infection: bacterial, fungal, viral, parasitic (such as protozoa or visceral
larva migrans)
· Cystic calculi.
 The differentials for lethargy were:
• Husbandry inadequacies, such as inappropriate temperature, light pattern, relative humidity, or lack
 of UV lighting
• Nutritional disease, e.g. hypocalcaemia or hypovitaminosis A
• Musculoskeletal disease, e.g. poor mineralization
· Neurological disease, e.g. meningoencephalitis
 Hepatic disease, such as hepatic lipidosis
 Gastrointestinal disease, such as obstruction or endoparasitism
· Urogenital disease, e.g. follicular stasis or egg retention, or renal failure
 Psychological, e.g. with excessive noise or disruptive light patterns
d   n as d sn  s s -
· Sensual deprivation, such as loss of vision (e.g. with cataracts or other intraocular disease).
The differentials for skin discolouration were:
· Natural or behavioural changes: particularly in species such as anoles and chameleons, but many
lizards can change colour to a degree
· Trauma, e.g. attack by another animal
· Ectoparasites, e.g. mites
· Septicaemia
· Burns
· Petechiae/ecchymoses.
 The differentials for loss of condition were:
· Poor husbandry, e.g. inappropriate temperature and/or relative humidity
· Inappropriate diet or starvation
· Endoparasites
· Progressive dehydration, e.g. with a lack of fresh vegetables or fruit or accessible water, diarrhoea,
or renal failure.
Case Work-Up
Blood test
using a portable blood analyser. Ionized calcium was low (0.6 mmol/, normal range
usually >1 mmol/l although species, gender and seasonal variations occur). Glucose
and other electrolytes were within the normal reference range.
Figure22.2
        a s    s
 restrained in dorsal recumbency.
Radiography
Conscious radiographs were taken. A vertical X-ray beam was used for the dorso-
ventral view (Fig. 22.3) and a horizontal beam for the lateral view. Bone density was
reasonably good, although some areas of the humeral and femoral cortices were
irregular. The gastrointestinal tract was somewhat distended by gas, suggesting a
degree of hypomotility. Some ingesta was present within the tract. No gastrointestinal
obstruction or respiratory pathology was seen.
Figure 22.3
 Dorso-ventral radiograph showing gas distending the gastrointestinal tract.
Diagnosis
Hypocalcaemia, resulting in muscular fasciculations and tetany, and gastrointestinal
hypomotility.
Anatomy and Physiology Refresher
Ionized calcium is the active portion of plasma calcium. Some 99% of the body's
(   o   n    s s 
causes release of calcium and phosphorus from bone as well as further cholecalciferol
(vitamin D3) absorption from the gastrointestinal tract. Cholecalciferol is a precursor
to several steroid hormones, involved in PTH reguilation, keratinocyte differentiation.
immunity, insulin secretion, muscle contractility and reproductive organ
development.
Ultraviolet (UV) light on the skin results in the production of vitamin D. UV-B light,
of a wavelength between 290 and 315 nm, is required for this photo-biosynthesis. An
adequate skin temperature is also required. Reptiles vary in their ability to perform
     sd    s  s 
species.
Aetiopathogenesis of Nutritional Secondary Hyperparathyroidism
Animals not receiving appropriate supplementation will develop hypocalcaemia and
increased PTH production (i.e. nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism). The extra
PTH will deplete bones of calcium, leaving osteopenia - that is readily detectable on
radiographs. These osteopenic bones are weak and susceptible to pathological
fractures.
Once bone reserves are depleted, serum hypocalcaemia may result. Clinical signs
seen with hypocalcaemia include muscle tremors and fasciculation due to tetany.
Digit twitching may progress to limb trembling and generalized tetanic spasms.
Gastrointestinal hypomotility may occur. Death may be due to heart failure.
(such as vitamin D (and/or its metabolites), A, C or K), minerals (such as calcium or
phosphorus), hormone changes (including PTH or oestrogen) and/or inadequate
exercise. Owing to the large number of functions of vitamin D, reptiles with a
deficiency of this vitamin may also suffer from a broad range of problems suich as
obesity, heart disease and reduced immunocompetence.
Epidemiology
Owing to the aetiology of this condition and the common presence of husbandry
deficits in captivity, hypocalcaemia is frequently seen in herbivorous pet reptiles.
(Carnivorous reptiles obtain minerals from bones in their diet of carcases.) It is not
together with clinical signs. It is important to note that such companion animals
should be treated - with oral calcium supplementation and UV access - even if not
showing clinical signs.
Treatment
Initial supportive care
 s   s       
with fluid administration (via an intraosseous catheter). The iguana was placed in a
vivarium with supplemental heating (the environmental temperature was maintained
at 25-30°C) and UV-B lighting. A small feed of convalescent diet - containing readily
absorbable amino acids - was gavaged (5 ml/kg).
Excessive restraint appeared to trigger tetanic episodes. Handling was restricted to
minimize any stress to the iguana. Medications were timed to reduce the frequency of
handling.
CLINICAL TIPS
Placement of an intraosseous (Io) catheter:
· I0 catheters are usually contraindicated in reptiles with bone pathology such as severe metabolic
bone disease, or those with infections in overlying soft tissues. In this case, the risk of an iatrogenic
fracture was outweighed by the benefits of access to the circulation.
• The proximal tibia - in the tibial crest - is the commonest site for placement of an IO catheter or
needle in lizards.
· Surgically prepare the skin over the stifle.
· In most cases, chemical restraint - such as a low dose of ketamine or propofol - is required to
place the catheter. (This patient was extremely debilitated and did not require sedation or general
anaesthesia for the procedure.)
* Inject local anaesthetic (o.01 ml of 2% lidocaine) into the periosteum.
· Use an intraosseous catheter, spinal needle or hypodermic needle. For the last, it can be helpful to
use another needle or piece of sterile surgical wire as a stylet to prevent blocking with cortical bone.
The needle should not measure more than half the length of the bone.
• Flex the stifle and insert the needle in a distal fashion while holding the tibia.
· The bone should move in the same direction as the needle when the needle hub is moved if
positioning is correct. When a small amount of fluid is injected, there should be no resistance and
 no soft tissue swelling at the site. Radiographs can be used to assess positioning (Fig. 22.4).
· Continuous rate infusions are preferable to bolus injections Io in lizards owing to the small bone
marrow space.
(a)
(b)
Figure 22.4
or ()  a e o  an  d aa soss
confirmation of positioning within the medullary cavity. (b) Adhesive tape is used to hold the
 needle in place.
Medication
Calcium gluconate was administered (100 mg/kg IM, repeating q8hr). Gastrointestinal
motility was stimulated with metoclopramide (0.06 mg/kg PO q24hr). Analgesia was
provided using buprenorphine (0.01 mg/kg IM q24hr).
Treatment Options and Management
Nutritional support
Initially (for the first 2 days), fluids with additional amino acids and sugars were
administered. Thereafter, a mix of herbivore convalescent diet was gavaged daily.
Mineral supplementation
Once the patient was clinically stable, calcium supplementation was switched to daily
oral administration using a liquid suspension containing calcium and phosphorus.
Husbandry advice
The owner was advised to monitor the enclosure temperature using a maximum-
minimum digital thermometer. The owner could adjust the supplemental heating as
required, based on these readings.
 si  ni sd d  a n  s  s 
The owner was advised to optimize the iguana's diet (see Nursing aspects, below),
providing a variety of fresh vegetables and a small amount of fruit. Mineral
supplementation should normally be given twice weekly, but in this case a daily
addition was advised until blood levels stabilized.
NURSING ASPECTS
Husbandry requirements of green iguanas:
· Environmental temperature: 25*C (cool end) to 40*℃ (basking area), with a minimum overnight of
21°℃. Background heating is usually supplied by a tubular heater, heat mat (positioned on the back
wall of the enclosure), ceramic bulb or heat plate - these can be attached to a thermostat. The
heating should be covered, for example with a mesh grill, to prevent direct contact and burning of
the pet.
· Provision of a branch or rock at the basking site will encourage its use.
· The use of a thermostat does not preclude the need for a thermometer to monitor temperature, as
thermostats are often inaccurate.
· UV-B light, 30 cm above the iguana. This should be placed near the basking site.
· Mercury vapour lamps will provide heating and UV lighting. However, these cannot be attached to
a thermostat and care should be taken that they do not overheat. Usually, these are switched on for
12 hours each day. Another source of background heating should be provided, particularly to
maintain the temperature overnight.
· Relative humidity (RH): 80-90%. Regular spraying or misting the enclosure with a warm water
spray will be required to maintain this high humidity. Placing the water bowl near the hot end of the
enclosure will also elevate humidity. RH can be measured using a digital hygrometer.
· Diet: this should be 90% vegetable matter (e.g. parsley, cabbage, green beans, carrot tops, mustard,
e  s 'ss  a a) r e  (  s  
· Supplementation: require 2:1 calcium to phosphorus ratio in the diet. A calcium and vitamin
supplement should be added to the food twice weekly.
Other Treatment Options
Nutritional support
Where reptiles do not self-feed for prolonged periods, it can be liseful to place an
oesophagostomy tube. This will ease the administration of fluids, food and
medication.
If a proprietary convalescent diet is not available, the clinician may use liquidized
vegetables or vegetable baby food for assist-feeding.
Follow-Up
the first instance. The following day, the lizard was more alert and reactive. Although
still unable to support her body weight, she was lifting her head and her eyes were
fully open.
Faecal material was passed 4 days after admission. The iguana did not start to self-
feed until 1 week after admission to the clinic. From that point on, muscular tone
improved and she began moving around the vivarium. Calcium supplementation was
switched to once daily oral administration at this point.
Blood calcium levels were repeated 48 hours after admission - at which point
ionized calcium was 0.8 mmol/l - and 1 week later - by which time it had risen to 1.0
mmol/l. At the monthly re-check, the level was 1.2 mmol/l. A repeat blood test 6
months later showed ionized calcium to be 1.6 mmol/, at which point the mineral
supplementation was reduiced to twice weekly.
Prevention
This case had a long history of husbandry problems. Despite several veterinary
clinicians stressing the importance of calcium, appropriate environmental
temperatures and UV-B lighting, the owner failed to provide sufficient husbandry for
prolonged periods. This resulted in a debilitated animal with a life-threatening illness.
Good husbandry and diet would have prevented this problem.
Prognosis
The long-term prognosis for an animal with chronic metabolic disease is not
favourable. Morbidity is likely to be present, although mortality is rare unless severe
hypocalcaemia occurs. Reproduction should be avoided in females owing to the extra
drain on calcium stores with egg production.
Section 4
Amphibians
23
Amphibians - an introduction
Introduction
There are over 40o0 species in the three orders of the class Amphibia. Many are
endangered in the wild, particularly due to worldwide spread of the fungal infection
chytridiomycosis (Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis) that may also affect captive
amphibians. Anurans (frogs and toads) are most commonly kept as pets, although
members of the orders Caudata (salamanders and newts) or Gymnophiona
(caecilians) may be seen from time to time.
Taxonomy
         r   
Table 23.1 Taxonomic classification of amphibians commonly seen as pets
Order
Suborder
Family
Species
Gymnophiona
Caecilians
6 families,e.g.
176 species
Caecilidae
Caudata
Salamanders
10 families,e.g.
473 species,e.g.
and newts
Sirenidae
Sirens
Cryptobranchidae
Giant salamanders
Salamandridae
Newts and European salamanders (e.g. fire
salamander, Salamandra sakamandra)
Proteidae
Olm, mudpuppies (Necturus maculosus) and waterdogs
Ambystomatidae
Mole salamanders (e.g. tiger salamander, Ambystoma
tigninwm, and axolotl, Ambystoma mexicanum)
Anura
Frogs and
28 families,e.g.
4750 species,e.g.
Pipidae
Clawed frogs (e.g. African clawed frog, Xenopus
laevis) and Surinam toads (Pipa pipa)
Bufonidae
True toads, harlequin frogs and relatives (e.g. cane
(marine) toad, Bufo maninus)
Dendrobatidae
Poison frogs (e.g.poison dart frog,Dendrobates spp)
Ranidae
True frogs (e.g. leopard frog, Rana pipiens)
Hylidae
Tree frogs (e.g. green tree frog, Hyla cinerea, and
White's tree frog, Litoria caeru/ea)
Bombinatoridae
Fire-bellied toad (Bombina spp)
Biology
also ecdysis. Mexican axolotls (Ambystoma mexicanum) are obligate neotenic species,
  n         
administered. Tiger salamanders (Ambystoma tigrinum) are a facultative neotenic
species, and metamorphose when TSH (thyroid-stimulating hormone) is produced in
response to deteriorating environmental conditions.
        m 
 s  s        a
solely on the environmental temperature for thermoregulation. They can vary their
         
constriction, and changes in skin colouir.
Anurans and caudates that hibernate have additional physiological adaptations to
lower the freezing point of tissues, and permit ice formation in extracellular
they adapt over a period of time. Rapid fluctuations in temperature should be avoided,
as potentially fatal thermal shock may result.
          s 
species thus excrete excess water and conserve plasma solutes.
These animals have various physiological means of preventing dehydration, such as
spp), dried mucus on the skin, behavioural changes such as posture variation and
limiting activity unless humidity is high. Some species, such as axolotls and
mudpuppies, are completely aquatic. Some anurans have a ^drinking patch', an area
of modified skin on their ventral pelvic region that is responsible for up to 80% of
their water uuptake.
Amphibian skin is relatively permeable, and is used for gas exchange. Desiccation
may occur in excessively dry environments. Terrestrial animals require a relative
environmental humidity of 60-80% for temperate species and 70-90% for tropical
species. Water quality is extremely important to amphibian health, and parameters
should be monitored. Water should be dechlorinated, and filtration or regular
replacement of water is necessary for aquatic species or larval forms.
Amphibian kidneys cannot concentrate urine more than the concentration of
           s 
diffused across the skin. Most terrestrial anurans excrete rea.
Amphibian hearts are three-chambered, comprising two atria and one ventricle.
The interatrial septum may be fenestrated, permitting mixing of oxygenated and
deoxygenated blood. The lymphatic system is well developed, with lymph hearts (or
The haematolymphopoietic system of amphibians differs from other taxonomic
groups. Some species have bone marrow, although its function is not the same as in
remains throughout life (although it may involute with chronic stress or
malnutrition). The function of lymph nodes (which are absent in amphibians) is
performed by gut-associated lymphoid tissue.
S      a  as
depending on life-stage and environment. Amphibians do not have a diaphragm. Most
S         
          s
cutaneous, buccopharyngeal and/or pulmonic. In adult salamanders, branchial,
such as axolotls (Ambystoma mexicanum) have external gills. Sirens have lungs and
         
buccopharyngeal and cutaneous respiration.
Amphibian teeth are shed and replaced throughout life. Most anuran and
Gonads are paired in amphibians, with seasonal fluctuations in reproductive
  s        
external fertilizers, most salamanders are internal fertilizers (via spermatophores),
while all caecilians fertilize internally  (copulating via a phallodeum). Many
amphibians are seasonal breeders; visual and environmental cues are important for
reproduiction.
Anurans have well-developed senses. These include auditory structures, ocuilar
structures (apart from caecilians), as well as taste, touch and olfaction. Amphibians
have a Jacobson's organ for chemodetection.
Husbandry
Most species require a vivarium with a terrestrial area as well as shallow water. Good
water quality should be maintained. Most species return to water to breed. Hide areas
should be provided. Temperature and humidity gradients should be present. UV light
    h  s    s    
The vivarium should mimic the native environment for the species as closely as
possible.
Many tadpoles are herbivorous (eating natural microflora on pond weed when
small), converting to carnivores at metamorphosis. Adult amphibians are all
carnivorous, mostly insectivores (being fed on earthworms, crickets, ants and
mealworms in captivity), although larger species consume vertebrates (such as
pinkies).  Invertebrates should be supplemented  with  vitamins and  calcium.
Nutritional  secondary  hyperparathyroidism   (NSHP)  is common  in  captive
amphibians if an inappropriate diet is consumed.
Anlra
Adult anurans do not possess a tail, nor do they have external gills (Fig. 23.1). The
hindlimbs are usually longer than the forelimbs, and toes are often webbed. To
improve jumping performance, the vertebrae are fused (including the pelvic girdle),
with presacral, sacral and postsacral regions. There is no sacrum. Although tadpoles
can regenerate lost limbs, generally adults cannot.
Trachea
Heart
Liver-
Stomach
Right lung
Spleen
Intestines
and body fat.
Large intestine
Kidneys
Urinarybladder
Cloaca
Vent
Figure 23.1
Schematic to show major organs in an anuran (ventral view).
White's tree frog (Litoria caerulea)
A nocturnal species native to Australia and New Guinea, White's tree frog has been
introduced to New Zealand and the USA. It may live 16 years in captivity. Obesity is
common if animals are overfed. The environmental temperature should ideally be 26-
28°℃, but they are able to withstand lower temperatures. This arboreal species should
be provided with branches for climbing.
Poison arrow frogs (Dendrobates spp)
These species come from tropical rainforests in Central and South America. They
secrete toxins through their skin; as the chemicals are sequestered from prey items
such as ants, captive animals do not have significant levels of toxins. They require a
high environmental humidity (80-100%) and temperature (28-32°C).
African clawed toads (Xenopus laevis)
This totally aquatic species requires an aquarium, with water 10-20 cm deep at 20-
26°C. They should be fed twice weekly on worms, fish or meat pieces.
Cauldata
Salamanders have an appearance similar to lizards. In most, the tail is flattened
laterally. Most species have four limbs; however, sirens lack hindlimbs. Digits and
   s         
feather-like gills. Although mostly insectivorous, some will take small vertebrate prey
(such as frogs or pinkies).
Tiger salamander (Ambystoma tigrinum)
This species originates from North America, and requires a temperature of 15-25°C.
Free-ranging individuals are generally terrestrial, returning to water to breed.
Fire salamander (Salamandra salamandra)
These live in deciduous forests in southern and central Europe, hiding in fallen leaves
and mossy tree trunks. Adults secrete the neurotoxic alkaloid samandarin. Most are
ovoviviparous, but two su bspecies are viviparous.
Axolotl (Ambystoma mexicanum)
This is a neotenic species, with the aduilt an unmetamorphosed larval form. It is totally
aquatic. Water temperature should be 10-25°C.
Gymnophiona
  s          
locomotion is worm-like. Small olfactory and sensory tentacles are present just rostral
to the eyes. Caecilians spend most of their time hidden underground. Their eyes are
small and covered by skin for protection during burrowing. They originate from
tropical regions of South-east Asia, Africa, the Seychelles islands and South America.
Most species are viviparous, but some are oviparous.
History
Husbandry is extremely important in the care of amphibians, with many diseases
ground as that for reptiles (see Chapter 15), describing the vivarium and diet.
Humidity and water quality are particularly important factors for amphibians.
Clinical Examination
Handling/restraint
           
    s   s   r s s
spot-legged poison frog (Epipedobates pictus) may die if manually restrained for a few
Dest examined tnder sedation or anaesthesia.
If torn, skin defects permit entry of pathogens. Handlers should wear moistened
powder-free examination gloves to reduce the risk of damage to the patient's skin.
their skin, and gloves will also protect the handler from contact with these
               s
     s s  s  
between the first two fingers, with the thumb gently pressed against the neck. Fine
Examination
The amphibian is initially observed in the enclosure or travel container, assessing
body condition, locomotion, demeanour, skin secretions, and respiratory rate.
Thereafter, the animal is restrained for a thorough physical examination. Areas of
note include the head, skin and cloaca.
Investigation
Phlebotomy
ventral abdominal vein or femoral vein may be ised (Fig. 23.2). The lingual vein lies
on the dorsal surface of the tongue when it is pulled forward (in the anaesthetized
animal). General anaesthesia should be induced if cardiocentesis is to be performed
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 23.2
    a s  n s  
venous plexus is located by flipping the tongue forward. (b) Midline ventral abdominal vein. (c)
Cardiocentesis.
Imaging
Imaging techniques may be used for amphibians as in other species, although dental
non-screen radiographic film is preferred in small animals to show finer detail.
Radiography is useful to assess bone density in suspected cases of NSHP or for
identification of radio-opaque foreign bodies. Contrast studies may be performed,
usually with a 1:10 dilution of contrast medium.
Ultrasonography is easiest performed with the animal inside a water bath,
 e s s a     o   g
affect cutaneous respiration).
Sampling
Skin lesions may be swabbed for microscopy or culture. Giemsa or Gram-staining is
commonly performed, as well as dark-field microscopy for protozoa. The most
sensitive test for chytridiomycosis is PCR performed on swabs taken from the skin
(usually the ventral abdomen and inner thighs).
Faeces should be collected for wet microscopy, assessing for endoparasites. Tracheal
swabs may be useful for investigation of respiratory disorders. It is preferable to
perform this technique under general anaesthesia. Blood culture is useful for animals
suspected to be septicaemic.
Treatment
Basic procedures
Drug administration
The easiest route of drug administration is topical application, due to the extremely
permeable nature of amphibian skin. Irritant formulations or those that occlude the
skin should be avoided. Medicated baths may also be used, taking into consideration
that temperature and pH will affect absorption. With both these routes, the exact dose
received is usually not known.
The oral route is preferred for accurate dosing. A small plastic gag is used to open
the mouth before administration.
Subcutaneous injections are possible, although care should be taken not to tear the
skin if performed in conscious animals. The intramuscular route is preferred for small
volumes. Intracoelomic injections are possible. The intravenous route is possible in
  s o (   n   (s  )
administered into the lymph sacs (e.g. the dorsal lymph sacs of anurans); this is
equivalent to injecting into the circulation. Intraosseous injections are rarely required.
Assist-feeding
          
debilitated adult amphibians. Maintenance of water and electrolyte balance is vital,
and ill animals are routinely bathed in shallow solutions of electrolytes.
Anaesthesia
Sedation or anaesthesia may be required for the animal's safety (to reduce the stress of
manual restraint), for the handler's safety (with aggressive species), or to perform
certain procedures (such as internal transillumination, venepuncture, or surgery).
Pre-anaesthesia
Aspiration after regurgitation is rare, but most species are fasted before elective
procedures (for example < 4 hours if < 20 g body weight, 48 hours if > 20 g, or 7 days
if being fed vertebrates).
Pre-medication
Pre-medicants are not usually administered to amphibians.
Inhalation agents
Anaesthetics such as halothane and isoflurane may be administered to amphibians by
plane of anaesthesia has been reached, the gel is wiped off. However, the dose
administered is not known and prolonged maintenance of anaesthesia can be
problematic.
CLINICAL TIPS
· Large specimens may be intubated.
· However, cutaneous respiration means maintenance via pulmonic administration of anaesthetic
gases is problematic.
· Cutaneous respiration is usually sufficient to maintain oxygenation.
Injectable agents
In larger species, agents such as ketamine, propofol and tiletamine/zolazepam have
been used, although results may be variable. Propofol has also been administered
topically to small amphibians, resulting in sedation or anaesthesia.
Immersion
This is the route of choice for anaesthesia of amphibians. Common agents include
tricaine methanesulfonate (MS-222), benzocaine and clove oil (eugenol). For all of
these agents, they are mixed with water from the animal's enclosure to minimize
thermal or chemical shock. For prolonged procedures, air or oxygen should be bubbled
into the bath to ensure sufficient oxygenation. The animal is induced with a higher
procedures, or anaesthesia prolonged by applying a more diluite concentration of the
agent over the skin. Recovery is speeded by washing off any residual anaesthetic with
clean water.
MS-222 is buffered before use with sodium phosphate or sodium bicarbonate,
S           
Monitoring anaesthesia
The cardiac impulse may be visi ble, or Doppler flow monitors can be used to assess the
          s 
pulmonic movemen ts.
Peri-anaesthetic care
The patient should be maintained within its species POTR throughout the procedure
bath for 60 minutes prior to surgery. The patient is kept moist throughout the
procedure.
Surgery
Many antiseptics are toxic to amphibians, including iodine products; 0.75%
              
interrupted or horizontal mattress pattern, ensuring skin edges do not roll inwards.
          s
gastric foreign bodies (often pieces of gravel used as substrate), in cases where
endoscopic retrieval is not possible. When performing a coeliotomy, a paramedian
incision should be executed to avoid the ventral midline abdominal vein. Other
Analgesia should be considered after painful procedures. Prophylactic antibiotics
should be administered after surgery. Assist-feeding may be required postoperatively
in some cases.
Euithanasia
An overdose of barbiturates can be administered intravenously or intracoelomically.
Alternatively an overdose of Ms-222 or benzocaine in a water bath will result in
euthanasia. Death is confirmed by a lack of heart beat (detected using a Doppler
probe), or ensured by pithing.
24
Trauma in an amphibian
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Superficial wound in a marine toad.
Introduction
Amphibians rarely present to veterinary clinics, but make interesting patients.
Conditions are often related to husbandry issues, although infectious diseases such as
chytridiomycosis are also prevalent. Care should be taken when handling and housing
amphibians in the clinic.
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
An adult marine toad (Bufo marinus) (Box 24.1) presented with a superficial wound on the
 proximal ventral area of one hindlimb.
BOX 24.1  Ecology of marine toads
• Also known as cane, giant or Mexican toads
· Range in the wild: native to Central and South America, but introduced to many regions for
s  sd n   a      nd s
plantations, but became a pest species
• Normal habitat: terrestrial. Require water to breed. Tropical/subtropical regions
· Average weight: females up to 2.5 kg (report of one individual measuring 38 cm and weighing
2.65 kg)
• Measure 10-15 cm from snout to vent (females < 26 cm); tadpoles 1.0-2.5 cm in length
• Tongue strikes prey in 37 ms, taking about 143 ms to capture prey
· Free-ranging diet: mostly invertebrates such as ants, beetles, termites. Also anything that fits into
the toad's mouth, such as small mammals (rodents), reptiles, birds and other amphibians
• Can project toxic fluid up to 1 m from their parotid glands. Human fatalities in Fiji and the
Sa s  adad dnos aaa  ' a a ae  aa ss
• Reproduction: sexually mature at 9-10 cm in length; 8-25 000 small eggs per clutch, in rosary
like strings
· Life expectancy 10-15 years in the wild, < 35 years in captivity
• Critical thermal maximum of 40-42*℃ and minimum around 10-15*C
· High tolerance of water loss.
Huisbandry
The toad was housed in a room with the owner's other pets, but within a separate
enclosure. The terrarium was constructed of glass - measuring 30 x 45 cm
insulated on three sides and with a ventilation panel in the lid. It was positioned in an
area of the owner's living room that was sheltered from direct sunlight. The substrate
consisted of a moist layer of sphagnum moss overlying a layer of pea gravel, with bark
chippings and a wooden branch at one end. A hide area of cork bark was also
provided. The enclosure also contained some artificial plants.
A small freshwater pool - 2 cm in depth - was provided. The water was changed
weekly. The enclosure was misted twice daily to increase the relative humidity. A UV
           sa 
when the owner acquired the animal six months ago.
The enclosure temperature was 23-27*C and relative humidity 70-85%. These were
monitored using a maximum-minimum digital thermometer and hygrometer.
The animal's diet comprised mealworms, crickets, locusts and pinkies (newborn
mice). The invertebrates were gut-loaded during the 24 hours prior to feeding the
toad, and dusted with a mineral supplement prior to feeding.
   s   s  s   
caerulea), axolotls (Ambystoma mexicanum) and some fire salamanders (Salamandra
salamandra). None of these animals had significant medical history. The marine toad
had been quarantined for a period of 1 month on acquisition; it was housed in a
separate room during this period and separate cleaning utensils were ised.
Case History
The toad had been in the current owner's possession for 6 months. The problem had
been noted 2 hours prior to presentation:
· A wound was seen on the right hind leg
· A new plastic hide had been placed in the enclosure the previous day. No other
husbandry changes had been made in the previous 6 months.
Clinical Examination
A visual assessment was made of the toad while contained within the clear plastic
transport container. This revealed:
· The toad was bright, alert and reactive
· A lesion was present on the ventral surface of the thigh on the right hind leg.
CLINICAL TIPS
Handling marine toads
· Care should be taken when handling marine toads owing to the risk of toxin ejection from their
parotid glands.
· Examination gloves should be worn to reduce the risk to the handler, and they should be wetted
with water to reduce the risk of trauma and transfer of infections to the toad. Eye goggles or a clear
visor are useful to protect the face.
· Toads should be restrained by grasping around the abdomen (the 'waist area), and supporting the
cranial body (Fig. 24.1).
Figure 24.1
Restraint of a marine toad.
Further clinical examination revealed:
· The toad was in good body condition - with good musculature but no excessive fat
deposits - and weighed 1 kg
· Oral mucous membranes were pink
· No stomatitis, ocular lesions, or dysecdysis was present
· The owner had reported no lameness, and all four limbs appeared to be moving well.
After the main clinical examination, the toad was released into a larger enclosuire and
its locomotion assessed further - and was found to be normal
· Minor haemorrhage was present from the wound, which was approximately 2 cm in
length. The wound was relatively clean, although some moss was stuck to the skin
edges.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSES
The differentials for the wound were:
· Lacerations due to inappropriate handling, encounter with a sharp object within the enclosure, or
injuries from live rodent prey (not legal in the UK)
· Attack from a con-specific (not possible in this case as housed in isolation)
·• Pathology resulting in thin friable skin that is easily torn, e.g. bacterial or fungal infection (for
example chytridiomycosis, Box 24.2), malnutrition, or neoplasia.
BOX 24.2 Chytridiomycosis
· This disease is caused by Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis.
· The fungus uses keratin as its substrate and, although infection usually causes only microscopic
changes in tadpoles, overt disease is seen in adults.
· Osmotic regulation and other functions of the skin are disrupted. Clinical signs include excessive
shedding of the skin, hyperaemia of pale skin, and sudden death. Secondary infections with other
pathogens are possible.
· Owing to the extreme contagiousness of this infection, equipment should be sterilized between
enclosures and between handling of amphibians. This is necessary, particularly in the veterinary
clinic, if amphibians from more than one source are seen.
· Treatment of some cases is possible with itraconazole baths, but a complete cure is not
guaranteed.
Case Work-Up
Cleaning
The wound was flushed with sterile saline to remove excessive debris and to enable
closer examination of the lesion.
Other Options for Investigation
Culture
A swab from the lesion could have been submitted for bacterial and fungal culture.
This is especially useful if the lesion is deep and suspected to be due to a bite. Although
contaminants from the environment are likely to be present, a significant growth
combined with the presence of obvious infection at a later date warrants sensitivity-
based antibiosis.
Imaninn
"ag"8
If the toad was lame or had other signs of ill health, radiography would be useful to
assess for fractures and also bone density (metabolic bone disease is relatively
common in captive amphibians).
Blood analysis
If the patient had been systemically unwell - or became so during treatment
phlebotomy would be advised to enable haematology and clinical chemistries to be
performed.
Diagnosis
Owing to the history of a recent addition to the enclosure furniture with a sharp edge,
a traumatic wound was suspected.
Anatomy and Physiology Refresher
The skin of amphibians performs the roles of thermoregulation, homeostasis of
pathogens. The skin comprises the epidermal layer and the dermal layer. The stratum
corneum layer of the epidermis is thin and easily damaged. The dermal layer
comprises the stratum spongiosum and stratum compactum. The dermal layer also
contains capillaries, nerves and smooth muscle. Respiration in anurans (frogs and
toads) occurs partly via the skin.
Aetiopathogenesis of Skin Lesions
Damage to the skin results in a break in the protective layer over the body. Fluids may
be lost and pathogens may readily enter.
Epidemiology
Skin lesions are not uncommon in amphibians because of the thin anatomy of the
integument. However, they should be minimal if captive animals are maintained in
an appropriate environment.
Treatment
Anaesthesia
MS-222 was lised to induce anaesthesia in the toad, using a 0.3% (3 g/l) solution
buffered with sodium bicarbonate to produce a pH of around 7 (Fig. 24.2). Within 5
minutes, this resulted in surgical anaesthesia of 25 minutes' duration.
Figure 24.2
 Induction of anaesthesia in the marine toad, using Ms-222 in a plastic zip-lock bag.
Surgery
The wound was cleansed with 0.75% chlorhexidine and then rinsed with sterile saline.
It was flushed with gentamicin solution. The skin edges were debrided and closed
 n    n       
small amount of tissue glue was applied to assist with waterproofing.
Peri-anaesthetic care
          
analgesia. The toad was bathed in normal saline for 20 minutes before induction of
available for other solutions that more closely mimic the animal's electrolyte status.)
The toad was hospitalized in a small plastic enclosure with damp kitchen roll as
substrate until it had recovered from anaesthesia and was discharged. An upturned
plastic box with cut-out doorway was provided as a shelter, along with a shallow
water dish (added after recovery from anaesthesia). Dechlorinated water should be
used for all water provision in the hospital. The patient took food the day after
surgery, and assist-feeding was not required.
Treatment Options and Management
Hygiene
It is important to maintain good hygiene in the enclosure during the healing period. It
may be simpler to swap the moss substrate for moist kitchen paper as it is easier to
replace and keep clean. Water quality in the enclosure should also be the best possible.
with checks made routinely.
Husbandry
General husbandry should be optimal. This includes ensuring the correct
environmental temperature and relative humidity. Prey items should be offered as
appropriate.
The suspected source of the injury - the new hide box - was checked and found to
have one sharp edge. This was filed to create a smooth surface.
NURSING ASPECTS
Medications may readily be administered within food providing the toad is eating.
Other Treatment Options
Medical management
In this case, the wound was relatively large and fresh and surgical closure deemed
appropriate. However, in some cases, the wound may be small and/or contaminated,
and healing by secondary intention may be preferred. The wound should be kept clean
during this period, with daily flushing using sterile saline. Systemic antibiosis (e.g.
enrofloxacin at 5-10 mg/kg PO/SC/IM q24hr or oxytetracycline at 25 mg/kg SC/IM
q24hr) may be required for severe or problematic wounds. Analgesia and assist-
feeding, e.g. by gavage, should be administered as deemed necessary.
Follow-Up
The toad was re-examined 1 week after the surgery and the wound was found to be
healing well. The patient was eating as normal. The sutures were removed 2 weeks
after surgery.
Prevention
Care should be taken to ensure no sharp items are present within the enclosure of
amphibians, and during handling.
Prognosis
The prognosis for this lesion was good, as it was fresh and minimally contaminated.
For bite wounds, deep infections are common and do not always respond to therapy
Section 5
Fish
25
Fish - an introduction
Many species of fish are kept in captivity, varying from small tropical species
housed in indoor heated aquaria to larger temperate species in outdoor ponds.
Enclosures are often expensive to build and maintain, and ornamental fish can
themselves be expensive to purchase. Unlike some other captive animals, it is often
imperative to treat the aquarium or pond inhabitants medically as a group, although
there will be instances when individuals present for therapy.
Taxonomy
There are two superclasses of fish. Although some aquarists keep cartilaginous fishes
such as small sharks and rays, most fish species kept as pets belong to the last class in
Table 25.1, the ray-finned fishes (Actinopterygii). This group includes (among many
others) carps, flatfishes, perch-like fishes and seahorses.
Table 25.1 Taxonomic classification of fish
Superclass
Class
Order
Family
Species
Agnatha
Cephalaspidomorphi
Petromyzontiformes
c.40 spp (lampreys)
(jawess
Myxini
Myxiniformes
c.43-50 spp (hagfishes)
fishes)
Gnathostomata
Chondrichthyes
14 orders
34 families
c.915 spp (sharks, skates
(jawed fishes)
(cartilaginous fishes)
and rays, and chimaeras)
Sarcopterygil(lobe-finned fishes)
5 families
8 spp (e.g. lungfishes)
Actinopterygi (ray-finned fishes)
39 orders
c.428 families
c.23 600 spp
The most common captive cold freshwater fishes are the goldfish (Carassius
auratus) and koi carp (Cyprinus carpio), both of which are freshwater fish and belong
to the Cyprinidae family. Guppies (Poecilia reticulata) and tetras (such as the neon
tetra, Paracheirodon innesi) are other freshwater fish popular with novice aquarists,
  e       s    
former. Brackish-water species such as the glassfish (Chanda ranga), mudskippers
(Periophthalmus spp) and gobies  (such as the spotted goby, Stigmatogobius
sadanundio) are more difficult to maintain. Common tropical marine fish include
angelfishes (such as the blue-ringed angelfish, Pomacanthus annularis), surgeons and
(such as the cleaner wrasse, Labroides dimidiatus), and seahorses (such as the yellow
seahorse, Hippocampus kuda). Coldwater marine fish include rainbow wrasse (Coris
julis) and the tompot blenny (Parablennius gattorugine). Aquaria commonly hold a
mixed collection (a ‘community' tank) of fish species with the same environmental
Living plants are useful in aquaria for a number of reasons. They will provide
shelter for the inhabitants, are a source of food, and improve water quality by
absorbing nitrates.
Biology
Most fish species have protective scales covered by a layer of mucus; damage to these
leads to problems with osmotic balance. The main site for gaseous exchange is the
gills; these are also involved in osmoregulation and excretion of nitrogenous waste.
mammals, although there are no lungs or diaphragm, and the kidneys lie dorsally just
beneath the spine. Some species have a swim-bladder to assist with buoyancy. Fish are
poikilothermic, and thus water temperature is important for immune function and
metabolism of drugs (Fig. 25.1).
Lateralline
Dorsal fin
Operculum
(a)
Pectoral fin
Pelvic fin
Vent
Anal fin
Caudal fin
Anterior chamber
Posterior pole
Posteriorchamber
ofswim-bladder
of kidney
of swim-bladder
Anterior pole
Spine
of kidney
Brain,
Gills
Heart
Gonad
(b)
Liver Spleen
Gastrointestinal tract
Figure 25.1
(a,b) External and internal anatomy of a fish, typified by the koi carp (Cyprinus
carpio).
    ns   a d    
little tanks, while bigger groups or larger fish require more substantial enclosures
(often ponds). Whatever the size, water quality should be maintained (monitoring
regularly to ensure it is optimal). Filtration is required to control levels of ammonia
and nitrite (the main toxic products excreted from fish), usually involving
mechanical, biological, chemical or ultraviolet components. Fish may require
freshwater, brackish-water, or marine water. Tropical or marine species may require
various salts to be added, and heating may be needed.
As a general rule, fish are fed commercial complete diets, sometimes supplemented
with live foods. Thankfully, this means that nutritional deficiencies are infrequent.
Goldfish (Carassius auratus)
Free-ranging goldfish originate from China (Fig. 25.2). They grow up to 25 cm in
length. Captive breeding has produced many variations in colour, finnage and body
form. This is a coldwater species (10-20°C), requiring a water pH of 6.5-7.5 and dH
(hardness) to 15°. They produce a large amount of waste, necessitating efficient
filtration and regular water changes (25% weekly). As with most fish, they are
omnivorous; captive animals are usually fed on flake or pellet foods, buit may also take
vegetable matter and invertebrates. Eggs, when produced, are scattered in the tank.
Figure25.2
The oranda is a variety of goldfish (Carassius auratus).
Guppy (Poecilia reticulata)
This live bearer comes from Central America, measuring 3-5 cm in length (although
cultivated specimens are larger). Captive fish require a water temperature of 22-28*C.
               
been developed. Other Poecilia species are also popular, including the mollies.
Neon tetra (Paracheirodon innesi)
These are the most popular aquarium fish. They originate from South America, grow
to 4 cm, and can live over 10 years. They are omnivorous, being fed on small live
foods (such as insect larvae) as well as frozen, flake, and pellet foods, and
supplemented with green foods. Water temperature should be 22-26°C, with a pH of
5.0-7.0, and dH to 10°.
Mudskippers (Periophthalmus spp)
These species originate in mangrove swamps, distributed from Africa through South-
east Asia to Australia. They need a beach area to crawl out onto, along with rocks and
roots for climbing out of the water. Air above the water should be warm and humid.
Water temperature should be 25-30C, with a pH of 8.0-8.5, dH to 15° and SG
(salinity) 1.002-1.007. They feed on invertebrates (e.g. worms, crickets and flies), and
may accept frozen and flake foods.
Cleaner wrasse (Labroides dimidiatus)
These Indo-Pacific fish grow to 10 cm in the wild. They are carnivorous, and feed on
finely chopped fish and shellfish in captivity, supplementing their natural diet of
ectoparasites from other fish. Water should be 24-26°C, with a pH of 8.3-8.4 and SG
1.023-1.027.
Tompot blenny (Parablennius gattorugine)
These originate from the eastern Atlantic coast from the Mediterranean to northern
Scotland, and grow up to 20 cm in length. As a carnivorous species, they should be fed
       s   s s
with a pH of 8.0-8.4 and SG 1.024-1.025.
History
The environment of the fish is important in maintenance of health (Box 25.1). The
monitoring protocols and records employed by the aquarist. For large or complicated
enclosures, it is often easier to visit the owner's home to assess husbandry conditions
visually.
BOX 25.1 Suggested topics to cover during history taking for fish
· Animal:
· Species
· Gender (if known)
·Age
· Source
· Period in owner's possession
· In-contact species
· Previous medical problems (in individual, group, or aquarium)
* Current problem
· Environment:
· Aquarium size, dimensions, substrate, furnishings, live plants
• Water: volume, source, pre-treatment(s) and routine treatments, changes, quality monitoring
· Filtration: type, cleaning, duration
· Heating and lighting: source, photoperiod, water temperature (day/night)
· Cleaning and disinfection
· Diet:
· Food (including source and storage)
· Frequency and amount of feding
* Supplements
· Recent weather conditions (outdoor ponds)
Where water is analysed, a representative sample should be taken. This usually
the fish has been transported to the clinic), and preferably not just after a water
change (when quality will be temporarily improved).
In community tanks, details should be obtained for all species of fish in the
enclosure. The clinician should assess the suitability for co-habitation of the species
(the reader is referred to other texts for further information on the various species).
Clinical Examination
Ideally, fish should be assessed within their normal enclosure. This will enable the
veterinary clinician to assess the husbandry unit and any potential problems therein.
If the fish is brought to the veterinary clinic, it should be transported in a sturdy
container (e.g. a plastic bucket, or a water-tight plastic bag within a polystyrene box)
filled with water from the aquarium. As anaesthesia is often necessary, request that
the owner brings another container of water to mix with the anaesthetic agent. The
fish should be kept in the dark during transport to reduce stress. Prior to long
journeys, it can be lseful to fast the fish for 24 hours to minimize excrement (and
thence ammonia) production in transit.
Handling/restraint
The stress of capture and restraint may result in collapse and death, and should
therefore be performed deftly and with confidence. The period of restraint should be
minimal. The best mode of capture is utilization of a net comprising fine mesh. The
fish should then either be moved to a smaller container of water for observation or
held loosely in the net. Medium-sized fish in a small container may be gently
restrained by hand. Wet examination gloves should be worn to reduce the risk of
damaging the fish's integument during handling, and also to minimize transfer of
potential zoonotic pathogens to the clinician (Box 25.2).
BOX 25.2 Zoonoses from fish
• Fish tuberculosis (mycobacteriosis, e.g. Mycobacterium marinum, M. fortuitum, M. chelonae) may
result in nodular skin disease in humans.
· Nocardia spp result in similar lesions to mycobacteriosis.
· Vibrio and Aeromonas spp may infect humans through ingestion or contamination of skin wounds.
· Other potential zoonotic diseases include Pseudomonas spp, protozoa and nematodes.
· Good personal hygiene will reduce the risk of disease transmission.
Examination
If possible, the fish should first be visually assessed in their natural environment. If
they have travelled to the veterinary clinic in a container, some assessment may still
be made regarding locomotion and respiration.
Restraint is necessary for clinical examination. If this is done in the conscious
individual, it should be extremely brief (and therefore often only cursory) to minimize
stress. If anaesthetized, the period will be less brief, and a more meticulous
examination can be conducted. In all cases, prepare sampling equipment (such as
swabs, scalpel blade for skin scrape, scissors for a gill snip, and blood sampling tools)
prior to handling.
If sedated or anaesthetized, a body weight is obtained (to assess body condition and
enable accurate drug dosing). The skin and fins are thoroughly examined, and usually
a skin scrape is taken. The head is assessed, including the oral cavity, eyes, opercula
 d q A A  a ( A i ds  1) s 
findings are often lacking unless a significant abnormality such as a large mass is
present. The cloaca should be examined, and a faecal sample collected for microscopy.
CLINICAL TIPS
Gill snip
· Anaesthetize the fish, using MS-222.
· Lift the operculum (gill cover).
· Cut a few small pieces of gill tissue (maximum 2 mm of primary gill lamellae) using fine scissors
Any haemorrhage should quickly cease.
· Prepare slides - using a drop of water from the fish's tank - and perform microscopy straight away.
Investigation
Water quality
Unless regularly performed by the owner using a good quality test kit, the clinician
should analyse a water sample for nitrogenous waste products. Other parameters that
may be measured as appropriate include temperature, pH, hardness and salinity.
Phlebotomy
General anaesthesia (see below) is usually required to restrain fish sufficiently for
S s           s
ventrally in the midline or laterally. Larger koi carp have veins on the medial aspect of
their operculae, which may be accessed (although these are preferred only for
euthanasia, to avoid damaging the gills in a live animal). In teleost fish, the brachial
arch may be useful.
Imaging
Radiography is valuable in some cases. The fish should be anaesthetized for the
procedure. The lateral view is easiest in most species that are laterally compressed,
although it is ideal to take two orthogonal views to aid interpretation. The bony
skeleton and swim-bladder (where present) are relatively easily visualized.
Ultrasound, CT, MRI and endoscopy are other imaging modalities that may prove
useful. Interpretation of imaging results may be difficult unless a normal animal can
be imaged for comparison.
Sampling
As outlined above, routine samples taken during clinical examination include a skin
should be fresh in order to visualize movement of these organisms.
Samples may also be submitted for culture, although culture from skin swabs
typically grows contaminants from the environment. Biopsies from skin, fins, gills,
and internal organs may be examined histologically
Treatment
Basic procedures
Drug administration
Many medications can be administered by adding to the fish's water, such as those for
S   e      e  s
necessitates the stress of handling the fish to move to and from the bath).
ill fish has a reduced appetite.
If possible, drugs should be administered by injection to ensure delivery (Fig. 25.3).
However, this procedure requires restraint and is stressful to fish. The skin is irrigated
with sterile saline before injection. Subcutaneous injections are avoided, as most of
P             
muscles (approached either on the dorsal flank or alternatively from the dorsal
midline), or sometimes under the pectoral fin from cauidally, are used for
intramuscular injections. Scale loss may occur at the site of injection. Intravenous
injections may be given in anaesthetized animals (see Phlebotomy section above).
fins, should be administered with caution due to the proximity of internal organs.
IM
IM= intramuscular
IV=intravenous
IP=intraperitoneal (intracoelomic)
Figure 25.3
 Injection sites in fish.
CLINICAL TIPS
· Drug metabolism will be affected by body temperature, and thence by environmental temperature.
· Any temperature alterations may necessitate recalculation of drug dosing (particularly the dosing
interval).
Supportive care
It is not usually possible to assist-feed fish. However, changing the water composition
of their environment will result in rehydration or solute supplementation. For
example, placing a freshwater fish in a weak saline solution will result in a net water
gain due to osmotic forces.
Anaesthesia
Pre-anaesthesia
The fish should be fasted for a period prior to anaesthesia if possible. This is
 predominantly in order to maintain good water quality during travel to the clinic and
during hospitalization.
Pre-medication
Pre-medicant sedatives are rarely utilized, as they necessitate additional handling
(which is stressful) to administer. Eugenol may be used to sedate fish. Mild
hypothermia will result in immobilization.
Injectable agents
These may be used in larger fish, but safety margins are often narrow and recovery
prolonged. Ketamine combinations and propofol have been reported. Lidocaine may
be used for local anaesthesia.
Immersion
(tricaine methanesulfonate) is the most frequently employed agent. This forms an
acidic solution, and is therefore buffered before use. A concentration of 15-50 mg MS-
222/l will usually result in sedation. Induction of anaesthesia is achieved with a
concentration of 100-200 mg/l, while maintenance usually requires 50-100 mg/l.
Other water-borne agents that may be used include benzocaine, eugenol (clove oil),
isoflurane (bubbled into the water) and ethanol.
           
maintenance with a lower dose. Medicated water is applied over the gills (via the oral
     s         (
recirculating (where ‘spent’ water is not re-used) or recirculating (where water is
collected off the fish and re-cycled in the system) (Fig. 25.4).
Air pump aerating
anaesthetic solution
Reservoir containing
Pump
Separate reservoir
anaesthetic solution
supplyingcontaininganaesthetic-
water to
free water (into which
fish's mouth return pipe and supply
Water flow
pump canbe transferred
to alter anaesthetic depth)
Figure 25.4
 A recirculating anaesthetic circuit for use with fish.
The water should be oxygenated using an air-stone device, or by bubbling oxygen
from an anaesthetic machine. Excessively high oxygen levels may damage the gills.
fish is then held in the water and moved forwards until coordinated voluntary
movement is present.
Monitoring anaesthesia
As the fish becomes anaesthetized, it will lose its righting reflex as well as responses to
tactile and surgical stimuli. Respiratory rate is monitored by visualizing opercular
movement. The heart beat may be visible, or a Doppler flow monitor may be used to
hear it. If desired, an ECG may be attached.
Peri-anaesthetic care
Analgesia should be provided if a painful procedure is performed. During anaesthesia.
CLINICAL TIPS
Analgesics in fish
· Butorphanol 0.1-0.4 mg/kg IM.
· Ketoprofen 2 mg/kg IM.
Surgery
Suturing is usually not possible or practical in fish, either due to the lack of elastic
skin to close over a defect (in which case healing occurs by secondary intention)
and/or due to problems with waterproofing after closure. Superficial ulcers are
common, and are treated by debridement and antiseptic application. Water-resistant
oin tments may be applied to dress wounds temporarily.
Euthanasia
S            
anaesthesia is induced with water-borne agents before euthanasia is performed by
injecting pentobarbitone intracoelomically.
26
Enucleation of an eye in a goldfish
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Unilateral ocular swelling in a goldfish.
Introduction
Goldfish are attractive fish, relatively hardy and long-lived (> 20 years in optimum
conditions). They are commonly kept as family pets and also as display fish in public
ponds. External lesions are easily identified by owners, including ocular pathologies.
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
An adult goldfish (Carassius auratus) presented with unilateral ocular swelling of gradual onset.
Husbandry
The goldfish was housed in an indoor display pond, approximately 25 cm deep and 4.5
X 6.0 m in size. Water was changed continuously (from mains water), constituting a
third of the water being changed every 6 weeks. Filtration was achieved using rapid
sand and ultraviolet filters. The water was not routinely monitored for the presence of
toxins such as nitrates and nitrites. Commercial goldfish food was offered once daily
on 5 days each week. A relatively low stocking density was present, with several other
goldfish in the pond. The other fish in the pond did not show any clinical signs of
disease.
Case History
The goldfish's right eye had been noted to gradually increase in size over a period of 2
months. Otherwise the fish appeared unaffected by the ocular problem, but as it was
in a display pond the facility's management were concerned about public perception
and presented the animal to the veterinary clinic for assessment. The history presented
was:
· No loss of appetite
· Activity normal
· Gradual development of right ocular swelling.
CLINICAL TIPS
Transport of fish to veterinary clinic
· A container large enough to permit some swimming is necessary. Usually this is a leak-proof plastic
 box or bucket, but may need to be a thick plastic bag within a firm container such as a polystyrene
box.
• To avoid undue stress to the animal with water changes, the fish should be transported in water
from its enclosure.
• It is advisable for the owner to bring another two containers of water also, which can be needed if
anaesthesia is required.
Clinical Examination
The patient was initially assessed in the presenting container:
· Swimming movements were normal (albeit in a small enclosure)
· There were no obvious lesions on the integument
· Respiration rate and depth were evidenced by opercular movement, and noted to be
normal
· The right eye was distended, extending 2 cm out from the skull (Fig. 26.1).
Figure 26.1
 Dorsal view of goldfish's head, showing distended right eye.
It was decided to perform further investigations, and a ‘hands on' examination was
reserved for when the fish was anaesthetized.
CLINICAL TIPS
Clinical examination of fish
· Observation of the fish in water provides useful information, including assessment of the animal's
mobility and respiratory movements.
  o  a m xa  J e d  ass se l ss os  -
water:
• The fish can be gently grasped in the hands, or a net used to capture it.
· Some of the examination may be performed with the fish in water, or it may be raised into the
air for a brief period.
• It is advisable to hold the fish above the water container in case a sudden movement by the
animal releases it.
· A net should be used for larger fish before handling, or they should be anaesthetized.
· Handling is stressful for fish, and may result in physical damage. Although this may appear minor,
for example with the loss of a few scales, this may provide an entry portal for infection that may
progress to septicaemia and death. Great care should therefore be taken when handling specimens.
Nets should be free of holes that may catch a fin, and of abrasive surfaces.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSES
If possible, the practitioner should differentiate between buphthalmos (abnormal enlargement of
the eye) and exophthalmos ('pop eye', abnormal protrusion of the eye, e.g. as a mass pushes it).
Systemic disease usually results in bilateral exophthalmos, and other clinical signs or behaviour
changes are often present concurrently.
The differentials for ocular swelling are:
· Infection: localized infection is often the cause of unilateral pathology
· Trauma: may cause ocular rupture
 Corneal damage: resulting in corneal oedema, may rapidly (within 24 hours) progress to cataract
formation
• Retrobulbar oedema, e.g. due to gas in or behind the eye
· Retrobulbar mass, e.g. abscess, neoplasia
· Ocular neoplasia
· Gas supersaturation ('gas bubble disease')
• Ammonia toxicity
· Septicaemia
· Malnutrition, e.g. hypovitaminosis A (pitting of the cornea may lead to exophthalmos, uveitis and
retinal degeneration).
Case Work-Up
The goldfish was anaesthetized using tricaine methane-sulfonate (MS-222). Once
induced, the fish was positioned in lateral recumbency on a wet incontinence pad.
Water was dripped over the fish's body to keep the integument moist. Anaesthesia was
maintained by slowly syringing a 100 mg/ml solution of buffered Ms-222 into the oral
cavity using a catheter-tip syringe (Fig. 26.2).
Figure 26.2
Anaesthetized goldfish. Ms-222 is being administered into the oral cavity using a
syringe to maintain anaesthesia.
A full clinical examination was performed:
· Body weight was 250 g
· Right eye was enlarged. The cornea was opaque so intra-ophthalmic examination
was not possible. No discharge was present
· The left eye did not have any apparent problems
· No other lesions were observed or palpated on the goldfish.
CLINICAL TIPS
Preparation of water for fish
· If the owner is unable to provide spare containers of water from the fish's usual environment, the
veterinary practitioner should prepare containers of water in advance.
 a    an   si    s e
chlorine and ammonia).
  s sns s  si a  'r n on ae  e
asphyxiation is often seen first as the vulnerable gills are exposed directly to toxins in the water.
Morbidity and mortality depend on levels in the water.
· If chlorine alone is present, leaving the water to stand for a few days will allow the chlorine to
dissipate into the air. If chloramine is present, a commercial product (usually containing sodium
thiosulphate) may be used to ‘condition’ the water. These products also remove chlorine more
rapidly than standing.
· The water should also be at a similar temperature to the usual enclosure. For temperate species,
this may require standing water from the mains supply for a period. For tropical species this will
require supplemental heating.
Anaesthesia
Use water that has been de-toxified (see above). In preference, use water from the
fish's own enclosure, as the animal will be accustomed to the chemical constituents
and temperature. The aim is to buffer any changes such as thermal shock that may be
stressful to the fish's physiology.
MS-222 is a sodium-channel blocking local anaesthetic agent that is absorbed across
the gills in fish, resulting in sedation or general anaesthesia (depending on the
      s        
with water, Ms-222 produces a clear, colourless, acid solution. This solution should be
buffered to pH 7.0-7.4 by adding phosphate buffer or sodium bicarbonate: either add
sodium bicarbonate until the pH is measured at 7.0-7.4, or add sodium bicarbonate to
    m    o    m  
exposure to Ms-222 should be avoided, as the powder or solutions may be irritant or
corrosive.
Prepare three tanks of water: Ms-222 at a concentration of 200 mg/l to induce
anaesthesia, Ms-222 at 100 mg/ for maintenance solution, and fresh stock water (i.e.
from the fish's enclosure) for recovery. Place the fish in the induction tank and
monitor closely. Once a surgical plane of anaesthesia is reached, the fish is removed
from the induction tank.
The maintenance solution is administered into the oral cavity and flows out across
the gills. It can be given either using a syringe or automatically using a pump to
administer the solution. The system can be either non-recirculating (where the
solution is not re-used after administration to the fish) or recirculating (where the
solution is collected and recycled).
· The gills should be kept moist at all times to prevent damage. If anaesthetic solution
  sr r  i i s      na   s
recovery from anaesthesia).
     n m         q  a
forward motion through the water until conscious movements are present. The fish
should be monitored for a period to ensure swimming movements are persistent and
that opercular movements are regular.
CLINICAL TIPS
Stages of anaesthesia in fish
(0) Conscious: voluntary swimming, normal equilibrium and responsiveness.
(1) Sedation: decrease in reaction to stimuli, not swimming but normal equilibrium.
 s  a a  rs on  as s  ion (
response to postural changes.
s n ss (s    (se  s se s ()s
tactile pressure, decreased respiratory rate (noted by opercular movement).
(IV) Medullary collapse: no response to tactile stimuli or postural changes, no respiration.
CLINICAL TIPS
Monitoring anaesthesia
· A Doppler probe can be used to assess heart rate.
 Opercular movements are equivalent to respiratory rate.
Further Investigations
Husbandry
Investigations should include details of the aquarist's tank or pond set-up as well as
water analysis.
CLINICAL TIPS
Water analysis
· Water should be sampled from the usual environment and tested as soon as possible.
• Parameters of interest include:
· Temperature
· Dissolved oxygen
· Ammonia
• Nitrite and nitrate
* pH (e.g. this may be low if carbon dioxide supersaturation is present)
· Hardness
· Chlorine and chloramine (often present in mains water supply)
• In marine systems, salinity and redox potential are also measured.
Ophthalmoscopy
Ophthalmic examination can be performed as in other species. A slit lamp is useful for
magnification to assess the cornea, anterior chamber, iris and lens (not possible in
this case due to corneal opacity). Indirect ophthalmoscopy is used to examine the
fundus. Fluorescein or rose bengal stains are used to assess corneal ulceration. Corneal
scrapings may be collected for cytological examination. If intraocular pressure is
raised, a transocular intraocular aspirate can be taken to relieve pressure (and provide
a sample for culture and microscopy).
Imaging
In order to further evaluate the lesion, it was suggested that imaging be performed
However, this was declined due to the financial implications. Ultrasound is the most
useful modality to assess the globe and soft tissues in the periocular region.
Radiography may be useful if the pathology is more invasive. Soft tissue and fluid
margins will be apparent, and if the ocular lesion had extended into the bony
structures it is possible some changes may have been seen.
Blood sampling
Since ocular signs may be associated with systemic disease, a complete physical
examination should be performed. Blood sampling for haematology and biochemistry
may be useful to assess for systemic disease. Blood culture and cytology will enable
diagnosis of septicaemia.
CLINICAL TIPS
Venous access in fish
· Caudal vein: lies ventral to tail vertebrae, access via ventral midline or lateral approach.
· Medial aspect of operculae: accessible in larger koi for euthanasia.
· Brachial arch.
Diagnosis
Unilateral exophthalmos.
Anatomy and Physiology Refresher
Ocular anatomy (Fig. 26.3) varies between species of fish, for example the shape of the
pupil and colour of the iris. Teleosts (bony fish including goldfish) do not have eyelids.
Reaction to light relies on retraction of rods/cones into the retinal pigment epithelium
or increasing pigment present in retinal epithelial processes. Both of these responses
require time and therefore sudden exposure to intense light may result in retinal
damage.
Extraocular Suspensory
Scleral
muscles
ligament
cartilage
Retina
Sclera
Choroid
Choroidal
rete
Cornea
Opticnerve
Lens
Vitreous
Iris
Falciform
process
Aqueous
Retractor lentis
muscle
Figure 26.3
Ocular anatomy in a fish.
Extraocular muscles permit independent movement of each eye, although this
movement is involuntary (following objects requires the fish to move its body within
the water). The ocular globe is flattened and elliptical, and the cornea thickened. A
cartilaginous ring is present within the sclera.
The choroid gland contains a vascular rete around the optic nerve. The iris attaches
to the cornea, held in place by the annular ligament. The lens is large and spherical,
suspended by the suspensory ligament assisted by the posterior retractor lentis muscle
(this muscle moves the eye during accommodation).
Aetiopathogenesis of Exophthalmos
Several aetiologies may result in this condition. Inadequate husbandry conditions
may result in immune suppression and predispose to infection. Overstocking may
result in intra-or inter-specific aggression and lesions that are susceptible to secondary
infections. Examples of infectious agents that may affect the eye or periocuular tissues
include:
· Bacteria (e.g. Streptococcus, Staphylococcus, Aeromonas, Pseudomonas, or Vibrio
spp: granulomatous lesions (e.g. Mycobacteria, Nocardia and Flavobacterium))
· Parasites (e.g. the protozoan Tetrahymena)
· Fungi (e.g. secondary invasion of corneal ulcers with Saprolegnia, especially in poor
water conditions).
Although primary neoplasia is rare, medulloepithelioma of the ciliary body has been
reported in a goldfish.
Retrobulbar oedema  and fluid retention commonly  results in  exophthalmos
(unilateral or bilateral). The failure of osmoregulation is called ^dropsy', and is ofter
due to infection or neoplasia. Fluid may also be retained elsewhere in the body, for
example oedema of the vent, skin and bowel, or abdominal distension (where the
scales become elevated to give a ‘pinecone' appearance to the fish).
Gas supersaturation may produce exophthalmos. This may be associated with over-
d       s  s    s
Supersaturation of the water results in gas bubbles in the circulation and/or skin and
other tissules.
The optic nerve may become stretched in severe cases of exophthalmos, and
blindness may ensue.
Epidemiology
Treatment
This requires identification of the underlying cause of exophthalmos.  Medical
treatment, for example with antibiotics and local steroids, is rarely suiccessful.
In this case, the eye was enucleated (Fig. 26.4), using a similar procedure to that
used in other animals. Surgery involved dissection around the base of the mass,
clamping the optic nerve and blood vessels (particularly the choroidal rete). Minor
haemorrhage was present, and adrenaline on a cotton-bud was used to provide
haemostasis. The orbit was packed with a waterproof ointment.
Figure 26.4
Eye enucleation surgery in the goldfish.
 (  o  o   d sm si
enrofloxacin (5 mg/kg IM). Butorphanol (0.4 mg/kg IM) was administered to provide
analgesia.
NURSING ASPECTS
Intramusciilar injections in fish
· IM injections (see Fig. 25.3) are administered into epaxial muscles (on the flank, dorsal to the
lateral line and lateral to the dorsal fin). The needle is inserted between scales to minimize scale
damage.
• The area should not be cleaned before the injection, as this will remove the protective mucus layer
over the skin.
· Pressure should be provided for a short while after the injection, as drugs often leak out into the
water after IM injection.
 Owners should be warned of the possibility of scale loss after injections.
Treatment Options and Management
In public displays, fish with an abnormal eye or missing an eye may be euthanized.
readily treated by enucleation.
If infection is diagnosed, antimicrobials are best selected based on culture and
S         s 
Supportive treatment should be provided in cases with viral infections.
Neoplasia is best treated by surgical excision. Chemotherapy for ocular neoplasia is
not reported in fish.
CLINICAL TIPS
Treatment of infections
· Bacterial: in-feed or bath or injections, antibiotic selected based on culture.
 Fungal: malachite green or formalin baths, oral itraconazole.
· External parasites: osmotic shock with saltwater (for freshwater fish) or freshwater (for saltwater
species) bath; large water change ( > 50%) to reduce parasite load; anti-parasite drug baths.
Other Treatment Options
If the goldfish had presented earlier in the course of the disease, it may have been
possible to consider medical treatment if trauma or an infection had been present.
This may have enabled salvage of the eye, although it is not possible to say whether
sight would have been retained.
Topical medication is likely to wash off under water. Antibiotics can be
administered by injection or in-feed. Dosing a single animal in a group situation
would be difficult, and isolation would be required during the treatment. External
infections may be treated with baths, e.g. malachite green or formalin for fungal
infections.
Follow-Up
following day. The ointment did not remain in the orbit beyond a couple of days, but
no problems were noted with healing. The animal continued to feed and swim well
with only one eye.
Prevention
Further investigations such as bacteriology and histology were not performed on this
case, and an underlying aetiology was not diagnosed. The keeper was advised to
optimize and monitor husbandry conditions (including diet and water quality) to
reduce the risk of further disease due to immune suppression, infection or
malnutri tion.
Prognosis
Without a diagnosis, the prognosis given was guarded. However, case follow-up at 6
months showed the goldfish to be coping well with one eye.
MCQS
Mammals
1 Degus belong to which taxonomic order?
(a) Lagomorpha (b) Chiroptera (c) Rodentia (d) Insectivora (e) Diprotodontia
2 What is the dental formula for rabbits (Oryctolagus cuniculus)?
(a) 1 2/1, C 0/0, PM 3/2, M 3/3
(b) 1 1/1, C 0/0, PM 1/1, M 3/3
(c) I 1/1, C 1/1, PM 3/3, M 3/3
(d) 1 1/0, C 0/0, PM 0/0, M 3/3
(e) I 1/1, C 1/1, PM 1/1, M 3/3
3 Which of these species is NOT susceptible to heat stress?
(a) African pygmy hedgehog (Atelerix albiventris) (b) Chinchilla (Chinchilla
laniger) (c) Degu (Octodon degus) (d) Guinea pig (Cavia porcellus) (e) Rabbit
(Oryctolagus cuniculus)
4 Which of the following statements is TRUE for rabbits (Oryctolagus cuniculus)?
   (  n  ()
medetomidine produce peripheral vasodilation (c) Atropine is an effective
anticholinergic in most rabbits (d) Ketamine is a good muscle relaxant (e)
Midazolam produces a longer period of sedation than diazepam
5 Which of the following statements is TRUE? Cheyletiella parasitivorax:
(a) May infest rabbits without clinical signs (b) Is a common aetiological agent
for dermatosis in chinchillas (c) Is not zoonotic (d) Is a burrowing mite (e)
6 Which of the following statements about rabbit abscesses is TRUE?
(a) For best results from culture, submit a sample from the abscess capsule (b) The
treatment of choice is lancing to allow drainage (c) Oral penicillins are a good
first-line antibiotic choice (d) Abscesses rarely develop associated with dental
disease (e) Surgical excision of the abscess should not be attempted
7 Which position is best for radiographic assessment of a chinchilla's (Chinchilla
laniger) skull for potential otitis?
(a) Laterals (b) Oblique laterals (c) Dorso-ventral (d) Rostro-caudal (e) Skyline
(a) Delay wound healing (b) Impair immune function (c) Increase the risk of
sepsis after surgery (d) Result in prolonged convalescence (e) All of the above
9 Sugar gliders (Petaurus breviceps) are:
(a ) Insectivorous ( b ) Nectivorous ( c ) Omnivorous ( d ) Frugivorous (e)
Insectivorous and sap-feeders
10 Which of the following is NOT usually associated with pain in rabbits?
(a) Inappetence (b) Increased activity (c) Sitting very still (d) Tooth grinding (e)
Unresponsive
11 Which statement about bacterial dermatoses in mice (Mus musculus) is FALSE?
(a) Staphylococcus aureus may cause spontaneous ulcerative dermatitis (b)
Corynebacterium kutscheri can cause furunculosis (c) Topical ointments are
P        
penicillins or cephalosporins (e) Surgical excision may be necessary to treat some
abscesses
1 2 Which of these CANNOT be used to monitor rabbit (Oryctolagus cuniculus)
anaesthesia?
(a) Ear pinch (b) Toe pinch (c) Palpebral reflex (d) Corneal reflex (e) Response to
surgical stimuli
1 3 What are possible differential diagnoses for a Syrian hamster (Mesocricetus
auratus) with haematuria?
(a) Renal trauma with haemorrhage (b) Cystitis (c) Endometritis (females) (d)
Uterine endometrial adenocarcinomas (females) (e) All of the above
14 Which of the following investigations are warranted in a ferret with vomiting?
(a) Trial therapy with supportive treatment (b) Abdominal radiography (c)
Abdominal ultrasound (d) Haematology and clinical chemistries (e) Any or all of
the above
15 Myobia musculi infestation in mice (Mus musculus):
(a) Usually results in lesions around the back and ventrum (b) Has a life cycle of
23 days (c) Is mostly transmitted by indirect contact, via fomites (d) Is usually
treated with lime sulfur dip (e) Is usually non-pruritic
Birds
 ( ss) id  d e e siu e s p n a 
  (          )
fats (c) Deficient in vitamin A (d) Both b and c
(e) a, b and c
17 Cream-coloured lesions in a raptor's oral cavity could be due to:
(    (       (
Any of the above
18 Which of the following antifungal medications will most rapidly reach therapeutic
levels in the bloodstream of a parrot suffering from air sacculitis due to aspergillosis?
(a) Amphotericin B, administered intravenously (b) Itraconazole, administered
orally (c) Ketoconazole, administered orally (d) Nystatin, administered orally (e)
Terbinafine, administered orally
19 Knemidocoptes spp infestation in budgerigars (Melopsittacus undulatus) results in
which clinical signs?
(a) Feather loss on the dorsal head (b) Feather picking over the abdomen (c)
Paronychia (nailbed infection) (d) Scaly appearance of the beak and legs (e)
Oculo-nasal discharge
20 Air sacculitis in a cockatiel (Nymphicus hollandicus) commonly presents as:
       s n  s  ()g
   ss    r    s aa 
21 Which of the following statements regarding avian anaesthesia is TRUE?
           )
gaseous anaesthetic agent (b) Butorphanol administered as a pre-medicant never
ventilation) should not routinely be used(d) There is usually a long delay
(minutes) between respiratory arrest and cardiac arrest in cases of anaesthetic
overdose (e) Halothane has a wide safety margin
22 Which statement about egg binding in birds is FALSE?
abdominal wall herniation, hyperthermia, and oviduct infection (b) Clinical signs
may include lethargy and reduced respiratory rate (c) Patient stabilization is
important, with supportive care (d) Diagnosis is usually by radiography (e)
Oxytocin is not recommended in birds
23 Proventricular dilatation disease (PDD):
(a) Is caused by a circovirus (b) Has a short incubation period, usually less than a
histologically by degeneration of ganglia and lymphohistiocytic infiltrations
24 Local anaesthetics in birds:
(a) Have a wide safety margin (b) Are often administered in topical ointments (c)
Should not be used for regional anaesthesia and analgesia (d) May be
has occuirred
25 Which of the following bones is NOT part of the shoulder joint in birds?
(a) Scapula (b) Humerus (c) Coracoid (d) Sternum (keel) (e) Clavicle
26 Which statement about raptors is TRUE?
       )       ()
jesses to the swivel (c) Harris’ hawks (Parabuteo unicinctus) hunt best when
solitary (d) Bumblefoot usually develops on lame legs (e) Working raptors are fed
ad libitum to ensure sufficient energy reserves for flight
27 Which of these would NOT be a common differential for a mass on the wing of a
budgerigar (Melopsittacus undulatus)?
(a) Feather cyst (b) Xanthoma (c) Fibrous osteodystrophy associated with
nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism (NsHP or metabolic bone disease.
MBD) (d) Haematoma associated with a fracture (e) Articular gout
28 A proven pair of zebra finches (Taeniopygia guttata) have recently had reduced
reproductive success, with lower numbers of surviving chicks. Which of the following
nutritional elements should be assessed in the investigation?
(a) Vitamin A (b) Vitamin D
(c) Vitamin E
(d) Calcium (e) All of the above
going to use an external fixator and intramedullary pin for the repair, using a
            
structures will NOT be near the surgical field?
(a) Digital flexor tendons (b) Cranial tibial muscle (c) Medial gastrocnemius
muscle (d) Tibial artery and nerve (e) Deep fibular nerve
        s     s
bubo) is FALSE?
(a)Non-respiratory tract disorders can result in signs of dyspnoea (b)
Reptiles
31 Which of the following best describes a Hermann's tortoise (Testudo hermanni)?
)       s  o       ()
 d m s  go y   d  ( (  s
30 cm SCL
(c) No horny tip on tail, thigh tubercles, grow up to 35 cm SCL
  5g o dn mo 'sq qi ' o dn A ()
(e) No horny tip on tail, lack of thigh tubercles, grow up to 35 cm long
32 The most common antemortem test for OPMV (ophidian paramyxovirus) is:
   ( ss  o s ()  ()  ()
an oral swab (e) Any of the above
33 What stimulates respiration in reptiles?
) x  s   () x  s  s ()
partial pressure of carbon dioxide (d) High partial pressure of carbon dioxide (e)
Presence of nitrous oxide in inspired gases
34 Which of the following species demonstrates autotomy?
( ( s)   ( (    
Sheltopusik (glass lizard, Ophisaurus apodus) (d) Savannah monitor lizard
(Varanus exanthematicus) (e) a + b + c
              s
disease?
(a) Total serum calcium (b) Ionized serum calcium (c) Radiography (d) Vitamin
D3 blood levels (e) History and clinical examination
36 Retained spectacles in snakes:
(a) May be caused by excessive environmental humidity (b) May be associated
with endoparasitism (c) Are always shed with the next shed (d) Should be
managed conservatively (e) Should be managed surgically
37 A reason/reasons for castrating a green iguana (Iguana iguana) is/are:
(a) Prevention of unwanted offspring (b) Treatment of testicular neoplasia (c)
(e) a + b+ c
38 Which species do NOT have eyelids?
(a) Royal python (Python regius) (b) Bearded dragon (Pogona vitticeps) (c)
Leopard gecko (Eublepharis macularius) (d) a + b
(e) a + c
39 The surgical approach of choice for ovariectomy in a bearded dragon (Pogona
vitticeps) is:
(a) Trans-plastron (b) Paramedian (c) Inguinal (d) Midline (e) Flank
40 Clinical signs of respiratory disease in snakes may include:
(a) Coughing up discharges (b) Stomatitis (c) Seeking cooler areas of the
enclosure (d) Altered posture, with head and cranial body raised vertically (e) All
of the above
41 Which ONE of the following statements about spiny-tailed lizards (Uromastyx
acanthinurus) is FALSE?
(a) They are herbivorous (b) They belong to the Agamidae family of lizards, and
thus have acrodont dentition (with teeth fixed to the maxillary and mandibuilar
bones) (c) Their body shape is dorso-ventrally flattened to enable them to burrow
and hide under rocks (d) They should be kept in a vivarium with a moderately
high humidity (e) They are sexually dimorphic
42 A rescue centre presents a Horsfield's tortoise (Testudo horsfieldi) at your clinic to
'do a health check and test for infectious disease' before mixing with the centre's
resident population. Which of the following would you NOT perform routinely?
(a) Faecal parasitology and bacteriology (b) Oro-pharyngeal swabs for herpesvirus
and mycoplasma PCR
(c) Full-body radiographs to assess bone density (d) Haematology and clinical
chemistry (e) Blood culture
43 Which of the following statements about dysecdysis in a Burmese python (Python
moluruis) is FALSE?
(a) It may be a result of excessive humidity in the environment during shedding
(b) Ectoparasite infestation may result in the condition (c) A lack of bathing area
or rubbing stones may predispose the condition (d) Pieces of retained skin can be
  sm m    d  p q se h () a 
through and remove retained skin
44 Cryptosporidiosis in snakes:
(a) Resuilts in constipation as the primary clinical sign (b) Is readily detected on
  () s s     si s  n 
gastric wall hypertrophy (e) Is treated with fenbendazole
45 Which of the following statements about shell trauma in chelonia is FALSE?
(a) The chelonian should be radiographed to assess the extent of bony damage (b)
( so  sss   s s   s 
dressing changes uintil infection (or potential infection) is uinder control (d) Wires
or screws may be used to hold fragments of shell in apposition (e) Epoxy resin or
 hoof acrylic are commonly used to repair shell defects
Amphibians
46 Respiration in amphibians may be:
(a ) Branchial (via external gills) (b) Buccopharyngeal (across oral mucous
membranes) (c) Pulmonic (via lungs) (d) Cutaneous (across the skin) (e) All of
the above
47 Which of the following statements about the cardiovascular system in amphibians
is INCORRECT?
(a) Venepuncture is possible in the midline ventral abdominal vein in some
species such as larger toads (b) The lingual plexus in anurans lies ventral to the
tongue (c) The amphibian heart lies midline, dorsal to the pectoral girdle and
sternum, and is located by visualization, palpation or Doppler flow (d) Phlebotomy
in salamanders is usually performed via the ventral tail vein (e) Amphibian hearts
are three-chambered (right atrium, left atrium, and a single ventricle)
48 Cloacal prolapse in a frog:
(a) May be due to gastrointestinal foreign body (b) Is often associated with
tenesmus (c) May resolve spontaneously if small (d) Treatment should include
elimination of the underlying cause (e) All of the above
Fish
49 Which of the following is NOT a useful indicator of anaesthetic depth in a fish?
      () s  ()   ()
base (d) Swimming movements (e) Doppler probe over heart
  s      n   s
(a) Reduced surface area of pond or tank, e.g. by surface plants (b) Algal bloom (c)
aquarium (e) All of the above
MCQs - Answers
1 (c) Degus (Octodon degus) are rodents. They belong to the Hystricognathi, the cavy-
like rodents. There are 118 families in this suborder, which includes pets in the
Caviidae (e.g. guinea pig), Chinchillidae (e.g. chinchilla) and Octodontidae (e.g.
degu) families. Although little is published about degus, medicine can be extrapolated
from the other hystricognaths.
2 (a) Rabbits have two upper incisors, with the smaller ^peg’ teeth caudal to the other
upper set. Incisors grow at approximately 3 mm per week, and cheek teeth (premolars
and molars) 3 mm per month.
3 (a) African pygmy hedgehogs (Atelerix albiventris) are used to an environmental
temperature range of 23-32'C, usuially requiring suipplemental heating when captive
in temperate zones. The other species originate from cooler climes; although
supplemental heating may be required for debilitated animals or during anaesthesia,
they will suffer if excessively heated.
4 (a) Sedated or anaesthetized rabbits shouild always have ocuilar luibricant applied to
prevent the eyes drying out and to reduce potential trauma from substrate.
anticholinesterase, so glycopyrrolate is the anti-cholinergic drug of choice.
5 (a) Similar to other companion animals, Cheyletiella may be found on some rabbits
without clinical signs. In other individuals, a scaling dermatosis with partial alopecia
            
hypersensitivity reaction, and more severe signs are seen.
             
material, this is often sterile and the clinician has an increased chance of success
with a sample from the abscess capsule.
tympanic bullae. The tympanic bullae are very large in the chinchilla, and this
species is used in auditory research.
S             
anorexia, and cardiovascular stress. Herbivores such as rabbits are also susceptible to
gastrointestinal hypomotility.
 p s  ds     s s  () e
          m   
P             i
nectar; several 'recipes' exist.
10 (b) Any abnormal behaviour in rabbits may be due to pain, but usually activity is
reduced. Abdominal or spinal pain may be demonstrated by a hunched or crouched
posture.
11 (c) Fastidious grooming by mice will remove most ointments, and toxicity may be
seen associated with parenteral intake. Topical antiseptics (e.g. chlorhexidine 0.5-
1.0%) are often beneficial.
1 2 (c) The palpebral reflex is an unreliable indicator of anaesthetic depth in the
rabbit. The corneal reflex should normally be retained at a surgical plane of
anaesthesia, but is lost if medetomidine is used.
           e
lirethral and vaginal openings in female hamsters, but blood from the reproductive
relatively common. It should be noted that a white discharge is normal at the end of
the oestrous cycle in hamsters.
1 4 (e) Depending on the severity of clinical signs, all of these would be useful
investigations.  Common   differentials    include   gastritis   with    ulceration,
gastroenteritis, oesphageal/gastrointestinal obstruction (often a foreign body, but
neoplasia such as lymphoma is also common), insulinoma, or other metabolic
disease. Megaoesophagus will result in regurgitation.
15 (b) Owing to the life cycle of 23 days, the treatment is repeated to kill newly
hatched mites (usually ivermectin at 0.2-0.4 mg/kg SC/PO/topically, repeated every
7-14 days for three doses). Parent mice usually pass the mite to offspring, but lesions
often do not develop until the animal reaches maturity. Pruritus varies, with some
animals being asymptomatic and others intensely so due to an allergic response.
Lesions of alopecia and ulceration are typically around the head, neck, lateral thorax
and flanks.
16 (e) Free-living African grey parrots feed mostly on seeds and nuts. However, they
are more active and have a higher energy demand than more sedentary captive birds.
This results in consumption of a greater quantity of food in free-living birds,
           
will suffer from malnutrition, and should be fed a proprietary pelleted food
supplemented with fresh fruit and vegeta bles.
           
treatment can be started. Samples should be examined microscopically in the first
1 8(a) Amphotericin B is fungicidal, and rapidly effective. Fluids should be
administered simultaneously as the drug is potentially nephrotoxic. The azole family
take several days before they are effective. These drugs are variably hepatotoxic, and
i traconazole appears to be toxic in grey parrots.
1 9(d) The burrowing knemidocoptic mange mite is relatively common in
budgerigars and can affect other species. Most frequently the cere becomes grey,
scabby and crusting. Burrowing tracts may be seen in the beak. Leg lesions, on the
  s,    n  s      
20 (d) Birds hide signs of illness until severely ill. Clinical signs of disease are isuially
           
increased respiratory effort may be seen in the form of tail-bobbing or open-mouth
breathing. Sneezing and oculo-nasal discharge may be seen with upper respiratory
tract disease.
21 (a) The facemask should be closely-fitting to reduce environmental contamination
by anaesthetic gases. After induction, most species can be intubated for maintenance.
22 (b) Tachypnoea is commonly seen. Other clinical signs may include a wide-based
non-perching stance, or hindlimb paresis or paralysis, dypnoea, swollen cloaca, and
  e   o   s   s
         s 
Oxytocin results in profound cardiovascular effects, and smooth muscle contractions
of the oviduct are usuially ineffective.
23 (e) PDD is caused by a bornavirus. The incubation period is variable, and may be
years. Gastrointestinal transit time is slowed, and many secondary infections occur
associated with this stasis. Although the proventriculus usually has histopathological
  o            
commonly biopsied. Histological lesions are mainly detected in the autonomic nerve
 n            s
central nervous system in neuirological cases.
S        r  
induced arthritis. Systemic uptake of local anaesthetics is rapid in birds, and
overdosage is easy in small patients. Toxicity results in tremors, ataxia, recumbency,
seizures, stupor and cardiovascular effects (including cardiac arrest and death).
Accurate dose calculation and dilution of drugs will reduce the risk of toxicity.
Ointments are not commonly used, as dose calculation is difficult, plumage may be
damaged, and oral ingestion after preening is likely. As with other analgesics, pre-
emptive administration is preferable.
25 (d) The left and right clavicles are fused to form the furcula in most birds. The
sternum supports the thoracic girdle, which also includes the scapulae and coracoid
26 (a) The crop is a dilation of the oesophagus. It is present in most birds and serves
as a storage area for food en route to the stomach (proventriculus). Owls
              s
fur and feathers, whereas, in Falconiformes, bone is absorbed due to the longer time
ingested material remains in the gastrointestinal tract before the pellet is
regurgitated.
27 (c) NSHP occurs in animals with calcium and vitamin D deficiencies. Reptiles
often respond to NSHP by replacing decalcified bone with fibrous connective tissue,
S             
and seizures associated with the hypocalcaemia, osteodystrophy (e.g. bowing of the
of calcium. Bone deformities are common in young growing animals. Radiographic
lesions are often seen in the spine, tibiotarsi, radii and humeri. Surgery may be
required to correct bone deformities, or euthanasia considered in severe cases.
an appropriate diet containing calcium and vitamin D.
28 (e) Many elements are involved in good reproductive performance. Birds that are
used repeatedly for breeding have a much greater metabolic demand, particularly the
females, and are more likely to show clinical signs of chronic nutritional deficiencies
than non-breeding birds. Marginal deficiencies of adults may first be highlighted by
clinical signs in their offspring.
29 (a) The digital flexor tendons are ventral to the phalanges of the digits. Access both
laterally and medially is required to place the external fixator pins. The craniomedial
incision to allow access to insert the intramedullary pin is between the cranial tibial
stifle joint. The deep fibular nerve runs from caudally at the stifle across the
tibiotarsus, and lies medially at the hock (intertarsal) joint.
3 0 (d) Space-occupying masses in the coelomic cavity (e.g. egg binding or
organomegaly) commonly compress the air sacs and result in dyspnoea. Faecal
           s
Serratospiculum spp and Syngamus trachea. Periocular swelling may be seen with an
s     sn s r n  s 
include trauma resulting in subcutaneous haemorrhage or emphysema, or neoplasia.
Clinical signs of respiratory tract disease in birds are varied, including exercise
nasal discharge. Dypnoea will only be relieved by placement of an air sac cannula in
  s    si d s  n  e si 
cannula permits access to the air sacs and thence the lungs, bypassing the upper
airways.
31 (b) Identification of tortoise species is important, to permit appropriate husbandry
conditions to be selected. Hermann's tortoises originate from France, Italy, Spain and
various Mediterranean islands. They require a daytime temperature range of 20-30°C
with a basking spot of 40'C. They eat mainly weeds such as dandelions, sow thistle,
clover and plantains. As with other chelonia, they require supplemental UV-B when
32 (a) Serological tests detect antibodies against OPMVs. The most commonly used
are haemagglutination inhibition (Hl) tests. Seroconversion may take 6-8 weeks, so
on histology of lung and CNs tissue. The virus may be isolated in cell culture, usually
from lung, but also from kidney, intestine and liver. Virus can also be isolated from
oral and cloacal swabs.
3 3(a) This is important during recovery from anaesthesia, when 1o0% oxygen
should not routinely be administered to reptiles. Similarly, provision of high levels of
    s       a
actually reduce respiratory rate and depth.
34 (e) Autotomy is the self-amputation of a part of the body, such as the tail in some
species of lizards. It is a mechanism of self-defence, where the animal hopes a
    d -       
Caution should be exercised when handling these species, particularly if phlebotomy
bony vertebrae (they are cartilaginous), and scales may have a slightly different
appearance.
35 (c) The other tests are also useful, but radiography is most valuable for assessment
of bone mineralization. lonized calcium is the active fraction of calcium in the
bloodstream, and therefore a more usefil parameter than total blood calcium (which
is often within the normal range in cases with metabolic bone disease).
3 6 (d) Whenever possible, conservative treatment should be uitilized. Over-zealous
removal of the retained spectacle may damage the normal basal spectacle. It is
preferable to correct predisposing husbandry and nutritional problems. Increasing
environmental humidity should ensure hydration. Synthetic artificial tears may be
         
of the spectacle. If surgery is required, it should be delicate and microscopy should be
llsed.
3 7 (e) Mature intact green iguanas can be very aggressive during the breeding
season. Castration of mature iguanas is less likely to successfully reduce aggression
than castration of immature animals as a preventative measure. The testes are intra-
abdominal, and the surgical procedure is quite technically demanding.
spectacles), as in snakes.
is made slightly off midline. A similar procedure in a laterally compressed chameleon
would be performed via a lateral (flank) incision.
4 0 (e) Signs may relate directly to the respiratory tract, including coughing
dyspnoea, tachpnoea, or open-mouth breathing. Increased respiratory noise or
lethargy and dehydration. Animals may spend more time in cooler areas to lower
their metabolic rate, as a coping mechanism for hypoxia.
41 (d) The species originates from North Africa, living in rocky outcrops in desert
areas of low humidity.
42 (e) Although blood culture may be indicated in chelonia with signs suggestive of
septicaemia (e.g. plastron flushing, severe lethargy, or heterophilia with toxic
changes), it is not routinely performed in a baseline health check.
43 (a) Dysecdysis is more common if humidity is too low during shedding. Burmese
(or Indian) pythons require a relative humidity of 30-70%, and a daytime
temperature range of 25-30°C (5-10°C higher at the “hot spot', and 5-10°C lower at
night).
4 4 (d) The coccidian organism (Cryptosporidium serpentis) causes an intense
inflammatory reaction within the gastric crypts. Diagnosis without biopsy is difficult;
the oocysts may be seen on gastric washes or using a fluorescent antibody test on
         
organism.
45 (b) All vertebrate species experience pain, but nociceptive pathways have not been
fully elucidated in all reptile species. An endogenous opioid system has been
demonstrated in reptiles. Assessment of pain is difficult in chelonia, as subtle
behavioural changes may be the only clinical signs. If bone or soft tissues have been
damaged, analgesia should be provided.
P   a s s    (l  t
species, as well as intraspecies depending on life-stage. Most larvae stages are aquatic
and rely on branchial respiration. Anurans (frogs and toads) possess lungs, and in
adults respiration may be cutaneous, buccopharyngeal and/or pulmonic. Neotenic
species of Caudata such as the axolotl rely heavily on branchial respiration.
47 (b) The lingual plexus lies dorsally at the base of the tongue, and is readily
accessed by pulling the tongue rostrally.
4 8 (e) Other causes of cloacal prolapse include local irritation, endoparasitism,
gastroenteritis, and cloacal masses. The frog should be kept in water to prevent
dessication of  the  prolapsed tissue.  Larger prolapses require reduction and
replacement, often under general anaesthesia.
49 (a) Eye position will not alter during fish anaesthesia. Of the other parameters
swimming movements are lost before reaction to tactile stimuli (pinching the tail-
base) as anaesthesia deepens. Opercular movements are equivalent to respiratory
rate, and a Doppler probe can be ised to measuire heart rate.
50 (e) Low oxygen levels in water may result in severe effects in fish. Respiratory
distress is seen, with fish gasping at the surface of the water; this may be fatal. Gill
damage, anaemia and methaemoglobinaemia may ensue, resulting in clinical
hypoxia.
APPENDIX 1
Critical care
Good exotic patient assessment and preparation before procedures will reduce the
development of critical problems. However, despite optimizing care of animals, there
may be times when an animal requires emergency intervention to resuscitate it.
Preparation
  u  on ia nda p si g sans ar on no si h
emergency occurs. The author recommends having a ‘crash kit' (Fig. A1.1) that is
portable enough to be carried between rooms in the clinic. In smaller establishments,
it may be feasible to have a stock of materials in one central location. Emergency
situations often arise when the patient is undergoing a procedure, particularly if
anaesthesia is required. In practice, it is useful to keep basic equipment - such as that
required for anaesthetic, drug and fluid administration - in this kit (Box A1.1) along
with emergency drugs.
Figure A1.1
Typical 'crash kit'.
BOX A1.1 Contents of a 'crash kit
· Drugs
· Adrenaline
· Atropine (glycopyrrolate for rabbits and rats that possess atropinesterase)
• Doxapram
· Diazepam
· Local anaesthetic spray
· Local anaesthetic ointment (e.g. lidocaine/prilocaine, EMLA?)
· Intubation equipment
• Endotracheal tubes (uncuffed, 1-6 mm diameter)
· Laryngoscope, with size 0-1 Wisconsin blade
· Intravenous catheters (20-26 gauge)
· Needles (18-24 gauge) and syringes (1-5 ml)
 Ocular lubricant
· Adhesive tape.
Other facilities that are uiseful include:
· Resuscitators (Fig. A1.2), e.g. Ambu?-bags
· Blood analysers: those that can produce results with a small aliquot of blood are
ideal for small animals (e.g. iStat? portable analyser)
· Imaging: radiography and ultrasonography in particular, e.g. to identify fluid in a
coelomic cavity
· Blood
 d o n -   ssd 
sphygmomanometer for indirect method
· Digital thermometer - along with sources of supplemental heating (such as heat
pads or a forced warm air blanket) and cooling (such as fluids at room temperature or
ice packs).
Figure A1.2
 Small animal resuscitators.
Principles of CCPR
Cardiocerebral pulmonary resuscitation (CCPR) is an emergency procedure performed
in patients with cardiac or respiratory arrest. The inclusion of écerebral indicates the
need to preserve brain function.
In line with other pets, some basic principles (ABCDEF, see below) should be
followed when treating a collapsed animal. If the animal undergoes respiratory or
cardiac arrest while anaesthetized, switch off anaesthetic gases and administer
reversal agents for injectable anaesthetics. CCPR is frequently unsuccessful. It is not
uisually performed in animals with end-stage disease.
·Airway
· Ensure the airway is patent.
· Intubate the patient. A tracheostomy (or air sac cannulation in birds) can be
performed if oro-tracheal intubation is not possible
· Breathing
· Provide IPpV (intermittent positive pressure ventilation) with 1o0% oxygen (or
atmospheric air via an Ambu-bag). Ideally, this is done via an endotracheal tube,
but a close-fitting facemask will also create a seal and enable thoracic inflation
(although there is a risk of air entering the gastrointestinal tract).
· Chest wall compressions are an alternative method of deflating and inflating the
lungs.
· Cardiovascular
· Obtain venous access. If this is not possible, the intraosseous route may be ised
to access the circulation. If the patient is hypovolaemic, administer fluids (see
below).
· Perform external cardiac compression. (Internal cardiac compression is more
effective but not usually feasible in small patients.)
· Drugs
· At certain times, drugs are required to aid resuscitation (see below).
· Electrical defi brillation
· Not usually applicable to small exotic pets
· Follow-up
· Assess the animal's history and perform a clinical examination to identify any
· Continue support with fluids, monitor urine output, IPpV ntil spontaneous
breathing resumes, oxygen (via nasal catheter or oxygen-enriched cage) until
animal is stable, restore body temperature with active warming.
Drugs for Use in Emergencies (Table A1.1)
· Adrenaline for cardiac arrest (fibrillating or asystole)
· Anticholinergics (atropine and glycopyrrolate) for bradycardia, or where excess oral
volume of secretions but they will be more viscous, and potentially more likely to
result in obstruction of small airways. Glycopyrrolate shouild be used in animals that
· Dexamethasone and prednisolone sodium succinate for shock. May be ineffective,
and may cause severe immune suppression (particularly in rabbits and birds) and
gastrointestinal ulceration.
· Diazepam for seizuires.
· Doxapram, a respiratory stimulant. Use in cases of respiratory depression or arrest.
It has a short duration of effect and therefore may require repeated dosing
Mechanical ventilation should not be administered with doxapram. (Some adverse
effects have been noted with this drug: improved cardiac output results in a pressor
response. This effect may lead to a fall in arterial pO2 due to a worsening of
ventilation-perfusion matching in the lungs. Hyperventilation results in a lowered
pCO2, and thence cerebral vasoconstriction and slowing of the cerebral circulation.
Doxapram also results in an increased release of catecholamines. Stimulation of the
central nervous system may resuilt in seizures. Cardiovascuilar effects may cause
dysrhythmias.)
· Frusemide, a diuretic. Use in cases of heart failure, pulmonary congestion or
oedema.
· Lidocaine (lignocaine) for cardiac arrhythmia.
· Reversal agents for anaesthetic drugs, e.g. atipamezole against α2-agonists, or
antagonists (such as naloxone) against opioids such as fentanyl or morphine.
Table Al.1  Emergency drug doses
Drug
Species
Dose (mg/kg)
Route
Comment
Adrenaline
Rabbit
0.2
IVIT
Combine with cardiac (usually
Guinea pig
0.003
IV
extemal) compressions if
Ferret
0.02
IMM/SC/IT
asystole occurs
Non-human primates
0.2-0.4 (diluted in
T
5 ml sterile water)
0.5-1.0 ml/kg (of
IV
1:10000 dilution)
Birds
0.5-1.0 ml/kg (of
MM/OAT
1:1000 dilution)
Fish
0.2-0.5 ml/kg (1:1000)
IPAMIVIC
Atropine
Rodents
0.05-0.1
SC/IM
Ferret
0.02-0.04
SC/IM
Non-human primates
0.02-0.05
IM
s
0.2-0.5
IMMOT
Reptiles
0.2
SC/M/IV
Amphibians
EO'O
IM/SC
Fish
0.1
IM/Ce/V
Dexamethasone
Rabbit
2
IMIV
Rodents
0.5-2.0
SC/M/IV/PO
Ferret
4-8
IMIV
Non-human primates
0.25-1.00
POVIMIV
Birds
2-6
IMIV
Amphibians
1-5
SC/M
Fish
1-2
IMCe
Diazepam
Rabbit
1
IMIV
Can repeat boluses as required
Rodents
1-5
IMIV
Ferret
1
IMAV
0.5-1.0mg/kg/h
CRI(IV)
Non-human primates
0.25-5.0
IMIV
s
0.5-1.0
IMIV
Reptiles
2.5
IMV
Doxapram
Rabbit
2-5
IV/SC
Repeat every 10-15min if
Chinchilla, gerbil, guinea
2-10
IV/P
required
pig,hamster, mouse, rat
1-11
IV
Non-human primates
2
IV
as
5-20
MMOT
Reptiles, amphibians
5
IMIV
Fish
5
IVCe
Been used in sharks(pm)to
treat respiratory depression
Frusemide
Rabbit
0.3-5.0
SC/M/V/PO
Duration 6-12 hr
Rodents
1-10
SC/IM/PO
Ferret
1-4
SC/M/IV/PO
Non-human primates
1-2
IV/PO
Reptiles
5
POVIMIV
Effects of loop diuretic are
questionable asreptile
kidneys lack a loop of Henle
Fish
2-5
IM
Glycopyrrolate
Rabbit,rodents
0.01-0.02
SC
0.01
IM
Non-human primates
0.005-0.010
IM
as
0.01
IMV
Reptiles
0.01
SC/M/V
Not effective at these doses in
the green iguana (iguana
(euenb)
Lidocaine
Rabbit
2
IV/IT
(lignocaine)
Non-human primates
1-2
V
0.01-0.05mg/kg/min
IVCRI
Prednisolone
Non-human primates
1-15
A
sodium
10-20
IMIV
succinate
Amphibians
5-10
IMIV
Naloxone
Non-human primates
0.01-0.05
IMIV
CRl, continuous rate infusion; IC, intracardiac; ICo, intracoelomic; IM, intramuscular; IO, intraosseous; IP, intraperitoneal; IT,
intratracheal: IV, intravenous: prn (oro re nata), *as the situation arises: SC, subcutaneous: Top, topically. Note: Where a drug
dose has neither been licensed nor published for a specific species, in an emergency situation the author would use the dose
reported for a closely related species.
Fluid Administration
Many exotic pets are dehydrated when presented to the veterinary clinician (Table
A1.2).  Some  may  become  dehydrated,  or  suffer significant  blood  loss  during
procedures. Fluids are often necessary to treat hypovolaemic shock; blood pressure
should be monitored when administering fluids. The use of fluids is discussed further
in the introductory chapters.
Table Al.2 Principles of fluid administration
Fluid
Species
Route
Dose
Frequency
Comment
lsotonic
Rabbit
IP/O/IV/SC
Maintenance =
CRl, or divide and
Use lactated Ringer's for fluid
crystalloids,
100-150 ml/kg/day
administer a
and electrolyte deficits,
lactated
bolus q6-12hr
dextrose/saline for primary
Ringer's,
Chinchilla
IV/SC
Aep/09-00
dextrose (4%)
Chipmunk
SC; IP; IV/IO
2-5 ml: 3-5 ml; 5-7 ml
intravascular fluid volume;
normal saline
IP;SC
chipmunk IV/IO doses are for
(0.18%)
Mouse
IP;SC
1-3ml 1-2 ml
shock therapy. Only small
Rat
IP:SC
10-15ml:5-10ml
boluses possible via reptile IO
Ferret
DS/AI
60-70 ml/kg/day
route due to small marrow
space
Birds
IV/O/5C
50ml/kg/day<10ml/
Can administer 10 m/kg IV/1O as
kg/hr
a bolus in birds, one or two
times
Reptiles
IV/O/SC/C0
5-10ml/kg/hr
Fish
IVAP
20-60 ml/kg/day
Usually
(lactated Ringer's):
administered in
18m/kg prn
sasop pepp
(Ringer's)
Glucose5%
Rabbit
IV/SC
10ml/kg
Anorexia
Rodents
SC
Use routinely in small rodents
pre-anaesthesia, and for
pregnancy toxaemic in guinea
pigs
Birds
IV
Amphibians
Shallow bath
For treating hydrocoelom and SC
oedema
Fish
IVACo
40-60ml/kg/day
Severe dehydration
Colloids,e.g.
Rabbit
IV/O
5m/kg
Repeat if still
Hypovolaemic shock,
hetastarch
hypotensive
hypoproteinaemia. Administer
Chipmunk
5-7 ml
over 5-10 minutes and
Gerbil
0.1ml
re-assess blood pressure.
Ferret
5 ml/kg, maximum
Caution in patients with
total10-20ml/kg/
congestive heart failure or renal
Aep
failure. Can administer with
10-15ml/kg (cr 5ml/
crystalloids, reducing crystalloid
kg+15m/kg
treatments
%05-EEAq wno
lactated Ringer's)
Liquidized diet,
Rabbit,
PO
50ml/kg/day in total
Divide and give
Anorexia.Warm food first. Use
e.g. proprietary
rodents
bolus qghr
organic, lactose-free baby
nutritional
Ferret
5-10 mVanimal
q&hr
foods; use vegetarian types for
support diets,
Birds
<50ml/kg
q6-24hr
herbivores and carnivorous
baby food,
Reptiles
10-30ml/kg
q24hr
types for carnivores. Dilute
liquidized
Amphibians
10-20 ml/kg
q24hr
carnivore convalescent diet in
pellets
chlorine-free fresh water for
amphibians
Blood
Rabbit
IV
10-20m/kg.
Can repeat,
Anaemia.Monitor for transfusion
maximum rate 22 mV
advise
rea ctions. Maximum volume
kg/h
cross-match
from donor 1%of body
Ferret
OVAI
6-12 ml/animal
weight: 6 ml blood into 1 ml
cross-match
anticoagulant (e.g.
as
IV
10-20%bloodvolume
acid-citrate-dextrose)
(5-26ml/kg)
JOuop
preferred:
heterogeneous
species donor
acceptable for
single
transfusion
Haemoglobin
Ferret
IV
6-15ml/kg
Infusion over 4
Anaemia. Administer slowly
solutions
hours, once or
twice in 24
hour period
as
IV/IO
5m/kg
One or two
Aternative in birds with
boluses
hypovolaemia and shock is
hypertonic saline7.5%(5m/kg
bolus over 10 min)
the situation arises'; q&hr, every 8 hours; SC, subcutaneously
Other Aspects of Critical Care
· Environment
· As discussed in the introductory chapters, it is important to ensure the animal is
housed in an appropriate environment during hospitalization. Provision of the
animal's usual temperature, humidity, hide and substrate will help optimize the
patient's metabolic functions. A UV light should be present for those species
requiring one (i.e. most reptiles, amphibians and some birds).
· It is also vital to offer appropriate food and water. If you do not routinely stock
certain foods, ask the client to supply some for a short hospital stay (or go
shopping).
Heating
· Many small animals are susceptible to hypothermia and supplemental heating
should be provided, particularly after anaesthesia.
heating to provide their preferred optimal temperature range (POTR).
. Oxygen
· Bubble through water in the aquarium for aquatic species such as fish.
· An intranasal catheter can be placed to provide oxygen.
· Care should be taken when supplementing oxygen in reptiles, as a low oxygen
saturation is required to stimulate breathing, and provision of an elevated oxygen
· Fluids
· Reptiles: Bathing reptiles in shallow warm water often encourages them to drink
(and also to pass urine, faeces and urates). This is usually performed once or twice
daily for 10-15 minutes.
· Amphibians: Normal (0.5-0.8%) saline may be used as an electrolyte bath for ill
terrestrial amphibians. Provide access to a bath of untreated fresh water in the
enclosure simultaneously. Other electrolyte solutions may be used for longer term
 o   51o   99  s , 5 s  
CaCl, and 0.2 g NaHCO, in 1 litre water).
s   s e        
against stress-induced mortality in freshwater fish.
· Nutritional support
· Often necessary with ill exotic pets (further details in introductory chapters)
· Medication
· Drugs such as analgesics and prokinetics are often required to aid recovery from
illness.
 Antimicrobial agents may be required for certain infectious diseases
APPENDIX2
Zoonoses A zoonosis is a disease of animals
transmissible to man. In some cases, this disease
transmission is difficult and hence rarely occurs; in
other cases, extreme caution should be taken when
dealing with animals, as transmission is relatively easy.
Some diseases may be subclinical in man while others
can be fatal. In certain instances, individuals - such as
those who are immunocompromised - will be more
susceptible to disease and the disease may be much
more severe in them than in the general population.
Appropriate precautions should be taken to reduce risks to owners and staff when
dealing with exotic pets. This may be a simple case of good hygiene - such as washing
  n p m  - s    
such as examination gloves and a facemask. For some conditions, it is advisable to
humanely euthanize the animal and dispose of the body safely (e.g. by cremation) to
avoid any further risk to humans. Separate equipment for different enclosures will
help reduce the spread of diseases. Immunosuppressed individuals should avoid
handling potentially infected animals or materials.
         n
clinicians dealing with wildlife are more likely to be exposed to disease. However,
exotic pets may have an unknown origin, and poor biosecurity or lack of quarantine
after addition of a new animal to a collection may permit the spread of pathogens.
Some zoonotic diseases are listed in legislation to safeguard human health, e.g.
            
countries.
Mammalo
Ivlallai
Bacterial
· Bordetella bronchiseptica: Usually  associated with  respiratory disease. Other
bacterial respiratory infections that may be zoonotic are Klebsiella pneumoniae and
Pasteurella spp.
· Campylobacter spp: Causes enteric disease.
 Chlamydophila psittaci: May cause conjunctivitis in guinea pigs; the infection is
usually self-limiting (see Birds section below for further details).
· Escherichia coli: Transmission is usually via the faeco-oral rouite. Certain strains
will cause serious illness (potentially fatally) in humans.
· Leptospira: Most mammal species can become infected with pathogenic Leptospira.
Maintenance host species (usually wildlife) such as mice, rats, opossums and skunks
shed the organisms in their urine for a prolonged time period. Leptospira ballum in
hamsters (from contaminated mice) results in nephritis and hepatitis. Disease in
· Listeria monocytogenes: Symptoms in humans include fever, nausea and diarrhoea.
It can be fatal.
· Salmonella: Causes disease in many mammals, although some individuals may be
asymptomatic, e.g. Salmonella typhimurium and S. enteritidis in rodents. They cause
        s n  
 sn    s  s   n  
should be euithanized.
· Shigella spp: Cause enteric disease.
· Streptobacillus moniliformis: Causes polyarthritis in mice and rats, and ‘rat bite
fever' in humans (with fever, rigors, and migratory polyarthralgias).
·Tuberculosis  (Mycobacterium tuberculosis): Most commonly from non-humar
lymphadenopathy in ferrets. Transmission is usually by inhalation, especially
aerosolized fluids from coughing. It is of concern in humans due to the spread of
strains with drug resistance.
           e
(Francisella tularensis) and plague (Yersinia pestis), listeriosis.
· Yersiniosis (Yersinia pseudotuberculosis). The source of infection is often
contamination of food by wild birds or rodents. Many species are asymptomatic
    a       s
diarrhoea in guinea pigs. In callitrichids and other primates, sudden death may be
the first sign of an outbreak. Treatment in pets is not advised.
Fuingal
asymptomatic.
Viral
· Hantavirus is transmitted to humans via inhalation of aerosolized virus in urine,
saliva or faeces of infected rodents. Disease in humans may be haemorrhagic fever
with renal syndrome (in Asia and Europe) or pulmonary syndrome (in the Americas).
It is very rare in the UK and rare in North America, but often fatal in humans.
· Hepatitis can be transmitted from primate body fluids. It results in fever, anorexia
and jaundice in humans.
· Lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) is a potential zoonosis from rodents.
· Monkey pox causes a smallpox-like disease. Direct contact will transmit infection
 (  v a  o   s d ia) s  d 
humans. Symptoms in humans include a febrile rash. The disease can be fatal.
· Rabies: The disease results in neurological signs. All mammals are prone to
infection, but susceptibility varies. Reservoir hosts commonly include bats and
terrestrial carnivores. An endemic cycle of one distinct phylogenetic clade has been
scratched by an infected animal. Pre-exposure vaccination provides some protection.
Untreated human cases are fatal.
· Mouse rotavirus and rat rotavirus-like agent may be zoonotic.
Parasites
· Rodent cestodes: Dwarf tapeworm (Rodentolepis (previously Hymenolepis) nana)
and rat tapeworm (Hymenolepis diminuita) are a threat particularly to children
· Cheyletiella parasitivorax: Causes erythematous pruritic lesions in  humans,
particularly on the arms (often due to direct contact when holding a pet rabbit).
· Fleas: Usually cat or dog flea (Ctenocephalides felis or canis) from other pets may be
found on pet rabbits (not usually the rabbit flea, Spilopsyllus cuniculi).
· Various helminths affecting non-human primates are zoonotic. The raccoon ascarid
Baylisascaris procyonis is also zoonotic.
 Sarcoptic mange: Sarcoptes scabiei. Trixacarus caviae may result in dermatitis in
infected humans.
· Protozoal
· Encephalitozoon cuniculi: Causes illness mainly in immunocompromised
humans (such as those with AIDS).
· Entamoeba histolytica: Can cause diarrhoea in primates and amoebic dysentery
in humans.
· Toxoplasma gondii is transmitted by eating undercooked rabbit meat. Animals
Other infections
      n     e
 e        
primates, as many diseases - including viruses - will transfer between them and
humans (as well as vice versa).
Ss         s s
transmission does not appear to occur, e.g. Giardia in rabbits.
Reptiles
Bacterial
· Escherichia coli.
integument, gastrointestinal and respiratory tracts. Infection usually originates from
organism enters via skin lesions.
· Pseudomonas.
· Tick-borne rickettsiae such as Q fever.
· Salmonella. Many healthy reptiles harbour Salmonellae asymptomatically in their
gastrointestinal tract, shedding bacteria intermittently. This is a potential risk for
handlers, which can be protected against by wearing gloves while handling reptiles or
by washing hands afterwards. Immunosuppressed individuals - such as the elderly,
infants or those with impaired immune systems - are more at risk.
· Yersinia (see above for detail).
Parasites
· Pentastomids.
Birds
Bacterial
· Campylobacter spp: Bacteria are usually water-borne. Human disease is a severe
form of food poisoning.
· Erysipelothrix rhusiopathiae. Rodents act as reservoirs. Disease is common in
turkeys and is also reported in raptors.
· Escherichia coli.
· Pasteuirella multocida (avian cholera)
       s
pigeons, poultry and waterfowl. Clinical signs often involve the respiratory system
but may be vague in a sick bird, and so this disease should therefore be considered
with most sick cage birds. Conjunctivitis and rhinitis are common clinical signs in
pigeons. Adult raptors commonly have chronic disease with non-specific respiratory
Owners should always be warned of the risk of this zoonotic disease, and euthanasia
           
of dust from faeces or feathers, or via direct contact. Symptoms in humans are flu-
like', including fever, headache, non-productive cough, lymphadenopathy, confusion,
       - s   
immunosuppressive drug therapies - are most at risk. Care should be taken when
performing avian necropsies, which should preferably be carried out inside a fume-
hood. It is advisable to perform microscopic examination using a modified Ziehl-
Neelsen stain on an impression of spleen or air sac at the start of the necropsy before
proceeding further. If a suspect case is hospitalized, staff shouild wear PPE (gloves.
facemasks, plastic aprons and hats).
S         s
typhimurium. Disease in humans varies, but is often gastrointestinal; a fever may be
present.
· Tuberculosis: Difficult to cure so advise euthanasia of infected birds to reduce the
human risk. The environment should also be decontaminated. Disease in humans
varies  from  local -  particularly Mycobacterium  tuberculosis -  to  systemic 
particularly M. avium - disease.
 Yersinia pseudotu berculosis (pseudotu berculosis).
Fungal
· Aspergillus spp.
Viral
· Avian influenza: Close contact with infected birds - currently poultry or wild birds --
may result in human disease. Outbreaks of the H5N1 strain resulted in human
fatalities in 1997 (Hong Kong) and 2003-2004 (throughout Asia).
· Newcastle disease (PMV-1 infection). In most couintries this is a notifiable disease in
poultry. In humans, a brief conjunctivitis or flu-like symptoms are seen.
· West Nile virus. Originating in Uganda in 1937, this virus has since spread widely.
An outbreak in the USA in 1999 resulted in deaths in humans, horses and many wild
Parasites
· Red mites (Dermanyssus gallinae). These may infect passerines, and can bite
humans. Pruritus and skin lesions are seen in humans.
Amphibians
Bacterial
· Mycobacteria are not very infective to other in-contact amphibians, but can result
should be euthanized.
· Other aquatic bacteria as listed in the Fish section.
Fish
Bacterial (in aquatic environments)
are infected by ingesting contaminated water or via direct contact with a wound.
Usually symptoms are of gastroenteritis and localized wound infection.
· Campylobacter spp.
· Edwardsiella tarda.
· Escherichia coli (enterotoxic and enteropathogenic types)
· Erysipelothrix spp.
· Legionella pneumophila
· Mycobacteria (Mycobacterium fortuitum, M. marinum, M. chelonia): Also called
nodules - usually on hands or fingers - often heal without treatment in several
with M. marinum - or deep into adjacent tissues - resulting in arthritis, osteomyelitis
most at risk.
· Pseudomonas spp (Pseudomonas fluorescens). Common in freshwater and marine
aquarium fish.
· Vibrio (Vibrio fluvialis, V. parahaemolyticus, V. vulnificus). These organisms can be
humans is usually via eating infected marine fish or through contamination of skin
wounds.
· Yersinia enterocolitica.
Parasites
 Cryptosporidium may infect both fish and humans. No reported zoonotic cases.
· Nematodes can be transmitted via ingestion of food fish and therefore are no risk to
humans working in aquaria.
Other Potentially Injurious Factors (Not Zoonoses) to Consider when Dealing with
Exotic Pets
· Allergy: For example to rabbit or rodent dander or urine. Acute respiratory
compromise may occur in humans with allergies in response to aerosolized rat uirine.
· Constriction by large snakes.
     n     n s  e
required for tank maintenance.
· Electrocution: From electric fish suich as the electric eel, electric catfish and several
genera of rays. Wear arm-length rubber gloves to reduce the risk to the handler.
· Toxins, such as those from the fangs of venomous snakes or Heloderm lizards, from
spp). Several fish species possess spines - some of which are venomous - such as
lionfish, stingrays, some catfish, and surgeonfish.
· Trauma: From bites, scratches, pecks and tail whipping. These may become infected.
Human Infections Causing Disease in Animals (i.e. Reverse Zoonoses)
      i   
lymphoproliferative conditions in callitrichids.
d   sr  sn  s  s sr  e
hedgehogs (Atelerix albiventris) . Herpes simplex has also been implicated in
callitrichid (marmosets and tamarins) fatalities with disseminated disease associated
· Measles may be asymptomatic in non-human primates or may be fatal (particularly
in New World primates).
APPENDIX 3
Suppliers
· Easily-digestible formulae for other species e.g. Carnivore Care?, and Critical Care?
or Critical Care Fine Grind? for herbivores from Oxbow Animal Health, Murdock, NE
68407 USA.
· Warm air blanket, e.g. Bair Hugger?, Arizant Healthcare Inc., Eden Prairie, MN
55344, USA.
· Portable blood analysis, e.g. i-STAT?, Abbott Laboratories, Abbott Park, IL, USA
· Local anaesthetic cream, e.g. EMLA?, AstraZeneca, Macclesfield, Cheshire UK.
· Easily digestible avian formula, e.g. Harrison's Recovery Formula, Harrison's Bird
Foods, Loughborough, UK.
· Brooder, e.g. Brinsea TLC (Thermal Life-support Cabinet) 4M Intensive Care Unit
(see Fig. 10.1a), Brinsea Products Ltd, North Somerset, UK.
· Incubator, e.g. Animal Intensive Care Unit (see Fig. 10.1b), Animal Care Products,
various suppliers.
· Resuscitator, e.g. Constant Delivery Animal Resuscitator (see Fig. A1.1), McCulloch
Medical, McCulloch Products Ltd, Auckland, New Zealand.
· Fentanyl/fluanisone, e.g. Hypnorm, VetPharma Ltd, Leeds, UK.
 Romanovsky stain, e.g. Diff Quick, Andwin Scientific, Thermo Fisher Scientific Ltd,
various suppliers.
Further reading
SECTTON T MAMMALS
CHAPTER 2 Mammals - an introduction
arpenter JW. Exotic Animal Formulary, 3rd edn. Elsevier/Saunders; 2005.
arcourt-Brown F. Textbook of Rabbit Medicine. Oxford: Butterworth-Heinemann; 2002.
ohnson-Delaney CA, editor. Exotic Companion Medicine Handbook for Veterinarians. Lake Worth,
Florida: Zoological Education Network, 2008.
eeble E, Meredith A. Manual of Rodents and Ferrets. Quedgeley, Gloucester: British Small Animal
Veterinary Association; 2009.
ongley LA. Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets. Edinburgh: Elsevier/Saunders; 2008.
acDonald D, Norris S. The New Encyclopedia of Mammals. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 2004
eredith A, Redrobe S. Manual of Exotic Pets, 4th edn. Quedgeley, Gloucester: British Small Animal
Veterinary Association; 2002.
'Malley B. Clinical Anatomy and Physiology of Exotic Species: Structure and Function of Mammals,
Birds, Reptiles and Amphibians. Edinburgh: Elsevier/Saunders; 2005.
uesenberry KE, Carpenter JW. Ferrets, Rabbits and Rodents: Clinical Medicine and Surgery, 2nd edn. St
Louis: Saunders; 2004. pp. 135-230
CHAPTER 3 Post-spay complications in a rabbit
arpenter JW. Rabbits. Exotic Animal Formulary, 3rd edn. St Louis: Elsevier/Saunders; 2005. pp. 409-444
arcourt-Brown F. Textbook of Rabbit Medicine. Oxford: Butterworth-Heinemann; 2002.
eeble E, Meredith A. Self-Assessment Colour Review of Rabbit Medicine & Surgery. London: Manson
Publishing: 2006.
lesenberry KE, Carpenter Jw. Ferrets, Rabbits and Rodents: Clinical Medicine and Surgery, 2nd edn. Si
Louis: Saunders; 2004. pp. 135-230
CHAPTER 4 Spinal fracture in a rabbit
irling SJ. Diagnostic imaging. In: Meredith A, Flecknell P, editors. Manual of Rabbit Medicine and
Surgery. 2nd edn. Quedgeley, Gloucester: British Small Animal Veterinary Association; 2006:52-6T.
eeble E. Nervous and musculoskeletal disorders. In: Meredith A, Flecknell P, editors. Manual of Rabbit
Medicine and Surgery. 2nd edn. Quedgeley, Gloucester: British Small Animal Veterinary Association;
2006:103-116.
'Malley B. Rabbits. Clinical Anatomy and Physiology of Exotic Species: Structure and Function of
Mammals, Birds, Reptiles and Amphibians. Edinburgh: Elsevier/Saunders; 2005. pp. 173-195
ard ML. Physical examination and clinical techniques, 2nd edn. Meredith A, Flecknell P, editors
Manual of Rabbit Medicine and Surgery. British Small Animal Veterinary Association, Quedgeley.
Gloucester, 2006;18-36.
CHAPTER 5 Ferret with abdominal mass
shnson-Delaney CA. Ferrets. In: Johnson-Delaney CA, editor. Exotic Companion Medicine Handbook, Vol
1. Lake Worth, Florida: Zoological Education Network; 2008:1-42
Mammals, Birds, Reptiles and Amphibians. Edinburgh: Elsevier/Saunders; 2005. pp. 237-261
wington J. Ferret Husbandry, Medicine and Surgery, 2nd edn. Edinburgh: Saunders/Elsevier; 2007
uesenberry KE, Carpenter JW. Ferrets, Rabbits and Rodents: Clinical Medicine and Surgery, 2nd edn. St
Louis: Saunders; 2004. pp. 135-230
CHAPTER 6 Urolithiasis in a chinchilla
oefer H, Latney La'T. Rodents: urogenital and reproductive system disorders. In: Keeble E, Meredith A,
editors. Manual of Rodents and Ferrets. Quedgeley, Gloucester: British Small Animal Veterinary
Association; 2009:150-160.
uesenberry KE, Donnelly TM, Hillyer EV. Biology, husbandry, and clinical techniques of guinea pigs and
chinchillas. In: Quesenberry KE, Carpenter JW, editors. Ferrets, Rabbits and Rodents: Clinical
Medicine and Surgery. 2nd edn. St Louis: Saunders; 2004:232-244.
CHAPTER 7 Cheilitis in a guinea pig
ollamby S. Rodents: neurological and musculoskeletal disorders. In: Keeble E, Meredith A, editors.
2009:161-168.
ongley L. Rodents: dermatoses. In: Keeble E, Meredith A, editors. Manual of Rodents and Ferrets.
Quedgeley, Gloucester: British Small Animal Veterinary Association; 2009:107-122.
uesenberry KE, Carpenter JW. Ferrets, Rabbits and Rodents: Clinical Medicine and Surgery, 2nd edn. St
Louis: Saunders; 2004. pp. 135-230
CHAPTER 8 Skin neoplasia in a hamster
ennett RA. Rodents: soft tissue surgery. In: Keeble E, Meredith A, editors. Manual of Rodents and Ferrets.
Quedgeley, Gloucester: British Small Animal Veterinary Association; 2009:73-85.
irnie D. Animal. London: Dorling Kindersley; 2001.
ongley LA. Rodent anaesthesia. Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets. Edinburgh: Elsevier/Saunders; 2008. pp. 59-
84
ongley L. Rodents: dermatoses. In: Keeble E, Meredith A, editors. Manual of Rodents and Ferrets.
Quedgeley, Gloucester: British Small Animal Veterinary Association; 2009:107-T22.
acDonald D, Norris S. The New Encyclopedia of Mammals. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 2004.
'Malley B. Hamsters. Clinical Anatomy and Physiology of Exotic Species: Structure and Function of
Mammals, Birds, Reptiles and Amphibians. Edinburgh: Elsevier/Saunders; 2005. pp. 227-236
SECTION 2 BIRDS
CHAPTER 9 Birds - an introduction
Animal Veterinary Association; 2008.
arcourt-Brown N, Chitty J. Manual of Psittacine Birds, 2nd edn. Quedgeley, Gloucester: British Small
Animal Veterinary Association; 2005.
arrison GJ, Lightfoot TL. Clinical Avian Medicine. Palm Beach, Florida: Spix Publishing: 2006
            
British Small Animal Veterinary Association, Birmingham, pp. 54-57.
ongley LA. Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets. Edinburgh: Elsevier/Saunders; 2008.
CHAPTER 10 Regurgitation in a cockatoo
arner MM. Overview of tumors: Section II A retrospective study of case submissions to a specialty
diagnostic service. In: Harrison GJ, Lightfoot TL, editors. Clinical Avian Medicine. Palm Beach,
Florida: Spix Publishing; 2006:566-571.
adley T. Disorders of the psittacine gastrointestinal tract. Veterinary Clinics of North America: Exotic
Animal Practice. 2005;8(2):329-349.
arcourt-Brown NH. Diagnostic imaging. In: Harcourt-Brown NH, Chitty J, editors. Manual of Psittacine
Birds. 2nd edn. Quedgeley, Gloucester: British Small Animal Veterinary Association; 2005:97-106.
arrison GJ, Lightfoot TL. Emergency and critical care: Section 1. In: Harrison GJ, Lightfoot TL, editors.
awrie A. Systemic non-infectious disease. In: Harcourt-Brown NH, Chitty J, editors. Manual of Psittacine
Birds. 2nd edn. Quedgeley, Gloucester: British Small Animal Veterinary Association; 2005:245-265.
ghtfoot TL. Overview of tumors: Section 1. Clinical avian neoplasia and oncology. In: Harrison GJ,
Lightfoot TL, editors. Clinical Avian Medicine. Palm Beach, Florida: Spix Publishing: 2006:560-565.
ongley LA. Avian anaesthesia. In: Longley LA, editor. Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets. Edinburghi
Saunders/Elsevier; 2008:127-182.
'Malley B. Avian anatomy and physiology. Clinical Anatomy and Physiology of Exotic Species: Structure
and Function of Mammals, Birds, Reptiles and Amphibians. Edinburgh: Elsevier/Saunders; 2005. pp.
97-161
CHAPTER T1 Harris' hawk with bumblefoot
ailey T, Lloyd C. Raptors: disorders of the feet. In: Chitty J, Lierz M, editors. Manual of Raptors, Pigeons
and Passerine Birds. Quedgeley, Gloucester: British Small Animal Veterinary Association; 2008:176-
189.
irschberg RM. Anatomy and physiology. In: Chitty J, Lierz M, editors. Manual of Raptors, Pigeons and
emp A, Newton I. Hawks, eagles, and Old World vultures. In: Perrins C, editor. The New Encyclopedia of
Birds. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 2003:162-173.
'Malley B. Avian anatomy and physiology. Clinical Anatomy and Physiology of Exotic Species: Structure
and Function of Mammals, Birds, Reptiles and Amphibians. Edinburgh: Elsevier/Saunders; 2005. pp.
97-161
1. Palm Beach, Florida: Spix Publishing: 2006:395-409.
CHAPTER 12 Tibiotarsal fracture in a dove
arcourt-Brown N, Chitty J. Manual of Psittacine Birds, 2nd edn. Quedgeley, Gloucester: British Small
Animal Veterinary Association; 2005.
arcourt-Brown NH. Orthopaedic and beak surgery. In: Harcourt-Brown NH, Chitty J, editors. Manual of
Psittacine Birds. 2nd edn. Quedgeley, Gloucester: British Small Animal Veterinary Association;
2005:120-135.
rosz SE (2003) Long bone fracture repair and bandaging: clinical anatomy of the humerus, femur, and
tibiotarsus. AAV Annual Conference, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, Pp. 277-283.
edig PT (2003) Orthopedic principles and methods for the humerus, antebrachium, femur, and
tibiotarsus of birds. AAV Annual Conference, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, pp. 285-295.
CHAPTER 13 Feather plucking in a parrot
hitty J. Feather and skin disorders. In: Harcourt-Brown NH, Chitty J, editors. Manual of Psittacine Birds.
2nd edn. Quedgeley, Gloucester: British Small Animal Veterinary Association; 2005:191-204.
oles BH. Avian Medicine and Surgery, 2nd edn. Oxford: Blackwell Science; 1997.
  n s s  s a   hi
arrison GJ, Lightfoot TL. Clinical Avian Medicine. Palm Beach, Florida: Spix Publishing; 2006
'Malley B. Avian anatomy and physiology. Clinical Anatomy and Physiology of Exotic Species: Structure
and Function of Mammals, Birds, Reptiles and Amphibians. Edinburgh: Elsevier/Saunders; 2005. pp.
97-161
aftery A. The initial presentation: triage and critical care. In: Harcourt-Brown NH, Chitty J, editors.
Manual of Psittacine Birds. 2nd edn. Quedgeley, Gloucester: British Small Animal Veterinary
Association; 2005:35-49.
CHAPTER I4 Stomatitis 1n a Harris' hawk
alhausen RD. Implications of mycoses in clinical disorders. In: Harrison GJ, Lightfoot TL, editors.
Clinical Avian Medicine, Vol 2. Palm Beach, Florida: Spix Publishing: 2006:691-704.
'Malley B. Avian anatomy and physiology. Clinical Anatomy and Physiology of Exotic Species: Structure
97-161
anford M. Raptors: infectious diseases. In: Chitty J, Lierz M, editors. Manual of Raptors, Pigeons and
Passerine Birds. Quedgeley, Gloucester: British Small Animal Veterinary Association; 2008:2T2-222
SECTTON3REPTILES
CHAPTER T5 Reptiles - an introduction
idge AM. Laboratory Medicine: Avian and Exotic Pets. London: Saunders; 1999.
irling SJ, Raiti P. Manual of Reptiles, 2nd edn. Quedgeley, Gloucester: British Small Animal Veterinary
Association; 2004.
alliday T, Adler K. The New Encyclopedia of Reptiles & Amphibians. Oxford: Oxford University Press;
2002.
ighfield AC. Practical Encyclopedia of Keeping and Breeding Tortoises and Freshwater Turtles. London:
Carapace Press; 1996.
ickson OF. Weigh and measurement data on tortoises (Testudo graeca and Testudo hermanni) and their
relationship to health. Journal of Small Animal Practice. 1980;21:409.
CHAPTER 16 Gastrointestinal foreign body in a tortoise
enson KB. Reptilian gastrointestinal diseases. Seminars in Avian and Exotic Pet Medicine. 1999;8:90-97.
alvert I. Nutrition. In: Girling SJ, Raiti P, editors. Manual of Reptiles. 2nd edn. Quedgeley, Gloucester:
British Small Animal Veterinary Association; 2004:18-39.
arpenter JW, Mashima TY, Rupiper DJ. Miscellaneous agents used in reptiles. Exotic Animal Formulary,
3rd edn. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2005. pp. 90-93
iaz-Figueroa O, Mitchell MA. Gastrointestinal anatomy and physiology. In: Mader DR, editor. Reptile
Medicine and Surgery. 2nd edn. St Louis: Saunders/Elsevier; 2006:145-162.
sque TC, Peters EL. Ingestion of bones, stones and soil by desert tortoises. In: Bury RB, Germano DJ,
editors. Biology of North American Tortoises. Washington DC: Fish and Wildlife Research, US
Department of the Interior; 1994:105-111.
ailey A, Coulson IM. Differential scaling of home-range area to daily movement distance in two African
tortoises. Canadian Journal of Zoology. 1996;74:97-102.
asbun C, Samour J, Al-Ghais S. Duodenal volvulus in free-living green turtles from coastal United Arab
Emirates. Journal of Wildlife Disease. 1998;34:797-800.
ernandez-Divers SJ. Surgery: principles and techniques. In: Girling SJ, Raiti P, editors. Manual of
Reptiles. 2nd edn. Quedgeley, Gloucester: British Small Animal Veterinary Association; 2004:147-
167.
icobson ER. Causes of mortality and disease in tortoises: a review. Journal of Zoo and Wildlife
Medicine. 1994;25:2-17.
arlow Rw, Tollestrup K. Mining and exploitation of natural mineral deposits by the desert tortoise
Gopherus agassizii. Animal Behaviour. 1982;30:475-478.
cArthur S, Barrows M. Nutrition. In: McArthur S, Wilkinson R, Meyer J, editors. Medicine and Surgery
of Tortoises and Turtles. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing: 2004:73-85.
cArthur S, Hernandez-Divers S. Surgery. In: McArthur S, Wilkinson R, Meyer J, editors. Medicine and
Surgery of Tortoises and Turtles. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing: 2004:403-464.
   or  n     s    
Function of Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, and Amphibians. Edinburgh: Elsevier/Saunders; 2005:41-56.
               s
(Eretmochelys imbricata). Journal of Zoo and Wildlife Medicine. 1996;27:386-391.
CHAPTER 17 Bearded dragon with hepatic disease
arten SL. Differential diagnoses by symptoms, Section VI: Lizards. In: Mader DR, editor. Reptile Medicine
and Surgery. 2nd edn. St Louis: Saunders/Elsevier; 2006:683-695.
ink RS. Speciffic diseases and clinical conditions, Section Vll: Anorexia. In: Mader DR, editor. Reptile
Medicine and Surgery. 2nd edn. St Louis: Saunders/Elsevier; 2006:739-741.
irling SJ, Raiti P. Manual of Reptiles, 2nd edn. Quedgeley, Gloucester: British Small Animal Veterinary
Association; 2004.
ernandez-Divers SJ, Cooper JE. Specific diseases and clinical conditions, Section Vll: Hepatic lipidosis
In: Mader DR, editor. Reptile Medicine and Surgery. 2nd edn. St Louis: Saunders/Elsevier; 2006:806-
813.
Malley B. Lizards. Clinical Anatomy and Physiology of Exotic Species: Structure and Function of
CHAPTER 18 Osteomyelitis in a Hermann's tortoise
one L. Neurologic disorders. In: Mader DR, editor. Reptile Medicine and Surgery. 2nd edn. St Louis:
Saunders/Elsevier; 2006:852-857.
tzgerald KT, Vera R. Spinal osteopathy. In: Mader DR, editor. Reptile Medicine and Surgery. 2nd edn. St
Louis: Saunders/Elsevier; 2006:906-912.
ongley LA. Chelonian (tortoise, terrapin and turtle) anaesthesia. Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets. Edinburgh:
Elsevier/Saunders; 2008.
ader DR. Abscesses. In: Mader DR, editor. Reptile Medicine and Surgery. 2nd edn. St Louis:
Saunders/Elsevier; 2006:715-719.
ader DR, Bennett RA, Funk RS, et al. Surgery. In: Mader DR, editor. Reptile Medicine and Surgery. 2nd
edn. St Louis: Saunders/Elsevier; 2006:581-630.
cArthur S, Hernandez-Divers S. Surgery. In: McArthur S, Wilkinson R, Meyer J, editors. Medicine and
Surgery of Tortoises and Turtles. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing: 2004:403-464.
cArthur S, Meyer J, Innis C. Anatomy and physiology. In: McArthur S, Wilkinson R, Meyer J, editors.
Medicine and Surgery of Tortoises and Turtles. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing: 2004:35-72.
ees Davies R, Klingenbery RJ. Therapeutics and medication. In: Girling SJ, Raiti P, editors. Manual of
Reptiles. 2nd edn. Quedgeley, Gloucester: British Small Animal Veterinary Association; 2004:115-
130.
ilkinson R, Hernandez-Divers S, Lafortune M, et al. Diagnostic imaging techniques. In: McArthur S,
Wilkinson R, Meyer J, editors. Medicine and Surgery of Tortoises and Turtles. Oxford: Blackwell
Publishing: 2004:187-238.
CHAPTER 19 Dystocia in a snake
S  s  s    s    s  
Saunders/Elsevier; 2006:787-792.
ernandez-Divers SJ. Surgery: principles and techniques. In: Girling SJ, Raiti P, editors. Manual of
Reptiles. 2nd edn. Quedgeley, Gloucester: British Small Animal Veterinary Association; 2004:147-
167.
bst FJ, Richter K, Jacob U. The Completely Illustrated Atlas of Reptiles and Amphibians for the
Terrarium. Neptune City, New Jersey: T:F.H; T988.
CHAPTER 20 Dysecdysis in a leopard gecko
ood DC, Studdert VP. Bailliere's Comprehensive Veterinary Dictionary. London: Bailliere Tindall; 1988.
aser MA, Girling S. Dermatology. In: Girling SJ, Raiti P, editors. Manual of Reptiles. 2nd edn. Quedgeley
Gloucester: British Small Animal Veterinary Association; 2004:184-198.
alliday T, Adler K. The New Encyclopedia of Reptiles & Amphibians. Oxford: Oxford University Press;
2002.
S     s           
Quedgeley, Gloucester: British Small Animal Veterinary Association; 2004:6-17.
CHAPTER 21 Aural abscesses in a map turtle
aser MA, Girling S. Dermatology. In: Girling SJ, Raiti P, editors. Manual of Reptiles. 2nd edn. Quedgeley.
      s
alliday T, Adler K. The New Encyclopedia of Reptiles & Amphibians. Oxford: Oxford University Press;
2002.
ernandez-Divers SJ. Surgery: principles and techniques. In: Girling SJ, Raiti P, editors. Manual of
Reptiles. 2nd edn. Quedgeley, Gloucester: British Small Animal Veterinary Association; 2004:147-
167.
'Malley B. General anatomy and physiology of reptiles. Clinical Anatomy and Physiology of Exotic
Species: Structure and Function of Mammals, Birds, Reptiles and Amphibians. Edinburgh:
Elsevier/Saunders; 2005. pp. 7-39
'Malley B. Tortoises and turtles. In: Clinical Anatomy and Physiology of Exotic Species: Structure and
Function of Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, and Amphibians. Edinburgh: Elsevier/Saunders; 2005:41-56.
CHAPTER 22 Hypocalcaemia in a green iguana
irnie D. Animal. London: Dorling Kindersley; 2001.
alvert 1. Nutritional problems. In: Girling SJ, Raiti P, editors. Manual of Reptiles. 2nd edn. Quedgeley.
atwell K. Variations in the concentration of ionised calcium in the plasma of captive tortoises (Testudo
species). The Veterinary Record. 2009;163(3):82-84.
'aser MA, Girling S. Dermatology. In: Girling SJ, Raiti P, editors. Manual of Reptiles. 2nd edn. Quedgeley,
alliday T, Adler K. The New Encyclopedia of Reptiles & Amphibians. Oxford: Oxford University Press;
2002.
'Malley B. General anatomy and physiology of reptiles. Clinical Anatomy and Physiology of Exotic
Species: Structure and Function of Mammals, Birds, Reptiles and Amphibians. Edinburgh
Elsevier/Saunders; 2005. pp. 7-39
'Malley B. Tortoises and turtles. In: Clinical Anatomy and Physiology of Exotic Species: Structure and
SECTTON 4 AMPHIBIANS
CHAPTER 23 Amphibians - an introduction
alliday T, Adler K. The New Encyclopedia of Reptiles & Amphibians. Oxford: Oxford University Press;
2002.
elmer PJ, Whiteside DP. Amphibian anatomy and physiology. In: O'Malley B, editor. Clinical Anatomy
and Physiology of Exotic Species: Structure and Function of Mammals, Birds, Reptiles and
Amphibians. Edinburgh: Elsevier/Saunders; 2005:3-14.
ongley LA. Amphibian anaesthesia. In: Longley LA, editor. Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets. Edinburgh:
Saunders/Elsevier; 2008:245-260.
illiams DL. Amphibians. In: Meredith A, Redrobe S, editors. Manual of Exotic Pets. 4th edn. Quedgeley.
Gloucester: British Small Animal Veterinary Association; 2002:257-266.
'right KM, Whitaker BR. Amphibian Medicine and Captive Husbandry. Malabar, Florida: Krieger
Publishing; 2001.
CHAPTER 24 Trauima in an amphibian
arnett SL, Cover JF, Wright KM. Amphibian husbandry and housing. In: Wright KM, Whitaker BR, editors.
Amphibian Medicine and Captive Husbandry. Malabar, Florida: Krieger Publishing: 2001:35-61.
alliday T, Adler K. The New Encyclopedia of Reptiles & Amphibians. Oxford: Oxford University Press;
2002.
elmer PJ, Whiteside DP. Amphibian anatomy and physiology. In: O'Malley B, editor. Clinical Anatomy
and Physiology of Exotic Species: Structure and Function of Mammals, Birds, Reptiles and
Amphibians. Edinburgh: Elsevier/Saunders; 2005:3-14.
right KM. Trauma. In: Wright KM, Whitaker BR, editors. Amphibian Medicine and Captive Husbandry
Malabar, Florida: Krieger Publishing: 2001:233-238
SECTION 5 FISH
CHAPTER 25 Fish - an introduction
ddes M. Fish anaesthesia. In: Longley LA, editor. Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets. Edinburgh:
Saunders/Elsevier; 2008:261-278.
aclean B. Ornamental fish. In: Meredith A, Redrobe S, editors. Manual of Exotic Pets. 4th edn.
Quedgeley, Gloucester: British Small Animal Veterinary Association; 2002:267-279.
indford G. Aquarium: An Owner's Manual: The Complete Illustrated Guide to the Home Aquarium.
London: Dorling Kindersley; 1999.
ildgoose WH. Manual of Ornamental Fish, 2nd edn. Quedgeley, Gloucester: British Small Animal
Veterinary Association; 2001.
CHAPTER 26 Enucleation of an eye in a goldfish
ddes M. Fish anaesthesia. In: Longley LA, editor. Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets. Edinburgh:
Saunders/Elsevier; 2008:261-278.
arms CA. Fish. In: Fowler ME, Miller RE, editors. Zoo and Wild Animal Medicine. 5th edn. St Louis:
Saunders/Elsevier; 2003:2-20.
iwton MPC. Exotic species. In: Petersen-Jones S, Crispin S, editors. Manual of Small Animal
Ophthalmology.  2nd  edn. Quedgeley, Gloucester: British Small  Animal  Veterinary Association;
2002:285-295.
:wbart GA. Self-Assessment Colour Review of Ornamental Fish. London: Manson Publishing; 1998.
S          s 
Veterinary Association; 2001.
APPENDICES
Appendix 1 Critical care
arpenter JW. Exotic Animal Formulary. St Louis: Elsevier; 2005.
ennox AM (2009): Avian advanced anaesthesia, monitoring and critical care. BSAVA Annual Congress.
ongley LA. Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets. Edinburgh: Elsevier/Saunders; 2008.
right KM, Whitaker BR. Amphibian Medicine and Captive Husbandry. Malabar, Florida: Krieger
 Publishing; 2001.
Appendix 2 Zoonoses
Animal Veterinary Association; 2008.
owler ME, Miller RE. Zoo and Wild Animal Medicine, 5th edn. St Louis: Saunders; 2003.
irling SJ, Raiti P. Manual of Reptiles, 2nd edn. Quedgeley, Gloucester: British Small Animal Veterinary
Association; 2004.
arcourt-Brown F. Textbook of Rabbit Medicine. Oxford: Butterworth-Heinemann; 2002.
arcourt-Brown N, Chitty J. Manual of Psittacine Birds, 2nd edn. Quedgeley, Gloucester: British Small
Animal Veterinary Association; 2005.
     s       
University Press; 2009.
eeble E, Meredith A. Manual of Rodents and Ferrets. Quedgeley, Gloucester: British Small Animal
Veterinary Association; 2009.
eredith A, Redrobe S. Manual of Exotic Pets, 4th edn. Quedgeley, Gloucester: British Small Animal
Veterinary Association; 2002.
Veterinary Association; 2001.
Index
NB: Page numbers followed by f indicate figures; t indicate tables; b indicate
boxes
A
Abdominal mass, ferret, 3441
aetiopathogenesis of abdominal neoplasia, 39-40
anorexia, 34, 35b-36b
clinical examination, 34
differential diagn0ses, 35b-36b, 38b
epidemiology, 40
investigations, 36-38, 41
liver changes, 38b
medications, 40
nursing aspects, 40b
presenting signs, 34b
prevention, 41
prognosis, 41
supportive care, 36
surgery, 40
treatment, 40
Abscesses
in ferret, 35b-36b
in map turtle See Abscesses, aural (in map turtle)
Abscesses, aural chelonia, 35b-36b, 174-179
aetiopathogenesis, 176
anaesthesia, 176, 177f
clinical examination, 175
deterioration, 178
diagnosis, 176
differential diagnoses, 175b
epidemiology, 176
history taking, 175
husbandry, 174, 178
hygiene issues, 177-178
investigations, 175
medications, 177
nursing aspects, 177b
nutritional support/modifications, 178
prevention, 179
prognosis, 179
supportive care, 178
surgery, 177-178
treatment, 176-178
water quality, 178 See also Map turtle
Acepromazine, 44
Adrenaline, 229-231
Adrenocortical neoplasms, in ferret, 39
Aeromonas hydrophila, 237
Aestivation, 115
Aetiopathogenesis of gastrointestinal neoplasia, 79
African clawed toad, biology, 191
African grey parrot, 59, 60b
African pygmy hedgehog, 11, 14
African spurred tortoise, biology, 116
Air sacs, in birds, 61f
Aleutian disease, in ferret, 35b-36b, 38
Alfaxalone, 126-127
Allergies, 237
Amazon parrot
ecology, 98b
feather plucking See Feather plucking, in Amazon parrot
orange-winged, 98f
restraint, 64, 99b-100b
Ambystoma mexicanum (axolotl), 191
Ambystoma tigrinum (Tiger salamander), 191
Aminoglycosides, 136
Amoxycillin, 40, 77, 85, 101
Amphibians, 189-195
anaesthesia, 194
anatomy and physiology, 198
anura, 190-191
assist-feeding, 194
biology, 189-190
caudata (salamander), 191
clinical examination, 192
drug administration, 193-194
as ectotherms, 189
euthanasia, 195
examination, 192
gastrotomy in, 194-195
gymnophiona, 192
haematolymphopoietic system, 190
handling/restraint, 192
hearts, 190
history taking, 192
husbandry, 190-192
investigations, 192, 193f
kidneys, 189
marine toad See Marine toad
pairing of gonads in, 190
respiratory system, 190
skin, 198
surgery, 194-195
tadpole, 191
taxonomy, 189, 190t
thyroid gland, 189
treatment, 193-194
zoonoses, bacterial, 236-237
Anaesthesia, 91
African pygmy hedgehog, 14
Amazon parrot, 100
amphibians, 194
birds (in general), 69-72, 70b
euthanasia, 72
investigations, 76
cockatoo/cockatiel, 78
corn snake, 167b
cystocentesis under, 16
fish, 207-208, 208b, 208f, 212
in general, 2-3
goldfish, 211-212
hamster, 53-54
Harris' hawk, 105
with isoflurane See Isoflurane, anaesthesia with
mammals (in general), 18-20, 18t
map turtle, 176, 177f
marine toad, 198-199
phlebotomy, 15
rabbit, 24
reptiles, 126-128, 127t
Socorro dove, 91, 91b, 96
stages of, in fish, 212
sugar glider, 14
tortoise, 154
Analgesia
birds, 72
chinchilla, 45
guinea pig, 50b
hamster, 54-55
Harris' hawk, 86
rabbit, 25-26, 32
reptiles, 129
tortoise, 135-136
Anorexia
in ferret, 34, 35b-36b
in guinea pig, 50b
in tortoise, 159
Antibiotic therapy
in bearded dragon, 148
in cockatoo, 77
in ferret, 40
in fish, 214
in Harris' hawk, 85-87
Antibiotic-impregnated beads, tortoise, 154-155
Antibiotics, Harris' hawk, 86
Anticholinergics, 229
Antifungal treatment, Harris' hawk, 107
‘Anting' /'anointing' behaviour, African pygmy hedgehog, 11
Anura (amphibians), 191
Ara ararauna (blue and gold macaw), 61
Aspergillus spp., 236
Assist-feeding
amphibians, 194
birds, 69
mammals (in general), 17-18
rabbit, 22, 25, 25b, 25f
reptiles, 126 See also Gavage feeding
Ataxia, in birds, 88b-89b
Avian influenza, 236
Axolotl, biology, 191
Azotaemia, urinary tract disease (chinchilla), 43
B
Bacterial folliculitis, 100
Bacterial zoonoses
in amphibians, 236-237
in birds, 236
in fish, 237
in mammals, 234-235
in reptiles, 235-236
Bacteriology, samples sent for, 16
Bandaging, of Harris' hawk, 85-86
Barbiturates, overdose in amphibians, 195
Bare-eyed cockatoo, 74b
Barium, contrast studies with, 76
Barn owl, biology, 62
Beak, reshaping, 77
Bearded dragon
anatomy and physiology, 146
biology, 117
ECG attached to, 128f
ecology, 139b, 139f
as ectotherms, 138
with hepatic disease See Hepatic disease, in bearded dragon
Behavioural modification drugs, Amazon parrot, 102t
Benzocaine, 195
Bile acids, in bearded dragon, 141
Biochemistry investigations
corn snake, 163
Harris' hawk, 106
tortoise, 131
Biopsies
ferret, 38
guinea pig, 50
leopard gecko, 171
reptiles, 124
tortoise, 154
Birds, 59-72
air sacs, 61f
anaesthesia, 69-72, 70b
euthanasia, 72
anatomy and physiology, 59, 60f-61f, 91-92, 100-101, 101f
of leg, 92f
assessment of demeanour, 73
assist-feeding, 69
ataxia in, 88b-89b
in aviary, 62
budgerigar, 59-61
canary, 61
carnivorous, 62
clinical examination, 64-66
cockatoo See Cockatoo/cockatiel
cranial tibial muscle, 92
dove See Dove
drug administration, 67-69, 68f
euthanasia, 72
falconiformes, 61-62
fluid administration, 67b, 69b, 71
fluids, 67b
*free-lofting', of owl, 62, 64
handling/restraint, 65-66, 65f
hawks See Harris' hawk; Hawks
hindlimbs, 92
history taking, 63-64, 63b-64b
injection sites in, 68f
intubation in, 70b
investigations, 2-3, 66-67, 67b
timing of, 76b
lameness, 88b-89b, 95b
macaw, 61
mynah, hill, 61
normal droppings, components, 74b
owl, 62
parrot See Parrot
of prey, 84
raptor See Raptor
renal portal system, 67b
skeleton, 88
skin, 100-101
surgery, 72, 92-93
magnification, 72
taxonomy, 59, 60t
tethered, 62, 85b, 104
treatment, 67-72
basic procedures, 67-69
surgery, 72
zebra finch, 61
zoonoses
bacterial, 236
fungal, 236
parasitic, 236
viral, 236
Blood samples/tests, 83
Amazon parrot, 100
bearded dragon, 140-145, 147-149
cockatoo/cockatiel, 76
corn snake, 163, 163t
ferret, 37-38, 41
fish, 212
green iguana, 182-183
Hermann's tortoise, 151-152, 152t
leopard gecko, 171
marine toad, 198
rabbit, 23
reptiles, 2-3
Socorro dove, 91
tortoise, 132t See also Haematology See also Phlebotomy
Blue and gold macaw, 61
Bonzocaine, 194
Bordetella bronchiseptica, 234-235
Bronchoalveolar lavage, 16
Bubo bubo (eagle owl), 62
Budgerigar
biology, 59-61
clinical examination, 64
iodine deficiency, 61b
splints, use of, 94
Bumblefoot, in Harris' hawk, 81-87
aetiopathogenesis, 84
bandaging, 85-86
characteristics, 84
clinical examination, 81
diagnosis, 84
differential diagnoses, 83b
epidemiology, 85
grading of lesions, 85b
grade 2, 82f
husbandry changes, 85
investigations, 83, 84f
medications, 85
as multifactorial disease, 84
nursing aspects, 85b-86b
presenting signs, 81b
prevention, 87
prognosis, 87
species differences, 85
treatment, 85-87, 85b-86b
aims of therapy, 86b
See also Harris' hawk
Buprenorphine, 25, 32, 50, 54, 199
Buster collars, in parrot, 102
Butorphanol, 70, 127, 167b
C
Calcium gluconate, 165
Callitrichids, biology, 12
Campylobacter spp., 234, 237
Canary
biology, 61
as pets, 59
Candidiasis/Candida albicans (in Harris' hawk)
aetiopathogenesis, 106-107
debridement, 107
epidemiology, 107
prognosis, 108
sample collection, 106
Capnography, 19, 71
Carassius auratus See Goldfish
Cardiac puncture, 15
Cardiocerebral pulmonary resuscitation (CCPR), principles, 228-229
Cardiovascular system
assessment of, 19
monitoring of anaesthesia, 91
Carnitine, 148
Carnivorous species
birds, 62
reptile biology, 111
snake, 118, 126
Carts (hindlimb supports), 32
Catgut, in rabbit, 25-26
Catheterization, urinalysis, 16
Caudata (salamander), 191
Caviidae See Guinea pig
Cavity washes, reptiles, 124
Ceftazidime, 136
Celecoxib, 80
Cephalexin, 25, 77
Cerebrospinal fluid analysis (CsF), in rabbit, 29, 30b, 31f
Cestodes, rodent, 235
Chameleo calyptratus See Veiled chameleon
Cheilitis, in guinea pig, 47-50
aetiopathogenesis, 49
anorexia, 50b
clinical examination, 47, 48f
conservative treatment, 49
diagnosis, 48
diagnostic results, 50
differential diagnoses, 47b-48b
epidemiology, 49
investigations, 50
medications, 49
nursing aspects, 49b
presenting signs, 47b, 48f
prevention, 50
prognosis, 50
treatment, 49 See also Guinea pig
Chelonia, 130b-131b
abscesses, aural, 176
anatomy, 112f, 132
biology, 111-116
body condition assessment, 122
handling/restraint, 119-120
hibernation, 115
injectable agents, 126
IPPV in, 176
sexing, 122-123 See also Tortoise
Chemical restraint, 2-3
risks, 3
Chemotherapy, in ferret, 40-41
Cheyletiella parasitovorax, 235
Chinchilla
anatomy and physiology, 44
biology, 11
ecology, 43b
handling/restraint, 14
kidneys, 43-44
urolithiasis See Urolithiasis, in chinchilla
Chipmunk, 7-8, 13
Chlamydophila psittaci, 64b-65b, 234
Chlorhexidine, 48, 85, 108
Cholecalciferol, 183
Choline, 148
Choroid gland, in fish, 213
Chytridiomycosis, 198b
Cimetidine, 40, 136
Ciprofloxacin, 77
Cisapride, 45
Clove oil, 194
Coccidiosis, 117
Cockatoo/cockatiel
anatomy and physiology, 78-79
beak, reshaping, 77
biology, 59-61
crop feeding, 80
ecology, 74b
oesophagus, 78-79
regurgitation in See Regurgitation, in cockatoo
splints, use of, 94
Coelioscopy, corn snake, 164
Coeliotomy, exploratory
chelonia, 137
chinchilla, 44
corn snake, 166
ferret, 38
rabbit, 24
tortoise, 136, 137b
Coelomic cavity in cockatoo, endoscopy of, 78b
Columba livia (racing pigeon), 63
Columbiformes, 63
Computed tomography (CT)
map turtle, 175
rabbit, 31
reptiles, 124
tortoise, 156
Consultation, 1-3
clinical examination, 1-2
differential diagnoses, 2
discussion with owner, 3
history taking, 1
investigations, 2-3
Contrast radiography, corn snake, 164
Contrast studies, barium, 76
Corn snake
anaesthesia, 167b
biology, 118
clinical examination, 162
ecology, 162b
Co-trimoxazole, 77
Cranial tibial muscle, birds, 92
'Crash kit', contents, 229b, 229f
Creatinine, in abdominal fluid, 23
Cricetulus griseus (Chinese hamster), 8
Critical care
CCPR principles, 228-229
'crash kit', contents, 229b, 229f
drugs, emergency, 229-231
environment, 231-233
fluid administration, 231, 232t-233t
heating, 231
oxygen, 231-233
preparation, 228-233
Crocodilians, handling/restraint, 121
Crop feeding, birds, 67, 80
cockatoo/cockatiel, 80
Crop swab, in cockatoo, 75, 77
Cryptosporidiosis, 235
Cryptosporidium, 237
CT scanning See Computed tomography (CT)
Culture testing
cockatoo/cockatiel, 77
Harris' hawk, 83
leopard gecko, 171
marine toad, 198
rabbit, 29
tortoise, 153, 155 See also Blood samples/tests See also Samples
Cystitis, chinchilla, 43
Cystocentesis, urinalysis, 16, 43
Cytology
bearded dragon, 145
hamster, 53
Harris' hawk, 106
reptiles, 124
sampling technique, 16
D
Dangerous Wild Animals Act 1976, 121
Debridement
Harris' hawk, 86-87, 107
tortoise, 157
Degu
biology, 11
degloving tail injuries, 13-14
handling/restraint, 13-14
Dendrobates spp. (poison arrow frog), biology, 191
Dental formulae
African pygmy hedgehog, 11
muridae, 8
rabbit, 7
Dermanyssus gallinae, 236
Dermatophilosis, 171
Dermatophytosis, 235
Dexamethasone, 29, 229
Diarrhoea, in ferret, 35b-36b
Diazepam, 31b, 45, 229
Dietary modifications See Nutritional support/modifications
Dipstick testing, chinchilla, 43
Diuresis, chinchilla, 46
Doppler
flow monitors, 194
probes, 71, 83, 128f
ultrasound, 145
Dove
Socorro dove See Socorro dove
tibiotarsal fracture See Tibiotarsal fracture, in dove
Doxapram, 44, 229
Drowning, 237
Drug administration
amphibians, 193-194
birds, 67-69
epicoelomic route, 126
fish, 207
intracoelomic injection, 126, 193-194
intramuscular injections, 17, 67, 125, 193-194, 214
intraosseous route, 17, 68, 126, 193-194
intraperitoneal route, 17
intratracheal, 69
intravenous access, 17, 68, 68f, 125-126, 193-194
mammals, 16-17
nebulization, 69, 126
oral route, 16-17, 67, 125, 193, 207
reptiles, 125-126
subcutaneous injections, 17, 68, 193-194
topical medication, 125, 193
Drugs, emergency, 229-231
doses, 230t-231t
Duodenostomy feeding tube, 69
Dyschezia, in bearded dragon, 140
Dysecdysis
aetiopathogenesis, 172
in bearded dragon, 140, 145
diagnosis, 172
epidemiology, 172
in leopard gecko, 169-173
aetiopathogenesis, 172
clinical examination, 169-171, 170f
diagnosis, 172
differential diagnoses, 171b
epidemiology, 172
husbandry, 173
investigations, 171-172
nutritional support/modifications, 173
presenting signs, 169b
prevention, 173
prognosis, 173
rehydration, 173
treatment, 172-173
Dystocia, in corn snake, 161-168
aetiopathogenesis, 164-165
diagnosis, 164
differential diagnoses, 162b
epidemiology, 165
investigations, 163-164, 163f, 163t
laboratory, 167
medical therapy, 165
nursing aspects, 165b
percutaneous ovocentesis, 167
postoperative care, 167b
presenting signs, 161b
prevention, 168
prognosis, 168
retained eggs, manipulation, 167
salpingectomy, 166-168, 166b
treatment, 165, 167-168
E
Eagle owl, biology, 62
Ectoparasites, 16
Edwardsiella tarda, 237
Elaphe guttata See Corn snake
Electrocardiograms, 71
Electrocution, 237
Encephalitozoon cuniculi, 235
Encephalitozoonosis testing, rabbit, 29-31
Endoscopy
birds (in general), 67b
cockatoo/cockatiel, 78, 78b
Harris' hawk, 106
tortoise, 136
Endothelial neoplasms, in ferret, 39
Endotracheal washes, 16
Enemas, 136
Enrofloxacin, 25, 148, 166, 199
Entamoeba histolytica, 235
Enterotomy, exploratory coeliotomy with, 136
Environment, 231-233
Epithelioma, 54
Epitheliotropic lymphoma, hamster, 54
Epstein-Barr virus, human herpes, 237
Erinaceidae (African pygmy hedgehog), 11
Erysipelothrix spp., 236-237
Escherichia coli (E. coli), 234-237
in cockatoo, 77
Eublepharis macularis See Leopard gecko
Euthanasia
amphibians, 195
birds (in general), 72
fish, 208
Harris' hawk, 87
mammals (in general), 20
rabbit, 32
reptiles, 129
Examination gloves, 119
Eyelid gecko, 166
F
Faecal analysis
birds (in general), 66-67
cockatoo/cockatiel, 74b-75b, 77
corn snake, 164
ferret, 38
reptiles, 124
Falconiformes, biology, 61-62
Falconry equipment, 62b, 62f
Fallopian tube, in rabbit, 24
Famotidine, 40
Feather plucking, in Amazon parrot, 97-103
aetiopathogenesis, 101
anatomy of feathers, 101, 101f
behavioural differentials, 98b-99b, 102
clinical examination, 97-99
diagnosis, 100
differential diagnoses, 98b-99b
epidemiology, 101
history taking, 99
investigations, 100
medical differentials, 98b-99b
presenting signs, 97b
prevention, 103
prognosis, 103
treatment, 101-102, 102t See also Amazon parrot See also Parrot
Feather pulp analysis, 100
Feeding tubes, naso-oesophageal/oesophageal, 17-18
Fentanyl, 23
Ferret
abdominal mass in See Abdominal mass, in ferret
anatomy and physiology, 38-39, 38f
biology, 12
foreign body, 35b-36b, 37f
handling/restraint, 14, 19
international comparisons, 35b
kidneys, 39
lymphoma in, 39b, 40-41
nutritional support/modifications, 36, 40, 40b
pancreas, 38-39
Fibrosarcoma, 79, 79f
Fine needle aspirate (FNA)
ferret, 38
map turtle, 175
sampling technique, 16
tortoise, 153
Fire salamander, biology, 191
Fish, 203-208
anaesthesia, 207-208, 208b, 208f
stages of, 212
anatomy and physiology, 212-213, 213f
basic procedures, 207
cleaner wrasse, 205
clinical examination, 205-206
drug administration, 207
enclosures for, 203
euthanasia, 208
examination, 206
freshwater, 203
gill snip, 206
goldfish See Goldfish
guppy, 204
handling/restraint, 205-206
history taking, 205, 205b
intramuscular injections in, 214
investigations, 206-207
mudskipper, 205
neon tetra, 204-205
restraint, 206
superclasses, 203
supportive care, 207
surgery, 208
taxonomy, 203, 204t
tompot blenny, 205
treatment, 207-208
venous access in, 212
water preparation, 211
water quality, 206
zoonoses from, 206b
bacterial, 237
 parasitic, 237
Fleas, 235
Fluanisone, 23
Fluconazole, 107
Fluid administration
in bearded dragon, 148
in birds (generally), 67b, 69b, 71
in chinchilla, 45
in cockatoo/cockatiel, 75
in critical care, 231, 232t-233t, 233
in ferret, 40b
in rabbit, 22, 22f, 25b
in tortoise, 134
Foreign body, gastrointestinal (in ferret), 35b-36b, 37f
Foreign body, gastrointestinal (in tortoise), 130-137
aetiopathogenesis, 133
analgesia, 135-136
clinical examination, 130
common foreign bodies, 133
diagnosis, 132
differential diagnoses, 130b-131b
endoscopic retrieval, 136
epidemiology, 133
investigations, 131
medications, 136
metal or mineral materials, 133
nursing aspects, 134b
other diagnostic tests which could have been performed, 132
presenting signs, 130b
prevention, 137
prognosis, 137
treatment, 134-136, 134b See also Tortoise
Fractures See Spinal fractures, in rabbit; Tibiotarsal fracture, in dove
Francisella tularensis, 235
Frogs, biology, 191
Frusemide, 231
Fungal infections
in birds, 75
stomatitis See Stomatitis, Harris' hawk
zoonoses, 235-236
G
Garter snake, biology, 118
Gastric lavage, corn snake, 164
Gastric protectants, reptiles, 136
Gastrointestinal ileus, in rabbit, 21
common nature of following surgery, 22, 25
Gastrointestinal neoplasia, aetiopathogenesis, 79
Gastrointestinal tract
in cockatoo, 76, 80
in ferret, 38f-39f
neoplasms of, 39-40
in rabbit, 23f
in tortoise, 132-133
Gastrointestinal transit time
ferret, 12
rabbit, 7
Gastrotomy, in amphibians, 194-195
Gavage feeding
birds, 69f
lizard, 147
raptor, 108
reptiles (in general), 126
tortoise, 134b-135b See also Assist-feeding
Gecko
African fat-tailed, 170f
body condition assessment, 122
eyelid, 166
leopard See Leopard gecko
ocular problems in, 2
skin, 120
Gentamicin, 77
Geochelone carbonaria (red-foot tortoise), 116
Geochelone denticulata (yellow-foot tortoise), 116
Geochelone pardalis See Leopard tortoise
Geochelone sulcata See African spurred tortoise
Gerbil
biology, 8
degloving tail injuries, 13-14
handling/restraint, 13-14
-gluconolactone oxidase, 49
Glutamate dehydrogenase (GLDH), 141
Glycopyrrolate, 44
Golden hamster See Syrian hamster
Goldfish
biology, 204
buphthalmos, 210b
clinical examination, 209-210
eye enucleation (ocular swelling), 209-214
anaesthesia, 211
diagnosis of disease, 212
differential diagnoses, 210b
husbandry, 212
investigations, 212
presenting signs of ocular swelling, 209b
prevention, 214
prognosis, 214
exophthalmos
aetiopathogenesis, 213
differential diagnoses, 210b
epidemiology, 213
treatment, 213-214, 214b
ophthalmoscopy, 212
water analysis, 212 See also Fish
Gout, 106
Gracula religiosa (Greater Hill mynah bird), 61
biology, 61
Granulomas, in ferret, 35b-36b
Green iguana
anatomy and physiology, 183
biology, 117
ecology, 181b
hypocalcaemia in, 180-186
aetiopathogenesis of nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism, 183
clinical examination, 181-182
diagnosis, 183
differential diagnoses, 182b
epidemiology, 183
investigations, 182-183
medications, 185
nursing aspects, 185b
nutritional support/modifications, 185
prevention, 186
prognosis, 186
supportive care, 184
treatment, 184-185, 185b
Green-winged macaw, 66f, 100f
Guinea pig
anatomy and physiology, 48-49
biology, 11
calculi, 44
cheilitis See Cheilitis, in guinea pig
ecology, 48b
handling/restraint, 14
labio-nasal sulcus, 48-49
scurvy in, 49b
venepuncture complications in, 15
Guppy (fish), biology, 204
Gymnophiona, biology, 192
H
Haemangiosarcomas, abdominal, 39
Haematology
corn snake, 163
Harris' hawk, 106
reptiles, 123
tortoise, 131 See also Blood samples/tests See also Phlebotomy
Haemorrhagic disease (viral), vaccination of rabbit against, 7
Halothane, 70b
'Hamburger' grip, tortoise, 120f
Hamster polyomavirus (HaPV), 54
Hamster
anatomy and physiology, 53-54
biology, 8
handling/restraint, 13-14
skin neoplasia in See Skin neoplasia, in hamster
Syrian, ecology, 52b
Hand feeding, 17, 126
Hantavirus, 235
Harris' hawk
anatomy and physiology, 84, 84f
biology, 62
body condition and exercise, 86
with bumblefoot See Bumblefoot, in Harris' hawk
ecology, 82b
gregarious nature of, 61
nutritional support/modifications, 86
stomatitis See Stomatitis, Harris' hawk
Hartmann's solution, 24, 45, 93, 177
Hawks See Harris' hawk
Heating, 231
Hedgehog, 11, 14
Helminths, 235
Hepatic disease, in bearded dragon, 138-149
aetiopathogenesis of hepatic lipidosis, 146-147
assays, non-specific, 141
causes of hepatic lipidosis, 146b
clinical examination, 138
cytology of liver FNA, 145
definition of hepatic lipidosis, 147b
diagnosis, 146
differential diagnoses, 140b
epidemiology, 147
haematological changes, 141-145
husbandry, 148
investigations, 140-145, 141f
medications, 148
nursing aspects, 147b
nutritional support, 147
parameters tested, 142t-144t
potassium levels, 141
presenting signs, 138b
prevention, 149
prognosis, 149
protein levels, 141
supportive care, 147
treatment, 147-148 See also Bearded dragon
Hepatitis, 235
Herbivorous species
chinchilla, 45
green iguana, 117
mouse, 8
 prairie dog, 7-8
rabbit, 7
Hermann's tortoise
biology, 115-116
ecology, 151b
osteomyelitis in See Osteomyelitis, in Hermann's tortoise
sexing, 122-123 See also Tortoise
Heterodon nasicus See Hognose snake
Heterophilia, 145
Heterophils, in tortoise, 156
Hibernation, 115b, 189
chelonia reptile group, 115
Hindlimb paralysis, in rabbit
bilateral, 28
continuing, 32
differential diagnoses, 27b-28b See also Spinal fractures, in rabbit
Hindlimbs, of birds, 92
Hognose snake, biology, 118
Horsfield's tortoise, biology, 116
Human herpes Epstein-Barr virus, 237
Human herpes simplex 1, 237
Husbandry, 161b
amphibians (in general), 190-192
bearded dragon, 148
chinchilla, 42
cockatoo/cockatiel, 73, 79-80
corn snake, 161, 164-165
ferret, 34
goldfish, 212
green iguana, 180, 185
guinea pig, 47, 50
hamster, 51, 55
Harris' hawk, 81, 85, 87, 104
Hermann's tortoise, 150, 157
history taking, in mammals, 12
leopard gecko, 169, 170f, 171, 173
lizard, 116-117
map turtle, 174, 178
marine toad, 199
parrot, 97
inadequacies, 102
rabbit, 21, 27
reptiles (in general), 1, 118
Socorro dove, 88
tortoise, 130
Hydronephrosis, 24
Hydrotherapy, in rabbit, 32
Hydroureter, 24
Hyperglobinaemia, 151
Hyperparathyroidism, nutritional secondary, 183
Hyperproteinaemia, 151
Hyperuricaemia, 106
Hypocalcaemia
in African grey parrot, 59, 60b
in green iguana, 180-186
aetiopathogenesis of nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism, 183
clinical examination, 181-182
diagnosis, 183
differential diagnoses, 182b
epidemiology, 183
investigations, 182-183
medications, 185
nursing aspects, 185b
nutritional support/modifications, 185
presenting signs, 180b, 181f
prevention, 186
prognosis, 186
supportive care, 184
treatment, 184185, 185b
Hypoechoic fluid, in rabbit, 26
Hypoglycaemia
avoiding in birds, 69
avoiding in hamster, 54b-55b
Hypovitaminosis C (scurvy), in guinea pig, 49b
Hystricognathi, guinea pig, 11
Iguana, green See Green iguana
Imaging
of amphibians, 192
of fish, 206, 212
of leopard gecko, 172
of marine toad, 198
of rabbit, 24f, 28, 31
of tortoise, 156 See also Computed tomography (CT) See also Magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) See also Radiography See also Ultrasound imaging
Immersion, anaesthesia
amphibians, 194
fish, 207-208
Inappetence, in reptiles, 130b-131b
Inhalation agents
amphibians, 194
birds (in general), 70
mammals, 18-19
reptiles, 126
Injectable agents
amphibians, 194
birds (in general), 70-71
fish, 207
mammals, 20
reptiles, 126-127, 127t
Insectivorous species, leopard gecko, 117
Insulinomas, in ferret, 37-39
Intermittent positive pressuire ventilation (IPpV)
in chelonia, 176
in dove, 91
in reptiles, 126, 167b
Intracoelomic injection, in tortoise, 134b
Intubation, birds (in general), 70b
lodine deficiency, in budgerigar, 61b
Iron overload disorders, in birds, 61
Isoflurane, anaesthesia with
cockatoo/cockatiel, 76
ferret, 38, 41
hamster, 53
mammals (in general), 18, 19t
rabbit, 24
Socorro dove, 91
Itraconazole, 107
K
Kaolin, 40
Ketamine, 44, 71, 126-127, 194
Ketoconazole, 107
L
Labroides dimidiatus (cleaner wrasse)
biology, 205
Lactulose, 136
Lameness, in birds, 88b-89b, 95b
Laser ablation, tortoise, 157
Legionella pneumophila, 237
Leopard gecko
biology, 117
clinical examination, 169-171
condition assessment, 171
dysecdysis, 169-173
aetiopathogenesis, 172
diagnosis, 172
differential diagnoses, 171b
epidemiology, 172
husbandry, 169, 170f, 171, 173
investigations, 171-172
nutritional support/modifications, 173
prevention, 173
prognosis, 173
rehydration, 173
treatment, 172-173
ecology, 170b
eyes, treating, 172-173
nursing aspects, 171b
Leopard tortoise, biology, 116
Leporidae See Rabbit
Leptospira spp, 234
Leucocytosis, 76
Lidocaine, 231
Listeria monocytogenes, 234
Litoria caerulea (White's tree frog), 191
Little Corella, 74b
Liver disease
in bearded dragon See Hepatic disease, in bearded dragon
in ferret, 38b
Lizard
anatomy and physiology, 112f, 146
bearded dragon See Bearded dragon
biology, 116-118
gavage feeding, 147
green iguana See Green iguana
handling/restraint, 119-121, 120f
Helodermatidae family, 121
injectable agents, 127
kidneys, 146
leopard gecko See Leopard gecko
liver, 146-147
lungs, 146
sexing, 122, 123b
tail loss, 120
veiled chameleon, 117
water dragons, 117-118 See also Bearded dragon See also Hepatic disease, in
bearded dragon
Lumbar vertebrae in rabbit, fracture See Spinal fractures, in rabbit
Lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV), 235
Lymphoma
in ferret, 39b, 40-41
in hamster, 54
Lymphopenia, 76
M
Macaw
biology, 61
phlebotomy, 66f, 100f
restraint, 64
seizures in, 75b
Magnetic resonance imaging (MR1)
rabbit, 31
reptiles, 124
tortoise, 156
Malignant disease
in ferret See Abdominal mass, in ferret
in hamster See Skin neoplasia, in hamster See also Lymphoma See also Melanoma
Mammals, 7-20
anaesthesia, 18-20, 18t
assist-feeding, 17-18
basic procedures, 16-18
biology table, 9t-10t See also biology under specific species
callitrichids, 12
chinchilla See Chinchilla
chipmunk, 7-8, 13
clinical examination, 13-15
degu, 11, 13-14
diaphragm in, 121
drug administration, 16-17
euthanasia, 20
ferret See Ferret
gerbil, 8, 13-14
guinea pig See Guinea pig
hamster See Hamster
hedgehog, 11, 14
history taking, 12-13, 12b
injectable agents, 19-20
investigations, 15-16
mouse, 8, 13
phlebotomy, 15
prairie dog, 7-8, 13
primate, non-human, 12, 14-15
protozoal zoonoses, 235
 pulse oximetry, 71
rabbit See Rabbit
radiography, 15-16
rat, 8, 13
sampling, 16
sugar glider, 11-12, 14
surgery, 20
taxonomy, 7, 8t
treatment, 16-20
zoonoses
bacterial, 234-235
fungal, 235
other infections, 235
protozoal, 235
viral, 235
Mammography, 16
Map turtle, 174-179
anatomy and physiology, 176
aural abscesses See Abscesses, aural (in map turtle)
ecology, 175b
Marine toad
anatomy and physiology, 198
chytridiomycosis, 198b
clinical examination, 196-197
ecology, 197b
handling, 197b
restraint, 197f
traumatic wounds in, 196-200
aetiopathogenesis of skin lesions, 198
anaesthesia, 198-199
cleaning of, 198
diagnosis, 198
differential diagnoses, 198b
epidemiology, 198
husbandry, 199
hygiene issues, 199
investigations, 198
medical management, 199
prevention, 199
prognosis, 199
surgery, 199
treatment, 198-199
Marmosets, 12, 14-15
Measles, 237
Medetomidine, 126
Melanocytomas, hamster, 54
Melanoma, hamster, 54
Meloxicam, 25, 50b
Mesenteric lymphadenopathy, in ferret, 35b-36b
Mesocricetus auratus (Syrian hamster), 8
Methionine, 148
Metoclopramide
in bearded dragon, 148
causing seizures, 75b
in chinchilla, 45
in cockatoo, 75, 77
in guinea pig, 49b-50b
in tortoise, 134
Metronidazole, 40, 136, 148
Mouse, 8, 13
Midazolam, 24, 36, 70
Mineral supplementation, in green iguana, 185
Monitoring of anaesthesia
amphibians, 194
birds (in general), 71
chinchilla, 44
fish, 208, 212
mammals, 19
reptiles, 127-128, 128f
Socorro dove, 91
Monkey pox, 235
Monocytosis, 76, 145
MRI scanning See Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
MS-222 See Tricaine methanesulfonate (MS-222)
Mudskipper (fish), biology, 205
Multifilament suture materials, 25
Muridae See Gerbil; Hamster; Mouse; Rat
Mustelidae See Ferret
Mycobacteria, 235-237
Mycobacteriosis, 171
Myelography, rabbit, 31b
Myxomatosis, vaccination of rabbit against, 7
N
Nandrolone, 148
Nematodes, 237
Neomycin, 136
Neoplasia, 55
abdominal, in ferret, 39-40
alimentary tract, in cockatoo, 80
cervical stump (rabbit), 24
in ferret, 35b-36b, 39-40
of skin, in hamster See Skin neoplasia, in hamster See also Lymphoma; Melanoma
Nephrectomy, in rabbit, 24-25
Neutrophilia, in rabbit, 26
Newcastle disease (PMV-1 infection), 236
Nocardia spp, 237
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), 32, 46, 107
Nutritional support/modifications
in bearded dragon, 148
in chinchilla, 45
in cockatoo/cockatiel, 75
in ferret, 36, 40, 40b
in green iguana, 185
in Harris' hawk, 86
in map turtle, 178
in parrot, 101-102
in rabbit, 21
in Socorro dove, 95
in tortoise, 133 See also biology under specific groups of pets
Nystatin, 107
0
Obesity, in prairie dog, 7-8
Obstructive ileus, in tortoise, 132
Octodontidae (degu), 11
Oesophagostomy tube placement, in tortoise, 135b
Ointments, topical, 85-86
Omeprazole, 40
Omnivorous species
bearded dragon, 117
chipmunk, 7-8
mouse, 8
tortoise, 116
veiled chameleon, 117
Ophidian paramyxovirus (OPMV), 119
Ophthalmoscopy, in fish, 212
Orbital venous plexus, blood collected from, 15
Osteoarthritis, in tortoise, 156
Osteoarthrosis, in tortoise, 156
Osteomyelitis, in Hermann's tortoise, 150-160
aetiopathogenesis, 156-157
anorexia, 159
clinical examination, 150-151
diagnosis, 156
differential diagnoses, 151b
epidemiology, 157
husbandry, 157
investigations, 151-156, 158f-159f, 159-160
nursing aspects, 153b
pathology, 155
presenting signs, 150b
prevention, 160
prognosis, 160
supportive care, 159
surgical options, 157
treatment, 153-155, 157-159, 157b See also Hermann's tortoise See also Tortoise
Ovariohysterectomy, in rabbit
benefits versus harm, 21
routine administration of spay, 21
transfixing of cervical body, 24 See also Post-spay complications in female rabbit
Owl, biology, 62, 63f
Oxygen supplementation, 19
birds, 71
chinchilla, 44
Oxytetracycline, 199
Oxytocin, in reptiles, 166b
P
Pain, in rabbit, 22b
Panniculus reflex, absence in rabbit, 28
Papillomas, in psittacines, 79
Parablennius gattorugine (mudskipper, guppy, tompot blenny), 205
Parabuteo unicinctus See Harris’ hawk
Paracheirodon innesi (neon tetra)
biology, 204-205
Parasitic zoonoses, 235-236
Paresis, paralysis distinguished, 27b-28b
Paromomycin, 136
Parrot
African grey, 59
Amazon See Amazon parrot
feather plucking See Feather plucking, in Amazon parrot
nutritional support/modifications, 101-102
as pets, 59
restraint, 64
toxic foods for, 60b
Passeriformes, 61
Passerines, clinical examination, 64, 65f
Pasteurella multocida, 236
Pentastomiasis, 119
Pentobarbitone, 20, 129
Perches
African grey parrot, 59
Harris' hawk, 86
raptor, 62b
Percutaneous ovocentesis, in corn snake, 167
Peri-anaesthetic care
amphibians, 194
birds (in general), 71-72
cockatoo/cockatiel, 78
fish, 208
mammals, 19-20
marine toad, 199
reptiles, 128
Periophthalmus spp. (mudskipper), 205
Petauridae (sugar glider), 11-12
Phlebotomy
Amazon parrot, 100
amphibians, 192, 193f
bearded dragon, 140-141
birds (in general), 66, 66f
chemical restraint of animal prior to, 2-3
ferret, 38, 41
fish, 206
macaw, 100f
mammals, 15
preferred sites, 16t
rabbit, 23, 23f
sites in, 23b
reptiles, 123, 124t
tortoise, 152b See also Blood samples/tests
Physignathus spp See Water dragons
Physiotherapy, in rabbit, 32
Pigeon, 63
Poecilia retinulata (guppy), 204
Poephila guttata (zebra finch), 61
Pogona vitticeps See Bearded dragon
Poison arrow frog, biology, 191
Poliglecaprone, 21, 44, 92
Polydioxanone, 21, 92
Polyglecaprone, 54
Polymerase chain reaction, Harris' hawk, 106
Polymethylmethacrylate, 87, 126
Post-spay complications in female rabbit, 21-26
aetiopathogenesis of adhesions/ileus, 25
clinical examination, 21
diagnosis, 24
differential diagnoses, 22b
investigations, 23-24, 23b, 23f
nursing aspects, 25b
potential postoperative complications, 22b
presenting signs, 21b
prevention, 22, 26
prognosis, 26
reasons for spaying, 22b
treatment, 25
Povidone iodine, 85
Prairie dog
biology, 7-8
handling/restraint, 13
zoonoses transmitted by, 235
Pre-anaesthesia
amphibians, 194
birds (in general), 69
fish, 207
mammals, 18
reptiles, 126
Prednisolone sodium succinate, 229
Preferred optimum temperature range (POTR), reptiles, 111, 147, 165
Pre-medication
amphibians, 194
birds (in general), 69-70
fish, 207
mammals, 18, 18t
reptiles, 126, 127t
Preventative healthcare, 1, 2funder particular conditions
Primate, non-human
biology, 12
handling/restraint, 14-15
Probiotics, Harris' hawk, 107
Prokinetics, 20
chinchilla, 45
post-spay complications in female rabbit, 22, 25, 25b
Propofol, 126-127, 194
Proventricular dilatation disease, 80
Pseudomonas spp., 236-237
Psittaciformes
African grey parrot See African grey parrot
blue and gold Macaw, 61
budgerigar See Budgerigar
cockatiel, 59-61
Psittacines
alimentary tract neoplasias, 80
clinical examination, 64, 65f
feather plucking in, 101
papillomas in, 79
tibiotarsal fractures, 92
Psittacosis, 64b-65b, 236
Psittacus erithacus See African grey parrot
Pulse oximetry, 71
Python regius See Royal python
R
Rabbit
abdominal cavity, surgical procedures involving, 21
anaesthesia, 24
anatomy and physiology, 28, 29f
females, 24, 24f
assist-feeding, 22, 25, 25b, 25f
biology, 7
bone density, 28
euthanasia, 32
floppy bunny syndrome', 27b-28b
handling/restraint, 13, 13f
pain, signs of, 22b
post-spay complications in females See Post-spay complications in female rabbit
skeleton, 28
spinal fractures See Spinal fractures, in rabbit
surgery, 21, 22b
zoonoses transmitted by, 235
Rabies, 235
Racing pigeon, biology, 63
Radiography, 131
bearded dragon, 140, 141f, 145
birds, 60f-61f, 66
birds (in general), 66
chemical restraint of animal prior to, 2-3
chinchilla, 43
cockatoo/cockatiel, 76
contrast, corn snake, 164
contrast radiography, 145
corn snake, 163, 163f
cranio-caudal view
Socorro dove, 90f
tortoise, 131, 156
ferret, 38
green iguana, 183
hamster, 53, 53f
Harris' hawk, 83, 106
lateral view
bearded dragon, 141f
birds, 61f, 66
cockatoo/cockatiel, 76
ferret, 39f
hamster, 53, 53f
mammals (in general), 15
rabbit, 23, 23f, 30f
Socorro dove, 89, 90f
tortoise, 131, 156
leopard gecko, 172
mammals (in general), 15-16
mammals and reptiles, distinguished, 123
map turtle, 175
plain radiographs
chinchilla, 43
rabbit, 29, 30f
rabbit, 23, 23f, 29, 30f
reptiles, 123, 125f
Socorro dove, 89, 90f, 94f-95f
tortoise, 131, 153, 155-156, 158f-159f, 159-160
ventral/ventro-dorsal view
bearded dragon, 141f
birds, 60f, 66
cockatoo/cockatiel, 76
ferret, 38f
green iguana, 183f
hamster, 53, 53f
mammals (in general), 15
rabbit, 23, 23f, 30f
Socorro dove, 89, 90f
tortoise, 131, 131f, 156, 158f
Ranitidine, 40, 45
Raptor
anatomy and physiology, 106
bandaging, 85-86
clinical examination, 65
fasting, prior to anaesthesia, 105
gavage feeding, 108
history taking, 64
hunting, kept for, 59, 61
oesophagus, 106
oral cavity, 105, 105f
perches for, 62b
physical examination, 81-82, 83f
small intestines, 106
stomach, 106
tongue, 106 See also Harris' hawk See also Hawks
Rat snake, 164
Rat
biology, 8
handling/restraint, 13
Rectal temperature, assessment
chinchilla, 44
mammals, 19
rabbit, 24
Red-foot tortoise, biology, 116
Red mites, 236
Reflexes, checking, 19
Refractometers, urine testing, 43
Regurgitation, in cockatoo, 73-80
clinical examination, 73
diagnosis, 78
differential diagnoses, 74b-75b
investigations, 76-78, 78b
medications, 77
presenting signs, 73b
prevention, 80
prognosis, 80
supportive care, 73, 75, 75f, 78
treatment, 75, 77, 79-80 See also Cockatoo/cockatiel
Renal portal system, birds, 67b
Renomegaly, in ferret, 35b-36b
Reptiles, 111-129
anaesthesia, 126-128, 127t
anatomy and physiology, 172
assist-feeding, 126
body condition assessment, 122
chelonia group, 111-116, 112f
clinical examination, 119-123, 122b
crocodilians, 121
diaphragm, lack of, 121
euthanasia, 129
examination, 121-123
gastric protectants, 136
handling/restraint, 119-121
hepatic lipidosis, causes, 146b
hibernation, 115
history taking, 118-119, 118b-119b
investigations, 2-3, 123-124, 124t, 125f
lizard See Lizard
oxytocin in, 166b
red-eared terrapin, 116
sexing, 111, 122-123, 123b
snake See Snake
surgery, 128-129
taxonomy, 111, 113t-114t
tortoise See Tortoise
treatment, 125-129
basic procedures, 125-126
UV lighting, 139b
zoonoses, 111, 119
bacterial, 235-236
parasitic, 236
See also Map turtle See also Snake
Respiratory system
amphibians, 190
assessment of, 19
monitoring of anaesthesia, 91
Respiratory tract sampling, corn snake, 164
Reversal agents, 231
Reverse zoonoses, 237
Rickettsiae, 236
Rock Pigeon, 63
Romanowsky stain, 23
Rotavirus, rodent, 235
Royal python, biology, 118
Russian hamster, 8
S
Salamander, biology, 191
Salmonella, 234, 236
Salpingectomy, in corn snake, 166-168, 166b
Samples
amphibians, 192
birds (in general), 66-67
corn snake, 164
ferret, 38
fish, 206-207
Harris' hawk, 106
mammals, 16
rabbit, 30b
reptiles, 124
skin, in leopard gecko, 171
tortoise, 155 See also Blood samples/tests See also Culture testing See also Faecal
analysis See also Swabs
Sarcoptic mange, 235
Scent marking, in sugar glider, 11
Sciuridae See Chipmunk; Prairie dog
Sedation of animals
in general, 2-3
phlebotomy, 15, 23, 38
Sensitivity testing
Harris' hawk, 83 See also Culture testing
Sevoflurane, 50
anaesthesia with, 18
Shigella spp., 234
Skin biopsies, leopard gecko, 171
Skin neoplasia, in hamster, 51-55
aetiopathogenesis, 54
anaesthesia, 53-54
diagnosis, 53
differential diagnoses, 52b
epidemiology, 54
husbandry, 51, 55
investigations, 53
laboratory, 54
medications, 55
nursing aspects, 51b
presenting signs, 51b
prevention, 55
prognosis, 55
supportive care, 54-55
surgery, 54-55
treatment, 54-55
Skull radiography, 106
Slit lamp examination, in fish, 212
Snake
anatomy and physiology, 164, 165f
biology, 118
body condition assessment, 122
constriction by, 237
corn, 118
dystocia in See Dystocia, in corn snake
garter, 118
handling/restraint, 119, 121, 121f
hognose, 118
injectable agents, 127
legal restrictions on keeping, 121
python, 118
quarantine checks, 118
reproductive tract, 164, 165f
sexing, 123, 123b
Snout-to-vent length (SVL), in reptiles, 122b
Snowy owl, 63f
Socorro dove
breeding programmes, 89b
ecology, 89b
nutritional support/modifications, 95
Spinal fractures, in rabbit, 27-33
aetiopathogenesis, 28
cage rest, 28, 32-33
clinical examination, 27
diagnosis, 28
differential diagnoses, 27b-28b
euthanasia, 32
investigations, 29-31, 30b
medical treatment, 28
myelography, 31b
neurological examination, 28-29
nursing aspects, 31b
physiotherapy, 32
presenting signs, 27b
prevention, 32
prognosis, 32-33
support harnesses, 32
surgery, 32
treatment, 28-29, 31-32 See also Post-spay complications in female rabbit See also
Rabbit
Splenomegaly, in ferret, 35b-36b
Spur-thighed tortoise
biology, 116
sexing, 122-123
Squirrel monkey, 12
Staphylococcus sp., 54, 100
Starling family of birds, 61
Steroid treatment
in bearded dragon, 148
in chinchilla, 45
in rabbit, 28
Stomatitis, Harris' hawk, 104-108
anaesthesia, examination uinder, 105
clinical examination, 104
diagnosis, 106
differential diagnoses, 105b
epidemiology, 107
investigations, 106
nursing aspects, 105b, 108b
other conditions, 108
presenting signs, 104b
prevention, 108
prognosis, 108
treatment, 107-108
Streptobacillus moniliformis, 234
Strigiformes (owl)
biology, 62, 63f
Sucralfate, 40, 136
Sugar glider
biology, 11-12
handling/restraint, 14
Suppliers, 238
Support harnesses, rabbit, 32
Suture materials, in rabbit, 25-26
Swabs, 16, 77, 106 See also Samples
Syrian hamster, 8
ecology, 52b
Syringe feeding, 17, 126
T
Tadpole, 191
Tamarin, biology, 12
Terrapin, red-eared, biology, 116
Testudo hermanni See Hermann's tortoise
Testudo horsefieldi See Horsfield's tortoise
Tetracycline, 77
Thamnophis spp See Garter snake
Thyroxine, 148
Tibiotarsal fracture, in dove, 88-96
aetiopathogenesis, 92
alternative surgical options, 93-94
anaesthesia, 91, 91b
clinical examination, 88
diagnosis, 91
differential diagnoses, 88b-89b
epidemiology, 92
intramedullary pin, placement, 92, 93f, 96
investigations, 89, 90f, 91, 94f-95f
left leg, views, 90f
medications, 93
non-surgical support, 94
nursing aspects, 95b
presenting signs, 88b
 prevention, 96
prognosis, 96
repair of fracture, 93, 93f
supportive care, 93
surgery, potential postoperative complications, 94b
treatment, 92-95, 93f See also Socorro dove
Tibio-tarsus bone, birds, 92
Tiger salamander, biology, 191
Tiletamine, 194
Toads See Marine toad
Toe pinch reflex, chinchilla, 44
Tompot blenny (fish), biology, 205
Tortoise
African spurred, 116
anaesthesia, 154
anatomy and physiology, 112f, 132, 156
bathing, 153
biology, 111-116
gastrointestinal foreign bodies in See Foreign body, gastrointestinal (in tortoise)
gastrointestinal tract, 132
gavage feeding, 134b-135b
handlimb paresis, 130b-131b
handling/restraint, 120f
Hermann's See Hermann's tortoise
hibernation, 115, 115b
investigations, 152b
jugular vein, 152b
leopard, 116
nutritional support/modifications, 133
oesophagostomy tube placement, 135b
red-foot, 116
spur-thighed, 116 See also Chelonia
Toxins, 237
Toxoplasma gondi, 235
Trachemys scripta elegans See Terrapin, red-eared
Transitional cell carcinoma (TCC), in ferret, 40
Trauma, 237
Tricaine methanesulfonate (MS-222)
amphibians, 194-195, 198-199
fish, 207-208, 211
Trichoepithelioma, 54
Trimethoprim potentiated sulphonamides, 45
Tuberculosis, 234-236
Tularaemia (Francisella tularensis), 235
Turtle
biology, 1l1 See also Map turtle
Tyto alba (barn owl), 62
U
Ultrasound imaging
bearded dragon, 145
chinchilla, 43-44
cockatoo/cockatiel, 78
corn snake, 164
ferret, 36-37, 38b
hamster, 53
Harris' hawk, 83
leopard gecko, 172
map turtle, 175
rabbit, 23-24
reptiles, 123
Ultraviolet (UV) lighting
for calli trichidae/cebidae, 12
for reptiles, 111, 139b, 153, 183
Urinalysis
in bearded dragon, 145
chinchilla, 43
ferret, 38
rabbit, 26, 29-31
sampling technique, 16
Urolithiasis
in chinchilla See Urolithiasis, in chinchilla
in ferret, 35b-36b
Urolithiasis, in chinchilla, 42-46
aetiopathogenesis, 44
clinical examination, 42
diagnosis, 43-44
dietary modifications, 45
differential diagnoses, 43b
dissolution therapy, 45
epidemiology, 44
infrequently reported, 44
investigations, 43
nursing aspects, 45b
presenting signs, 42b
prevention, 46
prognosis, 46
supportive care, 44-45
treatment, 44-46 See also Chinchilla
L
Veiled chameleon, biology, 117
Venepuncture
in bearded dragon, 141f
in guinea pig, 15
Verapamil, 26
Vibrio spp, 237
Viology, corn snake, 164
Viral zoonoses
in birds, 236
in mammals, 235
Vitamin C, lacking in guinea pig, 49
Vitamin K1 injection, in cockatoo, 77
Volkmann's curette, debridement, 86-87
Vomiting inability
muridae, 8
rabbit, 7
W
Water dragons, biology, 117-118
West Nile virus, 236
Wheelbarrow test, rabbit, 28
White's tree frog, biology, 191
X
Xenopus laevis (African clawed toad), 191
Y
Yellow-foot tortoise, biology, 116
Yemen chameleon, 117
Yersinia enterocolitica, 237
Yersinia pseudotuberculosis, 235-236
Z
Zebra finch, biology, 61
Zolazepam, 194
Zoonoses, 234-237
bacterial
in birds, 236
in fish, 237
in mammals, 234-235
in reptiles, 235-236
in birds
bacterial, 236
fungal, 236
parasitic, 236
viral, 236
definitions, 234
in fish, 206b, 237
fungal
in birds, 236
in mammals, 235
in mammals
bacterial, 234-235
fungal, 235
other infections, 235
parasitic, 235
protozoal, 235
viral, 235
parasitic
in birds, 236
in fish, 237
in mammals, 235
in reptiles, 236
in primate, 12
in reptiles, 111, 119
bacterial, 235-236
parasitic, 236
reverse, 237
viral
in birds, 236
in mammals, 235