CECILIA GORREL
SAUNDERSSOLUTIONSIN
VETERINARYPRACTICE
Serles Edlor:Fred Nind
SMALLANIMAL
DENTISTRY
Unique new cased-based approach
Modern,clearly designed and illustrated
Ideally suited for CPD oras an exam revision ald
SAUNDERS
ELSEVTER
SAUNDERSSOLUTIONSIN
VETERINARYPRACTICE
SMALL ANIMAL DENTISTRY
Cecilia Gorrel, BSc MA VetMB DDS MRCVS HonFAVD DipEVDC
European and RCVS Recognized Specialist in Veterinary Dentistry
SAUNDERS
Front Matter
SAUNDERS SOLUTIONSIN VETERINARY PRACTICE
SMALL ANIMAL DENTISTRY
Series Editor: Fred Nind BVM&S, MRCVS
Cecilia Gorrel
SAUNDERS
ELSEVIER
European and RCVS Recognized Specialist in Veterinary Dentistry
Edinburgh London New York Oxford Philadelphia St Louis Sydney Toronto 2008
Commissioning  Editor:  Joyce  Rodenhuis,   Rita  Demetriou-Swanwick
Development Editor: Sarah Keer-Keer, Louisa Welch Project Manager: Jess Thompson
Designer/Text Design: Charles Gray/Keith Kail Ilustrations Manager: Merlyn Harvey
Illustrator: Deborah Maizels
Copyright
SAUNDERS
ELSEVIER
 2008, Elsevier Limited. All rights reserved.
   n  n  p q i od sn  d og
any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any
information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the
         s
via the Elsevier website at http://www.elsevier.com/permissions.
First published 2008
ISBN: 978-0-70202871-7
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Notice
Knowledge and best practice in this field are constantly changing. As new
research and experience broaden or knowledge, changes in practice, treatment and
drug therapy may become necessary or appropriate. Readers are advised to check the
most current information provided (i) on procedures featured or (ii) by the
manufacturer of each product to be administered, to verify the recommended dose or
formula, the method and duration of administration, and contraindications. It is the
the patient, to make diagnoses, to determine dosages and the best treatment for each
individual patient, and to take all appropriate safety precautions. To the fullest extent
of the law, neither the Publisher nor the Author assumes any liability for any injury
and/or damage to persons or property arising out or related to any use of the material
contained in this book.
Neither the Publisher nor the Author assumes any responsibility for any loss or
injury and/or damage to persons or property arising out of or related to any use of the
material contained in this book. It is the responsibility of the treating practitioner,
relying on independent expertise and knowledge of the patient, to determine the best
treatment and method of application for the patient.
The Publisher
Printed in China.
your source forbooks,
ELSEVIER
journals and multimedia
In the health sciences
www.elsevierhealth.com
Workingtogethertogrow
librariesin developing countries
www.celsevier.com www.bookaid.org www.sabre.org
ELSEVIER
BOOKAID
Sabre Foundation
The
publisher's
policy is to use
paper manufactured
from sustainable forests
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank:
· Graeme Blackwood (my better half) for continuous encouragement, proofreading and help with
• My friends, notably Jacqueline Hosford and Carole Hulbert, for their support and encouragement · My
 business partner Peter Southerden and the rest of the dentistry and oral surgery team (Sue Vranch, Lisa
Milella and Alex Smithson) for their involvement in the treatment of most of the reported cases · All
the veterinarians who refer cases to me.
This book could not have happened without you!
Introduction
Fred Nind, Series Editor
Saunders Solutions in Veterinary Practice series is a new range of veterinary
textbooks which will grow into a mini library over the next few years, covering all the
main disciplines of companion animal practice.
Readers should realize that it is not the authors’ intention to cover all that is
known about each topic. As suich the books in the Solutions Series are not standard
reference works. Instead, they are intended to provide practical information on the
more frequently encouintered conditions in an easily accessible form based on real-life
case studies. They cover that range of cases that fall between the boringly routine and
the referral. The books will help practitioners with a particular interest in a topic or
those preparing for a specialist qualification. The cases are arranged by presenting
sign rather than by the underlying pathology, as this is how veterinary surgeons will
see them 1n practice.
Each case also includes descriptions of underlying pathology and details of the
nursing required, both in the veterinary clinic and at home. It is hoped that the books
will also, therefore, be of interest to veterinary students in the later parts of their
course and to veterinary nuirses.
resource which can be accessed economically, shared with colleagues and used
anywhere. They will also provide busy veterinary practitioners with quick access to
authoritative information on  the diagnosis and treatment of interesting and
challenging cases. The robust cover has been made resistant to some of the more
gruesome contaminants found in a veterinary clinic because this is where we hope
these books will be lised.
Joyce Rodenhuis and Mary Seager were the inspiration for the Series, and both
the Series editor and the individual authors are grateful for their foresight in
        s  s
production.
DENTISTRY
When I graduated as a veterinary surgeon, dentistry was an unpopular backwater
subject. Dental surgery was basic, brutal and unpopular.
Now the discipline has blossomed. The high levels of pain associated with some
a patient's behaviour and well-being after effective dental treatment for a chronically
painful condition can bring a wonderful warm glow to the heart of the practitioner
which is not quickly forgotten.
Instrumentation has been developed which makes dental procedures easier and
the range of procedures that can be undertaken has steadily expanded.
Veterinary surgeons have risen to this challenge, recognizing that dental cases
form a significant part of any general practitioner's case load. It is hoped that this
book will help practitioners to handle these cases in an effective way, minimizing the
frustrations and stress that can be associated with unsatisfactory technique. The book
will also help to identify what is possible and practical for the general practitioner and
what is best left to a referral specialist.
Author's note
Oral health is important for the general health and well-being of dogs and cats.
        n       
when disease has been treated that they note a difference in their animal. At recheck
it is common that owners report a dramatic change in behaviour. Although I had
               
of the detrimental effects that oral and dental diseases can have on the patient. The
dramatic improvement after treating oral and dental conditions is what makes
            g
treatment of oral and dental conditions commonly encountered in canine and feline
general practice. It is not a standard referenced textbook and does not cover all aspects
of dentistry and oral surgery.
The format is a short summary of the aetiology and pathogenesis of common
conditions and diseases, followed by case descriptions. The case descriptions aim to
highlight diagnostic procedures, treatment options, anticipated problems and the
importance of monitoring. There are often different treatment options available for
the same condition; the choice depends on a number of factors,e.g. the systemic
health of the patient, compliance with home care regimens, lifestyle (i.e. working or
pet dog). The goal of veterinary dentistry is a comfortable animal with a functional
bite; aesthetics is only a minor consideration.
Dentistry encompasses conditions of all structures of the oral cavity, namely teeth
(hard tissues and periodontium), oral mucosa, salivary glands, etc. Some conditions
can be managed successfully in general practice and some need referral to a specialist
for treatment. The general practitioner needs to recognize the conditions, be able to
perform a full diagnostic work-up, realize the clinical significance of the findings and
institute treatment (in-house or referral) as required.
Oral conditions and diseases are a diagnostic  challenge. Several disease
i.e. malodour, changes in eating patterns and dysphagia are indications that there is a
problem in the oral cavity, but they are not specific for a particular disease.
Manifestations of disease are often not detected on conscious clinical examination.
Full oral and dental examination, including dental radiography, under general
treatment. In my experience, it is common that an animal is referred to me with a
diagnosis that is not the cause of the problem. The importance of a full oral exam
linder general anaesthesia cannot be underestimated. It should be performed for all
animals with suspected oral disease.
In summary, oral/dental diagnosis and treatment planning should not be based
on presenting signs. If this is attempted, the risk of misdiagnosis and incorrect
treatment is high. Animals presented with suispected oral/dental disease require a full
oral examination under general anaesthesia as a minimum prior to diagnosis and
treatment.
As a quick reference, Table 1 links common clinical findings
detected at
examination under general anaesthesia to the cases reported in this book.
Table 1 Clinical findings under general anaesthesia
Cavities
Ch apter 20 - Clinic al lesions and signs of disc omfort
Chapter 21 - Idiopathic canine rot resorption
Ch apter 39 - Caries
Discoloured teeth
Chapter 21 - Idiopathic canine root resorption
 Ch apter 34 - Multiple tooth and jaw fracture
 Drain age tracts
Ch apter 32 - Uncomplicated crown fracture with periapical complication s
Chapter 35 - Iatrogenic tooth damage
En amel dysplasia
Ch apter 38 - En amel dysplasia
Excessive dental wear (attrition and/or abrasion)
Ch apter 34 - Multiple tooth and jaw fracture
Chapter 37 - Excessive wear
Gingivitis
Chapter 6 - Natural progression of disease
Chapter 7 - Period ontitis in a cat
Ch apter 8 - Importance of period ontal probin g depth (PPD)
Ch apter 9 - Systemic effects of periodontitis
Chapter 1 0 - Iatrogenic injuries
Ch apter 1 2 - Chron ic gin givostomatitis as a consequence of period ontitis and iatrogen ic injuries
Ch apter 1 5 - Idiopath ic chronic gin givostomatitis with extraction leading to partial cure
Chapter 18 - Noclinical signs of root resorption
Ch apter 20 - Clinicallesions and signs of disc omfort
Ch apter 21 - Id iopathic canine root resorption
Ch apter 23 - Persistent primary teeth
Chapter 24 - Interceptive extractions
Ch apter 27 - Tooth sh ortening and en dod ontic therapy
Ch apter 28 - Tooth shortening and endod ontics, then extraction
Ch apter 29 - Extraction of permanent teeth
Ch apter 30 - Iatrogen ic malocclusion
Ch apter 32 - Uncomplicated crown fracture with periapical complication s
Ch apter 33 - Complicated crown fracture with periapical disease
Chapter 34 - Multiple tooth and jaw fracture
Chapter 35 - Iatrogenic tooth damage
Ch apter 36 - Complicated crown fracture of an immature tooth
Chapter 37 - Excessive wear
Chapter 38 - Enamel dysplasia
Ch apter 39 - Caries
Gingivostomatitis
Chapter 1 2 - Chron ic gingivostomatitis as a consequence of period ontitis and iatrogen ic injuries
Chapter 13 - Chron ic gingivostomatitis associated with FeLV and FIV
 Ch apter 1 4 - Idiopathic chronic gin givomatitis with extraction leading to cure
Ch apter 15 - Idiopathic chronic gin givostomatitis with extraction leading to partial cure
 Ch apter 16 - Canine chronic gingivostomatitis 
Hard (bony) swelling
Ch apter 33 - Complicated crown fracture with periapic al disease
Ch apter 35 - Iatrogenic tooth damage
 Jaw fracture
Chapter 9 - Systemic effects of periodontitis
 Ch apter 1 0 - Iatrogenic injuries
 Maloc chu sion
Ch apter 23 - Persistent primary teeth
Ch apter 24 - Interceptive extractions 
Chapter 27 - Tooth shortening and endodontic therapy
Ch apter 28 - Tooth sh ortening and en dod ontics, then extraction
Ch apter 29 - Extraction of permanent teeth
Ch apter 3 0 - Iatrogen ic malocclusion
Missin g teeth
Ch apter 6 - Natural progression of disease
Chapter 18 - No clinical signs of root resorption
Ch apter 19 - Virtu ally edentulous, no clin ical signs of root resorption
Ch apter 20 - Clinic al lesions and signs of disc omfort 
Chapter 21 - Idiopathic canine rot resorption
Chapter 34 - Multiple tooth and jaw fracture
Chapter 35 - Iatrogenic tooth damage
 Non-healing extraction sites
Chapter 7 - Periodontitis in a cat
 Ch apter 13 - Chron ic gingivostomatitis associated with FeLV and FIV
 Oronasal communicat ion
 Ch apter 9 - Systemic effects of periodontitis
 Period ontitis
Chapter 7 - Period ontitis in a cat
Ch apter 8 - Import ance of period on tal probin g depth (PPD)
Ch apter 9 - Systemic effects of periodontitis
Ch apter 1 0 - Iatrogen ic injuries
Ch apter 12 - Chronic gin givostomatitis as a consequence of period ontitis and iatrogen ic injuries 
Chapter 37 - Excessive wear
 Persistent primary teeth
Chapter 23 - Persistent primary teeth
Root remnants
Chapter 7 - Period ontitis in a cat
Ch apter 9 - Systemic effects of periodontitis
Chapter 10 - Iatrogenic injuries
Chapter 1 2 - Chronic gingivostomatitis as a consequence of period ontitis and iatrogen ic injuries
Ch apter 1 3 - Chronic gin givostomatitis associated with FeLV and FIV
Tooth crown fracture
salanjul oiuasonel pue suo poad jo aouanbasuo e se seuoisoai ug oluotu - ZL Jade u
Chapter 21 - Idiopathic canine root resorption
Chapter 27 - Tooth shortening and endodontic therapy
Ch apter 32 - Uncomplicated crown fracture with periapical complications
Chapter 33 - Complicated crown fracture with periapical disease
Ch apter 34 - Multiple tooth and jaw fracture
Ch apter 36 - Complicated crown fracture of an immature tooth 
Traumatic soft tissue lesions lip and/or oral mucosa)
Ch apter 7 - Period ontitis in a cat
Ch apter 1 8 - No clinica signs of root resorption
Ch apter 25 - Rubber toy technique and alveoloplasty
Ch apt er 26 - Ru bber toy technique and othod on tic applian ces
Ch apter 27 - Tooth sh ortening and endod ontic therapy
Chapter 28 - Tooth shortening and endodontis, then extraction
Ch apter 29 - Extraction of permanent teeth
Sections 1 and 2 of this book summarize relevant oral and dental anatomy, and
detail oral examination and recording, and radiography. The work-up is identical for
all cases and is designed to detect underlying, not immediately apparent, pathological
conditions which lie at the root of the patient's problem. All findings should be
recorded on a dental record. A problem list can then be drawn up and further
investigations performed as indicated. Radiography is essential in most cases.
It is suggested that readers of this book familiarize themselves with Sections 1
and 2 before moving on to Sections 3-7.
Sections 3-7 deal with the following common conditions:
· Periodontal disease
· Chronic gingivostomatitis
· Root resorption
· Malocclusion
· Pulp and periapical disease.
For each  condition or disease entity, there is a short summary of
aetiopathogenesis and  then case descriptions. The case descriptions include
straightforward cases as well as more complex ones. Each case also contains a theory
refresher, which allows each one to be read as a self-contained clinical report.
Inevitably, this incurs some repetition of the theory within different cases.
In order to get the full benefit from the book, it is necessary to read Sections 1 and
2 as a whole. The cases in Sections 3-7 can then be used as a reference guide to help
            
presented in such a way that the reader can draw up their own problem list and
treatment plan based on my detailed oral examination findings, and then compare
that with what was actually done.
Cecilia Gorrel
Table of Contents
Front Matter
Copyright
Acknowledgements
Introduction
Author's note
Part 1: ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Chapter 1: The tooth and its periodontium
Chapter 2: Occlusion
Part 2: DIAGNOSTIC TECHNIQUES
Chapter 3: Oral examination and recording
Chapter 4: Radiography
Part 3: PERIODONTAL DISEASE
Chapter 5: Periodontal disease - an introduction
Chapter 6: Natural progression of disease
Chapter 7: Periodontitis in a cat
Chapter 8: Importance of periodontal probing depth (PPD)
Chapter 9: Systemic effects of periodontitis
Chapter 10: Iatrogenic injuries
Part 4: CHRONIC GINGIVOSTOMATITIS
Chapter 11: Chronic gingivostomatitis - an introduction
Chapter 12: Chronic gingivostomatitis as a consequence of periodontitis and
iatrogenic injuries
Chapter 13: Chronic gingivostomatitis associated with FeLV and FIV
Chapter 14: Idiopathic chronic gingivostomatitis with extraction leading to cure
Chapter 15: Chronic gingivostomatitis with extraction leading to partial cure
Chapter 16: Canine chronic gingivostomatitis
Part 5: ROOT RESORPTION
Chapter 17: Root resorption - an introduction
Chapter 18: No clinical signs of root resorption
Chapter 19: Virtually edentulous, no clinical signs of root resorption
Chapter 20: Clinical lesions and signs of discomfort
Chapter 21: Idiopathic canine root resorption
Part 6: MALOCCLUSION
Chapter 22: Malocclusion - an introduction
Chapter 23: Persistent primary teeth
Chapter 24: Interceptive extractions
Chapter 25: Rubber toy technique and alveoloplasty
Chapter 27: Tooth shortening and endodontic therapy
Chapter 28: Tooth shortening and endodontics, then extraction
Chapter 29: Extraction of permanent teeth
Chapter 30: Iatrogenic malocclusion
Part 7: PULP AND PERIAPICAL DISEASE
Chapter 31: Pulp and periapical disease - an introduction
Chapter 32: Uncomplicated crown fracture with periapical complications
Chapter 33: Complicated crown fracture with periapical disease
Chapter 34: Multiple tooth and jaw fracture
Chapter 35: Iatrogenic tooth damage
Chapter 36: Complicated crown fracture of an immature tooth
Chapter 37: Excessive wear
Chapter 38: Enamel dysplasia
Chapter 39: Caries
MCQS
MCQs - Answers
APPENDIX 1: Home care: maintenance of oral hygiene
APPENDIX 2: Equipment and instrumentation
APPENDIX 3: Antibiotics and antiseptics
APPENDIX 4: Endodontics
Further reading
Index
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
The tooth and its periodontium
THE TOOTH
Some fundamental points on the teeth of small animals are outlined as follows: · The
basic anatomy resembles that of man · There are differences in the number of teeth ·
There are differences in the shape of teeth: · The crowns are more tapered · There are
sharp cutting suirfaces · There are fewer chewing suirfaces
· There are differences in spacing: · Teeth are further apart · Any contact points are
small and not as tight.
Tooth consists of:
· Crown - generally above the gum line· Root(s) - generally below the gum line·
Enamel
· Dentine
. Cementum
· Pulp (endodontic system).
Figure 1.1 depicts the basic structure of a tooth and its periodontium
Enamel
Gingiva
Dentine
Pulp
Periodontal ligament
Cementum
Alveolar bone
Figure 1.1
Basic anatomy of the tooth and periodontium.
From GorrelC (2004): Veterinary Dentistry for the General Practitioner, with permission of Elsevier
Enamel:
· Thin layer as compared to man · Hardest and most mineralized tissue in the body ·
Inorganic content amounts to 96-97% of weight · Has no nerve or blood supply
· Has no reparative or regenerative capacity.
Dentine:
· Comprises the bulk of the mature tooth · Inorganic content amounts to 7o% of wet
weight · Tubular structure
· Slow continuous deposition of dentine throughout life (secondary dentine) · Rapid
deposition in response to trauma (reparative/tertiary dentine).
Cementum:
· Avascular bone-like tissue · Less calcified than enamel or dentine · Slow continuous
Pulp:
· Composed of connective tissue · Lined by odontoblasts
· Pulp chamber = pulp tissue contained in the crown · Root canal(s) = section of root
containing pulp tissue · Root apex = where the root canal opens into the periapical
tissues:· Single, wide opening in the immature tooth · Numerous foramina in the
mature tooth.
THEPERIODONTIUM
The periodontium is an anatomical unit, which functions to attach the tooth to the
jaw and provide a suspensory apparatus resilient to normal functional forces.
Periodontium consists of:
· Gingiva
· Periodontal ligament
· Cementum
· Alveolar bone.
Gingiva:
· Forms a cuff around each tooth: · Free gingiva · Attached gingiva
· Margin of free gingiva forms invagination between tooth and gingiva = sulcus ·
Normal sulcus depth is 1-3 mm in dogs and 0.5-1 mm in cats.
Figures 1.2, 1.3 and 1.4 depict the basic structures of the gingiva and gingival
sulcus.
AM
MGJ
AG
IP
FG
Figure 1.2
 The visible landmarks of clinically normal gingiva. MGJ = mucogingival junction or
line; AM = alveolar mucosa; AG = attached gingiva; FG = free gingiva; IP = interdental papilla.
From Gorrel C (2004 ): Veterinary Den tistry for the General Practitioner, with permission of Elsevier.
Junctionalepithelium
Oral sulcular
Oral gingival
epithelium
epithelium
Figuure1.3
The gingival cuff. The oral surface is lined by a parakeratinized squamous cell
epithelium, the oral gingival epithelium. The gingival sulcus is lined by the oral sulcular epithelium,
which is closely apposed, but not adherent to the tooth. The junctional epithelium or epithelial
attachment is adherent to the tooth surface. Both the sulcular epithelium and the junctional
epithelium are non-keratinized squamous cell epithelia.
From Gorrel C (2004 ): Veterinary Dentistry for the General Practitioner, with permission of Elsevier.
Gingival
sulcus
Figure 1.4
The gingival sulcus. It is measured from the free gingival margin to the base of the
sulcus using a periodontal probe.
Periodontal ligament:
· Connective tissue that anchors the tooth to the bone · Acts as a suspensory ligament
for the tooth · Is in a continual state of physiological activity.
Cementum:
· Avascular bone-like tissue · Less calcified than enamel or dentine · Slow, continuous
deposition throughouit life · Capable of resorptive and reparative processes.
Alveolar bone:
· Ridges of the jaw that support the teeth · Teeth are contained in deep depressions
(alveolar sockets) in the bone · Consists of four layers:
· Periosteum · Compact bone
· Cancellous bone · Cribriform plate (lines the alveolar sockets)
· Vessels and nerves perforate the cribriform plate to supply the periodontal ligament ·
sa  m o a   as
(usually resorption) readily to external and systemic influences · The margin of the
crest of the alveolar bone is normally located 1 mm below the cemento-enamel
junction.
DENTALFORMULAE
Dog:
· Primary teeth: 2 X {1 3/3 : C 1/1 : P 3/3} = 28
· Permanent teeth: 2 × {1 3/3 : C 1/1 : P 4/4 : M 2/3} = 42.
Cat:
 = 7/ : /1 5 : x 7  5.
· Permanent teeth: 2 x {1 3/3 : C 1/1 : P 3/2 : M 1/1} = 30.
TOOTH DEVELOPMENT AND MATURATION
· Crown formation (primary and permanent teeth) occurs within the alveolar bone.
· Enamel formation is completed before the tooth erupts.
· Dentine formation is just beginning when the tooth erupts.
· Root development occurs mainly after tooth eruption.
The primary teeth start forming in utero and erupt between 3 and 12 weeks of
age. The permanent crowns start forming at or shortly after birth and mineralization
of the crowns is complete by around 11 weeks of age. Resorption and exfoliation of the
primary teeth and replacement by the permanent dentition occurs between 3 and 7
months of age in the dog, and between 3 and 5 months of age in the cat. Once the
crowns of the permanent teeth have erupted, root development continues for several
months. The approximate ages when teeth erupt in dogs and cats are shown in Table
1.1.
Table 1.1 Approximate ages (in weeks) when teeth erupt in dogs and cats
Primaryteeth
Permanentteeth
Puppy
Kitten
Dog
Cat
Incisors
4-6
3-4
12-16
11-16
Canines
3-5
3-4
12-16
12-20
Premolars
5-6
5-6
16-20
16-20
Molars
16-24
20-24
Once the enamel has formed, the ameloblasts (the cells which produce the enamel
matrix) are lost and further development of enamel does not occur. The only natural
S            
through deposition of minerals, mainly from saliva, into the superficial enamel layer.
Although enamel formation is completed by the time the tooth erupts, dentine
formation of a root apex) is by no means complete at the time of eruption. Figure 1.5
depicts maturation of a permanent tooth following eruption.
7months
1.5years
2years
3.5years
Figure 1.5
 Maturation of a permanent canine tooth after eruption. Enamel formation is complete
at the time of eruption, while dentine production and root development (root elongation and
formation of an apex) are just beginning. The apical foramen of an immature tooth is a single, wide
opening. As the individual ages, closure of the apex (apexogenesis) occurs by continuous deposition
of dentine and cementum until, in mature teeth, the root apex consists of numerous small openings or
foramina, allowing the passage of blood vessels, lymphatics and nerves.
From Gorrel C (2004): Veterinary Dentistry for the General Practitioner, with permisson of Elsevier.
NORMAL RADIOGRAPHIC ANATOMY
· All normal anatomical landmarks are not demonstrable on any given radiograph
· It is important to be familiar with them so they can be identified and correctly
interpreted when they are visualized.
· There are also wide structural variations within normal limits.
· Contralateral radiographs should always be taken for comparison.
The teeth and their supporting tissues
Enamel:
· Thin radiodense band that covers the crown · It tapers to a fine edge at the cervical
margin of the tooth · Often incompletely visualized on radiographs.
Dentine:
· Accounts for the bulk of the hard tissues of the mature tooth · It is less radiodense
than enamel.
Cementum:
visible radiographically when it has undergone hyperplasia, i.e. not normally seen on
radiographs.
Pulp cavity:
 Consists of the pulp chamber (in crown) and the root canal(s) · It is visualized as a
continuous radiolucent space in the centre of the tooth · The size and width of the
pulp chamber and root canal(s) will vary:· With the age of the animal· If pulpal
disease (inflammation, necrosis) occurs.
Periodontium:
 The lamina dura represents the wall of the alveolar tooth socket · It is seen as a
radiodense line, which runs parallel to the root of the tooth · It is not always visible on
radiographs, but a break in the path of a visible lamina dura usuially implies
          s
radiolucent line that is situated between the lamina dura and the root of the tooth ·
The cortical bone on the crest of the alveolar ridge is continuous with the lamina
dura.
Nutrient canals
· Seen as radiolucent lines of uniform width ± radiodense borders · Contain the blood
Infraorbital
· Mandibular
· Smaller canals extending into the interdental spaces· Smaller canals
communicating with the periapical foramina.
Foramina
Important foramina to remember are:
· The anterior palatine (incisive) foramen · The infraorbital foramina
· The mental foramina.
2
Occlusion
Occlusion is the term uised to describe how the teeth contact each other (occlude
with each other). Malocclusion is an abnormality in the position of the teeth.
from tooth malpositioning (dental malocclusion), or a combination. Malocclusion is
common in the dog, but also occurs in cats. The clinical significance of malocclusion
cases, it may be the direct cause of severe oral pathology. It is consequently important
to diagnose malocclusion early in the life of the animal so that preventative measures
can be taken.
The development of  the occlusion  is determined  by both genetic and
environmental  factors.  While  the  specific genetic mechanisms  regulating
malocclusion are unknown, a polygenic mechanism is likely and explains why not all
siblings in successive generations are affected by malocclusion to the same degree, if
they are affected at all. With a polygenic mechanism, the severity of clinical signs is
linked to the number of defective genes.
It is known that the following are inherited:
· Jaw length
· Tooth bud position
· Tooth size.
It is also known that the development of the upper jaw, mandible and teeth is
independently regulated genetically. Disharmony in the regulation of these structures
         s  
functional modification may also result in skeletal malocclusion. Although tooth bud
position is inherited, various events during development and growth may alter the
definitive tooth position.
NORMAL OCCLUSION
The shape of the head (mesocephalic, dolicocephalic, brachycephalic) affects the
positioning of the teeth.
MESOCEPHALICDOG
The mandible is shorter and less wide than the upper jaw. This means that:
· There is a scissor bite of the incisor teeth (Fig. 2.1).
· There is interdigitation of the canine teeth (Fig. 2.2).
· The incisor scissor bite and canine interdigitation form the dental interlock, which
coordinates rostral growth of the upper jaw and mandible.
. There is interdigitation of the premolars (Fig. 2.3).
· There are premolar and molar relationships (Fig. 2.4).
Figure2.1
Mesocephalic dog - scissor bite of the incisor teeth. The upper incisors are rostral to
the lower, with the incisal tips of the mandibular incisors contacting the cingulae of the upper
incisors.
Figure 2.2
 Mesocephalic dog - interdigitation of the canine teeth. The mandibular canine fits into
the diastema (space) between the upper third incisor and the upper canine, touching neither, i.e.
there should be equal space on either side of the mandibular canine crown.
Figure 2.3
Mesocephalic dog - interdigitation of the premolars. The mandibular first premolar
should be the most rostral of the premolars. Cusps (tips) of the premolars oppose the interdental
spaces of the opposite arcade, with the mandibular first premolar being the most rostral. This
 interdigitation is called the *pinking shear effect.
Figure 2.4
Premolar and molar relationships in the mesocephalic dog. The mesiobuccal surface of
the first mandibular molar occludes with the palatal surface of the maxillary fourth premolar and the
distal occlusal surface of the mandibular first molar occludes with the palatal occlusal surface of the
maxillary first molar.
MESOCEPHALIC CAT
The incisor and canine occlusion of the adult mesocephalic cat is the same as in the
dog. The premolar and molar occlusion differs (Fig. 2.5) from the dog as follows:
· The most rostral premolar is the maxillary second premolar (the cat lacks the first
maxillary premolar and the first two mandibular premolars).
· The buccal surface of the first mandibular molar occludes with the palatal surface of
the maxillary fourth premolar.
· The maxillary first molar is located distopalatal to the maxillary fourth premolar and
does not occlude with any other tooth.
· The cat does not have any teeth with occlusal (chewing) surfaces.
Figuure2.5
Premolar and molar relationships in the cat. The most rostral premolar is the maxillary
second premolar. The buccal surface of the first mandibular molar occludes with the palatal surface
of the maxillary fourth premolar. The maxillary first molar is located distopalatal to the maxillary
fourth premolar and does not occlude with any other tooth.
BRACHYCEPHALIC ANDDOLICOCEPHALIC DOG AND CAT
Brachycephalic animals have a shorter than normal upper jaw (Fig. 2.6).
Dolicocephalic animals have a longer than normal upper jaw (Fig. 2.7). In both cases,
the mandible is not responsible for any rostrocaudal discrepancy. All will have some
degree of malocclusion as compared to a mesocephalic animal (Figs 2.8 and 2.9).
Figu1re2.6
 Brachycephalic animals have a shorter than normal upper jaw. A short jaw results in
reduced interdental spaces with rotation and/or overlap of teeth.
From Gorrel C (2004 ): Veterinary Dentistry for the General Practitioner, with permission of Elsevier.
Figure 2.7
 Dolicocephalic breeds have a longer than normal upper jaw. The increased jaw length
results in interdental spaces that are wider than normal.
From Gorrel C (20 04 ): Veterinary Dentistry for the General Practitioner, with permission of Elsevier.
Figure 2.8
 Mandibular prognathic bite. The lower jaw is too long with respect to the short upper
jaw.
From Gorrel C (2004 ): Veterinary Dentistry for the General Practitioner, with permission of Elsevier.
Figure 2.9
 Mandibular brachygnathic bite. The mandible is too short in relation to the long upper
1aw.
From Gorrel C (20 04 ): Veterinary Dentistry for the General Practitioner, with permission of Elsevier.
DIAGNOSTICTECHNIOUES
3
Oral examination and recording
Conscious examination yields limited information:
· Gross abnormalities may be detected
· Occlusal evaluation.
Definitive oral examination requires general anaesthesia:
· All detected abnormalities should be recorded
· Clinical record and dental chart are essential.
CONSCIOUS EXAMINATION
· Gentle technique
· Limited to visual inspection and some digital palpation
· Occlusion must be evaluated in the conscious animal.
Examination involves assessing not only the oral cavity proper, but also palpation
of:
· The face (facial bones and zygomatic arch)
· Temporomandibular joint
· Salivary glands (mandibular/sublingual; the parotids are usually only palpable if
enlarged)
· Lymph nodes (mandibular, cervical chain).
The mouth is first examined by gently holding the jaws closed and retracting the
lips (do not pull on the fur to retract lips) to look at the soft tissues and buccal aspects
of the teeth. This is the optimal time to evaluate occlusion.
Below is a checklist for evaluation of occlusion:
· Head symmetry
· Incisor relationship
· Canine occlusion
· Premolar alignment
· Distal premolar/molar occlusion
· Individual teeth positioning.
Finally, open the animal's mouth. Most animals allow at least a cursory
of the oral cavity should be examined as well as the teeth.
Mucous membranes:
· Colour and texture
· Evidence of bleeding problems (petechiation, purpura, ecchymoses)
· Signs of trauma
· Evidence of vesicles and/or ulceration.
Teeth and periodontium:
· Number of teeth
· Tooth fracture
· Gingival recession
· Furcation exposure.
Assess the oropharynx (soft palate, palatoglossal arch, tonsillary crypts, tonsils
and fauces) if possible.
EXAMINATIONUNDERGENERALANAESTHESIA
The oropharynx should be examined prior to endotracheal intubation. Normal
anatomical features of the oral cavity need to be identified and inspected. A series of
liseful checklists are given below.
Oropharynx:
· Soft palate
· Palatoglossal arch
· Tonsillary crypts
· Tonsils
· Hamular process of the pterygoid
· Fauces.
Lips and cheeks:
· Mucocutaneous junction
. Vestibules
· Philtrum
· Frenula (maxillary and mandibular)
· Salivary papilla (parotid and zygomatic).
Oral mucous membranes:
· Alveolar mucosa
· Mucogingival line
· Attached gingiva
· Free gingiva.
Hard palate:
· Incisive papilla
· Incisive duct openings
· Palatine raphe and rugae.
Floor of mouth and tongue:
· Sublingual caruncle
· Lingual frenulum
· Lingual salivary gland (cat)
· Tongue papillae (types and distribution).
Teeth:
· Primary, permanent or mixed dentition
 Missing and/or supernumerary teeth
· Abnormalities in size and/or shape
· Abnormalities in angulation and/or position
 Wear patterns (abrasion, attrition)
· Pathology, e.g. caries, enamel hypoplasia, tooth fracture.
Periodontium
The periodontium of each tooth needs to be assessed to:
· Identify the presence of periodontal disease (gingivitis and periodontitis)
· Differentiate between gingivitis (inflammation of the gingiva) and periodontitis
(inflammation of the periodontal tissues resulting in loss of attachment and
eventually tooth loss)
· Identify the precise location of disease processes
· Assess the extent of tissule destruction where there is periodontitis
Instruments required include:
1. Periodontal probe
 2. Dental explorer
3. Dental mirror.
The following indices and criteria should be evaluated for each tooth:
1. Gingivitis and gingival index
2. Periodontal probing depth (PPD)
3. Gingival recession
4. Furcation involvement
5. Mobility
6. Periodontal (clinical) attachment level (PAL/CAL).
the teeth, it may be necessary to remove these to assess periodontal status accurately.
Gingivitis and gingival index
The presence and degree of gingivitis is assessed based on:
· Redness
· Swelling
· Presence or absence of bleeding on probing of the gingival sulcus.
Various indices can be used to give a numerical value to the degree of gingival
inflammation present. In the clinical situation, a simple bleeding index is the most
l1seful (Fig. 3.1):
· A periodontal probe is gently inserted into the gingival sulcus at several locations
around the whole circumference of each tooth, and given a score of 0 if there is no
bleeding and a score of 1 if the probing elicits bleeding.
Figure 3.1
 s a si d d g xa aa,  n s s
the gingival sulcus at several locations around the whole circumference of each tooth, and given a
 score of 0 if there is no bleeding and a score of 1 if the probing elicits bleeding.
An index which relies on both visual inspection and bleeding, namely the
modified Loe and Silness gingival index, can also be used (Table 3.1). It is more
accurate than the bleeding index, but more time-consuming. It is the most common
index lised in research.
Table 3.1  The modified Loe and Silness gingival index
Gingival index
Clin ically healthy gin giva.
Gingival ind ex
Gingival ind ex
Mod erate gingivitis: the gin gival margin is red and swollen; gentle probing of the gin gival sulcus results in bleed ing.
Gingival index
 Severe gingivitis: the gin gival margin is very swollen with a red or bluish red; there is spontaneous haemorrh age and/or ulceration of the
gingival margin.
Periodontal probing depth (PPD)
PPD measures the depth of the sulcus (Fig. 3.2):
· A graduated periodontal probe is gently inserted into the base of the gingival sulcus,
i.e. intil resistance is felt.
  s s       sa      e
millimetres at several locations around the whole circumference of the tooth. The
probe is moved gently horizontally, walking along the floor of the sulcus.
Figure 3.2
 Periodontal probing depth (PPD).
d a sn d  ss an n           
probing depth. It should be measured and recorded at several sites around the circumference of each
tooth.
(b) The probe has been placed on the surface of the gingiva to depict the depth to which it had been
inserted.
From Gorrel C (2004): Veterinary Dentistry for the General Practitioner, with permission of Elsevier.
The gingival sulcus is 1-3 mm deep in the dog and 0.5-1 mm in the cat.
Measurements in excess of these values usually indicate the presence of periodontitis,
when the periodontal ligament has been destroyed and alveolar bone resorbed, thus
allowing the probe to be inserted to a greater depth. The term used to describe this
situation is periodontal pocketing. All sites with periodontal pocketing should be
ligament and bone are intact (i.e. there is no evidence of periodontitis) and the
increase in PPD is due to swelling or hyperplasia of the gingiva.
Gingival recession
Gingival recession is the distance (in mm) from the cemento-enamel junction to the
P    (   o s   
probe. At sites with gingival recession, PPD may be within normal values despite loss
of alveolar bone due to periodontitis.
Figure 3.3
Gingival recession is measured from the cemento-enamel junction to the gingival
margin using a graded periodontal probe. The right upper first incisor has an extensive (most of the
root surface is exposed) gingival recession affecting its buccal aspect.
From Gorrel C (2004): Veterinary De
istry for the General Practitioner, with permission of Elsevier.
Fuircation involvement
Furcation involvement refers to the situation where the bone between the roots of
multirooted teeth is destroyed due to periodontitis (Fig. 3.4). The furcation sites of
multirooted teeth should be examined with either a periodontal probe or a curved
dental explorer. The grading of furcation involvement is listed in Table 3.2.
Figure 3.4
Furcation involvement. The furcation sites of multirooted teeth should be examined
with either a periodontal probe or a dental explorer so that the degree of furcation involvement can
be graded. The right maxillary second premolar has a grade 3 furcation, i.e. the explorer or probe can
be passed through from buccal to palatal.
From Gorrel C (20 04 ): Veterinary Dentistry for the General Practitioner, with permission of Elsevier.
Table 3.2 Grading of furcation involvement
Grade
 No furcation in volvement
Grade
In itial furcation involvement: the furcation can be felt with the probe/explorer, but horizontal tissue destruction is less than one-third of the
horizontal width of the furcation.
Grade
Partial furcation involvement: it is possible to explore the furcation but the probe/explorer cann ot be passed through it from bucc al to palatal/lingual
2
Horiz ontal tissue destruction is more than one-third of the horizontal width of the furcation
Grade
Total furcation involvement: the probe/explorer can be passed through the furcation from bucc al to palatal/lingual.
Tooth mobility
The grading of mobility is listed in Table 3.3.
· It is assessed using a suitable instrument, e.g. the blunt end of the handle of a dental
mirror or probe.
· It should not be assessed using fingers directly, since the yield of the soft tissues of
the fingers will mask the extent of tooth mobility.
Table 3.3  Grading of tooth mobility
Grade 0
 No mobility
Grade 1
 Horizontal movement of 1 mm or les
Grade 2
Hor izontal movement of more than 1 mm
Vertical as well as horiz ontal movement is possible
* Note that multirooted teeth are scored more severely and a horizontal mobility in excess of 1 mm is
usually considered a Grade 3, even in the absence of vertical movement.
Periodontal/clinical attachment level (PAL/CAL)
Periodontal attachment level records the distance from the cemento-enamel junction
(or from a fixed point on the tooth) to the base or apical extension of the pathological
pocket.
· PAL can be measured with a periodontal probe.
• It can also be calculated, i.e. PPD + gingival recession/PPD - gingival hyperplasia.
· It is a more accurate assessment of tissue loss in periodontitis than PPD.
Recording
The information resulting from the examination and any treatment performed needs
to be recorded. A basic dental record consists of written notes and a completed dental
chart. Additional diagnostic tests and radiographs are included as indicated.
A dental chart is a diagrammatic representation of the dentition, where
information (findings and treatment) can be entered in a pictorial and/or notational
form. It provides a simple way of recording most of your findings and treatments.
However, it is only a chart and needs to be supplemented by clinical notes,
radiographs, etc. to make a complete dental record.
Copies of the dog and cat dental record sheets used in our clinic are depicted in
Fig. 3.5a and b. The front is used to record clinical findings, and the back is used to
enter diagnosis, draw up a treatment plan and record the treatment performed. The
nurse or technician who performs the clinical examination completes the front page.
The veterinarian checks the clinical findings and interprets any radiographs taken,
and then fills in the back page of the chart. Figure 3.5a depicts a blank record sheet
and Fig. 3.5b shows a completed form.
DrCeilaGol BSc,MAMB,DDSHonFAVD,DEVDCRCS
Cient
Veterinary Dentistry and Oral Surgery Referrals
Date
Animal:
Clinician:
Compno
DENTAL RECORD:DOG
Student
OCCLUSALEVALUATION
EXTRAORALFINDINGS
ORAL SOFT TISSUES
OTHERRELEVANTFEATURES
PLAQUE
Incisor ccclusion:
Canine occusion
Premolar alignment
Distal P/M occlusion
Head symmetry
CALCULUS
Individual teeth:
Other:
Y
Y
ORAL PROBLEMLIST
THERAPEUTIC PLAN
PERIODONTICS
ORAL SURGERY (Note siles on graph-X)
Sonic scaling
uitrasonic scaling
Ciosed extractions]...
Subgingival ourettage
Periodontal debridement
Open extrction（s）-..
Pumice polshing
 Air polishing
Incisional biopsy
Excisional biopsy
Periodontal surgery-
Otheticomments
OTHERDENTALPROCEDURES
COMPLICATIONS/COMMENTS
110
109
108
107
209
A
Bucek
N
Bucca
spec
A
A
Λ
specl
八
ISpeC
410
409
408
404
308
909
310
311
?
DrCellaGoel BSc, MAVeMB,DDSHon FAVD,DipEVDC,MRCVS
VeterinaryDentistry and Oral SurgeryReferals
Date...
Animal....
Cinician:
DENTALRECORD:CAT
Comp no.....
Student...
OCCLUSALEVALUATION
EXTRAORALFINDINGS
ORAL SOFT TISSUES
OTHERRELEVANT FEATURES
PLACUE
Incisor ccclusion.
RC
Canine occusionc
NAR
.NAD
.Non
Premolar alignment
Distal PIM occlusion:
Head symmetry....
CALCULUS
Individual teeth:.
C
Other...
208
?
7
V
L
C
ingua
pecl
W
0889
W
W
W
ORAL PROBLEM LIST
THERAPEUTIC PLAN (afte reviewing radiographs)
.ORL.S07.407
.Periedwtaltherapd.
2.CCF304.
2.6xtrAct304,307.40.
3.Periodortitis 104,204
1.10e.and2oearemissing
5.Mild generaed gingivitis
PERIODONTICS
ORAL SURGERY (Note sies on graph -X)
Sonic scaing
Ulrasonic scaling
Closed extractions)
Subgingivalcurellage
Periodontal debidement
Pumice polshing
 Airposhing
Inisional biopsy
Exisionalbiopsy
Periodontal surgery
Other comments
OTHERDENTALPROCEDURES
COMPLICATIONS/COMMENTS
Needs recau for CuA andfullmouth radiogrephs
year'stime.
RIGHT
106
104
204
206
20
08
6.02
LEFT
Buccal
Buccal
aspect
aspect
Buccal
Buccal
aspect
asped
RIGHT
408
407
404
403
102
07
809
LEFT
Figure 3.5
 Dental record sheets.
(a) Blank record sheet. From Gorrel C, Derbyshire S (2005): Veterinary Dentistry for the Nurse and
Technician, with permission of Elsevier.
(b) Completed form. After Gorrel C, Derbyshire S (2005): Veterinary Dentistry for the Nurse and
Technician, with permission of Elsevier.
We number the teeth using the modified Triadan System, which is a three-digit
numbering system. The first digit denotes the quadrant of the mouth and whether the
tooth is part of the permanent or primary dentition (Table 3.4).
Table 3.4 Modified Triadan System, a three-digit numbering system
Permanent den tition
 Right upper = 1
Left upper = 2
Right lower = 4
Left lower = 3
 Primary den tition
Right upper = 5
Left upper = 6
Right lower
Left lower = 8
The second and third digits together denote the tooth. In dogs, the teeth are
numbered consecutively from the rostral midline to the caudal end of each quadrant.
In cats, where the complement of teeth is reduced (the first maxillary premolar and
the first and second mandibular premolars are absent), some numbers are skipped in
the premolar region.
On the completed cat dental record sheet (Fig. 3.5b), plaque and calculus
accumulation can be noted as mild, moderate or severe. We do not routinely score the
degree of accumulation of plaque or calculus, as they will be removed during the
periodontal therapy.
Note that only abnormalities are recorded on the chart. Gingivitis has been
recorded using the modified Loe and Silness gingival index. Sites with increased
periodontal probing depths are marked on the occlusal view.
Abbreviations are used when filling in the record sheet. It is important that a list
of what the abbreviations mean is available. A list of commonly used abbreviations is
given in Table 3.5.
Table 3.5 Common abbreviations
NAD
 No abnormality detected
ORL
 Odontoclastic resorptive lesion
GR
G ingival recession
GH
Gingival hyperplasia
UCF
 Uncomplicated crown fracture
CCF
 Complicated crown fracture
UCRF
 Unc omplic ated crown an d root fracture
CCRF
Complic ated crown and root fracture
Wear (abrasion or attrition) facet
4
Radiography
Radiography is a vital diagnostic tool in veterinary dentistry. Radiographs are
required to:
· Reach a diagnosis
· Plan optimal treatment
· Perform certain procedures
· Assess the ouitcome of treatment performed.
General anaesthesia is required for radiography. Ideally, clinical examination and
recording should precede the radiographic evaluation. It is also useful to clean the
teeth before any radiographs are taken. Dental calculus, because it is radiodense, can
obscure pathological lesions on a radiograph.
DENTAL RADIOGRAPHY
For a dental radiograph to be diagnostic, it should be an accurate representation of the
size and shape of the tooth without superimposition of adjacent structures (Fig. 4.1).
Intra-oral (film placed inside mouth and X-ray beam directed from outside the mouth
through the tooth and adjacent structures onto the film) radiographic techniques are
therefore required. The two basic techniques are:
1. Parallel technique for the mandibular premolars and molars
2. Bisecting angle technique for all other teeth.
Figure 4.1
A diagnostic view. For a dental radiograph to be diagnostic, it should be an accurate
representation of the size and shape of the tooth without superimposition of adjacent structures.
 Intra-oral placement of dental film and parallel technique gives an accurate representation of the
mandibular third and fourth premolars and the first molar, as well as detail of the mandibular bone
B  ss  n  o   s    s    
defined. The enamel is seen as an incompletely visualized radiodense band that covers the crown and
tapers to a fine edge at the cervical margin of the tooth. The dentine is less radiodense than enamel
and accounts for the bulk of the hard tissues of the tooth. The cementum is not visible. The pulp
cavity is the continuous radiolucent space in the centre of the tooth which extends from the coronal
portion to the apex of the roots. The wall of the alveolar tooth socket (the lamina dura) is the
radiodense line which runs parallel to the root of the tooth. The periodontal ligament space is the
fine radiolucent line between the lamina dura and the root of the tooth. The cortical bone on the
crest of the alveolar ridge is continuous with the lamina dura. The mandibular canal is clearly visible.
Contralateral (same teeth, opposite side) views should routinely be taken for
comparison.
FULL-MOUTHRADIOGRAPHS
Full-mouth radiographs describe a series of films where each tooth of the dentition is
accurately depicted in at least one view. A full-mouth radiographic series of all
animals undergoing dental examination provides valuable information, but is not
always practically or financially viable. However, it is strongly recommended that all
adult cats have full-mouth radiographs taken as part of the oral and dental
examination. Odontoclastic resorptive lesions are common in cats and clinical
examination without radiography will only detect end-stage lesions.
In cats, it is necessary to take a minimum of eight views, but 10 views are
recommended, to ensure that all teeth are properly visuialized. These are as follows:
Essential radiographic views
· Incisor view in the upper jaw
· Lateral view for each of the canines of the upper jaw
· Left and right maxillary premolar and molar views
· Mandibular incisor and canine view
· Left and right mandibular premolar and molar views.
Recommended radiographic views
· Lateral view for each of the canines of the mandible (in addition to the eight
essential views).
The choice of film size for each view is subjective. The smallest film that will
depict the area of interest should be used to facilitate film positioning. Adult periapical
size film can be used for all cat views.
In the case of dogs, full-mouth radiographs are encouraged, especially at first
examination. If this is not possible then radiographs should be taken where indicated
based on the findings during the clinical examination. In the event of full-mouth
radiographs, the size of film and the number of films used will depend upon the breed
of dog and the shape of its face.
EOUIPMENT AND MATERIALS FOR CONVENTIONAL INTRA-
ORAL RADIOGRAPHY
· X-ray machine
· X-ray film
· Processing facilities
· Mounts or envelopes for film storage.
The X-ray unit
A dental X-ray machine (Fig. 4.2) is preferable to a veterinary X-ray machine.
However, most veterinary X-ray machines can be used for dental radiography, but the
film-focus distance will need to be adjusted to between 30 and 50 cm.
SATE
Figure 4.2
 A dental X-ray unit installed in the designated dental theatre is the ideal situation.
These units are available as free standing or wall mounted. Wall mounting is usually preferable to
save space.
X-ray film
To allow intra-oral film placement and achieve high definition, dental film ( Fig. 4.3)
should be used. Dental film is single emulsion, non-screen, and is available in three
sizes (occlusal, adult periapical and child periapical) and different speeds. The dental
film is packed in either a paper or a plastic envelope, and the film is flanked by black
paper and backed by a thin lead sheet (foil) that reduces scattered radiation.
Figure 4.3
Sizes of dental film. Dental film is available in three sizes, namely occlusal (5 cm × 7
cm), periapical (3 cm X 4 cm) and paediatric (2 cm X 3 cm). The smallest film that depicts the area
of interest should be used to facilitate film positioning in the mouth.
Orientation
Ensure the correct side of the film envelope is facing the incident beam; the envelope
is marked or labelled. If exposed through the back of the envelope, the lead sheet will
 a      s  n   
pattern of the lead sheet imposed on it.
Each film has a raised dot in one corner. The dot helps with orientation when
viewing and mounting dental radiographs if the following procedure is adhered to.
Firstly, the dot should face the incident beam. Secondly, the film should be placed in
the mouth so that the dot is always facing a specific direction. We position the dot so
that it is always facing forward in the mouth. Another way of doing it is to ensure
that the film is placed so that the dot is always in the same position, i.e. facing
forward in the mouth on one side and backward in the mouth on the contralateral
side.
Exposure settings
           
definition. The actual settings required vary with different X-ray machines and with
different film-focal distances, as well as with the speed of dental film used.
 d       n  
different teeth. The X-ray unit is brought as close to the tooth that is being
radiographed as possible, so setting film-focus distance is not required.
If you are using a veterinary X-ray unit and D speed dental film, set the film-focal
distance between 30 and 50 cm and try the following exposures:
op tTeus/1en
60-70 kV
20-25 mA
 Medium/large dog
70-80 kV
20-25 mA
 Rabbit/guinea-pig
 50-60 kV
10-20 mA
Chinchila
 50-60 kV
5-15 mA.
Irrespective of the type of X-ray unit available, it is advisable to take series of trial
exposures on animals of different size to make up exposure charts prior to
undertaking dental radiography on patients.
Dental fi lm processing
Automated processors are available for dental film processing, but excellent results can
be obtained with the uise of a chair-side processor (Fig. 4.4).
Figure 4.4
 The Rinn box. A chair-side ‘darkroom' for processing dental film is a simple and
inexpensive way of processing dental film. Thorough rinsing under running water (rubbing the film
gently with your fingers until it no longer feels ‘soapy') after developing and fixing is essential to
avoid fixation stains.
Handling and mounting of dental radiographs
It is important to handle and mount processed dental films with care. Fingerprints can
damage the emulsion on the film surface and the film is easily scratched. After rinsing
thoroughly, adequate time should be allowed for the film to dry before being mounted
or else it will adhere to the mount. It is also important to archive the film in such a
way that it can be easily retrieved and identified. Remember that these films make up
part of the patient's clinical records.
Dental radiographs are viewed and mounted as if you were facing the animal and
looking into its mouth (Figs 4.5 and 4.6). The raised dot should face you when
viewing the film. Based on the anatomy of the jaws and teeth, it is then possible to
identify upper and lower jaw views. If the films were always exposed with the dot
facing forward in the mouth, then all views on the right side will have the dot in a
different position from the left-side views (Fig. 4.5). If the films were always exposed
with the dot in the same position, then all the views on one side will have the dot on
the distal aspect of the teeth and the other side will have it on the mesial aspect of the
teeth (Fig. 4.6).
Upper incisor
Right maxillary
Right upper lateral
and
Left upper lateral
Left maxillary
premolarand
canine view
canine view
canine view
premolarand
molarview
Right mandibular
Right mandibular
Leftmandibular
Leftmandibular
premolarand
lateral canine view
Mandibular
lateral canine view
premolarand
molar view
incisors and
molarview
canine view
Figure 4.5
Mounting if films are exposed with the dot facing forward in the mouth. Dental
radiographs are viewed and mounted as if you were facing the animal and looking into its mouth. The
raised dot should face you when viewing the film. Based on the anatomy of the jaws and teeth, it is
then possible to identify upper and lower jaw views. If the films are always exposed with the dot
facing forward in the mouth, then all views on the right side will have the dot in a different position
from the left-side views. This diagram depicts how we would mount a full-mouth series of cat
radiographs when all the films have been exposed with the dot facing forward. This is our preferred
method.
From Gorrel C, Derbyshire S (2005): Veterinary Dentistry for the Nurse and Technic ian, with permission of Elsevier.
Upper incisor
Right maxillary
Right upper lateral
and
Lef upper lateral
Left maxillary
canine view
premolar and
canine view
canine vew
premolar and
molarview
molarview
Rightmandibular
Right mandibular
Leftmandibular
Left mandibular
premolar and
lateral canine view
Mandibular
lateral canine view
premolarand
molar view
incisors and
molar view
canine view
Figure 4.6
Mounting if films are exposed with the dot in the same position. If the films are always
exposed with the dot in the same position, then all the views on one side will have the dot on the
distal aspect of the teeth and the views on the other side will have it in the mesial aspect of the teeth.
This diagram depicts how we would mount a full-mouth series of cat radiographs if the films had
been exposed with the dot always in the same position.
From Gorrel C, Derbyshire S (2005): Veterin ary Dentistry for the Nurse
INTRA-ORAL RADIOGRAPHIC TECHNIOUES
the film.
· The parallel technique is used to radiograph the mandibular premolars and molars
(Fig. 4.7).
· All other teeth are radiographed using the bisecting angle technique (Fig. 4.8).
X-ray beam
Endotracheal tube
Film
8
X-ray beam
06
Long axis of tooth
parallel and close
to X-ray film
Film
Figure 4.7
The parallel technique.
(a) With the patient in lateral recumbency (with the side to be radiographed uppermost), the film is
placed between the tongue and the teeth and pushed as far down into the sublingual fossa as possible.
(b) The X-ray beam is then directed from lateral to medial at right angles to the long axis of the tooth.
X-ray beam
Long axis of tooth
90°
Bisecting angle
Film
Comecl
Figure 4.8
 The bisecting angle technique. To avoid foreshortening or elongation of the image, an
imaginary plane is drawn halfway between the plane of the film and a plane through the long axis of
the tooth, i.e. at the bisecting angle, and the X-ray beam is directed perpendicular to this plane. In
this way, both sides of the triangles formed are the same length and the resulting image of the tooth is
similar to the real tooth.
DnofElsevier
The parallel technique:
· The patient is placed in lateral recumbency (with the side to be radiographed
ulppermost).
· Film is placed between the tongue and the teeth and pushed as far down into the
sublingual fossa as possible.
· The X-ray beam is then directed from lateral to medial at right angles to the long axis
of the tooth.
The bisecting angle technique:
· An imaginary plane is drawn halfway between the plane of the film and a plane
through the long axis of the tooth, i.e. at the bisecting angle, and the X-ray beam is
directed perpendicular to this plane; this is important to avoid foreshortening or
elongation of the teeth in the resulting image.
To achieve correct positioning requires a mental image of the normal orientation,
handles can be used to visualize these planes outside the mouth and so aid the
positioning of the beam. A common problem is to 'miss the apex' of a tooth (especially
on canine teeth) due to poor estimation of root length or position.
It may be helpful to position the patient as follows:
· Sternal recumbency for the incisors in the upper jaw
· Dorsal recumbency for the mandibular incisors
· Dorsal or lateral recum bency for mandi bular canines.
The premolar and molar views of the upper jaw of the cat are difficult. Often, the
wedge or small sandbag under the nose, thus tilting the head up so that the dental
arch is parallel with the table, will help avoid this.
        
 s h   o o  rd    n s s
necessary to take more than one view, changing the angle of the incident beam
slightly (either rostrally or caudally), to be able to visualize both roots separately.
EXTRA-ORALFILMPLACEMENT
Extra-oral views are not ideal for dental examination, mainly due to superimposition
of the contralateral side, which obscuires the image and causes distortion of the image.
However, it may be possible to obtain diagnostic radiographs of the maxillary and
S   d      s s
with wide skulls. Some examiners routinely use extra-oral film placement to
radiograph the maxillary premolars and molars in the cat. The technique is depicted
in Fig. 4.9.
X-raybeam
Palate-
Film
Figure 4.9
Extra-oral film placement. The film is placed on the table and the animal is placed in
 dorsolateral recumbency with the side to be radiographed closest to the film, i.e. the lower side of the
animal's head. The mouth is held wide open using a radiolucent device, e.g. a plastic needle cap.
Tilting the head rotates the contralateral side away and an open mouth should mean the beam passes
only through the soft tissue of the contralateral side. The tilting will place maxillary teeth almost
parallel to the film, but the beam still requires adjustment according to the bisecting angle technique
to reduce image distortion.
From Gorrel C (2004): Veterinary Dentistry for the General Practitioner, with permisson of Elsevier
THEPARALLAXEFFECT
As a radiograph is two-dimensional, it is not possible to tell which of two objects in
the image is nearer to the viewer. It is often necessary to know at what depth an
object is - for example, in locating an ectopic unerupted tooth. When a second image
is taken, after rotating the beam position around the object's axis, the image of the
object will move relative to other structures. When the object appears to move in the
same direction as the shift in the X-ray head, it is placed lingually (nearer to the film);
 n  d   s ne    n s  
film). This technique is also useful to separate and identify two overlying roots, e.g.
the mesiobuccal and palatal roots of an upper carnassial tooth in carnivores.
The SLOB rule (same direction lingual, opposite direction buccal) may help you
remember the parallax effect. To use the SLOB rule you need to know the original and
second beam position. An object that has moved in the same direction as you have
moved the incident beam is lingually located. Conversely, an object that has moved in
the opposite direction to that which the incident beam has been moved is buccally
located.
An easy way to visualize this is to place two similarly sized objects one in front of
the other, both in front of a white wall. Use a semi-darkened room. Stand in front of
both objects, take a torch and shine the beam at both objects, noting the position of
the shadows on the wall. Then move the torch to the left or right and observe how the
shadows of the two objects move relative to each other.
RADIOGRAPHY
· X-ray machine
· Digital sensors
· Computer and software.
Both indirect and direct digital systems are available on the market for intra-oral
radiography. The digital sensor replaces conventional film. The advantages of using
digital radiography include speed, reduction in exposure requirements and easier
RADIOGRAPHIC INTERPRETATION
The radiographs should be viewed on a viewing box with minimal peripheral light
those being evaluated, are used for comparative purposes. A good knowledge of the
   a n   ss s   n
imperative to avoid misdiagnosis. Normal radiographic features (teeth and bone) are
outlined in Chapter 1 and pathological radiographic features are covered in Sections
3-7.
PERIODONTAL DISEASE
5
Periodontal disease - an introduction
i.e. oral bacteria, and is limited to the periodontium. It is probably the most common
disease seen in small animal practice, with the great majority of dogs and cats over
the age of 3 years having a degree of disease that warrants intervention.
Periodontal  disease is a collective term  for a number of plaque-induced
inflammatory lesions that affect the periodontium. It is a uinique infection in that it is
not associated with a massive bacterial invasion of the tissues. Gingivitis is
inflammation of the gingiva and is the earliest sign of disease. Individuals with
lintreated  gingivitis may develop periodontitis. The inflammatory reactions in
periodontitis result in destruction of the periodontal ligament and alveolar bone. The
result of untreated periodontitis is ultimately exfoliation of the affected tooth. Thus,
gingivitis is inflammation that is not associated with destruction (loss) of supporting
tisslie - it is reversible. In contrast, periodontitis is inflammation where the tooth has
lost a variable degree of its support (attachment) - it is irreversible
Infection of the periodontium may cause discomfort to the affected animal. There
is also strong evidence that a focus of infection in the oral cavity can cause disease of
distant organs. Consequently, prevention and treatment of periodontal diseases is,
contrary to common belief, not a cosmetic issuie, but a general health and welfare
issule!
AETIOLOGY
The primary cause of gingivitis and periodontitis is accumulation of dental plaque on
the tooth surfaces. Calculus (tartar) is only a secondary aetiological factor.
Classic experiments have demonstrated that accumulation of plaque on the tooth
tissues, and that removal of the plaque leads to disappearance of the clinical signs of
this inflammation.
Dental plaque
Dental plaque is a biofilm composed of aggregates of bacteria and their by-products,
salivary components, oral debris, and occasional epithelial and inflammatory cells.
Plaque accumulation starts within minutes on a clean tooth surface. The initial
populate the subgingival region if left undisturbed.
The formation of plaque involves two processes, namely the initial adherence of
bacteria and then the continued accumulation of bacteria due to a combination of
bacterial multiplication and further aggregation of bacteria to those cells that are
already attached. As soon as a tooth becomes exposed to the oral cavity, its surfaces
are covered by the pellicle (an amorphous coating of salivary proteins and
glycoproteins). The pellicle alters the charge and free energy of the tooth surfaces,
which increases the efficiency of bacterial adhesion. Certain specific bacteria such as
   n      
These bacteria produce extracellular polysaccharides, which then aggregate other
bacteria that are not otherwise able to adhere.
           g
facultative anaerobic bacteria. As gingivitis develops, plaque extends subgingivally.
Aerobes consume oxygen and a low redox potential is created, which makes the
population does not decrease, but with increasing numbers of anaerobes, the
aerobic/anaerobic  ratio  decreases. The  subgingival  florae  associated  with
periodontitis are predominantly anaerobic and consists of Porphyromonas spp.,
Prevotella spp., Peptostreptococcus spp., Fusobacterium spp. and spirochetes. High
levels of Porphyromonas spp. and spirochetes are consistently associated  with
progressive periodontitis in the dog. The bacterial florae of cats with and without
gingivitis and periodontitis are similar to those found in humans and dogs under
similar conditions.
To summarize, the first bacteria to adhere to the pellicle are aerobic Gram-
           
further down the gingival sulcus, the environment becomes suitable for growth of
anaerobic organisms, motile rods and spirochetes.
Dental calculus
Dental calculus is mineralized plaque. However, a layer of plaque always covers
calculus.  Both  supragingival  and  subgingival plaque becomes mineralized.
Supragingival calculus per se does not exert an irritant effect on the gingival tissues.
The main importance of calculus in periodontal disease seems to be its role as a
plaque-retentive surface. This is supported by well-controlled animal and clinical
studies that have shown that the removal of subgingival plaque on top of subgingival
calculus will result in healing of periodontal lesions and the maintenance of healthy
periodontal tissues.
PATHOGENESIS
The pathogenic mechanisms involved in periodontal disease include:
· Direct injury by plaque microorganisms
· Indirect injury by plaque microorganisms via inflammation.
The microbiota in periodontal pockets is in a continual state of flux; periodontitis
is a dynamic infection caused by a combination of bacterial vectors that change over
time. As a result, the molecular events that trigger and sustain the inflammatory
reactions constantly change. Many microbial products have little or no direct toxic
immune inflammatory reactions that cause the tissue damage. It is now well accepted
that it is the host's response to the plaque bacteria, rather than microbial virulence per
se, that directly causes the tissue damage.
gingiva. Sulcus depths are normal (i.e. periodontal probing depths are 1-3 mm in the
of the coronal part of the periodontal ligament allows apical migration of the
epithelial attachment and the formation of a pathological periodontal pocket (i.e.
periodontal probing depths increase). If the inflammatory disease is permitted to
progress, the crestal portion of the alveolar process begins to resorb. Alveolar bone
proceed apically on  a horizontal  level. Horizontal bone  destruction  is often
accompanied by gingival recession, so periodontal pockets may not form. If there is no
gingival recession the periodontal pocket is supraalveolar, i.e. above the level of the
alveolar margin. The pattern of bone destruction may also proceed in a vertical
direction along the root to form angular bony defects. The periodontal pocket is now
intra-or subalveolar, i.e. below the level of the crestal bone.
process. Tissue destruction occurs as acute bursts of disease activity followed by
relatively quiescent periods. The acute burst is clinically characterized by rapid
deepening of the periodontal pocket as periodontal ligament fibres and alveolar bone
are destroyed by the inflammatory reactions. The quiescent phase is not associated
with clinical or radiographic evidence of disease progression. However, complete
healing does not occur during this quiescent phase, because subgingival plaque
remains on the root surfaces and inflammation persists in the connective tissuie. The
inactive phase can last for extended periods
Other conditions, such as physical or psychological stress and malnutrition, may
impair protective responses, such as the production of antioxidants and acute phase
proteins, and can aggravate periodontitis, but do not actually cauise destructive tissue
inflammation. A genetic predisposition to destructive inflammation of the
Significance
Undisturbed plaque accumulation results in gingivitis. While some individuals with
untreated gingivitis will develop periodontitis, not all animals with untreated
gingivitis do so. It cannot be predicted which individuals with gingivitis will develop
periodontitis. However, animals in which clinically healthy gingivae are maintained
will not develop periodontitis. Consequently, the aim in periodontal disease prevention
and treatment is to establish and maintain clinically healthy gingivae to prevent
periodontitis.
TREATMENT
General considerations
The treatment of periodontal disease is aimed at controlling the cauise of the
inflammation, i.e. dental plaque. Conservative or cause-related periodontal therapy
consists of removal of plaque and calculus, and any other remedial procedures
required, under general anaesthesia, in combination with daily maintenance of oral
hygiene. In other words, the treatment of periodontal disease has two components:
1. Maintenance of oral hygiene
2. Professional periodontal therapy.
Maintenance of oral hygiene is performed by the owner and is often called home
care. Its effectiveness depends on the motivation and technical ability of the owner
and the cooperation of the animal.
Professional periodontal therapy is performed under general anaesthesia and
includes supra-and subgingival scaling, rootplaning and tooth crown polishing.
The term ‘dental prophylaxis’ or ^prophy’ has been used to encompass clinical
prophylaxis, i.e. steps taken to prevent disease development and progression, is not the
professional periodontal therapy carried out under general anaesthesia but the daily
home care regime to remove plaque. If no home care is instituted, then plaque will
rapidly reform after a professional periodontal therapy procedure and the disease will
progress. The owner must be made aware that home care is the most essential
component in both preventing and treating periodontal disease.
The aim of treatment differs whether the patient has gingivitis only or if there is
also periodontitis.
Gingivitis
Gingivitis is by definition reversible. Removal or adequate reduction of plaque will
restore inflamed gingivae to health. Once clinically healthy gingivae have been
achieved, these can be maintained by daily removal or reduction in the accumulation
of plaque. In short, the treatment of gingivitis is to restore the inflamed tissues to
clinical health and then to maintain clinically healthy gingivae, thus preventing
periodontitis. The purpose of the professional periodontal therapy in the gingivitis
            
toothbrushing). Once the teeth have been cleaned it remains up to the owner to
remove the plaque that re-accumulates on a daily basis.
Summary for treatment of gingivitis:
 Educating the owner to uinderstand the disease process
· Instituting a daily home care regimen by the owner - ideally, toothbrushing with a
pet toothpaste in conjunction with a dental hygiene product
· Professional periodontal therapy (supra-and subgingival scaling and polishing)
inder general anaesthesia to remove dental deposits (plaque and calculus)
· Regular check-ups to ensure that the owner is following recommendations and to
boost the owner's motivation.
Periodontitis
Untreated gingivitis may progress to periodontitis. In most instances in a practice
situation, periodontitis is irreversible. It is important to remember that periodontitis is
a site-specific disease, i.e. it may affect one or more sites of one or several teeth. The
aim of treatment is thus to prevent development of new lesions at other sites and to
prevent further tissue destruction at sites which are already affected.
Professional periodontal therapy removes dental deposits above and below the
gingival margin. It then rests with the owner to ensure that plaque does not re-
accumulate. Meticulous supragingival plaque control, by means of daily
toothbrushing and adjunctive antiseptics when indicated, will prevent migration of
the plaque below the gingival margin. If the subgingival tooth surfaces are kept clean,
the suilcuilar epithelium will reattach
In  patients with suspected periodontitis, I recommend instituting daily
toothbrushing 3-4 weeks prior to the planned professional periodontal therapy if the
animal will allow it. This will result in less inflamed tissue at the time of professional
therapy and will allow assessment of the ability of the owner to perform home care. If
home care is not possible, the professional treatment will need to be more radical, e.g.
extraction of teeth that could potentially have been retained with good home care.
Periodontal surgery is the term used for certain specific surgical techniques
aimed at preserving the periodontium. Periodontal surgery techniques include closed
curettage, gingivoplasty, various flap techniques, osseous surgery, guided tissue
regeneration and, of course, implants. The techniques create accessibility for
         r
facilitates plaque control by home care regimes. Some techniques are aimed at
regeneration of periodontal attachment lost, e.g. guided tissue regeneration.
Periodontal surgery   is never first-line treatment for periodontal disease
Conservative management of periodontal disease (i.e. thorough supra-and subgingival
scaling, rootplaning and polishing), in combination with daily meticulous home care,
is always the first step. Periodontal surgery should only be performed where the owner
has shown the ability to keep the mouth clean. If a client cannot maintain good oral
hygiene measuires in his pet, then in the interest of the well-being of the animal there
is no indication for surgery.
Summary for treatment of periodontitis:
· Educating the owner to understand the disease process
· Training and motivating the owner to perform daily home care
 Instituting a daily toothbrushing regimen by the owner
· Professional periodontal therapy - this includes supra-and subgingival scaling and
polishing, rootplaning and extraction of unsalvageable teeth under general
anaesthesia
· Regular check-ups to ensure that the owner is following recommendations and to
boost the owner's motivation
· Periodontal surgery may be indicated (if the owner has shown the ability to
maintain adequate plaque control).
6
Natural progression of disease
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Halitosis.
PATIENT DETAILS
A 14-month-old, neutered male whippet.
CASE HISTORY
The dog was seen in primary practice for a non-oral problem (suturing of a skin
laceration after running through a barbed wire fence while chasing rabbits). The
owners were concerned about a possible oral infection as the dog had halitosis. They
were worried about the risk of infecting their children as the dog was licking them in
the face.
ORAL EXAMINATION - CONSCIOUS
The dog was amenable to conscious oral examination, which confirmed the halitosis
and revealed a generalized gingivitis.
ORAL EXAMINATION - UNDER GENERAL ANAESTHETIC
See the front page of the dental record for details of findings (Fig. 6.1a) and the back
page of the dental record for details of the treatment performed (Fig. 6.1b).
?
DrCeciaGelScMAMBDDSHonFAVDDEVDCMRCVS
Client..CASEPGRIo1.....
Voterinary Dentistry and Oral Surgery Reflerrals
Animal.Pog-naturelprearessiow
Cinician....
Compno..
DENTAL RECORD:DOG
Student.
OCCLUSALEVALUATION
EXTRAORALFINDINGS
ORAL SOFT TISSUES
OTHERRELEVANTFEATURES
PLAQUE
Incisorooclusion...
RPMIRMC
Canine ooclusion..
Norualfor.
Premolar alignment...
dplicesephalie
bred,Le.mia
Distal PIM ooclusion...
relativemandioular
CALCULUS
Head symmetry.....
"braonganthia
RPMIRICLC
Individual leethc..
Other......
?
ORALPROBLEMLIST
THERAPEUTIC PLAN
1.Moderategeneralizedgingivitis
1.PeriodevtaLtherapy Rnd howe oore
PERIODONTICS
ORAL SURGERY (Note siles on graph -X)
Sonic scaling
uitrasonic scaling
Closed extracion(s]:
Subgingival curetage
Periodontal debridement
Open extractions]
Air polishing
incisional biopsy
Excisional biopsy
Periodontal surgery
othenlcon
OTHER DENTAL PROCEDURES
COMPLICATIONS/COMMENTS
M
AMM
SUCCE
VV
aspect
aspect
Bucca
asoecl
6OP
80
407
406405
404
304
307
308
309
310
311
EE
Figure 6.1
 Front page (a) and back page (b) of the dental record
(a) All clinical findings are reported on the front page of the dental record. Normal periodontal
probing depth (PPD) is not noted on the dental record to avoid clutter. This dog had no increased
periodontal probing sites. Apart from the generalized gingivitis, the only other abnormality detected
was absence of 105, 305 and 405.
(b) Details of treatment are reported on the back page of the dental record. Treatment consisted of
periodontal therapy (supra-and subgingival scaling and crown polishing). Radiographs were taken that
confirmed that 105, 305 and 405 were congenitally absent.
After Gorrel C, Derbyshire S (2005): Veterinary Dentistry for the Nurse and Technic ian, with permission of Elsevier. After Gorrel C, Derbyshire S (2005):
Veterin ary Den tistry for the Nurse and Technic ian, with permission of Elsevier.
In summary, examination under general anaesthesia confirmed the moderate
generalized gingivitis (Fig. 6.2a, b). There was no evidence of periodontitis, i.e. no
gingival recession and no increased periodontal probing depth at any site (Fig. 6.3).
There was moderate accumulation of calculus, especially on the buccal aspect of the
l1pper fourth premolar and first molar bilaterally (Fig. 6.2a).
(b)
Figure 6.2
Lateral photographs of the left upper premolar and molar region (a) and of the right
lower jaw (b).
(a) Note the swelling and reddening of the gingival margin indicating moderate to severe gingival
    n        s  
dental deposits (plaque and calculus).
(b) Dental deposits have been removed. The gingival inflammation is evident, especially interproximal
408 and 409.
Figure 6.3
 Lateral photograph of gingival probing of sulcus of 1o7. The probe is inserted at
several sites around the whole circumference of each tooth to measure periodontal probing depth. In
this dog, the probe could not be inserted to a depth greater than 1-2 mm at any site around any
tooth, i.e. only normal sulcus depths were recorded. This is a case of gingivitis, with no evidence of
periodontitis.
FURTHERINVESTTGATTONS
Radiographs were taken at sites of the missing premolars (105, 305 and 405) to
confirm that they were congenitally absent.
ORAL PROBLEMLIST
1. Generalized gingivitis, uncomplicated by periodontitis
2. Congenital absence of 105, 305 and 405.
THEORY REFRESHER
Periodontal disease is a collective term for a number of plaque-induced inflammatory
lesions that affect the periodontium
In gingivitis, the plaque-induced inflammation is limited to the soft tissue of the
gingiva. Sulcus depths are normal (i.e. periodontal probing depths are 1-3 mm in the
dog and 0.5-l mm in the cat). As periodontitis occuirs, the inflammatory destruction
            
          
progress, the crestal portion of the alveolar process begins to resorb. Alveolar bone
destruction type and extent are diagnosed radiographically. The resorption may
          
alveolar margin. The pattern of bone destruction may also proceed in a vertical
direction along the root to form angular bony defects. The periodontal pocket is now
intra-or subalveolar, i.e. below the level of the crestal bone.
Diagnosis of periodontal disease relies on  clinical examination of  the
periodontium in the anaesthetized animal. In addition, radiography is mandatory if
there is evidence of periodontitis on clinical examination. It is essential to
differentiate between gingivitis and periodontitis in order to institute appropriate
treatment. In individuals with gingivitis, the aim is to restore the tissues to clinical
health; in individuals with established periodontitis, the aim of therapy is to prevent
progression of disease.
The following parameters need to be assessed and recorded for each tooth in all
patients:
1. Gingivitis and gingival index
2. Periodontal probing depth (PPD)
3. Gingival recession (GR)
4. Furcation involvement
5. Mobility
6. Periodontal/clinical attachment loss (PAL/CAL).
Periodontal probing depth, gingival recession, furcation involvement and
mobility measure the extent of destruction of the periodontium, i.e. they assess the
presence and severity of periodontitis.
 It is essential to remember that PPD is not necessarily correlated with severity of
d          s 
pocket if there is no attachment loss), while gingival recession may result in the
absence of a pocket but also minimal remaining attachment. Periodontal attachment
          s ( si
point on the tooth) to the base or apical extension of the pathological pocket. It is thus
a more accurate assessment of tissue loss in periodontitis. PAL is either measured
directly with a periodontal probe or it is calculated (e.g. PPD + gingival recession).
 In this case the inflammation was limited to the gingivae, i.e. gingivitis.
CLINICAL TIPS
 Plaque control is essential and home care (ideally daily toothbrushing) must be instituted.
 Differentiate between gingivitis and periodontitis in order to choose appropriate treatment.
 Periodontal probing depth does not always correlate with loss of attachment.
· Plaque disclosing solution is a useful tool to monitor the efficacy of toothbrushing.
 Radiographs should be taken of sites where teeth are clinically absent to determine whether the
tooth is congenitally absent or unerupted.
TREATMENT OPTIONS
A combination of regular professional periodontal therapy (to remove established
dental deposits) and daily home care (to minimize plaque accumulation) is the
treatment for gingivitis.
TREATMENTPERFORMED
Periodontal therapy (supra-and subgingival scaling and crown polishing), to remove
plaque and calculus and provide a clean environment (which the owner can then keep
clean with daily toothbrushing), was performed.
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
· Daily toothbrushing
(o pa pe aa n susa a oi ma aa ip ap e ppe no iap lap e a ·
· The dog was booked for conscious examination l month later.
The owners and the eldest daughter (15 years old) were instructed in
toothbrushing technique. They were given complementary toothbrush and paste, and
advised to start daily brushing.
RECHECKS
At recheck 1 month later, the owners reported that there was no halitosis. The dog had
readily accepted toothbrushing and the eldest daughter was brushing the dog's teeth
every evening. The dog would not eat the dental diet and had shown no interest in
dental hygiene chews (in fact, he had buried the dental hygiene chews in the garden).
Conscious clinical examination revealed that the gingivae were clinically healthy
(Fig. 6.4) and plaque disclosing solution revealed virtually no plaque (the daughter
had brushed the teeth just before the appointment).
Figure6.4
 Lateral photograph of the right rostral oral cavity. The gingivae show no clinical
evidence of inflammation, i.e. they are pale pink and there is no bleeding on brushing or careful
probing. Daily toothbrushing for 1 month has resolved the gingivitis.
The dog was rechecked (conscious examination) every 6 months for 3 years. The
daughter performed meticulous toothbrushing and the gingivae were clinically
healthy. He was placed under general anaesthesia to suture a skin laceration when he
was 4 years old and oral examination at the time revealed clinically healthy gingivae
with probing depths of 1 mm or less at all sites, i.e. no evidence of periodontitis. It was
decided to put him on an annual recall system.
He was brought in to see me 9 months later due to halitosis. The eldest daughter
had left home to attend university and the parents had not been brushing his teeth.
Conscious clinical exam revealed the presence of dental deposits and generalized
gingivitis, complicated by periodontitis (Fig. 6.5a, b). Based on the findings at
conscious examination, daily toothbrushing was immediately resumed and the dog
was booked for examination under general anaesthesia and periodontal treatment 3
weeks later.
b
Figure 6.5
Anterior (a) and lateral (b) photographs of the rostral oral cavity. There is obvious
accumulation of dental deposits and a marked gingival inflammatory response. Note the gingival
recession affecting 101, 201, 202, 203, 204 and all lower incisors. There is also an uncomplicated
crown fracture (UCF) of 203.
Conscious examination 3 weeks later showed reduction in the severity of the
gingivitis (Fig. 6.6a, b). Oral examination under general anaesthesia confirmed
periodontitis at several sites. In fact, some of the lower incisors had lost so much
periodontal attachment (Fig. 6.7a, b) that they were extracted. Following the
professional periodontal therapy and extractions, the owners resumed daily
toothbrushing and the gingivitis resolved. See the front of the dental record for details
of findings (Fig. 6.8a) and the back of the dental record for details of treatment (Fig.
6.8b).
(b)
Figure 6.6
Anterior (a) and lateral (b) photographs of the rostral oral cavity. Note the reduction
in gingival inflammation (gingivae are less oedematous and less red) achieved with 3 weeks of daily
toothbrushing without removing dental deposits. Whenever possible, it is useful to institute daily
toothbrushing prior to the professional periodontal cleaning. There will be a reduction in gingivitis
and the dog will be habituated to the daily toothbrushing, which is important immediately after
 periodontal therapy.
(b)
Figure6.7
Anterior view of the lower incisors.
(a) The periodontal probe is in situ at the bucco-distal aspect of 301.
(b) The periodontal probe has been removed from the pocket and placed on the surface of the gingiva
to demonstrate the recorded probing depth. At this site there was a probing depth of 5 mm and a
 gingival recession of 3 mm. The periodontal attachment loss is thus 8 mm.
Dr Cecia Gomel BScMA,Vet MBDDS,Hon FAVD,Dipl EVDCMRCVS
Clent.CASE PORIO1.
Veterinary Dentistry and Oral Surgery Referrals
Date:.
Animal.,Pog:ratureLprogressiow
Chinician.....
DENTALRECORD:DOG
Comp no.....
Student.
OCCLUSALEVALUATION
EXTRAORAL FINDINGS
ORAL SOFT TISSUES
OTHER RELEVANT FEATURES
PLAQUE
Incisor occlusion...
Canine oocusion....
Horwal foc.
Premolaralignment..
dplicosephalie
Distal PM occlusion
brachyanathia)
CALCULUS
Head symmetry...
Individual teethc.
Oher..
ORAL PROBLEMLIST
THERAPEUTICPLAN
1.Periodoutaltherapyfollowed by howeoare
3.Wreomplle
tederewm festwr Ros
ydeuGoipe
PERIODONTICS
ORAL SURGERY (Note sies on graph -X)
Sonic scaling
UIrasonic scaling
Closed extraction[s]
Subgingival curettage
Periodontal debridement
Open exracions):.0.so2.0t.1oo.Flepslasdwith5/oMonry
Pumice polishing
Air polishing
Incisionalbiopsy
Excisional biopsy
Periodonlalsgory
othenlco
PAL10buaL4wm
401buaLm
201,202,208,204bul
4mm
40lingual=5mm
wongo
Bll5mm
102.bAl.=..mm.
PoRbal.Arm.
4o2lingualsm
403bual=4
OTHER DENTAL PROCEDURES
COMPLICATIONS/COMMENTS
adiographs of all tecth affee
Radiograph os HCF (1 film)
Ahtrushi
302.401,402 (1 flm)
RIGHT
08
107
106
208
607
210
leoong
V
VV
Buccal
aspect
aspect
Bucca
aspect
60
408
407
406
304
08
09
310
Figure 6.8
Front page (a) and back page (b) of the dental record.
that
periodontitis is a site-specific disease. PPD is recorded on the occlusal view of the tooth on the dental
record so that you can easily identify the precise site of disease. Normal periodontal probing depth
(PPD) is not noted on the dental record to avoid clutter. However, when gingival recession is present,
then PPDs are always recorded so that periodontal attachment loss (PAL) can be calculated (GR +
PPD) and entered on the record at its precise site in green ink. PAL is a more accurate assessment of
attachment loss. In this case, there was insufficient space on the record sheet to add PAL at precise
sites, so it was recorded on the back of the record sheet in green ink in the *periodontics' section.
(b) Details of treatment are reported on the back page of the dental record. Treatment consisted of
periodontal therapy (supra-and subgingival scaling and crown polishing), and open extraction of 301,
302, 401 and 402. Flaps were closed with 5/0 Monocryl. Radiographs were taken of all teeth affected
by periodontitis to assess the full extent of the disease. A baseline radiograph of 203 (uncomplicated
crown fracture) was taken to assess pulp and periapical status. Post-extraction radiographs were also
taken.
After Gorrel C, Derbyshire S (2005): Veterinary Dentisry for the Nurse and Technician, with permission of Elsevier. After Gorrel C, Derbyshire S (2005):
Veterinary Dentistry for the Nurse and Technician, with permission of Elsevier.
After this treatment, the dog was placed on an annual recall system for 5 years. In
this time, he was examined under anaesthesia twice. The owners were brushing daily
and no further intervention was required. The gingivae remained clinically healthy
and there was no progression of the periodontitis (affected sites remained static and
no new sites developed).
PROGNOSIS
The dog is allowing optimal home care, i.e. daily toothbrushing. The result is
maintenance of clinically healthy gingivae and the prevention of periodontitis. As
   s    o  so  s 
maintained. If they reduce the frequency of brushing or stop altogether, then
periodontitis will rapidly develop.
COMMENTS
The dog is now 10 years old. He maintains healthy gingivae and has not developed
further periodontitis. His history is really a textbook description of the natural
progression of periodontal disease, i.e. undisturbed plaque accumulation results in
gingivitis and untreated gingivitis often results in periodontitis. In a periodontitis-
To summarize, when he was 14 months old he presented with gingivitis due to
plaque accumulation. For 3 years he maintained clinically healthy gingivae as a
 s   n      
stopped and within 9 months of undisturbed plaque accumulation he presented with
periodontitis (severe enough to require extraction  of several teeth).  Daily
toothbrushing was then resuimed and for 5 years he has maintained gingival health
with no further periodontitis.
Client education is of paramount importance in preventing and treating
periodontal diseases. They must be fully aware that it is the daily removal of plaque by
periodontal therapy lasts at most only 3 months. Feeding of a dental diet or dental
hygiene chews will reduce the accumulation of plaque and calculus, but will not result
In this case, because the daughter had been brushing the teeth the owners had
not quite realized how important the daily toothbrushing was. It wasn't until it was
stopped and disease rapidly developed that the vital nature of daily toothbrushing
became clear to them.
Plaque disclosing solution  is a useful tool to monitor  the efficacy of
toothbrushing. I advise owners to brush as well as they possibly can and then to apply
plaque disclosing solution to identify any remaining plaque which they can then
brush away. Optimally, they should check toothbrushing efficacy with a plaque
disclosing solution frequently, e.g. initially every day and then once a week.
It must be noted that halitosis is often a sign of periodontal disease, although
gingivitis and periodontitis can be present without obvious halitosis.
It is prudent to take radiographs of sites where teeth are clinically absent to
determine whether the tooth is congenitally absent or unerupted. An increased risk of
cyst formation has been reported with unerupted teeth. The follicle of the unerupted
tooth undergoes cystic transformation. The resultant follicular (dentigerous) cyst may
cause extensive alveolar bone resorption as it increases in size. These cysts expand as
an osmotic gradient develops between the cyst lumen and the surrounding tissues. The
pressure of the expanding cyst stimulates resorption of the bone. Follicular cysts can
become large and cause extensive resorption of the surrounding alveolar bone.
Consequently, unerupted teeth that are maintained require regular radiographic
monitoring to identify development of a follicular cyst at an early stage. Treatment
then consists of removing the unerupted tooth and its associated cyst. Some clinicians
choose to extract unerupted teeth as a prophylactic measure.
The uncomplicated crown fracture of 203 has been monitored radiographically
and no pulp or periapical disease has developed, so no treatment is indicated.
7
Periodontitis in a cat
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Non-healing extraction site and ulcerated lip.
PATIENT DETAILS
A 7-year-old, neutered female, domestic short-haired cat.
CASE HISTORY
The cat had received three episodes of periodontal treatment in the last 4 years. These
had consisted of scaling, polishing and extraction (no record of which teeth or reason
for extraction). Six months prior to the referral it was noted that the left upper canine
extraction socket had not healed. The cat had received several courses of antibiotics
with no improvement. Also, the left lower canine was catching the upper lip and
causing ulceration.
The cat was referred to us for management of the non-healing extraction socket
and the lip lesion.
ORAL EXAMINATION - CONSCIOUS
The cat was relatively amenable to quick conscious oral examination, which revealed
the following:
1. Missing teeth (presumably extracted)
2. Generalized moderate to severe gingivitis
3. Non-healed extraction socket of 204
4. Ulcer left upper lip (due to traumatic occlusion from 304).
ORAL EXAMINATION-UNDER GENERAL ANAESTHETIC
See the front page of the dental record (Fig. 7.1) for details of findings.
Dr Cecila Goel BSc, MA, Vet MB, DDS, Hon FAVD,DiplEVDC,MRCVS
Clent:.CASE PGRIO.2.
Veterinary Dentistry and Oral Surgery Refemals
Date:.
Animal..AT.....
Clinician...
Comp no.....
_DENTALRECORD:CAT
Student....
OCCLUSAL EVALUATION
EXTRAORAL FINDINGS
ORAL SOFTTISSUES
OTHER RELEVANT FEATURES
Incisor occlusion:
Canine ocdlusion:
Premolar alignment:
Distal P/M occlusion:
HAP
Head symmetry.
Individual teeth:.
Other:
口
~
Figure 7.1
Dental record. All clinical findings are reported on the front page of the dental record.
Remember that periodontitis is a site-specific disease. PPD is recorded on the occlusal view of the
tooth on the dental record so that you can easily identify the precise site of disease. Normal
periodontal probing depth (PPD) is not noted on the dental record to avoid clutter. However, when
gingival recession is present, then PPDs are always recorded so that periodontal attachment loss (PAL)
can be calculated (GR + PPD) and entered on the record at its precise site in green ink. PAL is a
more accurate assessment of attachment loss.
 In summary, examination under general anaesthesia identified the following:
1. Missing teeth (103, 109, 201, 203, 204, 209 and 409)
2. Generalized moderate to severe gingivitis
3. Non-healed extraction socket of 204 (Fig. 7.2)
4. Non-healed extraction socket of 409 (Fig. 7.3)
 5. Ulcer left upper lip
6. Gingival recession affecting 104, 107 (Fig. 7.4a, b), 108, 207, 208, 304, 309, 404 and
408
7. Grade 1 furcation involvement of 207
8. Grade Il1 furcation involvement of 107 (Fig. 7.4a, b), 309 and 408
9. Grade 1I mobility of 408.
Figure7.2
Occlusal view of the non-healed extraction socket of 204.
Figure 7.3
Lateral photo of the non-healed extraction socket of 409.
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.4
 Advanced periodontitis.
(a) Bone loss and gingival recession have resulted in exposure of the furcation on the palatal aspect
of 107.
(b) Tooth 107 has a grade Il1 furcation lesion, i.e. the probe can be passed through the furcation.
FURTHER INVESTIGATIONS
Full-mouth radiographs (10 views) were taken.
RADIOGRAPHIC FINDINGS
The radiographs revealed a generalized horizontal alveolar bone loss, which was more
severe in the upper jaw (Fig. 7.5). There was extensive bone loss at the furcation of
107 (Fig. 7.5), 309 (Fig. 7.6) and 408 (Fig. 7.7). The bone loss at 408 had a vertical (as
well as horizontal) component and there was a pathological fracture of the mesial root
(Fig. 7.7). In addition, the root of the extracted 204 (Fig. 7.8) and the distal root of the
extracted 409 were retained.
Figure 7.5
 Advanced periodontitis. Radiograph reveals generalized horizontal bone loss and
extensive loss of furcation bone of 1o7.
Figure 7.6
Advanced periodontitis. Radiograph demonstrates horizontal bone loss and furcation
involvement of 309.
Figure 7.7
 Advanced periodontitis, pathological root fracture and retained root from previous
extraction. Radiograph demonstrates horizontal bone loss and external root resorption of 408.
             
differentiated from idiopathic root resorption. The bone loss at the furcation of 408 is severe. Note
the pathological fracture of the mesial root of 408, which explains the grade 1I mobility recorded for
this tooth. Note also the retained distal root from extraction of 409, which prevented healing of the
socket.
Figure 7.8
Partial extraction. Note the retained root from extraction of 204. This explains why the
socket was not healing. The pulp diameter of the retained root is much larger than that of the
contralateral tooth. In fact, the pulp diameter is compatible with an immature tooth. Consequently,
the injury that caused pulp necrosis and cessation of tooth development probably occurred before the
cat was a year old.
ORALPROBLEMLIST
1. Generalized gingivitis
2. Moderate periodontitis in 104, 108, 207, 208, 304 and 404
3. Advanced periodontitis in 107, 309 and 408 (pathological fracture of the mesial
root)
4. Root remnants from previous extractions (204 and the distal root of 409)
5. Ulcer left upper lip (due to traumatic occlusion from 304).
THEORY REFRESHER
Periodontal disease is a collective term for plaque-induced inflammatory lesions that
affect the periodontium.
In gingivitis, the plaque-induced inflammation is limited to the soft tissue of the
gingiva. Sulcus depths are normal (i.e. periodontal probing depths are 1-3 mm in the
dog and 0.5-1 mm in the cat). As periodontitis occurs, the inflammatory destruction
of the coronal part of the periodontal ligament allows apical migration of the
epithelial attachment and the formation of a pathological periodontal pocket (i.e.
destruction type and extent are diagnosed radiographically. The bone resorption may
proceed apically  on  a horizontal level.  Horizontal bone destruction is often
            
form. If there is no gingival recession, the periodontal pocket is supra-alveolar, i.e.
above the level of the alveolar margin. The pattern of bone destruction may also
proceed in a vertical direction along the root to form angular bony defects. The
periodontal pocket is now intra-or subalveolar, i.e. below the level of the crestal bone.
   s s       
root resorption needs to be differentiated from idiopathic root resorption (see Chapter
17).
         
periodontium in the anaesthetized animal. In addition, radiography to assess the type
and extent of alveolar bone destruction is mandatory if there is evidence of
periodontitis on clinical examination. It is essential to differentiate between gingivitis
and periodontitis in order to institute appropriate treatment. In individuals with
gingivitis, the aim is to restore the tissues to clinical health; in individuals with
The following parameters need to be assessed and recorded for each tooth in all
patients:
1. Gingivitis and gingival index
2. Periodontal probing depth (PPD)
3. Gingival recession (GR)
4. Furcation involvement
5. Mobility
6. Periodontal/clinical attachment loss (PAL/CAL).
Periodontal probing depth, gingival recession, furcation involvement and
presence and severity of periodontitis.
It is essential to remember that PPD is not necessarily correlated with severity of
pocket if there is no attachment loss), while gingival recession may result in the
a bsence of a pocket but also minimal remaining attachment. PAL records the distance
from the cemento-enamel junction (or from a fixed point on the tooth) to the base or
apical extension of the pathological pocket. It is thus a more accurate assessment of
tissue loss in periodontitis. PAL is either measured directly with a periodontal probe or
it is calculated (e.g. PPD + gingival recession).
A detailed examination of the periodontal ligament space and interproximal
alveolar margin requires the use of an intra-oral radiographic technique. The
alveolar margin, widening of the periodontal space, a break in the path or loss of the
radiopacity of the lamina dura and destruction of alveolar bone, resulting in supra-or
accurately the features of periodontitis because this technique provides a better view
of the alveolar margin and reveals more accurately the actual extent or depth of the
periodontal lesion in relation to the root of the tooth. Radiographs produced with a
bisecting angle technique may appear to indicate greater destruction of the alveolar
bone than is actually present, because the central ray is directed obliquely to the long
axis of the teeth and jaw, which produces dimensional distortion. Moreover, with the
bisecting angle technique, subgingival calculus may be superimposed on alveolar bone
and would thus not be detected. The film taken using a parallel technique will
demonstrate deposits of subgingival calculus and defects of the cementum, but may
not cover a sufficient area to demonstrate extensive periodontitis lesions adequately.
In the maxilla and anterior mandible, bisecting angle and parallel views of the same
region may be required to visualize the extent of the tissue destruction more
accurately.
CLINICAL TIPS
· Horizontal bone destruction is often accompanied by gingival recession and periodontal pockets
may not form.
 Try to differentiate inflammatory root resorption from idiopathic root resorption.
 Periodontal probing depth does not always correlate with loss of attachment.
· Radiographs using a parallel technique will demonstrate periodontitis more accurately.
• If home care is not tolerated, or certain teeth are not accessible to cleaning, further extractions may
be required.
· Extractions should be confirmed radiographically.
TREATMENT OPTIONS
1. Extraction of all teeth affected by periodontitis. In the absence of frequent (daily)
plaque control, periodontitis will progress. The great majority of adult cats are not
amenable to toothbrushing and extraction of all teeth showing evidence of loss of
attachment is often the treatment of choice.
2. Extraction of teeth most severely affected and then home care to try to prevent
further periodontal destruction. The owner was keen to maintain as many teeth as
possible. Also, the cat was docile and friendly, and the owner was sure that she would
allow toothbrushing.
TREATMENTPERFORMED
See the back page of the dental record (Fig. 7.9) for details of the treatment performed.
1 .Periodontal therapy to remove plaque and calculus and provide a clean
environment.
2. Open extraction of root remnants (204, distal root of 409). Successful extraction
was confirmed radiographically.
3 .Open extraction of 107, 309 and 408. Successful extraction was confirmed
radiographically.
4. Shortening and endodontic treatment and restoration of 304 to remove traumatic
occlusion and thus allow the lip ulcer to heal.
ORAL PROBLEM LIST
THERAPEUTIC PLAN
1.Generalzed gingivitis
taldebrid
aldrbrtd
409 (distal root)
5.Shortenirg Andendodortio tretent and restorationfso4
PERIODONTICS
ORAL SURGERY (Note siles on graph - X)
Sonic scaling
Uitrasonic scaling
Closed extraction（s)
Subgingivalcuretage
Periodontal debridement
Openextracton（s).204RR.09RR.309.408
Airpolishing
口
Incisional biopsy
Excisional biopsy
Periodontal surgery
OTHER DENTAL PROCEDURES
BOMPLIGATIONS/COMMENTS
1.Fall-mouthradiographs (tofils)
2.Posb-ecractionradiographs（4fums)
s.Shorteningndendodotitreatntndrestortionof so4
cookforeow
cious reehcoke
(sfilrs)
RIGH
106
04
204
206
Buccal
Buccal
oodse
aspect
Buocal
Buccal
aspect
aspect
108
107
104
103
303
304
EF
Figure 7.9
  a  d  a   ae     p
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
 Daily chlorhexidine rinse for 3 weeks
 Booked for conscious examination in 3 weeks.
RECHECKS
At recheck 3 weeks later, the owner reported that there had been no problems in
administering chlorhexidine. The extraction sites had all healed uneventfully. The
owner was shown how to brush the teeth. They were given complementary
toothbrush and paste and booked for check-up in 1 month.
At recheck 1 month later, the owner reported that she was brushing the cat's teeth
The gingivae of all teeth except 108, 207 and 208 appeared clinically healthy. There
   m         s 
with the toothbrushing.
The cat was seen 6 months later for examination under anaesthesia and
radiographic assessment of the endodontic therapy of 304. Examination showed
clinically healthy gingivae of most teeth except 108, 207 and 208, which had moderate
gingivitis and further gingival recession (i.e. periodontitis was progressing).
Radiographs confirmed successful outcome of the endodontic therapy of 304. Further
    se           
cat on an annual recall, i.e. examination under general anaesthesia and radiographs
once a year.
At recheck 1 year later, the cat had clinically healthy gingivae and no evidence of
PROGNOSIS
This cat is allowing optimal home care, i.e. daily toothbrushing. She will still require
professional treatment at regular intervals, which need to be decided based on efficacy
of home care. Annual recall may be sufficient for this particular cat.
COMMENTS
In my experience, most adult cats are not amenable to toothbrushing. However, in
situations where the owner is confident that they can do it I will give them the benefit
of the doubt. If home care is successful, as in this case, then the prognosis is excellent.
Sites that are affected by periodontitis will not regenerate, but the disease can be
halted. If home care is not tolerated, or certain teeth are not accessible to cleaning,
then further extractions are required.
8
Importance of periodontal probing depth (PPD)
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Recurrent gingivitis and halitosis.
PATIENT DETAILS
An 8-year-old, neutered female, golden retriever.
CASE HISTORY
There were no oral or dental problems until around 8 months ago, when severe
gingivitis localized to the upper canine teeth was noted. Three episodes of professional
periodontal therapy (scaling and polishing and extraction of ‘some’ teeth) under
general anaesthesia had been performed in the last 6 months and the dog had received
a short course of antibiotics following each dental cleaning. The gingivae had
appeared healthy for approximately 3 weeks after each cleaning and antibiotic course,
and then the gingival inflammation had flared up again.
The dog was referred to us for management of recurrent gingivitis affecting the
upper canine teeth. The owner did not feel that the oral inflammation was affecting
the general well-being of the dog (i.e. interested in walks and eating well), but he did
not appreciate the halitosis.
ORAL EXAMINATION - CONSCIOUS
The dog was relatively amenable to quick conscious oral examination, which revealed
the following:
1. Missing teeth (presumably extracted)
2. Generalized moderate gingivitis
3. More severe gingivitis around upper canines
4. Gingival recession of the buccal aspect of 104 and 204
5. Gingival draining tracts of the buccal aspect of 204
6. Halitosis.
ORAL EXAMINATION-UNDER GENERAL ANAESTHETIC
Dr Ceciia Gomel BSc, MA, Vet MB, DDS. Hon FAVD, Dipl EVDC,MRCVS
Clent:.CASUPORIO3
Veterinary Dentistry and Oral Surgery Referrals
Date:
Animal.IwportanetofPPD...
Cinician:
Compno..
DENTAL RECORD:DOG
Student.
OCCLUSALEVALUATION
EXTRAORAL FINDINGS
ORAL SOFT TISSUES
OTHER RELEVANT FEATURES
PLAQUE
Incisor occlusionc
RPM
Canine ooclusion.
traet ssaly ao4
Premolaralignment:
Distal PiM occlusion
CALCULUS
Head symmetry..
Other
Y
Figure 8.1
 Dental record. All clinical findings are reported on the front page of the dental record.
Remember that periodontitis is a site-specific disease. PPD is recorded on the occlusal view of the
tooth on the dental record so that you can easily identify the precise site of disease. Normal
periodontal probing depth (PPD) is not noted on the dental record to avoid clutter. However, when
gingival recession is present, then PPDs are always recorded, so that periodontal attachment loss
(PAL) can be calculated (GR + PPD) and entered on the record at its precise site in green ink. PAL is
a more accurate assessment of attachment loss.
 In summary, examination under general anaesthesia identified the following:
1. Missing teeth (101, 102, 110, 202, 205, 210, 311 and 411)
2. Generalized mild to moderate gingivitis (Fig. 8.2a, b)
3. Severe gingivitis at upper canines (Fig. 8.3a, b)
4. Gingival recession of the buccal (Fig. 8.3a, b) and palatal aspects of 104 and 204
5. Gingival draining tracts buccally of 204 (Figs 8.2b and 8.3b)
6. Gingival recession of the buccal and lingual aspects of 304 and 404
7. Gingival recession and furcation involvement (grade I1) of 206 (Figs 8.2b and 8.3b)
8. Gingival recession buccally over the distal root of 109 (Fig. 8.4) and 209
record for precise location)
10. Uncomplicated crown fracture of 208 (Fig. 8.2b).
(a)
Figulre8.2
 Lateral photographs of the right (a) and left (b) upper jaw. Generalized mild to
moderate gingivitis is evident.
(a) Note the gingival recession on the buccal aspect of 104 and over the distal root of 109.
      t  n 1q   s  a  (
located to the buccal aspect of 204 are obvious, as is the furcation involvement at 206. The crown
fracture of 208 is also obvious.
(b)
Figure 8.3
Lateral photographs centred on the right (a) and left (b) upper canine teeth.
(a) The gingiva of 104 is inflamed and there is a buccal gingival recession.
(b) The gingivae of 204 and 206 are inflamed and the gingival margin has receded apically. Three
                g
involved in the disease process.
Figuure 8.4
Lateral photograph of the right caudal maxilla. The gingiva has receded to expose most
of the buccal aspect of the distal root of 1o8. Note the location of the zygomatic and parotid papillae.
FURTHERINVESTIGATIONS
Radiographs were taken of 104, 204, 206, 109 and 209 to assess the extent and severity
of the periodontitis. A baseline radiograph of 208 (UCF) was also taken to assess pulp
and periapical status.
RADIOGRAPHIC FINDINGS
The radiographs of 104 and 204 confirmed the clinical diagnosis of periodontitis.
There was resorption of the alveolar margin and widening of the periodontal space.
The radiograph of 104 showed extensive bone loss extending beyond the apex (Fig.
8.5).
Figuure8.5
             
beyond the apex.
The radiograph of 206 showed horizontal bone loss and obvious furcation
involvement (Fig. 8.6), again confirming the clinical diagnosis of advanced
periodontitis.
Figure 8.6
Radiograph centred on 206. Marked horizontal bone loss and furcation involvement of
206 is evident.
The radiographs of 109 (Fig. 8.7a) and 209 (Fig. 8.7b) demonstrated marked
periapical destruction at the palatal root.
(D)
Figure 8.7
Radiographs centred on 109 (a) and 209 (b). Note the periapical bone destruction (of
periodontal origin) around the palatal root of both teeth.
 d       (    
ORALPROBLEMLIST
1. Generalized gingivitis
2. Periodontitis in 104, 204, 206, 109, 209, 304 and 404
3. Lateral periodontal abscess in 204
4. Class 11 (periodontic-endodontic) lesions of 109 and 209.
THEORY REFRESHER
In gingivitis, the plaque-induced inflammation is limited to the soft tissue of the
gingiva. Sulcus depths are normal (i.e. periodontal probing depths are 1-3 mm in the
            
type of alveolar bone destruction are diagnosed radiographically. The resorption may
proceed  apically  on  a horizontal  level.  Horizontal bone destruction  is  often
gingival recession, the periodontal pocket is supra-alveolar, i.e. above the level of the
alveolar margin. The pattern of bone destruction may also proceed in a vertical
direction along the root to form angular bony defects. The periodontal pocket is now
intra-or subalveolar, i.e. below the level of the crestal bone.
There are possible pathways of communication between the pulp and the
periodontium: via denuded dentine tubules, via lateral and/or accessory pulp canals,
P         s   
origin and a periodontal-type lesion may originate from the pulp. Another possibility
is that a lesion is the result of a combination of endodontic and periodontal pathology.
In this case, the periapical lesions are the consequence of spread of the periodontal
infection to involve the pulp tissue, with the development of secondary endodontic
disease as a complication.
The lesions are classified according to aetiology as follows:
· A Class 1 lesion, or endodontic-periodontic lesion, is endodontic in origin, i.e.
    t  d  s  s 
endodontic lesions.
The prognosis for long-term retention of the tooth is based on the above
classification. Class I lesions have a better prognosis, as endodontic treatment may
lead to resolution of the periodontal extension of the inflammation. In contrast, Class
H1 and Il1 lesions require endodontic treatment as well as extensive periodontal
therapy, and the periodontal destruction is often too extensive to be amenable to
treatment, with extraction of the tooth usually being required.
A periodontal abscess is an acute exacerbation of the process occurring in a
chronic periodontal pocket. It usually occurs from partial or complete obstruction of
the orifice of the pocket. The acute periodontal abscess may produce rapid and
extensive bone loss. In some instances, the bone loss will extend beyond the apices of
the roots of the teeth.
Diagnosis of  periodontal  disease  relies  on  clinical examination   of the
periodontium in the anaesthetized animal. In addition, radiography is mandatory if
there is evidence of periodontitis on clinical examination. It is essential to
differentiate between gingivitis and periodontitis in order to institute appropriate
treatment. In individuals with gingivitis, the aim is to restore the tissues to clinical
health; in individuals with established periodontitis, the aim of therapy is to prevent
progression of disease.
The following parameters need to be assessed and recorded for each tooth in all
patients:
1. Gingivitis and gingival index
2. Periodontal probing depth (PPD)
3. Gingival recession (GR)
4. Furcation involvement
5. Mobility
6. Periodontal/clinical attachment loss (PAL/CAL).
Periodontal probing depth, gingival recession, furcation involvement and
mobility measure the extent of destruction of the periodontium, i.e. they assess the
presence and severity of periodontitis.
It is essential to remember that PPD is not necessarily correlated with severity of
attachment loss. Gingival hyperplasia may contribute to a deep pocket (or pseudo-
             s
absence of a pocket but also minimal remaining attachment. PAL records the distance
from the cemento-enamel junction (or from a fixed point on the tooth) to the base or
apical extension of the pathological pocket. It is thus a more accurate assessment of
tissue loss in periodontitis. PAL is either measured directly with a periodontal probe or
it is calculated (e.g. PPD + gingival recession).
As already mentioned, radiography to assess the type and extent of alveolar bone
destruction  is  mandatory  for periodontitis patients.  The radiographic changes
associated with periodontal disease include resorption  of  the alveolar margin,
widening of the periodontal space, a break in the path or loss of the radiopacity of the
lamina dura, and destruction of alveolar bone resulting in supra-or infra-bony
pockets.
CLINICAL TIPS
· Supragingival scaling does not address inflammation below the gingival margin and will have no
effect on periodontitis.
 Periodontal probing at several sites around each tooth is essential.
• It is often not until an oral condition has been treated that the owner notices a difference in
behaviour.
 Lateral periodontal abscesses and ulcers in the mucous membranes are very painful.
· Radiography is mandatory if there is evidence of periodontitis on clinical examination.
 The acute periodontal abscess may produce rapid and extensive bone loss.
TREATMENT OPTIONS
Extraction of 104, 204, 206, 109 and 209 is the only treatment option. This needs to be
followed by daily home care to prevent progression of periodontitis (304 and 404) and
development of new lesions at other sites.
TREATMENT PERFORMED
The dog received the following treatment (see back page of the dental record depicted
in Fig. 8.8):
1 . Periodontal therapy
yto remove plaque and calculus and
1 provide a clean
environment.
2. Open extraction of 104, 204, 206, 109 and 209. Successful extraction was confirmed
radiographically before replacing the flaps (Fig. 8.9a, b). Figures 8.10, 8.11, 8.12, 8.13
and 8.14 show the full extent of periodontitis of these teeth.
ORALPROBLEMLIST
THERAPEUTICPLAN
3.Generalized gingivitis
1.Periedontal therRpy end hemcon.
2.xrat 104.204,206.109rd209
3.6xtract 204
4.Clas1l(peo-ndo)lesons1og and209
5.WCF20g
PERIODONTICS
ORAL SURGERY (Note siltes on graph -X)
Sonic scaling
Urasoic scaing
Closed extraction（s]
anfs
Periodontal debridement
Open extractions]..104.109.204.20.209
Air polishing
neisional biopsy
Excisional biopsy
Periodontal sugery
oherlcomments
OTHERDENTALPROCEDURES
Advise iwmedate start withbrushing
for
HCF：
RIGH
MI
succa
YV
JCCa
aspec
specl
Bucca
aspec
40
108
405
404
08
309
Figure 8.8
Dental record. Details of treatment are reported on the back page of the dental record.
(a)
(b)
Figu1re 8.9
Lateral photographs of extraction sites of 104 (a), and 204 and 206 (b). Successful
extraction was confirmed radiographically before closing. The buccal flap was sutured to the palatal
 gingiva (a simple interrupted suture pattern) using 5/0 Monocryl. The closure was without tension.
Figuure8.10
 Photograph of extracted 104. Note the extensive loss of periodontal ligament and
accumulation of subgingival calculus at the mesiopalatal aspect of the tooth.
Figure8.11
Photograph of extracted 204. Note the extensive loss of periodontal ligament and
accumulation of subgingival calculus at the mesiopalatal aspect of the tooth.
Figure8.12
 Photograph of extracted 106. The tooth was sectioned into two single-rooted units
prior to extraction. Note the loss of attachment and accumulation of subgingival calculus at the
furcation.
Figure 8.13
 Photograph of extracted 109. The tooth was sectioned into three single-rooted units
prior to extraction. The distal and palatal roots have lost virtually all their support and are covered
with calculus. In contrast, the mesial root has lost very little attachment and is covered by healthy
periodontal ligament. Remember, periodontitis is a site-specific disease!
Figure 8.14
 Photograph of extracted 209. The tooth was sectioned into three single-rooted units
prior to extraction. The distal and palatal roots have lost virtually all their support and are covered
with calculus. In contrast, the mesial root has lost very little attachment and is covered by healthy
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
 Daily chlorhexidine rinse for 1 week
· Start daily toothbrushing
 Booked for conscious examination in l month
RECHECK
At recheck 1 month later, the owner reported that he was brushing the dog's teeth
almost daily and that they both enjoyed the interaction. He also reported that she was
much brighter and more playful than before the extractions.
  s      s   s
solution revealed virtually no plaque (the owner had brushed the teeth an hour before
the appointment). The gingivae were clinically healthy.
A recall in 3 months’ time was advised (examination under anaesthesia) to assess
efficacy of home care and recheck radiographs of 208 to assess pulp and periapical
statuis.
PROGNOSIS
The dog is allowing optimal home care, i.e. daily toothbrushing. It is also being fed a
dental diet and given dental hygiene chews. The dog will still require professional
treatment at regular intervals, which need to be decided based on efficacy of home
care. As long as effective home care is maintained, the prognosis for this dog is
excellent!
COMMENTS
Uncomplicated gingivitis is generally not associated with discomfort or pain in
humans. In fact, it is an insidious process and the patient may be unaware of its
existence. The significance of gingivitis is that, if untreated, periodontitis may
develop.
Based on feedback from human patients, uncomplicated periodontitis is also not
associated with severe pain or discomfort. In contrast, complications such as the
development of a lateral periodontal abscess or ulcers in the mucous membranes are
very painful.
At initial examination, the owner did not feel that the oral condition was causing
any discomfort or pain. However, at check-up 1 month after extraction of the teeth he
remarked on how much brighter and more playful the dog was. In fact, he described
her as “being like a puppy again'. In my experience, it is often not until an oral
The owner was concerned about halitosis, which the referring veterinarian
attributed to gingivitis. This case highlights the importance of a thorough periodontal
examination to diagnose periodontal disease. Periodontal probing at several sites
around each tooth is essential. In this case, periodontal probing was not performed by
the referring veterinarian and the cause of the halitosis was thus misdiagnosed as
gingivitis of two teeth (104 and 204), when it was in fact advanced periodontitis of
five teeth (104, 204, 206, 109 and 209) and moderate periodontitis of two teeth (304
and 404). Once periodontitis has been diagnosed, radiographs are mandatory. In this
not detectable on clinical periodontal examination.
It is essential to differentiate between gingivitis and periodontitis in order to
institute appropriate treatment. Supragingival scaling and antibiotics do not address
9
Systemic effects of periodontitis
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Ten-month history of a progressively worsening cough.
PATIENTDETAILS
A 12-year-old, neutered male, Yorkshire terrier.
CASE HISTORY
The dog was being treated for septic pneumonia, with consolidation of the left cranial
lung lobe likely to be secondary to his periodontal disease. He also had tracheitis and
collapsing trachea. He was referred to us to manage the periodontal disease. No
history of any previous oral or dental disease or treatment was available to us.
ORAL EXAMINATION - CONSCIOUS
The dog was amenable to conscious facial and oral examination, which revealed the
following:
1. Missing teeth (presumably extracted, but some may have been congenitally absent);
no teeth at all in the upper jaw, with lower incisors, canines and some premolars
missing.
2. Oronasal communication at sites of 104, 108 and 204.
3. Severe accumulation of dental deposits in lower premolars and molars (suspect
advanced periodonti tis).
4. Marked rostral bone loss of both upper and lower jaw.
5 . Separation of mandibular symphysis; the right and left mandibles were freely
movable.
In addition, there was moderate ocular discharge, a right-sided nasal discharge
and right mandibular lymph node enlargement.
See the front page of the dental record (Fig. 9.1) for details of findings.
Dr Cecia Gomel BSc, MA,Vet MB,DDS, Hon FAVD, Dipl EVDC, MRCVS
Clent.CASUPURIO4
Veterinary Dentistry and Oral Sugery Reflerrals
Date:
Animal..Deg.-.ystewiosffeots
Cinician.
Compno..
DENTAL RECORD:DOG
Student.
OCCLUSALEVALUATION
EXTRAORAL FINDINGS
ORALSOFT TISSUES
OTHERRELEVANT FEATURES
PLAQUE
Incisor occlusionc.
Canine ooclusion.
1.Ororasal fishulag at site
Premolaralignment:
（）psoor
Distal PiM ooclusion
3.Gwlarged
CALCULUS
Head symmetry..
Individual teeth
infistula
HandlbuLar
Other:
Figure 9.1
 Dental record. All clinical findings are reported on the front page of the dental record.
Normal periodontal probing depth (PPD) is not noted on the dental record to avoid clutter. However,
when gingival recession is present, then PPDs are always recorded. True attachment loss is the sum of
the recession and probing depth. Remember that periodontitis is a site-specific disease. PPD is
recorded on the occlusal view of the tooth on the dental record so that you can easily identify the
precise site of the disease.
In summary, examination under general anaesthesia identified the following:
1. Missing teeth (all teeth in the upper jaw, all lower incisors, canines, 306, 310, 311,
405, 406, 410).
2.Advanced periodontitis in 305, 307, 308, 309, 407, 408, 409 and 411. The loss of
attachment was manifested clinically as gingival recession and furcation exposure.
 3. Marked bone loss in the rostral lower jaw with symphyseal separation; the right and
left mandibles were freely movable (Fig. 9.2).
4. Oronasal communication at sites of 104, 108 (Fig. 9.3) and 204. Root remnants are
present in oronasal communication at the site of 108.
Figure9.2
Extensive alveolar bone loss. The lower incisor and canine teeth were absent and there
had been extensive bone loss. In fact, the bone loss had resulted in destruction and separation of the
mandibular symphysis, and the left and right mandibles were freely movable.
Figure 9.3
Occlusal photograph showing the oronasal communication (as a result of the severe
periodontitis) at the sites of 104 and 108.
FURTHERINVESTIGATIONS
1. A series of full-mouth radiographs (14 films) was taken.
2. In lieu of the extreme rostral bone loss in both the upper and lower jaw, a biopsy
(gingiva, underlying connective tissue and bone) was harvested from the rostral
mandible and sent for histopathological examination.
RADIOGRAPHICFINDINGS
The radiographs showed the following:
1. Severe loss of alveolar bone in the rostral upper (Fig. 9.4) and lower jaw (Fig. 9.5)
2. Root remnant of 108 (Fig. 9.4)
3. Advanced periodontitis in 305, 307, 308, 309, 407, 408, 409 and 411 (Figs 9.6 and
9.7).
Figure 9.4
 Radiograph of the upper jaw. The only remaining tooth is a root remnant of 1o8. Note
the atrophy of the alveolar bone as a result of tooth loss.
Figure 9.5
Radiograph of the rostral lower jaw. The alveolar bone associated with incisors and
canines has been resorbed. The mandibular symphysis is virtually destroyed by the inflammatory
process. Tooth 305 has lost most of its supportive bone.
Figure 9.6
 Radiograph of the left mandible. Advanced periodontitis is manifested by horizontal
bone loss and furcation exposure of the remaining teeth. Note the thin cortical plate at the ventral
border of the mandible.
Figure 9.7
 Radiograph of the right mandible. Advanced periodontitis is manifested by horizontal
a               s 
border of the mandible.
ORALPROBLEMLIST
1. Oronasal communication at 104, 108 (with retained root remnants in fistula) and
204
2. Periodontitis in 305, 307, 308, 309, 407, 408, 409 and 411
3. Mandi bular symphyseal separation.
THEORYREFRESHER
Periodontal disease is a collective term for a number of plaque-induced inflammatory
lesions that affect the periodontium.
In gingivitis, the plaque-induced inflammation is limited to the soft tissue of the
     s  d  s   s a
dog and 0.5-1 mm in the cat). As periodontitis occurs, the inflammatory destruction
of the coronal part of the periodontal ligament allows apical migration of the
periodontal probing depths increase). If the inflammatory disease is permitted to
progress, the crestal portion of the alveolar process begins to resorb. The type and
extent of alveolar bone destruction are diagnosed radiographically. The resorption
may proceed apically on a horizontal level. Horizontal bone destruction is often
accompanied by gingival recession, so periodontal pockets may not form. If there is no
gingival recession the periodontal pocket is supra-alveolar, i.e. above the level of the
S            
direction along the root to form angular bony defects. The periodontal pocket is now
intra-or subalveolar, i.e. below the level of the crestal bone. The end result of
periodontitis is loss of the tooth. The crestal portion of the alveolar bone will undergo
atrophy once the tooth is lost.
Diagnosis of  periodontal disease relies on  clinical examination of  the
periodontium in the anaesthetized animal. Radiographs are mandatory if there is
evidence of periodontitis on clinical examination. It is essential to differentiate
individuals with gingivitis, the aim is to restore the tissues to clinical health; in
individuals with established periodontitis, the aim of therapy is to prevent progression
of disease.
The following parameters need to be assessed and recorded for each tooth in all
patients:
1. Gingivitis and gingival index
2. Periodontal probing depth (PPD)
3. Gingival recession (GR)
4. Furcation involvement
5. Mobility
6. Periodontal/clinical attachment loss (PAL/CAL).
Periodontal probing depth, gingival recession, furcation involvement and
mobility measure the extent of destruction of the periodontium, i.e. they assess the
presence and severity of periodontitis. Radiographs must be taken of any tooth
showing clinical signs of periodontitis.
It is essential to remember that PPD is not necessarily correlated with severity of
           
pocket if there is no attachment loss), while gingival recession may result in the
absence of a pocket but also minimal remaining attachment. PAL records the distance
from the cemento-enamel junction (or from a fixed point on the tooth) to the base or
apical extension of the pathological pocket. It is thus a more accurate assessment of
it is calculated (e.g. PPD + gingival recession).
    s          s
periodontitis, will lead to a transient bacteraemia on chewing. In fact, an association
has been demonstrated between periodontal disease and histopathological changes in
the kidney, myocardium and liver. The association between severe periodontal disease
and respiratory disease is accepted in human dentistry. While it cannot be proven that
the tracheitis, collapsing trachea, septic bronchopneumonia and consolidated left lung
lobe diagnosed in this dog were directly caused by the periodontitis, at the very least
the presence of communication between the oral cavity and nasal passages would
complicate resolution of the respiratory disease. It was deemed essential to repair the
to be any chance of resolution of the respiratory problems.
CLINICAL TIPS
 Diagnosis of periodontal disease relies on clinical examination of the periodontium in the
anaesthetized animal.
· Radiographs are mandatory if there is evidence of periodontitis on clinical examination.
 Differentiate between gingivitis and periodontitis in order to choose appropriate treatment.
 b  n  'd     r    s
bacteraemia on chewing.
TREATMENTOPTIONS
Repair of oronasal communications and extraction of all remaining teeth is the
  s ons ras r a p s  n pn
discomfort and requires no trea tment.
TREATMENTPERFORMED
See also the dental record (Fig. 9.8) for details of the treatment performed.
   sss s      
radiographically (Figs 9.9 and 9.10).
2. Open extraction of root remnants of 1o8. Successful extraction was confirmed
radiographically.
3. Repair of oronasal communications at sites of 104, 108 and 204. Single-layer repair
was uised (Fig. 9.11).
ORALPROBLEMLIST
THERAPEUTICPLAN
.Orralititrtnifo44
.Single layerreir.
2.Adad perodoii57,080940740409
2.Oprextretion
3.Rat renawts10
S.Opn.extraotier.
4.No treatmew reuired
PERIODONTICS
ORAL SURGERY (Note sites on graph - X)
Sonic scaling
asonic scaling
Closed extraction（s]:-.
Subgingival euretage
Periodontal debridement
Pumice polishing
Air polishing
neisionalbiopsy
Excisional biopsy
Periodontal sugery
otherlcommen's
.eriddsilelaerlfaaftlatad
045/0Monrls
R.Biopsd(gingiva.conretivetissue.bone)rostralmandible.
5/0Mrglclosure.
OTHER DENTAL PROCEDURES
COMPLICATIONS/COMMENTS
(sng+）seo
Hwihsoffoodardanalgeses.Cotig treattfer
rii
Ruehgek in.s weks.
RIGH
108
06
207
208
209
Bucca
uccal
isoecl
specl
M贝
60
408
407
406
405404
403402401301302303
314
307
308
509
311
Figure 9.8
Dental record. Details of treatment are reported on the back page of the dental record.
Figure 9.9
 Radiograph of the left mandible. The post-extraction radiograph confirms successful
extraction of all teeth.
Figure 9.10
 Radiograph of the right mandible. The post-extraction radiograph confirms successful
extraction of all teeth.
Figure 9.11
Oronasal fistulae repair. Occlusal photograph demonstrating the single-layer oronasal
communication repair utilized. The flaps were closed with 5/0 Monocryl.
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
 Continuation of antibiotics and steroids for respiratory disease
 Daily chlorhexidine rinse for 3 weeks
· Soft food
 Booked for conscious examination in 3 weeks.
RECHECK
At recheck 3 weeks later, the oronasal communication repair and extraction sites were
healing nicely. The histopathology report on the biopsy from the rostral mandible was
compatible with periodontitis, i.e. bone with reactive features and no evidence of
neoplasia. The dog was coughing less and seemed brighter. He was eating well and
had gained some weight. He was still on antibiotics and steroids for the respiratory
disease.
The dog was rebooked for conscious exam 1 month later. At this time, all surgical
sites were fully healed. The dog was bright and alert, and while he still coughed, it was
mainly on excitement. The referring veterinarian reported that the septic
bronchopneumonia was resolved.
PROGNOSIS
There should be no further problems in the oral cavity (edentulous and no oronasal
communications). He will always require soft food. The mandibular symphyseal
separation is not causing any discomfort or worsening of remaining function and
thus requires no intervention.
The septic bronchopneumonia was resolved, but the dog is likely to still have
signs associated with the collapsing trachea and consolidated lung lobe.
COMMENTS
Periodontitis can result in dramatic bone loss. In this dog, the anterior portion of both
the upper and lower jaw had been lost. It was one of the most dramatic cases of bone
loss due to periodontitis that I have ever seen! Consequently, 1 took the biopsy for
histopathological examination, which is not routine for periodontitis.
Early detection (periodontal probing and radiographs) and treatment of the
periodontal disease (periodontal therapy and extraction) would have prevented the
severe bone loss and establishment of oronasal communications, and may well have
prevented the development of the severe respiratory disease.
10
Iatrogenic injuries
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Mandibular fracture.
PATIENT DETAILS
A 10-year-old, neutered male, shih-tzu.
CASE HISTORY
The dog was referred to us for management of an iatrogenic jaw fracture that had
occurred the previous day during extraction of the left lower canine tooth. The
referring veterinarian also indicated that he may have left a few root remnants from
other extractions.
The dog had been discharged with analgesics overnight. He was extremely
uncomfortable and the owners were most distressed. They had not been aware that
there could be any complications associated with what they thought was a ‘simple
dental cleaning and possibly a few teeth pulled'. The dog had received periodontal
therapy and extraction (in fact, only a few teeth were remaining) several times during
its life, with no complications. The dog had been discharged by one of the nurses and
not by the veterinarian; in fact, the referring veterinarian had apparently refused to
speak to the owners. In short, an unpleasant miscommunication had occurred.
ORAL EXAMINATION-CONSCIOUS
The dog was too uncomfortable for conscious oral examination to even be attempted.
ORAL EXAMINATION - UNDER GENERAL ANAESTHETIC
See the front page of the dental record (Fig. 10.1) for details of findings.
Dr Cecia Gomel BSc, MA, Vet MB,DDS, Hon FAVD, Dipl EVDC, MRCVS
Clent.CASEPERIOS
VeterinaryDentistry and Oral Surgery Referrals
Date:
Animal._Poa-iatrpgznie injwries
Cinician.
Compno..
DENTAL RECORD:DOG
OCCLUSALEVALUATION
EXTRAORALFINDINGS
ORALSOFT TISSUES
OTHER RELEVANT FEATURES
PLAQUE
Incisor occlusionc.
RPMRICU
Canine ooclusion.
Laeeratiows voatral
Premolaralignment:
Distal PiM occlusion
CALCULUS
Head symmetry....
Individual teethc.
Other:
9000000
Figure 10.1
Dental record. All clinical findings are reported on the front page of the dental
record. Normal periodontal probing depth (PPD) is not noted on the dental record to avoid clutter.
However, when gingival recession is present, then PPDs are always recorded. True attachment loss is
the sum of the recession and probing depth. Remember that periodontitis is a site-specific disease.
PPD is recorded on the occlusal view of the tooth on the dental record so that you can easily identify
the precise site of disease.
 In summary, examination under general anaesthesia identified the following:
1. Fracture of the left mandible level with the apex of extracted 304.
2 . Advanced periodontitis of 404 (gingival recession, increased
1 PPD) and 409
(gingival recession, increased PPD, grade Ill furcation). Teeth 404 and 409 were the
only ones remaining.
3. Extraction sockets (from surgery the day before) filled with coagulum (Fig. 10.2).
4. The mesial root of 309 still in the socket.
5. Lacerations of oral soft tissues, especially the ventral tongue (Fig. 10.2).
Figure 10.2
Occlusal photograph of the left mandible. The extraction sockets of 304, 308 and 309
are filled with coagulum, but the retained mesial root of 309 is evident. Note the lacerations on the
tongue. These are likely to have been caused by slippage with a dental luxator or elevator.
FURTHERINVESTIGATIONS
Radiographs were taken of the right and left mandible. The upper jaw contained no
teeth and the bone was covered by healthy mucosa, so radiographs were not indicated.
RADIOGRAPHICFINDINGS
Eight films were required to visualize the left and right mandible.
The radiographs showed the following:
1. A fractured left mandible, with the fracture lines extending from the apical region
of the extracted 304 to the ventral border of the mandible (Fig. 10.3).
2. A crown remnant of 305 (Fig. 10.3).
3. Partial extraction of 309; the mesial root was still in place in the socket (Fig. 10.4).
4. Partial extraction of 408; there were both mesial and distal root remnants (Fig.
10.5a, b).
5. Periodontitis (alveolar bone loss, furcation exposure) of 409 (Fig. 10.5b).
Figu1re 10.3
 Radiograph of the left mandibular fracture. The fracture originates level with the apex
of the extracted 304. There is one fracture line through the alveolar bone and two fracture lines
extending to the ventral border of the mandible. Note the retained crown portion of 305.
Figuure10.4
Radiograph of the retained mesial root of 309. The retained mesial root was also
evident on clinical examination.
Figure 10.5
Radiographs of partially extracted 408. While both mesial and distal root remnants
are obvious in the view in (a), a second view (b) was taken to fully visualize the retained distal root.
This view clearly depicts the retained distal root of 408 as well as tooth 409. Note the horizontal
bone loss and furcation exposure of 409.
ORALPROBLEMLIST
1. latrogenic fracture of the left mandible
3. Root remnants of 309 (mesial root) and 408 (mesial and distal roots)
4. Crown remnant of 305.
THEORYREFRESHER
Teeth affected by advanced periodontitis require extraction. Many extractions due to
periodontitis are relatively easy to perform as most of the attachment apparatus has
been lost by the disease process. Remember that periodontitis is a site-specific disease
(loss of periodontal attachment may only affect one or a few sites arouind the
circuimference of the tooth, with other sites uinaffected by bone loss) and thus some
Possible complications to extraction of teeth include the following:
Thermal bone injury:
Adequate water-cooling of the bur (whether used in a high-or slow-speed handpiece)
  ss   q   n  m a  
Thermal necrosis of bone usually results in the development of a bone sequestrum that
needs to be surgically retrieved as a second procedure.
Tooth fracture:
Extraction may result in fracture of the tooth, either the crown or the root. Fracture of
the root is in one piece and can be visualized, it is removed using small luxators and
elevators to cut the remaining periodontal ligament fibres. This is where a small (2
mm) luxator or root tip pick come in handy. Visibility is essential to be able to place
instruments in the periodontal ligament space. Use the water spray to remove blood. If
the root fractures, a radiograph is required to assess how much root is still in place
and its position. Based on the radiographic findings, the extraction can be planned
An open extraction may be required to access the root remnant. If the root tip cannot
be removed, the client must be informed and the affected jaw monitored clinically and
radiographically for evidence of pathology.
Oronasal communication:
A communication between a maxillary tooth alveolus and the nasal chamber may
occur. Established fistulae are lined by epithelium and will therefore not heal
spontaneously. The three most common causes of oronasal fistula formation involving
the maxillary alveolus area are:
· Advanced periodontal disease
· Periapical lesions
· latrogenic.
An oronasal fistula in the region of the canine tooth is usually the result of
advanced periodontal disease, where the process caused destruction of the medial
bony wall of the alveolus. Periapical pathology of the maxillary canine teeth and
premolars can also cause perforation of the medial bony wall of the alveolus.
Extraction of a maxillary canine tooth may also cause perforation of the medial bony
wall when an incorrect technique is used. A small iatrogenic perforation will probably
heal if the gingival flap is replaced and sutured. Large fresh defects or long-standing
infection, should be surgically repaired.
Emphysema:
   a            
blown into the bone and soft tissues. Continuous air-drying, especially if the air is
directed into the alveolus, can also lead to emphysema. Cats seem particularly prone,
and on recovery have swelling across the base of the nose and forehead. There is
obvious crepitus on palpation of the swelling. Alternatively, the floor of the mouth is
concerned and it is best avoided.
Sublingual oedema:
Traumatizing the lingual mucosa may result in sublingual oedema. If severe, it may
require medical management with anti-inflammatory drugs and sometimes diuretics.
It is easily avoided by using a gentle technique.
Jaw fracture:
Advanced periodontal disease around mandibular teeth will weaken the mandible
itself, and jaw fractures can and do happen. Extreme caution should be used in elderly
toy and small breeds that seem most prone to this. Preoperative radiographs prior to
all extractions are strongly recommended.
Some mandibular fractures do not need surgical fixation, particularly those
where the fracture lines are contained within the areas of attachment of the
 masticatory muscles, as the muscles will effectively splint the fracture during healing.
Mandibular fractures will need repair if they cauise:
· Malocclusion
· Instability.
Stable fractures, if causing malocclusion, need repair to recreate a normal
occlusion.
s          's  
for the fracture to heal. It can also be used as temporary support or as an adjunct to
other methods of fixation.
Haemorrhage:
Clotting defects may not be apparent until after you have extracted a tooth, when the
associated haemorrhage does not stop after a few minutes, but continues copiously,
and can become life threatening. Suturing the gingiva with a haemostatic gauze or
plug in the alveolus can help.
CLINICAL TIPS
 Use adequate water to cool both high-and low-speed burs. Thermal necrosis of bone usually results
 in the development of a bone sequestrum that needs to be surgically retrieved as a second procedure.
· Some extractions may be really difficult despite advanced periodontal disease.
 If the root fractures, a radiograph is required to assess how much root is still in place and its
position.
 Extraction sites should be radiographed postoperatively.
 If the root tip cannot be removed, the client must be informed and the affected jaw monitored
clinically and radiographically for evidence of pathology.
· Established oronasal fistulae are lined by epithelium and will not heal spontaneously.
· A small iatrogenic perforation will probably heal if the gingival flap is replaced and sutured.
d sa hs   na   na e s a Ps  
radiographs prior to all extractions are strongly recommended.
• Mandibular fractures will need repair if they cause malocclusion or are unstable.
 Suturing the gingiva with a haemostatic gauze or plug in the alveolus can help control haemorrhage.
 Jaw fracture is not an uncommon complication to extraction of mandibular canines. The owners
should always be made aware of this risk
TREATMENT OPTIONS
The remaining root remnants and remaining diseased teeth need to be extracted.
Management of the mandibular fracture would require surgical fixation only if the
fracture was unstable after reduction. The dog is edentulous so occlusion is not an
issule.
TREATMENT PERFORMED
The dog received the following treatment (see the back page of the dental record
depicted in Fig. 10.6):
midline to distal 309. The crown remnant of 305 and 309 (mesial root) were removed.
Uneven bone was smoothed using a diamond round bur in a high-speed handpiece.
 di pn a  as sea di pa ae e  sa a a
replaced flap maintained the fracture in a stable reduced position. Consequently,
surgical fixation of the fracture was not required.
2. Open extraction of 404 and of the mesial and distal root remnants of 408.
ORAL PROBLEMLIST
THERAPEUTICPLAN
L.Radiogreph
.Radiorph.+/-eract
PERIODONTICS
ORAL SURGERY (Note sites on graph-X)
Sonic scaling
utasonic scaling
Closed extraction[s]
Subgingival curetage
Periodontal debridement
Pumice polishing
Air polishing
Jncisionalbiopsy
Exisional biopsy
Periodontal sugery
otherlcommens
Beealand Lingual fuapraised frommidlineto dictalsog.Fracture
wRsredwoed and thetwpflapswere swtwred together(s/oMonoergl)to
stabilize the frasture.
OTHER DENTAL PROCEDURES
GOMPLICATIONS/COMMENTS
Radiographs ofRand Lmandile(efilms)
Soffood
hs(4filws)
MIM
8908886
VV
soec
specl
食贝
M
Figure 10.6
Dental record. Details of treatment are reported on the back page of the dental record.
Extractions and fracture fixation (Fig. 10.7) were checked radiographically before
replacing the flaps.
Figure 10.7
 Radiograph of the rostral mandible. The radiograph was taken to confirm successful
extraction of 404 and to check that the fracture at the site of 304 was reduced. Note the thin ventral
bone and the incipient fracture line in the alveolar bone of 404.
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
· Analgesics
· Soft food
 Tape muzzle - to be kept on at all times - fitted so that a 1.0 cm gap was left to allow eating and
drinking
: Booked for conscious examination in 2 days and then 4 weeks later.
RECHECKS
At recheck 2 days after surgery, the dog seemed comfortable. It was eating well and
did not mind the tape muzzle. The fracture was reduced and seemed stable. Analgesics
were supplied for a total of 10 days, and the owner was advised to feed only soft food
and to keep the tape muzzle in place for 3 weeks.
The dog was seen again a month later. The owners reported that he was back to
                s 
palpable along the ventral border of the left mandible and there was no evidence of
any instability in the fracture line. The owners were advised that he would need soft
food as there were no remaining teeth.
PROGNOSIS
The dog has no remaining teeth and the fracture has healed. No further treatment is
anticipated.
COMMENTS
Jaw fracture is not an uncommon complication to extraction of mandibular canines.
The owners should always be made aware of this risk.
Preoperative radiographs will provide information about the extent of the
periodontitis and the integrity of the remaining alveolar bone, and will allow
planning of the extraction procedure to avoid fracture, e.g. a larger flap is raised and
more alveolar bone is removed in cases where the ventral mandibular border is only a
thin shell. In my opinion, extraction of mandibular canines with advanced
periodontitis is the most difficult of all extractions. In fact, I have plans for fracture
repair already outlined in my mind before I start the extraction. A gentle technique
and the removal of buccal and lingual alveolar bone are essential.
CHRONIC GINGIVOSTOMATITIS
11
Chronic gingivostomatitis - an introduction
Chronic gingivostomatitis (CGs) describes a clinical syndrome characterized by
focal or diffuse inflammation of the gingivae and oral mucosa. It occurs in dogs but is
predominantly seen in cats.
CATS
Commonly described clinical findings in cats with  CGs include elevated serum
            so
to have raised salivary concentrations of IgG and IgM, but reduced concentration of
salivary IgA. It is unclear if the Ig pattern described is a cause or result of the
inflammatory disease. Histological examination of affected oral mucosa shows a
submucosal inflammatory infiltrate consisting of plasma cells, lymphocytes,
macrophages and neutrophils.
The elevated serum globulins in affected cats and the nature of the submucosal
inflammatory infiltrate have lead a number of authors to suggest that there may be an
immunological basis  for  the condition.  To date,  no underlying intrinsic
immunological abnormality in cats affected by CGs has been identified; however, the
condition may  still  be immune mediated.  Clinical  studies have implicated  the
potential involvement of various viral agents, feline calici virus (FCV) in particular, as
well as Gram-negative anaerobic bacterial species. However, attempts to reproduce the
disease using these putative infective aetiological agents have been unsuccessful.
The most common sign of feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV) infection is oral
inflammation. However, most cats with CGS test negative for FIV, but it needs to be
excluded. Feline leukaemia virus (FeLV) also needs to be excluded in the initial work-
up. The role of FCV in the development of CGS is unclear. FCV has been isolated from
up to 100% of CGs cases, compared with up to 25% of cats in a healthy population,
             
stomatitis. However, FCV isolated from cats with CGS and then inoculated into
specific pathogen-free cats produced signs of acute calici virus infection but not CGS,
suggesting that other factors contribute towards the development of the oral
inflammation. The fact that CGS often resolves in FCV-positive cats after extraction of
all or most teeth and the subsequent reduction in dental plaque suggests that other
antigenic stimuli are involved in the pathogenesis of the condition. It is possible that
it is the sum of the total antigenic stimulation from plaque bacteria and viruses that is
significant in the development of CGS.
Historically, the intractable nature of the disease, in combination with a poor
understanding of the aetiopathogenesis of feline CGs, has resulted in the widespread
lise of empirical symptomatic treatment regimens.
to a minimum. In some cats, this may result in a reduction in inflammation.
Unfortunately, most cats will not cooperate adequately with home care measures and
plaque reforms beyond a critical level. These cats need extraction of premolar and
molar teeth. In some cats, all teeth may require removal. The extraction of all
premolar and molar teeth has given the most dependable results, with up to 80% of
cats being clinically cured or significantly improved. The 20% that are non-responsive
to extraction can be treated with antiseptics, intermittent antibiotics or interferon.
FCV isolation should always be performed prior to using interferon and also to
           s  
FCV-positive cats where extraction of at least all premolar and molar teeth has not led
to cure. Using interferon without surgical treatment (extraction) has not been shown
to have any benefit.
Cats with CGS require a thorough work-up prior to any treatment. The purpose of
the work-up is not to reach a diagnosis per se, but rather an attempt to identify
routine haematology and blood biochemistry; and a thorough oral and dental
examination (including full-mouth radiographs to identify the presence of
periodontitis, resorptive lesions, retained root remnants or other lesions). Systemic
diseases, e.g. chronic renal failure and diabetes mellitus, which may predispose to the
development of severe gingival inflammation in the presence of plaque, must be
excluded before any treatment is initiated. Additional investigations include testing
for FCV and/or biopsy and microscopic examination of the affected tissues. We do not
routinely test for FcV. It is only if the cat does not respond to extraction of all or most
teeth that we determine FCV status. Only cats that test positive (virtually 1o0%) will
be treated with interferon therapy. Biopsy and histopathological examination of
affected tissue are only performed if the lesions are asymmetrical. There have been
recent reports of squamous cell carcinoma developing in cats with GCs. We have seen
one case where surgical management lead to cure of the CGs. Two years after the
curative treatment, localized intense inflammation of the right glossopalatine mucosa
developed (the rest of the oral mucosa was healthy). Biopsy and histopathological
DOGS
CGS is less common in dogs than it is in cats. It is thought to be an inappropriate
response to oral antigens, namely bacterial plaque present on the tooth surfaces. While
underlying vesiculo-bullous disease, e.g. pemphigus and pemphigoid or discoid lupus
erythematosus (DLE) cannot be excluded, it is essential to have plaque control before
these can be investigated
In the dog, I approach CGS as follows:
or renal disorders, which may predispose to the development of severe gingival
inflammation in the presence of plaque.
2 .Meticulous oral examination to identify a possible reason for the intense
inflammatory response, e.g. retained root remnants, periodontitis, other dental
pathology.
3. Periodontal therapy (scaling and polishing) and treatment of pathological lesions,
i.e. extract root remnants, extract teeth affected by periodontitis.
4. Daily home care (mechanical and chemical plaque control) is instituted.
5. Assess the response to treatment.
In the great majority of cases, the above approach results in complete cuire. In
extraction (removal of teeth that the owner cannot keep clean, usually the posterior
teeth) is then performed. This is usually sufficient. In one aggressive dog that would
not allow home care, all teeth were extracted. This resulted in healthy oral mucosa.
Healthy oral mucosa are maintained with daily toothbrushing and adjunctive
chlorhexidine rinsing as required. As long as adequate plaque control is maintained,
the prognosis is excellent. However, if the owners become lax with plaque removal the
gingivostomatitis will return within a few weeks. It is crucial that the owner
understands this.
12
Chronic gingivostomatitis as a consequence of
periodontitis and iatrogenic injuries
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Inappetance, drooling associated with gingivostomatitis.
PATIENTDETAILS
A 9-year-old, neutered female, domestic long-haired cat
CASE HISTORY
          i   s
ago, when the cat received ‘dental with extractions due to heavy accumulation of
plaque and calculus'. Within 2 weeks of treatment the cat presented with inappetance
and drooling, and gingivostomatitis was diagnosed by the referring veterinary
surgeon.
In the last 2 years the cat had undergone five episodes of periodontal treatment.
These had consisted of scaling, polishing and extraction (there was no record of which
teeth had been extracted). There had been some improvement immediately following
each treatment (the cat would start eating), but the inflammatory reaction had flared
up again within weeks (the cat would stop eating). Several courses of antibiotics and
the administration of long-acting steroid had shown initial improvement and then
deterioration within a few weeks. The latest long-acting steroid injection had not had
any beneficial effect at all. The cat was referred to us for management of the chronic
gingivostomatitis. Prior to referral we requested haematology and biochemistry screen
and FeLV and FIV testing to be performed by the referring veterinary surgeon. The cat
was found to be negative to both FIV and FeLV and the only blood abnormality was
elevated plasma globulins.
ORAL EXAMINATION - CONSCIOUS
This was an intensely uncomfortable cat that would not allow conscious examination
of its face or oral cavity.
ORAL EXAMINATION - UNDER GENERAL ANAESTHETIC
See the front of the dental record sheet (Fig. 12.1) for details of findings.
Dr Cecila Gomel BSc MA, Vet MB, DDS, Hon FAVD, Dip EVDC,MRCVS
Clent.CAsE
Vterinary Dentisty and Oral SurgeryRefemals
Date.
Animal:.Ckronieginaivestowtiis
Clinicianc.
Comp no....
DENTAL RECORD:CAT
Student...
OCCLUSALEVALUATION
EXTRAORALFINDINGS
ORAL SOFT TISSUES
OTHER RELEVANT FEATURES
Incisor oclusion.....
Canine occlusion....
Premolar alignment:.
alveolar,bald
Distal P/M occlusion:
Head symmetry:
CALCULUS
Individual teeth...
Other...
3
?
C
Figure 12.1
The front page of the dental record sheet is used to record all clinical findings.
Remember that periodontitis is a site-specific disease. PPD is recorded on the occlusal view of the
tooth on the dental record so that you can easily identify the precise site of disease. Normal
periodontal probing depth (PPD) is not noted on the dental record to avoid clutter. However, when
gingival recession is present, then PPDs are always recorded so that periodontal attachment level
(PAL) can be calculated (GR + PPD) and entered on the record at its precise site in green ink. PAL is
a more accurate assessment of attachment loss.
 In summary, examination under general anaesthesia identified the following:
1. Moderate to severe gingivitis of incisors and canines
2. Missing all premolars and molars
3. Severe gingivostomatitis of the alveolar, buccal and glossopalatine mucosae
4. Marked hyperplasia of the inflamed glossopalatine mucosa (Fig. 12.2)
5. Complicated crown fracture (CCF) of 204
6. Gingival recession of 104, 204, 304 and 404
7. Increased periodontal probing depth of 104, 204, 304 and 404.
Figure 12.2
 Rostrocaudal photograph of the oropharynx. Note the hyperplastic and intensely
inflamed glossopalatine folds.
FURTHERINVESTIGATIONS
A series of full-mouth radiographs (10 views) was taken.
RADIOGRAPHICFINDINGS
Radiographs identified  retained  root  remnants 
(presuimablyfrom
 previous
extractions) of 108 (Fig. 12.3), 208, 307 (Fig. 12.4a), 308 (Fig. 12.4a), 309 (Fig. 12.4a),
the mesial root of 408, and 409.
司
Figure 12.3
 Lateral radiograph of the right upper premolar and molar region. Note the retained
root remnants of 108.
(a)
(b
Figure12.4
(a) Preoperative radiograph of the left mandibular premolar and molar region. The
roots of all the teeth in this quadrant (307, 308 and 309) are retained from previous
surgery. This could, at best, be called partial extraction.
(b) Postoperative radiograph of the left mandibular premolar and molar region. The
postoperative view shows empty extraction sockets and confirms complete removal
of all root remnants. Note the intact lamina dura of all sockets, confirming that the
integrity of the mandibular canal (carrying the neurovascular supply to teeth and
soft tissue) was not broached during the extraction procedure.
Periodontal bone loss affecting the canines was also evident (Figs 12.5a, b, 12.6a
and 12.7a).
(a)
(b)
C
Figure12.5
(a) Rostrocaudal radiograph of the rostral upper jaw. Note the loss of alveolar bone
height associated with the canines. The proliferation of the buccal bone plate is also
 an indicator of periodontitis. The crown fracture of 204 is also obvious. The pulp
  s  e     t t   
(b) Lateral radiograph of 104. Note the loss of alveolar bone height surrounding 104.
(c) Lateral radiograph of extraction site of 104. The socket of 104 is empty and the
lamina dura is intact. The successful removal of the retained root remnant of 108 is
also confirmed by this view.
(b
Figure 12.6
(a) Lateral radiograph of 204. The loss of alveolar bone height surrounding 204 is
obvious in this view. Note also the complicated crown fracture of 204.
(b) Lateral radiograph of extraction site of 204. The socket of 204 is empty and the
lamina dura is intact.
(a)
(b)
Figure 12.7
 Rostrocaudal  radiographs  of  the  rostral  mandible  pre-extraction (a)  and  post-
extraction (b).
teeth.
(b) The sockets are empty and the lamina dura intact, confirming successful
extraction of the mandibular incisors and canines.
ORAL PROBLEM LIST
1. Moderate to severe gingivitis of incisors and canines
2. Gingivostomatitis of alveolar, buccal and glossopalatine mucosae
3. Marked hyperplasia of inflamed glossopalatine mucosa
4. Complicated crown fracture of 204
5. Root remnants of 108, 208, 307, 308, 309, 408 (mesial root) and 409
6. Advanced periodontitis of 104, 204, 304 and 404.
THEORY REFRESHER
Chronic gingivostomatitis (CGs) describes a clinical syndrome characterized by focal
or diffuse inflammation of the gingivae and oral mucosa. It occurs in dogs but is
predominantly seen in cats.
Commonly described clinical findings in cats with CGS include elevated seruim
globulins,  predominantly  hypergammaglobulinaemia,  and  a  submucosal
inflammatory infiltrate consisting of plasma cells, lymphocytes, macrophages and
neutrophils. The elevated serum globulins in affected cats and the nature of the
there may be an immunological basis for the condition. To date, no underlying
intrinsic immunological abnormality in cats affected by CGs has been identified;
however, the condition may still be immune mediated. Clinical studies have
implicated the potential involvement of various viral agents, calicivirus in particular,
as well as Gram-negative anaerobic bacterial species. However, attempts to reproduce
           
The purpose of the work-up is not to reach a diagnosis per se, but rather an attempt to
identify possible underlying causes. Such a work-up includes: testing for FIV and
microscopic examination of the affected tissues. A meticulous oral and dental
examination, including full-mouth radiographs to identify the presence of
periodontitis, resorptive lesions, retained root remnants or other lesions, is mandatory.
Systemic diseases, e.g. chronic renal failure and diabetes mellitus, which may
predispose to the development of severe gingival inflammation in the presence of
plaque, must also be excluded before any treatment is initiated.
In this case, a probable underlying cause for the inflammatory reaction in the
oral mucous membranes was identified, namely root remnants from previous
extractions and periodontitis of the canine teeth. Extraction of diseased teeth and root
remnants is likely to result in a complete cure.
In summary, cats with chronic gingivostomatitis are usually extremely
uncomfortable. Every attempt should be made to identify and eliminate or treat any
inderlying cause for the intense oral inflammation. Full-mouth radiographs are a
mandatory component of the diagnostic work-up.
CLINICAL TIPS
• Cats with chronic stomatitis require a thorough work-up, including FeLV and FIV testing. prior to
 an o    n  A  nn a
 Full-mouth radiographs are a mandatory component of the diagnostic work-up.
 The success of tooth extraction should be confirmed radiographically
· Cats without any teeth may require assistance with grooming.
TREATMENTOPTIONS
Extraction of all teeth affected by periodontitis and removal of all root remnants are
necessary.
TREATMENTPERFORMED
1. Extraction of root remnants (108, 208, 307, 308, 309, 408 mesial root, and 409) with
an open technique; flaps were replaced with 5/0 Monocryl. Successful removal was
confirmed radiographically at all sites.
2. Extraction of 104, 204, 304 and 404 with an open technique; flaps were replaced
with 5/0 Monocryl. Successful extraction was confirmed by radiographs.
See Figs 12.4b, 12.5c, 12.6b and 12.7b for some of the postoperative radiographs
taken.
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
· A 10-day course of antibiotics (given as daily injection by referring veterinary surgeon for the first
3 days postoperatively, then as palatable drops in food)
· Analgesics for 3 days (vetergesic by syringe)
 Booked for conscious examination 1 month later.
RECHECK
At recheck 1 month later, the extraction sites had all healed uneventfully and there
was no evidence of gingivostomatitis.
PROGNOSIS
The cause of the inflammation (periodontitis and retained root remnants from
previous extractions) has been removed and there should be no need for any further
dental treatment.
COMMENTS
The chronic gingivostomatitis in this case was caused by the presence of numerous
root remnants from dental extraction, i.e. it was iatrogenic. Careful extraction with
radiographic facilities could have prevented the problem. The cat also had
      s   s   s
incisor or canine regions. The gingivostomatitis was localized to the alveolar gingivae
(overlying the retained root remnants), and extended laterally to involve the buccal
mucosa and distally to affect the glossopalatine folds. In fact, the glossopalatine folds
were inflamed and hyperplastic.
The success of tooth extraction should be confirmed radiographically. Ideally, the
whole tooth should be extracted. If this cannot be achieved, the owner needs to be
aware that there are root remnants which may need to be removed as a second
procedure.
 In a significant number of cats referred to us we can identify an underlying cause
for inflammation, often retained root remnants from previous extractions. In my
opinion, any cat anaesthetized for a dental procedure should receive a series of full-
mouth radiographs to identify pathology and allow optimal treatments. Also,
Cats without any teeth may require assistance with grooming. This long-haired
cat required daily brushing.
13
Chronic gingivostomatitis associated with FeLV and FIV
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Inappetance, drooling, sockets from previous extractions not healing.
PATIENTDETAILS
An adult (estimated 7 years), neutered male, domestic short-haired cat.
CASE HISTORY
The cat was an adopted stray cat that had been with the owners for 6 years and was at
least a year old when they adopted him. He lived in a multi-cat household (eight other
cats). All cats were indoor/outdoor cats.
The cat had received ‘routine dental treatment 10 weeks prior to referral. At this
time several teeth were extracted, but no record of which teeth was made. It was noted
on the record that some teeth had fractured during extraction and had been ‘drilled
out'. Within a week of treatment the cat started drooling and stopped eating. Non-
healing sockets  were identified and several courses  of antibiotics had been
administered with no improvement. The cat was referred to us 10 weeks after the
initial treatment.
ORAL EXAMINATION - CONSCIOUS
The cat allowed general physical examination but would not allow conscious
examination of the face or oral cavity.
Blood was drawn for haematology and biochemistry screen and FeLV/FIV testing.
It was decided not to wait for these results before inducing anaesthesia, as the cat was
deemed safe for anaesthesia based on the general clinical examination. The owner
was made aware that FeLV and/or FIV infection was a possibility.
ORAL EXAMINATION-UNDERGENERALANAESTHETIC
A thorough oral examination, including investigating periodontal parameters, was
performed and all findings were noted on the dental record.
In summary, examination under general anaesthesia identified the following:
1. Teeth 204, 208, 209, 107, 108, 109, 309 and 409 were missing (presumably extracted
10 weeks earlier)
2. Non-healing extraction sockets of 204 (Fig. 13.1a), 309 and 409 (Fig. 13.2a)
3. Gingivostomatitis associated with the extraction socket of 204 (Fig. 13.1a)
4. Gingivostomatitis of alveolar and buccal mucosa bilaterally in the edentulous upper
premolar and molar regions (Fig. 13.3).
(b)
Figuure13.1
Occlusal  photograph (a) and rostrocaudal radiograph (b) of  the non-healing
extraction socket of 204.
(a) The socket has not healed after extraction of 204 10 weeks earlier. In fact, the
owner reported that the defect was larger than it was immediately after the
extraction.
(b) The radiograph shows an empty socket with no evidence of any retained root
material.
(a)
(b)
Figure 13.2
Lateral photograph (a) and radiograph (b) of the right mandibular quadrant.
(a) Note the non-healing extraction socket of 409.
(b) The radiograph reveals that both the mesial and distal roots of 409 have not been
extracted. Note the radiolucent areas where atomization (drilling away root
substance) was attempted.
Figure 13.3
Occlusal photograph of the upper jaw. Note the gingivostomatitis affecting the
alveolar and buccal mucosa over the edentulous premolar and molar regions bilaterally.
FURTHERINVESTIGATIONS
A series of full-mouth radiographs (10 views) was taken.
RADIOGRAPHICFINDINGS
The radiographs revealed no evidence of any retained root remnants in the upper jaw
(Fig. 13.1b). In the lower jaw, it was found that the roots of 309 (Fig. 13.4) and 409
(Fig. 13.2b) were retained.
Figure 13.4
Lateral radiograph of the left caudal premolar and molar region. The radiograph
reveals retention of both roots of 309. Note the radiolucent region in the mesial root as a
consequence of atomization.
ORALPROBLEMLIST
1. Gingivostomatitis bilaterally in the edentulous upper premolar and molar regions
(not associated with retained roots from previous extractions)
2. Gingivostomatitis and non-healing socket of 204 (not associated with a retained
root remnant)
3. Gingivostomatitis and non-healing socket of 309 with retained root remnants
4. Gingivostomatitis and non-healing socket of 409 with retained root remnants.
At this time the blood results were available. The only blood abnormality was
elevated plasma globulins and a left shift in the neuitrogram. However, the cat tested
positive for both FeLV and FIV.
THEORYREFRESHER
Chronic gingivostomatitis (CGS) describes a clinical syndrome characterized by focal
or diffuse inflammation of the gingivae and oral mucosa. It occurs in dogs but is
predominantly seen in cats.
The purpose of the work-up is not to reach a diagnosis per se, but rather an attempt to
identify possible underlying causes. Such a work-up includes: testing for FIV and
FeLV, possibly also for FCV; routine haematology and blood biochemistry; and
sometimes biopsy and microscopic examination of the affected tissues. A meticulous
oral and dental examination, including full-mouth radiographs to identify the
presence of periodontitis, resorptive lesions, retained root remnants or other lesions, is
mandatory. Systemic diseases, e.g. chronic renal failure and diabetes mellitus, which
may predispose to the development of severe gingival inflammation in the presence of
plaque, must also be excluded before any treatment is initiated.
In this case, a probable underlying cause for the inflammatory reaction in the
oral mucous membranes and non-healing of the extraction sockets was identified,
namely FeLV and FIV infection. The presence of root remnants from previous
extractions at 309 and 409 would further contribute to the non-healing of these
sockets.
The fact that this cat tested positive for both FeLV and FIV creates a complicated
situation. The cat is part of a multi-cat household and the risk of infection of the other
cats needs to be taken into account. This cat would need to be restricted to an indoor
lifestyle to prevent spreading infection.
CLINICAL TIPS
· Cats with chronic stomatitis require a thorough work-up, including FeLV and FIV testing. prior to
 an  as aa A A o A on naa A
· The best way to remove root remnants is to raise a mucoperiosteal flap and carefully bur away some
buccal bone plate to allow insertion of a luxator or elevator into the periodontal ligament space and
then loosen the root in the conventional way.
• FeLV-and FIV-infected cats need to be restricted to an indoor-only lifestyle to prevent spread of
infection.
TREATMENT OPTIONS
1. Euthanasia - the cat is infective and part of a multi-cat household.
2. Symptomatic treatment (remove retained root remnants 309 and 409, debride
socket of 204, antibiotics and anti-inflammatory agents as required). Biopsy from the
non-healing socket of 204 would also be prudent. Following symptomatic treatment,
the cat would need to be restricted to an indoor lifestyle only to prevent potential
spread of FeLV and FIV. The FeLV and FIV status of the other cats in the household
TREATMENTPERFORMED
The implications of an FeLV-and FIV-positive cat in a multi-cat household were
discussed at length with the owner over the telephone. The owner requested
symptomatic treatment while they thought about the implications of the viral status.
They arranged with their own veterinary surgeon to have the other eight cats tested.
Treatment performed consisted of:
1. Periodontal therapy.
             
extractions were closed with 5/0 Monocryl. Postoperative radiographs were taken to
confirm successful extraction.
3. Curettage of the socket of 204.
4. Biopsy of the non-healing socket of 204.
On reflection, the owner decided to opt for euthanasia, which was performed
immediately.
COMMENTS
Cats with FeLV and/or FIV have an altered immune response. Severe oral
inflammation may be one manifestation of this. It is good practice to test for FeLV and
FIV early on in cats that manifest with oral inflammation. Most cats with
inflammatory oral disease will test negative, but it needs to be excluded.
The identification of FeLV and/or FIV infection is in itself not an indication for
euthanasia. Many cats do well with symptomatic management, i.e. strict plaque
control, usually by means of radical extraction, and medical management (antibiotics,
anti-inflammatory drugs) if acute phases develop. However, infected cats need to be
restricted to an indoor-only lifestyle to prevent spread of infection.
The decision to take a biopsy from the non-healing extraction socket of 204 was
taken in lieu of recent reports of squamous cell carcinoma developing in chronic
gingivostomatitis cats. The histopathological findings in this case were chronic
inflammation, with no evidence of neoplasia.
Atomization of root remnants as attempted in this case is unlikely to achieve the
goal of removing the retained roots. It is impossible to differentiate between tooth and
bone, and to selectively remove tooth material using a bur. The most likely outcome,
as in this case, is to drill canals into the roots. The best way to remove root remnants
is to raise a mucoperiosteal flap and carefully bur away some buccal bone plate to
allow insertion of a luxator or elevator into the periodontal ligament space, then
loosen the root in the conventional way.
14
Idiopathic chronic gingivostomatitis with extraction
leading to cure
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Inappetance and drooling.
PATIENT DETAILS
A 6-year-old, neutered male, domestic short-haired cat.
CASE HISTORY
There was no history of any oral disease until 1 year ago, when the cat presented with
inappetance and drooling. The owner reported that he would start to eat and then
back off his food as if he was in pain. The oral mucous membranes were intensely
inflamed. He had been treated with antibiotics and corticosteroids intermittently (six
treatments in total) during the last year. Initially, the combination of a short course of
cat had resumed eating. The effect had only lasted for 4-6 weeks and become shorter
for each course. The last course of antibiotics and long-acting steroid had been
ineffective.  There  was no history of oral/dental examination under general
          
was FeLV and FIV negative. The only blood abnormality was elevated plasma
globulins and a left shift in the neutrogram.
The cat was referred to us for management of the chronic gingivostomatitis.
ORAL EXAMINATION - CONSCIOUS
The cat would not allow conscious examination of the face or oral cavity.
ORAL EXAMINATION-UNDERGENERAL ANAESTHETIC
A thorough oral examination, including investigating periodontal parameters, was
performed and all findings were noted on the dental record.
In summary, examination under general anaesthesia identified a severe
glossopalatine folds were intensely inflamed (Fig. 14.1a-c). Moderate amounts of
plaque and calculus were present on the buccal aspects of the upper premolars. All
teeth were present and showed no evidence of periodontitis.
(C)
(a)
Figure 14.1
Right lateral (a), left lateral (b) and rostrocaudal (c) photographs of the oral cavity.
(a) The inflammation affects free and attached gingivae, and extends into the buccal
mulcosa distally.
(b) Note the extension of the inflammation to involve the buccal mucosa.
(c) The inflammatory reaction extends caudally to involve the glossopalatine folds.
FURTHER INVESTIGATIONS
A series of full-mouth radiographs (10 views) was taken.
An oropharyngeal swab from the glossopalatine mucosa was taken and submitted
for feline calici virus (FCV) isolation.
RADIOGRAPHICFINDINGS
No obvious pathology (Fig. 14.2a, b) could be identified on any of the 10 views.
(b)
Figure 14.2
 Left (a) and right (b) lateral radiographs of mandibular premolars and molars. All
teeth are present and there is no evidence of any dental or periodontal disease. This applied to all 10
views taken.
ORALPROBLEMLIST
Idiopathic chronic gingivostomatitis.
THEORYREFRESHER
Chronic gingivostomatitis (CGS) describes a clinical syndrome characterized by focal
or diffuse inflammation of the gingivae and oral mucosa. It occurs in dogs but is
predominantly seen in cats. It is thought to be an inappropriate response to oral
antigens, namely bacterial plaque present on the tooth surfaces.
It is uiseful to view CGS as being subdivided into three different types, which may
overlap. In one type, an underlying cause that explains the inflammatory response
(albeit not the intensity) can be identified. Common causes are retained root remnants
from previous extraction, periodontitis or other dental pathology. In the second type,
concurrent disease that alters the animal's ability to mount an appropriate
and diabetes mellitus, will alter the immune response and may predispose to the
development of severe gingival inflammation in the presence of plaque. Cats infected
             
the presence of plaque on the tooth surfaces. Cats infected with FCV are also likely to
have an altered immune response. In the third type, no obvious dental pathology or
nderlying immune incompetence can be identified, i.e. idiopathic.
Cats with CGS require a thorough work-up prior to any treatment. The purpose of
the work-ip is not to reach a diagnosis per se, but rather an attempt to identify
         s  s
infection; sometimes testing for FCV infection; routine haematology and blood
biochemistry; and sometimes biopsy and microscopic examination of the affected
tissues. A meticulous oral and dental examination, including full-mouth radiographs
to identify the presence of periodontitis, resorptive lesions, retained root remnants or
other lesions, is mandatory. Systemic diseases, e.g. chronic renal failure and diabetes
mellitus, which may predispose to the development of severe gingival inflammation in
the presence of plaque, must also be excluded before any treatment is initiated.
In this case, no underlying cause for the inflammatory reaction in the oral
mucous membranes was identified. The cat appeared otherwise healthy based on
clinical examination and blood results. It tested negative to FeLV and FIV, and FCV
could not be cultured from oral swabs. All teeth were present, with no evidence of
periodontitis or resorptive lesions.
CLINICAL TIPS
 Cats with chronic stomatitis require a thorough work-up, including FeLV (perhaps FCV) and FIV
testing. prior to any treatment to try to identify any underlying cause for the condition.
· Chlorhexidine is the gold standard antiplaque agent.
· Extraction of all premolars and molars results in cure in roughly 80% of cats.
· Radiographic assessment of all extraction sites is mandatory.
 Following extensive extraction procedures, cats should be hospitalized for controlled administration
of analgesics and antibiotics until they are eating.
· If intra-oral sutures induce inflammation, they should be removed under anaesthesia after the
wound has healed.
• In assessing the outcome of treatment, the oral inflammatory reaction needs to be linked to clinical
behaviour. In some cases, the cats show no evidence of any oral discomfort in spite of having some
 residual oral inflammation.
TREATMENT OPTIONS
1. Conservative management, i.e. meticulous periodontal therapy followed by daily
home care (daily chlorhexidine rinse and toothbrushing). Theoretically, once dental
deposits have been removed, if the owner controls plaque accumulation then the
inflammatory reaction should subside. Plaque control by the owner would consist of
daily removal using a toothbrush (mechanical plaque removal), augmented by daily
rinsing of the oral cavity with the gold standard antiplaque agent, namely
chlorhexidine (chemical plaque control). This regime would need to be followed daily
for the rest of the animal's life to maintain healthy gingivae and oral mucosae. In
practical terms, it is difficult to convince an adult cat with inflamed oral soft tissues to
accept any sort of home care. In a few selected cats, we have been able to control
plaque with twice-daily chlorhexidine rinsing and postoperative antibiotics for 3
weeks immediately after professional periodontal therapy. This achieved a level of
gingival and oral mucosal health which allowed brushing to be instituted without
causing discomfort. The health of the gingival and oral mucosa was then maintained
S           s   s
This cat did not allow conscious examination of the oral cavity and the owner was
absolutely sure that he would not be able to perform any home care. Consequently,
2. Extraction of all premolars and molars, which results in cure in roughly 80% of
cats. This is the option of choice for this cat. It was emphasized to the owner that it
may not result in complete cure, and that further extraction (all teeth) and adjunctive
medical management (intermittent antibiotics or interferon) may be required.
TREATMENTPERFORMED
1. Periodontal therapy of the incisors and canines.
2. Open extraction of all premolars and molars; flaps were replaced with 5/0 Monocryl.
Postoperative radiographs were taken to confirm successful extraction at all sites.
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
• It was planned to hospitalize the cat for 3 days to provide antibiotics and analgesia by injection
until he started eating. He was tempted with soft palatable food.
 He started eating the day after surgery and was discharged with no medication.
· The cat was rebooked for conscious examination a month later.
RECHECKS
At recheck 1 month later, the owner reported that the cat was bright, alert and eating
well. He was being fed soft food but had started to steal kibbles from the other cat.
Conscious oral examination was permitted and revealed that the extraction sites were
healing nicely, but there was a reaction to the suture material. The cat was
anaesthetized and the remaining sutures removed.
At recheck 3 weeks after removing the remaining sutures, all extraction sites were
healed and there was no evidence of inflammation of the gingivae or oral mucosae
(Fig. 14.3a, b).
(a)
(b)
Figure 14.3
Oblique occlusal (a) and occlusal (b) photographs of the upper jaw.
(a) At recheck 1 month after extraction, all the extraction sites were healing nicely,
but there was a reaction to the suture material.
(b) The remaining sutures have been removed.
At recheck 6 months after the extractions, the owner reported that the cat was
doing very well and conscious examination revealed a healthy oral cavity (Fig. 14.4).
The cat did not resent handling and oral examination, and it was recommended that
the owner try to brush the remaining incisors and canines to keep plaque at a
minimum. It was also recommended that the cat be examined under general
anaesthesia at regular intervals, e.g. annually, to monitor the status of the remaining
teeth.
Figure 14.4
 Rostrocaudal photograph of the oral cavity. Note the healthy oral cavity 6 months
after extraction of all premolars and molars.
PROGNOSIS
The fact that there is no evidence of gingivostomatitis 6 months after extraction is
promising. If the owner manages to brush the remaining teeth and maintain clinically
healthy gingivae, this cat may never require further extractions. However, if plaque is
allowed to accumulate and gingivitis/periodontitis or gingivostomatitis develops, then
the remaining teeth will need removal. Frequent professional checks and intervention
as required is recommended.
COMMENTS
The idiopathic type of CGS is treated by extracting premolars and molars. It is
essential that the whole tooth is removed, as retained root fragments will sustain the
inflammatory response. Radiographic assessment of all extraction sites is mandatory.
Even with successful extraction, the outcome is difficult to predict. In roughly
80% of cases removal of the premolars and molars results in reduction of the
inflammation, if not cure. In the remaining 20% of cases further treatment is
required, i.e. extraction of remaining teeth, intermittent antibiotics, interferon. It is
essential that the owner is aware of this from the outset.
In assessing outcome of treatment, the oral inflammatory reaction needs to be
linked to clinical behaviour. In some cases, the cats show no evidence of any oral
discomfort, i.e. they eat, drink and groom themselves, yet on oral examination there is
evidence of inflammation, although not as severe as before extraction. I view these as
successful and do not interfere unless clinical signs of discomfort develop.
1 would strongly recommend hospitalization for controlled administration of
analgesics and antibiotics following extensive extraction procedures. We normally
hospitalize such patients until they are eating and drinking. This generally means 1-3
days in hospital.
It is not uncommon to find that, 3-4 weeks after surgery, the extraction sites are
healing nicely but the sutures have become plaque-retentive surfaces and are causing
           
anaesthesia and the remaining suitures removed.
15
Chronic gingivostomatitis with extraction leading to
partial cure
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Reluctance to eat, progressive apathy and weight loss.
PATIENTDETAILS
An 8-year-old, neutered female, domestic short-haired cat.
CASE HISTORY
The cat was referred to us for management of chronic oral inflammation of 2 years'
duration. Presenting signs had been a progressive reluctance to eat, apathy and
weight loss. During the first year, she had been treated with antibiotics and
corticosteroids intermittently (five treatments in total). Initially, the combination of a
short course of antibiotics and a long-acting steroid had resulted in  clinical
improvement in that the cat had resumed eating. The effect had only lasted for 3-6
weeks and become shorter for each course. In the last year, the cat had received
professional periodontal therapy with extractions twice, as well as four courses of
antibiotics and long-acting steroid. There had been short periods of improvement after
each episode of therapy. At the second episode of periodontal therapy, it was recorded
which teeth had been removed (108, 208, 309, 409 and root remnants from previous
extraction) and the extractions had been confirmed radiographically. The procedure
had been performed by a veterinarian with a special interest and training in dentistry.
She arranged referral to us and did preoperative blood and viral testing. The cat was
FeLV and FIV negative, but FCV positive.
ORAL EXAMINATION -CONSCIOUS
The cat allowed conscious oral examination, which revealed the absence of all
premolars and molars, and gingivostomatitis of the mucosa overlying the alveolar
bone as well as the buccal mucosa and glossopalatine folds.
ORALEXAMINATION-UNDERGENERALANAESTHETIC
A thorough oral examination, including investigating periodontal parameters, was
performed and all findings were noted on the dental record.
In summary, examination under general anaesthesia identified the following:
1. All premolars and molars were missing
2 . Gingivostomatitis (alveolar, buccal and glossopalatine mucosae) affecting the
premolar and molar regions in all four quadrants (Fig. 15.1)
3. Mild gingivitis associated with the canines (Fig. 15.1)
4. No gingivitis associated with incisor teeth (Fig. 15.1).
Figure 15.1
 Rostrocaudal photograph of the oral cavity. This was the clinical appearance of the
oral mucosa immediately before treatment with feline omega interferon. Note that the upper incisors
have no clinical evidence of gingivitis and the upper canines only show mild gingival inflammation.
FURTHERINVESTIGATIONS
A series of full-mouth radiographs (10 views) was taken.
RADIOGRAPHICFINDINGS
No obvious pathology could be identified. There was no evidence of any retained roots
from previous extractions.
ORAL PROBLEM LIST
1. Mild gingivitis (canines)
        
quadrants).
THEORY REFRESHER
Chronic gingivostomatitis (CGS) is a common condition of the cat characterized by
intense inflammation of gingival and non-gingival oral mucosa. It is thought to be an
inappropriate response to oral antigens, namely bacterial plaque present on the tooth
surfaces. Affected cats may show mild to severe dysphagia, with slight to absolute
reluctance to eat. The decline in food intake leads to progressive apathy and weight
loss.
I find it useful in the clinical situation to view CGS as three different types, with
some degree of overlap. In one type, an underlying cause that explains the
inflammatory response (albeit not the intensity) can be identified, e.g. retained root
           
appropriate inflammatory response can be identified, e.g. chronic renal failure,
diabetes mellitus or viral infection (FeLV, FIV, FCV). In the third type, no obvious
dental pathology or underlying immune incompetence can be identified, i.e. it is
idiopathic.
Cats with chronic stomatitis require a thorough work-up prior to any treatment.
The purpose of the work-up is not to reach a diagnosis per se, but rather an attempt to
identify possible underlying causes. As a minimum, such a work-up includes testing
for FIV and FeLV, and routine haematology and blood biochemistry. A meticulous oral
and dental examination, including full-mouth radiographs to identify the presence of
periodontitis, resorptive lesions, retained root remnants or other lesions, is mandatory.
Systemic diseases, e.g. chronic renal failure and diabetes mellitus, which may
predispose to the development of severe gingival inflammation in the presence of
plaque, must also be excluded before any trea tment is initiated.
The idiopathic type of CGS is refractory to medical management. The extraction
of all premolar and molar teeth has given the most dependable results, with up to 80%
of cats being clinically cured or significantly improved.
In this case, no underlying cause for the inflammatory reaction in the oral
mucous membranes was identified, i.e. it is classified as an idiopathic CGs, but an
          
positive. The role of FCV in the development of CGS is unclear. FCV has been isolated
    o     p s     d 
population, indicating that the carrier state may be a prerequisite for the induction of
chronic stomatitis. However, FCV isolated from cats with CGS and then inoculated
inflammation. The fact that CGS often resolves in FCV-positive cats after extraction of
all or most teeth and the subsequent reduction in dental plaque suggests that other
antigenic stimuli are involved in the pathogenesis of the condition. It is possible that
it is the sum of the total antigenic stimulation from plaque bacteria and viruses that is
significant in the development of CGS.
CLINICAL TIPS
 Chronic gingivostomatitis-affected cats may show mild to severe dysphagia, with slight to absolute
reluctance to eat.
 Cats with chronic stomatitis require a thorough work-up prior to any treatment.
* The idiopathic type of CGS is refractory to medical management.
 The extraction of all premolar and molar teeth has given the most dependable results, with up to
80% of cats being clinically cured or significantly improved.
 The role of FCV in the development of CGS is unclear.
· The use of interferon therapy for CGs is still being evaluated.
• Interferon should only be used in FCV-positive cats where extraction of at least all premolar and
 molar teeth has not led to cure.
TREATMENT OPTIONS
1. Conservative management, i.e. meticulous periodontal therapy followed by daily
home care (daily chlorhexidine rinse and toothbrushing). The cat only had incisors
and canines, and there was only mild gingivitis associated with these teeth.
2. Extraction of the remaining teeth. The incisor and canine teeth were not affected by
periodontitis, and there was no evidence of oral inflammation in the rostral portion of
the mouth. Extracting these teeth was deemed unlikely to have much beneficial effect
on the caudal inflammation.
3. Medical management. The cat had already received nine courses of antibiotics and
long-acting steroid over the last 2 years. The effect of each treatment had become
shorter every time.
4 . Interferon. Interferons are cytokines that have antiviral, antiproliferative and
immunomodulatory effects through direct and indirect effects on target cells. Studies
have shown that interferon shortens the duration of acute calici virus infection in
experimentally infected cats. It may thus also be effective in treating cats with CGs in
which infection with FCV is a contributory factor.
TREATMENTPERFORMED
given by subcutaneous injection on alternative days for five doses. After the fifth dose,
10 0oo IU feline recombinant interferon omega (FelFN) in 2 ml of isotonic saline was
given orally by the owner once daily for 2 months and then on alternate days for the
third month. No other medication was given.
RECHECKS
The cat was re-examined, and oral swabs were taken for FCV isolation after 6, 10 and
14 weeks. There was a significant reduction in oral inflammation (Fig. 15.2) and no
FCV was isolated.
Figure15.2
 Rostrocaudal photograph of the oral cavity. Much reduced oral inflammation is
Six months later, the cat was re-examined under general anaesthesia. There was
no inflammation of the oral mucosa (Fig. 15.3). Swabs were taken from the tonsils
and tonsillar crypts for FCV isolation. The result was negative.
Figure 15.3
 Rostrocaudal photograph of the caudal oral cavity. The oral mucosa is not inflamed.
This photograph was taken 6 months after treatment with feline omega interferon.
PROGNOSIS
The use of interferon therapy for CGs is still being evaluated. We have treated more
than half a dozen cases (all of which were FCV positive, FeLV and FIV negative and
s         e    
improvement in all but one case. The exact treatment regimen is inder development.
We have treated some cases using the same protocol as described for this case; other
cases have been treated using a slightly different protocol in that, following the initial
1 mega unit/kg subcutaneous injection on alternate days for five doses, the same
injection regimen was repeated 30 days after the first injection and no oral FelFN was
given. We are also evaluating intralesional injection as a possible protocol.
       s   n
therapy may be useful in cases that are refractory to surgical management.
COMMENTS
CGS resolves in many FCV-positive cases following radical or fuill-mouith extraction
without any specific antiviral treatment. In roughly 80% of cases removal of the
premolars and molars results in reduction of the inflammation, if not cure. In the
remaining 20% of cases further treatment is required, i.e. extraction of remaining
teeth, antiseptics (daily chlorhexidine flushing), intermittent antibiotics, interferon. It
is essential that the owner is aware that their cat may fall into the 20% of cases that
are refractory to suirgical management alone.
In assessing outcome of treatment, the oral inflammatory reaction needs to be
S         s     
discomfort, i.e. they eat, drink and groom themselves, yet on oral examination there is
evidence of inflammation, although not as severe as before extraction. I view these as
successful and do not interfere unless clinical signs of discomfort develop.
S   n       
treatment (extraction of at least all premolar and molar teeth) may work well for some
patients.
In this case, extraction of the remaining teeth was not appropriate and
intermittent antibiotics had been tried. Consequently, immune modulation using
interferon was chosen. FCV isolation should always be performed prior to using
interferon and also to monitor viral status as a consequence of treatment. Interferon
should only be used in FCV-positive cats where extraction of at least all premolar and
molar teeth has not led to cure. Using interferon without surgical treatment
(extraction) has not been shown to have any benefit
16
Canine chronic gingivostomatitis
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Halitosis and selective feeding.
PATIENT DETAILS
A 6-year-old, neutered male, greyhound.
CASE HISTORY
The dog was a retired racing greyhound. He had been with the owners for 3 months at
the time of presentation to the referring veterinarian. The owners were concerned
about halitosis and his eating habits. He was on a mixed dry kibble and moist canned
food diet, but would only eat the moist food and would not eat every day, and never
any large amounts. He had lost 2 kg in 3 months. The referring veterinarian
diagnosed ‘severe periodontal disease' and the dog received periodontal therapy
(scaling and polishing), followed by a short course of antibiotics. This resulted in a
reduction of the oral inflammation and increased appetite for a few weeks, after
which both the halitosis and eating problems returned. The dog was then referred to
us for investigation and treatment. Haematology and biochemistry screens were
normal.
ORAL EXAMINATION - CONSCIOUS
Conscious oral examination was allowed, which revealed intense halitosis and
gingivostomatitis (Fig. 16.la). The mandibular lymph nodes were enlarged and
seemed painful on palpation.
(a)
(b)
Figure 16.1
Lateral photograph of the right mandibular premolar region (a) and oblique lateral
photograph of the right rostral upper jaw (b). The free and attached gingivae are intensely inflamed.
Note the clear demarcation of gingiva from oral mucosa.
ORAL EXAMINATION-UNDER GENERALANAESTHETIC
performed and all findings were noted on the dental record.
 In summary, examination under general anaesthesia identified the following:
1. Severe inflammation of free and attached gingivae (Fig. 16.1a, b)
2. Inflammation of the buccal mucosa (Fig. 16.2)
3. Inflammation of the lingual mucosa
4. Moderate amounts of plaque and calculus were present on the buccal aspects of the
upper premolars and molars (Fig. 16.2)
5. No evidence of periodontitis (loss of periodontal attachment), i.e. no increased PPD
Or GR.
Figure 16.2
 Oblique lateral photograph of the right maxilla. There is only a moderate amount of
calculus and plaque present. Note the inflammation of the buccal mucosa as well as the gingivae.
FURTHERINVESTIGATIONS
All teeth were present and there were no clinical signs of periodontitis, so radiographs
were not indicated at this stage.
ORAL PROBLEM LIST
Chronic gingivostomatitis.
THEORYREFRESHER
Chronic gingivostomatitis (CGS) describes a clinical syndrome characterized by focal
or diffuse inflammation of the gingivae and oral mucosa. While it is more common in
cats, it also occurs in dogs.
It is thought to be an inappropriate response to oral antigens, namely bacterial
plaque present on the tooth surfaces. While underlying vesiculo-bullous disease, e.g.
pemphigus and pemphigoid or discoid lupus erythematosus (DLE), cannot be
excluded, it is essential to have plaque control before these can be investigated.
In the dog, I approach CGS as follows:
1. Haematology and biochemistry screens to exclude systemic diseases, e.g. endocrine
or renal disorders, which may predispose to the development of severe gingival
inflammation in the presence of plaque
2. Meticulous oral examination with radiographs as necessary to identify a possible
reason for the intense inflammatory response, e.g. retained root remnants,
periodonti tis, other dental pathology
3. Periodontal therapy (scaling and polishing) and treatment of pathological lesions,
i.e. extract root remnants, extract teeth affected by periodontitis
4. Daily home care (mechanical and chemical plaque control) is instituted
5. Assess response to treatment.
In the great majority of cases, the above approach results in complete cure. In
some cases, the owner is not able to maintain adequate plaque control and selective
teeth) is then performed. This is usually sufficient. In one aggressive dog that would
not allow home care, all teeth were extracted. This resulted in healthy oral mucosa.
In this dog, there was no evidence of any underlying systemic disease
sound, i.e. there was no clinical loss of attachment.
CLINICAL TIPS
 It is essential to have plaque control before underlying vesiculo-bullous disease can be investigated.
 Control of this condition relies more on what the owner does at home to keep the plaque burden to
 a minimum than it does on professional periodontal therapy.
TREATMENT OPTIONS
The treatment of choice for this case was conservative management, i.e. meticulous
periodontal therapy followed by daily home care  (daily chlorhexidine rinse and
controls plaque accumulation then the inflammatory reaction should subside. Plaque
control by the owner would consist of daily removal using a toothbrush (mechanical
plaque removal), augmented by daily rinsing of the oral cavity with the gold standard
antiplaque agent, namely chlorhexidine (chemical plaque control). This regime would
need to be followed daily for the rest of the animal's life to maintain healthy gingivae
and oral mucosae.
TREATMENTPERFORMED
Periodontal
 therapy, i.e. meticulous supra-and subgingival scaling and tooth
polishing.
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
· Daily toothbrushing
· Daily chlorhexidine rinse
· Ten-day course of antibiotics.
 The dog was booked for conscious examination in 1 month.
The owner was given instructions how to brush the teeth and apply chlorhexidine
rinse. Complementary toothbrush and toothpaste were supplied, as well as plaque
disclosing swabs, so that he could check the adequacy of the plaque removal.
RECHECKS
At recheck 1 month later, the owners reported that the dog was bright, alert and
eating well (kibble as well as the moist food). There had been no problems with the
toothbrushing. In fact, they were able to open his mouth and brush palatal and lingual
tooth surfaces, as well as the buccal. There was no halitosis. Oral examination under
general anaesthesia revealed no dental deposits and relatively healthy gingivae (Fig.
16.3). The teeth were polished. The chlorhexidine rinse was discontinued and the
owner advised to carry on with meticulous daily toothbrushing using toothpaste.
Figure 16.3
 Right-side lateral photograph 1 month after initial treatment. The inflammation of the
free and attached gingivae is much reduced. The teeth were polished and the owners resumed daily
toothbrushing.
At recheck 3 and 6 months after periodontal debridement, conscious examination
revealed no dental deposits and clinically healthy gingivae as a result of the continued
daily brushing.
Nine months after initial therapy, the owners went on holiday for 2 weeks, and
the dog was placed in kennels and did not have its teeth brushed for that period of
time. On their return the gingivostomatitis had flared up. They started daily
toothbrushing and daily chlorhexidine rinsing, and within 10 days the oral mucosae
were no longer inflamed.
One year after initially therapy, the dog was placed under general anaesthesia for
oral examination and periodontal therapy as required. A thorough oral examination
revealed no clinical evidence of periodontitis, i.e. no increased probing depths and no
gingival recession. There was minimal plaque accumulation and virtually no calculus.
Mild gingivitis was evident at some sites (Fig. 16.4). The teeth were scaled and
polished.
Figure 16.4
            -
toothbrushing there is minimal accumulation of dental deposits and only a mild marginal gingivitis.
The oral mucosae are not inflamed.
The owners were advised to carry on with daily toothbrushing. They were also
reminded that professional periodontal therapy would be required. The dog was
booked for re-evaluation in 1 year's time.
PROGNOSIS
As long as the owners carry on with the daily home care, the prognosis for this dog is
excellent. However, if the owners become lax with plaque removal the
gingivostomatitis will return within a few weeks. This occurred when they went on
holiday for 2 weeks. Resuming daily toothbrushing returned the oral mucosa to
health.
COMMENTS
We have seen many similar cases over the years, and they have all responded to
meticulous plaque control and selective extraction in some cases (i.e. extracting
autoimmune disorder in any of these cases.
The control of this condition relies more on what the owner does at home to keep
the plaque burden to a minimum than it does on professional periodontal therapy. The
          s   s
outset. In my experience, most owners are prepared to take on this responsibility and,
continuous reinforcement!
ROOT RESORPTION
17
Root resorption - an introduction
Hard tissues are protected from resorption by their surface layers of blast cells. It
appears that as long as these layers are intact, resorption cannot occur. Although
bone, dentine and cementum are mesenchymal, mineralized tissues composed mainly
of collagen and hydroxyapatite, they differ markedly in their susceptibility to
resorption.
Two mechanisms are involved in resorption of hard tissue:
1. The trigger
2. A reason for the resorption to continuie.
The trigger mechanism in root resorption is a root surface detached from its
protective blast cell layer. Detachment may follow any damage to the protective blast
layer. For the resorption to continue, a stimulus is required, e.g. infection or a
continuous mechanical force.
Root resorption always starts at a surface, and is termed internal if emanating
from the root canal wall and as external if emanating from the root surface.
Internal resorption is rare in permanent teeth. Radiographically, it is
characterized by an oval-shaped enlargement of the root canal space. Histological
examination reveals resorption of the internal aspect of the root by multinucleated
S       ss     
regarding the origin of the pulpal granulation tissue involved in internal resorption.
The most logical explanation is that it is puilp tissue that is inflamed because of an
infected coronal pulp space. In addition to the requirement of the presence of
granulation tissue, root resorption takes place only if the odontoblast layer and
predentine are lost or altered.
Traditionally, a pink tooth has been thought pathognomonic of internal root
 p   ss  q s s  d  n
lindermining the crown enamel. However, a pink tooth can also be a feature of a
specific type of external root resorption, namely peripheral inflammatory external root
resorption (detailed later in this chapter), which must be ruled out before a diagnosis
of internal root resorption is made. A pink tooth can also be due to pulpal
haemorrhage.
There are different forms of external root resorption described in man. The
underlying mechanism is understood for some of these, whereas other forms are still
linexplained and therefore termed idiopathic. A classification system for external root
resorptions that have a known mechanism has been proposed in man and is as
follows:
1. Surface resorption
2. Replacement resorption associated with ankylosis
3. Inflammatory resorption.
This classification system works for external root resorption in cats and dogs as
Well.
SURFACERESORPTTON
A surface resorption is initiated subsequent to injury of the cementoblast layer. The
denuded root surface attracts clast cells, which will resorb the cementum for as long as
osteoclast-activating factors are released at the site of injury, usuially a few days.
When the resorption stops, cells from the periodontal ligament will proliferate and
populate the resorbed area, resulting in deposition of reparative dental tissue (new
cementum).
It is thought that minor traumas caused by unintentional biting on hard objects,
bruxism, etc. can cause localized damage to the periodontal ligament and trigger this
type of resorption. The process is self-limiting and reversible.
REPLACEMENT RESORPTION
Replacement resorption results in replacement of the dental hard tissue by bone. When
   r     s   s
populate the resorbed area. If the resorption is large it will take some time for these
cells to cover the entire surface. Cells from the nearby bone may then arrive first and
establish themselves on the resorbed surface. Bone will thus be formed directly upon
the dental hard tissue. This results in fusion between bone and tooth, i.e. ankylosis.
This can be seen as a form of healing; the bone has accepted the dental hard tissue as
part of itself and the tooth becomes involved in the normal skeletal turnover. So,
during consequent remodelling of bone, both dental hard tissue and bone will be
resorbed. When the resorptive process is over, the osteoblasts will form bone in the
resorbed area. In this way the dental tissues will gradually be replaced by bone. In
short, ankylosis is a form of healing of root surface resorption, which from a clinical
standpoint may be undesirable.
INFLAMMATORY RESORPTION
In addition to apical root resorption caused by apical periodontitis as a consequence of
pulpal necrosis, there are two main forms of external resorption associated with
inflammation in the periodontal tissues, namely:
1. Peripheral inflammatory root resorption (PIRR)
2. External inflammatory root resorption (EIRR).
Both forms are triggered by destruction of the cementoblasts. In PIRR, the
an inflammatory lesion in the adjacent periodontal tissues. EIRR, on the other hand,
words, the common factor for these two types of resorption is inflammation in the
adjacent tissues. As far as PIRR is concerned, the periradicular inflammation per se
keeps the resorptive process going, while the stimulus for EIRR is periradicular
inflammation caused by products released from the necrotic pulp by way of the
dentinal tubules exposed by the resorption.
    
A damaged cervical root surface (e.g. due to excessive scaling or other trauma) is
lisually covered by junctional epithelium. Sometimes this does not occur; instead, the
damaged area will be repopulated by connective tissue. In the presence of a
periodontal lesion the onset of a resorptive process is triggered. It is conceivable that
denuded root surface, and thus initiate and maintain clastic activity. This type of
resorption is found immediately apical to the marginal tissues and thus is often
situated cervically, and has therefore been termed cervical root resorption. However.
the location is related to the level of the marginal tissues and the pocket depth, and
may thus not always be cervical in position.
External inflammatory root resorption (ElRR):
This type of root resorption is a complication that can follow dental trauima. It begins
the traumatic injury. The pulp is also damaged and becomes necrotic. As the surface
resorption approaches the dentine, the osteoclasts will carry on their resorptive
activity, as necrotic and possible infected pulp matter is released from the thus
exposed dentine tubules. The pulp products will then maintain an inflammatory
process in the adjacent periodontal tissues that in turn will trigger the continuance of
the resorption.
Odontoclastic resorptive lesions (ORLs) may well represent the single most
              
dental clinical caseload in small animal veterinary practice. It is likely that the lesions
are either peripheral inflammatory root resorption (triggered by inflammation of
periodontal tissues) or replacement resorption (idiopathic).
Clinically, they commonly present as a cavity at the cemento-enamel junction of
the tooth. However, studies which included radiography have demonstrated that the
cemento-enamel junction. The lesions can be detected by means of a combination of
visual inspection, tactile examination with a dental explorer and radiography
Visual inspection and tactile examination with a dental explorer will only
identify end-stage lesions, i.e. when the process involves the crown and has resulted in
an obvious cavity. Radiography will identify lesions that are localized to the root
surfaces within the alveolar bone, which would not be detected by clinical methods.
radiographs (using intra-oral radiographic techniques) are recommended for all cats
presented for dental therapy.
Most studies have shown an increased incidence with increasing age. Differences
in breed susceptibility have also been suggested in some studies, but differences in
The lesions have also been shown to occur in both feral and wild cats, and in other
species, e.g. man, dog and chinchilla.
In a recent study, which investigated the incidence of ORLs in a clinically healthy
population of 228 relatively young cats (mean age was 4.92 years), using a
combination of clinical examination and radiography, it was found that the overall
prevalence rate was 29% and that it increased with age. The mandibular third
premolars (307, 407) were the most commonly affected teeth and the pattern of
with clinically missing teeth were more likely to have ORLs. Neutering, sex, age at
neutering or mean whole-mouth gingivitis index did not affect the prevalence of ORL.
Currently, the suggested methods of managing odontoclastic resorptive lesions
are:
1. Conservative management
2. Tooth extraction
3. Coronal amputation.
Historically, restoration of the tooth surface has been recommended for the
treatment of accessible lesions that extend into the dentine and do not involve pulp
tissue. However, several studies have shown that tooth resorption continues and the
restorations are lost. Consequently, the use of restoration of odontoclastic lesions as a
major treatment technique cannot be recommended.
Conservative management:
is recommended for lesions that are not evident on clinical examination, i.e. only seen
radiographically, and there is no evidence of discomfort or pain. In general practice,
most lesions are only diagnosed when pathology is extensive and conservative
management is rarely an option.
In most cases, extraction or coronal amputation of an affected tooth is indicated.
Preoperative radiographs are mandatory  to allow  selection of the appropriate
treatment option.
Extraction:
Teeth with ORLs are notoriously difficult to extract, as the root is resorbing and being
replaced by bone-like tissue. Moreover, there are areas of ankylosis, i.e. fusion of bone
and tooth substance, along the root surface. In addition to preoperative radiographs to
detect the lesions and determine appropriate treatment, postoperative radiographs to
ensure that the whole tooth has been removed are required.
Teeth affected by ORL can be extracted using a closed technique, but an open
technique is usually less traumatic to the tissues and easier to perform.
Coronal amputation:
The indications for, and outcome of, coronal amputation have been well documented
and the procedure is recommended for selected cases, but needs radiographic
monitoring at regular intervals postoperatively to ensure that the root is resorbing and
that healing is uineventful.
In brief, the technique involves raising a gingival flap both buccally and
            
affected tooth is amputated using a small round bur. A small amount of root tissue is
also removed with the bur, just enough to ensure that the intentionally retained
in place.
In summary:
· ORLs are common.
· The lesions are progressive.
· Diagnosis requires radiography.
· The purpose of the treatment is the relief of discomfort or pain. In most instances,
extraction of the tooth, or coronal amputation, remain the preferable treatment
options.
· Successful extraction and uncomplicated healing needs clinical and radiographic
monitoring.
18
No clinical signs of root resorption
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Bilateral upper lip ulcers.
PATIENT DETAILS
A 7-year-old, male, domestic short-haired cat.
CASE HISTORY
The upper canines had been extracted a few months earlier. Following the extractions
of the upper canine teeth, the lower canines were impinging on the upper lip (in fact,
the upper lip was trapped between the maxillary alveolar ridge and the lower canines
bilaterally), causing ulcerated indentations. The lip lesions were causing discomfort as
evidenced by reduced appetite and pawing at the mouth to free the trapped lip tissue.
The case was referred to us for management of the lip ulcerations. The reason for
extracting the upper canine teeth was not mentioned in the clinical records.
ORAL EXAMINATION - CONSCIOUS
The owner reported that the lip lesions had developed within a few weeks of
extracting the upper canine teeth. They were not sure why the teeth had been
extracted, but thought they could have been ‘broken'.
The cat allowed conscious examination of the head and mouth, which identified
the following:
1. Bilateral deep ulcerated indentation of the upper lip where the lower canines were
occluding
2. Occlusion otherwise normal
3. Teeth 106 and 206 were missing
The cat was obviously uncomfortable, and pawed at its face and freed the trapped
lip tissue several times during the examination.
ORAL EXAMINATION -UNDER GENERAL ANAESTHETIC
A thorough oral examination, including investigating periodontal parameters, was
In summary, examination under general anaesthesia identified the following:
1. Bilateral deep ulcerated indentation of the upper lip where the lower canines were
occluding
2. Teeth 106 and 107 were missing
3. Mild gingivitis, localized to the upper premolars and molars bilaterally.
FURTHERINVESTIGATIONS
A series of full-mouth radiographs (10 films) was taken.
RADIOGRAPHICFINDINGS
1. The extraction sockets of 104 and 204 had healed and there was no evidence of any
retained root remnants.
2. Teeth 106 and 206 were absent, with some tooth-like material remaining in the
alveoli, but the teeth were almost completely resorbed and replaced by alveolar bone.
3. External root resorption affecting 307 could be seen (Fig. 18.la, b).
(a)
(b)
Figure 18.1
 Radiograph (a) and lateral photograph (b) of the left lower premolars and molar.
(a) Note the extensive resorption of both roots of 307, with the process extending
difficult to differentiate between tooth suibstance and bone.
(b) Clinically, the left premolars and molar appear healthy. The gingivae are
clinically healthy and there is no evidence of disease of dental hard tissue. The
resorptive process affecting the roots and crown of 307 would not have been detected
without radiography.
THEORYREFRESHER
Resorption of teeth is common in domestic cats. Tooth resorption has also been shown
to occur in feral and wild cats.
Odontoclastic resorptive lesions (ORLs) are a type of “idiopathic’ external root
resorption, where the hard tissues of the root surfaces are destroyed by the activity of
multinucleated cells called odontoclasts. The destroyed root surface is replaced by
cementum-or bone-like tissue. The process starts in the cementum and progresses to
involve the dentine, where it spreads along the dentine tubules and eventually comes
to involve the dentine of the crown as well as the root. The peri-pulpal dentine is
relatively resistant to resorption and the pulp therefore only becomes involved late in
the disease. The process extends through the crown dentine, eventually reaching the
enamel. The enamel is either resorbed or it fractures off and a cavity becomes
clinically evident. In the absence of routine radiography, the lesions are first noted
clinically when they become evident in the crown, often as cavities at the cemento-
enamel junction (CEJ). The first clinical manifestation of ORLs is thus a late-stage
lesion. In many cases, the progressive dentine destruction with ORLs weakens and
undermines the crown to such an extent that minor trauma, e.g. during chewing.
causes the crown to fracture off, leaving the root in the alveolar bone. The resorbing
            
overlying gingiva may be inflamed.
Visual inspection and  tactile examination  with a dental explorer  will only
identify end-stage lesions, i.e. when the process involves the crown and has resulted in
an obvious cavity. Radiography will identify lesions that are localized to the root
surfaces within the alveolar bone (as in this case), which would not be detected by
clinical methods. Moreover, it is only with the aid of radiography that the extent of a
resorptive process can be identified. Selection of the best treatment option thus
depends on radiography. ln fact, a series of full-mouith radiographs (the technique is
covered in Chapter 4) is recommended for all cats presented for dental therapy. If
taking a series of full-mouth radiographs is not possible, e.g. financial restrictions,
then take one view of each mandibular premolar/molar region. The mandibular third
premolars are the most commonly affected teeth and it has been shown that, in nine
out of 10 cats with resorptive lesions, the process will be identified on these two views.
If radiographs show resorption of these teeth, then a full-mouth series must be taken.
It remains a matter of debate as to whether odontoclastic resorptive lesions
(ORLs) cause discomfort or pain to the affected individual. Based on the fact that
pulpal inflammation occurs late in the disease process, it seems likely that lesions that
are limited to the root surfaces and do not communicate with the oral environment
are asymptomatic. However, once dentine destruction has progressed to such an
extent that the process invades the pulp and/or a communication with the oral cavity
has been established (when the enamel has been resorbed or it has fractured off to
reveal the dentine to the oral cavity), then discomfort and/or pain are likely. Some
cats may show clinical signs indicating oral discomfort or pain, e.g. changes in food
preferences (soft rather than hard diet) and reduced food intake, but many cats do not.
CLINICAL TIPS
 Resorption of teeth is common in domestic cats.
· The first clinical manifestation of odontoclastic resorptive lesions is a late-stage lesion.
 Visual inspection and tactile examination with a dental explorer will only identify end-stage lesions.
· A series of full-mouth radiographs is recommended for all cats presented for dental therapy.
• The mandibular third premolars are the most commonly affected teeth.
· To date, there is no known treatment, which prevents development and/or progression of
odontoclastic resorptive lesions.
 Cats with diagnosed resorptive lesions will develop further lesions with time
 Crown amputation needs to be monitored clinically and radiographically
TREATMENTOPTIONS
To date, there is no known treatment, which prevents development and/or progression
of ORLs. It seems uinlikely that such treatment can be developed without knowledge of
the cause of the pathology. Currently, the suggested methods of managing
odontoclastic resorptive lesions are:
1. Conservative management
2. Tooth extraction
3. Coronal (crown) amputation.
TREATMENT PERFORMED
1 . Periodontal therapy to remove plaque and calculus and provide a clean
environment.
2. Crown amputation of 307. A postoperative radiograph was taken as baseline for
future monitoring of continued resorption.
3. Tooth shortening and endodontic therapy, and restoration of 304 and 404, to
remove the traumatic occlusion and allow healing of the lip ulcers.
second intention).
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
 Chlorhexidine rinsing for 1 week was carried out.
· The cat was scheduled for conscious oral examination after 3 weeks, and also rebooked for
examination under anaesthesia and full-mouth radiographs (to monitor the outcome of endodontic
treatment of 304 and 404, and to monitor continued resorption of intentionally retained roots of
307, as well as check for further resorptive lesions) 6 months later
RECHECKS
At conscious examination 3 weeks later, the owner reported that the cat was no longer
pawing at its face and had regained its appetite. The lip lesions had healed. The
restorations of 304 and 404 were in place and the teeth were not discoloured. The
gingiva overlying the intentionally retained roots of 307 had healed and there was no
evidence of inflammation.
Examination under anaesthesia and full-mouth radiographs 6 months later
confirmed successful outcome of the endodontic therapy of 304 and 404, showed
continued root resorption of the root remnants of 307 (Fig. 18.2) and identified
development of root resorption of 407 (Fig. 18.3a-c). Treatment consisted of crown
amputation of the distal root and open extraction of the mesial root of 407.
Figure 18.2
 Radiograph of the left mandible 6 months after crown amputation of 307. The
intentionally retained roots of 307 were covered by healthy gingiva and the radiograph confirms
continued resorption of the roots.
(b)
(C)
Figure 18.3
 n a g ( q) sn  () d 
(a) The resorptive lesion affecting 407 is evident on clinical examination.
(b) The radiograph confirms extensive root resorption of the distal root and crown of
407. Note that the mesial root is not resorbing to the same extent and a periodontal
ligament space can be detected. Treatment consisted of crown amputation of the
distal root and open extraction of the mesial root.
(c) This radiograph was taken 6 months earlier and there is no radiographic
evidence of root resorption of 407. The importance of radiographs as part of a full
oral examination should not be ignored. If radiographs are not taken, pathology will
not be detected.
At conscious examination 3 weeks later, the gingiva over 407 had healed with no
evidence of inflammation. The cat was rebooked for examination under general
anaesthesia and full-mouth radiographs in 1 year's time, to monitor the outcome of
the coronal amputations of 307 and 407, and to identify and treat any new resorptive
lesions that are likely to develop.
PROGNOSIS
Cats with diagnosed resorptive lesions will develop further lesions with time. The
lesions can affect any tooth, but the pattern of development is strikingly symmetrical,
i.e. if a cat has root resorption of 307, it is just a matter of time before 407 is affected.
Regular (usually annual) examinations uinder anaesthesia and a series of full-
mouth radiographs are indicated for cats with diagnosed root resorption.
In short, this cat is guaranteed to develop root resorption of other teeth, and
requires lifelong radiographic monitoring and intervention (coronal amputation or
extraction) as appropriate. It is essential that the owner is aware of the need for
continuous monitoring and intervention as required.
COMMENTS
External root resorption affecting the root surfaces only is not generally associated
with clinical signs of discomfort or pain. The reduction in appetite experienced by this
cat was more likely attributable to the discomfort from the lip lesions calised by the
lower canine occlusion than to the root resorption.
           
indications, namely that there is obvious loss of tooth substance and lack of a clear
periodontal ligament space on the radiograph (i.e. a distinct root cannot be identified
from suirrounding bone). It is contraindicated where there is no radiographic evidence
of root resorption, i.e. a root has a smooth contour and is clearly delineated by a
periodontal ligament space. In this cat the distal root of 407 was obviously resorbing
while the mesial root seemed less affected. Consequently, this tooth was treated by
        a
Gingival healing over the intentionally retained roots needs to be checked 3-4 weeks
after surgery. If the gingiva has not healed or there is marked inflammation, further
surgery to remove tooth root substance is required. Continued root resorption needs to
be evaluated radiographically, usually 6 months after initial surgery.
19
Virtually edentulous, no clinical signs of root
resorption
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Inappetance and dysphagia.
PATIENT DETAILS
A 14-year-old, female, domestic short-haired cat.
CASE HISTORY
The cat had always had an extremely good appetite until roughly a month ago, when
she started having trouble eating. She seemed to want to eat but had trouble
swallowing and would stop eating after a few mouthfuls. In the last 2 weeks she had
not been eating at all and barely drinking. She was drooling continuously. She was
referred to us for evaluation and management.
The cat had never had any oral or dental problems. In fact, she had never had her
teeth scaled and polished. The owner was very clear that they had restricted finances
   ss   a   m   
cost.
ORAL EXAMINATION - CONSCIOUS
The cat was distressed and would only allow a cursory conscious examination of the
face and oral cavity. She was virtually edentulous, with only the right upper canine
tooth evident. All edentulous areas were covered by clinically healthy gingivae. She
strongly resented attempts to open the mouth, so this was abandoned.
The owner declined pre-anaesthetic blood work-up.
ORALEXAMINATION-UNDERGENERALANAESTHETIC
Examination under general anaesthesia confirmed that 104 was the only remaining
tooth. There was no evidence of any pathology affecting 104 based on inspection and
tactile exploration with a dental explorer. There was no inflammation of the gingivae
and oral mucous membranes. However, a large, right-sided tonsillar mass was
identified. The owner did not want any further treatment (likelihood of squamous cell
carcinoma and poor prognosis) and the cat was euthanized.
FURTHER INVESTIGATIONS
I was given permission to take a series of full-mouth radiographs and submit a section
of the tonsillar mass for histopathology. This was for my own interest and the client
was not charged. I wanted to confirm that the mass really was a squamous cell
carcinoma and I was interested in the dental findings.
RADIOGRAPHIC FINDINGS
The series of full-mouth radiographs (eight views) identified numerous teeth in
different stages of replacement resorption. See Figs 19.1, 19.2, 19.3, 19.4 and 19.5 for
details of radiographic findings.
(a)
Figure 19.1
Rostrocaudal radiograph (a) and right lateral radiograph (b) of the rostral upper jaw.
(a) The upper incisors and canines are in different stages of replacement resorption
The roots of the incisors are still identifiable as ^tooth', but the absence of a clear
periodontal ligament space indicates active external root resorption and replacement
of lost tissue by bone. These roots are ankylosed, i.e. there is fusion between root and
bone. The crown of 104 is still in place, but most of the root has been resorbed and
replaced by bone. Tooth 204 has been almost completely resorbed and replaced by
bone-like material. It is impossible to clearly differentiate between remaining root
tissule and bone.
(b) The incisors, right upper canine and some premolars are in different stages of
replacement resorption. The lateral view confirms the findings identified from the
rostrocaudal view. Note that the root of 104 is more intact than one could see in the
rostrocaudal view. Different projections of the same area generally give a clearer
ascertained in a lateral radiograph of the premolar and molar region (Fig. 19.2).
Figure 19.2
Lateral radiograph of the right upper jaw centring on the premolar and molar region.
This view gives a third projection of the resorbing 104, giving a more detailed visualization of the
root pathology. There is no evidence of 106, 107 and 109, but the resorbing root remnants of 108 are
obvious. Clinically, all edentulous areas were covered by healthy gingiva.
Figure19.3
 Rostrocaudal radiograph of the rostral lower jaw. Clinically, there was no evidence of
teeth and the edentulous areas were covered by healthy gingiva. The replacement resorption of the
lower incisors and canines is obvious. There is also evidence of resorbing root remnants in the
premolar and molar regions bilaterally. Their exact position is best ascertained in a lateral radiograph
of the premolar and molar region (Figs 19.4 and 19.5).
Figure 19.4
Lateral radiograph of the left mandibular premolar and molar regions. Tooth 307 has
been completely resorbed and replaced by bone. The mesial root of 308 and the apical portions of
o  on    ,    a o  s 
mental and mandibular foramina.
Figure 19.5
 Lateral radiograph of the right mandibular premolar and molar regions. It is only the
apical portion of the mesial root of 408 that is still identifiable as ‘tooth'. Note the obvious mental
foramen.
HISTOPATHOLOGY
Histopathology of the tonsillar biopsy confirmed the clinical suspicion of squamous
cell carcinoma.
THEORYREFRESHER
Resorption of teeth is common in domestic cats. Tooth resorption has also been shown
to occur in feral and wild cats.
Odontoclastic resorptive lesions (ORLs) are a type of ‘idiopathic’ external root
resorption, where the hard tissuies of the root surfaces are destroyed by the activity of
multinucleated cells called odontoclasts. The destroyed root surface is replaced by
cementum-or bone-like tissue. The process starts in the cementum and progresses to
involve the dentine, where it spreads along the dentine tubules and eventually comes
to involve the dentine of the crown as well as the root. The peri-pulpal dentine is
relatively resistant to resorption and the pulp therefore only becomes involved late in
the disease. The process extends through the crown dentine, eventually reaching the
enamel. The enamel is either resorbed or it fractures off and a cavity becomes
clinically evident. In the absence of routine radiography, the lesions are first noted
clinically when they become evident in the crown, often as cavities at the cemento-
enamel junction (CEJ). The first clinical manifestation of ORLs is thus a late-stage
lesion. In many cases, the progressive dentine destruction with ORLs weakens and
undermines the crown to such an extent that minor trauma, e.g. during chewing,
causes the crown to fracture off, leaving the root in the alveolar bone. The resorbing
root remnants are usually covered by intact gingiva, as in this case. However, in some
cases the overlying gingiva may be inflamed.
It remains a matter of debate as to whether feline odontoclastic resorptive lesions
(FORLs) cause discomfort or pain to the affected individual. Based on the fact that
pulpal inflammation occurs late in the disease process, it seems likely that lesions that
are limited to the root surfaces and do not communicate with the oral environment
are asymptomatic. However, once dentine destruction has progressed to such an
extent that the process invades the pulp and/or a communication with the oral cavity
has been established (when the enamel has been resorbed or it has fractured of to
reveal the dentine to the oral cavity), then discomfort and/or pain are likely. Some
preferences (soft rather than hard diet) and reduced food intake, but many cats do not.
CLINICAL TIPS
 Resorption of teeth is common in domestic cats.
· The first clinical manifestation of odontoclastic resorptive lesions is a late-stage lesion.
COMMENTS
This cat had run through the whole spectrum of the resorptive process, resulting in
the loss of most teeth, and had never shown any signs of oral discomfort. In fact, she
had never had a day off food until the last month of her life. The dysphagia and
      s      
carcinoma rather than the extensive root resorption.
20
Clinical lesions and signs of discomfort
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Cavities at the buccal aspects of several teeth.
PATIENT DETAILS
A 5-year-old, female, domestic short-haired cat.
CASE HISTORY
The cat had no previous history of oral or dental disease. She had been presented to
the referring veterinarian due to signs of oral discomfort, i.e. reduced appetite and
selecting soft foods. On conscious clinical examination, the referring veterinarian had
identified cavities at the buccal aspects of several teeth and referred the cat to us for
evaluation and treatment.
ORAL EXAMINATION -CONSCIOUS
The cat did not allow anything other than a cursory examination of the head and
mouth. The findings were as follows:
1. Normal occlusion
2. Generalized mild gingivitis, which was more severe at buccal aspects of upper
premolars
3. Obvious cavities at the buccal aspects of 307 and 404
4. Small cavity at the buccal gingival margin of 204.
ORAL EXAMINATION - UNDER GENERAL ANAESTHESIA
A thorough oral examination, including investigating periodontal parameters, was
performed and all findings were noted on the dental record.
 In summary, examination under general anaesthesia identified the following:
   s    s     i
premolars.
2. Obvious cavities at the buccal aspects of 307 (Fig. 20.1a) and 404 (Fig. 20.2a).
3. Small cavities at the buccal gingival margin of 204 (Fig. 20.3a) and 107 (Fig. 20.4).
The lesion on 107 was only obvious after calculus had been removed.
4. Teeth 106, 206, 207 and 407 were missing. The gingiva at these sites was not
inflamed except over 407, which was intensely inflamed.
(b)
Figuure 20.1
Lateral photograph (a) and lateral radiograph (b) of the left lower quadrant.
(a) Note the soft tissue-filled cavity at the buccal aspect of 307.
(b) The radiograph shows that external root resorption has caused destruction and
bone replacement of the mesial root. In contrast, the distal root is radiographically
unaffected. The resorptive process has spread to involve the crown, resulting in the
obvious clinical lesion. Once the disease is clinically apparent, i.e. a cavity is formed,
root resorption is extensive. The first clinically detectable sign of resorption is
already an end-stage lesion.
(a)
(b)
Figure 20.2
Lateral photograph of the right lower canine (a) and radiograph of the rostral lower
jaw (b).
(a) Note the large, soft tissue-filled cavity at the buccal aspect of 404.
(b) Both right and left canine roots are affected by replacement resorption.
(a)
(b)
Figure 20.3
Lateral photograph of the left upper canine (a) and oblique lateral radiograph of the
left rostral upper jaw (b).
(a) Note the small, soft tissue-filled cavity at the buccal aspect of 204.
(b) Replacement resorption of 204 is obvious. Note the radiolucent resorption tracks
within the dentine of the root. Teeth 206 and 207 were missing on clinical
examination. The radiograph shows no evidence of 206, but the resorbing roots of
207 are evident.
Figure20.4
Lateral photograph of 107. Note the small buccal cavity.
FURTHERINVESTIGATIONS
A series of full-mouth radiographs (10 films) was taken.
RADIOGRAPHICFINDINGS
The following teeth were affected by external root resorption: 304 (Fig. 20.2b), 307
(Fig. 20.1b), 404 (Fig. 20.2b), 104 (Fig. 20.5), 107 and 204 (Fig. 20.3b).
Figure 20.5
 Oblique lateral radiograph of the right rostral upper jaw. Replacement resorption of
104 is obvious.
 Note the radiolucent resorption tracks within the dentine of the root. Tooth 106 was
 missing on clinical examination and the radiograph shows that it is resorbing.
At the sites of the clinically missing 106 (Fig. 20.5), 206 (Figs 20.3b and 20.6), 207
(Figs 20.3b and 20.6) and 407 (Fig. 20.7), some tooth-like material remained, but most
of the dental tissue had been replaced by alveolar bone.
Figure20.6
 Lateral radiograph centring on the left upper premolars. Teeth 206 and 207 were
missing on clinical examination. The gingiva overlying these sites was clinically healthy. There is no
radiographic evidence of 206. It is likely to have been completely resorbed and replaced by bone.
Both roots of 207 are resorbing.
Figure20.7
Lateral radiograph of the right mandibular premolars and molar. Tooth 407 was
missing on clinical examination and the overlying gingiva was intensely inflamed, with pieces of
crown material protruding.
THEORYREFRESHER
Odontoclastic resorptive lesions (ORLs) are a type of ‘idiopathic' external root
resorption, where the hard tissues of the root surfaces are destroyed by the activity of
multinucleated cells called odontoclasts. The destroyed root surface is replaced by
cementum-or bone-like tissue. The process starts in the cementum and progresses to
involve the dentine, where it spreads along the dentine tubules and eventually comes
to involve the dentine of the crown as well as the root. The peri-pulpal dentine is
relatively resistant to resorption and the pulp therefore only becomes involved late in
the disease. The process extends through the crown dentine, eventually reaching the
enamel. The enamel is either resorbed or it fractures off and a cavity becomes
clinically evident. In the absence of routine radiography, the lesions are first noted
clinically when they become evident in the crown, often as cavities at the cemento-
enamel junction (CEJ). The first clinical manifestation of ORLs is thus a late-stage
lesion, as in this case. In many cases, the progressive dentine destruction with ORLs
weakens and undermines the crown to such an extent that minor trauma, e.g. during
chewing, causes the crown to fracture off, leaving the root in the alveolar bone. The
resorbing root remnants are usually covered by intact gingiva. However, in some
cases the overlying gingiva may be inflamed.
Visual inspection and tactile examination with a dental explorer will only
identify end-stage lesions, i.e. when the process involves the crown and has resulted in
an obvious cavity. Radiography will identify lesions that are localized to the root
surfaces within the alveolar bone, which would not be detected by clinical methods.
Moreover, it is only with the aid of radiography that the extent of a resorptive process
can be identified. Selection of the best treatment option thus depends on radiography.
In fact, a series of full-mouth radiographs is recommended for all cats presented for
dental therapy. If taking a series of full-mouth radiographs is not possible, e.g.
financial restrictions, then take one view of each mandibular premolar/molar region.
The mandibular third premolars are the most commonly affected teeth and it has been
shown that, in nine out of 10 cats with resorptive lesions, the process will be identified
on these two views. If radiographs show resorption of these teeth, then a full-mouth
series must be taken.
CLINICAL TIPS
 The first clinical manifestation of odontoclastic resorptive lesions is a late-stage lesion.
 The progressive dentine destruction will weaken and undermine the crown to such an extent that
minor trauma, e.g. during chewing. may cause the crown to fracture off, leaving the root in the
alveolar bone.
· Visual inspection and tactile examination with a dental explorer will only identify end-stage lesions.
· Radiography is essential to identify the extent of a resorptive process.
 To date, there is no known treatment, which prevents development and/or progression of
 odontoclastic resorptive lesions.
 If a periodontal ligament space can be identified in affected teeth, then extraction should be
attempted.
• It is essential that the owner of a cat with resorptive lesions understands that the cat is guaranteed
to develop root resorption of other teeth, and will require lifelong radiographic monitoring and
intervention (crown amputation or extraction).
TREATMENT OPTIONS
To date, there is no known treatment, which prevents development and/or progression
of odontoclastic resorptive lesions (ORLs). It seems unlikely that such treatment can
be developed without knowledge of the cause of the pathology. Currently, the
suggested methods of managing odontoclastic resorptive lesions are:
1 . Conservative management, which means scaling, polishing, and monitoring
clinically (development of a cavity) and radiographically. Suitable for lesions that
affect the root surfaces only, i.e. with no oral communication established. Normally
only applicable to larger teeth, namely canines.
2. Tooth extraction. If a periodontal ligament space can be identified, then extraction
should be attempted.
3. Coronal (crown) amputation. Suitable for teeth where the roots have undergone
or clinically) at the time of diagnosis.
TREATMENT PERFORMED
1 . Periodontal therapy to remove plaque and calculus, and provide a clean
environment for surgery.
crown remaining). Postoperative radiographs were taken of all sites as the baseline for
future monitoring of continued resorption.
3. Open extraction of the mesial root of 307. Postoperative radiographs were taken to
confirm complete extraction of the root.
4. Conservative management of 104 and 304.
5. Shortening of 304 without entry into the pulp chamber, to prevent trauma to the
upper lip (as the crown of 204 was removed).
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
· Soft food
· Chlorhexidine rinsing for 1 week
 The cat was scheduled for conscious oral examination after 3 weeks, and also rebooked for
 examination under anaesthesia and full-mouth radiographs (to monitor the conservative management
of 104 and 304, to monitor the continued resorption of intentionally retained roots of 204, 307
 distal root, 404 and 407, as well as to check for new resorptive lesions at other sites) 6 months later.
RECHECKS
At consciois examination 3 weeks later, the extraction and coronal amputation sites
had healed, i.e. they were covered with clinically healthy gingivae. The owner
reported that the cat seemed comfortable and was eating extremely well.
Examination under anaesthesia and full-mouth radiographs 6 months later
confirmed continued resorption of the roots of the teeth that had been treated by
means of crown amputation, namely 107, 204, 404, the distal root of 307 and both
roots of 407. These sites were covered by clinically healthy gingiva. Also, the roots of
104 and 304 were progressively resorbing but the lesions were still localized to the root
surfaces, with no obvious cavity formation at the gingival margin.
Examination under anaesthesia and full-mouth radiographs 6 months later (1
       s   
roots that had been intentionally retained, namely 107, 204, 404, the distal root of 307
and both roots of 407. These sites were covered by clinically healthy gingiva. At this
time, there was obvious oral communication, with small cavities at the buccal and
lingual gingival margin of both 104 and 304, and crown amputation was performed.
Moreover, new lesions had developed on 108 (Fig. 20.8), 308 and 408. These teeth
were also treated by crown amputation. All crown amputation sites healed
uneventfully.
Figure 20.8
Lateral radiograph of the right upper jaw. Tooth 108 is now showing signs of root
resorption extending into the crown. Note the continued replacement resorption of 1o7 (crown
amputation performed a year earlier).
The cat is rebooked for examination under general anaesthesia and full-mouth
and treat any new resorptive lesions that are likely to develop. The owners will contact
us sooner if signs of oral discomfort occur or if they see cavities developing on any of
the remaining teeth.
PROGNOSIS
Resorptive lesions are progressive. Diagnosed lesions will progress and new lesions
will develop. Regular examinations under anaesthesia and a series of full-mouth
radiographs are indicated for cats with diagnosed root resorption
In short, this cat is guaranteed to develop root resorption of other teeth, and
requires lifelong radiographic monitoring and intervention (crown amputation or
extraction) as appropriate. Moreover, the canine teeth which were treated
conservatively will need crown amputation or extraction.
COMMENTS
Some cats with resorptive lesions may show no clinical signs at all, especially if the
pathology is limited to the root surfaces. However, once dentine destruction has
progressed to such an extent that the process invades the pulp and/or a
communication with the oral cavity has been established (when the enamel has been
resorbed or it has fractured off to reveal the dentine to the oral cavity), then
discomfort and/or pain are likely. This cat displayed signs of discomfort in reduced
appetite and selectively choosing soft food. This only occurred when the resorption
was end-stage, i.e. clinical cavities were obvious.
It is essential that the owner of a cat with resorptive lesions understands that the
cat is guaranteed to develop root resorption of other teeth, and will require lifelong
In this case, conservative management of 104 and 304 resulted in these teeth
being kept for an additional year.
21
Idiopathic canine root resorption
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Complicated crown fracture of 404.
PATIENT DETAILS
A 9-year-old, neutered male, cross-breed.
CASE HISTORY
The dog was referred to us for endodontic treatment of a complicated crown fracture
of 404. The fractured tooth had been noted by the referring veterinarian at the time of
vaccination. There was no history of any previous dental treatment. The owner had
  sem h r p nou p p o   g me a 
discomfort.
ORAL EXAMINATION - CONSCIOUS
He was a nice-tempered dog that allowed conscious examination of the head and
mouth. The following were identified:
1. Normal occlusion
2. Generalized moderate gingivitis
3. Teeth 101, 102, 201, 202, all lower incisors and 304 were missing
4. Complicated crown fracture of 404.
A thorough oral examination, including investigating periodontal parameters, was
In summary, examination under general anaesthesia identified the following:
1.Teeth 101, 102, 201, 202, 110, 210, al1 1ower incis0rs, 304, 305, 310, 311, 405, 410
and 411 were missing
2. Generalized moderate gingivitis
3. Complicated crown fracture of 404
4. Cavity (filled with soft tissue) at the lingual cervical aspect just above the gingival
margin of 404
5. Cavity (filled with soft tissue) at the buccal cervical aspect just above the gingival
margin affecting 104, 109 (Fig. 21.1), 208, 306, 307, 308, 309, 406, 407, 408 and 409
6. Teeth 108, 109, 208 and 209 (Fig. 21.1) were discoloured pink.
Figure 21.1
 Oblique lateral photograph of 108 and 109. Both 108 and 109 are discoloured pink.
This is a consequence of the destruction of the dental hard tissue extending into the crown and
involving the pulp, which 'shines through' the thin enamel. Note the soft tissue-filled cavity on the
buccal aspect of 109.
FURTHER INVESTIGATIONS
A series of full-mouth radiographs (14 views) was taken.
RADIOGRAPHICFINDINGS
The series of full-mouth radiographs showed replacement resorption of all remaining
teeth. See Figs 21.2, 21.3, 21.4, 21.5, 21.6, 21.7, 21.8 and 21.9 for details of findings.
Figure21.2
 Rostrocaudal radiograph of the rostral upper jaw. Clinically, there was no evidence of
101, 102, 201 and 202, and the edentulous area was covered by healthy gingiva. The radiograph
 shows that these teeth have undergone resorption and been replaced by bone.
Figure21.3
Lateral radiograph of the right upper jaw. Tooth 103 has a clear periodontal ligament
space and a smooth root outline, i.e. there is no radiographic evidence of external root resorption. A
clear periodontal ligament space separating the tooth from the alveolar bone can be identified for
104, but note the vertical radiolucent lines in the root, indicating ongoing resorption of dentine. The
clear periodontal ligament and the roots have the appearance of bone rather than dentine.
口
Figure 21.4
Lateral radiograph of 108 and 109. The crowns of these teeth have lost their roots
and have only soft tissue attachment to the jaw. Clinically, there was a soft tissue-filled cavity at the
buccal aspect of 109 just above the gingival margin and both teeth were discoloured pink as a
consequence of the resorptive process spreading into the crowns of these teeth.
Figure 21.5
Lateral radiograph of the left upper jaw. The roots of 205, 206, 207 and 208 all show
extensive replacement resorption. It is difficult to identify a clear periodontal ligament and the roots
    s           
crowns of 207 and 208.
Figure 21.6
 Lateral radiograph of 207, 208 and 209. The crowns of these teeth have lost their
roots and have only soft tissue attachment to the jaw. Clinically, 208 and 209 had a pink
discoloration due to the progressive destruction of crown dentine, allowing the pulp to 'shine
through' the thin enamel.
Figuure21.7
 Rostrocaudal radiograph of the rostral lower jaw. Clinically, the edentulous incisor
region was covered by healthy gingiva. The radiograph shows that these teeth have undergone
 resorption and been replaced by bone. Tooth 304 was missing clinically. The radiograph shows its
 root undergoing replacement resorption. The overlying gingiva was intact and non-inflamed. The root
of 404 is undergoing replacement resorption and the destruction of dental hard tissue involves the
crown. Clinically, this tooth had a soft tissue-filled cavity on the lingual aspect just above the gingival
margin. The tooth also had a complicated crown fracture. In fact, the dog was referred to us for
endodontic treatment of this tooth.
Figure21.8
 Lateral radiograph centring on 308 and 309. Both teeth are affected by extensive
replacement resorption involving the crown as well as the roots. Clinically, both teeth had soft tissue-
filled cavities buccally just above the gingival margin.
Figure21.9
Lateral radiograph centring on 408 and 409. Both teeth are affected by extensive
         e      
filled cavities buccally just above the gingival margin.
THEORYREFRESHER
Resorption of teeth is common in domestic cats. Tooth resorption has also been shown
to occur in feral and wild cats. It has also been reported in man and in dogs.
 s      () s  s
resorption, where the hard tissues of the root suirfaces are destroyed by the activity of
multinucleated cells called odontoclasts. The destroyed root surface is replaced by
cementum-or bone-like tissue. The process starts in the cementum and progresses to
involve the dentine, where it spreads along the dentine tubules and eventually comes
to involve the dentine of the crown as well as the root. The peri-pulpal dentine is
relatively resistant to resorption and the pulp therefore only becomes involved late in
the disease. The process extends through the crown dentine, eventually reaching the
enamel. The enamel is either resorbed or it fractures off and a cavity becomes
clinically evident. In the absence of routine radiography, the lesions are first noted
clinically when they become evident in the crown, often as cavities at the cemento-
enamel junction (CEJ). The first clinical manifestation of ORLs is thus a late-stage
undermines the crown to such an extent that minor trauma, e.g. during chewing.
causes the crown to fracture off, leaving the root in the alveolar bone. The resorbing
overlying gingiva may be inflamed.
Visual inspection and tactile examination with a dental explorer will only
identify end-stage lesions, i.e. when the process involves the crown and has resulted in
an obvious cavity. Radiography will identify lesions that are localized to the root
surfaces within the alveolar bone, which would not be detected by clinical methods.
Moreover, it is only with the aid of radiography that the extent of a resorptive process
can be identified. Selection of the best treatment option thus depends on radiography.
It remains a matter of debate as to whether ORLs cause discomfort or pain to the
affected individual. Based on the fact that pulpal inflammation occurs late in the
disease process, it seems likely that lesions that are limited to the root suirfaces and do
not communicate with the oral environment are asymptomatic. However, once
dentine destruction has progressed to such an extent that the process invades the pulp
and/or a communication with the oral cavity has been established (when the enamel
has been resorbed or it has fractured off to reveal the dentine to the oral cavity), then
discomfort and/or pain are likely. Some animals may show clinical signs indicating
oral discomfort or pain, e.g. changes in food preferences (soft rather than hard diet)
and reduced food intake, but many do not.
CLINICAL TIPS
· The first clinical manifestation of odontoclastic resorptive lesions is a late-stage lesion.
 Visual inspection and tactile examination with a dental explorer will only identify end-stage lesions.
· Radiography is essential to identify the extent of a resorptive process.
To date, there is no known treatment, which prevents development and/or progression of
odontoclastic resorptive lesions.
· It is common for an owner to report marked improvement in general well-being of the animal once
remedial dentistry has been performed.
TREATMENT OPTIONS
To date, there is no known treatment, which prevents development and/or progression
of ORLs. It seems unlikely that such treatment can be developed without knowledge of
the cause of the pathology. Currently, the suggested methods of managing
odontoclastic resorptive lesions are:
1. Conservative management
2. Tooth extraction
 3. Coronal amputation.
TREATMENTPERFORMED
The oral cavity was flushed with 10 ml of chlorhexidine preoperatively to provide a
clean environment for surgery, which consisted of:
1. Crown amputation of 105, 106, 107, 108, 109, 205, 206, 207, 208, 209, 306, 307, 308,
309, 404, 406, 407, 408 and 409
2. Open extraction of 103, 104, 203 and 204.
All flaps were replaced using 5/0 Monocryl.
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
 Daily chlorhexidine rinse for 1 week
· NSAIDs for 5 days
 Soft food.
RECHECKS
Conscious examination 6 weeks after treatment revealed successful healing of the
extraction and coronal amputation sites. The gingivae covering the margins of the
alveolar bone were non-inflamed. The owner reported a marked change in the dog's
behaviour, i.e. he was much brighter, more interested in walks and more social. Also,
appetite had increased. Despite having no teeth, he was actually eating kibble as well
as soft food.
At examination uinder anaesthesia and full-mouth radiographs 6 months after
initial treatment, the gingivae covering the margins of the alveolar bone were non-
inflamed and the roots were continuing to resorb.
No further treatment has been required.
PROGNOSIS
The extraction sites should heal uneventfully. The gingivae at the sites where coronal
amputation was performed should heal and the roots should carry on resorbing.
Continued root resorption should be monitored clinically and radiographically.
COMMENTS
The only teeth unaffected by external root resorption were 103, 203 and 204. We chose
to extract these as they would almost certainly develop pathology with time.
Moreover, three teeth without antagonists do not provide a functional benefit. An
edentulous animal has no problem with eating. Some will require soft food but many
still eat kibble despite having no teeth.
the animal once remedial dentistry has been performed. At initial consultation the
owner felt that the dog had no signs of oral discomfort, but at the postoperative check-
up 6 weeks after surgery the first thing they said was that he was like a new dog - a
puppy again'.
MALOCCLUSION
22
Malocclusion - an introduction
By definition, malocclusion is an abnormality in the position of the teeth.
Malocclusion is common in the dog, but also occurs in cats. The clinical significance
of malocclusion is that it may cause discomfort and sometimes pain to the affected
animal. In some cases, it may be the direct cause of severe oral pathology. It is
           
that preventative measures can be taken.
malocclusion), from tooth malpositioning (dental malocclusion), or a combination of
environmental  factors. Specific genetic mechanisms regulating malocclusion are
unknown. A polygenic mechanism, however, is likely and explains why not all
at all. With a polygenic mechanism, the severity of clinical signs is linked to the
number of defective genes.
The most reasonable approach to evaluate whether malocclusion is hereditary or
acquired is as follows:
· Skeletal malocclusion is considered inherited unless a developmental cause can be
reliably identified.
· Pure dental malocclusion, unless known to have breed or family predisposition,
should be given the benefit of the doubt and not be considered inherited.
An outline of the more common types of malocclusion is given below.
SKELETALMALOCCLUSION
S     s      
have a longer than normal upper jaw; in both cases, the mandible is not responsible
for any rostrocaudal discrepancy.
Mandibular prognathic bite:
In the mandibular prognathic bite, often called ^undershot', the mandible is longer
than the maxilla and some or all of the mandibular teeth are rostral to their normal
position. If the dental interlock prevents the mandible from growing rostrally to its
genetic potential, lateral or ventral bowing of the mandible may occur to
accommodate the length. This results in an open bite and is characterized by
   si  s e s  d    
of the mandible.
Mandibular brachygnathic bite:
A mandibular brachygnathic bite, often called ^overshot', occurs when the mandible is
shorter than normal.
Wry bite:
A wry bite occurs if one side of the head grows more than the other side. In its mildest
form a one-sided prognathic or brachygnathic bite develops. In more severe cases, a
crooked head and bite develop with a deviated midline. An open bite may also develop
in the incisor region so that the affected teeth are displaced vertically and do not
occlude.
Narrow mandible:
In some animals, the mandible is too narrow with respect to the upper jaw. The result
is that the lower canines impinge on the maxillary gingivae or the hard palate instead
of fitting into the diastema between the upper third incisor and upper canine on
either side. The animal may not be able to close its mouth and injury to the gingivae
or palatal mucosa commonly occurs. In untreated severe cases, an oronasal
communication may develop over time. This condition is seen in both the primary
(deciduous)  and permanent  dentition.  Persistent primary  canines  will  further
exacerbate the condition, as the permanent canines erupt medially to their primary
counterparts in the mandible. The incorrect dental interlock will interfere with the
normal growth in width and length of the developing mandible. The condition can
also be caused by persistent primary mandibular canines in a mandible of normal
Width.
DENTALMALOCCLUSION
Dental malocclusion is malpositioning of teeth where there is no obvious skeletal
abnormality, i.e. there is no jaw length or width discrepancy.
Anterior crossbite:
This is a clinical term ised to describe a reverse scissor occlusion of one, several or all
of the incisors. The condition is thought to be secondary to persistent primary
incisors. However, there is probably a skeletal origin as well, since affected animals
often develop a mandibular prognathic bite. In other words, an anterior crossbite in
an immature animal may be the first sign of a developing mandibular prognathism.
Anterior crossbite is common in medium-and large-breed dogs, where persistent
primary teeth are less common. The cause can be either a dental malocclusion (i.e.
linguoversion of the upper incisors) or a skeletal malocclusion (i.e. mandibular
prognathism or maxillary brachygnathism).
Malocclusion of the canine teeth:
The two most common abnormalities in canine tooth position are:
responsible for this condition. A breed predisposition has been reported in the
Shetland sheepdog.
· Medial displacement of the lower canines. Persistent primary mandibular canines are
thought to be the cause of this condition. However, the condition is not frequent in
toy breeds, where persistent primary teeth are common. This malocclusion is frequent
in dolicocephalic breeds, where it is of skeletal origin in that the mandible is too small
for the long maxilla.
Malocclusion of the premolars and molars:
Posterior crossbite is used to describe an abnormal relationship of the carnassial teeth.
seen commonly in the dolicocephalic breeds, where the normal buccolingual
relationship is reversed.
MALOCCLUSION ASSOCIATED WITH PERSISTENT PRIMARY
TEETH
Persistent primary teeth, i.e. primary teeth that are still in place when the permanent
The mode of inheritance is not known, but it seems to be familial. The three most
commonly affected areas are the lower canines, the upper canines and the incisors.
Mandibular canines:
The mandibular permanent canine begins eruption medial to its primary counterpart.
Once the primary tooth is lost, the permanent canine flares out laterally to occupy the
not lost, the permanent canine may be forced to continue erupting medial to the
persistent primary counterpart and will impinge on the hard palate, causing pain,
inflammation and possibly, with time, an oronasal communication.
Maxillary canines:
   d   a   d  g
     d    s    
diastema intended for the permanent mandibular canine. The following malocclusion
situations couild then develop:
· The maxillary or mandibular canine may become impacted, i.e. it does not erupt
fully.
· The mandibular canine may push the upper third incisor or the upper canine in a
labial/buccal direction.
· The mandibular canine may be forced to erupt medial to the maxillary canine, thus
impinging on the hard palate, with possible formation of an oronasal communication
if left uintreated.
Incisors:
The permanent incisors erupt caudal to their primary counterparts. Retention of one
or more of the primary teeth may interfere with scissor occlusion of the permanent
teeth, with upper incisors occluding behind the mandibular incisors, i.e. an anterior
crossbite, which may result in localized soft tissue trauma.
DENTALINTERLOCKINDUCEDABNORMALITIES
             
        e   
incisors that interact to form the dental interlock. Once this interlock has been
established, the maxilla and mandible are forced to grow rostrally at the same rate,
irrespective of the genetic information. For example, mandibuilar canines that are
locked rostral to the upper third incisors will cause a non-hereditary mandibular
prognathic bite; mandibular canines that are locked medial and more caudal than
normal will cause a narrow mandible and a mandibular brachygnathic bite.
PREVENTION ANDTREATMENT OF MALOCCLUSION
Prevention is always better than treatment. Early recognition of a problem is essential
to avoid discomfort and pain to the animal and prevent the development of severe
orthodontics. Malocclusion affecting the permanent dentition may need no treatment
at all, if it is not causing the animal discomfort or any oral pathology. Malocclusion
causing discomfort and pathology always needs treating.
MALOCCLUSION AFFECTING THE PRIMARY DENTITION
Primary teeth involved in malocclusion should be extracted as early as possible, i.e. at
6-8 weeks of age. This will allow the maxilla and mandi ble to develop to their fuill
        
counterparts is called “interceptive orthodontics'. It will prevent dental interlock-
induced malocclusion from developing. If the developing malocclusion is of skeletal
will form the same incorrect interlock.
Persistent primary teeth should be extracted as soon as possible to prevent
malocclusion.
The roots of primary teeth are longer and narrower than the roots of the
permanent teeth. Extraction requires care and patience to avoid tooth fracture. It is
essential not to fracture the root, as a remnant may continue to deviate the eruption
pathway of the permanent tooth. Every attempt should be made to minimize the risk
of iatrogenic damage to the developing permanent teeth. Preoperative radiographs to
             
MALOCCLUSIONAFFECTING THEPERMANENT DENTITION
If there is no evidence of discomfort/pain or any associated oral pathology,
malocclusion affecting the permanent dentition may need no treatment. Malocclusion
causing discomfort and pathology, however, always need treating. The treatment
options available are orthodontics, tooth shortening or extraction. In many instances,
tooth shortening or extraction are preferable to orthodontics on ethical grounds.
Tooth shortening often requires pulpal exposure. In this situation, endodontic therapy
of the shortened tooth is mandatory.
Lingually displaced mandibular canines in young dogs can often be corrected by
stimulating the dogs to play, as often as possible, with specific rubber toys of an
appropriate size and shape.
ETHICALCONSIDERATIONS
In man, medical (predisposition to periodontal diseases), functional (alteration of
to malocclusion are the primary reason for orthodontic treatment. In human
orthodontics, whether malocclusion is hereditary or acquired is not a consideration
when planning treatment. This is in contrast to veterinary orthodontics, where
aesthetics and ethical concerns are linked, and treatment for the sole purpose of
showing dogs or cats cannot be encouraged. The aim of any treatment is primarily to
make the animal comfortable; aesthetics are a secondary consideration.
It is essential to determine if the presenting malocclusion is hereditary or not
Orthodontic correction of a malocclusion is contraindicated where the malocclusion is
hereditary unless the animal is also neutered. The rationale for this is to avoid spread
of inherited malocclusion within a breed.
MANAGING MALOCCLUSION CASES IN GENERAL PRACTICE
             
make an evaluation, the practitioner needs to be able to identify normal occlusion for
the species and breed, and have an understanding of the aetiology and pathogenesis of
malocclusion, as detailed earlier in this chapter. It is essential to determine if the
malocclusion is of skeletal, dental or combination origin. Preventive measures (such
as controlled playing with an appropriate rubber toy, interceptive orthodontics or
extraction of persistent primary teeth) should be carried out early in the animal's life.
In most instances, treatment other than prevention is best left to a veterinarian with
special skills.
SUMMARY
Malocclusion is common and may cause pain/discomfort and severe oral pathology. It
is essential to diagnose malocclusion early in the life of the animal. Prevention is the
best form of treatment. Skeletal malocclusions and persistent primary teeth are
hereditary. Orthodontic treatment of an inheritable malocclusion should only be
considered in the neutered animal. In most instances, treatment, other than
prevention, is best left to a veterinarian with special skills in dentistry. The aim of any
treatment is to make the animal comfortable with a functional bite; aesthetic
considerations are of secondary importance.
23
Persistent primary teeth
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Persistent primary teeth and developing malocclusion.
PATIENTDETAILS
A 20-week-old, female, Yorkshire terrier.
CASE HISTORY
The owner was concerned that 'she has too many teeth'. She had a poor appetite and
would not eat anything other than grilled chicken, cut into small pieces. The case was
referred to us for management.
ORAL EXAMINATION - CONSCIOUS
The dog disliked having her face handled. She was tiny (weight 1.8 kg) and difficult to
the following:
1. Mixed dentition with numerous persistent primary teeth
2. Generalized moderate to severe gingivitis.
ORAL EXAMINATION - UNDER GENERAL ANAESTHETIC
A thorough oral and dental examination, including investigating periodontal
parameters, was performed. All findings were noted on the dental record sheet.
1. Skeletal relationship
· The upper and lower jaw seemed to be of normal length and width for breed.
2. Persistent primary teeth
· The primary upper incisors were solidly (no mobility) in place and the permanent
counterparts were erupted caudal to them (Fig. 23.1).
· The primary lower incisors had been shed and the erupted permanent lower incisors
were occluding between the persistent primary and the permanent upper incisors
(i.e. reverse scissor occlusion of permanent incisors).
· All four primary canines were solidly in place. The diastema between the third
 n n d    s     g
in front of the persistent primary canine bilaterally (Fig. 23.2). The permanent
lower canines were trapped medial to the persistent primary canines, and were
occluding with and traumatizing the palatal mucosa.
· Persistent primary first premolars in all quadrants were causing crowding and
rotation of the permanent successors.
3. Generalized moderate to severe gingivitis
· The gingivitis was most severe in regions where there were persistent primary as
well as permanent teeth (Fig. 23.2).
Figure23.1
 Incisor occlusion. The permanent upper incisors were fully erupted caudal to the
persistent primary upper incisors. The primary lower incisors had been exfoliated and the permanent
counterparts were fully erupted and occluding between the rows of upper incisors.
Figure 23.2
 Canine occlusion. The permanent upper canines were erupting in front of the
persistent primary canine bilaterally, thus closing the diastema where the permanent lower canines
should occlude. Note the severe gingivitis (reddening, swelling and spontaneous haemorrhage of the
gingival margin).
FURTHERINVESTIGATIONS
Radiographs were taken of all persistent primary canine teeth (to determine the
anatomy of the primary tooth, and the position and stage of development of the
permanent counterpart).
RADIOGRAPHIC FINDINGS
The primary teeth were fully developed with closed apices. All permanent teeth were
in early development (around half of total root length formed for incisors, around one-
third of the total root length formed for the canines and around two-thirds of the
estimated total root length for the premolars).
THEORYREFRESHER
Persistent primary teeth, i.e. primary teeth that are still in place when the permanent
permanent couinterparts. The smaller breeds are more often affected by this condition.
The mode of inheritance is not known, but it seems to be familial. The three most
commonly affected areas are the lower canines, the upper canines and the incisors.
The mandibular permanent canine begins eruption medial to its primary
counterpart. Once the primary tooth is lost, the permanent canine flares out laterally
to occupy the diastema between the upper third incisor and upper canine. If the
primary canine is not lost, the permanent canine may be forced to continue erupting
medial to the persistent primary counterpart and will impinge on the hard palate,
causing pain, inflammation and possibly, with time, an oronasal communication.
 The maxillary permanent canine erupts rostral to its primary counterpart. If the
 o    d    s  s  a
diastema intended for the permanent mandibular canine. The following malocclusion
situations could then develop:
· The maxillary or mandibular canine may become impacted, i.e. it does not erupt
fully.
· The mandibular canine may push the upper third incisor or the upper canine in a
labial/buccal direction.
· The mandibular canine may be forced to erupt medial to the maxillary canine, thus
impinging on the hard palate, with possi ble formation of an oronasal commuinication
if left untreated.
The permanent incisors erupt caudal to their primary counterparts. Retention of
one or more of the primary teeth may interfere with scissor occlusion of the
permanent teeth, with upper incisors occluding behind the mandibular incisors, i.e.
an anterior crossbite, which may result in localized soft tissue trauma.
CLINICAL TIPS
 Persistent primary teeth may interfere with the normal eruption pathway of the permanent
counterparts.
 The mode of inheritance is not known, but it seems to be familial.
 Extraction of all persistent primary teeth is the treatment of choice.
· The owner does need to be aware that there is always a risk of iatrogenic damage to the developing
 permanent teeth when primary teeth are extracted.
· The owner must also be aware that further treatment may be indicated for malocclusion of the
permanent teeth.
· Extracting persistent primary teeth is difficult.
TREATMENTOPTIONS
1. Wait for the primary teeth to be shed. Most of the persistent primary teeth are
solidly in place and the radiographs show little evidence of root resorption of the
primary teeth. In short, they are unlikely to exfoliate, and their continued presence
will lead to both incisor and canine malocclusion, as well as a predisposition to
periodontitis. So, this is not a good option!
2. Extract all persistent primary teeth. This is the option of choice. The owner does
need to be aware that there is always a risk of iatrogenic damage to the developing
permanent teeth, but careful technique under strict radiographic control (pre-and
post-extraction radiographs are mandatory, also intra-extraction if there are
complications) minimizes this risk. The owner must also be aware that further
treatment may be indicated for malocclusion of the permanent teeth. It is, however,
likely that the malocclusion of the permanent teeth will be even more severe if the
persistent primary teeth are left in situ.
TREATMENTPERFORMED
1 . Periodontal therapy to remove plaque and calculus and provide a clean
environment for extraction, and for the owner to start instituting home care (daily
toothbrushing).
2. Extraction of persistent primary teeth 501, 502, 503, 504, 506, 601, 602, 603, 604,
606, 704, 706, 804 and 806 were extracted using an open technique, taking great care
not to interfere with developing permanent tooth roots. Pre-and post-extraction
radiographs were taken (Figs 23.3a, b and 23.4a, b). The flaps were replaced with 5/0
Monocryl.
3. Curettage of palatal indentations.
(a)
(b)
Figure 23.3
Radiographs of the right upper canine and rostral premolar region.
(a) Prior to extraction of the persistent 504 and 506. The persistent primary canine
has a long, fine root and closed apex. There is little evidence of any ongoing root
resorption. The roots of 506 have resorbed and only the crown is still in place. Note
that the diastema between 103 and 104 is narrow. This is trapping the erupting 404
medially, where it is occluding with the palatal mucosa.
(b) Post-extraction radiograph. The persistent 504 has been successfully removed.
Note the clear empty extraction socket. The crown remnant of 506 has also been
removed.
(a)
(b)
Figure23.4
Radiographs of the left upper canine and rostral premolar region.
(a) Prior to extraction of the persistent 604 and 606. Tooth 604 has a long fragile
root with little evidence of any ongoing root resorption. The persistent 606 also has a
closed apex and no evidence of any ongoing root resorption. Note that 206 is rotated
90° due to the lack of space. The diastema between 203 and 204 is even narrower
than on the right.
removed.
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
 Daily chlorhexidine rinse
 Booked for conscious examination 3 weeks later.
RECHECK
At recheck 3 weeks after extraction of all persistent primary teeth, it was obvious that
the reverse scissor occlusion of the incisors was permanent. However, canine
     s i     
uneventfully. The owner was shown how to brush the teeth and daily toothbrushing
was recommended.
PROGNOSIS
It is likely that the reverse scissor occlusion of the permanent incisors is established.
Similarly, the malocclusion of 304 and 404 may also be established, as there is not
enough of a diastema between the upper third incisor and upper canine on either side
for them to flare out and take their normal interlock position. There is, however, a
chance that the prompt extraction of the persistent primary canines will allow the
developing permanent teeth to achieve a normal or near normal position and
interlock.
COMMENTS
resorption) and the risk of iatrogenic injury to the developing permanent teeth is
relatively high. In fact, the owners should always be made aware of this risk. The
operator needs to be familiar with radiographic techniques and interpretation, as well
as skilled with extraction techniques. Referral to a specialist is often indicated.
In this case, prompt extraction of the persistent primary teeth did not prevent the
establishment of an incisor malocclusion, but did prevent the developing canine
malocclusion. The incisor malocclusion is not causing trauma either to soft tissue or
teeth, and the dog requires no further treatment.
24
Interceptive extractions
INITIAL PRESENTATION
No presenting signs.
PATIENT DETAILS
An 8-week-old, male, German shepherd.
CASE HISTORY
I saw this dog when I was working in general practice. He was presented to me for
first vaccination, a healthy puppy with a severe skeletal malocclusion, of which the
owner was totally unaware.
ORAL EXAMINATION - CONSCIOUS
He was a well-behaved puppy that allowed careful conscious evaluation, which
revealed the following:
1. All primary teeth present
2. Skeletal malocclusion
· The upper jaw was extremely long and narrow with respect to the lower jaw, which
had a relatively normal length and width for the breed, i.e. relative mandibular
brachygnathism.
· The lower primary canines were distal to the upper primary canines and occluded
with the palatal mucosa.
· The lower primary incisors also occluded with the palatal mucosa.
3. Generalized mild gingivitis.
ORAL EXAMINATION - UNDER GENERAL ANAESTHETIC
A thorough oral and dental examination, including investigating periodontal
parameters, was performed. All findings were noted on the dental record sheet.
In summary, examination under general anaesthesia identified the following:
1. Skeletal malocclusion
· The upper jaw was extremely long and narrow with respect to the lower jaw, which
had a relatively normal length and width for the breed, i.e. relative mandibular
brachygnathism.
· The lower primary canines occluded with palatal mucosa, distal to the upper
primary canines, causing deep ulcerated indentations.
· The lower primary incisors occluded with the palatal mucosa, causing small non-
lcerated indentations. There were also small non-ulcerated indentations in the
2. Generalized mild gingivitis.
FURTHERINVESTIGATIONS
Radiographs were taken of the maloccluding primary lower canine teeth (to
determine the anatomy of the primary tooth, and the position and stage of
development of the permanent counterpart).
RADIOGRAPHICFINDINGS
The primary canines were fully developed with closed apices. The permanent canines
were in the normal position with respect to the primary canines (upper permanent are
rostral to the primary and lower permanent are lingual to the primary). Root
third of the total root length formed. As expected, the permanent canines were still
within the alveolar bone, i.e. not yet erupting.
THEORYREFRESHER
Primary teeth involved in malocclusion should be extracted as early as possi ble, i.e. at
6-8 weeks of age. This will allow the maxilla and mandible to develop to their full
genetic potential independently before the permanent teeth erupt and dental interlock
forms. Extracting maloccluding primary teeth before eruption of their permanent
induced malocclusion from developing. However, if the developing malocclusion is
skeletal in origin (as in this case), then the permanent teeth are likely to form the
same incorrect interlock when they erupt. Malocclusion causing discomfort and
pathology always needs treating, and interceptive orthodontics will remove discomfort
or pain associated with maloccluding teeth.
The roots of primary teeth are longer and narrower than the roots of the
permanent teeth. They may also be resorbing, which makes them fragile structures to
not to fracture the root, as a remnant may continue to cause deviation of the eruption
pathway of the permanent tooth. Preoperative radiographs to determine the anatomy
of the primary tooth, but also the position and stage of development of the permanent
counterpart, should always be taken.
This type of malocclusion,i.e. where the maloccluding teeth are due to a
discrepancy in size of the upper and lower jaw, is inheritable and this dog should not
be used for breeding.
CLINICAL TIPS
· Primary teeth involved in malocclusion should be extracted as early as possible.
 If the developing malocclusion is skeletal in origin then the permanent teeth are likely to form the
same incorrect interlock when they erupt.
·• It is essential not to fracture the primary root during extraction, as a remnant may continue to cause
deviation of the eruption pathway of the permanent tooth.
· Malocclusion due to a discrepancy in size of the upper and lower jaw is inheritable and affected
 animals should not be used for breeding.
· Interceptive orthodontics for skeletal malocclusion is unlikely to be the only treatment required.
TREATMENT OPTIONS
1. No treatment. This is the poor choice! Although the primary canines will only
remain for a short period of time (should be lost and permanent canines starting to
erupt between 12 and 16 weeks of age), the lower primary canines are causing severe
indentation and ulceration of the palatal mucosa, which is likely to be uncomfortable.
Moreover, the lower canines are preventing any genetic potential for rostral growth of
the mandible and may well contribute to the development of a more severe
malocclusion of the permanent teeth.
2 . Interceptive orthodontics. Here, this involves immediate extraction of the
need to be aware that this is a skeletal malocclusion and that the permanent teeth are
likely to malocclude. The likelihood of further treatment (probably shortening and
endodontic therapy of the permanent lower canines) is almost a certainty. It is,
however, highly possible that the malocclusion of the permanent teeth will be even
more severe if the maloccluding primary teeth are left in situ.
TREATMENT PERFORMED
1 .Periodontal therapy to remove plaque and calculus and provide a clean
environment for surgery, and for the owner to start instituting home care (daily
toothbrushing).
    n      n   
post-extraction radiographs were taken. The flaps were closed with 5/0 Monocryl.
3. Curettage of ulcerated palatal indentations.
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
· Daily toothbrushing
 The dog was booked for conscious examination 8 weeks later (when permanent canines should be
erupting).
RECHECK
At recheck 8 weeks after interceptive orthodontic treatment, it was obvious that the
erupting permanent lower canines would impede on the palatal mucosa (Figs 24.1 and
24.2). There had been rostral growth of the mandible and the permanent mandibular
canines were located palatal to the maxillary rather than distal to them (Fig. 24.2). So,
the interceptive orthodontics had allowed rostral growth of the mandible. The owner
was aware that further treatment would be required.
Figure24.1
Lateral photograph of the head at 16 weeks of age. The long upper jaw is evident. You
don't even have to look at the teeth to know that this dog will have a malocclusion.
Figure24.2
Lateral photograph of occlusion at 16 weeks of age. The lower incisors and canines
are occluding with the palatal mucosa. When the dog was 8 weeks old, the primary mandibular
canines were distal to the maxillary canines. At 16 weeks of age, the mandibular canines are palatal to
the maxillary canines. So, extraction of the primary lower canines allowed rostral growth of the
mandible.
Further mandibular growth occurred, and by the time the dog was 8 months old
the mandibular canines were rostral to the maxillary canines, but they were trapped
medially causing palatal trauma (Fig. 24.3). Tooth shortening and endodontic therapy
(partial pulpectomy, direct pulp capping and restoration - as tooth roots were not fully
formed and a vital pulp is required for continued tooth root development) of 304 and
404 were performed when he was 8 months old. He was also neutered at the same
time. Six months later, when the teeth were relatively mature (closed apices, good
thickness of secondary dentine), conventional endodontic therapy (pulpectomy, root
filling and restoration) was performed (Fig. 24.4). Postoperative radiographs 6 months
after conventional endodontic therapy confirmed a successful outcome, i.e. no
evidence of any periapical complications. The lower incisors and shortened canines
were occluding with the palatal mucosa, causing small non-ulcerated indentations. In
short, he has a functional and comfortable bite and no further treatment has been
required.
Figu1re24.3
Lateral photograph of occlusion at 8 months of age. Note that there has been further
rostral growth of the mandible; the lower canines are now rostral to the upper canines. The
maloccluding lower canines were causing deep ulcerated indentations in the palatal mucosa and
intervention (tooth shortening and endodontic therapy) was performed. The dog was neutered at the
same time. To maintain pulp vitality and continued tooth development, the endodontic therapy at this
time consisted of partial pulpectomy, direct pulp capping and restoration.
Figure24.4
Occlusal photograph of shortened teeth at 14 months of age. When the dog was 14
months old, the lower canines were relatively mature (closed apices and good thickness of dentine),
so conventional endodontic therapy (pulpectomy, root filling and restoration) was performed. Note
that the restorative material used is silver amalgam. Due to the hazards associated with mercury
disposal, I no longer use amalgam. Today, the restorative material of choice for this type of procedure
is composite or compromer.
PROGNOSIS
This malocclusion is of skeletal origin and the permanent teeth are likely to form the
same incorrect interlock. Further treatment will be required.
COMMENTS
Interceptive orthodontics for skeletal malocclusion is unlikely to be the only treatment
required. The permanent teeth are likely to be involved in malocclusion and further
treatment is nearly always required. It is, however, likely that the malocclusion of the
permanent teeth will be even more severe if the maloccluding primary teeth are left in
situ. This type of malocclusion is of genetic origin, i.e. inheritable. Consequently, it is
important that the owner agrees not to breed from the affected dog.
25
Rubber toy technique and alveoloplasty
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Malocclusion - lower canine teeth erupting into palatal mucosa.
PATIENT DETAILS
A 6-month-old, male, bearded collie.
CASE HISTORY
The owner is active in the show ring and thus concerned about the malocclusion. In
fact, the owner is more worried about the aesthetics than the developing pathology
(palatal trauma). The dog is showing no obvious signs of discomfort. He is very active
and enjoys playing with toys. The case was referred to us for evaluation and
treatment.
ORAL EXAMINATION - CONSCIOUS
The dog was amenable to thorough oral examination and occlusal evaluation, which
revealed the following:
1. Mild generalized gingivitis
2. Upper and lower jaw of normal length for this breed
3. The lower jaw was slightly too narrow with respect to the upper jaw
4. Lower canines not yet fully erupted
and upper canine bilaterally, causing indentations and gingival hyperplasia (Fig.
25.1a, b)
6. Diastema between the upper third incisor and upper canine of adequate size for
lower canine to fit bilaterally (Fig. 25.1a, b).
(a)
(b)
Figure 25.1
Lateral photograph (a) and occlusal photograph (b) of the malocclusion. The right
lower canine is occluding with the gingival mucosa of the diastema. The malocclusion is the same on
the left side.
(a) Note the inflamed hyperplastic gingiva.
(b) Note the indentation, as well as the inflamed hyperplastic gingiva.
THEORY REFRESHER
In some animals, the mandible is too narrow with respect to the upper jaw. The result
is that the lower canines impinge on the maxillary gingivae or the hard palate instead
of fitting into the diastema between the upper third incisor and upper canine on
either side. The animal may not be able to close its mouth and injury to the gingivae
or palatal mucosa commonly occurs. In untreated severe cases (i.e. where the lower
of the diastema), an oronasal communication may develop over time.
This malocclusion is seen in both the primary (deciduous) and permanent
dentition. Persistent primary canines will further exacerbate the condition as the
permanent canines erupt medially to their primary counterparts in the mandible. The
incorrect dental interlock will interfere with the normal growth in width and length of
the developing mandible. The condition can also be caused by persistent primary
mandi bular canines in a mandi ble of normal width.
In this case, the upper and lower jaw were of normal length; the mandible was
narrow with respect to the upper jaw, but there was sufficient diastema for the lower
canines to form a correct interlock if they were moved just slightly laterally.
CLINICAL TIPS
Incorrect dental interlock will interfere with the normal growth in width and length of the
developing mandible.
· Malocclusion is seen in both the primary and permanent dentition.
 The use of a removable orthodontic appliance ('rubber toy' technique) has proved to be successful
in correcting the malocclusion within 4 weeks.
· The diastema between the third incisor and canine tooth in the upper jaw should be wide enough to
 accommodate the mandibular canine tooth in its corrected position.
· The most appropriate objects to use are toys with a round or oval shape.
  n se  a a a a in  aa  ss n n ais na a e
distance between the mandibular canine teeth.
· If no movement is seen after 3 weeks, other treatment methods should be considered.
 Photographs (rostral, left and right views) should be taken to record the extent of the malocclusion
 prior to treatment.
• The time required for correction is longer when the teeth are fully erupted.
 This condition is probably heritable. Breeding from affected animals should be discouraged.
TREATMENT
Oral examination under anaesthesia was not indicated at this stage.
For normal canine interlock to be achieved, the lower canines would need to be
moved laterally.
The owner was advised to play with the dog for 15 minutes three to four times a
day using a hard rubber ball of appropriate size and shape ('rubber toy technique') to
encourage the lower canines to flare out laterally. All other toys were removed. The
owner was also given toothbrushing instruction and advised to start daily brushing
The dog was rebooked for evaluation and possibly further treatment in 1 month.
Rubber toy’ technique
Lingually displaced mandibular canines in young dogs can often be corrected by
stimulating the dogs to play, as often as possible, with specific rubber toys of an
  o       is  s 
discrepancies), the use of a removable orthodontic appliance ('rubber toy' technique)
has proved to be successful in correcting the malocclusion, within 4 weeks in most
cases. The technique also encourages development of a strong bond between owner
and animal during the course of the treatment
and canine tooth in the upper jaw should be wide enough to accommodate the
mandibular canine tooth in its corrected position. In other words, the only
orthodontic movement required is lateral movement of the mandibular canines, and
there needs to be enough space available between the third incisor and canine in the
upper jaw for them to fit into their correct positions.
The most appropriate objects to use are toys with a round or oval shape. The size
is important. 'The correct size of toy sits in between and just behind the canine teeth.
and is larger than the distance between the mandibular canine teeth. The toy thus
applies primarily lateral pressure to the teeth while the dog plays. A toy that is too
small will be held more caudally in the mouth and thus exert no lateral force on the
canine teeth. Too large a toy might cause intrusion rather than lateral tipping. In dogs
that prefer to hold a toy between the carnassial teeth rather than the canine teeth, a
very large toy may be needed. It needs to be so large that it cannot be fitted between
the carnassial teeth. Rostral as well as lateral tipping of the mandibular canines occurs
with a toy this large.
The composition and consistency of the toy are important. It should be of hard
rubber that slightly deforms on chewing. If the toy is too soft, it is unlikely to create
enough pressure for lateral tipping of the mandibular canines. If it is too hard, the
result is tooth damage due to abrasion. The toy should have a smooth surface to avoid
excessive abrasion.
Active play for 15 minutes, three times per day, is the recommended minimum.
Longer and more frequent episodes are preferable, and the owner should be
recommended to play with the dog as often as possible and to take away all other toys.
Assuming a 1-week learning phase, 2 additional weeks are needed before any benefit
is likely to be seen. If no movement is seen after 3 weeks, other treatment methods
shouild be considered.
In this case, the likelihood of normal canine occlusion within 4 weeks was high
Photographs (rostral, left and right views) should always be taken to record the
extent of the malocclusion prior to trea tment.
Once the mandibular canines are in their correct position, the established canine
dental interlock should prevent relapse. However, continued playing with the toy for
several months is recommended. It appears that there is little risk of overcorrection
(labioversion) of the canine teeth. The technique works in teeth that are still erupting
when the teeth are fully erupted.
RECHECKS
The owner phoned after 3 weeks to let us know that normal canine occlusion was
established. It was agreed to reschedule the recheck appointment to 8 weeks rather
than the planned 4 weeks from start of treatment.
Conscious evaluation after 8 weeks revealed normal canine interlock, with no
evidence of any trauma to the gingiva (Fig. 25.2). The dog was accepting daily
toothbrushing and the gingivae were clinically healthy. The owner was advised to
 n n s g     d      
Figure25.2
Lateral photograph of the canine occlusion (right side) after 8 weeks of treatment.
Normal canine interlock has been established bilaterally. Note the normal architecture of the gingiva
 in the diastema, i.e. there is no evidence of inflammation or hyperplasia. Once trauma is removed, the
gingiva will rapidly take on a normal appearance.
A telephone conversation after 3 months reported that normal interlock was
maintained. The owner planned to carry on with the playing as they both enjoyed the
interaction. Daily toothbrushing was also being performed and readily accepted by the
dog.
PROGNOSIS
The rubber toy technique works especially well in teeth that are still erupting and
where direct lateral tipping is the only movement required.
COMMENTS
To achieve primarily lateral pressure to the teeth while the dog plays, the correct size
of toy is critical. As depicted in Fig. 25.3, the toy needs to be larger than the distance
between the mandibular canine teeth, and when the dog holds it in its mouth the toy
should sit in between and just behind the canine teeth. A toy that is too small will be
held more caudally in the mouth and thus exert no lateral force on the canine teeth.
Too large a toy might cause intrusion rather than lateral tipping.
Figure25.3
'Rubber toy’ technique. The correct size of toy is critical to achieve primarily lateral
pressure to the teeth while the dog plays. As shown here, the toy needs to be larger than the distance
between the mandibular canine teeth, and when the dog holds it in its mouth the toy should sit in
between and just behind the canine teeth.
(Photograph courtesy of Dr Leen Verh aert, who described th is technique.)
This technique is extremely useful and should be employed as soon as possible
when straight lateral movement of the lower canines is required. If full correction is
not achieved then alveoloplasty of the diastema (Fig. 25.4a, b) may be sufficient. In
more severe cases, orthodontics or tooth shortening and endodontics may still be
required.
(a)
(b)
Figure 25.4
Lateral photographs of alveoloplasty procedure (a) and outcome (b). In this dog
(different case), the 'rubber toy technique’ had established normal canine interlock on the left side,
but the right lower canine was not quite flared out (it was just touching the gingiva of the diastema).
An alveoloplasty procedure was performed to correct the remaining minor malocclusion. The
procedure consists of raising a full-thickness buccal mucoperiosteal flap and then recontouring the
bone so that the lower canine is lateral. The flap is then advanced to close the defect and sutured in
place without tension.
(b) Six weeks after surgery. The lower canine is lateral in position and is not causing
any damage to the gingiva.
Although this is a very minor malocclusion, it is skeletal in origin and thus likely
to be inheritable. The owner was counselled not to breed from this dog.
26
Rubber toy technique and orthodontic appliances
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Malocclusion - left lower canine occluding with palate.
PATIENTDETAILS
A 6-month-old, female, bearded collie.
CASE HISTORY
The case was referred to us for evaluation and treatment of the malocclusion. The
owner was active in the show ring and thus concerned about the malocclusion. While
the owner was concerned about the developing pathology (palatal trauma), she was
most concerned about the aesthetics and the effect on the dog's show career. She was
adamant that tooth shortening would not be an option.
ORAL EXAMINATION - CONSCIOUS
This was one of the most docile and cooperative dogs that I have ever met. She readily
allowed thorough oral examination and occlusal evaluation, which identified the
following:
1. Mild generalized gingivitis
2. Wide spacing of teeth in the upper jaw, indicating that the upper jaw is long (Fig.
26.1)
3. Lower jaw slightly too short and narrow with respect to the upper jaw (Fig. 26.2)
4. Lower canines not yet fully erupted
5. Right lower canine flared out laterally and fitted in the diastema between 103 and
104 (Fig. 26.1)
6. Left lower canine upright in position, occluding with hard palate medial to the
upper canine, causing a non-ulcerated indentation and hindering full mouth closure
(Fig. 26.2)
7. Diastema between 203 and 204 of adequate size for 304 to fit (if it was moved
slightly rostrally and laterally).
Figure 26.1
 Oblique lateral photograph of the right rostral occlusion. The upper jaw is long (as
evidenced by the wide spaces between the teeth and the width of the diastema) and the lower jaw is
short with respect to the upper jaw. Tooth 404 is caudal in position, but has flared laterally and fits
in the diastema between 103 and 104.
Figure 26.2
 Head-on photograph of the rostral occlusion. While 404 has flared laterally and fits
into the diastema, 304 is trapped medial to 104, occluding with the palate and preventing full mouth
closure.
THEORY REFRESHER
Malocclusion can result from jaw length and/or width discrepancy (skeletal
malocclusion), from tooth malpositioning (dental malocclusion), or a combination of
both. This case is a skeletal malocclusion (mandibular brachygnathia) and is thus
inheritable.
A mandibular brachygnathic bite, often called ‘overshot', occurs when the
mandible is shorter than normal. The degree of malocclusion varies as follows:
· The upper incisors are rostral to the lower incisors by 0.5 mm to 5 cm or more.
· The upper canines are caudal to but touching the mandibular canines, level with the
lower canines, or rostral to the mandibular canines.
· The mandibular premolars are caudally displaced relative to the maxillary premolars,
disrupting the ^pinking shear’ effect. The degree of displacement is similar to that of
the incisors and canines.
This case was classified as a mild relative mandibular brachygnathism, i.e. the
mandible is too short (and narrow) with respect to the upper jaw. The cause of the
malocclusion is the long upper jaw. The left lower canine was causing trauma to the
hard palate. Malocclusion causing discomfort and pathology always needs treating.
CLINICAL TIPS
· Malocclusion can result from jaw length and/or width discrepancy (skeletal malocclusion), from
tooth malpositioning (dental malocclusion), or a combination of both.
· Wide spacing of teeth in the upper jaw may indicate that the upper jaw is too long.
 Orthodontic treatment is not always straightforward.
· Maintenance of oral hygiene is extremely important while an orthodontic appliance is in place.
 Orthodontic treatment may cause iatrogenic injuries.
 The effect of orthodontic treatment needs to be monitored clinically and radiographically
* This condition is probably heritable. Breeding from affected animals should be discouraged.
TREATMENTOPTIONS
1. Extraction of the maloccluding tooth, i.e. 304. This is best avoided. The mandibular
canines contribute to the bony strength of the lower jaw and should be maintained if
at all possible. Also, the risk of iatrogenic jaw fracture when extracting periodontally
sound lower canine teeth is a very real risk. Additionally, in this case extraction was
in direct contradiction of the owner's clearly expressed wishes.
2. Shortening and endodontic treatment of 304. This is a good option to reduce the
discomfort, but the owner was adamant that this would also destroy the dog's show
career.
3.Orthodontic movement of 304. This is also a good option for this dog as the
          s
         e  n n  
animal. For normal canine interlock to be achieved, the lower canines would need to
be moved slightly rostrally and then flared out laterally.
TREATMENT PLAN
For normal canine interlock to be achieved the left lower canine would need to be
moved slightly rostrally and then flared out laterally. The plan was to achieve this in
two stages: namely, to start by using the ‘rubber toy technique' (see Chapter 25) and
then an orthodontic appliance if necessary.
To achieve rostral as well as lateral tipping of the mandibular canines, a very
large toy is needed. It needs to be so large that it cannot be fitted between the
carnassial teeth.
The composition and consistency of the toy are important. It should be of hard
rubber that slightly deforms on chewing. If the toy is too soft, it is unlikely to create
enough pressure for lateral tipping of the mandibular canines. If it is too hard, the
result is tooth damage due to abrasion. The toy should have a smooth suirface to avoid
excessive abrasion.
Oral examination under anaesthesia was not indicated at this stage. The owner
was advised to play with the dog for 15 minutes three to four times a day using a hard
rubber ball ('rubber toy technique') to encourage the lower canines to move rostrally
and flare laterally. An appropriately sized hard rubber ball was selected. All other toys
were removed. The owner was also given toothbrushing instruction and advised to
    e       
treatment in 1 month.
RECHECKS
The owner phoned after 1 week to let is know that the dog would not play with the
ball. We then moved on to stage 2 of the planned treatment and manufactured an
intra-oral maxillary acrylic bite plane under general anaesthesia (Fig. 26.3). We also
took impressions, made a bite registration and produced models of the occlusion (Fig.
26.4). The dog was discharged with instructions to the owner of how to clean around
the appliance (chlorhexidine rinsing and toothbrushing). She was rebooked 3 weeks
later.
Figure 26.3
 Photograph of the wire-reinforced acrylic bite plane in place in the upper jaw. Note
the difference between the right and left grooves. The right groove is designed to maintain the
occlusion of 404, and the left groove is designed to move 304 rostrally and laterally on chewing. This
type of appliance is only effective if the dog chews.
MADGE
Figure26.4
Plaster of Paris models of the occlusion. The models document the extent of the
malocclusion at the start of treatment and provide an aid in designing appropriate orthodontic
appliances. The models are mounted in an articulator and jaw movement can then be mimicked.
At the 3-week recheck, it became obvious that this type of appliance was not
going to work as the dog would not close its mouth. In fact, she had not done so for 3
weeks and had refused to eat hard food. This type of appliance relies on mastication to
be effective, i.e. every time the dog chews, as the lower canines contact the bite plane
they will be forced rostrally and laterally. So, since the dog did not chew, the appliance
had no effect.
She was again placed under general anaesthesia; the maxillary bite plane was
removed, and impressions and bite registration for the manufacture of a mandibular
orthodontic device were taken. Baseline radiographs were taken of 304 and 404
(orthodontic movement of teeth may induce iatrogenic pulp/periapical disease, as
well as external root resorption). The mandibular expansion device (Fig. 26.5) was
cemented in place 2 weeks later, again under general anaesthesia. Within 4 weeks the
canines were in almost normal interlock and the expansion device was at its limit, i.e.
it would not cause further tooth movement (Fig. 26.6). The dog seemed to manage
well with the appliance in place. She was eating well and gaining weight. The device
was left in place for a further 4 weeks to retain the canines in correct occlusion. Eight
weeks after initial placement of the mandibular expansion device, the dog was again
placed under general anaesthesia to remove the appliance. The outcome is depicted in
Figs 26.7 and 26.8. Radiographs were again taken of 304 and 404. No abnormalities in
tooth root development were detected and there was no evidence of any root
resorption. Alveoloplasty of the left diastema (Fig. 26.9) was performed to ensure that
Figu1re26.5
 Photograph of the mandibular expansion device in place in the lower jaw. This device
 pushes both lower canines laterally. It is activated every 3-4 days by inserting a key. A cooperative
animal is crucial.
Figu1re26.6
Lateral photograph of the mandibular expansion device in place. After 4 weeks the
expansion device was at its limit and 304 was almost flared out laterally to fit in the diastema. Note
the inflamed and hyperplastic gingiva where 304 is occluding.
Figu1re26.7
 Lateral photograph of the left rostral occlusion at the time of removal of the
mandibular expansion device. The left lower canine is now occluding with the gingiva in the
diastema, rather than the palatal mucosa.
Figuure26.8
 Models of occlusion at the time of removal of the mandibular expansion device. The
left lower canine is now occluding with the gingiva in the diastema, rather than the palatal mucosa. It
is prudent to make models of the outcome of the treatment.
Figure26.9
  d s            
that the left lower canine was securely positioned laterally.
The dog was rechecked after 6 months, conscious and under general anaesthesia.
Canine occlusion was normal and radiographs showed no evidence of pulp/periapical
complications or root resorption.
PROGNOSIS
If the dog accepted playing with the rubber ball, then near normal or even normal
canine occlusion could be achieved rapidly in such a young dog.
COMMENTS
Orthodontic treatment is not always straightforward. Revision of the initial treatment
plan is not uncommon and total success is not guaranteed. The owner needs to be
aware of this and also that multiple episodes of general anaesthesia are likely to be
required. The owner also needs to be aware that a degree of discomfort will be present
for as long as the device is in place. Maintenance of oral hygiene (daily toothbrushing
and rinsing with chlorhexidine) is extremely important while an appliance is in place.
Moreover, the dog is not allowed access to toys and is restricted to supervised lead
    e  ( a  o     o) s
appliance is in place. In short, she needs to be restricted to a rather unnatural lifestyle
for adog
complication, root resorption. Therefore, the effect of orthodontic treatment needs to
be monitored clinically and radiographically. Appliances that supply just enough force
to achieve the required movement need to be selected.
Initially, 1 thought that orthodontic tooth movement would be quick and easy in
this case. As it turned out, this was not the case. In retrospect, tooth shortening and
endodontic treatment may have been a better option from the animal's point of view,
but the owner would not have agreed to that; furthermore, on initial evaluation this
did not appear to be the treatment of choice. However, the dog did not appear to be in
appreciable discomfort during the 8 weeks that the mandibular expansion device was
in place and the outcome was successful.
This case is a mild skelelatal malocclusion and is thus likely to be inheritable. The
owner was counselled not to breed from this dog.
27
Tooth shortening and endodontic therapy
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Inability to close mouth.
PATIENT DETAILS
An 11-month-old, male, bearded collie.
CASE HISTORY
The owner was concerned that the dog didn't seem to be able to close his mouth
completely and drooled continuously. Also, he would not play with toys and would
only eat soft food.
The dog had been involved in a slow speed accident with a car when 6 months old
(the owner had accidentally backed into him). He had seemed unhurt at the time. The
problem with jaw closure was noted roughly a month after the accident and had been
getting progressively worse.
The dog was seen by its own veterinarian, who referred the case to us for
evaluation and treatment.
ORAL EXAMINATION - CONSCIOUS
This was a nice-tempered dog that allowed thorough oral examination and occlusal
evaluation (Figs 27.1 and 27.2).
Figure 27.1
Wry bite - rostral view in the conscious animal. Occlusion is best examined in the
conscious animal. The dog does not allow closure of the mouth and drools continuously. There is
obvious saliva staining of the fur. Note the midline deviation of the incisors. Tooth 404 is flared out,
and there is space in the diastema between 103 and 104 for this tooth to fit in normal occlusion if
the jaws were able to close.
Figure 27.2
Wry bite - left lateral view of rostral occlusion in the conscious animal. Tooth 304 is
trapped medially, occluding with palatal mucosa, causing a deep, ulcerated indentation.
The following were noted:
1. Saliva-soaked and saliva-stained fur around jaws
2. Would not allow full closure of jaws
3. Generalized gingivitis
4. Complicated crown fracture (CCF) of 101
5. Occlusion:
· The upper jaw was longer on the left than on the right side
· The lower jaw was of normal length and width for the breed
· There was an obvious midline deviation of incisors
· Tooth 304 was upright in position and occluded with the palate, causing a 14-mm-
deep ulcerated indentation
· Tooth 404 flared laterally and fitted into the diastema between 103 and 104.
ORAL EXAMINATION-UNDER GENERAL ANAESTHETIC
A thorough oral and dental examination, including investigating periodontal
parameters, was performed. All findings were noted on the dental record sheet.
In summary, examination under general anaesthesia identified the following:
1. Generalized gingivitis
2. Complicated crown fracture (CCF) of 101
3. Occlusion:
· The upper jaw was longer on the left than on the right side, with obvious midline
deviation
· The lower jaw was of normal length and width for the breed
· Tooth 304 was upright in position and occluded with the palate, causing a 14-mm-
deep uilcerated indentation, which was filled with debris
· Tooth 404 flared laterally and fitted into the diastema between 103 and 104.
It was identified that it was the maloccluding 304 which prevented full mouth
closuire. There was no evidence of trauma associated with occlusion of any other
teeth.
FURTHER INVESTIGATIONS
Radiographs of 101 (CCF), 304 and 404 were taken.
RADIOGRAPHICFINDINGS
1. Tooth 101 (CCF) had a wide pulp diameter and open apex.
2. Teeth 304 and 404 had complete apical closure and a suibstantial amount of
secondary dentine formed.
THEORYREFRESHER
Malocclusion  can  result  from jaw  length and/or  width  discrepancy  (skeletal
malocclusion), from tooth malpositioning (dental malocclusion), or a combination of
both. The malocclusion seen in this case is called a wry bite, and is the consequence of
the discrepancy in length between the left and the right upper jaw, i.e. it is a skeletal
malocclusion. A wry bite occurs if one side of the head or one side of a jaw grows
bite develops. In more severe cases, a crooked head and bite develops, with a deviated
midline. An open bite may also develop in the incisor region so that the affected teeth
are displaced vertically and do not occlude.
reliably identified. In this case, the traumatic incident at 6 months of age could
explain the wry bite. The trauma may have caused cessation of growth of the right
side for a period of time. The complicated fracture of 1o1 supports the hypothesis that
it was a right-sided trauma. The left upper jaw and the lower jaw carried on growing
at the normal rate. So, this skeletal malocclusion should be given the benefit of the
doubt and not be considered inherited.
Malocclusion causing discomfort and pathology always needs treating.
The treatment options available are orthodontics, tooth shortening or extraction.
The aim of any treatment is primarily to make the animal comfortable; aesthetics are
a secondary consideration.
CLINICAL TIPS
 Malocclusion can result from jaw length and/or width discrepancy (skeletal malocclusion), from
tooth malpositioning (dental malocclusion), or a combination of both.
 Malocclusion causing discomfort and pathology should always be treated.
 The aim of any treatment is to make the animal comfortable; aesthetics are a secondary
consideration.
 Relatively mature teeth with a good layer of secondary dentine and apical closure can be treated by
conventional endodontics (pulpectomy, root filling and restoration).
 Immature teeth should be treated by partial pulpectomy, direct pulp capping and restoration.
TREATMENT OPTIONS
 n     s     eg
contribute to the bony strength of the lower jaw. Maintaining 304 would be beneficial
to the dog.
2. Shortening and endodontic treatment of 304. This is probably the best option for
this case. It would take the canine out of occlusion and allow full closure of the
mouth. The palatal defect would heal rapidly once the inciting trauma had been
removed.
3. Orthodontics. No orthodontic options are applicable to this case.
TREATMENT PERFORMED
1 .Periodontal therapy to remove plaque and calculus and provide a clean
environment for surgery, and for the owner to start instituting home care (daily
toothbrushing).
2. Shortening and conventional endodontic therapy (pulpectomy, root canal filling
and restoration) of 304. Tooth 304 was shortened to level with the lower incisors.
 3. Curettage of palatal indentations.
4. Extraction of 101 (CCF). Pre-and post-extraction radiographs were taken.
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
· NSAIDs for 5 days
· Daily toothbrushing
· The dog was rebooked for oral examination and radiographs of 304 (to assess periapical status)
under general anaesthesia after 6 months.
RECHECK
At recheck 6 months after initial treatment, the owner reported that the dog was no
longer drooling and was now eating dry food and dental hygiene treats. She was
Drushing his teeth almost daily. Conscious examination revealed that the dog had full
mouith closure and there was no evidence of saliva staining of the fur on the muzzle.
Oral examination under general anaesthesia identified mild gingivitis associated with
premolars and molars, where the owner had trouble getting access with the
toothbrush. The palatal defect associated with 304 had healed and there was no
evidence of any soft tissue injury associated with any other teeth. The restoration of
304 was intact and the tooth was not discoloured. Radiographs confirmed a successful
outcome of the endodontic procedure performed on 304 (Fig. 27.3). No further
treatment was indicated, unless the restoration is damaged or lost. The owner was
given toothbrushing instruction and continued daily toothbrushing was encouraged.
Figu1re27.3
Radiograph 6 months after conventional endodontic treatment. Endodontic therapy
requires radiographs (generally 6 months later) to assess the outcome. This radiograph demonstrates
successful outcome in that there is no evidence of any periapical destruction, i.e. the periodontal
        s      e s n
evidence of any radiolucent regions in the bone around the apex.
PROGNOSIS
Shortening 304 removed the trauma, and healing of the palatal indentation should be
rapid. The dog can close its mouth and should have pain-free occlusion as well as
acceptable function.
Conventional endodontic treatment has a high success rate. As long as the
restoration stays in place, 304 has an excellent prognosis. The success of the
endodontic treatment needs radiographic confirmation 6 months after ini tial therapy.
COMMENTS
          
types of malocclusion. If the tooth that requires shortening is relatively mature (good
layer of secondary dentine and apical closuire), then conventional endodontics
(pulpectomy, root filing and restoration) is preferable to partial pulpectomy, direct
pulp capping and restoration. The latter technique should be limited to immature
teeth, where the goal is to keep the pulp alive for continued root development. It
should be seen as a temporary procedure and conventional endodontics should be
performed once the tooth is mature enough.
The skeletal malocclusion in this case was not considered inheritable as a clear
cause had been identified. Breeding from her was considered acceptable.
28
Tooth shortening and endodontics, then extraction
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Malocclusion - lower canine teeth erupting into palatal mucosa, causing teeth indentations and
ulceration.
PATIENT DETAILS
A 6-month-old, female, Great Dane.
CASE HISTORY
The owner was concerned about the indentations and uilcerations caused by the
maloccluding lower canine teeth. The dog was showing signs of discomfort from the
   d   s  s  d  
eating very well, etc.). The dog had been examined by its own veterinarian, who
referred the case to us for evaluation and treatment.
ORAL EXAMINATION - CONSCIOUS
The dog was nice tempered but anxious when the head and face were examined. Oral
malodour was obvious. Cursory oral examination revealed that the upper jaw was of
normal length and width for the breed, but the mandible was much too short and
indentations, which were filled with debris.
ORAL EXAMINATION-UNDERGENERAL ANAESTHETIC
A thorough oral and dental examination, including investigating periodontal
parameters, was performed. All findings were noted on the dental record sheet. In
summary, examination under general anaesthesia identified the following:
           eg
narrow lower jaw, i.e. mandibular brachygnathism. The lower incisors were
occluding with the palatal mucosa, but not causing any soft tissue lesions. The lower
canines occluded with the palatal mucosa, distal to the upper canines, causing deep
uilcerated indentations (12 mm), which were filled with debris. There were also non-
ulcerated indentations in the palatal mucosa where the lower carnassials occluded.
2. Generalized mild gingivitis.
FURTHERINVESTIGATIONS
Radiographs of 304 and 404 were taken to determine the developmental stage
RADIOGRAPHICFINDINGS
Teeth 304 and 404 were immature (as expected in a 6-month-old dog) with open
apices and only a thin layer of secondary dentine formed.
THEORYREFRESHER
Malocclusion can result from jaw length and/or width discrepancy  (skeletal
malocclusion), from tooth malpositioning (dental malocclusion), or a combination of
both. This case is a skeletal malocclusion and is thus inheritable. Malocclusion
causing discomfort and pathology always needs treating.
The treatment options available are orthodontics, tooth shortening or extraction.
The aim of any treatment is primarily to make the animal comfortable; aesthetics are
a secondary consideration.
CLINICAL TIPS
 Malocclusion can result from jaw length and/or width discrepancy (skeletal malocclusion), from
tooth malpositioning (dental malocclusion), or a combination of both.
· Skeletal malocclusion is inheritable. Affected dogs should not be used for breeding.
 The aim of any treatment is primarily to make the animal comfortable; aesthetics are a secondary
consideration.
 Malocclusion causing discomfort and pathology should always be treated.
 It is important to monitor partial pulpectomy, direct pulp capping and restoration procedure
radiographically.
TREATMENT OPTIONS
1. Extraction of all maloccluding teeth. The lower canines are the two teeth that are
causing pathology. While the lower incisors and lower carnassials do occlude with the
palatal mucosa, they are causing only small indentations which are not ulcerated. The
lower canines are large, functionally important teeth and contribute to the bony
strength of the lower jaw. Maintaining them would be beneficial to the dog.
2. Shortening and endodontic treatment of the lower canines. This is probably the best
option for this case. It would take the canines out of occlusion and allow the palatal
defects to heal.
3. Orthodontics. This is not practical for this case. Theoretically, one could perform
jaw lengthening surgery, but this would not be humane.
TREATMENTPERFORMED
1 .Periodontal therapy to remove plaque and calculus and provide a clean
environment for surgery, and for the owner to start instituting home care (daily
toothbrushing).
2. Shortening and endodontic therapy (partial pulpectomy, direct pulp capping and
restoration) of 304 and 404. Both teeth were shortened level with the incisors.
3. Curettage of palatal indentations.
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
· NSAIDs for 5 days
 Antibiotics for 5 days
· Daily toothbrushing
idead ssasse on) tot pe to po sdeiopu pe uxa ieo o pooqau sm bo au ·
 status) under general anaesthesia after 6 months.
RECHECK
The dog did not come back for its 6-month recheck, as she developed other, more life-
again until 1 year after the tooth shortening and endodontic therapy. At this time, the
owner was concerned about halitosis and signs of discomfort (not eating well).
Oral examination under general anaesthesia 1 year after initial treatment showed
that the palatal indentations caused by the mandibular canines had healed, but there
were now deep ulcerated palatal indentations from lower incisors (Fig. 28.1). The
indentations were filled with pus and there was intense malodour. The palatal
indentations from the lower carnassials were superficial and not ulcerated. The
restorations of 304 and 404 were intact and the teeth were not discoloured. However,
d       e    sg
systems and there was a periapical destruction associated with 404 (Figs 28.2 and
28.3). Treatment consisted of open extraction of the mandibular incisors and canines
(Fig. 28.4), and curettage of the palatal defects. The dog was discharged with
antibiotics for 1 week and advised to see their own veterinarian in 3 weeks to check
healing of extraction sites and palatal defects.
Figuure28.1
 Occlusal photograph of the hard palate. The maloccluding lower incisors are causing
deep, infected indentations in the palatal mucosa. Halitosis was intense. Note the pus oozing out of
the indentations.
Figu1re28.2
Lateral radiograph of 304. The radiograph reveals failure of the endodontic procedure
of pulpal disease (inflammation and necrosis) tooth development ceased, as evidenced by the wide
pulp diameter and open apex.
Figure 28.3
(partial pulpectomy, direct pulp capping and restoration) performed a year earlier. As a consequence
of pulpal disease (inflammation and necrosis) tooth development ceased, as evidenced by the wide
pulp diameter and open apex. Note the hard tissue bridge separating the pulp from the direct pulp
capping material. This tells us that pulpal inflammation and necrosis occurred some time after initial
treatment. Note also the periapical destruction.
Figure 28.4
Occlusal photograph of the extraction sites. The mandibular incisors and canines
were extracted using an open technique. Pre-and post-extraction radiographs were taken. The flap was
replaced using 5/0 Monocryl.
A lovely thank you card from the owner 6 weeks after extraction reported that the
dog was happy and functional. The extraction site and the palatal defects had healed
uneventfully.
PROGNOSIS
Shortening the lower canines will remove the trauma and allow healing of the palatal
indentations. The dog should have pain-free occlusion as well as acceptable function.
Partial pulpectomy, direct pulp capping and restoration is a temporary procedure
used in immature teeth. The purpose of the procedure is to keep the pulp vital to allow
continued tooth development. Once the tooth is more mature, a total pulpectomy, root
filling and restoration procedure is required. While, partial pulpectomy, direct pulp
capping and restoration has a good success rate, there is always the possibility that
the pulp becomes inflamed and tooth development ceases. If pulpal pathology
(inflammation, necrosis) occurs, then periapical pathology will develop. If this occurs,
the tooth requires either extraction or conventional endodontic therapy (pulpectomy,
root filling and restoration).
COMMENTS
No further treatment is required for the malocclusion.
It is rare that the incisors cause extensive soft tissue damage with this type of
malocclusion. Normally, it is only the canine teeth that cause severe pathology. In
other words, shortening and endodontic therapy of the mandibular canines results in
healing of the palatal ulcerations and a pain-free, functional bite.
This case highlights the importance of monitoring partial pulpectomy, direct pulp
capping and restoration procedure radiographically so that interceptive treatment
(further endodontic therapy or extraction) can be performed early.
29
Extraction of permanent teeth
INITIAL PRESENTATION
 Malocclusion - long upper jaw resulting in a relative mandibular brachygnathia.
PATIENTDETAILS
A 7-month-old, female, weimaraner.
CASE HISTORY
The owner was concerned about the “long curved nose' and the obsessive chewing on
toys, furniture, etc. Their own veterinarian noted that the lower jaw was too short
with respect to the upper jaw, and the dog was referred to us for evaluation and
treatment of the malocclusion.
ORAL EXAMINATION - CONSCIOUS
The dog was well behaved and allowed conscious examination, which revealed the
following:
1. Skeletal malocclusion
· The upper jaw was extremely long and narrow with respect to the lower jaw, which
was of relatively normal length and width for the breed, i.e. relative mandibular
brachygnathism.
· The lower canines occluded with the palatal mucosa, distal to the upper canines,
causing deep indentations in palate.
· The lower incisors occluded with the palatal mucosa, causing less severe
indentations.
2. Generalized gingivitis
3. Uncomplicated crown fracture of 204.
The pulp did not seem exposed to the environment on visual examination.
Exploration was not attempted, since touching an exposed pulp would have caused
ORAL EXAMINATION -UNDER GENERAL ANAESTHETIC
A thorough oral and dental examination, including investigating periodontal
parameters, was performed. All findings were noted on the dental record sheet.
In summary, examination under general anaesthesia identified the following list:
1. Skeletal malocclusion
· The upper jaw was extremely long and narrow with respect to the lower jaw, which
was of a relatively normal length and width for the breed, i.e. relative mandibular
brachygnathism.
· The lower canines occluded with the palatal mucosa, distal to the upper canines,
causing ulcerated indentations in the palate (Fig. 29.1).
· The lower incisors occluded with the palatal mucosa, causing non-ulcerated
indentations (Fig. 29.1). There were also indentations in the palatal mucosa where
the lower carnassials occluded.
2. Generalized mild gingivitis (Fig. 29.1)
3. Uncomplicated crown fracture of 204.
Figure 29.1
Traumatic lesions in the palatal mucosa. The upper jaw is long and narrow, while the
                
normally. Note the ulcerated indentations created by the maloccluding lower canines (they occlude
with the palatal mucosa medial to the upper canines). Note also the indentations in the palatal
mucosa where the lower incisors occlude. There is a generalized gingivitis as evidenced by the red
and swollen gingival margins around the circumference of all teeth.
Careful examination with a sharp explorer did not allow communication into the
puilp
FURTHERINVESTIGATIONS
Radiographs were taken of 204 (UCF) and of 104 (contralateral healthy tooth).
RADIOGRAPHICFINDINGS
The shape and diameter of the pulp system of 104 (contralateral healthy) and 204
(UCF) were the same. Both were immature teeth, as expected in a 7-month-old dog.
There was no evidence of periapical pathology of 204 (UCF).
THEORYREFRESHER
Malocclusion  can result  from jaw length and/or  width discrepancy  (skeletal
malocclusion), from tooth malpositioning (dental malocclusion), or a combination of
both. This case is a skeletal malocclusion and should therefore be considered as
inheritable. Malocclusion causing discomfort and pathology always needs treating.
The treatment options available are orthodontics, tooth shortening or extraction.
In many instances, tooth shortening or extraction are preferable to orthodontics on
ethical grounds.
In human orthodontics, whether malocclusion is hereditary or acquired is not a
consideration when planning treatment. This is in contrast to veterinary orthodontics.
where aesthetics and ethical concerns are linked, and treatment for the sole purpose of
showing dogs or cats cannot be encouraged. The aim of any treatment is primarily to
make the animal comfortable; aesthetics are a secondary consideration.
It is essential to determine if the presenting malocclusion is hereditary or not.
Orthodontic correction of a malocclusion is contraindicated where the malocclusion is
hereditary, unless the animal is also neutered. The rationale for this is to avoid spread
of inherited malocclusion within a breed.
Crown fractures are classified as complicated if the fracture line exposes the pulp
to the oral environment and as uncomplicated if they do not involve pulpal exposure.
Crown fractures are obvious visually. However, at times it can be difficult to
determine if the pulp is exposed by the fracture line, and general anaesthesia for
examination with a dental explorer and radiography are necessary.
An uncomplicated crown  fracture usually  requires  minimal  treatment, e.g.
            s  
liner or restorative material. However, such fractures do require monitoring (clinical
vital. If pulp and periapical diseases develop, the tooth requires either extraction or
endodontic therapy.
CLINICAL TIPS
 Malocclusion can result from jaw length and/or width discrepancy (skeletal malocclusion), from
tooth malpositioning (dental malocclusion), or a combination of both.
· Skeletal malocclusion is inheritable. Affected dogs should not be used for breeding.
· Malocclusion causing discomfort and pathology always needs treating.
 The treatment options available are orthodontics, tooth shortening or extraction.
· It can be difficult to determine if the pulp is exposed by a crown fracture.
 Uncomplicated crown fracture usually requires minimal treatment, but ongoing monitoring is
important.
TREATMENTOPTIONS
1. Shortening and endodontic treatment of the lower canines. This is a possible option
to reduce the discomfort, but there would still be indentations and possi bly uilceration
associated with the maloccluding incisors. In other words, there would not be
complete healing of the palatal defects and the dog may still be uncomfortable.
2. Shortening and endodontic treatment of the lower canines and extraction of the
lower incisors. This is the best option. The trauimatic occlusion would be removed and
the palatal mucosa would heal. Also, the mandible would not be weakened by the
removal of the lower canines and associated bone. Radiographic monitoring of the
endodontic therapy (radiographs 6 months later) would be required. So, two episodes
of general anaesthesia would be necessary.
3. Extraction of the lower canines and incisors. This is an acceptable choice in this
case, as the lower incisors were also causing deep palatal indentations. It is a one-
stage procedure, unlike option 2, which would require radiographic monitoring of the
outcome of the endodontic therapy.
IREATMENTPERFORMEL
          e 
environment.
2. Smoothing sharp fracture edges and sealing exposed dentine tubules. Since the
radiographs showed no evidence of pulp/periapical disease of 204, there was no need
for endodontic therapy.
3. Extraction of the lower incisors and canines. The owner wanted a quick solution to
the problem and was not prepared to return for radiographic monitoring of
  s n         s
x- 1-  o   s   u
radiographs were taken.
4. Curettage of palatal indentations was performed.
Figuure29.2
Open extraction. The mucoperiosteal buccal access flap extends from the mesial
aspect of 305 to the mesial aspect of 405, with short, vertical releasing incisions at these locations.
Buccal and lingual bone was removed to facilitate extraction (luxation and elevation) of lower
 canines and incisors. Pre-and post-extraction radiographs were taken.
Figu1re29.3
Flap closure. Once postoperative radiographs had confirmed successful extraction of
  ( n ssn a d c aq  o pna a p m) 
 Monocryl. For optimal healing the flap closure must be completely free of tension.
Figure 29.4
Extracted teeth. Note that all tooth roots appear intact. Radiographs to confirm
successful extraction and absence of sharp bony edges are still required.
POSTOPERATIVECARE
: NSAIDs for 5 days
 Daily toothbrushing
 The dog was rebooked for conscious examination 4 weeks later.
RECHECK
Conscious examination 4 weeks later showed that the palatal ulcerations and all
extraction sites had healed. Small indentations where the lower carnassials occluded
were still present, but they were not deep and fully epithelialized. The owner was
brushing the teeth daily and the gingivae were clinically healthy. The owner reported
that the dog was no longer incessantly looking for objects to chew on.
The owner did not want to return for radiographic monitoring of the pulp and
periapical status of 204 (UCF). It was decided that the referring veterinarian would
take radiographs of 204 at the time of neutering 3 months later.
PROGNOSIS
Extraction of the maloccluding lower incisors and canines will allow healing of the
palatal indentations and remove the discomfort (Fig. 29.5). The dog should have pain-
free occlusion as well as acceptable function.
Figure29.5
Lateral photograph after tooth extraction. The length discrepancy between the upper
and lower jaw is obvious. Extraction of the lower incisors and canines will remove the traumatic
occlusion and allow the palatal injuries to heal. The dog will have pain-free and relatively functional
occlusion.
The malocclusion is inheritable and she should not be used for breeding.
Uncomplicated crown fractures do require monitoring (clinical examination and
 dn  a s dn a  s  sa   (o
periapical disease develop, the tooth requires either extraction or endodontic therapy.
COMMENTS
No further treatment is required for the malocclusion.
Pulp/periapical complications with 204 (UCF) may still occur. The owner was
advised to monitor the tooth colour and seek veterinary advice if the tooth begins to
discolour (pink, grey).
30
Iatrogenic malocclusion
INITIAL PRESENTATION
A dog unable to close his mouth, with atrophy of the muscles of mastication on the left side of
the face.
PATIENTDETAILS
A 5-year-old, male, springer spaniel.
CASE HISTORY
The dog was referred for management of complications to jaw fracture healing. Case
history was not supplied. The owner reported that the dog had been involved in a road
traffic accident 6 weeks earlier. The mandible had fractured, as had multiple teeth.
The mandibular fracture had been  stabilized using double figure-of-eight  wires
             
extracted. Further extractions had been performed 3 weeks prior to referral. The dog
had been unable to close his mouth since the accident (6 weeks ago) and the owner
had noticed that the muscles on the left side of the face (above eye) were undergoing
atrophy. The dog was eating well but selecting soft food rather than kibbles.
ORAL EXAMINATION - CONSCIOUS
         s  a s
S      s  s
· Continuous drooling
· Normal jaw opening, but unable to fully close mouth (Figs 30.1, 30.2 and 30.3)
· Lower jaw deviating to the right (Figs 30.1, 30.2 and 30.3)
· Incisors in reverse scissor occlusion (Figs 30.1, 30.2 and 30.3)
· Tooth 404 positioned laterally to 103 (Fig. 30.2)
· Tooth 304 positioned medially to 203 (Fig. 30.3)
· Missing teeth (Fig. 30.1)
· Fractured teeth (Fig. 30.1)
· Marked muscle wastage of muscles of mastication (temporal, masseter and
pterygoid) on the left side.
Figure30.1
Head-on photograph of the rostral occlusion. The mandible is deviated to the right
 and the dog is unable to close his mouth because of the iatrogenic (mandibular fracture stabilized
without considering occlusion) malocclusion; 404 is lateral to 103 and 304 is trapped medial to 203.
There is also reverse scissor occlusion of incisors, which may have been present prior to jaw fracture.
Note also the missing (303, 401, 403) and fractured teeth (202, 402).
Figure30.2
 Right lateral photograph of the rostral occlusion. The deviation of the mandible to
the right and the traumatic occlusion of the right lower canine (404 occluding with the lateral aspect
of 103) is evident, as is the reverse scissor occlusion of the incisors.
Figure 30.3
 Left lateral photograph of the rostral occlusion. The deviation of the mandible to the
right and the traumatic occlusion of the left lower canine (304 is occluding with the palatal aspect of
203) providing mechanical obstruction to full mouth closure is obvious, as is the reverse scissor
occlusion of the incisors.
ORALEXAMINATION-UNDERGENERALANAESTHETIC
While occlusion is best assessed in the conscious animal, in cases that are not
amenable to conscious occlusal evaluation, it needs to be performed under general
anaesthesia. The tongue needs to be folded caudally during the evaluation so as not to
interfere with normal jaw closure. Pharyngotomy intubation rather than orotracheal
intubation is useful when occlusal evaluation is required.
A thorough oral and dental examination, including investigating periodontal
parameters, was performed. All findings were noted on the dental record sheet.
1. The mandibular fracture had healed. The jaw was stable and there was a palpable
callus at the ventral border of the left and right mandible level with apices of canine
teeth.
2. Jaw opening was normal.
3. Full closure of the mouth was not possible due to the mechanical obstruction from
the malocclusion (Figs 30.1, 30.2 and 30.3):
· Tooth 404 was positioned laterally to 103
· Tooth 304 was positioned medially to 203.
4 .There was no swelling, abnormal movement or crepitus from the
temporomandibular joint (TMJ) on either opening or partial closure of the jaws. When
evaluating the TMJ, it is useful to place the animal in dorsal recumbency and
manipulate jaw opening, closure and lateral movement while a second person holds
the head and upper jaw in a fixed position. The tongue needs to be folded caudally to
avoid interference with jaw closure.
5. There was marked atrophy of the muscles of mastication on the left-hand side.
6. There were complicated crown fractures (CCF) of 202 and 402 (Fig. 30.1).
7. There was an uncomplicated crown fracture (UCF) of 204.
8. There was a retained root remnant of 403.
9. The extraction sockets of 108, 208 and 309 were not fully healed (extracted 3 weeks
earlier).
10. There was generalized moderate gingivitis.
FURTHERINVESTIGATIONS
Radiographs were taken of the following:
1. Mandi bular fracture sites
2. Right and left temporomandibular joint (TMJ)
3. Upper incisors
4. Lower incisors
5. Extraction sites of 108, 208 and 309
      
RADIOGRAPHIC FINDINGS
·. The fracture healed with obvious callus formation.
· TMJ radiographs revealed no abnormalities (Fig. 30.4a, b).
· Teeth 202 and 402 had complicated crown fractures, with no evidence of pulp and
periapical disease as yet.
· The socket of 403 contained a root remnant.
· The extraction sockets of 108, 208 and 309 were empty.
  s)  sd  d p a o s () t  e
healthy contralateral 104).
(a)
(b)
Figu1re 30.4
 Dorsoventral (DV) radiograph of the right (a) and left (b) temporomandibular joints
(TMJs). There is no evidence of pathology affecting the TMJs. Note the smooth condylar surfaces and
clear joint spaces of similar width.
THEORY REFRESHER
Malocclusion in this case has resulted from an inappropriate choice of jaw fracture
repair technique which did not take occlusion into account. The fracture had been
stabilized with the teeth maloccluding (404 positioned laterally to 103 and 304
positioned medially to 203, i.e. the mandible deviated to the right). The fracture had
been stable in this position and had healed, resulting in inability to fully close the
mouth due to the mechanical obstruction from the maloccluding mandibular canine
teeth.
The atrophy of the muscles of mastication on the left-hand side can be due to
either neurogenic damage at the time of the accident or be the result of disuse for
more than 6 weeks.
CLINICAL TIPS
· Occlusion is best assessed in the conscious animal.
 Pharyngotomy intubation rather than orotracheal intubation is useful when occlusal evaluation is
required.
· Atrophy of the muscles of mastication can be due to either neurogenic damage or be the result of
disuse.
 Uncomplicated crown fracture usually requires minimal treatment, but ongoing monitoring is
important.
TREATMENT OPTIONS
1. Selective extraction of the teeth that are hindering closure of the jaws. This is the
best choice in this case as it only requires extraction of 103 and 203. A buccal
alveoloplasty may also be required on the left.
2. Shortening and endodontic treatment of the lower canines. This is unnecessary as
jaw closure can be achieved by removing the smaller and functionally less important
103 and 203.
3. Orthodontic movement of teeth. While theoretically possible, it is not applicable in
this case. It would require multiple anaesthetics and cause prolonged discomfort to the
animal.
4 . Refracturing the mandible and stabilizing it in correct occlusion. This is
theoretically possible, but would cause discomfort to the animal during a relatively
long healing period. Option 1 provides immediate relief and is thus preferable.
TREATMENT PERFORMED
1 .Periodontal therapy to remove plaque and calculus and provide a clean
environment for surgery, and for the owner to start instituting home care (daily
toothbrushing)
2 . Removal of loose orthopaedic wire (double figure-of-eight around mandibular
canines)
3. Smoothing of rough edges and sealing dentine of 204 (UCF)
4. Open extraction of 202 (CCF) and 402 (CCF)
5. Open extraction of the root remnant of 403
6. Open extraction of 103 (Fig. 30.5a, b) and 203 (Fig. 30.6a, b)
7. Buccal alveoloplasty at 203.
(a)
(b)
Figure 30.5
Pre-extraction (a) and post-extraction (b) radiographs of 103.
(a) The upper third incisors have long, curved roots, which make them difficult to
extract using a closed technique.
(b) Successful extraction, i.e. with the whole root having been removed, should
always be confirmed radiographically.
(a)
(b)
Figure 30.6
 g sdo (a) nonx-isod 1 () nxa-
(a) Due to the long and curved root of the upper third incisors, I usually use an open
extraction technique.
(b) Successful extraction, i.e. with the whole root having been removed, should
always be confirmed radiographically. If an open extraction technique is used, then
the radiograph should be taken before the flap is replaced and the socket sutured
closed.
Postoperative radiographs were taken of all extraction sites. Flaps were replaced
with 5/0 Monocryl.
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
: NSAIDs for 5 days
 Twice daily chlorhexidine rinse
 The dog was rebooked for conscious recheck in 1 month.
RECHECKS
Conscious recheck a month later revealed healing of extraction and alveoloplasty. The
dog could close his mouth fully and had a functional bite. He was now eating kibble as
well as soft food. The atrophy of the muscles of mastication on the left remained
 s     a   g
radiographs of 204 (UCF) in 3 months.
At conscious examination 4 months after initial treatment, there was no evidence
of muscle atrophy on the left (Fig. 30.7). The muscles of mastication had recovered
fully, supporting the view that the atrophy was due to disuse rather than neurogenic
damage. The owner reported that he seemed pain free and had no trouble closing his
mouth (Fig. 30.8a, b). In fact, he was chewing on toys and enjoying dental hygiene
chews. The owners were also brushing his teeth daily. Examination under anaesthesia
revealed clinically healthy gingivae as a result of the daily toothbrushing. There was
traumatic occlusion of the remaining upper incisors with the remaining lower
incisors and the lingual mucosa. The malocclusion was causing lingual gingival
recession and wear of 301, and inflammation of the lingual mucosa (Fig. 30.9). All
remaining incisors were extracted. Radiographs of 204 (UCF) revealed no evidence of
pulp and periapical disease (as compared with the contralateral healthy 104 and the
previous radiograph of 204 taken 3 months earlier).
Figure30.7
 Head-on photograph of the head taken 4 months after initial treatment. The dog has
 pain-free and functional occlusion, with no obvious masticatory muscle atrophy. The fact that the left-
sided atrophy of the muscles of mastication was reversible supports the view that it occurred as a
consequence of disuse rather than neurogenic damage at the time of the jaw fracture.
(b)
Figure30.8
 Oblique lateral photograph of left rostral occlusion (a) and of right rostral occlusion
(b). The dog can close its mouth fully now the traumatic occlusion has been removed. Note the clean
teeth and healthy gingivae as a consequence of daily toothbrushing.
Figure 30.9
 Occlusal photograph of the lower incisors. The remaining upper incisors were causing
trauma to the remaining lower incisors and lingual gingivae. Note the gingival recession and wear
facet on 301. Treatment consisted of extracting all remaining incisors.
The dog was discharged with the recommendation to continue with daily
toothbrushing. An uncomplicated crown fracture usually requires minimal treatment,
e.g. removal of sharp edges with a bur and sealing of the exposed dentine with a
crown fracture of 204 may still occur. The owners were advised to contact us
s  s  ss    os  ss   
e.g. selective feeding, stops playing with toys, etc. Further radiographs of 204, e.g.
after a year, would be prudent as pulp and periapical disease may occur in the absence
of tooth discoloration. The dog will be recalled in 1 year, but no further treatment is
anticipated.
PROGNOSIS
The extraction of 103 and extraction and buccal alveoloplasty at 203 resulted in full
mouth closure. The dog should have pain-free occlusion as well as acceptable
function.
The muscle wastage may be neurogenic or due to disuse. If the latter, one would
expect some recovery.
COMMENTS
The method of jaw fracture repair chosen in this case had resulted in healing of the
fracture but had created the malocclusion. While it is necessary to stabilize a fracture
to get healing, maintaining occlusion is of paramount importance. In fact, the
occlusion can be used to achieve fracture stabilization. A different device, e.g. an
intra-oral acrylic splint, would have provided sufficient stability for bone healing
while maintaining occlusion. The technique uses the teeth to splint the fracture. The
advantages of this technique are:
· It is not invasive.
· Perfect occlusion is maintained.
· It is technically easy to do.
· It is a quick procedure, therefore only a short anaesthetic time is necessary.
The results are excellent and the technique is highly recommended.
PULP ANDPERIAPICAL DISEASE
31
Pulp and periapical disease - an introduction
Trauma to a tooth (mechanical, chemical, thermal, infective) often results in
pulpal inflammation (pulpitis). Depending on the type of trauma, its severity or
duration, the pulpitis may be reversible, but often this is not the case and the
inflammation becomes irreversible. The result of untreated irreversible pulpitis is pulp
(apical periodontitis) and the periapical bone, resulting in bone destruction around
the apex of the root (periapical disease).
A tooth affected by pulp and periapical diseases should always be treated, it
            
the tooth or to perform endodontic treatment and retain the tooth. Endodontic therapy
is a specialist procedure and should not be undertaken without adequate training and
supervised experience. The principles of endodontic therapy, which allows a tooth to
be maintained, are outlined in Appendix 4.
PULPAL REACTIONS
The immature tooth has a wide pulp cavity. As the tooth matures, secondary dentine
is laid down and the pulp cavity becomes narrower. Note that the contours of the pulp
to the surface. Consequently, crown fracture very often involves exposure of the pulp
in the older animal as well as the young.
As the animal gets older there is normally a reduction in the size of the pulp
cavity, which is associated with continued deposition of secondary dentine. There are
conditions that accelerate the rate of deposition of secondary dentine, thus
prematurely reducing the size of the pulp cavity. Attrition and abrasion are two
common conditions resulting in a narrow pulp cavity. Injury, orthodontic force and
disease can all alter and decrease the pulp chamber and canals. In extreme cases,
injury to a tooth will result in the complete obliteration of the pulp chamber and root
canals. More unusually, the obliteration is partial, with the pulp chamber retaining
the size and shape it had at the time of the injury, and the root canals becoming
completely obliterated. On the other hand, injuries that cauise inflammation and
degeneration/necrosis of the pulp also account for many abnormally large pulp
necrotic.
PERIAPICALLESIONS
Pathology in the area surrounding the apex of a root, i.e. periapical pathology, is most
may be blood borne, but such cases are rare. The earliest radiographic evidence of
periapical pathology is widening of the periodontal ligament space in the apical
region. This widening is due to inflammation of the apical periodontal ligament. If
uintreated, the apical periodontitis progresses to involve the suirrounding bone,
resulting in destruction of the bone, which is replaced by soft tissue. This is evident as
s    s       s g
abscess).  Definitive differentiation  between  these  three possibilities requires
histopathology of the tissue. In veterinary dentistry, histopathology of periapical
lesions is rarely performed. Treatment for all three entities is the same, i.e. endodontic
therapy or if there are complicating factors, e.g. advanced periodontitis, then
extraction. It is important to remember that not all apical rarefaction is pathological
in dogs and cats. The periapical bone of normal canines often appears radiolucent in
the dog. Comparison should always be made with other teeth of the same type in the
same animal. A distinctly round radiolucent area, however, is usually pathological.
Periapical  sclerosis,  instead  of  radiolucency, as a result of a chronically
inflamed/necrotic pulp can sometimes be seen.
The periapical cyst usually occurs as a sequel to the periapical granuloma. It is a
true cyst, since the lesion consists of a pathological, often fluid-filled, cavity that is
lined by epithelium. Periapical cysts enlarge due to the osmotic gradient set up
between the lumen of the cyst and tissue fluids in the surrounding connective tissue.
These lesions can become very large at the expense of the adjacent bone tissue, which
is resorbed due to pressuire from the cyst.
and cellulitis through spread of the infection. A fistulous tract opening on the skin or
oral muicosa may develop.
Periapical lesions may be entirely asymptomatic or excruciatingly painful. The
often insidious and not noticed by the owner. It is often only after completion of
           
             
Similarly, discoloured teeth with a necrotic pulp need to be treated before periapical
pathology develops. Once diagnosed, patients with necrotic pulps and periapical
pathology should receive endodontic treatment (referral) or extraction of the affected
tooth as soon as possible.
COMBINED PERIODONTIC AND ENDODONTIC LESIONS
There are possible pathways of communication between the pulp and the
periodontium. These are denuded dentine tubuiles, lateral and/or accessory pulp
canals, and at the apical foramen. Consequently, a periapical lesion may have a
possibility is that a lesion is the result of a combination of endodontic and periodontal
pathology. The lesions are classified according to aetiology as follows
· A Class I lesion, or endodontic-periodontic lesion, is endodontic in origin, i.e.
pathology begins in the pulp and progresses to involve the periodontium.
· A Class 11 lesion, or periodontic-endodontic lesion, is periodontic in origin, i.e.
pathology begins in the periodontium and progresses to involve the pulp.
· A Class Ill lesion, or true combined lesion, is a fusion of independent periodontic and
endodontic lesions.
have a better prognosis, as endodontic treatment may lead to resolution of the
periodontal extension of the inflammation. In contrast, Class 1I and Ill lesions require
endodontic treatment as well as extensive periodontal therapy, and the periodontal
Teeth with severe destruction of the periodontium should be extracted whatever
the original cause. Other treatment options are endodontic therapy and/or periodontal
therapy depending on the classification. Referral to a specialist is recommended.
OSTEOMYELITIS
     s          
mandi ble, but it is proba bly the most frequent cause. Osteomyelitis then occurs as an
            
chronic, and presents a different clinical course depending on its nature.
Osteomyelitis can be very difficult to differentiate from neoplastic bone lesions on
radiography. Biopsy and histopathological examination of the bone is really the only
removing the cause (extraction or possibly endodontic therapy of teeth with pulp and
periapical disease) in combination with antibiotic therapy. The choice of antibiotic
should be based on the results of culture and antibiogram. The duration of antibiotic
treatment required is usually longer than for other oral infections.
32
Uncomplicated crown fracture with periapical
complications
INITIAL PRESENTATION
No presenting signs.
PATIENT DETAILS
A 9-year-old, neutered female, springer cross.
CASE HISTORY
    i  n    s s  s
The owner was interested in oral care, and the dog had received an annual scale
and polish since she was 2 years old (seven episodes of periodontal therapy under
The owner reported that the dog was worried about having her face touched. The dog
had previously allowed toothbrushing, but had not allowed it for the last year.
ORAL EXAMINATION - CONSCIOUS
The dog was aggressive when the head was approached and conscious oral
examination was not possible.
ORAL EXAMINATION-UNDER GENERAL ANAESTHETIC
A thorough oral examination, including investigating periodontal parameters, was
performed and all findings were entered on the dental record sheet.
In summary, examination under general anaesthesia identified the following:
1. Mild to moderate accumulation of dental deposits
2. Mild to moderate generalized gingivitis
3. Uncomplicated crown fracture (UCF) of 108 and 208 (Fig. 32.1)
4. Drainage tract at the mucogingival junction of mesial 208 (Fig. 32.1).
Figure 32.1
Lateral photograph of 208. The uncomplicated crown fracture involved the tip of the
 ne no p an aon dsn  nus e e m s u as aq uo pe dsn 
 mucogingival line mesial to 208.
FURTHER INVESTIGATIONS
Radiographs were taken of 108 and 208.
RADIOGRAPHIC FINDINGS
The diameter of the pulp system of 108 was wide and the apices of the roots were
life. There was also periapical inflammation with bone destruction and external root
resorption (see Fig. 32.2 for details of the radiographic findings for 108).
Figure32.2
 Radiograph of the right upper caudal mandible. Note the wide diameter of the pulp
chamber and the distal root canal of 108, indicating pulp necrosis and cessation of dentine
production. Periapical pathology is evident. There is a significant periapical destruction of the distal
root of 1o8 and the apical segment is rough and uneven, indicating inflammatory external root
resorption. A second view was taken to visualize the mesial roots, which were also found to have
external root resorption and periapical bone destruction.
The diameter of the pulp system of 208 was narrow and the apices were closed,
P a   1e        1 n 
inflammation with bone destruction. The drainage tract was shown to originate from
the mesiopalatal root (see Fig. 32.3a, b for details of the radiographic findings for
208).
(a)
(b)
Figure 32.3
 Radiographs centring on 208.
(a) Tooth 208 is mature with closed apices and narrow root canals, as expected in a
9-year-old dog. Lucent areas surround all three roots, indicating periapical bone
destruction as a result of pulp necrosis.
(b) A gutta percha point inserted in the drainage tract shows that it originates from
the mesiopalatal root.
THEORY REFRESHER
Uncomplicated crown fractures expose dentine tubules and thus allow communication
between pulp and oral environment, which can result in inflammation or death of the
pulp. An uncomplicated crown fracture usually requires minimal treatment, e.g.
removal of sharp edges with a bur and sealing of the exposed dentine with a suitable
liner or restorative material. However, such fractures do require monitoring (clinical
examination and radiography) at regular intervals to ensure that the pulp remains
healthy. If pulp and periapical disease develops, the tooth requires either extraction or
endodontic therapy.
The immature tooth has a wide pulp cavity. As the tooth matures, secondary
dentine is laid down and the pulp cavity becomes narrower. Injuries that cause
inflammation and/or necrosis of the pulp account for many abnormally large pulp
cavities, as dentine production ceases when the pulp is chronically inflamed or
necrotic. Necrotic immature teeth require endodontic treatment if they are to be
retained. However, multiple general anaesthesia episodes are required and thus in
most cases extraction of an immature tooth with a necrotic pulp, which is achieved in
a single session, is uisually the best couirse of action.
It should be noted that immature teeth might well be present in the mature
animal  if  trauma  caused  pulp inflammation/necrosis  during  the  developmental
the animal.
CLINICAL TIPS
 Uncomplicated crown fracture usually requires minimal treatment, but ongoing monitoring is
important.
 e   n d   sis n    s 
pulp cavities, as dentine production ceases when the pulp is chronically inflamed or necrotic.
Immature teeth might well be present in the mature animal if trauma caused pulp
inflammation/necrosis during the developmental period.
• Pulp and periapical disease may be entirely asymptomatic or excruciatingly painful.
· The clinical signs indicative of disease are often insidious and not noticed by the owner.
TREATMENT OPTIONS
Extraction or endodontic treatment of 108 and 208.
TREATMENTPERFORMED
1 . Periodontal therapy to remove plaque and calculus and provide a clean
environment.
they are to be retained. In lieu of the extensive pathology (Fig. 32.2) present and to
avoid the multiple anaesthetic episodes required for endodontic treatment of an
immature tooth, extraction was the best course of action in this case.
3. Endodontic treatment (pulpectomy, root filling and restoration) of 208 (Fig. 32.4).
The tooth was mature and unaffected by periodontitis, and the antagonist was present
and healthy. Also, the owner was prepared to try to reinstitute daily toothbrushing. It
was therefore decided to maintain the tooth.
4. Debridement of the drainage tract by means of blunt dissection from the orifice at
Figure32.4
Radiograph centring on 208. This tooth has received endodontic treatment
(pulpectomy and debridement of the three root canals, followed by root canal filling). This
radiograph was taken to confirm adequate filling of the root canals before placing the final
restorations.
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
 Daily chlorhexidine rinse for 1 week
 Reintroduce daily toothbrushing after 1 week
 The dog was booked for conscious recheck after 3 weeks
RECHECK
At the recheck 3 weeks later, the owner reported a dramatic improvement in the dog's
general demeanour, with increased appetite, a desire to play with toys and she was no
longer protective about the face. Toothbrushing was also allowed.
 ps    e o s p s o s  
examination. The extraction site of 108 had healed nicely. The restoration of 208 was
intact with no evidence of discoloration of either tooth or restoration. The drainage
tract had healed. There was minimal plaque accumulation on the teeth and the
gingivae were clinically healthy. She was rebooked for examination under general
anaesthesia and radiographs to assess the outcome of the endodontic treatment of 208
in 6 months' time.
Examination under general anaesthesia and radiographs 6 months later
confirmed successful outcome of the endodontic treatment of 208 (periapical bone had
regenerated). There was minimal plaque accumulation on the teeth and the gingivae
were clinically healthy.
PROGNOSIS
The prognosis for this case is excellent, since the dog is allowing optimal home care.
i.e. daily toothbrushing. She is also fed a dental diet and given dental hygiene chews.
However, the dog will still require professional treatment at regular intervals; the
specifics of the treatment need to be decided based on the efficacy of home care.
COMMENTS
Based on the developmental stage of the tooth (wide pulp system diameter, open
apices), the uncomplicated crown fracture of 108 that resulted in pulp necrosis and
periapical disease occurred at around 9 months of age. Although the dog received
professional periodontal therapy annually (seven times), the UCF of 108 was not noted
and pulp and periapical disease was allowed to develop for 8 years. The uncomplicated
crown fracture of 208 was more recent, as the tooth was mature.
Pulp and periapical disease may be entirely asymptomatic or excruciatingly
painful. The clinical signs indicative of disease are often insidious and not noticed by
the owner. It is often only after completion of treatment (in this case, extraction of
108 and endodontic treatment of 208) that the owner reports a dramatic improvement
in the animal's general demeanour, including temperament.
33
Complicated crown fracture with periapical disease
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Bilateral swelling on the ventral border of the mandible.
PATIENT DETAILS
A 3-year-old, neutered male, German shepherd.
CASE HISTORY
An extremely aggressive dog that only tolerates its owners! The dog needed to be
muzzled at all times when in public. The first signs of aggression were noted when the
dog was 16 weeks old. The aggression had become progressively worse with
increasing age. The owner noticed a change in eating behaviour over the last few
months. First, the dog went off its food for a few days and then started to wolf it down
without chewing. They then noticed a swelling on the ventral mandible
approximately a month prior to seeing us. They consulted their own veterinarian,
who referred them to us for examination and treatment of the dog. The referring
veterinarian had not been able to perform any examination at all.
ORAL EXAMINATION - CONSCIOUS
Conscious examination of this extremely aggressive dog was not possible.
ORALEXAMINATION-UNDERGENERALANAESTHETIC
A thorough oral and dental examination, including investigating periodontal
parameters, was performed. All findings were noted on the dental record sheet.
In summary, examination under general anaesthesia identified the following:
1. Occlusion normal
2. Generalized mild to moderate gingivitis
3. Complicated crown fracture (CCF) of all four canine teeth
4. Bilateral hard swelling on the ventral border of the mandible (extending from level
with the first premolar to the distal aspect of the third premolar).
FURTHER INVESTIGATIONS
Radiographs were taken of all four canine teeth.
RADIOGRAPHIC FINDINGS
All four canines were mature teeth with closed apices. Periapical destruction and
external root resorption were evident with all four canine teeth. The periapical lesions
were more extensive in the lower jaw (Fig. 33.1), and had resulted in thinning and
expansion of the ventral cortical bone.
Figure 33.1
Rostrocaudal radiograph of the anterior mandible. Note the extensive periapical
lesions affecting 304 and 404.
ORAL PROBLEM LIST
Complicated crown fracture (CCF) resulting in pulpal inflammation and periapical
disease affecting all four canines.
THEORY REFRESHER
The crown fracture has exposed the pulp, resulting in pulpal inflammation. The teeth
are mature, i.e. the apices are closed, so the injury must have occurred when the dog
was more than 1 year old. The inflammatory response has spread to involve the
periapical region, resulting in destruction of the periapical bone. This is evident as an
apical rarefaction on a radiograph. The bone defect is filled with soft tissue, which
may be granulation tissue (periapical granuloma), cyst (periapical or radicular cyst)
or  abscess  (periapical  abscess).  Definitive differentiation between  these  three
possibilities requires histopathology of the tissue. The periapical cyst usually occurs as
a sequel to the periapical granuloma. It is a true cyst since the lesion consists of a
pathological, often fluid-filled, cavity that is lined by epithelium. Periapical cysts
enlarge due to the osmotic gradient set up between the lumen of the cyst and tissue
fluids in the surrounding connective tissue. These lesions can become very large at the
expense of the adjacent bone tissue, which is resorbed (due to pressure from the cyst).
Periapical lesions may be entirely asymptomatic or excruciatingly painful. The
extremely painful condition.
Periapical disease as a consequence of pulpal  inflammation is  treated by
removing the inflamed pulp. This can be achieved in one of two ways, either
endodontic therapy (the pulp is removed, the debrided root canal is filled and the
access cavities restored, and the tooth is maintained) or extraction of the affected
             
contraindication for endodontic treatment. Once the inflamed pulp has been removed,
the periapical bone will regenerate and the defect will heal.
CLINICAL TIPS
· Bone defects are filled with soft tissue, which may be granulation tissue, cyst or abscess.
Differentiating between these three possibilities requires histopathology of the tissue.
· Periapical lesions may be entirely asymptomatic or excruciatingly painful.
· The presence of periapical disease is not a contraindication for endodontic treatment.
TREATMENT OPTIONS
Extraction or endodontic treatment of all four canines
TREATMENT PERFORMED
1 .Periodontal therapy to remove plaque and calculus and provide a clean
environment.
2. Endodontic treatment of 104 (Fig. 33.2), 204 (Fig. 33.3), 304 and 404 (Fig. 33.4).
Due to the aggressive nature of the dog, endodontic therapy and restoration of all four
teeth were performed in one long session.
Figulre33.2
Lateral radiograph centring on the apex of 1o4. This radiograph was taken to confirm
adequate fill of the debrided and disinfected root canal of 104 prior to placing final restorations.
Figulre33.3
Lateral radiograph centring on the apex of 204. This radiograph was taken to confirm
adequate fill of the debrided and disinfected root canal of 204 prior to placing final restorations.
Figure 33.4
Rostrocaudal radiograph of the anterior mandible. This radiograph was taken to
 confirm adequate fill of the debrided and disinfected root canals of 304 and 404 prior to placing
final restorations.
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
· Antiobiotics for 10 days
· NSAIDs for 5 days
 The dog was booked for recheck under anaesthesia in 6 months' time.
RECHECK
The dog was placed under general anaesthesia for oral examination and radiography
6 months after initial treatment. There had been no improvement in temperament!
The restorations were intact and there was no evidence of tooth discoloration.
The ventral border of the mandible had a normal contour. Radiographs revealed
healing of the periapical defects.
PROGNOSIS
As long as the restorations stay in place, no further treatment should be required.
It was advised that radiographs of the canines should be taken if the dog required
general anaesthesia for any reason.
COMMENTS
Endodontic therapy for teeth with pulpal necrosis is generally performed in two or
            s
pulpectomy and debridement (filing and flushing), followed by filling the root canal
    n        
root canal from the oral environment). The second stage consists of removing the
temporary restoration and root-filling material, and further debridement of the root
canal. If the root canal is clean it is then filled with a permanent root-filling material
and the tooth is restored. If the root canal is still not clean, then an antiseptic
temporary root-filling material and restoration is placed again, and the final
treatment is done as a third session. Generally, two sessions spaced 3-6 weeks apart
are suifficient.
Due to the aggressive nature of this dog, it was decided to perform the required
endodontic therapy (pulpectomy, debridement, root canal filling and restoration) in
one session. The whole procedure, including examination and radiography, took just
linder 5 hours to complete.
We do not  routinely administer postoperative antibiotics after endodontic
treatment. However, in this case, due to the extensive periapical destruction and the
fact that the endodontic treatment was performed in one sitting, it seemed prudent to
    e      s 
The choice of performing endodontic therapy and restoration rather than
extraction was based on the fact that the canine teeth are functionally important teeth
with no evidence of periodontitis. Also, extraction incurred the risk of iatrogenic jaw
fracture exacerbated by the pre-existing bone loss.
There had not been any improvement in temperament after treatment. Although
the owner did not know when the fractures had happened, the radiographs show
mature teeth, so the dog must have been older than 1 year and the aggressive
behaviour started at 16 weeks of age. Consequently, the two are likely to be unrelated.
The owner was advised to consult an animal behaviourist to deal with the aggression.
34
Multiple tooth and jaw fracture
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Hesitation and anxiety about bite work, and multiple fractured teeth.
PATIENTDETAILS
A 6-year-old, intact male, German shepherd, working police dog
CASE HISTORY
The dog was a working police dog that had started to hesitate during bite work a few
months earlier. During bite work he firstly seemed worried about having to bite and
then he would not hold on to the sleeve. He had been taken off training several times
due to anxiety and hesitation.
His own veterinarian identified several fractured teeth on conscious examination
and referred the case to us. There was no history of any previous oral or dental
problems.
The handler reported that the dog was an obsessive cage biter and was certain
that the teeth had been fractured for at least a year, i.e. this was not a new injury, but
his bite work had been fine until a few months ago.
ORAL EXAMINATION - CONSCIOUS
An extremely well-behaved dog that allowed careful examination, which revealed the
following:
1. Occlusion normal
2. Generalized gingivitis
3. Generalized tooth wear
4. Complicated crown fracture of 103, 104 and 203
5. Discoloured 102
6. Missing 405 and 308.
ORAL EXAMINATION - UNDER GENERAL ANAESTHETIC
periodontal parameters. All findings were noted on the dental record sheet.
 In summary, examination under general anaesthesia identified the following:
1. Generalized mild gingivitis
2. Generalized tooth wear (attrition and abrasion)
3. Complicated crown fracture (CCF) of 103 (Fig. 34.1), 104 (Fig. 34.1) and 203 (Fig.
34.2a)
4. Discoloured 102 (Fig. 34.1)
5. Uncomplicated crown fracture (UCF) of 105 and 107
6. Missing 405, 411, 308 and 311.
Figure 34.1
Oblique lateral photograph of the rostral right upper jaw. Note the complicated
crown fracture of 103 and 104, and the discoloured 102.
[a)
(b)
(d)
Figure 34.2
   s  sds
(a) Oblique lateral photograph of the rostral left upper jaw. The complicated crown
fracture of 203 is obvious. Note also the wear facet on the distal aspect of 204 due to
cage biting.
(b) Rostrocaudal radiograph centring on 203. Note the fracture of the premaxilla
level with the apex of 203.
(c) Rostrocaudal radiograph of the extraction socket of 203. The fracture line is even
more obvious after extraction of 203.
(d) Oblique lateral photograph of the extraction site. The flap used to suture the
socket closed will provide stabilization during healing of the jaw fracture.
FURTHERINVESTIGATIONS
Radiographs were taken of 102 (discoloured), 103 (CCF), 104 (CCF), 203 (CCF), 204
(contralateral healthy), 105 (UCF) and 107 (UCF), as well as of the 405 and 308
regions (where the teeth were missing).
RADIOGRAPHICFINDINGS
Most significantly, a fracture of the premaxilla level with the apex of 203 (CCF) was
identified (Fig. 34.2b).
105 (UCF) or 107 (UCF). There was apical periodontitis and external root resorption of
104 (CCF), and no evidence of unerupted teeth or root remnants at either the 405 or
308 regions.
ORAL PROBLEM LIST
1. Fracture of the premaxilla level with the apex of 203
2. Generalized mild gingivitis
3. Generalized tooth wear (attrition and abrasion)
4. Complicated crown fracture (CCF) of 103, 104 and 203
5. Periapical pathology associated with 104
6. Discoloured 102 (with no evidence of periapical pathology)
7 .Uncomplicated crown fracture (UCF) of 105 and 107 (without evidence of
pulp/periapical pathology)
8. Missing 405, 411, 308 and 311 (no evidence of unerupted teeth or root remnants).
THEORY REFRESHER
Crown fractures are classified as complicated if the fracture line exposes the pulp
to the oral environment and as uncomplicated if they do not involve pulpal exposure.
Crown fractures are obvious visually. However, at times it can be difficult to
determine if the pulp is exposed by the fracture line, and general anaesthesia for
Complicated crown fractures always need treatment. An exposed pulp will become
inflamed and may eventually undergo necrosis. The inflammation can spread from
            
fracture should be extracted to avoid damage to the adjacent developing permanent
tooth. A permanent tooth, if unaffected by periodontal disease, can be treated by
means of endodontic therapy. If the tooth has periodontitis or the fracture is too
extensive, then extraction is the treatment of choice. In fact, with complicated crown
fractures extraction is preferable to no treatment at all.
Uncomplicated crown  fractures may also require treatment as the exposed
dentine tubules allow communication between pulp and oral environment, and can
thus result in inflammation or death of the pulp. An uncomplicated crown fracture
usually requires minimal treatment, e.g. removal of sharp edges with a bur and
sealing of the exposed dentine with a suitable liner or restorative material. However,
such fractures do require monitoring (clinical examination and radiography) at
regular intervals to ensure that the pulp remains vital. If pulp and periapical disease
develops, the tooth requires either extraction or endodontic therapy.
Discoloured teeth usually have a necrotic pulp and possibly also periapical
disease. Radiographs are mandatory. If there is pulp/periapical disease the teeth need
extraction or endodontic therapy.
Teeth that are missing on clinical examination always need radiopraphic
investigation. It is possible that there are root remnants from previous extractions
(unlikely in this case, as there was no history of previous dental treatment) that may
need removal or that the teeth are uinerupted. Unerupted teeth may be involved in the
development of follicular (dentigerous) cysts that can cause massive destruction of
bone as they enlarge. An unerupted tooth should either be extracted or monitored
radiographically (to detect cyst formation early) at regular intervals.
CLINICAL TIPS
 Complicated crown fractures always need treatment.
• Primary teeth with complicated crown fracture should be extracted to avoid damage to the adjacent
developing permanent tooth.
 Uncomplicated crown fractures usually require minimal treatment.
· Discoloured teth usually have a necrotic pulp and possibly also periapical disease.
· Teeth that are missing on clinical examination should always be investigated radiographically.
· Any unerupted tooth should either be extracted or monitored radiographically.
 The upper canines are functionally important teeth and should be maintained if possible.
TREATMENTOPTIONS
TREATMENTPERFORMED
1 .Periodontal therapy to remove plaque and calculus, and provide a clean
environment for extraction, endodontic treatment and restoration.
2. Extraction of 102, 103 and 203. Since these teeth are not functionally important,
extraction, a one-step procedure, was chosen rather than endodontic treatment and
restoration, which requires radiographs to be taken after 3-6 months. An open
technique was used to allow primary healing. Radiographs confirmed successful
extraction at all sites (Fig. 34.2c). The flap sutured over the extraction socket also
provided support during healing of the jaw fracture (Fig. 34.2d).
3. Endodontic treatment (pulpectomy, root canal filling and restoration) of 104. The
upper canines are functionally important teeth and should be maintained if possible.
         e  e   e s
hold on to prey. There was no evidence of periodontitis and there was more than 50%
of original crown height, so this was an ideal tooth for endodontic treatment and
restoration.
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
· Daily toothbrushing
· Soft food for 3 weeks
· No bite work for 3 weeks
· Analgesics for 3 weeks
· The dog was booked for conscious recheck after 3 weeks
· He was also booked for oral examination and radiographs of 104 (to assess the outcome of
endodontic treatment), 105 and 107 (to check periapical status) under general anaesthesia after 6
months.
RECHECKS
Conscious examination 3 weeks postoperatively showed that the extraction sites had
healed nicely. The handler reported that he was brighter in himself and had stopped
cage biting.
            
suiccessful return to normal bite work.
The 6-month recheck to monitor outcome of endodontic treatment of 104 and the
periapical status of 105 and 107 is due in 2 months' time.
PROGNOSIS
The stable fracture of the premaxilla should heal in 3-4 weeks. Endodontic treatment
and restoration is associated with a high suiccess rate. In short, the dog should be able
to return to work in 3-4 weeks' time.
COMMENTS
The anxiety and hesitancy with bite work was most likely due to the fracture of the
premaxilla rather than the fractured teeth. The cage biting may well have been a
reflection of oral discomfort/pain.
35
Iatrogenic tooth damage
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Swelling of the left rostral mandible and a draining fistula at the ventral border of the left
 rostral mandible.
PATIENT DETAILS
A 6-year-old, neutered male, Labrador retriever.
CASE HISTORY
A rostral mandibular fracture was repaired 5 years earlier, when the dog was a year
old, at a specialist centre with orthopaedic expertise. The clinical notes and
radiographs had been lost', so the details of the treatment were not available to us.
A fistula at the ventral border of the left mandible developed 3 years after the
P       sa    n 
centre. Radiographs were taken, which showed a periapical lucency associated with
 a  sa   ' sa e si,  s e  os
long course of antibiotics. The problem resolved but flared up again within 3 months
of ceasing antibiotic treatment. The dog was then treated intermittently with
antibiotics for just over 2 years before being referred to us. Antibiotic therapy resulted
in an improvement, but the fistula remained and started to drain within a few weeks
of stopping an antibiotic course.
ORAL EXAMINATION - CONSCIOUS
The dog was extremely well behaved, and allowed careful conscious examination of
the head and mouth, which revealed the following:
1. Occlusion normal
2. Generalized gingivitis
3. All mandi bular incisors were missing
4. Some mandibular premolars were missing
5. Hard swelling of the rostral left mandible (no reaction to firm palpation)
6. Draining fistula at the ventral border of the left mandible (thick, yellow fluid).
ORAL EXAMINATION-UNDERGENERALANAESTHETIC
A thorough oral examination, including investigating periodontal parameters, was
performed and all findings were noted on the dental record.
In summary, examination under general anaesthesia identified the following:
1. Mild generalized gingivitis
2. Hard swelling of the rostral left mandible (Fig. 35.1)
3. Draining fistula at the ventral border of the left mandible (Fig. 35.1)
4. All mandibular incisors, as well as 307, 308, 406 and 408, missing
5. Gingival inflammation at the region of the missing 406.
Figure 35.1
 Oblique ventrolateral photograph of the left mandible. The ventral border of the left
 mandible is hard and swollen with a drainage tract. The drainage tract originated from the periapical
inflammation of 304.
FURTHERINVESTIGATIONS
Radiographs were taken of the rostral mandible, 304 and 404, and at the sites of the
missing 307, 308, 406 and 408.
RADIOGRAPHICFINDINGS
The following were evident on the radiographs:
1. Bony swelling with periosteal new bone on the left rostral mandible
2. Teeth 304 and 404 were immature teeth with wide pulp system diameter and
incomplete apical closure (Fig. 35.2a-c)
3. Lucency around the apex of 304 (Fig. 35.2a)
4. Circular lucencies at the midroot of both 304 (Fig. 35.2a, c) and 404 (Fig. 35.2a, b)
5. Root remnants of 307 (Fig. 35.2c) and 406 (Fig. 35.2b)
6. Teeth 308 and 408 absent
7. All mandibular incisors absent.
(b)
Figure35.2
 Radiographs of the rostral mandible.
(a) Rostrocaudal view. Although the dog is 6 years old, 304 and 404 are immature
teeth (wide pulp system diameter and incomplete apical closure). The development of
these teeth is compatible with a dog younger than a year of age. Consequently,
pulpal inflammation and necrosis (which stops further tooth development) must
have occurred at around 9 months of age. Note the circular lucencies at the midroot
of both 304 and 404. These are compatible with drill holes for a pin or a screw to
repair the rostral mandibular fracture. The pulpal inflammation and necrosis of 304
have spread to involve the periapical tissue, as evidenced radiographically by the
radiolucent zone around the apex of the root. The periosteal new bone formation on
the left is a consequence of the pulp and periapical disease of 304.
(b) Lateral view of the right rostral mandible. Note the circular midroot radiolucency
compatible with a drill hole and the immature 404. Drilling through teeth will cause
pulpitis and pulp necrosis and cessation of tooth development, as seen with 404.
Clinically, there was gingival inflammation over the missing 406. The radiograph
shows root remnants as the likely cause of the gingival inflammation.
(c) Lateral view of the left rostral mandible. Note the circular midroot radiolucency
compatible with a drill hole and the immature 304 with a periapical destruction.
Drilling through teeth will cause pulpitis and pulp necrosis and cessation of tooth
development, and with time development of periapical complications, as seen with
304. Note also the root remnants of 307. The gingiva overlying the root remnants
was not inflamed.
ORAL PROBLEM LIST
1. Mild generalized gingivitis
2. Pulp and periapical disease of 304 and 404 (apical lucency of 304, the draining
fistula at the ventral border of the left mandible and the bony proliferation of the left
3. All mandibular incisors missing
4. Root remnants of 307 and 406
THEORYREFRESHER
The development of 304 and 404 was incomplete, compatible with a dog younger than
tooth development) must have occurred at around 9 months of age.
              
root will cause pulpal inflammation, necrosis and in time (months to years) periapical
complications.
The periapical radiolucency associated with 304, as well as the bony swelling
with periosteal proliferation and the draining fistula at the ventral border of the left
mandible, are all complications due to pulp necrosis. In this case, it took 3 years before
the consequences of the iatrogenic damage became obvious clinically. In short, the
jaw fracture repair caused injury to the teeth, with subsequent development of
periapical complications. It must be remembered that pulp/periapical disease is
associated with discomfort and pain.
Periapical disease as a consequence of pulpal necrosis is treated by removing the
cause of the inflammation, in this case the necrotic pulp. Once the cause of the
inflammatory reaction has been removed, the bone defect and draining fistula will
heal. Necrotic pulp can be removed in one of two ways, namely endodontic therapy
and restoration (the pulp is removed, the root canal debrided and filled, the access
sites restored, and the tooth is maintained) or extraction of the affected tooth (the
whole tooth is removed). In this case, the drill holes through the teeth exclude
endodontic treatment, as it is technically impossible to remove pulp adequately and to
fill the root canal (root canal sealer will disperse into the periodontal tissue around the
with the periapical pathology.
Teeth that are missing on clinical examination always need radiographic
investigation. It is possible that there are root remnants from previous extractions that
may need removal or that the teeth are inerupted. Unerupted teeth may be involved
in the development of follicular (dentigerous) cysts that can cause massive destruction
of bone as they enlarge. An unerupted tooth should either be extracted or monitored
radiographically (to detect cyst formation early) at regular intervals.
This dog was missing all the mandibular incisors clinically and radiographically.
These teeth were probably extracted at the time of the jaw fracture repair. The root
remnants of 307 and 406 could either have been due to tooth fracture at the time of
the trauma that caused the jaw fracture, but they could also have been incompletely
extracted at the time of jaw fracture repair. The absence of 308 and 408 (clinically and
radiographically) was considered as congenital.
CLINICAL TIPS
· Drilling through a tooth root will cause pulpal inflammation, necrosis and in time (months to years)
periapical complications.
· Pulp/periapical disease is associated with discomfort and pain.
· Teeth that are missing on clinical examination always need radiographic investigation.
· Unerupted teeth should either be extracted or monitored radiographically (to detect cyst formation
early) at regular intervals.
 Standard orthopaedic techniques such as pinning and plating are not recommended for jaw fracture
repair.
· Antibiotics alone will not cure periapical disease.
TREATMENT OPTIONS
Extraction of 304 and 404 was the only option.
TREATMENTPERFORMED
1 .Periodontal therapy to remove plaque and calculus, and provide a clean
environment for extraction.
2. Open extraction of 404 (Fig. 35.3a-c) and 304 (Fig. 35.4). Flaps were replaced with
5/0 Monocryl.
4. The root remnants of 406 were extracted because there was inflammation of the
overlying gingiva. In contrast, there was no evidence of inflammation of the gingiva
overlying the root remnants of 307 and these were consequently left in situ.
C
Figure35.3
Lateral photograph during extraction of 404 (a), photograph of extracted 404 (b) and
post-extraction radiograph (c).
(b) Note the drill hole in the extracted 404.
(c) The radiograph confirms successful extraction of 304 and 404.
Figure 35.4
 Photograph of extracted 304. Note the drill hole.
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
· Daily toothbrushing
 Analgesics for 5 days
· The dog was booked for conscious recheck after 3 weeks.
RECHECK
Conscious examination 3 weeks postoperatively showed that the extraction sites had
healed nicely and there was no evidence of a fistulous tract at the ventral border of the
mandible.
PROGNOSIS
The prognosis for this case is excellent. The cause of the pathology has been removed.
Once the extraction sites have healed, the dog will no longer suffer discomfort or
pain and will have a functional bite.
COMMENTS
Standard orthopaedic techniques, e.g. pinning and plating, are not recommended for
jaw fracture repair. The likelihood of damaging teeth and oral anatomical structures
(e.g. mandibular canal) is unacceptably high, and the animal will suffer discomfort
and pain from the iatrogenic damage caused by these techniques. In this case, the dog
lived with a focus of infection causing discomfort and possibly pain for 5 years.
Jaw fractures are best repaired using techniques such as orthopaedic wiring.
external fixation and intra-oral acrylic splints. These techniques allow maintenance of
occlusion and fracture fixation without damaging the teeth and oral anatomical
struictuires.
Antibiotics alone will not cure periapical disease. Antibiotics may reduce the
   s iq  go pd e no p s dos a 'sns snus
necrotic pulp is present the disease will recur and progress. In this case, antibiotics
were used intermittently for 2 years, when the appropriate treatment would have been
extraction.
This  case  highlights   the  importance  of  understanding  pulp/periapical
pathophysiology in order to choose the right treatment option.
36
Complicated crown fracture of an immature tooth
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Tooth 404 fractured with exposed bleeding pulp.
PATIENT DETAILS
A 7-month-old, intact male, cross-breed.
CASE HISTORY
The dog came back from a run bleeding from the mouth. The owners took the dog to
their regular veterinarian, who identified a complicated crown fracture of 404. The
dog was given analgesics and referred to us. The dog was seen by us the day after the
injury occurred.
ORAL EXAMINATION - CONSCIOUS
He was a boisterous but non-aggressive dog, who allowed conscious examination of
the face and a quick view of the oral cavity.
Occlusion was normal and there was a mild generalized gingivitis. The tip of the
crown of 404 was fractured and the pulp was exposed.
ORAL EXAMINATION -UNDER GENERAL ANAESTHETIC
A thorough oral and dental examination, including investigating periodontal
parameters, was performed. All findings were noted on the dental record sheet.
In summary, examination under general anaesthesia identified the following:
1. Mild generalized gingivitis
2. Complicated crown fracture (CCF) of 404.
FURTHER INVESTIGATIONS
Radiographs were taken of 404 (CCF) and 304 (contralateral healthy).
RADIOGRAPHIC FINDINGS
The radiographs confirmed that both 304 and 404 were immature teeth, as expected in
a 7-month-old dog.
ORAL PROBLEM LIST
1. Complicated crown fracture in an immature tooth
2. Mild generalized gingivitis.
THEORY REFRESHER
A partial pulpectomy and direct pulp capping procedure is indicated for recent tooth
crown fractures with pulp exposure in immature teeth. An immature tooth has a thin
dentine wall and an open apex, allowing a good blood supply to the pulp. Treatment is
aimed at maintaining a viable pulp, as this is needed for continued root development.
To optimize success, a partial pulpectomy and direct pulp capping procedure
needs to be performed as quickly as possible after the injury. Referral needs to be
arranged on an emergency basis.
Once root development is complete, i.e. the apex has closed and sufficient dentine
has been deposited, conventional endodontic therapy (pulpectomy and root filling)
should be performed.
CLINICAL TIPS
 A partial pulpectomy and direct pulp capping procedure is indicated for recent tooth crown
fractures with pulp exposure in immature teeth.
· To optimize success, a partial pulpectomy and direct pulp capping procedure needs to be performed
as quickly as possible after the injury, so if the case is to be referred, it should be done so as an
emergency.
· The purpose of a partial pulpectomy and direct pulp capping procedure is to keep the pulp alive to
complete root development.
TREATMENT OPTIONS
restoration) of 404.
TREATMENT PERFORMED
1 .Periodontal therapy to remove plaque and calculus, and provide a clean
environment.
2. Partial pulpectomy, direct pulp capping and restoration of 404 (Fig. 36.1).
Figure 36.1
Lateral radiograph of 404. This radiograph was taken after completion of a partial
closure of the apex.
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
 NSAIDs for 5 days
 Daily chlorhexidine rinse for 1 week
· Start daily toothbrushing
 The dog was booked for examination, radiography and required further treatment (conventional
endodontics) 6 months after initial treatment - the owner was advised to contact us earlier if the
 tooth started to discolour.
RECHECKS
Due to personal circumstances the owner was unable to keep the 6-month recheck
appointment. Telephone conversations revealed that the dog was fine in itself, the
  a a      n  sm s
arranged for 9 months after the original treatment.
Examination and radiographs at this time revealed a successful outcome of the
partial pulpectomy and direct pulp capping procedure. The restoration was intact,
with no evidence of marginal leakage (i.e. no discoloration around the edges of the
restoration). The radiograph (Fig. 36.2) showed continued root development, with
thick dentine walls and closed apex. Conventional endodontic therapy (total
pulpectomy, debridement, root canal filling and restoration) was performed.
Figu1re36.2
 Lateral radiograph of 404. This radiograph was taken 9 months after the partial
pulpectomy and direct pulp capping procedure depicted in Fig. 36.1. Note the continued tooth
  n   s   a  a   e   
root-filling procedure was performed.
A recheck with radiography 6 months after the conventional endodontic therapy
showed no evidence of periapical pathology (Fig. 36.3) and confirmed a successful
outcome of the procedure.
Figure36.3
Lateral radiograph of 404. This radiograph was taken a further 6 months later, after
the total pulpectomy and root-filling procedure. The radiograph indicates successful outcome of the
endodontic procedure in that there is no evidence of any periapical disease. No further treatment
should be necessary as long as the restoration remains intact.
PROGNOSIS
No further treatment should be required unless the restoration is damaged or lost. The
owner was advised to contact us immediately should this occuir.
COMMENTS
The purpose of a partial pulpectomy and direct pulp capping procedure is to keep the
pulp alive to complete root development. It must be remembered that a living (vital)
pulp is not necessarily a healthy pulp. In fact, it may be inflamed, and pulpal necrosis
and periapical pathology may develop. Consequently, a partial pulpectomy and direct
pulp capping procedure needs to be monitored radiographically and, once the goal of
complete root development has been achieved, the tooth should receive conventional
endodontic therapy (total pulpectomy, root canal debridement and filling), which has
a higher long-term success rate than a partial pulpectomy and direct pulp capping
procedure.
In this case, it took three general anaesthetics and 1.5 years before it was clear
 d   m        
functionally important tooth such as a canine.
37
Excessive wear
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Severely worn teeth.
PATIENT DETAILS
A 6-year-old, neutered male, cross-breed
CASE HISTORY
There was no previous history of oral/dental disease or treatment. The owner was
concerned that the teeth appeared to be short and seemed to be getting shorter rapidly.
The referring veterinary surgeon was concerned about possible pulpal exposure as a
result of the excessive wear and referred the case to us for management.
The dog showed no evidence of discomfort or pain. He was eating well and there
             
    o       s     
toys that he chewed in the garden.
ORAL EXAMINATION - CONSCIOUS
The dog had a nice temperament, and allowed conscious examination of the face and
of the oral cavity. The findings were as follows:
1. Occlusion was normal.
2. Generalized gingivitis was observed.
3. There was excessive wear of all teeth. The incisors were worn almost to the level of
the gingival margin. All teeth had exposed dentine with obvious reparative dentine
formation. There was no obvious pulpal exposure of any tooth.
ORAL EXAMINATION -UNDER GENERAL ANAESTHETIC
A thorough oral and dental examination, including periodontal parameters, was
performed. All findings were noted on the dental record.
In summary, examination under general anaesthesia identified the following:
1. Mild generalized gingivitis was observed.
2. There was excessive wear of all teeth (Fig. 37.1a, b).
3. There was pulpal exposure of 404. Exploration with a sharp explorer allowed entry
into the pulp chamber.
4. There was periodontitis of 109 and 409. Both these teeth had increased probing
depths as well as gingival recession.
(a)
(b)
Figure 37.1
Clinical photographs.
(a) Rostrocaudal photograph centring on upper incisors and canines. The incisors
were worn to gum level.
(b) Lateral photograph of the right upper and lower canines and premolars. All teeth
were affected by severe wear.
FURTHERINVESTIGATIONS
Radiographs were taken of 404 (pulpal exposure), 304 (contralateral without pulpal
exposure), 109 (periodontitis) and 409 (periodontitis).
RADIOGRAPHIC FINDINGS
The diameter of the root canal of 404 was wider (pulpal exposure) than in 304
(contralateral, without pulpal exposure), indicating pulp necrosis and cessation of
dentine production of 404. In addition, there was periapical bone destruction and
external root resorption of 404. Figure 37.2 shows the important radiographic findings
associated with 404.
Figure 37.2
 Oblique rostrocaudal radiograph centring on 404. The excessive wear had resulted in
pulpal exposure of 404. Note that the root canal of 404 is wider than the root canal of 304,
indicating pulp necrosis and cessation of dentine production of 404 as a consequence of the pulpal
exposure. There is also periapical bone destruction and external root resorption of 404.
Teeth 109 and 409 showed extensive destruction of the margin of the alveolar
bone.
ORAL PROBLEM LIST
1 . Excessive tooth wear, leading to pulpal exposure, pulp necrosis and periapical
complications of 404
2. Advanced periodontitis of 109 and 409.
THEORYREFRESHER
Apart from the reduction in size of the pulp cavity, which is associated with
continued deposition of secondary dentine as the animal gets older, there are also
conditions that accelerate the rate of deposition of secondary dentine, thus
prematurely reducing the size of the pulp cavity. Attrition and abrasion are two
common conditions resulting in a narrow pulp cavity.
Attrition is the loss of tooth substance that results from wear that is produced by
opposing teeth coming into contact with one another, i.e. teeth that have occlusal
contact. Attrition is therefore also called occlusal wear. Incisal wear is the term used
when describing attrition of the incisor region. There is progressive attrition with
increasing age, resulting in the wearing away of the cusps and exposure of the
dentine. The deposition of secondary dentine keeps pace with the loss of tooth
substance and there is rarely pulpal exposure. In fact, the crown pulp may come close
to obliteration. In other words, attrition is a physiological event that occurs, to
varying degrees, in all individuals. Factors such as loss of teeth, malocclusion and
habits such as stone chewing may produce excessive attrition, i.e. attrition that is so
rapid that the formation of secondary dentine cannot keep pace with it, and pulp
exposure results.
Abrasion is the wearing away of tooth structure which is not caused by incisal or
occlusal wear. In other words, wear of tooth surfaces that are not in contact. In man,
the most common cause of abrasion is incorrect use of a toothbrush, resulting in
abrasion of the buccal tooth surfaces, usually just above the gingival margin. In the
dog, the most common cause of abrasion is cage biting. The hard tissues on the distal
aspect of the maxillary canine teeth are progressively lost, weakening the tooth until
the crown fractures (generally with pulpal exposure).
In this case, the excessive wear (mainly attrition) was due to chewing on sand-
coated tennis balls. A dry tennis ball is mildly abrasive, but when it becomes wet
(saliva) and coated with sand from the beach, it becomes extremely abrasive and
causes rapid loss of dental hard tissue as the animal chews on it.
CLINICAL TIPS
• Attrition and abrasion are two common conditions resulting in a narrow pulp cavity.
· Attrition is a physiological event that occurs, to varying degrees, in all individuals.
 Abrasion is the wearing away of tooth structure which is not caused by incisal or occlusal wear.
Measures to prevent excessive attrition and abrasion should be instituted as soon as there is
evidence of excessive wear.
 Stone chewing and playing with a ball on a sandy surface are common causes of excessive attrition.
TREATMENT OPTIONS
Extraction or endodontic treatment and restoration of 404, and extraction of 109 and
409.
TREATMENT PERFORMED
1 . Periodontal therapy to remove plaque and calculus, and provide a clean
environment.
2 . Conventional endodontic therapy (pulpectomy, debridement and filling of root
canal and restoration of access cavities) of 404 (Fig. 37.3).
3. Open extraction of 109 and 409. The flaps were replaced with 5/0 Monocryl.
Successful extraction was confirmed radiographically.
Figure 37.3
 Oblique rostrocaudal radiograph centring on 404. Radiograph showing completed
endodontic treatment. The pulp was removed, the root canal debrided and filled, and the access
preparation restored.
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
· NSAIDs for 5 days
• Start daily toothbrushing
· Stop playing with tennis balls on the beach - as the dog loved chasing balls, it was advised to use a
smooth rubber ball (less abrasive even if coated with a bit of sand) instead of the tennis ball, rather
than stop the game completely
• The dog was booked for examination and radiography of 404 in 6 months' time
RECHECKS
Oral examination at 6 months after initial treatment revealed clinically healthy
gingivae (the owner had been brushing the teeth once daily) and no further wear of
the teeth. The owner had stopped throwing balls for him. They had bought a puppy
and the two of them played together energetically, so ball throwing was no longer
required for exercise purposes. The restoration of 404 was intact, and the radiographs
revealed no further root resorption and apical defect was filling in with new bone.
The dog was rebooked for oral examination and radiographs of 404 in 1 year's
time.
PROGNOSIS
I expect to see full bony healing of the periapical lesion at 404 at the next recall in 1
year's time. No further treatment would then be required.
S          s
inflammation and treatment options then would be further endodontic treatment
(redo the conventional endodontic treatment, possibly in combination with surgical
endodontics) or extraction of 404. However, the most likely outcome is full healing
and no further treatment.
COMMENTS
Measures to prevent excessive attrition and abrasion should be instituted as soon as
there is evidence of excessive wear. Stone chewing is a common cause of excessive
attrition. Another common cause is playing with a ball on a sandy surface. The ball
becomes wet and covered with sand or grit, and as the animal bites on the ball, the
teeth are worn excessively. Prevention in such circuimstances is restricting access to
stones and playing with a ball in an environment where the ball does not become
covered in abrasive material.
The advanced periodontitis with extensive bone loss of 1o9 and 409 was a
separate condition (i.e. not a consequence of the abrasion for which the dog was
initially referred), and illustrates the importance of a complete oral examination in all
cases.
38
Enamel dysplasia
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Discoloured teeth and defective enamel.
PATIENT DETAILS
A 6-year-old, neutered female, Shetland sheepdog.
CASE HISTORY
The permanent teeth appeared normal when they erupted. However, within a few
months sections of enamel seemed to flake off and the teeth started to discolour. The
dog had received professional periodontal therapy (scaling and polishing) twice with
no obvious improvement. The dog was well mannered until 4 years old, when she
started avoiding having her face touched and grew progressively more wary and
aggressive. It was now impossible to examine the face at all. There were no problems
with a full general examination and aggressive behaviour was only manifest when
approaching the head.
The owner was worried about the dog's interaction with her young children.
ORAL EXAMINATION - CONSCIOUS
The dog would not allow access to her face at all, so conscious oral examination was
not performed.
ORAL EXAMINATION -UNDERGENERALANAESTHETIC
A thorough oral and dental examination, including investigating periodontal
parameters, was performed. All findings were noted on the dental record.
In summary, examination under general anaesthesia identified the following:
1. Occlusion normal
2. Mild generalized gingivitis
3. Generalized enamel dysplasia (Fig. 38.1).
Figure 38.1
Lateral photograph of the left side of mouth. Note the generalized enamel dysplasia.
The enamel is partly missing on all teeth.
FURTHERINVESTIGATIONS
A series of full-mouth radiographs (16 films) was taken.
RADIOGRAPHICFINDINGS
All teeth, except incisors and canines, were affected by pulp and periapical pathology
(see Fig. 38.2).
(a)
(b)
(C)
Figure 38.2
Selected radiographs. All teeth (except the incisors and canines) were affected by
periapical disease. Note the distinct periapical radiolucencies. The inflammation and necrosis of the
pulp of these teeth have spread to involve inflammation and destruction of the periapical bone.
(a) Lateral view of 208 and 209.
(b) Lateral view of 305, 306 and 307.
(c) Lateral view of 309.
(d) Lateral view of 409.
ORALPROBLEMLIST
1. Generalized enamel dysplasia
2. Pulp and periapical disease of all teeth except incisors and canines
3. Mild generalized gingivitis
THEORYREFRESHER
Enamel dysplasia (hypoplasia) may be defined as an incomplete or defective
formation of the organic enamel matrix of teeth. The result is defective (soft, porous)
enamel. It can be caused by local, systemic or hereditary factors. Depending on the
cause, the condition can affect one or only a few teeth (localized form), or all teeth in
the dentition (generalized form). It is essential to remember that enamel dysplasia
results only if the defect occurs during the formative stage of enamel development, i.e
during amelogenesis. Thus, the defect occurs before the tooth erupts into the oral
cavity. Crown formation lasts from the 42nd day of gestation through to the 15th day
postpartum for the primary teeth, and from the second week through to the third
the insult, enamel dysplasia will affect primary and/or permanent teeth. Only those
areas of enamel undergoing active formation during the period of the insult will be
affected. This is seen clinically as bands of dysplastic enamel encircling the crown,
with areas of normal enamel elsewhere on the tooth.
Teeth with enamel dysplasia may appear normal at the time of eruption, but they
soon become discoloured as the defective (porous) enamel soaks up pigments (from
food, soil, etc.). In more severely affected teeth, the defective enamel may flake off
with use. In very severe cases, the enamel is visibly deficient, discoloured in patches or
partly missing already at the time of eruption
As already mentioned, enamel dysplasia may be caused by local, systemic or
hereditary factors. Local factors include trauma to the developing crown, e.g. a blow
to the face or an infection. Usually, only one or a few teeth are affected. Systemic
factors include nutritional deficiencies, febrile disorders, hypocalcaemia and excessive
intake of fluoride during the period of enamel formation. Usually, most teeth are
affected. Historically, enamel dysplasia in dogs occurred due to distemper infection.
This is rare today, as most dogs are vaccinated against distemper. Hereditary types of
enamel dysplasia have been described in humans, but the incidence of this in cats and
dogs is unknown.
Poorly protected or exposed dentine is painful. Affected teeth become less sensitive
with increasing age of the animal, since secondary dentine is laid down continuously
by the pulp. Another consideration is that dysplastic enamel harbours dental plaque.
In severe cases of generalized enamel hypoplasia, where the dentine is effectively
exposed to the oral environment, chronic pulp disease and potentially periapical
disease may occur due to pulpal irritation via the poorly protected or exposed dentine
tubuiles.
CLINICAL TIPS
 p  a  a  se p aq  so s a
organic enamel matrix of teeth. The result is defective (soft, porous) enamel.
 Enamel dysplasia can be caused by local, systemic or hereditary factors.
Enamel dysplasia results only if the defect occurs during the formative stage of enamel development.
 Poorly protected or exposed dentine is painful.
 In severe cases of generalized enamel hypoplasia, chronic pulp disease and potentially periapical
disease may occur. Radiographic assessment and monitoring are required.
             
importance.
 In young animals exhibiting signs of discomfort, topical fluoride application may be beneficial.
 Debriding the defect and replacing lost tissue with a suitable filling material is useful for smaller
lesions.
TREATMENT OPTIONS
Extraction or endodontic treatment and restoration of all teeth except the incisors and
canines.
TREATMENT PERFORMED
1 . Periodontal therapy to remove plaque and calculus, and provide a clean
environment. Calculus was carefully removed using hand instruments (scalers and
curettes), as the use of mechanical instruments would have resulted in the removal of
the remaining soft enamel. Plaque removal and smoothing of tooth surfaces was
accomplished using a soft rubber cup and a fine-grade prophy paste.
 s se  s        es
replaced with 5/0 Monocryl. Successful extraction was confirmed radiographically.
Figure 38.3 demonstrates the clinical appearance of periapical disease.
Figure 38.3
Photograph of extracted 409. Note the soft tissue attached to the apices of the roots.
Histologically, this tissue is likely to be granulation tissue replacing the destroyed periapical bone.
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
 NSAIDs for 5 days
· Antibiotics for 10 days
 Soft food
· The dog was booked for examination under anaesthesia (as the dog was not allowing conscious oral
examination) after 3 weeks.
RECHECKS
At recheck 3 weeks later, the owner reported a dramatic change in behaviour. The dog
was no longer worried about having her face touched. Conscious examination of the
oral cavity was allowed (so examination under general anaesthesia was not required)
and revealed healing of all extraction sites. She did not mind gentle toothbrushing of
the buccal aspects of the incisors and canines. The owner was shown how to brush
and advised to do so daily. They were rebooked for check-up in 3 months.
At the 3-month recheck, the dog had clinically healthy gingivae and clean teeth
(plaque disclosing solution applied). The owner reported that they both enjoyed the
daily toothbrushing. A recall in 1 year was arranged.
Annual rechecks (examination under anaesthesia and radiographs) over 4 years
show no evidence of any pulp/periapical disease of remaining teeth. The owner is
brushing daily.
PROGNOSIS
With continued daily toothbrushing, the dog is unlikely to develop further problems.
COMMENTS
In the management of patients affected by enamel dysplasia, oral hygiene is of
paramount importance. Daily plaque removal will promote periodontal health and
possibly reduce pulpal irritation. Affected animals require radiographic assessment
       s  s    
series of full-mouth radiographs at regular intervals is indicated. In young animals
exhibiting signs of discomfort, topical fluoride application may be beneficial. Topical
fluoride application will enhance enamel remineralization and harden' the enamel.
The main effect of fluoride incorporation into the enamel is that it makes the enamel
more resistant to the acid dissolution that occurs with caries. It must be remembered
that fluoride is potentially toxic, and the risk of systemic administration of fluoride
products meant for topical application is greater in the dog and cat, as they will
swallow these products. The use of professionally applied varnishes and gels associated
with a moderate rise in plasma fluoride concentrations may well be safer than daily
use of fluoride-containing toothpastes. In other words, it is useful to apply fluoride
varnishes or gel at regular intervals. The best way to do this is following a dental
cleaning. The product is applied while the animal is linder general anaesthesia and
excess is removed before the animal is allowed to recover.
              
these patients, gross calculus accumulation is carefully removed with hand
instruments (a scaler or curette) rather than powered scalers (sonic or ultrasonic). The
crowns are polished with a fine-grain (to reduce abrasion) prophy paste. Restoration
of lost enamel, i.e. debriding the defect and replacing lost tissue with a suitable filling
material, is useful for smaller lesions as it protects against dentine sensitivity. It is not
practical for extensive, generalized lesions. Restoration requires referral to a specialist
39
Caries
INITIAL PRESENTATION
None.
PATIENT DETAILS
A 6-year-old, neutered female, Staffordshire bull terrier.
CASE HISTORY
The referring veterinarian noticed caries while performing an annual periodontal
debridement.
ORAL EXAMINATION - CONSCIOUS
This was a boisterous but nice-tempered dog that allowed conscious examination,
which identified the following:
1. Occlusion normal
2. Generalized gingivitis
3. Moderate accumulation of dental deposits
4. Discoloured areas on chewing surfaces of the molar teeth.
ORAL EXAMINATION - UNDER GENERAL ANAESTHETIC
A thorough oral and dental examination, including investigating periodontal
parameters, was performed. All findings were entered on the dental chart.
 In summary, examination under general anaesthesia identified the following:
1. Mild to moderate generalized gingivitis
2. Caries on occlusal surfaces of 109, 209, 309, 409 and 410.
FURTHER INVESTIGATIONS
Radiographs were taken of all molar teeth.
RADIOGRAPHICFINDINGS
The occlusal caries of 109, 209 and 410 extended into the dentine, but there was no
evidence of pulp and periapical involvement.
The occlusal caries of 409 extended into the pulp chamber, but there was no
definitive periapical involvement.
The occlusal caries of 309 had resulted in substantial loss of dental hard tissue
and extended into the pulp chamber, with definitive periapical involvement.
ORAL PROBLEM LIST
1. Caries (involving dentine but not extending into the pulp system) of 109, 209 and
410
2. Caries of 409 extending into the pulp, but with no periapical complications
3. Caries 309 extending into the pulp and with periapical disease
4. Mild to moderate generalized gingivitis.
THEORYREFRESHER
Caries usually affect the teeth that have true occlusal tables, namely the molar teeth.
While both periodontal disease and caries are caused by the accumulation of
dental plaque on the tooth suirfaces, the pathogenesis of the two diseases is completely
different. Periodontal disease is a plaque-induced inflammation of the periodontium
and caries is a plaque-induced destruction of the hard tissues of the tooth. Caries starts
as an inorganic demineralization of the enamel. The demineralization occurs when
           
sorce of energy. The fermentation products are acidic and demineralize the enamel.
Once the enamel has been destroyed, the process extends into the dentine. In the
dentine, the process accelerates as an organic decay and will eventually involve the
pulp, causing pulpitis and eventually pulp necrosis and/or periapical pathology.
Dental caries stimulates the formation of secondary dentine on the surface of the
deposition of secondary dentine may keep pace with its advance and prevent exposure
of the dental pulp.
The initial inorganic demineralization can be halted as long as the process has
not reached the enamel-dentine junction. However, if the process has entered the
dentine it becomes irreversible and progressive. Treatment (restoration or extraction)
becomes mandatory. In the dog, caries is very rarely diagnosed at the early enamel
demineralization stage. It is usually diagnosed only when the process already involves
the dentine, or the pulp is exposed, or there is periapical pathology. The reason why
   n        e 
Firstly, the occlusal surfaces are not generally explored with a sharp explorer during
clinical examination. Secondly, dog enamel is thinner than human enamel and the
process is thus likely to extend into the dentine more rapidly than in human patients.
 (        o  ss
of the molar teeth seem predisposed in dogs. Clinically, caries manifests as softened,
often discoloured (dark brown or black) spots in the enamel. A dental explorer will
‘catch' in the softened carious tooth surface. A small enamel defect covers a large
cavern of decayed dentine. Note that not all lesions are grossly discoloured and all
occlusal surfaces, whether discoloured or not, should be meticulously examined with a
dental explorer. If the explorer sticks in the tooth surface, then caries should be
suspected and radiographs are indicated. Radiographically, radiolucent defects are
seen in the affected area of the crown. Radiographs will also give an indication of
how close to the pulp chamber a caries lesion extends (the extent of secondary dentine
formation, and the amount and thickness of dentine that separates the pulp from the
carious lesion), which allows selection of the most appropriate treatment. Discoloured
areas that are hard and the explorer does not ‘catch' are not caries. They could be
exposed dentine due to attrition or stain.
Diagnosed caries requires treatment. The options are extraction or referral to a
specialist for restoration (if the process involves the pulp tissue, endodontic therapy
substance at the time of diagnosis, then extraction is the only option. Measures to
prevent new lesions must be instituted in animals with diagnosed caries. In addition
to home care and dietary modifications, as detailed in Appendix 1, these dogs may
benefit   from  regular  professional fluoride  applications.  Fluoride  enhances
remineralization and makes the enamel more resistant to the acid dissolution that
occurs with caries.
CLINICAL TIPS
· Caries usually affect the teeth that have true occlusal tables, namely the molar teeth.
· Treatment of caries is mandatory.
 A dental explorer will 'catch' in a softened carious tooth surface
· A small enamel defect covers a large cavern of decayed dentine.
 Radiographically, radiolucent defects are seen in the affected area of the crown.
 Discoloured areas that are hard and the explorer does not *catch' are not caries.
 Treatment options are extraction or referral to a specialist for restoration
• Measures to prevent new lesions must be instituted in animals with diagnosed caries.
TREATMENT OPTIONS
1. Extraction of all affected teeth.
2. Debridement and restoration of 109, 209 and 410, and extraction of 309 and 409.
3.Debridement and restoration of 109, 209 and 410; debridement and endodontic
  (       ) 
debridement and endodontic therapy (pulpectomy, root canal debridement of mesial
root, root filling of mesial root, hemisection and extraction of distal root and
restoration) of 309.
TREATMENT PERFORMED
1 . Periodontal therapy to remove plaque and calculus, and provide a clean
environment.
 2. Debridement and restoration of 109 (Fig. 39.1a, b), 209 (Fig. 39.2a, b) and 410 (Fig.
39.3a, b).
3. Endodontic treatment of 409 (Fig. 39.4)
4. Endodontic treatment of the mesial root of 309, and hemisection and extraction of
the distal root of 309 (Fig. 39.5a, b).
5. Application of fluoride varnish to all teeth.
(a)
(b)
Figure 39.1
Debridement and restoration of 109.
(a) Carious tooth substance has been removed and a cavity prepared to accept a
restoration
(b) The restored occlusal tooth surface.
(a)
(q)
Figure 39.2
Debridement and restoration of 209.
(a) Carious tooth substance has been removed and a cavity prepared to accept a
restoration.
(b) The restored occlusal tooth surface.
(b)
Figure39.3
Lateral radiographs of 410.
(a) Caries manifests radiographically as a radiolucent zone in the dentine. Note that
the process does not extend into the pulp system.
(b) Carious tooth substance has been removed and the cavity restored.
Figu1re39.4
Lateral radiograph of 409. The radiograph confirms that the debrided root canals
have been adequately filled with the inert root-filling material.
(a)
(b)
Figure 39.5
Lateral radiographs of 309.
(a) Prior to endodontic therapy. Note the extensive caries in the distal occlusal
surface that clearly extends into the pulp.
(b) After endodontic therapy. The mesial root received conventional endodontic
treatment (pulpectomy, root canal debridement, root filling and restoration); the
tooth was then sectioned and the distal crown and root segment were extracted.
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
· NSAIDs for 5 days
 Soft food
 No access to sugar-containing treats - on questioning the owner at the time of discharge, it became
clear that the dog received digestive biscuits and chocolate at frequent intervals daily
 Chlorhexidine rinse once daily
· Start daily toothbrushing
 The dog was booked for recheck (examination under anaesthesia and radiographs) in 6 months'
time.
RECHECKS
Examination under general anaesthesia 6 months after initial treatment revealed mild
generalized gingivitis (the owner was finding toothbrushing difficult to perform). All
restorations were intact (Fig. 39.6a, b) and there was no discoloration of the teeth or
the margins of the restorations. Radiographs confirmed successful outcome of the
endodontic therapy of 409. The radiograph of 309 shows that the periapical
radiolucency was smaller in size and was filling in with bone. The dog was rebooked
for recheck 6 months later to monitor periapical healing of the mesial root of 309.
(a)
(b)
Figure39.6
 Photographs of 309 after endodontic treatment. The mesial crown root segment of
309 shows no clinical evidence of periodontitis, i.e. no increased probing depths or gingival
recession. There is mild gingivitis only. The restorations are intact, with no evidence of discoloration.
(a) Lateral view.
(b) Occlusal view.
PROGNOSIS
With continued dietary management and daily toothbrushing, the dog is unlikely to
develop further caries lesions. The periapical lesion of the mesial root of 309 needs
further monitoring. If radiographs 6 months down the line don't show full bony
healing, the tooth will probably be extracted.
COMMENTS
In simple terms, caries occurs when plaque bacteria use fermentable carbohydrate
(notably sugar) from the diet as a source of energy. The fermentation by-products are
acidic and demineralize the enamel. Caries can thus be prevented by removing the
other easily fermentable carbohydrate). Dogs should not be fed human biscuits and
confectionery, as they are high in sugar.
There were three treatment options for this case. Extraction of all affected teeth
would have been the least expensive option, requiring only one episode of general
anaesthesia, and would have resulted in a comfortable dog with a relatively functional
bite. The second alternative would have been debridement and restoration of 109, 209
and 410, and extraction of 309 and 409. Again, this would have been a one-stage
procedure and less expensive than the third option, namely: debridement and
owner did not want the dog to lose the teeth if other options were feasible.
Consequently, the third option was chosen. This option is more expensive and requires
several anaesthetic episodes, but the dog does get to keep a functional posterior
protocols makes it unlikely that further caries lesions on other teeth will develop in
this dog.
MCQS
1. Which one of the following statements regarding canine and feline enamel is false?
(a) It is a thin layer as compared to man (b) It has no nerve or blood supply (c) It is
      (    
97% of weight (e) It is the hardest and most mineralized tissue in the body
2. Which one of the following statements regarding canine and feline dentine is false?
(a) It comprises the bulk of the mature tooth (b) Inorganic content amounts to 70%
of wet weight (c) It has a tubular structure (d) Dentine formation is complete
(a) It is avascuilar bone-like tissue (b) It is less calcified than enamel or dentine (c)
4. Which one of the following statements is true?
(a) Ameloblasts produce enamel matrix (b) Ameloblasts lay down mineralized enamel
(c) Odontoblasts produce dentine and cementim matrix (d) Odontoblasts produce
all the dental hard tissues (e) Odontoclasts selectively destroy dentine
5. Which one of the following statements is true?
(a) The pulp system is lined by odontoblasts that produce dentine continuously
throughout life (b) In a multirooted tooth, each root has its own separate puilp
system (c) The root and its pulp system are fully developed by the time a tooth
   s   s      g   i
roots (e) A mature tooth has a single wide opening at the apex of the root
(a) The periodontium is an anatomical unit (consisting of gingiva, periodontal
ligament, cementum and alveolar bone) which functions to attach the tooth to the
 jaw and provide a suspensory apparatus resilient to normal functional forces (b)
The periodontium is an anatomical unit (consisting of gingiva, periodontal
ligament, cementum and alveolar bone) which functions to rigidly attach the tooth
           
          s
tooth to the jaw and provide a suspensory apparatus resilient to normal functional
forces (d) The periodontium is an anatomical unit (consisting of gingiva,
periodontal ligament, dentine and alveolar bone) which functions to rigidly attach
the tooth to the jaw (e) The periodontium has no ability to repair
7. Which one of the following statements is false?
(a) The gingiva forms a cuff around each tooth (b) The gingival sulcus is the
invagination that the margin of the free gingiva forms with the tooth (c) Normal
sulcus depth is 1-3 mm in dogs and 0.5-1 mm in cats (d) The periodontal ligament
calcified than enamel and/or dentine
8. Which one of the following statements is true?
  s   ()           ()
              a
   s   ()    s    () 
and 30 permanent teeth
9. Which one of the following statements is true?
(a) The cat has 26 primary teeth and 40 permanent teeth (b) The cat has 28 primary
teeth and 42 permanent teeth (c) The cat has 28 primary teeth and 32 permanent
teeth (d) The cat only has 42 permanent teeth (e) The cat has 26 primary teeth and
30 permanent teeth
10. Which one of the following statements is false?
(a) The primary teeth start forming in utero and erupt between 3 and 12 weeks of
age (b) Resorption and exfoliation of primary teeth and replacement by permanent
teeth occurs between 3 and 7 months of age in the dog (c) Resorption and
erupts (e) Root development occuirs mainly during tooth eruption
11. Which one of the following statements is true?
(a) The development of the occlusion is determined exclusively by genetic factors (b)
The specific genetic mechanisms governing occlusion are known (c) The
development of occlusion is determined solely by environmental factors (d) Jaw
length, tooth bud position and tooth size are not inherited (e) The development of
the upper jaw, mandi ble and teeth is independently regulated genetically
12. Which one of the following statements is true?
(a) In the mesocephalic dog, the mandible is shorter and less wide than the upper jaw
(b) In the mesocephalic dog, the mandible is shorter and wider than the upper jaw
(c) Brachycephalic animals have a shorter than normal lower jaw (d)
Dolicocephalic animals have a longer than normal lower jaw (e) The occlusion of a
mesocephalic cat is the same as in the dog
13. The periodontal probe is used for:
(a ) Evaluating  caries (b) Evaluating enamel/dentinal defects (c) Evaluating
periodontal probing depths and furcation lesions (d) Probing for subgingival
calculus (e) Evaluating odontoclastic resorptive lesions
14. Which of the following statements regarding a dental explorer is false?
(a) It is used to evaluate caries (b) It is used to evaluate enamel/dentinal defects (c) It
can be used to probe for subgingival calculus (d) It is a sharp-ended instrument (e)
It is designed to be used to evaluate periodontal pocket depth
15. Which one of the following statements is true?
(a) Untreated gingivitis always progresses to periodontitis (b) An individual with
clinically healthy gingivae will not develop periodontitis (c) Clinically healthy
gingivae can be achieved by the daily use of a dental diet or dental hygiene chew
(d) Calculus accumulation is a primary cause of periodontal disease (e) Gingivitis
is irreversible
16. Which one of the following statements is false?
(a) Gingivitis is a plaque-induced inflammation (b) Untreated gingivitis may
progress to periodontitis (c) Clinically healthy gingivae can be achieved by daily
toothbrushing (d) Toothbrushing is the single most effective means of removing
plaque (e) All effective dental hygiene chews have a hard texture
17. Home care is defined as measures taken by the owner to remove/reduce the
accumulation of dental deposits thus promoting periodontal health. Which of the
following is not home care?
(a) Toothbrushing (b) Feeding a dental hygiene diet (c) Feeding a dental hygiene
chew (d) Scaling teeth (e) Toothbrushing and a dental hygiene diet or chew
18. Gingivitis is best treated by which one of the following options?
(a) Daily tooth brushing in conjunction with professional cleaning (b) Professional
cleaning and a daily dental hygiene chew or diet (c) Professional cleaning (d)
Toothbrushing alone (e) Dental hygiene diet or chew alone
19. Which one of the following statements is false?
(a) Periodontal surgery is first-line treatment for periodontal disease (b) Periodontal
surgery should only be performed when the owner has shown the ability to keep
the mouth clean (c) Conservative management of periodontitis, in combination
with meticulous home care, is the first line of treatment (d) Periodontal surgery is
performed under general anaesthesia (e) Plaque needs to be removed on a daily
basis in the periodontitis patient
20. If the dental film is positioned intra-orally (either on the occlusal plane or angled
as close as possible to the tooth to be radiographed), and the X-ray beam is directed at
right angles to the film plane, which of the following options will occuir?
(a) Elongation of the image (b) Foreshortening of the image(c)A correct
reproduction of the image (d) Magnification and elongation of the image
21. If the dental film is positioned intra-orally (either on the occlusal plane or angled
as close as possible to the tooth to be radiographed), and the X-ray beam is directed at
right angles to the long axis of the tooth, which of the following options will occur?
(a)Elongation of the image(b) Foreshortening of the image(c)A correct
reproduction of the image (d) Magnification and foreshortening of the image
22. If the dental film is positioned intra-orally (either on the occlusal plane or angled
as close as possible to the tooth to be radiographed), and the X-ray beam is directed at
right angles to the bisecting line, which of the following options will occur?
(a) Elongation of the image(b)Foreshortening of the image(c)A correct
23. Which one of the following statements relating to a persistent primary tooth is
incorrect?
(a) It is likely to affect the direction of eruption of the permanent tooth (b)
         
primary and permanent tooth may lead to the development of a localized
periodontal defect (d) It should be extracted early in the animal's life (e) It should
only be extracted when the animal has reached skeletal maturity
24. Which one of the following statements is incorrect?
(a) Untreated complicated crown fractures will inevitably result in pulpal pathology
(b) Pulpal pathology may be painful (c) Complicated crown fractures always
require treatment (d) Complicated crown fractures do not require treatment (e)
The preferred treatment option for a periodontally sound functionally important
tooth with a complicated crown fracture is endodontic therapy
25. Which one of the following is not a complication that can occur during tooth
extraction?
(a) Tooth crown fracture (b) Tooth root fracture (c) Jaw fracture (d) Haemorrhage
(e) Abscess formation
26. Which one of the following statements relating to feline chronic gingivostomatitis
is false?
(a) Affected cats commonly have elevated serum and salivary immunoglobulins (lg)
(b) Affected cats commonly have elevated serum immunoglobulins (IgG, IgM and
IgA are all raised), and elevated salivary IgG and IgM but reduced IgA (c) It is
(               
Histological examination of affected oral mucosa shows a submucosal infiltrate
consisting of plasma cells, lymphocytes, macrophages and neutrophils (e) No
l1nderlying intrinsic immune abnormality has been identified in affected animals
27. Which one of the following statements relating to feline chronic gingivostomati tis
is false?
(a) The extraction of all premolar and molar teeth has given the most dependable
results, with 80% of cats being clinically cured or significantly improved (b) Feline
          (  
cases compared with 25% of cats in a healthy population (c) FCV isolation from
free cats produced signs of acute calici virus infection, but not chronic
gingivostomatitis (d) FCV isolation from cats with chronic gingivostomatitis and
gingivostomatitis (e) The most common sign of feline immunodeficiency virus
(FIV) infection is oral inflammation, yet most cats with chronic gingivostomatitis
test negative for FIV
2 8.Which one of the following statements relating to canine chronic
gingivostomatitis is true?
(a) Chronic gingivostomatitis is more common in the dog than in the cat (b) The
likely cause is an underlying vesiculo-bullous skin disease (c ) The oral
inflammation is generally caused by systemic diseases, e.g. endocrine or renal
disorder (d) It is thought to be an inappropriate response to bacterial plaque
effect
29. Which one of the following statements relating to tooth resorption is false?
(a) Hard tissues are protected from resorption by their surface layer of blast cells (b)
Resorption of hard tissue requires a trigger and then a reason for the resorption to
continue (c) Internal root resorption emanates from the root canal wall(d)
is common in permanent teeth
30. Which one of the following statements relating to external root resorption is false?
(a) A surface resorption is initiated by injury to the cementoblast layer (b) Surface
replacement of dental hard tissue by bone (d) There are two main forms of external
root resorption associated with inflammation of the periodontal tissue, namely
(e) External root resorption is uincommon in the cat
31. Which statement relating to root resorption in the cat is false?
(a) Cats with clinically missing teeth were more likely to have external root
resorption (b) Teeth 307 and 407 are the most commonly affected (c) The pattern
of distribution of resorptive lesions is strikingly symmetrical (d) Neutering, sex
and age at neutering did not affect the prevalence of resorptive lesions (e) Mean
mouth gingivitis index is directly related to the prevalence of resorptive lesions
32. Which one of the following statements relating to the treatment of root resorption
in the cat is true?
(a) Accessible lesions which extend into dentine and do not involve the pulp are best
treated by restoration (b) Conservative management, i.e. monitoring clinically and
radiographically, is indicated when there is only a small cavity in the tooth (c)
Coronal ampuitation is indicated even when there is no radiographic evidence of
  e   n      
    ) n   g  o
require radiographic monitoring
33. Which one of the following statements relating to root resorption in the cat is
false?
(a) Resorptive lesions are common (b) Prevention is not possible (c) The lesions are
34. Which one of the following statements relating to malocclusion is false?
(a) It is an abnormality in the position of the teeth (b) It can result from jaw length
       a 
specific genetic mechanisms reguilating malocclusion are inknown (e) A polygenic
affected by malocclusion to the same degree
35. Which one of the following statements relating to occlusion and malocclusion is
trule?
(a) The upper and lower jaws of brachycephalic animals are shorter than normal (b)
The upper and lower jaws of dolicocephalic animals are longer than normal (c)
Brachycephalic animals have a shorter than normal upper jaw and dolicocephalic
      a       s
often called ‘overshot'
(e) A mandibular brachynathic bite is often called ‘undershot'
36. Which one of the following statements relating to malocclusion is true?
(a) The mandibular prognathic, the mandibular brachygnathic, the wry bite and a
narrow mandible are all dental malocclusions (b) The mandibular prognathic, the
mandibular brachygnathic, the wry bite and a narrow mandible are all skeletal
malocclusions (c) The mandibular prognathic, the mandibular brachygnathic and
a narrow mandible are all dental malocclusions (d) The mandibular prognathic,
the mandibular brachygnathic and the wry bite are all dental malocclusions (e)
The mandibular prognathic, the mandibular brachygnathic and a narrow
mandible are all skeletal malocclusions, but the wry bite is a dental malocclusion
37. Which one of the following statements is false?
         )
          
The maxillary permanent canine erupts rostral to it primary counterpart (d) The
mandibular permanent canine begins eruption medial to its primary counterpart
38. Which one of the following statements relating to periodontal disease is true?
(a) The primary cause of periodontal disease is dental plaque (b) The cause of
periodontal disease is dental calculus (c) Gingivitis and periodontitis are both
associated with destruction of the supporting tissue (d) Gingivitis is irreversible (e)
Periodontitis is generally reversible
39. Which one of the following statements relating to dental plaque is false?
(a) It is a biofilm (b) Accumulation starts within minutes on a clean tooth surface (c)
The initial accumulation is supragingival (d) Supragingival plaque will extend
into the sulcus and populate the subgingival region if left undisturbed (e) Plaque
accumulation starts within a few days of cleaning a tooth surface
40. Which one of the following statements relating to dental calculus is true?
becomes mineralized (c) Subgingival calcuilus is the primary cause of periodontitis
(d) Dental calculus is always covered by a layer of plaque (e) Supragingival
calculus is the primary cause of gingivitis
41. Which one of the following statements is true?
(a) Periodontitis is always associated with increased periodontal probing depth (b)
Gingival recession is not associated with loss of attachment(c) Gingival
hyperplasia is always associated with loss of attachment (d) Horizontal bone loss is
often accompanied by gingival recession so periodontal pockets may not form (e)
Disease progression is a slow, continuous process
42. Which one of the following statements is false?
(a) Periodontal disease is a collective term for plaque-induced inflammation of the
periodontium (b) An individual with clinically healthy gingivae will not develop
   ) sd do     s m n 
gingivae to prevent periodontitis
43. Which one of the following statements relating to pulpitis is false?
(a) Pulpitis is inflammation of the pulp (b) Pulpitis is always associated with intense
pain (c) It may be associated with pain, but may also be asymptomatic (d)
Untreated chronic pulpitis will result in pulp necrosis (e) Chronic pulpitis can
cauise periapical complications
44. Which one of the following is a real emergency, i.e. needs treatment as soon as
possible if the tooth is to be saved?
(a) Complicated crown fracture of a permanent tooth in a dog less than l year old
(i.e. an immature permanent tooth) (b) Complicated crown fracture of a
permanent tooth in an adult dog (i.e. mature permanent tooth) (c) Complicated
crown and root fracture of a permanent tooth in an adult dog (i.e. mature
permanent tooth) (d) Uncomplicated crown fracture of an immature tooth (e)
Uncomplicated crown fracture of a mature tooth
(a) No treatment required (b) Extraction (c) Referral for endodontic treatment so the
Radiographic monitoring
46. A tooth with an uncomplicated crown fracture requires which one of the following
treatment options?
(s s s     (   ()
and radiographic monitoring (c) Extraction (d) Coronal amputation (e) Fixation
with a splint
47. Which one of the following statements relating to periapical pathology is false?
(a) Periapical pathology is a consequence of chronic pulpitis (b) Periapical pathology
is a consequence of pulp necrosis (c) It manifests radiographically as a distinct
radiolucent zone surrounding the apex of a tooth (d) The periapical lesion may be
a granuloma, cyst or abscess (e) A cyst can be clearly differentiated from a
granuloma or abscess on a radiograph
48. Diagnosed periapical pathology should be treated by which one of the following
alternatives?
(a) No treatment required(b) A long couirse of antibiotics (c) Administration of
analgesics (d) Extraction or endodontic treatment of the affected tooth (e)
Corticosteroids to reduce the inflammatory response
49. Which one of the following statements relating to combined endodontic and
periodontic lesions is false?
(a) A Class I lesion (endodontic-periodontic) is endodontic in origin, i.e. pathology
begins in the periodontium and progresses to involve the pulp (b) A Class II lesion
periodontium and progresses to involve the pulp (c)A Class I1 lesion (true
combined) is a fusion of independent periodontic and endodontic lesions (d) Class I
lesions have a better prognosis than Class lI or Il1 lesions, as endodontic treatment
may lead to resolution of the periodontal extension of the inflammation (e)
Although Class II and IH1 lesions require both endodontic treatment and periodontal
therapy, they have a better prognosis than a Class I lesion
50. Which one of the following statements relating to osteomyelitis of the jaw bone is
false?
(a) It is not particularly common in dogs and cats (b) Infection of dental origin (as
             s
definitive diagnosis (d) Osteomyelitis is easily differentiated from neoplastic bone
lesions on radiography (e) Once diagnosed, osteomyelitis is treated by removing
the cause (extraction or possibly endodontic treatment of teeth with pulp and
MCQs - Answers
1.(c) It is deposited continuously throughout life 2.(d) Dentine formation is complete
when the tooth erupts 3.(e) Cementum is produced by odontoblasts 4.(a) Ameloblasts
  s   n    i   
(consisting of gingiva, periodontal ligament, cementum and alveolar bone) which
 se ds e d  a a on  n n m so
to normal functional forces 7.(e) Cementum is more calcified than enamel and/or
dentine 8.(b) The dog has 28 primary teeth and 42 permanent teeth 9.(e) The cat has
         
during tooth eruption 11.(e) The development of the upper jaw, mandible and teeth is
independently regulated genetically 12.(a) In the mesocephalic dog, the mandible is
shorter and less wide than the upper jaw 13.(c) Evaluating periodontal probing depths
and furcation lesions 14.(e) It is designed to be used to evaluate periodontal pocket
periodontitis 16.(e) All effective dental hygiene chews have a hard texture 17.(d)
( a ) Periodontal  surgery  is first-line  treatment  for  periodontal  disease 20.(b)
reproduction of the image 23.(e) It should only be extracted when the animal has
reached skeletal maturity 24.(d) Complicated crown fractures do not require treatment
25.(e) Abscess formation 26.(a) Affected cats commonly have elevated serum and
salivary  immunoglobulins  (Ig) 27.(d) FCV isolation from cats with chronic
gingivostomatitis and  then  inoculated into specific pathogen-free cats produced
chronic gingivostomatitis 28.(d) It is thought to be an inappropriate response to
bacterial plaque present on the tooth surfaces 29.(e) Internal root resorption is
common in permanent teeth 30.(e) External root resorption is uncommon in the cat
       s   
evidence of ongoing root resorption 33.(c) The lesions are not progressive 34.(e) A
polygenic mechanism is likely, which explains why all siblings in suiccessive
  s       
animals have a shorter than normal upper jaw and dolicocephalic animals have a
longer than normal upper jaw 36.(b) The mandibular prognathic, the mandibular
brachygnathic, the wry bite and a narrow mandible are all skeletal malocclusions 37.
(b) The maxillary permanent canine begins eruption medial to its primary
counterpart 38.(a) The primary cause of periodontal disease is dental plaque 39.(e)
Plaque accumulation starts within a few days of cleaning a tooth surface 40.(d)
Dental calculus is always covered by a layer of plaque 41.(d) Horizontal bone loss is
An individual with gingivitis will always develop periodontitis 43.(b) Pulpitis is
always associated with intense pain 44.(a) Complicated crown fracture of a
permanent tooth in a dog less than 1 year old (i.e. an immature permanent tooth) 45.
(c) Referral for endodontic treatment so the tooth can be maintained 46.(b)
Smoothing of any sharp edges (possibly restoration) and radiographic monitoring 47.
   s           )
48.(d) Extraction or endodontic treatment of the affected tooth 49.(e) Although Class
II and 1l1 lesions require both endodontic treatment and periodontal therapy, they
          
differentiated from neoplastic bone lesions on radiography
APPENDIX 1
Home care: maintenance of oral hygiene
CLIENT EDUCATION
The caise (dental plaque) and effects (discomfort, pain, loss of teeth, chronic focus of
infection, systemic consequences) of periodontal disease must be thoroughly explained
to the pet owner. The owner must be made aware that home care is the most essential
maintaining oral hygiene, i.e. keeping plaque accumulation to a level compatible with
periodontal health, rests with the owner of the pet. Once instituted, home care
regimens need continuous monitoring and reinforcement. The veterinary nurse can
play a vital role in educating clients, checking compliance and reinforcing the need
for home care.
However, the owner must realize that, even with home care, most animals still
need to have their teeth cleaned professionally at intervals. The intervals between
professional cleaning need to be determined for each animal. With good home care,
the interval between professional cleanings can be greatly extended. It is useful to
draw an analogy to the situation in man, i.e. most of us brush our teeth daily but still
scaling and polishing) at regular intervals.
TOOTHBRUSHING
Toothbrushing has been proven to be the single most effective means of removing
plaque. It is the gold standard for plaque control. Every effort should be made to
             
Toothbrushing should be introduced gradually and as early in the animal's life as
possible. Adult cats are generally less amenable to the introduction of toothbrushing
than adult dogs, but with patience and persistence, many will accept some degree of
home care. In contrast, kittens often accept toothbrushing more readily than puppies.
In both species it is much easier to introduce toothbrushing earlier rather than later in
the animal's life.
Toothbrushes
There are innumerable brush-head and handle designs and sizes of human and
veterinary toothbrushes available, but there is insufficient evidence to clearly
recommend any particular one. The choice of brush should be based on the
 s            s
medium texture nylon filament brush of a suitable size for the intended pet seems to
motor-driven toothbrush with good results. Electric motor-driven toothbrushes are
now available for dogs and cats (Fig. A1.1).
Petosansilentpowe
CP
Figure A1.1
Electric motor-driven toothbrush (Petosan Silentpower) for dogs and cats. This
toothbrush has been launched by Petosan As Norway (www.petosan.com).
Image courtesy of Petosan AS
A flannel cloth folded over a finger, or a rubber ‘finger brush', may be more
comfortable for animals and owners, but is less effective (removes less plaque) than a
nylon filament brush. The use of a finger brush or cloth during the training phase is
          s    
toothbrush.
Toothpaste
The use of non-foaming tasty pet toothpaste is recommended, but not critical. It is the
mechanical action of brushing which removes the plaque. Therefore, brushing with a
toothbrush moistened with water will still do the job. Pet toothpaste tastes nice and
the pet will therefore usually allow the owner to brush for longer, thus removing more
plaque. The paste should be pressed down into the bristles to maintain it on the brush
or the animal will just lick it off.
The use of human toothpaste is not recommended, mainly due to the high
fluoride content, which may lead to acute, but more likely chronic, toxicity problems,
Frequency of toothbrushing
The current clinical recommendation is daily toothbrushing to establish and maintain
clinically healthy gingivae for the whole life of the animal. Brushing less frequently is
not sufficient to maintain clinically healthy gingivae.
Brushing technique
There is no one correct method of brushing, but rather the appropriate one that in
each case removes plaque effectively without damaging either tooth or gingiva.
Individual preference and dexterity, and the variable dentogingival morphology
occurring with different stages of disease, will dictate the best method. In most
instances, a combination of roll and miniscrub technique will achieve the objective.
The teeth and gingival margin are brushed in a circular or side-to-side motion.
The brush is angled at 45° to the tooth surfaces, so that the bristles enter the gingival
       s      s
and around the teeth are cleaned.
Figure A1.2
  e          
side-to-side motion. The brush is angled at 45? to the tooth surfaces, so that the bristles enter the
gingival sulcus. The circling motion should ensure that all cracks and crevices in and around the teeth
are cleaned.
Some practical suggestions to give to owners are as follows:
· Start toothbrushing as early in life as possible, as prevention of disease development
is the goal. The primary teeth will be exfoliated and replaced by the permanent
dentition. Consequently, the benefit of introducing toothbrushing at a young age will
not benefit the primary teeth, but the procedure will be accepted at the time the
permanent teeth erupt.
 Make the animal comforta ble and approach from the side rather than in front.
· Start with just a few teeth (premolars and molars rather than incisors, since
retracting the lips is usually readily accepted, while many animals don't like having
their nose lifted) and gradually increase the number of teeth cleaned each time uintil
the whole mouth can be cleaned in a single session.
· Initially, the mouith does not need to be opened. Concentrate on brushing the buccal
surfaces of the teeth, especially at the gingival margin.
· When the animal is comfortable with having the buccal surfaces of all its teeth
brushed, an attempt should be made to open the mouith and carefully brush the palatal
and lingual surfaces of the teeth (Fig. Al.3). If this is not accepted, there is every
reason to continue with daily brushing of the buccal surfaces. However, gingivitis will
occur on the palatal and lingual surfaces if these are not brushed, and periodontitis
intervals.
· Offer a reward at the end of the procedure, e.g. a game or a walk.
· Include toothbrushing as part of the daily grooming routine. Home care is more
likely to be acceptable to an older pet if it is introduced as an extension of a pre-
existing routine, e.g. evening meal, walk, grooming. The owner is also more likely to
remember a consistent routine.
· Owners can sit small dogs and cats on their lap whilst brushing, at the same time
 s d  an sn     
restrains whilst a second performs the toothbrushing. Some animals may better accept
Figure A1.3
Toothbrushing technique. When the animal is comfortable with having the buccal
surfaces of all its teeth brushed, an attempt should be made to open the mouth and carefully brush
the palatal and lingual surfaces of the teeth.
DENTALDIETSANDDENTALHYGIENECHEWS
The use of products (dental diets, hygiene chews and biscuiits) aimed at encouraging
chewing activity and designed with textural properties that maximize the self-
cleansing effect of function are beneficial in reducing the accumulation of dental
deposits and consequently the degree of gingivitis that develops.
None of the products in this category are as effective as daily toothbrushing.
Consequently, their use cannot achieve, or maintain, clinically healthy gingivae in
the absence of toothbrushing.
While every attempt should be made to ensure that daily toothbrushing is
performed by the owner, dietary means of reducing the accumulation of dental
deposits and thus reducing the severity of gingivitis is a useful adjunctive measure
and is highly recommended. In selecting an appropriate dental diet or dental hygiene
chews for patients, I would recommend using either a product that has been shown to
be effective in peer-reviewed publications, or a product that has been awarded a
VOHC? Seal of Acceptance.
CHEMICAL PLAOUE CONTROL
In addition to mechanical plaque control, chemical plaque control does have a role in
treating periodontitis. They are not indicated to prevent or treat gingivitis.
SUMMARY
There is no magic bullet that we can feed our pets to prevent periodontal disease. Daily
toothbrushing remains the single most effective method of restoring inflamed
may be an issue for some people. Compliance failure has not been critically
investigated in veterinary dentistry; however, it is not difficult to imagine that many
factors may prevent owners from brushing their pets' teeth. Such factors include lack
of skill, questionable perceived benefit, unpleasantness of the procedure and lifestyle
reinforcement and individually determined recalls to check efficacy yields surprisingly
good compliance.
TheVeterinay Oral Helth Council VOHC@Sealf Acceptance system identifies products that meet pre-set standards for preventionof accumulation of
dental plaque and calculus (tartar). It is a product effectiveness recognition system, with no regulatory function, and is limited to considering products
designed to control plaque and calculu s
APPENDIX 2
Equipment and instrumentation
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
Many dental procedures result in the creation of a bacterial aerosol, so ideally a
separate room should be designated for oral and dental procedures. The room must
         s    
money.
Ergonomic considerations are of paramount importance in the layout of the
dental operatory. All equipment and instruments should be within easy reach of the
operator. Posture is important! Ideally, the operator should be seated.
It is essential to protect operator and staff. The veterinarian and the assistant
should wear facemasks and appropriate eye wear (spectacles or face shield) to protect
themselves from the bacterial aerosol and other debris. There is a risk of infection of
skin wounds if the operator works in a dirty environment without gloves. The oral
cavity is never a sterile site, so the use of suirgical gloves is recommended.
Important patient considerations are as follows:
· General anaesthesia with endotracheal intubation is essential. This prevents
inhalation of aerosolized bacteria (and other debris) and asphyxiation on irrigation
and cooling fluid.
· A pharyngeal pack is also recommended during oral and dental treatment. Remember
to remove the pharyngeal pack prior to extubation! The animal should be positioned
on a surface that will allow drainage to prevent it becoming wet and hypothermic
This can be achieved by the use of a ‘tub-tank' or placing the animal's head on a towel
or disposable 'nappy'. Most animals benefit from a heating pad.
Some important equipment and instrumentation considerations are as follows:
· Clean, sterilized instruments should be available for each patient. Ideally, several pre-
packed kits with the required instruments for different procedures, e.g. examination,
periodontal therapy, extraction, should be available.
· Power equipment requires regular maintenance (daily, weekly) in the practice and
 s         s 
maintenance and servicing requirements with the supplier.
EOUIPMENT AND INSTRUMENTATION FOR ORAL AND
DENTALEXAMINATION
There is a wide selection of dental equipment and instrumentation available on the
market. My recommendation is to identify your needs and then invest in a bit more
than you think you will require. The better you get at performing dentistry and oral
 ose si a na  a a a  p   
element of personal preference, so test different options before making a decision.
Finally, be prepared to upgrade!
The details of how to perform oral examination and recording are covered in
Section 2, Chapter 3. The following will outline equipment and instrumentation
requirements. Personal preferences have been inserted as a guide, where appropriate
Periodontal probe
The periodontal probe is a rounded narrow or flat, blunt-ended, graduated instrument.
Due to its blunt end, it can be inserted into the gingival sulcus without causing
trauma (Fig. A2.1). The periodontal probe is used to:
· Measure periodontal probing depth
· Determine the degree of gingival inflammation
· Evaluate furcation lesions
· Evaluate the extent of tooth mobility.
Figure A2.1
The periodontal probe is a blunt-ended, graduated instrument, which can be inserted
into the gingival sulcus without causing trauma.
A rounded narrow, rather than flat, probe (e.g. No. 14 Williams B) is my preferred
choice, as it is easier to enter the gingival sulcus without causing damage with the
rounded probe, especially in cats, where the flat probe is impossible to use.
Dental explorer
The dental explorer or probe, a sharp-ended instrument, is used to:
 Determine the presence of caries
· Explore other enamel and dentine defects, e.g. fracture, odontoclastic resorptive
lesions.
The explorer is also useful for tactile examination of the subgingival tooth
surfaces. Subgingival calculus and odontoclastic resorptive lesions may be identified
in this way.
Dental explorers are either straight or curved (Fig. A2.2). They are also either
single-ended or double-ended, usually combined with a periodontal probe, i.e. one end
is an explorer and the other end is a periodontal probe. My preference is the Explorer
probe No. 6, which is a single-ended straight explorer.
Figure A2.2
             s
 double-ended explorers/probes due to the risk of inadvertent damage to the animal with the end you
are not using in the oral cavity.
Dental mirror
A dental mirror is a vital, but traditionally rarely used, tool. It allows the operator to
visualize palatal/lingual surfaces while maintaining posture, reflect light onto areas
of interest, and retract and protect soft tissue. Orientation may cause confusion and
the use of a dental mirror requires practice. The time taken to learn how to use a
dental mirror is a worthy investment. To prevent condensation occurring on the
mirror, it can be wiped across the buccal mucous membranes before lise. Dental
mirrors are available in several sizes. A small (paediatric size) mirror for cats and
small dogs and a larger one for medium to large dogs should be available.
Dental record sheets
Recording and dental record sheets are covered in Section 2. A complete dental record
is required for diagnostic and therapeutic purposes, as well as for medico-legal
reasons.
EQUIPMENT AND INSTRUMENTATION FOR PERIODONTAL
THERAPY
Scaling
Scaling describes the procedure whereby dental deposits (plaque, but mainly calculus)
  s    s ss     
performed using either hand instruments or mechanical instruments, or a
combination of both.
Hand scaling instruments: Scalers and curettes (Fig. A2.3) are used to remove
dental deposits from the tooth surfaces.
FigureA2.3
Scaler (top) and curette (bottom). The scaler can only be used to remove
supragingival dental deposits. The curette is used to remove subgingival deposits and restore the root
surface to smoothness. It can also be used to remove supragingival dental deposits.
Scalers are used for the supragingival removal of calculus. A scaler has a sharp
working tip and should thus only be used supragingivally. If a scaler is used
subgingivally, the result is laceration of the gingival margin. The scaler should always
be pulled away from the gingiva towards the tip of the crown. Scalers require frequent
sharpening to maintain their cutting edges.
Curettes are used for the subgingival removal of dental deposits and for root
planing. They can also be used supragingivally. The working tip of a curette is more
slender than that of a scaler. Also, the back and tip are rounded to minimize gingival
trauma. Curettes also require frequent sharpening.
The differences between a scaler and a curette are summarized in Fig. A2.4.
Shank
Handle
Working tip
Supragingivalscaler
Subgingival curette
Figure A2.4
               s
tip of a scaler is more robust than that of a curette. Curettes are less bulky, with rounded back and
tip, for use in gingival pockets. Both hand scalers and curettes require frequent sharpening to
maintain their cutting edges.
From Gorrel C (2004 ): Veterinary Dentistry for the General Practitioner, with permission of Elsevier.
A selection of curettes is required. My preferred curettes are the Gracey 7/8 and
the Columbia 13/l4. 1 don't recommend a separate scaler as curettes can be used both
above and below the gingiva, while scalers are limited to supragingival use.
Mechanical scaling instruments: Mechanical or powered scalers enable fast and
     s        g
rotary. Gross supragingival calculus deposits are best removed with hand instruments
(scaler, curette) prior to using mechanical scaling equipment.
 ss e   os  s    s s
at removing dental calculus. Sonic scalers are generally less effective than ultrasonic
scalers, but generate less heat and are thus safer to use. Depending upon the design of
the tip of the scaler, these instruments may be used for supra-and subgingival scaling.
A thin, pointed tip, sometimes called a perio, sickle or universal insert, is the
recommended insert.
uiltrasonic frequencies. They are driven by a micromotor, so do not require a
    sn     e  a ss
magnetostrictive mechanism, or a piezoelectric mechanism in the handpiece. The
ultrasonic oscillation of the tip causes cavitation of the coolant, which aids in the
disruption of the calculus on the tooth surface. Ultrasonic scalers are generally
designed for supragingival use, but tips designed for subgingival scaling are available.
A thin, pointed insert is recommended for supragingival use. Inserts specifically
designed for subgingival use are recommended for subgingival scaling.
I have no real preference between sonic or uiltrasonic scalers and uise both.
Rotary scalers are best avoided, but are included here for completeness. In this
system, roto pro burs are inserted in the high-speed handpiece of a compressed air-
driven unit. They are so-called ‘non-cutting' burs, which when applied to calculus
caise it to disintegrate while the coolant flushes the debris away. In man, the use of
thus no longer used for scaling. In addition to postoperative pain, roto pro burs can
caise extensive damage to tooth enamel and hence their use in veterinary dentistry is
not recommended.
Calculus forceps
Calculus forceps have been designed to aid removal of heavy calculus from the surface
of teeth. It is essential to lse these forceps with extreme care and in the described
lsed to extract teeth.
Polishing
Polishing removes plaque and restores the scaled tooth surfaces to smoothness, which
  s 'sd aod p   sn  a , q as
- pds- e un y e n o d od e un si r r 
handpiece, or by means of particle blasting (air polishing).
Prophy paste in a cup/brush in a slow-speed contra-angle handpiece: The speed of
rotation of the cup/brush can be regulated. To minimize the amount of heat
minuite.
     s    s
bicarbonate of soda) will polish the tooth surface without causing damage to the
enamel. It is essential to protect the soft tissues (gingivae and oral mucosa) during air
polishing. A simple way of protecting the soft tissues is to cover them with a piece of
gauze.
Prophy paste: Prophy paste is available in bulk containers and in individual
patient tubs. The latter are inexpensive and should be used to prevent contamination
and the iatrogenic transmission of pathogens.
EQUIPMENT
AND
INSTRUMENTATION
FORTOOTH
EXTRACTION
Hand instruments
Luxators and elevators: A selection of dental luxators and elevators of varying sizes is
required. My preferred selection is shown in Fig. A2.5.
Figure A2.5
Luxators and elevators. My favourite luxators and elevators are depicted. On the left
o  s     o  (s  s   
elevators.
Luxators and elevators are used to cut/break down the periodontal ligament,
which holds the tooth in the alveolus. The different sizes are required so that an
appropriate range for each size of root can be selected. Always start with a small
    si s  s     d   
and the alveolar bone. Luxators have a very thin working end and are used to cut the
ligament, but should not be used for leverage or they may break. Elevators have a
relatively thick shank. They are used to break down the periodontal ligament with a
combination of apical pressure and leverage. An extraction can be started with a
     (          
elevator will assist removal of fractured root tips and should be available for all
extractions - just in case!
Periosteal elevator: A periosteal elevator (Fig. A2.6) is required for open (surgical)
extractions to expose the alveolar bone by raising a muco-periosteal flap. However,
even if a closed (non-surgical) extraction technique has been used, the gingiva may be
sutured over the extraction socket. In this situation, a periosteal elevator is invaluable
to free the gingiva, allowing suturing over of the extraction socket without tension.
FigureA2.6
P s  s r   a   r
(small instruments are required) are depicted. The two periosteal elevators depicted on the left are
 6d ho a a so 1 1as 0 '(sop o Had m a 1 (s 1 dstd a a
the Periosteal No. 9. The size 15 blade shown in the handle is my preferred choice.
Extraction forceps: Although forceps can be lsed to aid ligament breakdown by
rotational force on the tooth, it is very easy to snap the crown off by using excessive
force. There is some truth in the saying that the only extraction forceps required are
your fingers. If the tooth cannot be lifted out with your fingers, then the periodontal
ligament has not been adequately broken down. In short, dental forceps are not
essential, but if they are to be used then a selection of sizes, to fit the root anatomy of
the tooth being extracted, is required.
Power equipment
Power equipment is required to perform dentistry and oral surgery. Regular
maintenance is essential to avoid problems with equipment failure
Micromotor unit: A micromotor unit can be used for polishing teeth as well as
sectioning teeth. For sectioning teeth, the micromotor should be set at maximum
speed (30 000 rpm). Micromotor units do not generally include water cooling of the
bur and an external source (e.g. assistant applying coolant continuously to the tissues)
is required to prevent thermal damage.
high-speed handpiece with water cooling, a slow-speed handpiece (with or without
water cooling) and a combination air/water syringe (Fig. A2.7). A high-speed
handpiece, although not essential for sectioning multirooted teeth prior to extraction,
facilitates the process and allows accurate application of coolant water. Investing in a
high-speed handpiece with fibre-optic light is strongly recommended. The slow-speed
handpiece accommodates the contra-angle handpiece used for polishing the teeth. The
three-way syringe can deliver either a stream of water or a spray of water and air, or
air only. It is uised to irrigate/lavage the mouth (water or water/air spray) and to dry
the teeth (air only). Some units come with two high-speed outlets (Fig. A2.7) and one
of these can be used with a sonic scaler. Suction is also available with some units (Fig.
A2.7).
FigureA2.7
 Compressed air-driven unit. This unit (IM3/Kruuse) has suction, a three-way syringe,
a slow-speed outlet (with prophy handpiece attached), a high-speed outlet (with a high-speed
handpiece with fibre-optic light attached) and a light for trans-illuminating teeth.
Investing in a compressed air-driven unit from the outset is recommended. The
high-speed handpiece greatly facilitates tooth sectioning, and the three-way syringe
(for lavage and drying) will aid in the removal of debris and improve visibility during
examination and any procedure. Suction is a real bonus. Investigate the maintenance
and service options offered before making your choice.
Burs: Dental burs are made of a variety of materials, including stainless steel,
tungsten carbide steel and 'diamond'. There is a wide selection of burs available to fit
both the slow-and the high-speed handpieces (Fig. A2.8). A selection of round, pear-
shaped, tapered fissure and straight fissure burs will be required for sectioning of teeth
and removal of alveolar bone. ‘Diamond' burs abrade rather than cut and may be safer
for the inexperienced uiser.
Figure A2.8
A selection of tungsten carbide burs. From the left are round, pear-shaped and
tapered fissure high-speed handpiece burs. Round and cross-cutting straight fissure burs for the slow-
 speed handpiece are shown on the right.
MISCELLANEOUS
Sharpening
instrument sharpening kits (stones and oil), with instructions, are available through
veterinary wholesalers.
Scalers and curettes should be sharpened before each ise, i.e. after cleaning and
sterilization. Sterilization will blunt the instruments and sharpening of dirty
instruments will contaminate the sharpening stone. Sharpening is performed to retain
the 70-80° angle between the face and the lateral surface of the working tip.
Luxators and elevators need to be sharpened regularly, usually after each use,
with a cylindrical Arkansas stone. If either have damage to the working end they
should be professionally reground.
Scalpel blade
The use of a scalpel blade to free the gingival attachment to the tooth is recommended
for both closed and open extraction techniques. A size 15 or 11 blade, used in the
handle, is ideal (Fig. A2.6).
Suture kit and suture material
A suture kit with small (ophthalmic) instruments should be available (Fig. A2.6). An
absorbable suiture material should always be used in the oral cavity. Monocryl?
(Polyglecaprone, manufactured by Ethicon) is currently my suture material of choice.
Suiction
Suction is invaluable. Excess water and debris can easily be removed, improving
visibility for the operator and increasing safety for the patient (reducing the risk of
aspiration). In addition, blood loss can be estimated more accurately. Invest in either a
S        i   
l1nit.
APPENDIX 3
Antibiotics and antiseptics
Antibiotics and antiseptics have a role to play in the management of oral diseases,
but their use should be limited and selective. Dosing regimens and strategies that lead
ANTIBIOTICS
Antibiotics can be used for prevention and for therapy.
Preventive lise of antibiotics
The main objective of preventive (prophylactic) antibiotics is to prevent treatment-
induced bacteraemia. Periodontal therapy, tooth extraction and surgical treatment of
           
minutes. The preventive or prophylactic uise of antibiotics should only be necessary in
Animals that should receive preventive antibiotic administration are:
· Geriatric or debilitated animals
· Patients with pre-existing heart and/or systemic diseases
· Immunocompromised patients.
In addition to preventing treatment-induced bacteraemia, preventive antibiotic
administration helps control wound infection. Consequently, animals that may benefit
· Gross infection
· Chronic stomatitis.
The choice of both type of prophylactic antibiotic and precise protocol remain
controversial. A wide variety of microorganisms is found in the flora of the mouth
and saliva. Antibiotic prophylaxis requires a drug with antimicrobial activity against
Gram-positive and Gramnegative aerobes and anaerobes. The timing  of
administration of antibiotics is critical. It is generally accepted that antibiotics should
be administered within 2 hours of the surgery and not continued for more than 4
hours after the procedure. In addition, antibiotics must be given at a high enough
dose to reach a tissue level fouir times higher than the MlC of the causative organisms.
A number of studies have shown that ampicillin, amoxicillin-clavulanic acid, certain
cephalosporins and clindamycin meet the above requirements in dogs, cats and
humans.
In our referral practice in the UK, we use either one of the following protocols.
In the presence of severe infection, we use 20 mg/kg i.v. of ampicillin prior to
surgery (at the time of catheter placement for anaesthesia). This dose is repeated after
6 hours if the catheter is still in place. Metronidazole is given intravenously in
addition to ampicillin to ensure a wider anaerobic spectrum.
Twice the therapeutic dose of amoxicillin or amoxicillin-clavulanic acid is given
20-30 minutes for the drug to disperse before the animal is anaesthetized and the
surgical procedure is started. In fractious animals, who are unlikely to tolerate an
intramuscular injection while conscious, we may choose to administer the antibiotic
immediately after induction of anaesthesia. Examination and patient preparation will
ensure that at least 20 minutes have elapsed before the suirgical procedure is started.
Therapeutic uise of antibiotics
The therapeutic use of antibiotics is indicated in patients with local and systemic
signs of established infection, i.e. marked swelling, pus formation, fever,
lymphadenopathy and an elevated white blood cell count. Clinical judgement is
important in making the diagnosis of infection and deciding on antibiotic therapy.
Antibiotic administration just ‘to be on the safe side' is not prudent use of
antimicrobials!
Principles for prudent use of therapeutic antibiotics:
1. The causative agent should be identified and the antibiotic sensitivity determined.
In the oral cavity, the organisms involved have been well defined and are known to
include a mixed flora of aerobic and anaerobic, Gram-positive and Gramnegative
bacteria. Empirical antibiotic treatment based on previous susceptibility studies is
therefore acceptable. Amoxicillin-clavulanic acid and clindamycin, and to a lesser
extent cephalosporins, provide broad antibacterial activity against oral infections in
dogs and cats. Culture is indicated for infection not responding to the initial
treatment, recurrent infection, postoperative wound infection and osteomyelitis.
2. The antibiotic with the narrowest anti bacterial spectrum shouild be used. This will
minimize the risk of development of resistant bacteria.
3 . Combinations of antibiotics are discouraged. The exception to this rule is the
combination of amoxicillin or cephalosporins with metronidazole in severe mixed
infections in which anaerobes are believed to play a major role.
4 . A bactericidal antibiotic is preferable to a bacteriostatic agent. A bactericidal
antibiotic (amoxicillin, cephalosporins and metronidazole) is preferred over a
bacteriostatic antibiotic (clindamycin), mainly because there is less reliance on host
inflammatory and immune reactions. Other considerations include the toxicity of the
           
antibiotic.
5. The antibiotic of choice must be administered at the proper dose and correct time
interval. Refer to a current Compendium of Data Sheets for Veterinary Products for
correct dosing and time interval. A 7-day course of antibiotics is generally
28 days. Suboptimal dosing and/or pulse therapy is not generally recommended.
P           
development of adverse reactions. Re-evaluation of the diagnosis is required if there is
           
adverse reactions (e.g. mild gastrointestinal side-effects and inappetance, due to
changes in the gut flora as a result of systemic antibiotics, with amoxicillin and
clindamycin) occasionally occur.
ANTIBIOTICS AND PERIODONTAL DISEASE
In veterinary practice, antibiotics are often used indiscriminately (incomplete
diagnostic work-up, incorrect dose and time intervals, inadequate monitoring of
The indication for preventive (prophylactic) use of antibiotics in animals with
gingivitis and/or periodontitis is well defined (indicated for individuals that cannot
cope with treatment-induced bacteraemia). In contrast, the indication for therapeutic
use of antibiotics in the management of periodontal disease is not well defined. A
required for discriminate (limited and selective) therapeutic use of antibiotics.
Periodontal disease is a clinical descriptive term for inflammation of the periodontium
cauised by the accumulation of dental plaque (a bacterial biofilm) on the tooth
surfaces. It is essential to differentiate between gingivitis (inflammation limited to the
gingiva) and periodontitis (inflammation involves periodontal ligament and alveolar
bone) prior to instituting any treatment.
Gingivitis
In gingivitis, daily mechanical removal of dental plaque (toothbrushing) will restore
inflamed gingivae to health and continued regular plaque removal will maintain
Periodontitis
The role of antibiotics for treatment of periodontitis is not clear and requires further
investigation. The two main questions that need to be answered before any general
mechanical plaque removal, and can they be a substitute for such treatment?
Can antimicrobial agents enhance the effect of mechanical plaque removal?:
There are many similarities between  human  and canine periodontal disease.
Consequently, data from human studies do have relevance to canine periodontal
disease.
In human dentistry, it is recognized that antimicrobial treatment is of secondary
importance in the treatment of periodontitis, compared to conservative periodontal
therapy.  Conservative   periodontal   therapy   involves   professional   cleaning
(supragingival scaling and polishing, subgingival scaling and root planing) in
combination with meticulous daily plaque removal by the patient. Where follow-up
S         
mechanical debridement as compared to mechanical debridement alone. No similar
study has been performed in dogs or cats.
Various antibiotic regimens have been tested for the treatment of human patients
not responding to conservative periodontal therapy. Although favourable short-term
effects have been reported, a great variability in treatment response among patients
has been noted. Re-emergence of putative pathogens has been observed and has been
care is provided, a demonstrable long-term retardation effect following short-term
in animals with periodontitis. At present, no such data is available.
To summarize, reducing the bacterial load postoperatively can be achieved by
mechanical plaque control. The use of systemic antibiotics in combination with
conservative periodontal therapy will at best achieve a retardation of the disease
process.
s     p     s
specific features of periodontal disease which suggest that treatment by antimicrobial
will not be sufficient. First, there is generally a lack of bacterial invasion of the tissues
there is the requirement that the agent is available at a sufficiently high
concentration in  the subgingival environment outside  the  periodontal  tissues.
inhibited, inactivated or degraded by non-target microorganisms. Thirdly, subgingival
plaque is a biofilm and it is known that biofilms effectively protect bacteria from
antimicrobial agents. Finally, the majority of microorganisms associated with
periodontal disease can frequently be detected at low numbers in the absence of
Successfully suppressed putative pathogens are likely to grow back if favourable
ecological conditions (e.g. deep periodontal pockets) persist. Therefore, continuous
control of ecological factors will be necessary after initial treatment.
It is important to understand that in vitro tests cannot be directly correlated to
clinical efficacy, as they do not reflect the true conditions found in periodontal
pockets. In particular, they do not account for the biofilm effect. Demonstration of in
         d     
periodontal disease.
        sd  i
recommended as prevention and/or first-line treatment of periodontal disease for any
species, and definitely not in the absence of mechanical periodontal therapy
Professional periodontal therapy followed by meticulous mechanical plaque control by
  s  d   m  s ( nd 
situations, e.g. severe local infection, or a systemically ill or immunocompromised
individual, antibiotics may be a useful adjunctive modality. However, the adjunctive
use of antiseptics rather than antibiotics is likely to achieve the same result and is
associated with fewer hazards, e.g. resistance development. In short, antibiotics have
not been shown to prevent periodontitis, neither have they been shown to have any
significant role in the treatment of periodon titis.
Antibiotic delivery: In the few specific situations where antibiotics may be a
useful adjunctive modality, the method of delivery needs to be determined. Antibiotic
agents may be delivered by direct placement into the periodontal pocket (local route)
or via the systemic route. Each method of delivery has specific advantages and
disadvantages.
Local therapy may allow the application of an agent at a concentration that
cannot be achieved by the systemic route. Local application may thus be particularly
           
visible lesions.
On the other hand, systemically administered agents may reach widely
distribuited microorganisms. Studies in man have shown that periodontal bacteria
may be distributed throughout the whole mouth in some patients, including non-
dental sites such as the dorsum of the tongue and/or the tonsillary crypts.
Disadvantages of systemic antibiotic therapy relate to the fact that the drug is
dispersed over the whole body and only a small portion of the dose actually reaches
the subgingival flora. In addition, adverse drug reactions, e.g. resistance, are more
ANTISEPTICS
Antiseptics have two major roles in veterinary dentistry and oral surgery, namely to:
1. Reduce the number of bacteria in the oral cavity prior to and during a procedure
2. Supplement mechanical plaque control.
It is good practice to rinse the oral cavity with a suitable antiseptic prior to and
         
induced by dental procedures. It also reduces the number of bacteria in the aerosol
       a    
operator and assistant.
Chlorhexidine gluconate, an aqueous, non-alcohol-containing solution, is
generally regarded to be the oral antiseptic of choice in animals. The correct
concentration should be used. A 0.2% solution is generally recommended as being
 o              s
solution throughout the procedure. Care should be taken to avoid the eyes.
Numerous chemical agents have been evaluated for the supplementation of
mechanical plaque control. Clinically effective antiplaque agents are characterized by
a combination of intrinsic antibacterial activity and good oral retention properties.
Agents that have been evaluated include chlorhexidine, essential oils, triclosan,
sanguinarine, fluorides, oxygenating agents, quaternary ammonium compounds,
substituted amino-alcohols and enzymes. Of these, the greatest effect on the reduction
of plaque and gingivitis can be expected from chlorhexidine. Chlorhexidine is the gold
 s     m   e  s
agents delivered from toothpastes, gels or mouth rinses can augment mechanical oral
hygiene to control the formation of supragingival plaque and the development of early
periodontal disease. It must be emphasized that none of these agents will prevent
gingivitis on their own, i.e. in the absence of mechanical plaque removal. Moreover,
all these agents are associated with adverse side-effects. These effects vary according
to the chemical agent, and include poor taste, a burning and/or numbing of oral
mucous membranes, staining of teeth and soft tissues, and allergic reactions. The use
of chemical antiplaque agents should be seen as adjunctive to the mechanical removal
of plaque.
 Some examples of situations where adjunctive use of topical chlorhexidine is
liseful are:
· Immediately postoperatively when discomfort from treatment (deep subgingival
debridement, multiple extractions) may prevent mechanical plaque removal with a
toothbrush
· Intermittent use when an inflammatory process flares up, e.g. cats with chronic
gingivostomatitis
· Adjunct to toothbrushing when toothbrushing is performed suboptimally, e.g. the
            p
efficient brushing.
      s s  s  s
It can be applied with a syringe, a piece of gauze or a toothbrush.
My preferred method of administering chlorhexidine is to use the aqueous
solution as an oral rinse once or twice daily (depending on the severity of
inflammation). The solution is dispensed into the oral cavity using a syringe. The
apply a gentle stream of chlorhexidine as a rinse. This is done on both sides of the
mouth. For cats and small dogs we recommend 3 ml per side (total of 6 ml); for
    s  n      s s
SUMMARY
The prevention and treatment of periodontal disease relies on mechanical plaque
control. If an owner is either unwilling or incapable of mechanically removing dental
plaque, they need to be aware that periodontitis and tooth loss are likely to occur.
Their pet will require professional intervention at regular time intervals and teeth
affected by periodontitis need to be extracted.
APPENDIX 4
Endodontics
Endodontics is the treatment of the pulp of the tooth (endo- = inside; -dontic =
tooth). Endodontic therapy is a specialist procedure, and should not be undertaken
without adequate training and supervised experience. The following outlines the more
common endodontic treatments that are required in small animal dentistry.
There are three pulpal treatments, each of which has specific indications. They
are:
1. Pulp capping
2. Partial pulpectomy with direct pulp capping
3. Root canal therapy.
Conventional root canal therapy  is the most commonly  indicated type of
endodontic treatment. It involves total removal of pulp tissue, i.e. total pulpectomy,
cleaning and filling of the root canal, followed by tooth restoration.
Root canal therapy is indicated when there is or may be irreversible pulp
periapical involvement) in the mature permanent tooth. Immature permanent teeth
are a special consideration and are dealt with separately.
The objectives of conventional root canal therapy are:
· To clean and disinfect the pulp chamber and root canals
· To fill the root canal(s) with a non-irritant, antibacterial material, thus sealing the
apex
· To close the access and exposure sites with a suitable restorative material.
Many different methods are employed in the preparation and filling of root
canals. In simple terms, root canal therapy involves removing the pulp, replacing it
with an inert material and restoring the tooth. The inflamed or dead pulp is removed
using special files. Once the pulp has been removed, the root canal is cleaned, both
mechanically with files but also chemically with a disinfectant. The clean and
disinfected root canal is then filled with inert material and the crown is restored with
a suitable restorative material. The tooth is not restored to its original shape and size,
                
would be likely to fail if this was attempted.
The  whole procedure is performed under general anaesthesia  with strict
radiographic control. It is time-consuming, as each step needs to be performed with
meticulous detail to ensuire a suiccessful ouutcome.
The outcome of conventional root canal therapy should be monitored
anaesthesia. Evidence of disease around the tip of the root at this time indicates the
need for further endodontic therapy or extraction of the tooth. Further endodontic
   s         s p
from this direction as well).
SPECIALCONSIDERATTONSWTTHIMMATURETEETH
A partial pulpectomy and direct pulp capping procedure is indicated for recent tooth
crown fractures with pulp exposure in immature teeth. An immature tooth has a thin
  d   n     x o   a a
aimed at maintaining a viable pulp, as this is needed for continued root development
Necrotic immature teeth require endodontic treatment if they are to be retained
The procedure is an adaptation of conventional root canal therapy, as already
described for the mature permanent tooth. The necrotic pulp tissue is gently removed,
and the pulp chamber and root canal thoroughly cleaned. It is important to remove all
the necrotic tissue, which usually extends slightly beyond the radiographically
verifiable open apex. Sterile calcium hydroxide powder or paste is packed into the root
canal, extending just beyond the apex. A degree of apexogenesis (normal root length
and apex development) or apexification (treatment-stimulated root closure) can be
stimulated if this procedure is performed. The exposuire site is sealed with a restorative
material. The tooth is monitored closely and the calcium hydroxide dressing is
changed approximately every 6 months, as a fresh dressing is more effective in
seen radiographically and if the apex is closed, a conventional root canal treatment
should be performed. A conventional root canal treatment can only be carried out if
calcium hydroxide dressings, it may be possible to obtain an apical seal using a
in most cases extraction of an immature tooth with a necrotic pulp is the best course
            e s
strategic permanent teeth that have undergone some degree of maturation.
It should be noted that immature teeth might well be present in the mature
such teeth is the same as for any immature permanent teeth, regardless of the actual
age of the animal.
Further reading
Books
rossley D, Penman S, editors. Manual of Small Animal Dentistry, 2nd Edition, Gloucestershire, UK:
British Small Animal Veterinary Association, 1995.
Drrel C. Veterinary Dentistry for the General Practitioner. Philadephia: WB Saunders, 2004.
arvey CE, Emily P. Small Animal Dentistry. Missouri: Mosby, 1993.
olmstrom S, editor. The Veterinary Clinics of North America Small Animal Practice: Canine Dentistry.
Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1998.
itt C. Small Animal Dentistry - A manual of techniques. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing, 2007.
itt C, Deeprose J, Crossley D, editors. Manual of Canine and Feline Dentistry, 3rd Edition,
Gloucestershire, UK: British Small Animal Veterinary Association, 2007.
erstraete FJM, editor. Self-assessment Colour Review of Veterinary Dentistry. London: Manson
 Publishing, 1999.
iggs RB, Lobprise HB. Veterinary Dentistry Principles and Practice. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven,
1997.
Articles
ndersson L, Lindskog S, Blomlof L, et al. Effect of masticatory stimulation on dentoalveolar ankylosis
after experimental tooth replantation. Endod Dent Traumatol. 1985;1:13-16.
periodontics, orthodontics and endodontics. International Endodontic Journal. 1985;18:109-118.
ndreasen JO. Review of root resorption systems and models. Etiology of root resorption and the
homeostatic mechanisms of the periodontal ligament. In: Davidovitch Z, editor. Proceedings of the
International Conference on the Biological Mechanisms of Tooth Eruption and Root Resorption.
Birmingham: Ebesco Media; 1988:9-21.
ndreasen JO, Kristerson L. The effect or limited drying or removal of the periodontal ligament.
1981;39:1-13.
a    s  n       
1996;13(3):97-99.
erger M, Schawalder P, Stich H, Lussi A. Feline dental resorptive lesions in captive and wild leopards
oyce EN, Logan El. Oral health assessment in dogs: study design and results. Journal of Veterinary
Dentistry. 1994;11(2):64-74.
larke DE, Cameron A (1997): Feline dental resorptive lesions in domestic and feral cats and the possible
link with diet. In: Proceedings of the 5th World Veterinary Dental Congress, Birmingham, UK, pp.
33-34.
oles S. The prevalence of buccal cervical root resorptions in Australian cats. Journal of Veterinary
Dentistry. 1990;7(4):14-16
rossley D, Dubielzig R, Benson K. Caries and odontoclastic resorptive lesions in a chinchilla (Chinchilla
lanigera). Veterinary Record. 1997;141:337-339.
eBowes LJ, et al. Association of periodontal disease and histologic lesions in multiple organs from 45
dogs. Journal of Veterinary Dentistry. 1996;13:57.
uPont G. Crown amputation with intentional root retention for advanced feline resorptive lesions - a
clinical study. Journal of Veterinary Dentistry. 1995;12(1):9-13.
   r s n  s          
and soft diets. Odontologisk Revy. 1965;16:31-41.
gelberg J. Local effects of diet on plaque formation and gingivitis development in dogs. Il. Effect of
askell RM, Gruffydd-Jones TJ. Intractable feline stomatitis. Veterinary Annual. 1977;17:195
old SI, Hasselgren G. Peripheral inflammatory root resorption. A review of the literature with case
reports. Journal of Clinical Periodontology. 1992;19:523-534.
orrel C (l994): The effects of fluoride and its possible uses in veterinary dentistry. In: Proceedings of
the World Veterinary Dental Congress, Philadelphia.
S                 
of Veterinary Dentistry. 1999;16(3):109-113.
 orrel C, Larsson A. Feline odontoclastic resorptive lesions: unveiling the early lesion. Journal of Small
Animal Practice. 2002;43:482-488.
orrel C, Rawlings JM. The role of a ‘dental hygiene chew' in maintaining periodontal health in dogs.
Journal of Veterinary Dentistry. 1996;13(1):31-34.
orrel C, Rawlings JM. The role of toothbrushing and diet in the maintenance of periodontal health in
dogs. Journal of Veterinary Dentistry. 1996;13(3):139-143.
orrel C, Inskeep G, Inskeep T. Benefits of a 'dental hygiene chew’ on the periodontal health of cats.
Journal of Veterinary Dentistry. 1998;15(3):135-138.
orrel C, Warrick J, Bierer T. Effect of a new dental hygiene chew on periodontal health in dogs. Journal
of Veterinary Dentistry. 1999;16(2):77-81.
ruffydd-Jones TJ. Gingivitis and stomatitis. In: August JR, editor. Consultations in Feline Internal
Medicine. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1991:387-402.
ammarstrom L, Blomlof L, Lindskog S. Dynamics of dentoalveolar ankylosis and associated root
resorption. Endod Dent Traumatol. 1989;5:163-175.
amp SE, et al. A macroscopic and radiologic investigation of dental diseases in dogs. Veterinary
Radiology. 1984;25:86.
arvey CE, Thornsberry C, Miller BR, et al. Antimicrobial susceptibility of subgingival bacterial flora in
dogs with gingivitis. Journal of Veterinary Dentistry. 1995;12:151-155.
arvey CE, Thornsberry C, Miller BR, et al. Antimicrobial susceptibility of subgingival bacterial flora in
cats with gingivitis. Journal of Veterinary Dentistry. 1995;12:157-160.
arvey CE, Shofer FS, Laster L. Correlation of diet, other chewing activities and periodontal disease in
North American client-owned dogs. Journal of Veterinary Dentistry. 1996;13(3):101-105.
    s        s   
    
ennet PR, Harvey CE. Anaerobes in periodontal disease in the dog: a review. Journal of Veterinary
Dentistry. 1991;2:8.
ennet PR, Harvey CE. Craniofacial development and growth in the dog. Journal of Veterinary Dentistry.
1992;9(2):11.
             s
1992;9(3):23.
opewell-Smith A. The process of osteolysis and odontolysis, or so-called ‘absorption' of calcified tissues:
a new and original investigation. The evidences in the cat. Dental Cosmos. 1930;72:1036-1048.
Journal of Small Animal Practice. 2001;42(2):67-70.
gham KE, Gorrel C, Blackburn JM, et al. Prevalence of odontoclastic resorptive lesions in a clinically
gham KE, Gorrel C, Bierer TL. Effect of a dental chew on dental substrates and gingivitis in cats. Journal
of Veterinary Dentistry. 2002;19(4):201-204.
nsen L, Logan El, Finney O, et al. Reduction in accumulation of plaque, stain and calculus in dogs by
shnessee JS, Hurvitz Al. Feline plasma cell gingivitis-pharyngitis. Journal of the American Animal
Hospital Association. 1983;19:179.
ing GN, Hughes FJ. Effects of occlusal loading on ankylosis, bone and cementum formation during
1999;70:1125-1135.
nowles JO, et al. Prevalence of feline calicivirus, feline leukaemia virus and antibodies to FIV in cats
with chronic stomatitis. Veterinary Record. 1989;124:336.
nowles JO, et al. Studies on the role of feline calicivirus in chronic stomatitis in cats. Veterinary
Microbiology. 1991;27:205.
evin J (l996): Tooth resorption in a Siberian tiger. In: Proceedings of the 1oth Annual Veterinary Dental
Forum, Houston, Texas, pp. 212-214.
ndhe J, Hamp S-E, Loe H. Plaque induced periodontal disease in beagle dogs. A 4-year clinical,
roentgenographical and histometrical study. Journal of Periodontal Research. 1975;10:243-255.
membrane. Scandinavian Journal of Dental Research. 1980;88:161-163.
ndskog S, Blomlof L, Hammarstrom L. Repair of periodontal tissues in vitro and in vivo. Journal of
Clinical Periodontology. 1983;10:188-205.
ndskog S, Blomlof L, Hammarstrom L. Cellular colonization of denuded root surfaces in vivo: cell
morphology  in dentin resorption and cementum  repair. Journal  of  Clinical  Periodontology.
1987;14:390-395.
specific plaque hypothesis. Journal of Dental Research. 1979;58:2404-2414.
ogan El, Finney O, Hefferren J. Effects of a dental food on plaque accumulation and gingival health in
dogs. Journal of Veterinary Dentistry. 2002;19(1):15-18
ommer MJ, Verstraete FJM. Prevalence of odontoclastic resorption lesions and periapical radiographic
lucencies in cats: 265 cases (1995-1998). Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association.
2000;217:1866-1869.
ove DN, et al. Bacteroides species from the oral cavity and oral associated diseases of cats. Veterinary
Microbiology. 1989;19:275.
ove DN, et al. The obligative and facultatively anaerobic bacterial flora of the normal feline gingival
margin. Veterinary Microbiology. 1990;22:267.
Ind EM, Bohacek LK, Dahlke JL, King VL, Kramek BA, Logan EI. Prevalence and risk factors for
odontoclastic resorptive lesions in cats. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association.
1998;212:392-395.
allonee DH, et al. Bacteriology of periodontal disease in the cat. Archives of Oral Biology. 1988;33:677.
iller BR, Harvey CE. Compliance with oral hygiene recommendations following periodontal treatment in
client-owned dogs. Journal of Veterinary Dentistry. 1994;11(1):18-19.
e RF, Witherspoon DE, Gutmann JL. Tooth resorption. Quintessence International. 1999;30:9-25
yman S, et al. Role of *diseased’ root cementum in healing following treatment of periodontal disease.
kuda A, Harvey CE. Etiopathogenesis of feline dental resorptive lesions. In: Harvey CE, editor. Veterinary
Clinics of North America, Small Animal Practice: Feline Dentistry. Philadelphia: WB Saunders;
1992:1385-1404.
eichart PA, Durr U-M, Triadan H, et al. Periodontal disease in the domestic cat. Journal of Periodontal
Research. 1984;19:67-75.
eindel JF, et al. Recurrent plasmacytic stomatitis-pharyngitis in a cat with esophagitis, fibrosing gastritis
and gastric nematodiasis. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association. 1987;190:65.
eiter A, Mendoza KA. Feline odontoclastic resorptive lesions: an unsolved enigma in veterinary
dentistry. Veterinary Clinics of North America Small Animal Practice. 2002;32:791-837.
   s         n
on dental calculi formation in the cat. Archives of Oral Biology. 1965;10:245-253.
osin E, Dow SW, Daly WR, et al. Surgical wound infection and use of antibiotics. In: Slatter DH, editor.
Textbook of Small Animal Surgery. 2nd Edition. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1993:84-95.
ngnes G. A pilot study on the effect of toothbrushing on the gingiva of a beagle dog. Scandinavian
Journal of Dental Research. 1976;84:106-108.
irkiala E, Asikainen SEA, Kanervo A, et al. The efficacy of tinidazole in naturally occurring periodontitis
in dogs: bacteriological and chemical results. Veterinary Microbiology. 1993;36:273-288.
ito R, et al. Oral administration of bovine lactoferrin for treatment of intractable stomatitis in feline
immunodeficiency  virus  (FIV)-positive and  FIV-negative  cats. American Journal of  Veterinary
Research. 1996;10:1443.
ligeyana Y, Grove TK, Strayhorn C, et al. Expression of adhesion molecules during tooth resorption in
feline teeth: A model system for aggressive osteoclastic activity. Journal of Dental Research.
1996;75:1650-1657.
         s  s  s    
Oral Biol0gy. 1988;33:677.
B         s        
gingivitis-stomatitis. Journal of Dental Research. 1990;69:877.
outherden P, Gorrel C. Treatment of a case of refractory feline chronic gingivostomatitis with feline
recombinant interferon mega. Journal of Small Animal Practice. 2007;48:104-106.
ockard CR. The genetic and endocrinic basis for differences in form and behaviour. The Americar
Anatomical Memoirs No. 19. Philadelphia: The Wistar Institute of Anatomy and Biology, 1941.
enorio AT, et al. Chronic oral infection of cats and their relationship to persistent oral carriage of feline
calici, immunodeficiency, or  leukaemia viruses. Veterinary Immunology and  Immunopathology.
1991;23:1.
nompson RR, et al. Association of calicivirus infection with chronic gingivitis and pharyngitis in cats.
Journal of Small Animal Practice. 1984;25:207.
comp JA, van Rijn L, Jansen J. Experimental gingivitis and frequency of toothbrushing in the beagle
dog model. Clinical findings. Journal of Clinical Periodontology. 1986;13:190-194.
editor. Veterinary Clinics of North America Small Animal Practice: Feline Dentistry. Philadelphia:
WB Saunders; 1992:1405-1416.
erhaert L. A removable orthodontic device for the treatment of lingually displaced mandibular canine
teeth in young dogs. Journal of Veterinary Dentistry. 1999;16(2):69-75.
erstraete FJM, Aarde Van RJ, Nieuwoudt BA, Mauer E, Kass PH. The dental pathology of feral cats on
Marion Island, Part I: periodontitis, external odontoclastic resorptive lesions and mandibular
thickening. J Comp Pathol. 1996;115:283-297.
              
Journal of Veterinary Research. 1998;59:692-695.
'aters L, et al. Chronic gingivitis in a colony of cats infected with feline immunodeficiency virus and
feline calicivirus. Veterinary Record. 1993;132:340.
hite SD, et al. Plasma cell stomatitis-pharyngitis in cats: 40 cases (1973-1991). Journal of the American
Veterinary Medical Association. 1992;200:1377.
'illiams CA, Aller Ms. Gingivitis/stomatitis in cats. In: Harvey CE, editor. The Veterinary Clinics of North
America Small Animal Practice: Feline Dentistry. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1992:1361.
from the continental United States and Canada and possible mode of transmission. Journal of the
American Veterinary Medical Association. 1989;194:213.
etner K, et al. Comparative immunological and virological studies of chronic oral diseases in cats.
Weiner Tierarztliche Monatsschrift. 1989;76:303.
Index
Notes
Page numbers in bold refer to figures and tables.
Readers are advised to refer to specific breeds for real-life studies related to each
condition presented within this book.
Theory refresher information can be located for each condition within each
chapter.
A
abrasion, 195
air polishing (particle blasting), 224
alveolar bone, 4-5
loss, 63, 64
alveoloplasty, 144, 144, 149
amoxicillin-clavulanic acid, 227, 228
ampicillin, 227
ankylosis, 106
anterior crossbite, 130
antibiotics, 227-30
delivery, 229-30
periapical disease, 189
preventive/prophylaxis, 227
therapeutic use, 227-8
antiseptics, 230
apical periodontitis, 171
attrition, 194
B
ball playing, 193, 195, 196
bearded collie
drooling, 150
malocclusion, 141-53, 142
oral examination, 141, 145, 150
orthodontic appliances, 146-9
rechecks, 143, 147
rubber toy technique, 142-9
tooth shortening, endodontic therapy, 150-3
treatment, 142, 146-7
wry bite, 151, 151
bite work, 181, 184
bone destruction, 173
brachycephalic breeds
malocclusion, 129
occlusion, 9, 9
buccal cavities, 116, 117, 118
burs, 226, 226
C
cage biting, 181, 184
calculus, 32, 99, 214
calculus forceps, 224
canines, 54, 194
malocclusion, 130, 135
maturation, 6
occlusion, 133, 134
upper, 184
carbohydrates, fermentable, 204
caries, 201-5
enamel demineralization, 202
fermentable carbohydrates, 204
cat(s)
dental formulae, 5
dental records, 19-20
long-haired, chronic gingivostomatitis, 79-84
dental record, 80
oral examination, 79, 81
radiographic findings, 79, 81, 81-3
treatment, 83
short-haired See short-haired cats
tooth eruption, 5, 5
cementum, 3, 4, 209
radiographic anatomy, 5-6
cephalosporins, 228
chemical plaque control, 220
chlorhexidine, 91-2, 100, 230
chronic gingivostomatitis (CGS), 75-101
feline immunodeficiency virus, 85-8
feline leukaemia virus, 85-8
iatrogenic injuries, 79-84
idiopathic, 89-93
periodontitis, 79-84
rechecks, 92, 92-3
see also specific breeds
clindamycin, 228
clinical attachment level (CAL), 21
complicated crown fracture (CCF), 159, 182, 182, 183
immature tooth, 190-2
periapical disease, 177-80
permanent tooth, 182
primary tooth, 182
compressed air-driven unit, 225, 225-6
conservative management, 119
coronal (crown) amputation, 107, 111, 112, 119, 120
cough, 61
cross-breed
ball playing, 193, 195, 196
complicated crown fracture, 190, 191
oral examination, 190, 191
rechecks, 191, 192
excessive wear, 193-6
oral examination, 193
radiographic findings, 193, 194
rechecks, 196
crown amputation, 107, 111, 112, 119, 120
crown formation, 198
crown fracture, 122, 177
classification, 159
complicated See complicated crown fracture (CCF)
lincomplicated See uncomplicated crown fracture (UCF)
curette, 223, 223
scaler vs., 223
cyst(s)
follicular (dentigerous), 44, 186
periapical, 171, 172, 178
radicular, 171
D
debridement, 175, 202, 203
dental calculus, 32, 99, 214
dental diets, 220
dental explorer, 210, 222, 222
dental film, 211
dental formulae, 5
dental interlock, malocclusion, 130-1
dental mirror, 222
dental plaque, 31-2, 99, 214
chemical control, 220
‘dental prophylaxis,', 33
dental records, 21, 222
abbreviations, 21
cats, 19-20
dogs, 17-18
numbering system, 21, 21
dentigerous (follicular) cysts, 44, 186
dentine, 3, 209
caries, 202, 204
radiographic anatomy, 5
tubules, 173
diagnostic techniques, 11-28
oral examination See oral examination
radiography See radiography
recording, 17-20, 21
diastema, gingiva, 142, 143, 143
direct pulp capping, 190, 191, 231-2
dog(s)
aggression, 177, 180
chronic gingivostomatitis, 78, 212
dental formulae, 5
dental records, 17-18
head shape see specific shape
tooth eruption, 5, 5
see also specific breeds
dolicocephalic breeds
malocclusion, 129
occlusion, 9, 9
draining fistula, 185
drooling, 79, 89, 150
dysphagia, 113
E
elevators, 224-5, 225
emphysema, 71
enamel, 3, 209
inorganic demineralization, 202
radiographic anatomy, 5
enamel dysplasia (hypoplasia), 197-200
definition, 197-8
management, 200
tooth discolouration, 198
endodontic lesions
classification, 172
 periodontal combination, 172, 215
endodontics, 231-2
immature teeth, 231-2
malocclusion, 154
 post-treatment radiography, 152, 205
 pulpal necrosis, 179
stages, 179-80
tooth fracture, 184
tooth shortening, 150-3
see also specific treatments
equipment, 221-6
dental, 221-2
oral, 221-2
patient considerations, 221
sharpening, 226
staff considerations, 221
see also specific equipment/instrumentation
ethical considerations, malocclusion, 131
euthanasia, 87
examination, oral See oral examination
external inflammatory root resorption (EIRR), 106
external root resorption, 182
extraction forceps, 225
F
feeding, selective, 98
feline calici virus (FCV)
chronic gingivostomatitis, 77
interferon, 77, 78
 positive, 97
feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV), 77, 85-8
feline leukaemia virus (FeLV), 77, 85-8
feline recombinant interferon omega (FelFN), 96
fermentable carbohydrates, 204
fistula
draining, 185
oronasal, 66
fluoride
caries, 202
enamel dysplasia, 200
follicular (dentigerous) cysts, 44, 186
foramina, radiographic anatomy, 6
forceps
calculus, 224
extraction, 225
furcation involvement, 16, 16, 55
G
general anaesthesia
clinical findings, xii-xiii
oral examination, 13-16, 21
German shepherd
bite work, 181, 184
complicated crown fracture with periapical disease, 177-80
oral examination, 177
radiographic findings, 177, 178
rechecks, 179
treatment, 178, 179
interceptive extractions, 137-40, 139
oral examination, 137
treatment, 138
jaw fracture, 181-4, 182
teeth fractures, 181-4
gingiva, 3, 4
cuff, 3, 4
diastema, 142, 143, 143
healthy, 167
lingual, 167
sulcus, 3, 4
gingival flap, 107
gingival index
evaluation, 14-15
scoring system, 15
gingival recession, 15-16, 16
gingivitis
antibiotics, 228
bleeding index, 14, 14
definition, 31
halitosis, 35, 38, 52, 54
Loe and Silness modified index, 14-15, 15
pathogenesis, 32
periodontitis, 35, 228
recurrent, 52, 54
toothbrushing, 100, 101
treatment, 33, 211
gingivostomatitis, chronic See chronic gingivostomatitis (CGS)
golden retriever
halitosis, 52, 60
periodontitis
dental record, 53, 58
oral examination, 52, 54
radiographic findings, 54, 55-6
treatment, 57
recurrent gingivitis, 52, 54
tooth extraction, 59
Great Dane
malocclusion, 154-7
endodontic procedure, 156
recheck, 155-6
treatment, 155
tooth extraction, 155
greyhound, chronic gingivostomatitis, 98-101, 99, 100
recheck, 100, 100-1
H
haemorrhage, 72
halitosis
chronic gingivostomatitis, 98
golden retriever, 52, 60
whippet, 35, 39, 41
hard tissue, root resorption, 105
home care, 211, 218-20
chemical plaque control, 220
client education, 218
dental diet, 220
toothbrushes, 218
toothbrushing See toothbrushing
toothpaste, 218-19
see also specific breeds; specific condition
horizontal bone destruction, 48, 55
hygiene chews, 220
T
iatrogenic injuries, 68-74
chronic gingivostomatitis, 79-84
tooth damage, 185-9
immature teeth, 174
complicated crown fracture, 190-2
endodontics, 231-2
inflammation, 174
necrosis, 174
inappetance, 79, 89, 113
incisors
lower, 41
malocclusion, 130
occlusion, 133, 134
reverse scissor 0cclusion, 136, 163
upper, 194
inflammation
immature tooth, 174
periodontal tissues, 106-7
inheritance issues, malocclusion correction, 131
instrumentation, 221-6
dental examination, 221-2
oral examination, 221-2
 patient considerations, 221
 periodontal therapy, 222-4
staff considerations, 221
tooth extraction, 224-6
see also specific instrumentation
interceptive extractions, 137-40
interceptive orthodontics,', 131, 138
interferon
chronic gingivostomatitis, 96
feline calici virus, 77, 78
intra-oral maxillary acrylic bite plane, 147, 147
intra-oral radiography
bisecting angle technique, 26, 26-7, 49
definition, 22
digital system, 28
equipment, 22-3, 23
exposure settings, 24
materials, 22-6
orientation, 23-4
parallel technique, 26, 26, 49
periodontitis, 49
X-ray film See X-ray film
X-ray unit See X-ray unit
jaw fracture, 72, 181-4
iatrogenic malocclusion, 162-7
T
Labrador retriever, iatrogenic tooth damage, 185-9
oral examination, 185
radiographic findings, 185-6, 186
treatment, 189
lip ulceration
 periodontitis, 45
upper, 108
lower incisors, 41
luxator, 224
M
malocclusion, 7, 127-67, 213
alveoloplasty, 141-4
brachycephalic breeds, 129
dental interlock, 130-1
displacement, degree of, 145
ethical considerations, 131
iatrogenic, 162-7
interceptive extractions, 137-40
management, 131-2
permanent dentition, 131
 permanent tooth extraction, 158-61
 persistent primary teeth, 133-6
 prevention, 131
primary dentition, 131
rubber toy technique, 141-4
skeletal See skeletal malocclusion
tooth shortening, endodontic therapy, 150-3
treatment, 131
mandible
draining fistula, 185, 186
narrow, 129-30, 144
periodontitis, 64
swelling, 185, 186
mandibular brachygnathic bite, 129, 145
mandi bular canines
malocclusion, 134
persistent primary teeth, 130
rubber toy technique, 142-3, 144
permanent, 134
mandibular expansion device, 147, 148
mandi bular fracture, 70
iatrogenic malocclusion, 162
mandibular prognathic bite, 129, 130
maxillary canines, 130, 134
MCQs, 209-17
mesocephalic breeds, 7, 8, 9
occlusion, 7, 8
metronidazole, 227
micromotor unit, 225
modified Loe and Silness gingival index, 14-15, 15
molars, 90
extraction, 77
malocclusion, 130
muscle atrophy, 162-5
N
necrosis, 174
non-healing extraction site, 45
nutrient canals, 6
0
occlusion, 7-9, 213
odontoclastic resorptive lesions (ORLs), 106-7, 109
odontoclasts, 109
oedema, sublingual, 71
oral examination, 13-21
conscious animal, 13
equipment, 221-2
general anaesthesia, 13-16, 21
instrumentation, 221-2
recording, 17-20, 21
see also specific breeds; specific conditions
oronasal communication, 71
narrow mandible, 129-30
oronasal fistulae repair, 66
oropharynx, 81
orthodontic(s)
appliances, 145-9
human, 131, 159
interceptive, 131
therapy, 149
veterinary, 131, 159
osteomyelitis, 172, 215, 228
‘overshot,', 129, 145
P
palatal mucosa
infected indentations, 155
malocclusion, 141
partial pulpectomy, 190, 191, 231-2
particle blasting (air polishing), 224
pellicle, 31
periapical abscess, 17l, 172
periapical cyst, 171, 172, 178
periapical disease, 169-205
antibiotics, 189
complicated crown fracture, 177-80
pathology, 215
pulpal inflammation, removal techniques, 178
pulpal necrosis, 186
see also specific conditions
periapical granuloma, 171-2, 178
periapical inflammation, 173
periapical lesions, 56, 171-2
periapical sclerosis, 171-2
periodontal abscess, 56, 178
periodontal attachment loss (PAL), 38-9
periodontal disease, 29-74, 214
aetiology, 31-2
antibiotics, 228-30
antimicrobial agents vs. mechanical plaque removal, 228-9
caries, 201-5
definition, 201-2
dental calculus, 32
dental plaque, 31-2
human vs. canine, 228-9
iatrogenic injuries, 68-74
natural progression, 35-44
pathogenesis, 32
treatment, 33-4
equipment, 222-4
instrumentation, 222-4
see also specific condition
periodontal-endodontic lesions, 172, 215
periodontal ligament, 4
periodontal pocket, 48
 periodontal probe, 210, 221-2, 222
periodontal probing depth (PPD), 15, 15, 38, 52-60
periodontal surgery, 33-4
periodontitis, 182
advanced, 48
antibiotics, 228, 229
apical, 171
chronic gingivostomatitis, 79-84
definition, 31
intra-oral radiography, 49
pathogenesis, 32
radiographic findings, 48
signs/symptoms
cough, 61
halitosis, 35, 39, 41, 52
non-healing extraction site, 45
recurrent gingivitis, 52
ulcerated lip, 45
systemic effects, 61-7
toothbrushing, 33
tooth extraction, 71
treatment, 33-4, 229
periodontium, 3-5, 4, 209, 216
oral examination, 14-16, 21
radiographic anatomy, 6
structure, 3-4, 4
see also specific tissues
periosteal elevator, 224-5
peripheral inflammatory root resorption (PIRR), 106
permanent dentition, 2l, 131
 permanent incisors, persistent primary teeth, 1345
permanent teeth
complicated crown fracture, 182
extraction, 158-61
malocclusion, 131
tooth shortening, 131
persistent primary teeth, 211-12
extraction, 136
malocclusion development, 133-6
extraction issues, 135, 136
plaque See dental plaque
plaster of Paris models, 147, 148
polishing, 224
premolar, rostral, 135, 136
premolars, 90, 194
extraction, 77
malocclusion, 130
primary dentition, 21, 131
primary teeth
complicated crown fracture, 182
malocclusion, 131, 138
 persistent See persistent primary teeth
roots, 131, 138
prophy paste, 224
pulp, 3
inflammation, 109, 182
necrosis, 171, 186
pulp capping, direct, 190, 191, 231-2
pulp cavity
immature tooth, 174
radiographic anatomy, 6
pulp disease, 169-205
pulpal reactions, 171
see also specific conditions
pulpectomy, 179
partial, 190, 191, 231-2
pulpitis, 171, 214
R
radicular cyst, 171
radiography, 22-8
anatomical landmarks, 5-6
dental, 22, 23
diagnostic view, 22, 23
extra-oral placement, 27, 27
full-mouth recommendations, 22
interpretation, 28
intra-oral See intra-oral radiography
parallax effect, 27-8
see also specific condition
respiratory disease, 64
restoration, 179, 180, 202, 203
reverse scissor 0cclusion, 136, 163
Rinn box, 24
root canal therapy, 231
root remnant removal, 88
root resorption, 113-15, 212
classification system
inflammatory, 106-7
replacement, 105-6
surface, 105
clinical lesions, 116-21
clinical signs, absence, 108-12
external, 213
hard tissue, 105
idiopathic, 122-6
pink tooth, 105
 prognosis, 120
trigger mechanism, 105
virtually edentulous, 113-15
rostral displacement, 130
rostral premolar, 135, 136
rotary scalers, 224
rubber toy technique
malocclusion, 141-9
toy size, 143
S
scaler, 223
curette vs., 223
scaling, 222-4
hand instruments, 222-3, 223
mechanical instruments, 223-4
see also specific instruments
scalpel blade, 226
selective feeding, 98
Shetland sheepdog
discoloured teeth, 197
enamel dysplasia, 197-200, 199
management, 200
trea tment, 198-200
shih-tzu, mandibular fracture, 68-74
dental record, 69, 73
oral examination, 68
radiographic findings, 68, 70-1
rechecks, 74
treatment, 72
short-haired cats
chronic gingivostomatitis, 85-97
idiopathic, 89-93, 95
oral examination, 85, 86-7, 89, 94, 95
radiographic findings, 85, 86-7, 90
rechecks, 96, 96-7
tooth extraction, 89-97
treatment, 87-8, 96
 periodontitis, 45-51
dental record, 46, 50
oral examination, 45, 47
oral problem list, 47
radiographic findings, 45, 48
rechecks, 51
treatment, 49, 51
root resorption, 108-15
radiographic findings, 108-9, 109, 111
rechecks, 110, 111
skeletal malocclusion, 129-30, 151, 154
inheritance, 151
interceptive orthodontics, 137, 140
sonic scalers, 223
springer cross, uncomplicated crown fractures, 173-6
oral examination, 173
periapical complications, 173-6
radiographic findings, 173, 174
rechecks, 175-6
treatment, 175
springer spaniel, iatrogenic malocclusion, 162-7
mandibular fracture, 162
oral examination, 162-3
radiographic findings, 164, 164, 166
rechecks, 165-6, 167
treatment, 165
squamous cell carcinoma, 78, 113, 115
Staffordshire bull terrier, caries, 201-5
oral examination, 201
radiographic findings, 201
treatment, 202-3, 205
stomatitis, 95
sublingual oedema, 71
suction, 226
suture kit, 226
suture material, 226
T
teeth
anatomy, 2-9
buccal cavities, 116
discolouration, 105, 182, 197, 198
extraction See tooth extraction
fractures, 71, 181-4
immature See immature teeth
maturation, 5, 6
missing, 182, 186
mobility grading, 16, 16
physiology, 2-9
polishing, 224
primary See primary teeth
radiographic anatomy, 5-6
root drilling, 186
scaling, 222-4
shortening, 140, 150-7
structure, 3, 4
unerupted, 182
see also specific teeth; specific tissu1es
temporomandibular joint (TMJ), 163, 164
thermal bone injury, 70-1
tooth See teeth
toothbrushes, 218, 219
toothbrushing, 218
frequency, 219
technique, 219, 219-20, 220
tooth extraction, 59, 77, 184, 212
complications, 70-2
equipment, 224-6, 225
extraction forceps, 225
flap closure, 160
instrumentation, 224-6
interceptive, 137-40
non-healing, 47
odontoclastic resorptive lesions, 107
open technique, 160
see also specific breeds; specific conditions
toothpaste, 218-19
Triadan system, 21, 21
tungsten carbide burs, 226, 226
U
uultrasonic scalers, 223-4
uncomplicated crown fracture (UCF), 159, 174, 182, 215
periapical complications, 173-6
“undershot,, 129
upper canines, 135, 136
upper incisors, 194
upper lip ulceration, 108
V
Virbagen, 96
W
weimaraner, permanent tooth extraction, 158-61, 161
genetics, 161
oral examination, 158
radiographic findings, 158-9, 159
treatment, 160
whippet, halitosis, 35-44
dental record, 36-7, 42-3
oral examination, 35-41, 38
rechecks, 39-41, 39-41
treatment, 39
wry bite, 129, 151, 151
X
X-ray film, 23
handling, 24-6
mounting, 24-6, 25
 processing, 24
sizes, 24
X-ray unit, 23, 23
exposure settings, 24
V
Yorkshire terrier
periodontitis, 61-7
dental record, 62, 65
oral examination, 61, 63
radiographic findings, 61, 63, 63-4
treatment, 66, 66
persistent primary teeth, 133-6
oral examination, 133
recheck, 136
treatment, 135