SUEFITZMAURICE
SAUNDERSSOLUTIONSIN
VETERINARYPRACTICE
Series Editor:FredNind
SMALLANIMAL
NEUROLOGY
Unique new case-based approach
Modern,clearly designed and illustrated
Ideally suited for CPD or as an examrevision aid
SAUNDERS
ELSEVIER
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.com
SAUNDERSSOLUTIONS IN
VETERINARY PRACTICE
SMALL ANIMAL
NEUROLOGV
DEDICATION
To my parents
Commissioning Eaitor: Robert Edwards
Development Eoitor: Ewan Halley
Project Manager: Anitha Rajarathnam
Designer/Design Direction: Charles Gray
/lustrator: Deborah Maizels
SAUNDERSSOIUTIONSIN
VETERINARYPRACTICE
SMALL ANIMAL
NEUROLOGV
Series Editor: Fred Nind BVM&S, MRCVS
Susan N. Fitzmaurice
BVSc DipACVIM(Neurology) DipECVN MRCVS
With contributions by
Edward Friend BVetMed CertSAS MRCVS
SAUNDERS
ELSEVIER
Edinburgh London New York Oxford Philadelphia St Louis Sydney Toronto 2010
SAUNDERS
ELSEVIER
@ 201 0, Elsevier Limited. All rights reserved.
 No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or
mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any information storage and retrieval system, without
Department: phone: (+1) 215 239 3804 (U5) or (+44) 1865 843830 (UK): fax: (+44) 1865 853333; e-mail:
healthpermissions@elsevier.com. You may also complete your request on-line via the Elsevier website at
http ://ww.elsevier.com/permissions.
 First published 2010
ISBN: 978-0-7020-2911-0
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
 A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
 A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress
Notice
Jo Aessanau awonaq Aew Adeyaut bnjp pue juawieann anjoeid ui sabueuo 'ahpamouy ano uapeouq 
 appropriate. Readers are advised to check the most current information provided (i) on procedures
featured or (i) by the manufacturer of each product to be administered, to verify the
recommended dose or formula, the method and duration of administration, and contraindications. It is
the responsibility of the practitioner, relying on their own experience and knowledge of the patient, to
make diagnoses, to determine dosages and the best treatment for each individual patient, and to take all
appropriate safety precautions. To the fullest extent of the lavw, neither the Publisher nor the Authior
 assumes any liability for any injury and/or damage to persons or property arising out or related to any use
of the material contained in this book.
The Pubfisher
Printed in China.
Working together to grow
libraries in developing countries
www.elseviet.com | www.bookaid.otg I www.sabte.otg
ELSEVIER
BOOK AIm
Sabre Foundation
The
publisher's
your source for books,
policy is to use
 journals and multimedia
pe per manufactured 
ELSEVIER
in the health sciences
from sustalna ble forests
www.elsevierhealth.com
Contents
Introduction
vii
5 CRANIAL NERVE FUNCTION
Author's note
ix
23 Blindness
115
Acknowledgements
xi
 24 The control of pupil diameter
119
 25 Alteration in pupil function
121
1 THE NEUROLOGICAL CASE
26 Secretions
125
1 Taking a history
27 Alteration of eyelid position and movement 
127
3
28 Horner's syndrome
6
131
2  The neurological examination
29 Idiopathic facial paralysis
135
3 Localizing lesions
34
30 Dropped jaw
138
31  Middle ear disease
141
2 ALTERATION IN MENTAL STATe
 32  Otogenic intracranial infection
143
4 Alteration in mental state - an introduction
47
33 Deafness
146
34 Sneezing
52
150
5 Head trauma
59
35 Coughing
152
6  Metabolic encephalopathy: insulinoma
 36 Change in voice and swallowing
158
7 Metabolic encephalopathy: hepatic
encephalopathy
62
63
6 GAIT
8 Metabolic encephalopathy: osmolality
 9 Granulomatous meningoencephalitis
66
37 Gait - an introduction
163
38 UMN: spinal empyema
167
3 BEHAVIOUR CHANGE
39 UMN: spinal cord infarction
171
40 UMN: vertebral malformation
174
10 Behaviour change - an introduction
71
 41 UMN: intervertebral disc disease
177
11  Loss of house-training
74
42 UMN: spinal fracture
181
12 Defecation: faecal incontinence
79
43 LMN paresis and paralysis - an introduction
184
13 Psychological
82
44 LMN paresis and paralysis: acquired
14 Intracranial arachnoid cyst
84
myasthenia gravis
186
15 Aggression
86
 45 LMN paresis and paralysis: brachial plexus
avulsion
194
4 SEIZURES
 46 LMN paresis and paralysis: flaccid tail
196
47 Ataxia: spinal ataxia
199
16 Seizures - an introduction
91
48 Ataxia: cerebellar ataxia
205
17 Skull tumour
94
49 Ataxia: vestibular ataxia
208
18 Meningioma
96
19 Cerebral haemorrhage
97
7 LAMENESS
20 Hydrocephalus
100
 21 Idiopathic epilepsy
104
50 Lameness - an introduction
213
 22 Post-ictal behaviour change
109
 51 Lameness: nerve root compression
214
vi
CONTENTS
 52 Lameness: nerve root tumours
218
12 URINARY INCONTINENCE
53 Lameness: ischaemia
221
73  Urinary incontinence - an introduction
293
74 No attempt to urinate
295
8 POSTURE
75 Leaks, dribbles urine
297
 54 Posture － an introduction
227
55 Torticollis
229
APPENDICES
56 Collapse
232
MCQs
301
MCQ - Answers
307
9 BALANCE
 57 Balance - an introduction
241
Appendix 1
Abbreviations
244
309
58 Loss of balance
247
Appendix 2
59 Truncal ataxia
250
Cerebrospinal fluid and the ventricular
60 Ventroflexion of the neck
system
310
Appendix 3
10 PALPATION
Collection of CSF
312
255
Appendix 4
61  Muscle tone - an introduction
CSF analysis
314
62 Tremor
258
63 Tetanus
260
Appendix 5
 64  Hypocalcaemia
Imaging the nervous system
315
264
266
Appendix 6 
65 Trismus
Neuropathology
319
 66 Bilateral atrophy of the masticatory muscles
268
67 Unilateral atrophy of the masticatory muscle 270
Appendix 7
Referral of a patient
325
11PAIN
Further reading
327
275
Index
329
68 Pain - an introduction
69 Neck pain
278
 70 Meningitis of large breed dogs
281
71  Retroperitoneal disease
284
72 Scratching
286
Introduction
Saunders Sofutions in Veterinary Practice series is a new
Joyce Rodenhuis and Mary Seager were the inspira-
range of veterinary textbooks which will grow into a mini
tion for the Series. Robert Edwards has overseen their
library over the next few years, covering all the main
writing and production. The Series editor and the indi-
disciplines of companion animal practice.
vidual authors are grateful for their foresight in commis-
Readers should realize that it is not the authors' inten-
sioning the Series and their unfailing support and
tion to cover all that is known about each topic. As such
guidance during their production.
the books in the Sofutions Series are not standard refer-
ence works. Instead, they are intended to provide practi-
NEUROLOGY
cal information on the more frequently encountered
conditions in an easily accessible form based on real-life
Neurological cases can be challenging, confusing and
case studies. They cover that range of cases that fall
even downright frightening. In many cases we are
between the boringly routine and the referral. The books
dealing with one of the few organs in which severely
ido e u isaaui jenned e yim siauonoeid diau l
compromised function is not compatible with life. It is
 or those preparing for a specialist qualification. The cases 
easy to think that all neurological cases are hopeless.
are arranged by presenting sign rather than by the
This book shows you that this is not always the case. For
underlying pathology, as this is how veterinary surgeons 
many patients, treatment is available which can provide
will see them in practice
an acceptable quality of life.
It is hoped that the books will also be of interest to
But before selecting that treatment a diagnosis must
veterinary students in the later parts of their course and
be established. Neurological diagnosis rests on the
to veterinary nurses.
bedrock of a thorough and logical clinical neurological
Continuing professional development (CPD) is man-
examination. All the electronic wizardry in the world will
datory for many veterinarians and a recommended
not give you a diagnosis without it. This book will guide
practice for others. The Saunders Series will provide a
you through that basic process, indicate the sort of extra
CPD resource which can be accessed economically
help that electronic wizardry can sometimes provide and
hopefully mean that those neurological cases are not so
also provide busy veterinary practitioners with quick
frightening after all.
access to authoritative information on the diagnosis and
 Even for those cases that do end up being put to
treatment of interesting and challenging cases. The
sleep, you will at least now know why you are doing it.
robust cover has been made resistant to some of the
more gruesome contaminants found in a veterinary
Fred Nind
clinic because this is where we hope these books will be
Series Editor
used.
2010
vii
This page intentionally left blank
Author's note
If you read no further, consider these three things:
would normall conduct an investigation into a case.
1. Diagnosing the neurological disease is cheap and
First, quiz the owners. Second, examine the patient.
requires only observation and interpretation (i.e.
Then localize the lesion. Finally, if necessary, conduct
there is no excuse for not trying).
further diagnostic tests. Neurologic diseases are only
2. Differentiating which disease is responsible for the
briefly described, as examples of the way clinical signs
neurological signs may be possible based on signal-
can present. Diagnostic testing is only briefly summa-
ment and history (i.e. the answer may be in front of
rized, because if you have got that far in case manage-
you).
ment, you should be reading more detailed textbooks
3. Imaging of the nervous system can never replace the
wl on pan aey I Ahojoued jesjup pue Aojoen uo
neurological examination and history in the manage-
the amount of neuroanatomy as it frightens most vets
ment of cases (i.e. you cannot rely on technology)
away from clinical neurology but it is difficult to throw
away specific terminology and not run the risk of obscur-
Most people can't do the first, haven't checked the
ing the message.
second, and put their faith in the third. These people are
The vast proportion of a diagnosis comes from the
called clients. You know better.
history and clinical examination, so buy this book instead
The aim of this book is to make the recognition and
of an MRl machine.
 interpretation of neurological signs easier for those who
work in general practice. It is ordered in a way that I
Susan Fitzmaurice, 2010
ix
This page intentionally left blank
Acknowledgements
Thank you to Professor Brian Farrow of the University of
assistance with the more flamboyant neurological cases
Sydney's School of Veterinary Medicine, whose teaching 
over the years.
inspired me to learn more about neurology, and Profes-
None of this would have been possible without refer-
sor Sheldon Steinberg of the University of Pennsylvania's
rals from the general practitioners: I am grateful to be
School of Veterinary Medicine, my residency supervisor,
trusted with your clients' animals.
who enabled me to do so.
Thank you to Fred Nind for asking me to write
I appreciate the tremendous support of the veterinary
something concise and practical about small animal
nurses with whom I have worked over the years, and
neurology for Elsevier Ltd, to Edward Friend for his con-
tributions to Chapters 7 and 35, and lastly, to Graeme,
rals. Particular thanks to the AHT Departments of Patho-
for everything.
logy and Radiology, who have provided valuable
XI
This page intentionally left blank
SECTION
1
THE
NEUROLOGICAL
CASE
Chapter 1
Taking a history
Chapter 2
The neurological examination 
6
Chapter 3
 Localizing lesions
34
This page intentionally left blank
1
Taking a history
INTRODUCTION
COMPONENTS OF THE HISTORY
Allowing the client to describe the problem without
Signalment
interruption is the fastest way to take a complete history.
The age, sex and breed of an animal. The incidence of
Admittedly, the information usually arrives in a disorga-
many diseases is determined by the signalment.
nized order with extraneous detail or no detail at all.
 Points made will need clarification. Using a template to
Presenting complaint
collect details aids the memory of the interviewer and
The sign or group of signs which lead to the consuftation
assimilates the points of interest in a logical order.
and the reason for the referrar. It may be a historical
● Never assume the client understands the medical
problem or one that is present at the time of the exami-
jargon they use.
nation. Generally, the presenting complaint consists of
● Never assume the past diagnosis is correct.
the latest or most catastrophic problem to befall the
● Many clients describe left and right orientation as
 animal. Chronic clinical disease may go unreported by
they see it, facing the animal. Ask them to point out 
the owner but must not be ignored by the veterinarian.
the side of the problem or ask if it is the same side
Concurrent abnormalities affect clinical decisions,
as that currently visibly affected
overall prognosis, financial outlay, as well as owner
compliance
Gentle persistence is required. No one likes to be made
to feel stupid, so be tactful when phrasing questions.
Last normal
Allow enough time, but do keep control of the situation.
When the presenting complaint began. Clarify by asking
After being encouraged to recount the events, owners
if the animal was totally normal prior to that point
 sometimes repeat the same story several times at which
in time.
point it would be appropriate to gently deflect them
with a new line of enquiry. Elicit information if it is not
History narrative
volunteered but avoid leading questions which limit
The description of the animal's abiities, disabiities,
 observations to those suggested by the examiner. Listen
generalhealthanddailyroutine.Clarify theextentof the
to all parties in the exam room, including children. It is
animal's ability with specific questions:
vital to get a description of what the client saw or heard
rather than their interpretation.
Strength/gait/posture:
Example: Dog presented for seizures:
● Can he walk up/down stairs?
Client: 'My dog fell down the stairs and hit its
● Can he get into the car himself?
head.'
● Can he climb onto furniture by himself?
uaddey leun aas noA pla, 1aA
● Can he lift a hindlimb to urinate?
Client: 'No, but I heard a noise and found the
● Can he maintain a squatting position to defecate
dog on the floor thrashing about, hitting the
(without collapsing)?
Wall with its limbs.
● Can he keep up with you on a walk?
3
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
Mental state:
Ask the owner to compare the animal's ability at the
time of examination to that occurring at the commence-
● Is he house-trained? Has there been any urination/
defecation in the house? Where? When?
ment of signs for a better idea of the progression of the
disease.
● Does he respond to commands?
● Does he recognize/greet people/animals and have the
interactions changed?
● Will he fetch specific toys if requested?
● Has his sleep pattern changed?
CLINICAL TIP
●How does he normally react at a veterinary
 Sometimes a problem has been going on so long
practice?
that owners accept it as normal or assume 'old
age' is to blame.
CLINICAL TIP
Despite being specifically asked, owners
sometimes will not mention that the animal has
Treatment
defecated or urinated in the house. Owners
describe it as 'an accident' and continue to say the
● What medications have been used? Start/finish dates
pet is house-trained. The vet thus misses an early
Compliance (check the amount dispensed and ask
 sign of cerebral disease, polyuria, urinary or faecal
how much is left over)
incontinence or psychological disturbance. It is still
● Serum levels at various anticonvulsant dose rates
worth asking if the animal is house-trained as it
● Response to physical rest. Clarify what the owner
shows the animal was capable of learning and
means by 'resting' the animal
retaining information at some stage in its life.
● Side-effects noted: polyuria (PU), polydipsia (PD),
polyphagia (PP), panting, sedation, hyperactivity,
ataxia, vomiting, etc.
● Adverse reactions: dose-related/idiosyncratic
● Dietary
supplements,
homeopathy,
alternative
Seizures:
therapies.
● Pre-ictal
Past history
● Is there any warning? Any triggers?
● Description.
● BlOP: been in the owner's possession. When did the
● Ictus
owner acquire the dog? From whom?
● Time of day? Activity at or prior to the onset of
● Any major illness/trauma?
seizures?
● Has there been any previous occurrence of the same
● Single or multiple
problem? Similar or different?
● Duration
Frequency
OTHER BODY SYSTEMS
● Description: physical movement, mental state, pro-
gression of event, each event similar or variable.
It is very important to review the function of other body
● Post-ictal
systems. Disease of other organ systems can produce
● How does the seizure end? Description of activity/
signs suggestive of primary neurological disturbance
mental state.
(depression/lethargy, exercise intolerance, weakness,
● Duration of recovery period, until the animal is back
collapse, muscle spasm, pain).
to its normal mental state and activity
Some owners regard this as an irrelevant diversion
from the main problem so it can help to introduce these
Progression of signs
questions with a brief comment on the importance of
● Improving, stabilized, worsening, waxing and waning/
 an overview of their animal's general health.
episodic/intermittent
Inquire about the occurrence of vomiting, diarrhoea,
● Response to rest/exercise/time of day/feeding.
J 'ubiam Apoq ul abueup Aue jo buizaaus 'buyonon
1  Taking a history
5
vomiting is reported, request a description to determine 
Travel
if regurgitation is the real problem. Any alteration in
thirst should be quantified and compared with past
 parasitic and saprophytic infectious disease not found in
behaviour. Appetite change, ability to prehend and 
the local area. Check for exposure to other animals in
swallow food, and urination and defecation ability need
kennels.
to be questioned.
Environment
Daily routine
Animals with chronic loss of vision may appear to
It is important to discover the role of the animal in the
Mau e on paou uaum ssaupug asuo uappns doaaan
owner's lifestyle as this will influence treatment decisions
location or if furniture is rearranged. Exchanging wall-
and client expectations, e.g. working, agility, hunting,
to-wall carpet for floorboards removes a pet's ability to
show dog vs. geriatric pet. An owner with a bad back
grip, and accentuates previously subclinical weakness
living in an apartment block with no elevator is unable
and ataxia. Other animals in the household or kennels
to carry a paralysed dog outside. A detailed inquisition
may be affected due to hereditary or environmental
of the owners' circumstances is not required but do
factors (e.g. shared food source).
remember to address future treatment requirements in
your questioning
Anything else?
● "What does he do all day?"
This conversational gambit gives the client a chance to
● Exercise and feeding: when and how much?
mention things they have only just remembered or may
● House-trained; urination/defecation habits
not have thought relevant when first recounting the
● Interactions with other humans/animals.
history. It can be incredibly helpful
The neurological
examination
Examination of nervous system function is achieved
a reflex action). The menace response, proprioception
by observation, palpation and inducing reflexes and
and pain perception may be absent or inconsistently
responses. The following section will explain the signifi-
present with a decreased alertness.
cance of the tests and how to perform them
Each section of the examination is simply a part of
Examination
the jigsaw (Fig. 2.1). The whole picture becomes clear
Observe the animal. Notice its interaction with other
once all the information is in place.
animals and humans in the waiting room. Once in the
examination room, remove any leads and allow the dog
to wander around the examination room unrestricted
unless there is a loss of balance, history of trauma,
CLINICAL TIP
paralysis, or any possibility of aggression. This can be
The more you practise, the easier it gets.
done while the history is being taken. Most dogs inves-
tigate new surroundings and then either rest, return to
the owner for attention, or try and escape out of the
examination room. If the latter occurs, ask the owner to
MENTAl STATe
restrain the dog. If the dog appears abnormally quiet, or
is excessively timid, it is useful to walk the doq outdoors
Aim
and see if its mental state changes. Ask the owner if the
To discover the degree of mental alertness and the
behaviour witnessed is the normal reaction of the animal
quality of responsiveness.
 at the veterinary practice or at home
Most cats will refuse to exit their cat baskets. Once
Significance
removed from this shelter, the normal cat usually seeks
Mental alertness is sustained by a network of neurons
refuge under chairs, tables or behind waste bins, and
within the brainstem (ARAS: ascending reticular activat-
refuses to move. Some normal cats do wander about the
ing system) that project to the cerebrum. Damage to
room and investigate and may or may not voluntarily
either alters alertness. Systemic illness commonly causes
return to the basket. It is a good idea to keep the cat
decreased alertness in the absence of primary structural
confined until one's full attention can be given to obser-
neurological disease. Voluntary actions originate from
vation of both the mental state and the gait. This is to
the cerebrum and are influenced by the patterns of
prevent the cat from jumping until the balance and
behaviour of that species and learnt behaviour imposed
strength have been assessed. It is also because of the
by domesticity; it is therefore important that the clinician
fact that many cats will walk a little initially and then
is aware of normal species behaviour and the level of
refuse to budge.
training (if any) of the animal. Inappropriate responsive-
Notice if, and how, the animal responds to its name,
ness to the environment indicates cerebral malfunction,
noise and visual stimuli. Does it walk about the room
 or a psychological disturbance (Fig. 2.2).
without taking note of distractions? Does it bump into
A depressed mental state can alter responses.
A
objects, get stuck in narrow places and have problems
response, used in a neurological sense, is an action
reversing out, or turn a particular way when changing
which requires a degree of input from the cerebrum (cf.
aeds oiui aieis on leadde pue dons l saoa zuoia
6
2 The neurological examination
at a wall or into a corner? None of these behaviours are
normal (Fig. 2.3).
Assessment
 Describe the abnormal mental state (see page 47) stating
what is abnormal about the level of alertness or the
 appropriateness of the animal's response to its surround-
ings. This will act as a better comparison with subse-
quent examinations than a simple, bald statement of
'dull'. The clinician will need to decide if the evidence
from the history and the examination supports a neuro-
logical cause of the altered mental state or not.
Figure 2.1 Equipment required for the neurological
examination.
POSTURE
Aim
To describe the position of the limbs, head and trunk.
Significance
The position of body parts is notably influenced by
balance, proprioception, coordination, strength and
painful stimuli. The significance of an abnormality will
only become obvious once the entire examination is
complete.
Examination
Observe the animal while it sits, stands and moves about.
For example, hindlimb weakness can manifest as an
arched back with the hindlimbs positioned further crani-
ARAS: projecting to the
 cerebrum to maintain consciousness
ally under the body (Fig. 2.4).
When sitting, the weak or paralysed hindlimbs may
Figure 2.2 The ascending reticular activating system
(ARAS).
extend straight out between or amongst the forelimbs.
The paretic animal is often slow to rise from a sitting
position and the hindlimbs may not be fully extended 
Figure 2.4 A myopathic Great Dane shifting the limb
Figure 2.3 Cat with an altered mental state.
 position to better support its body weight
8
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
Figure 2.7 Cat with a right head tilt.
Figure 2.5 Husky dog with paraparesis secondary to a
chronic T3-L3 spinal cord lesion. Note the muscle atrophy.
Watch for tremors of the trunk and the head at rest
 and during movement. Offer the animal something to
smell and notice if there is any intention tremor of the
head. Record the position of the head and if it is turned
or tilted or both, and to which side (Fig. 2.7)
If the animal is recumbent, is it able to lift its head
from the floor? And its forequarters? An animal in laterall
recumbancy needs to lift its head before rising. If the
neck is painful, or the animal is tetraparetic, it may not
be able to rise unaided. Does it roll? Rolling is a sign of
vestibular disease.
It is not necessary to perform the righting reffex by
which an animal is held upside down off the ground by
its pelvis. The normal response is for the animal to auto-
matically assume a 45° angle to the horizontal with the
Figure 2.6 Dobermann dog with cervical cord
 compression. Note the abduction of the left hindlimb
forelimbs outstretched toward the ground. The sensory
stimuli are from visual and vestibular input. If blind-
when standing, or could be further apart than normal
folded, the normal animal will still assume the same
(abducted) (Fig. 2.5).
posture. If vestibular dysfunction is present, the animal
Watch for abduction of limbs which may slowly slide
will curl up or writhe about.
out to the side while the animal sits or stands. Note
Assessment
excessive flexion or extension of joints (Fig. 2.6)
Note the spontaneous movement of the neck. If the
Description of abnormal posture (see pages 223, 224).
animal shakes its head or body, is the neck moved as
vigorously as normal, or at all? Does the head turn when
GAIT
the animal changes direction or is the whole body, head-
Aim
neck-trunk, moved as a unit? Is the head elevated into
a normal position or is the spine held in one straight
To describe the animal's movement.
line? Restriction of neck movement is a sign of pain.
Ventroflexion of the neck in cats is usually a sign of
Significance
weakness. It may not be noticed if the cat is always lying
Movement is initiated by the upper motor neuron (UMN),
down resting its head on the forepaws or ground. The
a collective name for the nerve cell bodies within the
neck may be lowered and the back may be arched in an
cerebrum and brainstem and their axons which form the
effort to shift weight to the forelimbs in cases of hindlimb
descending motor tracts (fasciculi) of the brainstem and
or back pain.
spinal cord. The UMN initiates and maintains normal
2 The neurological examination
Midline
Table 2.1 Characteristics of the motor supply
Cerebrum
UMN lesions
LMN lesions
Motor cortex
Hemiparesis - contralateral
Paresis or paralysis
Yes
Ye5
Spinal reflexes 
Normal to 
Decreased or
Midbrain
increased
 absent
Muscle tone
 Red nucleus 
Normal to 
Decreased or
increased
 absent 
Atrophy
Gradual
Rapid 
(disuse)
(denervation)
Pons
 Reticular formation 
initiate and sustain movement. Weakness is a diminution
of voluntary movement. Paralysis is an absence of vol-
Medulla
untary movement.
Pyramids 
Hemiparesis-hemiplegia
UMN lesions are differentiated from LMN lesions by
Reticulospinal tract-
-ipsilateral 
the quality of spinal reflexes and muscle tone. UMN
Decussation
lesions result in a loss of descending inhibition and a
subsequent increase in muscle tone and spinal reflexes
is observed. LMN lesions remove innervation to the
musdles and a decrease in muscle tone and spinal
Lower motor neuron
reflexes is seen.
Figure 2.8 Pathways for voluntary control of movement.
Observing the gait alone does not provide sufficient
information for the clinician to assign the lesion to a
specific part of the nervous system (i.e. LMN vs. UMN).
movement and influences extensor muscle tone to
Spinal reflexes must be tested and muscle tone must be
support the body against gravity (Fig.2.8).
assessed (Table 2.1).
It is also important to note that certain orthopaedic
Descending trocts
diseases can change the gait in a way that suggests
● Corticospinal - initiate movement
neurological disease. Equally, lameness may result from
● Corticorubrospinal - initiate movement
certain neurological diseases. Thus, while observation is
● Reticulospinal - control tone and posture
crucial, the clinician must actually touch the animal in
● Vestibulospinal - control tone and posture
order to differentiate orthopaedic from neurological
causes of abnormal gait.
Cerebral lesions usually have little effect on the strength
Strength is only one aspect of the gait. Balance and
and coordination of the gait as the corticospinal tracts
coordination change the direction and extent of limb
 are of minimal importance in the small animal.
movement. Cerebral lesions can result in circling, pacing,
The UMN terminates on interneurons within the
head pressing; movements which appear normal in exe-
spinal cord which have an excitatory or inhibitory effect
cution but apparently purposeless in function, with a
on the lower motor neuron (LMN). The LMN is the col-
propulsive, relentless quality. The circling is towards the
lective name for the motor neurons and their axons
side of the cerebral lesion (Fig. 2.9).
which directly connect to muscle. The term LMN encom-
Proprioception is the perception of the body in space.
passes the motor neurons of the cranial nerves as well
Position and movement of the head is chiefly detected
as the peripheral and spinal nerves, their neuromuscular
by the vestibular apparatus in both inner ears (special
junctions and the muscles themselves. It also applies to
proprioception). Receptors in musdles, tendons and
the autonomic nervous system although the LMNs in
joints project sensory information into the CNS (general
that case may be referred to as preganglionic or
proprioception). This is then transmitted to the cerebrum
 postganglionic.
(conscious  proprioception)  and   to the  cerebellum
UMN and LMN lesions both cause weakness. Weak-
'sAemued bupuanse Aq (uodanoudoid snopsuosun)
ness may be observed by a slowness to rise from sitting,
Projections to the cerebellum enable it to regulate the
inability to support the body weight or an inability to
gait. Cerebellar lesions do not cause weakness. Reduced
10
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
Figure 2.9 A dog with a right cerebral lesion. Note the
twisted lead, evidence of circling.
Figure 2.10 Observing the gait. Keep the dog between
you and the owner.
or absent proprioception causes ataxia. Associated defi-
cits found on examination help localize the lesion to the
vestibular system, the cerebellum, the spinal cord, or the
tors are common. Lesions of the general proprioception
receptors are rare.) Ataxia is a sensory phenomenon.
Examination
Observe the animal's ability to move. Normal animals are
able to rise and walk unaided on floors with no grip
(linoleum, floorboards). Weak and ataxic animals should
ideally be examined on a non-slip surface. If the animal is
paraparetic, support it under the abdomen so that any
Figure 2.11 Observing the gait. Grass obscures the view
movement of the hindlimbs can be seen. If the animal is
of paw movement.
unable to rise, enlist assistance to hold the animal in a
normal standing position and slowly move or coax it
forward without releasing support. This is to determine if 
Neurological deficits are noticeable when the animal
the animal is ambulatory tetraparetic (weak but able to
walk unaided) or non-ambulatory tetraparetic (unable to
is walking. Lameness shows up at faster gaits. Observe
the gait from the side, front and from the rear. Squat
walk without assistance). Sometimes paraparetic animals
down to observe the footfall of smaller dogs and cats
will not move the hindlimbs when a sling supports their
abdomen. Remove the sling, and support the hindquar-
(Figs 2.10, 2.11).
ters with a hand under the inguinal area, or with a hand
Walk the dog in small-radius circles: ask the owner to
on either flank. Have an assistant coax the animal
stay in the centre of the circle and lead the dog in a
clockwise then anticlockwise direction. Watch for cir-
forward and watch for any hindlimb movement.
cumduction of the outer hindlimb; the limb on the
periphery of the circle may swing out to the side in an
CLINICAL TIP
 arc when advanced. This indicates either a propriocep-
Do not confuse musdle tone with voluntary
tive deficit, restricted movement of the joints, or
increased muscle tone. If the dog will not cooperate by
movement. UMN paralysis increases muscle tone
and such an animal may be 'propped' up into an
walking in tight circles, watch the limbs when the animal
upright, standing, position. Rigor mortis also
turns and changes direction in the examination room
increases muscle tone, and there is no way that a
when off the lead.
dead animal could be said to possess voluntary
sdats io sls joop Aue jano pue dn dans bop aun ypieM 
movement.
and note if the paws are dragged or scraped against
the step.
2 The neurological examination
11
Allow cats to walk around the examination room. If
they refuse to move, place them on the opposite side of
the room to their owners or basket, which may encour-
age them to walk.
Assessment
The clinician must decide which, if any, of the limbs have
abnormal movement. The head and trunk posture and
movement should be commented upon. The animal's
strength and coordination is then examined further with
the postural reactions.
POSTURAL REACTIONS
Figure 2.12 Good technique. Forelimb hopping. (Arrow
indicates direction of movement.) Keep the animal in a
Aim
 normal position.
● To assess the degree of voluntary motor function of
each limb
● To assess the proprioceptive ability of each limb
● To detect deficits not noted when observing the gait
● To subjectively quantify the deficits.
Significance
Postural reactions are tests of strength and coordination.
They distinguish the normal from the abnormal limb.
 Cerebrallesions can leave the gait unaffected, producing
contralateral paresis and proprioceptive deficits only
noted when performing postural reaction tests. Ortho-
paedic disease, myopathies and defects in neuromuscu-
lar transmission may leave an animal unwilling or unable
to weight-bear on a limb, but the proprioception is left
Figure 2.13 Forelimb hopping. Bad technique. The animal
unaffected.
is lifted too high and is being pushed in a medial direction
(see the arrow with the cross).
Examination
Hopping: The animal's weight is transferred to one
weight on the forelimb being tested without collapsing,
limb which is then slowly pushed laterally, away from
the clinician should support the forequarters with a hand
the centre of gravity.
under the sternum. Do not allow the owner to hold the
head or the lead around the animal's neck as this
Forelimbs: The animal is supported under the abdomen
removes the animal's weight from the forelimbs making
by one of the clinician's hands. The other hand grasps
it easier for the animal to hop (Fig. 2.13).
the antebrachium, flexing the limb off the ground. The
animal is gently pushed laterally, away from the centre
Hindlimbs: A similar technique is used. The body
of gravity (Fig. 2.12).
weight is supported by a hand under the animal's
The clinician notes any delay in initiating the hopping
sternum; while the examiner's other hand holds one
movement (a sign of weakness, or a conscious or uncon-
hindlimb in a flexed position. This is easier to perform
scious proprioceptive deficit) and the degree of lateral
with the animal's head facing the clinician. The point of
movement of the tested limb (reduced by weakness,
supporting some or all of the animals weight is to
exaggerated with cerebellar disease). A weak limb may
ensure that the limb being hopped is weight-bearing. It
collapse, so the clinician must be ready to prevent the
is very important, whether testing the fore- or hindlimbs,
animal falling forward. If the animal cannot support
that the animal remains in as normal an anatomical posi-
12
SMAlL ANImAL NEUROLOGY
to prevent the animal from falling. Hemistanding
describes the animal supporting its body weight using
the limbs on one side of its body.
It is not physically possible to support the body weight
of a giant breed dog while hopping it. This is overcome
by leaving the forelimbs on the ground when hopping
the hind, and vice versa when testing the forelimbs.
Alternately, hemiwalking is used. Long-limbed sight-
hounds and short-limbed clinicians is another difficult
combination which can be resolved with the same
technique.
Assessment
Figure 2.14 Hindlimb hopping. Keep the dog in a normal
anatomic position. Push the animal in a lateral direction
When the body is pushed laterally and the shoulder is
(arrow).
no longer vertically aligned with the paw, the limb hops
laterally so that the paw is once again 'under the shoul-
der and weight-bearing is achieved. An abnormal
response is a delayed movement of the limb, an exag-
gerated movement of the limb (hypermetric and over-
reaches, the paw being placed too far laterally), no
movement or collapse of the limb. Slow movement with
a decreased range and collapse of the limb indicate
weakness of the limb. A delayed onset of movement
with preservation of strength is common with cerebellar
lesions. A delayed onset with collapse of the limb indi-
cates weakness.
Compare one forelimb with the other. Compare one
hindlimb with the other. The normal hindlimb appears
stiff and is placed slightly wider when hopped than
would occur in a normal forelimb when hopped!
Figure 2.15 Hemiwalking. Push the dog laterally (arrow
Strength is subjectively graded a5:
indicates the direction of movement)
●Absent: 0
● Decreased: 1+
● Normal: 2+
tion as possible, with the spine as parallel to the ground
as possible (Fig. 2.14).
Wheelbarrowing assesses the forelimb gait. It is physi-
cally more difficult to perform than hopping. The clini-
Hemiwalking: This is a useful technique for larger,
cian supports all the weight of the hindquarters by
heavier dogs. The clinician stands on one side of the
placing a hand under the animal's abdomen. The animal
animal, lifts the ipsilateral fore- and hindlimb, and slowly
is then pushed forward. Cats almost uniformly refuse to
pushes the animal laterally, away from the clinician
cooperate and lie down which may be misinterpreted as
(Fig. 2.15).
forelimb weakness. It can be difficult to observe the
The animal hops on both limbs. This is a useful test
movement of the forelimbs from one's position at
for those animals that will not hop on the hindlimbs:
the rear of the animal. It can be difficult controlling the
normal dogs will sometimes extend the hindlimb and
direction the dog walks, and they may struggle when
leave it to slide to the side when being pushed by the
manipulated in this fashion. One way around this is for
clinician. When hemiwalking, the animal has to hop or
the clinician to place the other hand under the dog's
it will fall. This technique should be used with caution
head and dorsiflex the neck; this also removes visual
in the weak animal as the clinician is poorly positioned
clues and may highlight a proprioceptive deficit. It places
2 The neurological examination
13
an enormous strain on the clinician's back and the infor-
Proprioceptive positioning ('knuckling'): Each limb,
mation obtained can be more reliably gained by hopping
in turn, is tested by flexing the paw so that its dorsal
and proprioceptive testing.
surface becomes the weight-bearing surface. Normal
animals willimmediately turn the paw back to its natural
position. An abnormal response is one in which the
CLINICAL TIP
movement is delayed, does not occur, or replaces the
 It is vital that the clinician is able to apply postural
paw too far forward, caudal, or lateral (abducted).
testing in a consistent manner to a whole range
Technique is all important. Begin by supporting the
animal's weight under the abdomen, when testing
of animals. Unreliable or difficult methods produce
the hindlimbs, and under the sternum when testing the
unreliable findings which the clinician cannot
forelimbs. Weak or painful animals may have normal
interpret.
proprioception but be physically unable to support their
body weight and correct the 'knuckled over' paw. Some
normal animals will only correct the paw's position when
Extensor postural thrust: The clinician stands behind
the limb being tested is weight-bearing to some degree.
the animal and with hands around the thorax, lifts the
The clinician slightly moves the animal, shifting its weight
animal's forequarters and then the hind off the ground.
 over to the tested limb to see if this is the case. Proprio-
The suspended animal is lowered to the ground, and its
ceptive testing is a response and can therefore be
hindlimbs reach out and walk backwards. This is a useful
affected by the animal's level of alertness. Cats do not
alternative to hopping for testing hindlimb strength in
tolerate “knuckling’ of the hindpaws and it is usually
cats. It is not routinely performed in dogs due to their
easier to test the hindlimb proprioception with placing
size and weight. The normal response is for the hindlimbs
responses (Fig. 2.17).
to walk backwards, supporting weight to the same
degree. A weak hindlimb is noted by it lagging behind
The paper slide test is harder to perform and less
consistent results are obtained. The animal's paw is
or being dragged (Fig. 2.16)
placed on a sheet of paper, which is then pulled to the
side. The animal should return the displaced limb to a
 normal position. The problem is that a lot of normal dogs 
do not seem stimulated enough to return the limb to a
Figure 2.16 Lift the cat under the axillae and walk it
Figure 2.17 Proprioceptive testing. Once the paw is
backwards on a table top (arrow indicates direction of
released by the clinician, the animal repositions the paw
movement)
immediately.
14
SMAlL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
normal position, and thus allow the limb to remain on
Pausing in mid-space will induce the animal to reach for
the paper sheet. There is some thought that the paper
the table; this is a nice demonstration that the animal
 slide test assesses the proximal limb proprioceptors and
has learnt what to expect but it is not a measure of
the “knuckling' tests the distal limb proprioceptors. This
proprioception.
is irrelevant in the clinical setting. Proprioceptive deficits
Proprioception i5 subjectivety graded a5:
occur because of lesions in the sensory nerves, the
ascending proprioceptive pathways, the sensory relay
● Absent: 0
nuclei of the thalamus or the sensory cortex of the
● Decreased: 1+
cerebrum.
● Normal: 2+
Placing is another method of testing proprioception in
Abnormal wear of the claws and overlying fur:
smaller patients. The animal is held under the sternum
 Proprioceptive deficits result in abnormal paw position
and abdomen, picked up, and brought towards the edge
when walking. Scraping, ‘knuckling over' or dragging
of a table. The normal animal reaches for the table and
the dorsum of the paw against the ground flattens the
places the forelimbs and hindlimbs on the table top
dorsal surface of the middle two claws, wearing off the
without delay. Technique is very important. The animal
overlying fur. Examine all paws. This may not be notice-
 must be brought towards the table at a speed which
able if the dog is only walked on grass (Fig. 2.19).
enables the animal time enough to move its own limbs
It must not be held so tightly against the clinician's body
PALPATION
that it is unable to freely move its limbs. For this reason
it is good practice to test the animal by holding it on
Aim
either side. Small animals often get their hindlimbs
To detect muscle asymmetry, atrophy, hypertrophy,
caught in the clinician's lab coat pocket. Visual placing
muscle tone, joint laxity, or restricted movement, pain,
is the above technique performed without covering the
masses, heat, cold, or swelling.
animal's eyes. Tactile placing is the above technique
Significance
performed with a hand over the animal's eyes (Fig. 2.18).
The animal soon learns to reach for the table, whether
Pain and joint abnormalities affect the gait and posture.
the eyes are covered or not. when performing tactile
Atrophy occurs with disuse, denervation, secondary
placing, approach the table at a slow, steady pace.
fibrosis of musdle, generalized weight loss, and in some
Figure 2.18 Visual placing. Note how the cat reaches for
Figure 2.19 The dorsal surface of the claws has been
the table. Bandages alter the way animals move limbs
worn by dragging them. The dog had a C1-5 cervical cord
This cat was neurologically normal
lesion.
2 The neurological examination
15
myopathies. Muscle enlargement may follow ischaemia,
 nied by vomiting (cf. acute spinal pain). Weak animals
local inflammation, trauma, neoplasia, myotonia, and
may flex the limbs and collapse when pressure is
muscular dystrophy. The distal or proximal limb may be
applied to the spine. Some normal animals sit
selectively involved.
(Fig. 2.20).
Muscle tone is influenced by both the UMN and LMN
Judging the amount of muscle tone present, as assessed
Lumbosacral junction (LsJ): There are several methods
by palpation, contributes to the differentiation of LMN
to detect pain at the LSJ. Apply direct pressure over the
from UMN causes of paresis and paralysis.
LS region. Extending one or both hips and applying pres-
Warmth of the extremities and pulse quality assesses
sure to the Ls junction (ordosis test) can detect hip or
limb perfusion.
LSJ pain. Extension or traction of the tail may cause pain.
Palpation of the LS junction per rectum may cause pain.
Examination
Pressure on LSJ while lifting the pubis may elicit pain.
Observation and palpation assess the symmetry of
Limbs: Palpate the limbs with the animal standing and
the left and right sides
in lateral recumbency. Palpate each muscle group and
then press the long bones. Flex and extend the joints,
Head: The head is examined when the cranial nerve
function is assessed. Ear canals should be palpated and
feeling for crepitus, swelling, laxity or restriction of
smelt for evidence of otitis externa. Lymph nodes and
movement. A ruptured gastrocnemius tendon gives rise
to a plantigrade stance: hold the stifle fixed in extension
tracheal sensitivity are checked as part of the physical
and gently press against the bottom of the paw: if the
exam.
gastrocnemius tendon is intact the tarsus remains
Neck: Apply gradually increasing digital pressure to the
extended.
dorsal spine and to the lateral spine to detect pain. A
Assess muscle tone by the resistance to limb flexion:
normal animal tolerates firm pressure. Hold the muzzle
limb tone should be uniform between the fore and
hindlimbs. Hit the muscle belly with a patellar hammer.
closed with one hand and slowly flex the neck laterally
to either side. A normal animal is able to place its nose
A dimple develops in myotonia from sustained local
on its shoulder. An animal with neck pain refuses to
muscle contraction.
move its neck. The clinician is able to feel increased neck
Assessment
tension or spasm and should not force the head laterally.
Muscle tone is assessed as absent (O), reduced (1+),
Keep one hand on the neck while the head is dorsiflexed
and then ventroflexed. The normal animal is able to look
(+) psaui Aeae +e) pasaoui (+h) ewou
up at the ceiling and down at the floor without resisting
neck movement. Do not perform this test in toy breed
dogs with tetraparesis or neck pain as C1-C2 sublux-
ation may be present. Fearful or excited normal dogs, or
cats, may resist neck manipulation. Observe spontane-
Ous movement of the neck; this is usually limited in
range when neck pain is present.
Thoracic and lumbar spine: Place one hand under the
animal's abdomen and with the other apply gradually
increasing digital pressure to the dorsal spine to detect
sites of pain. A normal animal tolerates firm pressure and
does not collapse. If the animal resents palpation and
struggles, wait until the animal calms down, and repeat
the palpation to be sure that pain was the cause of the
animal's reaction. Pressure on a painful thoracic or
lumbar spine causes the abdominal wall to tense which
Figure 2.20 Testing for spinal pain. Always palpate the
can be felt by the examiner. It can be confused with
abdominal pain. Acute pancreatitis is usually accompa-
abdominal wall at the same time.
16
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
SPINAL REFLEXES
animal is standing. The body weight must be supported 
 so that the limb is non-weight-bearing during testing.
Aim
● To categorize the weakness or paralysis of a limb as
Hindlimb
either UMN or LMN in origin
Patellar reflex
● To localize the level of a spinal cord lesion
Afferent arc: femoral nerve (L4-6). Efferent arc: femoral
● To monitor progression of disease.
nerve (L4-6).
Significance
 Palpate the stifle. Check its range of movement.
Ensure the stifle is at least partially flexed. Locate the
A reflex is composed of an afferent (sensory) arc and an
patellar ligament. Strike the tendon directly with the
efferent (motor) arc. An absent or decreased reflex indi-
hammer, or place your finger on the ligament and strike
cates a lesion is present within the reflex arc. This is
your finger. The patellar ligament is large and immobile
characteristic of LMN disease. UMN pathways supply
enough to strike directly in most animals. Observe exten-
inhibitory and excitatory influences to the LMN reflex
sion of the stifle (Fig. 2.22). It is present at birth but
arcs. In the normal animal, there is a net effect of
difficult to elicit under 4 weeks of age. It is one of the
descending inhibition of the spinal reflex arcs. When this
two most reliably evoked limb reflexes.
inhibition is removed by a lesion of the UMN pathways,
the reflexes increase. Knowledge of the reflex arcs
enables the clinician to localize a lesion with greater
accuracy (Fig. 2.21).
CLINICAL TIP
Examination
Locating the patella and its ligament prevents the
The animal is held down in lateral recumbency and the
embarrassment of repeatedly hitting the tibial
uppermost limbs are tested. Left and right sides are
tuberosity to no effect. This is a surprisingly
compared. Small dogs and cats are easier to examine if
common error.
held in dorsal recumbency by the owner on the owner's
lap. If increased voluntary muscle contraction from fear
or excitement prevents the limb moving when reflexes
are tested, try testing the lowermost limbs as they are
often more relaxed than the uppermost limbs. If the
lowermost limbs have a reduced reflex, be aware that
this may have resulted from recumbency limiting limb
movement.
If the dog cannot be placed in lateral recumbency
without an unseemly tussle, test each limb while the
Upper motor neuron
(UMN)
Stretchreceptor
Dorsal root
ganglion
Sensory
neuron
Lower motor
Muscl
neuron (LMN)
Figure 2.22 Strike the patella ligament and observe
Figure 2.21 The stretch reflex.
extension of the stifle.
2 The neurological examination
17
Graniat tibial reflex
Afferent arc: peroneal nerve (L6-S1). Efferent arc: pero-
neal nerve (L6-S1)
Support the limb under the stifle or medial tibia,
allowing the tarsus to dangle. Strike the fleshy proximal
portion of the cranial tibial muscle. Observe flexion of
the tarsus. Peroneal nerve function is assessed during the
withdrawal reflex by observing tarsal flexion.
CLINICAL TIP
A common error is to gently pat the limb with the
reflex hammer. Apply as much force as used when
Figure 2.23 The withdrawal reflex. Note flexion of all
 clapping one's hands with moderate enthusiasm.
 joints.
Gastrocnemius reflex
increasing the pressure. Avoid damaging soft tissue.
Do not jab at the paw with a needle; this is an unreliable
Afferent arc: tibial nerve (L7-S1). Efferent arc: tibial
stimulus. The withdrawal reflex is present at birth,
nerve (L7-S1).
with simultaneous extension of the contralateral limb
Hold the metatarsus and with traction, extend the
(crossed extensor reflex) occurring up to 3 weeks of age
stifle and partially flex the tarsus. This tenses the gas-
(Fig. 2.23)
trocnemius tendon. Strike the tendon. Observe contrac-
tion of the caudal thigh muscles. Striking the tendon can
physically move the limb; do not confuse this for a reflex.
This reflex can be difficult to elicit and is unreliably
CLINICAL TIP
present. Tibial nerve function can also be assessed by
observing normal extension of the tarsus.
If the hindlimb withdrawal reflex appears reduced
in a paraplegic animal, compare it with the 
 forelimb withdrawal reflex to judge what is normal
CLINICAL TIP
for the animal.
Use a patellar hammer (reflex hammer, pleximeter)
to elicit tendon reflexes. It is easier to deliver a
uniform force (and it does not hurt as much as a
Forelimb
pair of scissors when you need to strike your own
finger).
Biceps reflex
Afferent arc: musculocutaneous nerve (C6-8). Efferent
arc: musculocutaneous nerve (C6-8).
Palpate the biceps tendon insertion. Keeping the
Withdrawat (flexor) reflex
tendon under your finger, strike your finger with the
Afferent arc: depends on which dermatome is
hammer. Flexion of the elbow may or may not occur in
stimulated.
the normal animal. Contraction of the biceps muscle can
●Lateral digit: sciatic nerve (L6-S1)
be seen in animals with smooth coats (Fig. 2.24). The
● Medial digit: femoral nerve (L4-6).
musculocutaneous nerve function  is more reliably
● Efferent arc: sciatic nerve (L6-S1).
assessed by the withdrawal reflex.
Pinch the lateral and medial digits in turn and observe
Triceps reflex
flexion of the tarsus, the stifle and the hip. If this fails to
Afferent arc: radial nerve (C7-T2). Efferent arc: radial
Aenpeie 'pag leu aun azaanbs oi sieisoway asn 'nooo
nerve (C7-T2)
18
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
Extensor corpi radiatis reflex
Afferent arc: radial nerve (C7-T2). Efferent arc: radial
nerve (C7-T2).
Support the forelimb medially at the elbow and strike
the proximal part of the extensor carpi radialis muscle.
Extension of the carpus is seen. (Physically pressing this
muscle will also induce carpal extension.)
Withdrawal (flexor) reflex
Afferent arc: varies with the area stimulated. Efferent
arc: musculocutaneous, axillary, radial, median, ulnar
nerves.
Figure 2.24 The biceps reflex
Pinch the digit and observe flexion of the digits (C8-
T2: median and ulnar nn), carpus (C8-T2: median and
ulnar nn), elbow (C6-8; musculocutaneous n), and
shoulder (C7-T1:axillary and radial nn). Present at birth,
with simultaneous extension of the contralateral limb
(crossed extensor reflex) occurring until 3 weeks of age.
The reflex withdrawal movement ONLY demonstrates
the integrity of the reflex arc and does NOT indicate that
the animal has perceived the stimulus that caused the
reflex. Pain perception requires the noxious stimulus to
be transmitted by ascending pathways to the brain. The
integrity of the ascending sensory pathways is a prog-
nostic sign in spinal cord disease
MEMORIZE THIS
The presence of a withdrawal REFLEX does not 
signify intact pain PERCEPTION.
 Figure 2.25 The triceps reflex
Other spinal reflexes
Perineat (anal) reflex
Afferent arc: pudendal nerve (S1-S3).Efferent arc:
Palpate the triceps tendon in the partially flexed fore-
pudendal nerve (S1-53).
limb (Fig. 2.25). Steady it under your finger then strike
Touching the left and right sides of the anal sphincter
your finger. Extension of the elbow may occur but it is
with a thermometer or closed forceps induces contrac-
often absent in normal animals. Radial nerve function is
tion of the anus (and flexion of the tail by the caudal
also assessed by observing normal elbow extension and
nerves). The strength of anal sphincter contraction is
weight-bearing.
judged by digital rectal exam. Anal tone in the animal
CLINICAL TIP
sphincter showing mucosa is abnormal. Being able to
rectal a conscious cat also indicates a weak anal reflex.
If the reflex induces limb extension, ensure the
limb is initially flexed otherwise the reflex action
Anogenital reflex: Tactile stimulation of the anus and
will not be seen.
genitalia or caudal abdomen initiates urination and def-
ecation until 3-4 weeks of age.
2 The neurological examination
19
Bulbocavernosus reflex: Squeezing the bulb of the
case stimulation on either side of the spine will only
 penis or vulva will cause anal sphincter contraction and
produce a reflex contraction on the side opposite the
tail flexion. It tests the same reflex arc as the perineal
lesion.
reflex.
Qutaneous trunci (pannicutus) reflex
CLINICAL TIP
Afferent arc: spinal nerves of the consecutive derma-
Horner's syndrome and an ipsilateral absence of
tomes of the lateral thoracic wall; ascending spinal cord
pathways. Efferent arc: C8-T1 segments; lateral thoracic
the cutaneous trunci reflex often occur together
nerve; cutaneous trunci muscle.
secondary to avulsion of the caudal brachial
Commence at the cranial edge of the ilial wings.
plexus.
Pinch the skin either side of the dorsal spine. Note that
pinching one side induces bilateral contraction of the
cutaneous trunci muscle (Fig. 2.26).
 Afferent lesions occur within the spinal cord: pinching
The reflex contraction of the cutaneous trunci muscle
caudal to the spinal cord lesion does not produce the
may be reduced in generalized LMN diseases. It may be
reflex contraction on either side. A 'cut-off' point is
difficult to see in obese dogs. It is present at birth.
established, with the reflex inducible cranial to that point
and absent caudal to that point. The site of the spinal
cord lesion lies a few cord segments cranial to the 'cut-
off’ point on the skin. This mismatch is due to the
CLINICAL TIP
unequal growth of the spinal cord and the vertebrae.
The reflex is naturally absent cranial to the C8-T1
Efferent lesions occur within the spinal cord at the
dermatomes (level of shoulder) and absent caudal
C8-T1 cord segments, or within the nerve roots exiting
to the wings of the ilium. Do not confuse this
these segments. The lesion may be unilateral in which
with a 'cut-off'.
Scratch reflex
The stimulation of repetitive scratching of the lateral
thorax or neck induces weak scratching movements of
the ipsilateral hindlimb from 2-4 days old until 3-4
weeks of age in the normal neonate.
Extensor thrust reflex
Using gentle pressure, spread the digits. Extension of the
limb should occur. This reflex can be difficult to assess.
This is a different phenomenon to the extensor postural
thrust response.
Assessment
Gruding reflexes
Observe the force, speed and extent of flexion or exten-
sion after a single stimulus (Table 2.2).
Only the patellar reflex and the withdrawal reflexes
are reliably elicited. Their absence signifies a lesion within
Figure 2.26 A stimulus on one side will produce muscle
the reflex arc (LMN disease) in either the sensory or
 contraction bilaterally (arrows, bilateral muscle
motor arc. Sensory function is assessed further by check-
contraction)
(e'7 algel) uondanodoid pue uondaad ued bu!
20
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
Evidence of UMN release
Table 2.2 Grading reflexes
Crossed extensor reflex
Grade
Action
Afferent arc: same as flexor reflex. Efferent arc: flexors
0
 Absent, areflexic
No reflex movement 
of ipsilateral limb; extensors of contralateral limb.
1+ Reduced,
Slow, decreased, reduced 
Gentle pinching of a digit induces flexion of the
hyporeflexic
movement
stimulated limb and rapid reflex extension of the
2+ Normal,
 Brisk reflex action followed by
normoreflexic
relaxation 
contralateral limb in animals. It is a sign of removal of
3+ Increased,
Exaggerated, larger, brisker, reflex
inhibition of the reflex arc and is an abnormal finding if
hyperreflexic 
 action 
elicited in animals over 3 weeks old in lateral recum-
4+ Clonus, clonic
Increased, repetitive, sustained
bency. Its presence or absence is not a prognostic sign.
reflex action
The reflex may be absent in normal kittens less than 3
weeks old.
 A more noxious stimulation induces pain and causes
Table 2.3 Variation in reflex function
the animal to struggle and voluntarily extend the con-
Exceptions to the rule
Resolution
tralateral limb.
Neurologically normal dogs
Hypotonia, weakness,
Mass reflex is the exaggerated reaction which can
≥10 years old may lack one
short-strided gait are
occur when testing the withdrawal reflex or the perineal
or both patellar reflexes
also present in LMN 
disease
reflex in animals lacking descending UMN inhibition.
 Decreased forelimb withdrawal
Imaging of both cenvical 
Bilateral flexion of the hindlimbs, anal contraction and
reflex occurred in 31% of dogs
 areas, C1-5 and C6-TZ
tail flexion, and possibly urine expulsion may occur.
with a C1-5 lesion
Babinski's sign(s)
In normal adult humans scratching the lateral side of the
CLINICAL TIP
sole from the heel to the toes then medially elicits flexion
of the big toe. Dorsiflexion of the big toe with or without
If the reflex is absent or reduced, first question
fanning of the other toes is called a Babinski's sign, and
your examination technique. Recheck. Alter your
is abnormal in adults, indicating the presence of a
technique. Re-assess.
corticospinal tract (UMN) lesion. Babinski's sign is normal
 in infants under three years of age and is widely depicted
 in various Medieval, Renaissance and Baroque paintings
Spinal shock describes the flaccid paralysis and areflexia
 of Madonna and child.
occurring in mammals following a complete spinal cord
Varying the stimulus by scratching, squeezing, strok-
transaction. It may have resolved by the time the cat or
ing, percussing, and flexing the lower limb, gave scope
dog is examined. An inverted reffex is one in which the
for ego-aggrandisement and renaming of the sign, e.g.
movement elicited is opposite to that normally seen, e.g.
Chaddock, Scherzi, Oppenheim, Gordon, Schaefer,
flexion produced while testing the triceps reflex. It has
-uhis sh! pue bupuy lesjup pewouqe aul lladwnns
 not been assigned any diagnostic significance in the dog
cance remains the same.
 or cat.
This reflex is not reliably present in small animals and 
Normal or increased reflexes indicate that the reflex
is not required for localizing lesions. It is included here
arc is intact. Do not diagnose neurological disease on
as almost every veterinarian has heard of it and tries to
the basis of an increased spinal reflex in the absence of
elicit it. Tonic extension of the big toe occurring
any other abnormality. Lesions severe enough to remove
in dystonic syndromes of humans is a sign of extrapyra-
descending inhibition also affect the descending motor
midal disorders and is known as 'striatal toe'. Extra-
tracts and ascending proprioceptive pathways. UMN
pyramidal refers to the location of descending tracts
lesions are accompanied by normal, increased or clonic
within the brainstem, and such pathways contribute
spinal reflexes. Pseudo-hyperreffexia occurs with a loss
the majority of motor tracts in small animals. Striatal toe
of antagonistic muscle tone, e.g. hyperreflexic patellar
is a tonic extension and Babinski's sign is an elicited
reflexes with a sciatic nerve lesion.
action.
2 The neurological examination
21
Babinski's sign also refers to the paradoxical raising of
the eyebrow during eye closure in cases of hemifacial
spasm in humans.
PAIN PERCEPTION
Aim
To assess the integrity of pain pathways in the PNS and
CNS.
Significance
Pain perception is a subjective assessment by the patient
of a noxious stimulus. The patient's behavioural response
to the stimulus is assessed by the clinician. Loss of pain
perception in spinal cord disease indicates severe damage
and a poor prognosis for recovery. An unconscious
animal unresponsive to pain is said to be comatose
Examination
Pinch the skin or squeeze the nail bed using a haemostat.
Figure 2.27 Pinching the toe to elicit pain. The animal
struggles to escape.
Commence with gentle pressure. More force should be
applied only if required to elicit a reaction. Pin pricks are
unreliable stimuli and should not be used. Have a reliable
assistant hold the head, or consider muzzling the animal.
Significance
Some restraint of the patient is required but must not
Loss of bladder contraction results in urine retention.
interfere with the interpretation of the behavioural
This may be secondary to a loss of afferent information
response. Some animals turn to look atthe source of pain, 
from the bladder, signalling its fullness. Damage to
others vocalize or struggle to be released (Fig. 2.27).
the detrusor muscle from over-distension or infiltrative
This test is usually performed at the end of the neu-
disease will also weaken bladder contractions. UMN
rological examination as inflicting pain almost guaran-
spinal cord lesions result in paralysis of the bladder in
tees to lose the animal's cooperation.
which muscle tone may be palpated (unless secondary
over-distension has occurred). LMN lesions of the spinal
Interpretation
cord segments or nerves result in a flaccid paralysis of
The majority of clinical cases require the clinician to decide
the bladder. The motor supply to the bladder's detrusor
if pain perception is present or not. Do not obsess about
muscle is the parasympathetic pelvic nerve originating
the categories of superficial or deep pain. The bottom line
from S1-3 cord segments.
is: Does the animal feel pain ... or not? Note if a greater
The urethral sphincter tone is increased with UMN
force or a lesser force than normal is required. A 'normal
lesions. Motor supply to the internal urethral sphincter
force required to elicit pain is hard to quantify. Recall the
composed of smooth muscle originates from the (sym-
digital pressure used to elicit a pulse: applying the same
pathetic) hypogastric nerve and the L1-4 (dog) or L2-5
degree of pressure, or slightly more, to the nail bed with
(cat) cord segments. The external sphincter, composed 
hemostats induces most calm animals to respond.
of skeletal musdle, receives motor innervation via the
pudendal nerve originating from sacral cord segments
URINARY FUNCTION
S1-3. Loss of urethral sphincter contraction causes
urinary leakage.
Aim
● To assess the ability to void urine voluntarily
Examination
● To judge the degree of effort required to empty a
Palpate the bladder size and tone prior to and following
bladder
voluntary urination. Observe the animal's ability to
● To estimate the degree of urine retention.
posture and initiate voiding, and the force and calibre
22
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
of the urine stream. Do not assume that urine found
CN I: OLFaCTORY NERVE
in a patient's cage was voluntarily voided or that it
Aim
signifies the bladder has been successfully emptied.
Reflex action can cause an incomplete bladder contrac-
Rarely if ever tested.
tion. Always palpate the bladder and express the residual
Significance
urine.
The olfactory neurons run from the receptors in the nasal
Interpretation
mucosa through the cribriform plate of the ethmoid
A large flaccid bladder indicates a LMN lesion. Such a
bone to the olfactory bulbs. Olfactory receptors and
bladder may be easy to express from lack of both sym-
nerves are purely sensory and mediate the sense of
pathetic and somatic innervation of the urinary sphinc-
smell. Conscious perception of scent occurs within the
ters. Depending on the level of the lesion, sympathetic
 pyriform lobes.
innervation may persist, accounting for resistance to
Examination
bladder expression. A distended tense bladder from a
UMN lesion is typically difficult or impossible to manually
Strong scents such as ammonia may stimulate the tri-
express. It is also very difficult to express the bladder of
geminal receptors (CN V) of the nasal mucosa which
 normal male cats and dogs.
detect painful stimuli, rather than the olfactory receptors
(CN I).
CRANIAL NERVES
Interpretation
Aim
The animal is observed sniffing a food substance and is
 presumed to perceive the odour. Lack of a sense of smell
To assess the motor and sensory functions of the cranial
is called anosmia.
nerves (CNN) by observation, and by eliciting reflexes
and responses.
CN Il: OPTIC NErVE
Significance
Aim
The 12 cranial nerves enter or leave the brainstem
passing through skull foraminae often in concert with
To assess vision and pupil control.
each other (Table 2.4). CNN are labelled numerically
Significance
from rostral to caudal. Skeletal and smooth muscle are
innervated by cranial nerves: LMN lesions may therefore
The optic nerve is purely sensory, and transmits informa-
occur in generalized neuromuscular disease or dys-
tion to the occipital cortex for vision, and to the midbrain
autonomia. Cerebral lesions have a subtle effect on the
as the afferent arc of the pupillary light reflex (PLR). The
afferent pathways for both phenomena are shared to a
 go unnoticed by the general practitioner.
certain point. This fact aids localizing lesions: absence of
both vision and the PLR indicate a lesion in the common
pathways.
The ganglion cells of the retina form the optic nerve,
Table 2.4 Mnemonic for cranial nerves
the end of which is seen on retinal examination as the
Olfactory
On
optic disc (Fig. 2.28). The optic nerve is myelinated by
n!do
PO
oligodendrocytes and surrounded by a subarachnoid
Oculomotor
Olympus's
space and meninges. It enters the skull via the optic
IV
Trochlear 
Towering
canal, joining the brain rostral to the pituitary gland.
V
Trigeminal
dol
The majority of fibres (cat: 65%, dog 75%) in the
VI
Abducent
A
Vll
Facial
Fearless
optic nerves cross (decussate) to the opposite side to
VIlI
Vestibulocochlear
Veterinarian
form the contralateral optic tract. The site of decussation
IX
Glossopharyngeal
Gained 
is called the optic chiasm. The optic tract projects to the
X
Vagus
Virtue
ipsilateral occipital cortex by way of the ipsilateral lateral
IX
Accessory
And
IK
Hypoglossal
geniculate nucleus and optic radiation. Thus, a complete
Honour
 optic nerve lesion will produce ipsilateral menace deficit
2 The neurological examination
23
 Figure 2.28 Contrast agent outlining the optic nerve
(arrow). A side-effect of myelography from cisterna magna
Figure 2.30 The menace response. The contralateral eye
injection.
is covered, and the menacing hand is not too close to the
face.
Eye
any collisions with the furniture and on which side of
the head they occurred. Do not misinterpret a loss of
Retina
balance and falling into or against objects as blindness.
Visual following: A mentally alert visual animal may
Ciliary
respond to the first cotton ball falling in front of its face
ganglion
Optic nerve
(CN II)
and subsequently ignore similar efforts to gain its visual
Oculomotor-
attention hence this response may be absent in normal
nerve (CN II)
animals.
Optic chiasm
Optic tract
Menace response: The examiner uses one hand to
Lateralgeniculate
 cover an eye, while the other hand is brought sharply
Parasympathetic
nucleus 
nucleus of CN III
Optic radiation
towards the uncovered eye of the patient. Do not touch
(midbrain)
the vibrissae or stimulate the face with gusts of air, both
Pretectal nucleus 
Occipital cortex
of which stimulate the trigeminal nerve (CN V). The
(midbrain)
normal response to a menacing gesture is to blink (Fig.
2.30). It is not a reflex and requires the animal to pay
attention. This may be gained by gently tapping the
Figure 2.29 Vision and pupil constriction initially share a
 animal on the side of the head, and then repeating the
common pathway.
menace response test. Systemically unwell animals may
be too lethargic to respond appropriately.
It is a learnt response and is present in kittens and
puppies by 10-12 weeks of age.
and a lesion in the optic tract or higher will produce a
contralateral menace deficit (Fig. 2.29).
Interpretation
The menace response is defined as a blink immediately
Examination
after a menacing gesture. An absent response is referred
 Obstacle course: Blindness is often first noted in a new
to as a menace deficit and may occur from a lesion in
environment so it may not be necessary to create an
either the afferent or efferent pathways. It is not a reflex
elaborate obstacle course in the examination room.
as the pathway requires cerebral integration and is
Encourage the animal to walk around the room. Note
affected by cerebral function (e.g. alertness). Facial
24
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
the optic nerve to subcortical structures with the motor
innervation supplied by the facial nerve (CN Vll).
Cn Ill: OCULOmOTOr NErvE
Aim
To assess pupil constriction and movement of the globe.
Significance
Afferent fibres leave the optic tract and pass to the
ipsilateral pretectal nucleus in the midbrain. Most fibres
then decussate to the contralateral parasympathetic
Figure 2.31 Indirect ophthalmoscopy. This has the
nucleus of CN Ill also in the rostral midbrain. Pregangli-
additional benefit of keeping the clinician's face away
from the animal's jaws.
onic fibres exit the midbrain ventrally and pass to the
ciliary ganglion in association with the CN Ill efferent
neurons to the extraocular muscles. Postganglionic
fibres, called short ciliary nerves, innervate the iris con-
strictors. The feline iris is supplied by lateral and medial
paralysis (CN Vill) will prevent the eyelid closing but the
short ciliary nerves. Loss of one of these nerves creates
eyeball may retract (CN Vl). The menace response is still
a D-shaped pupil; 5-8 short ciliary nerves innervate the
regarded as absent (O). Make a note in the records that
canine iridial constrictors.
the animal appears to be visual.
The somatic efferent branch of CN Ill innervates the
A unilateral cerebellar lesion may cause an ipsilateral
dorsal rectus, ventral rectus, medial rectus, and ventral
menace deficit in the presence of normal vision and
oblique extraocular muscles. These muscles have differ-
facial nerve function. A diffuse cerebellar lesion can
ent roles in different positions of gaze. It also supplies
produce a bilateral menace deficit.
the levator palpebrae musdles. The nerve cell bodies lie
The response is graded as absent (O), decreased (1+),
within the CN Ill nudleus in the rostral midbrain, in
or normal (2+).
association with the parasympathetic nucleus of CN Ill.
Visual placing response: the normal animal reaches
Both branches of the oculomotor nerve exit the brain-
stem ventrally and exit the skull through the orbital
for the table.
fissure to innervate intrinsic and extrinsic muscles of
Fundic examination: Indirect ophthalmoscopy (Fig.
the eye.
2.31) allows the retina to be viewed as a whole, and has
Examination
the benefit of not requiring placement of ones face
adjacent to the patient's mouth. An assistant restrains
Pupil size: Pupil size can be assessed simultaneously
the animal's head while the clinician shines light at the
by standing approximately an arm's length away and
animal's eye and finds the bright yellow-green tapetal
viewing the face through an ophthalmoscope. The two
reflection. Resting one hand on the animal's head, an
tapetal reflections are compared. Examine the pupil size
arm's length away, the clinician lowers the lens in front
and reaction in ambient light and in darkness. Normal
of the eye, illuminating the fundus. This is brought into
pupils should dilate equally in darkness (dark adaption).
focus by slightly moving the lens closer or further from
the eye. A common mistake is to forget the focal distance
the iris, e.g. synechia, iris atrophy, subluxated lens and
of the hand-held lens and come too close to the eye.
glaucoma as these affect pupil size, shape and symmetry
Note any haemorrhage, detached retina, hyperreflec-
(Figs 2.32, 2.33).
tive areas or hyporeflective areas. Vision will be affected
Interpretation
before the PLR in retinal and optic nerve lesions.
Anisocoria is always pathological. Sympathetic paralysis
The dazzle reflex: Strong light shone in the eye
prevents the affected pupil from dilating fully in darkness 
induces a reflex blink mediated by afferent input from
but PLRs are normal.
2 The neurological examination
25
Arousal, fear or excitement increases the sympathetic
CLINICAL TIP
output, dilating the pupils. Approaching sleep results in
decreased sympathetic activity and removal of inhibition
The batteries in disposable flashlights (torches)
 of the CN Ill parasympathetic nucleus, resulting in small
weaken quite quickly creating an inadequate
pupils.
stimulus and inconsistent test results.
Pupillary light reflex (PLR): Using an ophthalmo-
scope, shine a strong light into one eye and observe that
Swinging flashlight test: Shine a strong light into one
pupil constrict (Fig. 2.34). This is called a direct PLR.
eye for 2 seconds, then immediately transfer the light 
The afferent arc is mediated by CN Il and the efferent
source to the other eye, and then back again (Fig. 2.35).
by the parasympathetic branch of CN Ill. The majority of
 The normal response is for both pupils to remain con-
afferent fibres decussating at the optic chiasm and then
stricted reqardless of which eye is being stimulated
again after the pretectal nucleus explain the relative
When an afferent lesion is present, moving the light
strength of the direct PLR. Shine the light in one eye and
from the normal to the abnormal eye causes both pupils 
observe the pupil constriction in the contralateral pupil:
to dilate. The dilation of a previous constricted pupil,
this is called the indirect PLR and is normally less vigor-
despite direct stimulation with light, is called the Marcus
ous. Pupillary escape is the normal slight redilation of a
Gunn sign, or Marcus Gunn pupif. The degree of dilation
normal pupil when under constant stimulation by light
is greater than that seen in the normal phenomenon of 
and is due to adaption of the retina.
pupillary escape.
Figure 2.32 Viewing both pupils through a direct
 Figure 2.34 Assessing pupil constriction.
ophthalmoscope to assess symmetry.
14mm
 Pupil size:
 Pinpoint
2mm
5mm
7mm
12mm
 (normal, calm animal 
(midposition)
(widely dilated)
 in exam room)
Figure 2.33 Description of pupil size.
26
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
X
Dorsal
M. rectus
M.rectus
medialis (CN II)
lateralis (CN VI)
Caudal
A）
Medial.
 Light is shone into the pupil with an
M.retractor
afferent lesion - no constriction of either pupil
bulbi (CN VI)
M. obliquus
X
dorsalis (CN IV)
M. rectus
dorsalis(CN IIl)
Lateral
M. obliquus
M. rectus
B
Rostral
ventralis (CN III)
ventralis (CN IIl)
Light is shone into the functional eye -
 both pupils constrict 
Ventral
X
Figure 2.36 Extraocular muscle movement.
C
Both pupils dilate again
X Aferent lesion (CNIll)
Figure 2.35 The swinging flashlight test (abnormal)
Interpretation of PLR:Always interpret the results of
the PLR with those of the menace response. The afferent
pathways are initially shared. Draw the diagrams of both
pathways and map the site of the lesion. Midbrain
Figure 2.37 Support the head under the chin and observe
 pathology will also affect the mental state and the gait.
the size and symmetry of facial structures.
Eye movement: Move the head from side to side and
observe the eye movement. The detectors of head rota-
tion are the semicircular canals of the vestibular appara-
tus. Sensory information enters the medulla via CN Vill,
strabismus. When present in the normal head position,
projecting rostrally via the medial longitudinal fasciculus
it is called resting (spontaneous) strabismus. Dorsiflex the
(MLF) through the brainstem to the nuclei of CNN ll, IV
 neck and observe the eye position again. The eye posi-
and Vl. The efferent arc of this reflexive eye movement
tion is best examined if the clinician is standing above
comprises CNN Ill, IV and Vl, depending on the position
the animal. Avoid retracting the skin of the forehead as
of the head. The lateral rectus (CN VI) abducts the
this will elevate the eyelids, exposing more sclera, thus
creating the illusion of ventral strabismus (Fig. 2.38).
eyeball and the medial rectus (CN Ill) adducts. Normal
 animals have conjugate eye movements (Fig. 2.36).
Normal animals should gaze in the direction in which
they are facing. CN I paralysis gives rise to a ventrolat-
Eye position: Face the animal and observe the position
eral strabismus at rest. Convergent strabismus in which
of the eye within the socket (Fig. 2.37).
the visual axis is deviated medially is called esotropia.
The pupil sits in the middle of the palpebral fissure of 
Outward turning of the eye, divergent strabismus, is
normal animals. Deviation of the visual axis is called
called exotropia.
2 The neurological examination 
27
Examination
Fundic examination may show rotation of retinal blood
vessels.
Cn v: TrIGeminal Nerve
Aim
To assess jaw strength, and the presence of sensation to
the face.
Significance
CN V is composed of sensory and motor fibres. As the
name suggests, there are three branches; ophthalmic
(sensory to the eye, medial canthus and nostril), maxillary
(sensory to the lateral canthus and nostril), and man-
dibular (motor to the muscles of mastication and sensory
to the mandible). The motor nucleus of CN V lies within
the pons. Its axons join with the sensory fibres of CN V,
Figure 2.38 Bad technique. Note how the skin is
exit the pons, pass through the petrosal bone and exit
retracted when restraining the head
the skull via the oval foramen. The sensory axons within
all three branches of CN V unite and enter the skull via
the oval foramen. Sensory impulses are transmitted to
other cranial nerve nuclei to complete reflex arcs, and
Positional (inducible) strabismus is that present with
are also transmitted to the contralateral cerebral cortex.
an alteration in head position (see page 236)
 Unilateral cerebral lesions can reduce pain perception in
the contralateral face; these deficits are subtle and may
Upper eyelid position: Face the animal and compare
be overlooked. Unilateral lesions of the trigeminal nerve
the symmetry of the left and right palpebral fissures.
give rise to ipsilateral motor and sensory deficits. There
Paresis or paralysis of the levator palpebrae muscle pro-
 are clinical situations in which either the motor or the
duces ptosis, decreasing the size of the palpebral fissure.
sensory deficits occur alone.
Examination
Cn Iv: trochlear Nerve
Symmetry: Assess the symmetry of the temporalis and
Aim
masseter muscles by observation and palpation of the
CN IV only has motor function. It plays a role in eyeball
head (Fig. 2.39)
movement and position. Its limited function is difficult
 a  s p   a
to assess.
nent and enophthaimos occurs.
The position of the globe within the socket is easily
Significance
assessed by viewing the animal's head from above: the
The nucleus of CN IV lies within the caudal midbrain.
curve of the cornea being more or less prominent. Swell-
The axons pass dorsally, decussate, and exit the brain-
ing of the masticatory muscles pushes the eyes forward,
stem dorsally. CN IV then passes ventrally and exits the
causing exophthaimos, which is noticed as a bulging,
floor of the skull via the orbital fissure to innervate the
prominent eye with sclera exposed on all sides of the iris
dorsal oblique muscle, an extraocular muscle. Contrac-
(Figs 2.40, 2.41).
tion of the dorsal oblique rotates the dorsal aspect of
the globe medially (intorts). Failure of this function is not
Jaw tone: Observe the resting position of the mandi-
noticed viewing the round canine pupil, but the slit-like
bles. If the mouth hangs open, push the lower jaw
vertically-oriented feline pupil may show strabismus with
upwards and note if it passively drops once released.
the dorsal aspect of the pupil rotated laterally.
Open the mouth, testing the resistance to movement. If
28
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
Figure 2.39 Masticatory muscle atrophy increasing the
Figure 2.41 Exophthalmos secondary to masticatory
prominence of the zygomatic arch.
 muscle myositis.
Figure 2.42 The jaw can be completely closed by the
dog.
Figure 2.40 The right eye is enophthalmic, from 
right-sided Horner's syndrome.
the animal is only aggressive towards strangers, ask the
owner to open the mouth (Fig. 2.42).
To be time-efficient, this test can be followed by
examination of the tongue, and the gag reflex.
Blink reflex: Touch the lateral canthus of the eye (CN
V: sensation) and observe the reflex blink (CN Vll: motor).
The eyelids should fully close. Touch the medial canthus
and observe the blink reflex. The blink is in reaction to
touch rather than a menacing gesture (Fig. 2.43).
Facial sensation: This is also tested as part of the blink
reflex (Fig. 2.44). Gently insert a pen or closed haemo-
Figure 2.43 The blink reflex: testing both the facial
sensation and the ability to blink.
stats into each nostril in turn. The animal should pull its
2 The neurological examination
29
Significance
The abducent nerve contains motor fibres to the retrac-
tor bulbi and the lateral rectus muscles. Its nucleus lies
within the rostral medulla. Axons exit the brainstem
ventrally and leave the skull via the orbital fissure.
Examination
Globe retraction: Reflex retraction of the eye within
the socket occurs in response to touch. The afferent arc
is mediated by CN V (ophthalmic branch), and the effer-
ent by CN Vl. There are several ways of stimulating the
afferent arc:
Figure 2.44 Testing facial sensation: the mandibular
● Part the eyelids. Wait. The eyeball retracts as the
branch of the trigeminal nerve.
cornea dries
● Part the eyelids. Blow on the cornea
● Part the eyelids. Gently touch the cornea
head away from the noxious stimulus. Touch or pinch
The preferred method is to touch the eye through a
(llA ND) uonoena d loy yoem pue (A ND) d doi au
closed eyelid. This technique is well-tolerated by the
Pinch the lower lip; the animal should pull its head away
animal and does not traumatize the cornea. Gentle pres
from the noxious stimulus.
sure stimulates globe retraction which, with practise, can
be felt through the closed lid.
CLINICAL TIP
Eye position and movement: Paralysis of the lateral
Pinching and jabbing at a pet's face is guaranteed
rectus can result in spontaneous medial strabismus and
to shock the owners. Briefly explain what you are
an inability to fully abduct the eyeball.
about to do and why.
Interpretation
Schirmer tear test: see CN Vll.
Globe retraction is difficult to assess in the presence of
enophthalmos. Paralysis of function is due to LMN
Interpretation
lesions (nerve or brainstem). Associated deficits localize
An animal's behavioural response to pain is altered by
the site.
its mental state. Reflexes may be reduced by lesions of
the sensory or motor arcs. Lesions of CN V sensory fibres
CN VIl: FaCIaL NErVE
may give rise to abnormal sensations and scratching of
Aim
one side of the face rather than the anaesthesia expected.
Masticatory muscle has a different composition to
To assess movement of the muscles of facial expression
 appendicular muscle and may be specifically targeted by
and quantify tear production.
the immune system, therefore involvement of the mas-
ticatory musdles alone may not be due to a CN V lesion.
Significance
Lesions of the CN V nucleus are accompanied by
The facial nerve contains motor fibres to muscles of
clinical deficits from surrounding structures: cerebellar
facial expression and parasympathetic fibres to nasal,
peduncles, the ipsilateral ascending proprioceptive and
salivary and lacrimal glands. Sensory fibres transmit
descending motor tracts, and the ARAS.
information from the taste buds of the rostral 2/3 of the
tongue. Facial nerve axons within the medulla are closely
CN VI: ABDUCENT NERVE
associated with the CN Vl nucleus and the caudal
cerebellar peduncle. CN Vll lies adjacent to CN VIll
Aim
when exiting the brainstem and passing into the inter-
To assess the function of two extraocular muscles.
nal acoustic meatus of the petrosal bone (Fig. 2.45).
30
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
 Brain stem
Facial motor nucleus
Lacrimal gland 
Internal acoustic meatus -
 Stapedius (sound dampening)
Taste (rostral two-thirds
of tongue)
 Submaxillary and sublingual
gands (salivation)
Stylomastoid foramen
Facial musculature
Figure 2.46 Left facial weakness. Note the more ventral
Figure 2.45 Pathway of the facial nerve.
position of the left upper and lower lips, the lack of 
retraction of the left oral commissure, and the slight
deviation of the nose to the right.
Examination
Facial symmetry and movement: Observe facial sym-
metry by noting the position of the upper lips, lower lips,
ears, nasal philtrum, and palpebral fissure. Lift the chin
between the mandibles for a better view of lip asym-
metry. Offer the animal an object to smell and note
movement of both nostrils. Make a sudden noise and
note symmetry of ear movement. Check the skin of the
upper lip for bite wounds which occur when the lip is
caught between the canines. Note the appearance of
the cornea: it may look wet and shiny despite a reduced
tear production (Fig. 2.46).
Blink reflex: The eyelids should dlose completely when
Figure 2.47 Placement of the Schirmer tear test strip.
stimulated by touch (CN V) or following a menacing
gesture (menace response).
Lip retraction: The upper lip should retract when
pinched with haemostats. This reflex requires sensation
(CN V) and motor (CN Vll) integrity.
Schirmer Tear Tert
Schirmer tear tests
Stondordized Sterile Strips
Schirmer tear tests (Figs 2.47, 2.48) measure the aqueous
PatnNa.5.006.310
COLOR BAR Tear Front Indicator
tear film using a calibrated paper strip with an impreg-
andMillimeterScaleon EachStrip
For DiagnosticUse
nated line of blue pigment. The basal level of tear pro-
5SetsofTwo Strips
duction by the lacrimal gland (CN Vll) is increased in
Schering-Plough Animal Healt
response to stimulation (CN V: sensation; CN Vll: motor).
Schirmer Tear Test I(STT I): measures both basal and
reflex secretions. The rounded end of the STT strip is
Figure 2.48 A normal STT I reading
folded and placed under the lower lid just medial to the
2 The neurological examination
31
lateral canthus. Tears wick up the strip, smearing the
CN VIll: VeStIbULOCOChLear Nerve
blue pigment as the liquid rises. The level of the blue dye
Aim
is read at 60 seconds.
● Normal ≥15 mm
● To look for signs of balance disturbance (vestibular
● Dry eye ≤10 mm
division)
● Severe dry eye ≤5 mm.
●To distinguish between peripheral and central causes
 of vestibular derangement
False normal/increase: painful eye; artificial tears.
● To subjectively assess hearing ability (cochlear
False decrease: atropine; anaesthetics; normal daily vari-
division).
ation; variation between STT strip brand.
Significance
Schirmer Tear Test Il (STT Il): measures basal secre-
The vestibulocochlear nerve is purely sensory in function.
tions. Administer a drop of topical anaesthetic to the
The balance and hearing receptors develop in close asso-
eye. Dry the conjunctival sac with a sterile Q-tip (cotton
ciation and are both found within the petrosal bone.
bud). Place the STT strip under the lower lid just medial
Their axons join, leaving the petrosal bone together via
to the lateral canthus. Read the level of the blue dye at
60 seconds (Fig. 2.49).
the internal acoustic meatus, in close association with
the facial nerve. The vestibular nerve enters the rostral
●Normal ≥7 mm
medulla and its axons terminate, for the most part, in
● Dry eye ≤7 mm
the vestibular nuclei. Some fibres travel directly to the
Interpretation
cerebellum. The cochlear nerve enters the rostral medulla
and terminates in the cochlear nuclei.
LMN lesions cause weakness or paralysis of the effector
CN V, Vll and Vlll are anatomically close at the level
organ. Skeletal muscle becomes weak, paralysed and
of the brainstem
flaccid. Glands cease secretion. Partial closure of the
eyelids indicates weakness of the facial muscles. The
Examination
lower eyelid may droop, widening the palpebral
fissure. Flaccidity of the lips causes them to droop.
Hearing: Making a noise and watching the animal's
Dependent ears are positioned further ventrally on the
reaction can lose effectiveness if repeated or if the
head.
animal is fearful or excitable. Historical clues are more
useful. Objective assessment of hearing is achieved with
the brainstem audio-evoked response which tests the
integrity of anatomical pathways.
Head position: a head tilt is commonly seen with ves-
tibular dysfunction.
Nystagmus: Spontaneous jerk nystagmus is always an
abnormal finding when the head is stationary. Record
the direction of the fast, jerking, phase as horizontal,
vertical, or rotatory, to the left, to the right, up, down,
or changeable. Rotatory nystagmus is commonly con-
fused with horizontal and vertical nystagmus. Distin-
guishing the direction is made easier by viewing a scleral
or retinal blood vessel. If it rotates, the nystagmus is
rotatory. Nystagmus may only be detected when per-
forming a fundic exam; the significance is the same.
Observe the eyes when the neck is flexed laterally, dor-
sally, and ventrally and when the head is stationary. If
Figure 2.49 Dry eye in a dog with a left trigeminal nerve
nystagmus appears in these new positions it is called
lesion. Note the left temporalis muscle atrophy
inducibie or positional nystagmus.
32
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
Physiological nystagmus is a normal reflex generated
by the vestibular receptors (sensory) and movement of
the extraocular muscles innervated by CN ll, IV, VI
(motor). Turn the head horizontally for several cycles at
a frequency of about 2 Hz and amplitude of approxi-
mately 45°. The fast phase of eye movement is in the
direction of rotation. Try to prevent the owner from
distracting the animal as visual fixation stops the fast
Positional (inducible) strabismus: Positional vertical
strabismus may occur ipsilateral to the vestibular lesion.
Normal animals maintain the iris within the centre of the
 palpebral fissure.
Figure 2.50 Assess jaw tone, tongue symmetry, mucous
membrane colour, odours, and the gag reflex.
Interpretation
Subjective assessment of hearing cannot differentiate
This is usually combined with examination of the jaw
unilateral deafness from normal hearing.
tone and the tongue.
Vertical nystagmus indicates central vestibular disease
whether or not the fast phase is downwards or upwards.
Interpretation
Nystagmus that changes direction also indicates a central
CN IX is closely associated with CN X and both are
vestibular lesion. Positional nystagmus can occur with
usually affected together in clinical disease. Neuro-
either central or peripheral vestibular lesions.
muscular disease commonly depresses pharyngeal motor
function but not sensation: the animal may pull the head
CN IX: GLOSSOPHaRYNGEaL NErVE
away without moving the pharynx. Many animals toler-
ate bilateral stimulation of the pharynx but normal
Aim
animals do not display dysphagia.
To test sensation (and movement) of the pharynx.
Significance
CN X: VAGUS NERvE
 CN IX is a mixed nerve. It supplies motor innervation to
Aim
salivary glands, the stylopharyngeus muscle (and possibly
To test sensation (and movement) of the pharynx, to
assess laryngeal function.
from the caudal tongue (taste buds), carotid sinus, and
 pharynx. The motor axons originate in the rostral medulla
Significance
and exit the skull via the jugular foramen and tympano-
Sensory and motor to pharynx and larynx.
occipital fissure. Sensory fibres pass through the same
portals and enter the medulla, projecting into the solitary
Examination
tract. From there, they either ascend rostrally to be con-
Listen for inspiratory stridor.
sciously appreciated by the cerebrum, or project to other
nuclei of the brainstem to create reflex arcs.
Gag reflex: See earlier in this chapter
Examination
Interpretation
Gag reflex: Insert a finger, pen, or patellar hammer
See laryngeal paralysis, dysphagia, pages 152 & 158.
handle, into the caudal pharynx and touch one side,
then the other. Observe pharyngeal contractions and
CN XI: ACCESSORY NERVE
elevation of the soft palate (gagging) (Fig. 2.50). CNN IX
Aim
and X contribute to both the sensory arc and motor arc
of this reflex.
Deficits are not recognized as a clinical problem
2 The neurological examination
33
Significance
Significance
The internal branch arises from the nucleus ambiguous
The hypoglossal nucleus lies within the caudal medulla.
within the medulla, along with CN IX and CN X. The
CN Xll exits the skull via the hypoglossal canal and inner-
external branch arises from the ventral horn cells within
vates the intrinsic and extrinsic tongue muscles
 C1-6 spinal cord segments and travels rostrally through
the foramen magnum. The two branches unite within
Examination
the skull forming CN Xl, which then exits via the jugular
If it is safe to do so, open the mouth and observe tongue
NN ym buoe ainss!y iendpoo-ouedu pue uaweoj
movement and symmetry. Normal animals move the
IX and X. The internal branch remains with CN X while
tongue when the mouth is open. Using a finger, attempt
the external branch splits off to innervate the trapezius,
to retract the tongue and note the muscle tone. If the
and parts of the sternocephalicus and brachiocephalicus
animal is aggressive, observe the mouth from a distance;
muscles.
the tongue should move during panting. The tongue can
be palpated between the mandibles, which may give
Examination
some idea of atrophy or hypertrophy.
Palpation of the trapezius muscle.
Interpretation
Interpretation
LMN lesions lead to atrophy, flaccidity and weakness and
A purely focal CN Xl lesion would not cause forelimb
this also applies to the tongue muscles. Enlargement of
weakness, nor result in dysphagia.
the tongue can occur in some myopathies. Uraemia may
result in tongue necrosis.
CN XIl: HYPOGLOSSaL NERVE
Aim
To assess movement, size and strength of the tongue.
Localizing lesions
William of Occam (died circa 1350) pioneered the KISS
a short time frame, it is important to mention this to the
('Keep It Simple, Stupid!') approach to problem-solving
owner, and consider using what could be termed benign
with his philosophical principle that the fewest possible
neglect', i.e. wait and see.If the animal does not respond
assumptions are to be made in explaining a thing. This
as expected within the timeframe expected, then further
 principle is known as Occam's razor and is used in local-
investigation is certainly justified.
izing neurological lesions
The aim is to find the focus of the pathology. Thus
Cotegories of disease
all signs are assessed and judged if they can be ascribed
1. Malformation
to a single lesion or not.
2. Inflammation
Once this intellectual exercise is over, the clinician
3. Degeneration
then prioritizes any tests required to diagnose the actual
4.Trauma
disease.
5. Tumour.
If the anatomical site of disease is not known, then
testing cannot be performed in a logical, rational, cost-
Some owners wish to know as soon as possible what is
efficient and expedient manner (Table 3.1)
or is not going on. The clinician must be confident in
assessing the benefit of investigation to the animal. The
clinician must be able to explain to the owner the sig-
AETIOLOGY OF THE LESION
nificance of abnormal results (or the lack of abnormali-
The history provides important information as to the
ties) on diagnostic tests
nature of the underlying disease. It is wrong to assume
that history-taking can be avoided by performing various
How to prioritize diagnostic tests
blood tests and imaging techniques. In fact, that would
1. Utility
be one of the most serious errors a clinician could make
● Will this test alter the treatment of the animal?
Assessing the speed of onset, the rate of progression,
● Will this test give more information about possible
either worsening or improving, and the duration of signs
underlying  pathologies  than  other diagnostic
gives the first clues as to the diagnosis and hence the
options?
possible prognosis.
2. Morbidity
Pathological processes have typical patterns of behav-
● What is the risk to the animal in performing the
iour and these can be simplistically demonstrated with
test? (How can this risk be decreased?)
 graphs. These are guidelines only. Diseases have nuances
● What is the risk to the animal in NOT performing
and variations in clinical appearance. Textbooks only
the test? (ls there another diagnostic method?)
describe the common presentations (Fig. 3.1).
●Which is greater?
It is important to consider the nature of the underly-
3. Interference
ing disease before planning any diagnostic tests. If all
● Will this procedure confound the results of future
the possible underlying diseases (the differential diagno-
tests?
ses) are uniformly fatal within a short time span, it is only
4. Cost
fair to the owner, who is funding the investigation, to
+ Can the owner afford to act upon the test results?
inform them of this fact. Equally, if the suspected aetiol-
(i.e. will this test alter the treatment of the
ogy is one which will resolve without intervention within
 animal?).
34
3 Localizing lesions
35
The accuracy of neurological diagnoses
Table 3.1 The required thought process for diagnosis
Anatomic and aetiological diagnoses based solely on the
Question
Answer
history and examination are accurate in the majority of
1. What is abnormal?
Take a history
cases. In a study of human neurological patients, the
2. What body system is
Examine the animal
errors in clinical diagnosis were attributed to incomplete
responsible?
 or incorrect collection of historical and physical findings,
3. Is it the nervous system?
Perform a neurological
insufficient knowledge of the spectrum of clinical mani-
examination
festations associated with the patient's disease and
4. Where is the lesion?
Interpret the exam findings
5. What could the lesion be?
Consider signalment,
incorrect analysis of the findings (poor diagnostic
history, anatomic
reasoning)
location 
An incorrect initial assessment reduces the efficiency
6. How best to diagnose?
Consider the anatomic
 of patient care and delays initiation of appropriate treat-
location 
7. How best to treat?
Consult textbooks and
ment. Technology cannot be relied upon as a panacea
journals
for diagnostic difficulties as test results may be
negative.
Interpretation of neurological signs
Apart from inadequate history-taking, the chief hurdles
signs
of the diagnostic steeplechase are an inability to examine
the nervous system, and more commonly, an inability to
Paroxysmal
interpret the findings of such an exam.
disorders
The trick of examination is to follow a routine,
1
and train oneself to notice both the normal and
abnormal.
Seconds Minutes Hours
Days Weeks Months Years
Interpretation of findings requires a basic understand-
Time—
ing of how the nervous system works. Happily, there are
 Figure 3.1 Temporal patterns of neurological disease
characteristics associated with each section of  the
nervous system (Boxes 3.1 -3.9). Make a list of the abnor-
malities, apply 'Occam's razor', and see if the deficits can
be assigned to one area of the nervous system (Fig. 3.2)
Do not forget the basics ... co-existing
disease
1. Neurologically affected animals may have disease
elsewhere, e.g. arthritis of forelimbs as well as
hindlimb ataxia. Physical examination is important.
2. Animals may have new, acute deficits and long-term
unrelated signs, e.g. an acute balance loss from
peripheral vestibular disease and residual proprio-
Box 3.1 TELENCEPHALON: cerebrum
ceptive deficits from an unresolved TL
cord
Altered alertness
compression secondary to IVDD. History taking is
 Altered behaviour
important.
Seizures
3. A neurological lesion may begin as a focus and
Contralateral visual deficit 
expand to cause damage to surrounding structures,
Minimal gait change
giving the appearance of multifocal disease, e.g. IV
Compulsive walking, pacing, circling
Contralateral proprioception deficits
disc extrusion leading to myelomalacia. Repeat neu-
Contralateral paresis.
rological examinations are important.
36
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
Cerebrum
Cerebellum (dorsal
metencephalon)
Spinal cord
Cervical
Cervicothoracic
Thoracolumbar
Lumbosacral
(intumescence)
(intumescence)
Uppermotorneuron
Thalamus
Diencephalon-
Hypothalamus 
Mesencephalon
(midbrain)
Peripheral Central
Pons (ventral
Medulla
Lower motor
metencephalon)
Vestibular system
cblongata
neuron
Lower motor
neuron
Figure 3.2 Divisions of the nervous system.
Box 3.2 DIENCEPHALON: thalamus, pituitary
Box 3.6 MYELENCEPHALON: medulla oblongata
Altered alertness
±Altered alertness
Altered behaviour
 CN VI-XII
Seizures
Major gait change: ataxia/paresis-paralysis
Visual and PLR deficits
lpsilateral proprioception deficits
Minimal gait change
Ipsilateral paresis.
Compulsive walking. pacing, circling
Contralateral proprioception deficits
Contralateral paresis
Altered temperature, appetite, thirst 
Box 3.7 VESTIBULAR APPARATUS
 Endocrine dysfunction.
 ± altered alertness
 Spontaneous nystagmus
Box 3.3 MESENCEPHALON: midbrain
Altered posture: roll, fall, lean, head tilt
 Major gait change: ataxia
 Altered alertness
± ipsilateral proprioceptive deficits
PLR deficits
 ± ipsilateral paresis/paralysis.
CNN II . IV
Major gait change; ataxia/paresis-paralysis
Contralateral proprioception deficits 
Contralateral paresis.
Box 3.8 SPINAL CORD: UMN
Major gait change: ataxia/paresis-paralysis
BOX 3.4 VENTRAL METENCEPHALON: pons
Ipsilateral weakness 
lpsilateral proprioceptive deficits
Altered alertness
Normal/increased spinal reflexes
CNV
Normal/increased muscle tone
 Major gait change: ataxia/paresis-paralysis
 Minimal muscle atrophy
lpsilateral proprioception deficits 
± absent sensation caudal to the lesion.
Ipsilateral paresis.
Box 3.5 DORSAL METENCEPHALON: cerebellum
 Box 3.9 LMN: ventral horn cell, ventral nerve root, nerve,
neuromuscular junction, muscle
Alert
Ipsilateral menace deficit (not blind)
Major gait change: paresis-paralysis
lpsilateral or contralateral pupil dilation 
Ipsilateral weakness
± vestibular signs
± Decreased spinal reflexes
Major gait change: ataxia, tremors 
± Decreased muscle tone
 Preservation of strength
 Severe muscle atrophy.
3 Localizing lesions
37
 Table 3.2 Cranial nerve function
CNN
Components
Function
Olfactory
Sensory
Olfaction
do
Sensory
Vision
 Oculomotor
Motor
 Eyeball movement 
Raises dorsal eyelid 
Constricts pupil
IV
Trochlear
Motor
Eyeball movement 
V
 Trigeminal 
Motor
Muscles of mastication 
Sensory
Face, eye, jaws, oral cavity
VI
Abducens
Motor
Eyeball movement 
VlI
Facial
Motor
Muscles of facial expression
Tear and salivary glands
Sensory
Taste
Middle ear, blood vessels of the head, palate
VII
Vestibulocochlear
Sensory
Balance
Hearing
IX
Glossopharyngeal
Motor
Pharynx
Salivary glands
Sensory
 Pharynx
Carotid body and sinus
Taste
X
Vagus
Motor
Pharynx, larynx, oesophagus, viscera
Sensory
Pharynx, larynx, viscera
Taste
 External ear canal
XI
Accessory
Motor
Trapezius, sternocephalicus, brachiocephalicus mm
IX
Hypoglossal
Motor
anbuol
Summary
3.3 for Spinal reflexes.
● Sciatic [L6,7, S1,(2)]: flexion of stifle, tarsus, digits and
extension of hip, tarsus, digits
Voluntary movement of the forelimb
● Femoral [L4,5,6]: flexion of hip, and extension of
(Table 3.4)
stifle.
The action of a muscle can vary with the limb position
(Fig. 3.3).
REFERRED PAIN
Summary
The phenomenon of tissue injury occurring in one region
● Radial nerve C7,8, T1,(2): extension of the forelimb
but appearing to originate from a distant site is called
● Musculocutaneous nerve C6,7,8: flexion of the elbow
referred pain. The injured and healthy areas share seg-
● Median and ulnar nerves C8, T1 ,(2): flexion of carpus
mental innervation.  Referred pain from  visceral to
and digits.
somatic structures is well-recognized in humans, prob-
ably due to the patient's language skills. It is rarely
Voluntary movement of the hindlimb
considered in veterinary medicine.
(Table 3.5)
A common example of referred pain in small animals
Figure 3.4 shows the peripheral nerves to the hindlimb.
is the lameness originating from compression or infiltra-
38
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
Table 3.3 Spinal reflexes
Reflex
Sensory nerve
Muscle
Peripheral
Cord
nerve(s)
segments
Biceps reflex
Musculocutaneous
Biceps brachii
Musculocutaneous 
C6.7.8
Brachialis
Triceps reflex
Radial
Triceps brachii
Radial
C7,8, T1,Z
Extensor carpi
Radial
 Extensor carpi radialis
Radial 
C7,8, T1,2
radialis
Fexor/ withdrawal
Ulnar: lateral digit V
Forelimb flexors
Axillary,
C6,7,8. T1,2
reflex of the
Radial : dorsal digit Ill, IV
musculocutaneous,
forelimb
Musculocutaneous:
median, ulnar, part
medial, Z cm distal to
of the radial n.
elbow
Axillary: lateral, Z cm
 caudal to shoulder
Patellar reflex
Femoral
Quadriceps femoris
Femoral
L4,5.6
Cranial tibial 
Peroneal
Cranial tibial
Peroneal
L6,7. (51)
Gastrocnemius 
Tibial
Gastrocnemius 
Tibial
(L6).7. 51
Fexor/ withdrawal
Lateral digit:sciatic
Hip, stifle, tarsal
Sciatic
L6,7. 51
reflex of the 
Medial digit:femoral 
flexors
hindlimb 
Anal reflex 
Pudendal
External anal sphincter
Pudendal
51,2.3
 Perineal reflex
 Pudendal 
Anal sphincter and tail
Pudendal n.,
51-3, Cd 1-n
flexors
coccygeal n.
Cutaneous trunci
Segmental spinal nerves
Cutaneous trunci
Lateral thoracic n.
C8. T1
reflex
tion of a nerve root supplying that limb. Lateralized cervi-
4. Lesions caudal to the red nucleus of the midbrain
cal disc extrusion and nerve root tumours are the most
cause
ipsilateral weakness  and  proprioceptive
common diagnoses in the forelimbs. L7-S1 compression
deficits.
and discospondylitis are two common problems result-
 5. Lesions rostral to the red nucleus cause contralateral
ing in root signature lameness of the hindlimbs
weakness and proprioceptive deficits.
Cerebral tumours have presented as neck pain. It is
6. Sometimes it is difficult to distinguish between
thought to be a form of referred pain as meningitis was
medulla oblongata and cervical cord lesions.
not a feature
Visceral pain initiates a reflex spasm of the abdominal
Localizing spinal cord lesions
sapsnw jeujwopqe pue jeixed3 bupienb, palleo sapsnu
 1. Strength and proprioception are affected caudal to
become rigid in an effort to limit motion during spinal
the lesion.
pain. These protective mechanisms are not cassed as
 2. Postural reactions will distinguish the normal limbs
referred pain.
from the abnormal limbs.
3. Presence or absence of spinal reflexes in the abnor-
mal limbs indicates the segmental level of the lesion
Differentiating brainstem from spinal cord
(Fig. 3.6):
lesions (Fig. 3.5)
● Intact reflexes in paralysed limbs: lesion is rostral
1. The brainstem consists of the medulla, pons, mid-
to those segments. UMN paralysis.
brain and thalamus.
● Absent reflexes in paralysed limbs: lesion is within 
2. The ascending reticular activating system (ARAS)
 those segments tested. LMN paralysis.
runs from the brainstem to the cerebrum. If it is
4. Some C1-5 cervical cord lesions cause more severe
damaged, alertness is decreased
 paresis in the forelimbs than the hindlimbs. This has
 3. Cranial nerves Il to Xll originate in the brainstem, and 
been known as central cord syndrome but extradural
are numbered from rostral to caudal.
lesions, such asIVD extrusion, are commonly implicated.
3 Localizing lesions
39
Table 3.4 Forelimb movement, muscle, nerve and cord segments
Movement
Muscle
Nerve
Cord segments
 Advance the forelimb; elevate, draw
Trapezius
Accessory CN XI
Cervical spinal cord
forward, pull limb and shoulder
 Omotransversarius
Cervical spinal nerves
forward or backward 
Rhomboideus 
Serratus ventralis
Cleidomastoideus
 Superficial pectorals
Supraspinatus
Suprascapularis
(C5),6.7
Shoulder flexion
Deltoideus
Axillary
(C6).7.8
Teres major
Teres minor
Subscapularis
Infraspinatus 
Shoulder extension
Deep pectorals
Caudal pectorals, C8 T1
 Supraspinatus
Suprascapularis
(C5).6.7
Infraspinatus 
Subscapularis
Subscapularis
C6.7
 Elbow flexion
Biceps brachii
Musculocutaneous
C6.7.8
 Brachialis
Coracobrachialis
Ext. carpi radialis 
Radial
C7,8, T1,(2)
 Pronator teres
Median
C8. T1,(2)
Elbow extension
Triceps brachii
Radial
(7,8, T1,(2)
Anconeus
Carpal and digital flexion 
Fexor carpi radialis
Median 
C8. T1,(2)
Superficial digital flexor
Fexor carpi ulnaris
Ulnar 
Deep digital flexor
Median/ulnar
C8. T1,(2)
Muscles between flexor tendons
 Palmar interosseous mm
Ulnar 
Carpal extension
Extensor carpi radialis 
Radial
C7,8, T1,(2)
Extensor carpi ulnaris
 Digit extension 
Common digital extensor
Radial
C7,8. T1,(2)
Lateral digital extensor
Ext. pollicis longus et indicis proprius
 Cauda equina syndrome
Sacral nerve roots
Cauda equina (horse's tail) describes the appearance of
● Reduced/absent anal and urinary sphincter tone and
nerve roots travelling caudally within the spinal canal
perineal reflex
before exiting through the appropriate intervertebral
●Atonic bladder
foramina. Cauda equina syndrome describes the clinical
●Reduced/absent skin sensation of the perineum.
signs resulting from lesions in this anatomic area.
Caudal (coccygeal) nerve roots
Sciatic nerve roots
● Reduced/absent tail tone, movement and sensation.
● Decreased withdrawal reflex (particularly hock flexion)
● Pseudo-hyperreflexia of the patellar reflex
FOCAL LESIONS WITH MULTIFOCAL SIGNS
● Weight-bearing on the dorsal surface of the paw
●Atrophy of gluteal and caudal thigh muscle groups
Skull
●Decreased sensation of associated dermatomes.
See Table 3.6 for multiple CNN deficits.
40
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
 Table 3.5 Hindlimb movement, muscle, nerve and cord segments
Movement
Muscle
Nerve
Cord segments
Hip flexion
lliopsoas
 Femoral
L4,5.6
Tensor facia lata
Hip extension
Superficial, middle, deep gluteals
Caudal glute al 
L7. (51,2)
 Biceps femoris
 Cranial glute al 
L6,7. 51
 Semimembranosus, semitendinosus
Hip adduction
External obturator.
Cbturator
(L4).5.6
Pectineus, adductor
Gracilis, sartorius
Hip abduction 
Middle gluteal
Cranial glute al 
L6.7. 51
Deep gluteal
Outward rotation
Internal obturator
 Sciatic
L6,7. 51,(2)
 of the hip
Gemelli
Quadratus femoris
Stifle flexion 
Biceps femoris 
 Sciatic
L6,7. 51.(2)
 Semitendinosus
Popliteus
Tibial
Gastrocnemius
Superficial digital flexor
Stifle extension
Quadriceps femoris
 Femoral
L4,5.6
(Tensor fascia lata)
(Cranial gluteal)
(L6,7. 51)
Tarsal flexion and 
Cranial tibial, peroneus longus, long digital
 Peroneal
L6.7
 digital extension
 extensor, lateral digital extensor, extensor
hallicus longus, peroneus brevis
Tarsal extension 
Gastrocnemius, superficial and deep digital
Tibial 
L7. 51
flexors
(Biceps femoris, semitendinosus, gracilis)
(Sciatic)
[L6,7. 51,(2)]
Digital flexors 
Superficial and deep digital flexors
Tibial 
L7. 51
Pantar surface of
 Interosseous mm
Tibial 
L7. 51
hindpaw
Cavernous sinus syndrome (css)
develop cerebral signs due to dilation of the lateral ven-
This is an uncommon neurological presentation but one
tricles (Table 3.7).
which is similar to retrobulbar disease due to the effects
Herniation patterns
on the intrinsic and extrinsic ocular muscles. It can occur
unilaterally or bilaterally and in both cases, neoplasia is
When compensatory mechanisms fail to cope with the
increasing intracranial pressure, brain tissue shifts posi-
the most common cause. In humans, bilateral Css was
tion within the skull. The brain may herniate under the
more frequently associated with vascular, infectious, and
falx cerebri,under the tentorium cerebelli,or caudally
non-infectious inflammatory diseases (Fig. 3.7).
through the foramen magnum. Changes in breathing
pattern, posture, or pupil size and reactivity are noted.
Ventricular system
Compression of the oculomotor nerve or midbrain
Blockage of CSF flow leads to dilation of ventricular
results in mydriasis which is unresponsive to light.
compartments rostral to the obstruction. Compression
 The lesion may initially present as cerebral disease but
of adjacent brain tissue creates signs distant from the
subsequent pressure on the brainstem produces a dra-
original focus. The brainstem lesion may subsequently
matic change in gait, posture or alertness. Equally, an
3 Localizing lesions
41
2
Pudendal nerve
Suprascapular nerve
Axillary nerve
Femoralnerve
Musculocutaneous nerve
Obturatornerve
Median nerve -
Pelvicnerve
UInar nerve-
Sciaticnerve
Radialnerve
Saphenous branch
Peroneal nerve
Tibial nerve
Figure 3.3 Peripheral nerves to the forelimb
Figure 3.4 Peripheral nerves to the hindlimb.
Lateral ventricle
Interthalamic adhesion
3rd
ventricle
Tectum of
 midbrain
T2T3
L3L4
C1
C5C6
Mesencephalic
aqueduct
4th
LMN
LMN
ventricle
C1-C5C6-T2
T3-L3
L4-S1
Cd
XI
 Forelimb 
UMN
LMN
Normal
Normal |Normal
Olfactory bulb (l)
XIl
Hindlimb
UMN
UMN
UMN
LMN
Normal
Optic chiasm (ll)
Pituitary Midbrain Pons
VII
Bladder
UMN
UMN
UMN
LMN
LMN
Medulla oblongata
Figure 3.6 Signs associated with spinal cord lesions at
Figure 3.5 Cranial nerve nuclei within the brainstem. EW.
different segmental levels. UMN, upper motor neuron;
Edinger-Westphal (parasympathetic nucleus of CN Ill).
LMN, lower motor neuron.
42
SMAlL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
Table 3.6 Multiple CNN deficits
Site
Affected
Other signs
cranial nerves
Orbital fissure
, IV, v(1). VI 
Horner's syndrome
Cavernous sinus 
, 1V, V(1,2). VI
Horner's syndrome, seizures, neurotrophic keratitis 
Orbital apex (retrobulbar)
11, III, IV, V(1),. VI
Horner's syndrome (exophthalmos, restriction of eye moverment)
Fituitary/sella turcica
11, 1I
 Mental state, seizures, behaviour change
 Cerebellopontine angle
V. Vl, vIl. VIlI!
Ataxia; paresis, cerebellar signs 
Jugular foramen 
IX, X, XI
Ataxia, paresis
Tympanic bulla 
VIl
 Horner's syndrome, inner ear (cochlear; vestibular): meningitis; chronic otitis
externa
Skull base syndrome
CN V-XIl
 Horner's syndrome, ± pain from mass eroding/invading bone or soft tissue,
 or from meningeal involvement 
CN V(1): ophthalmic branch, V(2): maxillary branch. V(3): mandibular branch.
hfraorbital foramen
Lateral part of frontal sinus
Cribriform plate
Optic canal
Orbitalfissure
Hypophyseal fossa-
Foramen rotundum
Foramen ovale
Cavernous sinus
Canal for transverse sinus
Canal for trigeminal nerve
 Internal acoustic meatus
Jugular foramen
Hypoglossal canal-
 Condyloid canal
Dorsum sellae
Figure 3.7 Foramen of the skull and the cavernous sinus.
3 Localizing lesions
43
Table 3.7 Relationship of the ventricular lumen with divisions of the CNS
Major
Subdivisions
Associated
Derivatives
Lumen
component
CNN
 Prosencephalon 
Telencephalon 
I N
Cerebral cortex
Lateral ventricles 
Basal nuclei
Rostral part of third 
Limbic systerm
ventricle
Rhinencephalon
Diencephalon
II ND
Thalamus
Most of the third 
Hypothalamus
ventricle
Mesencephalon
CN III, IV
Midbrain tectum (corpora
Mesencephalic
quadrigemina) and tegmentum
aqueduct
(cerebral peduncles)
 Rhombencephalon 
Metencephalon-dorsal
CNV
Cerebellum 
Fourth ventricle
Metencephalon-ventral
Pons
Myelencephalon
CN VI-XII
 Medulla oblongata 
Fourth ventricle
 Remainder of
Spinal cord 
Spinal cord 
Central canal 
 neural tube
Position of
expanding cerebellar lesion can increase pressure within
Cerebrum
Corpus
Cerebellum
 tentorium
callosum
the caudal fossa and compress the brainstem (Fig. 3.8).
cerebelli
Multifocal neurological disease
Lesions in anatomically separate areas of the nervous
system are referred to as multifocal. The disease pro-
cesses commonly responsible for this scenario are:
1. Trauma
2. Inflammation, e.g. infectious or non-infectious
inflammatory disease
3. Vascular, e.g. vasculitis, haemorrhage
Skull
4. Degeneration, e.g. lysosomal storage disease, mito-
chondrial disease.
Animals may present with a focal lesion which expands
 Foramen and creates further neurological deficits, e.g. brain her-
magnum
 niation, myelomalacia. Certain anatomical sites create a
variety of deficits which may initially appear as if sepa-
rate regions are individually affected, e.g. a generalized
neuromuscular disease causing cranial nerve lesions and
Lateral
Optic
Third
Mesencephalic
chiasma ventricle aqueduct
 appendicular weakness; dysautonomia; a lesion in the
ventricle
Brainstem
region of the cerebellopontine angle causing paradoxical
Figure 3.8 Herniation of the brain. (A) Cerebral
vestibular disease, hemiparesis, facial nerve and trigemi-
hemisphere mass causing a lateral deviation of the falx
cerebri (midline shift) and compression of the lateral
nal nerve paralysis.
ventricle (+→ arrows) with herniation under the tentorium
cerebelli(+→ arrows); (B) Subtentorial mass compressing 
the brainstem, causing rostral herniation under the 
tentorium or caudal herniation under the tentorum or
caudal herniation through the foramen magnum.
This page intentionally left blank
Z
SECTION
ALTERATIONIN
MENTALSTATE
Chapter 4
Alteration in mental state - an introduction
47
Chapter 5
Head trauma
52
Chapter 6
Metabolic encephalopathy: insulinoma
59
Chapter 7
62
Chapter 8
 Metabolic encephalopathy: osmolarity
63
Chapter 9
Granulomatous meningoencephalitis
66
This page intentionally left blank
Alteration in mental state -
an introduction
INTRODUCTION
Describing the mental state
This is the most common reason for animals to be pre-
1.Alert
sented to the veterinarian. Owners remark that the
●Conscious; capable of responding to sensory
animal is 'not himself', 'not right'. When pressed for
stimuli. A more clinically useful statement would 
details, the next observation is just as non-specific: leth-
be to describe what the animal is responsive to
argy, depression. This should be no surprise; many dis-
and if that response is normal or appropriate.
 2. Obtunded/depressed/lethargic
eases result in a less reactive mental state, drowsiness or
apparent indifference to stimuli.
· A mild to moderate decreased interaction with or
Alertness is promoted by the ascending reticular acti-
interest in the environment
vating system (ARAS), a network of neurons projecting
● Responds slowly to verbal stimuli
from the brainstem to the cerebral cortex. Damage to
● Increased hours of sleep.
3.Stupor
the ARAS alters the level of consciousness.
● Unresponsive
unless rousedbyanoxious
stimulus
CLINICAL TIP
● Appears to be in a deep sleep to which it returns
once the stimulus has ceased.
Not all lethargic animals have brain disease.
4.Coma
● Complete 
unresponsivenesstoanystimuli.
Unrousable
Presenting signs
● Graded according to a scale for monitoring pro-
Some animals are described as having a far-off' gaze,
gression of causative disease.
or staring, vacant expression. This may signal a depressed
Delirium: In the human this is characterized by disori-
state of alertness. Mydriasis, blindness, a lack of blinking,
entation, fear, irritability, agitation and misperception of
and a rigid neck posture can create the same impression.
 sensory stimuli which may be episodic and interspersed
Deafness and exercise intolerance will alter an animal's
with lucid intervals. It results from a generalized impair-
responsiveness to commands.
ment of brain function and occurs in metabolic or toxic
disorders or multifocal cerebral disease. It may precede
What is consciousness?
or follow stupor/coma.
Consciousness is the state of awareness of the self and
the environment. The former is anthropomorphized by
Dementia: This is a persistent insidious reduction in
owners, while the latter is used by veterinarians to judge
mental awareness or understanding in an alert patient.
the level of mental responsiveness. This state of aware-
The term is generally applied, in humans, to those with
ness relies on the animal being alert.
a chronic problem with little chance of improvement,
Consciousness is graded by the decreasing level
e.g. degeneration, trauma, tumour.
of function from alert to comatose. The term semi-
Localizing the lesion
comatose has been used in texts, but as coma is defined
as a total lack of responsiveness to stimuli, using the
Stupor and coma result from one or both of the
prefix 'semi-' can confuse communication.
following:
47
48
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
● Diffuse, bilateral cerebral impairment
Expiratory respiratory muscles
● Failure of the rostral brainstem ARAS within the mid-
● Used in forced expiration. The internal intercostals
 pons, extending rostrally to the thalamus.
muscles and the abdominal musdles contract the rib
cage caudally, decreasing intrathoracic volume. Intra-
CLINICAL TIP
abdominal pressure is increased, pushing the dia-
phragm cranially.
Stupor and coma usually result from sub-acute or
acute brain disease
Stimulus for respiration
Spontaneous respiration is produced by rhythmic dis-
charge of motor neurons in the medulla. It is stimulated
A lesion in the compact brainstem damages a larger
by changes in arterial blood and CSF/brain ECF concen-
 proportion of the ARAS with a more profound effect on
trations of CO or H+ and O2.
consciousness than would the same sized lesion in the
These chemical changes are detected by the aortic
cerebrum which only picks off a small fraction of the
bodies, each a collection of specialized cells near the
now-dispersed fibres.
arch of the aorta, and the carotid bodies, found associ
ated with the carotid bifurcation bilaterally. Chemo-
receptor cells are also present in the medulla.
CLINICAL TIP
Increased cellular metabolism raises the CO, concen-
tration and hence H+ concentration, which in turn stim-
It is more common for coma to result from
ulates respiration via the chemoreceptors, particularly
brainstem lesions than from cerebral disease
those of the medulla.
Acidosis from ketone bodies will stimulate respiration
causing hyperventilation.
Five observations aid in specifying the area of
Loss of HCl from vomiting decreases ventilation,
dysfunction:
allowing CO2 (and H+) to increase.
1. State of consciousness
2.Pattern of breathing
Hypoxia (low PaO, or decreased O, delivery in vascular
3. Size and reactivity of the pupils
stasis) also increases ventilation by stimulating the carotid
4. Eye movements and oculovestibular responses
and aortic bodies.
Afferents from the carotid body travel to the medulla
5.Skeletal muscle motor responses.
via CN IX, and those from the aortic bodies, via CN X.
Autonomic motor pathways from  the medulla
RESPIRATORY PATTERN
descend to innervate respiratory muscles. Voluntary
Normal respiration
control of respiration is mediated by the cerebrum and
descending pathways bypass the medulla and innervate
Respiration maintains normal oxygenation and acid-
respiratory muscles.
base balance. Abnormalities can alter mental state, exer-
The pneumotaxic centre in the pons and afferent
cise ability and voice production
o uoisuedxa bunl bunp saaau jebea aun woy sieuais
deflation modify the spontaneous discharges from the
Inspiratory respiratory muscles
medulla.
● Diaphragm: accounts for most of thoracic volume
Movement of joints stimulates respiration. This is
change during quiet inspiration. Innervated by the
employed during anaesthesia to combat breath holding
phrenic nerve which originates from cord segments
during induction. Gently stretching and flexing the limbs
and nerve roots C5-7, found at vertebral level
 can stimulate inspiration
C4-C6
● External intercostal muscles elevate the lower ribs.
Abnormal respiration
Innervated by segmental spinal nerves.
Figure 4.1 shows the respiratory patterns.
Either muscle set alone can provide adequate ventilation
Mechanical hypoventilation
at rest. Most of the work of breathing is moving the
Hypoventilation occurs with skeletal muscle weakness
elastic tissues of the thoracic wall and lungs.
4 Alteration in mental state - an introduction
49
Normal (at rest)
radiculoneuritis, botulism, or upper motor neuron (UMN)
disease such as a cervical disc extrusion. The animal is
physically unable to ventilate itself and the thoracic wall
movement is either minimal or absent. Preservation of
diaphragmatic movement with loss of intercostal and
abdominal muscle function can produce paradoxical
ventilation in which the thorax retracts on inspiration
Abnormal
and expands during expiration.
Dogs unable to expand the thorax will be unable to
1  Periodic respiration (Cheyne-Stokes)
bark or cough.
Cervical cord lesions cranial to spinal cord segments
C5-7  will weaken the diaphragm and intercostal
muscles; severe lesions, such as those obliterating the
pain pathways, will produce respiratory paralysis and
death.
 The degree of hypoventilation is judged by the arterial
partial pressure of CO2 (PaCO2).
Periodic respiration (Cheyne-Stokes
2 Cluster breathing (gasping)
respiration)
Brain damage can produce hypersensitivity to arterial
PCO2. Hyperventilation ensues, lowering the arterial
PCO2. Apnoea results. Hypoxia then stimulates the
carotid and aortic chemoreceptors and respiration
recommences. As endogenous CO, builds up the pattern
repeats.
The hyperventilation phase lasts longer than the
apnoea. Regular respiration occurs in a smooth cre-
3 Central neurogenic hyperventilation
 scendo ending in a smooth decrescendo.
Periodic breathing with a shorter, less regular cycle
develops with severe increases in ICP and the resultant
ischemia of the brainstem (cluster breathing or gasping).
AAAAAUAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAU
It occurs with a lesion anywhere from cerebral hemi-
spheres to upper pons. It may also occur in sleep,
hypoxia, uraemia and severe congestive heart failure.
4 Apneustic respiration
Hyperventilation with brainstem injury
Sustained rapid, regular and fairly deep hyperventilation
occurs with rostral brainstem lesions. It also follows pul-
5 Ataxic respiration (irregular rate and depth of respiration)
monary complications of brain damage which cause
systemic hypoxia or metabolic acidosis: aspiration, con-
gestion, infection or neurogenic pulmonary oedema.
Apneustic breathing
Ventilation pauses at full inspiration and again at end-
expiration. It occurs with pontine lesions.
Figure 4.1 Respiratory patterns
Ataxic breathing
An unpredictable pattern of deep and shallow breathes
occurring randomly with irregular pauses. It is seen with
50
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
lesions of the respiratory centres of the (central) medulla,
Table 4.1 Pupil size and pupil light response
e.g. trauma, cerebellar herniation or haemorrhage.
Pupil size
Light response
Interpretation
PUPIL SIZE AND REACTIVITY
Unilaterally
Slow or absent
CN Ill compression 
dilation 
secondary to
Table 4.1 indicates pupil size and pupil light response
tentorial herniation 
(PLR). Figure 4.2 shows pupil size in the comatose
Unilateral
Slow
lpsilateral or 
patient.
dilation 
 contralateral 
cerebellum 
Bilaterally
Slow or absent
Inadequate brain
EYE MOVEMENT AND OCULAR-VESTIbULAR
dilation 
perfusion
INTERACTION
Bilateral CN III
paralysis
The neurons contributing to the generation ofnystag-
Midbrain 
mus are intertwined with those brainstem neurons sub-
Bilateral
Absent
Rostral brainstem or
mid-position 
medulla
serving consciousness.
 Unilaterally
Cross-re active
Optic nerve injury
dilated or
(Marcus Gunn*)
Extensive retinal 
Thevestibulo-ocular reflex(VoR) is a compensatory
equal 
pathology
mechanism designed to keep images stabilized on the
 Bilaterally
May be difficult to 
Opiates,
retina when the head rotates. Rotation of the head to
constricted 
 determine
Metabolic
the left, for example, results in the eyes slowly moving
(pinpoint)
(reactive in 
encephalopathy
to the right. The sensory input to the reflex comes from 
metabolic disease)
Cerebrocortical 
disease
the semicircular canals, part of the vestibular apparatus.
Pontine lesions
The term VOR is applied to the reflex generated by rotat-
Unilaterally
Intact
 Injured sympathetic
ing the head relative to the body and also by the simul-
constricted
pathway
taneous rotation of the head and body as one item.
*Marcus Gunn swinging light test to look for a relative
Sensory input from the joint and muscle receptors in the
afferent pupil defect.
Metabolic
Small reactive 
Diencephalic 
Small reactive 
Optic nerve
Rostral midbrain or medulla
Dilated, Marcus-Gunn sign
Midposition, fixed
Ill nerve4
Midbrain
 Pons
Dilated, fixed
Dilated, fixed
 Pinpoint 
Figure 4.2 Pupil size in the comatose patient.
4 Alteration in mental state - an introduction 
51
neck (cervico-ocuiar reffex) contributes very little to the
VOR at the usual frequencies of rotation used in clinical
examination. There is negligible contribution from the
vestibular otoliths which react to linear acceleration.
The motor function is performed by the extraocular
musdles. The afferent (CN Vlll nuclei) and efferent arcs
(CNN Ill, IV, Vl) are connected by the medial longitudinal
fasciculus (MLF) within the brainstem. An intact reflex
signifies that a long length of brainstem, from medulla
to midbrain, retains some function. The reflex is abol-
ished by a lesion anywhere along this pathway. Associ-
ated deficits aid localization. In the comatose animal, the
lesion is usually destruction of brainstem tracts and
 Figure 4.3 Opisthotonus.
hence the prognosis is grave.
The oculocephalic reflex is synonymous with the VOR
induced by passive rotation of the head, keeping the
body still. The dofl's head manoeuvre is used to describe
the same method of stimulating the VOR to produce the
compensatory slow phase eye movement but it was
originally used to refer to the elevation of the eyelids and
 Caused by lesions above the red nucleus
● Indicates severe brain damage.
upward rotation of the eyes generated by ventroflexing
the neck. To avoid confusion, VOR is the preferred term
Decerebrate posturing (extensor posturing)
Physiological nystagmus is a normal phenomenon
● Extension of all limbs, opisthotonus
induced by rotation of the head. The slow, vestibular
● More severe than decorticate posturing
component, the VOR, moves the eyes in the direction
● Caused by brainstem damage below the red nucleus
opposite to the rotation. As rotation continues, a fast
(mid-collicular), e.g. midbrain and cerebellum lesions.
jerk, or saccade, in the direction of rotation then takes
place, aligning the eyes 'straight ahead'. A nystagmus is
Opisthotonos (Fig. 4.3)
thus formed by the slow drift phase opposite rotation,
· Muscular spasm causing dorsiflexion of head, neck
and the fast jerk in the direction of rotation. The re-
and spine
aligning quick phase requires a structurally intact pontine
● Accompanied by extension of forelimbs ± hindlimbs
or mesencephalic reticular formation and descending
● Occurs  when  inhibition of extensor muscles is
supratentorial influences. Absence of physiological nys-
removed, e.g. midbrain lesion (removal of descending
tagmus has the same implications as loss of the VOR.
inhibition), tetanus and strychnine toxicity (prevention
of local spinal inhibition).
SKELETAL MOTOR RESPONSE
Decerebellaterigidity
Abnormal postures in the comatose animal can indicate
● Opisthotonus with thoracic limb extension, flexion of
the level of neurological damage and hence aid in moni-
pelvic limbs (hips) up under the body, or pelvic limbs
toring and prognosis. These postures may be present
rigidly extended
at rest or assumed when the animal is physically
● Acute cerebellar lesion.
stimulated.
Adversive syndrome
Decorticate posturing (flexor posturing)
● Leaning, head turning, propulsive cirdling, or ocular
● Described in comatose humans with the arms flexed
deviation toward the side of the rostral thalamic
over chest and the legs extended
lesion.
5
Head trauma
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Obtunded, stupor, coma.
INTRODUCTION
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
Being hit by a car, human, large animal, falling tree or
 Initial assessment of a traumatized animal is done quickly
furniture, being shot at or in a dog fight are all reported
 and is repeated at frequent intervals. Mental state, pupil
causes of head trauma in small animals. The dog that
size and pupil light reflex (PLR), eye movement (resting
knocks its head against a door frame and carries on
position, spontaneous movement, and vestibulo-ocular
walking will not have sustained clinically significant head
reflex, VOR) should be noted. Approximately 10% of
trauma.
traumatic brain-injured humans also have a cervical
spine injury. Avoid rotating or hyperextending the neck.
The Glasgow Coma Scale was modified by Dr Andy
SIGNALMENT
Shores for use in small animals and this helps monitor
A 6-year-old male crossbred dog.
progression of signs (Table 5.2). One study found that
there was a 50% probability of survival during the first
48 hours after head trauma in dogs with a score of 8.
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
Contrary to humans, the age of the animal did not
predict survival. The study was not able to suggest a
Presented in a mentally unresponsive state.
long-term prognosis based on either survival or func-
tional capacity.
Examination in this case revealed:
CASE HISTORY
· Coma
A sudden onset of stupor or coma (Table 5.1) should not
● Lateral recumbency
automatically be blamed on external trauma, unless, of
● Bilaterally symmetrical pinpoint pupils
course, the event is witnessed or has produced other
● VOR was present
physical evidence. The owner must always be ques-
● Regular respiration with good thoracic excursions
tioned, however briefly, on the animal's recent health
● Absence of external signs of trauma
status.
● Heart rate and pulse rate were 126 bpm
In this case, the dog had been exercising off the lead
● Temperature was 37.7°C.
and out of view. A train was heard to pass nearby. The
dog was called but failed to return. The animal was
found soon after, in lateral recumbancy in an unrespon-
Neuroanatomic localization
sive mental state. The owners presented the dog, saying
The lesion was localized to the cerebrum or brainstem
it had been hit by a train.
ARAS based on the coma.
52
 5 Head trauma
53
Differential diagnosis
have shown some earlier signs of mentation or behav-
iour change or have a less-acute onset but this is not
It seemed highly unlikely that a dog could be hit by a
always the case. Metabolic encephalopathy can alter
train and not be visibly damaged by the experience.
Head trauma from a blunt projectile may have occurred.
mentation acutely and for extended periods of time
(hours).
Increased intracranial pressure from neoplasia, cerebral
haemorrhage, or inflammation would be expected to
CaSE WORK-UP
Table 5.1 Causes of stupor and coma
1. Assessing oxygenation
●Pulmonary contusions are common post-trauma.
Brainstem
Bilateral cerebrum
Auscultation detects increased lung sounds distrib-
Metabolic encephalopathies
uted unevenly over the thorax, or decreased lung
Hypoglycaemia
sounds with consolidation. There is no specific
Hyperosmolar (DKA: hypernatraemia)
therapy. Treatment is supportive.
Hypo-osmolar (water intoxication)
● Neurogenic pulmonary oedema is rare but most
Uraemia
often associated with severe head trauma. It pro-
Acidosis
Anoxia
gresses within hours or days to resolution or
Portosystemic shunt
death. Improvement, if it is to occur, is usually seen
Hyperkalaemia
within 48 hours. It results from a central sympa-
hypocalcaemia
-el dil ui aseaui ue wog ahneu oau
Toxicity
Inflammation
 Post-ictal
ment is aimed at reducing ICP, oxygenation, and
Vascular
Hydrocephalus
diuretics.
Hydrocephalus
Herniation with secondary compression
● Respiration patterns are often altered in coma. A
of brainstem 
lack of increased effort does not imply adequate
Oxygenation/ventilation.
Table 5.2 The modified Glasgow Coma 5cale for small animals
Small animal coma scale
Score
Motor activity
Normal gait, normal spinal reflexes
6
Hemiparesis, tetraparesis, or decerebrate activity
5
Recumbent, intermittent extensor rigidity
4
Recumbent, constant extensor rigidity
3
Recumbent, constant extensor rigidity with opisthotonus 
2
Recumbent, hypotonia of muscles, depressed or absent spinal reflexes
1
Brainstem reflexes
Normal pupillary light reflexes and oculocephalic reflexes
6
Slow pupillary light reflexes and normal to reduced oculocephalic reflexes
5
Bilateral unresponsive miosis with normal to reduced oculocephalic reflexes
4
Pinpoint pupils with reduced to absent oculocephalic reflexes
3
Unilateral, unresponsive mydriasis with reduced to absent oculocephalic reflexes
2
Bilateral unresponsive mydriasis with reduced to absent oculocephalic reflexes
Level of consciousness
Occasional periods of alertness and responsive to environment
6
Depression or delirium, capable of responding but response may be inappropriate
Semicomatose, responsive to visual stimuli
4
Semicomatose, responsive to auditory stimuli
3
Semicomatose, responsive only to repeated noxious stimuli
2
Comatose, unresponsive to repeated noxious stimuli
1
Note: Asymmetrical abnormalities (e.g. pupil size) are assigned the lower score of the two possible. Score before medication and
supportive care administered. Oculocephalic reflex, VoR; Semicomatose-stuporous.
54
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
2. Assessing ventilation
the systemic blood pressure increases and a reflex
● Hypoventilation results from brain injury, thoracic
bradycardia follows. These reflex changes are
trauma and pain, weakness secondary to spinal
called the Cushing's reflex and are more common
cord or brainstem injury. In addition, ventilation-
in end-stage disease.
perfusion mismatch  can follow head  trauma
● Increases in ICP are monitored by neurological
without evidence of pulmonary disease on the
examination in veterinary patients. Papilloedema is
radiographs.
rarely seen after acute head injury in humans.
● Short, shallow respiration with intermittent
attempts at deep respiration accompanies pleural
space disease (pleural effusions, pneumothorax).
CLINICAL TIP
● Respiratory acidosis is a warning that respiratory
 Pulse oximeters overestimate oxygenation.
failure will occur.
3. Assessing systemic perfusion
End-tidal CO2 monitors underestimate PaCO2
· Hypoperfusion manifests as a faster heart rate
(dog), weaker pulse, paler mucous membrane
colour, slower capillary refill time, and lower rectal
Investigation of this case required:
temperature.
Hypovolaemic animals
shave
● Sudden onset coma: blood and urine analysis to
depressed mentation which improves with treat-
assess the metabolic state and clotting ability
ment. The mortality rate in humans with severe
● Tetraplegia: radiographs of the axial skeleton to
traumatic brain injury is doubled with a systolic
assess for fractures. The lack of voluntary movement,
blood pressure of <90 mmHg.
and response to pain made judgement of a subclinical
spinal injury very difficult. Muscle tone was normal to
slightly increased, which made a lower motor neuron
CLINICAL TIP
lesion less likely.
● Possible external
trauma:  thoracic  radiographs,
 Systemic hypotension does not result from lesions
abdominal radiographs, monitor PCV and urine
rostral to the lower brainstem.
production.
● Further history: the dog had been well prior to the
coma.
4.Assessing intracranial pressure (Table 5.3)
● Imaging the brain: the sudden onset of coma without
● The closed skull qives the traumatized, swelling
confirmed trauma or systemic disease.
brain little room for accommodation. Increasing
ICP forces blood and CSF out of the brain. As ICP
DIAGNOSIS
equals or exceeds the systemic arterial pressure,
Metabolic causes were ruled out by normal laboratory
findings. The low normal body temperature was insuf-
ficient to produce such a profound depression of the
Table 5.3 Assessing the coma patient
mental state. Over the course of the following 12 hours,
Function
Aim
swelling of the right temporalis muscle developed. Blunt
trauma, possibly from a stone, was suspected. Imaging
Oxygenation
PaO2 >90 mmHg (dog)
 of the brain was discussed but declined.
PaO2 >100 mmHg (cat)
5aO >95%
PCV 25-30%
PROGNOSIS
Haemoglobin (Hb) 7-10 g/dl
(N = 13.8-21.4 g/dl)
The prognosis for a head trauma case is determined by
Ventilation
10-20 breaths/min
the other injuries sustained and the degree of neurologi-
PaCO2 of 25-35 mmHg
cal deficit. The latter is judged by serial examination.
Perfusion 
Systolic pressure >90 mmHg
Dramatic improvements in brain function can be seen
Intracranial pressure
Improvement in neurological
in the first week after treatment of acute head trauma
examination
 and many animals return to being functional pets
5 Head trauma
55
Treatment and prognosis remain directed by exami-
may continue for 3 months, also a result of the Cush-
nation findings. If the animal neurologically deteriorates
 ing's reflex from increased ICP
despite medical treatment then imaging is indicated. CT
● Seizures may commence months to years later in an
classification of head trauma in humans has prognostic
otherwise neurologically normal animal. Some 10%
value but suchstudies do not exist inveterinary
of humans with ‘medium to severe' craniocerebral
medicine.
injury develop seizures, generally within 2 years after
Brain death is an indication for euthanasia
the trauma.
Syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic
Clinical criteria for brain death
hormone secretion (SlADH)
1. Exclude: toxin/drug-induced, metabolic coma, hypo-
Excessive ADH secretion can result from various cerebral
thermia and hypovolaemia.
2. Examination:
diseases. Water retention and continued urinary loss of
sodium (20-30 mEq/l) results in a dilutional hyponatrae-
● Coma
● No spontaneous respiration at PCO2 >60 mmHg
mia.There is a decreased serum osmolality,increased
urine osmolality, and decreased urine output. Treatment
● Absent brainstem reflexes:
● pupils dilated and unresponsive to light
requires fluid restriction and diuresis.
Serum sodium should be increased no faster than
● absent vestibulo-ocular reflex
● absent corneal reflex in both eyes
0.5-2 mEq/l/hr or 12 mEq/l/day in order to avoid osmotic
demyelination (central pontine myelinolysis)
● absent gag reflex.
Cerebral salt wasting (csW)
The period of observation in humans is lengthy (6-72
Caused by an increased secretion of atrial and brain
hours). No time guidelines exist for animals
natriuretic peptide which suppresses aldosterone syn-
Electroencephalogram (EEG) and brainstem auditory
thesis. Increased renal excretion of sodium occurs (150-
evoked response (BAER) have also been used in assess-
200 mEq/l), followed by water, resulting in hyponatraemia
ment of brain death. They are not necessary. They
and hypovolaemia. Treatment is sodium replacement
confirm the clinical assessment, nothing more
and fluid administration.
Caloric testing is used in humans as another test of
Central diabetes insipidus
the vestibulo-ocular pathways through the brainstem.
Decreased release of ADH results in loss of large volumes
Irrigation of the ear canal with warm or cold water
of dilute urine, leading, if untreated, to dehydration,
hypernatraemia, and increased serum osmolality.
ear. This creates a convection current within the semi-
circular canal that stimulates the hair cells. Direct
In this particular case a reasonable chance of useful
thermal effects on the vestibular nerve may play a role.
function returning was predicted, based on the function-
The response can be delayed up to 1 minute or more.
ing VoR and small symmetrical pupils
lce cold water in the externalear canal for 3-5
minutes induces fast phase nystagmus to the contra-
TREATMENT
lateral side but this may be absent in normal dogs.
 Testing with warm water (44°C) is apparently even less
Treatment aims to limit damage from the four horsemen
reliable.
of the intracranial apocalypse: hypotension, hypoxaemia,
The complications of head trauma include:
hypercarbia and increased intracranial pressure (ICP).
·DIC
1. Maintaining oxygenation
● Gastrointestinal ulcers
● Supplemental oxygen should be provided to any
● Aspiration pneumonia
 critical trauma patient until proven unnecessary
● Sepsis
● Nasal O2 catheter: 100 ml/kg/min provides 40%
● Pulmonary oedema; neurogenic, cardiogenic
 inspired O2
● Atelectasis
● Transtracheal O2 catheter: 50 ml/kg/min provides
● Cardiac arrhythmias
40% inspired O2
● Hypertension (human) from excessive secretion of
● Whole blood is used if the PCV <20% (Hb <8 g/
catecholamines begins within the first 10 days and
dl) or is rapidly declining. Aim for a PCV of 25-
56
SMAlL ANImAL NEUROLOGY
30% and albumin >2.0 g/l. Rate of administration:
Larger volumes may be given to hypovolaemic animals
4-10 ml/kg/hr over 4-6 hours
during cardiopulmonary resuscitation if over-perfusion is
● Haemoglobin-based oxygen carriers(oxyglobin) are
not a major concern: Lactated Ringers solution (LRS) or
administered when haemoglobin (Hb) is <7 g/dl.
0.9% NaCl 90 ml/kg/hr (dog), 40-60 ml/kg/hr (cat) to
Aim for 7-10 g/dl (n = 13.8-21.4 g/dl). This is used
effect. LRS is slightly hypotonic to plasma. If large
in dogs at 5 ml/kg increments with a limit of 30 ml/
volumes are required for treating hypovolaemia, a more
kg/day. The half life is 30-40 hours. It improves
isotonic solution or colloid should be used.
 oxygenation and has a vasopressor action.
● One fourth of the bolus is provided within the first
 2. Maintaining ventilation
5-15 minutes and the patient reassessed
● Positive pressure ventilation is required if oxygen-
● Improvement is usually seen by the time half the
ation or ventilation cannot be maintained or
animal's vascular volume (dog: 45 ml/kg; cat: 20-
requires severe increases in respiratory effort
30 ml/kg) has been given.
● 10-20 breaths/min qive the desired PaCO, of
25-35 mmHg.
Most (70-80%) of the crystalloid solution moves to the
3. Maintaining systemic perfusion
ECF within an hour of IV administration in a normal
● Give fluids based on cardiovascular need as judged
animal.
by blood pressure, urine output and central venous
Infusion rates can be reduced by 40-60% when col-
pressure. Restore systolic pressure to >90 mmHg
loids are used in addition.
●Smaff volume resuscitation is recommended for
Hetastarch and Dextran 70 have the same doses, dose
hypotensive cats, and hypotensive dogs when
limit, and half-life.
the consequences of fluidoverload are life-
● 10-20 ml/kg IV to effect as a bolus in dogs
threatening, e.g. head trauma, pulmonary contu-
● 5 ml/kg IV increments over 5-10 minutes in cats
sions, cardiogenic shock, oliguric renal failure, and
● Limits: Dog: 20-50 ml/kg/day. Cat: 5-20 ml/kg/
hyperosmolar states (hypernatraemia, hypergly-
day
caemia). It is also the recommended technique for
● Half-life of 25 hours.
cardiopulmonary resuscitation of animals that are
Hypertonic saline at 3% and 7% has been used in
euvolaemic before the arrest. Volume replacement
resuscitation at a dose of 4-6 ml/kg IV given slowly
and expansion should not cause cerebral oedema
over 5 minutes.The durationof actionis 15-
as long as volume overload and elevated right
60 minutes. Vagal-induced bradycardia and hypoten-
heart pressures are avoided and serum osmolality
sion occur if it is given too rapidly.
remains normal.
Cardiac arrhythmias, often ventricular, commonly
occur 12-36 hours after trauma secondary to direct
Methods
injury, or shock/ischaemia. The pulse must be checked
Dog
while the heart is auscultated. Poor tissue perfusion
● Isotonic crystalloids 10-20 ml/kg + hetastarch 3-5 ml/
is an indication for treatment with lidocaine. Most
kg. Given as an IV bolus
cases resolve within 2-4 days. Severe hypothermia
● Titrate additional crystalloid 10-20 ml/kg + 1-5 ml/
causes cardiac arrhythmias.
kg colloid to raise blood pressure
4. Control ICP
● Stop when desired mean arterial pressure or maximal
Normal ICP for dog and cat: 5-12 mmHg. Treat-
colloid dose is reached
● Consider vasopressors (phenylephrine or dopamine
monitoring of ICP is not routinely performed. Fluid
infusion) if the blood pressure and cardiac output
restriction is not used. Reduction of the colloid
cannot be restored.
oncotic pressure alone does not increase oedema in
the injured brain.
Cat
● Mannitol:
●Isotonic crystalloids 10-15 ml/kg + hetastarch 2-3 ml/
● 0.5-2.0 g/kg IV over 10-20 minutes
kg. Given as an IV bolus
● Limit: 3 boluses within a 24-hour period to avoid
● Titrate additional hetastarch 2-5 ml/kg to raise blood
hyperosmolality
pressure to >40 mmHg
● Effects within minutes and lasts 2-5 hours
● Ensure body temperature is >36.5°℃.
● Warm solution before use to dissolve crystals
 5 Head trauma
57
● Practical benefits outweigh theoretical concern
7. Control seizures
about creating intracellular hyperosmolality or
Emergency treatment:
worsening intracranial haemorrhage.
● Propofol: 1-2 mg/kg IV
● Frusemide
● Infusion: 0.1-0.6 mg/kg/min, to effect
● Doses and timing of administration vary from
● Decreases ICP. Anaesthetic. High doses can drop
source to source
blood pressure which can decrease cerebral per-
● 0.75-1.0 mg/kg IV to reduce CSF production
fusion. Avoid hypotension
● 2-5 mg/kg IV before mannitol use for synergistic
● Benzodiazepines: 0.5-1.0 mg/kg IV
effect
● Infusion: 0.5-2.0 mg/kg/hr in 0.9% saline
● 0.7 mg/kg IV or IM 15 minutes after mannitol
● Little or no effect on ICP. Anticonvulsant
administration
●Phenobarbitone: 2-6 mg/kg IV
● Some use it alone, without mannitol. There
● Anticonvulsant
is a delayed onset of effect compared with
● Pentobarbitone: 2-15 mg/kg IV slowly, to effect
 mannitol.
● Difficult to obtain. Anaesthetic. Causes hypo-
● Barbiturate comas are used in humans to control
tension and hypothermia, neither being desir-
unresponsive ICP. The dose is titrated based on
able. The dose required to decrease brain
EEG measurements and cardiovascular stability.
metabolism also causes hypotension. Excite-
This is not performed in animals as neither ICP nor
ment during recovery can resemble seizure
EEG are monitored
activity resulting in unnecessary repeat doses.
● Hyperventilation to a PaCO2 of 30 mmHg is the
aim in human medicine. Vascular response to CO2
Anticonvulsant prophylaxis is not routinely com-
levels may be absent or decreased in head trauma.
menced after head trauma. Head trauma sufficient to
Prolonged or excessive hyperventilation can lead
induce stupor or coma may lead to seizures later in
to diffuse cerebral hypoxia
life. Such animals may be otherwise neurologically
● Hypertonic saline can cause hypernatraemia.
normal. Anticonvulsants are only used if the seizure
5. Control pain
pattern warrants it.
● Opioids are used for pain control. There is little or
8. Other factors
no change to the ICP in most circumstances
●Vomiting occurs with increased ICP and vestibular
●Fentanyl: Dog: 0.002-0.005 mg/kg IV, IM, SQ
derangement as both stimulate the vomiting
q1-2 hr. Cat: 0.001-0.003 mg/kg IV IM SQ
centre. The vestibular system also projects to the
q2-4 hr
chemoreceptor trigger zone (CTZ). Narcotics cause
● Fentanyl patch: 25 μg/hr: <5-10 kg; 50 μg/hr:
emesis. Delayed gastric emptying and/or gastric
10-20 kg: 75 μg/hr: 20-30 kg; 100 μg/hr: >30 kg
atony occur with head injury
● Patches require 3-6 hours to produce maximum
● Serum grucose. Hyperglycaemia aggravates isch-
effect in cats, and 12-24 hours in dogs. Duration
aemia. Avoid hypoglycaemia. Glucose should only
of action varies: 1-3 days. If the animal weighs
be used to treat hypoglycaemia
<5 kg, keep half the patch covered
● Hypermetabolic state. Severe traumatic brain
● Morphine/methadone: dog/cat: 0.05-1.0 mg/kg
injury has a 140% increase in resting metabolic
IM, SQ, slow IV q4 hr.
expenditure. Place a feeding tube if the patient is
6. Correct hypothermia
unable to eat voluntarily for >2 days
● Hypothermia blunts the cardiac response to
●Nursing: Elevate the head 10-30% above the
catecholamines
heart, avoid compression of jugular veins, ensure
● Mild hypothermia is used in humans to decrease
the bladder empties, turn the patient frequently,
the brain's metabolic demands and thus make it
monitor electrolytes and maintain normovolemia
more capable of withstanding ischaemia. Tym-
with isotonic crystalloid fluids. Lubricate the eyes
panic membrane temperature is a more accurate
frequently to prevent corneal ulcers
reflection of brain temperature than oesophageal
● Corticosteroids: Brain oedema post-trauma is a
temperature.
mixture of cytotoxic (ischemia) and vasogenic
(blood-brainbarrier disruption)andyet use
of corticosteroids in humans has been associated
58
SMALLANIMAL NEUROLOGY
with a worse outcome. There is some debate as
Repairing a fracture is no guarantee of a successful
to the cerebro-protective benefit of methylpred-
outcome.
nisolone sodium succinate unrelated to its gluco-
Treatment in this case consisted of pain relief and
corticoid activity. If coma has been caused by mass
supportive care. The dog regained consciousness within
lesions (brain tumours, epidural hematomas) then
2 days and was able to walk with assistance within
corticosteroids are indicated.
2 weeks.
BRAIN SURGERY
Follow-up
1. Penetrating bite wounds lead to abscesses. Debride-
At 3 months after the coma had resolved, the dog had
ment and broad spectrum antibiotics are indicated.
 2. In the absence of progressive deterioration, removing
a generalized tonic-clonic seizure. The dog was normal
on neurological examination. MRl of the brain was
haematomas may not significantly improve the case.
3.If the skull segment is depressed more than its
normal. CSF was also normal. Further seizures of a
similar nature occurred infrequently (once or twice a
own thickness and compounded, surgery should be
year). No anticonvulsants were used.
considered.
Referral is recommended prior to any brain surgery, not
after. Fatal brain injury occurs without skull fracture.
Metabolic encephalopathy:
insulinoma
INITIAL PRESENTATION
intolerance, weakness or collapse commonly occur. Stupor and coma may result
INTRODUCTION
CASE HISTORY
Cerebral dysfunction appears acutely, episodically, or as
A description of the animal's activity and responsiveness
an insidiously worsening process depending on the
is vital. when and how often an abnormal event occurs
underlying disease, its speed of onset and the duration
and how long it lasts is useful for diagnosis and also for
and severity of the metabolic derangement. Signs may
monitoring progression of disease and the success of
be triggered by additional stresses such as eating, exer-
future treatment.
cise, excitement, drug therapy, surgery and concurrent
The dog was presented for assessment of a 6-month
disease.
history of episodic events which commenced with
Cases of metabolic coma typically have intact and
digging activity indoors and hiding in corners. Twitching
symmetrical PLR and VOR reflexes. Respiration may have
 of the face and body, vocalizing, defecating, and running
altered depth or rate but is regular, in comparison to
about the house then followed. The dog was mentally
structural diseases causing coma.
unresponsive during the event and if restrained, its limbs
Distinct areas of the CNs may be preferentially sus-
were felt to flex and extend. The events lasted up to 2
ceptible, producing focal signs in a diffuse disease.
hours and occurred at any time of day, with weeks or
Mixed metabolic derangements occur, with no part
seemingly severe enough to produce the clinical signs
being otherwise normal.
Mild changes can have an additive effect on cerebral
function. Each must be addressed.
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
 Cardiac dysfunction secondary to severe electrolyte
disturbances and acute metabolic acidosis may be rapidly
Neurological examination of this case was normal. No
lethal.
video of the event was available.
SIGNALMENT
NEUROANATOMIC LOCALIZATION
A 9-year-old neutered female boxer dog.
The lesion was localized to the cerebrum due to the
behaviour change. Episodic changes can occur with a
persistent structural lesion of the brain or an intermittent
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
metabolic defect. Episodic behaviour change also occurs
Episodic digging behaviour, twitching and vocalizing.
with psychological conditions in small animals. The
59
60
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
normal approach is to rule out organic CNS disease
Table 6.1 Blood glucose values
 before diagnosing psychological causes.
 In all three causes of episodic behaviour change, the
Normal
Abnormal
Clinical signs
Dog: 2.9-6.5 mmol/
3.3-3.8 mmol/ 
<2.5 mmol/
tural or metabolic lesions can cause subtle abnormalities
Cat: 3.1-7.2 mmol/l 
(e.g. change in house training, change in personality or
sleep patterns) between the flamboyantly abnormal
events, so it is vital to thoroughly quiz the owner.
An unresponsive mental state can also occur when
an animal is agitated or distracted by severe pain, or an
acute balance loss, or intense pruritus: the owner tries
hunger are a result of excess sympathetic stimulation.
to distract the animal but the animal pays no attention
Collapse, weakness, exercise intolerance, ataxia, an
obtunded or stuporous state, and transient blindness are
to find any other abnormality, then the unresponsive
 also reported. A peripheral neuropathy occurs secondary
mental state probably results from cerebral dysfunction
to insulin-secreting tumours in dogs.
of some kind.
 Some aspects of this patient's episodes were sugges-
DIAGNOSIS
tive of seizure activity; the localization would be the
same.
Fasting hypoglycaemia or hypoglycaemia with neuro-
logical signs confirms the diagnosis. Repeated testing is
required in some cases. Serum fructosamine levels assess
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
glycaemic control during the previous 2-3 weeks. A
Intracranial pathology or extracranial systemic disease
below-normal level or one in the lower half of the
was suspected in this case.
normal range (e.g. <300 μmol/l) suggests periods of
hypoglycaemia. Insulin levels should be measured when
hypoglycaemia is present. Less than 20% of dogs with
CASE WORK-UP
hypoadrenocorticism have hypoglycaemia (Table 6. 1).
Blood glucose was measured on an in-house system and
found to be low (2.3 mmol/l; range 2.0-5.5). It was
rechecked with a commercial lab and found to be
CLINICAL TIP
1.9 mmol/l. Concomitant serum insulin level was high at
Hypoglycaemia found in a seizuring animal is the
85 μIU/ml (5.0-20.0).
cause of the seizures until proven otherwise.
Causes of hypoglycaemia
● Excess insulin; endogenous, exogenous
●Liver insufficiency
An insulinoma was diagnosed. Abdominal ultrasound
● Glycogen storage diseases
did not reveal a pancreatic mass
● Neonates
Exploratory laparotomy found small lesions within the
● Hunting dogs, toy breeds
liver and a solitary mass in the pancreas. Histopathology
● Neoplasia
confirmed the diagnosis of an insulin-secreting beta cell
● Hypoadrenocorticism
tumour.
+ Sepsis.
PROGNOSIS
Hypoglycaemia often presents with intermittent neuro-
logical deficits. Seizures are usually self-limiting as cat-
Insulinomas commonly metastasize to the liver, mesen-
echolamine secretion raises the blood glucose level
tery, omentum and lymph nodes. Debulking the tumour
Behaviour change can go on for hours. Eating can both
improves the control of hypoglycaemia and survival time.
raise blood glucose levels and stimulate insulin secretion,
     
either improving or triggering signs. Non-specific rest-
Pancreatitis and diabetes mellitus are postoperative
lessness, anxiety, shaking, trembling, twitching and
complications.
6 Metabolic encephalopathy: insulinoma
61
TREATMENT
 6. Glucagon 50 ng/kg IV cat/dog. CRl: 5-10 ng/kg/min
IV, dose adjusted to maintain euglycaemia
1. 0.5 g/kg dextrose IV = 1 ml/kg 50% dextrose. Dilute
7. Octreotide 10-40 μg/dog SC q8-12 hr. Used with
in saline 1:2 to avoid phlebitis. Give slowly. Improve-
insulin-secreting tumours.
ment occurs within a few minutes.
The dog was treated with IV dextrose but remained
2. Unresponsive neurological signs due to cytotoxic
hypoglycaemic. Prednisolone and divided feeds were
oedema and cell death: treat raised ICP (mannitol,
commenced.
furosemide), maintain normoglycaemia, control sei-
zures. When hypoglycaemia is profound or pro-
longed, the signs may not reverse immediately after
FOLL0W-UP
glucose  injections despite normoglycaemia being
Clinical signs recommenced a few months post-surgery
reinstated.
and resolved when the dose of prednisolone was
3. Feed 3-6 times a day.
increased. The animal was later euthanized at the
4. Prednisolone 0.25 mg/kg PO q12 hr, increase if
owner's request following its first generalized seizure.
required to control the clinical signs.
 5. Diazoxide 5 mg/kg q12 hr. Dose adjusted to control
clinical signs.
7
Metabolic encephalopathy:
hepatic encephalopathy
Ed Friend and Susan Fitzmaurice
INTRODUCTION
communications. Urine analysis is commonly overlooked
as a diagnostic tool but should be performed, as ammo-
Severely reduced liver function is required to produce
nium biurate crystals can be found in both species. The
hepatic encephalopathy. This is most commonly due to
diagnostic yield from ultrasound is determined by the
vascular shunting. Low blood glucose levels may contrib-
operator skill. Portography and transcolonic scintigraphy
ute to the cerebral malfunction caused by an array of
are also used. Microvascular dysplasia of the liver
substances which include ammonia
has a similar cdlinical presentation and requires liver
Only two-thirds of canine congenital portosystemic
biopsy for diagnosis. Inborn errors of metabolism cause
shunts occur in small breeds such as Yorkshire terriers,
hyperammonaemia without evidence of hepatic
Maltese terriers, poodles and miniature schnauzers.
dysfunction.
Domestic shorthair cats represent the majority of feline
cases.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
CASE HISTORY
● Congenital portosystemic shunt
Cerebral dysfunction occurs in approximately 95% of
● Severe primary hepatobiliary disease
cases with signs generally commencing by 2 years
● Congenital urea cydle deficiencies
of age. Intermittent episodes of abnormal behaviour
● Organic acidaemias.
(aimless wandering, head pressing, circling or a change
in personality), ataxia, blindness and seizures may be
triggered by gastrointestinal bleeding, infections, hypo-
PROGNOSIS
kalaemia, constipation and high protein diets. Improve-
ment may be seen after antibiotic therapy. The animal
Seizures may persist even after surgical ligation of the
may be slow to recover from a general anaesthetic.
shunt.
Seizures with a normal inter-ictal period may be the only
abnormality.
TREATMENT
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
There is little correlation between blood ammonia levels
Neurological deficits are usually symmetrical. Non-
and the clinical signs but treatment aims to reduce the
formation and uptake of this metabolite and other
neurological signs include stunted growth, anorexia,
encephalotoxins from the gut.
depression, intermittent vomiting, diarrhoea and poly-
1. Antibiotics: neomycin, ampicillin, metronidazole
sas panolo-laddo lo uapioh Aaneudoddeul eisdi
2. Lactulose: Cat 0.5-5 ml PO q8-12 hr; Dog 5-25 ml
have been noted in both the dog and the cat. Intermit-
tent ptyalism occurs in 75% of affected cats, possibly
PO q8-12 hr. Adjust the dose so as to produce soft
stool while avoiding outright diarrhoea.
related to either nausea or seizure activity
3. High-quality protein diet.
4. Treat/avoid Gl ulceration, azotaemia, constipation,
CASE WORK-UP
infection.
Diagnostic efforts are aimed at demonstrating decreased
 5. Seizures: propofol, diazepam (lower dose required),
liver function, and the presence of anomalous vascular
potassium bromide.
62
8
Metabolic encephalopathy:
osmolality
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Anorexia, lethargy, vomiting, ataxia, muscle weakness, tremors, altered mental state and
behaviour, seizures and coma.
INTRODUCTION
160 mEq/l (cat). Lethargy commences with Na
Osmolality is the number of solute particles in a kilogram
(kg) of solvent. Serum osmolality is chiefly determined
Signs of hyper-osmolality may be intermittent, worsen-
by the sodium concentration as seen in the following
ing during periods of fluid loss from vomiting and diar-
equation:
rhoea. Osmotic dehydration and shrinkage of the brain
may tear meningeal blood vessels.
Serum Osm = 2(Na+ K)+ glucose/18+ BUN/2.8
Hypernatraemia is associated with:
Acute: Fluid loss via the GlT, burns, third space accu-
An estimate can be made by doubling the serum Nat
mulation, renal failure or diuresis, impaired thirst or
and adding 10, if glucose and BUN are normal. Serum
access to water with or without diabetes insipidus or salt
osmolality is calculated by the formula above or by freez-
poisoning (2-3 g/kg body weight).
ing point depression. A difference between the two
values indicates the presence of other osmotically active
Mild chronic: Chronic, untreated diabetes insipidus.
particdles, e.g. ethylene glycol, mannitol. Decreasing the
colloid oncotic pressure has minimal effect on brain
Severe chronic: Essential hypernatraemia caused by a
diencephalic abnormality characterized by a lack of thirst
water content in the normal brain
and failure of ADH secretion in response to osmorecep-
Normal serum osmolality; cat/dog: 280-305 m0sm/kg.
In experimental animals, a reduction in plasma osmo-
tor stimulation.
lality of as little as 5% under otherwise normal circum-
Hyponatremia is caused by:
stances causes brain oedema and increases intracranial
Acute: Sudden hypotonic water load, decreased renal
pressure (IC P).
Less than 260 or more than 330 mEq/l are likely to
ADH activity, psychogenic polydipsia or acute CNS
produce cerebral dysfunction but it is the speed of
disease (cerebral salt-wasting syndrome). It is uncom-
change in osmolality that is most likely to provoke neu-
mon in veterinary practice
rological signs.
● Causes of hyper-osmolality: hypernatraemia, severe
Chronic: Renal disease, decreased blood volume,
hyperglycaemia
enhanced ADH output (hypothalamic lesions, head trauma,
● Causes of hypo-osmolality: hyponatraemia/water
meningitis, hypothyroidism or hypoadrenocorticism).
intoxication
● Clinical signs most commonly occur with rapid
Signs occur with a sodium <1 20 mEq/l, and are highly
changes in osmolality
likely to be present if sodium <115 mEq/l. Presentation
63
64
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
is similar to hypernatraemia but also includes weight
gain (fluid retention) and dyspnoea.
feedback system.
Hypovolaemia increases water intake by two methods
unrelated to any change in plasma tonicity. Decreased
SIGNALMENT
ECF increases renin secretion and thus levels of circulat-
A 1O-month-old female Staffordshire bull terrier
late thirst. Baroreceptors in the heart and blood vessels
also play a role.
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
Lesions of the osmoreceptors in the hypothalamus
Intermittent ataxia and collapse.
stop the signal to drink, causing adipsia. Hypodipsic
hypernatraemia has been described in cats and dogs.
The animals are disinterested in drinking despite high
CASE HISTORY
plasma sodium levels.
This young dog had intermittent lethargy and persistent
Inappetance is a non-specific sign, meaning that it
inappetance since she was acquired at 7 weeks of age
The thirst was highly variable, being alternately absent
It signals that the animal is not normal, but the history
or excessive. A head tremor and collapsing on the fore-
and examination should be used to find other signs
limbs had first been seen 1 week prior to referral
which can narrow down the diagnostic field and enable
the body systems to be listed in order of the most likely
affected.
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
The dog was underweight with dry oral mucous mem-
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
branes. She was quiet but mentally responsive. Neuro-
logical examination was normal.
Causes of the adipsia, inappetance, lethargy, and epi-
sodic neurological signs of CNs or muscular origin
● Hypothalamic lesion: hydrocephalus or other brain mal-
NEUROANATOMICAL LOCALIZATION
formation, encephalitis with secondary hypernatraemia
A reasonable assumption in this case, based on the signs
●Hypothyroidism
commencing and occurring simultaneously, is that the
●Hypoadrenocorticism
head tremor and forelimb collapse have the same cause.
● Hepatic encephalopathy
Neither sign is pathognomonic for a particular area of
the nervous system, so a list of possible sites should be
CASE WORK-UP
considered: weakness from LMN or UMN origin; cerebel-
lar disease; cervical cord disease with neck spasm and
Hypernatraemia 198 mmol/l (reference range: 144-160)
UMN weakness worse in the forelimbs or multifocal
hyperchloraemia, azotaemia, urine specific gravity 1.048
lesions.
were found
L-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria (L-2-HGA), an inherited
Causes of hypernatraemia which were ruled out by
error of metabolism, has been reported in Staffordshire
the preliminary lab work and history include: gastroin-
bull terriers aged between 6 months and 7 years.
testinal fluid loss, diabetes insipidus, renal failure and salt
Seizures, ataxia, altered behaviour (dementia) and
toxicity.
tremors occur.
Sodium retention caused by excessive levels of aldo-
Thirst is stimulated by an increased plasma osmolality
sterone from an aldosterone-secreting adrenal tumour
acting on osmoreceptors found in the anterior hypo-
or bilateral adrenal hyperplasia was assessed by serum
thalamus. The same or different osmoreceptors in the
aldosterone concentration and abdominal ultrasound.
anterior hypothalamus stimulate vasopressin (ADH,
Both were normal.
antidiuretic hormone)release fromtheposteriorpitu-
ADH serum levels were not assessed as the urine
itary. Vasopressin increases permeability of the renal
specific gravity was >1.030.
collecting ducts to water thus retaining water and
ACTH stimulation test was normal.
decreasing plasma osmolality. Dehydrated animals stop
MRl of the brain found a congenital cerebral malfor-
drinking before the plasma hypertonicity is resolved,
mation of the corpus callosum and lateral ventricles.
8 Metabolic encephalopathy: osmolality
65
DIAGNOSIS
salt intoxication). The speed of correction should
mirror the speed of development
Essential hypernatraemia secondary to a brain deformity
4. Add volume for metabolism and insensible losses:
affecting thehypothalamic osmoreceptors.
2 ml/kg/hr. Dose increase by 1-2 ml/kg/hr if fever
and hyperpnea are present. Rapid replacement can
PROGNOSIS
cause cerebral oedema.
 5. Loop diuretics, e.g. furosemide, increase renal
The prognosis depends on the ability to control the
sodium excretion.
hyperosmolality. Adding water to the food intake has
6.Watch for fluid overload and pulmonary oedema
been successful.
 7. Add maintenance fluid ration to canned food.
TREATMENT OF HYPERNATRAEMIA
This dog was treated by adding water to the daily diet
1. For hypernatraemia (Nat ≥170 mEqL) with normal
and dividing feeding into four-times daily. The sodium
level returned to normal.
perfusion and hydration, replace the solute free
water using maintenance crystalloids (0.9% NaCI).
 2. Free water deficit (L) =[(measured Na/desired level of
FOLL0W-UP
Na) - 1]xbody weight (kg)x0.6.
3. Replace free water deficit over 24-48 hours. Lower
Appetite and energy level increased. Neurological signs
0.5-1 mOsm/kg/hr (or by 2 mEq sodium/l/hr in acute
did not recur.
Granulomatous
meningoencephalitis
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Staring into space while lying on the sofa.
INTRODUCTION
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
Looking in one direction for an extended period of time
The dog was neurologically normal.
is often a sign of cerebral disease. Staring at walls,
into corners, or “into space' are common presenting
NEUROANATOMICAL LOCALIZATION
signs and distracting the animal may or may not be suc-
cessful at stopping it. Neck pain limits head movement 
Cerebrum, due to the behaviour change, which may
and general activity but such animals move their eyes
have been partial seizure activity.
towards stimuli and are mentally responsive. Recently-
It may not have been neurological: the dog may have
blind animals move slowly, bump into objects and do
had undiagnosed arthropathy causing a reluctance to
not respond to visual clues; clinical diagnosis is
 move but this was not evident in the history or physical
straightforward.
examination. An age-related hearing loss may not have
been noticed previously and have contributed to the
dog's lack of response to being called. A trial of non-
SIGNALMENT
steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) had been
An 11-year-old male labrador.
used but this had had no effect on the frequency or
duration of the events and had been discontinued.
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
Episodes of staring.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Metabolic encephalopathy: intermittent loss of con-
sciousness may be from hypoglycaemia which can be
CASE HISTORY
difficult to diagnose from one random blood sampling.
Hour-long episodes of being mentally unresponsive
Liver failure, but there was no history or physical
while lying on the sofa and staring at the wall com-
evidence of this and so was it discounted.
menced 6 months prior to referral. The events occurred
Seizure activity.
at least once a week at any time of day and only when
 Increased intracranial pressure from neoplasia.
indoors. The dog was normal between the events. No
Cognitive dysfunction syndrome, a progressive, incur-
other abnormalities were reported.
able loss of normal behaviour in the absence of any
66
9 Granulomatous meningoencephalitis
67
other known cause, was a consideration in this aged
Add-on therapy potentially allows for a reduction in
dog. Owners often describe their pet as 'senile'. Systemic
 dose or elimination of prednisolone. Myelosuppression
or primary neurological diseases must be ruled out first 
by these drugs is a common side-effect:
before diagnosing this condition.
1.Azathioprine
Presenting signs mimic those of cerebral disease or
2.Radiation therapy
ageing change (deafness, reduced mobility):
3. Procarbazine 25-50 mg/m² PO q24 hr
● Inattentive, becoming lost in familiar environments,
4.Cytosine arabinoside50 mg/m² SQ q12 hr for 2
failure to recognize familiar people/animals
consecutive days. Repeat every 3 weeks
● Increased irritability/aggression/agitation/anxiety
5. Cyclosporine:
● Inactive, aimless wandering, pacing at night, vocal-
● 6 mg/kg PO q12 hr
izing at night
● 10 mg/kg PO SID q24 hr for 6 weeks then decrease
● Disturbance of sleep/wake cycle
to 5 mg/kg SID
●Loss of house-training.
6. Lomustine (CCNU)
● 44-88 mg/m2 P0 q6 weeks
CASE WORK-UP
● 60 mg/m2 PO q6 weeks
7. Mycophenolate mofetil 20 mg/kg/day divided q8 hr
Blood glucose and fructosamine levels were repeated
and were normal.
or q12 hr.
MRl of the brain was normal.
CSF was abnormal with elevated WBC count and
total protein: RBC = 1; WBC = 585; TP=0.77 g/l. Cytol-
In this case, prednisolone was commenced and no
ogy showed a high nucleated cell density comprising
events were noted in the following 2 weeks
93% neutrophils (mostly non-degenerate), 6% small
Neurological examination remained normal. The dose
Iymphocytes; 1% macrophages/monocytes.
of prednisolone was gradually reduced and stopped
after 6 weeks of treatment.
DIAGNOSIS
Five months later, the dog became restless and vocal-
ized at nightwhen on the sofa.Selegiline anddietary
Neutrophilic pleocytosis accompanies tissue destruction
antioxidants were used in case brain ageing change had
within the CNs. It is not pathognomonic of infection. The
long duration of signs with corresponding normal inter-
produced a cognitive disorder. Treatment with selegiline
improves cognitive function and slows progression of
ictal period is highly unlikely to occur with bacterial CNS
infection. MRl result ruled out neoplasia of the brain
signs in dogs and cats with a clinical effect noted in most
within one month of treatment. Food containing
which, given the animal's age, was a consideration. Non-
increased  antioxidants  and mitochondrial co-factors
infectious inflammation or degeneration of the brain was
considered. A late-onset storage disease was possible.
improves cognition in clinical studies.
Normal MRI is possible with CNS inflammation.
Granulomatous meningoencephalomyelitis (GME) has a
highly variable appearance. An atypical form of GME
FOLL0W-UP
was considered.
The dog was euthanized as the owner could no longer
PROGNOSIS
cope with the disruption. Postmortem examination
found granulomatous meningoencephalitis (GME)
Uncertain, however lack of progression of signs and
normality between the events suggested it was good.
Non-infectious inflammatory encephalitis
TREATMENT
The vast majority of CNS inflammation is currently
Treatment options for non-infectious
idiopathic, which pet owners can find extremely difficult
inflammatory CNs disease
to accept. Treatment is empirical and the prognosis
Prednisolone 1-2 mg/kg PO q12 hr. Try to taper the dose
is guarded but treatment should always be attempted.
after a period of normality or if iatrogenic hyperadreno
Not all dogs fall into the following categories. Resist the
corticism develops.
temptation to label everything GME (Table 9.1).
68
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
Table 9.1 Differentiating non-infectious inflammatory meningoencephalitis
NME
NE
GME
Age
6 months-7 years (juvenile or
1-10 years old
Any age. Often young-middle aged
young)
Location 
 Cerebral hemispheres
 Brainstem + cerebrum
Brain, spinal cord, optic nerve 
Common signs
Cerebral: seizures etc., neck pain
Brainstem: central vestibular,
Caudal brainstem, cervical cord,
 seizures etc., neck pain
(cerebrum); neck pain,
cerebellovestibular (seizures)
Progression
Acute: <Z weeks
Chronic; months
 Multifocal: acute and rapid 
Chronic: 4-6 months
Focal: chronic and slow
CSF
Lymphocytic pleocytosis
 Mononuclear pleocytosis
Mononuclear pleocytosis
(lymphocytes + monocytes)
(lymphocytes, plasma cells, fewer
monocytes)
Pathology
Acute encephalitis or chronic
Necrosis of cerebral white
Angiocentric granulomatous
cerebrocortical necrosis and
 matter
inflammation of white matter
inflammation. Grey and white
 Cortex and meninges are not
Leptomeningeal involvement 
Leptomeninges.
involved
Prognosis
Poor: <6 months
Poor
Variable: poor to good 
Little response to prednisolone
NME, necrotizing meningoencephalitis; NE, necrotizing encephalitis; GME, granulomatous meningoencephalitis.
NE: necrotizing encephalitis
NME: necrotizing meningoencephalitis
● Yorkshire terrier, French bull dog, Alaskan huskies
● Pug, Maltese, chihuahua, Pekingese, Boston terrier,
shih tzu, Coton du Tulear, papillon.
Subacute necrotizing encephalopathy in two young
female Yorkshire terriers was recently found associated
GME: granulomatous meningoencephatitis
with a mitochondrial respiratory chain complex I and IV
● Any breed, often small, but not exclusively.
defect.
3
SECTION
BEHAVIOUR
CHANGE
Chapter 10
Behaviour change - an introduction
71
Chapter 11
Loss of house-training
74
Chapter 12
 Defecation: faecal incontinence
79
Chapter 13
Psychological
82
Chapter 14
Intracranial arachnoid cyst
84
Chapter 15
Aggression
86
This page intentionally left blank
10
Behaviour change - an
introduction
Consciousness = alertness + awareness.
Parasomnias are defined as intrusions of abnormal
● Alertness (the level of consciousness) is judged by
movement or behaviour into the sleep pattern. Intermit-
reflex and behavioural responsiveness to stimuli and
tent paddling of limbs and lifting the head, with or
is governed by the ARAS and the cerebrum. Psycho-
without urination can occur in REM (also known as REM
logical change can alter responsiveness but does not 
sleep behaviour disorder) and can easily be stopped by
produce states resembling stupor and coma.
waking the animal. It could be mistaken for seizure
●Awareness (the quality or 'content' of consciousness)
activity.
is judged by behaviour. Behaviour is controlled by the
A sudden attack provoked by waking or disturbing
cerebrum. Organic neurological disease and psycho-
the dog during sleep is thought to be a manifestation
logical factors can both cause a change in
of territorial aggression or vulnerability and has been
behaviour.
termed sleep-associated aggression.
Sudden shock-like myoclonic jerks of limbs or body
The goal when investigating a case of abnormal behav-
when falling asleep are called hypnic jerks or sfeep starts.
iour is to rule out organic neurological causes, e.g. meta-
It occurs to an exaggerated degree in miniature wire-
bolic encephalopathy, brain tumour, pain, before
haired dachshunds with Lafora's disease (familial myo-
concluding that the behaviour change is psychological
clonic epilepsy)
in nature.
Snoring is an indication to check for narrowed upper
In veterinary medicine, consciousness is generally
airways, e.g. polyps, long soft palate.
regarded as a synonym for an alert mental state without
taking into account what the animal may or may not be
Compulsive repetitive yawning (chasm) as a sign of
able to perceive, interpret or distinguish. If describing an
CNS disease, e.g. seizures, encephalitis, tumours of the
altered consciousness (alertness or awareness), describe
fourth ventricle and frontal lobes, has not been reported 
what is abnormal about the animal.
in animals. There is reference to frequent yawning as a
Normal behaviour is assessed against that occurring
sign of otitis-media-interna but other deficits from
in others of the same species, breed and age group (Fig.
pathology in this location are far more common. Perhaps
10.1). Consulting relevant textbooks is recommended.
head shaking and yawning in otitis media is a method
Avoid anthropomorphism: withdrawing the upper
for clearing a blocked eustachian tube.
lips horizontally to show canines and incisors has been
given the description of smiling or grinning. It is done,
Hypersomnia is the excessive but normal-appearing
often by Dalmatians, in response to a command or inter-
sleep at inappropriate moments, e.g. during meals, from
 action with humans. It is described as a passive defensive
which the patient awakens when stimulated.
behaviour or an anxiety-induced behaviour.
Bulldogs with sleep apnoea exhibit hypersomnia but
are presented for treatment of upper airway obstruction.
Animals with narcolepsy generally also have cataplexy
SLEEP BEHAVIOUR
which causes the most obvious sign: episodic collapse.
 Sleep consists of cycles of rapid eye movement (REM) and
Fever, systemic illness or cerebral disease can increase
non-rapid eye movement (NREM) phases (Table 10.1).
sleep duration and frequency. Pain, weakness and exer-
Seizures can be triggered in slow wave sleep.
cise intolerance cause inactivity.
71
72
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
Lesions of the ascending reticular activating system
Narcolepsy can accompany neurological disorders
and its projections to the thalamus can cause excessive
such as head trauma, tumours, and encephalopathies in
daytime sleepiness.
humans and so affected animals should be appropriately
investigated by a neurologist before assumptions of
Narcolepsy comprises  hypersomnia  and 
dcataplexy,
inheritance are made.
resulting in intermittent collapse and sleep.
It occurs sporadically in many dog breeds and is inher-
Insomnia is an inadequate amount of sleep or impaired
ited in some: labradors, doberman pinschers, poodles
quality of sleep. Transient causes in humans include a
and dachshunds. It is rarely reported in cats. Episodes
 change in sleep environment, uncomfortable room tem-
are induced by exercise, eating and excitement and are
perature, stressful events, acute medical or surgical
reversed by stimulating the animal, e.g. patting or
disease, stimulants or removal of CNS depressant medi-
name-calling.
cation. Elderly dogs pacing throughout the night may
The cataplexy, the sudden atonia of limb muscles
have cognitive dysfunction syndrome but other causes
causing collapse, or a drop attack, lasts seconds or
of restlessness should be considered. Hospitalized dogs
minutes and is the most obvious clinical sign of narco-
can sleep an excessive amount when first discharged
lepsy. Cataplexy alone does not affect consciousness.
home.
CLINICAL TIP
Old age is not a disease.
INGESTION BEHAVIOUR
Pica is the ingestion, chewing or licking of non-food
items such as metal, dirt, clay, sticks, rocks or fabric. The
animal is intensely focused on and selective of the
ingested item, which is described as a morbid craving in
humans. It may be a form of obsessive-compulsive dis-
order (OCD). It is common in iron deficiency in humans.
Coprophagia, the ingestion of faeces, is normal maternal
behaviour. It is not known why the majority of dogs do
this. Eating grass or vegetation is common in cats and
dogs. Vomiting usually follows but subsequent appetite
is rarely impaired. Animals are not known for their skills
Figure 10.1 Most domestic shorthair cats do not jump
in botany and do not discriminate between toxic and
through hoops, lit or unlit.
non-toxic plants. Chewing houseplants, many of which
Table 10.1 Phases of sleep
Phase
Motor
Autonomic
Duration
NREM : Initial
Assumes rest position. Closes eyes. Sudden
HR,RR,BP decrease
A few minutes
twitches, hypnic jerks 
Pupils constrict 
NREM: Slow wave
Limb movement, parasomnias
HR,RR, BP decrease
30 minutes
Pupils constrict
REM
Atonia. Twitching of face, paws, tail
Irregular respiration
10-15 minutes
HR and BP increase with movement
10 Behaviour change - an introduction
73
are toxic, may be attention-seeking behaviour. Dogs
CLINICAL TIP
with portosystemic shunts may have a dietary preference
for fruit and vegetables. Fabric chewing/eating or wool
Animals may drink or eat ravenously immediately
sucking cats are usually either Siamese or Burmese and
after a seizure. This is not classed as polyphagia.
often have been weaned early at 2-4 weeks. There may
be fabric preferences which may include plastic. Most
cats begin with wool sucking before progressing to
Animals with structural forebrain disease may only eat
other materials. This may be an OCD. Blanket or flank
from one haff of the bowf. This is a manifestation of
sucking occurs in doberman pinschers.
hemi-inattention or hemi-neglect in which the animal
ignores the side contralateral to the lesion. Most sensory
information decussates to the contralateral cerebral
Polyphagia is the excessive ingestion of food com-
hemisphere where it is interpreted. A lesion interrupting
pared to normal caloric requirements. An overly simplis-
tic view of appetite control is that the feeding centre in
this system of perception results in neglect of the con-
tralateral hemispace. Affected animals are usually slightly
the hypothalamus is constantly active unless switched
to moderately obtunded and have a tendency to turn in
off by the satiety centre. The feeding centre can be
stimulated directly (primary) or more commonly, second-
one direction rather than the other. Use of the expres-
sion neglect in this sense is reserved for a failure to
arily to a non-neuroloqical cause
orientate to a meaningful stimulus in the absence of any
sensory or motor deficit (e.g. blindness, deafness or
Primary
paralysis), which would prevent the animal responding.
● Psychogenic
Absence of appetite, anorexia, can be distinguished
● Labradors and Scottish terriers are over-represented
from reluctance to eat by history taking and observation.
in the over-consumers
The former is usually a sign of systemic illness although
●Reported
in
some
cases
encephalitis/
some dogs will miss the occasional meal without any
encephalopathy
sign of illness. Patients hand-fed while hospitalized may
● Destruction of the satiety centre in the ventromedial
reject normal rations when first discharged home.
hypothalamus
Interest in food with a hesitation or refuctance to eat
● Stimulation of the feeding centre in the lateral
may be due to oral pain or pain on opening the mouth.
hypothalamus.
Group dynamics between the household animals may
induce fear or subordination and refusal to eat.
Secondary
Prehension difficulties (oral pain, pain on opening the
mouth, jaw weakness or tongue weakness) may slow
● Disease states: e.g. diabetes mellitus, hyperthyroid-
eating and be erroneously interpreted by the owner as
ism, hyperadrenocorticism, exocrine pancreatic insuf-
a reduced appetite. Prehension difficulties can also lead
ficiency, acromegaly, insulin-secreting tumour
to messy eating, i.e. dropping food, scattering food over
● Drug-induced:  corticosteroids,
benzodiazepines,
a greater area than normal, dropping water back into
phenobarbitone, potassium bromide, megestrol
the bowl creating a frothy opaque food-flecked fluid.
acetate or cyproheptadine
● Inadequate caloric intake
Psychogenic polydipsia, excessive water consump-
● Increased metabolic rate: pregnancy, lactation or
tion driven by psychological causes, is rare. It results in
increased exercise.
low-normal or decreased serum osmolality.
11
Loss of house-training
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Behaviour change: loss of house-training.
INTRODUCTION
coaxed, the cat walked normally but tended to circle to
the right. Left-sided placing responses and hopping were
Occasional urinating or defecating in the house by the
slow. The menace response was absent in both eyes. PLR
pet is often excused by the owner as 'having accidents'
were normal. Pupil size was normal and so was fundic
If it breaks the life-long pattern of behaviour, it is abnor-
examination.
mal. Loss of house-training is a common early sign of
(bladder or rectum) or sphincter incompetence and
NEUROANATOMICAL DIAGNOSIS
anxiety disorders should be ruled out.
Right cerebrum indicated by the behaviour change,
obtunded state, circling to the right, left-sided postural
SIGNALMENT
deficits. The bilateral loss of the menace response could
be ascribed to the dull mental state of the cat.
An 11-year-old male domestic shorthaired cat.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
● Meninqioma
Loss of house-training.
● Other cerebral neoplasia.
CASE HISTORY
The long time course and presentation as a behaviour
 change is quite typical of a slowly expanding intracranial
The cat had been urinating and defecating in the house
lesion in a cat.
 in different places for three months. Episodic periods of
Urine found in house
unresponsiveness, sitting quietly and staring into space,
had occurred during the same period. No abnormalities
Loss of consciousness with urination occurs more com-
were found on blood work. Thyroid function was normal.
monly with seizures than syncope. It also depends on
Blood pressure was normal.
bladder fullness at the time of the event. Finding puddles
(or floods) of urine in the house caused by an otherwise
house-trained dog may be the first sign of seizure activity
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
noted by the owner. Loss of house-training with an
The cat dashed out of the carrier and then sat, immobile,
apparently random pattern of urination is a common
outwardly unresponsive to the environment.When
behaviour change induced by cerebral disease.
74
11 Loss of house-training
75
Figure 11.2 Note the shift of the falx cerebri to the left,
and the compression of the lateral ventricles. The capsule
 Figure 11.1 Right-sided meningioma.
on the right is used a marker.
CLINICAL TIP
ventricles and compression of the blood vessels. This
phase of expansion may be overlooked as signs can be
 Rather than ask if the pet is house-trained (the
vague: lethargy, depression. Owners ascribe them to the
answer will be yes), ask if the pet has urinated in
advancing age of their pet.
the house recently
CLINICAL TIP
Old age is not a disease.
Weakness or pain may prevent the animal from going
outside or to a litter tray to urinate. Cats may only be
A sudden onset of signs is usually a result of secondary
able to negotiate the cat flap in one direction.
change such as oedema, haemorrhage, compression of
Polydipsia/polyuria can result in the house-trained
the brainstem, or blockage of the ventricular system.
animal being unable to hold a large volume of urine for
The presentation ranges from seizures to behaviour
the usual length of time.
change to collapse, as most brain tumours occur in the
cerebrum (telencephalon). Cats usually present with a
CASE WORK-UP
behavioural change and altered alertness, whereas dogs
most commonly present with seizures.
MRl: a large contrast-enhancing broad-based peri-
The inter-ictal phase may be normal. Questioning may
pherally-attached mass on the right (Fig. 11.1).
reveal a loss of house-training or a subtle change in
personality. Frontal lobe tumours often present as sei-
DIAGNOSIS
zures with a normal inter-ictal phase: months can pass
before an altered personality develops.
Surgical removal of the mass confirmed the diagnosis of
Intracranial neoplasia may present as neck pain. The
meningioma and resulted in a dramatic improvement in
associated lethargy/depression can be mistaken for that
the cat's mental state which returned to normal. No
caused by severe pain.
seizures were noted postoperatively. The cat remains
The overall incidence of brain tumours in the canine
normal several years after the surgery (Fig. 11.2).
population is quoted as 0.01% to 3%. To put that in
Brain tumours
context, the overall incidence of seizures, from any
cause, in the dog population is about 3%. Every general
What is wrong with my pet?
practice sees a few new seizure cases a year, so it stands
The presenting signs depend on the location of the
to reason each veterinary practice would also be
lesion and the speed of onset. Gradually increasing intra-
 seeing similar numbers of dogs with brain tumours. (The
cranial pressure is accommodated by the collapse of the
comparison of seizures to tumours is not to imply that
76
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
the latter causes the former. It was made to give a sense
 of proportion to a clinical occurrence.) To re-use a bank-
rupt expression, brain tumours are 'not uncommon’
... but he is so young!
Neoplasia is on the differential diagnosis list for any case
of brain disease. The index of suspicion is increased in
older dogs aged 9.4 years ±3.4 years and brachycephalic
dogs over 2 years old. The young are not immune
primary brain tumours were reported in dogs as young
as 3 months old. The age of onset was the same for
primary and secondary canine brain tumours. Meningio-
mas are the most common brain tumour in cats, occur-
Figure 11.3 MRl of multiple meningiomas in an adult
ring in adults over 5 years old, sometimes at multiple
male DSH cat (T1wwl + contrast)
intracranial sites.
... but he is so well!
Primary brain tumours are common. They rarely metas-
tasize outside the CNs. Affected animals are generally
Neoplasia may be focal or multifocal within the brain.
Tumour type is suspected, based on species, breed, ana-
found 23% of affected dogs had evidence of unrelated
tomic location, MRl appearance and (rarely) CSF (see Fig.
malignant neoplasia elsewhere; 58% of dogs with a
11.3 and Table 11.1). Histology is required for a defini-
pituitary adenoma had extracranial neoplasia found on
tive diagnosis.
postmortem.
This means that:
How long hos it been there?
1. Successful treatment of a brain tumour may be
Clinical signs may be present for 0-3 years prior to diag-
thwarted by disease elsewhere.
nosis. The median time was 26 days in dogs. The rate
2. Tumours found at extracranial sites may not be
of onset was similar in primary and secondary brain
related to the intracranial pathology.
tumours, although one source states that secondary
 3. Imaging of the thorax and abdomen should be per-
tumours have a faster progression. The location of the
formed prior to investing in specific treatment of a
tumour influences the rate of deterioration. Meningio-
brain tumour. Unfortunately, thoracic radiographs
mas grow slowly, which partially accounts for the long
underestimatethefrequencyofpulmonary
duration of clinical signs in affected cats prior to diag-
metastases.
nosis (Fig. 11.4).
What couid it be?
Is it malignant?
MRI had 100% success in detecting an intracranial mass
Malignant describes a worsening process that will lead
in a study of canine brain tumours. CT was less sensitive,
to death. Brain tumours, regardless of their cytological
at 90%. Radiologists could predict the histological
characteristics, are malignant. Expansion of the tumour
tumour type as their top differential on MRl images in
within the skull will ultimately cause fatal increases in
only 71% of cases.
ICP and death.
CSF may be normal (10%), show a mixed cell pleo-
What are the treatment options?
cytosis (58%) or albuminocytologic dissociation (30%)
Supportive
in canine primary brain tumours. Atypical cells in CSF
have been found in CNs lymphoma cases. These figures
Tumours increase the extracellular fluid of the brain by
indicate that
several mechanisms.
1. The clinician thought the benefit of acquiring CSF
1. Vasogenic. Structural injury and metabolic impair-
was greater than the potential risk of herniation
ment of the capillary endothelium and neovascular-
 2. CSF results are rarely specific.
ization by vessels lacking tight junctions all increase
3. Neoplastic cells rarely appear in the CSF.
blood-brain  barrier permeability.  The  increased
11 Loss of house-training
77
Table 11.1 Categorizing brain tumours
Dog
Cat
Primary
Meningioma (45%)
Meningioma: most common feline brain tumour
Astrocytoma (17%)
Glioma: rare
Cigodendroglioma (14%)
Choroid plexus tumours (7%)
Primary CN5 lymphoma (4%)
 Secondary: local
Tumours of the skull, extension from the nose.
Pituitary tumour, cranial nerve sheath tumour.
 extension
pituitary tumours, cranial nerve sheath tumour
tumours of surrounding tissue (sarcoma, carcinoma)
Secondary:
Haemangiosarcoma, lymphosarcoma, metastatic
Metastatic (mammary carcinoma, lymphosarcoma)
distant spread 
carcinoma (mammary gland, lung. anal sac,
prostate, kidney. thyroid, bladder), malignant 
melanoma
 3. Hydrocephalic. Obstruction of the ventricular system
causes a retrograde increase in ventricular pressure.
This removes the gradient down which the interstitial
fluid flows and also produces periventricular oedema.
Treatment: CSF shunting, decrease CSF production
(prednisolone, hyperosmolar fluids, furosemide).
Anti-inflammatory doses of prednisolone 0.25-0.5 mg/
kg PO BID are highly effective at reducing vasogenic
oedema and hence ICP. Clinical improvement is noted
within a few days.
It might be preferable to delay adding anticonvulsants
until the mental state has improved after steroid treat-
Figure 11.4 Slow growing tumours can reach a large size
before producing clinical signs. Relative size of a feline 
ment. The side-effects of sedation and ataxia may be
meningioma to the skull
mistaken for a worsening of the intracranial disease. If
seizure frequency improves after steroid administration,
it will be due to the reduction of oedemarather than a
direct anticonvulsant action.
If the seizure frequency is such that anticonvulsant
use is required, try starting the animal on a low pheno-
barbitone dose, increasing it over the following 2-3
the path of least resistance, the white matter. The
weeks to the usual 2-3 mg/kg PO q12 hr.
formation and spread is directly influenced by the
Non-invasive supportive treatment of animals with
systemic arterial pressure.
brain tumours is limited to controlling oedema and sei-
Treatment: glucocorticoids, hyperosmolar fluids and
zures. There is litle benefit to the animal in placing a
surgical excision Avoid hypertension.
ventricular shunt unless definitive treatment of the
2. Compressive. Obstruction of the bulk flow of inter-
tumour is planned.
stitial fluid into the ventricular system. This accounts
 Life expectancy with supportive treatment alone is
for the effects of those tumours which do not alter
quoted as 1-4 months after diagnosis. Metastatic
the blood-brain barrier
tumours and nasal tumours extending into the brain are
Treatment: surgical excision.
only given supportive care.
78
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
Table 11.2 Treatment of brain tumours
Tumour
Treatment
Longevity (months)
Meningioma: cat
Surgery
Months-years
 Meningioma: dog
Surgery
Range: 0.5-22, Median: 7
Radiation
Range: 5-12, Median: 5-9
Surgery/radiation
Range: 3-58, Median: 16.5
Glioma: dog
Radiation
6
Chemotherapy
7-11
 Trigeminal neuroma: dog
Surgery (rarely reported)
Months 
Untreated
Range: 5-27
Fituitary tumour (canine)
Surgery (rarely attempted)
<40
 Radiation 
Mean: 46
Untreated
Mean: 18
Fituitary tumour (feline)
Radiation
Range: 8-20
Lymphoma
Chemotherapy
Radiation
Skull multilobular osteochondrosarcoma 
Surgery
Median: 26
Definitive
Radiation therapy may induce late-onset brain necro-
Surgical removal of feline meningiomas is possible and
sis, infarction, and leukoencephalopathy approximately
gives almost immediate clinical improvement, and an
6 months after treatment. Dogs may be more likely to
excellent postoperative quality of life. Longevity is mea-
develop this than cats. See Table 11.2 for treatment of
sured in years.
brain tumours.
12
Defecation: faecal
incontinence
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Appears aware but unable to control the urge; appears unaware and drops faeces when walking.
lying down, in bed; has poor control of defecation when excited or during prolonged
confinement.
CLINICAL TIP
Prevention of defecation
1. Reflex by the internal anal sphincter contracts. This
 Dogs with hindlimb weakness or lumbosacral joint
occurs, for example, in response to a sudden increase
(LSJ) pain may be unable to maintain the squatting
in abdominal pressure or increases in rectal filling.
 position and often stand up and defecate while
 2. Voluntary: mediated by higher centres (cerebrum).
walking.
Faecal incontinence
Faecal incontinence is the inability to control and retain
faeces until voluntary conscious defecation is initiated.
INTRODUCTION
Defecation reflex
SIGNALMENT
● Filling of the rectum: the internal sphincter contracts
A 13-year-old male miniature wirehaired daschund.
pushing faeces back into the colon until the volume
is sufficient. At this point, the internal anal sphincter
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
(smooth muscle) relaxes and the external anal sphinc-
ter contracts. The external anal sphincter is composed
Faecal incontinence and urinating in spurts.
of skeletal muscle innervated by the pudendal nerve
formed from sacral segments and nerves S1-3.
CASE HISTORY
● The stimulus for defecation is distention of the
rectum.
A L1-2 IV disc extrusion had occurred 1 month earlier
● Awareness of rectal distension depends on the sacral
resulting in hindlimb paralysis, urine retention and lack
afferents more than the cerebrum.
of pain perception in both hindlimbs. Hemilaminectomy
● Initiation of defecation by rectal distension activates
at the site decompressed the cord and voluntary move-
 parasympathetic efferents (pelvic nerve) that contract
ment of the tail had returned despite the paraplegia
the colon and inhibit the external anal sphincter and
persisting. The owner reported that the dog urinated in
pelvic musdles.
spurts when taken outdoors and held in a standing posi-
●Facilitation of defecation and expulsion is by the
tion. On one occasion the dog pulled itself out of its bed
animal adopting the proper posture and the genera-
to the backdoor where it had then urinated (which may
tion of increased abdominal pressure.
or may not be a coincidence).
79
80
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
CASE WORK-UP
Neurological exam found a quiet alert dog with volun-
Urine culture and sensitivity from a cystocentesis sample
P m eibadeed pue (hubm) suawaow en Ae
was performed.
lack of pain perception in both hindlimbs. Muscle tone
There was no indication to do an MRl of the surgical
was present in both hindlimbs, as were the patellar
site at this stage. Recovery from paraplegia with lack of
reflexes and the withdrawal reflexes bilaterally. The cuta-
pain perception was always going to take weeks to
neous trunci reflex was normal bilaterally with no cut
months, if it occurred at all. Also, the dog had regained 
off. The bladder had some resistance to expression,
or seemed to have regained tail function and there was
 se s l u o  as s 
no spinal pain.
as a ping-pong ball.
TREATMENT
NEUROANATOMICAL LOCALIZATION
Phenoxybenzamine and diazepam and frequent bladder
The lesion was localized to the T3-L3 cord.
expressions were recommended. Antibiotics were given
The urinating in spurts and indoors may be due to:
to treat the urinary tract infection.
1. Straining to urinate
● Poor coordination between bladder contraction
and sphincter relaxationcreates a functional
FOLLOW-UP
obstruction called reflex dyssynergia or detrusor-
Four months later the dog re-presented for assessment
urethral dyssynergia. Urination has voluntary initia-
of faecal incontinence. The dog was able to walk unaided
leaving a large residual volume which is difficult to
and had voluntary control of tail movement and urina-
tion. Defecation occurred as the dog walked around.
Urination control had returned to normal.
result from a lesion anywhere rostral to the sacral
cord. It is more common in large breed young
The neurological examination found a mentally alert
adult male dogs.
ambulatory dog with hindlimb ataxia with intact spinal
reflexes and intact hindlimb pain perception. Panniculus
● Detrusor atony results from an overstretched
bladder, sacral lesions or dysautonomia. Depend-
was also intact. Anal tone was present. The faecal matter
looked normal.
ing on the degree of bladder weakness, the animal
may or may not be able to initiate urination. The
Couses of foecot incontinence:
urine stream produced can lack the normal force
1. Reservoir failure
and speed of flow.
● Increased sphincter tone or urethral spasm
● colorectal disease(
(inflammation, infection or
neoplasia)
secondary to local inflammation, trauma, and
pain.
● increased urge to defecate
2. Increased urgency to urinate
2. Sphincter failure
● Detrusor hyperreflexia commonly occurs with
● non-neurological: ano-rectal disease (trauma, neo-
plasia, fistula or surgery)
inflammation of the bladder or urethra. The
voiding reflex is triggered, despite the lack of
● neurological
● LMN: paresis or paralysis of the external anal
bladder distension. This is sensed and responded
to with urgency, hence the term ‘urge inconti-
sphincter. The external urethral sphincter is also
nence'. The bladder is small or normal in size.
innervated by the pudendal nerve so affected
animals may also have urinary incontinence
● Uncontrolled passive passing of faeces.
3. Failure of coordination (of filling reflexes)
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
● seen in UMN spinal cord lesions (52% of dogs)
A combination of lower urinary tract infection secondary
● may be the presenting sign in animals with minimal
to urine retention, and reflex dyssynergia secondary to
neurological deficits (Grade 2) or as a sequela to
spinal cord injury from IVDD was suspected.
severe (Grade 5) spinal cord injury
12 Defecation: faecal incontinence
81
● may wax and wane
In this case the faecal incontinence was thought to be a
● can defecate voluntarily when taken outside
sequela to the previous spinal cord injury. Prognosis was
4. Loss of house-training: voluntary defecation in inap-
guarded but the return of other neurological function
propriate places, e.g. behaviour change or cerebral
gave hope that faecal control might return in time.
disease.
13
Psychological
INTRODUCTION
should show signs of pain in the history or on examina-
tion, e.g. not shaking the head fully, root-signature
High levels of activity are normal for certain breeds and
lameness, etc. Nerve compression/inflammation/neopla-
ages of dog. It is often rewarded and reinforced inad-
sia can cause pain or a suspected paraesthesia giving
vertently by owner attention. Hyperactivity is overdiag-
episodic signs in a conscious animal
nosed in dogs. Most are overactive or under-exercised.
Anxiety can produce increased activity, pacing, vigi-
lance, destructive behaviour, vocalization as well as
SIGNALMENT
panting, salivation, pupil dilation, drooling, shedding fur,
A 7-year-old neutered female Border collie
urination and defecation. Signs of separation anxiety
begin shortly after the owner's departure.
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
Low serum levels of phenobarbitone can cause hyper-
activity. Hyperthyroid cats may appear more restless and 
Pacing around the house, clawing at the carpet and
aggressive.
staring, restless and circling.
 Stereotypic, ritualistic, or obsessive-compulsive disor-
ders (OCDs) are a select aspect of normal behaviour
CASE HISTORY
repetitively performed out of context and which replaces
normal functioning during the episode. There may be a
The dog began to pace soon after adoption from a
specific trigger initially but the condition progresses so
rescue centre 1 year ago. She was aggressive if the
that any state of stress, anxiety or high arousal will
owner tried to move her from the bed or furniture. She
 induce the stereotypic behaviour. The animal appears 
was taken to training classes, was provided with activity
conscious but may not be responsive to the environ-
toys when left alone, and was given a lot of exercise on
ment. The behaviour can be interrupted and no post-
a lead. The aggression resolved and the pacing episodes
ictal phase of ataxia or depression follows.
lessened but continued and could last for hours. The
 Stereotypic movement is the most commonly reported 
pacing worsened in new environments. At 10 days
category: tail-chasing, pacing, spinning/circling, fence-
prior to referral, the dog began circling, which was
running, jumping in place, chasing light, freezing, staring
almost always to the right, and clawing at the
and vocalizing and snapping at the air (fly catching/
carpets. This behaviour could last many hours during
 snapping; catching rain drops).
which nothing apparently could distract the dog. The
Over-grooming, limb or paw chewing, licking, flank-
dog was walked twice daily and was taken to training
sucking and scratching may also be categorized as
classes intermittently.
OCDs. Skin lesions and paresthesias should be ruled out.
Seizure activity is generally considered a prime dif-
ferential diagnosis as the animal is often not responsive
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
to the owner during the event. One dog was referred
The dog endlessly paced around the perimeter of the
for poorly-controlled seizures which consisted of the dog
examination room at a fast walking gait. She stopped,
sitting and spinning on its tail. This was neither a seizure
stared, and then resumed the pacing. She could be
nor an OCD: treatment of his dermatitis resolved the
distracted from the behaviour. Neurological examination
problem. Dogs with neck pain may episodically circle but
was otherwise normal
82
13 Psychological
83
NEUROANATOMICAL LOCALIZATION
 increasing intracranial pressure or worsening parenchy-
mal damage.
Behaviour is ultimately governed by the cerebrum. Lack
The animal was referred to a behaviourist for further
of any definable organic cause along with the normal
assessment and treatment.
neurological examination and the history was suggestive
of a psychological disturbance
DIAGNOSIS
Anxiety disorder.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
TREATMENT
The dog was rewarded for responding to commands,
CASE WORK-UP
 including recall so that she could be allowed off the lead.
The owners were told to instruct the dog to settle if the
Haematology and biochemistry were normal. MRl of the
 pacing started. Clomipramine and a DAP (dog appeasing 
head was discussed but not performed. The pacing had
started 1 year ago and had not changed, in essence,
pheromones) collar were also used.
since it commenced. No other changes to the dogs
FOLL0W-UP
ability had occurred. Behaviour change from organic
intracranial disease worsens with time due to the
The dog did not improve.
14
Intracranial
arachnoid cyst
SIGNALMENT
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
A 6-month-old male Yorkshire terrier.
● Cerebral malformation
● Encephalitis (distemper; necrotizing)
● Metabolic encephalopathy
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
Circling, lack of house-training.
CASE WORK-UP
Haematology and biochemistry were normal. Post-
CASE HISTORY
prandial serum bile acid measurement is a sensitive
The pup had always circled a lot, especially when on the
detector of liver dysfunction and disruption of entero-
lead or when excited. He was not house-trained and
hepatic circulation from a portosystemic shunt. The bile
bumped into furniture when running about the house
acid stimulation test in this dog was normal. Lack of
but not when moving at a slower pace. The pup resented
handling and would struggle to escape, and bite. Treat-
shunt (PsS) helped to rule out this disease as a probable
ment with lactulose syrup and oral Synulox had not
cause of the clinical signs. The neurological deficits on
improved the clinical signs.
examination rule out a psychological cause for the cir-
cling. Cerebral malformation or inflammation is most
 likely at that age.
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
 Encephalitis was a possibility. Canine distemper may
The pup was alert and appeared to be responsive to the
cause neurological signs in the immunocompromised
environment and the owner. The dog circled to the left
(e.g. young or unvaccinated) dog several weeks after
but did turn to the right on occasion. Slight hypermetria
infection. This acute CNs inflammation results from
loj leuou se pabpnf sem ypum sqwl le ui uaas sem
direct viral injury. Those able to contain the infection and
the breed. Hopping and placing were decreased on the
avoid acute inflammation may go on to develop neuro-
right side. Cranial nerve examination found that the
logical signs later in life. A chronic encephalitis results
 menace response was absent bilaterally and the symmet-
and is caused by an inflammatory response and subse-
ric pupils were small in ambient light but could dilate in
quent demyelination.Distemper may produce acute
darkness. PLR were normal. An open fontanelle could
encephalitis 1-2 weeks after immunization, with a modi-
be felt.
fied live virus (MLV) vaccine. Neurological signs are vari-
able. Myoclonus is a common sequela.
Necrotizing encephalitis in the Yorkshire terrier typi-
NEUROANATOMICAL LOCALIZATION
cally appears between 1 and 10 years of age, resulting
The lesion was localized to the left cerebrum, due
in cerebral and brainstem signs which worsen over
to the right postural deficits, the circling to the left,
several months. The signs in this case appeared to be
small pupils, lack of menace response, and lack of
static. The dog had been vaccinated and had not trav-
house-training.
elled outside the UK.
84
14 Intracranial arachnoid cyst
85
Figure 14.2 Sagittal T2Wl. Large CSF-filled structure
Figure 14.1 Transverse T1wl. CSF-filled triangular
 dorsal to the cerebellum is the quadrigeminal cistern
quadrigeminal cistern arachnoid cyst between the cerebral
arachnoid cyst.
hemispheres.
MRl of the head found a quadrigeminal cistern arach-
 as calculated from a mid-sagittal image, suggested that
noid cyst and enlargement of the lateral and third ven-
the cyst was more likely to be clinically relevant rather
tricles. The enlarged cistern may have compressed the
midbrain aqueduct, causing secondary dilation of the
levels were not increased in the cases of parenchymal
third and lateral ventricles. CSF cell count, cytology and
compression by the cyst. Ventriculomegaly was an asso-
total protein level were normal.
ciated finding which may be due to a breed predisposi-
tion. Obstructive hydrocephalus is blamed for the
development of clinical signs in humans with quadri-
DIAGNOSIS
geminal cysts but this was not found to be the case in
Hydrocephalus.  The quadrigeminal cistern  arachnoid
canine patients.
 cyst could be an incidental finding.
Quadrigeminal cistern arachnoid cysts are rare but
TREATMENT
have been reported in small breed dogs presented for
investigation of seizures or ataxia. A large infratentorial
The pup was commenced on 0.5 mg/kg prednisolone
CSF-filled structure on the midline is visible on MRl
once daily for a fortnight but it made no difference to
caudal to the occipital lobes, dorsal to the midbrain and
the dog's condition and the treatment was discontinued.
rostral to the cerebellum (Fig. 14.1). Intracystic haemor-
The owner was happy with the dog's quality of life.
rhage may occur.
Surgical drainage if behaviour or neurological deficits
Compression of the occipital lobes by >14% or com-
worsened was discussed, but was ruled out by the
pression of both the occipital lobes and the cerebellum,
owner.
15
Aggression
INTRODUCTION
at 2 years of age. The last seizure occurred 2 months
prior to referral at which time phenobarbitone was com-
Pain and psychological disturbances are more common
menced. Since then, the dog had urinated in her bed,
causes of aggression than cerebral disease. Aggression
defecated indoors, not greeted visitors and had snapped
from pain is either due to touching the painful area or
at the owner twice.
the animal avoiding such contact. Treating the source
of pain generally restores the animal's personality to
normal.
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
Aggression from a behavioural, 'psychological' cause
The dog was alert and ambulatory with hindlimb ataxia.
has many triggers, e.g. fear, anxiety, being challenged
or threatened. Treatment is life-long.
Hindlimb hopping and proprioception were reduced in
There is no guarantee that treating a cerebral cause
both hindlimbs. Forelimb function was normal. Spinal
of aggression will reverse the clinical sign
reflexes were normal. Spinal pain could not be elicited
It is reasonably common for dogs to be presented
by palpation.
for neurological assessment after biting all the family
members, sometimes more than once, over a period of
NEUROANATOMICAL LOCALIZATION
time. In many instances, the owner admits to wanting a
guilt-free reason for euthanizing the pet and thinks that
The lesion was localized to the T3-L3 spinal cord seg-
an MRl of the brain is the answer. Neurological and
ments owing to the hindlimb weakness as demonstrated
physical examinations and history typically fail to find any
by the decreased ability to hop, the reduced propriocep-
abnormality.
tive ability of the hindlimbs and the presence of intact
If the owner is willing to accept and manage the risks
spinal reflexes in both hindlimbs. Intact spinal reflexes
of aggression and will agree to treat either an underlying
signify that the lumbosacral intumescence is intact and
brain disease or a psychological disturbance then MRI
so the cause of weakness must be further rostral. In an
would be of value to the dog as it would aid treatment
ideal world where diagnosis is easy, all animals with
choices.
hyperreflexia.
The seizures began years ago and the dog had not
SIGNALMENT
developed any behavioural abnormality until recently.
A 10-year-old neutered female labrador
 Seizures may result from small frontal lobe lesions which
with time will expand and cause inter-ictal neurological
deficits. As a general rule of thumb, such deficits would
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
have been expected to appear within 1 year. The age of
Hindlimb ataxia.Behavioural change
onset of seizures and normal inter-ictal period is highly
suggestive of idiopathic epilepsy. Post-ictal behaviour
change and ataxia can occur but would not be
CASE HISTORY
expected to last 2 months. Low serum phenobarbitone
There was a 2-month history of hindlimb ataxia. Once-
levels can cause hyperactivity but not aggression. Poly-
yearly generalized seizures, which had first been noticed
uria and polydipsia are side-effects of phenobarbitone
86
15 Aggression
87
and this may result in urination in the house if the animal
mately 70-90% of cases occur in large breed dogs
is not allowed outside to eliminate more frequently.
>20 kg with the mean age being 5-6 years. Most occur
The recent behaviour change was thought to reflect
 in the thoracic and lumbar spine. The most common
the dog's response to being painful, even though a pain 
primary tumour in cats and dogs is osteosarcoma.
response such as vocalizing could not be elicited on
Surgical resection of canine vertebral osteosarcoma is
examination.
reported, with postoperative survival being less than 3
days. If left untreated all dogs were dead or euthanized
by 1 month after diagnosis as a result of problems
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
related to the primary tumour.
● Intervertebral disc disease
●Spinal neoplasia
Metastatic neoplasia is less common. Prostatic adeno-
● Spinal cord neoplasia
● Discospondylitis
tion along the ventral vertebral bodies of L5-L7, the
● Articular facet enlargement with cord compression.
sacrum, pelvis and femurs.
Lymphosarcoma of the spinal cord may be part of a
multicentric distribution or occur as a primary tumour.
CASE WORK-UP
In either situation, the lesion may be extradural or intra
MRI was chosen to image the spine and soft tissues (Fig.
medullary. Some 95% of feline spinal lymphosarcomas
15.1). It is important to include all the neuroanatomical
were solitary thoracolumbar spinal lesions in young cats.
area under consideration. In this case, the lesion was
 Progression of signs is typically an acute deterioration
within the T2 vertebral body, compressing the adjacent 
after an insidious onset. Some 85% of affected cats also
spinal cord. If only the TL junction had been imaged to
had extraneural lymphosarcoma. CsF is worth collecting
look for IVDD this lesion would have been missed
as neoplastic cells may be seen on cytology: one of the
rare occasions in which CSF analysis yields specific
DIAGNOSIS
results. Sample CSF caudal to the lesion. The CSF may
be normal if the tumour is extradural, i.e. does not
Vertebral body neoplasia.
involve the subarachnoid space. Surgical decompression
of the spinal cord may be required to obtain a tissue
diagnosis, however, such local treatment should not be
AETIOPATHOGENESIS OFEXTRADURAL
viewed as curative. Chemotherapy with or without radi-
VERTEBRAL BODY TUMOURS
ation produces rapid remission lasting up to 12 months.
Primary tumours arise from the surrounding tissue (bone
Untreated animals have an approximate survival time of
cartilage, fibrous, vasculature or lymphoid). Approxi-
1-2 months.
Figure 15.1 Sagittal MRl of spine. T1vwl post-contrast. Tumour of the vertebral
body compressing the spinal cord.
88
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
Figure 15.2 The eye is drawn to the narrowed C6-7 IVD
 Figure 15.3 Dorsal extradural compression secondary to
space. Note the fractured dorsal spines of C6 and C7
 neoplasia.
vertebrae.
 Table 15.1 Differentiating tumour and infection
Vertebral neoplasia usually does not cross the IVD
space to involve the adjacent vertebra (Figs 15.2 and
Radiographic sign
Neoplasia
Discospondylitis
15.3).
Table 15.1 shows the differentiating factors between
Bony lysis and cortical
tumour and infection.
break 
Endplate destruction
Spinal pain, cord compression, and the possibility of
 Collapse of adjacent 
fracture contribute to a very poor prognosis. Muitiple
disc space
myeloma is an exception; while chemotherapy is not
Collapse/shortening of
curative, it does reduce the tumour burden, relieve bone
vertebral body
pain and allow repair of osteolytic lesions thus prolong-
Pathological fracture
Bone sclerosis
ing length and quality of life; 25% of affected dogs have
Bone production 
vertebral involvement detected by radiography. Multiple
Cyst-like expansile 
osteolytic lesions of the axial and appendicular skeleton
lesion
have been reported in canine lymphoma and metastatic
Paravertebral soft tissue
mas5
carcinoma.
Involvement of dorsal
lamina, processes,
Cartilaginous exostoses (osteochondroma/osteo-
articular facets
chondromatosis) are nodules composed of cartilage
 Usually one vertebra
with or without bone which arise at the growth plates
Usually involvement of
of vertebrae, ribs and long bones. Almost all arise from
the disc space
the dorsal lamina or spinous process. They may be soli-
Widening of canal or
 foramen 
tary (rare) or multiple. Young dogs and adult cats are
Loss of bone density
affected. Growth of the mass ceases at skeletal maturity
Extensive soft tissue
in dogs. Resection relieves cord compression and allows 
involvement 
histopathological diagnosis. Recurrence and malignant 
transformation are reported.
TREATMENT
The  dog
was
euthanized.  No postmortem was
performed.
SECTION
4
SEIZURES
Chapter 16
Seizures - an introduction
91
Chapter 17
 Skull tumour
94
Chapter 18
Meningioma
96
Chapter 19
Cerebral haemorrhage
97
Chapter 20
Hydrocephalus
100
Chapter 21
ldiopathic epilepsy
104
Chapter 22
 Post-ictal behaviour change
109
This page intentionally left blank
16
Seizures - an introduction
Seizures originate from the brain. They are the physical
a.Generafized seizure: lack of consciousness/respon-
manifestation of abnormal synchronous electrical dis-
siveness, involuntary motor activity of the whole
charge in the brain. The brain can be stimulated to do
body, autonomic signs (salivation, urination and
so by intracranial or extracranial causes. The chief purpose
defecation). Described as:
of clinical examination and laboratory tests is to differ-
● Clonic: rhythmic muscle contractions ('pao-
entiate the two.
ding, running)
 1. Extracranial causes; derangement elsewhere in the
Tonic: marked increase in muscle tone with
 body, secondarily affecting brain metabolism:
varying intensity
a. Metabolic: hypoglycaemia, portosystemic shunt,
Tonic-clonic: increase in muscle tone followed
hyperosmolarity or hyperviscosity syndrome
by/alternating  with  rhythmic  musdle  con-
b. Toxic
tractions
 2. Intracranial causes:
Atonic: loss of muscle tone. Rare
a. Structural: physical interruption of brain tissue;
Myoclonic: shock-like muscle jerks, focal or
 inflammation, malformation, degeneration, trauma,
generalized, occurring as single or multiple
haemorrhage/ischemia or tumour
events.
 b. Functional: derangement at a cellular level alter-
Generalized tonic-clonic seizures were regarded
 ing electrical impulses; idiopathic epilepsy.
as the most common seizure type but a recent
study found 65% of dogs had partial seizures.
The difference in opinion is due to recognizing
DESCRIPTION OF THE SEIZURE
that the commencement of a generalized seizure
1. Prodromal phase: change in mood or behaviour
may have a partial onset, and classifying it as
lasting 1-24 hours before seizure activity. Not clas-
such. Partial seizures may be missed in cats as the
sified as seizure activity, e.g. clinging to/following
motor/behaviour signs can be subtle: sitting,
the owner, appearing anxious or restless. Usually
staring, growling, salivating or facial twitching.
only noticed by those familiar with the animals
A bystander can assess the animal's mental
normal behaviour.
responsiveness to stimuli but not the level of
2. Pre-ictal phase (aura): commencement of seizure
awareness. This makes it difficult to classify some
before impairment of consciousness occurs. Lasts
stereotypic activities as seizures or psychological
seconds to minutes and is characterized in humans
disturbances. If an animal will not respond to
by altered sensory perception.
being called or stroked because it is fearful,
3. lctus/fit/seizure: Commonly identified by a lack of
painful, or struggling to maintain balance, the
consciousness/responsiveness and rhythmic involun-
event may be mistaken for seizure activity and
tary motor activity lasting seconds to minutes. Varia-
treated inappropriately.
tions exist. The point of describing or dlassifying a
seizure is that different types may respond better to
CLINICAL TIP
certain anticonvulsants and some seizures occur
more often in specific diseases. A convulsion is a
Myoclonus does not always indicate seizure
series of involuntary contractions of skeletal muscles.
activity.
The term is commonly used as a synonym for seizure.
91
92
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
b. Partial seizure: focal involvement, with or without
CLINICAL TIPS
ondarily generalize to involve the whole body. The
Animals with a focal (partial) onset of
sequential spread of motor activity to other body
seizures should be investigated for
parts is called a Jacksonian march and results
intracranial pathology.
from spread of the electrical disturbance through
 Intracranial vs. extracranial is the most
the motor cortex. Generalization may happen so
important 'classification' of seizures.
quickly that the partial/focal onset is overlooked.
●Simple partiar seizure: consciousness unim-
paired, e.g. seeking attention from the owner,
rhythmic contraction or flexion of a specific
limb, turning the head in the same direction,
DIAGNOSIS
tonic opening of the jaw, head tremor, anxiety.
trembling, hypersalivation (ptyalism), vomiting,
1. History is vital: description of event
incoordination, sitting down/losing hindlimb
● Differentiate from: syncope, vestibular disease,
tone, staring look, restlessness and dilation of
weakness/collapse, behavioural disorders, rhyth-
pupils.
mic repetitive events in which the animal ignores
●Compfex partiar seizure: impaired conscious-
the owner (pruritus; painful events), sleep disor-
ness, e.g. disoriented, unable to recognize
ders (hypnic jerks, narcolepsy/cataplexy).
owners, unable to respond to commands,
● The importance cannot be over-emphasized.
head pressing, apparent changes in percep-
2. Neurological examination:
tion, following imaginary objects, unprovoked
● Abnormalities may be due to post-ictal change,
aggression, unmotivated barking, repetitive
commencement of anticonvulsants, the underly-
stereotypic behaviour from which it cannot be
ing pathology, or longstanding unrelated neuro-
distracted, confusion and abnormal behaviour,
logical deficits.
lip-smacking or chewing.
● An abnormal inter-ictal examination in a seizuring
dog was a strong predictor (90%) of an abnormal
CLINICAL TIPS
brain MRl. Normal inter-ictal examination however
was not a failsafe guarantee of a normal brain:
● Brief, recurring stereotyped changes in 
22% of such dogs had an abnormal MRl.
behaviour, motor signs, or autonomic signs
● Frontal lobe lesions can present initially as seizures
may be partial seizures.
with a normal inter-ictal examination.
● Brief recurring stereotypic motor activity
3. Complete blood count, serum biochemistry profile,
may be a 'movement disorder'.
urine analysis
●Aids differentiating extracranial causes from intra-
cranial causes.
4. Post-ictal phase: Seen as a state of apparent confu-
4. Imaging the brain
sion following a seizure in which the animal wanders,
● Differentiates intracranial causes
paces, or runs around, exhibiting restlessness, ataxia,
● Some abnormalities may not be causal
bumping into things, not responding to the owner
● MRl is preferred to CT in most cases for its high
and may lose all house-training. Some animals
contrast resolution of soft tissue and lack of arte-
appear mentally depressed for days or weeks and are
facts in the caudal fossa (area of the skull between
lethargic and sleep a lot. The first evidence of seizure
the tentorium cerebelli and the occipital bone)
activity noticed may be the post-ictal behaviour
●Age at onset of seizures in the dog does not
change and finding urine or faeces in the house and
 predict the MRl outcome, thus dogs more than 6
saliva-soaked fur. One study found no correlation
years of age at the first seizure must not be con-
between the type, intensity, or duration of seizures
demned as having incurable brain disease and
and the duration of the post-ictal phase. It can be
denied investigation/treatment. Equally, young
the most disruptive and worrying phase for the
dogs should not be assumed to have a good
owner.
prognosis.
16 Seizures - an introduction 
93
5. CSF analysis
Chief concerns:
● Requires GA so generally done at the time of MRI/
● Fear of dog having a seizure unattended
ID
● Fear of finding the animal dead after a seizure
● Pleocytosis may occur after repeated or prolonged
● Fear of the dog drowning during a seizure while
seizures in humans. Electroconvulsive therapy may
swimming.
raise total protein levels. Post-ictal change to CSF
in animals is therefore possible
The emotionat stress was reduced by:
● Of seizuring dogs with abnormal CSF, only 74%
● Regular contact and easy access to veterinarians
had an abnormal MRl of the brain
● Thorough information on seizures, the therapeutic
● Of seizuring dogs with normal CSF, 26% had an
regime, prognosis, and instructions for handling a
abnormal MRl of the brain
seizuring animal.
THE OWNERS' PERSPECTIVE
A total of 60% of owners said that owning an epileptic
dog had a negative influence on their daily life, causing
stress and restricting their activity.
17
Skull tumour
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Seizures.
INTRODUCTION
prior to referral. The dog had not been treated with any
medication.
Head trauma usually has to be severe to cause lasting
signs.
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
SIGNALMENT
The dog was quiet but mentally responsive. The gait was
normal. The menace response was absent on the left.
An 11-year-old female Jack Russell terrier.
The placing responses and hopping were all decreased
on the left. A raised mass could be seen and palpated
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
(gently) on the right parietal skull.
A recent onset of seizures
NEUROANATOMICAL DIAGNOSIS
CASE HISTORY
The history of seizures, and left-sided deficits found on
examination indicated a right-sided cerebral lesion.
The first seizure began 20 minutes after the dog's head
was knocked by an opening door. A lump on the side
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
of the dog's skull was noted by the owners at this time.
For the following 5 months the seizures occurred spon-
The firm right-sided mass was thought to be a neoplasm
taneously every 2 weeks and consisted of a 5 minutes
of the skull. The knock on the head from a gently
generalized tonic-clonic seizure followed by a post-ictal
period lasting several hours during which time the dog
in a normal dog nor induce brain damage. The dog had
did not recognize or respond to the owner. On one
lived in the household for 11 years and had skilfully
 Occasion, the dog seizured a few hours after the veteri-
avoided opening doors until recently, which suggests the
narian pressed the right-sided skull mass. The seizure
dog was not as aware, as visual, or as balanced as
pattern had changed recently with three seizures occur-
normal. Pressing the mass appeared to transfer force to
ring during the week prior to referral.
the underlying cerebrum.
Inter-ictally the dog remained house-trained but had
been seen to bump into the furniture and miss its footing
CASE WORK-UP
when ascending stairs. The claws were heard to drag on
the linoleum floor. Episodes of twitching, jerking and
 Skull radiographs: an increased opacity was seen on the
laainb buueadde Ajelauab pue inys smel aun buidwep
calvarium (Fig. 17.1).
than normal were also observed. These inter-ictal
MRl: a right-sided focal mass with a broad based
changes had become more noticeable in the 2 weeks
peripheral attachment to the overlying skull with exten-
94
17 Skull tumour
95
plete surgical resection is followed by tumour recurrence
within 2-3 months. The most common cause of death
is recurrence rather than metastasis
Multilobular osteochondrosarcomas are slow grow-
ing, locally destructive tumours occurring in the calvar-
ium, orbit, Zygomatic arch, mandible, maxilla, and hard
palate. Dogs and cats may be affected. CT is required to
detect the large intracranial component. Surgical
removal, even if incomplete, greatly improves survival
times. Recurrence is slow to develop (median time: 14
months). Lung metastases also grow slowly (mean time
of metastasis to euthanasia is 9 months)
An osteoma presents as a palpable non-painful
Figure 17.1 Skull radiograph (arrow to calcified mass)
lump, appearing radiographically as well-circumscribed 
densebone.
Treatment of seizures
sion into the overlying temporalis muscle was seen. A
When to start anticonvulsant therapy:
midline shift and compression of the right lateral ven-
● If status epilepticus has occurred
tricle was present. Minimal cerebral oedema was seen.
●If individual seizures occur at less than 2 week
Signal characteristics indicated that it was a calcified
intervals
mass.
● If seizure frequency is increasing.
Thoracic radiographs were normal.
It is important to remember two facts:
1. The inter-ictal period varies animal to animal and
DIAGNOSIS AND TREATMENT
within the same animal.
Multilobular osteochondroma was confirmed by surgical
2. Anticonvulsants rarely‘cure' seizures.
removal. The neuroloqical deficits resolved
It therefore makes sense to wait until the seizure pattern
Aetiopathogenesis of skull tumours
is known. Animals experiencing short, single seizures
The presenting signs depend on the location of the mass 
with a minimal post-ictal phase once every few months
and the degree of soft tissue displacement, e.g. seizures,
may not benefit in a measurable way from anticonvul-
behaviour change, trismus, exophthalmos or a firm pal-
sants. The owner may tolerate the pet's intermittent
pable mass.
seizure more than the drug side-effects.
Osteosarcoma of the calvarium produces a visible
In this case, the seizures every 2 weeks were frequent
external mass and extradural compression of the brain.
enoughformost owners andvetstoconsider
Direct invasion of the CNS parenchyma is rare. Incom-
medication
18
Meningioma
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Seizures.
SIGNALMENT
TREATMENT
A 15-year-old male standard wirehaired dachshund.
 Surgical removal of the mass was suggested but declined.
FOLLOW-UP
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
Seizures occurred once every 6-7 weeks until the pattern
Seizures.
changed, 5 months after the diagnosis The inter-ictal
period shortened to 1-2 weeks. The post-ictal period
CASE HISTORY
lengthened and consisted of 2-3 hours of pacing and 
Two seizures had occurred, 2 months apart. The dog
vocalizing. Phenobarbitone was commenced and serum
was normal inter-ictally. Laboratory work was normal.
levels were in the low therapeutic range. The seizure
pattern did not improve, so the dose and subsequent
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
serum level was increased. Seizure frequency increased
again, with single events occurring on successive days.
Neurological exam was normal.
The dog appeared lethargic but was otherwise neuro-
logically normal.
NEUROANATOMICAL LOCALIZATION
The dog was euthanized 9 months after the first
Seizures indicate cerebral disease. Extracranial causes of
seizure was seen.
cerebral disease had been eliminated.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Frontal lobe meningioma was suspected given the age.
CASE WORK-UP
On MRl a small contrast-enhancing mass was found on
the surface of the left frontal lobe at the caudal limit of
the frontal sinuses (Fig. 18.1).
CSF WBC =2; TP= 0.32 g/l cytology was normal.
Thoracic radiographs were normal.
DIAGNOSIS
The characteristics were highly suggestive of a menin-
gioma. Increased total protein is common with intracra-
Figure 18.1 MRl of the frontal lobes. T1wl + contrast.
nial neoplasia.
Suspected meningioma on the left.
96
19
Cerebral haemorrhage
INITIAL PRESENTATION
 Dull, seizures, circling.
INTRODUCTION
No petechiae, joint swelling, or other bruising was
found.
Haemorrhage into the nervous system may present as
meningeal irritation causing neck pain or diffuse spinal
NEUROANATOMICAL DIAGNOSIS
pain. Lesions of the CNS may be multifocal or focal.
Left cerebrum.
The history of falling over backwards was suggestive
SIGNALMENT
 of cerebellar disease but no sign of this was present on
A 1 -year-old female Staffordshire bull terrier.
examination.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
Vascular/haemorrhagic or inflammatory disease were
Seizures.
considered most likely given the age. Neoplasia or
decompensated hydrocephalus were also possible.
CASE HISTORY
CASE WORK-UP
One month prior to referral the hindlimbs gave way
during exercise. Ataxia, circling and falling backwards
The bleeding time was prolonged at 7 minute (N
were noted the following day. The dog recovered and
<4 minute)
had its first seizure the day before referral.
Clotting times were at the high end of normal.
Haematology: normal platelet count. Bruising de-
veloped at the venipuncture site.
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
Baerman examination of faeces - larvae seen were
The dog was obtunded and ambulatory, circling to the
identified as Angiostrongylus sp.
left and had a left head turn (Fig. 19.1).
MRl of the brain showed two suspected haemor-
No ataxia was noted. The menace response was
rhages, one in the dorsal cerebellum and one in the left
present bilaterally. Both pupils were miotic but a PLR
cerebrum stretching from the olfactory bulb caudally
 could be detected bilaterally. The fundus looked normal.
 creating a mass effect and some secondary oedema (Figs
Hopping, proprioception, and spinal reflexes were all
19.3 and 19.4).
normal. No spinal pain was found. The left upper lip was
CSF was not taken because it would not have added
swollen and bruised (Fig. 19.2).
anything to the diagnosis and there was an unnecessary
97
98
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
 Figure 19.4 MRl. GRE cerebellar haemorrhage
risk of haemorrhage if meningeal vessels were damaged
Figure 19.1 Left head turn.
during sampling.
DIAGNOSIS
The diagnosis was an acquired clotting defect giving rise
to intracranial haemorrhage.
TREATMENT
● Treatment for Angiostrongyus vasorum (lungworm)
● Vitamin K antagonism (rodenticide)
● Prednisolone, for intracranial oedema.
The dog had not received aspirin, which interferes with
platelet function.
Angiostrongylus vosorum
(French heartworm)
Figure 19.2 Bruised lips.
Despite the name, this parasite (metastrongylid
 nematode) has a worldwide distribution.
The definitive hosts ingest the infective L3 larvae by
eating the intermediate host (snails and frogs). The L3
larvae travel through the portal circulation to the liver
then right cardiac ventricle and pulmonary arteries
au on an pue paus ae shai 'ae Aau aaym
pulmonary capillaries, hatch into L1 larvae which pene-
trate the airways, are coughed up, swallowed, and
excreted in the faeces to be ingested by the intermediate
host.
L1 larvae may migrate to aberrant sites via the circula-
tion but clinical signs are mostly:
1.Respiratory system: cough, dyspnoea
2. Coagulopathy: haemorrhages in sclera, conjunctiva,
gingiva, brain, subcutaneous tissue and body cavi-
ties. There may be bruising and haematomas may
form at venipuncture and surgery sites
Figure 19.3 MRl. GRE left cerebral haemorrhage
3.Collapse.
 19 Cerebral haemorrhage
99
Neck /back pain is reasonably common so these animals
 can present as though they have meningitis. CSF analysis
may demonstrate erythrophagia but is unnecessary for
the diagnosis as evidence of haemorrhage is usually
 present on physical/retinal examination or can be found
on the coagulation profile, bleeding time measurement
or haematology (Fig. 19.5).
The dog is only infected by ingesting stage 3 larvae
within the intermediate host.
The dog was neurologically stable, with normal heart
rhythm, respiration and lung sounds for 24 hours. Bilat-
erally dilated pupils suddenly developed and respiratory
arrest occurred half an hour later. Pulmonary haemor-
 rhage was evident on intubation.
Figure 19.5 Scleral haemorrhage in another case of 
Angiostrongylus vasorum infection presenting with signs
 of neck pain.
20
Hydrocephalus
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Seizures.
INTRODUCTION
was absent bilaterally. Both pupils were small but pos-
sessed normal pupillary light reflexes. Proprioception and
What appears strikingly abnormal to a vet does not
hopping responses were normal in all limbs. The head
always ring warning bells for the general public. In fact,
was enlarged. No open fontanelles were palpated. Slight
one owner presented his 'rottweiler puppy for first vac-
bilateral ventrolateral strabismus was present but eye
cination only to be told it was a guinea pig. Always
movement was normal.
comment on the abnormal, even if it is not the reason
for the animal's presentation.
NEUROANATOMICAL LOCALIZATION
SIGNALMENT
Cerebrum. The menace response is present from 10-12
weeks of age in puppies. The absent menace response
A 3-month-old female golden retriever.
may reflect the age of the dog or bilateral cerebral
involvement. Seizures, loss of learnt behaviour and
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
miotic pupils are all signs of cerebral disease. Bumping
ue ynim Addnd s!un ui uoisi palanje sisabhns spalgo ou!
Seizures.
otherwise normal gait. Ventrolateral strabismus with
normal eye movements is a characteristic finding of con-
CASE HISTORY
 genital hydrocephalus.
Frequent generalized seizures commenced 4 days prior
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
to referral. Since then the pup had not been able to find
treats thrown to her, she had lost interest in her toys
Congenital hydrocephalus, possibly decompensated by
 and had begun urinating and defecating in the house.
intraventricular haemorrhage or a recently acquired 
The pup had previously been house-trained successfully.
encephalitis.
 She had always bumped into things while walking and
this was thought to be normal behaviour for a puppy.
CaSE WOrK-UP
The owners had noticed the pup's domed head (Fig.
20.1) at 8 weeks of age when they had bought her from
Haematology, biochemistry, urine analysis, and bile acid 
the breeder.
stimulation performed by the referring vet were all
normal.
Enormously enlarged lateral ventricles, an enlarged
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
third ventricle and a narrowed aqueduct through the
The alert ambulatory puppy walked normally but occa-
midbrain were found on MRl of the head (Fig. 20.2). The
sionally bumped into table legs. The menace response
4th ventricle appeared to be a normal size.
100
20 Hydrocephalus
101
DIAGNOSIS
Congenital hydrocephalus
Ventriculomegaly is the enlargement of the ventricular
 system. Hydrocephalus is the combination of ventriculo-
megaly with cerebral dysfunction.
Aetiopathogenesis of hydrocephalus
Congenital and acquired forms of hydrocephalus result
from either blockage of CSF flow through the ventricular
system or poor absorption of CSF at the arachnoid villi.
Excess secretion of CSF by a choroid plexus papilloma is
a rare cause of acquired hydrocephalus. Impaired CSF
 circulation has been proposed as the cause of hydro-
Figure 20.1 Note the steep rise between the nasal and
cephalus in dogs with the genetic disorder primary ciliary
frontal bones
dyskinesis.
A congenital malformation might be expected to
show signs from birth or ambulation but this is not
always the case. Hydrocephalus is typically associated
with dome-headed toy breed puppies showing cerebral
signs but it can become clinically apparent in the young
POL:27
adult dog of an atypical breed. The thin rim of remaining
cerebral tissue is susceptible to injury which could
(oz by) subis jo asuo uappns e loy tunoooe
As with any neurological disease, the signs follow
anatomical derangement.  The instigating lesion  of
acquired hydrocephalus may be sited at any point along
the ventricular system and show initial signs related to
that structure, e.g. cerebellopontine, midbrain, menin-
geal, with secondary cerebral involvement occurring
'upstream'
Congenital hydrocephalus generally presents  with
Figure 20.2 MRl sagittal brain T2Wl. Narrowed
cerebral signs: altered mentation and behaviour, pacing,
mesencephalic aqueduct (arrow).
circling and seizures. The rate of progression of signs
is highly variable from a gradual worsening to acute
decompensation. Enlargement of the head with a dome-
shape is a visually striking clue. Open fontanelles are not
pathognomonic for hydrocephalus.
The ventricular fluid had the MRl characteristics of
Bilateral ventrolateral strabismus ('setting sun' sign) is
CSF, and the ventricles were symmetrical. There was no
common and may result from skull deformity causing
contrast enhancement.
shallow orbits (Fig. 20.4). Ocular and pupil movement
CSF analysis: elevated total protein level of 0.41 g/l
are normal which rules against midbrain or CN Ill dys-
but the cell count and cytology were normal.
function as being the cause.
Ultrasound imaging through fontanelles may detect
dilated ventricles. A radiographic ground-glass uniform
opacity of the enlarged calvarium results from flattening
CLINICAL TIP
of the internal ridges and depressions (Fig. 20.5). The
Open fontanelles are not diagnostically significant
gyri and sulci of the brain are still present. CT and MRI
 per se but may occur with hydrocephalus.
easily detect enlarged ventridles, trans-ependymal
oedema, sites of obstruction, and causative lesions such
102
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
as inflammation, intraventricular haemorrhage or
tumour.
 Although congenital hydrocephalus is thought to be
due to narrowing of the mesencephalic aqueduct during
fetal development, the cause of this is not evident at the
time of diagnosis. Failure of lateral aperture formation
was recorded in a 3-month-old great Pyrenees puppy.
PROGNOSIS
There is no correlation between clinical signs and the
degree of ventricular dilation. As with most neurological
diseases, the prognosis cannot be determined by imaging 
and so the clinician must rely on the examination find-
 Figure 20.3 Hydrocephalic brain: note the thin rim of
ings, progression of signs, and knowledge of any under-
Cerebral cortex (arrows).
lying disease process.
TREATMENT
Surgical drainage of hydrocephalus in acquired cases can
relieve signs and prevent worsening while the primary
lesion undergoes treatment. In a recent retrospective
study of nine dogs with acquired hydrocephalus treated
by ventriculoperitoneal (VP) shunting, seven were eutha-
nized due to a lack of improvement or worsening of
signs 2 days to 19 months (mean 8.6 months) after the
operation.
Placing a shunt into the ventricle of a congenital
hydrocephalic is difficult to recommend based on the
uncertain prognosis and the need for shunt readjust-
 Figure 20.4 Hydrocephalic 3-month-old Jack Russell
ments due to blockage, under-drainage, migration,
 terrier puppy. Ventrolater al strabismus.
infection and growth of the animal. If no benefit from
medical management is seen within 2 weeks or the
 patient deteriorates, then surgery should be considered.
Reported success rates range from 50% to 90%. In the
retrospective study mentioned, five dogs with congenital
hydrocephalus were treated with VP shunting, with
three of these dogs euthanized due to severe seizures
 2-9 months postoperatively.
 Conservative treatment has not been successful long-
 d     
1. Corticosteroids
● Oral prednisolone 0.25-0.5 mg/kg BID decreases
CSF production, reducing to 0. 1 mg/kg every other
day which is given for 1 month, then stopped if
possible
Figure 20.5 Skull radiograph of another hydrocephalic
● IV dexamethasone reduced CSF production imme-
aul jo anueyeadde yioows ssej6 punoub, aul aioN Addnd
diately after 0.15 mg/kg and attained maximal
 calvarium (arrow, open fontanelle)
reduction of 50% in 50 minutes.
20 Hydrocephalus
103
● If no benefit from corticosteroid use is observed
4. Proton pump inhibitor
within 2 weeks, then other therapy should be
● Omeprazole.
considered, e.g. shunts.
2.Osmotic diuretics
Treatment in this case was limited to phenobarbitone
● Mannitol. 1-2 mg/kg IV over 15-20 minutes. This
and corticosteroids. The pup became more playful.
may be repeated 2-4 times over 48 hr. Monitor
Surgical placement of a ventricular shunt was offered
hydration.
but  declined. The pup seizured again and  was
3. Carbonic anhydrase inhibitor
euthanized.
● Acetazolamide 10 mg/kg PO q6-8 hr reduces CSF
pressure by reducing CSF production. Short-term
use.
21
Idiopathic epilepsy
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Seizures.
INTRODUCTION
The right pupil was slightly larger than the left.
When light was shone into the right eye, neither
The definition of idiopathic epilepsy is the ocurrence of
pupil constricted. When light was shone in the left
seizures for which an underlying cause has not been
eye the right and left pupils constricted. The right
found. It is a diagnosis made by exclusion of other
optic disc was darker than the left suggesting a lack of
aetiologies.
myelin. The other CNN were normal as were the spinal
A presumptive diagnosis is made after:
reflexes.
● at least two seizures have been observed
● the physical and neurological examinations are normal 
during the inter-ictal period
NEUROANATOMICAL LOCALIZATION
● no behavioural abnormalities are observed while the
The absent menace response and PLR in the right eye
animal is at home
indicated a CN Il lesion. Seizures are a sign of cerebral
● normal lab tests (haematology, biochemistry, urine)
disease. The dark optic disc suggesting demyelination of
and diagnostic imaging (CT, MRI)
the optic disc suggested a long-term lesion, and so the
two lesions may have been unrelated.
SIGNALMENT
A 4-year, 10-month-old male golden retriever.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
● Optic nerve atrophy
CASE HISTORY
● Idiopathic epilepsy
● Lesion of the optic chiasm compressing the thalamus
A generalized tonic-clonic seizure occurred while the
would be expected to alter mentation and vision.
dog was walking on the beach. This was followed by a
 normal inter-ictal period and then another seizure,
CASE WORK-UP
similar in nature, 2 weeks later. Phenobarbitone had
been commenced. No exercise intolerance was reported.
● MRl of the head was normal
The dog was described as being otherwise normal.
● CSF was normal
● Ophthalmology consultation diagnosed right optic
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
nerve atrophy.
The dog was alert ambulatory, with a normal gait, pos-
DIAGNOSIS
tural reactions and proprioception. The right menace
response was absent but facial muscle function was
Two separate lesions. The cause of the seizures was not
normal.
found. Idiopathic epilepsy.
104
21 Idiopathic epilepsy
105
Seizures occur in 1-3% of dogs, with idiopathic epi-
● Idiopathic epilepsy is typically generalized tonic-clonic
lepsy accounting for about 20-80% of those seizures,
which may commence as a partial seizure
depending on the reference. It has a proven inheritance
● Partial seizures follow an identical pattern character-
in a number of canine breeds but can also affect cross-
istic to the individual dog
breds. Do not breed from affected animals. Idiopathic
● Partial seizures have been linked to focal, structural
epilepsy also occurs in cats. The incidence of idiopathic
brain lesions.
epilepsy in cats varies greatly. One source states that
Seizure threshold
60% of seizuring cats had idiopathic epilepsy.
There is no established range for the age of onset of
● There is no clinical evidence that the use of acetyl
idiopathic epilepsy in cats; it may be from 3 months to
promazine is associated with increased seizure activity
16 years. In a study of 12 cats, the age range at onset
in dogs with seizure disorders
of seizures was 0.25-12 years with a median age of 2
·Housing, feeding, habits, time of day/year play a
years. The age of onset in dogs is between 1 and 5 years
minor, if any, role.
of age.
might precipitate a seizure in a predisposed animal.
● In humans the seizure frequency can increase during
PROGNOSIS
the menstrual cycle.This is activated by oestrogens
A total of 15% of affected dogs show a spontaneous
and suppressed by progesterone. This is called
remission (freedom from seizures for more than 3 years
catamenial epilepsy. It has been proposed, but not
without anticonvulsants) or remission with treatment
proven, that oestrus in the dog may have the same
(seizurefreeformorethan3yearswhileon
effect.
anticonvulsants).
Approximately 25% of idiopathic epileptic dogs are
TREATMENT
refractory to treatment. Examine all aspects of the case
for errors (incorrect diagnosis, or inadequate use of
How to start anticonvulsant therapy
drugs); 20-40% are refractory to initial monotherapy
1. Warn the owners about side-effects and review their
with anticonvulsants.
expectations.
Idiopathic epilepsy is not thought to shorten the life-
2. The initial oral dose is based on body weight and is
span of affected dogs; however another source states
usually at the lower end of the dose range.
that 19% of dogs die of causes directly related to their
 3. Loading doses for rapid rise in serum level should
seizure disorder.
only be given while the animal is hospitalized, as the
sedation and ataxia produced is profound.
Seizure pattern
4. Adjustments of dose are made in the light of the
● The type, number and frequency of occurrence varies
serum level at steady state and its effect on the
from animal to animal regardless of the aetiology.
seizure pattern. It is impossible to judge the effect
● The physical characteristics of seizures are relatively
ofan anticonvulsant without taking a history.
constant over time in any particular animal. The fre-
Owners must keep seizure diaries
quency of seizures may change over time. If seizure
5. Sedation and ataxia generally last 7-14 days in
appearance or frequency changes, the animal should
the naive patient. Gradually introducing the recom-
be reassessed for underlying disease that may alter
mended dose may limit this.
drug metabolism or intracranial function.
6. Polyphagia can lead to animals raiding bins, opening 
●Seizures usually occur at rest or when sleeping
refrigerators or snatching food from ovens. Increase
the volume of the diet without increasing calorie
diagnose hypoglycaemia or hepatic encephalopathy
intake. Divide meals
● Triggers are rarely found. Seizures are usually
7. Bromide must be given with food, the salt content
spontaneous.
of which should be kept constant. Phenobarbitone
● Brain tumours may initially present as seizures in dogs
absorption is 10% less when given with food,
 but more commonly present as a behaviour change
although therapeutic levels can still be obtained
in cats.
● Seizures from brain tumours may be infrequent.
Table 21.1 gives an example of a seizure diary.
106
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
Table 21.1 Example of a seizure diary
Date
Time
Activity at
 Duration
Recovery period
Notes
(am/pm)
onset
28/2
LIE
Sleep
1 minute, every hour, x3
Dazed in between, OK next day 
 Clusters; rectal diazepam 
31/3
pm
Resting
 1-2 minutes, single
Ataxic 30 minutes then slept
Urination 
2/4
Current dose: 60 mg BID
Phenobarbitone level: 28 mg/
IP
CLINICAL TIPS
FOLL0W-UP
When to monitor anticonvulsant levels
· Managing a seizure patient requires
correlation of the seizure pattern, serum
● The aim is to have the drug within the therapeutic
levels and the presence of side-effects.
range. Ater initiating therapy or changing dose;
Advise owners to give a missed dose as
serum levels can vary between animals on the same
soon as possible and then continue with
dose rate.
the schedule.
● At a steady state (after 5 half-lives have passed)
● If seizure control is poor or worsens
●When toxic signs develop
● When there is alteration in liver or kidney function
Effects of anticonvulsants
● If non-compliance is suspected, either by the animal
(spitting it out, avoiding it in food, vomiting/regurgi-
Desirable:
tation) or the owner
●Reduce the frequency, number, duration and motor
● Legal requirements for supplying the drug to an
activity of a seizure.
animal 'under your care'.
● Shorten the post-ictal period.
Sampling:
Defining 'control':
● Peak (4 hr) and trough (12 hr) do not vary significantly
Good' or 'well-controlled' is defined as:
in 91% of dogs (phenobarbitone) at steady state
● ≥50% reduction in number of seizure compared with
●After 5 half-lives (i.e. steady state)
the untreated state.
● Serumseparation tubes falsely decrease serum
● A decrease in the frequency of seizures to <1 per
 phenobarbitone/benzodiazepine levels 
month for at least 1 year.
● Clorazepate can increase the phenobarbitone serum
● These two factors are maintained for at least two-
level and hence side-effects
thirds of the time since diagnosis.
● No change in ALT and ALP in cats after 25 days of
phenobarbitone by mouth
Owners generally tolerate monthly seizures, and for a
● Check ALT and AST prior to and 5 days after starting
period, weekly seizures. They are less likely to accept
diazepam in cats (hepatic necrosis).
cluster seizures, status epilepticus and the adverse effects
of anticonvulsants (Table 21.2).
When to add another anticonvulsant
● Monotherapy is preferred
● Do not give up on a drug too soon: assess its effect
CLINICAL TIP
through several seizure cycles (e.g. at least through
three typical inter-ictal periods). Explain to the owner
Owners and vets vary in their definition of seizure
that 'to wait and see' is an unavoidable part of seizure
 control. Clarify expectations to improve
management
● After increasing the first drug to the limit of
compliance.
tolerance
 21 Idiopathic epilepsy
107
(PG+PB+KBR)
 Pregabalin
2-4 mg/kg
川 8b
7.8-8.2
23-79%
58 (Z + others)
Zonisamide
10 BID
Hepatic
10-40
15
 Gabapentin 
(G+PB+BR)
10 TID
Hepatic
3-4
55%
Felbamate
15 BID/TID
Hepatic
Renal
9-9
Clorazepate
0.5-1 TID
Hepatic
Levetiraceram
64 (L+PB +BR)
 Levetiracetam; PB, Phenobarbitone; BR, Bromide; PG, Pregabalin; G, Gabapentin.
10-20TID
 transient 
70 (L+PB)
011 0Z
Rena
Nat 17-30 mg/
30 mg/kg/day
72 (BR): 80-90
1-1.6 mg/ml 
20-35
700-2300
Bromide
kg/day
(PB+BR)
24 day
10 day
Renal
3
Diazepam
BID/TID
Hepatic
0.5-0.7
0.2-Z
15-20
0.5
8
Phenobarb
2-5 BID
2.5 BID
edaH
40-90
34-43
10-30
50-70
Half-life (hours)
Metabolism 
Excretion
% Control 
Drug
1e3
600
Dog
600
1E7
108
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
● Top recommended serum level is reached
● Remission rate: 15% (dogs) spontaneous remission
● The additional drug is generally added on to the
and remission with treatment (seizure free for >3
current therapy. Depending on the reason (ineffective
years while on anticonvulsants) of idiopathic epileptic
first drug; unacceptable or adverse effects) the dose
dogs
of the initial drug may be slowly decreased.
● Spontaneous remission: freedom from seizures for >3
years without anticonvulsants
When to wean off anticonvulsants
● If the animal has not seizured for 6-12 months
● If the animal was mistakenly diagnosed as seizuring
●How: slowly (over months). Decrease one drug at
and medication is not correcting the problem
a time.
22
Post-ictal behaviour
change
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Multiple seizures, behaviour change.
INTRODUCTION
pacing, twitching, was disinterested in the owners' pres-
ence and did not appear frightened of loud noises as he
Status epilepticus is defined as repeated seizure
normally was.
activity without an intermission or seizure activity
lasting more than 5 minutes, or two or more seizures
with incomplete recovery between seizures. It is gener-
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
ally not known why it happens to some and not other
The dog paid attention to the environment but was less
animals. A low serum drug level was responsible in
responsive to the owners than usual. His gait was normal
only 5.7% of dogs in one study. Side-effects include
neuronal injury, hyperthermia, hypoxia, acidosis, hypo-
as he continuously walked about the room. The menace
tension, renal failure, disseminated intravascular coagu-
response was intermittently present. The rest of the
examination was normal.
lation and cardiopulmonary failure. Animals may have a
personality change lasting approximately 1-2 weeks
post-ictally.
NEUROANATOMICAL LOCALIZATION
The lesion was localized to the cerebrum because of the
SIGNALMENT
seizures and menace deficit. The latter may be absent if
A 3-year-old neutered male Jack Russell terrier.
the animal is not normally responsive or is mentally
depressed as the menace response is not a reflex. The
gait is generally normal in cases of cerebral disease. The
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
change in behaviour is also suggestive of cerebral
 Behaviour change following multiple seizures.
derangement.
CASE HISTORY
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
A single seizure had been noted 1 month prior to refer-
The age of onset suggests:
ral. The dog had been resting when it stiffened in its
 Idiopathic epilepsy
basket, and began to paddle the limbs and salivate and
Portosystemic shunt
urinate while remaining unresponsive to voice or touch.
Encephalitis
The recovery period lasted half an hour, during which
Hydrocephalus.
aul punoue paoed pue palenibe paleadde bop aun awn
house. This passed and the dog returned to normal.
Lead toxicity is more common in young dogs. Cerebral
Multiple seizures occurred during the 4 days prior to
haemorrhage secondary to ingesting Angiostrongylus
referral. Since then the dog had been urinating in doors,
vasorum in snails was possible.
109
110
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
the study had seizures in the preceding 4 days and thus
the MRl charge could be expected to be a post-ictal
change.
PROGNOSIS
Good. The dog's behaviour was expected to improve.
TREATMENT
In this case the dog had received several IV doses of
diazepam 0.5 mg/kg in the hours prior to referral. The
dog did not have any generalized seizures once referred
but remained agitated and had transitory facial twitch-
ing which was thought to be partial seizure activity
Phenobarbitone was commenced at 3 mg/kg BID.
Some sedation and ataxia was noted for 1 week but this
lessened. One week after the last seizure had occurred,
Figure 22.1 Transverse T2Wwl. Bilateral oedema in the
the dog responded to the owner with normal
tempor al lobes.
affection.
Treatment for status epilepticus
● Lorazepam is a long-acting benzodiazepine with high
CASE WORK-UP
affinity for the GABA receptor complex. Lorazepam
Haematology, biochemistry, urine analysis, clotting and 
(0.2 mg/kg IV) and diazepam (0.5 mg/kg IV) - give
bleeding times and bile acid stimulation test were
the same seizure-free interval after use.
normal. CSF sampled at the time of MRl was normal
●Diazepam: onset of antiepileptic activity within
MRl of the brain found increased signal intensity
2-5 minutes after IV administration in the dog. Diaz-
a        h 
epam constant rate infusion of 2-5 mg/hr in 5%
(Fig. 22.1).
dextrose solution or 0.5 mg/kg/hr in 0.9% saline IV.
Adsorption to the plastic infusion set did not lower
efficiency at this rate
DIAGNOSIS
●Midazolam: 0.35 μg/kg/min IV (dog)
Prolonged post-ictal behaviour change following sus-
● Phenobarbitone IV anticonvulsant action after 15-
pected idiopathic epilepsy.
20 minutes. Dose of 2-4 mg/kg IV can be repeated
Transitory T2Wl hyperintensity of the cortical grey
at 30 minutes intervals up to a total cumulative dose
matter, subcortical white matter or hippocampus has
of 20 mg/kg
been found in humans after generalized tonic-clonic
● Pentobarbitone anaesthesia 3-15 mg/kg given to
seizures or status epilepticus and represent vasogenic or
effect. Excitement during recovery may mimic seizure
cytotoxic oedema. This has also been reported in the
activity.
● Levetiracetam: Dog toxicity trial; single IV dose of
the MRl lesion occurred completely or partially in 10-16
210 mg/kg gave no adverse effects. Dog single
weeks time.
60 mg/kg IV bolus over 2 minutes (N=6) no side-
Hyperintense lesions on T2wwl in the cerebrum, cere-
effects. IV use with diazepam IV potentiates the anti-
bellum or brainstem has been histopathologically cor-
convulsant effects of both
related with demyelination in the acute stage of canine
● Rectaf diazepam: dose 0.5 mg/kg used when the
distemper in clinical cases. T2wl hyperintensity of the
initial seizure occurs. Up to three times
temporal lobe was also seen in acute canine distemper
● Propofor: 1-8 mg/kg IV increments to effect and
without demyelination being present but these dogs in
0. 1-0.6 mg/kg/min continuous rate infusion.
22 Post-ictal behaviour change
111
Side-effects of anticonvulsants (D, dog; C, cat)
11. Hepatotoxicity: primidone (D), diazepam (C)
1. Transient sedation and ataxia for 7-14 days:
12. Pancreatitis?: bromide with or without phenobarbi-
bromide (D, C), phenobarbitone (D, C), diazepam
tone (D)
13. Dermatitis: bromide
(C)
 2. Hyperactivity: phenobarbitone-low serum levels (D);:
14. Coughing: bromide (C)
15.Anaemia
bromide (D), felbamate (D) - high serum levels
3. Pelvic limb stiffness and ataxia: bromide (D)
16. Blood dyscrasia: phenobarbitone (D, C)
4. Polyphagia: phenobarbitone (D), diazepam (C),
17. Coagulopathy (C)
18. Refractory/tolerance to the drug: benzodiazepine
bromide (D)
 5. Polyuria/polydipsia: phenobarbitone (D, C), bromide
(D), phenobarbitone (D), levetiracetam (D)
(D)
6. Vomiting: bromide (give with food) (D,C), zon-
FOLLOW-UP
isamide (D)
7. Anorexia: bromide (D)
At 2 weeks after the last seizure, the dog was responsive
8. Diarrhoea: bromide (D)
to the owners and appeared to be normal. Neurological
 9. Induction of liver enzymes (ALT, ALP): phenobarbi-
examination was normal. A lack of house-training per-
tone (D). ALKP more than ALT. Normalizes 5 weeks
sisted. The owner confessed that she had never been
after discontinuation of treatment
strict about house-training the dog. Serum phenobarbi-
10. Decreases thyroxine (T4) and free thyroxine (fT4)
tone level was in the low-normal range (20 mg/dl.
and increases TSH without signs of hypothyroidism:
Normal 15-35). The dose would be increased if clusters
phenobarbitone (D)
of seizures occur at the next seizure occurrence.
This page intentionally left blank
5
SECTION
CRANIALNERVE
FUNCTION
Chapter 23
Blindness
115
Chapter 24
The control of pupil diameter
119
Chapter 25
Alteration in pupil function 
121
Chapter 26
Secretions
125
Chapter 27
Alteration of eyelid position and movement
127
Chapter 28
Horner's syndrome
131
Chapter 29
ldiopathic facial paralysis
135
Chapter 30
Dropped jaw
138
Chapter 31
Middle ear disease
141
Chapter 32
Otogenic intracranial infection 
143
114
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
Chapter 33
Deafness
146
Chapter 34
Sneezing
150
Chapter 35
Coughing
152
Chapter 36
Change in voice and swallowing
158
23
Blindness
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Bumps into things, reluctant to move, hesitant to use stairs, stumbles on uneven ground, sleeps
ground, low head carriage, develops aggressive behaviour.
INTRODUCTION
Atrophy of the optic nerve is reflected in a shrunken
pale grey optic disc.
Blindness: the lack of vision, is a result of pathology in
the afferent pathway of the visual system (Fig. 23.1).
It may appear worse at night (nyctalopia) or during
SIGNALMENT 1
the day (hemeralopia: blindness with good night vision).
A 6-year-old neutered female lurcher.
Animals adapt remarkably well to a loss of vision as long
as the environment remains constant. A lack of adaption
in  which the animal still behaves in  a quiet tentative
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
manner, bumping into objects, may indicate a cerebral
lesion. Long-term blindness may appear to be sudden in
 Inappetance and episodes of staring into space.
onset following a change in living arrangements, e.g.
staying in kennels or visiting new areas. Physical obstruc-
CASE HISTORY
tion of the eyes by blepharospasm or bilaterally pro-
truded third eyelids secondary to enophthalmos is
The dog had been inappetant for 2 weeks when it
capable of mechanically rendering the animal sightless.
started to have periods of standing under the dining
Localizing the anatomic site for blindness requires exami-
room table and staring into space. Ptosis of the right eye
nation of the fundus, PLR and vision
PLR can persist in an eye blinded by retinal detach-
matology, biochemistry, urine analysis and abdominal
ment, retinal degeneration or optic neuritis. The pupil in
radiographs had failed to find the cause of the reduced
such cases is more dilated than normal.
appetite.
Enlargement of the optic disc occurs in papilloedema
and, more commonly, optic neuritis.
.Papilloedema
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
describes an enlarged pale pink oedematous optic nerve
head (disc) with indistinct margins over which retinal
The dog was mentally depressed with a menace response
blood vessels 'kink'. It has been reported as a sign of
that was absent in the right eye and decreased in the
increased intracranial pressure. Papilloedema does not
left. PLRs were absent bilaterally with a mydriatic left
cause visual deficits
pupil. There was decreased movement of the right eye
 Optic neuritis results in acute bilateral blindness and
in all directions, right enophthalmos and right ptosis.
may be retrobulbar and hence invisible on fundic exam,
Sensation to the face was normal. Retractor bulbi reflex
or may involve the optic disc.
was present bilaterally.
115
116
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
Retina
Optic nerve
Optic chiasm
Optic tract
Figure 23.2 Transverse T1wwl+C: thickened dura mater.
Lateral geniculate 
interfering with cranial nerve function.
nuicleus
Optic radiation 
Occipital cortex
Figure 23.1 Pathway for visual perception.
Gait, posture, hopping, proprioception and spinal
reflexes were normal. No spinal pain was detected
NEUROANATOMICAL DIAGNOSIS
Figure 23.3 Dorsal T1wl+C: as in Figure 23.2
The lesion was localized to the right CNN Il, Ill, IV and
Vl, and the sympathetic nerve supply to the right eye
(Horner's syndrome) and to the left CNN Il and Ill. The
pathic) and neoplasia in small animals. Pial (pia mater)
lesion was thought to lie in or near the cavernous sinus,
involvement is seen as enhancement following the gyri
or optic and orbital canals (see page 42).
into the cortical sulci. This is more common in inflam-
matory/infectious meningitis in humans but a small study
of affected animals failed to prove this relationship.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Dural enhancement is that which does not enter the
● Meningioma on the floor of the skull
sulci. Magnet strength, pulse sequence and dose of con-
● Pituitary tumour
trast agent influence the intensity of meningeal enhance-
● Lymphoma
ment on MRl. Absence of enhancement does not rule
● Neosporosis was possible.
out inflammation. Postoperative meningeal enhance-
ment occurs in humans both at the surgical site and at
a distance from it. This could potentially be a diagnostic
CASE WORK-UP
problem postoperatively in a deteriorating patient.
MRl of the head showed thickened contrast-enhanced
CSF collected at the cisterna magna from this dog
dura mater (pachymeninges) around the brain and
had a normal cell count and cytology but the total
across the floor of the skull (Figs 23.2 and 23.3).
protein was elevated at 0.78 g/l.
Contrast-enhancement of the meninges on MRl has
Thoracic radiographs, to check for visible metastases,
been associated with inflammation (infectious and idio-
were normal. Repeat haematology and biochemistry
23 Blindness
117
only revealed a lower urea (2.6 mmol/l; N 3.5-7.0) due
to large with the left slightly larger than the right pupil.
to inappetance.
Light shone in the left eye failed to constrict either pupil.
Light shone in the right eye induced both pupils to con-
strict to a small degree. Fundic exam was normal. Spon-
DIAGNOSIS
taneous horizontal nystagmus fast phase to the right
A definitive diagnosis could not be made as biopsy was
was present at rest. Vertical nystagmus was seen when
declined and the dog euthanized
the neck was dorsiflexed
Pachymeningitis of the spinal and brainstem dura
mater is a rare condition reported in pointer dogs pre-
NEUROANATOMICAL DIAGNOSIS
senting with neck pain and cranial nerve deficits (CNN
The lesion was localized to the left optic nerve, the right
V, Vll and Villl) as well as Horner's syndrome and seizures.
optic nerve and/or left and right oculomotor nerves. The
Neutrophilic CSF with a raised total protein level was
central vestibular apparatus was also affected, probably
found.
 on the left given the lack of paradoxical vestibular signs.
Ossification of the dura mater forming radio-opaque
The obtunded mental state indicated either brainstem or
lines is an incidental finding in older dogs.
widespread  cerebral  involvement.  The  pacing  and
Thickened cranial meninges occur in humans causing
pausing without apparent reason indicated cerebral
entrapment of cranial nerves, and blockage of veins,
disease.
arteries and CSF flow resulting in cranial nerve deficits,
The lesion could have been multifocal, or there may
focal neurological deficits and raised ICP. Infections,
have been an expanding focus near the optic chiasm
neoplasia and autoimmune disorders are implicated. A
affecting vision and pupil control, causing raised ICP and
 group of patients remains undiagnosed despite menin-
compression of the brainstem.
geal biopsy.
CASE WORK-UP
SIGNALMENT 2
MRI found thickened meninges on the rostral two-thirds
A 10-year-old neutered female domestic shorthaired cat.
of the brain, also involving the optic chiasm. The frontal
sinus mucosa was also thickened but no communication
between the brain and sinus was seen (Fig. 23.4). CSF
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
was normal. Toxoplasma titres were negative. FIP titre
Blindness, pacing and mental dullness.
was negative.
CASE HISTORY
There was a 3-week duration of pacing and a 1-week
duration of hindlimb ataxia and mental depression. The
cat walked through its food bowl and into objects,
pacing around the house for hours and sat facing
yet the cat responded to its name and seemed to know
when feeding time was due. The cat had been sneezing
 and a left ocular discharge was present.
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
Initial examination found an obtunded cat which paced
around the examination room and stood in corners for
prolonged periods. Posture and gait were remarkably
normal. Left-sided placing was slightly reduced. Menace
Figure 23.4 Transverse T1wwl+C: thickened dura mater
response was absent bilaterally. Pupil size was medium
118
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
 Table 23.1 Systemic fungal disease with CNs involvement
Organism
Neurological signs
Other signs
Diagnosis
Blastomycosis
Rare in dogs
Lung. lymph node, skin, eye, bone
Cytology
(8. dermatitidis)
Cats: diffuse or multifocal CNS
Antibodies CSF/serum
Histoplasm osis
Uncommon
Lung. lymph node, GIT, liver, spleen,
Cytology
(H. capsufatum)
Paresis, ataxia, CNN
eye, bone marrow, (skin)
Coccidioides spp (C. inmmitis.
Uncommon
Lung, bone, skin, abdominal viscera,
Antibodies CSF/serum
C. posadasin)
CNS, meninges
eye, heart, prostate
(serious biohazard)
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
healthy and diseased animals. Cytology on CSF, exu-
dates, aspirates, bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL)
Meningoencephalitis, possibly bacterial or fungal spread
● Treatment: prolonged (months); fluconazole, itracon-
from the sinus. Meningioma
azole, 5-flucytosine, ketoconazole, amphotericin B
● Prognosis: guarded for resolution of CNs infection.
Systemic fungal disease
Fungal infections which gain access via inhalation or
Nasal mycosis
ingestion  and then disseminate throughout multiple
Aspergillosis
organs are known as systemic mycoses. weight loss,
● Agent: Aspergillosis fumigatus
lymphadenopathy, fever, and respiratory signs are
● Exposure: ubiquitous. Not typically infectious. Normal
common. A geographical distribution of the pathogens
nasal inhabitant
exist. Travel history is important. CSF protein is raised,
● Species: dogs (opportunistic pathogen). Rarely cats
and a mixed pleocytosis (± high percentage of eosino-
● Organs: respiratory (chronic nasal disease, sinus, facial
phils) is common. Cryptococcal organisms are commonly
pain)
seen in the CSF of affected patients (Table 23.1).
● Neurological access:
● Extension through cribriform plate
Cryptococcosis
● Presentation: meningoencephalitis. Seizures. (Sys-
●Agent: Cryptococcus neoformans
temic aspergilosis is rare, fatal and affects multiple
● Exposure: inhalation. Bird droppings and eucalyptus
organs. There is no history of nasal involvement. A
bark and leaves
different organism is involved.)
● Species: common in cats. Dogs. Immunosuppression
● Diagnosis: difficult. Biopsy. Serology unreliable
not required.
● Treatment: topical clotrimazole
● Organs: respiratory (nasal, nasopharynx, pulmonary),
● Prognosis: poor/grave for CNs involvement.
cutaneous (nodules, ulcerative, facial deformity),
ocular (uveitis, optic neuritis) neurological (diffuse or
DIAGNOSIS
focal meningoencephalitis)
· Neurological:
Meningoencephalitis, meningioma
● Access: Extension from the nose is common. Hae-
matogenous to skin, eyes and CNS
TREATMENT
● Presentation: In 20% of affected cats and 50-80%
 of affected dogs neurological signs may be the first
The cat's condition worsened and the animal was
sign of disease and result from involvement of the
euthanized.
brain, cord, meninges or a combination.
Histopathology of the brain found a highly undiffer-
● Diagnosis: 60-90% have organisms in the CSF.
entiated tumour of the meninges extending into the
Fungal culture. Latex agglutination detecting capsular
neuropil. A poorly differentiated meningioma was the
antigen in serum, CSF. Antibodies are found in
final diagnosis.
24
The control of pupil
diameter
Abnormal pupil function in the pet can lead the owners
● Parasympathetic (CN ll): equal and maximally
to report large “black' eyes, a staring expression, or
dilated pupils 
sunken eyes which have 'disappeared' behind the pro-
● Sympathetic: the affected pupil is smaller as it fails
to dilate fully.
lapsed third eyelids and ptosis of Horner's syndrome. The
face may be described as having an 'odd expression'.
 Dilation of conjunctival vessels from sympathetic paraly-
Pupillary light reflex
sis is reported as a red eye. Anisocoria may be noticed.
● The indirect pupilary light reffex is produced by
 Pupils are normally symmetrically sized and shaped.
shining light into the contralateral eye. The indirect
Calm animals in an examination room have a pupil diam-
PLR is slower than the direct PLR due to the majority
eter of approximately 5 mm. Sympathetic drive actively
of afferent fibres decussating (twice) to supply the
dilates the pupils. Constriction is mediated by the para-
directly stimulated eye.
sympathetic branch of CN Ill via the ciliary nerves
● The swinging flashlight test detects afferent lesions.
(Fig. 24.1). Structural change to the iris occurs with
increasing age, and ocular pathology such as uveitis,
Hippus is a rhythmic, repetitive constriction and dilation
of both pupils occurring independently of illumination,
glaucoma, lens luxation and synechia. Dyscoria describes
convergence or psychic stimuli. Its presence does not
a misshapen pupil. The feline iris is supplied by lateral
necessarily signal disease and does not have a localizing
and medial short ciliary nerves. If the lateral short ciliary
or prognostic value to date. Hippus has been reported
nerve is affected, the pupil cannot constrict laterally and
in levothyroxine overdose and mucopolysaccharidosis
this gives a reverse-D-shaped pupil in the right eye and
Type ll in the dog.
a D-shaped pupil in the left eye.
Unequal pupil size is called anisocoria. The difficulty
is deciding which side is abnormal. Blue irises have a
larger pupil size than brown, which can give rise to
CLINICAL TIP
anisocoria in heterochromia iridis. The animal should be
examined in ambient light, darkness and with the strong
Assessing the PLR in conjunction with the menace
light source of an ophthalmoscope.
response will localize the lesion to the shared
Ambient light
afferent pathways of vision and pupil control, or
to those anatomic areas distinct to each function.
● Afferent lesions (CN Il) create small subtle (2-3 mm)
differences between the pupils.
● Efferent lesions (CN Ill) give rise to a large (7-8 mm)
difference between the pupils.
MIoSIs
Darknes5
Miosis is an abnormal reduction in pupil size.
● Afferent lesions: both pupils dilate fully due to a lack
Unilateral miosis must be differentiated from contra-
of light stimulation and the presence of normal sym-
lateral mydriasis. It may result from Horner's syndrome,
pathetic tone.
or unilateral ocular disorders causing pain, e.g.
 Efferent lesions:
keratitis.
119
120
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
Short ciliarynerve
Qliary ganglion 
Oculomotor nerve
Optic tract
 Figure 24.2 Bilateral mydriasis.
Parasympathetic
nucleus of CN III
(Edinger-Westphal
muscle) as well as extermal ophthaimopfegia (impairment
mucleus)
of the extraocular muscles) in addition to deficits of gait
Pretectal nucleus
and mental alertness. The preganglionic ps fibres have a
superficial arrangement in CN Ill and are vulnerable to
 compression as CN Ill passes through the orbital fissure.
Figure 24.1 Pathway for pupil constriction.
Unilateral mydriasis is one of the first signs of imminent
brain herniation due to compression of these peripher-
ally located parasympathetic fibres.
Bilateral miosis occurs in dogs secondary to opiate
Pharmacological paralysis may be bilateral or unilat-
use. Anterior uveitis, metabolic encephalopathies and
eral, depending on the method of drug administration,
structural brain lesions also cause bilateral miosis and
while CN ll lesions are usually unilateral. Sympathomi-
would be accompanied by other diagnostic signs.
metic drugs such as adrenaline produce mydriasis, as do
opioids in cats (cf. miosis in dogs).
MYDRIASIS
Pharmacological testing of
A widely dilated pupil is described as mydriatic. Mydriasis
parasympathetic lesions
may be unilateral or bilateral (Fig. 24.2).
Both eyes are tested with equal amounts of eye drops.
 It typically results from oculoparasympathetic paraly-
The normal eye is used as the control.
sis either pharmacological (atropine) or structural in
Pilocarpine HCl 2% does not have a localizing value
nature. The parasympathetic (ps) nucleus of CN Ill lies
but indicates that the lesion is neurological. If the myd-
close to the CN Ill nucleus innervating the extraocular
riatic pupil does not constrict but the control eye does,
muscles. Midbrain lesions would therefore produce
iridial disease or a pharmacological block (atropine) is
internal ophthaimoplegia (impairment of iris sphincter
responsible for the mydriasis (see Table 24.1).
Table 24.1 Localizing the origin of mydriasis
Drug
 Pre-ganglionic lesion
Post-ganglionic lesion
Normal pupil (control)
Filocarpine HCl 0.1%
No constriction
Constriction 
No constriction
(direct-acting)
Filocarpine HCI 2%
Constriction (>z0 minutes)
Prompt constriction (sooner, greater,
Constriction (within Z0 minutes)
(direct-acting)
longer than control?
Physostigmine 0.5%
Constriction (40-60 minutes
No constriction
Constriction
(indirect-acting)
before the normal eye)
25
Alteration in pupil function
INTRODUCTION
the lesion may be in the region of the optic chiasm and
compressing the thalamus.
These two cases illustrate altered pupil function localized
to different regions of the nervous system.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
SIGNALMENT 1
● A focal lesion of the brainstem with secondary effects
 on the cerebellum or cerebrum
An 8.5-year-old male Staffordshire bull terrier.
● Neoplasia
● Haemorrhage
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
● Inflammation.
Bumping into things.
CASE WORK-UP
MRI found a contrast-enhancing lesion which was iso-
CASE HISTORY
intense on T1 and of variable intensity on T2wl. There was
The dog suddenly became mentally dull and ataxic 5
 secondary dilation of the third and lateral ventricles (Fig
days prior to referral. The dog bumped into objects,
 25.1). Within the third ventricle choroid plexus papilloma
growled at the owner, slept a lot more and urinated
(CPP) and ependymoma are intraventricular in location
indoors. Appetite and thirst had decreased. The dog fell
and enhance uniformly. Meningiomas can be intraaxial.
to the left when getting off the sofa.
DIAGNOSIS
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
Midbrain compression causing mydriasis.
The dog was obtunded with a lowered head posture.
The left menace response was absent and the pupils
SIGNALMEnT 2
were bilaterally mydriatic and lacked a PLR. Fundic exam-
ination was normal. The dog walked slowly and on one
A 3.5-year-old neutered male collie cross dog.
occasion was seen to lean to the left. Hopping was
slightly slower in all limbs. Proprioception was normal.
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
Lethargy, vomiting and protrusion of the third eyelids.
NEUROANATOMICAL LOCALIZATION
The lesion was localized to the midbrain to explain the
CASE HISTORY
dilated pupils lacking a PLR. An absent menace can be
due to a depressed mental state, however the change
The dog had been lethargic for 1 week, lagging behind
should be bilateral. A left cerebellar lesion could explain
on exercise and lacking interest on a walk. He had
the left menace deficit and falling to the left. A right
vomited twice. Two days prior to referral, bilateral pro-
cerebral lesion or left optic nerve lesion could also
trusion of the third eyelids occurred, followed the next
account for the menace deficit in this dog in which case
day by squinting in the light and bilateral dry nasal
121
122
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
Dry nose (xeromycteria)
lo jeaeun) aueid jeseu Ap e se sjuasaid asou Aa
bilateral), epithelial crusts and a slight mucopurulent
discharge.
Serous glands of the nasal plane have a parasympa-
thetic innervation by the facial nerve. The afferent stimu-
lus for nasal secretion is transmitted by the trigeminal
nerve. Pathological dryness of the nose, xeromycteria,
results from:
1. Failure of parasympathetic innervation
● Parasympatholytic drugs such as atropine
Figure 25.1 Sagittal T2wl showing lesion compressing
● Dysautonomia
midbrain and aqueduct causing dilation of the third
2. Facial nerve paralysis
ventricle.
3. Epithelial damage, e.g. Canine distemper virus can
cause hyperkeratosis of the nasal plane and digital
discharge. The dog appeared to be urinating more often
pads
but was not polydipsic.
4. Trigeminal nerve lesion.
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
Reduced tear production: dry eye
The dog had a depressed mental state, dry oral mucous
The precorneal tear film's three components are: (1) a
membranes and bilateral dry nasal discharge. There were
superficial lipid layer which prevents evaporation of (2)
normal menace responses and absent PLRs bilaterally
the middle aqueous layer that is bound to the cornea by
The pupils were midsized with the right slightly smaller
(3) the inner mucoid layer.
than the left. The third eyelids were prolapsed. Right
The aqueous layer is predominantly composed of
enophthalmos and right ptosis were present.
water secreted chiefly by the lacrimal gland. Parasympa-
Gait, posture, proprioception, hopping and spinal 
thetic branches of CN Vll innervate the lacrimal gland.
reflexes were all normal.
Two-thirds of aqueous tear production is in response to
The Schirmer Tear Test (STT) was O mm bilaterally
sensory stimuli (reflex secretion) and the sensory arc is
A 10% phenylephrine testing of the right eye pro-
duced a normal palpebral fissure size and third eyelid
production is governed by CN Vll.
 appearance in 5 minutes.
Dry eye, xerophthalmia, results from impaired
secretion of the lacrimal glands and presents with a
NEUROANATOMICAL LOCALIZATION
dull appearance to the cornea, dry, sticky mucopurulent
discharge adherent to the cornea, corneal ulcers,
Dry mouth (xerostomia)
pigmentation and  neovascularization  - 'red  eye"
Lack of saliva impedes the formation of a food bolus but
(conjunctivitis).
 xerostomia is not a reported cause of dysphagia in small
animals. A unilateral facial nerve lesion commonly
 results in dry eye but it would be impossible to clinically
Couses
recognize decreased saliva production from the same
1. Failure of secretion by the lacrimal gland:
lesion.
· Lack of afferent innervation: trigeminal nerve
(neurotropic keratitis)
Couse
● Lack of efferent innervation: facial nerve
1. Panting
● Destruction of the gland: drugs, autoimmune or
2. Dehydration
idiopathic
 3. Decreased salivary gland secretion
 2. Increased evaporation by failure of eyelids to close
● Parasympathetic failure: drugs, dysautonomia,
(CN Vll or generalized muscle weakness).
CNN Vll and IX lesions
 3. Non-neurological: inflammation: idiopathicorimmune-
4.Uraemia.
mediated; drugs or general anaesthesia.
25 Alteration in pupil function 
123
Diagnosis
 Table 25.1 Clinical signs of dysautonomia
The STT measures the aqueous tear film.
Organ
Clinical sign
● Dry eye + dry mouth (xerostomia): immune-mediated
destruction of both glands is rare. It may present as
Eye
 Dilated unresponsive pupils
dysphagia.
Photophobia
● Dry eye + dry nose (xeromycteria): could be neuro-
Blepharospasm
genic (CNN V or VIl). Consider dysautonomia.
Protrusion of the third eyelid
Glands
●Dry eye+dry nose+ dry mouth:consider
Dry mouth, nose, eye
115
 Slow gastric emptying
dysautonomia.
Generalized ileus 
Constipation (cat)
The lesion in this dog was localized to the autonomic
Diarrhoea (dog)
Megaoesophagus
nervous system.
Vomiting. retching. regurgitation, dysphagia
Anorexia, weight loss
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Cardiac
Bradycardia unresponsive to exercise or stress
Urinary
 Urinary and faecal incontinence
 Canine dysautonomia
 Distended bladder 
Widespread dysfunction of the sympathetic and para-
Dysuria
Other 
 Depression, lethargy 
 sympathetic nervous systems occurs sporadically in cats
 Dilated anal sphincter
and dogs and is called cdysautonomia (Table 25.1). Feline
Hind limb (HL) proprioceptive deficits
dysautonomia used to be known as Key-Gaskell syn-
Another method uses 1-2 drops of 0.05% pilocarpine
within 2 days to 2 weeks. Parasympathetic signs pre-
solution placed in one eye. Dysautonomic dogs are said
dominate. Mydriatic pupils unresponsive to light are a
to show rapid constriction with some normal animals
consistent finding. Degenerative change also occurs in
responding within 45-60 minutes.
cranial nerve nuclei, dorsal root ganglia and ventral
horn cells accounting for the involvement of skeletal
Tear production
muscle.
Diagnosis is based on clinical signs. Pharmacological
<5 mm/60 seconds. Normal: 15-20 mm/60 seconds (see
testing of the pupil may help
Treatment is supportive. Prognosis is guarded but not 
page 30).
uniformly hopeless.
Heart rate variability
Atropine response test
AUTONOMIC FUNCTION TESTING
1. Measure heart rate
Pupillary reaction
2. 0.02 mg/kg atropine IV
 3. Heart rate measured every 5-10 minutes for up to
Pilocarpine 0.1% test
60 minutes
1. 1% pilocarpine diluted 1:10 with irrigating
4. The maximum change in the heart rate is measured.
solution
Healthy dogs are expected to have an increase in
2. Apply 1 drop to one eye
heart rate of more than 40 bpm or an end-test heart
 3. Monitor every 15 minutes for development of miosis
rate of more than 140 bpm.
4. Result:
● No change after 60 minutes: normal
In dysautonomia, no significant change in heart rate
● Miosis after 60 minutes: parasympathetic denerva-
occurs during a 60 minutes period.
tion; 87% of affected dogs responded in one
Blood pressure variability
study
 5. If no response after 90 minutes, apply 1-2% pilo-
Orthostatic hypotension test
carpine. If the iris cholinergic receptors are blocked
1. Place the dog in lateral recumbency on a firm but
by atropine there will no response.
moveable surface.
124
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
2. Measure the indirect blood pressure in the fore- and
Dysautonomia: absence of a flare response in 97% of
hindlimb simultaneously.
dogs. Wheal developed in 50% of dogs.
3. Elevate the dog by 30°, with the forelimbs higher
than the hind.
Bladder function
4. Results may be inconclusive. Ideally, the normal
Bethanechol challenge
animal will show little change in blood pressure
1. 0.0375 mg/kg bethanechol chloride injected SC.
when tilted and the dysautonomic dog will demon-
2. Subjective evaluation of dog's ability to evacuate
strate a drop in blood pressure in the forelimbs and
bladder 30 minutes after the injection.
an elevated pressure in the hind.
3. Detrusor atony secondary to prolonged distension
may hamper bladder contraction.
Sympathetic skin response
Introdermot histomine test
DIAGNOSIS
1. Clip an area of skin on the lateral thorax.
2. Inject 0.05 ml of histamine (1: 10 000) intradermally
Canine dysautonomia was diagnosed based on the lack
next to an equal quantity of 0.9% saline solution as
of pupil constriction, reduced oral, nasal and lacrimal
a control.
secretions and vomiting. No megaoesophagus was
3. Monitor for 30 minutes for development of a
found on thoracic radiographs.
● Wheal: local oedema from an increased capillary
permeability caused by the direction actions of his-
FOLL0W-UP
tamine on the blood vessels.
● Flare: redness extending from the site of injury due
The dog improved over 2 months with supportive care.
to arteriolar dilation caused by a sympathetic
The right third  eyelid  occasionally protruded. STT
neuron reflex.
remained abnormal on the right (6 mm) but had
4. Normal dog: visible wheal and flare.
improved on the left (16 mm).
26
Secretions
INCREASED TeaR PrODUCTION: EPIPHORA
SALIVATION
Presenting signs
The parotid, mandibular, sublingual and zygomatic
Overflowing tears, tear staining of the medial canthus
glands secrete saliva into the oral cavity under the influ-
ence of the parasympathetic nervous system. The parotid
Cause
and zygomatic glands are innervated by CN Ix. The facial
Reflex lacrimation occurs in response to eye pain which
nerve (CN Vll) innervates the mandibular and sublingual
glands. In both cases, the post-ganglionic fibres travel in
should be evident on examination. Owners sometimes
report epiphora occurring a few days before ipsilateral
association with the mandibular branch of the trigeminal
facial paralysis develops. Parasympathetic stimulation
nerve (CN V).
 Salivation is a reflex which is stimulated by taste (CNN
from organophosphate toxicity results in SLUD (saliva-
tion, lacrimation, urination, defecation),
Vll, IX) and tactile sensation in the mouth (CN V) and
Obstruction of the tear duct is a common cause of
gastric end of the oesophagus (CN X)
 tear staining.
Higher centres initiate salivation, as demonstrated by
Paradoxical ('crocodile') tears occur in the human
 anticipation of a food reward, or as part of an anxiety
during and immediately after eating as a rare phenom-
response.
enon secondary to aberrant reinnervation of CN Vll
when the fibres innervating the salivary glands are
EXCESSIVE SALIVATION
redirected to the lacrimal gland. This may be tested with
1 % tropicamide placed on the tongue as a sialogogue.
Presenting sign
Excess tearing is seen in the ipsilateral eye after approxi-
Drooling, dribbling, strings of saliva hanging from
mately 1 minute.
mouth, frequent swallowing.
Excessive salivation is more commonly due to an
inability to swallow (pseudoptyalism) than an excessive
WET NOSE
production (ptyalism, hypersalivation, sialism, sialismus,
Presenting signs
sialorrhoea, sialosis). Drooling is one of the first signs of
facial paralysis noticed by the owner. Finding their pet
nostrils may be normal. It is an unreliable indicator of
with wet fur under the chin is often the first evidence
general wellbeing hence the thermometer's supremacy.
 of seizure activity.
Systemic causes are usually bilateral.
Conditions causing oropharyngeal irritation or pain
are far more common than neurological lesions as the
Causes
cause of excessive salivation.
● Early sign of nasal irritation by fungi, parasites, foreign
Excessive production
bodies or neoplasia
● Viral or allergic
● Nausea
● Rhinorrhoea: CSF leaking from the nose caused by
●Medication: stimulated by taste; opioids (dog);
Congenital fistula or head trauma
organophosphates
● Over-hydration.
● Hepatic encephalopathy (cats)
125
126
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
● Purring
RedUCED teaR PrODUCTION: DRY EYE
●Hyperthermia
● Seizures
The precorneal tear film's three components are: (1) a
●Anxiety
superficial lipid layer which prevents evaporation of (2)
+ Anticipation of food.
the middle aqueous layer that is bound to the cornea by
(3) the inner mucoid layer.
Overflow of saliva
The aqueous layer is predominantly composed of
● Inability to close jaws (CN V) or move lips (CN Vll)
water secreted chiefly by the lacrimal gland. Parasympa-
● Cannot or will not swallow (dysphagia)
thetic branches of CN Vll innervate the lacrimal gland.
Seizures.
Two-thirds of aqueous tear production is in response to
sensory stimuli (reflex secretion) and the sensory arc is
DRY mOUTh (XeROStOmIA)
 production is governed by CN Vll.
This has not been reported as a primary problem. Lack
Dry eye, xerophthalmia, results from impaired secre-
of saliva impedes formation of a food bolus but xerosto-
tion of the lacrimal glands and presents with a dull
mia has not been a reported cause of dysphagia in small
appearance to the cornea, dry, sticky mucopurulent
animals. A unilateral facial nerve lesion commonly results
discharge adherent to the cornea, corneal ulcers,
in dry eye but it would be impossible to clinically recog-
pigmentation and neovascularization -‘'red eye
nize decreased saliva production from the same lesion.
(conjunctivitis),
Cause
1. Panting
Causes
 2. Dehydration
3. Decreased salivary gland secretion
1. Failure of secretion by the lacrimal gland:
● Lack of afferent innervation: trigeminal nerve
(neurotropic keratitis)
CNN Vll and IX lesions
4. Uraemia.
● Lack of efferent innervation: facial nerve
● Destruction of the gland: drugs, autoimmune or
idiopathic
DRY NOSE (XEROmYCTERIA)
 2. Increased evaporation by failure of eyelids to close
Dry nose presents as a dry nasal plane (unilateral or
(CN Vll or generalized muscle weakness).
bilateral), epithelial crusts and a slight mucopurulent
 3. Non-neurological: inflammation: idiopathicorimmune-
discharge.
mediated; drugs or general anaesthesia.
Serous glands of the nasal plane have a parasympa-
thetic innervation by the facial nerve. The afferent stimu-
lus for nasal secretion is transmitted by the trigeminal
Diagnosis
nerve. Pathological dryness of the nose, xeromycteria,
The Schirmer Tear Test (STT) measures the aqueous tear
results from:
film.
 1. Failure of parasympathetic innervation
● Dry eye + dry mouth (xerostomia): immune-mediated
● Parasympatholytic drugs such as atropine
destruction of both glands is rare.
● Dysautonomia
● Dry eye + dry nose (xeromycteria): could be neuro-
2. Facial nerve paralysis
genic (CNN V or Vll). Consider dysautonomia.
3. Epithelial damage, e.g. canine distemper virus can
●Dry eye + dry nose + dry mouth: consider
cause hyperkeratosis of the nasal plane and digital
dysautonomia.
pads
4. Trigeminal nerve lesion.
27
Alteration of eyelid position
and movement
●Touch or pain (CN V), e.g. blink reflex, ocular
INTRODUCTION
irritation
The palpebral fissure is the opening between the eyelids.
● Sound (CN Vlll), e.g. sudden loud startling noise.
It forms at 7-10 days in the newborn cat and dog.
Opening and closing the palpebral fissure is called blink-
Reflex eyelid contraction can occur in synchrony with the
ing. Blepharospasm is a sustained or intermittent, invol-
rate of spontaneous nystagmus of vestibular disease.
untary forced closure of the palpebral fissure. A 'squint',
Both features appear, and resolve, in concert with each
in medical parlance, describes strabismus, not the palpe-
other.
bral fissure narrowing of blepharospasm.
Excessive blinking or involuntary eye closure (blepha-
rospasm) is most commonly caused by ocular pain. Addi-
PRESENTING SIGNS
tional clues such as epiphora and conjunctival hyperemia
should be present. Photophobia, the dislike and avoid-
● Ptosis: half-closed eyes, droopy eyelid(s). The contra-
ance of light, is due to ocular pain in the presence of
lateral eye may appear exophthalmic by comparison.
bright light. It is a sign of meningeal irritation.
● Absent blink: staring appearance, sleeps with the eyes
Dysfunction of the central controls of voluntary blink-
open, secondary corneal pathology
ing may give rise to an increased blink rate, eyelid spasms
● Blepharospasm: Holds eye(s) shut, 'avoids the light',
or eyelid tic. This is known as 'essential blepharospasm
photophobia, excessive blinking
and is a form of dystonia reported in humans. Some-
● Protrusion of the third eyelid: the eye 'disappears"
times other facial muscles are involved and hemifaciall
● Narrower or wider palpebral fissure: the eye appears 
spasm occurs.
smaller, recessed, sunken, or bigger, bulging or
enlarged.
Couses of a narrow palpebral fissure
● Enophthalmos
Innervation of the palpebral fissure
● Oculomotor nerve paralysis
The size of the palpebral fissure is chiefly controlled by
● Horner's syndrome
CN Ill and sympathetic neurons which elevate the upper
● Blepharospasm
eyelid (Fig. 27.1). Failure of one or both causes a droop-
● Hemifacial spasm
ing of the upper lid called ptosis (Table 27.1).
+ Tetanus.
Eye closure is achieved by contraction of the orbicu-
laris oculi muscle, innervated by the facial nerve (CN Vll)
Couses of o wider polpebrol fissure
(Table 27.2).
● Exophthalmos
 CN Vll paralysis prevents blinking. The lack of orbicu-
● CN Vll paralysis
laris oculi muscle tone may cause the lower lid to droop,
● Cerebellar nudlei lesion.
thus slightly widening the palpebral fissure in facial
 par alysis.
Third eyelid protrusion
The third eyelid is kept in position by the forward
Stimuli for blinking
position of the globe. Only a small portion is normally
Reflex blinking occurs in response to:
visible ventromedially in the palpebral fissure. Smooth 
● Visual stimuli (CN I), e.g. dazzle reflex, menace
muscle from the periorbita attaches to the base of the
response
third eyelid and aids its retraction. Movement of the
127
128
SMAlL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
Table 27.1 Opening the palpebral fissure
Muscle
Innervation
Action
Upper eyelid: open 
 Levator palpebrae superioris
II N)
 Eevation and retraction of upper
 eyelid; (chief elevator of eyelid)
Levator anguli oculi medialis
Palpebral branch of CN Vll
 Lifts nasal portion of eyelid and 
 erect hairs of eyebrow
Muller's smooth muscle:
Postganglionic sympathetic nerves
Elevates upper eyelid, and retracts
 medial component
(infratrochlear division of nasociliary
 dorsal portion of third eyelid
nerve)
Lower eyelid: open 
 Muller's smooth muscle;
 Sympathetic fibres travelling in 
Depresses lower eyelid and
inferior component 
 Maxillary division of CN V 
retracts lower half of the third 
eyelid 
Pars palpebralis of the
Buccal branches of CN Vll
 Depressor of the lower eyelid
 sphincter colli profundus
during opening
Table 27.2 Closing the palpebral fissure
Table 27.3 Third eyelid protrusion
Muscle
Innervation
Action
Causes of third eyelid
Examples
protrusion
Orbicularis oculi
 Branch of
Sphincter-like closure of
CN VIl
palpebral fissure.
 Enophthalmos 
Corneal or conjunctival
Depresses the eyebrow
 irritation 
 Retractor anguli
Branch of
Draws lateral palpebral
 Atrophy of masticatory muscles
 oculi lateralis 
CN VIl
angle caudally
Atrophy of extraocular muscles
Loss of orbital fat 
Dehydration
 Denervation of orbital smooth
muscles (Horner's syndrome)
Tethering of the globe by
Levator anguli oculimedialis
Levator palpebrae superioris
 retrobulbar neoplasia
muscle (palpebral branch of
muscle (oculomotor nerve) plus
 Congenital microphthalmia,
facial nerve)
Miller's muscle (sympathetic)
 phthisis bulbi
 Sympathetic paralysis
Feline dysautonomia
Frontalismuscle
(accompanied by mydriasis)
(palpebral branch
 Horner's syndrome
of facial nerve)
(accompanied by miosis)
 Retraction of the globe
Tetanus
Medial palpebral
 by the retractor bulbi
 Facial paralysis (absent blink
ligament
 apsnu 
reflex)
 Systemic illness 
Cats with systemic illness (Haws
syndrome)
 Chemical sedation
 Crbicularis oculi muscle
(palpebral branch of facial nerve)
Sphincter colli profundus muscle
(dorsal buccal branch of facial nerve)
third eyelid is passive in the dog. The cat has smooth
Retractor anguli oculi
musdle, which draws the third eyelid across the globe
lateralis muscle (palpebral
E Elevates upper lid
branch of facial nerve)
(Table 27.3).
 D Depresses upper lid
C Constricts palpebral fissure
SIGNALMENT
Figure 27.1 Musculature of the eyelids.
A 1-year-old neutered male Burmese cat.
 27 Alteration of eyelid position and movement
129
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
Abnormal gait.
CASE HISTORY
Hindlimb ataxia commenced suddenly 3 weeks prior to
developed dilated pupils and prolapsed third eyelids.
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
The cat was mentally dull and walked around the room,
circling to the right with a high-stepping forelimb gait.
There was a slight unsteadiness when walking, which
Figure 27.2 Blepharospasm. mydriasis. obtunded
occasionally appeared worse in the hindlimb. The cat
lent slightly to the right and fell to the right when first
removed from the cat carrier. Placing was slightly slower
in the right fore- and hindlimbs but this was inconsistent
DIAGNOSIS
The eyes were partially open when walking but held
closed at rest
The contrast-enhancement of the meningeal and epen-
When the lids were parted, the pupils looked sym-
dymal surfaces was suggestive of FIP.
metric, large and lacked pupillary light reflexes bilater-
ally. The dazzle reflex was present and the fundus looked
AETIOPATHOGENESIS OF FIP
normal bilaterally. No abnormal nystagmus or strabismus
was seen. Facial movement and sensation and the gag
Feline infectious peritonitis affects the CNS and eye with
reflex were all normal, as were spinal reflexes.
minimal effusions into body cavities. The systemic infec-
tion causes anorexia, weight loss, fever and depression.
Neurological deficits are commonly cerebellovestibular in
NEUROANATOMICAL LOCALIZATION
uoisal poo jeuids jesoj e se juasaid Aew anq aineu
On the basis of the dullness, blepharospasm, mydriasis,
giving rise to paresis and ataxia. Diagnosis is made on
lack of PLR, circling to the right, leaning and falling to
 histopathology but an index of suspicion is created from
the right, the neuroanatomic site was thought to be
the clinical presentation, imaging and lab work
multifocal with midbrain, cerebellar, and possibly cere-
MRI may find contrast-enhancement of the meninges
bral involvement (Fig. 27.2).
or the ependymal lining of the ventricles. Inflammation
can block the ventricular outflow giving rise to hydro-
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
cephalus. Proteinaceous CSF has an altered MRI inten-
sity, improving its visibility on FLAIR.
● Inflammation
CSF test results are variable. They may demonstrate
● Malformation.
a high protein level and pleocytosis (mononuclear or
mixed), or be normal.
CASE WORK-UP
Serology titres do not correlate with the severity of
the disease and can fluctuate. Persistently high (≥640)
The feline infectious peritonitis (FIP) titre was high at
feline coronavirus (FCoV) antibody titre indicates an
3100 (N <10).
increased risk of persistent FCoV infection. Titres ≥16 000
On MRI there was:
are suggestive of FIP.
● A contrast-enhancing focal midbrain lesion with some
A serum albumin: globulin ratio <0.5 increases the
enhancement of the third ventricle
index of suspicion for FIP. Wwhile an increase in the acute
● Secondary hydrocephalus of the lateral and third
phase protein alpha1-AGP ≥1500 μg/ml is not specific
ventridles
for FIP, a level <500 μg/ml is usually found in healthy
cats. A non-regenerative anaemia, lymphopaenia and
130
SMAlL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
Table 27.4 Viral infection of the feline CNS
 Organism
 Neurological signs
Other signs
Diagnosis
Treatment
FIV
Uncommon. CNS/PNS
Stomatitis, neoplasia,
Antibodies
 Behaviour change, seizures,
anaemia, uveitis
dementia, ataxia
FIP
Common. CNS
Vasculitis, kidney, liver,
Histopathology
 Prednisolone 4 mg/kg
 spleen, body cavities, eye
Antibody in CSF
PO SID
 Feline
 Kitten. Cerebellar hypoplasia,
Panleukopaenia enteritis
GIT: supportive.
 panleukopaenia/
 seizures, behaviour change
CNS: none
 parvovirus
 Feline Borna virus
Rare. Hindlimb ataxia, paresis,
Anorexia, fever, increased
 Fatal within 6 months:
hyperaesthesia, seizures,
 salivation 
 Supportive
behaviour change
mild neutrophilia with a left shift are often found on
PROGNOSIS
haematology.
FIP is most common in cats 6 months to 3 years of
Poor.
age originating from a multi-cat household. All neuro-
logically affected cats die. Immunosuppressive doses of
prednisolone (4 mg/kg/day PO) may slow progression.
TREATMENT
Feline immunodeficiency virus encephalomyelitis is
Prednisolone was commenced to treat the suspected
more frequently noted on histopathology than as a clini-
vasculitis associated with FIP.
cal manifestation. It is estimated that 5-30% of clinically
affectedFIV-positive cats develop encephalopathy.
 Behavioural change, twitching of the face and tongue,
OUTCOmE
seizures, nystagmus, ataxia, and intention tremor have
been reported. There is minimal if any progression of
The cat became 
recumbent, stuporous and was
signs.
euthanized.
Feline leukaemia virus predisposes the cat to develop-
Postmortem examination revealed a severe pyogranu-
ing lymphoma. Multiple skeletal lesions of osteochon-
lomatous meningoencephalitis resulting in a narrowed
dromatosis occur in young infected cats. Olfactory
mesencephalic aqueduct and interventricular foramina.
neuroblastoma is a rare FelV-associated neoplasm of the
Transtentorial herniation of the occipital lobes displaced
nasal cavity which invades through the cribriform plate
the cerebellum to herniate via the foramen magnum.
and may cause neurological signs (Table 27.4).
Inflammation was angiocentric. The diagnosis was FIP.
28
Horner's syndrome
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Eye appears sunken or 'disappears' from view. Odd appearance to the animal's face.
INTRODUCTION
ments T1-T3. This section of the pathway is referred to as
the First Order. Axons exit via T1-3 nerve roots and pass
Horner's syndrome describes the constellation of signs
through the thorax and several ganglia and travel rostrally
resulting from paralysis of the oculosympathetic pathway
up the neck in the vagosympathetic trunk to synapse in
anywhere along its considerable length. It is a common
the cranial cervical ganglion. This anatomical division is
cause of anisocoria in small animals.
referred to as the Second Order. Finally, the axons travel
Signs
through the middle ear, along the floor of the skull and
exit via the orbital fissure to innervate the smooth muscle
Miosis: Anisocoria is most obvious in darkness or during
of the eye, including the pupil dilators. The postganglionic
      e  
lidnd aun on uohuen jean euen aun woy Aemed
noted. It is less obvious when the animal is fatigued or
dilators is referred to as the Third Order.
drowsy as pupils naturally constrict as sleep approaches.
Lesions of the oculosympathetic pathway (Fig. 28.2)
Ptosis: Denervation of the smooth muscle of the upper
can be categorized as first, second, or third order accord-
ing to their anatomical site which can be most reliably
eyelid creates ptosis. The palpebral fissure may be nar-
rowed further by denervation of the smooth muscle of
discovered by finding concomitant neurological deficits.
 Pharmacological testing may help localize the lesion.
the lower lid which causes it to be raised.
It makes use of the phenomenon of denervation
Enophthalmos: Loss of sympathetic tone to orbital
smooth muscle and the resulting unopposed action of 
ganglionic lesion  develops.  A denervated receptor
the retractor bulbi muscle causes the eye to sink further
responds to a dilute concentration of neurotransmitter
into the orbit
whereas a normal receptor would not. This may be
Protrusion of third eyelid: Denervation of smooth
helpful in differentiating second from third order lesions.
muscle in the eyelid along with an enophthalmic position
thoracic radiography is used to investigate second order
results in a prominent third eyelid.
lesions.
Vasodilation of facial, aural, or conjunctival blood
vessels may be noted. lpsilateral coat colour change has
SIGNALMENT 1
been reported in Siamese cats secondary to the local
A 10-year-old male Labrador retriever.
temperature increase.
Figure 28.1 shows a left Horner's syndrome
CASE HISTORY
Pathway
This dog had a 7-day history of left third eyelid protru-
The sympathetic innervation of the eye originates in the
 sion, miosis and ptosis with reddened conjunctiva. The
hypothalamus, descends through the brainstem and
eye was fluorescein negative. The eye looked most
spinal cord to synapse within thoracic spinal cord seg-
abnormal when the dog was resting.
131
132
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
B
1st order
2nd order
3rd order
Orbital foramen
Hypothalamus-
Figure 28.1 Left Horner's syndrome.
Cranial cervical ganglion
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
The dog showed left ptosis, enophthalmos, and miosis
 in light and darkness. The menace response and PLR
were normal bilaterally.
Lateral tectotegmental
spinal tract
NEUROANATOMICAL LOCALIZATION
The lesion was localized to the sympathetic nerve supply
to the left eye and 10% phenylephrine drops reversed
the signs of Horner's syndrome within 20 minutes,
Thoracic spinal cord-
segments T1-T3
which   suggested   denervation  hypersensitivity   was
present and hence a third order Horner's syndrome.
Sympathetic chain ganglia
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Lack of other neurological deficits indicated that idio-
Figure 28.2 Oculosympathetic pathway.
pathic Horner's syndrome was the most likely cause.
There had been no history of otitis externa, balance loss
or facial paralysis in this dog which made middle ear
disease less likely.
Pharmacological testing of
Horner's syndrome
CASE WORK-UP
Place 1-2 drops of 10% phenylephrine in both eyes. The
Thoracic radiographs were taken to further investigate
normal eye acts as a control. Note the time the drops
were applied. Examine the pupil size in a darkened room.
This would be classed as a second order lesion,and
● Third order lesion: pupil dilation ≤20 minutes
theoretically should have been ruled out by the pharma-
● Second order lesion: pupil dilation =45 minutes
cological testing. Radiographs were normal.
● First order lesion: pupil dilation =60-90 minutes
28 Homer's syndrome
133
This is not 100% reliable for localizing lesions; 2.5%
OL:
dilutions and 0.1% phenylephrine (stock 10% solution
diluted 1 : 100 with saline solution) have also been used
 in the past.
DIAGNOSIS
Idiopathic Horner's syndrome
Approximately 45% of canine and 25% of feline
Horner's syndrome cases are idiopathic. Idiopathic Horn-
er's syndrome commonly occurs in golden retrievers, and
-./900
the lesion is thought to be postganglionic. Signs may
resolve spontaneously within 1-8 months.
The prognosis for Horner's syndrome is determined
by the site and the cause of the lesion. Horner's syn-
Figure 28.3 Dorsal T1Wwl. Hyperintense material rostral
drome occurring with cervical spinal cord disease signi-
and caudal to the left tympanic bulla, and caudal to the
fies damage to the lateral tectotegmentospinal tract and
right bulla
has not been used as a prognostic sign for recovery.
FOLLOW-UP
disease was present. Pain probably accounted for the
No further clinical signs developed in the dog.
depression. Extension of bacterial otitis media to the
cranial vault could also cause mental depression.
SIGNALMENT 2
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
A 12-year-old neutered female Siamese cat
● Otitis media-externa
● Polyp
PRESENTING SIGNS
● Osteomyelitis of the tympanic bullae
Nystagmus and left Horner's syndrome.
● Extension of infection into the cranial vault.
CASE HISTORY
CASE WORK-UP
This cat had had otitis externa for 12 months and left
MRl: material in right and left ear canals and bullae (Figs
28.3 and 28.4). Swelling/inflammation around the left
pterygoid bone. Contrast-enhancement of thickened
the last 3-4 days.
dura on the left cerebrum.
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
CSF: normal. (WBC 0, RBC 0; Total protein 0.19 g/l with
cytology of scattered lymphocytes and monocytes)
 Clinical examination revealed a mentally depressed cat
with left enophthalmos, left ptosis but no anisocoria in
TREATMENT
either light or darkness. The ears had a foul smell and
were painful when palpated. An intermittent pendular
The cat became a lot brighter on IV fluids and buprenor-
nystagmus was present and thought normal for the
phine pain relief. She ate well.
breed. Pus was aspirated from the right external ear canal.
Surgery:combined ventralbulla osteotomy and total
ear canal/lateral bulla osteotomy of the left and right
NEUROANATOMICAL LOCALIZATION
ears. There was an eroded bulla wall ventrally. A polyp
The neurological deficit was localized to the sympathetic
was found in the dorsolateral compartment of the bulla.
nerve supply to the left eye. No evidence of vestibular
Pus was found in the middle ears.
134
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
Ja
latrogenic pupillary dilation (Pourfour du
Petit syndrome)
ET:4
Unilateral mydriasis and exophthalmos was reported in
cats within 2 hours of endoscopically examining the
middle ear and flushing the tympanic cavity using a
Spruell needle. The PLR was brisk but incomplete on the
affected side. The ipsilateral palpebral fissure was wider
and eyelid closure was normal. The signs were thought
to be due to a mild stimulation of the postganglionic
sympathetic nerves as they passed through the tympanic
cavity resulting in a hyperactive function rather than
paralysis. Signs resolved within 1-7 days. Ipsilateral Third
 Order Horner's syndrome developed in one cat 4 days
C:1/120.8kHz
after the initial signs. This condition is rare (i.e. three cats
Figure 28.4 Dorsal T1wl+C. Contrast-enhancement of
soft tissue around the left bulla and right bulla.
over a 2-year period from one author performing a
common procedure).
The cat developed facial paralysis bilaterally after the
surgery.
An interesting phenomenon has been noted in which
hyperactive function of the postganglionic sympathetic
nerve to the eye was suspected in cats after their ears
had been flushed
29
Idiopathic facial paralysis
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Acute
Dropped or drooping flaccid upper and lower lips, dropped ear, lopsided face, odd look to face,
food collecting in the mouth between the flaccid lip and the teeth, dropping food, drooling
saliva (and secondary head shaking), inability to blink, sleeping with eyes open, widened
 palpebral fissure, dry eye, corneal ulcers, dry nose and deviation of the nose can all occur
(Fig. 29.1).
Chronic
Elevation of the lip and ear, widening of the palpebral fissure and contracture of the facial
muscles can occur.
INTRODUCTION
relaxes under general anaesthesia which helps distin-
guish it from the fibrosis and contracture secondary to
The facial nerve innervates the:
 chronic facial paralysis.
● Musdles of facial expression: ears, eyelids, lips, cheeks
Animals present with facial asymmetry, elevation and 
and nose
wrinkling of the upper lip, caudal displacement of the
● Sublingual and mandibular salivary glands
labial commissure, blepharospasm, elevation of the ear,
● Nasal and lacrimal glands
deviation of the nose to the ipsilateral side and hyper-
active palpebral (blink) reflex.
It also transmits sensory fibres from the taste buds of the
Myotonia causes a delayed relaxation of muscle fol-
rostral tongue but dysfunction is not noticed.
lowing stimulation. This could give the appearance of a
Facial nerve lesions typically cause paralysis of the
hemifacial spasm. Focal tetanus is limited to the limbs.
muscles of facial expression. In time, the flaccid muscles
The face is affected bilaterally in generalized tetanus.
atrophy, undergo fibrosis and contracture and thus
Other differentials of hemifacial spasm  include:
assume a more normal position. Voluntary and reflex
myokymia, blepharospasm, facial tic and partial
movement of the contracted muscles is still absent. The
seizure.
contracture does not relax under GA.
LMN paresis or paralysis is the most common sign of
Epiphora is an increased tear production and appears
dysfunction, however 'positive' signs of nerve irritation
as overflowing tears or tear staining of the medial
have been reported:
canthus.
Reflex lacrimation occurs in response to eye pain
Hemifacial spasm is a unilateral regular tonic-clonic
which should be evident on examination. Owners some-
contraction of one or more muscles of facial expression.
times report epiphora occurring a few days before
It results from an irritation of the facial nerve but has
ipsilateral  facial  paralysis  develops.  Parasympathetic
been reported in dogs in concert with intracranial masses
stimulation from organophosphate toxicity results in
physically distinct from the facial nerve. The spasm
SLUD (salivation, lacrimation, urination, defecation).
135
136
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
CASE HISTORY
The dog suddenly developed a lop-sided face, drooling
from the right side of the mouth and increased tear
production from the right eye, 5 days prior to referral.
The dog had become less active. There was no history
of ear disease. Treatment with corticosteroids and amox-
icillin had not improved the condition.
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
The quiet but alert dog with a normal gait, postural
reactions and proprioception was examined. The dog
was visual but lacked a right menace due to the lack of
a right blink. The left facial muscles were normal. Facial
sensation was normal bilaterally. Eye movement was
normal. STT was 20 mm bilaterally. No epiphora was
 Figure 29.1 Acute paralysis of R Vll. The right ear is
seen.
slightly more ventral. The right upper lip is noticeably
lower.
NEUROANATOMICAl LOCALIZATION
The lesion was localized to the right facial nerve, periph-
Obstruction of the tear duct is a common cause of
eral to the brainstem.
tear staining.
Paradoxical ('crocodile') tears occur in the human
during and immediately after eating as a rare phenom-
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
enon secondary to aberrant reinnervation of CN VIl
Causes of facial nerve paralysis:
when the fibres innervating the salivary glands are redi-
● Idiopathic: cat and dog
rected to the lacrimal gland. This may be tested with 1%
● Surgery: to the external ear canal or bulla
tropicamide placed on tongue as a sialogogue. Excess
osteotomy
tearing is seen in the ipsilateral eye after approximately
● Otitis media: inflammatory polyps(cats, dogs), tumour
1 minute.
(extension; SCC, benign adenoma, fibroma or choles-
The serous glands of the nasal plane are innervated
teatoma); bacterial infection (Staphylococcus, Pseu-
by the facial nerve. A wet nose with clear watery (serous)
domonas, Proteus and Streptococcus spp)
nasal discharge from one or both nostrils may be normal
● Neuromuscular diseases: polyradiculoneuritis, myas-
and has not been recognized as an early sign of impend-
thenia gravis, botulism and hypothyroidism
ing facial nerve paralysis. It is an unreliable indicator of
● Idiosyncratic reaction to sulphonamides (dog)
general wellbeing - hence the thermometer's suprem-
●Petrosal bone fracture.
acy. Systemic causes are usually bilateral and include:
over-hydration, early sign of nasal irritation by fungi,
In this case, otitis media, neoplasia of the bulla, menin-
parasites, foreign bodies, neoplasia, viruses, or allergies.
gioma of the brainstem, or idiopathic facial paralysis
Rhinorrhoea is the leakage of CSF by the nose and is
were considered most likely. In most cases of otitis media
reported following head trauma.
there has been some history of otitis externa, head
shaking or scratching. Osteomyelitis or neoplasia of the
SIGNALMENT
 bulla can result in the animal being unwilling to open its
An 8-year-old neutered female cross-breed dog.
mouth or chew food, which presents as inappetance,
not chewing hard food and not fetching items. The
 peripheral location of meningioma means that they can
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
present with peripheral CNN involvement, before ataxia
Right-sided facial paralysis.
and paresis develop.
29 Idiopathic facial paralysis
137
spaniels, and is unrelated to the presence of syringomy-
elia. The diagnosis is made by excluding known causes.
Some 75% of canine and 25% of feline cases of facial
paralysis are idiopathic. The lesion lies within the facial
nerve peripheral to the brainstem and consists of axon
and myelin loss without inflammation.
Spontaneous recovery may occur in 4-8 weeks but
paralysis may be permanent. Paralysed nasal muscles
give rise to uneven tension between the two sides and
the nose is pulled toward the unaffected side.If the
paralysed flaccid muscles later contract the nose
straightens
 Antiviral therapy and corticosteroids are not used to
Figure 29.2 Note the 'bulging' flaccid lips on the left.
treat this condition in small animals.
 particularly the lower, and the deviation of the nose to the
 Prehension can be impeded by the flaccid lip becom-
right.
ing trapped between the teeth causing pain. Always
check the upper lip for wounds. Dry eye is a possible
sequela from paralysis of the parasympathetic supply to
the lacrimal glands. The Schirmer tear test should be
rechecked.
CASE WORK-UP
Corneal protection is maintained by lacrimation in
response to pain (CN V), retraction of the globe (CN Vl)
CSF was normal as was an MRl of the head.
and movement of the third eyelid. However, lagophthal-
Toxoplasma and Neospora serology were negative.
mos, the inability to close the eyelid(s) leaving a partial
The dog was euthyroid
opening, does increase the risk of corneal abrasion and
fluorescein staining should be carried out routinely
DIAGNOSIS
Enhancement of the facial nerve has been seen on MRI
but the prognostic value of this is currently unproven.
Suspected idiopathic facial paralysis.
Fluid accumulation within the tympanic bullae is
FOLLOW-UP
noted as an incidental finding in various dog breeds,
generally the brachycephalics such as the CKCS, cocker
Five months later left facial paralysis occurred suddenly
spaniels, bulldogs and boxers. A diagnostic dilemma
and the nose deviated to the right. No other deficits
arises when these dogs are being assessed for facial
were found on this examination, so the lesion was
paralysis, Horner's syndrome, or peripheral vestibular
thought to be idiopathic left facial nerve paralysis
disease. When is the fluid within the tympanic bulla
(Fig. 29.2).
clinically significant? When should a bulla osteotomy be
performed? Should the material be removed by myrin-
AETIOPATHOGENESIS
gotomy? Contrast-enhancement of the bulla's mucosal
lining is not necessarily clinically significant. Bulla oste-
Idiopathic facial paralysis
otomy is not 100% benign and risks causing deafness,
Unilateral facial paralysis is a common problem. The
facial paralysis and Horner's syndrome. Decision-making
contralateral side may become paralysed within 1-2
is currently based on clinical judgement of the signal-
months. The onset is sudden, and animals are usually
 ment, history, presence or absence of otitis externa and
presented the samedaywith ahistory of havinghad‘a
 the progression of neurological deficits. The collection
stroke'. Cortical lesions may produce subtle facial weak-of fluid within the tympanic bulla has been termed
ness but LMN lesions produce the common causes of primary secretory otitis media without proof that the
facial weakness in small animals. It is very common in  viscous mucus present is from a secretory malfunction.
30
Dropped jaw
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Inability to prehend food or toys, slow, messy eating: drops food and dribbles water around the
bowl, drooling, salivating (pseudoptyalism), jaw hanging open, unable to close mouth, tilting or 
throwing the head back to eat
INTRODUCTION
Oral or pharyngeal pain or obstruction are common
causes of a failure to prehend food. Teeth chattering has
Prehension is the grasping of food or objects with the
been reported in cats with dental disease.
mouth. The inability to prehend food has been called
oral dysphagia
The most obvious deficit occurs with bilateral tri-
SIGNALMENT
geminal nerve paralysis. The mandibular branch of the
A 5-year-old female Hungarian vizsla.
- jo s  sn ( )  
tication. Unilateral paralysis does not interfere with
feeding. Bilateral paralysis causes the jaws to hang apart
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
at rest. The animal attempts to eat but food falls from
Inability to dlose the mouth.
the mouth. Food placed at the back of the mouth can
be swallowed.
CASE HISTORY
Tongue paralysis as a sole deficit is rare. Weak tongue
retraction has been noted as an examination finding, not
The dog suddenly developed a dropped jaw 1 week prior
a presenting complaint, in myasthenia gravis. A pit bull
to referral.
pup with episodic paralysis (from suspected hyper-
The owners had noticed the water in the drinking
kalaemic periodic paralysis) precipitated by exercise had
bowl being frothy the day before the jaw was visibly
flaccid neck, limb and tongue muscles. A fractured hyoid
hanging open. The next day the right third eyelid became
bone, strenuous tongue manipulation in small dogs and
prominent. Muscle loss on the head was noted bilater-
brainstem tumours are also reported causes. The rare
ally. The dog tried to pick things up but could not do
conditions of muscular dystrophy, congenital myotonia,
so. No regurgitation, choking or vomiting were reported.
and acromegaly cause hypertrophy of the tongue and
its protrusion from the mouth.
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
se ou yonoue uoisuayad un hed e Aed sd aul
prominently as in primates or ungulates. Nevertheless,
The dog was alert and ambulatory with normal proprio-
ception and hopping. Right Horner's syndrome and a
food. The flaccid paralysis of upper lips leads to them
dropped jaw with absent jaw tone were found (Figs 30.1
being caught between teeth during prehension. This is
and 30.2). Sensation was present in all areas of the face.
painful, and the mouth is opened again. Food is also
STT was normal. Facial muscle movement appeared to
trapped between gums and lips despite a functional
be normal. Atrophy of the masseter and temporalis
tongue and jaw.
muscles was present bilaterally.
138
30 Dropped jaw
139
2. Maxillary branch
● Sensory to the eyelids, nasal mucosa, nose, upper
teeth and upper lip
● Exits skull via the round foramen, alar canal and
rostral alar foramen
● Also transmits postganglionic parasympathetic
fibres to the lacrimal, palatine, and nasal glands.
3. Mandibular branch
● Sensory to the buccal cavity, tongue, teeth of
lower jaw, lower lip and some skin of the head
● Motor fibres to the musdles of mastication: mas-
seter, temporalis, medial and lateral pterygoids,
rostral digastricus and mylohyoideus
● Passes through the oval foramen.
Figure 30.1 The lower jaw hangs open.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
A mandibular neuritis/neuropathy  was suspected in
this dog.
Mandibular neuropathy is a common cause of an
acute inability to dlose the mouth. Also known as tri-
geminal neuritis, it is a spontaneous, non-painful, idio-
pathic inflammation  of  the trigeminal  nerve motor
branch bilaterally resulting in jaw paralysis. Sensation to
the face is intact in most animals. Horner's syndrome
may be associated with mandibular neuropathy but the
cause is not clear. The condition spontaneously resolves
in 2-3 weeks. Corticosteroids are not required. Golden
retrievers were over-represented in one study of this
condition.
Figure 30.2 Right Horner's syndrome
mandibular luxation. Lockjaw refers to the trismus of
tetanus rather than jaws in a fixed open position. A tonic
opening of the jaws is common during seizure activity.
NEUROANATOMICAL DIAGNOSIS
The mandibular branch of the trigeminal nerve and the
CLINICAL TIP
right sympathetic nerve supply to the eye.
Note any gagging, inability to swallow, and
The trigeminal nerve (CN V), as the name indicates,
regurgitation as these indicate other cranial nerve
has three branches:
1. Ophthalmic branch
involvement or muscle weakness.
● Sensory to the eyeball, eyelids, nasal mucosa and 
skin
CASE WORK-UP
● Exits orbital foramen of skull
●Gives rise to the lacrimal nerve which innervates
●Muscle enzymes were normal
the lacrimal gland: postganglionic parasympa-
● Haematology was normal
thetic fibres from CN Vll travel with this nerve to
● MRl of the head found bilaterally symmetric trigemi-
the lacrimal gland
nal nerves without enlargement of either oval foramen 
● Carries postganglionic sympathetic fibres to the
● Tympanic bullae were normal
pupil.
● CSF was normal.
140
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
DIAGNOSIS
tied together with a fabric bow and the water bowl was
elevated, to aid the lapping of water. No medication was
The diagnosis by exclusion is a mandibular neuropathy.
given.
Horner's syndrome can occur when the trigeminal nerve
The dog improved spontaneously, returning to normal
is damaged.
within 10 days (see also Chapter 36, p 158).
TREATMENT/PROGNOSIS
The dog was hand-fed canned food made into balls and
placed at the back of the throat. The jaws were partially
31
Middle ear disease
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Initial presentation may include: facial paralysis, Horner's syndrome, pain on opening the mouth.
INTRODUCTION
CASE HISTORY
The middle ear lies beyond the tympanic membrane (ear
2-3 months of left otitis externa. A week of depression
drum), and consists of the mucosa-lined tympanic bulla,
and 2 days of a left head tilt, nystagmus, ataxia, being
a bony balloon' lying on the ventrolateral surface of the 
unable to jump and stumbling to the left.
temporal bone. It contains the three auditory ossicles
which transmit sound waves from the external ear to the
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
 internal ear. The tiny muscles attached to either end of 
the ossicdle chain contract in response to loud noise,
The cat was alert, ambulatory, ataxic and had a left head
limiting the transmission of sound to the inner ear as a
tilt. When walking, the cat staggered or fell to the left.
protective mechanism. The auditory (eustachian) tube
Hopping and proprioception were normal in all limbs.
connects the middle ear to the nasopharynx. In cats, the
Spontaneous horizontal nystagmus with a fast phase to
large ventromedial and small dorsolateral compartments
the right was seen.
are separated by a very thin bony lamella. The facial
nerve and sympathetic nerve supply to the eye are closely
NEUROANATOMICAL LOCALIZATION
associated with the cavity of the middle ear.
The initial presentation may include:
Left peripheral vestibular apparatus.
● Facial paralysis, Horner's syndrome or pain on opening
the mouth
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
● Signs of associated chronic otitis externa (ear pain
with or without head tilt, shaking or scratching the
● A middle ear polyp
head, smelly ears)
● Bacterial otitis with secondary irritation of the inner
● Signs of associated otitis interna (peripheral vestibular
ear.
disease).
Secondary meningitis can occur by extension which may
SIGNALMENT
have caused irritation of the peripheral portion of the
CN VIlI.
A 2-year-old neutered male British blue cat.
Inflammation of the middle ear most commonly
results from extension of bacterial or yeast infections
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
from the external ear canal. The middle ear acts as a
Head tilt and nystagmus
reservoir for reinfection of the external ear canal.
141
142
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
An intact ear drum may be present with either otitis
media or otitis externa. Bacteria may ascend via the
auditory tube from the nasopharynx or gain access
haematogenously.
Nasopharyngeal polyps are found in the tympanic
bulla and may extend into the external ear canal or into
the nasopharynx. The index of suspicion should be raised
when presented with a cat affected by vestibular disease,
chronic otitis externa, snoring, stertor, facial paralysis or
12/%
Horner's syndrome. Surgical removal of the polyp is
required for successful treatment. Chronic otitis media
can lead to extension of infection into the cranial vault.
Figure 31.1 MRl T1wl + contrast. Enhancement of soft
Cholesteatoma develop within a chronically inflamed
tissue in and around the left tympanic bulla. Vill marks the
middle ear and require surgical removal.
vestibulocochlear nerve. ScC points to the semicircular
canal.
CASE WORK-UP
Lateral oblique, open-mouth, DV orVD views of the skull
DIAGNOSIS
allow visualization of the tympanic bullae. Increased
opacity within the lumen, and bony proliferation or
Otitis media, osteomyelitis with polyp.
thickening of the tympanic bulla are evidence of middle
ear involvement but these changes may not be apparent
TREATMENT
for several weeks. Some 25% of otitis media cases will
be missed by radiographic assessment only. Lysis of the
Ventral bulla osteotomy removed pus and polyp material
bulla is suggestive of neoplasia rather than osteomyelitis.
from the middle ear.
When the otitis is mild, radiographs and CT have the
Causes of otitis externa should be addressed. Cultures
same diagnostic yield. Fewer cases are missed on CT
of the external ear canal often differ from those of the
than radiography when the bulla changes increase in
middle ear. Myringotomy under general anaesthesia
severity.
with aspiration of material for culture and sensitivity has
MRl gives fabulous soft tissue detail which is impor-
been recommended. Empirical treatment with cephalo-
tant for assessing anatomy associated with the neuro-
sporins, amoxicillin, and clavulanic acid for two weeks
logical deficits caused by otitis media-interna. It can
is an option, followed by further investigation if no
detect extension of infection into the calvarium. Para-
improvement is seen. Any soft tissue masses within the
aural abscesses, possibly associated with past unsuccess-
bulla should be surgically removed and sent for
ful ear surgery, are noted. The extent of tumours of the
histopathology.
soft tissue and skull can be assessed
In this case, the cat was admitted to hospital to
FOLL0W-UP
prevent injury from falling. MRl of the head was per-
formed (Fig. 31.1).
There was resolution of the vestibular signs.
32
Otogenic intracranial
infection
INITIAL PRESENTATION
The initial presentation may include vestibular disease, facial paralysis or Horner's syndrome.
INTRODUCTION
Treatment with dexamethasone and amoxicillin/clavu-
inq eixene aun uassal ot paleadde sep s iot pioe ouel
Chronic ear infection can result in pyogranulomatous
the cat became inappetant and would not move from
otitis media-interna with osteomyelitis of the tympanic
its bed. No history of ear disease was reported but the
bulla. Extension into the cranial vault is detected on MRl
cat was seen to scratch at the right ear before the
as a globoid or plaque-like mass extending from the
balance loss occurred
bulla into the cerebello-medullary angle. This compresses
the brainstem, and causes meningoencephalitis. Abscess
formation may be seen as a thickened rim around the
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
mass. Material is seen within the bulla.
Somewhat surprisingly, there may be no clinical indi-
Examination found an alert ambulatory ataxic cat which
cation of intracranial extension. Head or neck pain,
lost balance when looking up, lurching to the right but
depression, lethargy, seizures, and CN V deficits are not
not falling. A right head tilt was obvious. Spontaneous
routinely found. A mild to moderate increase in rectal
nystagmuswasnotpresent at rest or when theneckwas
temperature (39-40°C) may be present. Haematology is
dorsiflexed. The vestibulo-ocular reflex was slow to the
normal or shows a mild neutrophilia. It should be sus-
pected in any age or breed of cat or dog with chronic,
bilaterally. No anisocoria was present. The placing
recurrent, or existing otitis media-interna that develops
response was slow in the right forelimb. Hopping
vestibular signs (peripheral or central) over a period of
was slightly reduced in the right fore- and right
hindlimbs. Spinal reflexes were normal. No spinal pain
hours to days. Most cases have been reported in the cat.
was found.
SIGNALMENT 1
NEUROANATOMICAL LOCALIZATION
An 8-vear-old neutered female domestic shorthaired cat.
The lesion was localized to the right facial nerve and the
right vestibular apparatus. The right-sided postural defi-
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
cits indicated right brainstem involvement. The CNN Vll
Loss of balance.
and Vill could be involved together by middle and inner
ear lesions respectively, or by a right brainstem lesion
 picking off the nerves. The lack of spontaneous nystag-
CASE HISTORY
mus in an ataxic cat with a head tilt is unusual and may
There had been a few days of lethargy before the spon-
indicate cerebellar involvement as the cause of the ves-
taneous nystagmus, right head tilt and ataxia occurred.
tibular signs.
143
144
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
continued empirically for 1 month if a negative culture
of bulla contents, CSF or both is obtained or for 3
months if a positive culture occurs. Multiple organisms
are frequently isolated in acute and chronic infections:
Staphylococcus spp.,E cofi, Pseudomonas aeruginosa,
Proteus mirabilis, Enterococcus spp. and Streptococcus
spp. Anaerobic organisms, and Pasteurella mu/tocida are
 additionally found in cats
This cat had a right ventral bulla osteotomy which
Figure 32.1 Transverse T1wwl: pre-contrast (left) and
allowed removal of a polyp from both compartments of
post-contrast (right). Extension of infection from ear to
the middle ear. Horner's syndrome developed post-oper-
meninges.
atively. The cat was given cephalexin for 4 weeks and
prednisolone for 4 weeks on a decreasing dose.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
PROGNOSIS
● A carcinoma of the right tympanic bulla extending to
the inner ear and brainstem
The prognosis was good to excellent with surgical treat-
● Otitis media-interna with extension to the brainstem
ment and antibiotics.
● Meningioma of the right brainstem
● Nerve root tumours of CN vill are rare.
FOLLOW-UP
The balance had improved to normal but Horner's syn-
CASE WORK-UP
drome was still present 1 month postoperatively.
MRI found that both compartments of the right middle
ear were filled with material hypointense on T1Wl and
SIGNALMENT 2
with areas of hyperintensity on T2Wl. There was con-
trast-enhancement of the bulla, the muscle external to
A 12-year-old neutered female Siamese cat
the bulla, and meninges of the brainstem and cerebel-
lum (Fig. 32.1).
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
CSF was abnormal, with an elevated total protein of
0.60 g/l (normal range: 0.0-0.25) and increased WBC of
Nystagmus.
13/μl (normal <5). Cytological examination showed 81%
neutrophils, 15% monocytes and small/medium lym-
CASE HISTORY
phocytes. No bacteria were seen. Culture of the CSF was
not performed. These results indicate tissue destruction,
Otitis externa had commenced in the right, then the left
in this case probably from inflammation, most likely
ear 6 months ago. Horner's syndrome on the left
bacterial.
appeared at the same time. The cat had been anorexic
In one study of otogenic abscesses, CSF was consis-
and mentally depressed for 3 days prior to referral. The
tently abnormal in acute presentations, revealing a neu-
cat had been referred for investigation of nystagmus.
trophilic pleocytosis and elevated protein levels. CSF may
be normal in chronic cases.
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
A mentally depressed febrile cat with foul-smelling,
DIAGNOSIS
painful external ear canals was found to have intermit-
Otitis media-interna with meningitis.
tent pendular nystagmus, left enophthalmos, a decreased
left palpebral fissure and anisocoria with a miotic left
 pupil in ambient light and in a darkened room. The blink
TREATMENT
reflex was weak on the left despite apparently normal
Treatment of otogenic abscesses consists of removal of
facial sensation. Normal vestibulo-ocular reflexes were
necrotic tissue by ventral bulla osteotomy. Antibiotics are
present.
32 Otogenic intracranial infection
145
NEUROANATOMICAL LOCALIZATION
The left facial nerve and the sympathetic innervation of
the left eye. Osteomyelitis of the tympanic bulla on one 
or both sides could account for the pain and fever.
The nystagmus was pendular, intermittent, and con-
sidered normal for the breed. No signs of vestibular
disease were present.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
● Extension of bacterial otitis externa to the middle
Figure 32.2 T1Wl + contrast. Meningeal thickening
(arrows).
ear(s)
● Polyp
Carcinoma.
CSF was normal.Aerobic and anaerobic culture were
CASE WORK-UP
negative.
IV fluids and pain relief improved the cat's mental state
Opaque white liquid in the right ear canal was aspi-
 and appetite.
rated under the general anaesthetic and appeared to be
Haematology and serology results were normal.
viscous pus.
MRl: fluid-like material was found in both tympanic
bullae and ear canals. There was extensive inflammation
TREATMENT
of bone and soft tissue of both bullae and the left ptery-
goid bone, with extension into the cranial vault. Con-
trast-enhancement of thickened dura mater on the left
from both tympanic bullae. The cat improved
cerebrum was noted (Fig. 32.2).
postoperatively.
33
Deafness
INTRODUCTION
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
Air conducts sound waves to the tympanic membrane.
On the first examination, the dog had a normal gait and
This energy is transmitted via the malleus, incus and
posture with normal postural reactions (hopping and
stapes ossicle chain of the middle ear to the fluid of the
proprioception) and cranial nerve examination. Wax
cochlear duct and thus its hair cells. Failure of the trans-
obscured the left ear drum.
mission of sound by the external or middle ear is called
conductive deafness
NEUROANATOMICAL DIAGNOSIS
The cochlear duct is found in an osseus spiral-shaped
passageway within the petrous-temporal bone known
The dog was suspected of being unilaterally deaf, given
as the cochlea. The bony cochlea along with the vesti-
the poor ability to localize the direction of sound. Falling 
bule and semicircular canals containing the vestibular
when shaking suggested a loss of balance and so ves-
apparatus comprise the inner ear. Movement of the hair
tibular involvement was suspected despite the lack of a
cells creates action potentials which travel via the
head tilt or abnormal nystagmus.
cochlear portion of CN Vill into the medulla oblongata.
The auditory pathway decussates multiple times as it
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
ascends to the auditory cortex. Failure of the generation
of action potentials or failure of their transmission to the
Cause of deafness
auditory cortex is called sensorineural deafness.
Inherited sensorineural deafness occurs in cats and dogs,
Deafness in an otherwise normal animal is a result of
and is linked to genes controlling coat colour. Merle or
a peripheral lesion (external, middle or inner ear, or
dapple coats have dark, irregular blotches on a white
cochlear nerve peripheral to the brainstem) rather than
background, e.g. dalmatians, and such breeds have a
high incidence of deafness. White-coated animals with
complete bilateral deafness from a brainstem lesion
or without blue irises have a high risk of deafness.
would be incompatible with life (Fig. 33.1),
Agenesis or degeneration of the hearing receptor is
responsible and is present from birth or soon after in the
majority of breeds. BAER testing is generally performed
SIGNALMENT
at 5-8 weeks of age before puppies from at-risk breeds
 A 2-year, 11-month-old female English springer spaniel.
are sold and re-homed. There is no treatment for inher-
ited deafness. Hearing aids magnify sound and are of no
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
benefit as the hearing receptor is destroyed.
Acquired sensorineural deafness occurs as an ageing
Not responding to commands
change. Ototoxicity from aminoglycosides, diuretics,
antiseptics and chemotherapy has been reported in
animals.
CASE HISTORY
Conditions which block the transmission of sound
For the last month the dog had been running in the
through the external or middle ear cause hearing loss of
wrong direction when called and was thought to be
varying severity. Deafness is a complication of tympanic
deaf. When she shook, she fell down.
bulla surgery.
146
33 Deafness
147
the headphones and picked up by the recording elec-
trodes under the skin of the head. If the sound success-
Pinna-
fully enters the brainstem, a series of 5-7 waveforms is
Auricular
recorded.
cartilage、
Congenital deafness destroys the hearing receptor in
one or both ears. This prevents sound entering the brain-
Temporalis
stem. In this situation the trace shows a stimulus artefact
muscle
followed by a flat line.
Cerebrum-
Movement of the head moves the recording elec-
trodes which create artefactual waves on the trace. The
Cerebellum-
 BAER test counteracts this by averaging all the responses
Auditory ossicles
to the clicks, so that over time, the random artefacts are
Petrous-
averaged out, leaving the true result. This is called signal
emporal bone
averaging and is used in electrodiagnostics to filter out
Auditory canal
Cochlea
(vertical part)
random waveforms which would obliterate the low
Pharyngo-tympanic
voltage evoked recordings. Repeated movement con-
tube
Auditory canal
tinually creates artefacts which means the test must be
Tympanic cavity
(horizontal part)
restarted, or the machine must be given time to average-
Tympanic bulla 
Tympanic membrane 
puppy, must remain still Various techniques are used
but some pups require sedation in order to achieve a
Figure 33.1 Diagram of the ear
meaningful trace (Fig. 33.2). A congenitally deaf animall
lacks waveforms, so it is vital that the trace convincingly
reflects this. Sedation does not interfere with the trans-
mission of sound through the ear and brainstem.
In this case: Otitis interna was considered most likely
An animal is described as either “bilateral hearing
in a dog of this age.
present', ‘unilaterally deaf in the left or right ear' or
CASE WORK-UP
bilaterally deaf'. The term '50% deaf’ has no clear
Hearing testing
meaning and must not be used (Fig. 33.3).
BAER tests initial anatomical pathways of hearing but
Behaviouralassessment
is no guarantee that the bilaterally hearing animal will
The behavioural response to sound is not diagnostically
pay attention to the owner.
accurate but is the ultimate purpose of hearing in a pet-
owner relationship. Even normal-hearing animals ignore
In this case: The BAER detected traces bilaterally, indi-
test sounds after the second or third occurrence.A
cating that the cochlea and CN Vll (cochlear nerve) were
startle response to noise can be stimulated by vibration,
functional.
e.g. a slamming door or a running engine, as well as
sound. Movement of the pinna in response to sound is
DIAGNOSIS
the minimum expected response from a hearing animal.
The dog was seen to lurch to the left when shaking its
Electrical assessment
head. Otitis interna was suspected. Enrofloxacin was
A series of clicks is transmitted to one ear at a time by
commenced and an MRl of the head was scheduled.
way of ear phones. The clicks evoke an action potential
in the cochlear duct which is then transmitted through
PROGNOSIS
the brainstem to the auditory cortex. The first 10 seconds
of this transmission records the passage through the
Dogs withunilaterally absent BAER are behaviourally
brainstem. For this reason the test is known as the brain-
indistinguishable in most cases, from dogs with normal
stem audio-evoked response (BAER) test.
bilateral hearing and so make excellent pets. The inheri-
The stimulus artefact, a deflection at the start of a
tance of deafness is not straightforward. The general
BAER trace, indicates that the stimulus is delivered by
recommendation is to breed only from bilaterally hearing
148
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
Stimulus
(Ad)
 artifact
Time (msec)
Figure 33.2 Normal BAER trace.
 Figure 33.4 Transverse T1wl. Increased hyperintensity of
the white matter.
Stimulus
artifact
Vertical nystagmus indicates a central vestibular
AM
Left side
disease with a lesion within the cerebellum or vestibular
nuclei of the brainstem. Not responding normally to
sound may mean that the dog had a problem centrally
s
processing the information (cerebral disease).
Right side
The slow progression was suggestive of a degenera-
tive disease such as fucosidosis, an inherited disorder in
English springer spaniels. Neosporosis and GME can give
rise to progressive multifocal disease but would be
Time (msec)
expected to worsen over a shorter period of time. Hydro-
Figure 33.3 Normal trace in the left ear. Absent trace in
cephalus secondary to a caudal fossa mass could give
the right ear. Unilaterally deaf in the right ear.
rise to both cerebral and cerebellar signs.
MRl recorded an unusual grey-white matter contrast
 with the white matter appearing more hyperintense rela-
animals but this pairing will still produce unilaterally or
tive to the grey matter (Fig. 33.4). No contrast enhance-
bilaterally deaf offspring on occasions.
ment was seen. This is suggestive of oedema, or
The percentage of bilaterally deaf Dalmatians is low
abnormal myelination.
(7%). Unilateral deafness in Dalmatians is more preva-
The dog was commenced on supplements used in
lent at 21%. Surprisingly, not all owners are aware of
mitochondrial disease but this did not halt progression
the problem. Bilaterally deaf adult Dalmatians may be
of signs.
presented for being disobedient ("hyperactive', “wilful',
One month later, the dog was still able to hear sound
untrainable). Such dogs may be re-homed numerous
but could not locate the origin of it. She did not appear
times. Dalmatian breeders in the UK often choose to
to recognize the owner; 2 months after the MRI the dog
have bilaterally deaf Dalmatians euthanized at diagnosis
was ataxic.
rather than risk the animal spending its life in animal
A DNA test for fucosidosis found the dog was homo-
shelters. Bilaterally deaf dogs can be trained with hand
zygous for the mutant gene and therefore affected.
signals by a dedicated owner.
AETIOPATHOGENESIS OF FUCOSIDOSIS
FOLL0W-UP
Fucosidosis is a lysosomal storage disease of autosomal
bop aun reun punoy lanel syaam e uoeuwexa peaday
recessive inheritance in English springer spaniels of either
had positional vertical nystagmus but had otherwise
sex. A deficiency of the enzyme alpha-fucosidase results
remained unchanged.
in accumulation of incompletely metabolized substrates
33 Deafness
149
in visceral and nervous tissue. Intracytoplasmic vacuoles
 of hearing and vision. The initial presenting complaint
may be seen in leukocytes from peripheral blood, bone
may be a resistance to handling and being over-anxious.
marrow and CsF.
This does not improve with time.
Signs reflect neurological involvement and are first
 s t  ia   a s 
noted between 4 months and 2 years of age. The main
age because of worsening signs. There is no cure.
 problems are ataxia, personality change and impairment 
DNA testing is available.
34
Sneezing
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Persistent episodic sneezing. Ptarmus (spasmodic sneezing).
INTRODUCTION
The rubbing had since stopped however the dog had
trains of about 7 sneezes once a day. Nasal disease had
Sneezing is a protective reflex mediated by the medulla
beenthoroughlyinvestigatedandnopathology
oblongata. Sensory input from pain fibres (trigeminal
had been found. Atrophy of the right temporal muscles
nerve) in the nasal mucosa initiate the reflex. A rapid
had begun in the last month.
inspiration followed by the explosive passage of air
through the nose and mouth expels irritants. Any nasal
disease may present as an acute onset of persistent
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
sneezing. Nasal discharge typically develops.
The dog was alert and ambulatory with normal postural
Sneezing with its subsequent loss has been reported
sem azis ldnd sqwn lle ui uondaoojdoid pue suooeal
in humans secondary to infarction of the medulla.
symmetric and the PLRs were normal. Right enophthal-
mos was present which made observing eye movement
Reverse sneezing is an outburst of noisy forceful inspi-
difficult but right eye movement was present. Atrophy
ration triggered by nasopharyngeal irritation which typi-
of the right masticatory muscles with the sensation
cally occurs in small breed dogs of any age. Episodes last
absent in the right side of the face in all three branches
seconds and can be associated with excitement or drink-
of the trigeminal nerve and a right dry eye were found.
ing. The problem is self-limiting and does not result in
The right ear and nostrils both moved. The nasal planum
anoxia or collapse. Faulty interplay of the epiglottis and
was wet and symmetrical. The lips were symmetrical.
soft palate is thought to be the cause. It is not a sign of
neurological disease.
NEUROANATOMICAL LOCALIZATION
SIGNALMENT
Right trigeminal nerve (atrophy, sensation). The enoph-
thalmos can occur with loss of masticatory muscles or
A 7-year-old neutered female Shetland sheepdog.
Horner's syndrome, both of which occur with trigeminal
nerve lesions. The former was considered most likely as
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
miosis was not present. Face rubbing, sneezing and
decreased tear production are also signs of trigeminal
Chronic sneezing and an asymmetrical head.
sensory dysfunction.
CASE HISTORY
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Conjunctivitis of the right eye, sneezing, and rubbing the
● Trigeminal neuroma was suspected given the long
right face were first noted 7 months prior to referral.
time course and slow progression
150
34 Sneezing
151
● Meningioma
DIAGNOSIS
● Skull tumour in the region of the oval foramen
Trigeminal nerve root tumour.
 Sneezing is an unusual presentation of a trigeminal
CASE WORK-UP
nerve lesion.
MRI showed a large uniformly contrast enhancing mass
Excessive salivation, coughing and dysphagia have
been reported in a sensory trigeminar neuropathy in a
in the area of the right trigeminal nerve root which was
 2-year-old rough collie dog in which bilateral sensory
compressing the adjacent brainstem. Minimal oedema
 loss over the trigeminal distribution was present.
of the surrounding parenchyma was noted.
CSF was abnormal with a large increase in total
protein of 0.70 g/l (N <0.25). WBC count and cytology
was normal.
35
Coughing
INTRODUCTION
LARYNGEAL PARALYSIS
Coughing is a voluntary or reflex action in which
By Ed Friend
deep  inspiration  is followed by  forced   expiration
Laryngeal paralysis is failure of abduction of the ary-
against a closed glottis. This requires strong contraction
tenoid cartilages by the dorsal cricoarytenoid musdles
of the respiratory muscles and the larynx. The sudden
during the respiratory cycle. This causes a reduction in
opening of the glottis releases air in an explosive
the diameter of the rima glottidis during the inspiratory
manner. Its passage through the vocal folds creates the
phase, and clinical signs are most prominently exercise
characteristic sound. It may be followed by a terminal
intolerance due to a reduced capacity to ventilate. Most
retch.
dogs are classified as idiopathic' laryngeal paralysis and
It is stimulated by irritation of the pharynx, larynx,
no underlying cause can be identified, but disease occurs
trachea, extrapulmonary bronchi and rarely by other
as a result of loss of innervation of the dorsal crico-
intrathoracic structures. The reflex is mediated by the
arytenoid muscle by the recurrent laryngeal nerves. The
medulla oblongata. Afferent input is supplied by the
traditional view is that nerve dysfunction occurs as a
glossopharyngeal nerve (CN IX) innervating the pharynx
result of the relative extreme length of these nerves. It
and the vagus (CN X) which contains sensory input
has been more recently observed, however, that idio-
from the pharynx, larynx and thoracic structures. The
pathic laryngeal paralysis is part of a generalized neu-
motor arc is governed by the intercostal muscles (T1-1 2),
ropathy. Many other areas of the animal may therefore
the diaphragm (phrenic nerve, C5-7) and the larynx
be affected, although the most prominent clinical sign
(CN X).
is usually the laryngeal dysfunction. The underlying neu-
A weak cough, termed 'bovine cough' in human neu-
ropathy in most cases is a disease that progresses over
rology, results from a failure to build up sufficient intra-
a period of weeks to years.
thoracic pressure due to a vagal lesion(recurrent
laryngeal nerve) or generalized weakness.
SIGNALMENT
A goose-honking sound is associated with tracheal
collapse.
Idiopathic laryngeal paralysis typically occurs in large and
The Valsalva manoeuvre is forceful exhalation against
giant breed dogs over the age of 9 to 10 years. It is
the resistance of a closed mouth and nose, as occurs
commonly seen in Labrador retrievers, golden retrievers,
during vomiting, straining to defecate, and coughing
collies and English and Irish setters. A congenital
with the subsequent release of resistance and exhala-
form of the disease has been described in the Bouvier
tion. This gives rise to autonomically mediated cardio-
des Flandres, Dalmatian, husky and bull terrier, with
vascular reflexes with changes in heart rate and blood
animals showing clinical signs at less than 1 year
pressure and is the basis for 'cough syncope'. Cough
of age.
syncope may result from the increased intrathoracic
All animals presenting with laryngeal paralysis should
pressure blocking venous return to the heart or strong
be investigated for the presence of an underlying cause
vagal stimulation inducing vasodilation and bradycardia
(see later in this chapter), and this should be especially
(vasovagal syncope).
thorough if the signalment is not typical. Other causes
152
35 Coughing
153
that should be ruled out are traumatic or surgical injury
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
(usually to the neck), masses that interfere with the
General examination is usually unremarkable. The most
pathway of the recurrent laryngeal nerves (e.g. media-
prominent finding is noise on laryngeal auscultation,
stinal or neck mass), endocrinopathies and infectious
-idsui aun uo (aaisnxa Aiensn jou ing) Apueuuoaid
diseases. The prognosis for dogs following surgery that
do not have ‘idiopathic' laryngeal paralysis is likely to
ratory part of the cycle. This will usually be significant
enough to be detected on thoracic auscultation.
be worse and so it is imperative that the underlying
cause is found out before surgery is embarked upon in
Heart sounds and other cardiac parameters such as
these cases.
pulse strength and quality and heart rate should all be
normal; it is imperative that cardiac disease is eliminated
as a cause for the clinical signs. Mucous membranes are
often cyanotic because of respiratory compromise. Lung
HISTORY
sounds may be harsher in the presence of aspiration
Dogs presenting with laryngeal paralysis usually have a
pneumonia and referred laryngeal noise is common.
Muscle atrophy, especially of the pelvic limbs, is very
gradual onset of respiratory stridor, cyanosis and decreas-
common.A basic neurological examination willreveal
ing exercise tolerance; there may be worsening of signs
pelvic limb weakness in most cases, along with conscious
in hot weather as the dog will be attempting to shift
 more air through the larynx to thermoregulate. Syncope
proprioceptive deficits. Pharyngeal sensitivity is reduced
in some dogs, which will have a very poor gag reflex.
is sometimes seen with light as well as vigorous exercise
and animals may present in severe respiratory distress. It
is only with careful questioning that a more chronic
MANAGEMENT Of A LaRYNGEAL
history becomes apparent. A change in bark will have
PaRALYSIS DOG PRESENTING WITH
been apparent in some cases.
SEVERE RESPIRATORY COMPROMISE
There may also be a history of coughing, sometimes
with lethargy and pyrexia. There may be a low level of
● Supplement with oxygen in a way that does not
irritation due to small amounts of saliva and food enter-
further stress the animal, e.g. oxygen cage.
ing the trachea, or if more severe aspiration occurs,
● Calm the animal; lightly sedate to reduce anxiety if
aspiration pneumonia may result. This has previously
appropriate(anxiety increases the rate and depth of
been thought to occur because the vocal folds are not
respiration, often worsening the ability to ventilate in
guarding the rima glottidis as effectively as normal;
laryngeal paralysis cases).
however it may also be due to reduced function of
● Place an intravenous line. Maintenance intravenous
pharyngeal nerves and muscles caused by the general-
fluids may later be required as the animal may not
ized neuropathy. Owners may notice this as increased
wish to eat or drink,but this is also useful to admin-
coughing during eating or drinking, or if the animal
ister medications or anaesthetics
struggles or is slower to eat.
● Check rectal temperature and cool if raised (cold
Megaoesophagus is sometimes reported with this
water towels with or without cool intravenous fluids)
condition, and so a history of regurgitation should be
ruled out. If this is diagnosed, concurrent aspiration
respiratory distress in an animal that has previously
pneumonia should always be considered and the prog-
been coping with laryngeal paralysis.
nosis is more guarded.
● Physical examination and further diagnostic tests to
The generalized neuropathy mayalsolead to
rule out concurrent diseases that may worsen the
pelvic limb weakness. This is usually mild and may be
respiratory distress, e.g. concurrent cardiac disease,
misdiagnosed as osteoarthritis as the animals are large
pleural effusion, etc.
breedandquiteold.Owners sometimes report
● Induce anaesthesia and intubate if very severe. This
scuffing of the nails as the dog walks on hard surfaces,
should be avoided if possible as the animal will be
or stumbling on tight turns. Weakness on rising is
very common. More severely affected dogs may be
help the laryngeal paralysis (see later), i.e. an experi-
unable to rise and progression of this aspect of the
enced surgeon has to be present who can perform
the surgery. Tracheostomy tubes can be used as a last
euthanized
resort to help recover the animal if surgery cannot be
154
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
performed, but there is a significant morbidity and
 must be under light anaesthesia, and so a gag to hold
mortality associated with their use. They also compli-
the mouth open is often useful), or if the larynx is being
cate the definitive surgery when this is eventually
examined after intubation (intubation will usually lead to
performed, as the animal may be more likely to cough
 temporary cessation of arytenoid movement.
postoperatively, which may disrupt the laryngeal
o pasn Aensn si eisausaeue apun uoeuwex
sutures
confirm  the clinical diagnosis of laryngeal paralysis,
although it must be remembered that there are other
differentials for upper respiratory tract obstruction.
DIAGNOSTIC TESTS
Some are not likely with the signalment of a typical case
Routine haematology and biochemistry are performed,
of idiopathic laryngeal paralysis, such as laryngeal col-
to look for concurrent disease in these older patients, in
lapse or overlong soft palate. Others are more likely in
particular concurrent endocrinopathies. It was once
the age and breeds that are affected, but are very rare:
thought that hypothyroidism may be a direct cause of
laryngeal tumours and pharyngeal wall salivary muco-
laryngeal paralysis, but it is now thought these two
celes, for example.
conditions may occur independently in the same indi-
Other diagnostic tests are not commonly performed,
viduals. If suspected, a T4/TSH assay may be useful.
but may be useful in some individuals. For example, a
Conscious orthogonal view thoracic radiographs
broncho-alveolar lavage for cytology and culture and
should be obtained. Conscious radiographs are initially
sensitivity may be useful if there is an aspiration pneu-
taken to attempt to rule out megaoesophagus, as the
monia; further imaging such as ultrasound or CT scan
presence of air in the oesophagus of an anaesthetized
may be required if neoplasia is suspected (along with
animal is a normal finding. A contrast oesophagram is
biopsy where appropriate); electromyography and
indicated if there is a strong suspicion of oesophageal
muscle biopsies for the thorough evaluation of an under-
dysfunction from the patient's history. These films should
lying neuropathy.
be studied carefully to ensure that there are no masses
interfering with the path of the recurrent laryngeal
TREATMENT
nerve, and that there is no concurrent aspiration
pneumonia.
Specific treatment for the underlying neuropathy in idio.
Final diagnosis is by laryngoscopy under a light plane
pathic laryngeal paralysis does not exist, but examination
of anaesthesia; propofol is commonly used to achieve
by a neurologist should be encouraged. If there are
this after light pre-medication. This final step of diagno-
neurological deficits in the limbs, non-specific adjunctive
sis is best performed immediately before surgical treat-
treatments can be recommended. These are often aimed
ment, to avoid additional anaesthetic risk to the patient.
at increasing the remaining muscle bulk as much as pos-
The vocal folds in the normal animal should be vigor-
sible to increase strength, such as swimming or regular
ously abducted by the movement of the arytenoid car-
moderate walks. Gentle physiotherapy (such as moving
tilages on every inspiration, and should return to the
 joints through their range of motion and muscle massage
resting state on every expiration. In dogs with laryngeal
to increase blood flow) may be helpful. Therapy that may
paralysis, they will usually hang in the resting state
help concurrent orthopaedic disease is useful, such as
without moving, although they may move ‘paradoxi-
weight loss, analgesics and joint remedies.
cally' by being drawn inwards (towards the midline) by
Pharyngeal and/or  oesophageal  dysfunction does
the negative pressure of inspiration. The vocal folds are
carry a guarded prognosis, as aspiration pneumonia can
 often inflamed and slightly swollen in cases of laryngeal
result. Affected dogs seem to cope better with tinned-
paralysis.
consistency food, rather than dry or liquid food. Dogs
The disease is usually bilateral by the time of diagno-
with oesophageal disease may benefit from being fed
sis, but unilateral disease may be detected in early cases
from a height and being held upright after feeding.
when slightly increased laryngeal noise without exercise
Aspiration pneumonia should be treated with a pro-
intolerance may be present. Surgery is not indicated at
longed (>4 week) course of antibiotics, that are ideally
this stage, as exercise intolerance is the principle clinical
chosen on the basis of culture and sensitivity results from
sign we wish to improve with surgery (see below).
a broncho-alveolar lavage. The most severely affected
False positives on laryngoscopy are common, espe-
dogs require hospitalization for supportive care, intrave-
cially if the plane of anaesthesia is too deep (the animal
35 Coughing
155
to treatment is based on resolution of clinical signs and
improvement of radiographic changes. Many dogs,
however, continue with a low level of disease that can
never be completely eliminated (presumably due to
ongoing aspiration) which is why the prognosis is
guarded.
The treatment of choice for exercise intolerance,
siseed jeabuel Aq pasne adoouss pue sisoue aaas
is currently a left arytenoid lateralization (laryngeal tie-
back'). This permanently abducts the arytenoid cartilage
and therefore the vocal fold, and thereby increases the
size of the rima glottidis. This is a technically difficult
procedure that has a high complication rate and so refer-
ral to a surgeon experienced in this procedure is
recommended.
 After laryngoscopy to confirm the diagnosis and any
additional tests such as chest radiography, the animal is
Figure 35.1 A mattress suture of polypropylene has been
positioned in right lateral recumbency. The left lateral
passed through the muscular process of the arytenoid
neck and laryngeal region are clipped and prepared for
led jepnen aul yhnoiun uaul pue (moe subies) abee
aseptic surgery. A sandbag placed under the neck can
of the thyroid cartilage (curved arrow).
help elevate the larynx and make the dissection easier.
The skin is incised just ventral to the jugular vein; dissec-
tion through the soft tissues reveals the thyropharyngeus
has healed. Limb function can occasionally be worsened
muscle that is then split. The muscular process of the
by surgery, presumably as a result of prolonged recum-
arytenoid is identified, and is mobilized. The degree of
bency exacerbating concurrent joint disease. These dogs
mobilization is critical to the success of the surgery and
should be encouraged to ambulate as soon as possible
requires considerable experience. The arytenoid is then
after surgery to avoid this complication.
sutured   with non-absorbable monofilament  suture
It is imperative that dogs are thoroughly screened
material to either the thyroid or the cricoid, depending
before surgery, to ensure that only patients that will
on surgeon preference (Fig. 35.1).
benefit from surgery are selected. For example, if the
The muscular process is rotated externally and cau-
predominant cdlinical  sign is  coughing  and difficulty
dally as the suture is tightened, thereby increasing the
rising, it is possible that surgery will not benefit the
rima glottidis diameter. Closure is routine, but particular
animal. This may change, however, as the disease pro-
care must be taken to accurately close the thyropharyn-
 gresses and so the animal should be re-examined regu-
 geus muscle, as this is an important pharyngeal constric-
larly to assess its ability to move air through the larynx.
tor and is vital for deglutition.
If there is considerable cyanosis and exercise intolerance,
The aim of surgery is to improve ventilation, and so
along with coughing and pelvic limb weakness (for
exercise intolerance and syncope will be greatly improved
example), surgery is still indicated but a more guarded
in most animals after surgery. Surgery will not however
prognosis should be given.
help many of the other clinical signs that may be associ-
ated with this disease, such as coughing, increased respi-
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
ratory noise, dysphagia, pelvic limb weakness and so on.
In fact, surgery may temporarily worsen the ability to
1. Monitor postoperatively to ensure the animal is able
Swallow, as incision through the thyropharyngeus muscle
to breathe normally. This aspect is usually improved
is required. Healing of this muscle should occur over a
compared with before surgery however, if the
period of several weeks. Thyropharyngeus disruption is
 surgeon is experienced.
one of the main reasons the author does not recom-
 2. Postoperative antibiotics are required if the pharyn-
mend bilateral arytenoid lateralization, or if surgery on
geal mucosa is inadvertently  perforated  during
the first side fails, surgery on the right side should be
surgery, or if there is concurrent aspiration pneumo-
delayed if possible until the left thyropharyngeus muscle
nia present (see earlier)
156
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
3. Analgesia - opioids for 24-48 hr are mandatory,
along with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (if
not contraindicated).
 4. Barking should be discouraged, and so some dogs
should be discharged home sooner than is ideal if
they cannot be kept quiet.
5. Tinned consistency food should be fed, when the
animal has fully recovered from the surgery.
6. Exercise should be limited for 4 weeks after surgery
CASE EXAMPLE
A 12-year-old male golden retriever.
CLINICAL HISTORY
Figure 35.2 Appearance at the time of presentation. Note
the temporal and pelvic limb muscle atrophy and mild
This dog was presented with an acute onset cough and
cyanosis.
lethargy. Appetite had been reduced for the previous
 24 hr and the exercise ability had reduced over the previ-
ous 6 months.
Although the dog had slowed down a bit over the
previous few months, he was still very lively and could
easily manage walks of over half an hour. No cyanosis
or episodes of syncope had occurred. The cough had
started 3 days earlier, and was increasing in frequency.
The owner mentioned that for several months the dog
had coughed a little while eating and drinking and
was a little slow on rising. There was no history of
regurgitation.
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
On examination, mild pyrexia (39.4°C) with increased
respiratory stridor (predominantly inspiratory) centred
 Figure 35.3 Alveolar pattern in the cranial lung lobe
over the larynx was found. The dog was panting in the
consistent with the presence of aspiration pneumonia
consulting room, but he was able to ventilate reasonably
well. There was mild cyanosis. He had marked temporal
musdle atrophy and mild pelvic limb weakness and
performed, which was negative on bacterial culture, but
musdle atrophy which might have been related to a
showed increased numbers of neutrophils (Fig. 35.3).
generalized neuropathy (Fig. 35.2)
DIAGNOSIS
CASE WORK-UP
A diagnosis of laryngeal paralysis was made and so he
Haematology  and biochemistry  were unremarkable.
was referred for surgery.
Chest radiographs were taken under general anaesthe-
sia, and showed a marked alveolar pattern in the cranio-
TREATMENT
ventral lung fields These changes were consistent with
an aspiration pneumonia. There was a small amount of
In this case, surgery was inappropriate at the time of
air in the oesophagus, but consistent with a normal
presentation, as the acute worsening of clinical signs
anaesthetized animal. A broncho-alveolar lavage was
was related to the presence of an aspiration pneumonia.
35 Coughing157
Treatment was initiated with intravenous fluid therapy
 cated at this stage. Follow-up appointments were made
and  intravenous  antibiotics  (amoxicillin-clavulanate
 at the referral centre, as progression of the laryngeal
20 mg/kg TID and metronidazole 10 mg/kg BID). He
 signs is likely. In these cases, tie-back surgery should only
made a rapid improvement: his cyanosis improved and 
 be performed when absolutely necessary, as surgery may
his appetite returned to normal. He was discharged
increase the likelihood of aspiration.
with a 4-week course of oral antibiotics (amoxicillin-
clavulanate 21.4 mg/kg BID and metronidazole 11.4 mg/
PROGNOSIS
kg BID). Follow-up radiographs to monitor progression
were taken every 4 weeks initially and then every 2-3
A guarded prognosis was given for the complete resolu-
months at the referring vet.
tion of the aspiration pneumonia, but if laryngeal func-
The amount of respiratory compromise shown by the
 tion deteriorates and signs of cyanosis develop, laryngeal
dog meant that laryngeal tie-back surgery was not indi-
 tie-back surgery is still indicated
36
Change in voice and
swallowing
INTRODUCTION
(e.g. myasthenia gravis or polyradiculoneuritis) is gener-
ally accompanied by non-ambulatory tetraparesis or
Dysphagia
tetraplegia.
A difficulty or inability to swallow is called dysphagia and
Airflow through the larynx is impeded by paralysis of
it presents as: gagging, retching, choking, extending or
the dorsal cricoarytenoid muscle. This muscle, innervated 
flexing the neck during swallowing, repeated attempts
by a branch of the vagus nerve (CN X), functions as chief 
to swallow, coughing when eating or drinking, nasal
abductor of the paired vocal folds and arytenoid carti-
discharge, and pseudo-ptyalism.
lages which together create the glottis, the cranial
Swallowing (degfutition) is initiated by sensory infor-
opening of the larynx. Narrowing of the airflow creates
mation from the oral cavity (CN V), pharynx (CN IX) and
stridor, dysphonia, and most importantly, inspiratory
epiglottis (CN X).
dyspnoea. Obstruction of the upper airway by nasopha-
Food, voluntarily pushed to the pharynx by the mas-
ryngeal polyps or a long soft palate creates a turbulent
ticatory muscles (CN V), the palatine muscles (CN V), and
airflow and loud, stertorous respiration (e.g. snoring or
caudal tongue movement (CN Xll), stimulates the reflex
 snorting) but rarely results in dyspnoea.
which is coordinated by the swallowing centre within
Presentation is prompted by dyspnoea, whereas spe-
the medulla oblongata
cific questioning of the owner is usually required to
Cessation of respiration and closure of the glottis (CN
discover changes in the pet's vocalization.
X) is synchronized with contraction of the pharyngeal
Inability to close the glottis risks aspiration of pharyn-
musdles (CNN IX, X) to avoid aspiration
geal contents (saliva, food and water). The chief
Folding of the epiglottis over the glottis is achieved
laryngeal adductor is the thyroarytenoid muscle, also
 by contraction of the geniohyoideus (CN XIl) and mylo-
innervated by the vagus. Coughing and gagging while
hyoideus (CN V) muscles, pulling the larynx forward
eating and drinking is a reflex protective of the airways.
 An inability to swallow saliva causes drooling (pseudo-
 Sensation to laryngeal mucosa is supplied by the internal
ptyalism). Oral dysphagia is the inability to prehend food
branch of the cranial laryngeal nerve, a division of CN X.
and form a bolus.
Unilateral laryngeal paralysis would be noticed in ath-
letic, working animals during exercise, but as most pets
Voice production
are relatively sedentary it takes bilateral paralysis to
Laryngeal paralysis can present with the following signs:
produce clinical signs.
an altered volume, pitch or character of voice (dyspho-
 Concomitant signs of aspiration pneumonia may be
nia), lack of voice (aphonia), inspiratory dyspnoea, sono-
present: fever, tachypnoea, cough or anorexia. Severely
rous respiration, high-pitched wheezing sound (stridor),
dyspnoeic animals choose to breathe rather than eat as
gagging or coughing when eating or exercise intoler-
to do both simultaneously would be impossible
ance with or without collapse.
Increased muscle tone in myotonia congenita pro-
Voice is generated by air passing through the larynx.
duces stridorous breathing and a high-pitched bark
Alteration of this process changes voice quality. An
along with the generalized appendicular muscle stiff-
inability to create and expel a thoracic reservoir of air
 ness. Dyspnoea and cyanosis have been reported during
results in hypophonia (quiet voice) or aphonia. Weakness
the increased muscular effort of whelping, or a sudden
or paralysis of the respiratory muscles from UMN lesions
change of posture. Laryngospasm is a complication of
(e.g. C1-5 spinal cord disease or tetanus), or LMN origin
tetanus.
158
36 Change in voice and swallowing
159
SIGNALMENT
CASE WORK-UP
A 7-year-old male miniature schnauzer.
Serology was negative for Toxoplasma, Neosporum
caninum and Borreliosis.
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
(13-52), TSH 0.13 ng/ml (<0.41).
A hoarse bark, difficulty eating, drooling, retching,
Muscle enzymes were elevated at: AST 306, CK 1082,
gagging.
ALT 224.
EMG; spontaneous potentials in the right trapezius,
supraspinatus, infraspinatus, carpal flexors, masseter and
CASE HISTORY
temporalis muscles.
Signs progressively appeared over 3 weeks, beginning
CSF: (25/5/03); total protein 0.57 g/l, WBC = 1,
with drooling from the right side of the mouth, retching
RBC = O. Cytology: a few reactive lymphocytes.
and gagging and spending a long time drinking. A
CSF: (4/6/03): total protein 1.88 q/l; WBC = 60;
high-pitched hoarse bark occurred 1 week later. Right
RBC = 1. Cytology: 85% large atypical cells consistent
Horner's syndrome, atrophy of right masticatory muscles,
with neoplasia. These resembled lymphocytes or histio-
right forelimb lameness and intermittent neck pain were
cytes.
reported the following week.
MRI showed severe muscle atrophy of the right tempo-
ralis, digastricus, masseter, pterygoid muscles which were
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
hyperintense due to fat infiltration. It also showed a
small discrete enhancing nodule in the approximate
Clinical examination revealed an alert ambulatory dog
with right fore lameness. Hopping was normal in all
region of the trigeminal nerve where it emerges from
limbs. The right forelimb placing response was reduced.
the trigeminal canal (Fig. 36.1). There was a similar
The right supraspinatus and infraspinatus muscles were
structure on left but it was much smaller. The right
atrophied. Muscle tone was reduced in the right fore-
tympanic bulla was half-full of fluid.
limb. Ptosis, miosis and enophthalmos of the right eye
with protrusion of the third eyelid were present. Sensa-
tion to the right nostril and right upper lip was reduced.
Atrophy of the right temporalis and masseter muscles
was present. Jaw tone was reduced. The gag reflex was
decreased. There was slight atrophy of the right side of
the tongue. Saliva drooled from the right side of the
mouth.
1.6
154Moy
NEUROANATOMICAL LOCALIZATION
Right CN V (M&S), CNN IX, X, and Xll. LMN signs to right
fore (brachial plexus or nerves). History of neck pain
(meninges; cord; vertebrae or discs). Lame right forelimb
(nerve compression or inflammation or neoplasia). A
multifocal disease affecting peripheral and cranial nerves
was suspected. LMN changes to the right fore and the
right Horner's syndrome can be caused by a lesion within
the ipsilateral brachial plexus or nerve roots.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Figure 36.1 Transverse T1Wl+C: atrophy of right
● Ganglioradiculoneuritis
 masticatory muscles and enlargement of the right
● Neoplastic infiltration of nerves.
 trigeminal nerve.
160
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
DIAGNOSIS
TREATMENT
Focal enlargement of the right trigeminal nerve
The vet discussed chemotherapy for suspected lym-
with  multifocal  nerve  involvement,  possibly  with
phoma but the owner declined and the dog was
lymphoma.
euthanized.
SECTION
GAIT
Chapter 37
Gait - an introduction
163
Chapter 38
UMN: spinal empyema
167
Chapter 39
UMN: spinal cord infarction 
171
Chapter 40
UMN: vertebral malformation
174
Chapter 41
UMN: intervertebral disc disease
177
Chapter 42
UMN: spinal fracture
181
Chapter 43
LMN paresis and paralysis - an introduction 
184
Chapter 44
LMN paresis and paralysis: acquired myasthenia gravis
186
Chapter 45
LMN paresis and paralysis: brachial plexus avulsion
194
Chapter 46
LMN paresis and paralysis: flaccid tail
196
Chapter 47
 Ataxia: spinal ataxia
199
Chapter 48
 Ataxia: cerebellar ataxia
205
Chapter 49
Ataxia: vestibular ataxia
208
This page intentionally left blank
37
Gait - an introduction
Weakness (paresis) or paralysis, ataxia, and lameness are
DEFINITIONS
the most commonly observed alterations in gait.
The onimat is described a5:
● Tetraplegic or quadriplegic: paralysed in all four limbs 
● Non-ambulatory tetraparetic: weak in all four limbs.
PARALYSIS AND PARESIS
Able to move all limbs but unable to stand and walk
Paralysis is the absence of voluntary movement.
unaided
● Ambulatory tetraparetic: weak in all four limbs but
Paresis is reduced voluntary movement.
able to walk unaided
● Hemiplegic: paralysed in the forelimb and hindlimb of
one side
Paresis may manifest a5:
● Hemiparetic: weak in the forelimb and hindlimb of
● Difficulty rising from sitting
one side
●Not moving
● Paraplegic: hindlimb paralysis
● Collapse, falling 
● Paraparetic: hindlimb weakness
● Unable or unwilling to exercise.
● Monoplegic: weakness of one limb. Usually described
● Unable to jump into the car, go up stairs or climb
by stating which limb is affected and how badly, e.g.
 onto furniture
paralysis of the right forelimb or weakness of the left
● Unable to support self on one hind limb while
hindlimb.
urinating
CLINICAL TIP
● Unable to maintain a squatting position to urinate/
defecate
Do not forget that weakness or paralysis may
●Slow moving or shuffling gait
also occur in other parts of the body causing
● Dragging/scuffing/scraping/abrading the dorsum of
dysphagia, regurgitation, dysphonia, absent blink,
the paw on the ground 
inspiratory dyspnoea, inability to prehend or
● Dragging self using forelimbs alone
altered neck posture. Always check the history and
● Decreased limb extension: plantigrade stance, crouch-
the cranial nerve function.
ing gait
● Increased limb extension (stiff or stilted) with short
LOCALIZATION
steps followed by collapse
● Synchronous use of both hindlimbs (bunny hopping).
A chain of synapsing neurons is called a pathway. A
pathway in the CNS may be known as a tract, fasciculus,
Some of these descriptions also apply to animals with
 peduncie, or lemniscus. Small bundles of neurons in the
orthopaedic disease causing lameness.
 PNS are called fascicles which combine to create nerves.
The affected limbs are discovered by observation
Descending tracts from the brain transmit the impulses
and by provoking movement with postural reaction
which make the animal move. The impulses gain access
testing.
to the musdles via nerves.
163
164
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
● Damage to the descending pathways causes paresis/
paralysis
314
● Damage to the nerves causes paresis/paralysis
● Damage to the connection between nerves and
 muscles, the neuromuscular junction, causes paresis/
LMN
LMN
paralysis
A)
)Tetraparesis, ataxia of all four limbs, increased spinal reflexes
ueut lauel sisaed asnen oi spual apsnw ot abewea ●
and muscle tone
paralysis.
CLINICAL TIP
L3L4
C5C6
T23
S
Most damage to the cerebrum does not cause
obvious paresis or paralysis. Such animals walk
LMN
LMN
with a normal gait. Postural reactions can detect a
subtle paresis.
B
)Paraparesis with increased spinal reflexes and muscle tone in
the hindlimbs (normal forelimb function)
Differentiating the cause of paralysis requires examina-
T2T3
3L4
tion of the limb's nerve function: musdle tone and
C5C6
reflexes. If the tone and the reflexes are intact, present,
normal (2+) or increased (3+,4+) on examination it
LMN
means that those nerves, and the spinal cord segments
LMN
 of their origin, are functioning and are not responsible
）Paraparesis with decreased spinal reflexes and muscle tone in
for the weakness or paralysis.
the hindlimbs (normal forelimb function)
Fantastic! A functioning reflex arc means a whole
Figure 37.1 Motor deficits in spinal cord lesions.
chunk of the nervous system works! The cause of the
weakness therefore lies in the descending tracts cranial
In anatomical terms, the engine is known as the
to the weak or paralysed limb.
upper motor neuron (UMN) and the wheels as the lower
But...if the tone and reflexes are reduced (1+) or
motor neuron (LMN).
absent (O) on examination it means that those reflex arcs
UMN and LMN are used as adjectives when describing
do not work and somewhere in that reflex pathway is
paresis and paralysis.
to be found the lesion causing weak or paralysed limbs
(Fig. 37.1) (see p 20, Table 2.3).
CLINICAL TIP
Review the technique on examination of reflexes.
CLINICAL TIPS
 Practise at every opportunity to gain insight into
normal variation.
Muscle atrophy occurs with denervation and
with disuse.
Monitoring progression of spinal cord disease requires
Disuse atrophy is generalized and takes weeks
to appear.
assessment of voluntary movement AND the spinal
Denervation atrophy is limited to the muscles
reflexes.
supplied and is usually severe, occurring
Imagine the common scenario of an acute severe
within days.
thoracolumbar spinal cord lesion from trauma or inter-
vertebral disc disease (IVDD). The animal initially presents
with hindlimb paralysis and increased hindlimb reflexes.
Imagine the motor control of the animal as a car, with
Several days later the hindlimbs become flaccid and
the descending tracts being the engine. The nerves,
 areflexic. What presented as a UMN lesion now appears
neuromuscular junction (NMl) and muscle are the
to be a LMN lesion! Why would this be? Has the animal
wheels. If the wheels are removed, the engine can rev
suddenly got tick paralysis? Have the peripheral nerves
as long as it wants but the car will not move.
been damaged by avulsion of the original trauma?
37 Gait - an introduction
165
No. Always consider that there may be one cause for
these animals have survived and transmit impulses from
all the signs. What has happened is that the original
the brainstem locomotor region. As few as 5-10% of
insult to the T3-L3 spinal cord has induced myelomala-
the descending axons are sufficient to drive the local
cia. This destructive process has extended caudally along
circuits producing basic locomotion in cats and rats. The
the spinal cord, destroying the cord segments containing
gait is rhythmic but not coordinated with the forelimbs.
hindlimb reflex arcs. The animal still has the original
lesion to the descending tracts, but once the reflex arcs
ASSESSING THE SEVERITY OF PARALYSIS
are destroyed the limb becomes flaccid and areflexic.
Spinal cord lesions are the most common cause of
Remember the car: if the wheels are removed, the car
 paralysis in small animals.
will have LMN paralysis. The LMN paralysis will be the
Cerebral lesions generally cause only subtle gait
overwhelming clinical presentation
change and are accompanied by other signs such as
behaviour change, alteration of mental state or seizures.
CLINICAL TIP
Brainstem lesions can result in significant gait change
The secret of localization is to view the process as
but are generally also accompanied by cranial nerve
a jigsaw. View all pieces in relation to each other
dysfunction and altered mental alertness.
 to get the whole picture (of health or
The spinal cord contains ascending and descending
dysfunction).
tracts which show clinical deficits in the following order:
1. Ascending tracts: proprioception: most susceptible:
ataxia proprioceptive deficits are commonly the first
IPSILATERAL OR CONTRALATERAL
abnormality.
To the lesion?
 2. Descending tracts: motor: paresis/paralysis
 3. Ascending tracts: pain perception: least susceptible:
The descending motor tracts originate in various parts
analgesia.
of the brain. If the pathways are damaged ABOVE the
red nucleus in the midbrain the weakness/paralysis will
In a lesion which slowly develops, the most susceptible
be CONTRALATERAL to the lesion.
tracts will be affected first so the signs will be ataxia ±
If the lesion is BELOw the red nucleus, the weakness/
 paresis. In a rapidly developing lesion the signs will prog-
 paralysis will be IPSILATERAL to the lesion.
ress through ataxia to paresis then paralysis in a short
period of time. In many cases the rapid onset lesion will
quickly produce paralysis with no progression of dys-
VARIATIONS
function being noted by the owner.
● Giant and large breed dogs with C1-5 spinal cord
Spinal cord lesions are graded based on the level of
 segment lesions can present with UMN hindlimb
dysfunction exhibited (Table 37.1). Grade 4 can be
paresis and ataxia
further defined with statements about urinary conti-
● Large breed dogs with caudal cervical cord C6-T2
nence or incontinence. Incontinence in pets affects the
lesions may not show obvious LMN signs to the
quality of life of the owner and hence the animal's
forelimbs.
longevity.
Another grading system, the modified Frankel score,
'Spinal walking'
uses the opposite ranking with paralysis (0) and normal
Stretch reflexes become hyperactive after spinal cord
strength and coordination (5).
transection. This gives rise to a positive supporting reac-
tion induced by pressing on the pads of such an animal.
The limb extends, following the point of pressure as it is
Table 37.1 Grading morbidity of spinal cord lesions
withdrawn. This explains why paralysed animals can
Grade
Dysfunction
stand.
Pattern generators exist in the spinal cord and are the
Neurologically normal
basis for 'spinal walking'. Automatic, hindlimb reflex
Ataxia, ambulatory paresis
Non-ambulatory paresis
walking can commence weeks to months after a severe
 Paralysis, pain perception present
T3-L3 spinal cord lesion (Grade 5). The cord transection
Paralysis, no pain perception
appears functionally complete but tract remnants in
166
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
CLINICAL TIP
ill animals being included in a study than would normally
 appear in a general practice population.
In cases of acute spinal cord disease, if the animal
A pragmatic assessment would invoke the famous
can walk, it can feel pain in those limbs.
physics thought experiment known as Schroedinger's
Cat. All outcomes are possible until the result is known.
The term 'good prognosis' is as subjective as the term
It is always worth repeating the maxim that flexion of
'seizure control'. Scientific papers define these terms but
the limb in response to pinching is an involuntary REFLEX
interpretation varies between papers. Pet owners do not
action. It does NoT measure an animal's ability to per-
read veterinary journals and have their own priorities and
ceive pain.
goals which the clinician must discover.
 A grading system similar to the Karnofsky scale (Table
PROGNOSIS FOR RECOVERY
37.2) for disability may be useful in quantifying disability
(and quality of life) in animals.
Prognosis for a patient to return to normal ambulation
is determined by a combination of:
1. Grade of dysfunction
2. Duration of clinical signs.
Generally speaking, the more severe the deficit (grade 5
vs. grade 1), the more guarded the prognosis. 'Guarded"
Table 37.2 Karnofsky scale for disability grading (modified)
means ‘a cautious appraisal' of the animal's chances of
(%)
Human
Cat/dog
achieving a defined goal. It is the scientific equivalent of
'sitting on the fence'. The term 'grave prognosis' indi-
100
Normal
Normal
cates that one should 'hope for the best but prepare for
90
 Minor signs, normal
Minor signs. Remains 
activities
 playful, active
the worst'.
80
Normal life possible
Reduced activity
When giving an opinion of prognosis make it clear to
with effort
which goals you are referring. Owners usually want to
70
Cares for self
Ambulatory paresisf
know a time frame in which this improvement will occur,
ataxia, eats, drinks,
e.g. 'there is a good prognosis for return of urinary
normal urination and
defecation. Grooms
continence and this is expected to happen within 2-3
60
Cares for self with
Uses ramps or is carried
weeks with the current treatment', e.g. 'there is an
 occasional assistance
up steps. Cannot
excellent prognosis for return of ambulation within 2
dimb. Harness or
weeks but normal strength and coordination will take
sing walks to support 
body weight. Falls 
longer, perhaps up to several months'.
50
Requires frequent care
Cannot walk unaided.
What is a 'good' prognosis?
 and considerable 
Cannot urinate
assistance
unaided. May use a
Owners commonly ask for percentage success rates or
K9 cart 
survival times for different treatment methods. Journals
40
Disabled, requires
 Paralysed. Incontinent.
special care at home
Needs hand-feeding.
quote these numbers for a group of afflicted animals,
 Frequent turning and 
e.g. the most common length of time for recovery in
bathing
animals with disease X is ... days/months. Look at the
30
Severely disabled,
No independent 
details and note that for some, the time is shorter and
 hospitalized 
 activity. Can ventilate
for other animals, the time is longer. Individual variation
20
Very sick, hospitalized
No independent
exists. The owner can only be offered an estimate of
activity. Side-effects
of disability, e.g.
success or longevity.
 aspiration pneumonia,
Also be aware that the published case studies repre-
 hypoventilation
sent treatment by clinicians who may have more exper-
10
Moribund
Moribund 
tise or better nursing facilities so that the published
Wote: this scale represents a suggested method of
success rates may be higher than those attainable in
other practices. Equally, the articles may represent a
quantifying ability in small animals but its utility remains
unproven. After Karnosfsky et al 1984 Cancer 1:634.
biased case selection, with a larger number of seriously
38
UMN: spinal empyema
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Inflammation of the spinal cord and its meningeal covering presents as ataxia, paresis and spinal
pain along with less specific signs of lethargy, fever (37-39.5?C) and anorexia.
INTRODUCTION
or absence of clinical disease caused by the
 organism.
Focal spinal cord disease is an uncommon presentation
● PCR on CSF.
of inflammatory CNs disease. Any segment is at risk but
inflammation of the cervical cord is most often reported.
Dogs less than 3 years old and hound and toy breeds
SIGNALMENT
are most at risk of developing meningomyelitis. The
A 1-year-old male English bulldog.
onset of signs is highly variable, lasting days to over 1
week. Improvement without treatment is unusual.
The diagnosis of meningomyelitis is made by:
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
● CSF sample: increase the diagnostic yield by sampling
Unwilling or unable to walk. In pain.
both cranial and caudal to the localized lesion. Pleo-
cytosis is found in the majority of cases. Tissue inflam-
mation occurs to some degree in other conditions
CASE HISTORY
such as compression, infarction, and neoplasia. The 
The dog had been painful for 2 days, pacing, vocalizing
general trend is that inflammatory CNs disease has
and crying when moved or when the neck was touched,
greater pleocytosis than other conditions. Variation
before becoming recumbent and depressed. Tempera-
prevents this being a cast iron rule
d s  (2 )   
● MRl: may be normal. Contrast enhancement of 
to becoming unwell, the dog had been bitten on the left
parenchyma and/or the meninges is highly suggestive
ear. The wound had healed with time, cleaning and
of the condition. The cord may be swollen
antibiotics.
● Myelogram: thought to be contraindicated in inflam-
matory disease because of the risk of contrast agent
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
worsening the inflammation. Contraindicated  in
known inflammatory CNS disease as it adds nothing
The dog was quiet and lay in sternal recumbency. When
to the diagnosis or the treatment. It is used in an
held up, the dog neither cried nor attempted to move.
emergency only if the chief differential is a suspected
Hopping and proprioceptive testing were negative in all
extradural lesion requiring surgery. May be normal or
limbs. When placed in lateral recumbency the dog could
show an intramedullary pattern.
right itself slowly. Spinal reflexes  were normal  in all
● Serology: positive titres indicate exposure to an
limbs. CNN were normal. The neck muscles were tense
organism but do not necessarily indicate the presence
and resisted flexion.
167
168
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
CLINICAL TIP
 Inflammatory disease usually causes multifocal
 neurological signs, so recheck often for the
development of other neurological deficits.
NEUROANATOMICAL LOCALIZATION
The lesion was localized to the cervical spinal cord seg-
Figure 38.1 Sagittal T1Wl and T1W/+C. Dorsal
ments C1-5.
compression of the cord at the level of the atlas.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
● Discospondylitis
● Haemorrhage or inflammatory disease were consid-
ered most likely in a dog of this age with pain and
fever
DIAGNOSIS
● Vertebral malformation with or without a cord mal-
Acute cellulitis, secondary to a foreign body or an
formation was a possibility.
infected dermoid cyst. Haematogenous spread was pos-
sible given the previous bite wound.
CASE WORK-UP
Spinal epidural empyema, the collection of pus in the
Haematology showed a monocytosis of 2.09 (range
extradural space, is rare in small animals. The most
0.2-0.72 × 109/l). There was a mild elevation of muscle
common presenting signs are spinal pain, fever and
enzymes: AST 150(N = 0-45 IU/l), ALT 403(0-40 IU/l),
rapidly worsening weakness. Leukocytosis and neutro-
CK 455(0-400 IU/l),
philia are common. Raised total protein and nudleated
The buccal mucosal bleeding time was 2 minutes and
cell count in the CSF are also reported. Extradural com-
30 seconds (normal <4 minutes). The PT was 15 seconds
pression of the cord may be focal or multifocal, with
(12-17) and APPT 94 seconds (71-102)
T3-L3 segments being the most commonly affected. The
Toxoplasma and Neospora titres were negative.
highest yield of positive cultures is obtained from the
MRl of the cervical spine found contrast-enhance
surgical site or blood culture. Any breed or age of dog
ment of the epaxial muscles at the level of the C1 and 
may be affected. MRl characteristics of the epidural
C2 vertebrae, extending between C1-2 and compress-
empyema are those of inflammation and oedema:
ing the spinal cord dorsally (Fig. 38.1). Contrast-enhance-
ment of the meninges was present. Discospondylitis of
C1 was suspected.
represent haemorrhage, which can be visualized as
CSF was not collected from the cisterna magna as it
would have meant pushing the needle through the area
A dermoid sinus is created from an incomplete sepa-
of pathology. CSF could have been collected from the
ration of the neural tube and skin on the dorsal midline,
lumbar site but was not
forming a tube-like tract lined with hair follicles and
A dorsal surgical approach was made and soft beige
glands. The sinus opening is small and marked by a tuft
coloured material was found dorsal to the arch of C1.
of fur. When infected the sinus is painful and may cause
This was debulked. Histopathology found myositis with
neurological deficits appropriate to the location(s) in the
oedema and fibrosis. The inflammatory cells were a
cervical, cranial thoracic or sacrococcygeal regions. They
mixed population. No infective organisms or foreign
may be located at either end of the dorsal ridge in
bodies were found. A very heavy growth of beta hae-
Rhodesian ridgebacks, and have been reported in small
molytic Streptococcus sp was cultured from the tissue
breed and other large breed dogs. Treatment is surgical
biopsies and was sensitive to amoxicillin/dlavulanic acid.
excision.
38 UMN: spinal empyema
169
TREATMENT
extending around the brainstem. Affected animals do
not consistently show signs of meningitis. A typical
Decompression of the spinal cord was not performed at
history would be chronic otitis externa with a sudden
the same time as surgical biopsy due to the extensive
onset of neurological signs (peripheral vestibular disease
material around the cord, and the potential to worsen
with or without facial paralysis and Horner's syndrome)
the neurological condition due to cord trauma or spinal
localized to the middle and inner ear. Ipsilateral paresis
destabilization. The dog rapidly improved on IV antibiot-
and proprioceptive deficits are uncommon. Bulla oste-
ics postoperatively and became ambulatory within days.
otomy and systemic antibiotics resolve the extension to
Pain relief was supplied by methadone IM every 4 hours
the brain in most cases.
and could be discontinued soon after antibiotic therapy
Bite wounds penetrating the skull or tail wounds
causing an epidural infection are reported. Surgical
drainage of an abscessed site followed by 6-8 weeks of
FOLLOW-UP
broad-spectrum or culture-specific antibiotics contribute
to an excellent prognosis.
Hindlimb ataxia  and forelimb proprioceptive deficits
Fever is inconsistently present. Approximately half the
were present a week after the operation. These resolved
cases have a peripheral leukocytosis or leukopenia or
within another month while the dog was still receiving
thrombocytopenia. CSF is abnormal in 90% of cases,
antibiotics. Another MRl was planned for 8 weeks after
with degenerate and toxic neutrophils and a raised total
the operation to monitor resolution of the lesions. Had
improvement not been seen, surgical decompression of
tive even in proven bacterial infection. There are no
the cord would have been performed
specific recommendations on how to improve this. Blood
and urine cultures are also diagnostically disappointing.
All are submitted, but treatment is commenced on an
BACTERIAL INFECTION OF THE CNS
empirical basis.
. Gram-negative infections are most
Bacterial meningitis is rare in small animals. They are not
common. Single or multiple organisms may be present
affected by specific bacteria with a predilection for the
(Table 38.1). Intravenous antibiotics are used until
nervous system as occurs in humans.
improvement is seen, usually taking 3-5 days, and are
Extension  from otitis media-interna is reasonably
followed by oral antibiotics until resolution occurs in
common and is visible on MRl as contrast enhancement
approximately2 weeks
Table 38.1 Systemic bacterial infection with CNs involvement
Organism
Neurological signs
Other signs
Diagnosis
Tre atment
Leptospirosis
 Benign meningitis. Rare
Kidney, liver, lung, eye,
IgG/gM
Penicillin, doxycycline
(Leptospira
coagulopathy
Fresh urine-dark field,
(potential zoonosis)
interrogans)
PCR
Borreliosis (Borrelia
Not well documented 
Joint, kidney
Difficult. Antibodies
Doxycycline
burgdorferi)
common, disease
Amoxicillin
uncommon.
 3rd generation
PCR on CSF
cephalosporins
Mycobacteriosis
CNS, occasionally
Skin, lung. GIT, bone,
Acid-fast organisms in
 Euthanasia (potential 
(classic tuberculosis)
eye
tissue or exudates.
zoonosis)
Culture
Listeriosis
Rare
(L. monocytogenes)
 Meningoencephalitis
Brucellosis (8. canis)
Rare
Minimal in neutered 
Antibody
 Difficult. Gentamicin and
Uveitis, meningitis,
animals despite
 Blood culture
minocycline
discospondylitis
chronic bacteremia
(zoonosis)
170
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
Treatment
● Empiricar: high dose IV aminopenicillin (Gram-
1. Antibiotics
positive aerobes and anaerobes, some Gram-
● Empiricar: third generation cephalosporin (Gram-
negative)
negative) with metronidazole (anaerobic)
● Ampicillin 22 mg/kg IV q6 hr.
2. Corticosteroids
● Cefotaxime 25-50 mg/kg IV q8 hr
● Metronidazole 10 mg/kg slow IV q8 hr
Anti-inflammatory dose of prednisolone PO or dexa-
methasone IV. Short term.
39
UMN: spinal cord infarction
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Sudden onset of asymmetrical weakness and proprioceptive deficits.
INTRODUCTION
NEUROANATOMICAL LOCALIZATION
Spinal cord disease may present with either upper motor
The lesion was localized to the cervical spinal cord seg-
neuron (UMN) or lower motor neuron (LMN) signs, or a
ments C1-C5, on the right hand side.
combination of the two, depending on the location of
the lesion.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The sudden onset and strikingly lateralized nature of the
SIGNALMENT 1
signs of this spinal cord disease are very suggestive of
A 2-year, 6-month-old neutered female miniature
spinal  cord  infarction   caused  by  fibrocartilagenous
thromboembolism. Compressive cord disease such as
schnauzer dog.
intervertebral disc disease (IvDD) and neoplasia is less
focal as a general rule and tends to progress. Sudden
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
onset IVDD is usually painful.
Sudden onset of asymmetrical weakness.
CASE WORK-UP
CASE HISTORY
MRl of the cervical cord 4 days after the onset of signs
found an area of hyperintensity on T2wl within the right
This dog began dragging the dorsum of the right hind
side of the spinal cord at the level of the C4-5 vertebrae.
paw. Later the same day the right forelimb started to
CSF was normal, but this may have reflected sampling
collapse when weight-bearing. The dog seemed a little
rostral to the lesion (Fig. 39.1).
depressed but brightened up after pain relief was given
Haematology and biochemistry were normal. Clinical
by the local vet. There had been no prior illness or injury
signs had improved overnight and the animal was ambu-
Jo panodui Anuaiedde nou pey subis aul pauodal
latory with proprioceptive deficits of the right fore and
worsened during the 3 days prior to referral.
hind paws at each step.
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
DIAGNOSIS
The dog was alert and non-ambulatory. When held up,
The diagnosis is based on a combination of factors as
voluntary movement was seen in all limbs. Hopping was
no one factor is diagnostic in itself. The sudden onset,
normal in the left forelimb, slow in the left hind, and
progression, lateralization and improvement, coupled
absent in the right fore and hind limbs. Spinal reflexes
with signal changes on MRl suggestive of intramedullary
were normal to increased in all limbs. Muscle tone was
oedema or tissue necrosis supported the clinical diagno-
increased in all limbs. No spinal pain was elicited.
sis of a fibrocartilagenous thromboembolism.
171
172
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
R
Figure 39.2 L1-2 IvD protrusion with syrinx present
cranially in a dog suspected of having a lesion within the
L7-s1 cord segments.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Figure 39.1 Transverse T2Wwl. Focal hyperintensity within
● Infarction
the right side of the cervical spinal cord
●Haemorrhage
● IVD disease.
SIGNALMENT 2
CASE WORK-UP
A 4-year-old neutered female golden retriever
-a Li aun jo jaal aun ie xuus ews Aan e punoy la
tebra which is not anatomically correct for the clinical
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
signs. No abnormalities were found on blood work or
lumbar CSF (Fig. 39.2).
Sudden onset of asymmetrical weakness with right
Hindlimbmovementreturnedandthedogwas
hemiparesis.
ambulatory on three limbs within 3 weeks with nursing
and hydrotherapy. The left hind improved to an ambula-
CASE HISTORY
tory state but had residual proprioceptive deficits. The
patellar and withdrawal reflexes had all improved.
The qolden retriever was let out into the qarden in the
morning and did not return. The owner found the dog
sitting down, unable to rise but trying to pull itself along
DIAGNOSIS
with the forelimbs. The dog had been out of sight for
less than 5 minutes.
history and the speed of improvement.
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
AETIOPATHOGENESIS
Abnormal findings consisted of a paralysed left hindlimb
Fibrocartilaginous thromboembolism (FcE) is very
 and a non-ambulatory paretic right hindlimb. The patel-
common in medium to large breed dogs aged 1-7 years
lar reflex was present in the left hindlimb and reduced
and presents as a sudden onset paralysis. Signs may
in the right hindlimb. The withdrawal reflex was absent
worsen from paresis to paralysis within 12-24 hours but
in the left hind- and slightly reduced in the right hindlimb,
not beyond. It commonly commences at exercise such
as compared with the forelimb withdrawal reflexes. Pain
as jumping for a ball, getting into the car, or just after
perception was present in both hindlimbs. No spinal pain
being let out into the garden. A sudden cry is often
was found
heard but no further evidence of pain is shown. Many
dogs suddenly rendered paraplegic struggle to sit, and
frantically push away with their fully functional fore-
NEUROANATOMICAL LOCALIZATION
limbs. When examined, the animals generally do not
The lesion was localized to the lumbosacral intumes-
%t heun punoy Apns auo laamoh uid euids mous
cence based on reduced hindlimb reflexes.
of dogs did show spinal pain on examination.
39 UMN: spinal cord infarction 
173
Smaller breed dogs and cats are less commonly
MRl, if available, is useful as it examines the intramedul-
affected but the presentation is the same as for larger
lary region. Images may be normal on standard MRI
dogs.
sequences during the first 48 hours after the onset of
Examination often reveals a striking asymmetry of
signs. Myelography is technically difficult if cord swelling
deficits between the affected limbs. Lesions can occur
is present. CSF changes, when they occur, are not
anywhere along the spinal cord length. Reflexes and
specific.
muscle tone reflect the lesion location except for those
Treatment consists of nursing the recumbent patient.
occurring in the lumbosacral intumescence which can
Corticosteroids are not required and do not alter the
produce an interesting mixture of deficits: the clinical
prognosis. The prognosis is generally excellent with
picture is one of flaccid paraplegia and yet some reflexes
many dogs showing improvement within 2 weeks. Most
are intact. It could be that the non-focal nature of the
return to a functional‘good quality'life.Some 88%of
thromboembolism is more noticeable in an intumes-
non-ambulatory patients regain the ability to walk within
cence. Others have ascribed this melange of reflex
1 month.
changes to spinal shock.
FCEs affecting the lumbosacral intumescence are said
to have a poorer prognosis but improvement is still pos-
Choroctenistics of an FCE
sible. Owners must be prepared for a recovery phase
● Sudden onset
lasting months, during which time hydrotherapy,
● Lack of progression of signs
physiotherapy, bladder and bowel care are required.
●Asymmetry of signs
● Non-painful.
The cause of fibrocartilaginous  material  embolizing
CLINICAL TIP
spinal vasculature is not known. The affected animals
are generally healthy. Investigation is aimed at ruling out
Recurrence is rare. It is not possible to give advice
other causes of acute spinal cord disease:
on prevention as the cause of FCE is not known.
●Haemorrhage
● Thromboembolic disease
● Intervertebral disc disease
● Neoplasia
● Inflammatory disease.
40
UMN:vertebral
malformation
INITIAL PRESENTATION
An acute onset of signs with chronic underlying pathology.
INTRODUCTION
CASE HISTORY
Congenital vertebral malformations are commonly found
The dog had always been clumsy since she was acquired
in neurologically normal dogs. Do not presume a causal
as an 8-week old puppy. She has struggled to rise from
relationship between neurological signs and a vertebral
sitting and has abducted all limbs when walking on tiled
malformation on the basis of non-contrast radiographs.
flooring all her life. No hip disease had been found to
Malformation of the vertebral body rarely causes a
account for this. Three days prior to presentation the
problem.
dog had slipped on a wet tiled floor and fallen, collaps-
A hemivertebra has a wedge-shaped vertebral body
ing to the ground. She was unable to rise, but could
and most commonly occurs in the thoracic or coccygeal
crawl. Two days later she was able to stand and walk
vertebrae of screw-tailed breeds such as pugs and bull-
unaided but had hindlimb ataxia. The dog did not appear
dogs. Adjacent vertebrae alter their shape to conform,
to be in pain.
resulting in scoliosis or kyphosis. Thoracic hemivertebrae
may lack a rib.
Butterfly vertebrae have a cleft in the vertebral body
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
with or without lateral spread of the two halves, and
The dog was slow to rise from sitting but could do
funnel-shaped endplates. They are not clinically signifi-
SO unaided. She showed hindlimb ataxia with the
cant and are most common in the screw-tailed breeds.
right hindlimb circumducting at each step. The forelimbs
Spina bifida is a developmental anomaly with a
had a shortened stride length. Hopping was normal
midline cleft in the dorsal vertebral arch through which
in the forelimbs but slow in the hind, especially the
spinal cord and meninges may penetrate.
right hindlimb. Proprioception  was normal in  the
 Block vertebrae are composed of two or more verte-
forelimbs but slow in the hindlimbs. When standing,
brae fused into one. Bone density is normal. The overall
the dog shifted most of its weight to the forelimbs.
size may be shorter.
Muscle tone was increased in both hindlimbs. Spinal
A transitional vertebra is one occurring at the junction
reflexes were increased in the hind and normal in the
of two regions that takes on the characteristics of the
forelimbs.
arch and articular facets of the adjacent division.
SIGNALMENT 1
NEUROANATOMICAL LOCALIZATION
A 2-year, 6-month-old neutered female English mastiff.
The lesion was localized to the T3-L3 spinal cord or the
cervical spinal cord. Large and giant breed dogs with
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
cervical cord lesions can present with hindlimb UMN
Acute hindlimb paresis.
signs.
174
40 UMN: vertebral malformation
175
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The most severe lesion is decided by the greatest
degree of compression seen on the myelogram but 53%
● Spinal cord compression by vertebral or meningeal
have a poor correlation between the myelographic com-
malformation was considered the most likely given
pression and the severity of the clinical signs
the chronically abnormal gait
A recent study found that restricted activity and use of
● Malformation of the articular facets.
a thoracic harness rather than a neck collar, with or
without the use of corticosteroids gave rise to similar levels
of clinical improvement (70-75%) over the same time
1. 'Wobbler syndrome': cervical
period as surgically treated dogs. Survival times were also
spondylomyelopathy or cervical vertebral
similar between the conservative and surgical groups.
malformation/malarticulation
Surgery has been the mainstay of treatment but
Compression of the cervical spinal cord in large and
serious thought should be given to using a conservative
giant breed dogs commonly presents as hindlimb ataxia
alternative.
with or without paresis. The term Wobbler vividly
describes the ataxia and ‘syndrome' indicates that
2. Spinal subarachnoid cysts (SAC)
there are many potential causes for the lesion. Forelimb
● Scalpel blade-shaped dilations of the subarachnoid
gait may appear normal, hypermetric, or have a
space in cats and dogs are known as subarachnoid
shortened, ‘choppy' stride. As expected from compres-
cysts despite the lack of an epithelial lining. Paresis
sive lesions, manifestations of pain such as a low head
and ataxia progressively worsen over weeks to years
carriage, resistance to neck movement, and a painful
prior to presentation. Most are located in the dorsal
reaction to neck palpation can occur. Tetraplegia is
cervical subarachnoid space between C1-3 vertebrae
unusual.
of Rottweilers less than 1 year old but older dogs, and
Onset of signs is insidious over weeks to months.
smaller breeds are also affected. Neck pain is not
Acute signs follow IV disc extrusion or a further insult
typically present. Thoracic SACs have the same clinical
superimposed onto a chronic lesion. Age of onset varies
behaviour, tend to occur between T11-13 vertebrae,
from breed to breed. Approximately 80% of cases are
and have been reported in the cat. SACs may be
either young Great Danes (<2 years old) or middle-aged
multiple
Doberman pinschers aged 6-8 years with males more
● Intradural extramedullary compression of the cord is
commonly affected than females. Female Borzois have
found on myelography in all cases. Filling of the
been reported with Wobbler syndrome. Compression
defect may be more obvious when in lateral recum-
most commonly occurs at vertebral level C5-6 and C6-7
bancy during a myelogram, than in dorsal recum-
in the Doberman.
bency for MRI.
Anterior stenosis of the vertebra canal at C2-3 and
● Surgical marsupialization is the treatment of choice
C3-4 is reported in young Bassett hounds under 8
shnpe bunon ui awoino poob e sey Aeauah pue
months of age.
with a duration of signs of less than 4 months.
Diagnosis requires imaging. Abnormal angulation
3. Extradural synovial cysts
'slipping', ‘tipping' or 'tilting' of the vertebrae on non-
contrast radiographs can be seen in dogs without cervi-
● Dorsolateral extradural compression of the cervical
calspinalcorddisease andare not considered
spinal cord in young adult male large breed dogs
pathognomonic of Wobbler syndrome. Stenosis cannot
occurs secondary to compression from cystic synovium
 be diagnosed without myelographic proof.
of the adjacent intervertebral articular facet. Signs are
Myelography allows depiction of static and dynamic
ans Aq paaallan aq ew pue (suuow g>) aaissaoid
compression of the spinal cord in various positions. It is
cal removal of the cystic tissue
not an entirely benign procedure so should be reserved
for those cases which have progressively worsening neu-
4. Infarction
rological function or neck pain that does not improve
with cage rest. In one study, 20% of dogs experienced
5. Spinal calcinosis circumscripta
transient neurologically deterioration for 2-3 days after
(cervical tumoral calcinosis)
a myelogram, regardless of the site of injection or the
● Large focal partially mineralized masses between C1
degree of neck manipulation.
and C2 or the cranial thoracic spine are occasionally
176
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
Figure 40.1 Transverse T1wwl (left) and T2W (right).
Figure 40.2 Transverse T1wl through axis. Compression
Lateral compression of the spinal cord.
 of spinal cord.
found in young large breed dogs. Progressive expan-
No medication had been used. There was a poor prog-
sion of the mass causes epidural spinal cord compres-
nosis for reversal or improvement of the chronic ataxia
sion with or without spinal pain
and weakness.
6. Atlantoaxial instability, subluxation,
luxation
FOLLOW-UP
● C1-2 malformation and subsequent subluxation fol-
The dog had improved back to its original state of dis-
lowing trauma is more common in, but not limited
ability by 13 days.
to, toy breed dogs. Congenital agenesis of the dens
has been reported in the rottweiler.
SIGNALMENT 2
A 13-week-old male Airedale puppy.
CASE WORK-UP
MRI of the neck was performed first and lateral compres-
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
sion of the spinal cord by the articular facets was seen
at the level of C7-T1. This was worse on the right side
This puppy had suddenly become non-ambulatory 2
(Fig. 40.1).
days after purchase. The pup did not seem in pain.
MRI of the T3-L3 spinal cord did not detect any
Neurological examination found an alert non-
lesions.
ambulatory tetraparetic dog with absent proprioception
in allimbs, and increased spinal reflexes. The lesion was
DIAGNOSIS
localized to the cervical spinal cord segments C1-5. Mal-
● Vertebral 
malformationwithsecondary
formation of the axis was found (Fig. 40.2). Voluntary
cord
 compression
motor control returned within 2 weeks. Treatment was
● Acute minor trauma on a chronically compromised
0.25 mg/kg prednisolone BID but the animal may have
spinal cord.
improved simply from the passing of time.
The dog remains ambulatory 3 years after first
examination.
PROGNOSIS
The dog was improving quickly following the fall indicat-
ing a good prognosis for resolution of the acute signs.
41
UMN: intervertebral
disc disease
INITIAL PRESENTATION
 Pain
 Proprioception deficits
Paresis/paralysis.
INTRODUCTION
CASE HISTORY
The anulus fibrosis of the intervertebral disc may rupture
The dog suddenly became depressed, lethargic and
or bulge, and compress the adjacent spinal cord, nerve
developed hindlimb ataxia.
root, or both. Normal activity is sufficient to precipitate
MDD in a degenerate disc (Figs 41.1 and 41.2 and see
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
Table 41. 1).
ueo Aaul Aienpeib no Ajuappns inooo Aeu subis
Clinical examination showed a quiet but mentally
resolve with time and rest, or progressively worsen. Pain
responsive ambulatory dog with an arched back, lowered
is a common sign, occurring in 60-70% of affected dogs
head posture, hindlimb ataxia and a shortened stride in
(Table 41 .2).
both forelimbs. While sitting, the dog was seen to
Cats are also affected by spontaneously occurring
knuckle the right fore and not correct this abnormal
Type I disc disease. Type Il is found as an incidental
posture. Hindlimb hopping  was decreased. Spinal
finding at post-mortem. The range of clinical presenta-
reflexes were increased in the hindlimbs and normal in
tions is similar to the dog. Pain may or may not
the forelimbs. No thoracic, lumbar, or lumbosacral pain
accompany feline IVDD. The age range for feline IVDD
could be elicited. The abdomen was relaxed. The neck
is wide: 4-17 years, with most affected before 8 years
was tense but the dog was muzzled and this may have
of age.
been a pain response or a behavioural response to being
The following cases of two dogs with hindlimb ataxia
handled.
illustrate the differences in localizing lesions between
large and small breed dogs.
NEUROANATOMICAL LOCALIZATION
The lesion was localized to the cervical spinal cord.
SIGNALMENT 1
A 6-year-old neutered female rottweiler.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
● Intervertebral disc disease (IVDD)
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
●Meningioma
Hindlimb ataxia.
Vertebral tumour
177
178
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
● Chronic lesion with an acute worsening e.g.: com-
Spinous process
pression from articular facets or subarachnoid cysts.
Articular process
Spinal cord-
Disc disease is the most common cause of spinal cord
Dorsal root-
Epidural space
disease in dogs and was considered the most likely diag-
Accessory process
nosis in this case.
Dorsal root
 ganglion 
Dura mater and
ventral root,
arachnoid
CASE WORK-UP
Transverse
Subarachnoid
Non-contrast radiography
process
space
Approximately 50-80% of IVDD cases can be accurately
diagnosed on non-contrast spinal radiographs, provided
the exposures and positioning are optimum. Even radi-
 Ramus communicans 
Anulus
Nucleus
Dorsal
Longitudinal
 and sympathetic trunk 
fbrosus puposus
ventral
ligaments
ologists have trouble detecting a second site of involve-
ganglion
ment. This level of accuracy is insufficient for surgical
treatment. Spinal surgery is not like an exploratory
Figure 41.1 Cross-section through disc space.
laparotomy.
Spinal radiographs are performed when spinal pain is
present and infection, neoplasia or trauma is thought
Type I
to be the underlying aetiology. General anaesthesia is
required for optimum positioning. If the animal has neu-
rological deficits sufficient to warrant surgery, then
contrast radiography (myelography), MRl, or CT of the
relevant anatomical area is required. It is desirable to
refer the patient to a clinician capable of localizing the
lesion, imaging the spinal cord, and performing any
surgery required. It is a waste of time and money to
perform non-contrast spinal radiography on a paraplegic
dachshund with back pain only to wake the animal up
Type Il
immediately afterwards and refer it on.
Radiogrophic signs of IVDD
● Narrowed or wedge-shaped IV space
● Narrowed articular process joint space
●Decreased size of the IV foramen
● Calcified disc material within the IV foramen
● Calcified disc material in the spinal canal
● Gas in the IV space (vacuum phenomenon)
● Displacement of calcified dura towards the cord
Figure 41.2 Type I and type ll disc disease.
(automyelogram).
Table 41.1 The nature of the anulus pathology has been categorized as type I or type ll
Type I
Type Il
Pathology
Tear, rupture
Bulge, prolapse
Breed
Chondrodystrophoid (2-7 year olds)
Non-chondrodystrophoid
Non-chondrodystrophoid (8-10 year olds)
41 UMN: intervertebral disc disease
179
Table 41.2 Signs of disc disease
Cervical
Thoracolumbar
Location 
All, except C1-2
Caudal to T9-10
Common
Neck pain 
Back pain 
 presentation
 Forelimb lameness
Non-ambulatory
paraparesis
Paraplegia
 Pain perception
Intact 
May be absent
 Respiration 
± Hypoventilation
Unaffected
Figure 41.5 Transverse T2vwl through the C5-6 IVD space
with ventral compression of the cord by hypointense
 material.
This case had narrowed C5-6 IVD space on non-
contrast radiographs.
Figure 41.3 Sagittal T2vwl. Extradural compression of the
cord at the C5-6 IvD space.
MRI illustrated a C5-6 IVD extrusion.
CSF was normal.
DIAGNOSIS/TREATMENT
C5-6 ventral slot enabled removal of extruded disc
material from the spinal canal.
PROGNOSIS
An approximate rule of thumb is that paraplegic dogs
Figure 41.4 Sagittal T2vwl. Extradural compression noted
that perceive pain have more than an 80% chance
in a more lateralized 'slice'
of walking again if they are treated surgically. Those
without pain perception and treated surgically have a
Myelography
50% chance of walking again within 3 months and
have a high incidence (30-40%) of intermittent faecal
The intervertebral site of thoracolumbar disc disease is
and urinary incontinence. A voluntary tail wag may be
accurately located by myelography in 80-1 00% of cases.
present in a paraplegic dog
Disc disease often lateralizes, i.e. the IVD material will be
The prognosis for cats with IVDD appears to be the
greater on one side of the cord than the other. Myelog-
same as for dogs. Consult surgical texts for further
raphy was successful in locating the side of the lesion in
information.
30-100% of cases. In 20% of myelograms, the site of
the TL IVDD could not be found at all. Disappointingly,
Ascending myelomalacia is the autolysis of the spinal
lateralization of clinical signs does not always correspond
cord following acute, severe spinal cord injury, whether
with the lateralization of the disc material.
from IVDD or a fracture. Approximately 10% of dogs
For all the limitations of myelography, it remains a
with paraplegia and lack of pain perception will develop
this irreversible condition within 5-7 days of the onset
a potential candidate for surgical decompression (Figs
of paralysis whether the spinal cord is decompressed
41.3-41.5).
or not. Destruction of the cord produces LMN signs
180
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
in the hindlimbs, a progressive loss of the cutaneous
Table 41.3 Comparison of dinical signs in acute
trunci reflex, and eventually tetraparesis. Treatment is
 pancreatitis and thoracolum bar IVDD
euthanasia.
 Depending on the study, recurrence rates for subse-
Acute pancreatitis
Acute IVDD
quent Type I thoracolumbar IVDD in dogs range from
Tense abdomen
Tense abdomen
2.6% to 26.5%. Prognosis for recovery is as above.
Depression
Depression
Anorexia
± Inappetance
Vomiting
± Proprioceptive deficits
SIGNALMENT 2
Diarrhoea
± Paraparesis or paraplegia
A 4.5-year-old neutered female miniature shorthaired
dachshund.
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
Hindlimb paralysis.
CASE HISTORY
The dog had become depressed, and exhibited a lower
head posture and arched back 4 days prior to referral.
She had been allowed to jump and run about and devel-
oped hindlimb paralysis 24 hours prior to referral.
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
Clinical examination showed a quiet, depressed dog
with hindlimb paralysis and absent hindlimb pain per-
ception. Forelimb function was normal. Patellar and
withdrawal reflexes were normal in the hindlimbs. CNN
Figure 41.6 VD myelogram with right contrast column
werenormal.
deviating medially and narrowed T13-L1 IvD space
NEUROANATOMICAL LOCALIZATION
The lesion was localized to the T3-L3 spinal cord
DIAGNOSIS/TREATMENT
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
A right hemilaminectomy at T13-L1 allowed removal of
extruded disc material.
The signalment and history were highly suggestive of
The dog had not regained voluntary motor control in
IVD disease. Spinal or spinal cord tumours are rare.
either hindlimb and remained urinary incontinent 4 years
Haemorrhage into the cord and subarachnoid space can
after initial presentation.
cause pain and progressively worsening signs. Infarction
-Alened oi ssaboud sou saop pue injued Aeeuab pou s!
sis over 4 days (see Table 41.3).
CASE WORK-UP
Myelography found extradural compression of the cord
at T13-L1 on the right side, extending rostrally and
caudally (Fig. 41.6).
42
UMN: spinal fracture
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Spinal pain, paralysis/paresis, proprioceptive deficits, urinary incontinence.
INTRODUCTION
site of dorsal spinous process fracture or malalignment
Most fractures are due to road traffic accidents (RTA)
of vertebrae. Luxation of vertebrae without a fracture is
and most occur in the thoracolumbar spine. Associated
uncommon.
injuries are significant: 34% of dogs with lumbar
fractures have  cardiopulmonary  injuries such as
pneumothorax and pulmonary contusions; 48% have
SIGNALMENT
other fractures, of which pelvic fractures were most
A 6-month-old male collie dog.
common and approximately 23% have abdominal
injuries.
Neurological deficits may not correspond to the site
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
of the fracture due to the associated cord oedema,
Hindlimb paralysis.
haemorrhage or myelomalacia. Repeat examinations at
least twice daily, paying particular attention to the
CASE HISTORY
quality of spinal reflexes and muscle tone in the limbs,
any 'cut-off' in the cutaneous trunci reflex, and move-
The dog had been hit by a car the previous day.
ment of the thorax. An UMN paraplegia changing into
LMN paraplegia indicates that the lesion is extending
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
into the lumbosacral intumescence. Cranial extension of
the lesion within the thoracic spinal cord will not change 
The dog was mentally alert with hindlimb paralysis,
the hindlimb reflexes or muscle tone but the cutaneous
normal to slightly increased hindlimb reflexes, no pain
trunci reflex will be abnormal and thoracic movement
perception in either hindlimb, absent cutaneous trunci
will weaken. Ascending myelomalacia is usually recog-
reflex caudal to the scapulae and absent pain perception
nized before the animal dies of respiratory failure.
caudal to the scapulae. The bladder was large and dif-
Schiff-Sherrington syndrome occurs with sudden onset
ficult to express. Respiratory movements were chiefly
T3-L3 spinal cord lesions and may give the impression
abdominal.
of a UMN cervical lesion
Assessing the degree of voluntary motor function is
NEUROANATOMICAL LOCALIZATION
difficult when the animal is kept immobile to stabilize
the fracture site. Calling the animal or offering food may
The lesion was localized to the T3-L3 cord. Lack of pain
induce voluntary movement in limbs. Pelvic fractures add
perception localized the lesion further to the cranial
to the animal's immobility.
thoracic cord.
181
182
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
ately after the trauma (Fig. 42.3). This creates a disparity
between the severity of neurological signs and the
changes seen on radiographs. Always check the articular,
transverse and dorsal spinous processes and ribs for frac-
tures. The L7 vertebral body may be displaced by more
(A)Lateral
than 50% and show minimal signs due to the mobility of
aal legatan jey ie punoy eunba epnen aul
Damage to the vertebral arch (dorsal lamina and
pedidles), articular facets and associated ligaments with
or without a vertebral body fracture is regarded as an
unstable configuration
Wedge compression fractures or oblique fractures of
the vertebral body are usually stable but bone fragments
(B)Ventrodorsal
may enter the spinal canal.
Forelimbs retracted caudally for cervical
and rostrally for thoracolumbar imaging
MRl, CT, or myelography is required to assess the
compression of the spinal cord. MRl has the additional
advantage of imaging the intramedullary region (Fig.
42.4).
CForelimb retraction
DIAGNOSIS
Area
Trauma.
Primary beam
 a Cranial cervical
C2-C3
b Caudal cervical
90-SO
PROGNOSIS
C Thoracic
T8
d Thoracolumbar
T13 - L1
L4 -L5 
Approximately 50% of thoracolumbar spinal fracture
e Lumbar
patients are euthanized due to severe neurological
deficits.
Figure 42.1 Positioning spinal radiographs
The chance of ambulation returning in a paraplegic
without pain perception starts at 50% and drops to 0%
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
if the spine is displaced by 100% or greater, or if pain
perception has been absent for more than 2 days.
Trauma.
Presence of pain perception does not ensure com-
plete neurological recovery.
CASE WORK-UP
Radiography
TREATMENT
 Positioning must reflect the neuroanatomical diagnosis
There is no pharmacological cure for spinal cord injury.
(Fig. 42.1). Trauma, infection and neoplasia may produce
Do not rely on corticosteroids.
multifocal lesions which require the whole spine to be
Treatment
radiographed. Assess changes in vertebral shape, density.
alignment and surrounding soft tissues. Always check
1. Identify the cause, e.g. external trauma, pathological
the dorsal articular facets as these will remain fractured
fracture, AA subluxation, IVDD and FCE.
even if vertebral bodies realign after the trauma (Fig.
 2. Stabilize spinal fractures.
42.2 and see Table 42.1)
3. Administer pain relief.
Lateral and VD views are required to assess alignment
 4. Nurse the recumbent patient
 of the spine. Support the spine when turning the animal
 5. Monitor the progression of neurological deficits.
under general anaesthesia or sedation as the relaxation
Applying an external splint to limit ventral and lateral
reductions of fractures and luxations can occur immedi-
flexion can produce the same degree of improvement as
42 UMN: spinal fracture
183
vertebralbody
Cauda equina
C1
C2C3C4
C5
T11 T12 T13
L5
L6L7 S1 S2S3 Cd1
Spinal cord segment
Figure 42.2 Alignment of the spinal cord and vertebral bodies. Note that there are eight cervical spinal cord segments and
 only seven cervical vertebral bodies.
Table 42.1 Termination of the spinal cord within the spine
Position of
Level of cord
S1-3 segments
termination
Dog
L5 vertebra
Cranial half of L7
vertebra
Smaller dog
Caudal half of L7
vertebra
1e3
L6 vertebra
Within the body of L7
Figure 42.4 Destruction of thoracic spinal cord.
Surgery is recommended if the spinal cord requires
decompression, if the spine requires alignment and sta-
bilization or if the animal deteriorates with medical care.
Radiograph at 6 weeks to check healing.
Methylprednisolone sodium succinate (MPss) came
into favour in the early 1990s because of a study per-
formed in paralysed human patients. It is of no measur-
Figure 42.3 Note the luxation of the thoracic vertebrae.
able benefit to small animals in clinical practice, and
causes moreside-effectsthanimprovement.Itisa
normal reaction of people to remember events which
internal surgical fixation of thoracolumbar spinal frac-
confirm a prejudice, so before recounting all the cases
tures in dogs. Medical treatment takes approximately
that appeared to improve with use of MPSs the clinician
twice as long to reach the same neurological grade as
should consider how many of those patients would have
that achieved by surgery but is cheaper and requires a
benefited from time, cage rest and general support
shorter hospital stay.
alone. MPss is no longer recommended as a treatment
Medical treatment is not an easy option: the owner
for spinal cord injury in the clinical setting.
must be vigilant in checking for pressure sores, bandage
soiling and urine scalding. It may not be tolerated by
In this case: The dog was euthanized because of the
cats, and may not withstand the pressures generated by
poor prognosis for return of voluntary function in the
large-breed hyperactive dogs.
hindlimbs.
43
LMN
N paresis and paralysis
- an introduction
The motor functions of the CNS are expressed through
classed as a lower motor neuron as it connects the CNS
the lower motor neuron (LMN) (Fig. 43.1), which consists
to an effector organ (Fig. 43.2).
of:
Malfunction of the LMN components produce dis-
● Cell bodies in the ventral horn of the spinal cord
eases with similar characteristics:
Ventral nerve root
● Paresis, paralysis
● Spinal nerve
● Reduced or absent muscle tone
● Neuromuscular junction
●Reduced or absent reflexes
● Motor endplate
● Muscle atrophy.
● Skeletal muscle.
Lower motor neuron cell bodies are also present within
certain cranial nerve nuclei which supply skeletal muscles
of the head region: muscles of facial expression, mastica-
Anterior
tory muscles, extraocular muscles, tongue, pharynx,
hypothalamus
larynx, and oesophagus. The visceral efferent (auto-
Posterior-
nomic) supply to the salivary and lacrimal glands is also
hypothalamus
CN III
Ciliary body, iris
Brain
Lacrimal,
stem
submandibular and
CN VII
sublingual glands
Dorsal root -
Sensory Motor
CN IX
Parotid gland
 ganglion
neuron
neuron
Cranial
CNX
cervical
Muscle
ganglion
Neuromuscular
 junction
ventral
Spinal
horn cell 
cord
Axon
Skeletal
Motor end
muscle
plate
S1-S3
Sympathetic
Parasympathetic 
Figure 43.1 Components of the LMN.
Figure 43.2 The autonomic LMN
184
43 LMN paresis and paralysis - an introduction
185
CLINICAL TIP
CLINICAL TIP
Myopathies tend not to cause paralysis.
Hypertrophy, increased tone and muscle pain may
accompany certain myopathies.
The presenting signs of a LMN disease depict weakness
 of the innervated muscle:
Ataxia and proprioceptive deficits do not occur in neu-
● Gait: exercise intolerance, stiff, stilted, shortened
romuscular disease that spares sensory nerves. An animal
stride, paresis or paralysis
may be too weak to correct a knuckled-over limb unless
● Posture: neck ventroflexion, muscle tremors, flaccid
the body weight is supported.
tail, crouched, arched back and plantigrade stance
●Palpation: severe muscle atrophy
regurgitation, facial weakness and a change in the
voice.
LMN paresis and
paralysis: acquired
myasthenia gravis
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Dysphagia, regurgitation, retching, dysphonia, ptyalism, inability to blink, cervical ventroflexion
(cat), tremors, stiffness progressing to generalized weakness with exercise, hindlimb weakness,
recumbency and eventually respiratory failure.
INTRODUCTION
and sitting down. The dog sat rapidly while attempting
to squat when urinating or defecating.
In the normal animal, the arrival of an action potential
The next day the dog collapsed and was presented
in a nerve terminus causes the voltage-gated calcium
for examination.
channels to open. The calcium influx induces a coordi-
nated release of acetylcholine (Ach) into the synaptic
cleft. The Ach binds to the Ach receptor on the skeletal
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
musdle endplate, opening the membrane to sodium ions
The dog was alert and could stand without assistance
which depolarizes the post-synaptic membrane. Muscle
(Fig. 44.2). She quickly developed an arched back, all her
contraction follows. The enzyme acetylcholinesterase
rapidly removes the Ach from the synaptic cleft, allowing
limbs extended, and she quickly sat and then lay down.
Proprioception was normal. Hopping was normal in
depolarization to recur (Fig. 44.1)
those brief periods of standing. Spinal reflexes were
Acquired myasthenia gravis is an immune-mediated
normal to increased. Muscle tone was normal. No
destruction of the acetylcholine receptors of the skeletal
atrophy or muscle pain was noted. Pain perception
muscle endplate that interferes with neuromuscular
appeared normal in allimbs. The blink reflex was weak
transmission causing weakness.
bilaterally with the lids only partially closing. Facial sensa-
tion was normal.
SIGNALMENT
A 1-year, 2-month-old female bull mastiff cross.
NEUROANATOMICAL LOCALIZATION
Generalized LMN disease.
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
Sudden collapse.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF ACUTE
LMN SIGNS
CASE HISTORY
Immune-mediated myasthenia gravis
A husky, harsh-sounding bark and drooling were noted
5 days prior to referral. The dog began to retch and
(facial, pharyngeal, laryngeal, oesophageal) or general-
brought up a clear sticky phlegm the following day.
ized (focal signs + appendicular/axial weakness). The
Exercise intolerance quickly developed, limiting the dog
most common initial signs in dogs are generalized weak-
to walking only a few yards before going stiff, trembling
auole snbeydosaoebaw lo snbeydosaoebau yiim ssau
186
44 LMN paresis and paralysis: acquired myasthenia gravis
187
Signs may worsen with cold weather, oestrus cycles,
Acetylcholine
pregnancy, concurrent infection and vaccination.
(Ach) vesicle -
The age of onset ranges from 7 weeks to 15 years of
Presynaptic
age. Two peaks occur: at approximately 2-3 years and
nerve terminal 
9-10 years.
Acetylcholinesterase
Synaptic
Tick paralysis
cleft
Acetylcholine
Envenomation by the xodes (Australia) or Dermacentor
(USA) ticks causes a sudden onset,rapidly ascending
Acetylcholine
flaccid paralysis by preventing release of Ach from the
leceptors(AchR)
nerve terminus. Cats appear resistant to the salivary
neurotoxin of Dermacentor spp. Clinical cases of tick
ya
 paralysis in Australia coincide with the larger tick popula-
Postsynaptic membrane
Sodium entry triggers
Muscle cell
tion in the spring and summer. Dogs and cats are
(neuromuscular endplate)
muscle contraction
membrane
affected mostcommonly in latewinterand earlyspring
Figure 44.1  The neuromuscular junction.
prior to developing humoral immunity.
Ascending flaccid paralysis occurs 5-9 days after the
attachment of the Dermacentor tick, progressing to
tetraplegia within 3 days. Spinal reflexes are absent
(patellar reflex lost before withdrawal reflex). A bark
reduced in volume and changed in character, facial
weakness and jaw weakness are found
Signs commence 5-7 days after the attachment of
the ixodes tick, depending on the rate of feeding rather
than the absolute number of ticks. High ambient tem-
peratures shorten the course of the disease while in cold
weather, signs may not commence until 2 weeks after
tick attachment. Ascending flaccid paralysis progresses
from hind to forelimbs within a few hours, leaving the
animal in lateral recumbency. Spinal stretch reflexes such
as the patellar reflex are quickly lost, followed by the
withdrawal reflex which weakens as the disease pro-
 gresses. The gag reflex is absent leading to pseudoptya-
Figure 44.2 Unable to stand for long. the dog would
lism. Voice change and regurgitation are common and
collapse to the ground.
early findings. Hypothermia develops. Centrally medi-
ated sympathetic stimulation produces peripheral vaso-
constriction and systemic hypertension with secondary
pulmonary oedema. Tachycardia or reflex bradycardia
In one study, 13% of seropositive dogs had generalized
and pupil dilation also occur. The pupillary light reflex
weakness without oesophageal or pharyngeal weak-
eventually fails. Respiratory rate falls but tidal volume
ness. Cats chiefly present with generalized weakness
remains unchanged. Respiration is laboured, with a
and a decreased palpebral reflex. Extraocular muscle
grunt on expiration from closure of the vocal folds. Cats
weakness is not reported in the small animal. Acquired
have a similar presentation with initial signs of agitation,
myasthenia gravis is more common in the dog than
coughing, retching, a changed voice and prominent
the cat.
mydriasis.
There is a higher prevalence in certain dog and cat
 Some dogs affected by xodes ticks have focal weak-
breeds. A sudden onset, rapidly worsening generalized
ness of laryngeal, pharyngeal and oesophageal muscles 
form, described as acute and fulminating, occurs in
without
appendicular
weakness.
Megaoesophagus
approximately 15% of cats and dogs with myasthenia
with or without dysphagia may be the sole presenting
gravis.
sign.
188
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
Table 44.1 Signs in LMN disease
Acute LMN
Spinal 
Facial
Jaw
Pharynx
Larynx
Oesophagus
Autonomic
weakness
reflexes
MG
Normal 
+
Botulism 
Absent
+
+
Pupil, tear production, GIT, urine
 retention 
Ticks (USA)
Absent
+
十
Ticks (Aus)
Absent
+
+
BP, HR, pupils
FRN*
Absent 
+
一
+
Rabies
士
+
+
+
士
*PRN: acute idiopathic polyradiculoneuritis.
Diagnosis is aided by clinical improvement seen after
or fed in hunt kennels. It is an uncommon cause of
tick removal. Engorged ticks may have fallen off by the
paralysis. Recovery occurs within 1-3 weeks. Death from
time the animal is presented.
respiratory paralysis or aspiration pneumonia is possible.
Envenomation
Acute idiopathic polyradiculoneuritis
Snakes, spiders, lizards, hornets, and worms found in
Inflammation of the ventral nerve roots occurs in dogs,
Greenland shark meat also interfere with neuromuscular
with or without a raccoon bite or scratch. Ascending
transmission. Familiarity with the local toxic fauna is
recommended.
after raccoon exposure. Vaccination has been associated
Rabies
with acute polyradiculoneuritis in a young dog. Progres-
sion within 3-10 days to non-ambulatory tetraparesis or
Rabies is transmitted by bites from an infected animal.
tetraplegia is accompanied by loss of voice and facial
The time between the bite and demonstration of neu-
weakness. Affected dogs are able to eat if given access
rological signs can vary from 1 week to 6 months. Behav-
to food. Respiratory paralysis is more likely with rapidly
iour change (pica, nervousness and fearfulness), ataxia
worsening tetraparesis. The perineal reflex is present
and paresis (limbs, jaw and tongue) are reported, with
while other spinal reflexes are absent. Neurogenic
death occurring within 7-10 days. The chief point to
atrophy is a feature, dysphagia is not. Hyperesthesia to
remember about rabies is that it has a highly variable
 innocuous touch has been reported.
clinical presentation.
Diagnosis is aided by finding an elevated level of total
protein in the lumbar spinal fluid, reflecting the position
Botulism
 of the nerve roots within the subarachnoid space (Table
Ingestion of the preformed type C. botufinum toxin in
44.1). Widespread denervation potentials are recorded
jo jasuo uappns e saonpod pooj uaoi pue uouie
on electromyography (EMG).
ascending flaccid paralysis, the severity of which is linked
to the amount of toxin ingested. The toxin prevents
Polymyositis
release of Ach from the nerve terminal. The onset of
Myopathies are characterized by exercise intolerance, a
signs occurs within 0.5-6 days after ingestion. Hindlimb
stiff, stilted gait, lameness alternating between limbs,
followed by forelimb paralysis occurs. Spinal reflexes
lameness worsening with exercise (cf. orthopaedic
are reduced or absent. Facial weakness, decreased jaw
disease), muscle swelling or atrophy and pain. Weakness
tone, reduced gag reflex and megaoesophagus are
may occur but proprioception is normal and spinal
 prominent. Autonomic manifestations may occur: mydri-
reflexes are generally intact. Dysphagia, regurgitation,
asis decreased PLR, decreased lacrimation, urine reten-
masticatory muscle atrophy and a weak bark also occur.
tion and constipation.
AST, ALT and CK are not uniformly elevated in myopa-
Diagnosis is made from the clinical signs and a history
thies. If raised, their decline may be used to monitor any
 of eating carrion or rotten meat such as found in parks
response to treatment.
44 LMN paresis and paralysis: acquired myasthenia gravis
189
Autoimmune polymyositis is an autoimmune disease
A positive test is not specific for myasthenia gravis.
of unknown aetiology mostly affecting adult large breed
Improvement may occur in some myopathies and
dogs of either sex. Infectious myopathies caused by pro-
neuropathies.
tozoa or tick-borne pathogens are rare but efforts must
A negative test does not rule out myasthenia gravis.
be made to rule them out with serology. Equally
Half the dogs with acute fulminating MG do not respond
drug-induced myopathies should be considered when
to Tensilon.
taking a history. Paraneoplastic myopathies are rare. A
generalized immune mediated disease may present as
Acetylcholine receptor (AchR)
polymyositis.
antibody titre
The titre is measured in serum before the use of corti-
 In this case preservation of spinal reflexes, muscle
costeroids. The serum concentration of AChR antibodies
tone and proprioception was suggestive of myasthenia
does not predict the severity of the disease.
gravis. Generalized weakness from cardiac insufficiency
or hypoadrenocorticism could produce exercise intoler-
Positive result:
ance and collapse.
● Dog >0.6 nmoll
+ Cat >0.3 nmol/l.
CaSe WorK-UP
About 2% of dogs with generalized myasthenia gravis
Diagnostics investigate the cause and the sequelae of
are seronegative. Seroconversion may occur. Using an
the weakness.
ELISA test may give a high percentage of false
Tensilon test
negatives.
Edrophonium chloride (Tensilon) is a rapid-onset, short-
Radiography
acting anticholinesterase. It prolongs the presence of
Ach in the synaptic cleft, allowing further stimulation of
Some 90% of affected dogs have megaoesophagus:
15-25.7% of affected cats had a cranial mediastinal
mass; 3% of affected dogs have thymomas.
ing neuromuscular transmission and muscular strength.
1. Place IV catheter
Aspiration pneumonia is a major cause of death or
 2. Assemble ventilatory support: ET tube, Ambu-bag or
euthanasia and thus acts as a prognostic sign.
anaesthetic circuit
Electrodiagnostics
3. Have ready: atropine 0.02-0.04 mg/kg IV, to treat
side-effects of salivation, diarrhoea, retching, vomit-
Repetitive nerve stimulation may elicit a decremental
ing, bronchial secretions and bradycardia. Pre-treat-
response. Electromyography  and  evoked potentials
ment of cats has been recommended
are useful for investigating the small percentage of
4. Draw up the dose of Tensilon:
seronegative animals. Referral is required for this
● Dog 0.1-0.2 mg/kg
investigation.
● Cat 0.25-0.5 mg total dose
Third degree heart block has been reported in some
5. Give 1/5th dose IV. If tolerated, inject the remaining
dogs with MG, polymyositis and thymoma.
drug after 30 seconds
6. The effect begins 20-30 seconds after injection.
In this case:
Improvement of function lasts up to 10 minutes.
1. Muscle enzymes were normal. Toxoplasma and
Neospora serology were negative. ACTH stimulation
was normal
2. Tensilon test was positive
 3. Thoracic radiographs showed megaoesophagus but
CLINICAL TIP
no pneumonia was noted
Improvement in muscle strength can occur in
4. Serum to measure AchR antibody level was taken,
myasthenics after rest. Tensilon-induced
and later found to be positive at 1.8 nmol/l (N < 0.6),
improvement lasts longer.
 confirming the diagnosis of immune-mediated myas-
thenia gravis.
190
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
DIAGNOSIS
wards. Feed at the time of peak effect of the anticho-
linesterase drug.
Immune-mediated myasthenia gravis
● Install a gastrostomy feeding tube to guarantee food 
and drug intake
PROGNOSIS
● Consider IV fluids to maintain hydration.
● Some 48% of focal/generalized MG dogs are eutha-
· Reducing the acidity of stomach contents may reduce
nized or died shortly after admission due to aspiration
lung inflammation from aspiration.
pneumonia.
● Spontaneous clinical and immunological remission
Corticosteroids
occurs within an average of 6.4 months (range: 1-18
● Prednisolone 0.5 mg/kg q48 hr. This can be gradually
months) in 88.7% of dogs
 increased over 2 weeks to immunosuppressive doses:
● The antibody titre does not correlate with the severity
2-4 mg/kg/day
of the disease
● Weakness may worsen when corticosteroids are com-
● Recurrence may happen months or years later
menced (Table 44.2)
● There is an excellent correlation between the resolu-
tion of the clinical signs including megaoesophagus,
immunosuppression
and the fall of the antibody titre to below 0.6
· Azathioprine, mycophenolate mofetil
● Prognosis is improved with: speedy recognition of
regurgitation (cf. vomiting), accurate diagnosis,
Monitoring
correct treatment, dedicated owners and good clini-
cal judgement.
1. Serum antibody level decreases after 7-10 days of
immunosuppressive doses of corticosteroids.
TREATMENT
2. Treatment continues while the antibody titre is posi-
tive. Monitor every 4-8 weeks.
No controlled studies have been done to determine the
3. If clinical signs have resolved while the animal is
optimum treatment for acquired MG. The best outcome
 on corticosteroids and anticholinesterase, gradually
requires 'good clinical judgement' and dedicated owners
withdraw the corticosteroids first.
4. Weakness may indicate under-dose or over-dose with
Search for concurrent disease
anticholinesterase. If SLUD side-effects are present,
● ACTH stimulation, thyroid status (endogenous canine
the animal may be over-dosed. Improvement with the
TSH, and serum free T4 levels by dialysis), muscle
Tensilon test indicates under-dosing. If no improve-
enzymes (CK, AST, ALT), electrolytes, serum biochem-
ment is seen after Tensilon injection, and an increase
istry, urine analysis and haematology
in anticholinesterase medication has not made a defi-
● Thoracic radiographs
nite improvement, the animal is probably over-dosed
● Tracheal wash for culture
and a decrease in medication is advised
● Remove thymoma.
5. Pupil constriction and bradycardia are seen in
Anticholinesterase5
humans during a cholinergic crisis. A medium-to-
dilated pupil with tachycardia is present during a
● Pyridostigmine bromide (Mestinon): 1-3 mg/kg PO
myasthenic crisis. Respiratory failure is present in
q8-12 hr
both crisis states.
● Neostigmine bromide (Prostigmin): 2 mg/kg/day PO
 in divided doses or 0.01-0.04 mg/kg IM q6-8 hr. The
syrup form should be diluted 50: 50 in water to avoid
Treotment of this cose
gastric irritation
1. Pyridostigmine q8 hr which was increased to every
● Side-effects: SLUD (salivation, lacrimation, urination,
6 hr.
diarrhoea). Treat with low doses of atropine
 2. Immune suppression with prednisolone BID.
3. Elevated feeding. The water bowl was raised onto a
Nutrition/hydration
platform
● Elevate food and water during feeding. Elevate the
4. The dog improved on this regime and was playful,
forequarters of the animal for 10-15 minutes after-
and managed short lead walks. If allowed off lead
44 LMN paresis and paralysis: acquired myasthenia gravis
191
the dog weakened after a few minutes jogging and
 Table 44.2 Drugs to avoid in myasthenia gravis
had to be rested during the lead-walk back home.
Antibiotics
No coughing and no regurgitation of food or phlegm
Aminoglycosides
occurred. Throat-clearing ‘gurgling' noises were
Polymyxin
absent. The blink reflex was normal.
Tetracyclines
 5. Mycophenolic acid was commenced, with the aim of
Lincosamides
 High-dose penicillin 
reducing the dose of prednisolone to prevent muscle
 Sulphonamides
atrophy. Vomiting and melaena quickly developed
and the drug was withdrawn.
Anaesthetics
6. Prednisolone was withdrawn gradually after 3
 Methoxyflurane
months of treatment. There had been generalized 
Anticonvulsants
muscle loss and a pot-belly had developed. Pyri-
dostigmine was thenwithdrawn and the dog
 Phenytoin
remained clinically normal. A repeat AchR antibody
 Barbiturates
titre was negative. Muscle bulk returned.
 Benzodiazepines
Psychotropic
 Neuroleptics 
REGURGItATION VS. VOmITING
 Phenothiazines
 Butyrophenones
Regurgitation
Amitriptyline
Regurgitation is the passive expulsion of material from
Endocrine
the mouth，pharynx,
：oroesophagus.
Abdominal
ACTH
contractions are absent. The animal extends the neck
Corticosteroids
and retrograde passage of white liquid or froth (swal-
Oxytocin
lowed saliva) or undigested food takes place seconds to
Thyroid hormones
hours after feeding. Ptyalism due to nausea is absent.
Methimazole
However, pseudoptyalism due to dysphagia may be
Cardiovascular
present.
Anti-arrhythmics
Oesophageal obstruction or weakness of the pharyn-
Quinidine
geal or oesophageal musdles present as regurgitation.
Lidocaine 
Weight loss, increased appetite, coughing, respiratory
 Procainamide
distress and aspiration pneumonia may also be present
Beta-blockers
Calcium channel blockers
with or without signs of generalized muscular weak-
ness. Pharyngeal weakness has the additional sign of
Analgesics, anti-inflammatory agents
dysphagia.
Morphine derivatives
The oesophagus is composed of skeletal muscle
 D-penicillamine 
 innervated by the vagus nerve which supplies both the
Antimalarials
sensory and motor fibres. The distal third of the
feline oesophagus is composed of smooth muscle, inner-
Neuromuscular blocking agents
vated by parasympathetic branches of the vagus nerve
Succinylcholine
D-tubocurarine
(CN X).
Weakness of oesophageal skeletal muscle causes flac-
Other
cidity and dilation of the oesophagus known as mega-
 Magnesium salts
oesophagus. Congenital and acquired megaoesophagus
Laxatives
are far more prevalent in the dog than the cat.
 Antacids
lodinated contrast agents
Couses of decreased oesophogeal peristolsis
Organophosphates
Carbamates
1. Focal or generalized myasthenia gravis, botulism, tick
paralysis (Australia)
2. Hypoadrenocorticism
192
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
3. Dysautonomia
Managementofregurgitation
4. Idiopathic
Elevated feeding. Divide the calorie intake into smaller
5. Polymyositis
portions given frequently. The forequarters of the animal
6. Peripheral neuropathy, e.g. lead toxicity (cat and
are raised vertically while it is eating, if possible, by
dog)
placing the food and the animal's forelimbs on a chair
7. Brainstem lesion affecting the vagal nerves or nuclei
or bench. If this is not tolerated raise the forequarters
bilaterally
after eating by lifting the forelimbs off the ground. In
 8. Increased muscle tone from myotonia or tetanus
the absence of peristalsis the aim is for gravity to drive
 9. Sensory lesion from ganglioradiculoneuritis.
the food into the stomach. Elevate the forequarters after
eating for as long as the animal/owner will tolerate it - if
Hypothyroidism was not found to be a risk factor for
possible for 10-15 minutes. The ability to swallow liquid
acquired megaoesophagus.
or solid food varies from dog to dog and is assessed by
Diagnosis of regurgitation
trial and error.
Prokinetic drugs, cisapride and metoclopramide im-
Description
prove oesophageal motility in the cat but not the dog.
● White froth
Anticholinesterase inhibitors are indicated in myasthenia
● Undigested food
gravis. Treating the underlying disease gives the best
· Absence of bile.
may be required if weight loss cannot be reversed by
Chronic vomiting can result in oesophagitis and thus
oral feeding or if aspiration pneumonia and anorexia
regurgitation.
occur.
Examination
Vomiting
Gurgling of liquid retained within the dilated oesopha-
Presenting signs
gus may be heard. Closing the mouth, and squeezing
the abdomen, or the cranial thorax, increases intratho-
Licking lips, salivation, depression, yawning, followed by
racic pressure which transfers to the thoracic oesopha-
forceful, non-productive, vigorous abdominal contrac-
gus. Air within the thoracic oesophagus is forced into
tions (retching) which end in expulsion of stomach and
the cervical oesophagus and produces a visible enlarge-
upper Gl contents via the mouth. Undigested food:
ment on the left side of the neck
gastric (or oesophageal) contents. Digested food: intes-
tinal contents
Imaging
Vomiting (emesis) is a complex reflex coordinated by
Non-contrast radiographs of the neck and the thorax are
the medulla oblongata. The vomiting centre in the
required. A dilated oesophagus filled with air, liquid or
medulla consists of scattered groups of neurons which
ingesta may be seen. The cat with neuromuscular weak-
integrate the somatic, visceral, gastrointestinal and respi-
ness demonstrates a dilated proximal oesophagus only
ratory components of vomiting. It receives stimuli from:
due to the distribution of smooth muscle in this species.
1. Neural input: viscera (CN X, sympathetic nerves),
Aspiration pneumonia may be present. Barium contrast
pharynx (CN IX), vestibular apparatus (CN VIll), cere-
studies, liquid or meal, are used for the diagnosis of
bral (fear/stress/pain)
intra- or extraluminal obstruction but pose a hazard to
 2. Direct stimulation: meningoencephalitis, increased 
the dysphagic animal which may inhale them. Endos-
ICP
leed anebnsaul ot pue sisoubeip log inyasn s! Adon
3. Humoral input: drugs, toxins or metabolites by stim-
strictures and oesophagitis.
ulating the chemoreceptor trigger zone (CTZ) which
projects to the vomiting centre.
Lob work
Investigation of neuromuscular weakness, e.g. AChR
Note: the vestibular apparatus also projects to the
antibody titre, ACTH stimulation, T4 and TSH levels,
vomiting centre via the CTZ in the dog but not in the
muscle enzymes, electrolytes, haematology, biochemis-
cat
try. urine analysis, electromyography and musdle
Cyclic vomiting responsive to phenobarbitone treat-
biopsy.
ment is thought to be a form of seizure activity.
44 LMN paresis and paralysis: acquired myasthenia gravis
193
Vomiting is a very common presenting sign for acute
Vomiting may be confused with expectoration (force-
vestibular disease, whether peripheral or central in
ful coughing) and regurgitation.
nature. Vomiting occurs a few times, the first day of
vestibular dysfunction, and then generally stops. Persis-
tent vomiting with persistent vestibular signs (spontane-
Treotment
Ous nystagmus, ataxia, falling, leaning or rolling) indicates 
The cause should be diagnosed. Antiemetics are used
continuing vestibular irritation and warrants investiga-
 to prevent morbidity from dehydration and electrolyte
tion of the balance disorder. A head tilt may continue 
loss. The CTZ and vomiting centre have a number of
despite resolution of ataxia and nystagmus so cannot be
receptors and by manipulating them, vomiting may be
used as a measure of clinical improvement
suppressed with medication.
45
LMN paresis and
paralysis: brachial
plexus avulsion
INTRODUCTION
trunci reflex was absent when either side was stimu-
lated. The left pupil failed to dilate fully in darkness. Pain
Failure of nerve transmission due to a functional distur-
perception was absent in the radial and ulnar nerve
bance from compression, ischaemia, or blunt trauma is
distributions but was present in the distribution of the
 called neurapraxia. The larger motor and proprioceptive
musculocutaneous nerve.
axons are affected preferentially with preservation of
pain perception. Structural integrity of the nerve's
Schwann cells and endoneurial connective tissue persist,
NEUROANATOMICAL LOCALIZATION
giving a good prognosis for recovery. Neurotmesis is the
Left brachial plexus, including the ventral nerve roots
complete or partial transection of the nerve's axon,
supplying the lateral thoracic nerve (C8-T1) to account
myelin sheath and endoneurial connective tissue. All
for the cutaneous trunci deficit, and those supplying
axon types are affected and pain perception is lost. The
destruction of the connective tissue and Schwann cell
the left miosis in darkness.
scaffolding   prevents  effective   nerve  regeneration.
Electrodiagnostics  and   repeat   cdlinical examination
 monitor clinical improvement.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Brachial plexus avulsion was diagnosed based on the
history and clinical findings.
SIGNALMENT
A rarely-occurring acute-onset flaccid paralysis of
A 2-year, 9-month-old female Staffordshire bull terrier.
both forelimbs from axon and myelin loss in the brachial
plexus has been reported in dogs and a cat. The cause
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
is unknown but may have an immune-mediated basis.
 Acute, progressively worsening bilateral forelimb paresis
Left fore weakness.
is more commonly caused by a cervical spinal cord lesion.
Neither was realistically suspected in this case but they
are worth mentioning as other causes of forelimb
CASE HISTORY
paresis.
Non-weight-bearing  left-fore paresis began  suddenly
Nerve sheath tumours most commonly occur in the
after being hit by a car 8 months prior to referral. The
brachial plexus causing chronic lameness prior to the
dog occasionally licked the left forepaw. No improve-
onset of flaccid paralysis of the affected limb. Occur-
ment had been noticed.
rence in the cervical cord segments C1-C5 or the
thoracolumbar cord segments T3-L3 results in cord com-
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
pression which may be acute in onset.
The dog was alert and ambulatory with a non-weight-
CASE WORK-UP
bearing left forelimb. Severe generalized atrophy of the
left fore was present (Fig. 45.1). The left elbow was held
Electromyography (EMG) is the recording of abnor-
flexed. Muscle contracture prevented extension of the
mal spontaneous activity in muscle cells. It evaluates the
right carpus, elbow and shoulder. The left cutaneous
electrical stability of the muscle membrane which is
194
45 LMN paresis and paralysis: brachial plexus avulsion 
195
Electrodiagnostic equipment is expensive and does
not represent a good investment for the general
 practitioner.
In this case, the diagnosis could be made without
the need for EMG. The lack of functional improvement
since the injury indicates a grave prognosis for recovery
of function. The musculocutaneous nerve function kept
the limb flexed and prevented abrasion of the paw. Self-
mutilation had not occurred.
No treatment was given.
Brachial plexus avulsion is caused by major trauma,
such as a RTA. Nerve roots lack a supportive perineurium
so are the point of weakness when force is applied to
Figure 45.1 Severe atrophy of the left forelimb
the forelimb. Ventral roots are more susceptible to
trauma than dorsal roots, which explains the persistence
of pain perception in a flaccid paralysed limb. The flac-
altered by denervation and by myopathies. EMG is an
cidity and non-weight-bearing state may not be recog-
extension of the physical examination and is useful for
nized as neurological damage if a fracture is present.
demonstrating abnormal neuromuscular function when
Humeral fractures rarely result in radial paralysis. Always
the history and examination findings are equivocal.
check for ipsilateral Horner's syndrome which follows
Areas of abnormality can be delineated prior to muscle
avulsion of the T1-3 nerve roots. Avulsion of C8, T1
biopsy in an effort to obtain a representative diagnostic
nerve roots removes the ipsilateral motor arc of the
sample.
cutaneous trunci reflex. These two deficits will aid
EMG is performed under general anaesthesia to
diagnosis.
obtain patient compliance. Insertional potentials are
 Absence of pain perception occurs if the dorsal roots
generated by the movement of the recording needle
are avulsed. Neurogenic atrophy, from ventral root
through musdle membranes. It ceases once the needle
trauma, occurs within 7 days. This is profound and far
is stationary. Normal muscle is electrically silent under
exceeds that expected from disuse of a fractured limb.
Denervation can be detected by EMG approximately 1
amplitude and frequency. Fibrillation and positive sharp
week after avulsion although EMG is generally not
waves occur in both nerve and muscle diseases. Myo-
required to make a diagnosis. Imaging of the plexus
tonic potentials wax and wane, giving the auditory
has little value. Contrast-enhancement of contused
impression of a rewing motor, or the decrescendo of a
nerve roots may be seen.Prognosis is determined by
dive bomber plane. EMG is assessed by the sound gener-
the neurological deficits present. Recovery after 6
ated and the pattern of the abnormal spontaneous
weeks was reported in a dog with brachial plexus
waveforms. ‘Frying eggs' or 'rain on roof' are evocative
contusion.
descriptions of fibrillation. The greater the amount of
In the absence of fractures, the non-weight-bearing
 abnormal potentials detected, the greater the pathologi-
lameness is not painful. Self-mutilation of the dener-
cal involvement of the muscle. The degree of EMG
vated limb is rare.
change, while indicating the anatomic distribution of the 
Avulsion carries a grave prognosis for return of func-
disease process, does not correlate with the severity of
tion. Stretching or bruising of the plexus carries hope of
the clinical deficit. It is particularly useful when aiming
recovery. Surgical reattachment of nerves is not per-
to distinguish between disuse atrophy and neurogenic
formed. Treatment is aimed at preventing limb contrac-
atrophy of muscle. Denervation potentials, a general
tion during a hoped-for recovery phase.
Amputation of the limb is rarely required. Partial avul-
vation of muscle, can be detected 7-10 days after dener-
vation has occurred.
advice from surgeons familiar with the technique.
46
LMN paresis and
paralysis: flaccid tail
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Flaccid tail, low tail carriage, tail paralysis.
INTRODUCTION
CASE HISTORY
Sacrococcygeal muscles dorsally and ventrally, and the
The cat suddenly appeared to be in pain and resented 
lateral intertransversarius coccygeus muscles extend and
handling by the owner. The cat spent unsupervised
flex the tail. Innervation is supplied by sacral and caudal
periods outdoors, but there had been no evidence of
nerves.
external trauma to the cat. Two days later the tail was
Tail paralysis is common in cats secondary to stretch-
noticed to hang vertically and lose all movement. The
ing or avulsion of the nerves during trauma.
hindlimb posture appeared crouched. The cat was able
A focal tail myopathy occurs in working dogs and is
to voluntarily urinate and defecate. A week of meloxi-
known as limber tail, limp tail, frozen tail or cold tail,
cam, buprenorphine, cage rest and time did not restore
with the latter sobriquets probably owed to its increased
the cat to normal.
occurrence in cold weather. The acute flaccid paralysis
There had been two similar episodes of pain and a
of the tail from its base or a few inches distal to the base
"floppy' tail 1 year and 2 years prior to this recurrence,
occurs post-exercise in English pointers, Labradors,
from which the cat had spontaneously recovered. The
beagles, setters, foxhounds and other hunting breeds. It
cat was described as being otherwise well
may or may not be painful. Recovery occurs within days
to weeks without specific treatment. It may recur. The 
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
tail may hang to one side during recovery. Biopsies are
not performed because of the potential to damage
The cat was alert, ambulatory with a normal gait
nerves while harvesting enough muscle to be diagnosti-
and normal hindlimb posture. The tail hung vertically
cally useful, besides which, the condition is quite distinc-
Hopping and placing were normal in all limbs. Muscle
tive and self-limiting.
tone and spinal reflexes were normal in all limbs. Anal
Interestingly, a dog with LMN or UMN tetraplegia
tone was present. Gently touching the caudal lumbar
may still wag its tail voluntarily. This is generally taken
spine made the cat cry out in a pain response (Fig. 46.1).
as a good prognostic sign for recovery of ambulation but
has not been subject to rigorous study.
NEUROANATOMICAL LOCALIZATION
Cauda equina.
SIGNALMENT
A 12-year-old neutered male domestic shorthaired cat.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
1. External trauma: tail-pull injury, sacral fracture
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
Sacral fractures are uncommon in the dog and cat,
Flaccid tail.
usually result from a RTA and are generally accom-
196
46 LMN paresis and paralysis: flaccid tail
197
Table 46.1 Clinical signs and prognosis for feline tail-pull
injury
Tail
Anal tone 
Bladder
Prognosis
Painful tail 
Normal
Normal 
Good,
base
without
surgery
Paralysed,
Normal 
[eWUoN 
'p005
anaesthetic
without
 surgery
 Paralysed
PWUON 
Urine
Fair. Most
retention
expected to
recover
Paralysed
Decreased
Difficult to 
75% recovery
express
rate
Paralysed
Absent
Easy to
50% recovery
Figure 46.1 Flaccid tail. Note the normal extension of the
express
rate
tarsi. The thorax was shaved for placed of a Fentanyl
patch for pain control.
4. Infection: bite wound
panied by pelvic injury such as a fractured ilium (dog)
 5. Feline hyperaesthesia syndrome
and sacroiliac subluxation (cat)
This constellation of signs occurs in any cat of any
Neurological signs are most common secondary
age with an onset usually between 5 and 8 years of
to fractures which traverse the spinal canal. Sciatic
age. Intermittent signs include violent licking and
nerve deficits, tail paralysis, urine retention or dys-
biting at the hindquarters and tail to the extent of
synergia may result. Sciatic deficits may not be
 drawing blood. Other signs include rippling skin dor-
noticed immediately due to the animal's immobility
sally, muscle spasms or twitching in thoracolumbar
from orthopaedic injury. Always check the degree of
spinal musculature, agitation, restlessness, running,
tarsal flexion when testing the withdrawal reflex as
excessive vocalization, papillary dilation and attack-
this is a measure of sciatic function.
ing objects or people. Palpation of the thoracolum-
Sacrocaudal fractures in cats result from RTAs and
bar epaxial muscles may cause pain. Causes of pain
bite injuries. The common sites are S3-Cd1, and
 or skin irritation should be ruled out before diagnos-
 S2-3 but neurological signs may not correlate with
ing this condition.
the site of injury. This discrepancy is thought to be
due to traction of the nerves, hence the name - tail-
CaSE WORK-UP
pull injury (Table 46.1).
Most cats recover hindlimb function, urination
A narrowed L7-S1 disc space was seen on non-contrast
and tail function within 1 month. A recent study
radiographs.
found that cats with intact tailbase sensation had
 MRI: Ventral compression of the cauda equina at the
control of urination within 3 days. About half the
level of the L7-S1 IV disc space with what appeared to
cats without tail base sensation post-trauma did
be calcified material (see Fig. 46.2).
recover control of urination by day 30. Full tail func-
tion can take months to return, if at all. It is not clear
if surgical treatment of the fracture will hasten
DIAGNOSIS
recovery. Medical treatment includes pain relief, and
Intervertebral disc extrusion.
treating constipation that can result from pelvic
nerve injury. Bladder care is vital. If the tail is continu-
TREATMENT
aq on paau Aeu uonendue uau 'pallos Aisno
considered.
L7-S1 dorsal laminectomy enabled the removal of friable
2. IVD disease
IV disc material ventral to the cauda equina. Pain relief
 3. Neoplasia: vertebral or in the cauda equina
was achieved with methadone.
198
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
FOLLOW-UP
One week after the surgery the cat was no longer in
pain. The tail was still quite flaccid but could be held up
in a normal position briefly by the cat.
Figure 46.2 Sagittal spine T1vwl. Ventral compression of
the cauda equina at the L7-S1 IvD space.
47
Ataxia: spinal ataxia
INITIAL PRESENTATION
In spinal cord disease, the ascending proprioceptive tracts may be affected before the descending
motor tracts resulting in ataxia as the presenting sign. Damage to the ascending spinocerebellar
tracts in spinal cord lesions results in cerebellar-like dysmetria. Spinal cord lesions will cause
ataxia of the limbs caudal to the lesion.
INTRODUCTION
Presenting signs of abnormat proprioception
Coordination relies on balance, position sense and the
 Supporting weight on the dorsum of the paw (knuck-
ling over', knuckling)
ordering of received sensory information into smooth
 Scraping, scuffing, catching the dorsal surface of the
movement. Failure of coordination, from any of the
digits/claws on the ground
components, results in ataxia a term used to describe
● Excessive adduction of a limb, causing the limbs to
irregular, unpredictable voluntary movement.
cross each other
Causes of ataxia
● Excessive abduction of a limb, or both limbs causing
a wide-based stance, or more extreme, a splaying of
Position sense is referred to as proprioception and is
achieved through muscle, tendon and joint receptors,
the limbs (Bambi on ice)
● Circumduction (swinging out to the side; abduction
associated sensory nerves, and ascending tracts within
in an arc-shaped trajectory) of the limbs, particularly
the spinal cord (Fig. 47.1).
when turning
These tracts project to the ipsilateral cerebellum
(unconscious proprioception) and to the contralateral
Hypermetria of forelimbs ('goose-stepping', 'saluting
gait')
● Stumbles, tripping over steps, own adducted limb, on 
tutes 'general proprioception'
uneven ground or surfaces with little traction, e.g.
When this system fails, the gait becomes ataxic and
wood flooring
limb position alters. This is most noticeable with spinal
· Delayed initiation of a step (delayed protraction)
cord  and  brainstem lesions  with  deficits ipsilateral
resulting in a longer stride than normal. This gives the
to the lesion. Cerebral lesions are subtle and tend not
hindquarters a crouched appearance. This may result
to affect the  gait but canreduce  the contralateral
in collapse when turning.
placing response. Sensory neuropathies are rare. Ataxia
and anaesthesia of the limbs with self-mutilation are the
Paresis may be responsible for the inability to
two chief clinical presentations of sensory deficits.
support the weight and walk normally, resulting in
Lesions of muscle, tendons, and joints present as lame-
stumbling, tripping or collapse. Supporting the animal's
ness not ataxia.
body weight while testing placing or the knuckling
199
200
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
Midline
Cerebral cortex
Cerebellum
Thalamus-
Caudal cerebellar
peduncle
Rostral cerebellar
peduncle
Cerebellum
Figure 47.2 The head is lowered to shift weight forward.
Hindlimb extension when sitting is common in UMN
Rostral peduncle
paraparesis or paraplegia.
Spinal cord
inappetant. When walking, the dog kept his head lowered
Dorsal root ganglion
Touch,
pressure,
and his back arched.
proprioception
Hindlimb ataxia began 6 days before presentation
and slowly worsened. The dog was unable to walk more
 Figure 47.1 Pathways of conscious and unconscious
than a few steps before the hindlimbs crossed and
proprioception.
tripped each other (Fig. 47.2).
responses should distinguish a proprioceptive deficit
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
from paresis.
Owners commonly describe their pet as ‘drunk,
The dog was quiet but mentally responsive. He was
wobbly, clumsy or unsteady'
unable to stand without assistance. The back was
arched, and pain was elicited by palpation of the lumbar
spine. Hindlimb paresis and ataxia were present when
CLINICAL TIP
the body weight was supported with a sling. The right
hind knuckled over more than the left. Spinal reflexes
Ataxia may be overlooked and go unmentioned by
were intact. The forelimbs were normal. No neck pain
owners who ascribe it to their new pet's young
was found.
age.
NEUROANATOMICAL LOCALIZATION
SIGNALMENT 1
T3-L3 cord, slightly worse on the right.
A 3-year-old male springer spaniel.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
CASE HISTORY
IVDD, external trauma, meningitis or discospondylitis
The dog suddenly started yelping when touched and
could all give rise to a sudden onset of pain. A migrating
would not jump into the car 3 weeks prior to referral.
grass seed within spinal muscles with cellulitis would
He was normally an active dog and spent the working
cause back pain but extension to the spinal canal would
day around horse stables. His condition did not improve
be unusual. No vertebral fractures could be seen on the
with self-imposed rest and he remained lethargic and
radiographs taken by the local veterinarian.
47 Ataxia: spinal ataxia
201
CASe WOrK-Up
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
MRI showed ventral extradural compression of the spinal
An abnormal gait of unknown duration.
cord at L3-4. A small syrinx was present extending ros-
trally (Fig. 47.3). This was thought to be secondary to
CASE HISTORY
the trauma of cord compression.
The dog was acquired from a “lost dogs home' 1 week
DIAGNOSIS
prior to referral and no past history was available
The dog liked to exercise but tripped and fell on
L3-4 disc extrusion.
uneven ground and when turning. She was unable
to jump into the car and was slow to descend stairs.
The dorsalsurface of the fore-and hindlimb paws
TREATMENT
were scraped against the ground, wearing down the
A right-sided L3-4 hemilaminectomy to remove extruded
claws.
disc material was carried out. The strength and proprio-
ception improved on a daily basis. The dog was walking 
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
unaided without ataxia 6 days postoperatively
An alert, fearful and aggressive dog with a normal
posture, hindlimb ataxia and slight forelimb hypermetria
SIGNALMENT 2
was examined.
A 5.5-month-old female German shepherd dog
Proprioception was slow, and hopping was slightly
reduced in all limbs. The patellar reflexes were 3+
bilaterally. Withdrawal reflex was present in all limbs.
Panniculus reflex was normal. The dog moved its neck
 painful. The mental state and cranial nerves were normal.
No neck pain could be detected.
NEUROANATOMICAL LOCALIZATION
Cervical spinal cord segments C1-5. Cerebellar disease
produces ataxia and hypermetria but does not result in
Figure 47.3 Sagittal spine MRl T2VW. Extradural
tetraparesis (Table 47.1). Conscious proprioceptive defi-
Si xus aul aeds l t- re pio aut jo uoissaiduo
cits cause the paws to be dragged dorsally, wearing
not obvious in this image.
down the dorsal surface of the claws.
 Table 47.1 Differentiating forelimb hypermetria
Lesion
Cervical cord disease
Cerebellar disease
Pathogenesis
Spasticity
Fine motor coordination
 Altered proprioception
Altered proprioception 
Distinguishing feature 
 Extended forelimbs
 Excessive flexion of forelimb joints
Description
Hypermetria, 'Over-reaching'.
Hypermetria, 'goose-stepping'. 'prancing'. 'high-stepping
'floating'
Strength
Weakness
No weakness
Other characteristics
Other cerebellar signs: menace deficit, truncal ataxia, intention tremor.
 exaggerated limb movement on hopping (± vestibular signs)
202
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
enlargedsu
vertebra
space
CORD
CSF
Figure 47.4 Sagittal T1Wl. Widening of the dorsal
subarachnoid space. Possibly a subarachnoid cyst. (Arrow
points to the spinal cord).
31.2H
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
● Malformation (vertebrae; cord; meninges)
Figure 47.5 Transverse T2vwl. Dorsoventrally flattened
● Inflammation
spinal cord (star), surrounded by CSF (dot). Wide
· Degeneration
subarachnoid space dorsally (bracket)
Tumour
●Vascular problem
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
The time course of the clinical signs was not known.
Diseases chiefly characterized by increased muscle
Hindlimb ataxia and paresis.
tone and spasticity present with a stiff, stilted gait com-
posed of short strides and limited flexion of the limb.
CASE HISTORY
'Dancing' Dobermann dogs have alternate flexing
and extending of the hindlimbs not the forelimbs and
Hindlimb ataxia and paresis commenced suddenly 8 days
this is not referred to as hypermetria.
prior to referral and worsened over the following 2 days.
The gait improved slightly but not to normal with the
use of prednisolone. The dog seemed to be painful.
CASE WORK-UP
A treatment trial of prednisolone for 1 week made no
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
difference to the dog's gait. Clinical signs remained
unchanged.
Hindlimb ataxia and paresis were present. The lumbar
MRl showed the cord to be narrow from the level of
spine was arched. The patellar reflexes were increased
C2 vertebra to C4 vertebra. Syrinx formation caudal to
bilaterally and the withdrawal reflexes were normal in all
C4 vertebra (not visible on these images). There was no
limbs. The abdomen was tense when palpated and the
contrast enhancement (Figs 47.4 and 47.5)
dog yelped when pressure was applied over the thora-
columbar junction.
DIAGNOSIS
NEUROANATOMICAL LOCALIZATION
Malformation of the spinal cord
The lesion was localized to the T3-L3 spinal cord
segments.
TREATMENT
None. The dog's condition remained stable.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Spinal cord compression by IVDD, neoplasia, or enlarge-
SIGNaLMENT 3
ment of the articular facets was considered most likely
A 7-year-old male German shepherd dog.
given the age of the dog and sudden onset of signs.
47 Ataxia: spinal ataxia
203
A common cause of hindlimb ataxia in the GsD is
FL
degenerative myelopathy but this has a gradual onset
ET:29
and does not cause the dog pain.
Degenerative myelopathy (DM)
Degeneration of all tracts of the spinal cord throughout
its length commonly occurs in German shepherd dogs
of both sexes over 5 years of age. The thoracic cord
segments are most severely affected and the presenting
signs of ataxia and UMN paresis reflect this. In accor-
dance with the UMN lesion, the patellar reflexes are
usually normal to increased. About 15% of cases will
Figure 47.6 Sagittal T2Wwl. Dorsal compression of the
have decreased or absent patellar reflexes. Forelimb
cord at T13-L1.
function is normal. Signs begin with hindlimb ataxia and
progress over 6-12 months during which time the ataxia
and paresis may relentlessly worsen or decline gradually
interspersed with periods of relative constancy of signs.
One hindlimb may be slightly worse than the other.
Spinal pain is not a feature. Urinary and faecal conti-
nence is maintained.
The chief differential diagnosis is Type Il intervertebral
disc disease of the thoracolumbar spine which may not
cause spinal pain nor respond to a treatment trial of
prednisolone.
The diagnosis of DM is currently one made by exclud-
ing other lesions. Given the age of the animal under
investigation Type Il IVDD and DM could co-exist. The
owner must be made aware of this if surgery on Type Il
VDD is considered.
Figure 47.7 Sagittal T2Wwl. Scout image of transverse
slices taken through an area of interest.
and ataxia so MRl is preferred. Lumbar CSF samples may
have a raised protein level but are not diagnostically
useful as the sole method of investigation. A DNA muta-
tion found to be a major risk factor in developing DM
has been discovered. Further study will clarify the per-
centage of 'gene positive' dogs that develop DM within
their lifetime.
The cause remains enigmatic.
Specific treatment does not exist. Physiotherapy
improves longevity by limiting disuse atrophy. Most
animals are euthanized when nonambulatory para-
paresis occurs. If the animal is kept alive long enough,
forelimb paresis and incontinence eventually develop.
This has also been termed degenerative radiculo-
myelopathy due to the pathology being described in the
lumbar dorsal nerve roots.
Degenerative myelopathy has also been reported in
other middle-aged to older, large breed dogs such as the
Figure 47.8 Transverse T2Wwl. Syrinx within the cord
Siberian husky, Bernese mountain dog, Rhodesian ridge-
rostral to the compressive lesion. No specific treatment is
given for the syrinx itself
back, boxer and Chesapeake Bay retriever. Pembroke
204
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
has been reported in the cat but all other possible dis-
eases must be ruled out first before presuming this to
:2
be the diagnosis
CASE WORK-UP
MRl showed dorsal compression of the cord by the
T13-L1 articular facets (see Figs 47.6-47.9).
DIAGNOSIS
Osteoarthrosis of the articular facets withsecondary
Figure 47.9 Transverse T2wl. Compression of the spinal
cord compression.
cord.
TREATMENT
Welsh corgis have a familial degenerative myelopathy
A dorsal laminectomy removed compression from the
with progression of signs occurring in animals over 1.5
spinal cord. Six weeks later, the dog was neurologically
years old. Euthanasia was performed at the mean age
normal.
of 13 years by which time 70% had forelimb paresis. It
48
Ataxia: cerebellar ataxia
INITIAL PRESENTATION
When the coordination fails, smoothness of movement is lost and is replaced by:
Dysmetria, an exaggerated movement of limbs which appears as a jerking staggering gait, e.g.
hypermetria of the forelimbs. Ipsilateral to the lesion
 Delayed onset of voluntary movement with normal strength
Oscillation of the trunk at rest: truncal ataxia
Intention tremor of the head
Falling forward, backward or to either side
Spasticity.
Strength is preserved. General proprioception is preserved (*knuckling response', placing). There
may be an ipsilateral menace deficit. Vestibular signs may occur with some cerebellar lesions.
INTRODUCTION
remained normal. Hindlimb ataxia was noted at first
vaccination 3 weeks prior to referral and had worsened
The cerebellum's main function is to coordinate muscu-
in the intervening period. The kitten remained ambula-
lar activity by controlling the rate, range, force and direc-
tory and could feed.
tion of movement of the head, trunk and limbs. Smooth
controlled movement results. The cerebellum receives
proprioceptive information from muscle, tendon and 
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
joints, balance information from the vestibular appara-
The kitten was mentally alert and ambulatory with
tus, visual information and input from the generators of
hindlimb ataxia, “knuckling-over of the right fore, and 
voluntary motor activity. It regulates motion and muscle
falling to either side. The head posture was normal
tone by influencing the descending motor tracts of the
except for the fine tremor. Weakness and absent pro-
spinal cord.
 prioception were found in the hindlimbs. Spinal reflexes
were normal.
SIGNALMENT
A 3-month-old female domestic shorthaired kitten.
NEUROANATOMICAL LOCALIZATION
The lesion was localized to the cerebellum and brainstem
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
or cervical spinal cord. A purely cerebellar lesion could
Hindlimb ataxia and a tremor.
not account for the hindlimb weakness detected on
hopping reactions. The proprioceptive deficits of the
right forelimb and both hindlimbs could be due to a
CASE HISTORY
cervical cord or brainstem lesion. A spinal cord lesion
The kitten was normal when acquired at 8 weeks of age.
was thought most likely as the mental alertness appeared
A male littermate was also bought and this animal had
to be normal. The fine tremor of the head at rest was
205
206
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
thought to be due to a cerebellar lesion, although the
rottweilers. Most cases slowly worsen. There is no
classic overshooting of an intention tremor was lacking.
treatment.
Myelination defects and CNS inflammation may also
cause a tremor.
Lysosomal storage disease
Cerebellar ataxia and tremors are common presenting
signs in the affected young animal.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Abiotrophy
Feline panleukopenia virus
Postnatal degeneration of the cerebellar cortex and
 In-utero or perinatal infection results in cerebellar hypo-
plasia which manifests as dysmetria, truncal ataxia, and
of onset and rate of progression are breed-related.
a fine head tremor as the kitten begins to ambulate.
Most cases are noticed once ambulation commences
Clinical signs do not progressively worsen but become
(3-12 weeks) but later onset at 6-12 months or adult
more obvious as the kitten grows active. Quality of life
onset (7-13 years) are also reported. MRl measure-
is deemed satisfactory by pet owners.
ments detected cerebellar atrophy in affected American
Staffordshire terriers.  Definitive  diagnosis  is  made
Infarction
by postmortem. Investigative efforts aim to rule out
There is sudden onset of non-progressive cerebellar
other potential causes of cerebellar dysfunction (Table
signs, possibly unilateral. MRl findings are highly sugges-
48.1).
tive of the condition. Diagnostic efforts focus on elimi-
nating causes of thromboembolic disease. Prognosis is
Neuroaxonal dystrophy (NAD)
good. Half the affected dogs were spaniels or spaniel
NAD is a degenerative disease of the CNS which presents
crosses in one study.
as cerebellar dysfunction in young cats or dogs under 7
Neosporosis
months old. Late onset disease occurs in the rottweiler
(1-2 years old) and German shepherd dog (15 months
Neospora caninum is a protozoal pathogen of dogs
old). A menace deficit, nystagmus and conscious
which has been reported as causing rapidly progressive
proprioception deficits are reported in the affected
fatal neurological disease. As expected with an infec-
 Table 48.1 Onset of signs in cerebellar abiotrophy
Onset (1st signs)
Slow
Progressive
Stabilize or unknown
 By first vaccination
Samoyed
Azores cattle dog
Coton de Tulear
(≤16 weeks of age)
Australian kelpie
Miniature poodle
Beagle
Rough coated collie
 Bernese mountain dog
 Border collie
 Bull mastiff 
Coton de Tulear
Irish setter
Jack Russell terrier
Kerry blue terrier
Labrador
Rhodesian Ridgeback
Mixed breed cat
By neutering (≤6 months old)
Old English sheepdog
Airedale
Gordon setter
Finnish harrier
≥1 year of age
 Brittany spaniel
American Staffordshire terrier
Epagneul Breton dog 
 Siamese cat
Domestic shorthair cat
48 Ataxia: cerebellar ataxia
207
tious disease, lesions are multifocal but the predominant 
In this case: Given the young age, a congenital malfor-
sign in young dogs is progressive paraparesis from 
myelitis. Progressively worsening ataxia of 2 months to
 to be the most likely disease. A storage disease was
2 years duration has been reported in adult dogs aged
 possible as many induce ataxia and tremors in young
3-10 years. Clinical signs indicated a cerebellar lesion.
animals. Congenital malformations may present as a
 MRI found a smaller cerebellum and contrast-enhancing
static clinical course or a rapid decompensation
thickened meninges overlying the cerebellum. Serum
antibody titre (IFAT) for Neospora was >1:800 in 4/4
CASE WORK-UP
dogs. CSF analysis showed a mononuclear pleocytosis.
The owner's chief concernwas that the littermate be
PCR testing of CSF for Neospora was positive in 3/4
tested. Clindamycin 10-20 mg/kg and trimethoprim-
preserved in good health. To that end, the affected
kitten was checked for infectious disease. Serological
sulfadiazine 15 mg/kg q12 hr improved 4/4 dogs,
titres for FIP, FelV and FIV were negative. Toxoplasma
serology was also negative. Imaging of the brain and CSF
confirmed the diagnosis
collection had been discussed but was dedlined
Dysmyelination or hypomyelination of
The affectedkitten worsened in the next few days
the CNS
and was no longer able to walk without falling.
There are rare, congenital disorders in which puppies are
DIAGNOSIS
affected between 2 and 8 weeks of age and show a
generalized (whole body) tremor present at rest and with 
Globoidcellleukodystrophy(GCL)was found on
movement. Signs decrease or disappear with sleep, and
postmortem.
worsen with exercise, excitement and goal-directed
This is a rare lysosomal storage disease caused by a
movement. The severity is breed-dependent. Some are
deficiency in the enzyme galactocerebrosidase which
rendered recumbent while in others the signs plateau
leads to the accumulation of psychosine, a substance
 and improve by 1 year of age.
toxic to oligodendrocytes and Schwann cells of the CNS
A wide-based stance, dysmetria, bunny-hopping
and PNS
gait, hindlimb bouncing while standing and a fine
GCL has been reported in two DsH cats aged 3 and
tremor are seen. Seizures, nystagmus, absent menace
 4 months with progressively worsening hindlimb ataxia,
response, weakness, imbalance, stiff hindlimbs are also
paraplegia, loss of pain perception in the hindlimbs, and
reported.
tremors of the thoracic limbs.
49
Ataxia: vestibular ataxia
INITIAL PRESENTATION (VESTIBULAR DYSFUNCTION)
Ataxia
 Falling, leaning, rolling or circling
Head tilt, nystagmus or positional strabismus.
INTRODUCTION
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
Balance in a general sense is the ability to remain upright
An alert ambulatory dog with a left head tilt was
and so anything interfering with the mechanisms keeping
observed to lean to the left and veer off to the left when
 an animal upright (strength, muscle tone, proprioception
walking. Hopping and proprioception were normal in all
and coordination) could be said to affect balance.
limbs. Decreased left facial sensation was detected. No
In neuroloqical terms, balance describes the control
abnormal nystagmus was found.
 of posture exerted by the vestibular system. The recep-
tors of the vestibular system are referred to as balance
NEUROANATOMICAL LOCALIZATION
receptors and detect the position and movement of
the head. This is termed 'special proprioception. (see
Leaning and falling to one side in the absence of weak-
Chapter 57, p 234)
ness is suggestive of vestibular disease. Peripheral ves
tibular disease leaves the postural reactions intact as in
this dog but when vestibular disease is present and
SIGNALMENT
worsening, one would expect to find spontaneous, i.e.
An 8.5-year-old neutered female crossbred dog.
 abnormal, nystagmus on examination
The absence of abnormal nystagmus in this dog and
the abnormal facial sensation should ring warning bells;
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
do not be fooled by the signalment. This is not a simple
Loss of balance and left head tilt.
case of old dog idiopathic peripheral vestibular disease.
The abnormal facial sensation indicates either a left
CN V lesion or, more rarely, a right cerebral lesion affect-
CASE HISTORY
ing the quintothalamic pathway.
Signs commenced gradually 3 weeks prior to referral and
No cerebral signs are present so, remembering
had been slowly worsening since.
occam's razor, this is probably a focal left CN V and left
The dog veered to the left when walking. The left
CN Vll lesion. These two nerves are anatomically close
hind gave way a little.
at the cerebellopartive angle.
208
49 Ataxia: vestibular ataxia
209
It could be that the central vestibular pathways in the
left cerebellum have been affected. Central vestibular
disease from cerebellar lesions sometimes, but not
always, cause paradoxical signs.
No paradoxical signs are present in this dog as the
head tilt and leaning are both to the left.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
A focal lesion such as neoplasia, inflammation, or
infarction.
The latter would not have a gradual onset with pro-
gressive worsening.
Figure 49.1 MRl T1wl + contrast. Compression of the
fourth ventricle (circled) by the mass had not caused 
ventriculomegaly. No atrophy of the temporalis muscle
CASE WORK-UP
despite CN V involvement (triangle)
MRI found a large contrast-enhancing lesion with the
characteristics of a meningioma or neuroma at the left
cerebellopontine angle. The large size suggested the
lesion had developed slowly (Fig. 49.1).
TREATMENT
DIAGNOSIS
Prednisolone then euthanasia. Radiation therapy had
Neoplasia.
been discussed with the owner.
This page intentionally left blank
SECTION
7
LAMENESS
Chapter 50
Lameness - an introduction
213
Chapter 51
Lameness: nerve root compression
214
Chapter 52
Lameness: nerve root tumours
218
Chapter 53
Lameness: ischaemia
221
This page intentionally left blank
50
Lameness - an
introduction
Lameness is an abnormal gait caused by pain or mechan-
GRADING LAMENESS
ical dysfunction. The qait is predictably irreqular (cf
Force plate analysis is an objective measure of weight-
ataxia). Proprioception pathways are not damaged so
bearing. A subjective scale to score lameness is used
ataxia does not occur and proprioception testing is
during examination. Most scales assign O as normal,
normal.
and5/5 or 10/10 as non-weight-bearing lameness
(Table 50.1).
PRESENTING SIGNS
Lameness moy be recognized by the following
changes:
1. Decreased weight-bearing (limping)
CLINICAL TIP
● Holding the limb off the ground
● The unaffected limb placed further medially to
A surprisingly large number of pet owners do not
equate lameness with pain. Many believe that an
 support more of the animal's weight
● Shortened stride length of the affected limb
old animal with a stiff gait, slowness to rise, and a
reduced exercise tolerance is normal and do not
● Shifting body weight to relieve pressure on
affected limb(s)
request treatment.
● head bob. The head jerks upwards as the
affected forelimb strikes the ground in an effort
to limit weight being transferred to the painful
forelimb
● lowered head and arched back to shift the
Table 50.1 Grading lameness
weight to the forelimbs from painful (or weak)
Grade Description of lameness
Weight-bearing
hindlimbs.
at rest
 2. Decreased flexion or extension of limbs
●Shortened stride, shuffling gait, appear stiff/'stilted'
Normal gait 
Normal
 or crouched.
 Difficult to observe intermittent 
 Normal
Observable: minor constantly
Normal 
Other signs of poin:
apparent
Obvious, constant
Normal 
● A reduced activity level. Refusing to go for walks.
Severe, constant 
Incomplete 
● Unwilling or unable to jump up or down
 Non-weight bearing 
Absent
● Slow to rise from a recumbent position
● Depression, weight loss, abnormal elimination habits,
poor grooming or aggression.
213
51
Lameness: nerve root
compression
INITIAL PRESENTATION
 Nerve root compression or infiltration causes pain, resulting in 'root signature' lameness in the
innervated limb.
Three cases of forelimb lameness are described.
SIGNALMENT 1
● Meningioma
● Vertebral tumour
A 9-year-old neutered male Dalmatian.
● Discospondylitis could collapse the disc space and
compress a nerve root.
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
Neck pain and left fore lameness.
CASE WORK-UP
CASE HISTORY
MRl was chosen to investigate the causes of neck pain
because of the potential for nerve root compression. A
The dog had been yelping intermittently for 1 month.
lateralized extrusion of disc material into the interverte-
Left forelimb lameness commenced 1 week prior to the
bral foramen is difficult to outline with myelography as
referral. Although the dog was described as active, there
the subarachnoid space is not sufficiently compressed.
had been no history of trauma.
Rotated views may help, but the lesion may not be out-
lined even then.
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
 MRI showed ventral compression of the cord over the
C5-6 IVD space (Fig. 51.1).
A weight-bearing left forelimb lameness and a resistance
CSF was not taken.
to lateral neck flexion were found. No neurological defi-
cits were present.
DIAGNOSIS
NEUROANATOMICAL LOCALIZATION
Nerve roots to the left forelimb, within the vertebral
decompressed. The lameness and neck pain resolved
canal to account for the neck pain.
 and the dog remained normal without pain relief.
Forelimb lameness may precede or occur simultane-
ously with the onset of neck pain caused by a lateralized
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
disc extrusion. Signs may wax and wane and are gener-
● Lateralized disc extrusion
ally of sudden onset. Progression to tetraparesis, or
●Nerve root tumour
weakness of the forelimbs can occur.
214
51 Lameness: nerve root compression
215
ROT:270
Figure 51.1 Sagittal T2wl. Compression of the cord at
Figure 51.2 Some normal male dogs do not lift a
C 5-6 IVD space.
hindlimb to urinate.
Myelography shows the filling of the subarachnoid
shortened stride of the left hind. The hindlimb gait was
space with contrast agent. Dorsal and vertical nerve
not ataxic but the altered stride length did give it an
roots are enclosed by the subarachnoid space just to the
irregular look when viewed front on and from the rear
level of formation of the spinal nerve. Lateral compres-
but when viewed from the side the left hind lameness
 sion of the spinal nerve at the intervertebral foramen will
and right hind compensation was easier to see.
go unnoticed by myelography. MRl is an ideal tool to
Atrophy of the muscles of the left hind was noted.
detect this and other causes of neck pain. Transverse
Hopping and proprioception were normal. The patellar
slices should be taken through each IvD space from
reflex was 3+ bilaterally and the withdrawal reflex was
C2-3 to C7-T1. Prognosis for relief from pain and res-
normal in allimbs. The anal tone was normal. Pain could
toration of strength is excellent after surgery.
be elicited by pressure over the LSJ.
Applying firm pressure to the lumbosacral joint while
elevating the pubis elicited pain. Hip pain was found by
SIGNALMENT 2
forced extension of the hips. To differentiate the source
A 9-year-old male working cocker spaniel.
of pain, avoid hip extension when applying pressure to
the LSJ.
Decreased tarsal flexion during limb withdrawal (flexor
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
reflex) indicates sciatic involvement. A lack of antagonism
Left hindlimb lameness and a reluctance or inability to
from sciatic deficits creates pseudo-hyperreflexia of the
jump into the car.
patellar reflexes.
CASE HISTORY
NEUROANATOMICAL LOCALIZATION
One month's duration of difficulty getting into the car,
A root signature lameness affecting lumbar nerve
reduced activity, and non-weight-bearing on the left
roots, cauda equina, and lumbosacral junction was
hind when standing. A bunny-hopping, synchronous
suspected.
hindlimb gait occurred when the dog tried to run.
Weakness, lack of coordination, and pain can prevent
Atrophy of the hindlimbs had been noted. The dog was
an animal from lifting a hindlimb or squatting to urinate
bupy!l paddois pey pue buneoajap uaym penbs ol Mois
(Fig. 51.2). The owner will know what is normal for their
a hindlimb to urinate.
pet but generally will not mention a change unless spe-
cifically asked.
 Such animals tend to assume the squatting posture
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
but having started to eliminate will rise up and walk
The dog was alert and ambulatory with decreased
along while finishing. Urination has a voluntary initiation
weight-bearing on the left hind when standing and a
and cessation. Urine retention may occur.
216
SMAll ANImAL NEUROLOGY
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
contrast agent will also limit interpretation. Epidural
placement of contrast has been used diagnostically by
Compression of a lumbar nerve root at the L7-S1 inter-
injecting contrast agent external to the dural sac between
vertebral site or at an intervertebral foramen can produce
S3 and Cd1 vertebrae or at the LS space (epidurog-
'root signature' lameness. The ipsilateral hindlimb is held
raphy). Filling may be incomplete due to epidural fat.
in partial flexion to avoid weight-bearing. Intermittent
MRl has the advantage of transverse imaging through
partial weight-bearing creates a 'stamping' action.
any level of the spine while producing excellent soft
Compression at L7-S1 by a combination of prolapsed
tissue detail. CT provides superior bone detail com-
disc, articular facet overgrowth, L7-S1 instability, liga-
pared with MRl and better soft tissue contrast than
ment or joint capsule hypertrophy or stenosis of the
radiographs.
cranial aperture of the S1 is common in middle to large
 Despite nerve root involvement abnormal spontane-
breed adult male dogs. It presents with signs of pain or
ous potentials may not be found on electromyography.
neurogenic paresis:
1. Pain
In this case: MRl demonstrated ventral compression of
● Slow to rise and to sit
the cauda equina at the L7-S1 disc space.
● Difficulty maintaining a squatting position to def-
ecate (gets up and walks off while defecating)
● Reluctant to jump in or out of vehicles
DIAGNOSIS
● Reluctant to exercise
● Uni- or bilateral (or shifting) hindlimb lameness
Type Il disc prolapse
 Permanent or intermittent.
2. Paresis
● Compression of nerve roots supplying tail, anal
TREATMENT
sphincter, external urethral sphincter and sciatic
If clinical signs have not resolved with strict rest and pain
nerve
relief, surgery must be considered. In such cases it is
● Tail paresis or paralysis
generally more cost- and time-efficient to perform MRI
● Urinary and faecal 'overflow' incontinence
initially, rather than radiography. All causes of localized 
●‘Knuckling' of paw
lumbar pain can be assessed, including nerve root
● Licking, biting paws or tail (suspect paresthesia)
tumours (rare), discospondylitis (often younger dogs),
In this case: Compression of nerve roots by IVDD
vertebral body tumours (rare), DJD of the articular facets
articular facets, neoplasia (vertebral or cauda equina) or
and paravertebral abscesses. Spondylosis is common at
L7-S1 and its presence is not diagnostic of neural
discospondylitis were considered.
compression.
The degree of compression is not correlated with the
CASE WORK-UP
severity of the signs or prognosis. Once again, treatment
decisions are based on the severity of the clinical signs.
Diagnosis requires demonstrating compression of the
1. Rest, pain relief for the first episode of pain or inter-
lumbosacral nerve roots. As these nerve roots arise from
mittent pain. Some 50% had a good outcome within
the lumbosacral intumescence imaging must include
approximately 3 months.
vertebrae L3-S1 and not just the L7-S1 disc space. One
 2. Surgical decompression for recurrent or continuous
must always remember the neuroanatomic localization
pain or neurological deficits. Some 75% had a sat-
of the lesion when interpreting any imaging and not be
isfactory outcome over a 3-year follow-up. In one
beguiled by lesions in adjacent, irrelevant locations seen
study, 78% of affected working dogs returned to
within the field of view.
their normal activity level. Incontinence failed to
The efficacy of myelography is hampered by the vari-
resolve postoperatively in 55-87%.
able position of the dural sac within the spinal canal. In
approximately 15-20% of dogs, the dural sac does not
Some sources report that the preoperative duration of
cross the L7-S1 disc space. Epidural leakage of contrast
neurological deficits such as incontinence negatively
agent during a lumbar injection, and a dural sac that lies
affects prognosis. Incontinence for more than 1 month
in the middle of the vertebral canal, or does not fill with
before surgery is less likely to resolve after surgery.
 51 Lameness: nerve root compression
217
A L7-51 dorsal laminectomy was performed in this
case. The bulging anulus fibrosis was removed. The
dog's gait and activity level returned to normal.
SIGNALMENT 3
An 11-year-old neutered female Briard dog
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
Neck pain and left forelimb weakness
Figure 51.3 T1wl + contrast. Compression of the spinal
cord (arrow) resulting in UMN tetraparesis
CASE HISTORY
There had been a sudden onset of neck pain and left
forelimb lameness of 3 weeks' duration. The dog had
progressively worsened and was presented with pro-
● Vertebral body tumour
found forelimb weakness.
●Distension of the cord from within may also cause
Carprofen and tramadol were used to manage the
pain.
pain.
The associated lameness which developed into forelimb
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
weakness is an extra clue that the neck pain is of related
origin and cervical in nature rather than cerebral. Also,
The dog was alert and responsive with a non-ambulatory
cerebral lesions are not expected to cause such a pro-
tetraparesis. When the body weight was supported,
found change in the gait without some change in the
the forelimbs were seen to be weaker than the hind.
mental state.
Proprioception was tested by supporting all of the
dog's body weight and was found to be decreased in all
CASE WORK-UP
limbs, more so in the forelimbs. Spinal reflexes were
 intact in all limbs. Neck pain was elicited by gentle pal-
Myelography was discussed, but MRl was chosen to
pation of the neck muscles.
 investigate a possibly lateralized or invasive lesion.
MRl showed a large tumour affecting the C5 vertebral
NEUROANATOMICAL LOCALIZATION
body and surrounding tissue (Fig. 51.3)
C1-5 spinal cord segments. Strength and proprioception
DIAGNOSIS
were reduced in all four limbs, and the spinal reflexes
were intact. UMN tetraparesis. Compression of a nerve
Probably a sarcoma. The dog was euthanized.
root to the left forelimb could account for the initial left
fore lameness.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
● IVD extrusion
● Spinal cord tumour
52
Lameness: nerve root
tumours
INITIAL PRESENTATION
present as a chronic persistent forelimb lameness lasting months for which no orthopaedic
explanation can be found. They are common in middle-aged dogs and more than 80% affect the
brachial plexus or its nerve roots.
SIGNALMENT 1
NEUROANATOMICAL LOCALIZATION
A 9-year-oldneuteredfemale West Highland white
Nerve roots of the right brachial intumescence. The
terrier.
proprioceptive deficits of the right hind indicate a
lesion within the vertebral canal.
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Right fore lameness
The first sign was lameness, suggesting nerve root
involvement, possibly compression by a lateralized IVD
CASE HISTORY
extrusion which had since worsened to cause right hind
There was a 6-week duration of right forelimb lameness.
deficits. Peripheral nerve sheath tumours, meningioma,
The limb had recently been giving way causing the dog
lymphoma were possible.
to stumble when running or turning. There had been no
Early diagnosis of a nerve root tumour requires an
history of trauma. The signs had not improved with
index of suspicion. The caudal cervical nerve roots C6-8
NSAID therapy.
are most commonly affected, weakening both flexion
and extension. when the T1 and T2 nerve roots are
involved ipsilateral Horner's syndrome  and cutaneous
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
trunci reflex loss occurs. Successful treatment requires
There was a generalized atrophy of the right forelimb.
forelimb amputation with clean tissue margins in the
Hopping was decreased in the right fore and also in the
severed nerve roots. If the dog is an unsuitable candidate
right hind. Both the right fore and hind paws were
for a forelimb amputation then onecould argue that
quickly returned to position during proprioceptive testing
further diagnostics are not warranted.
but they were replaced in an abducted position which is
abnormal. Placing in the right fore was slightly reduced.
CASE WORK-UP
The right fore withdrawal reflex was reduced but pain
perception in the limb was present. No Horner's syn-
Electromyography is a useful tool. It detects an unstable
drome was found. The cutaneous trunci reflex was
muscle membrane caused by denervation and aids dif-
normal bilaterally.
ferentiation of orthopaedic from neurogenic causes of
218
52 Lameness: nerve root tumours
219
lameness. Lumbar CSF should be collected even in the
absence of ipsilateral hindlimb signs. A compressive
spinal cord lesion often results in elevated total protein
levels and its presence would signal that invasion of the
spinal canal has taken place. Enlargement of the inter-
vertebral foramen by an encroaching nerve root tumour
can be detected on non-contrast radiography. Myelog-
raphy has been used to rule out extension of the tumour
to the spinal canal. Oblique views are required. An intra-
dural-extramedullary pattern ('golf tee') compression is
seen. MRl and CT have replaced myelography to a large
extent.
MRI has proved extremely useful in locating nerve
Figure 52.1 T1wl + contrast: thickened nerve root
root tumours. Most have some degree of contrast-
(arrow).
enhancement. Multiple planes through both axillae and
the spinal canal are required. Metastases are rare
In this case the EMG showed spontaneous potentials
present in the right forelimb indicating denervation
rather than disuse atrophy was present.
Lumbar CSF: The total protein was elevated at
0.80 g/l. WBC =7/mm?. Cytology was normal.
MRl showed enlargement of the right-sided C7 nerve
root. And ventral compression of the cord by an irregular
mass at the level of the C6-7 IVD space (Figs 52.1 and
52.2).
DIAGNOSIS
Figure 52.2 T2Wl sagittal. There are eight cervical cord
 segments and nerve roots. C7 exits the canal at the C6-7
Neoplasia: nerve root tumour.
IV foramen.
Neurogenic atrophy, paresis and loss of sensation are
not present during the initial period of lameness. Each
muscle is supplied by several nerve roots. If only one
nerve root is affected LMN signs will not be visible
However, invasion of one nerve root is sufficient to
paresis and proprioceptive deficits within weeks rather
cause pain. Self-mutilation of the affected limb is
than months. Lumbar CSF analysis is useful as it may
uncommon.
detect malignant lymphocytes. Enlargement of the
As the tumour enlarges, more nerve roots of the
intervertebral  foramen  is not seen  in  this acute
brachial plexus are affected and a painful mass may
presentation.
be palpable in the axilla. LMN signs become obvious.
Invasion of the spinal canal through the intervertebral
TREATMENT
foramen is the inevitable outcome resulting in ipsilateral
hindlimb proprioceptive deficits and paresis. Compres-
The dog was euthanized 2 months later.
sion of the brachial intumescence will eventually result
in LMN weakness of the contralateral forelimb and bilat-
SIGNALMENT 2
eral hindlimb UMN weakness.
Less than 20% of peripheral nerve sheath tumours
A 7-year-old neutered female crossbred dog
occur elsewhere. Their slow growth can go unnoticed
until they compress the spinal cord.
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
Lymphoma of the brachial plexus occurs in the cat
and has a rapid progression of signs from lameness to
Right hindlimb lameness.
220
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
CASE HISTORY
The dog suddenly began limping on the right hindlimb
4 months ago. Hip dysplasia was diagnosed and treated
with NSAIDs and hydrotherapy. Some initial improve-
ment occurred but the lameness worsened and became
intermittently non-weight-bearing. No other problems
were reported. The dog was still able to jump.
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
The bright, alert ambulatory dog had a right hindlimb
weight-bearing lameness. At rest, the right hind would
sometimes be held off the ground. When walking, the
 Figure 52.3 Dorsal plane. The signal from fat has been
right hindlimb adducted, and the right hind claws were
heard to intermittently scrape the ground. Right hind
suppressed, allowing contrast enhancement of the nerve
roots on the right to be visible (arrow).
proprioception was reduced.
The right withdrawal reflex was weak with poor
flexion of the stifle and tarsus. The hip flexed but was
weak. The patellar reflex was normal/increased. Pain
perception was present
Anal tone was present and appeared to be normal.
The dog appeared painful when the LSl was pressed. No
hip pain was found.
NEUROANATOMICAL LOCALIZATION
Right sciatic nerve or nerve roots
L
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
● Nerve root tumour
● Compression by IVDD.
CASE WORK-Up
MRl showed enhancement of the right lateral cauda
 Figure 52.4 Transverse image. T2Wwl: the right-sided nerve
equina beginning at the level of the cranial end of the
(arrow) is enlarged compared with the left (arrowhead)
L5 vertebral body and running to the L6-7 right side
foramina. There was no compression at the LSJ (Figs
52.3 and 52.4)
CSF analysis showed: an increase in total protein:
0.91 g/l. Increased WBC 16, with normal cytology. RBC
TREATMENT
130 ul was thought to be iatrogenic during collection.
The owner declined surgery due to the lack of a 100%
guarantee the dog would not be worse postoperatively.
DIAGNOSIS
The dog remained ambulatory and continent 7 months
Suspected schwannoma rather than lymphoma as the
after the diagnosis. The right hind 'knuckled' over con-
latter would be expected to have a shorter clinical time
stantly. The dog received daily NSAID and did not appear
course.
to be in pain.
53
Lameness: ischaemia
INTRODUCTION
The dog featured in Figure 53.1 presented with a
24-hour history of shifting hindlimb lameness followed
Arterial thromboembolism produces limb ischaemia and
by an arched back and then sudden paraplegia on the
either paresis or paralysis, depending on the degree of
day of referral. Femoral pulses were absent bilaterally
occlusion and amount of collateral circulation.
but the hind paws were warm until they became cold
This is most common in the cat and may be the first
 2 hours later. The right quadriceps femoris muscle was
sign of cardiac disease. More than 70% of cats with this
firm and were painful when touched as were the lumbar
condition have an underlying cardiomyopathy. It is rare
epaxial muscles. Pain perception and spinal reflexes were
in the dog and risk factors include cardiac disease, hyper-
absent in both hind limbs. The cause was thought to be
adrenocorticism, disseminated intravascular coagulation
a hypercoagulable state from a protein-losing glomeru-
(DIC), protein-losing nephropathy or enteropathy, heart-
 lonephropathy. The dog was euthanized as the progno-
worm, AIHA, neoplasia and sepsis.
sis for long-term normality was guarded and the pain
A saddle thromboembolism (TE) forms at the aortic
was extreme.
trifurcation in 9o% of affected cats. Clinical signs result
from ischaemia of the cauda equina and hindlimb
muscles. The proximal limb may retain voluntary move-
SIGNALMENT
ment while the distal limb is paralysed, or vice versa. Tail
function and anal tone may be intact. Trauma or neo-
A 6-year-old neutered male domestic longhaired cat.
plasia to the cauda equina tends not to be so selective.
Muscles particularly the gastrocnemius and cranial tibial
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
muscles are firm, painful and swollen
Acute thrombosis also occurs in single limbs causing
 Intermittent shifting lameness.
transient or permanent paresis/paralysis. Owners may
report transient signs as lameness.
CASE HISTORY
Acute and chronic onset of signs have been reported
in dogs aged 5-10 years of age. Chronic onset (>24 hr)
Lethargy, inappetance and weight loss had been present
produces exercise intolerance and pain (restlessness,
for 2 months. At 6 weeks prior to referral, a 3-day dura-
refusal to move, vocalization from palpation along the
tion of right hindlimb dragging occurred. Three weeks
spine) for weeks to months prior to diagnosing the
after this improvement, the left fore pad was swollen,
causative aortic thromboembolism. The femoral pulse
had lost fur and was painful, and 48 hours later still, the
was abnormal in all dogs. Minimal neurological deficits
hindlimbs were dragged on waking up from sleep. One
were present. Abdominal ultrasound was 100% success-
week later, the hindlimbs were momentarily seen to be
ful in demonstrating the thromboembolism. Muscle
dragged and the right forelimb was lame and non-
enzymes were generally within normal limits (cf. acute
weight-bearing. This improvement was followed by the
onset <24 hr). Survival times ranged from 1 month to
hindlimbs being  dragged again  which subsequently
2 years. Cavalier King Charles spaniels comprised the
improved in the 4 days prior to referral.
majority of dogs affected, although larger breeds were
There had been bowls of rat bait in the kitchen but
not spared.
it was not known if the cat had had access to any of it.
221
222
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
Signs of thromboembolism
● Pain
● Pallor
●Pulses absent
●Hypothermia
+ Paralysis.
Polycythaemia is an elevated red blood cell count.
Dehydration produces a relative polycythaemia and signs
 are secondary to dehydration. Absolute polycythaemia is
Figure 53.1 Non-selective angiography of a 9-year-old 
rare and most cases will present with neurological signs
male collie cross with aortic thromboembolism. (photo
due to the hyperviscosity and resulting poor perfusion.
courtesy of Dr Jacques Sottiaux)
Seizures, behavioural change, blindness, tremors and
ataxia occur. Lameness and muscle pain may be the
presenting signs (Table 53.1)
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
The neurological examination found a very quiet but
CASE WORK-UP
mentally alert and responsive cat with voluntary move·
Bleeding times were normal PT 17 minutes (Normal=
ment in both hindlimbs but more so in the right hind.
15-23), APTT 89 minutes (Normal= 70-120), ruling out
The tail had voluntary movement and anal tone was
present. The patellar reflex was normal bilaterally. The
Vitamin K antagonism from rat bait.
In-house globulin and PCV were normal. Serum K was
hindlimbs flexed by hip movement. The forelimb with-
normal (Note: this can be raised from reperfusion injury).
drawal reflex was normal. Cranial nerve and fundus
Total calcium was normal (Note: hypocalcaemia can
examinations were normal. The gastrocnemius muscles
cause muscle spasm; weakness and episodic signs). AST
were firm and felt enlarged but were not painful. The
femoral pulses were poor/very difficult to feel but all
paws felt warm and as warm as each other. The respira-
tory rate was 56 bpm at rest and there was a visible
respiratory effort, HR = 140.
Table 53.1 Differentiating relative and absolute
 polycythaemia
NEUROANATOMICAL LOCALIZATION
Relative
Absolute polycythaemia
polycythaemia
The lesion was localized to muscles and nerves distal to
the stifle, secondary to poor perfusion.
Loss of plasma volume
EPO-independent proliferation
Splenic contraction
Primary ('vera")
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
(s6op)
 Myeloproliferative disorder
EPO-dependent proliferation
The poor pulses, increased respiratory rate and episodic
Secondary
lameness/weakness were suggestive of a vascular cause;
Hypoxia (cardiopulmonary)
Non-hypoxic (renal:
haemorrhage or infarction (emboli; hyperviscosity from
neoplasia)
polycythaemia or hypergammaglobulinemia).
Normal total RBC mass
Increase in total RBC mass
The sudden onset of paralysis and pain in arteriar
Signs of dehydration,
CNS signs. Muscle pain.
thromboembofism mimics recent trauma. CK, AST, and
hyperviscosity, and the
Hypoxia: dyspnoea, Cyanosis
underlying disease
ALT values were high; 22% of affected cats will have a
PCV mildly increased:
PCV 60-70%
femoral pulse on presentation, which can complicate
55-65% (dog)
diagnosis as the classic sign of cold extremities may not
 Treatment: fluid therapy
Phlebotomy, leeches*, treat 
be present. Blood glucose concentration from the
 underlying mechanism 
affected limb(s) can be compared with the non-clinical
*On average over a 48 hr attachment, 1 leech decreased
limbs (The results for the ischaemic limb should be less
the PCV by 6%.
than that from the non-ischaemic limb)
53 Lameness: ischaemia
223
1878 IU/l (15-45), ALT 451 IU/l (30-6), CK >9400 IU/I
later the cat was walking normally and eating well and
(0-400). Globulin level was normal. Haematology was
was not on any medication.
 normal. The rest of the biochemistry was normal. Glucose
was 8.4 mmol/l and thought to be due to the stress
GASTROINTESTINAL ULCERATION
response.
Cardiology consultation found hypertrophic cardio-
Gastrointestinal ulceration, presenting as depression,
myopathy (HCM) and pulmonary oedema
anorexia, vomiting and melaena, is a common side-
effect of NSAID therapy, or the combination of NSAID
and corticosteroids. It occurs in the gastric antrum and
DIAGNOSIS
duodenum. Abdominal pain is uncommon.
Colonic ulcers also occur after glucocorticoid use and
HCM with thromboemboli.
spinal surgery, causing abdominal pain, constipation and 
fever. Perforation is 100% fatal.
PROGNOSIS
Risk factors
Recovery: 50% of cats will regain some degree of limb
● The use of one or more NSAID with or without con-
function within 2 months. Monitor blood flow to the
 comitant corticosteroid therapy
limb with a Doppler blood pressure monitor. Monitor
● High dose dexamethasone or methylprednisolone
return of sensation. A general rule of neurology is that
● Spinal surgery (increased sympathetic tone, inhibition
deficits are reversed in the order of their occurrence, i.e.
of colon motility and perfusion),
sensation is the last function to go and the first to return.
Thromboemboli can spontaneously resolve. Surgical
Treatment
removal has a high associated fatality rate. Reperfusion
1. Coat the ulcer
injury occurs if the clot is removed surgically but not if
● Liquid sucralfate 0.5-1 g PO q4-8 hr
it spontaneously resolves. Longevity: 3 months to 2.5
● There is no proven efficacy of inert adsorbents
years. Aspirin does not prevent recurrence.
such as Kaopectate or barium sulphate contrast
media.
 2. Decrease acid production
TREATMENT
● H2-antagonist
Aspirin 325 mg; one-quarter of an aspirin every other
● Cimetidine 5-10 mg/kg PO, IM, IV q6-8 hr
day
● Ranitidine 2 mg/kg PO, IV q8-12 hr (dog)
Bumetanide 1 mg; half tablet BID
● Ranitidine 2.5 mg/kg IV or 3.5 mg/kg PO q12 hr
Diltiazem 10 mg; half a tablet TID.
(cat).
● Proton pump inhibitor
The cat gradually showed improvement in his hindlimb
● Omeprazole 0.7 mg/kg up to 20 mg PO q24 hr.
function and femoral pulses. He could walk on all four
 3. Resection of the ulcer if it perforates or uncontrolled
limbs, trailing the left hind behind him but advancing it
haemorrhage is present.
at the hip. There was decreased tone of the left tarsus
Prophylaxis
and a knotted feel to the left gastrocnemius muscle
persisted. Both hindlimbs had patellar reflexes. The right
1. Sucralfate (1 hr before meals) - may prevent stress-
hind flexed when the metatarsals were stimulated but
induced ulcers but not NSAID-induced ulcers
not when the toes were stimulated; the left hind flexed
2. Misoprostol - a prostaglandin E2 analog - prevents
the hip and stifle but not the tarsus.
NSAID-induced ulcers
A month later, the cat vomited dark brown material
3. H2-antagonist
thought to be digested blood. The aspirin was stopped
4. The combination of misoprostol, cimetidine and
and sucralfate and ranitidine was used as gastrointesti-
omeprazole has not prevented gastric ulcers in dogs
nal protectants. The vomiting stopped. Eight months
receiving high dose glucocorticoids.
This page intentionally left blank
8
SECTION
POSTURE
Chapter 54
Posture - an introduction
227
Chapter 55
Torticollis 
229
Chapter 56
Collapse
232
This page intentionally left blank
54
Posture - an introduction
Posture is a description of the relative placement,
or‘the head turns to the left' describes the nose
arrangement, or position of the animal's head, body and
pointing to the left side of the animal (see also
limbs with respect to gravity. The term attitude refers to
Fig. 54.1).
the position of the eyes, head and limbs relative to the
● The combination of a head tilt and a head turn has
body. Some authors have used ‘attitude' as a synonym
been called a yaw.
● Bob, nod, intention tremor (see p 244)
postures should be described in the course of an
● Head pressing (obstinate progression): animals push
examination, this point of terminology is not hugely
themselves forward until they meet an obstacle then
important.
continue to push against it. It is a sign of cerebral
disease.
Posture is controlled by:
Neck
● Musdle tone
● Strength
● Dorsifexion: 'stargazing', head looking upwards
● Balance
● Ventroflexion: lowered head posture, head rests on
+ Coordination.
sternum
● Torticolis: twisting of neck
Posture is described by:
● May be held in a stiff, rigid, straight, unmoving posi-
tion, lowered or level with the thoracic spine.
● Direction: to the left, to the right, ventrally, dorsally.
The direction is ALWAYS given from the animals
Trunk
perspective NOT the viewer's. ‘To the left' refers to
● Lordosis; ventrally arched back, 'dipped', a concave
the animal's left side. When taking the history be sure
arch,hunched,‘tucked up
that the owner is describing the abnormality in this
● Kyphosis: dorsally arched back, a convex arch. The
manner
head is often lowered and the hindlimbs held further
●Proximity to the medial plane: abducted (further
forward, closer to the centre of gravity. It is a sign of
from), adducted (closer to)
neck, back, or abdominal pain and is also seen with
●Degree of limb extension: increased (hyper) or decreased 
hindlimb or generalized weakness
(hypo) extension, plantigrade or palmigrade.
● Scofiosis: lateral curve to the spine
● Pleurothotonus: tetanic bending of the body to one
DESCRIPTION OF ABNORMAL POSTURE
side
Truncaf ataxia; side to side oscillation, irregular unpre-
Head
dictable movement, tremor
● Tilt: one ear is dloser to the ground than the other,
●Falling: forward, backward, or to the one or the other
e.g. a right head tilt has the right ear closer to the
side. It can result from weakness, loss of propriocep-
ground.
tion, loss of balance (uneven vestibular input), altera-
● Turn: the head is level with the nose pointing cau-
tions in musdle tone or a combination of all these
dally, turning as if to look behind. 'A left head turn',
factors
227
228
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
 Figure 54.3 Left plantigrade stance.
● Non-weight-bearing
Figure 54.1 Aged Jack Russell terrier with a right cerebral
tumour. Head turn to the right.
● Weight-bearing on the dorsal surface of the paw:
‘knuckling over
● Plantigrade: weight-bearing on the phalanges and
metacarpals or metatarsals rather than the digits.
Palmigrade is sometimes used to refer to a planti-
grade forelimb position (see Fig. 54.3).
● Increased extension: stiff, stilted, rigid, spastic, 'saw
horse' (all limbs in extension)
● Decreased extension resulting in a joint being more
ventral than normal, e.g. a 'dropped' hock
● Oscillating extension and flexion causing a bouncing,
jerky coarse tremor.
Repetitive limb flexion in
the conscious patient
● Pain: lameness. Common
● Partial seizure: typically short-lived before generaliz-
Figure 54.2 Leaning to the left induced by an ipsilateral
ing to other body parts
 pontine glioma.
● Tremor: orthostatic tremor. Unusual
● Dyskinesia: breed-related. Rare.
● Leaning: the upright trunk is positioned lateral to its
SYNDROMES
centre of gravity. A sign of uneven muscle tone, or
balance loss (see Fig. 54.2).
A syndrome is a group of clinical signs resulting in a
● Lurching: is a sudden movement in one direction.
distinct clinical picture.
More than a lean; not quite a fall. Falling to one side
● Decerebrate rigidity: extension of all limbs and dorsi-
but not hitting the ground.
flexion of the head and neck
● Decerebellate rigidity: opisthotonus with thoracic
Limbs
limb extension, flexion of pelvic limbs (hips) up under
● Adduction (mnemonic: dd, limb = d, limbs close
the body
 together) limb closer to median plane than normal
● Opisthotonus: extension of forelimbs and dorsiflexion
● Abduction: limb further from median plane than
of the head and neck
normal
● Schiff-Sherrington: extensor hypertonia of the fore-
● Wide-based
stance,
'splayed':  limbs bilaterally
limbs with paraplegia
abducted
● Adversive syndrome: leaning, head turning, propul-
● Hindlimbs held closer to forelimbs, shifting weight to
sive circling, or ocular deviation toward the side of
forelimbs
the rostral thalamic lesion.
55
Torticollis
INTRODUCTION
CASE HISTORY
Scoliosis describes a lateral curvature of the spine. It
The dog had tried to jump onto a chair to steal a ham-
may be congenital due to a wedge-shaped malformation
burger but was restrained by a short lead and fell back-
of vertebral bodies (hemivertebrae). Acquired scoliosis
wards, hitting the ground. The dog had remained
occurs secondary to syringomyelia or hydromyelia from
immobile in a twisted position since the accident 2 hours
unequal tone in or sensory input from the spinal
prior to referral.
musculature.
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
Kyphosis: The dorsal deviation of the thoracic vertebral
column is seen as an arching of the back. It commonly
The dog was obtunded and in lateral recumbency with
accompanies back and  abdominal pain.  Vertebral
an almost 90° turn of his head and neck to the right.
malalignment from hemivertebrae or vertebral fracture
The left eye was visible and had a menace response,a
or luxation are less frequent causes
normal direct PLR in a medium sized pupil. The left
fundus was normal. There was no strabismus or sponta-
Lordosis is a downward curvature of the lumbar spine
neous nystagmus in the left eye. The right eye was
hidden by the abnormal posture (Fig. 55.1).
with exaggeration of the normal dip between the scapu-
lae and the hip (dipped back, swayback). It can be due
to hemivertebrae or vertebral fracture/luxation.
NEUROANATOMICAL DIAGNOSIS
The lesion was initially localized to the neck. Vestibular
Torticollis, also known as 'wry neck', results from an
disease can cause a head tilt. Cerebral disease can cause
involuntary unilateral contraction of the neck muscles
a head turn. A combination of vertebral trauma, vesti-
causing torsion (twisting) of the neck. Head rotation
bular and cerebral lesions was a possibility given that
(head tilt) with laterocollis (turn to one side), retrocollis
trauma was the cause.
(dorsiflexion), but usually not antecoffis (ventroflexion) is
seen. It may be secondary to an acquired cervical spine
or spinal cord lesion, or muscle spasm from local or
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
higher CNS origin.
A fundamental question is: did the signs result from the
fall or induce the fall? If the latter, then many other dif-
ferential diagnoses needed to be considered. In this case,
SIGNALMENT
the dog was historically normal until directly after the
A 9-year-old male Maltese terrier
trauma caused by restricted movement.
There was a good chance that C1-2 subluxation was
present following neck trauma.
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
Small or toy breed dogs with a malformation of the
A twisted neck and inability to walk
dens or the supporting apical, alar, and transverse
229
230
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
EAR
Figure 55.2 Fexed lateral view C1-C2
Figure 55.1 Torticollis. Left ear (arrow). Tail (double
arrows)
ligaments are predisposed to developing C1-2 sublux-
ation after minor trauma. Hypoplasia of the dens is the
most common malformation but a simple absence of the
dens does not guarantee subluxation is present.
Animals of any age may be affected but 80% of clini-
Aew subis 'abe jo sieas 7 lapun shop ul leadde sases jes
be intermittent. The majority have gait deficits (84%)
while 61% have neck pain. Paresis and ataxia are more
 common presentations than tetraplegia. Such instability
is manifest by a widened space between the dorsal
arches of C1 and C2. Slight ventroflexion of the neck
makes this more pronounced at the substantial risk of
worsening the spinal cord compression.
The wings of the atlas may obscure the location of
the dens, so a slightly rotated position may overcome
this. Open-mouth views cause dorsiflexion of the neck
during positioning and should be avoided in animals
with clinical signs.
Trauma to the cervical spine in an animal with a
normal dens and associated ligaments usually results in
a fracture of the dens from the body of the axis
The prognosis is determined by the degree of neuro-
logical deficit and ranges from good to fair to guarded
 accordingly.
Figure 55.3  VD myelogram of the cervical cord.
CASE WORK-UP
lateral view of the neck did not show C1-C2 subluxation
(Fig. 55.2).
Conscious cervical radiographs were taken but were not
CSF was collected at the cisterna magna without
diagnostically useful due to the torticollis
incident and a myelogram was done to look for trau-
The following day the dog was more alert. Non-
matic extrusion of IV discs. No compression of the
contrast lateral and VD cervical radiographs taken under
cervical cord was found on lateral, VD or oblique views
general anaesthesia were normal. The slightly flexed
(Fig. 55.3).
55 Torticollis
231
The CSF was pink and opaque. CSF results showed
 spontaneous vertical nystagmus changing intermittently
RBC 3211/mm?, WBC 47/mm? and TP 1.23 g/l. No RBC
 to horizontal nystagmus fast phase to the right were
phagocytosis was found in the CSF, indicating this was
found. These findings indicated central vestibular disease.
a recent bleed into the subarachnoid space. latrogenic
The direction of the horizontal nystagmus was opposite
haemorrhage also increases the RBC count of the CSF.
 to that expected (paradoxical). The right menace deficit
However, in most cases the blood appears as wisps of
indicated that this paradoxical central vestibular lesion
haemorrhage swirling within clear CSF or as frank haem-
 involved the cerebellum. A right cerebellopontine lesion
orrhage. During collection latrogenic haemorrhage of 
was suspected, probably due to a developing oedema
3211 RBC/mm? would not be expected to increase the
secondary to the head trauma.
total protein to this degree. For these reasons the abnor-
MRl of the head was offered but declined.
mal CSF values were thought to be due to trauma.
FOLLOW-UP
DIAGNOSIS
Voluntary movement improved and the torticollis
Two days after the trauma torticollis to the right, absent
resolved within 8 days. Right-sided placing deficits were
placing in all limbs, absent right menace response, and
noted but these subsequently resolved.
56
Collapse
INTRODUCTION
a. Reduced cardiac output
● Decreased left ventricular output: cardiomy-
Sudden onset of collapse is a common presenting sign
opathies, aortic stenosis or shock
in small animal practice but not all such animals are
●Reduced left ventricular filling: cardiac tampon-
afflicted with neurological disease. Physical examination,
 ade or hypovolaemia
haematology and biochemistry are invaluable in distin-
●Reduced right heart function: pulmonary
guishing neurological lesions  from other  causes of
embolism or pulmonary hypertension
weakness such as fever, sepsis or hypovolaemia. Always
●Arrhythmias: bradycardia (sick sinus syndrome
try to ascertain the level of mental awareness of the
 or A-V block) or tachycardia (supraventricular
animal during and after the collapse. Systemically
or ventricular).
unwell animals are depressed (obtunded), which mimics
b. Hypotension
cerebral disease. Syncopal animals lose consciousness
● Decreased systemic vascular resistance (fever or
but return to normal mentation almost immediately,
sepsis)
unlike seizure activity, which usually leaves the animal
● Reflex hypotension (vasovagal)
more lethargic than normal for a variable period of
C. Anoxia
time lasting minutes to hours. A severely depressed
● Anaemia
mentation (stupor) or a persistent lack of response
● Hypovolaemia
to stimuli (coma) signal dysfunction of the brainstem
● Poor perfusion from hyperviscosity.
or cerebrum. Stupor and coma occur in metabolic or
 2. Endocrine disorders
●Hypoglycaemia
causing a loss of balance and subsequent collapse are
● Tetany/hypocalcaemia
usually strikingly obvious on examination. An animal that
● Pheochromocytoma
has acutely lost balance is mentally alert but usually pays
● Hypoadrenocorticism
less attention to the owner, as it struggles to regain its
3. Neurological disorders
footing.
● Seizures
Collapse may be sustained (recumbency), or may
● Central or peripheral vestibular disease
occur episodically, with spontaneous resolution
●Weakness
● Increases in intracranial pressure
● Narcolepsy/cataplexy
CLINICAL TIP
● Dystonia, e.g. myotonia
Never accept the owner's interpretation of the
 collapse. Always request a description.
The history and physical examination localized the cause
of collapse in the following dogs of identical age and
breed.
Causes ofcollapse
1. Syncope (fainting, see Table 56.1) is a temporary loss
SIGNALMENT 1
of consciousness due to an inadequate supply of
oxygen or glucose to the brain from:
A 7-year-old neutered male boxer dog.
232
56 Collapse
233
Table 56.1 Distinguishing seizures from syncope
NEUROANATOMICAL DIAGNOSIS
Syncope
Seizure
The events may be either syncope or seizure activity.
Raised intracranial pressure can result in collapse. Sei-
Associated
May or may not be
Often at rest
zures are often followed by a period of slightly altered
activity
associated with
mentation. The intermittent nature of the collapse with
exercise, feeding.
Valsalva manoeuvre
an altered mentation, along with a return to normal, was
 Duration of
suggestive of cerebral involvement. It is common for
<1 minute
>1 minute
collapse
animals to be fearful in a consulting room so the act of
Convulsive 
Rare
Common
biting the vet should not immediately be ascribed to
movements
 intracranial disease.
Urine
Unusual 
Common
incontinence
 Return of mental 
Within seconds
Usually quiet,
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
 alertness
lethargic for
minutes to 
Intracranial disease causing collapse or seizures: pituitary
hours
Mucous
Pale
Cyanosis or
tumour or glioma.
membranes
 normal
CASE WORK-UP
Haematology and biochemistry, cardiac ultrasound,
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
blood pressure measurement and thoracic radiographs
3-monthhistoryofepisodic
collapseand
did not reveal a cause for the collapse. ACTH stimulation
A
unresponsiveness.
indicated good control of the PDH.
MRl of the brain found a contrast-enhancing smooth-
bordered mass 16 mm tall in the region of the pituitary.
CASE HISTORY
The mass was hyperintense on T2 and isointense on T1
The dog had been diagnosed with pituitary-dependent
images (Figs 56.1 and 56.2).
hyperadrenocorticism (PDH) 3 months prior to referral
when the collapsing episodes had also been reported.
DIAGNOSIS
The collapsing episodes all appeared to be the same and
consist of the dog sinking down to the floor into sternal
Pituitary macroadenoma.
recumbency, where it stayed motionless for a few
minutes in a mentally unresponsive state. The dog then
Pituitary tumours
lifted its head and rose to a standing position. He was
ACTH-producing adenomas are the most common
described as being a bit lethargic after the event and
canine pituitary tumours. The presenting signs reflect
the dog rested for several hours before returning to
ACTH secretion (hyperadrenocorticism) and the space-
normal. The events occur at any time of the day but
occupying effects of the mass (obtunded, altered
had not occurred when out exercising. There was no
behaviour, seizures, blindness, anisocoria and ataxia).
history of exercise intolerance although the dog did col-
The normal height of the canine pituitary gland is 2.1-
lapse on two occasions when let into the garden to
6 mm. The height of a pituitary tumour, causing neuro-
urinate and defecate. Treatment was trilostane for
logical signs or not, overlaps the normal range. The
hyperadrenocorticism.
smaller the tumour, the better the prognosis following
radiation therapy, although others say the height of the
tumour does not impact on survival. The growth rate of
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
canine pituitary tumours is unknown.
Examination was made difficult by the dog biting the
Pituitary tumours in cats are uncommon. Functional
neurologist. Once muzzled, the dog persisted in trying
anterior pituitary tumours secrete excessive growth
to bite which was apparently out of character. The dog
hormone or ACTH. Insulin-resistant diabetes is the most
was otherwise neurologically normal but was pot-
common presentation of acromegaly in cats. Polyuria,
bellied, had patchy alopecia and panted a lot
polydipsia, polyphagia and weight gain had been present
234
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
vided a negative feedback to the hypothalamic pro-
duction of corticotrophin-releasing hormone (CRH). The
resultant increase in CRH stimulates the growth of
the pituitary adenoma. The neurological signs and skin
hyperpigmentation which follow expansion of the pitu-
itary tumour in this manner are referred to as Neison's
syndrome.
TREATMENT
The owners' declined to treat the dog's brain tumour
Figure 56.1 Transverse T1wl+C. Pituitary tumour with
with radiation therapy. The dog was euthanized after it
contrast-enhancement.
bit the owner the following month
SIGNALMENT 2
A 7-year-old neutered male boxer dog
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
Episodic collapse.
CASE HISTORY
Three episodes of collapse had been witnessed. These
occurred at seemingly random times of the day and had
commenced 2 weeks prior to presentation. Neck pain
Figure 56.2 Sagittal T2wl. Pituitary tumour compressing
the thalamus ventr ally
was first reported a few days prior to referral. The dog
was described as being otherwise normal.
for 2-42 months prior to diagnosis in one study of 17
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
cats. The vast majority of acromegalic cats are middle-
aged to older castrated males. CNs signs from a space-
Neck pain was detected on lateral neck flexion but the
occupying macroadenoma occurred later and were
dog would still spontaneously move its neck in all direc-
infrequent in comparison. Lethargy, impaired vision,
tions. The dog was neurologically normal but a little
dilated pupils, reduced PLR, circling and vocalizing were
quiet.
reported. A plantigrade hindlimb stance occurred sec-
ondary to chronically inadequate glycaemic control.
NEUROANATOMICAL LOCALIZATION
Radiation therapy has had mixed success at reducing
The cause of collapse could be:
hormonal (GH) secretion. CNS signs improve during
or soon after radiation therapy. Tumour height pre-
1. Cardiac disease
treatment has been measured at 3.1-12.6 mm.
2. Cerebral disease
3. Cervical cord disease
4. Systemic illness.
PROGNOSIS
Rapid  enlargement of an  ACTH-secreting pituitary
The neck pain and collapsing episodes both occurred in
tumour can occur following treatment for hyperadreno-
a similar timeframe so could result from the same under-
corticism. The bilateral destruction of the adrenal glands
lying problem. Neck pain may be the first sign of intra-
removes the excess circulating cortisol which had pro-
cranial disease. If this is a possibility, as judged from the
56 Collapse
235
history, then MRl should be performed rather than
myelography.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
● Intracranial haemorrhage
● Neoplasia.
CASE WORK-UP
The animal's general health was assessed with haema-
tology, biochemistry and an ACTH stimulation test.
These were all normal.
Cardiac work-up (thoracic radiographs, ECG and
cardiac ultrasound) was also normal.
Cerebral disease was then considered the most likely
localization due to the intermittent signs. Neck pain
Figure 56.3 Dorsal T1Wl+ contrast. Ring-enhancing
alone does not cause an animal to collapse. Cervical cord
 glioma.
disease significant enough to result in collapse would
also produce tetraparesis and ataxia.
The dog then collapsed three times in 1 day and
became obtunded. Increased intracranial pressure from
SIGNALMENT 3
a space-occupying lesion was suspected. Dexametha-
sone 2 mg/kg was given IV and the dog's mentally state
A 7-year-old female boxer dog.
 improved dramatically.
e pey bop aun lan ot loud saep may buimooy aun u
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
generalized tonic-clonic seizure confirming the suspicion
of a cerebral lesion. Phenobarbitone and prednisolone
Neck pain and collapse.
were commenced. The dog remained mental bright and
no further neck pain was noted.
CASE HISTORY
The dog had a 6-week history of restlessness, intermit-
DIAGNOSIS
tent yelping and holding the neck rigidly. There had
MRl of the brain found an ovoid mass in the right pari-
been a recent onset of collapse and being unable to
etal lobe. T1 hypointensity and T2/FLAIR hyperintensity
stand.
suggested a fluid-like consistency. Contrast enhance-
ment of the rim was present. Peri-lesional oedema
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
was present which partially compressed the right lateral
ventricle. A cystic glioma was suspected, based on
Clinical examinations showed a quiet but alert dog with
the MRl appearance and the signalment of the dog
(Fig. 56.3).
then the hindlimbs, and the left-sided limbs were the
Surgical and radiation therapy  were offered but
weakest (Fig. 56.4). Proprioception was reduced in all
declined.
limbs. Spinal reflexes were normal. Neck pain was found.
CNN were normal.
TREATMENT
NEUROANATOMICAL LOCALIZATION
The dog was euthanized.
Postmortem examination found a soft gelatinous
C1-C5 spinal cord segments. Neck pain suggested
cystic mass within the cerebral parenchyma. Histopa-
involvement of the intervertebral disc, vertebrae, menin-
thology diagnosed a cystic oligodendroglioma.
ges or nerve roots or possibly cerebral disease.
236
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
FOLLOW-UP
The owners refused surgical exploration due to the poor
 prognosis for recovery.
nant peripheral nerve sheath tumour with severe com-
pression of the spinal cord and hydromyelia.
Spinal cord tumours
Like every other lesion in neurology, the location of a
 spinal cord tumour defines the presentation.
The onset of signs may be slowly progressive or of
Figure 56.4 UMN tetraparesis, weaker in the forelimbs
sudden onset. Progression is influenced by the rate of 
than the hind.
tumour growth but also by any secondary changes the
tumour induces such as oedema or a pathological frac-
ture. In summary, tumours can mimic other causes of
spinal cord lesions and their presence should not be
discounted by the apparent general health of the animal
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
or its relative youth.
Classifying the tumour's relationship to the meninges
· IVDD
by myelography or other imaging aids differential
● Vertebral tumour
diagnosis.
● Extradural or intradural spinal tumour or a space-
● Extradural: peripheral to the dura mater. Compresses
occupying lesion within the cerebrum.
the cord. Most common. Often causes pain
● Intradural, extramedullary: within the subarachnoid
CASE WORK-UP
space. Compresses the cord. Common. Can cause
 pain
MRl showed a  left ventrolateral extradural contrast-
● Intramedullary: within the spinal cord parenchyma.
enhancing mass at the level of the C2-C3 disc space.
Least common. Generally not painful.
The mass was isointense on T1wl. Location and con-
trast-enhancement suggested either a meningioma or a
Clinical onset is usually fastest with intramedullary
nerve root tumour
lesions and slowest with intradural lesions. Variation pre-
Meningioma is the most common canine spinal cord
vents prognosis being assigned solely by the speed of
tumour, 68% occurring in the cervical cord with most
onset.
at the level of, or cranial to, the C3 vertebra. Signs are
slowly progressive and include mild to moderate neck
Extrodurot
 pain, paresis and ataxia. Neoplastic cells are not found
1.Vertebralbodytumours:
in the CSF. The dorsal and transverse planes on MRI
primary tumours are
common in the dog (osteo-, chondro-, fibro-, haem-
best show the gradual expansion of the subarachnoid
 space cranial and caudal to the lesion which is similar
angiosarcoma and myeloma), but rare in the cat.
2. Metastatic neoplasia is unusual in dogs. Lympho-
to the ‘golf tee' sign on myelography. MRl contrast-
enhancement and a broad-based dural margin (tapering
sarcoma is the most common spinal tumour in
cats.
to a dural tail, i.e. meningeal enhancement beyond
the tumour) aid diagnosis. Surgical removal alone
creates a prolonged remission from  4 months to
Introdurat
4 years.
1. Nerve sheath tumours are slow-growing. They most
commonly affect the brachial plexus and signs are of
slow onset. If occurring in a nerve root supplying
DIAGNOSIS
epaxial muscles signs begin acutely once the cord is
Nerve root tumour.
compressed
56Collapse
237
 2. Meningiomas are slow-growing. They often affect
Intramedullary
the cervical cord in dogs. They are rare in cats. Treat-
1. Primary glial tumours are rare.
ment is by surgical removal.
2. Metastatic tumours are rare:haemangiosarcoma,
3. Nephroblastoma occurs at T10-L2 in young dogs
lymphosarcoma, malignant melanoma, mammary
aged 6-12 months. Affected animals are often
carcinoma in dogs.
German shepherd dogs or retrievers.
This page intentionally left blank
9
SECTION
BALANCE
Chapter 57
Balance - an introduction 
241
Chapter 58
Loss of balance
244
Chapter 59
 Truncal ataxia
247
Chapter 60
Ventroflexion of the neck
250
This page intentionally left blank
57
Balance - an introduction
Balance is maintained by equal input from the vestibular
input occurring in unilateral vestibular disease gives
receptors found bilaterally in the inner ears (see Fig.
rise to spontaneous abnormal nystagmus. Bilateral
57.1). The receptors detect a change in head position
destruction of the vestibular receptors from a
and the impulses generated are transmitted into the
congenital defect or a drug-induced degeneration
brainstem via the vestibular branch of the vestibulo-
removes the afferent stimulus and no nystagmus,
cochlear nerve (CN Vlll). Damage to the receptors, or
physiological or pathological, can be generated.
the vestibular nerve before its entry into the medulla
Destruction of the MLF within the brainstem is
oblongata, results in a clinical syndrome known as
accompanied by coma. Absence of the VOR in this
peripheral vestiburar disease.
case signals a grave prognosis for recovery.
The vestibular nerve enters the rostral medulla and
The MLF also projects caudally to the cervical and
terminates in the ipsilateral vestibular nuclei, with a few
cranial thoracic spinal cord and has the same func-
fibres directly entering the cerebellum via the caudal
 tion as the vestibulospinal tract.
cerebellar peduncle. From the vestibular nuclei, the
4.Reticular formation within the brainstem.
 information is relayed to the:
The vestibular nuclei project to the emetic centre
1. Cerebellum, via the caudal cerebellar peduncle.
within the brainstem which explains vomiting occur-
Axons from the vestibular nuclei project to the floc-
ring with an acute loss of balance.
culonodular lobe and the fastigial nucleus of the
5. Thalamus and then the sensory cortex, via the medial
cerebellum. Lesions in this location give rise to the
lemniscus.
 syndrome known as paradoxical vestibular disease.
Lesions of the thalamus and sensory cortex do not
2. Spinal cord, via the vestibulospinal tract.
result in signs of vestibular disease.
The vestibulospinal tract originates in the lateral ves-
Vertigo is the hallucination of movement. It is not
tibular nucleus and projects caudally to interneurons
known if animals experience this sensation of
which connect with ventral horn cells throughout the
dizziness.
entire spinal cord. The vestibulospinal tract facilitates
ipsilateral extensors, and inhibits ipsilateral flexors
Damage to the vestibular projections (pathways) within
and contralateral extensors with the net effect of
the CNS gives rise to a clinical syndrome called centrar
providing ipsilateral extensor tone. A lesion in this
vestibular disease.
tract or the lateral vestibular nucleus, or the ipsilateral
vestibular receptor creates the opposite effect: the
contralateral extensor tone increases, causing the
PRESENTING SIGNS
animal to lean and fall to the side of the lesion.
3. Cranial nerve nuclei , IV, Vl, via the medial longitu-
The vestibular system provides the major sensory contri-
dinal fasciculus (MLF).
bution to the orientation of the eyes, trunk and limbs
The medial vestibular nucleus gives rise to the MLF,
relative to the position or movement of the head. Intact
which projects rostrally in the brainstem to the
vision and normal proprioception from joints and skin
cranial nerve nuclei Ill, IV, and Vl. This coordinates
enable the animal to compensate a little for vestibular
eye movement with the position of the head and
dysfunction.  Blindfolding an animal with vestibular
gives rise to the vestibulo-ocular reflex (VOR). Uneven
disease worsens the loss of balance
241
242
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
help when moving such an animal. Never ever leave
such an animal unattended on a table (to state the
obvious).
occipital lobe
emicirculal
canals
CLINICAL TIP
semicircular canals
Animals with cerebral lesion propulsively walk,
 continuing even when an object is in the way. It is
described as 'aimless', as to the outside observer
there does not appear to be a stimulus or 
motivation for the action. The animal tends to
circle towards the side of the cerebral lesion. No
ataxia is noted. The circling can be of varying
diameter and the gait appears unhurried.
Figure 57.1 Brain T2vwl. Semicircular canals visible on T2
 as 'rubber duck' shaped outlines (arrows). Air-filled
tympanic bullae (stars)
Head tilt
Vestibular dysfunction occurs unilaterally or asym-
The head tilts towards the side of the peripheral vestibu-
metrically in almost all cases of disease. The aim of
lar lesion but may paradoxically point to the contralateral
examination is to determine which side is affected and,
side in some cases of central vestibular disease.
second, if the dysfunction is peripheral (outside the CNS)
or central (within the CNS) in nature. Peripherally-located
Nystagmus
disease processes usually have a better prognosis than
The three semicircular canals contain receptors which
centrally located lesions.
detect accelerating or decelerating rotation of the head
Vestibular projections control eye movement and
in any plane. Rotation of the head generates increased
muscle tone. Dysfunction of the vestibular system,
activity in one receptor and decreased activity in the
peripherally or centrally, results in alteration of these two
paired contralateral receptor. This difference in activity
aspects.
creates uneven vestibular input between the left and
right sides which generates (physiological) nystagmus
Ataxia
when the head is rotated.
Unilateral loss of vestibular input reduces the ipsilateral
The vestibular neurons are tonically active at rest. A
extensor tone in the limbs. The animal therefore leans,
unilateral vestibular lesion results in uneven sensory
falls, and may roll toward the side of the lesion. Lack of
input at rest and a spontaneous nystagmus occurs. Nys-
ipsilateral extensor tone in the axial musdles may cause
tagmus is abnormal when present in a motionless head.
the trunk to flex, with the concavity ipsilateral to the
Nystagmus is an involuntary rhythmic to and fro
lesion. The combination of the two contributes to the
movement of the eyes. The oscillation may be smooth
animal circling towards the side of the lesion. The circles
and equal in either direction (pendular). This is com-
 are typically of small radius and the gait is quite fast (cf.
monly seen in the Siamese cat and lacks clinical
cerebral disease)
importance.
The rolling will continue unless the animal is physically
A slow drift of the eyes alternating with a fast saccade
restrained or sedated. The latter may be required in the
correcting the direction of the gaze is known as jerk
acute phase of vestibular disease to prevent injury to
nystagmus. The quick (jerk) phase may be horizontal,
the animal. The cage floor and walls should be well-
rotatory, or vertical. The fast phase is easiest to notice
padded. Pay particular care when handling a recumbent
and its direction is opposite to the side of the lesion in
animal because they can suddenly turn, and bring the
peripheral vestibular disease and in most cases of central
head down against the ground with some force. Enlist
vestibular disease.
57 Balance - an introduction
243
Strabismus
hypermetria, with preservation of strength and general
proprioception may be seen.
Extension of the neck by elevating the nose stimulates
Cerebellovestibular lesions can present with some or
the vestibular receptors and impulses project to the
extraocular muscles via the MLF. Normally the eyes
all of the signs of vestibular dysfunction. In addition,
remain centered in the palpebral fissures. A unilateral
some of the signs may appear, paradoxically, on the
vestibular lesion can produce an ipsilateral ventral stra-
opposite side to other signs of vestibular dysfunction.
bismus when the neck is dorsiflexed. This is called posi-
This is called paradoxical vestibular disease. To the unini-
tiated, this may appear as multifocal disease when in 
tional strabismus and indicates abnormal sensory input
rather than an abnormal efferent supply to the extra-
fact the lesion has a precise anatomic location. Para-
ocular muscles. (see page 26)
doxical vestibular disease only occurs with cerebellar
Central vestibular disease has the additional signs of
lesions and therefore is always classed as central vestibu-
ipsilateral hemiparesis and ipsilateral proprioceptive defi-
lar disease. The lesion location in paradoxical vestibular
cits due to damage of adjacent descending motor tracts
disease cannot be judged from the direction of the head
tilt, or from the direction of the spontaneous nystagmus;
and ascending proprioceptive tracts within the brain-
stem. If the vestibular pathways within the cerebellum
it is ipsilateral to any gait deficits present (hypermetria,
CP deficits or hemiparesis).
are affected, an ipsilateral menace deficit, ipsilateral
58
Loss of balance
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Leaning, falling, rolling, circling, ataxia, head tilt, nystagmus.
INTRODUCTION
CLINICAL TIP
Sudden onset of idiopathic peripheral vestibular disease
If the presentation has a progressive onset, or 
is very common in the older dog. Vomiting may imme-
 an unusual constellation of presenting signs,
diately precede the loss of balance. The animal leans and
 consider aetiologies other than idiopathic and
falls to one side and as a result is usually recumbent. The
recommend further investigation.
all sAed pue 1ybjudn ulewal 0l ajb6nns ot sieadde bop
attention to the owner while doing so. This dramatic
presentation is often mistaken for a seizure, especially if 
the animal has also urinated. Examination in the acute
SIGNALMENT 1
phase always detects a head tilt and spontaneous jerk
nystagmus. The head and eyebrows may also twitch in
An 8-year-old male Labrador dog.
synchrony with the nystagmus. The animal is alert. Pos-
tural testing to determine proprioception and strength
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
is almost impossible in the first 24-48 hr due to the
extreme ataxia. Two people are required to support the
Head tilt and loss of balance
larger dog on a non-slip surface while hopping and
"knuckling' is attempted. Neurological signs correspond 
CASE HISTORY
to a unilateral peripheral vestibular lesion. The age and
speed of onset are highly suggestive of the diagnosis.
A left head tilt and balance loss began 1 month ago and
Signs do not worsen with time. Improvement is slow
had not improved. The dog was unsteady when jumping
and is expected within a few days. Ataxia resolves first,
off furniture and had fallen over.
followed by cessation of the spontaneous nystagmus.
The dog was unable to localize the direction of sound.
Ambulation without assistance may take 2-3 weeks but
Mild otitis externa had been an intermittent problem
the prognosis for return to normal function is excellent.
over the years.
A residual head tilt may persist for months. Recurrence
has been reported. Treatment is purely supportive.
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
Idiopathic peripheral vestibular disease also occurs in
cats of any age, not specifically the geriatric animal.
The dog was alert, ambulatory and had a normal gait.
Onset and improvement follow a similar pattern to that 
Hopping and proprioception were also normal. A spon-
of the dog. In a group of 75 affected cats, approximately
taneous rotatory nystagmus with the fast phase to the
half presented with a head tilt, ataxia and no spontane-
right, slight positional ventral strabismus of the left eye
Ous nystagmus. Six cats had bilateral peripheral vestibu-
and a left head tilt were present (Fig. 58.1). The left
lar disease.
upper lip appeared to droop, owing to the left head tilt
244
58 Loss of balance
245
Table 58.1 Differentiation of central and peripheral
vestibular disease
Peripheral
Central
Nystagmus
Horizontal 
Horizontal
(type)
Rotatory
Rotatory
Vertical 
May be positional
 May change direction
Nystagmus
Fast phase directed 
Fast phase directed 
(direction)
away from the
away from OR
side of the lesion
towards the side of
Direction does not
the lesion
 alter with a
 Direction may alter
change in head
with change in
 position 
head position 
Figure 58.1 Left head tilt (no head turn present)
Proprioceptive
Absent
lpsilateral to the
deficits 
lesion 
Weakness
Absent
lpsilateral to the
Facial muscle function was normal bilaterally. Facial sen-
lesion 
sation was present bilaterally.
NEUROANATOMICAL DIAGNOSIS
Metronidazole toxicity occurs within 2 weeks of
The lesion was localized to the left peripheral vestibular
commencing the antibiotic. Anorexia and intermittent
apparatus - the inner ear to affect both the cochlear
vomiting for 24 hr may precede the development of a
duct and semicircular canals given the inability to localize
generalized ataxia and vertical positional nystagmus. The
sound as well as the loss of balance or the surface of
ataxia may be asymmetric and can progressively worsen.
the brainstem where the left CN Vll enters (Table 58.1).
Seizures have been reported in addition to the central
vestibular signs.
The dose rates implicated ranged from 67-129 mg/
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
kg/day in the dog. Recovery usually occurs within
●The lack of improvement after a month, the inability
 1-2 weeks and relies on removal of the drug and sup-
to localize sound and the continuing presence of
portive care. Complete return to normal can take weeks
spontaneous nystagmus ruled out idiopathic vestibu-
to months. The recommended dose rate to avoid neu-
lar disease
rological signs is 30 mg/kg/day given in divided doses.
● Neuroma
Susceptibility varies between animals. Acute high doses
or chronic moderate to high dose therapy may increase
● Meningioma
● Otogenic abscess.
the risk.
Ototoxicity was not considered given lack of exposure
CaSE WOrK-UP
to drugs.
MRl showed a contrast enhancing mass on the periphery
Ototoxicity affects both hearing and balance recep-
of the brainstem at the entrance of the CN Vill.
tors. Aminoglycosides can damage the hair cells of the
BAER could have been used to investigate the possi-
 peripheral balance and hearing receptors. Streptomycin
ble hearing loss.
and gentamicin have their greatest effects on the ves-
CSF analysis showed RBC 2016 μl; WBC 6 ul; TP
tibular receptor whereas kanamycin, tobramycin, and
1.54 g/l. Cytology detected mostly mature neutrophils
neomycin cause more damage to the auditory receptor.
with occasional small/medium lymphocytes and mono-
Furosemide can cause ototoxicity in the cat with high
cytes. These results indicated necrosis and a space-
IV doses. Combining furosemide with aminoglycosides
occupying mass. No evidence of extension of infection
increases the risk of ototoxicity.
from the middle ear was seen.
246
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
DIAGNOSIS
The size of the massuggests it has been slow growing
as a mass of that size suddenly appearing in the cere-
bellopontine angle would produce greater deficits of
balance and mentation.
13
The differentials based on location and response to
contrast agent were meningioma or neuroma.
TREATMENT
●Radiation therapy
Prednisolone.
CLINICAL TIP
Peripheral vestibular disease usually carries a better
prognosis for recovery than central vestibular
Figure 58.2 T1wl+Contrast-enhancement of tissue within
disease because of the anatomical site of the
skull and around TMJ.
lesion.
● Left facial nerve chronic (muscle contraction had
SIGNALMENT 2
occurred).
A 5-year-old male Cavalier King Charles spaniel.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
 Otitis media-interna on the right. Idiopathic facial paraly-
sis can be unilateral or bilateral. The left facial paralysis
Head tilt, balance loss, and pain on opening the mouth
may have resulted from left otitis media or could be idio-
pathic. Osteomyelitis of the tympanic bulla with inflam-
CASE HISTORY
matory tissue around the temporomandibular joint (TMJ)
The dog had had a chronic bilateral otitis externa for
may link the CNN deficits with the reluctance to open the
months. He had become reluctant to fetch toys, and
mouth.
would not allow the owner to open his mouth. Hard dog
biscuits were refused but the dog would eat soft canned
CASE WORK-UP
food. A right head tilt and loss of balance had com-
menced during the week prior to referral.
MRl showed severe inflammation around the bulla and
TMJ extending into the calvarium (Fig. 58.2)
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
CSF analysis showed RBC 10 μl; WBC 1 μl; TP 0.29 g/l
Cytology: normal.
The dog was alert and ambulatory with a right head tilt.
Spontaneous rotatory nystagmus with a fast phase to
the left was present. Right facial weakness and left facial
DIAGNOSIS
paralysis were noted. The left lip appeared to have con-
Right inner and middle ear otitis/osteomyelitis. Inflamma-
tracted. The dog struggled and refused to allow its
tion of the masticatory muscle secondary to ear disease.
aam buiddou pue uondanoudoid pauado aq on ynnou
Meningitis of the brainstem.
normal in all limbs. Tear production was normal bilater-
ally. No neck pain was detected.
TREATMENT
NEUROANATOMICAL DIAGNOSIS
Treatment consisted of surgical debridement of the bulla
● Right peripheral vestibular apparatus
and antibiotics. Resolution of the neurological signs
● Right facial nerve
occurred.
59
Truncal ataxia
INTRODUCTION
asen Aa/a ypeoidde ol eap! poob e s! l! inq pazjubooa
as potentially infectious. Be aware of the endemic
Inflammatory CNs disease is a very common cause of
parasites, vector-borne infections and fungal diseases
neurological signs in small animals, more so in the young
in your area. This will increase the chances of a timely
to middle-aged. Peripheral leukocytes invade the brain,
diagnosis.
cord and meninges in response to tissue injury. In the
majority of cases, the aetiology remains elusive and the
SIGNALMENT 1
disease is described in histopathological terms. Vasculitis
may clinically mimic CNs inflammation.
A 4-year-old neutered female West Highland white
Involvement of other systems (skin, lung, GlT, eye,
terrier.
haematopoietic system or blood vessels) and structures
adjacent to the CNS (sinus, ear, nose, pharynx or inter-
CASE HISTORY
vertebral disc), the possibility of haematogenous spread
(bite wounds, dental disease or endocarditis), predispos-
Hindlimb ataxia was first noted 6 months prior to refer-
ing conditions (immune-compromised, young, FelV, FIV
or CDV) and exposure (rabies, fungal, tick-borne patho-
and the dog improved after receiving clindamycin for 3
gens or parasites) should be considered.
weeks. The problem recurred 1 month after treatment
Clinical diagnosis of infectious disease requires:
ceased and a 10-day course of clindamycin improved the
dog again. Two months later, hindlimb ataxia recurred
● Clinical signs referable to the agent
again and the dog improved on 14 days of clindamycin.
● Serological evidence of exposure to the agent
The Neospora serum titre at the time of referral was
● Exclusion of other causes
unchanged at >1600. The dog improved to normal on
● Demonstration of the agent or a response to
clindamycin after each recurrence of signs but had not
treatment.
improved with treatment for the current return of
A recent or active infection is suggested by:
hindlimb ataxia.
● The presence of IgM
● An increasing antibody titre over 2-3 weeks
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
● Seroconversion from negative to positive
The dog was alert with a truncal ataxia at rest and a
Presenting signs
hindlimb ataxia when walking. Hopping was normal on
the left side but slow to initiate movement on the right.
● Meningitis: spinal pain, blepharospasm
Placing was slow in the right fore and hind.
● Encephalitis. A variety of signs which may not reflect
all the sites of disease which may be focal or multifo-
cal. Balance loss is common
NEUROANATOMICAL LOCALIZATION
● Acute or chronic onset/progression
The lesion was localized to the cerebellum to account
● Fever and neutrophilia are not consistently present.
for the truncal ataxia, and either the right brainstem or
The presentations of infectious and non-infectious
cervical cord, or left cerebrum, to account for the placing
meningoencephalitis are similar. Certain patterns can be
deficits.
247
248
 SMAlL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
CEREBElLAR TREMOR
CASE HISTORY
At rest, the body may sway from side to side, forward
Six to eight weeks prior to referral the dog had been
to backward, up and down with irregular amplitude and
unable to go up stairs, had collapsed when getting out of
frequency creating a jerky', 'coarse' movement known
his bed and had swayed and looked drunk' when stand-
as truncal ataxia. A fine head tremor is commonly seen
ing. He had fallen off the ramp leading up the steps. The
and worsens with movement, particularly at the end of
gait looked more normal when the dog was moving fast
a goal-directed action (intention tremor) such as reach-
huea uaym ,paagom, bop aul ls bueis uaym ueun
ing for food or sniffing an object. This can occur with
and fell over when lifting a hindlimb to urinate.
lesions of the cerebellum or spinocerebellar tracts
Crepitus in both hips was found and radiographs
revealed bilateral hip dysplasia. Glucosamine, chondroi-
tin and carprofen were commenced but did not improve
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
the dog's movement, which had worsened in the 4
Inflammatory disease was suspected in this small breed
weeks prior to referral
response to treatment and the high serology titre.
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
The dog was quiet but alert and responsive to the envi-
CASE WORK-UP
ronment. Cranial nerve examination was normal. Truncal
ataxia was obvious with the dog lurching and falling to
CSF analysis showed WBC 2 μul. Total protein was
the right. There was hindlimb ataxia with a wide hindlimb
increased at 0.58 g/l. Cytology was normal with small
stance at rest. There was also hindlimb paresis and
reduced placing response in all limbs, which was worse
MRl showed ventriculomegaly and atrophy of the
on the right side. Spinal reflexes were increased in the
cerebellum.
hind and normal in the fore limbs. No spinal pain was
found.
DIAGNOSIS
NEUROANATOMICAL LOCALIZATION
Increased total protein in the CSF is not specific for any
particular pathology. The lack of pleocytosis does not
The lesion was localized to the cerebellum, to account
rule out encephalitis.
for the truncal ataxia and falling, and the brainstem or
Neosporosis was suspected.
cervical spinal cord to account for the proprioceptive
deficits and weakness. Hindlimb ataxia and weakness
may result from an additional lesion in the T3-L3 spinal
FOLL0W-UP
cord segments.
The dog improved on clindamycin and trimethoprim/
sulphonamides, which were continued for 3 months. At
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
the check-up 1 month later, the owners reported that
A focal lesion within the cerebellum and adjacent brain-
there was occasional hindlimb ataxia at home. Hopping
stem with a progressive course could be neoplastic, such
and proprioception were normal on examination. No
as a choroid plexus papilloma, meningioma, ependy-
truncal ataxia was present. The antibiotics were stopped
moma, or inflammatory disease such as GME or Neos-
and the dog remained normal.
pora infection. Globoid cell leukodystrophy can present
with hindlimb ataxia and cerebellar signs in the West
SIGNALMENT 2
Highland white terrier but the onset of signs occurs in
younger animals. Cerebellar abiotrophy also occurs in
A7-year-oldneuteredmaleWest Highlandwhite
younger animals.
terrier.
CASE WORK-UP
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
Haematology, biochemistry and urine analysis were
Abnormal hindlimb gait and ataxia.
normal.
59 Truncal ataxia
249
Table 59.1 Protozoal infections of the CNS
Organism
Neurological signs
Other signs
DX
X1
Toxoplasmosis
CNS, muscle
Liver, lung, skeletal
IgM >1:64
Clindamycin HCI
(7. gondin)
muscle, pancreas, eye
IgG x4 increase
Trimethoprim- sulphonamide
Antibody and PCR on
Azithromycin
CSF
Canine neosporosis
Neuromuscular,
Heart, skin, lung, liver
Antibody: serology. CSF
Trimethoprim- sulfadiazine,
(N.caninum)
encephalitis
PCR
 pyrimethamine,
Canine
Uncommon
 Skin, renal, joints,
Demonstrate
Antimony
leishmaniasis
Neck pain, weak
viscera,eye
 amastigotes, serology.
Allopurinol
(Leishmania spp)
PCR
Amphotericin B
MRl showed meningeal enhancement.
The dog was euthanized.
CSF analysis showed neutrophil pleocytosis with an
Postmortem examination found protozoal tachyzoites
elevated total protein: RBC O μl (normal = O), WBC
in some of the inflammatory lesions within the cere-
728/μl (normal <5), total protein 2.85 g/l (normal
brum, pons, medulla and cerebellum. Neosporosis was
<0.25 g/l). Cytology showed degenerate neutrophils
diagnosed
(80%), with small numbers of macrophages/monocytes
CSF culture (bacterial) was negative
Protozoal infection
Toxoplasma lgG titre 100, indicating exposure to the
organism, IgM titre <20.
Toxopfasma gonoii tissue cysts form in the CNs, muscle
Neospora caninum serology (IFAT) was positive at
and viscera and may persist for the life of the host.
>1:1600.
mosis is associated with canine distemper, FelV, FIV, and
DIAGNOSIS
FIP viral infections. Signs result from host cell death
during replication and following inflammation. Serologi-
Meningoencephalitis. Empirical treatment for protozoal
cal diagnosis is difficult. A positive response to treatment
infection was commenced with clindamycin 15 mg/kg
aids diagnosis.
Neosporosis has only been reported in dogs. The
Prednisolone was used at 0.25 mg/kg BID in an attempt
young tend to have progressive paraparesis/polymyo-
to limit inflammation and signs which gave a 2-day
sitis. The hindlimb extensor rigidity does not resolve.
improvement before signs worsened.
Older dogs have CNS signs which may be acute or
chronic (Table 59.1). Prognosis is guarded but not
FOLL0W-UP
hopeless.
At 5 days after presentation, the dog was unable to
Leishmania spp are transmitted by a sand fly vector.
stand, was mentally dull, and turned to the right. At 9
Neurological signs are rare and may result from
days after presentation, hindlimb paralysis occurred.
vasculitis.
60
Ventroflexion of the neck
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Head droop, head drop, 'dropped head', chin on or close to sternum
INTRODUCTION
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
The major antigravity support for the head is supplied
Decreased activity.
by two groups of muscles. The major and minor rhom-
boids attach to the dorsal spinous processes of the
CASE HISTORY
C4-T4 vertebrae medially while the levator scapulae and
serratus ventralis insert on the lateral processes of the
There was a 2-3 week history of waxing and waning
cervical vertebrae and the ribs
changes described as a change in personality. The cat
Cervical ventroflexion occurs in cats but not dogs as
lay on top of the shed in the rain, would not mix with
a sign of muscle weakness. The cat remains able to see
the other cats and did not run away. Food was pre-
despite the dramatic posture. Other signs such as gen-
hended but then dropped. The cat's head fell forwards"
eralized weakness, resting the head on the ground, and
 and the animal dribbled saliva. No vomiting or regurgita-
a stiff forelimb gait are noted. Winging of the scapulae
tion was reported
in which the dorsal scapulae slightly protrude during
weight-bearing is another sign of muscle weakness
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
(Fig. 60.1).
Clinical examination showed an alert cat with slight neck
Observotion differentiates it from:
ventroflexion and a slight right head tilt/turn. She walked
● A lowered head posture secondary to neck pain or
without ataxia but her forelimbs became stiff and she
when shifting the centre of gravity forward in para-
stopped walking and lay down, sometimes also lowering
paresis or severe hindlimb lameness.
her head. Hopping was normal. Proprioception was
● Hypnic jerk which is the sudden drop and recovery of
normal. Muscle tone was normal. Jaw tone and the blink
head position when falling asleep.
reflex were both decreased. Spinal reflexes were normal.
● Tetraplegia resulting in lateral recumbancy and inabil-
 Schirmer Tear Test was O mm in the right eye.
ity to lift the head from the floor.
● A generalized sudden loss of muscle tone in syncope
NEUROANATOMICAL DIAGNOSIS
 and narcolepsy-cataplexy.
The lesion was localized to the LMN. Neuromuscular
junction, myopathy, nerve roots were possible sites. The
SIGNALMENT
behavioural change was caused by the cat being too
A 6-year-old neutered female domestic shorthaired cat.
weak to move.
250
60 Ventroflexion of the neck
251
and EMG which helps map the distribution of involve-
ment for biopsy purposes. Multiple muscle biopsies are
required to ensure a diagnostic sample is obtained. Joint
taps and CsF analysis are also recommended to rule out
other causes of pain and lameness. Thoracic radiographs
check for megaoesophagus, secondary pneumonia, and
neoplasia. Haematology, biochemistry and urine analysis
are used to find clues of other organ involvement. Cats
uapns e ym juasaid Aeu sheas tl on suuou g pabe
onset weakness secondary to an acquired idiopathic
polymyositis. Neck ventroflexion occurs. Muscle pain
may be present. Spontaneous recovery can occur in
Figure 60.1 Ventroflexion in a hypokalaemic cat.
approximately 30% of affected cats.
The diagnosis in this cat was uncertain. Polyradiculo-
neuritis, antibody-negative acquired myasthenia gravis
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
or polymyositis were considered.
Neck ventroflexion has been reported in:
TREATMENT
1. Hypokalemic polymyopathy
● hereditary in the Burmese cat
Prednisolone 1-2 mg/kg PO q12 hr is given as treatment
● acquired from diuretics, renal dysfunction,
of autoimmune polymyositis once samples have been
chronic vomiting/diarrhoea and vegetarian diets
taken. Prognosis for recovery is good but like any immune-
● serum potassium <3.5 mEq/l.
mediated disease, relapse during the reduction of the
2. Hyperthyroidism 
prednisolone dose is possible. Monitoring the fall in
3. Myasthenia gravis
muscle enzyme levels and improvement in exercise ability
4. Myopathies: immune-mediated; hereditary, hyper-
suggests the best time to begin the tapering process.
natremic or inflammatory
The cat initially improved while cage rested but
5. Polyneuropathy
returned 2 weeks later in a weaker state. 0.25 mg/kg
6. Ammonium chloride toxicity
prednisolone BID was commenced and the cat was
7. Hypocalcaemia
normal 8 weeks later.
8. Portosystemic encephalopathy
 9. Thiamine deficiency
FOLL0W-UP
10. Organophosphate toxicity
11. Ethylene glycol intoxication.
The prednisolone dose was tapered and stopped and the
cat remained normal. The improvement may have been
CASE WORK-UP
spontaneous.
Haematology and biochemistry, including electrolytes
Head tremor (bobbing, nodding)
and muscle enzymes, were normal. An ACTH stimulation 
Head tremors may occur in isolation or in the context of
test was normal. Toxoplasma serology lgM <20; IgG <50,
a generalized tremor. The character may be jerky, disor-
i.e. negative. Thoracic radiographs were normal. Acetyl-
ganized, and worsen with goal-directed movement
choline receptor antibody level was negative. Tensilon
(intention). Regular movement in the horizontal plane is
test was negative. Motor NCVs were normal. EMG was
termed 'no-no'. Movement in the vertical plane is
normal. Musdle biopsies: no abnormalities found in
described as 'yes-yes'. The pathological significance of
either cranial tibial or triceps muscles
the direction is unknown in animals.
Animals with bilateral vestibular dysfunction have a
low crouching stance, are ataxic, fall to either side and
DIAGNOSIS
often move the head in wide sweeping arcs side to side.
Diagnosis of autoimmune polymyositis is aided by muscle
Concomitant signs indicate the origin of the head
enzyme levels which commonly elevate after exercise
movements.
252
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
Head bobbing when walking is a compensatory
 Table 60.1 Direction of isolated benign head tremor
shop u!
movement of lameness to reduce weight-bearing on the
affected limb.
'No-no'
Yes-yes'
Isolated intermittent head nodding has been reported
in dogs (Table 60.1). The cause is not known but
Bulldog, boxer
 Bulldog. boxer, Doberman pinscher,
 Shetland sheepdog
it appears to be benign. It does not interfere with
 normal activity and consciousness is unimpaired through-
out. Therapeutic  response   to anticonvulsants is
Head nodding in hypokalaemic cats reflects the
variable.
muscle weakness which gives rise to neck ventroflexion.
Serum hypokalaemia <3.2 mEq/l and increased serum
Creatine kinase aids diagnosis.
10
SECTION
PALPATION
Chapter 61
Muscle tone - an introduction
255
Chapter 62
Tremor
258
Chapter 63
Tetanus
260
Chapter 64
Hypocalcaemia
264
Chapter 65
Trismus
266
Chapter 66
Bilateral atrophy of the masticatory muscles
268
Chapter 67
Unilateral atrophy of the masticatory muscle
270
This page intentionally left blank
61
Muscle tone - an
introduction
Tone is the resistance of a muscle to stretch. It is gener-
Schiff-Sherrington  syndrome usually disappears
ated by reflex circuits of muscle spindles and Golgi
10-14 days after onset to be replaced by the usual signs
tendon organs projecting onto motor neurons. The
of T3-L3 paraplegia: normal to increased spinal reflexes
motor neurons in turn receive input from the UMN
 and muscle tone.
There are conduction delays in the feedback loops
The release of  inhibitory neurotransmitters from
regulating muscle length and this gives rise to a small
spinal cord interneurons is prevented by the tetanus
oscillation called physiologic tremor. The tremor worsens
with any change to the feedback loop or the UMN
muscle spasm occur in strychnine poisoning which also
influences upon it.
acts on spinal interneurons.
 If the motor nerve is damaged, the muscle loses tone
Acute spinal lesions in vertebrates cause a period of
and becomes flaccid. If inhibition to the motor neurons is
 spinal shock in which spinal reflexes caudal to the lesion
removed, muscle tone increases (hypertonia, spasticity).
are profoundly depressed resulting in areflexia and
There are both inhibitory and facilitatory UMN path-
 atonia. The duration is proportionate to the degree the
ways descending through the brainstem and cord to
gait is controlled by the cerebrum. Spinal shock may be
influence the LMN. Lesions of descending UMN path-
present for 12 hours in the dog and cat. If areflexia is
ways produce the clinical picture of 'release', i.e. removal
found in an acutely paralysed animal recheck reflexes
of inhibition to the extensor muscles.
frequently thereafter. Hyperreflexia and hypertonia may
In humans, the loss of descending inhibition from the
develop. Spinal shock is rarely encountered in small
basal ganglia creates a rigid, unchanging hypertonia,
animal patients.
whereas loss of other descending UMN inhibition results
in a spastic, varying hypertonia. The terms rigid and 
spastic do not carry such localizing value in veterinary
PRESENTING SIGNS
neurology.
Tremor is an involuntary rhythmic oscillation of a body
Interneurons within the spinal cord are inhibitory to
part. Oscillations are of large (coarse) or small (fine)
motor neurons limiting their duration, intensity and dis-
amplitude.
tribution of discharge. A sudden severe thoracolumbar
spinal cord lesion in the dog can remove this inhibition
Clonus is the involuntary alternate contraction and
to the forelimbs, resulting in the Schiff-Sherrington
relaxation of skeletal muscle occurring in rapid succes-
syndrome (Table 61.1).
sion. It is a sign of UMN dysfunction and is commonly
Do not confuse this with a severe C1-C5 spinal cord
seen during seizures.
lesion (Table 61.2).
Myoclonus is a sudden, brief involuntary movement of
a body part from an abrupt muscle contraction. It is also
CLINICAL TIP
described as quick, jerky and shock-like. Such move-
Schiff-Sherrington syndrome signifies severe
ments may be rhythmic (implying repetition) or arrhyth-
spinal cord dysfunction but does not imply its
mic. Focal, multifocal or generalized myoclonus occurs
irreversibility. Prognosis is assessed as in other
lowing voluntary action. The trigger for myoclonus origi-
cases of paralysis.
nates in the CNS or PNS.
255
256
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
 Table 61.1 Signs of Schiff-Sherrington syndrome
Fibrillation is  an  electrophysiological  hallmark  of
denervation produced by spontaneous contraction of a
Forelimbs
Hindlimbs
single muscle fibre. It is too small to be noticed on phy-
sical examination
Rigid extension: hypertonia
Hypotonia 
Normal reflexes
Normal reflexes
Voluntary movement present: stiff 
Myokymia is evocatively described as ‘worms under
Paraplegia
1196
the skin'. This involuntary, undulating, wave-like rippling
Normal proprioception
movement within a muscle represents spontaneously
Pain perception present 
Pain perception absent
discharging groups of motor units caused by motor
nerve hyperexcitability. It is a rare clinical finding and
*Proprioception testing is fruitless in a paralysed animal
occurs with other neurological signs.
because the animal is unable to move its limb into the
eibaideed bupnpoud uoisal pios jeuids v uoisod pao
will also damage the ascending proprioceptive pathways.
Spasm is a sudden involuntary contraction of a muscle
Lastly, if pain (sensory) perception is absent, proprioceptive
or group of muscles which may be associated with pain
testing will also be absent.
from nerve compression or meningitis. Cramp is another
term for a painful spasm. It can occur spontaneously or 
be triggered by light touch.
Table 61.2 Signs associated with a C1-5 cervical
Tonic: a contraction characterized by continuous
cord lesion
tension (cf. clonic).
Forelimbs
Hindlimbs
Tetany: intermittent tonic muscle contraction as occurs,
Hypertonia
Hypertonia
for example in hypocalcaemia.
Incre ased spinal reflexes
Increased spinal reflexes
 Paralysis
Paralysis
Tetanus: sustained muscle contraction, e.g. C. tetani
 Pain perception present
 Pain perception present
 intoxication (tetanus), strychnine poisoning.
Spastic, spasticity: abnormally high muscle tone which
resists passive movement but which can be altered
Jerk:suddenreflexorinvoluntarymovement.
by the speed and degree of joint movement imposed.
Startle: myoclonus in response to an unexpected
It may suddenly give way, like the closing of a clasp
stimulus.
knife.
Hyperekplexia: a pathologically exaggerated startle
Rigid, rigidity: unchanging hypertonia with a constant
response. Inherited syndromes are reported in the
resistance to flexion (lead pipe rigidity").
human associated with the inhibitory glycine receptor
Hypertonic, hypertonia: exaggeration of normal 
gene.
muscle tone manifest as resistance to passive movement.
Twitch is the term for a brief contraction of skeletal
It is a sign of UMN pathology (release of inhibition).
musdle in response to a neuronal impulse.
Tic: A tic is an involuntary, abrupt, arrhythmic, repeti-
Fasciculation is the involuntary, rapid, arrhythmic con-
tive movement of varying intensity involving discrete
traction of small numbers of muscle fibres within a
musdle, insufficient to generate tension and move the
spasm.
joint. It is visible to an observer and may be induced by
tapping a partially denervated muscle belly. The sponta-
neous discharge may arise from anywhere along the
LMN. It occurs in diseases of nerve, muscle, or less com-
monly, spinal cord grey matter. It rarely occurs secondary
CLINICAL TIP
to UMN pathology. It is a feature of thyrotoxicosis,
 Increased muscle tone (spasticity) is seen in the
tetany, anaesthetic muscle relaxants and acetylcholines-
gait as stiffness.
ter ase inhibitors.
61 Musde tone - an introduction 
257
Stiffness is defined as a lack of flexibility, being inca-
head nodding and action-induced dystonias are abnor-
pable of bending and occurs with
mal repetitive movements occurring in apparently con-
● Joint pathology restricting movement
 scious animals. Rare reports of writhing movements in
● UMN spinal cord lesions increasing extensor muscle
animals exist.
tone
The following descriptive terms are included here to
● Muscle fibrosis restricting limb movement
aid communication with the internet-informed owner:
● Continuous motor unit activity within a muscle.
● Athetosis: slow, undulating, purposeless writhing
movements most evident in the distal limbs
Dyskinesia can be used as a general term to describe
● Ballism, ballismus: rapid large amplitude, erratic,
excessive involuntary movements. In humans it implies
violent, flinging or flailing of limbs
dysfunction of the basal ganglia. Repetitive episodic
● Chorea: a fidgety appearance due to random unpre-
excessive involuntary movements involving the whole
dictable brisk abrupt, or slower, flowing, involuntary
body or individual muscle groups occur.
movements that shift randomly from one part of the
This is a poorly defined area in veterinary neurology.
body to another. This is called choreoathetosis when
Behavioural abnormalities, stereotypic actions, benign
combined with slow writhingmovements.
Tremor
INTRODUCTION
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Tremor is an involuntary rhythmic oscillation of a body
Causes of tremor
part. Oscillations are of large (coarse) or small (fine)
Weakness
amplitude. They may occur when the animal is recum-
● Pain
bent, weight-bearing at rest or during voluntary move-
● Hypothermia
ment. Tremors often worsen with stressful or exciting
● Metabolic derangement: hypoglycaemia, hypocal-
stimuli such as play and disappear with sleep. The
caemia, pheochromocytoma or hyperthyroidism
description of a tremor aids diagnosis.
● Intoxication:
Shake, quiver and shiver are synonyms.
● metaldehyde: slug and snail bait
● methylxanthines: chocolate, caffeine
SIGNALMENT
● macadamia nuts
●mycotoxin: mouldy food
A 2-year-old neutered female Bichon Frise dog.
● organophosphates, pyrethrins: flea treatments
● Dysmyelination or hypomyelination of the CNS.
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
Generalized tremor.
CASE WORK-UP
Haematology and biochemistry were normal. MRl of
the brain was normal. CSF was normal. Neospora and
CASE HISTORY
Toxoplasma titres were negative.
A sudden onset of generalized tremor which was present
at rest and which worsened when the dog was excited
DIAGNOSIS
or stressed. The dog was lethargic.
Idiopathic tremor syndrome was diagnosed in this
case.
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
 Clinical examination revealed a fine generalized tremor
The condition is commonty referred to 05:
of the head, trunk and limbs but sparing the eyeballs.
●Little: <15kg
There was no intention tremor. The dog was ambulatory
● White: approximately 50% have a white coat colour
 and had normal proprioception and hopping responses.
● Shaker: generalized fine tremor of the head and
Cranial nerve function was normal
body, including the extraocular muscles
● Dogs: not reported in the cat.
NEUROANATOMICAL LOCALIZATION
The main presenting sign is a generalized tremor appear-
A generalized tremor syndrome was diagnosed. No evi-
ing with voluntary movement, worsening with excite-
dence of cerebellar disease was present.
ment, stress or exercise and usually disappearing with
258
62 Tremor
259
sleep. A fine tremor of the eyeballs may occur in any
direction in an irregular waveform (cf. vestibular dys-
function). The age of onset is usually less than 5 years.
CLINICAL TIP
Nystagmus is defined as an involuntary oscillation
of the eyeballs in a jerk or pendular waveform. It
is classified according to direction i.e. horizontal,
vertical, rotatory.
Normal activity and vision are not impeded. Hypermetria,
Figure 62.1 Muscle atrophy in inherited myopathy
truncal ataxia and seizures occur infrequently. Signs may
(central core) of Great Danes
progress or remain static.
Investigations rule out other causes. Most cases
respond to a combination of prednisolone and diazepam
within a few days. If not, the diagnosis should be recon-
sidered or the doses increased. Relapse is possible but
treatment remains effective for subsequent episodes.
A generalized tremor occurs in central axonopathy of
'marching up and down' appearance caused by the
Scottish terriers which develop severe ataxia and tremors
constant shifting of weight from one limb to another.
at 10-12 weeks of age. Weakness was reported in one.
The tremors disappear in the swing phase of walking.
It is thought to be progressive.
when leaning against a support and when lying
down. They worsen with increased weight-bearing
such as in forelimbs when leaning forward to eat,
TREATMENT
and in hindlimbs when assuming a sitting position.
1 mg/kg prednisolone BID and 0.2 mg/kg diazepam TID
Limb tremors were induced by pressing against the
reduced the tremor and the dog became more active as
ventral surface of the paws to mimic weight-bearing
a result. A month after commencing treatment the doses
in the recumbent dog. Proprioception and strength
are normal. Intermittent facial tremors may occur.
No underlying pathology could be found in the
Tremor in the Great Dane dog has three important
CNS or PNS. EMG performed in the conscious
differential diagnoses.Historical and physical factors
weight-bearing dog found continuous discharges
indicate the diagnosis in most cases.
of 13-16 Hz in both extensor and flexor muscles.
1. Inherited myopathy (central core) of Great Danes
Auscultation of the affected limbs detected a low-
 presents as exercise intolerance, muscle wasting and
pitched repetitive throbbing/thumping sound, akin
exercise-induced tremors commencing at less than 1
to a distant helicopter, which corresponded to the
year of age in both sexes (Fig. 62.1).
muscle tremors. Phenobarbitone had some success
2. Cervical cord compression (Wobbler syndrome) pro-
in reducing the severity of the tremors. Effective
duces proprioceptive deficits and ataxia.
serum levels were similar to those used for seizure
3. Orthostatic tremor syndrome has been reported in
control.
Great Danes of either sex at 18 months of age. A
Interesting fact: Humans with primary orthostatic
constant tremor of all limbs and the trunk begins a
tremor display a characteristic tremor of the patellae
few seconds after standing up and develops into a
known as knee bobbing, juddering or quivering.
Tetanus
INTRODUCTION
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
Tetanus is the disease produced by the Clostridium tetani
toxin tetanospasmin within the CNS where it prevents
lation. Mild generalized tetanus commonly presents as a
 inhibitory interneurons from releasing glycine and GABA.
stiff gait and a rigid stance often described as a ‘saw
Uninhibited continuous muscular contraction results in
horse' posture. The tail may be erect or elevated. Skeletal
either a generalized or focal form of the disease. The
muscle of the head is generally affected at the same time
toxin load and possibly species susceptibility determines
or soon after, and trismus (lockjaw'), retracted lips, erect
which will develop and the rate of progression of signs
ears, enophthalmos and protrusion of the third eyelid
C. tetanf is ubiquitous and survives in the environment
are easily noticed (Fig. 63. 1). Flickering of the third eyelid
for months to years as spores. Inoculation of tissue by a
is produced by intermittent spasm of the retractor bulbi
penetrating wound creates the anaerobic environment
muscles which creates momentary enophthalmos and
required for conversion to the toxin-producing vegeta-
a passive protrusion of the third eyelid. Laryngeal
tive form of C. tetanf.
spasm, dysphagia, constipation and urine retention are
Stick injuries, teething, nail bed infections, bites,
possible.
and penetrating wounds which quickly heal may go
unnoticed by the owner. Snake bite, large burns, and
iatrogenic causes such as inadequate sterilization of
CLINICAL TIP
surgical equipment, poor wound management, IM
injections and surgical contamination with ingesta have
Animals do not smile but the expression risus
also been reported as risk factors.
sardonicus persists in veterinary terminology to
describe the facial spasm of tetanus. Whether
SIGNALMENT
animals are sardonic or wry is open to owner
 interpretation.
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
Severe generalized tetanus results in recumbency and
 Exophthalmos.
opisthotonus. All muscle groups are affected but exten-
sor tone predominates. Ventilation may be impaired.
Stimuli such as light, noise and touch can increase
CASE HISTORY
muscle spasticity further.
Focal tetanus presents as rigidity in the inoculated
by the ears appearing more upright and the nostrils
limb (Fig. 63.2). It may remain localized to that limb or
flared. The dog seemed stiff, made odd noises when
spread to the contralateral limb and then to the CNS.
eating and drinking and made a different noise when
Focal tetanus is more common in cats than dogs. Rec-
panting. A claw had been torn 1 week before signs
ognition of signs is difficult in the slowly progressive
commenced.
 generalized form presenting as stiffness.
260
63 Tetanus
261
Figure 63.1 Generalized tetanus: retraction of ears and
lips, small palpebral fissures.
Figure 63.3 Right exophthalmos secondary to a
retrobulbar mass. More sclera is visible on the right.
Exophthalmos is a more forward positioning of the
eyeball in the socket (cf. enophthalmos). It is a charac-
teristic sign of orbital disease (Fig. 63.3). An increased
volume within the retrobulbar space pushes the globe
rostrally (Fig. 63.4). The axis of gaze may be deviated by
retrobulbar masses and cause strabismus (see Fig. 63.5)
Exaggerated exophthalmos is called proptosis, although
the terms may be used synonymously.
Ocular asymmetries con give the impression of
exophthatmos (pseudoproptosis)
Figure 63.2 Focal tetanus in the right hind limb
1. Globe enlargement
● Glaucoma
Examination of this case detected a stiff gait, ears
● Maximally dilated and fixed pupils give the appear-
retracted higher on head, bilateral exophthalmos and
ance of an enlarged globe, e.g. iris atrophy, CN IIl
less flaccid lips than expected for a spaniel. The tongue
par alysis.
was prominent between the mandibles ventrally. There
2. Asymmetry of the lid fissures
was harsh panting. The temperature was 40.3°C. She
● Widened palpebral fissure (CN VI): highly visible
could open her mouth and could blink. There were no
sclera
myotonic dimples. The gait did not improve with exer-
● Narrowed palpebral fissure (ptosis) gives the
cise. Strength and proprioception were normal. Muscle
impression of enophthalmos and hence contralat-
tone was increased in all limbs.
eral exophthalmos
● Macroblepharon: excessively long lids leading to
exposure of the sclera.
NEUROANATOMICAL DIAGNOSIS
 3. Enophthalmos can create a false impression of con-
A generalized increase in muscle tone gave rise to the
tralateral proptosis.
clinical signs. Continuous motor unit activity within a
4.Asymmetry of the bony orbits.
muscle is generated by electrically unstable muscle mem-
branes (e.g. myotonia) or may be neural in origin (e.g.
In this case the exophthalmos was caused by increased
tetanus),
muscle tone pushing the eye forward.
262
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
Orbital ligament cut)
Lacrimal gland 
Temporalis 
muscle
Bulbar conjunctiva (cut)
Medial palpebral
ligament
Levator
nasolabialis
muscle
Extraocular
muscles
4th premolar
Masseter
Figure 63.5 Greyhound hit by a (blue) car. Fractured
frontal process of left frontal bone, causing left 
muscle
Ramus of
exophthalmos and a slight lateral strabismus.
Zygomatic process
Zygomatic
of maxilla (cut)
gland
mandible (cut)
Figure 63.4 Anatomy of the retrobulbar area.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
● Tetanus
Myotonia
● Hypocalcaemia.
Musdle membrane excitability is altered by abnormal ion
channel numbers or function. In myotonia this results in
delayed muscle relaxation and manifests clinically as
stiffness in the gait and stance, difficulty rising, muscle
hypertrophy, dysphagia, regurgitation, a high-pitched
Figure 63.6 Myotonia secondary to hyperadrenocorticism.
bark, stridor, tongue protrusion and drooling. The stiff
Note excessive bruising and increased tone in hindlimbs
 creating a wide-based stance.
stilt-like movement complicates climbing stairs or step-
ping off a kerb and the animal may fall as a result.
Muscle stiffness improves with exercise, and may worsen
with a sudden change in posture. Opening the mouth
cism. A stiff gait may be the presenting complaint rather
may be difficult. It is not a painful condition (cf. tetanus).
than polyuria and polydipsia (Fig. 63.6).
Clinical examination detects myotonic dimples which
are depressions remaining  in musdle bellies after
CASE WORK-UP
percussion.
Inherited, congenital forms of myotonia exist in the
Haematology and electrolytes were normal. Creatine
Chow Chow and miniature Schnauzer breeds of dog.
kinase was slightly elevated at 700 U/l and probably
Domestic kittens may be affected. Signs worsen with
resulted from increased muscular contraction. The lack
cold temperatures. Acquired myotonia is a side-effect of
of a prolonged history including exercise intolerance
iatrogenic  and  naturally-occurring  hyperadrenocorti-
ruled out muscular dystrophies.
63 Tetanus
263
DIAGNOSIS
4. Sedatives to reduce sensitivity to external stimuli and
lessen muscle spasms.
A diagnosis of tetanus was based on clinical signs. Isola-
●Acepromazine 0.1-0.2 mg/kg IM q6 hr
tion of the bacteria from the wound is rarely successful.
● Chlorpromazine 0.5 mg/kg IV q8 hr
Measurement of serum antibody to tetanus toxin has
● Diazepam 0.5-1.0 mg/kg IV as needed.
been used. Electromyography could be helpful in diag-
 5. Adequate nutrition, bladder and bowel evacuation,
nosis of focal tetanus.
prevention of pressure sores.
● Continuous muscle contraction raises body tem-
TREATMENT
perature and uses calories
● Sphincter hypertonus may prevent urine expres-
Treatment for tetanus was commenced
sion. Consider catheterization
1. Tetanus antitoxin to neutralize circulating toxin.
● Limit handling by synchronizing treatments of the
● Tetanospasmin can spread to other motor neuron
patient
endplates via the bloodstream
●Avoid noise and movement.
● No effect on toxin within nervous tissue
● Equine anti-tetanus serum IM or IV
This case was treated with metronidazole 200 mg TID
● Test dose given SQ. If no adverse reaction after
and diazepam 5 mg TID PO for 2 weeks.
15-30 minutes, the IV dose is given
● Dose chosen empirically but does not exceed
PROGNOSIS
20,000 U IV, IM, or SQ
● Dose is based on the amount of toxin to be neu-
Prognosis depends on the extent and severity of the
tralized rather than the patient's body weight.
spasticity. Respiratory failure may occur within 5 days.
 2. Antibiotics to eliminate C. tetani and prevent more
Improvement may be noticed within 1 week. Signs can
toxin formation.
persist for months. Return to normal is possible.
● Metronidazole 10-15 mg/kg IV q8 hr
● For 2 weeks or until clinically recovered.
FOLLOW-UP
3. Wound debridement to remove the anaerobic
The dog improved and was normal within 2 months.
environment
● Eliminate necrotic tissue.
64
Hypocalcaemia
INTRODUCTION
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
Clinical signs of hypocalcaemia reflect calcium's impor-
Neck pain.
tance to the electrical stability of excitable tissue. Spasms,
cramp and tetany are commonly observed. Handling and
excitement typically induce or worsen the signs. Onset
CASE HISTORY
-uou jo pojad e molloy Aew pue ppewep pue uappns s!
specific illness comprising lameness, stiffness, pain, ner-
The dog had been quiet and depressed for months and
vousness, panting, lethargy, weakness, inappetance and
was inappetant. Vomiting had been intermittent. Painful
fever. Total serum calcium may not reflect the low
episodes had occurred in the week prior to presentation.
ionized calcium and the latter should always be specifi-
NSAID administration had not improved the dog's condi-
cally checked. The neuromuscular signs may be episodic
tion. The dog had been referred for treatment of sus-
despite a persistent hypocalcaemia. Diagnosis: ionized
pected IUD disease.
serum calcium <1.0 mmol/l.
The muscle spasms are often painful (cramp). Rigid
abdominal muscles and pain induced by palpation of the
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
spinal epaxial muscles may be confused with spinal pain
from IVDD, discospondylitis, etc. Pancreatitis may be an
The dog was depressed and lethargic. Examination
equally erroneous conclusion.
found shaking, trembling, a stiff neck, tetraparesis,
A stiff, stilted hunched gait, with fasciculation and
lateral recumbancy and increased muscle tone in all
trembling occurs (Fig. 64.1).
limbs. Meleana was present. Heart rate and body tem-
Ear and facial twitching may occur. Elevated third
perature were both low.
eyelids are reported in the cat. Intense facial rubbing
occurs in cats and is seen in over 50% of dogs. Intense
biting or licking of the paws is another manifestation of
NEUROANATOMICAL LOCALIZATION
what may be a paraesthesia. Humans report numbness
and tingling of the fingers, feet and the perioral area.
Neck pain and stiffness suggested meningitis. A general-
 Seizures are commonly reported, and witnessed at
ized stiffness and tremor may have been a response to
the veterinary practice, while those caused by idiopathic
spinal pain. Bradycardia, vomiting, melena and weak-
epilepsy or intracranial lesions have usually resolved
ness suggested a systemic involvement.
before the animal is presented.
Muffled heart sounds, weak pulses and paroxysmal
tachyarrhythmias are commonly detected on physical
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
examination.
●Hypocalcaemia
Tetanus
SIGNALMENT
● Meningitis
A 5-year-old neutered female terrier dog.
●Discospondylitis.
264
64 Hypocalcaemia
265
● Dose and frequency of use is determined by recur
rence of the signs
● May be used as an infusion or as bolus. Do not add
to bicarbonate-containing solutions
● Discontinue if bradycardia occurs
●Hyperthermia will resolve once muscle contractions
cease
● Limit stimulation of the patient.
Stobilization phase: hypocolcoemia with mild
persistent or intermittent signs
● 10% calcium gluconate diluted 1:1 in saline and
given SQ q6-8 hr
Figure 64.1 Hypocalcaemic muscle pain. Arched back,
● Maintain serum calcium levels just below normal for
low neck carriage, wide hindlimb stance.
2 days before reducing the SQ calcium gluconate
dose. Withdraw after another 2-3 days of satisfactory
serum calcium levels
CASE WORK-UP
Cat 0.5-1 g/day
Bleeding and clotting times were normal.
● Commence oral Vitamin D: 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D
Hypocalcaemia and hypokalaemia were found on
(Calcitriol) has an onset of action of 1-4 days, and a
biochemistry.
half-life of less than 24 hours. It does not require
activation in the kidney.
DIAGNOSIS
Long-term prevention of return of ctinicot signs
Common couses for hypocalcaemia:
● Oral calcium carbonate tablets: may be able to taper
● Primary hypoparathyroidism, which is life-long.
and stop after several months
● Post-parturient eclampsia (puerperal tetany), which is
● Vitamin D is the mainstay of treatment. It stimulates
transient.
Gl absorption and bone resorption of calcium.
● Post-thyroidectomy in cats, which is also transient
Monitoring is crucial for successful management. Hyper-
In this case, the parathyroid hormone (PTH) level was
calcaemia must be avoided. The animal should be hos-
18.0 pg/ml ( 10-60) and the total calcium level was
pitalized during stabilization. Check the ionized calcium
1.28 mmol/l (2.3-3.0).
level at least monthly in the stabilized pet.
The  diagnosis  was  hypocalcaemia  secondary  to
In this case IV calcium gluconate followed by oral
primary hypoparathyroidism.
vitamin D and oral calcium gluconate was used to
control the clinical signs. The calcium gluconate was
eventually stopped and the dog was maintained on oral
TREATMENT
vitamin D.
Treatment is dlictated by the severity of the signs but as
Yelping and head shaking commenced when the
tetany is a common presentation, prompt use of IV
ionized calcium dropped from 1.04 to 0.81 mmol/l
calcium gluconate is indicated in most cases.
(N = 1.12-1.4). This resolved with an increase in the
vitamin D dose.
Emergency: tetany
● Intravenous 10% calcium gluconate 0.5-1.5 ml/kg (or
 5-15 mg/kg) given slowly over 10-30 minutes
65
Trismus
INITIAL PRESENTATION
This condition is characterized by an inability to open the mouth or catch balls and carry sticks.
mouth may be seen.
INTRODUCTION
5. Tympanic bulla: osteomyelitis; tumour (e.g. multi-
lobular osteochondrosarcoma)
Trismus is a forced closure of the mouth. It may be
 6. Caudal pharyngeal lesion
referred to as “lockjaw"
7. Neck pain: usually able to differentiate from jaw pain
by keeping the neck still while manipulating the
It resutts from increased muscie tone:
jaws.
● Seizures
● Tetanus, strychnine poisoning 
● Hypocalcaemic tetany
SIGNALMENT
● Myotonia.
A 3-year-old neutered male German shepherd dog.
or masticatory muscle contracture:
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
● Inflammation, e.g. masticatory muscle myositis (MMM)
● Fibrosis, e.g. end-stage MMM, muscular dystrophy.
Unable to prehend objects.
Pain on opening the mouth mimics trismus but repre-
CaSE HISTORY
sents an unwillingness to open the mouth rather than
a physical inability to do so. Pain on opening the
The owners thought the dog's head had looked bony
mouth suggests a lesion of the retrobulbar area, tem-
for a few months. Three weeks prior to referral the dog
poromandibular joint, ear canal, parotid gland, pharynx
was unable to prehend balls and sticks. The dog had a
or masticatory muscles. Any structure that moves or is
good appetite but could not chew hard, dry food. There
compressed during jaw movement has the potential to
was no exercise intolerance. The referring vet was unable
cause pain. An animal with oral pain may attempt pre-
to open the mouth fully
hension but drop the object
Source of pain
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
1. Dental: trauma, foreign bodies
Clinical examination showed profound atrophy of the
2. Masticatory muscle: spasm; inflammation- immune-
masseter and temporalis muscles bilaterally. The mouth
 mediated; polymyositis
could not be fully opened (trismus) (Fig. 65.1). Bilateral
3. TMJ: craniomandibular osteopathy
enophthalmos was present. Sensation to the face was
 4. Retrobulbar: abscess, inflammation
intact.
266
65 Trismus
267
F
Figure 65.2 T1Wl+contrast. MMM presenting as
exophthalmos, trismus, and increased head size.
Enhancement of muscle (arrow). Normal muscle (double
arrows).
Figure 65.1 Trismus under general anaesthesia.
NEUROANATOMICAL DIAGNOSIS
● Electromyography (EMG) found small areas of spon-
taneous fibrllation in the temporalis muscle
Restriction of jaw movement indicated increased muscle
● A muscle biopsy was taken from the left temporalis
tone or muscle inflammation, neoplasia, fibrosis or an
muscle for diagnosis/prognosis. The biopsy found
abnormality of the temporomandibular joint (TMJ)
marked endomysial lymphohistiocytic inflammation,
with some necrotic muscle fibres. Prominent fibrosis
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
was seen
● The serum 2M antibody level was positive at 1: 500
● Masticatory muscle myositis (MMM)
(>1:100 is consistent with a diagnosis of MMM)
● TMJ disease with secondary (disuse) atrophy of the
(Fig. 65.2).
masticatory muscles.
Masticatory muscle applies pressure to the retrobulbar
DIAGNOSIS
area. Its atrophy can lead to enophthalmos. Masticatory
muscle myositis is also known as eosinophilic myositis
Masticatory muscle myositis.
due to the presence of peripheral eosinophilia. It is
common in adult German shepherd dogs. The degree of
elevation of CK does not reflect the severity of the
TREATMENT
clinical signs.
Prednisolone 1 mg/kg BID PO was commenced.
Increased jaw tone from tetanus occurs in the gener-
alized form of the disease. Focal tetanus affects limbs.
FOLL0W-UP
CASE WORK-UP
Recheck appointment 3 weeks later found a lethargic,
● Haematology: mild inflammatory reaction with mod-
depressed polyuric and polydipsic dog with more masti-
erate eosinophilia
● Muscle enzymes: AST = 62 IU/l (N), ALT = 47 IU/l (N),
the third eyelids covered the pupils obscuring vision
CK = 469 IU/l (raised)
causing the dog to bump into objects. Trismus had not
● General anaesthesia was performed. The mouth
improved. The jaws could not be separated more than
could not be opened more than 3 cm
 2-3 cm. The owner could not tolerate the polyuria and
● TMJ radiographs were normal
had the dog euthanized.
66
Bilateral atrophy of the
masticatory muscles
INTRODUCTION
Mucous membranes were pale. The temperature was
39.7°C. There was a generalized muscle loss, including
Atrophy of the masticatory muscles (MM) allows the
masticatory musdles bilaterally (Fig. 66.1). Jaw tone was
skull shape to be more obvious and owners often report
good. The dog had normal facial muscle function. Sensa-
a “lump' which is a newly palpable or visible occipital
tion to the face was present. No neurological deficits
protuberance. Loss of MM leads to enophthalmos.
were found.
Depending on the cause of the MM atrophy, a dropped
jaw or trismus may be seen.
NEUROANATOMICAL LOCALIZATION
SIGNALMENT
Bilateral atrophy of the masticatory muscles results from:
An 8-year-old male golden retriever dog
Bilateral trigeminat neuropathy
The masticatory muscles (temporalis, masseter, ptery-
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
goideus, digastricus muscles) are innervated by the man-
Generalized muscle loss, especially on the head.
dibular branch of the trigeminal nerve (CN V). Damage
to a motor nerve typically results in the clinical signs of
CASE HISTORY
atrophy, flaccidity and weakness of the innervated
muscle. Bilateral involvement of the mandibular branch
Diarrhoea, fever and weight loss were noted 1 month
 of the trigeminal nerve causes the jaw to partially or fully
prior to referral. The diarrhoea stopped but inappetance,
hang open. The jaw can easily be closed by the examiner
lethargy, fever and weight loss continued. Muscle loss
but drops open again when unsupported. The sensory
was generalized but particularly prominent on the head
branch of the mandibular nerve is unaffected in idio-
which prompted referral. Blood results were abnor-
pathic mandibular neuropathy.
mal. They showed a normocytic normochromic non-
regenerative anaemia, thrombocytopenia, neutropenia,
Myopathy: focal or generalized
relative lymphocytosis with pleomorphic lymphocytes and
The masticatory muscles contain the 2M fibre type which
occasional atypical large lymphocytes. Alb 23 g/l, ALKP
can lead to a specific attack by the immune system
306 μ/l, ALT 53 μ/l, AST 130 μ/l, CK 259 μ/l, pre-prandial
resulting in masticatory muscle myositis. Generalized
bile acids 25.
myopathies can also affect the 2M fibres. Trismus is
Prednisolone 25 mg BID was then given for 2 weeks
more common than a dropped jaw.
as the referring vet was concerned about MMM despite
a low 2M antibody of <1 : 100 (>1 : 100 is consistent with
a diagnosis of MMM). The muscle loss did not improve
Weight to55
and the dog was referred for EMG
Cachexia from systemic illness.
In this case the lesion was localized to the hemopoi-
etic system. The weight loss was thought to be the cause
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
of the masticatory muscle loss as no jaw weakness
Clinical examination revealed a mentally depressed dog
or sensory deficits to the face were found. A dropped
with petechia of the conjunctiva and retina bilaterally.
jaw and bilateral atrophy of the masticatory muscles
268
66 Bilateral atrophy of the masticatory muscles
269
CASE WORK-UP
APTT 108 seconds, PT 12 seconds. Repeated blood
samples showed severe non-regenerative anaemia PCV
0.17, Hb 5.6, RBC 2.32, leukocytosis WBC 131.7, absent
neutrophils 0 × 10°, lymphocytosis 27.66 × 10°, throm-
bocytopaenia 17 and high numbers of undifferentiated
cells 104 × 109.
Leukaemia was diagnosed.
DUTCOME
The dog collapsed and died within a few hours of arrival.
Figure 66.1 Profound atrophy of the masticatory muscles,
 pale gums and sclera.
resulting from aleukemic myelomonocytic leukaemia has
been reported in the dog.
CLINICAL TIPS
 Do not ignore other body systems.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
 Do not perform tests if you plan to ignore the
results.
Neoplasia.
67
Unilateral atrophy of the
masticatory muscle
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Asymmetry of head.
SIGNALMENT
NEUROANATOMICAL LOCALIZATION
A 6-year-old neutered female Labrador retriever dog
The lesion was localized to the right trigeminal nerve (CN
V), affecting all three branches as indicated by lack
of sensation to the eye (ophthalmic branch), eyelids
(ophthalmic/maxillary branches), upper lip (maxillary
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
branch), lower lip (mandibular branch), and atrophy of
Skin wounds to the right face, altered facial symmetry.
masticatory muscles (mandibular branch) on the right
side.
Enophthalmos can result from masticatory muscle
atrophy or from Horner's syndrome. No miosis was
CASE HISTORY
present in this dog so the former is the most likely cause.
The dog was initially presented for a right upper lip
Dry eye (STT = 0 mm/minute) can result from trigemi-
wound and abrasions to the right zygomatic area. One
nal nerve lesions.
week later the right face suddenly 'caved in'. The dog
When facial muscles are paralysed (CN Vil) the upper
wasn't catching thrown items as skilfully as usual.
lip is flaccid and can become trapped between teeth
when eating. The dog typically drops food rather than
bite through its own lip. The lip wound in this dog has
resulted from lack of sensation to the face and resulting
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
self-trauma.
Clinical examination showed atrophy of the right tem-
Lack of proprioceptive deficits or paresis in the limbs
poralis and masseter muscles. The jaw could be volun-
indicates that the CN V lesion may be peripheral to the
tarily closed by the dog. Sensation to the right side of
brainstem, rather than affecting the nucleus within the
the face (canthus, cornea, nostril, upper and lower lips)
brainstem. Compression of the brainstem may be present
was absent. Right enophthalmos was present but no
but clinical signs were not detected.
anisocoria was noted in either a light or darkened room.
Schirmer Tear Test (STT) was O mm/minute on the right
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
and 9 mm/minute on the left. The wound on the right
● Nerve sheath tumour of the trigeminal nerve
upper lip pierced the lip and the hole corresponded to
● Lymphoma
the position of the canine tooth. Observation found
● Meningioma.
normal voluntary movement of the eyelids, nostrils and
ears bilaterally. The rest of the neurological examination
Unilateral masticatory muscle atrophy often results from
was normal (Fig. 67.1).
a trigeminal neuropathy which is generally neoplastic.
270
67 Unilateral atrophy of the masticatory muscle
271
12.5
Figure 67.1 Facial wounds (arrow), atrophy of the right
Figure 67.2 T1wl enlarged right trigeminal nerve (arrow).
temporalis and masseter muscles.
Oval foramen smaller on the normal side (double arrows).
Atrophy of masticatory muscles (stars).
Trigeminal nerve sheath tumours present as unilateral
trigeminal motor and sensory dysfunction. Affected
animals may rub the ipsilateral face early or late in the
DIAGNOSIS
development of signs. The tumours are slow-growing
and eventually compress the brainstem at which time
Nerve sheath tumour of the trigeminal nerve
euthanasia is performed. Surgical removal has been per-
formed by few veterinary neurosurgeons. Potential mor-
TREATMENT
bidity from a surgical attempt should be weighed against
prolonged survival times (0.5-2 years) in the untreated
Surgical resection of the non-healing penetrating wound 
doq. A lobulated or solitary extra-axial mass with dis-
of the top lip was discussed. As the wound was not
placement of brainstem is found on MRl. The oval
infected, the owner elected to continue bathing it in salt
foramen may be enlarged.
      s   
and help prevent corneal ulceration. When evidence of
brainstem compression begins, such signs may improve
CASE WORK-UP
on prednisolone therapy.
MRl of the head showed enlargement and contrast
enhancement of the right trigeminal nerve. Atrophy of
the ipsilateral masticatory muscles was evident. Denerva-
FOLLOW-UP
tion atrophy results in fatty replacement and increased
The dog was euthanized 13 months later because of
signal intensity on T1 and T2 (Fig. 67.2).
worsening ataxia. Histopathology confirmed the diagno-
CSF was normal.
sis of a trigeminal nerve sheath tumour
This page intentionally left blank
SECTION
11
PAIN
Chapter 68
Pain - an introduction
275
Chapter 69
Neck pain 
278
Chapter 70
Meningitis of large breed dogs
281
Chapter 71
Retroperitoneal disease
284
Chapter 72
 Scratching
286
This page intentionally left blank
68
Pain - an introduction
Almost all pet owners equate pain with a poor quality
Humans can describe the quality of pain they experience
of life. It is important to recognize the presence of pain 
 and this gives rise to a lot of jargon.
in a disease process and to put it into perspective for the
It is difficult to judge what an animal is experiencing
owner by discussing definitive and palliative treatment
when it scratches, chews, self-mutilates, or twitches the
and the duration and severity of pain expected.
skin. The assumption is that sensation is present but
The sensation of pain is a subjective interpretation of 
 altered and possibly unpleasant. Once a causative lesion
a noxious stimulus which is transmitted to the cerebral
 has been found in such an animal the human experience
cortex via sensory nerves, dorsal spinal roots, spinal
of that lesion is assigned, rightly or wrongly, to the
tracts and thalamic nuclei (Fig. 68.1).
animal. This is how we presume animals experience
The presence of pain in an animal is inferred by the
paraesthesias. In this case using jargon can help in
 animal's altered behaviour, posture or gait.
finding the correct treatment.
PRESENTING SIGNS
DEFINITIONS
● Altered behavioural patterns: patients may hide,
Noxious: Potentially damaging to tissue.
 become aggressive, reclusive or lethargic, 'act like an
old dog', become restless or agitated and have a
Paraesthesia: Spontaneous abnormal sensation, ‘tin-
decreased appetite
gling, prickling, crawling'. Not pleasant but not painful.
● Vocalizes: spontaneously or triggered by certain
Dysaesthesia: An elicited or spontaneously occurring
movements
● Looks or bites at the source of pain
unpleasant, abnormal sensation, often with a 'burning
or electrical' quality.
● Increased sympathetic drive: increased heart rate,
dilated pupils
Allodynia: Pain evoked by light mechanical stimuli
● Reduced movement: decreased activity, will not greet
(touch or light pressure) which normally do not elicit
the owner, stays in bed, will not jump into a car, lame,
pain.
does not shake body or head fully, decreased
grooming
Hyperalgesia: An exaggerated perception of pain
● Altered posture: shifts position to limit weight-
evoked by a noxious stimulus.
bearing, restricts head movement, arches back,
lowers head, guards or becomes tense/rigid.
Hyperpathia: An unpleasant sensation. 'Burning' pain
provoked by noxious or non-noxious stimuli. The pain
spreads beyond the site of the stimulus and may inten-
sify with repeated stimulation and may continue after
the stimulus has ceased. The sensory threshold required
CLINICAL TIP
to elicit pain increases (cf. allodynia).
Cats purr even when in pain.
Hypoalgesia: Diminished pain perception in response
 to a normally painful stimulus.
275
276
SMAlL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
Midline
and individual variation exists. Firm pressure applied by
a haemostat on the nail bed should elicit a painful
response even in stoical animals. No normal conscious
animal tolerates the sharp end of a pen poked into its
Cortex
nasal mucosa
There is a trend to try and separate the presence of
deep pain from the presence of superficial pain. Pinching
Thalamus
the skin vs. traumatizing the periosteum are the two
tests reported. The pragmatic approach is to find out if
an animal feels any kind of pain or not. If it does, then
Medulla
the prognosis for recovery from the causative lesion is
-Nuclei gracilis
and cuneatus
generally held to be better than if it was absent.
DIFFERENTIATING REFLEX ACTION FROM A
PAIN RESPONSE
There is a mistaken belief that the cutaneous trunci
Spinal cord
reflex is synonymous with the presence of superficial
pain. This is an excellent moment to remember that a
Dorsal root ganglion
spinal REFLEX involves only a sensory arc, a motor arc,
Touch
bral interpretation required. Pain, on the other hand, is
Pain,
a subjective interpretation. It requires mental capacity. It
temperature
depends on a behavioural response for an observer to
Pain perception - spinothalamic
know that it exists.
 Fouch - spinothalamic and dorsal columns 
A noxious stimulus enters the spinal cord via the
dorsal root. This sensory impulse can enter a reflex arc
 Figure 68.1 Anatomic pathways for pain perception.
and produce an automatic, reflex action, e.g. the with-
drawal or flexor reflex. This is an excellent evolutionary
development as it removes the limb from noxious stimuli
Analgesia: Complete loss of pain sensation.
without the organism having to mentally register what
Hypoaesthesia (hypaesthesia): Decreased sensory
has taken place. It is fast, automatic, and involuntary
 perception in any modality. Frequently used as a synonym
(Fig. 68.2).
for hypoalgesia.
The noxious sensory impulse can also travel up the
spinal cord to the cerebrum and be registered as a
Anaesthesia: Total sensory loss. May be regional or
 painful experience.
global (general anaesthesia). May only involve some
This is where the confusion for many lies. The reflex
modalities (e.g. temperature, pain: analgesia)
occurs almost simultaneously with the painful response
in a normal animal, but what is forgotten is that these
two results are different phenomena. They are usually
EXAMINATION
simultaneous in the normal animal, but in neurological
Stimuli not normally associated with a painful reaction
disease it is vital to recognize each action as depending
are used in examination, e.g. flexing and extending the
on different anatomical pathways.
neck, pressure over the lumbosacral joint, passive range
of motion of a joint. When such a stimulus causes pain
it is noted on the examination form as a significant
finding.
CLINICAL TIP
 Equally, when a noxious stimulus is applied to a body
The withdrawal (flexor) reflex is not the same as
part, the lack of a painful response from the animal is
the ability to perceive pain.
significant. Bear in mind that pain is a subjective response
68 Pain - an introduction
277
 Perception
It is very important to make a 'big song-and-dance'
ujed jo
over this point of neuroanatomy. If a dachshund has
pain perception in its paralysed limb(s) it means that
Ascending
some ascending information can pass though the
sensory
Reflex
damaged area of spinal cord and thus the prognosis for
pathway
pathway
return of motor function is favourable. If the vet mis-
takes a reflex action for the perception of pain, then they
will be unable to offer an accurate prognosis and they
will be unable to monitor the progression of disease. The
animal's treatment suffers as a result.
Ascend to the brain
Stimulus
Dorsal root ganglion
Sensoryneuron
Lower motor
neuron
Muscle
Figure 68.2 Pain perception and the reflex arc.
Neck pain
INITIAL PRESENTATION
 Presenting signs may include: low head carriage, not lowering the head to eat from the floor,
shaking, trembling, neck spasms which may create a ventral head bob, episodic circling (small
radius) and moving the neck and trunk as one unit.
INTRODUCTION
CASE HISTORY
Common causes of neckpain include intervertebral disc
The dog had surgery for gastric dilation a few weeks
disease, meningitis and syringomyelia. All may present 
prior to developing neck pain.
acutely. Disc disease is more likely than the others to give
rise to ataxia and paresis (see Fig. 69.1). The pain may
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
appear episodic in disc disease and syringomyelia. Men-
ingitis may be multi-focal, and while signs may appear
The dog was unable to rise from lateral recumbancy
worse on some days compared with others, they are
without assistance but when standing was ambulatory
never entirely absent. Haemorrhage into the subarach-
with a shortened fore and hindlimb stride length. No
noid space causes spinal pain.
neurological deficits were present. Neck pain was severe.
 Focal lesions of the canine cerebrum may present as
neck pain. In the absence of other signs of cerebral
NEUROANATOMICAL LOCALIZATION
disease such as seizures and behaviour change, this can
create a diagnostic dilemma. Consider the age and
Vertebrae. Meninges. Nerve roots.
breed of dog and comb the history for clues which may
suggest either cerebral disease or cervical spine or cord
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
lesions. Consider imaging techniques which will encom-
 pass all realistic differential diagnoses. Remember that
● Discospondylitis
hypoventilation increases ICP which could result in her-
● Meningitis
niation followed rapidly by death during anaesthesia of
● Neoplasia of the spine.
 patients with brain tumours.
Discospondylitis is the infection of the disc space and
contiguous vertebral endplates. Bacteria gain access via
SIGNALMENT
the bloodstream (dental disease, endocarditis, urogeni-
A 6-year-old male Great Dane dog.
tal, skin or respiratory tract infection) or by extension
(migrating grass awn, direct trauma - pharyngeal stick
 injury). Fungal infection has been reported.
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
Young to middle-aged large-to-giant breed male
Neck pain.
dogs are affected most commonly. Some 18-28% of
278
69 Neck pain
279
Table 69.1 Radiographic diagnosis of discospondylitis
Early changes
Chronic changes
Irregular lysis of vertebral
Widening of the IVD space
endplates 
Collapse of IVD space
Bony proliferation -
vertebral osteophytes
Fusion of adjacent bodies
dachshund with neck pain (arrow).
Endplate sclerosis
CLINICAL TIP
Collect CSF while the animal is under anaesthesia
for imaging. Sterile meningitis also presents as
 spinal pain with or without fever in young larger
breed dogs
DIAGNOSIS
Discospondylitis. Recent gastric surgery may have caused
a bacteraemia
Diagnosis of discospondylitis can be difficult if the
Figure 69.2 T1wl+C. Discospondylitis
radiographic signs are not present and MRl is unavail-
able. Consider the following:
1. Haematology: may be normal
 2. Radiograph the whole spine looking for endplate
dogs have multiple areas affected, with the highest inci-
lysis
dence in the lumbar reqion, especially L7-S1, followed
3. Blood and urine cultures are 30-75% positive
by the thoracic and cervical spines. Extension to the
4. Consider CSF tap and joint taps to rule out menin-
vertebral canal and meninges is rare. Discospondylitis
gitis and polyarthritis
has a similar presentation in cats.
 5. Consider MRIif radiographs are normal: MRI is sensi-
The chief presenting sign is spinal pain, with or
tive and specific for spinal inflammation (Table 69. 1).
without fever. A stiff, stilted hindlimb gait and hindlimb
lameness give the appearance of hindlimb weakness.
CLINICAL TIP
Signs occur suddenly or develop over several weeks.
 Chronic discospondylitis may develop if the spinal pain
Pain may be present 2-6 weeks before the
responds to NSAID and no further diagnostic investiga-
radiographic changes appear.
tions are performed.
Discospondylitis should be differentiated from:
CASE WORK-UP
1. Neoplasia
MRl showed contrast-enhancement of endplates, nerve
● Less likely to affect a disc space
roots, longus colli muscles (arrows) at C7-T1 (Fig. 69.2),
● Can affect dorsal laminae.
The  MRl appearance of discospondylitis includes
2. Collapsed vertebral fracture
decreased T1 and increased T2 signal intensity of the
● Loss of continuity of vertebral borders
intervertebral disc, adjacent vertebral endplates, and soft
● Separation/avulsion of articular facets 
tissue ventral to the vertebral bodies, with non-uniform
● Change is size and shape of vertebral body or arch.
contrast enhancement of the affected tissue. Such
3. Spondylosis
changes precede the  development of radiographic
●No destruction of endplates
abnormalities.
● Smooth proliferation.
280
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
TREATMENT
tant bacteria. Consider surgical biopsies if the animal is
not responding to treatment.
In the absence of a positive blood or urine culture, com-
In this case, opiates, cephalexin and metronidazole
mence treatment for a suspected Staphylococcus spp
did not improve the dog within 24 hours and the owner
infection with a first generation cephalosporin. Anal-
requested   the  animal be  euthanized rather  than
gesics are required initially for at least 1-2 weeks. Reso-
continue.
lution of signs requires 6-14 weeks of antibiotic
therapy which is continued for a further 2 weeks after
PROGNOSIS
resolution.
Re-radiograph 0.5-3 months after the diagnosis.
● Bacteria - good
Radiographic improvement appears as vertebral fusion
● Resistant bacteria - guarded
and resolution of bony lysis. MRl improvement appears
● Fungal - bad.
as resolution of contrast-enhancement. A failure to
The empirical time frame for the use of antibiotics does
respond may be due to a fungal organism, a foreign
not apply to each case but this does not imply a poor
body, Bruceffa canis infection, soft tissue abscess or resis-
prognosis.
70
Meningitis of large
breed dogs
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Acute onset of neck pain, fever, lethargy, reluctance to walk, and a stiff gait.
SIGNALMENT
reflexes were normal. No joint swelling was found. The
temperature was 39.3°C.
A 1-year, 3-month-old male golden retriever dog.
NEUROANATOMICAL LOCALIZATION
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
Pain leading to altered posture and gait.
Pain, fever, inappetance and a shuffing gait.
Sources of poin in neurologicot disease
●Nerve: nerve root entrapment/compression, transec-
CASE HISTORY
tion, inflammation or infiltration
● Meninges: meningitis, vasculitis or stretch/tension
The dog became quiet, anorexic and appeared to be stiff
3 days prior to referral. The dog struggled to squat to
● Destruction of central spinal cord: syrinx formation
● IV disc: rupture of annulus fibrosis or discospondylitis
defecate, looked like it was 'walking on egg shells' and
● Periosteum: vertebral tumours or osteomyelitis
was unable to turn in tight circles. The dog shifted its
● Spinal ligaments: dorsal longitudinal ligament or joint 
weight from limb to limb and was panting. There was a
capsules/synovium of the articular facets
fever of 40.8°C. Meloxicam and buprenorphine were
●Muscle: sublumbar muscle/retroperitoneal space dis-
given.
ease, migrating plant awns or muscle spasm
The dog had been lame, depressed and febrile for a
● Skin: infected dermoid cyst
few days, 5 months earlier. This had resolved with
● Thalamus syndrome (rare)
meloxicam. Six weeks prior to referral, the dog was
lethargic, inappetant and febrile for 1 week. Thoraco-
 lumbar pain was detected at this time. Meloxicam was
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
given.
● Meningitis and/or polyarthropathy
●Discospondylitis
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
Haemorrhage into the subarachnoid space
Vasculitis
Clinical examinations showed a quiet, mentally respon-
Fever resulting from inflammatory,
 neoplastic or
sive dog which could walk unaided but which had an
immune-mediated tissue destruction
arched back, shuffling hindlimb gait with small steps
Polyarthritis-meningitis syndrome is relatively common
taken but no ataxia. There was a lowered head position,
and affected animals present with pyrexia, stiffness
and neck pain.
281
282
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
Figure 70.1 Xanthochromic CSF.
Figure 70.2 Neutrophilic CSF
CASE WORK-UP
bacterial infection does not occur in the UK, as yet (Table
Haematology showed a mature neutrophilia. Biochemis-
70.1).
try was normal
 Ehrlichiosis presentation is similar to Rocky Mountain
Lumbar CSF had a xanthochromic appearance, which
spotted fever (RMSF) in the acute phase. Thrombocyto-
can be due to high cell counts or a high total protein
penia (with defective platelet function), leukopenia and
level (Fig. 70.1). The cells consisted of mainly mature
anaemia follow. Weight-loss can be severe. Haemor-
neutrophils (73%) with a few lymphocytes (5%) and
rhage has a varied pattern of occurrence. Neurological
monocytes (22%).
signs of meningoencephalitis, lameness, and pain occur.
Cisterna magna CSF looked cloudy and contained:
Dramatic improvement occurs within 1-2 days of com-
  720     5  1 5
mencing treatment. Long-term sub-clinical infection can
consisted of mature neutrophils (81%) with some lym-
cause disease years later.
phocytes (3%) and monocytes (16%) (Fig. 70.2).
 Rickettsia induce endothelial damage and vasculitis.
Joint taps: cellularity was negligible.
Diffuse pain suggestive of meningitis, polyarthritis, or
 Non-contrast radiographs of the spine in lateral and
polymyositis may be the first sign of disease. Systemic
VD views were normal.
signs are various and include fever, anorexia, vomiting
Serology, urine culture and blood culture were all 
and diarrhoea as well as haemorrhage and oedema.
cancelled as the financial limit for the client had been
Clinical improvement is seen within 24 hours of com-
exceeded.
mencing antibiotics.
Concurrent infection with Ehrlichia, Rickettsia, Babesia
suahoued Aal lle lot uaas snono dds eauog pue
DIAGNOSIS
and choose a broad spectrum treatment.
The diagnosis in this case was made, as in many cases,
The diagnosis in this case was steroid responsive
on the basis of probability. It is most likely that all three,
meningitis-arteritis (SRMA).
episodes of pain and fever were caused by the same
SRMA is a common immune-mediated disease and
disease. Discospondylitis should have shown radio-
should be suspected in the young, adult, medium-to-
graphic changes during this period. As no lesions were
large breed dogs with an acute onset of neck pain, fever,
seen, this diagnosis was eliminated. CSF was then col-
lethargy, a reluctance to walk and a stiff gait.
lected and the gross appearance was highly suggestive
 CSF analysis shows non-degenerate neutrophilic pleo-
of meningitis as the results proved.
cytosis with normal to raised total protein levels. There
Neutrophilic meningitis signals tissue damage and is
may be a peripheral leukocytosis, with or without a left
a common finding in steroid-responsive meningitis of 
shift. High CSF and serum lgA concentrations are found.
larger breed dogs. Bacterial meningitis, on the other
Signs may wax and wane if left untreated but such
hand, is rare in small animals. Tick-bome intracelfular
patients are at risk of developing neurological deficits
70 Meningitis of large breed dogs
283
Table 70.1 Tick-borne infection of the CNS
Organism
Neurological signs
Other signs
Dx
Tx
Canine ehrlichiosis
CNS/meningeal
Thrombocytopenia
Morulae
Tetracycline
(Ehrichia spp)
inflammation or 
Leukopenia
Antibodies
Doxycycline
haemorrhage
Anaemia
PCR
Polyarthritis
Vasculitis
Canine RMSF (R.
Meninges, brain,
Thrombocytopenia
Indirect IFA ≥X4 increase,
Tetracycline
rickettsii)
 spinal cord
Leukopenia then leukocytosis
2-3 weeks apart
Doxycycline
Mild anaemia
PCR
Enrofloxacin 
Vasculitis
Canine bartonellosis
Meningoencephalitis,
Lame, bone pain, heart, skin, eye.
Antibodies
Fuoroquinolone
(Bantonella spp)
 meningomyelitis
joints 
PCR
Azithromycin 
Thrombocytopenia
Doxycycline
Anaemia
(spinal or multifocal). There is no improvement with
Treatment is the same for both IMP and SRMA. Treat-
antibiotics. A dramatic improvement, often within
ment commences with prednisolone but relapses on
24 hours, is seen with corticosteroids.
medicationor when tapering the dose indicates the
Beagles (Beagle pain syndrome), Bernese mountain
need for a second agent. There are no controlled studies
dogs, boxers, Akitas and German shorthaired pointers
have a high incidence of SRMA
made by availability of the agent, convenience of the
Dogs with immune-mediated polyarthropathy (IMP)
treatment schedule and severity of the side-effects.
were found to have SRMA, and vice versa. Both contrib-
Serum acute phase protein levels may be useful in future
ute to the animal's painful condition. Joints are rarely
in the monitoring of SRMA
swollen and pain may not be present on joint manipula-
tion. Specific limb lameness is not noted. This was thought
to be a specific syndrome in Akita and Bernese mountain
TREATMENT
 dogs but has been seen in other medium-to-large breed
dogs under 3 years old. Males are more frequently
The dog improved on 1 mg/kg prednisolone BID which
affected. Joint taps contain non-degenerative neutro-
was continued for 2 months before being gradually
phils, or lymphocytes, macrophages and neutrophils.
withdrawn.
71
Retroperitoneal disease
INITIAL PRESENTATION
Lumbar pain, pyrexia, lethargy, anorexia and abdominal pain.
INTRODUCTION
CASE HISTORY
The retroperitoneum is the potential space between the
Four months prior to referral, the dog became lethargic
ventral fascia of the sublumbar muscles and the perito-
 and painful. She would not jump into the car and yelped
neum. Its lateral extent borders the lumbar epaxial
when picked up. This persisted. The following month,
muscles. It communicates with the mediastinum and the
the dog developed an arched back and fever (39.8°C).
pelvic space.
The lumbar muscles were felt to be very tense ('rock
Non-absorbable suture material use during ovariohys-
hard'). The owner thought the dog was putting on
terectomy, penetrating wounds, kidney, ureter, or ure-
weight as the waist was wider than normal. Five days
thral trauma or migrating grass awns may all cause
prior to referral, the dog was again pyrexic (39.9°C) and
retroperitonitis. A fluctuating abscess or firm swelling
 bilateral swelling of the lumbar muscles was found with
with or without a draining sinus in the dorsal lumbar
serosanguineous fluid discharging from the right lumbar
region may occur concurrently or some time after devel-
area. Synulox was given for 4 days prior to bacteriology
opment of spinal pain.
culture and sensitivity of the suspected left lumbar
Migrating plant awns may cause an initial cough
abscess.
weeks or months before back pain commences
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
Migration theories
The lumbar muscles felt firm to touch. No neurological
1. Inhaled and migrates along the diaphragmatic crus
deficits were present. Temperature was normal.
to lodge in sublumbar muscles
2. Swallowed and passes through caudal duodenum to
ascend in the mesoduodenum to the lumbar
NEUROANATOMICAL LOCALIZATION
vertebrae
3. Penetrates the terminal oesophagus, passing through
Lumbar muscles.
the crus of the diaphragm to rest ventral to the body
of T13 or L1.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
● Foreign body
SIGNALMENT
● Bite wounds
● Injection abscess
A 4-year-old neutered female springer spaniel dog.
● Discospondylitis with soft tissue abscessation.
284
71 Retroperitoneal disease
285
LSPINE
CaSE WOrK-UP
24.0+C
08:33:3204
Haematology
showed  a  mature  neutrophilia  and
monocytosis.
MRI showed spondylitis of the L4 vertebra with sub-
lumbar inflammation and abcessation (Fig. 71.1).
In cases of migrating foreign bodies radiography can
show mild to moderate ventral periosteal reactions of
the T13-L4 vertebrae which may not become visible until
several weeks after the onset of back pain signs. Sub-
lumbar muscles are enlarged and diffusely outlined.
Osteomyelitis, periostitis and discospondylitis are fre-
quent complications of grass awn migration.
DIAGNOSIS
Migrating plant material, possibly inhaled.
Figure 71.1 Dorsal T1wl+C (fat saturation) of lumbar
TREATMENT
 spine. Bilateral subcutaneous areas of mottled
hyperintensity post-contrast with enhancement of the left
 Synulox was continued for 8 weeks, then withdrawn. No
lumbar musdle.
recurrence of pain occurred. Had signs recurred, surgical
exploration to remove foreign bodies would have been
performed.
72
Scratching
INTRODUCTION
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
Biting, scratching. chewing and auto-amputation
Rubbing the face.
of digits are rare but can occur with sensory neuropa-
thies (Fig. 72.1). Cauda equina compression in dogs may
CASE HISTORY
result in self-mutilation of the perineum, tail or pelvic
limbs.
The cat had refused to eat or drink for a month, brusquely
veering away from the food. At this time, the cat began
Scratching or rubbing the face is a sign of irritation
wiping the left side of its face with a forepaw. Various
or pain. The trigeminal nerve is sensory to the face. The
investigations had been performed to find a source of
facial nerve conveys sensation from the concave surface
uebaq uaun nen aul lne ou on uied rnl jo jeuap 'jeno
of the pinna, vertical ear canal and middle ear.
having short episodes of sitting still and staring into
Hypocalcaemia commonly presents with frantic face
space. The cat slept deeply and needed shaking
rubbing.
to arouse it. The jaw was seen to hang open and
Trigeminal neuromas are thought to create a paraes-
the tongue stuck out and made multiple licking
thesia of the ipsilateral side of the head which leads to
movements.
scratching at the face. This generally follows develop-
ment of ipsilateral atrophy of the masticatory muscles so
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
the diagnosis is self-evident.
Face rubbing is occasionally noted in dogs with facial
The cat was alert, friendly, ambulatory and had a normal
paralysis. It is not the reason for referral. It may be
gait, postural reactions and spinal reflexes. The left
 related to pseudo-ptyalism.
menace response was present. The left pupil was
Self-induced excoriations of the head and neck are
enlarged and lacked direct and indirect PLR. The left
seen in a small number of cats treated with methimazole
palpebral reflex was absent. Eye movement was normal.
 or carbimazole within the first 3 months of treatment.
The jaw hung partially open and had decreased tone.
Drug withdrawal and glucocorticoids are required.
The lower jaw had intact pain perception. Atrophy
Episodic pawing at one or both sides of the mouth,
of the left masseter muscle could be palpated. The
with exaggerated licking and chewing movements has
tongue had movement but protruded more than normal.
been reported in cats, predominantly Burmese. Facial
A raspy noise from the upper respiratory tract was heard
and tongue mutilation may occur. Predisposing factors
(Fig. 72.2).
seem to be dental (periodontal disease, erupting teeth
or routine dental treatment) or living in a multi-cat
NEUROANATOMICAL LOCALIZATION
household. No neurological deficits are found. The cause
is not known.
Left CN Ill because of the mydriasis and lack of pupil
constriction. Left CN V because of the lack of sensation
to the face, atrophy of masticatory musdles and poor jaw
SIGNALMENT 1
tone. The mandibular branch of CN V was affected
A 12-year-old neutered male domestic shorthaired cat.
because it carries the motor fibres to muscles of mastica-
286
72 Scratching
287
TR:540
06/
Figure 72.1 A 4-month-old female Border collie
E9.5
knuckled over hind paws. She had intact patellar reflexes
Figure 72.3 T1wl+C: large mass surrounding the left
but absent withdrawal reflexes in the hindlimbs. Pain
tympanic bulla (double arrows) and invading the floor of
perception was absent in the hind paws and reduced in
the forelimbs. The dog later chewed off one of its toes
the skull (single arrow). Atrophy of ipsilateral masticatory
and was euthanized.
muscles (star).
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
· Neoplasia of the skull, centred on the left tympanic
bulla region
● Lymphoma of CNN
●Meningioma on the left side of the brainstem.
CASE WORK-UP
MRI images were obtained (Fig. 72.3).
CSF was normal with RBC 0 ul; WBC 2 μl; TP 0.20 g/l.
Cytology detected low cellularity with scattered small
medium lymphocytes and monocytes only.
Figure 72.2 Dropped jaw, visible tongue, anisocoria (L>R)
DIAGNOSIS
Histopathology confirmed the suspected diagnosis of a
sarcoma. A highly infiltrative round cell sarcoma was
tion. It is also sensory to the lower jaw, but this function
found (Figs 72.4, 72.5).
remained intact. The raspy URT noise could have been
due to laryngeal paralysis.
Scratching at the neck is a common sign of syringo-
CN Ill and CN V lie close together within the cavern-
myelia in Cavalier King Charles spaniels, especially when
ous sinus. An invasive skull lesion in the region of the
walking on a lead or with exertion, barking or
oval foramen and therefore the TMJ was suspected as
excitement.
the cat first presented with a reluctance to eat and
Dilation of the central canal is termed hydromyelia.
rubbing the face, suggesting pain and a possible paraes-
Channel formation lacking ependymal lining within the
thesia. No history of ear disease was present so osteo-
spinal cord is known as syringomyelia. Syringohydro-
myelitis of the bulla and an otogenic brainstem abscess
myelia indicates communication between the two. Both
were not thought to be a realistic differential. CN X
occur in similar situations so differentiating them is not
departs the skull via the tympano-occipital fissure.
thought to be clinically important.
288
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
Scratching the neck.
CASE HISTORY
For 6 months the dog had been scratching its neck when
walked on a lead or if the left side of the neck was
touched. The dog did not scratch if only wearing the
collar, or if walked on a harness and lead; 2-3 times in
the last 4 years the dog had yelped. The frequency of
yelping for no apparent reason increased to once a
week.
Figure 72.4 Postmortem. Tumour (arrow) visible adjacent
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
to tympanic bulla (star).
Lightly stroking the left side of the neck induced scratch-
ing movements in the ipsilateral hindlimb. No neurologi-
cal deficits were noted.
NEUROANATOMICAL LOCALIZATION
The syndrome of scratching Cavalier King Charles span-
iels is well known now and it is difficult not to become
tunnel-visioned when presented with the breed. The
lesion was localized to the cervical cord, with syringo-
myelia suspected as the source of paraesthesia.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Dermatological causes must be considered. Always ask
if the animal bites, scratches or chews other parts of the
Figure 72.5 Postmortem. Gelatinous material within left
bulla.
body or has a history of otitis externa. If neck pain is
more prominent, always consider IVDD and meningitis
and plan investigations accordingly. Hypocalcaemia can
The condition occurs congenitally with or without
cause muscle spasms and facial pruritus.
concomitant malformations of the brain (hydrocephalus
or Chiari-like malformation) or spinal cord (spinal dysra-
CASE WORK-UP
phism). Acquired forms associated with spinal trauma,
IV disc herniation, neoplasia and inflammation have
CSF was normal: RBC 19 μl, WBC 2 μl. Total protein
 been reported.
0.25 g/l. Cytology was normal, consisting of few mono-
Clinical signs comprise torticollis, scoliosis, spinal pain,
cytes and small to medium lymphocytes.
ataxia and weakness and may be slowly progressive over
MRl: syringomyelia was detected (Figs 72.6 and 72.7)
weeks or years or acute in onset. It may be the cause of
with caudal descent of the cerebellum into the foramen
magnum.
SIGNALMENT 2
DIAGNOSIS
A 4-year-old male Cavalier King Charles spaniel
Chiari-like malformation and syringomyelia (CM/SM).
72 Scratching
289
Table 72.1 Options for pain relief
Drug
Mechanism
Use
Morphine,
Pure μ-receptor
Moderate to
methadone,
agonist opioid 
 severe, acute
fentanyl
 pain
Nociceptive and
 neuropathic
Figure 72.6 Sagittal T2W1. Large syrinx within spinal cord
 pain
and caudal descent of the cerebellum.
Buprenorphine
Partial
Note: ceiling
μ-agonist/k-
ata
antagonist 
opioid 
Butorphanol
Mixed
Visceral pain
K-agonist/u-
Note: ceiling 
antagonist 
effect
06/
opioid 
NSAID5
Inhibit 
Mild to
Cyclooxygenase
moderate. Bone
isoenzymes.
 and joint pain 
Role in the CNS?
Note: ceiling
effect.
Avoid use in
renal, GIT,
hepatic,
coagulation 
disorders and
G2:
shock.
Metomindine,
αZ-agonists
 Sedation and
xylazine
 analgesia
Figure 72.7 Transverse T2Wwl. Syrinx visible within the
Ketamine 
 NMDA-receptor
Hyperalgesia
cord at the level of the axis.
antagonist 
Anticonvulsants
Doses required
 Neuropathic pain,
Phenytoin
10u a.e
 central pain
Carbamazepine
necessarily the 
 syndromes
Gabapentin 
same as the
valproate 
anticonvulsant 
TrEATMENT
doses
Tricyclic
Blockade of
Nociceptive pain
Treatment of syringomyelia commences with the least
antidepressants;
serotonin and
 Neuropathic pain
invasive option of pain relief but may culminate in
 amitriptyline
norepinephrine 
surgery for those with worsening signs or unremitting
reuptake.
Corticosteroids
Anti-inflammatory 
 Inflammation,
pain. Postoperative improvement was seen in 80% of
nerve
cases but 47% went on to deteriorate again within 2.3
 compression,
years. Another surgical study of four Cavalier King
meningeal 
 Charles spaniels found no improvement in clinical signs
irritation 
or reduction of the syrinx by 3 months postoperatively.
Carbamazepine
Na channels 
 Spontaneous pain
Lamotrigine
Paraesthesias,
It is recommended that surgery is a last resort in Cavalier
Mexiletine
dysaesthesias
King Charles spaniels with unremitting pain.
Neuropathic pain
 antidepressants;
Treatment of pain
amitriptyline 
Treatment in this case consisted of a combination of
Gabapentin 
pregabalin 
by/bu oz-01 1e unuadeqeb pue @is by/bw 7 uajoudies
TID. The yelping decreased in frequency but the scratch-
ing continued with the same stimuli (Table 72.1).
This page intentionally left blank
12
SECTION
URINARY
NCONTINENCE
Chapter 73
 Urinary incontinence - an introduction 
293
Chapter 74
 No attempt to urinate
295
Chapter 75
Leaks, dribbles urine
297
This page intentionally left blank
73
Urinary incontinence - an
introduction
Urinationbecomes avoluntaryactionintheyoung
4.Express and empty the bladder every 6-8 hours.
animal. It is governed by interactions of the CNS and
If this is not possible, perform intermittent clean
PNS, many of them reflex. Cerebral influences inhibit or
catheterization. Place indwelling catheters in female
initiate urination. The pontine micturition centre is the
dogs.
major coordinator of the storage and voiding phases.
 5. Reduce sphincter tone if necessary:
The spinal cord transmits sensory and motor impulses.
●Phenoxybenzamine (smooth muscle)2.5-5 mg
The pelvic, hypogastric and pudendal nerves directly
q12-24 hr (cat) and 5-20 mg q12-24 hr (dog).
innervate the smooth and skeletal muscle of the bladder
The effects take 3-4 days to start.
and sphincter. Fast conduction through the tight con-
● Prazosin (smooth muscle). There is a risk of hypo-
nections between bladder muscle fibres facilitates
tension. Give half the calculated dose and observe
bladder contraction (Fig. 73.1).
for syncope, seizures or collapse.
● Diazepam (striated muscle) 1-2.5 mg q8 hr (cat)
Incontinence is the lack of voluntary control of urina-
and 2-10 mg q6-8 hr (dog).
tion. Neurological causes rarely affect the bladder and
●Dantrolene (striated muscle) 0.5-2 mg/kg PO
sphincter alone. Other abnormalities are found in the
q8 hr (cat) and 1-5 mg/kg PO q8 hr (dog).
history or on examination. Urological disease must
 6. If detrusor atony secondary to distension is present,
always be considered as a cause or a sequela.
place an indwelling urinary catheter on a closed col-
lection system to ensure the bladder is kept small at
all times. Identify and treat urinary tract infections.
Use bethanechol to stimulate bladder contraction.
CLINICAL TIP
● Bethanechol chloride 2.5-5 mg PO q8 hr (cat),
 5 mg P0 q8 hr (smal/medium dog) and 10-15 mg 
Grade 4 and 5 spinal cord lesions, sacral fractures,
PO q8 hr (large dog). Effects commence in the first
tail pull injury and cerebral disease are common 
week of treatment.
causes of urinary incontinence.
● Treatment of acute bladder distension is usually
successful but takes 1-2 weeks. The indwelling
catheter is removed after 10-14 days and urina-
tion is observed.
● Treatment of chronic bladder distension is made
PRESENTING SIGNS
difficult by inflammation and fibrosis of the mus-
No attempt to urinate, leaks, dribbles urine, strains to
cular wall.
urinate and increased urgency to urinate
● If UMN paralysis of the bladder is present bethan-
echol can be used after the sphincter tone has
been reduced.
TREATMENT
7. Detrusor hyperreflexia may be decreased by:
1. ldentify the
underlying   cause. Urological   vs
●Propanthelinebromide 0.25-0.5mg/kg
PO
neurological.
q8-12 hr.
 2. Treat the underlying neurological lesion.
● Imipramine 5-15 mg PO q12 hr (dog) and 2.5-
3. Treat urinary tract infections.
5 mg PO q12 hr (cat).
293
294
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
UMN lesions 
Cerebral cortex
Cerebellum
LMN lesions
L1-L4
S1-S3
A
Pelvicnerve
Pontine micturition
centre
Pudendal nerve
Hypogastric nerve
hhibits contraction
Bladder
(i.e.relaxation)
Smooth
Striated
Contraction
Figure 73.1 Control of urination.
8. Reflex dyssynergia requires a decreased urethral
CLINICAL TIP
tone.
 9. Sphincter incompetence is common in middle-aged
There may be resistance to bladder expression
to older spayed female dogs. It is not a primarily
with sacral cord lesions. It is generated by the
neurological disease.
internal urinary sphincter innervated by the
● Phenylpropanolamine: 1.5-2.0 mg/kg PO q8 hr.
hypogastric nerve originating from the lumbar
● Hormone replacement using diethylstilboestrol.
cord.
74
No attempt to urinate
INTRODUCTION
hindlimb. The cat was unable to qet in and out of the
cat flap or jump on to furniture. If jumping off furniture,
No attempt to urinate results in urine retention. Over-
the hindlimbs would collapse on landing. Recently, the
flow of urine may occur but the bladder does not fully
cat stayed in its basket and no urination had been
empty. In time, a sacral reflex may initiate urination
noticed.
 involuntarily but emptying will be incomplete and poorly
coordinated with sphincter relaxation. Normal residual
volume post-urination is usually less than 10 ml. Affected 
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
animals have palpably distended bladders. Ease of
The left hindlimb lacked all voluntary motor ability but
expression depends on the sphincter tone. Causes
there was a small amount of voluntary movement in the
include:
right hind. Hindlimb proprioception was absent bilater-
● Cannot perceive bladder distension: lesions of the
ally. Spinal reflexes were normal to increased in the
 cerebrum, spinal cord, pelvic nerve or sacral segments 
hindlimbs. Muscle tone was normal in all limbs. The
(S1-3)
bladder was enlarged and difficult to express. No spinal
● Does not initiate voluntary urination: cerebral lesion
pain was found.
● Cannot contract bladder: lesion of the detrusor
muscle, pelvic nerve, sacral cord, or dysautonomia
● Can perceive bladder distension and can contract
NEUROANATOMICAL LOCALIZATION
bladder wall but is recumbent and cannot assume
The T3-L3 spinal cord segments.
posture, so will not urinate.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
CLINICAL TIP
●Neoplasia
Rule out anuria or bladder rupture.
●IVD disease
● Myelitis.
SIGNALMENT
CASE WORK-UP
An 8-year-old neutered female domestic shorthaired cat.
Myelography showed ventral extradural compression at
the level of the L2-3 IV space.
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
CSF was normal.
Hindlimb weakness.
DIAGNOSIS
CASE HISTORY
A left-sided hemilaminectomy at L2-3 allowed removal
There was a 1 month history of hindlimb paresis and
of a large amount of calcified disc material the nature
ataxia which had started gradually, first affecting the left
of which was confirmed by histopathology.
295
296
 SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
TREATMENT
bladder remained enlarged and required expression.
She was readmitted and placed on another closed
Urinary incontinence persisted postoperatively. Diaze-
 system and indwelling urinary catheter for another week
pam and phenoxybenzamine made it easier to express
while receiving diazepam, phenoxybenzamine and
the bladder, but the cat was unable to voluntarily void.
bethanechol.
Detrusor atony was suspected so an indwelling urinary
A degree of voluntary movement returned to both
catheter on a closed system was placed and the cat was
hindlimbs within 2 weeks. The cat was able to urinate
monitored dlosely upon its removal 10 days later. The
normally soon after removing the catheter the second
cat became able to void small amount of urine but the
time.
75
Leaks, dribbles urine
INTRODUCTION
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
Leaking or dribbling urine is a passive action and urine
The cat was alert and ambulatory. A bilateral plantigrade
is found where the animal has been sitting or lying and
stance of the hindlimbs was present with the left slight
may occur as the animal walks about. It occurs with:
worse than the right hindlimb. The tail hung flaccidly
● Weak external sphincter due to a pudendal nerve
and lacked all voluntary movement (Fig. 75.1). Anal tone
lesion or sacral cord lesion (S1-3)
was significantly reduced. The cat did not detect noxious
● Weak bladder neck and smooth muscle of the urethra
stimulation of the tail or the anus (Fig. 75.2). The bladder
(internal sphincter) due to a lesion of the hypogastric
was enlarged and there was little resistance to expres-
nerve or lumbar cord (cat: L2-5, dog: L1-4)
sion. Faeces could be digitally removed from the con-
● Urine retention with overflow due to LMN or UMN
scious cat. The withdrawal reflex was present in all limbs
bladder paralysis
and seemed normal. The patellar reflex was 2-3+ bilater-
● 32% of dogs that had recovered pain perception and
ally. No spinal pain was detected.
ambulation following a grade 5 IVDD-induced T3-L3
spinal cord injury had urinary incontinence, infre-
NEUROANATOMICAL LOCALIZATION
quently dribbling urine in the house. All had mild
faecal incontinence.
The lesion was localized to the caudal nerves of the tail
and sacral nerves S1-3 or the associated spinal cord
segments of the cauda equina.
SIGNALMENT
This would account for the paralysis of the tail, anal
A 9-year-old neutered male Maine coon cat.
sphincter, urethral sphincter and the inability of the
bladder to contract. Distension of the bladder by urine
retention can separate the tight conjunctions between
CASE PRESENTING SIGNS
the detrusor muscle fibres which would also interfere
with synchronous bladder contraction. Extension of the
Tail paralysis, faecal and urinary incontinence and a
tarsus is mediated by the sciatic nerve whose chief com-
bilateral plantigrade stance.
ponents are the L7-S1 segments and nerves. Plantigrade
 stance of the hindlimbs may also result from tarsal injury
or gastrocnemius rupture but neither was found on
CASE HISTORY
palpation.
A low tail carriage and an abnormal hindlimb stance
described as 'rabbit-like' developed suddenly 2 weeks
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
prior to presentation. Faecal and urinary incontinence
commenced with urine and faeces leaking or dropping
● Trauma: A sudden onset of neurological signs is often
out where the cat lay or as the cat moved about the
blamed on trauma, especially in cats with access to
house. The owner did not think the cat was in pain as
the outdoors. Spinal fractures are uniformly painful.
the appetite remained normal and the pet had not
Survey radiographs sent by the referring veterinarian
become reclusive.
were normal.
297
298
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
Figure 75.1 Pantigrade stance, flaccid tail
Figure 75.3 T1Wl+contrast sagittal, lumbar spine.
Enhancement of cauda equina (arrow).
Figure 75.4 Distortion of the cauda equina
Figure 75.2 Lack of pain perception in the tail.
Only a few drops of lumbar CSF could be collected.
Cytology was judged the most important component to
● Vascular: Infarction of the lumbosacral intumescence
assess as lymphoma, a differential diagnosis, may shed 
can produce a sudden onset of LMN signs and would
neoplastic cells into the CSF. Surgical exploration was
not be expected to cause spinal pain. Spinal infarction
recommended but refused.  Prednisolone was com-
 may produce strikingly unilateral deficits but the small
menced to treat possible lymphoma. Sensation returned
size of the sacral segments and oedema associated
to the right side of the anus the following day. The cat
with infarction would render signs bilateral.
also became intensely painful and was restless and
●Intervertebral disc extrusionat L7-S1was a
attacked his hindquarters. Methadone IM was required
possibility.
every 4 hours for pain relief. CSF cytology was normal.
● Neoplasia: neoplasia or inflammation of the cauda
Inyujed Ajelauab lle ale sinownt leuids pue euinba
DIAGNOSIS
conditions
Euthanasia was performed due to concerns for resolu-
tion of the pain and incontinence.
CASE WORK-UP
At postmortem examination no extradural surgically
MRl showed a contrast-enhancing lesion  within the
removable lesion  was present.  The cauda equina
spinal canal at the level of the L6-S1 vertebrae (Fig.
appeared discoloured through the dural sac. Lymphoma
75.3).
of the cauda equina was found (Fig. 75.4),
APPENDICES
McQs
301
McQs - Answers
307
Appendix 1
Abbreviations
309
Appendix 2
Cerebrospinal fluid and the ventricular system
310
Appendix 3
Collection of CSF
312
Appendix 4
 CSF analysis
314
Appendix 5
Imaging the nervous system
315
Appendix 6
Neuropathology
319
Appendix 7
Referral of a patient
325
Further reading
327
Index
329
This page intentionally left blank
MCQs
1. A dog was left at the practice with a short
(c) Tetraplegia, hypoventilation, loss of all spinal
note from the client saying the dog had
reflexes
fallen down the stairs early that morning and
(d) Non-ambulatory tetraparesis, respiratory
had head trauma. Physical examination is
paralysis, loss of pain perception 
normal. Your priority is to:
(e) Paraplegia, urinary and faecal incontinence, tail
(a) Anaesthetize the dog and radiograph the head
paralysis
for possible fractures
(b) Inject the dog with dexamethasone to treat
increased intracranial pressure
4. The menace response is absent in the left
(c) Call the owner and clarify what happened
eye. where is the lesion?
(d} Dispense phenobarbitone
(a) Right facial nerve
(e} Take blood tests
(b) Right trigeminal nerve
(c) Left facial nerve
2. A 2-year-old German shepherd dog has been
(d) Left oculomotor nerve
having clusters of 3-4 generalized seizures.
(e) Left cerebrum
Treatment consists of rectal diazepam
administered by the owners when the first
seizure occurs, and a twice-daily regime of
5. One month ago a 10-year-old male domestic
 60 mg phenobarbitone. Seizure activity was
shorthaired cat began having episodes of
first noticed 1 year ago. The dog's behaviour
sitting very still, twitching its face and
in the inter-ictal period has always been
growling. The events last about 10 seconds
normal. You want to improve the seizure
and are followed by hours of pacing and
control. what information do you need to aid
circling. Upon questioning, the owner says
rational treatment decisions?
that the cat has not used the cat flap for the
(a} Length of the inter-ictal period
last 3 months and will sit facing into corners
(b) Serum phenobarbitone level
for long periods. Examination finds that the
(c)} Liver function tests
cat is unresponsive to the environment and
(d) Repeat neurological examination results
relentlessly but slowly circles to the right.
(e} All of the above
You decide to:
(a} Do a routine dental as that is probably why
3. Cervical fractures most commonly affect the
the face is twitching
axis. Animals typically present with neck pain.
(b) Dispense diazepam as it is sure to be idiopathic
Which combination of signs might be seen if
epilepsy
the fracture site becomes unstable and
(c) Recommend ear cleaning as the cat appears to
compresses the spinal cord?
have vestibular disease
(a)} Paraplegia, urinary retention, increased muscle
(d) Discuss imaging the brain as it appears to be
tone
cerebral disease
(b) Non-ambulatory tetraparesis, increased muscle
(e) Treat with flea control products as an
tone and normal spinal reflexes in all limbs
infestation could make the cat restless
301
302
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
6. A 6-month-old collie dog was hit by a car. The
(c) Left cerebrum
hindlimbs are paralysed, have 3+ patellar
(d) Optic radiation bilaterally
reflexes and withdrawal reflexes bilaterally.
(e) The lateral geniculate nuclei bilaterally
Perception of pain is absent when the
hindlimbs are tested. The dog struggles to sit,
9. A 12-year-old male domestic shorthaired cat
but can use both forelimbs. Where is the
is presented because the owner says the cat
lesion?
is no longer sitting in the usual places. In
the last 2 weeks, he has been found lying in
(a} C1-5 spinal cord segments
(b) C6-T2 spinal cord segments
the empty bath and also in the owner's
(c) T3-L3 spinal cord segments
wardrobe. Examination finds a mentally dull
(d) L4-S1 spinal cord segments
cat with a normal gait and decreased placing
(e} S1-3 spinal cord segments
responses in the left fore and hindlimbs.
Hopping was normal. Spinal reflexes were
 normal. The menace response was absent
7. Lateral spinal radiographs of the same
6-month-old collie dog detect an undisplaced
bilaterally. PLR were normal. where is the
oblique fracture of T13 vertebral body. The
lesion?
(a) Bilateral optic nerves
cutaneous trunci reflex is absent caudal
to the level of T9 vertebral body. Wwhich
(b) Right cerebrum
(c) Left medulla oblongata
statement is true?
(a} Undisplaced fractures of the vertebral body are
(d) Bilateral CN III
(e) Left cerebellum
stable. The dog should respond well to cage
rest and an external splint
10. A 6-year-old male Dalmatian ran into a
(b) The articular facets appear to be fractured at
tombstone while playing. He continued to
T12-T13. The fracture site is potentially
walk but had an arched back for the next
unstable. The dog has a good prognosis as
24 hours before developing hindlimb
long as the site is surgically stabilized
paralysis. You localize the lesion, ponder the
(c) MRl of the cord is required to look for
differential diagnoses and commence
herniated disc material
investigation. Lumbar CsF analysis detects
30 mg/dl total protein and no WBCs or RBCs.
and the prognosis is poor
Myelography shows ventral extradural
(e)} The cutaneous trunci reflex is absent because
compression at the T12-13 IV space. The VD
the brachial plexus is avulsed bilaterally
view is normal. This corresponds with the
anatomic localization. What neurological
 8. A 9-year-old male Staffordshire bull terrier
abnormalities do you find on examination?
became lethargic 6 months ago and
(a} Forelimb weakness, flaccid hindlimbs and
aggressive 2 weeks ago. The dog is
absent cutaneous trunci reflex
impossible to handle but could be observed
(b) Hypertonia and hyper-reflexia of the hindlimbs.
safely.when indoors the animal just lay on
Normal forelimb proprioception
the exam room floor. when taken outside
(c) Increased withdrawal reflex in the hindlimbs,
he appeared to be blind and showed little
absent right patellar reflex and flaccid anal
interest in the surroundings and would sink
tone
to the ground and lie in sternal recumbency.
(d} Absent patellar reflex, absent withdrawal reflex
The gait was normal. Pupils were large,
and normal pain perception
symmetric and unchanging in light and
(e) Torticollis, tetraparesis and 3+ spinal reflexes in
darkness. PLR were absent bilaterally. The
allimbs
facial, jaw and tongue muscles appeared
 normal in movement and symmetry. There is
11. The local hunt kennels called to say that half
one lesion ... where?
the dogs have collapsed and are vomiting
(a) The optic chiasm
and the others look weak. All dogs were
(b)} Right cerebrum
recently fed rotting meat. Examination of the
MCQs
303
worst affected dog reveals non-ambulatory
15. A young dog slips its collar, runs onto the
tetraparesis, an absent gag reflex, decreased
road and is hit by a car. Happily the dog
blink reflex, flaccid areflexic limbs and
survives, but immediately develops a
non-productive attempts to bark. Pain
non-weight-bearing lameness of the left
perception appears to be normal. The lesion
forelimb. A fractured radius is diagnosed
is localized to:
radiographically. A week post-surgery, the
(a} The medulla oblongata, to explain the loss of
left fore is still unable to move or support
 gag reflex and laryngeal paralysis
weight and the dorsal surface of the paw
(b} Autonomic nervous system to account for the
rests upon the ground. The left pupil is miotic
weakness and regurgitation
in light and darkness and has a normal PLR.
(c) C6-T2 and L4-S1 spinal cord segments to
The cutaneous trunci reflex is absent on the
account for the atonia and areflexia
left side. which of the following sentences
(d) The neuromuscular junction to account for the
best summarizes the clinical assessment?
widespread LMN dysfunction
(a) The limb is non-weight-bearing because the
(e) Spinal cord interneurons to account for
fracture site is infected and is causing the dog
widespread LMN dysfunction
pain
(b) The radial nerve was bruised and is expected
12. The ventricular system is lined by ependyma
to recover
which can become inflamed in cases of FIP.
(c) Head trauma has caused Horner's syndrome
Blockage of the mesencephalic aqueduct
The limb is not infected but the dog requires
results in:
more pain relief and an MRl of the head
(a} Dilation of the fourth ventricle
(d) The radial nerve was pierced by the internal
(b) Dilation of the quadrigeminal cistern
fixation which accounts for the pain and all
(c) Dilation of the cisterna magna
the neurological deficits.The dogrequires
(d} Dilation of the lateral ventricles
additional post-surgery radiographs of the
(e} Dilation of the central canal
limb
13. A left trigeminal nerve lesion can result in:
(e) The left brachial plexus has been damaged.
This accounts for the left fore paralysis, and
(a} Left ptosis
(b) Paralysis of the left upper lip
ipsilateral LMN reflex changes and Horner's
(c) An absent menace response on the left
syndrome
(d} An absent left blink reflex
16. Common causes of back pain include all of
(e)} Atrophy of the left side of the tongue
the following:
14. Anisocoria. The left pupil is mydriatic. The
(a) Immune-mediated meningitis, IVD extrusion 
right pupil is mid-sized. Light is shone in the
and discospondylitis
left eye and only the right pupil constricts.
(b) Spinal cord infarction, polyneuropathy and
Light is shone in the right eye and only the
degenerative myelopathy
right pupil constricts. The animal is comatose,
(c) Thiamine deficiency, degenerative myelopathy
so the menace response cannot be assessed.
and cerebral disease
There is one lesion ... where is it?
(d) Schiff-Sherrington syndrome, spinal cord
(a} Left optic chiasm to explain the left-sided
 infarction and borborygmus
mydriasis
(e) Hyponatremia, hypoglycaemia hypokalaemia
(b) The right ophthalmic nerve to explain the
left-sided mydriasis
17. A 5-year-old cat suddenly fell off the back of
(c) The left oculomotor nerve to explain the lack
the armchair and is presented in a distressed
of left pupil constriction
state as an emergency 15 minutes later. The
(d) The left oculosympathetic supply to explain the
animal is ataxic and almost unable to walk
lack of left pupil constriction
as it repeatedly falls to the left. A left head
(e) The midbrain to explain the lack of left pupil
tilt and spontaneous nystagmus, with a
constriction
horizontal fast phase to the right are noted.
304
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
Based on this preliminary information, where
20. Dry eye can occur secondary to:
is the lesion?
(a} Horner's syndrome
(a) The left cervical cord to account for the falling
(b) Otitis interna
to the left
(c) Facial nerve paralysis
(b) The left cerebellum to account for the
(d) Oculomotor nerve paralysis
paradoxical direction of the spontaneous
(e) Glossopharyngeal nerve paralysis
nystagmus
(c) The left vestibular apparatus to account for
21. The oculomotor nerve innervates the:
 all the signs
(a) Lacrimal gland
(d) The right vestibular apparatus to account for
(b) Pupil dilator muscle
all the signs
(c) Pupil constrictor muscle
(e)} The heart to account for the collapse and
(d) The third eyelid
distressed state
(e) All of the above
18. The same cat is examined the following day
22. Horner's syndrome presents with:
and found to have a normal placing response
(a} Miosis, ptosis and dry eye
in allimbs. when the body is supported, the
(b) Miosis, wider palpebral fissure and reddened 
cat is able to hop normally on each limb. The
conjunctiva
lesion is localized to the:
() Miosis, ventrolateral strabismus and lack of
(a} Right cerebellum because cerebellar lesions do
direct PLR
not cause weakness
(d} Mydriasis, ptosis and reddened conjunctiva
(b) Left peripheral vestibular apparatus because
(e) Miosis, ptosis and enophthalmos
strength and proprioception are normal
(c) Left brainstem lesion as indicated by the
23. which of the following signs has a prognostic
horizontal nature of the nystagmus 
value?
(d) Left cochlear duct to account for the loss of
(a) The presence or absence of pain perception
balance
(b) The direction of a head tilt 
(e)} Left pons to account for the left-sided balance
(c) Schiff-Sherrington sign
loss
(d) The Babinski reflex
(e) The biceps reflex
19. An 8-year-old retired greyhound was let out
into the garden this morning. Ten minutes
 24. Brain death is suspected in an animal lacking:
later the owner found the dog unable to
(a} Voluntary movement in all limbs
stand. Half an hour after this occurred the
(b) Withdrawal reflexes in all limbs
dog is examined. The findings include?
(c)  Pupillary light reflexes
non-ambulatory tetraparesis, decreased
(d) Vision
hopping response in all limbs but more so on
(e) Consciousness and all CNN reflexes
the left, absent proprioception in the left fore
and hind limbs and decreased proprioception
25. An 8-year-old boxer dog suddenly developed
in the right fore and hind limbs. Spinal
a right-sided head tilt. when walking
reflexes are slightly increased in all limbs.
around the house the dog keeps to the left,
Muscle tone is normal in all limbs. The dog
leaning on walls and occasionally staggering
is mentally alert, has normal cranial nerve
to the left but never falling. Examination
function and does not have any spinal pain.
detects a left-sided hemiparesis. Spinal
Where is the lesion?
reflexes are normal in all limbs.
(a) T3-L3 spinal cord segments, worse on the left
Proprioception is reduced in the left hindlimb.
(b)} Right cerebrum
Fundic examination detects a spontaneous
(c} Left brainstem
rotatory nystagmus with the fast jerk phase
(d} Left cerebellum
to the right. The dog is generally very well,
(e} C1-C5 spinal cord segments, worse on the left
but developed otitis externa of the right ear
MCQs
305
1 week ago. where is the lesion and what
(d) Seizuring
could it be caused by?
(e) Rolling
(a) Right-sided peripheral vestibular disease.
Possibly 'old dog' idiopathic vestibular disease
31. Mydriasis occurs in:
(b) Right-sided peripheral vestibular disease.
(a) Dysautonomia
Possibly otitis interna
(b) Horner's syndrome
(c) Right-sided central vestibular disease. Possibly
(c) Otitis media-interna
a brainstem abscess
(d) Diffuse cerebral disease
(d) Left-sided central vestibular disease. Possibly a
(e) Myasthenia gravis
cerebellopontine angle tumour
(e) Bilateral peripheral vestibular disease. Possibly
32. Flaccid facial muscles may occur in
otitis interna
(a) Trigeminal nerve paralysis
(b) Facial nerve paralysis
26. Circling is a sign of:
(c) Tetanus
(a) Settling down to sleep in a basket
(d) Metronidazole toxicity
(b)} Cerebral disease
(e} Otitis externa
(c) Vestibular disease
(d) Some lesions of the cerebellum
33. CsF analysis is useful in cases of:
(e} All of the above
(a} Fever of unknown origin
(b) Chronic cases of otitis media-interna which
27. which of the following groups of cranial
develop neurological signs
nerves exit the skull through the orbital
(c) Stiff, stilted gait with limited neck movement
foramen?
(d) Sudden onset paraplegia in a cat
(a} Optic, oculomotor and trochlear
(e} All of the above
(b) Oculomotor, trochlear and abducent
(c) Oculomotor, orbital and trochlear
34. Absence of a withdrawal reflex indicates:
(d) Facial only
(a) Lack of proprioception
(e) Oculomotor, abducent and facial
(b} A sciatic nerve lesion
(c) Lack of pain perception
28. which of the following is not a sign of facial
(d) Paralysis of the limb
nerve paralysis?
(e) Radial nerve paralysis
(a)} Lack of jaw tone
(b} Lack of a blink reflex
35. which of the following groups of signs
(c) Lack of a menace response
are common in acute thoracolumbar disc
(d)} Slightly wider palpebral fissure
extrusions?
(e}Dry eye
(a) Paraplegia, spinal pain and a flaccid anus
(b) Paraplegia, increased patellar reflexes and
29. which of the following is not a sign of
absent hindlimb withdrawal reflexes
peripheral vestibular disease?
(c) Non-ambulatory paraparesis, back pain and
(a} Head tilt
flaccid hindlimbs
(b)} Vertical nystagmus
(d) An arched back, vomiting and cranial
(c)Horizontal nystagmus
abdominal pain
(d) Rotatory nystagmus
(e)} Paraparesis, decreased proprioception and
(e} Strabismus
increased hindlimb spinal reflexes
30. which signs do not indicate vestibular
36. Cauda equina syndrome in small animals
dysfunction?
produces:
(a) Circling
(a)} Cranial nerve dysfunction
(b) Falling
(b} LMN deficits
(c) Leaning
(c) UMN deficits
306
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
(d) Generalized tetraparesis
40. The cat became quite contrary. It attacked the
(e)} All of the above
dog and ignored the canary. The final straw
came, when it forgot its own name, and sat
37. The first priority when presented with an
facing walls simply staring. Localize the
animal that may have neurological disease is:
lesion:
(a} To take blood tests
(a) UMN lesion
(b) To schedule imaging
(b) LMN lesion 
(c) To choose between MRl or myelography
(c) Brainstem lesion
(d) To decide if it has neurological disease or not
(d) Cerebellar lesion
(e) To run a series of DNA tests for that breed
(e) Cerebral lesion 
38. A dog walks into a bar. Why?
41. which disorder does not interfere with the
(a) Cerebral disease
neuromuscular junction?
(b)} Retinal detachment
(a} Tick paralysis
(c) Pituitary tumour pressing on the optic chiasm
(b) Botulism
(d} Optic neuritis
(c) Myasthenia gravis
(e) All of the above
(d) Polyradiculoneuritis 
(e) Snake envenomation
39. Sensation to the face is mediated by which
nerve?
42. Focal myasthenia gravis may cause weakness
(a)} Ophthalmic
in all of the following., except for one ...
(b) Facial
which is it?
(c) Glossopharyngeal
(a) Gag reflex, blink reflex and laryngeal muscles
(d) Trigeminal
(b) Menace response, lip retraction and gag reflex
(e) Vagus
(c) Laryngeal muscles, gag reflex and oesophagus
(d) Pupil constriction, blink reflex and lacrimation
(e) Muscles of facial expression, laryngeal muscles
and oesophagus
MCQs - Answers
1.  (c) Call the owner and clarify what happened
9. (b) Right cerebrum. Behaviour change, left-sided
2. (e) All of the above
proprioceptive deficits. The absent menace
response can be ascribed to the obtunded
3. (b) Non-ambulatory tetraparesis, increased muscle
mental state
tone and normal spinal reflexes in all limbs.
10. (b) Hypertonia and hyperreflexia of the hindlimbs.
Compression of the cord at the level of C2
vertebra would produce UMNdeficits in all
Normal forelimb proprioception. Normal fore-
limb function. UMN paraplegia
limbs. The presence of normal spinal reflexes
and increased muscle tone indicate that the
11. (d) The neuromuscular junction to account for the
reflex arcs are intact, and the weakness is due
widespread LMN dysfunction. Generalized LMN
to a UMN lesion. An animal that retains some
disease is present.
voluntary movement from a C1-5 spinal cord
12. (d) Dilation of the lateral ventridles. The mesence-
lesion will have the ability to perceive pain
 phalic aqueduct is in the midbrain.
Respiratory paralysis and loss of pain perception
13. (d) An absent left blink reflex. The blink reflex
indicate severe damage to the cervical cord and
requires intact sensation, mediated by CN V and
the animal would be paralysed or possibly dead
intact movement of the eyelids, mediated by CN
4. (c) Left facial nerve. The menace response requires
VII
the perception of the visual stimulus and a blink.
14. (e) The midbrain to explain the lack of left pupil
The menace response is absent because the
constriction and coma. The left pupil is mydriatic
animal is unable to blink (CN Vll)
and unable to constrict due to a left-sided CN
5. (d) Discuss imaging the brain as it could be cerebral
 川l lesion. The coma indicates a lesion within the
disease. Altered mentation, altered behaviour,
ARAS. A lesion of the left CN Ill nucleus within
seizures and circling to the right indicate right
the midbrain would account for both signs.
cerebral disease
Compression of CN Ill nerve can also result from
6. (c) T3-L3 spinal cord segments
brain herniation
7. (d) Ascending myelomalacia has probably occurred
15. (e) The left brachial plexus has been damaged. This
and the prognosis is poor. The fracture site indi-
accounts for the left fore paralysis, and ipsilat-
cates the site of one lesion. The lack of cutane.
eral LMN reflex changes and Horner's syndrome.
ous trunci reflex indicates a more rostral lesion.
Radial nerve paralysis prevents extension of the
The sudden onset paraplegia with loss of pain
limb and weight-bearing.
perception (grade 5 spinal cord lesion) second-
16. (a) Immune-mediated meningitis, IVD extrusion
ary to a spinal fracture carries a very poor prog-
and discospondylitis. Cerebral disease is reported 
nosis for recovery
as causing neck pain. Schiff-Sherrington syn-
8. (a) The optic chiasm. A lesion at the optic chiasm
drome is a localizing sign only
would cause blindness and lack of PLR. The
17. (c) The left vestibular apparatus to account for all
aggression and lethargy are caused by the lesion
the signs. The signs all indicate left-sided ves-
extending into the thalamus dorsally
tibular involvement
307
308
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
18. (b) Left peripheral vestibular apparatus because
30. (d) Seizuring. Seizures indicate cerebral dysfunc-
strength and proprioception are normal. Periph-
tion. Be carefur. The sudden onset of vestibular
eral vestibular disease does not affect the
signs cause animals to struggle to remain
 general proprioception or the strength
upright and they tend not to pay much atten-
19. (e) C1-C5 spinal cord segments, worse on the left.
tion to the owners while doing so. This results
UMN to all limbs worse on the left
in vestibular disease being mistaken for seizure
activity
20. (c) Facial nerve paralysis. The lacrimal gland is
innervated by CN Vll. CN Vll passes through the
31. (a) Dysautonomia. Parasympathetic dysfunction
middle, not the inner ear
32. (b) Facial nerve paralysis. CN Vil innervates muscles
of facial expression
21. (c) Pupil constrictor muscle. The parasympathetic
branch of CN Ill innervates the iris constrictor
33. (e) All of the above
22. (e) Miosis, ptosis and enophthalmos
34. (b) A sciatic nerve lesion
23. (a) The presence or absence of pain perception.
35. (e) Paraparesis, decreased proprioception and
The ability to perceive pain indicates some
increased hindlimb spinal reflexes. T3-L3 lesions
remaining spinal cord integrity in the paraplegic
produce UMN signs of weakness, normal to
patient. Lack of a biceps reflex may be a normal
increasedspinalreflexes andmuscle tone.
finding
 Decreased proprioception is usually the first sign
24. (e) Consciousness and all CNN reflexes
of spinal cord compromise
25. (d) Left-sided central vestibular disease. Possibly a
36. (b) LMN deficits
cerebellopontine angle tumour. The left-sided
37. (d) To decide if it has neurological disease or not.
hemiparesis and proprioceptive deficit indicate
The first step is to find the body system respon-
the central origin of the vestibular signs. The
sible for the presenting complaint. Take a history
head tilt is paradoxical in that it is directed in an
and perform an examination. Localize the lesion,
opposite direction to that of the lesion. The
whether it is to the nervous system or another
paresis and proprioceptive deficits are ipsilateral
body system. If the nervous system, is involved,
to the side of the lesion
specify the anatomic sites.
26. (e) All of the above. Obviously a history and exami-
38. (e) All of the above. All of the options can result in
nation will differentiate the possibilities from
blindness
each other
39. (d) Trigeminal
27. (b) Oculomotor, trochlear and abducent
40. (e) Cerebral lesion. Cerebral lesions can result in a
28. (a) Lack of jaw tone. Jaw tone is mediated by CN V
behaviour change
29. (b) Vertical nystagmus. Be carefur. Rotatory nystag-
41. (d) Polyradiculoneuritis. Polyradiculoneuritis, as the
mus can look like vertical nystagmus if the
name suggests, affects the nerve roots
patient is not examined carefully
42. (d) Pupil constriction, and lacrimation are unaffected
APPENDIX
Abbreviations
Ab: antibody
ICP: intracranial pressure
Ach: acetylcholine
MG: myasthenia gravis
AchR: acetylcholine receptor
MLF: medial longitudinal fasciculus
ARAS: ascending reticular activating system
MMM: masticatory muscle myositis
BAEP: brainstem audioevoked potential
MRI: magnetic resonance imaging
BAER: brainstem audioevoked response
NCV: nerve conduction velocity
BBB: bloodbrain barrier
OCD: obsessive compulsive disorder
CAT: computerized axial tomography
PaCOz: partial pressure of carbon dioxide dissolved in
CN: cranial nerve
arterial blood
CNN: cranial nerves, assigned Roman numerals from I to
PaOz: partial pressure of oxygen dissolved in arterial
Xll, hence CN V, etc.
blood
CNS: central nervous system
PNS: peripheral nervous system 
 CP: conscious proprioception
PRN: acute idiopathic polyradiculoneuritis
CPP: choroid plexus papilloma
PU, PD, PP: polyuria, polydipsia, polyphagia
CSF: cerebrospinal fluid
REM: rapid eye movement
CT: computerized tomography
RMSF: Rocky Mountain spotted fever
CTZ: chemoreceptor trigger zone
RNS: repetitive nerve stimulation
dB: decibel
RTA: road traffic accident
DlC: disseminated intravascular coagulation
SLUD: salivation, lacrimation, urination, diarrhoea
EMG: electromyography
 STIR: short-tau inversion recovery
FCE: fibrocartilaginous thromboembolism
STT: Schirmer Tear Test
FLAIR: fluid-attenuated inversion recovery
T13: depending on the context, either the 1 3th thoracic
GME: granulomatous meningoencephalitis
vertebra or spinal cord segment
GRE: gradient echo
T1Wl: T1-weighted image
HBC: hit by car
T2Wl: T2-weighted image
HL: hind limb
VOR: vestibulo-ocular reflex
309
APPENDIX
Cerebrospinal fluid and
the ventricular system
The central nervous system is created from a tube which
arteries. CSF flow is also enhanced by compressing the
expands. The centre of the tube remains hollow, is lined
jugular veins in the Queckenstedt manoeuvre.
by ependymal cells and contains CSF. The central canal
of the spinal cord is barely visible on MRl and contains
QUECKENSTEDT MANOEUVRE
a small amount of CSF. Expansion of the central canal is
called hydromyelia. Formation of CSF-filled spaces
Compression of both jugular veins decreases venous
without an ependymal lining in the spinal cord is
return from the brain, thus increasing the blood
referred to as syringomyelia, and the fluid-filled structure
volume within the skull. This increase in intracranial
is called a syrinx. Both hydro- and syringomyelia are
 content is compensated by CSF leaving the cranial vault 
pathological processes (Fig. 72.6, Fig. 72.7)
thus raising the pressure in the spinal subarachnoid
The hollow CSF-filled chambers of the brain are called
space.
ventricles. A curved, banana-shaped lateral ventricle lies
Queckenstedt noticed that the lumbar CSF pressure
within each cerebral hemisphere. Each connects to the
was slow to rise in cases of spinal cord compression. The
ring-shaped  third ventricle by an interventricular
increased CSF pressure could not be transmitted past the
foramen. The third ventricle lies on the midline and
site of subarachnoid obstruction. The diagnostic utility
encircles the thalamic adhesion. A narrow passageway
of the Queckenstedt test, or jugular compression test,
called the mesencephalic aqueduct passes caudally from
has been replaced by imaging techniques. It remains a
the third ventricle to the fourth ventricle. The fourth
useful method for increasing CSF flow during lumbar
ventricle is the last dilation of the ventricular system and
puncture.
its flattened structure lies dorsally within the medulla
Enlargements of the subarachnoid space are called
oblongata and is enclosed by a thin roof plate called the
cisterns. The cisterna magna lies between the caudal
medullary velum. In normal circumstances, CSF exits the
surface of the cerebellum and the dorsal surface of the
ventricular system, passing into the subarachnoid space
medulla oblongata and is the site of CSF collection.
via the lateral apertures, one on either side of the fourth
The quadrigeminal cistern lies dorsal to the tectum of
ventricle. The central canal communicates with the
the midbrain. The term quadrigeminal refers to the
fourth ventricle but CSF only enters the central canal in
 paired rostral and caudal colliculi of the tectum.
 any great volume under pathological circumstances (Fig.
The subarachnoid space extends to surround the
A2.1).
optic nerves, the spinal roots and blood vessels entering
 CSF enters the subarachnoid space and travels over
the CNS (Fig. A2.2). CSF analysis is therefore a useful
the surface of the brain and spinal cord. Flow is directed
tool in the diagnosis of optic neuritis, polyradiculoneuri-
caudally, hence the collection of CSF caudal to the site
tis and vasculitis.
of a lesion. CSF is absorbed chiefly through one-way
CSF production (Table A2.1) is constant and deter-
valves called arachnoid villi composed of arachnoid gran-
mined by the osmotic pressure of the blood. This can
ulations protruding into the venous sinuses. The flow of
be manipulated in treatment of increased ICP and 
CSF is thought to be due to pulsations of intracranial
hydrocephalus.
310
Appendix 2
311
 Third ventricle
CSF absorption into
venous sinuses
via arachnoid villi
Interventricular
foramen
Temporal horn of 
lateral ventricle
Lateral ventricle
 Rostral horn of 
left lateral ventricle -
Lateral recess
Fourth ventricle
Central canal
CSF flow
(lateral aperture of
the 4th ventricle)
CSF flow
Mesencephalic aqueduct
Figure A2.1 The ventricular system.
Bone
Bone
Periosteum-
Periosteum-
Epidural space
Dura mater -
Dura mater-
Subdural space-
Subdural space
Arachnoid-
Arachnoid
Subarachnoid space
 Subarachnoid space 
Pia mater.
Pia mater-
Spinal cord -
Brain
Figure A2.2 Relationship of the meninges to the CNS and surrounding bone of the (A) vertebrae and (B) skull
Table A2.1 CSF dynamics
Formation
Movement
Absorption
Site
Choroid plexus in all ventricles
Lateral ventricle to 3rd ventricle to
 Arachnoid villi in the venous
(major)
 aqueduct to 4th ventricle to
sinuses (major)
Ependymal surface
subarachnoid space
Transependymal, with increased 
 Blood vessels of the pia and
ventricular pressure (minor)
 arachnoid 
Influenced by
Osmotic pressure of blood
Pulsation of blood vessels, obstruction 
ICP
Independent of blood pressure 
 of pathway, increased ICP
CSF pressure exceeds venous 
 pressure (normal occurrence)
Dysfunction
Excess formation by choroid plexus
Obstruction of pathway causes
Rare. Absorptive capacity is
tumours
hydrocephalus
4 times greater than the
productive capacity
APPENDIX
Collection of CSF
INDICATIONS FOR CSF COLLECTION
● 65-90 mm CSF needles are required for lumbar
taps in obese small dogs and larger dogs
1. Spinal pain
● Use the smaller 22-gauge needle for cisterna
2. Fever of unknown origin
magna and lumbar taps in small dogs, cats, kittens
3. CNS lesions, especially if MRI is normal
and puppies. A 21-gauge needle can be used in
 4. Inflammation of nerve roots, optic nerve, meninges,
most dogsfor cisterna magna taps. The small gauge
CNS or blood vessels
slows CSF flow. The clinician must wait and check
 5. Periventricular or meningeal tumour
for CsF flow before inserting the needle further.
6. Suspected brachial plexus tumour (collect from
3. Advance the needle
lumbar site)
 The skin offers the most resistance to advance-
 7. Prior to injecting contrast agent in myelography.
ment of the needle. Either cut the skin with a
scalpel blade and insert through this small gap, or,
INCREASED RISK ASSOCIATED WITH
tent the skin and push the needle sharply through
the gathered tissue. Relax the skin and realign the
CSF COLLECTION
needle with the landmarks for insertion.
1. Bleeding disorder
● Some clinicians advance the needle with the stylet
2. Increased intracranial pressure
in place. Others remove the stylet.
3. Unsuitable candidate for general anaesthesia
● Flexion of the neck tenses fascial planes and a
4. Cervical instability, e.g. atlantoaxial subluxation
'pop' may or may not be felt as the needle
5. Lack of experience with the technique.
advances through layers of tissue.
● The atlanto-occipital membrane occasionally feels
firm to touch like inserting a needle into orange
TECHNIQUE FOR CSF COLLECTION
 peel. Other times there is no resistance whatso-
1. Choose the site for collection
ever. Do not rely on any particular sensation to
● Caudal to the lesion.
signal the arrival of the tip of the needle into the
● The site closest to the lesion.
cisterna magna. The distance between the skin
● Both cisterna magna and lumbar punctures. Useful
 and the subarachnoid space in kittens and puppies
for inflammatory disease.
is frighteningly small.
● Cisterna magna at the atlanto-occipital space
● Insertion of the needle through the cauda equina
(Fig. A3.1).
usually results in brief muscle twitching of the tail
● Lumbosacral ventral subarachnoid space at the
and hindlimbs. Ask the assistant holding the
vertebral level of L4-5 or L5-6 (Fig. A3.2)
hindlimbs to watch out for this.
● The skin is clipped and cleaned as if for surgery. A
4. Reposition the needle if necessary.
fenestrated drape may be used to cover the site
● If the needle hits bone keep on the midline,
and landmarks are palpated through this
walking the needle forward or back in small
2. Insert the CSF needle
increments.
● 40 mm length CSF needles are long enough for
● If CSF does not flow, remove the needle from the
 the cisterna magna in all but large breed dogs.
animal. Reinsert the stylet and check for block-
312
Appendix 3
313
A
Figure A3.1 Collection of CSF from the cisterna magna. Insert the CSF needle halfway between line A and line B, on the
midline (line C). To find the midline, palpate and align the dorsal spine of C2 (marked D) and the occipital protuberance
(marked E).
Dorsal spinous
ages. If tissue is found, smear and stain the mate-
process
rial.Change needle or reinsert with the stylet in
place. The most common cause of lack of CsF ffow
15
is poor positioning. Ensure the assistant is properly
briefed on positioning the animal before the
B
L7 is often shorter
than L6
needle is inserted.
5. Collect CSF
llium
● CSF is constantly produced. Collect as much as
required for a diagnosis; 1-2 ml is usually
adequate.
● Allow the CSF to drop into the collection con-
tainer. Do not use a syringe, as this results in iat-
rogenic haemorrhage.
6. Submit for analysis
● The protein content of CSF is low and EDTA is not
required to stop the sample from clotting.
● If iatrogenic haemorrhage results in clotting,
another sample is required.
● If only a small volume can be collected, decide on
Figure A3.2 Collection of CSF by lumbar puncture. Flex
 the diagnostic priority.
the lower spine. Palpate the cranial border of the wings of
● Cell count or cytology is most useful in sus-
the ilium (marked A),. and locate the midline (marked B)
 pected meningitis, lymphoma, 
or
fungal
Locate the dorsal spinous process of L6 (normally taller
infection.
than that of L7). Insert the needle between L5 and L6 on
● The protein level for compressive lesions such as
the midline. Keep in the midline and adjust the angle of 
entry if required. A muscle twitch of the hindlimbs and tail
extension of a nerve root tumour into the spinal
indicates entry through the cauda equina.
canal.
● Culture for suspected bacterial meningitis.
APPENDIX
CSF anal
Table A4.1 shows CSF dynamics.
as having two cell types each >33% of the total. WBCs
enter the CSF with iatrogenic haemorrhage. The number
is generally insignificant and it cannot be accurately pre
CELL COUNT AND CYTOLOGY
dicted by the ratio of WBC to RBC in peripheral blood.
Normal
●WBC <0-5/ul
TOTAL PROTEIN LEVEL
● RBC O/μ
Normal: Cisterna magna <25 mg/dl. Lumbar <35-45
●Cytology: lymphocytes and monocytoid cells.
mg/dl.
 Albuminocytologic dissociation refers to an elevation
Abnormol
of total protein level in the presence of a normal WBC
● RBCs: phagocytosis of RBCs is a sign of previous
count.
haemorrhage.
● WBCs: an increased cell count is called pleocytosis. It
IgG INDEX
is categorized by the total cell number:
●Mild: 6-25/ul
CSF IgG: serum IgG
IgG index =
● Moderate: 26-100/ul.
CSF albumin: serum albumin
● Markedly elevated: >100/ul.
● <0.5: no evidence of intrathecal IgG production
It is also categorized by the predominant cell type: neu-
● 0.5-0.75: intrathecal IgG production possibly raised
trophilic, lymphocytic, mononuclear, eosinophilic, histio-
● >0.75: intrathecal IgG production is raised.
cytic, or mixed. There is no standard definition of these
terms. One author defined a category as having ≥60%
CSF PRESSURE
of one cell type, or that the percentage of one cell type
was ≥40% of the total with no other cell type ≥33% of
Measuring CSF pressure is of little diagnostic use as it
the total number of wBC. Mixed pleocytosis was defined
varies so widely in the normal animal over a 24 hour
as having no cell type ≥40% of the total WBC count, or
period.
Table A4.1 CSF dynamics
Formation
Movement
Absorption
Site
Choroid plexus in all ventricles (major)
Lateral ventricle to 3rd
Arachnoid villi in the venous sinuses
Ependymal surface
ventricle to aqueduct to 4th
(major)
Blood vessels of the pia and
ventricle to subarachnoid
Transependymal, with increased
 arachnoid 
space
ventricular pressure (minor)
Influenced by
Osmotic pressure of blood
 Pulsation of blood vessels,
ICP
Independent of blood pressure
obstruction of pathway.
CSF pressure exceeds venous
increased ICP
 pressure (normal occurrence)
Dysfunction
Excess formation by choroid plexus 
Obstruction of pathway
Rare. Absorptive capacity is 4 times
tumours
causes hydrocephalus
greater than the productive
capacity
314
5
APPENDIX
Imaging the nervous
system
Interpreting images of the CNS and its bony protection
attached to the syringe of contrast agent, and insert that
requires symmetry. General anaesthesia is necessary to
instead.
achieve this. Survey radiographs of trauma patients are
After cisternal injection, the animal should be placed
a satisfactory compromise in the emergency setting.
in sternal recumbancy with the head elevated to allow
Relaxation of the spinal muscles during anaesthesia or
the contrast agent to flow caudally. If spinal instability is
sedation increases the risk of subluxation and spinal cord
suspected, keep the neck in a neutral position and tilt
injury in the unstable spine. Imaging the brain may need
the table top to achieve the same result. The animal is
to be delayed while signs of intracranial dysfunction are
not repositioned after a lumbar injection, and remains
stabilised.
in lateral recumbancy for the first post-injection radio-
graphs to be taken.
Ventrodorsal images of the neck require the endotracheal
RADIOGRAPHY
tube to be removed. The ET tube creates linear artefacts
Key points: High mA, low KvP, grid, collimation and
that interfere with interpretation (Figs A5.1-A5.4).
symmetry.
Oblique views are useful for determining the circum-
ferential location of lesions.
Seizures are reasonably common after injections of
MYELOGRAPHY
contrast agent at the cisterna magna. They are short-
Myelography is a contrast study of the spinal cord in
lived and occur during anaesthetic recovery. Treatment
which iodinated contrast material is injected into the
with IV diazepam usually suffices and the animals do not
subarachnoid space. Needle placement is the same as
go on to develop chronic seizures. Paresis and ataxia may
for collecting spinal fluid and is made closest to the site
worsen after myelography. This is usually, but not always
of the lesion. A lumbar tap at the L5-6 intervertebral
transitory.
space is appropriate for thoracic and lumbar lesions. If
Myelography is a difficult technique. It should not be
the site of interest lies in the cauda equina, injection of
attempted unless the clinician can deal with the after-
contrast at the cisterna magna will avoid injection arte-
math of diagnosis, non-diagnosis and side-effects. This
facts in the area of interest. Cervical cord lesions are
is only a brief outline of the technique. Other imaging
outlined by injections at the cisterna magna. If cervical
techniques may be more appropriate.
instability is present a lumbar tap avoids the need to flex
the neck.
MAGNETIC rESONaNCe ImaGInG (mrI)
The volume of contrast to inject varies based on the
area to be outlined; 0.3 ml/kg-0.5 ml/kg is usually ade-
Magnetic resonance produces digital images based on
quate. Obese animals may need slightly less: choose the
the differing mobility and quantity of hydrogen nuclei in
dose based on the optimum body weight of the breed.
tissues. Radiation is not used.
The injection should be done in a calm unhurried
The animal is placed on a moveable gantry with the
manner, with constant gentle pressure being applied.
body part under investigation positioned on or in a coil.
Some clinicians like to insert the syringe directly into
The gantry moves the animal into the tube or ring-
the hub of the spinal needle, while others, those with
shaped magnet. The magnet aligns the freely-moveable
shaky hands, might prefer to prefill a small extension
hydrogen ions of the body. Energy at radio frequency is
315
316
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
vertebra
 Spinal cord
vertebra
IVD space
Subarachnoid space
A)
Normal (lateral view)
Figure A5.2 Lateral myelogram. Extradural compression
of the cord, ventrally, over C6-7 IV space. Calcified disc
material (arrow).
B
Extradural lesion, e.g. IvD extrusion
Subarachnoid space
Golf tee sign
IVD
space
11
cord
vertebral
Intramedullary lesion, e.g.tumour
Spinal
(A
D
Normal
Extradural lesion
Intramedullary
Intradural
Intradural extramedullary lesion, e.g subarachnoid cyst
(ventrodorsal
eg. IVDD
lesion e.g.
extramedullry
view)
tumour
lesione.g.nerve
Figure A5.1 Myelographic patterns. Lateral view. (A)
oot tumour
Normal; (B) Extradural, e.g. IVDD: (C) Intramedullary. e.g.
Figure A5.3 Myelographic patterns. Ventrodorsal view.
tumour: (D) Intradural-extramedullary. e.g. subarachnoid
(A) Normal; (B) Extradural, e.g. IVDD: (C) Intramedullary.
cyst.
e.g. tumour. A midline extradural lesion may have this
appearance on VD view. (D) Intradural-extramedullary.
applied via a coil to the body part. The hydrogen ions
e.g. nerve root tumour.
are displaced to different degrees in different tissues.
When the radiofrequency is turned off, the hydrogen
ions and hence their appearance on MRl. Gadolinium
ions relax back to the original aligned position.
This
can be seen in areas of damaged blood-brain barrier
releases energy which is detected and converted to an
(pathology), absent BBB (pituitary, choroids plexus) or an
image.
incomplete BBB (neovascularization). Blood vessels may
 The magnet strength remains constant but by altering
be seen. Some normal structures enhance. Some abnor-
the duration and timing of radio frequency application
mal tissue will not.
different image sequences are obtained which highlight
tissue contrast in different ways.
Terminology
Paramagnetic intravenous contrast agent, a chelate
The appearance of tissue is described by its relative signal
 of gadolinium is used. It alters the relaxation of hydrogen
intensity. Soft tissue can vary in appearance in different
Appendix 5
317
GRE (gradient echo/Tz) sequences detect lack of
homogeneity in brain tissue and are sensitive for detect-
ing haemorrhage. ‘Black' hypointense areas appear
within brain tissue.
Mnemonic for hypointensity on gradient
echo images
Many - mineralization
Go-gas
 Forth - fibrous tissue
In - iron deposits 
Haste - haemorrhage.
CLINICAL TIP
The appearance of haemorrhage varies with time.
Figure A5.4 VD cervical myelogram. Right-sided
 extradural compression (arrows). IVDD.
MRI is preferred for imaging of intracranial structures
due to the soft tissue contrast, resolution within the
caudal fossa, multiplanar imaging and absence of radia-
tion. It is an ideal technique for investigating neck pain
sequences, and this sequence must be stated to clarify
the comparison.
due to the cross-sectional images through the interver-
tebral foramen, sagittal views through the spinal cord
 and the potential to extend imaging to the cerebrum. It
Hyperintense: e.g. the mass is hyperintense on
T2-weighted images (T2V/).
requires general anaesthesia to prevent movement arte-
facts (Fig. A5.5).
Isointense: e.g. the mass is isointense to grey matter
on T1-weighted images (T1 W/l).
Hypointense: e.g. the lesion is hypointense to grey
matter on T1Wl.
Heterogenous intensity: the tissue appearance varies
throughout the structure.
Mnemonic for bright (hyperintense) on TiWI:
C2 spine
Fat -fat
spinal coro
Boys - blood
Mainly - melanin
Prefer - proteinaceous fluid
Chips - contrast agent.
Mnemonic for bright (hyperintense) on T2W!
T-tumour
W - water
Figure A5.5 T1w transverse image of C1. The dorsal
O-oedema
spine of C2 and the dens are visible. Excellent grey and 
white matter differentiation
FAT - fat.
318
SMAlL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
Figure A5.6 Dog positioned in CT machine.
Figure A5.7 CT of brain haemorrhage (arrow). Midline
 shift (arrowheads).
COmPUTed (AXIal) tOmOGrAPhY (CT)
Table A5.1  CT grey scale in Hounsfield units (HU)
CT generates images from a highly collimated X-ray
Substance
Attenuation (HU)
beam rotating around the patient. This produces cross-
sectional images similar to conventional radiography.
Air
-1000
Information is obtained in one plane. Reformatting from
Fat
-80
Water
0
the original data provides other planes of view but with
CSF
0-15
poorer resolution (Fig. A5.6).
Cerebral oedema 
10-20
CT gives excellent bone detail. Different tissue densi-
Brain white matter
25-35
ties are compared using a grey scale of Hounsfield units
 Brain grey matter
35-50
(HU) (Table A5.1).
snowns
15-45
The contrast between tissues can be manipulated by
pooq buimoy
20-50
Haemorrhage
0-80
altering ‘windows' and “levels' and by adding IV iodin-
Bone
>500
ated contrast agents. A region of interest can be exam-
Dense metal
+1000
ined and the HU measured pre- and post-contrast.
 Post-contrast enhancement >10 HU is abnormal (Fig.
A5.7).
Terminology
ULTRASONOGRAPHY
Hyperdense: whiter, more attenuating, e.g. mineral-
Ultrasonography through fontanelles may detect hydro-
ization is hyperdense to brain parenchyma.
cephalus. There is a poor correlation between ventricular
size and clinical signs. MRl is preferred for intracranial
Isodense: equal in grey scale, similar in attenuation,
anatomy and soft tissue resolution.
e.g. the tumour is isodense to brain on pre-contrast
images.
Hypodense: darker, less attenuating, e.g. oedema is
hypodense to grey matter.
APPENDIX
Neuropathology
 Clinical neurology has an undeserved reputation among
REMOVAL OF THE BRAIN
students and general practitioners as simply being a
delay to the inevitable delivery of the patient to the
This should be performed as soon as possible after death
postmortem room.
to preserve cell morphology and for ease of removal. If
In truth, a well-timed history and neurological exami-
there is a delay, place the body in the fridge, not the
nation alone, with no further investigation and no other
freezer. Freezing and thawing damages cells. If delay is
expense, can sift the salvageable from the hopeless and
unavoidable and there isn't a fridge big enough and the
prevent unnecessary euthanasia.
head cannot be decapitated, then placing the animal in
There will be occasions, despite one's best efforts,
a freezer is better than allowing liquefaction at room
when euthanasia of a neurological case is required. His-
temperature (Fig. A6.1).
topathology of the nervous system is very important. A
1. Incise skin dorsally from the nose to the wings of
definitive diagnosis is a teaching aid for the practitioner,
the atlas, exposing the masticatory muscles and
an advancement of knowledge for the treatment of
the neck.
future patients and for advice to Breed Societies and
 2. Remove muscle from the skull bilaterally by incising
most of all, a solace for the pet owner who has a final
the temporalis muscles at the midline and reflecting
answer.
them laterally. This muscle is so thick that to gain
Asking a grieving owner for permission to perform
good skullexposureoften requires incising themuscle
a postmortem examination requires tact. Broach the
subject after euthanasia has been discussed. Several con-
3. Expose the occipital bone by severing all muscle
versational gambits have been helpful:
attachments and reflecting muscle caudally (Fig.
● Test results point to a few reasons why your pet died/
A6.2).
isn't expected to recover. It would be immensely
4. Ventroflex the neck and severe the cord between
helpful to know precisely what has happened. It
the occipital condyles and the atlas (Fig. A6.3).
would help treatment of other pets and may lead to
5. An oscillating saw is required to enter the skull
better outcomes in the future.
of larger dogs. Rongeurs may be used in cats or
● Many owners telephone a few weeks later and ask
small dogs.
for more information about why their pet died
6. Cut across the frontal sinus. This exposes the inner
Taking samples now will help answer that question.
calvarium which is then cut (Fig. A6.4).
● It is only by learning more from such cases that diag-
7. On each side, make a cut cranial to caudal from the
 nosis and treatment improves.
frontal sinus to the foramen magnum (Fig. A6.5).
● Looking at tissue samples is one of the best ways to
8. Take care sawing through the thin temporal bone,
learn about disease. In most cases, it is not possible
the inner lamina of the frontal bone and the occipi-
to take samples of the nervous system while the
tal bone caudally to avoid incising the brain.
 animal is living.
9. Prise off the skull. Use a lever or grab the skull with
● If the cause of death is thought to be infectious/toxic/
rongeurs between the frontal bones and pull the
inherited, this may have relevance for other animals
top of the skull dorsally and caudally. Ideally the
you own.
saw will have removed all obstruction to removal.
319
320
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
Figure A6.1 Equipment for postmortem examination.
Figure A6.4 Entering the frontal sinus.
Hacksaws from the hardware store can be used but take
'forever' to breach the skull.
Figure A6.2 Temporalis reflected bilaterally (arrow).
Figure A6.5 Incising the skull
Removing muscle from occipital bone (double arrows).
The bony tentorium cerebelli will need gentle retrac-
tion to free it from attachments (Figs A6.6-A6.8).
10. Examine the inner surface of the skull. Place to one
side. Examine the appearance of the meninges and
then incise them, exposing the brain.
11. Ventroflex the neck so that the brain starts to fall
out of the skull. (It will not actually do so at this
stage because of the cranial nerves.) Using rat tooth
forceps grab the meninges around the cord and
gently pull the brain forward to expose the ventral
cranial nerves (Fig. A6.9).
12. Severe the nerves close to the foramen. The olfac-
tory bulbs should be severed as close to the ethmoid
Figure A6.3 Occipital bone (double arrows). Condyles
bone as possible. The blunt end of a scalpel blade
(arrowheads). Cutting the spinal cord
holder serves this purpose (Fig. A6.10).
Appendix 6
321
Figure A6.6 Lifting off the skull.
Figure A6.9 Retracting brain to gain access to the cranial
 nerves (arrow). Meningioma visible (arrowhead).
Figure A6.7 Falx cerebri (single arrow). Frontal sinus
Figure A6.10 Severing the olfactory bulbs.
(double arrows). Brain (star)
13. The brain should gently fall into your hand. After
briefly marvelling at the complexity of life look at
the surfaces of the brain for discoloration and sym-
hand it around for examination, for instance).
Gentle palpation may reveal firmness, undulation
and yielding. Do not cut into the brain looking for
pathology; this is done after fixation.
14. Immerse the brain in a large container filled with
10% buffered formalin. There should be at least 10
times the volume of formalin as brain tissue. All
brain tissue should be covered by the fixative.
15. Seal and label the container. The brain should fix
for 1 week. It can then be removed from the for-
Figure A6.8 Cutting the final attachments. Falx cerebri
malin and placed inside several sealable plastic
(arrow). Tentorium cerebelli (arrowheads). Cerebrum (one
bags. This is then wrapped in a padded protective
star) Cerebellum (two stars).
layer prior to being sent to the neuropathologist.
322
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
16. If the whole body is to be sent to the pathologist,
3. Using an oscillating saw or rongeurs perform a dorsal
make sure the history and results of any diagnostic
laminectomy.
eap! suallaoxa ue s! ll jewjue ayn Auedwoose sisat
4. Grasp the dura and gently retract the spinal cord out
to telephone the pathologist ahead of time to
of the canal, cutting the spinal roots close to the
discuss the case and the estimated time of arrival
intervertebral foramina. This ensures the dorsal root
of the animal.
ganglion is also collected.
17. It is extremely important that the body be disposed
5. Cut the dura along the length of the cord to improve
of according to the owner's wishes, e.g. individual
fixation by the 10% buffered formalin.
cremation with or without return of the ashes. Fill
6. Immerse in 10x the volume.
out all the necessary paperwork or instruct the
 7. Examine the vertebral canal for fractures, masses and 
pathologists to do so.
IV disc disease.
Cosmetic removal of the brain
INTERPRETING THE NEUROPATHOLOGY
REPORT
This is possible. Do not shave any fur off the head. Once
the brain is removed, replace the top of the calvarium.
Basic neuroanatomy (see Figs A6.11-A6.14).
Consider padding the empty brain case with cotton wool
to approximate the normal skull size. Suture the mastica-
Basic terminology
tory muscles together across the midline. Suture subcu-
CNS
taneous tissue. Clean and blow-dry the fur. The eyes, if
Neuron
not removed for examination, are sunken. Consider
gluing the eyelids shut.
● Chromatolysis is a response to injury and is character-
ized by cell swelling and lysis of Nissl substance
causing a loss of basophilia.
REmOVAL OF ThE COrD
● Axonal reaction is a regenerative change within the
1. Incise the skin along the midline.
neuron following loss or damage to its axon.
2. Reflect all tissue from the dorsal laminae of the ver-
● Neuronophagia refers to phagocytosis of a necrotic
tebral column.
neuron.
Parietofrontal
Parietal
(coronal) suture
Frontal
Occipital
Cribriform plate of ethmoid
Perpendicular plate 
Petrous temporal
of ethmoid
Nasal
Occipital condyle
Basisphenoid
Incisive
Pterygoid
PresphenoidPalatine
homer
Maxilla
Figure A6.11 Bones of the skull
Appendix 6
323
Dendrite
● Niss  bodies/granules/aggregations/substance
are
Cell body
Axon hillock
basophilic rough endoplasmic reticulum and polyribo-
(soma)
Initial segment of axon
somes in the cytoplasm.
● Dying-back refers to degeneration of the distal part
of an axon due to failure of axonal transport.
Schwann cell
● Spheroids are focal swellings of the distal axon within
Nucleus
the CNS
 Nucleus of
Nucleolus
Schwann cell
● Siderosis refers to necrotic neurons covered by
Nssl substance
Myelin sheath-
calcium and iron salts.
Node of Ranvier-
● Internode is the segment of axon covered by myelin.
● Node of Ranvier is the space separating the internodes.
● Demyelination is the loss of normal myelin.
● Lysosomes are cytoplasmic membrane-bound organ-
elles functioning in waste-disposal.
Cross-section
Nucleus of
Neuroglia
Schwann cell
Myelin
（
● Satellitosis is the term for the proliferation of satellite
Axon
cells around the neuron body following injury.
Neurolemma
● Gliosis is proliferation, hypertrophy, or both, of glial
Terminal button
(sheath of Schwann)
 cells (astrocytes and microglial cells) as a non-specific
Figure A6.12 PNS: components of a myelinated axon.
reaction to injury.
Astrocytes
+ Star-like cell
Peripheral nerve
● Astroblasts are immature astrocytes
● Astrocytosis is proliferation of astrocytes
●Astrogliosis refers to increased number of fibrous
processes
Fascicle
● Gemistocytes are large, plump reactive astrocytes
 Epineurium 
formed in response to injury
n
● Glia limitans is the network of astrocytes that
 covers the CNS, lying adjacent to the ependyma,
pia mater and perivascular space.
Endoneurium-
Individual axon
● Oligodendrocytes
● Cell with few branches
● Found in grey and white matter. Source of CNS
Figure A6.13 PNS: components of a peripheral nerve.
myelin.
● Microglial cells
Sensory
Dorsal
Dorsomedian
 Dorsal funiculi
● Microgliosis is the proliferation of microglial cells
ganglion
pot
sulcus
● Found in grey and white matter.
 Peripheral
Lateral
Generat
nerve
funiculus
● Leuko-: prefix denoting an association with the CNS
White
Dorsal horn
matter
white matter.
Grey-
Lateral horn
● Polio-: prefix denoting an association with the CNS
matter
ventral horn
grey matter.
● -itis: suffix denoting inflammation, e.g. meningitis,
inflammation of the meninges.
ventralroot
Central
ventromedian
ventral funiculus
fissure
● Ischaemia refers to a deficiency of the blood supply
canal
to a body part due to obstruction of circulation by a
Figure A6.14 Cross-section of the spinal cord.
thrombus, embolus or vasoconstriction.
324
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
● Infarction is tissue necrosis secondary to ischaemia
● Interstitial refers to occupying the intervening spaces
● Malacia is pathological softening or softness.
or crevices of a tissue.
● Embolus is a fragment of foreign material travelling
PNS
within the vascular system from one site to another.
● Embolism is the sudden blockage of an artery by an
Neuron
embolus.
● Wagnerian degeneration describes neurologists at
● Thrombus refers to an aggregation of blood products
the Oktoberfest.
within the cardiovascular system forming a clot. A
● Wallerian degeneration means fragmentation and
blood clot.
phagocytosis of the nerve segment and myelin distal
● CNS macrophages are transformed microglia, blood
to the site of nerve transaction.
monocytes or blood neutrophils.
● Neurapraxia is a functional, not structural, distur-
● Status spongiosis is a sponge-like vacuolation of
bance of nerve conduction due to injury.
nervous tissue.
● Axonotmesis is axonal damage which spares the
●Pseudorosettes
are cells arranged radially around
endoneurial and Schwann cell scaffolding enabling
blood vessels.
subsequent axon regeneration. Wallerian degenera-
● Hallmarks of CNs inflammation are perivascular cuffing,
tion occurs.
gliosis, neuronal satellitosis and neuronophaqia
● Neurotmesis is the traumatic sectioning of all or most
●Perivascular cuffing is the accumulation of leukocytes
nerve structures. Wallerian degeneration occurs.
around a blood vessel
● Fascicle is a bundle of nerve fibres.
● Angiocentric refers to the pathological process
● Epineurium is the connective tissue surrounding mul-
centred around blood vessels.
tiple nerve fascidles.
● Syncytial refers to the merging of cells to form a
● Perineurium is the connective tissue surrounding indi-
 multinucleate cellular mass.
vidual nerve fibres.
● Virchow-Robin space (perivascular space) is the space
● Endoneurium is the connective tissue between the
between glia limitans and the blood vessel.
individual nerve fibres.
● Anaplasia is characterized by a loss of differentiation
of cells. Characteristic of neoplasia.
Myetin
● Malignant refers to the tendency to worsen and end
● Blebbing, ballooning, bubbling refers to focal separa-
in death.
 tion and distension of peripheral myelin.
● Benign means non-recurrent. The chance of recovery
● Schwann cells encircle peripheral nerve axons thus
is favourable.
forming their myelin sheath.
7
APPENDIX
Referral of a patient
WHEN TO REFER
● Scour the history and re-question the owner. Ask
specific questions. Clarify
● When you are unsure which organ system is involved
● Repeat the physical examination
● When you recognize neurological deficits but cannot
● Make a problem list
interpret the significance of the clinical findings
● Next to each problem, list which organ system could 
● When you can localize the lesion but you are unsure
be involved
of the possible diagnoses and so are unable to make
● List organs systems in order of probability of
a diagnostic plan and offer a prognosis with and
involvement
without various treatment options
● Investigate the organ or body system
● When you are concerned that you may have missed
● listed most frequently
 other subtle but important deficits
● easiest or cheapest to eliminate from the list
● When you desire a second opinion on the clinical
● with most life-threatening illnesses/greatest mor-
variation in the case presentation
bidity/mortality
● When you lack equipment for a diagnosis or when
● which have possibly treatable disease.
you lack the time to perform or ability to interpret
If you lack expertise with diagnosis:
results
● Some specialists can offer advice over the phone
● When you are unsure of the treatment options
based on the primary veterinarian's examination find-
● When you are unable to perform the surgery or
ings but this is fraught with danger. If the examina-
anaesthesia required
tion misses deficits or if the history is inadequate it
● When you lack expertise in monitoring the response
will not be possible to give an accurate assessment.
to the treatment.
Most of the diagnosis relies on the history and physi-
cal examination.
WHEN NOT TO REFER
If you lack equipment or expertise at performing tests:
● Sometimes tests are not required. Check if the
● When the owner has no means or inclination to pay
possible test outcomes would change any treatment
for the referral
plan, e.g. unilateral facial paralysis with no other
● When the animal has not yet been examined by the
signs, and no history of ear disease or head pain does
 general practitioner.
not warrant skull radiographs and MRl of the head
would be of little benefit to the animal.
● Non-contrast spinal radiographs are useful in cases of
WHEN REFERRAL IS NOT AN OPTION
spinal pain to check for vertebral tumours, discos-
When you are unsure of the organ system involved or
pondylitis, but not for IVDD. If IVDD is severe enough
signs, such as inactivity, weakness, collapse, exercise
to require surgery then contrast study or MRl is
intolerance or pain can be caused by dysfunction of
required. If it is not bad enough to require surgery
various body systems such as the cardiac, endocrine,
then plain radiographs will not alter treatment. Some-
haemopoietic or orthopaedic systems, not just the
times it is not possible to differentiate infection,
nervous system, you should:
tumour and disc disease from the history, signalment
325
326
SMALL ANIMAL NEUROLOGY
and examination, in which case non-contrast radio-
IF YOU ARE UNABLE TO TREAT
graphs are useful.
● CSF taps require practice. Know when to stop insert-
● A percentage of paralysed animals will recover with
rest. Consider carts for mobility of paraplegics.
ing the needle.
● Euthanasia for unremitting pain or poor quality of life
 remains a realistic option.
Further reading
Books
Miller ME, Evans HE, Christensen GC (1979): Miller's Anatomy
Braund KG (1993): Clinical Syndromes in Veterinary Neurology.
of the Dog. 2nd Edition. Saunders, Philadelphia.
 2nd Edition. Mosby. St Louis.
Nelson RW, Couto CG (2005): Manual of Small Animal Internal
DeLahunta A (1983): Veterinary Neuroanatomy and Clinical
 Medicine, 2nd Edition. Mosby. St Louis.
Neurology. 2nd Edition. Saunders, Philadelphia.
Overall K (1997): Clinical Behavioural Medicine for Small
Dewey CW, Hoffman AG, Rudowsky C (2003): A Practical
Animals. Moshy, St Louis.
  h   e a  a
Summers B, Cummings JF, deLahunta A (1994): Veterinary
Blackwell, Oxford
Neuropathology. Mosby, St Louis.
 
Medicine: Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 6th Edition.
Articles
Saunders, Philadelphia.
Lavely JA (2006): Pediatric neurology of the dog and cat.
Ganong WF (2005): Review of Medical Physiology (Lange Basic
Veterinary Clinics of North America: Small Animal Practice
Science), 22nd Edition. McGraw-Hill Medical, New York
36 (3). 475-501
King AS (1999): Physiology and Clinical Anatomy of the
Shelton D (2002): Neuromuscular diseases. Veterinary Clinics of
Domestic Mammmals: Central Nervous System, Volume 1.
North America: Small Animal Practice 32 (1), 1-305.
Wiley-Blackwell, Oxford.
This page intentionally left blank
Index
Page number in bold refer to figures and tables.
abducent nerve 29
behaviour change 59, 60, 63, 66,
chasm 71
abduction, limbs 8, 228
71-73. 74, 81. 86-88. 109-112
Cheyne-stokes respiration 49
abiotrophy 206
bethanechol 124
chewing 286
accessory nerve 32-33
biceps reflex 18
circling 9. 51. 84, 208-209, 235
acetylcholine receptor antibody titre
biting 264
circumduction 10. 199
189
blepharospasm 127
dient communication 3-5
acute idiopathic polyradiculoneuritis
blindness 23, 62, 115-119
conus 20, 255
188
blinking 127
SND
adduction 199
blink reflex 28, 28
divisions 43
adipsia 64
botulism 191
imaging 306-309
adversive syndrome 51, 228
bouncing 228
 CO-existing disease 35
aggression 86-88
bovine cough 152
cognitive dysfunction syndrome 66
alertness 6, 47. 71
brachial plexus avulsion 194
collapse 59. 232-233
allodynia 275
brain
coma 47.52.53.59.63
anal reflex 18
death 55
compulsive repetitive yawning 71
Angiostrongylus vasorum 98
herniation 43. 43
computed (axial) tomography (CT) 318
anisocoria 24, 119. 131
removal 319
conjunctival vasodilation 131
anogenital reflex 18
surgery 58, 80
consciousness 47, 71
anorexia 62. 73
tumour75-78
control, seizures 106
anosmia 22
brainstem
coordination 199
anticonvulsant therapy 95. 105
audio-evoked response test (BAER)
coprophagia 72
anuria 295
147-148. 148
cotton ball test 23
anxiety 82-83
lesions 38
coughing 111. 152-157
apneustic breathing 49
bulbocavernosus reflex 19
cramp 256
apocalypse, intracranial 55
bulla osteotomy 133. 142. 144
cranial nerves 22-33. 38. 42
arachnoid cyst 84-85, 85
bumping into objects 6. 115. 121
canial tibial reflex 17
areflexia 20
bunny hopping 163
crocodile tears 125
arterial thromboembolism 222
crossed extensor reflex 20
ascending myelomalacia 179, 181
caloric testing 55
cryptococcosis 118
ascending reticular activating system
canine dysautonomia 123-124, 123
Cushing's reflex 54
(ARAS) 6.47
cartilaginous exostoses 88
cutaneous trunci reflex 19, 276
aspergillosis 118
catamenial epilepsy 105
cut-off point 19
ataxia 10. 60, 62. 63. 177. 199-209.
cataplexy 72
235. 240-242
cauda equina syndrome 39. 196
dancing Dobermann 202
ataxic breathing 49
cavernous sinus syndrome 40, 42
dazzle reflex 24
atrophy 14,164
central cord syndrome 38
deafness 32. 146-151
atrophy. masticatory muscles 266
central diabetes insipidus 55
decerebellate rigidity 51
atropine 123
cerebellar
 decerebrate posturing 51
auto-amputation 286
ataxia 205-207
decorticate posturing 51
autonomic function testing 123
tremor 248
defecation 79-81
awareness 71
cerebral 
degenerative myelopathy 203
haemorrhage 97-99
delerium 47
Babinski's sign 20-21
salt washing (CsW) 55
dementia 47
bacterial infection (CNS) 169, 169
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) 309-310
denervation hypersensitivity 132
balance 31. 143, 208, 241-243
cervical spondylomyelopathy 175
detrusor atony 80
Bambi on ice 199
cervico-ocular reflex 51
detrusor hyperreflexia 80
329
330
INDEX
diencephalon 36, 43
fibrillation 250
histamine 124
direct PLR 25
fibrocartilaginous thromboembolism
history-taking 3-5
disc disease 177-179. 203
(FCE)172
Horner's syndrome 131-134, 139-140,
discospondylitis 88, 264-278
flaccid lips 31, 137,137
139, 143-144
dive bomber decrescendo 195
flaccid tail 196
Hounsfield units 318, 318
Doll's head manoeuvre 51
flexor reflex 17. 166, 276
house training (loss of) 74-78
dorsiflexion 227
flickering third eyelid 260
hopping 11. 11
drooling 125
fly-catching 82
hydrocephalus 53, 85. 100-103
dropped jaw 138-140
forelimb
hyperactivity 82. 111
dry
movement 37.39,37. 39
hyperalgesia 275
eye 122. 126
nerves 41
hyperekplexia 256
mouth 122.126
four horsemen 55
hypermetria 199. 201. 201. 205
nose 122, 126
frying eggs 195
hypernatraemia 63-65
 D-shaped pupil 24, 119
fucosidosis 148
hyperpathia 275
dysaesthesia 275
hyperreflexia 20
dysautonomia 43. 123
gag reflex 32.32
hypersomnia 71
dvscoria119
gagging 32, 158
hypertonia 255
dyskinesia 257
gait 8-11. 10. 163-166
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy 223
dysmetria 205
gasping respiration 49,49
hyperventilation 49.49
dysmyelination 207
gastrocnemius reflex
hypnic jerks 71
dysphagia 32. 158
gastrointestinal ulceration 223
hypoaesthesia 276
dyssynergia, detrusor-urethral 80
Glasgow coma scale (modified) 52, 53
hypoalgesia 275
globe retraction reflex 29
hypocalcaemia 258
ear disease 143-145
glossopharyngeal nerve 32
hypoglossal nerve 33
eating grass 72
goose-honking 152
hypoglycaemia 60
electromyography 194, 216
goose-stepping 199, 201
hypomyelination 207
encephalitis 67-68, 68
grading
hyponatraemia 63
enophthalmos 27. 131
coma 53. 53
hyporeflexia 20
envenomation 188
disability 166. 166
hypoventilation 48-49
emesis 192
lameness 211
emotional stress from owning epileptic
spinal reflexes 20
iatrogenic pupillary dilation 134
ε6 6op
spinal cord lesions 165. 165
ictus 91
epilepsy 104-109
 granulomatous meningoencephalitis
idiopathic
epiphora 125. 135
66-68. 68
epilepsy 104-109
esotropia 26
grunt on expiration187
facial paralysis 135-137
exercise intolerance 59
gurgling 192
Horner's syndrome 133
exophthalmia 27.134,255
incontinence
exotropia 26
head
faecal 79-81
extensor carpi radialis reflex 18
bobbing 213. 251
urinary 80
extensor postural thrust test 13
nodding 251
indirect ophthalmoscopy 24, 24
extensor thrust reflex 19
pressing 9. 227
indirect PLR 25
eyelids 31. 127. 128. 129. 135
shaking 135. 141
inducible nystagmus 31
eye movement 26-27
tilt 31. 141. 208-209. 227. 242
inducible strabismus
32
eye position 26-27, 29
trauma 52-58. 53
ingestion behaviour 72
tremor 248
insomnia 72
fabric chewing 73
turn 51.98.227
insulinoma 59-61
face rubbing 150, 286
hearing 31. 146
intention tremor 248
facial appearance 29-30, 118, 131.
hearing testing 147. 149
intervertebral disc disease 177-180
135
hemeralopia 115
intracranial
facial paralysis 135-137. 136, 143-145
hemi-
arachnoid cyst 84-85. 85
facial sensation 28-29, 28, 29
facial spasm 135
pressure 54, 63. 75
faecal incontinence 79-81
inattention 73
inverted reflex 20
falling 227
neglect 73
iris colour 62
fasciculation 256
plegia 163
ischaemia 221
feline
hemiwalking 12, 12
borna virus 130
hepatic encephalopathy 62
Jacksonian march 92
hyperaesthesia syndrome 197
herniation,brain 40,43.43
jaw, dropped 27. 138
immunodeficiency virus (FIV) 130
hindlimb
jaw, strength 27
infectious peritonitis (FIP) 129, 130,
movement 37.37,39,39,40
jaw tone 27
130
nerves 41
jerk 250
panleukopaenia virus 130, 130, 206
hippus 119 
jerk nystagmus 31, 241
Index
331
Karnofsky scale 166
myoclonus 84, 91. 255
pain 15. 273-278, 286
KISS principle 34
myokymia 256
pain perception 21, 275
knuckling. knuckled-over 13
myopathies 185
palpation 14-15
kyphosis 227. 229
myotonia 135. 261
palpebral fissure 127. 128
panniculus reflex 19
Lafora's disease 71
narcolepsy 72
paper slide test 13
lameness 211-221
neck
papilloedema 115
laryngeal paralysis 152. 158
pain 259, 273-275
paraesthesia 275
lateral tectotegmentospinal tract 133
ventroflexion 250
paralysis 9. 163. 177. 181. 185
leaning 228, 228
necrosis, tongue 33
paraplegia 173
Leishmaniasis 249
necrotizing
parasomnias 71
lesion localization 34-43
encephalitis 68, 84
paresis 163, 171, 184
lethargy 63
 meningoencephalitis 68
patellar hammer, use of 17
lip droop 31
neosporosis 206. 248
patellar reflex 16
lip retraction test 30
nerve
patterns of disease 35
localization (lesions) 34-43
root compression 211-214
pendular nystagmus 241
lockjaw 139, 260
root tumour 215-217
perineal reflex 18
lordosis 227. 229
neuraxonal dystrophy 206
periodic respiration (Cheyne-Stokes)
lordosis test 15
neurogenic pulmonary oedema 53
49
lower motor neuron 9, 36, 41, 164,
neuropathology 319-322
pharmacological testing of pupils 120.
184-198
neuropraxia 194
131-133
lurching 228
neurotmesis 194
phenylephrine drops 132
neurotropic keratitis 122
photophobia 127
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
non-infectious inflammatory
phrenic nerve 48
306,309
meningoencephalitis 68
physiological nystagmus 32, 51
mandibular neuropathy 139
normoreflexia 20
pica 72
Marcus Gunn sign/pupil 25
nose, deviation 135. 137
pilocarpine 120. 120, 123
mass reflex 20
nyctalopia 115
pituitary tumour 233
masticatory muscle
nystagmus 31-32, 133,141, 144, 241
placing test 14
atrophy 266-268
plantigrade stance 15. 228, 297
myositis 267
 obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD)
pleurothotonus 227
medial longitudinal fasciculus (MLF) 26
72. 82
polycythaemia 222
megaoesophagus 153
obstacle course 23
polymyositis 188
memorise this 18
obstinate progression 227
polyphagia 73.111
menace deficit 23
obtunded 52. 74. 121
pons 36
menace response 23. 100
Occam's razor 34
portosystemic shunt 62
meningioma 75-77.96
oculocephalic reflex 51
positional nystagmus 31
meningitis 281-283
oculomotor nerve 24
positional strabismus 32
mental state alteration 47. 59-60, 62,
oculosympathetic pathway 131
postural reactions 11
63.66
olfactory nerve 22
posture 7, 51, 227-228
mental state description 47
 ophthalmoplegia, internal, external 120
post-ictal behaviour change 92.
mesencephalon 36. 43
opisthotonus 51
109-112
metabolic encephalopathy 59-63
optic
Pourfour de Petit syndrome 134
metencephalon 36. 43
chiasm 22
prehension 73.138
metronidazole toxicity 245
nerve 22
pre-ictal phase 91
middle ear disease 141-142. 144
nerve atrophy 115
 prioritizing diagnostic tests 34
miosis 119, 131
nerve examination 24
prodromal phase 91
mnemonics 22.228,317
neuritis 115
prognosis, assessment of 166
monoplegia 163
orthostatic tremor syndrome 259
proprioception 9. 13.199
multifocal neurological disease 43
osmolarity 63-65
proptosis 261
muscle
 osteochondroma 88, 95
propulsive circling 51
atrophy 14. 164
osteochondromatosis 88
protozoal infections 249, 249
enlargement 15. 219
otitis
pseudo-hyperreflexia 20, 39 
firm, painful 219
externa 133
pseudo-proptosis 261
dimple 15
interna 144
pseudo-ptyalism 125
tone 10, 250-252
media 136. 141-142. 144
psychogenic polydipsia 73
myasthenia gravis 186-193
 otogenic intracranial infection 143-145
psychological problems 82-84, 86
mydriasis 120. 134
ototoxicity 245
ptarmus 150
myelencephalon 36. 43
ptosis 27. 127. 131
myelography 306
pachymeningitis 117
ptyalism 62, 92. 125
myelomalacia 43
pacing 9. 82
pupil function 24, 119-124
332
INDEX
pupil size 24-25, 50
infarction 171-173
truncal ataxia 205. 227. 247-249
pupillary escape 25
lesion 38
twitch 256
pupillary light reflex (PLR) 22-26, 50,
reflexes 16,38.38
119-120
shock 20
upper motor neuron 8, 36, 41, 164,
trauma 231
171. 184
Queckenstedt manoeuvre 310
'walking' 165
urge incontinence 80
spontaneous nystagmus 31
urinary
rabies 188
stamping 216
dribbling. leaking 297
referred pain 37
staring 6,47. 66. 119. 127
function 21-22
reflexes, grading 19-20
startle 256
incontinence 79. 293
reflex, inverted 20
status epilepticus 109-110
retention 295
regurgitation 191
stereotypies 82, 92
straining 80
respiratory pattern 48
stertorous respiration 158
response, definition 6
stiffness 256
vagus nerve 32
retroperitoneal disease 284-285
strabismus 26-27. 243
Valsalva manoeuvre 152
reverse D-shaped pupil 119
striatal toe 20
vasodilation 131
reverse sneezing 150
stridor, inspiratory 32. 158
ventral slot 179
rhinorrhoea 125
stupor 47, 52. 53. 59
ventricular system 40. 43, 303
righting reflex 8
swallowing 158
ventriculomegaly 101
ngidity 249
swinging flashlight test 25, 26
ventroflexion 8, 227, 250
risus sardonicus 260
syncope 152, 232-233. 233
vertebra
rolling 242
 syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic
block 174
root signature 214
hormone secretion (SIADH) 55
body tumour 87
syringomyelia 278
butterfly 174
saddle thrombus 221
systemic fungal disease 118. 118
hemi- 174
salivation 125
malformation 174-176
saw horse posture 228, 260
tactile placing test 14
transitional  174
scapulae, winging 250
tail 
vertical nystagmus 32
Schiff-Sherrington syndrome 181, 228.
flaccid 196
vertigo 241
255. 256
paralysis 196
vestibular
Schirmer tear tests 29-31. 30, 123. 126
 pull injury 197
ataxia 208-209
schwannoma 218, 220
take-home message 18, 267
central vs peripheral 245
scleral haemorrhage 99
taste buds 32
disease 234
scoliosis 227. 229
tear production 29-31.122
ocular reflex 50
scratching 286-290
teeth chattering 138
signs 141-145
scratch reflex 19
telencephalon 35. 43
vestibulocochlear nerve 31
secretions 125-126, 233
Tensilon test 189
vestibulo-ocular reflex (VOR) 50, 52
seizures 4, 59, 62, 63. 74, 75. 86,
tetanus 260-263
viral infection (CNS) 130
91-93. 94, 96, 97. 100, 104-112
tetany 256, 264
vision 115
senility 67
tetraplegia 175
vision pathway 23, 116
setting sun sign 101
third eyelid 127-128. 131. 260
visual following test 23
shock, spinal 20
thirst 64
visual placing test 14 
sialorrhoea 125
tic 256
voice change 158-160
skull
vomiting 57. 111. 191-193
foramen 42
borne infection 283
tumour 94-95
paralysis 187
warmth 15
sleep behaviour 71-72
tone, muscle 10, 250
weakness 9. 59, 63
sleeps with eyes open 127
tongue 33.138
wet nose 125
smiling 71. 260
tonic 256
wheelbarrowing 12
sneezing 150-151
torticollis 229-231
winging of the scapulae 250
 snoring 71
toxoplasmosis 249, 249
withdrawal reflex 17-18. 17. 287
sodium 63-65
tremors 63, 248, 251. 252,258-259
Wobbler syndrome 175
spasm 256
triceps reflex 17. 18
worn claws 14. 14
spasticity 256
trigeminal
spina bifida 174
nerve 27. 139
xanthrochromic CSF 282, 282
leuics
nerve root tumour 151
xeromycteria 122, 126
ataxia 199-204
neuroma 150
xerostomia 122. 126
cord tumours 236
neuropathy 251
empyema 167-170
paralysis 138
yaw227
fracture 181-183
trismus 260
yawning 71