SHAILEN JASANI
SAUNDERSSOLUTIONS IN
VETERINARYPRACTICE
Series Editor:Fred Nind
SMALLANIMAL
EMERGENCYMEDICINE
Unique new case-based approach
Modern,clearly designed and illustrated
Ideally suited for CPD or as an exam revislon aid
SAUNDERS
ELSEVIER
Saunders Solutions in
Veterinary Practice
Small Animal Emergency Medicine
(       
Sauinders
Front Matter
Saunders Soluitions in Veterinary Practice
SMALL ANIMAL EMERGENCY MEDICINE
Series Editor
Fred Nind BVM&S, MRCVS
Shailen Jasani
CHURCHILL
LIVINGSTONE
ELSEVIER
VetMB MA MRCVS (ACVECC Diploma eligible)
Edinburgh London New York Oxford Philadelphia St Louis Sydney Toronto 2010
Commissioning Editor: Robert Edwards Development Editor: Ewan Halley Project
Manager: Kiruthiga Kasthuriswamy Designer: Charles Gray
Copyright
SAUNDERS
ELSEVIER
 2011, Elsevier Limited. All rights reserved.
Aq o  n  sn   q r nd si g d o
any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any
information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the
phone: (+1) 215 239 3804 (US) or (+44) 1865 843830 (UK); fax: (+44) 1865
853333;  e-mail: healthpermissions@elsevier.com. You may also complete your
request on-line via the Elsevier website at http://www.elsevier.com/permissions.
First published 2011
ISBN: 978-0-70202984-4
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Notice
Knowledge and best practice in this field are constantly changing. As new research and
experience broaden our understanding. changes in research methods, professional practices, or
 medical treatment may become necessary.
Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own experience and knowledge in
evaluating and using any information, methods, compounds, or experiments described herein. In
 using such information or methods they should be mindful of their own safety and the safety of
others, including parties for whom they have a professional responsibility.
With respect to any drug or pharmaceutical products identified, readers are advised to check
the most current information provided (i) on procedures featured or (ii) by the manufacturer of
each product to be administered, to verify the recommended dose or formula, the method and
 duration of administration, and contraindications. It is the responsibility of practitioners, relying on
their own experience and knowledge of their patients, to make diagnoses, to determine dosages and
the best treatment for each individual patient, and to take all appropriate safety precautions.
To the fullest extent of the law, neither the Publisher nor the authors, contributors, or editors
assume any liability for any injury and/or damage to persons or property as a matter of products
liability, negligence or otherwise, or from any use or operation of any methods, products,
instructions, or ideas contained in the material herein.
The Publisher
Workingtogethertogrow
librariesin developingcountries
www.elsevier.comwww.bookaid.orgwww.sabre.org
ELSEVIER
BOOKAID
Sabre Foundation
ntcrnatik
Tho
publishers
your source forbooks,
policy is to use
paper manufactured
ELSEVIER
inthehealthsciences
www.elsevierhealth.com
Printed in China
Introduction
Saunders Solutions in Veterinary Practice series is a new range of veterinary
               
Readers should realise that it is not the authors’ intention to cover all that is
known about each topic. As such the books in the Saunders Solutions series are not
standard reference works. Instead they are intended to provide practical information
on the more frequently encouintered conditions in an easily accessible form based on
routine and the referral. The books will help practitioners with a particular interest
A   o   ss e     sn  
 a s s s        
surgeons will see them in practice.
Each case also includes descriptions of underlying pathology and details of the
nursing required both in the veterinary clinic and at home. It is hoped that the books
will also, therefore, be of interest to veterinary students in the later parts of their
course and to veterinary nurses.
    )   
will provide a CPD resource that can be accessed economically, shared with
colleagues and used anywhere. They will also provide busy veterinary practitioners
     s    ss   s
of the more gruesome contaminants found in a veterinary clinic because this is
where we hope these books will be used.
Joyce Rodenhuis, Mary Seager and subsequently Robert Edwards were the
inspiration for the series and both the series editor and the individual authors are
s      s n n   
and guidance during their production.
Emergency velerinary Meaicine
S s     a       
outside normal practice hours and this has helped develop the provision of
emergency veterinary care as a distinct professional discipline. However, we should
not forget that emergency cases can present during the normal working day as well
as out of hours.
procedures with which the practitioner is relatively unfamiliar, or the use of
equipment that is rarely needed in routine veterinary care.
              
extensive experience, as a practical guide to the care of these cases and should
become the handbook of the emergency team. Information is easy to find with a
plethora of practical clinical tips being highlighted.
A successful outcome for a severely ill emergency case can give the practitioner a
warmer inner glow than almost any other case. We hope this book will help you
achieve that glow more confidently and more often.
Fred Nind, Series Editor
2010
Preface
In essence, whether or not an animal presents as an emergency is ultimately at the
are afflicted by some of the same non urgent disorders that are seen during routine
status. However, there are also a significant number of dogs and cats presented for
animals present with a diverse variety of abnormalities, some of which are
imminently life-threatening, while others are associated with variable levels of pain
or other morbidity. Some of the challenges, and appeals, of emergency medicine are
the need to have a wide breath of knowledge and expertise covering all body systems,
to know how to prioritize individual patients and specific problems within a single
patient, and to be prepared to see and embrace the unknown and sometimes
lnexplainable!
S             
practice, non-referral dedicated emergency clinics, and referral hospitals. The same
cases may therefore be seen by individuals with varying degrees of experience and
with access to different levels of facilities. This book has been written by a clinician
who has worked in all of these environments over the last 10 years and it is very
much intended to demonstrate how excellent emergency medicine can be provided in
1). In particular, the author cannot stress enough how much invaluable information
can be obtained from astute physical examination, which does not require any
           h
emergency medicine in particular.
    n       
demonstrate the application of the fundamental principles described in Section 1 and
allow the reader to become more comfortable with early assessment of emergency
patients. As such, the author would strongly encourage the reader to read the whole
 s    a  s      
applying these fundamental principles to a limitless array of different disorders.
The reader is reminded that this book is not intended to be a reference text. The
detail as to be useful in the management of these cases. In addition, in contrast to
to be required in emergency patients in which a definitive diagnosis has not been
obtained. Again, this is one of the challenges, and appeals, of emergency medicine!
SJ
Hatfield, 2010
Acknowledgements
The author would like to thank all of the following who in some way have contributed to the
 i e sa is ' n da, p n aa s  s z q s po 
foundations for the emergency clinician I am today.
Chiara Valtolina for her advice and support throughout my book-writing journey, and Dan Lewis
s sq   ss    n r  s
S      o      
anaesthesia.
All my colleagues who provided me with many of the photographs in this book, in particular Kate
Einglish.
My family for their support over the years and tolerating being neglected while I have
endeavoured to take care of mungu prani (God's animals) as my mum likes to call them.
Last, but definitely not least, my dad for showing immense willpower in the face of prolonged
s si a pon  odsn po o  e g  se
Table of Contents
Front Matter
Copyright
Introduction
Preface
Acknowledgements
Section 1: The Fundamentals
Chapter 1: Major body system examination
Chapter 2: Shock and dehydration
Chapter 3: Emergency database interpretation
Chapter 4: Parenteral fluid therapy
Chapter 5: Analgesia for the emergency patient
Chapter 6: Oxygen supplementation
Section 2: Problem-Orientated Approach
Chapter 7: Abnormal urine or urination
Chapter 8: Acute abdomen
Chapter 9: Acute diarrhoea
Chapter 10: Acute red eye and pain
Chapter 11: Acute vomiting
Chapter 12: Cardiac dysrhythmias
Chapter 13: Collapse
Chapter 14: Cyanosis
Chapter 15: Head tilt and nystagmus
Chapter 16: Hyperthermia and pyrexia
Chapter 17: Hypothermia
Chapter 18: Jaundice
Chapter 19: Pallor and approach to anaemia
Chapter 20: Pelvic limb paresis and paralysis
Chapter 21: Petechiae and ecchymoses
Chapter 22: Regurgitation
Chapter 23: Respiratory distress
Chapter 24: Seizures
Chapter 25: Sudden loss of vision
Chapter 26: Urticaria, angio-oedema and anaphylaxis
Chapter 27: Wounds and open fractures
Section 3: Specific Disorders
Chapter 28: The trauma patient
Chapter 29: The acute abdomen
Chapter 30: Toxicological emergencies
Chapter 3l: Cardiovascular emergencies
Chapter 32: Respiratory emergencies
Chapter 33: Haematological and haemostatic emergencies
Chapter 34: Endocrine emergencies
Chapter 35: Ocular emergencies
Chapter 36: Urinary tract emergencies
Chapter 37: Dystocia
Chapter 38: Heatstroke
Section 4: Additional Topics
Chapter 39: Notes on sedation and general anaesthesia
Chapter 4o: Notes on transfusion medicine
Chapter 41: Notes on paediatric medicine
APPENDIX: MCQs
APPENDIX: MCQs - Answers
APPENDIX 1: Drug formulary
APPENDIX 2: Procedures - equipment and techniques
Further reading
Index
Section 1
The Fundamentals
Major body system examination
Clinical Tips
The initial physical examination should focus on the major body systems, namely the
cardiovascular, respiratory and central nervous systems, as severe abnormalities in these systems
have the potential to be rapidly fatal. This approach is somewhat different from the head-to-tail
physical examination commonly performed that is only appropriate for non-emergency patients.
· Pain assessment is also a high priority in the initial evaluation.
A considerable amount of invaluable information can be obtained from the physical
examination of the emergency patient. The initial priority is to identify any
potentially life-threatening problems so that immediate intervention can be provided.
As such the initial physical examination (primary survey) should focus on the major
  s        
severe abnormalities in these systems have the potential to be rapidly fatal. Abdominal
palpation and measurement of body temperature are also important. Once measures
have been taken to stabilize abnormalities in the major body systems a more
comprehensive physical examination  (secondary survey) can be performed. This
approach is somewhat different from the head-to-tail physical examination commonly
performed that is only appropriate for non-emergency patients.
Cardiovascular System
The most important questions to be answered when examining the cardiovascular
system are, does the patient have signs of compromised systemic perfusion, and is
there any evidence of primary cardiac disease? The following should be examined
during evaluation of the cardiovascular system:
· Heart rate, sounds and rhythm
· Pulse quality and rate (are there pulse deficits?)
· Mucous membrane colour and capillary refill time
· (Mentation)
· (Temperature of the extremities).
All of the information obtained from this evaluation should be used to guide
subsequent therapy. For example, a patient with severe hypovolaemia will require
aggressive fluid administration (see Ch. 4). However a more conservative approach
may need to be taken if a non-physiological heart murmur is detected during initial
evaluation. The most common cause of hypoperfusion in the emergency patient is
hypovolaemia (see Ch. 2). Cardiovascular abnormalities may also be seen for example
with heart failure (see Ch. 31), anaemia (see Ch. 19) and systemic inflammatory
response syndrome (SIRs) or sepsis.
Respiratory System
Animals with respiratory embarrassment are amongst the most unstable emergency
              
sedation of a dog with severe upper respiratory tract dyspnoea, see Ch. 32) may have
to be performed prior to examination of these patients. This is especially true for cats
(see Ch. 23). The following should be examined during evaluation of the respiratory
system:
· Respiratory rate
· Respiratory effort
· Respiratory pattern and noise.
Respiratory rate in a normal adult dog or cat is usually 15-30 breaths per minute
although a certain degree of normal variation occurs due to factors such as anxiety
and excitement.
Clinical Tip
· Panting in dogs is often an innocuous finding. However, occasionally it is the earliest sign of
S       sn     
ignored.
Respiratory effort
Dyspnoeic animals may show postural adaptation as described in Box 1.1. Some
dyspnoeic animals demonstrate increased abdominal effort (increased contraction of
abdominal muscles) that assists  with  expiration only.  Paradoxical abdominal
Dreathing, whereby the thoracic and abdominal walls move in opposite directions, is
thoracic wall moves out and the abdominal wall also moves out passively).
BOX 1.1 Postural adaptation to dyspnoea
· Open-mouth breathing
* Neck extension
· Repeated changing of position
• Abduction of elbows (dogs)
* Sternal recumbency (cats)
Respiratory pattern and noise
Respiratory distress can occur as a result of an abnormality affecting any one or more
of the following areas:
· Upper respiratory tract (URT) (e.g. laryngeal neoplasia)
· Lower respiratory tract (e.g. feline bronchial disease)
· Lung parenchyma (e.g. pulmonary contusions, pulmonary oedema)
· Pleural space (e.g. pleural effusion, pneumothorax)
· Thoracic wall and diaphragm (e.g. traumatic diaphragmatic rupture).
Being able to identify the area affected is extremely important with respect to
patient management. Depending on the case in question, a combination of
observation and listening may allow reliable localization of the affected area. This is
described further in Box 1.2. Lung sounds are typically louder cranioventrally and
may not be audible in a normal cat at rest.
 BOX 1.2 Interpretation of respiratory pattern and noise findings
(URT) obstruction (e.g. laryngeal paralysis)
 Inspiratory and expiratory stridor: fixed URT obstruction (e.g. mass lesion) (or diffuse tracheal
disease)
· Expiratory stridor: intrathoracic tracheal abnormality
· Prolonged expiration with increased abdominal effort: lower airway disease
· Muffled lung sounds ventrally: pleural effusion (lung sounds may be louder than normal dorsally)
· Muffled lung sounds dorsally: pneumothorax (lung sounds may be louder than normal ventrally)
· Louder than normal lung sounds (harshness, wheezes, crackles): small airway or parenchymal
disease
Central Nervous System
Initial examination of the central nervous system (CNS) focuses on mentation and
ability to stand and ambulate. If the animal is ambulatory, then gait is assessed.
Mentation may be affected by cardiovascular and respiratory abnormalities and if
such abnormalities are present, it is important to decide whether the animal's
mentation is appropriate. Inappropriately altered mentation should raise the index of
            s
evaluated until other abnormalities have been resolved or improved (e.g. fluid therapy
to correct systemic hypoperfusion, warming to treat hypothermia).
Similarly, animals may be recumbent as a result of primary CNs disorders but also
due to cardiovascular and respiratory compromise. Gait abnormalities in ambulatory
animals are most likely to be related to the nervous systems (central or peripheral) and
multiple limb involvement often suggests a more serious disease.
2
Shock and dehydration
Shock and dehydration are both commonly seen in emergency practice and both
represent different pathophysiological processes and have different clinicopathological
findings. Understanding these differences is essential to ensuring that the most
appropriate management is implemented.
Body Fluid Compartments
Total body water typically constitutes approximately 60% of a healthy non-obese adult
dog or cat's body weight. A basic understanding of the way in which the total body
shock and hydration. The total body water is distributed as follows:
· Intracellular compartment (40% body weight)
· Extracellular compartment (20% body weight):
- Interstitial space including lymph (15% body weight)
- Intravascular space (4% body weight)
1%).
Active and/or passive movement of fluid occurs continuously  between  the
intravascular and interstitial compartments at the capillary membrane. The most
important factor that determines the size of each fluid compartment is the amount of
solutes it contains.
Hypoperfusion and Shock
Organs and peripheral tissues rely on an adequate intravascular fluid space (adequate
perfusion) for the delivery of oxygen and nutrients and the removal of by-products of
in the blood supply to an organ or tissue. Although this can occur solely on a local
level, it is seen most commonly in the context of a global (systemic) reduction in blood
supply.
The term ‘shock' is used clinically to describe the condition of a patient in which
this global hypoperfusion has reached a certain level of severity, sufficient for the
patient to manifest a number of characteristic clinical findings. This usually occurs
  i     s     
delivery to the cells and thereby inadequate energy production. If the degree of shock
invariably unsuccessful.
Clinical Tip
· Systemic hypoperfusion is common in emergency patients and being able to recognize and treat
this abnormality is crucial for successful stabilization.
Causes of hypoperfusion
The mechanisms of hypoperfusion and shock can be divided into four categories.
However, it is important to remember that more than one type can exist in the same
patient at the same time, and that they share some common changes and
derangements at a cellular level.
Hypovolaemic shock
Hypovolaemia is a reduction in the effective circulating intravascular volume and is
the most common cause of hypoperfusion in companion animals. It can be subdivided
into absolute and relative hypovolaemia. Absolute hypovolaemia is the most common
type and occurs as a result of loss of fluid from the intravascular space. This fluid loss
may affect just the intravascuilar space (e.g. haemorrhage) or the extravascular space
as well (e.g. salt and water loss, for example in vomiting and diarrhoea).
Maldistributive shock
With maldistributive shock, the fluid in the intravascular space (the absolute volume
of which may or may not be reduced) is distributed across the body in an abnormal
           
potentially be viewed as a form of relative hypovolaemia. Maldistributive shock is
seen in animals with systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRs) which may
also occurs in anaphylactic/anaphylactoid shock.
Cardiogenic shock
Primary cardiac dysfunction (e.g. from organic heart disease or severe dysrhythmia)
causing hypoperfusion (see Ch. 31).
Obstructive shock
Systemic hypoperfusion occurs due to obstruction of blood flow from the heart or
venous return to the heart; the most common example of this in small animals is
pericardial tamponade.
Causes of systemic hypoperfusion in companion animals are listed in Table 2.1.
Table 2.1 Causes of systemic hypoperfusion in dogs and cats
Type of hypoperfu sion
Calses
Hypovola emia
Blood loss (trauma, coagulopathy, ruptured neoplasm)
Vomiting and diarrhoea
 Severe dehydration
Th ird space flu id loss (peritoneal, pleural, interstitial, gastrointestinal)
 Neoplasia
 Burm injury
Severe polyuria
 Maldistributive
Systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS):
· Sepsis
· Severe pan creatitis
· Major tissue trauma
·Neoplasia
· Burn injury
An aphylaxis/an aph ylactoid reaction
Cardiogenic
Card iomyopathy (especially d ilated an d hypertrophic)
Valvular disease
Severe dysrh ythmia
 Obstructive
 Peric ard ial tampon ad e
Constrictive pericarditis
Hypovolaemia
The two most common causes of hypovolaemia in companion animals are
          
extravascular fluid deficits, while animals presenting with hypovolaemia due to salt
and water loss (e.g. from vomiting and diarrhoea) will certainly have extravascular
fluid deficits.
Assessing perfusion and volume status
Clinical Tip
· Physical examination is undoubtedly the most valuable and readily available means of assessing
 systemic perfusion in companion animals. The amount of information that can be derived from this
examination should not be underestimated. Following initial assessment, repeated physical
examination allows response to therapy and ongoing progress to be readily evaluated.
A number of physical examination parameters are used to assess perfusion:
· Heart rate (HR)
· Arterial (usually femoral and dorsal pedal) pulse quality
· Mucous membrane (MM) colou1r
· Capillary refill time (CRT)
· (Mentation)
 (Temperatuire of extremities.)
The dorsal pedal artery is located just distal to the hock on the craniomedial aspect
for a number of reasons in addition to assessing perfusion status.
In animals with uncomplicated hypovolaemia, the perfusion parameters listed
above are reliable indicators of volume status and tend to follow predictable trends
both as hypovolaemia progresses, from compensatory through to early and then late
decompensatory phases, and as normal perfusion is restored.
LUgD
Compensatory phase of hypovolaemia
In this phase, hypovolaemia is mild. A compensatory increase in sympathetic activity
causes both an increase in heart rate and cardiac contractility, and peripheral
· HR 120-150 beats per minuite
· MM normal or pinker than normal with a rapid CRT of 1 second or less
· Femoral pulses are bounding or snappy (hyperdynamic) with dorsal pedal pulses
that are readily palpable
(      
   d  i a    s    nn n
(with bigger dogs usually having slower heart rates) and resting heart rate is also
dependent on factors such as the individual animal's level of fitness. It wouild be
highly unusual to detect a resting heart rate in a calm healthy greyhound of 110 beats
per minute; likewise a resting heart rate of 70 beats per minute in a Chihuahua. Thus
the heart rate identified muist be interpreted in the context of the patient in question
as a heart rate within the normal range may in fact be an inappropriate finding.
Early decompensatory phase of hypovolaemia
· HR 150-170 beats per minute
· Femoral pulses are weak with dorsal pedal pulses that are only just palpable
Late decompensatory phase of hypovolaemia
In this phase, hypovolaemia is severe and systemic perfusion is severely compromised.
The corresponding clinical picture is markedly hypodynamic:
· HR 170-220 beats per minute
· MM extremely pale/white with a CRT that, if detectable, is more than 2 seconds
· Femoral pulse very weak or ‘thready' with a dorsal pedal pulse that is no longer
palpable
inappropriately within normal limits or bradycardic. This is because the heart can no
longer sustain its compensatory chronotropic response.
Clinical Tip
• A heart rate in a dog of more than 220-240 beats per minute (more than 300 beats per minute in a
  n  a   n se  nn ss p e n n  s 
tachydysrhythmia (see Ch. 12)
Cats
s   s, rn        s n 
dogs'.
· The heart rate of healthy cats in the veterinary setting is usually 160-200 beats per
minute. However, cats are more susceptible to the stress of this environment and
       ( d s    a)    
completely healthy.
           
(inappropriate bradycardia, weak or absent pulses, pallor, prolonged or undetectable
CRT, depression and hypothermia).
· The oral mucous membranes can appear pale in normal cats and another site
(usually the conjunctival membranes) should be used to clarify this finding.
· Peripheral pulse assessment is not as reliable and repeatable in cats.
Assessing perfusion - the holistic approach
Animals with hypovolaemia may have concurrent abnormalities that preclude their
perfusion  parameters  changing in  the  predictable  way described  above.  When
  i  n  e  s  s  ss
           
               
other findings suggestive of moderate or severe hypovolaemia. This heart rate is in
fact an inappropriate bradycardia due to hyperkalaemia that would be overlooked
were it not interpreted in the context of all the other perfusion parameters.
· Mucous membranes may remain pale despite appropriate fluid therapy in an animal
with severe anaemia.
   e    s    
appropriate fluid therapy as a result of raised intracranial pressure.
In addition to physical examination, other measures of perfusion, if available
include blood pressure measurement, venous lactate concentration and urine output.
examination parameters.
Clinical Tip
as a ad po s a An si o po ss m sio  b -
(primary cardiac bradydysrhythmia - see Ch. 12), brain disease, severe hyperkalaemia (or
hypocalcaemia) or drug toxicity (e.g. digoxin)
Pain management
cardiovascuilar and respiratory function, and confuse clinical assessment. Adequate
analgesia is therefore extremely important. The use of opioids initially is the mainstay
of pain management and nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agents should be avoided
Maldistributive shock
Early on when intravascular volume remains adequate, dogs in maldistributive shock
refill time. With the onset of concurrent severe hypovolaemia, tachycardia progresses
but pulses become weaker and CRT more prolonged. However, unlike dogs with
uncomplicated severe hypovolaemia, dogs in severe hypodynamic maldistributive
              
to identify this retained mucous membrane colour as a discrepant finding that
suggests the presence of a distributive component to the hypoperfusion.
Cats in maldistributive shock are more likely to present with a hypodynamic
cardiovascular picture.
Dehydration
For clinical purposes, dehydration can be defined as the process whereby an animal
loses more salt and water from its body than it takes in. This loss of body fluid is
predominantly extravascuilar and the effect on intravascular volume depends on both
          s    
tonicity is related to the sodium concentration.
Assessing hydration status
interstitial volume. They are the moistness of the mucous membranes, skin turgor
described above also become relevant if dehydration is severe enough to cause
hypovolaemia.
Clinical Tip
· Guidelines for estimating dehydration on the basis of physical examination findings must only be
used as an approximation of fluid loss in the dehydrated patient to facilitate the initial fluid plan as
there are a number of potential inherent inaccuracies.
Guidelines similar to those in Table 2.2 are generally used to estimate dehydration
on the basis of physical examination findings. However, these guidelines must only be
lised as an approximation of fluid loss in the dehydrated patient to facilitate the initial
fluid plan (see Ch. 4) as there are a number of potential inherent inaccuracies. For
example, skin turgor can be affected by the degree of subcutaneous fat present (with
obese animals having increased turgor), and mucous membrane moistness can be
affected by salivation (e.g. due to nausea).
Table 2.2 Guidelines for estimating dehydration on the basis of physical examination
everity of dehydration (est imated % of body weight)
Progresson of physical examin ation find ings
<5%
Normal
Mild (5-6 %)
Skin turgor mildly reduced
Moderate (6-10%)
Skin turgor progressively reduced
Mu cou s membranes dry
Eyes sunken
Severe (1 0-15%)
Complete loss of skin turgor
Mu cous membranes very dry
Eyes severely sunken and dull
Progressive signs of hypovolaemia, ultimately lead ing to shock and death
Additional measures of dehydration
In addition to physical examination, a number of other parameters can readily be
evaluated to  determine  the presence and severity of dehydration.  Given the
inaccuracies of assessing hydration status based on physical examination, it is
recommended that these additional measures are utilized as much as possible
especially for monitoring rehydration (see Ch. 3). They include:
· Packed cell volume and serum total solids
· Blood urea and creatinine concentrations in conjunction with urine specific gravity.
Short-term changes in body weight may also provide useful information with
respect to fluid balance in hospitalized patients.
3
Emergency database interpretation
Together with an astute major body system examination, an immense amount of
useful information can be derived from an emergency database. Traditionally the
minimum emergency database consists of manual packed cell volume (PCV), plasma
(      o  )  
concentration. Where possible the author prefers to measure plasma creatinine
concentration alongside BUN as creatinine is less prone to acute fluctuations. Gross
plasma appearance may also provide valuable information.
In addi tion to the minimum emergency database, it is often appropriate to perform
additional measurements or tests as part of the emergency database for specific
patient populations. These include:
· Peripheral blood smear examination
· Plasma electrolytes (potassium, sodium, calcium)
Urinalysis: gross appearance; specific gravity, dipstick analysis, sediment
examination.
Depending on the facilities available, it may be possible to obtain all the blood
required for the emergency database from an intravenous catheter at the time of
placement.
Packed cell Volume and Plasma Total Solids
Manual PCV and TS should always be interpreted together and the changes identified
will raise the index of suspicion for particular causes (see Table 3.1).
Table 3.1 Interpretation of manual packed cell volume and plasma total solids
Packed cell volume (%)
lasma total solids (g/L)
Causes to consider
Decreased
Normal
Chron ic anaemia
Acute haemolytic anaemia
Decreased
Decreased
Haemorrhage
Chron ic anaem ia + addition al cau se of hypoprotein aemia
Aggressive fluid therapy
Normal
Increased
Hyperglobulinaemia
Artefactu al increase
Normal
Decreased
Acute haemorrhage
Hypoprotein aemia
Severe vasculitis
In creased
Normal
 Breed -related n ormal variation
Absolute polycythaemia
Dehydration with c
teinloss
In creased
Increased
 Dehydration
Clinical Tip
• In the majority of cases, reference ranges for normal plasma total protein concentration may be
applied to plasma total solids. Synthetic colloid administration and hyperglycaemia may artefactually
increase plasma total solids measured by refractometry.
Reduction in PCV and Ts following haemorrhage is the result of dilution by fluid
moving into the bloodstream from the interstitium. However, this decrease does not
occur immediately as there is a lag for fluid movement to occur. Furthermore, in dogs,
but not cats, splenic contraction occurs following acute haemorrhage to increase
circulating red blood cell mass. Therefore PcV may be normal in the face of low TS
following acute haemorrhage and these findings must be interpreted in light of the
patient's history and physical examination findings.
With the exception of haemorrhage and protein-losing enteropathy (PLE), most
causes
of
hypoproteinaemia
   relate 
to
hypoalbuminaemia.
Causes
of
hypoalbuminaemia  include protein-losing nephropathy
(PLN), liver failure,
malnutrition/malabsorption, chronic
effusions  and
exudative skin
1 lesions.
Hyperglobulinaemia may occur secondary to dehydration but also inflammation,
monoclonal gammopathy (e.g. due to plasma cell myeloma) and polyclonal
gammopathy (e.g. due to chronic inflammatory disease, inflammatory bowel disease,
feline infectious peritonitis).
When interpreting changes in all laboratory parameters, including PCV and TS, it is
     s n   s    n n
applicable to puppies and kittens (see Ch. 41).
Gross Plasma Appearance
Common abnormalities of plasma appearance and possible causes are listed in Table
3.2. In addition to plasma appearance, samples can be evaluated for the size of the
buffy coat following centrifugation, with a large buffy coat suggestive of leukocytosis.
Table 3.2 Possible causes of abnormalities in gross plasma appearance
Plasma appearance
Possible cau ses
Haemolysed
Poor sampling technique
In travascular h aemolysis
Icteric
Preh epatic cau ses, espec ially haemolytic anaemia
Hepatic disord ers cau sing intrahepatic ch olestasis
 Posthepatic disord ers (e.g. obstructive biliary tract d isease)
Lipaemic
Postpran dial lipaemiz
Pancreatitis
Hyperad ren oc orticism
Blood Glucose Concentration
associated  with patients suffering from diabetes mellitus.  Hyperglycaemia not
requiring   treatmentmay  also  be seen
1in
  other    endocrine    disorders
following seizures and head trauma.
Clinically significant hypoglycaemia requiring treatment is seen most commonly as
a result of hyperinsulinism, iatrogenic causes or neoplasia, and in very young animals
or toy breed dogs. Hypoglycaemia may also be identified in hypoadrenocorticism, liver
failure, sepsis and heatstroke.
Azotaemia
The causes of azotaemia may be divided into prerenal, renal or postrenal
Prerenal azotaemia
Prerenal azotaemia occurs as a result of reduced renal perfusion and a consequent
functional decrease in glomerular filtration rate (GFR). Causes include dehydration,
hypovolaemia and heart failure. Prerenal azotaemia is characterized by increased
PCV, TS and urine specific gravity (USG), and is usually only mild. It is typically
reversible but structural renal injury and renal azotaemia may develop if renal
hypoperfusion is protracted.
Renal azotaemia
Renal azotaemia occurs as a result of reduced GFR secondary to structural renal
changes. Urine specific gravity is isosthenuric (1.007-1.015) as the kidneys are no
longer able to concentrate or dilute the urine and azotaemia may be mild, moderate or
severe. Anaemia may be present with chronic renal insufficiency.
Clinical Tip
· Blood urea nitrogen (BUN) concentration may be affected by a number of extrarenal factors, being
increased for example by increased dietary protein intake, gastrointestinal haemorrhage and
increased protein catabolism. Thus BUN concentration should ideally be interpreted together with
serum creatinine concentration as the latter is considered a more reliable indicator of renal
function.
Postrenal azotaemia
Postrenal azotaemia occurs due to urinary tract obstruction or rupture which prevents
excretion of urea and creatinine from the body. Azotaemia in these cases may be very
severe but frequently will fully resolve with appropriate correction of the underlying
disorder. Protracted urinary outflow obstruction can result in damage to the renal
parenchyma and consequent intrinsic acute renal failure.
Peripheral Blood Smear Examination
Peripheral blood smear examination is recommended for the majority of emergency
patients.  Cytology  allows cell  morphology  to be  evaluated  and  abnormal cell
populations to be identified; a degree of quantitative information can also be
obtained. Red blood cells, white blood cells and platelets are evaluated (Figures 3.1 and
3.2).
Figure 3.1
Normal canine red blood cells, neutrophil, monocyte and platelets ( × 1000)
(Photograph courtesy of Kate English ).
Figure 3.2
 Normal feline red blood cells, neutrophil, monocyte and platelets ( x 1000)
(Photograph courtesy of Kate English ).
Red blood cells
Red blood cells are examined for  variability in size (anisocytosis) and colour
(polychromasia) (Figure 3.3), both of which are suggestive of regenerative anaemia.
When stained using a Romanowsky stain such as Diff-Quik, immature red blood cells
(polychromatophils), which are larger than mature cells, have a purplish-or bluish.
tinged appearance.
Figure3.3
 Peripheral blood smear from a dog showing regenerative anaemia (×10oo). Marked
polychromasia (large purplish-tinged red blood cells) and anisocytosis (variation in red blood cell
size) is present; a neutrophil and two platelets can also be seen.
(Photograph courtesy of Kate English )
Red blood cells should also be examined for additional features such as
spherocytosis (Figure 3.4) and the presence of increased numbers of nucleated red cells
(Figure 3.5). Spherocytes are smaller, more rounded and denser staining than normal
red blood cells and they lack central pallor. They are formed when red blood cells
undergo partial phagocytosis and are characteristic of immune-mediated haemolytic
anaemia (see Ch. 33). Nucleated red cells may be seen for example with strongly
regenerative anaemia or heatstroke (see Ch. 38).
Figure 3.4
Spherocytes in peripheral blood smear from a dog ( x 1ooo). Spherocytes are smaller,
more rounded and denser staining than normal red blood cells and they lack central pallor.
(Photograph courtesy of Kate English)
Figure 3.5
 Nucleated red blood cell in peripheral blood smear from a dog (x 1ooo); other red
blood cells and two platelets can also be seen.
(Photograph courtesy of Kate English)
White blood cells
Neutrophils are the white blood cells of main concern in most cases and it is generally
acceptable in the emergency setting to make a subjective assessment of neutrophilia or
neutropenia in the context of the patient in question. The proportion of band
neutrophils (Figure 3.6) should be estimated. These are immature neutrophils with
unsegmented nuclei released early from the bone marrow in response to acute
demand. A normal or low neutrophil count with a high proportion of band cells is
referred to as a degenerate left shift and indicates severe pathology. Neutrophils
should also be examined for toxic changes (Figure 3.7) which are morphological
abnormalities  that occur  during intensified neutrophil  maturation in  severe
inflammation.
Figure3.6
Canine band neutrophil ( x 1ooo).
(Photograph courtesy of Kate English)
Figure3.7
Canine toxic neutrophil showing cytoplasmic basophilia, toxic granulation and three
Dohle bodies ( x 1000).
(Photograph courtesy of Kate English )
S )        
immunosuppressive therapy) or sequestration (e.g. severe infection or inflammation).
Platelets
A manual platelet count should be performed under high power (x1ooo, under oil
immersion) in the monolayer of the smear. Guidelines vary but 1 platelet per high
power field may be considered equivalent to 15-20 x 10 platelets/litre. Prior to
performing the count, the feathered edge should be examined for the presence of
platelet clumps (Figure 3.8) which will reduce the number of platelets in the
monolayer and if missed, may lead to a misdiagnosis of thrombocytopenia. Platelet
clumping implies an adequate platelet count. Large platelets may be seen as part of a
macrothrombocytopenia is recognized in Cavalier King Charles spaniels.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.8
       
(Photographs courtesy of Kate English)
Spontaneous haemorrhage secondary to thrombocytopenia is unlikely to be seen in
patients with two or more platelets per high power field although it must be
remembered that this is only a guideline. It can be difficult to identify even a single
platelet in smears from animals with immune-mediated thrombocytopenia (see Ch.
33).
Plasma Electrolytes
Potassium
Hyperkalaemia
Some of the more common causes of hyperkalaemia are listed in Box 3.1.
BOX 3.1 Causes of hyperkalaemia
 Decreased urinary excretion
• Urethral obstruction
• Uroperitoneum
· Hypoadrenocorticism (Addison's disease)
· Anuric or oliguric renal failure
· Certain gastrointestinal disorders (e.g. trichuriasis (whipworm), salmonellosis)
· Effusions
· Drug-related (e.g. angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors, potassium-sparing diuretics)
 Release of intracellular potassium
· Insulin deficiency (e.g. diabetic ketoacidosis)
· Acute mineral acidosis
· Significant cell death (e.g. heatstroke, severe trauma, reperfusion following thromboembolism,
acute tumour lysis syndrome)
·Pseudohyperkalaemia (e.g. haemolysis, especially in certain breeds like the Japanese Akita;
thrombocytosis)
Contamination of plasma sample with potassium EDTA during transfer into blood tubes
Hypokalaemia
Hypokalaemia in emergency patients is most commonly the result of reduced intake
due to inappetence, and concurrent increased loss via the gastrointestinal tract due to
vomiting and/or diarrhoea. Excessive loss may also occur via the urinary system, for
example in some animals (especially cats) with chronic renal failure or secondary to
loop or thiazide diuretic administration.
Sodium
Sodium metabolism and water balance are closely interconnected via complex
mechanisms involving a number of different receptors and hormones, and it is
therefore essential to consider the patient's intravascular volume status when
interpreting  measured  serum sodium  concentration.  Some  causes  of  hyper-and
hyponatraemia are listed in Tables 3.3 and 3.4.
Table 3.3 Causes of hypernatraemia
Extrarenal
. Vomiting
·Diarrhoea
· Third space loss
· Cutan eous burn injury
Renal:
· Osmotic diuresis (d iabetes mellitus, mann itol admin istration)
· Diuretic therapy
· Chron ic ren al falure
· Polyuric acute ren al falure
Pastoh
 Normovolaemia (pure water deficit)
Hyperthermia
Diabetes insipidus (cen tral, nephrogenic)
Water restriction
 Primary hypodipsia
 Hypervolaemia (impermeant solute gain)
 Hyperton ic saline administration
 Salt poisoning
Table 3.4 Causes of hyponatraemia
 Hypovola emia (sod ium loss is greater th an water loss)
Vomiting
Diarrh oea
Hypoadrenocorticism (Addison's disease)
 Diuretic therapy
 Third space loss
 Cu tan eous burn injury
 Normovolaemia (pure water deficit)
Hypot onic fluid admin istration
Psych ogenic polydipsia
(Has) nats Ha aeidodde u go ao sus
 Hypervolaemia (water excretion reduced)
Congestive heart failure
 Severe hepatic failure
Nephrotic syndrome
Oliguric/anuric ren al failure
Clinical Tip
 Glucose is an osmotically active substance drawing water from the interstitium into the
intravascular space. A 1 mmol/l increase in blood glucose concentration is expected to cause a
reduction in serum sodium concentration of 0.3-0.4 mmol/l secondary to dilution. This must be
borne in mind when interpreting sodium levels in diabetic animals.
Calcium
In the blood, calcium is found in three forms: ionized, protein-bound and complexed
active form and accounts for 50-60% of total serum calcium in normal dogs.
Measurement of total calcium is more widely available but may not reliably correlate
with ionized calcium concentration.
Clinical Tip
· The use of albumin-based adjustment formulas to convert total serum calcium to ionized calcium is
no longer considered reliable. Measurement of serum ionized calcium is recommended in all cases
in which a clinically significant serum calcium abnormality is suspected.
Young dogs (typically less than 1 year old) may have serum calcium concentrations
that are greater than quoted reference ranges for adult dogs. This is presumed to be
            s
from this patient population.
Hypercalcaemia
        i     g
adverse pathophysiological effects, most notably on the kidneys, heart, central nervous
system and gastrointestinal tract. A useful acronym for remembering the most
common conditions associated with hypercalcaemia is HARDIONS and is explained
          
haemoconcentration, hyperproteinaemia and severe hypothermia.
Cause
Notes
A: hypoadren oc orticism (Add ison's
Transient, clinically insign ificant
disease)
R: Ren al failure
 Chron ic or polyuric acute ren al failure
 D: hypervitamin osis D
 Vitamin D promotes intestin al absorption and renal reabsorption of calcium
 Usually due to intoxication (e.g. rodenticides containing cholecalciferol, antips
xriasis cream contain ing calcipotriol c
calcipotriene)
1: Idiopathic
 Most common form in cats
 O: Osteolysis
 N: Neoplasia
 Humoral hyperc alc aemia of malignancy most common cau se in dogs; commonly due to lymphoma or anal sac apocrine
gland adenocarcinoma
 S: granulomatouS d isease
e.g pann iculitis and an giostrongylosis
Hypocalcaemia
A large number of conditions are associated with hypocalcaemia and the more
common ones are listed in Box 3.2.
BOX 3.2 Conditions associated with hypocalcaemia
· Hypoalbuminaemia
• Renal failure (chronic, acute)
· Acute pancreatitis
• Puerperal tetany (eclampsia)
· Hypoparathyroidism
· Soft tissue trauma
· Rhabdomyolysis
· Ethylene glycol intoxication
· Transfusion of blood in citrated anticoagulant
Urinalysis
Urinalysis is recommended in all emergency patients found to be azotaemic or where
there are concerns for example regarding urinary tract infection. It is preferable to
obtain urine for analysis prior to administration of intravenous fluid therapy or other
drugs (e.g. diuretics, glucocorticoids) that may alter urine production. However,
 s   m   s     
s           
detection of haematuria due to risk of traumatic haemorrhage with the other
techniques, and cystocentesis is arguably preferred for collection of samples for
microbiology as it avoids possible urethral and/or genital contamination of the
sample.
Gross discoloration
Gross appearance may be suggestive of certain  disorders.  Haematuria,
 s         
red, red-brown or brown in appearance. Methaemoglobinuria is also associated with
Drown urine. Significant bilirubinuria is associated with orangey irine while cloudy
urine is typically the result of pyuria, crystalluria or mucus.
Specific gravity
USG is a measure of total solute concentration and reflects the ability of the kidneys to
concentrate or dilute glomerular filtrate derived from plasma. Normal USG varies
widely amongst dogs and cats. Isosthenuria is defined as USG of 1.007-1.015. This
reflects the same total solute concentration as plasma and suggests inability of the
kidneys to modify the initial filtrate. Isosthenuria is isually associated with renal
azotaemia.
Clinical Tip
· Isosthenuria does not necessarily indicate structural renal injury in all cases. In disorders such as
diabetes mellitus or hypercalcaemia, or following the administration of drugs such as furosemide or
glucocorticoids, the ability of the kidneys to concentrate urine may be lost. Isosthenuria may
therefore be identified in a clinically dehydrated animal for example.
Concentrated urine (USG more than 1.015) and hyposthenuria (USG less than
prerenal azotaemia.
Dipstick analysis
With respect to emergency patients, dipstick analysis is most likely to be useful for
detection of glucosuria and ketonuria. Glucosuria is diagnostic for diabetes mellitus
when  accompanied  by significant hyperglycaemia.  However, glucosuria  is
dysfunction (e.g. seen with some nephrotoxins). Glucosuria and hyperglycaemia may
also be seen in stressed or excited cats.
most commonly due to diabetic ketoacidosis. Other less common causes of increased
ketone production and ketonuria include starvation, prolonged fasting or persistent
hypoglycaemia. Acetone, acetoacetate and β-hydroxybutyrate are the three ketones
produced and it is of note that the reagents in commercial urine dipsticks will not
detect β-hydroxybutyrate.
Clinical Tip
· Although ketones are ideally detected in urine, ketonuria implies ketonaemia and it is possible to
use the same urine reagent strips to detect ketones in plasma. This technique may be less sensitive
but it is extremely useful in dehydrated patients in which obtaining urine may require some delay.
 This is very much the case for dogs and cats presenting in a diabetic ketoacidotic crisis. At least two
haematocrit tubes are typically filled and centrifuged when measuring PCV and TS as part of the
emergency database; the plasma from one of these tubes is then used for ketone detection.
Dipsticks are unable to differentiate haematuria, haemoglobinuria and
examination. In contrast to animals with haemoglobinuria in which plasma is also
likely to be discoloured secondary to haemoglobinaemia, plasma in animals with
myoglobinuria is likely to be clear. Some causes of haematuria, haemoglobinuria and
myoglobinuria are listed in Box 3.3.
BOX 3.3 Causes of haematuria, haemoglobinuria and myoglobinuria
Haematuria
· Urinary tract trauma (e.g. blunt trauma; iatrogenic - urine sampling, renal biopsy)
· Urolithiasis
 Urinary tract inflammation (e.g. infection, feline lower urinary tract disease)
 Urinary tract neoplasia
· Systemic coagulopathy
· Renal infarction
· Renal pelvic haematoma
· Idiopathic renal haematuria
· Genital tract causes (e.g. inflammation, neoplasia, trauma, oestrus)
Haemoglobinuria
· Immune-mediated haemolytic anaemia
· Transfusion-associated haemolysis
· Splenic torsion
· Heatstroke
Myoglobinuria
· Significant rhabdomyolysis (e.g. status epilepticus, heatstroke, severe crush injury)
Dipsticks should not be used to diagnose the presence of leukocytes in canine or
feline urine as the methodology employed is unreliable in these species. Sediment
examination is the diagnostic technique of choice. Mild to moderate bilirubinuria
may be normal in dogs, especially males, but is always considered an abnormal
pyrexia and starvation.
Sediment examination
Urine sediment should be examined as quickly as possible after collection to minimize
degeneration of casts and cells. Sediment may be examined unstained or can be
stained with a commercial stain specifically intended for use with urine (e.g. Sedi-
Stainrm). The author, however, prefers to stain urine sediment with Diff-Quik.
Sediment is examined for the number of red and white blood cells per high power
field, infectious organisms (typically bacteria), crystals, and number of casts per low
power field.
Especially in the presence of haematuria and proteinuria, more than five white
B       s    
be more appropriate in a sample obtained via cystocentesis and a higher cut-off in a
voided sample. Urine should be submitted for culture and sensitivity if bacteriuria or
pyuria is identified.
4
Parenteral fluid therapy
Parenteral fluid therapy is the most common therapeutic intervention performed in
veterinary emergency practice. A thorough understanding of the indications for the
use of parenteral fluids, the types of therapeutic fluid available, and the most
benefit and minimize the potential harm associated with this therapy.
Hypovolaemia and dehydration are the most common indications for the use of
fluid therapy and it is essential to understand their differences with respect to
pathophysiology and clinical assessment in order to administer appropriate fluid
therapy (see Ch. 2). This chapter focuses on the different types of parenteral fluid
commonly available in nonreferral emergency practice and their appropriate use in
hypovolaemia and dehydration.
Types of Parenteral Fluid
Crystalloids
Crystalloids are electrolyte solutions that can pass freely out of the bloodstream
through the capillary membrane. Crystalloid solutions are described as isotonic,
hypertonic or hypotonic based on how their tonicity compares to that of plasma. The
tonicity is related to the sodium concentration and it is the tonicity that determines
how the crystalloid solution is distributed between fluid compartments following
administration into the bloodstream.
The two most commonly used crystalloid solutions are buffered lactated Ringer's
solution (Hartmann's solution, compound sodium lactate) and 0.9% sodium chloride
(normal strength or physiological saline). Both these solutions are examples of
similar to that of extracellular fluid. Following intravascular administration, these
fluids equilibrate relatively quickly with the interstitial space and 75-85% of the
administered volume is likely to have left the bloodstream 30-60 min after infusion
 s n         
     e        
replenish extravascular fluid losses in dehydration (see below).
   (s     ) s
0.45% sodium chloride (half strength saline)) crystalloid solutions are also available
but their use is much less commonly indicated. Hypertonic saline administration
cauises plasma volume expansion mainly by drawing water ouit of cells into the
extracelluilar space down an osmotic gradient. Most of this fluid remains in the
interstitial space but a proportion diffuses into the vasculature. The recommended
dose is 4 ml/kg i.v. (dogs 4-7 ml/kg, cats 2-4 ml/kg) over a minimum of 5 minutes
saline is indicated in volume resuscitation, especially in large or giant breed dogs
where rapid administration  of large  volumes of  isotonic  crystalloids may  be
impossible. Administration of hypertonic saline must be followed by the use of a
replacement  isotonic crystalloid due to the osmotic diuresis and rapid sodium
redistribution that occur with this treatment. Hypertonic saline is often administered
in combination with a colloid solution to prolong intravascular volume expansion.
Hypertonic saline is also indicated in the treatment of raised intracranial pressure,
especially with concurrent hypovolaemia, where it causes fluid to move out of the
brain parenchyma and into the vasculature (see Ch. 28).
Hypotonic saline is most often used in combination with 0.9% sodium chloride to
correct hyponatraemia gradually. It is also occasionally used in dehydrated animals
with cardiac disease to provide rehydration while limiting the amount of sodium
acministered.
Clinical Tip
* A 0.18% sodium chloride (with 4% glucose) solution is commercially available. This solution is
   o  n          
routine use. It may occasionally be required to treat animals with severe acute hypernatraemia but
this is rare in companion animals. If this solution is used, animals must be monitored very closely
 d  s aa   ed   se anaa 
serious clinical consequences.
· The author is aware of cases in which this solution has been used as a convenient way of
(e.g. 5% glucose in 0.9% sodium chloride solution) are available and glucose solutions can also
readily be formulated (see Appendix 1, Drug Formulary). The author would therefore strongly
discourage the use of the 0.18% sodium chloride solution as a means of administering glucose
supplementation.
Uses of isotonic crystalloid solutions
· High rate isotonic crystalloid therapy is used to treat hypovolaemia either alone or
· Low rate isotonic crystalloid therapy is used to treat dehydration.
Synthetic colloids
Colloid solutions consist of large (macro) molecuiles that do not readily leave the
intravascular space (through capillary pores) and are hyperoncotic relative to normal
animals. Synthetic colloids therefore draw fluid into and hold fluid in the vasculature,
preparations are often made up in a 0.9% sodium chloride solution. Nonsynthetic
(natural) colloid solutions that are currently used therapeutically include plasma and
human serum albumin solutions.
   r  s      
S     n   
hetastarch (e.g. Hetastarch 600/0.7?, Baxter); pentastarch (e.g. HAES-Steril 200/0.5?,
Fresenius Kabi)
· Gelatins (e.g. Gelofusine?, Braun; Haemaccel?, Intervet)
· Dextrans (e.g. Dextran-70?, Pharmacosmos).
The volume and duration of plasma expansion that follows colloid administration
depend in part on the specific colloid used (its colloid osmotic pressure (COP)), as well
as the dose given and the species in question
Indications for synthetic colloid use
Synthetic colloids are usuially uised in hypovolaemic patients in one of two scenarios:
1 When fluid resuscitation with an isotonic crystalloid solution has proved to be
ineffective; this is because colloids are more efficient at intravascular volume
expansion.
2 When there are specific reasons that warrant the inclusion of a colloid; this might
           
gastrointestinal or renal loss). Isotonic crystalloids will remain in the circulation for
             
responsible for retaining these fluids in the intravascular space.
Synthetic colloids are not generally used alone when employed in the treatment of
hypovolaemia and are typically  discontinued earlier on than  the replacement
crystalloid solution. It is much less common for patients to remain on long-term
colloid therapy (although on-going hypoproteinaemia or the presence of systemic
vasculitis or capillary-leak syndrome for example may warrant this treatment).
Adverse effects of synthetic colloids
effect on coagulation that is likely to be multifactorial in origin. Allergic reactions are
also rarely identified.
Haemoglobin-based oxygen-carrying solutions
Haemoglobin-based oxygen-carrying solutions (HBOC) are not blood replacement
solutions. They increase plasma haemoglobin concentration and therefore oxygen
carrying capacity but do not contain other blood constituents. The only HBOC
currently available for veterinary clinical use is Oxyglobin? (Biopure Corporation;
www.biopure.com).  This  solution is based on  polymerized modified bovine
sets. It is currently only licensed for use in dogs but has been used extensively off-
licence in cats with great success.
The main indication for Oxyglobin? is in euvolaemic anaemia where it can act as a
and crossmatching do not need to be performed. The product as supplied in foil by the
manufacturer also has a long shelf-life of 3 years. Oxyglobin? is used in these cases to
support the patient while diagnosis is achieved and treatment is instituted and given
time to take effect.
Clinical Tip
Administration of Oxyglobin? typically causes a fall in packed cell volume (PCV) due to
 intravascular volume expansion. Ideally, therefore, plasma haemoglobin concentration should be used 
      n       
equivalent PcV can be calculated as follows:
However, a haemoglobinometer is required to measure free plasma haemoglobin concentration as
in-house machines typically calculate haemoglobin concentration from haematocrit. Regardless of
whether a haemoglobinometer is available or not, positive clinical response to treatment is the best
 guide of effective therapy.
As Oxyglobin? contains large molecules it is also a potent colloid solution and can
therefore be used very effectively to provide intravascular volume expansion in
  s    s   ss
modified biological colloid, the much greater cost of Oxyglobin ? over other available
colloids means that its use in hypovolaemia is typically restricted to animals that have
suffered significant blood loss.
Clinical Tip
· The volume expanding properties of Oxyglobin? must be borne in mind when it is used to treat
 anaemia in patients without hypovolaemia as there is a very real risk of fluid overload if
inappropriately high rates are used, especially in cats.
· Typical rates for Oxyglobin? use in euvolaemic anaemic patients are 0.5-1 ml/kg/hr in cats and 1-
2 ml/kg/hr in dogs.
· Caution is also warranted in disease states associated with an increased risk of fluid overload such
as cardiac disease, pulmonary parenchymal disease and cerebral oedema
As with all colloids, Oxyglobin? will interfere with serum total solids measurement
via refractometry and results must be interpreted cautiously. Oxyglobin? will also
interfere with colorimetric serum biochemistry analysis although the parameters
affected will depend on both the analyser and the methodology. Peripheral blood
smear evaluation is not affected.
The Fluid Plan
On the basis of the physical examination, and subsequently other findings, it should
be possible to answer the following questions (see Ch. 2):
· Is the animal hypovolaemic and if so, is this mild, moderate or severe?
· Is the animal dehydrated and if so, what is the estimated percentage dehydration?
Hypovolaemia
The basic objective is to restore the effective circulating intravascuilar volume and
      ssn  s 
This volume expansion is performed over a short period of time - usually a few
minutes to an hour but sometimes longer - and may involve the use of both isotonic
if available). Isotonic crystalloids are the first choice in the majority of cases.
How?
Hypovolaemia is treated via the intravenous route using one or more of the shortest
central venous catheter is not available or inappropriate, the intraosseous route may
be used initially.
How much and for how long?
Isotonic crystalloids
See Table 4.1 for guidelines for initial rates of isotonic crystalloid fluid therapy in dogs
and cats with uncomplicated hypovolaemia. Initial boluses are usually given over 15-
20 minutes. For some bigger dogs the use of a pressure infusor (Figure 4.1) around the
 d s      n     g
time.
Table 4.l Guidelines for isotonic crystalloid therapy for hypovolaemia in dogs and cats. Initial
boluses are usually given over 15-20 minutes
SIZEOF
ANTICIPATEDSIZEOF
INITIAL
TOTALFLUID BOLUS
FLUID
(ml/kg)
BOLUS
Severityof
Mild
Moderate
Severe
hypovolaemia
Dogs
10-40
20-40
40-60
60-90
Cats
5-20
10-20
20-40
40-60
Figure 4.1
Two different types of pressure infusor for large volume rapid fluid administration.
Colloids
In moderate to severe hypovolaemia, the following rates of colloid administration are
applicable:
·Dogs:
 5 ml/kg boluses up to a total of 20 ml/kg
'Cats:
S/Tu 0 1 J0 Te101 e 01 dn sasn0q 8y/Tu g
:Oxyglobin@:
10-30 ml/kg total dose.
Whenever a synthetic colloid is added to an animal's fluid regime, due attention
must be paid to whether this affects the rate of crystalloid therapy, with the latter
being reduced if appropriate (often by about 50%).
Approach to fluid resuscitation
However, it is more appropriate to think in terms of bolus administration and
constant reassessment.
Clinical Tip
· Although it is possible to perform safe and successful volume resuscitation without the use of
infusion pumps, these devices greatly facilitate acute fluid therapy in smaller dogs and cats. Their
use is often inappropriate initially in medium-to larger-size hypovolaemic dogs (i.e. where the
maximum infusion rate of the pump may be too slow). Most infusion pumps are designed to
facilitate a bolus approach by allowing a set volume of fluid to be infused before an alarm sounds.
· In addition, the use of infusion pumps greatly enhances the reliability, accuracy and safety of more
chronic rehydration and maintenance fluid therapy. In the author's opinion, access to adequate
numbers of infusion pumps is extremely important in emergency practice.
given an initial intravenous isotonic crystalloid bolus of 40 ml/kg over 20 minutes:
· At the end of the initial bolus, the dog's perfusion parameters should be reassessed. If
the dog is now normovolaemic, no further boluses are administered but the dog
continues to be monitored closely for deterioration; if there has been some
improvement but the dog remains hypovolaemic, a second smaller bolus (e.g. 20
ml/kg) is administered, perhaps over a longer period of time; if there has been no
improvement, another 40 ml/kg bolus is administered.
· At the end of the second bolus, the dog's perfusion parameters should be reassessed.
If the dog is now normovolaemic, no further boluses are administered but the dog
continues to be monitored closely for deterioration; if there has been some
improvement but the dog remains hypovolaemic, a third smaller bolus (e.g. 10 ml/kg)
             
     n      
appropriate.
· This process is repeated continually until the dog's perfusion parameters reach end-
points suggestive of adequate perfusion and it is on an appropriate rate and
combination of fluid therapy to maintain this perfusion.
· The regular monitoring must then continue to detect any sudden deterioration.
· If the patient's presenting history and subsequent assessment suggest concurrent
dehydration, this must be taken into account with respect to on-going fluid therapy
(see below).
Clinical Tip
· There is no standard fluid combination, rate or period of administration in the treatment of
hypovolaemia. Depending on the individual patient in question and the nature of the problems, acute
volume expansion can be achieved in a matter of minutes using isotonic crystalloids alone or can
take several hours and require the use of two or more types of parenteral fluid. Fluid therapy must
therefore always be tailored to the needs of the individual patient
Dehydration
The basic objective in the treatment of dehydration is to replenish the deficit from all
fluid compartments that are affected. A significant proportion of dehydrated animals
have minimal intravascular deficits (i.e. they are not hypovolaemic) and the aim of
fluid therapy in these cases is therefore to replace fluid losses from the extravascular
(interstitial and intracellular) compartments.
Dehydration is corrected over a longer period of time than hypovolaemia - typically
12-48 hours depending on the severity and rate of onset - and is usually achieved
through the uise of replacement isotonic crystalloids alone. In animals that have a
normal intravascular volume, excessively aggressive rehydration will overexpand the
interstitial compartment. This is manifested clinically as increased skin turgor,
chemosis, subcutaneous pitting oedema and pulmonary oedema. Once pulmonary
oedema (i.e. fluid overload of the pulmonary interstitial space) has developed, and
despite the extensive protective lymphatic drainage available, alveolar flooding may
   s  s        
another possible and  extremely serious consequence of overexpansion of  the
interstitial compartment.
How?
Fluid therapy for rehydration is also usually given by the intravenous route. In some
cases, the use of the subcutaneous route may be a reasonable option. Examples
include:
· Animals with mild dehydration
· Animals whose owners are unable (or unwilling) to pay for intravenous fluid
therapy
·. Cases where owners are reluctant to leave their pets at the clinic.
Subcutaneous fluid therapy is also used intermittently to provide fluid support in
chronic illnesses such as chronic renal failure. Its sole use is inappropriate in patients
with hypovolaemia as absorption is too slow due to poor peripheral perfusion. An
            
distributed over multiple sites; this clearly is highly dependent on patient compliance.
How much?
            
dehydrated patient over a chosen period of time is:
.
Replacement volume
The volume of fluid required to replace the deficit in a dehydrated animal is calculated
as follows:
Despite the inherent inaccuracies (see Ch. 2), estimating the patient's percentage
dehydration on the basis of physical examination is useful as it allows the above
calculation to be made.
Maintenance requiirement
Clinical Tip
· Maintenance fluid requirements are related to metabolic rate which is a function of body surface
area and varies with species and breed, and especially with age and size. In particular it is important
 to remember that maintenance requirements for puppies, kittens and toy canine breeds are higher
than for adult animals and larger breeds.
• Although formulas are available for calculating maintenance intravenous fluid requirements based
on body weight, there is some disagreement between them and the author prefers a more empirical
approach with regular reassessment.
The commonly cited figures for maintenance crystalloid requirements are 2
ml/kg/hr or 50 ml/kg/day. While these rates may be appropriate for the majority of
fully grown dogs and cats, the notion that all dogs and cats have the same
maintenance fluid requirements is counterintuitive when one considers, for example,
a 3-year-old Great Dane versus a 6-week-old Yorkshire terrier. It is more appropriate
therefore to use a range for fully grown dogs of 1.5 ml/kg/hr (larger dogs) up to 4
ml/kg/hr (very small dogs), and a range for fully grown cats of 2-3 ml/kg/hr
 s        n n  
cats. Maintenance rates as high as 8 ml/kg/hr have been described by some auithors,
for example for paediatric animals of toy breeds. In addition, maintenance
requirements for overweight animals should be calculated using a reduced body
weight.
On-going losses
The practicalities of accurately quantifying on-going losses (e.g. vomitus, diarrhoea)
in addition to those assumed in maintenance requirements preclude this as a realistic
option in most settings. In order to allow initial fluid requirements to be calculated, a
uiseful technique is to estimate the contribution from these on-going losses in terms of
multiples of the patient's maintenance requirements. Thus some animals may have no
additional contribution here; a vomiting animal may have an extra maintenance
requirement added; and an animal with profuse vomiting and diarrhoea may have or
more extra maintence requirement added to the initial calculation.
For how long?
The initial fluid plan calculated for a dehydrated patient is an approximation and
must be approached dynamically; both the rate and the type of fluid used need to be
· Changes in both the physical examination and emergency database parameters of
hydration including body weight
· Whether the animal is eating/drinking (if allowed)
· A subjective assessment of the degree of on-going losses.
Due attention must also be paid to the provision of supplementary potassium in
particular in appropriate cases.
Fluid Therapy Case Examples
The rest of this chapter will use some common canine and feline emergencies to
highlight situations in which a more conservative approach is recommended in the
aggressive fluid resuscitation of hypovolaemic patients. There is no set protocol for
fluid therapy in any given situation and what follows are merely suggestions intended
as a guide and to prompt discussion of other available options in each case. In
addition to the case examples presented here, it is noteworthy that recent or active
haemorrhage may be a reason to be more conservative with fluid therapy as
overzealous volume expansion has the potential to exacerbate bleeding by disrupting
blood clots at sites of haemostasis. Providing only sufficient fluid therapy to restore
perfusion to minimum end-points may be most sensible in these cases but it must be
remembered that restoration of effective circulating volume is essential.
Use of parenteral fluid therapy is further demonstrated by the case examples
referred to throughout the book.
Case example 1 - pulmonary pathology
Clinical Tip
·• Pulmonary parenchymal pathology, including pulmonary contusions (see Ch. 28), is a reason to be
more conservative with fluid therapy. Despite the extensive lymphatic drainage available,
pathological lungs may be more prone to oedema than healthy lungs. Animals suffering from severe
trauma (thoracic or nonthoracic) or from other causes of shock may also develop acute lung injury
(ALI) or acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS); this is especially true for cats.
Presenting Signs and Case History
 A 3-year-old male neutered domestic short hair cat presented shortly after a suspected motor
vehicle accident. The incident was estimated to have occurred within the 2 hours prior to
presentation. The cat was initially found collapsed under a hedge. He had subsequently been seen to
take a few steps but was reportedly very lame in his pelvic limbs. No other significant preceding
history was reported.
Major body system examination
On presentation the cat was depressed and recumbent. Cardiovascular examination
revealed a heart rate of 150 beats per minute and neither a gallop sound nor a heart
murmur was detected. Both femoral pulses were palpable but very weak and dorsal
pedal pulses were not identified. Mucous membranes were pale, dry and cold to touch,
and capillary refill time was 2 seconds. The extremities were also cold.
Respiratory rate was 50 breaths per minute with a shallow, nonparadoxical and
regular pattern. Lung sounds were diffusely harsh and bilaterally symmetrical. The
pupils were equal and reactive and there was no external evidence of significant head
trauma. No gait assessment was made at this stage. Abdominal palpation revealed a
small soft bladder and was unremarkable. There was evidence of urine staining
around the perineum and the cat was moderately hypothermic (rectal temperature
35.5°C).
Assessment
       e    
with a low index of suspicion for raised intracranial pressure. Some respiratory
compromise was present and pulmonary contusions were considered the most likely
cause of the harsh lung sounds.
Management discussion
There is no information in this cat's history prior to the traumatic incident that would
significant preceding history and the time scale in question do not support the
likelihood of pre-existing dehydration.
The suspicion of pulmonary contusions (see Ch. 28) is a reason to be more
conservative with resuscitative fluid therapy in this case. The aim of fluid therapy
crystalloid solution is an appropriate choice in this cat but a conservative initial bolus
another 5-10 ml/kg isotonic crystalloid bolus may be given and the cat reassessed.
If significant hypovolaemia still persists after the second crystalloid bolus, the next
   )       s    
colloid bolus. This may reduce the risk of expanding the pulmonary interstitial space
to the point of alveolar flooding, which would exacerbate the existing respiratory
compromise from contusions. However, in some types of lung pathology, the
puilmonary vascuilature can become leakier to colloid molecules despite their large size.
Once the colloid molecules move into the pulmonary interstitium they may worsen
pulmonary oedema and may persist there for some time. Nevertheless, it is not
possible to predict in advance whether this will occur and it is therefore recommended
    s  s     si  s 
respiratory status worsens as a resuilt.
    s  s      
Conservative fluid therapy may need to be restarted for any procedures subsequently
Maintenance fluids (including potassium supplementation) may be required if the cat
is anorexic while hospitalized.
Intravenous fluids should be warmed to body temperature prior to administration
However, it is important to start fluid therapy before other warming measures are
instituted. This is because warming a hypothermic (and therefore peripherally
existing hypotension. Oxygen supplementation is recommended and opioid analgesia
is mandatory in this cat.
Case example 2 - cardiac disease, intracranial hypertension
Clinical Tip
 Cardiac disease is a reason to be more conservative with resuscitative fluid therapy. Animals with
 a  aa na  ss s m ado c ae ssi aa a  s
likely to develop congestive heart failure (see Ch. 31).
* The majority of dogs with clinically significant heart disease will have a murmur on auscultation
However, failure to identify a murmur or gallop sound, especially in cats, does not rule out clinically
 significant heart disease.
Clinical Tip
 Raised intracranial pressure (ICP) is a reason to be more conservative with resuscitative fluid
therapy. Causes of raised ICp include head trauma, severe seizuring and intracranial mass lesions.
Overzealous intravenous fluid therapy can lead to cerebral oedema and thereby exacerbate existing
raised intracranial pressure. However, the correction of hypovolaemia and consequence systemic
hypoperfusion must take precedence over concerns regarding intracranial hypertension. This is
because maintaining adequate cerebral perfusion is the priority and this is highly dependent on
systemic arterial blood pressure (see Ch. 28).
 Presenting Signs and Case History
 A 10-year-old male neutered Cavalier King Charles spaniel presented 30 minutes after a motor
vehicle accident witmessed by the owner. The dog fell over briefly as a result but no loss of
consciousness was observed. He had been very subdued since the incident. The owner also reported
that the dog had been less keen to exercise for a few weeks and was panting more during his walks.
He had also been coughing intermittently although this had not become noticeably worse. His
appetite had been variable but there had been no other clinical signs.
Major body system examination
On  presentation  the dog  was markedly  depressed.  Cardiovascular examination
revealed a heart rate of 140 beats per minute and a grade IV/VI systolic murmur with
the point of maximal intensity over the mitral valve region. Femoral pulses were
hyperdynamic and dorsal pedal pulses were readily palpable. Mucous membranes were
mildly hyperaemic with a capillary refill time of 1 second and the dog's extremities
were normal to the touch. Respiratory rate was 20 breaths per minute with normal
pattern and effort, and lung field auscultation was unremarkable. Gait assessment was
not made at this stage.
Anisocoria was present with slow but intact pupillary light reflexes (both direct and
consensual); bilateral menace responses were identified. There was left-sided scleral
haemorrhage but no blood in the left ear canal and no readily palpable skull fractures.
Abdominal palpation was nonpainful with a moderate size bladder palpable and rectal
temperature was mildly reduced (37.7°C).
Assessment
The dog was assessed as mildly hypovolaemic with an inappropriately depressed
hypovolaemia/hypoperfusion alone. This finding, supported by the anisocoria and
pain. However, the possibility of pre-existing cardiac insufficiency could not be
excluded and it was possible that the dog had had a resting tachycardia in the weeks
prior to this incident.
Management discussion
This dog is of a breed that is predisposed to mitral valve disease and his reported
history raises the suspicion of this becoming clinically significant. It is difficuilt to
know how important the heart disease is in the dog's clinical presentation.
Commencing acute volume expansion using an isotonic crystalloid solution is an
option in this dog. However, the benefits of restoring euvolaemia and thereby
optimizing cerebral perfusion have to be balanced with the possibility of clinically
significant cardiac disease. If the dog was suitably compliant, conscious thoracic
left atrial enlargement and pulmonary congestion and oedema. If facilities and
expertise allow, echocardiography to evaluate left atrial size more accurately would be
very uisefuil.
crystalloid rate of 3 ml/kg/hr rather than bolus therapy. This is especially true if blood
pressure measurement was possible and the dog was found to be normotensive.
        
rate adjusted as appropriate. Given the greater concerns in this case with respect to
fluid overload, intravenous fluid therapy should be discontinued as soon as possible.
Although this dog does not have any pre-existing dehydration that requires
replacement, maintenance fluids may be required if he remains depressed for an
be considered and a hypotonic solution such as 0.45% sodium chloride may be more
appropriate if  available.  Oxygen  supplementation  is recommended  and opioid
analgesia is mandatory.
Case example 3 - rehydration
Presenting Signs and Case History
A 3-month-old male entire Staffordshire bull terrier (4 kg) presented with a 2-day history of
vomiting and diarrhoea. The puppy had not eaten anything at all for 12 hours and although
    ss   n s   
four times each day. The diarrhoea was occurring with increasing frequency and while watery
initially had progressed to being bloody.
The puppy had been in the owner's possession for 1 week and was acquired from a private family.
He had been appropriately wormed but had not been vaccinated and the owner was unsure regarding
the dam's vaccination status. The owner was unaware of any significant scavenging incidents and the
 puppy had been confined to the house.
Major body system examination
s ss   e sa  a  
examination revealed a heart rate of 130 beats per minute and no murmur, gallop
sound or dysrhythmia was detected. Femoral and dorsal pedal pulses were
unremarkable and mucous membranes were pink and dry with a normal capillary
refill time. Respiratory rate was 30 breaths per minute, and respiratory pattern and
effort and lung field auscultation were unremarkable.
fluid-filled with no normal faeces palpable. A focal lesion suggestive of surgical disease
was not identified. Rectal temperature was 37.5°C and there was fresh blood on the
thermometer.
Skin turgor was markedly reduced.
Assessment
The puppy was assessed on the basis of physical examination findings as being
moderately dehydrated but still normovolaemic. Dehydration was estimated at 8% of
body weight.
Management discussion
The puppy will have salt and water losses affecting both the extravascular and
intravascular compartments and a replacement isotonic crystalloid solution is an
indicated once an emergency database has been obtained. The initial fluid rate for this
puppy is calculated as follows:
Replacement volume
It is decided to replace this deficit over 12 hr
Maintenance requirement
Given this dog's age an estimated maintenance requirement of 4 ml/kg/hr is used:
On-going losses
Given this dog's presenting history, an additional maintenance requirement is added
initially to allow for on-going losses:
The puppy's fluid requirement for the replacement period of 12 hours is therefore:
At the end of the replacement period, the fluid rate shouild be reduced to meet
maintenance and on-going loss requirements. The reader is reminded again that this
  p sn i n p p   n pdiu si  g as
number of assumptions and approximations. The rate should be adjusted as necessary
in accordance with regular assessment of both physical and laboratory parameters.
5
Analgesia for the emergency patient
'An hour of pain is as long as a day of pleasure' (English proverb)
Pain in Companion Animals
The advantages that the ability to feel pain confers with respect to survival are well
recognized. However, on-going pain results in a number of physiological and
psychological responses that are disadvantageous to any animal and especially one
that is affected by illness or injury. These are summarized in Box 5.1.
BOX 5.1 Disadvantages associated with on-going pain
· Unnecessary suffering
• Altered mentation: anxiety, agitation; dullness, depression
· Reduced food intake - may slow recovery
• Prolonged recumbency
· Self-mutilation
· Impaired respiration
* Sensitization to noxious stimuli
Excessive sympathetic stimulation, enhanced catabolism, delayed wound healing.
immune
 suppression
· Inability to monitor patients effectively due to aberrant physiological changes and consequent
clinical findings
Pain assessment
Nursing Aspect
Nurses should be considered central to on-going pain assessment as they typically spend more time
with and around hospitalized patients. They are therefore often better suited to detect changes in
pain status, especially as most of the signs of pain in companion animals are subjective.
The assessment of pain in animals is more difficult and more subjective than in
people and veterinary personnel have to rely much more on a combination of sign
signs that an animal in pain may exhibit depend on various factors, including:
· The source, severity and duration (acute, chronic) of pain
· Individual patient variability - age, species, breed, tolerance, temperament.
Signs consistent with pain are summarized in Box 5.2 in no particular order and it
is important to realize that these signs are derived from both patient observation and
interaction. Painful cats are often much less demonstrative than painful dogs, and
 d  s   a     s n s 
addition, physiological parameters are not consistently reliable as indicators of pain.
BOX 5.2 Signs consistent with pain in dogs and cats
· Consistent response on palpation of painful area
· Poor appetite
· Looking, licking, biting or scratching at painful area; self-mutilation
: Vocalization: dogs - growling, whining, groaning; cats - purring, growling, hissing
· Reduced grooming behaviour
· Altered gait and reluctance to walk
· Abnormal posture (especially cats who often sit with a hunched sternal posture rather than lying
curled in lateral recumbency)
· Reluctance to sleep
· Uncharacteristic behaviour (aggression or affection) towards humans
 Inappropriate urination and/or defecation
 (Unexplained tachycardia, tachypnoea/panting, hypertension, or pupillary dilation)
Clinical Tip
 There are certainly cases where it is not clear whether an animal is in pain. A liberal approach (i.e.
if in doubt, treat for pain) is essential and carries minimal risk when based on good knowledge of
the analgesics currently available. A low testing dose can be given and the patient monitored for a
favourable response.
· The reader is also reminded that cats are not inherently at greater risk of adverse effects from
 analgesics and pain relief is as important in cats as it is in dogs.
The pain pathway
A basic knowledge of the pain pathway is essential to understand the modes of action
of available analgesics and the rationale behind multimodal therapy. The pain
pathway essentially consists of the following.
· Peripheral component:
- Primary afferent nerve fibres that conduct the subsequent signal to the spinal
cord (dorsal horn) or cranial nerve nuclei
 Central component:
- Processing of nociceptive signals (modulation) in the spinal cord
- Further processing in higher centres resulting in conscious perception of pain.
Sensitization
Sensitization (or wind-up) refers to increased sensitivity to noxious stimuli following
injury to either peripheral tissues (causes inflammatory pain) or the central nervous
  a   a    s
· Allodynia: stimuli that are normally innocuous become painful.
Sensitization can occur in either or both of the peripheral and central components
of the pain pathway.
The clinical relevance of sensitization
In practical terms, once sensitization is underway, conscious perception of pain is
greater, it is more difficult to control and higher drug doses are required. It is
therefore preferable to try to prevent pain rather than merely to treat it once it is
     d      
initial presentation. In order to minimize sensitization, pain management should be
instituted as soon as possible and, once the pain is under control, the patient kept on a
level pain-free plateau. All animals going on to have operative procedures performed
noxious stimulation resulting from surgical intervention.
Analgesic Agents
Balanced analgesia involves the use of one or more appropriate analgesics
(multimodal therapy) in an effective dosing regimen given by the appropriate
route(s). Analgesic agents that are commonly available in emergency clinics include:
· Opioids
· Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agents (NSAlAs)
· Local analgesic/anaesthetic agents
· Ketamine
· Medetomidine.
An intuitive approach to pain management is based on thorough initial evaluation
followed by regular reassessment of the patient and adjustment of the treatment
protocol as indicated. This is especially relevant to the use of full agonist opioids
which may be used at highly variable dose rates and dosing frequencies. As described
later in this chapter, nonpharmacological measures are also very important in pain
management.
Opioids
Clinical Tip
· In the author's opinion, all veterinary practices that may see animals in moderate to severe pain
should have a full (pure) opioid agonist available, ideally morphine or methadone. These agents are
 extremely affordable, highly effective, and allow dose titration to effect. Although they need to be
 stored and administered in accordance with regulations for controlled drugs, this should not be
considered an impediment to their use.
Opioids (predominantly) act in the central component of the pain pathway. Most
partial agonists or agonists-antagonists. They are the mainstay of pain management
doses for sedation or anxiolysis. High doses of pure opioids in particular may result in
dysphoria (vocalization, anxiety, restlessness) that can be difficult to differentiate
from on-going pain. Naloxone (or butorphanol) can be used to reverse the effects of
full opioid agonists.
Both respiratory depression and bradycardia are rarely seen as side effects of
          
appropriate opioid administration can normalize respiratory status in such cases.
Until adequately treated, pain can also confuse assessment of other parameters such as
heart rate and blood pressure. Dose rates, routes of administration and dosing
frequencies of opioids in current use in emergency clinics are summarized in Table
5.1.
Table 5.1 Clinical information on opioid analgesics
Drug
DOGS
CATS
Dose/routes of administration
Dosing
Dose/routes ofadministration
Dosing
frequency
frequency
Morphine
0.1-1.0mg/kgslowi.v.,l.m.or s.c.prn,q4hr
0.1-0.5mg/kg slowl.v.,l.m.ors.cprn.q6hr
0.1-0.5mg/kg/hr CRI
0.05-0.2mg/kg/hrCRl
Methadone
0.1-1.0 mgkg slowiv.i.m.or s.c.prn.q4hr
0.1-0.5mg/kg slowi.v.i.m.or s.c.prn.q6hr
Pethidine
2-10mg/kgi.m.
prn,q1-2hr
5-10mg/kgi.m.
prn,q2hr
5-15mg/kgs.c.
8-15mg/kgs.c.
Buprenorphine
0.01-0.02mg/kgi.v,1.m.or s.c.
q6-8hr
0.01-0.02mg/kgLv,i.m.,s.c.or
q6-8hr
o.t.m.
Butorphanol
0.1-0.6mg/kg iv,L.m.or s.c.
prnq1-4hr
0.1-0.6mg/kgi.v,i.m.or s.c.
prn,q1-4hr
0.05-0.2mg/kg/hr CRI
0.05-0.2mg/kg/hr CRI
Naloxone（antagonist)O.01-0.1mg/kg slow1.v.toeffect
prn
0.01-0.1mg/kg slowl.v.toeffect
prn
CRI, constant rate infusion;i.m.,intramuscular I.v,Intravenouso.tm.,oral transmucosal;pn,prore nata (as needed);s.c.
subcutaneous
Morphine
Morphine is a full μ-agonist and remains the gold standard analgesic for moderate to
      o    
administration. In addition to its analgesic effects, morphine is also extremely useful
as an anxiolytic in respiratory distress. Vomiting is more likely than with other
opioids and will further exacerbate raised intracranial or intraocular pressure.
Morphine should therefore be avoided in patients where this is of concern. Rapid
intravenous  administration may  cause signs associated  with histamine release
(transient vasodilation and hypotension) and slow intravenous boluses or a constant
rate infusion are recommended.
Methadone
Methadone is a full μ-agonist that has the same or greater potency as morphine. Its
sedative and dysphoric effects are reportedly less marked than with morphine and it
does not typically induce emesis. Methadone does not cause histamine release
following intravenous administration. In the author's experience, panting (due to
effects on the thermoregulatory centre) occurs much more commonly following
methadone administration in dogs than it does with morphine and this may
complicate clinical assessment.
Buprenorphine
Clinical Tip
· Although buprenorphine may be effective for mild to moderate pain, it has a slow onset of action
   d e        e s p    
such cases.
Buprenorphine is a partial μ-agonist and a K-antagonist. It has a slow onset of
action that is typically up to 45 min and is therefore not useful for rapid management
of pain. Buprenorphine is indicated for mild to moderate pain and appears to be
especially effective as an analgesic in cats. The mixed agonist-antagonist actions of
this opioid mean that doses above a certain level may be progressively less effective
(i.e. buprenorphine has a bell-shaped dose-response curve with a ceiling effect). This
means that in theory there is limited capacity to increase the administered dose of
buprenorphine in an animal that remains painful. However, the ceiling may be higher
than the typical clinical dose range used and this may therefore be more of a
theoretical concern. Furthermore, buprenorphine is reported to have a strong receptor
affinity and in theory clinical doses of alternative opioids are therefore inlikely to be
effective for a variable but lengthy period of time, i.e. until the buprenorphine has
can be used effectively much sooner than traditionally thought possi ble.
Oral (orogastric) buprenorphine preparations are available for people but have not
been widely used in veterinary medicine. However, oral transmucosal administration
of injectable buprenorphine at standard clinical doses results in similar
pharmacokinetics to intravenous administration. The solution is tasteless and does
not typically cauise salivation or nauisea. Oral transmucosal administration of
analgesia at home, either in addition to an NSAIA or where the use of an NSAIA is
inappropriate. The drug is administered under the tongue or in the side of the mouth.
Butorphanol
Buitorphanol is both a μ-antagonist and a K-agonist with an onset of action of 15-20
minutes. Like buprenorphine, its analgesic effect is likely to reach a ceiling as the dose
increases. Clinically, butorphanol seems more useful for its sedative and antitussive
effects than as a potent analgesic. It may also be used to reverse sedation and
respiratory depression associated with full μ-agonist opioid use.
Tramadol
Tramadol is an entirely synthetic centrally acting analgesic that has been widely used
 a     s  m    s
analgesic efficacy is derived from complex interactions between opiate (primarily μ),
serotonin and adrenergic receptor systems. At least  one metabolite (O-
desmethyltramadol; Ml) is significantly active and may be essential in tramadol's
opioid effect. Tramadol is also reported to have antitussive activity.
While a range of adverse effects are theoretically possible, the main clinically
relevant side effects are sedation and nausea. The potential for cardiovascuilar and
respiratory depression  maybe  greater  following parenteral  (intravenous)
administration but is unlikely to be clinically relevant when used judiciously (the
injectable preparation is not currently available in the USA). Naloxone will partially
antagonize the effects of tramadol. The recommended dose range for dogs is 1-5
S              s
data suppoprts starting at the lower end of the dose range and upper end of the dosing
interval.
An oral preparation of tramadol is available that also contains paracetamol
(acetaminophen) - its use should therefore be avoided in cats.
Titration
Clinical Tip
· Pain management should be dynamic and based on regular reassessment. Full opioids - morphine,
methadone - are typically the most appropriate analgesic agents for use in moderate to severe pain.
The initial dose chosen should be guided by the severity of pain identified or suspected; intuitively.
the same dose of the same drug cannot be appropriate in all situations.
· The patient should be reassessed once the drug has had enough time to take effect and additional
 analgesia administered if indicated.
· Clinically significant side effects of full opioids are rare in companion animals that are not under
 general anaesthesia and these concerns should not prevent administration of adequate analgesia.
Animals presenting in pain need to be constantly reassessed following initial
           - s
high index of safety make them highly suitable for titration in severe pain
management.
Constant rate infusions
Constant rate infusions (CRl) of opioids (morphine in particular), as well as ketamine
and lidocaine, are in widespread use in referral emergency centres as they offer clear
   n         g
intravenous access available. CRls avoid the peaks and troughs in plasma drug
concentrations associated with intermittent boluses. They also provide more sensitive
control over the degree of analgesia being provided, thereby avoiding both
    a  ou s a  p d 
administration cannot be employed in the first opinion setting as long as facilities
allow and adequate monitoring is available.
Clinical Tip
· The author would only recommend the use of a constant rate opioid infusion if an infusion pump
or syringe driver is available; without their use, it is very difficult to guarantee a constant rate of
infusion and there are inherent risks of both under-and overdosing.
• When a constant rate infusion is used, the author cannot stress enough the importance of ensuring
 that all calculations are double checked, clearly documented and legible to avoid confusion and
potentially disastrous errors.
Although some institutions use standardized prepared stock solutions of morphine,
lidocaine and ketamine (MLK) for convenience, the author prefers to make up the CRI
solution on an individual patient basis with the initial concentrations being guided by
 n  s s     a     n i 
5.3.
BOX 5.3 Preparation of a morphine, lidocaine and ketamine (MLK) solution for
constant rate infusion
 Patient's name:
Patient's body weight: 20 kg
Initial infusion rate: 1 ml/kg/hr = 20 ml/hr
 1 Select initial dose rates for analgesic agents:
Morphine (10 mg/ml). Initial dose rate: 0.2 mg/kg/hr = 4 mg/hr
Lidocaine (20 mg/ml, i.e. 2%). Initial dose rate: 50 pg/kg/min = 1000 μg/min = 1 mg/min =
60 mg/hr
Ketamine (100 mg/ml). Initial dose rate: 0.5 mg/kg/hr = 10 mg/hr.
2 Select volume of crystalloid to be used and calculate how long this volume will last for:
Volume of crystalloid to be used: 500 ml bag :. 500 ml bag will last for 25 hr (i.e. 500 ml
divided by 20 ml/hr).
3 Calculate volume of analgesic agents required for this period of time, i.e. in this example 25 hr:
(uonos ju/lu 01 Aq papap b 001 'a'1) 1u o1 = b o01 = nu sz x mu/lu t :auyd1on
Lidocaine: 60 mg/hr X 25 hr = 1500 mg = 75 ml (i.e. 1500 mg divided by 20 mg/mL solution)
Ketamine: 10 mg/hr x 25 hr = 250 mg = 2.5 ml (i.e. 250 mg divided by 100 mg/ml solution).
 4 Remove a volume of crystalloid from the bag that is equal to the total volume of analgesic agents
to be added, i.e. in this example 10 + 75 + 2.5 = 87.5 ml.
 5 Add analgesic agents to the crystalloid solution.
 6 Label the MLK solution for infusion clearly with drug concentrations, date, time, name of person
 preparing the solution, and name of person double-checking preparation.
Note: it is extremely important to ensure that two individuals check all of the above calculations
and all of the volumes of analgesic agents and crystalloid removed/added. This safeguard will
hopefully prevent potentially serious errors from occurring.
Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agents
Clinical Tip
· The use of nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agents (NSAIAs) is contraindicated in patients with
hypovolaemia, hypoperfusion from other causes, or dehydration. A large proportion of painful
emergency patients fall into this category and NSAIAs should not be used in the initial management
 of such cases. Depending on the primary disorder, it may be appropriate to administer an NSAIA
following correction of hypoperfusion and dehydration, for example 12-48 hours following initial
 presentation, as long as the patient is stable and there are no other contraindications.
· Other contraindications for NSAlA administration are renal or hepatic insufficiency, haemostatic
abnormalities, evidence of or significant concern for gastroduodenal ulceration, and concurrent
corticosteroid administration.
           
minimize peripheral sensitization. They may be useful in moderate to severe pain and
overall analgesia achieved is greater when these agents are used together than when
either is used alone. Multimodal therapy may also allow lower doses of each agent to
be used, thereby reducing the risk of side effects.
types. COx-1 (constitutive, housekeeping) is variably found in all tissues of the body
and is involved in the production of prostaglandins that are essential for a variety of
normal fuinctions. Levels of COX-2 (induci ble) on the other hand are typically very low
but increase during tissue injury. It is primarily responsible for the production of
S    s      
meloxicam) have more selective inhibition of COx-2 versus COx-1 and may be
associated with fewer side effects and a safer therapeutic index.
Side effects/contraindications
The two most commonly recognized side effects and/or contraindications of NsAIA
use are gastroduodenal injury and renal injury.
Gastroduodenal injury
and their impaired production therefore increases the likelihood of mucosal injury
(haemorrhage, erosions, ulceration) in an already compromised tissue. Intuitively
therefore NSAlAs are contraindicated in animals with gastrointestinal abnormalities.
However, there are patients with gastrointestinal signs in which the use of an NSAIA
to manage discomfort associated with chronic osteoarthritis (for which opioids are
less effective). Considerations in such cases include the following:
· Hypovolaemia or dehydration should be treated before NSAIA therapy.
· An agent reported to be COx-1 sparing should be chosen.
· The drug should be given at a low dose and systemically if possible (mucosal lesions
of the agent at the site of the tablet or liquid); oral administration should be
accompanied by food.
· Gastroprotectants (e.g. omeprazole, ranitidine) should be used preemptively.
Renal injury
Prostaglandins are not critically involved in renal haemodynamics in normal healthy
animals. However, in response to a decrease in renal blood flow, locally acting
prostaglandins serve to protect renal perfusion. Their inhibition by NSAIA therapy can
therefore result in renal ischaemia and insufficiency. This is applica ble to both older
NSAlAs and newer agents with more selective COX-2 inhibition as constitutive COX-2
  a    n sd   a  d ss
decreased include those with hypovolaemia, cardiac insufficiency and pre-existing
renal disease.
Other side effects of NSAlAs described include effects on the liver and interference
with coagulation (see Ch. 30).
Paracetamol (acetaminophen)
Clinical Tip
· Paracetamol (acetaminophen) administration at any dose should never be recommended in cats due
to the reduced capacity for glucuronidation in this species and therefore significantly increased risk
of toxicity.
Paracetamol (acetaminophen) is not commonly used therapeutically in veterinary
medicine due to the widespread availability of licensed veterinary products that are
both effective and have been subjected to extensive clinical trialling. However,
paracetamol is widely available from numerous outlets and frequently present within
the home of many pet owners. It is therefore common in emergency practice either to
receive enquiries about administering paracetamol to dogs and cats or to see animals
to which this agent has been administered.
Paracetamol may be a useful (and possibly underused) analgesic in dogs but it
should never be administered to cats at any dose. It is an NSAIA and interferes with
prostaglandin synthesis but does not work  via inhibition of  COX-1 or COX-2.
Although this makes it a poor antiinflammatory agent, it does result in minimal
gastrointestinal side effects. Paracetamol can therefore be used either in addition to
poorly tolerated. As paracetamol interferes with prostaglandin production, it should be
avoided in hypoperfused or dehydrated patients. Hepatotoxicity is a potential side
effect of this drug. The recommended dose range in dogs is 10-15 mg/kg p.o. q 8-12
hr.
Local anaesthetic agents
 s  e         o
the central nervous system and prevent central sensitization. Longer-acting agents in
particular (e.g. bupivacaine, ropivacaine) are used extensively in referral centres in a
num ber of ways, including:
 Epidural administration (often combined with morphine)
· Intrapleural administration via thoracostomy tubes following thoracotomy
· Local and regional nerve blocks
· CR1 of 2% lidocaine solution without adrenaline (epinephrine) for analgesic
purposes in dogs (see Box 5.3). Lidocaine infusion may result in significant
cardiovascular depression in cats and is not recommended unless essential for
controlling ventricular dysrhythmia.
While these uses may not be applicable to most nonreferral emergency patients,
local anaesthetic agents can be employed to good effect in this setting.
Lidocaine
Lidocaine has a shorter duration of action (1-2 hr) than other agents but a rapid
onset of action (can be as quick as 3-5 min). It is the most widely available local
anaesthetic agent and may be used for emergency cases in a number of ways. For
example:
1 Topical analgesia for wounds: while an emergency patient is undergoing initial
stabilization, sterile gauze swabs can be soaked in a solution of 2% lidocaine mixed
with normal saline (o.9% sodium chloride) and applied to wounds which are then
wrapped in cling film pending management at the appropriate time (Figure 5.1).
Lidocaine can also be mixed with the gel that is applied to the wound prior to
clipping. Maximum recommended doses are 12 mg/kg in dogs and 6 mg/kg in cats. A
5% lidocaine patch (Lidoderm?, Endo Pharmaceuticals) is available and has been
used for dogs and cats with severe skin abrasions, severe bruising and surgical
wounds. However, the author has no experience with its use.
2 EMLA? cream 5% (AstraZeneca); contains 2.5% lidocaine and 2.5% prilocaine: can
be applied to the skin prior to intravenous catheter placement or venepuncture.
Depending on the site, a light occlusive dressing may be appropriate while
anaesthesia takes effect. EMLA? cream is especially useful for example in puppies and
kittens, in stressed animals and in rabbits. The author also tries to use this product as
much as possible as a general rule in all cats. EMLA? cream can also be applied to
wound edges to reduce irritation and thereby patient interference. Clinical experience
suggests that onset of action in some cases is significantly shorter than the commonly
  s     r s s  
following topical application.
3 Lidocaine spray: in addition to facilitating endotracheal intubation of cats,
proprietary lidocaine spray (e.g. Intubeaze?, Dechra Veterinary Products) may have
diverse uses for mucosal desensitization, for example to facilitate nasal catheter
         
alternatively, it can be constituted by mixing 2% lidocaine solution, without
adrenaline (epinephrine), for injection with a sterile lubricant. This is then used
topically, for example prior to insertion of nasal catheters or urinary catheterization.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.1
(a) Severe wound to the distal right pelvic limb of a cat. (b) Following application of
sterile swabs soaked in a solution of 2% lidocaine and normal saline, the wound is wrapped in cling
film.
Ketamine
Ketamine is a dissociative anaesthetic agent that is used most commonly for sedation
(see Ch. 39). However, it also has analgesic properties and blocks (and potentially
()        s
receptor antagonist. It is especially effective in this respect when combined with a full
opioid agonist and may be used as a CR1 (see Box 5.3). The recommended dose for
loading dose followed by a constant rate infusion of 0.1-1 mg/kg/hr.
Medetomidine
Medetomidine is an alpha2-adrenergic agonist that is also used most commonly for its
sedative properties (see Ch. 39). This agent does, however, also possess potent
microdoses recommended here,  cardiovascular  and respiratory  effects  should be
minimal and can be reversed by atipamezole if necessary. The sedative effects are
likely to be advantageous for patient management in those cases in which this agent
may be employed as an analgesic. Recommended doses for medetomidine when used
for analgesic purposes are 2-5 pg/kg slow i.v. or i.m. as needed (often q 30-90
minutes but potentially much longer if an opioid is used concurrently); alternatively,
a CRI of 1-3 μg/kg/hr may be used.
Sedation
Although sedation is not a substitute for pain relief, it can be invaluable in improving
the welfare of animals that are especially anxious or distressed, allowing them to rest
and to utilize their metabolic reserves for recovery rather than coping behaviour. In
cases in which opioids being used for analgesia do not provide sufficient sedation,
other agents such as acepromazine and benzodiazepines are options.
Nonpharmacological Measures
Nursing Aspect
Although analgesic agents are the mainstay of pain management, it is essential not to overlook the
important contribution of good nursing care and other nonpharmacological measures. These
measures reduce stress, improve patient wellbeing. and contribute significantly to pain management
Some of these measures are listed in Box 5.4.
BOX 5.4 Nonpharmacological measures of importance in pain management
· TLC, gentle handling (independent of interventions) and regular grooming
· Providing a suitable environment (some animals prefer a dimly lit quiet environment, others like
to be distracted)
· Tempting to eat if appropriate
· Ensuring bedding is dry, clean and comfortable
• Providing a familiar blanket or toy from home
· Allowing or preventing visits by the owner depending on patient response
· Providing cats with a box or carrier to sleep in
· Helping dogs out to urinate/defecate
· Bladder management as necessary
· Coordinating interventions (e.g. venepuncture) to minimize the number of painful procedures
performed
· Grouping treatments to allow undisturbed rest time
· Removing unnecessary catheters, tubing and bandages as soon as possible
· Using warm compresses or cold packs if appropriate
6
Oxygen supplementation
Clinical Tip
· Although there are some conditions that may not respond, the provision of oxygen supplementation
initially to any patient with respiratory distress is intuitive. Oxygen supplementation may also be
essential to animals presenting with disease processes affecting other major body systems as these
 can also impair oxygenation.
· The author would strongly encourage a liberal approach to the use of oxygen supplementation - if
in doubt, provide supplemental oxygen.
Indications for Oxygen Supplementation
Oxygenation may be impaired via a number of mechanisms (ventilation-perfusion
mismatch, hypoventilation, diffusion impairment, intrapulmonary or cardiovascular
shunt); more than one mechanism can, and often does, occuir in the same patient at
the same time. Oxygenation may be compromised in a large variety of disorders
affecting the respiratory, cardiovascular and neuromuscular systems in particular.
 i         
concentrations are provided for a sustained period of at least 24 hours), and the
author would strongly encourage a liberal approach to its use (bearing potential
financial constraints in mind).
(i.e. trial therapy). However, animals in need of oxygen supplementation may be
identified and monitored more objectively through the use of pulse oximetry (or
preferably arterial blood gas analysis if available). Pulse oximetry measures saturation
of arterial haemoglobin with oxygen (SpO2) which should be more than 95% in
normal dogs and cats on room air.
Methods of Oxygen Supplementation
A number of oxygen supplementation techniques have been widely described that
differ in terms of their cost, technical ease and efficiency. The method used is
determined by both patient-related (level and duration of supplementation required,
compliance, size) and nonpatient-related (available facilities, clinical expertise,
financial constraints) factors. Methods of supplementation include:
· Flow-by oxygen
· Mask
· Oxygen collar (using an Elizabethan collar)
· Nasal cannulae (prongs)
· Nasal/nasopharyngeal catheters
· Oxygen cage
· (Transtracheal oxygen)
· (Endotracheal intubation).
Clinical Tip
· Regardless of the method of supplementation used, oxygen should be humidified if possible prior
to delivery if supplementation continues for more than a few hours
Flow-by oxygen
technique used in emergency patients while major body system examination is
out. However, it is noteworthy that some animals, cats in particular, do better if
placed in an oxygen cage first instead (depends on underlying disorder). Flow-by
oxygen supplementation is usually only used short-term as it is wasteful. Some
P         
restraint, and it is clearly important not to stress these patients further.
Mask supplementation
Oxygen supplementation using a mask is another readily available technique that
allows access to the patient. This technique is typically only used short-term and many
of the same comments apply as for flow-by supplementation. In particular, some
animals are very intolerant of having a mask placed over their muzzle and this should
never be forced upon them. In addition, it must be remembered that panting is the
major means of cooling in dogs. Placing a mask over a panting dog's mouth can result
in a marked increase in humidity and lead to severe hyperthermia with potentially
disastrous consequences. Although it reduces the inhaled oxygen concentration that
can be achieved, masks may therefore need to be only loosely applied in some cases.
Oxygen collar
An oxygen collar is one means of providing more long-term oxygen supplementation,
especially to cats and small dogs. A rigid Elizabethan collar is applied and the front of
the collar is covered with cling film or a similar transparent wrap that is taped in
place; it is important not to cover the whole of the front to allow the collar to vent and
prevent the animal from overheating. Oxygen tubing is then passed into the collar
from the rear and the tubing is taped to the inside of the collar to secure it in place.
Humidified oxygen is delivered at a higher flow rate initially (e.g. 2 l/min) and then
reduced (e.g. to 1 l/min) once the collar has been filled. The author has achieved good
results with this technique, which also allows on-going access to the patient.
Nasal cannullae (prongs)
Nasal cannulae (nasal prongs) for human use (e.g. Venticaire?, Flexicare Medical Ltd,
Mountain Ash, UK) are available in a variety of sizes (Figuire 6.l) that work well for
some dogs. They are generally tolerated sufficiently well following application of local
anaesthetic drops to the nostrils (Figure 6.2). Humidified oxygen is provided at an
initial rate of 50-150 ml/kg/min. Nasal cannulae are less effective in dogs that are
panting. Although easy to apply, nasal prongs must be checked regularly as they are
very easily dislodged.
Figure 6.1
 Human paediatric and adult nasal cannulae.
Figure6.2
Labrador retriever with nasal cannulae in situ.
Nasal/nasopharyngeal catheters
Unilateral or bilateral indwelling nasal catheters (Figure 6.3) are used less frequently
nowadays with the availability of nasal cannulae but they remain invaluable in a
proportion of patients. In general the author reserves nasal catheters for dogs that are
poorly tolerant of nasal prongs and sometimes dogs in need of long-term
supplementation that are being sedated or anaesthetized for another procedure (i.e. so
as not to waste the episode of chemical restraint). Nasal catheter placement is a
 n    s s      a
sedation may be required.
Figure6.3
Labrador retriever with unilateral indwelling nasal catheter.
Oxygen cage
Big sophisticated oxygen cages that allow the percentage of oxygen supplementation
as well as environmental temperature and humidity to be controlled are found in a
       
levels of inspired oxygen concentration than can be achieved with other methods. A
the patient regularly without causing repeated decreases in the environmental oxygen
concentration. On the other hand, in some cases this lack of interaction is in fact
desirable as long as the patient can be monitored closely by other means (e.g.
observational, ideally using monitoring equipment as well). Oxygen cages are also not
           
general.
Oxygen cages offer an ideal way of providing oxygen supplementation for initial
stabilization to some animals presenting in respiratory distress without the need for
manual restraint. This is especially the case for dyspnoeic cats and the author
           s
presentation prior to further intervention, with close monitoring throughout. It must
be remembered  that some causes  of respiratory  distress  will  be minimally  or
in all cases. The decision is made on an individual case basis and other interventions
such as thoracocentesis or sedation may be more helpful.
Improvised oxygen cages can be created using a human neonatal incubator or by
              
kennel; alternatively, a cat carrier or small puppy crate can be wrapped in cling film.
B d            i  
similar garbage bag, tie the bag, and pipe oxygen through a hole cut into the side.
However, the author would not recommend the use of this technique unless a
(relatively) transparent bag can be used as the patient is otherwise completely out of
Sight.
More recently the Buster ICU cage (Kruuse UK Ltd, Leeds, UK) has become available
problem.
Figu1re6.4
Buster ICU cage. (Kruuse UK Ltd, Leeds, UK)
Clinical Tip
· The provision of oxygen supplementation to panting dogs can be difficult. These dogs are
  an n n  ps    n  
limited use. Nasopharyngeal catheters may potentially be more effective as the oxygen is delivered
closer to the site of communication between the oral and nasal cavities but this is debatable.
        a    
supplementation is not therefore dependent on whether the animal is breathing predominantly
through the nose or mouth. However, hyperthermia can be a significant problem when panting dogs
sop asanq oi ls ooi ane saeo uaxo pasao1d sou pe saseo asaxo u pauo ae
 Transtracheal oxygen supplementation provides a possible effective solution as the oxygen is
delivered lower down in the respiratory tract; however, it is technically more demanding to perform
and more intensive to maintain.
Animals that remain severely dyspnoeic or have an SpO2 of less than 90% despite
aggressive oxygen supplementation are candidates for anaesthesia, endotracheal
intubation and ventilation. However, in the absence of facilities to provide and
maintain mechanical ventilation, the practical implications of this intervention need
to be carefully considered. If affordable, referral should be considered but
transportation should only be undertaken following as much stabilization as possible
and preferably once arrangements to provide oxygen supplementation en route have
been made.
Section 2
Problem-Orientated Approach
7
Abnormal urine or urination
A number of different terms are in use clinically to describe signs exhibited by
animals with abnormal urine or urination and the following is the author's
interpretation of these terms:
· Dysuria: painful urination
· Stranguria: straining to urinate (usually painful)
(      ( s  
· Pigmenturia: grossly discoloured urine
· Periuria: urination in inappropriate location
Dysuria, Stranguria and Pollakiuria
Dysuria, stranguria and pollakiuria are often seen in combination and are a relatively
common cluster of signs in emergency patients, especially cats. These signs generally
suggest inflammation or irritability of the lower urinary tract (see Ch. 36).
Haematuria
Macroscopic haematuria may also occur as a result of an abnormality in the lower
lrinary tract but can be associated with a primary disorder of the kidneys or ureters.
It is also important to remember that gross haematuria may also be the result of a
systemic  coagulopathy  (e.g.  immune-mediated  thrombocytopenia,  secondary  to
angiostrongylosis).  Macroscopic  haematuria  may  manifest simply  as grossly
discoloured urine or fresh blood may be more obviously visible, including as blood
clots. The different appearances are variably associated with lesions lower down or
higher up in the urinary tract. In addition, blood at the beginning of urination may
indicate a disease process in the urethra or genital tract, while blood at the end of or
            
urinary tract (kidneys or ureters).
      s  s   
sediment examination may be required to identify occult blood.
Pigmenturia
While it is not typically possible to make specific diagnoses on the basis of urine
discoloration, the gross appearance may be suggestive of certain disorders.
Haematuria, haemoglobinuria and myoglobinuria are variably associated with urine
that is pink, red, red-brown or brown in appearance (see Box 3.3). Dipsticks are
unable to differentiate haematuria, haemoglobinuria and myoglobinuria; haematuria
and haemoglobinuria can be differentiated by sediment examination.
Methaemoglobinuria  (e.g. paracetamol  (acetaminophen)  intoxication)  is also
associated with brown urine. Significant bilirubinuria is associated with orangey
urine. Mild to moderate bilirubinuria may be normal in dogs, especially males, but is
haemolysis, hepatobiliary disorders, pyrexia and starvation. Cloudy urine is typically
the result of pyuria, crystalluria or muicus.
8
Acute abdomen The term acute abdomen refers to a
syndrome that involves the acute onset of clinical signs
secondary to an intra-abdominal disorder which
typically has the potential to be fatal. In a significant
proportion of these cases, abdominal pain is a strong
feature but may be harder to detect in cats. There are a
large number of potential causes of acute abdomen,
many of which require emergency surgical intervention
following stabilization of major body system
abnormalities. An important part of the early
management of a patient with acute abdomen is to
determine whether emergency surgical intervention is
required. Some of the more common causes of acute
abdomen are listed in Box 8.1.
BOX 8.1 Causes of acute abdomen
Surgical emergencies
· Gastric dilatation ± volvulus (GDV) · Septic peritonitis, e.g. due to:- Gastrointestinal tract
rupture/perforation - Dehiscence of surgical gastrointestinal tract wound - Uterine rupture -
Prostatic abscess rupture
· Intestinal obstruction (complete or partial) · Intussusception· Penetrating abdominal wound ·
Abdominal bite injury/crush injury· Uroabdomen · Urethral obstruction if catheterization is
unsuccessful · Pyometra - usually less urgent if open · Dystocia if medical management ineffective or
contraindicated · Bile peritonitis · Splenic torsion • Strangulated hernia · Intractable haemorrhage ·
Mesenteric torsion
Nonsurgical disorders
· Pancreatitis· Gastroenteritis, especially haemorrhagic gastroenteritis (HGE),
hepatitis/cholangiohepatitis · Pyelonephritis
Acute Abdomen Look-Alikes
Acute abdomen can be mistaken for a small number of other conditions, most notably
painful spinal disorders and hypoadrenocorticism (Addison's disease).
Spinal pain
In some animals, especially smaller ones, it can be difficult to differentiate abdominal
pain from spinal (especially thoracolumbar) pain and the author is aware of animals
with spinal disease that have undergone negative exploratory laparotomy following
misdiagnosis.
Signalment, history, physical examination and diagnostic findings are often
helpful in differentiating acute abdomen from spinal disease. In particular, animals
with uncomplicated spinal disease are unlikely to show marked cardiovascular
compromise that is a common feature of acute abdomen. Likewise animals with acuite
abdomen may be collapsed or weak but they are unlikely to show localized
neurological signs.
Clinical Tip
· Although it may be difficult in smaller animals, it is important to try to palpate the abdomen
without applying pressure over the spine with the thumbs.
Hypoadrenocorticism (Addison's disease)
Hypoadrenocorticism can be hard to differentiate from acute abdomen. Animals
suffering from an acute Addisonian crisis may have a history of gastrointestinal signs,
which is a common feature of acute abdomen. An acute Addisonian crisis almost by
definition involves potentially marked cardiovascular compromise, and abdominal
pain may also be a feature of this disease. Signalment, history and astute diagnostic
investigations may be helpful here.
Acute diarrhoea
Acute diarrhoea is a frequently encountered clinical sign in emergency medicine.
The majority of causes of acute diarrhoea relate primarily to the intestinal tract
although  small  intestinal diarrhoea  in  particular  may be associated  with
extraintestinal causes. There are a large number of causes of acute diarrhoea and
 xo  s  ss   ns    a n a
and 9.2. Clearly some of these conditions may also cause, or even be more frequently
associated with, chronic diarrhoea.
BOX 9.1  Causes of acute small intestinal diarrhoea
Intestinal disease
· Dietary indiscretion
· Food intolerance
· Food allergy
• Infectious disorders (bacterial, viral, parasitic, protozoal)
· Foreign body ingestion
· Intoxication
* Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD)
• Canine haemorrhagic gastroenteritis (HGE)
· Intussusception
· Neoplasia
Extraintestinal disease
· Acute pancreatitis
· Hepatic disease
· Renal disease
· Hypoadrenocorticism (Addison's disease)
* Hyperthyroidism (cats)
BOX 9.2 Causes of acute large intestinal diarrhoea
· Dietary indiscretion
· Food intolerance
· Food allergy
• Infectious disorders (bacterial, parasitic)
· Foreign body ingestion
· Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD)
· Neoplasia
Features used to distinguish small and large intestinal diarrhoea are listed in Box
9.3 but a definitive patient assessment should be made cautiously on the basis of the
type of diarrhoea alone and both types may occur in the same patient (e.g. with
diffuse inflammatory bowel disease). Animals with haemorrhagic watery diarrhoea
are likely to be suffering from small intestinal disease (especially canine haemorrhagic
gastroenteritis or parvovirus) but short transit time prevents the formation of melaena
(i.e. as there is insufficient time for bacteria to break down haemoglobin).
BOX 9.3 Distinguishing features of small versus large intestinal diarrhoea
Small intestinal diarrhoea
· Normal to slightly increased frequency of defecation
· Increased faecal volume
· Watery/fluid consistency
· Tenesmus rare
• Blood (melaena) and mucus rare/occasional
· Weight loss common
Large intestinal diarrhoea
· Increased frequency and urgency of defecation
· Small amount passed each time (overall volume may be normal)
· Soft consistency
· Tenesmus typical
• Blood (fresh) and mucus common
 Weight loss occasional
Possible iatrogenic causes of diarrhoea as a side effect of drug therapy must also be
considered.
Nursing Aspect
  s aa  o n s e    a  sg
diarrhoea and the duty nurse is often the person from whom this initial advice is obtained. Acute
diarrhoea is often the result of dietary indiscretion or food intolerance and may be self-limiting
without the need for veterinary intervention. The recommendation to examine the animal at the clinic
should be guided by the owner's wishes but also after obtaining adequate information with respect to:
• The animal's current status
· The nature of the diarrhoea
· The duration, frequency and severity of diarrhoea
· Any known history of dietary indiscretion, especially with respect to foreign bodies and
intoxication.
In the author's opinion it is reasonable to recommend withholding food for a short
period (e.g. 12-24 hours) with continued monitoring at home if the animal remains
relatively bright, is tolerant of water, and especially where there is a suspicion of
dietary indiscretion not relating to a foreign body. An easily digestible food can then
be introduced, feeding small amounts frequently. Owners should be advised to contact
the clinic again should the animal's condition deteriorate, at which time examination
can be arranged.
Approach to Diarrhoea
Signalment
Signalment may allow certain differential diagnoses to be viewed with a lesser or
greater index of suspicion. For example, younger animals are more likely to present
with dietary indiscretion, foreign body ingestion, or infectious diarrhoea including
intestinal helminthiasis.
History
A thorough history is mandatory in all animals with diarrhoea, although the timing
should be guided by the stability of the patient. It is important to try to determine
from the owner's description whether small or large intestinal diarrhoea is present
nature, severity and duration of the diarrhoea will help establish the likelihood of
clinically significant dehydration. In addition, the presence of other concurrent signs
may raise the index of suspicion for systemic diseases. Worming and vaccination
history should also be established as well as details of any recent drug therapy.
Major body system examination
           
secondary to severe dehydration and/or a consequence of the primary disorder. Signs
of maldistributive shock (hypoperfusion with hyperaemic mucous membranes and a
rapid capillary refill time) should raise the index of suspicion for severe acute
      s    i
animals with diarrhoea or may reflect pain, pyrexia or abnormalities in acid-base
detected that reflect the underlying cause (e.g. seizuring from intoxication).
           s
depending on the size and demeanour of the patient in question. Abdominal pain may
be identified and potentially characterized as diffuse or localized. Abdominal pain is
not likely to be present with a number of the causes of diarrhoea and its presence may
raise the index of suspicion for certain differential diagnoses (e.g. intestinal
some cases focal abnormalities such as an intussusception, foreign body or mass may
be identified.
Rectal temperature may be normal, increased or decreased depending on the
linderlying cause and clinical status of the patient. Digital rectal examination should
also be performed and may allow visual examination of faeces, collection of faeces for
analysis, and identification of local rectal lesions.
Complete physical examination performed at the appropriate time may reveal other
significant findings that can help establish a diagnosis.
Emergency database
The need to perform an emergency database in a diarrhoeic patient should be guided
by the animal's history and physical examination findings. The emergency database
will allow the patient to be evaluated for dehydration (raised packed cell volume and
serum total solids, prerenal azotaemia - see Ch. 3) as well as identify electrolyte and
acid-base abnormalities. Some animals with diarrhoea will have a protein-losing
enteropathy (PLE) and serum total solids may appear inappropriately low in
comparison with packed cell volume in suich cases. Dogs with hypoadrenocorticism
(Addison's disease) may have hyponatraemia, hyperkalaemia and mild to moderate
          s  s
dogs.
Clinical Tip
S            s   
perfusion, and electrolyte and acid-base status in puppies, kittens and toy breed dogs.
Clinical Tip
· Some dogs with diarrhoea due to primary intestinal disorders (e.g. salmonellosis, trichuriasis
(whipworm infection)) may develop a  very similar clinical picture to dogs with typical
hypoadrenocorticism (Addison's disease), i.e. hyponatraemia, hyperkalaemia, and a mild to moderate
prerenal azotaemia. This pseudo-Addisonian presentation must be kept in mind when considering the
possibility of hypoadrenocorticism in such cases.
More extensive clinicopathological testing may be required in some diarrhoeic
animals, especially in those with other systemic signs, but is generally not available in
the emergency setting.
Diagnostic imaging
A    s      d   
the animal's history and physical examination findings. In the routine emergency
setting, diagnostic imaging of the emergency patient is likely to consist of plain
radiography and, if available, abdominal ultrasonography for the detection of free
  p       
radiographs should be taken and are most useful for identifying radioopaque
intestinal foreign bodies and obstructions. Thoracic radiographs may be indicated to
look for pulmonary metastases where neoplasia is considered a likely cause of
diarrhoea.
Treatment
By collating all of the information obtained from the steps above, the clinician should
S n n           
This will depend not only on the underlying cause but also on the clinical status of the
patient with respect to perfusion, hydration and electrolyte and acid-base
a bnormalities.
Acute diarrhoea is often self-limiting and may only require supportive care and
short-term dietary management without a definitive diagnosis. Withholding food for
   s     (  )    
typically not necessary and may be contraindicated in some cases (especially
diarrhoea of infectious origin).
              i
differential diagnoses for diarrhoea, the most severe clinical presentations are
associated with infectious enteritides, intestinal obstruction, foreign body ingestion,
canine haemorrhagic gastroenteritis, acute pancreatitis and hypoadrenocorticism. See
Chapter 29 (The acute abdomen) and Chapter 34 (Endocrine emergencies) for further
information on these conditions.
Clinical Tip
· Antibiotic therapy is typically not indicated in dogs and cats with acute diarrhoea and its routine
use without confirmation of an infectious aetiology is not recommended.
 Antibiosis may have adverse effects on beneficial commensal intestinal flora and may also
encourage bacterial antibiotic resistance. The author typically reserves antibiotic therapy for animals
with severe haemorrhagic diarrhoea that are pyrexic or in which neutropenia is identified on
peripheral blood smear examination.
· Metronidazole has been used extensively in the treatment of large intestinal diarrhoea for reported
intestinal immunomodulatory effects rather than antimicrobial properties and the author has
occasionally used this agent for this purpose.
Haematochezia
Haematochezia refers to bright red fresh blood either on the surface of or mixed in
with faeces, and this must be differentiated from melaena (see below). The source of
the blood is typically the anus, rectum or descending colon (see Box 9.4).
significant morbidity and is rarely associated with mortality. In many cases, it is the
      n s   
fermentable fibre may be all that is needed. Empirical deworming using a broad-
          n 
intensive management and extensive investigations may be required in animals with
systemic illness or persistent haematochezia.
BOX 9.4 Causes of haematochezia
Rectal and colonic disease
· Proctitis
· Rectal prolapse
· Colitis (e.g. idiopathic, inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), stress, infection)
· Parasitism (e.g. helminthiasis)
• Neoplasia (e.g. adenocarcinoma, lymphoma); rectal polyp
· Mucosal trauma
Anal or anal sac disease
· Anal sacculitis or abscess
· Perianal fistula
· Perianal hernia
· Stricture
· Trauma
Melaena
Clinical Tip
· Not all dogs with dark stools have melaena; other causes of dark stools include diets high in iron,
and ingestion of activated charcoal or proprietary veterinary treats/diets with a similar gross
appearance if minimal digestion occurs.
· On occasion it may be unclear as to whether dark stools represent melaena or not; a high index of
suspicion should be maintained in such cases and the uncertainty is typically resolved rapidly on the
basis of clinical progression.
Melaena refers to dark tarry faeces that represents blood digested in the intestinal
tract and is a much more serious clinical sign than haematochezia (Figure 9.1).
Melaena may result from lesions in the gastrointestinal tract and is usually the result
of gastric or proximal small intestinal haemorrhage. However, melaena may occur
due to haemorrhage more distally in the intestinal tract. Importantly, melaena may
also be the result of ingestion of blood or serious abnormalities in other organs or
body systems (see Box 9.5).
children in care
s
pue
spot-checkine
Other change
are go
Ms
epapuadsns
raised the alar
Figure 9.1
 Dark tarry appearance of melaenic faeces.
BOX 9.5 Causes of melaena
Primary gastrointestinal disease
· Ulceration/haemorrhagic erosion (e.g. secondary to nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agent or
corticosteroid administration)
* Neoplasia (e.g. adenocarcinoma, lymphoma, mast cell tumour)
· Foreign body
• Intussusception
 a po  a) ss a .
• Parasitism (e.g. hookworms)
Ingested blood
• Nasal lesion (epistaxis)
· Oropharyngeal lesion
· Oesophageal lesion
• Pulmonary lesion (blood coughed up then ingested)
·(Dietary source)
Other organs/systems
· Coagulopathy (e.g. rodenticide intoxication, severe thrombocytopenia, hepatic failure)
· Uraemic gastritis due to renal failure
· Hypoadrenocorticism (Addison's disease)
Animals with melaena can suffer considerable blood loss resuilting in mild to severe
reduction in packed cell volume and serum total solids. Depending on the duration,
blood smear examination is essential in these cases (see Ch. 3). Chronic melaena may
result in hypochromic microcytic iron-deficiency anaemia. Peripheral blood smear
examination is also essential to evaluate platelet numbers as melaena is relatively
common in animals with sufficiently severe thrombocytopenia.
History and additional  physical examination findings should  help  determine
whether a primary gastrointestinal cause is more or less likely and therefore guide
diagnostics. Treatment is ultimately aimed at the underlying cause but intensive
required.
10
Acute red eye and pain The majority of causes of acute
red eye are also associated with varying degrees of
pain. Ocular pain is typically associated with
blepharospasm, excessive lacrimation and photophobia
These signs are likely to be more subtle in cats than in
dogs, and enophthalmos may also be seen in the latter
species.
The main causes of acute red eye, in particular in dogs, include: · Traumatic injury ·
Acute conjunctivitis
· Acute keratitis and corneal ulceration · Acute anterior uveitis
· Acute glaucoma
· Haemorrhage, both externally and hyphaema · Retrobulbar abscess and orbital
cellulitis.
Most of these disorders are discussed in more detail in Chapter 35 (Ocular
emergencies).
11
Acute vomiting
Acute vomiting is a frequently encountered clinical sign in emergency medicine.
Causes of acuite vomiting may broadly be divided into those that relate primarily to
the alimentary tract and digestive system, and those that do not. There are a large
number of causes of vomiting and some of the most important with respect to
emergency cases are listed in Box 11.1.
BOX 11.1 Causes of acute vomiting
Alimentary tract/digestive system causes
· Acute gastritis/gastroenteritis, e.g.
- Dietary indiscretion, including foreign body ingestion
- Food intolerance
-- Intoxication
· Drug-induced (e.g. nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agents)
· Infectious diseases (e.g. leptospirosis, canine parvovirus infection)
· Haemorrhagic gastroenteritis (HGE)
· Gastric ulceration
· Small intestinal obstruction, e.g.
- Foreign body
-- Intussusception
- Neoplasm
· Acute pancreatitis
Other causes
· Acute hepatobiliary disease
· Urogenital:
- Acute renal failure
- Acute urethral obstruction
- Pyelonephritis
- Pyometra
- Prostatitis/prostatic abscess
· Peritonitis: septic, urinary, biliary
· Endocrine:
- Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA)
- Acute Addisonian crisis (hypoadrenocorticism)
· Central nervous system (CNS):
- Acute vestibular disease
- Raised intracranial pressure
-- Inflammatory CNS disease
Nursing Aspect
Owners quite commonly ring for advice with respect to cats and especially dogs that have vomited
and the duty nurse is often the person from whom this initial advice is obtained. In the author's
opinion it is not necessary for all such cases to be seen at the clinic following initial contact. Acute
vomiting is often the result of gastritis or gastroenteritis secondary to dietary indiscretion and may be
self-limiting without the need for veterinary intervention. The recommendation to examine the animal
at the clinic should be guided by the owner's wishes but also after obtaining adequate information
with respect to:
· The animal's current status
· The duration, frequency and severity of vomiting
• The nature of the vomitus
· Any known history of dietary indiscretion, especially with respect to foreign bodies and
intoxication
· Previous medical and therapeutic history.
 pod ns e  o m n  as si in o so  
continued monitoring at home for example for dogs that have vomited once or twice only, that
remain relatively bright, that are tolerant of water, and especially where there is a suspicion of
dietary indiscretion not relating to a foreign body. Owners should be advised to contact the clinic
again should the animal's condition deteriorate, at which time examination can be arranged.
Approach to Vomiting
Signalment
Signalment may allow certain differential diagnoses to be viewed with a lesser or
greater index of suspicion. For example, foreign body ingestion is more likely in a
young Labrador retriever than acute pancreatitis, while the latter is more likely in a
middle-aged overweight Miniature Schnauzer. Canine parvovirus infection is more
likely in an unvaccinated 2-month-old male Rottweiler than in an elderly Great Dane.
History
A thorough history is mandatory in all animals with vomiting, although the timing
should be guided by the stability of the patient. It is important to determine from the
owner's description whether vomiting (active) as opposed to regurgitation (passive)
or even retching, gagging or coughing is present (see Ch. 22). The history may
provide useful information with respect to the possible cause of the vomiting (e.g.
 m           
vomitus may prove useful. For example, vomitus that contains fresh or digested
('coffee grounds') blood suggests gastric ulceration but may also occur for example in
haemorrhagic gastroenteritis or canine parvovirus infection. In addition, the presence
of other concurrent signs such as polyuria/polydipsia, weight loss or jaundice may
raise the index of suspicion for systemic diseases.
Clinical Tip
· In general animals that are vomiting but lack other clinical signs (e.g. polyuria/polydipsia, weight
loss, jaundice) are more likely to have a primary alimentary tract/digestive system cause of the
vomiting.
· A primary cause outside the alimentary tract/digestive system is more likely in animals with other
 clinical signs, in which vomiting may or may not be the most prominent feature.
Major body system examination
Cardiovascuilar examination may be normal in animals with vomiting or may be
consistent with variable degrees of hypovolaemia (see Ch. 2). Hypovolaemia may be
of maldistributive shock (hypoperfusion with hyperaemic mucous membranes and a
rapid capillary refill time) should raise the index of suspicion for severe acute
pancreatitis or a septic focus. Respiratory examination may be unremarkable in
vomiting animals or may reflect pain, pyrexia or abnormalities in acid/base status.
typically less than with regurgitation) that may cause dyspnoea. Neurological
examination may also be unremarkable but abnormalities may be detected that reflect
the underlying cause (e.g. seizuring from intoxication, vestibular signs).
           
depending on the size and demeanour of the patient in question. Abdominal pain may
be identified and potentially characterized as diffuse or localized. This may raise the
index of suspicion for certain differential diagnoses (e.g. septic peritonitis with diffuse
pain, acute pancreatitis with pain localized to the right cranial quadrant) but is by no
means definitive. In some cases focal abnormalities such as an intussusception,
foreign body or mass may be identified.
Rectal temperature may be normal, increased or decreased depending on the
underlying cause and clinical status of the patient. Digital rectal examination should
also be performed and may for example reveal melaena, foreign material or
prostatomegaly.
 p n me  p   o sr   d 
caustic intoxicant, vulval discharge in open-cervix pyometra, or goitre in a
hyperthyroid cat.
Emergency database
the animal's history and physical examination findings. The emergency database will
allow the patient to be evaluated for dehydration (raised packed cell volume and
serum total solids, prerenal azotaemia - see Ch. 3) as well as identify electrolyte (e.g.
with gastrointestinal foreign body). Dogs with hypoadrenocorticism (Addison's
disease) may have hyponatraemia, hyperkalaemia and mild to moderate azotaemia
Severe azotaemia may be present with acute renal failure or urethral obstruction. A
faecal ELIsA test for canine parvovirus is recommended in young dogs as vomiting
may precede haemorrhagic diarrhoea.
More extensive clinicopathological testing may be required in some vomiting
the emergency setting.
Diagnostic imaging
         n  d   
animal's history and physical examination findings. In the routine emergency setting,
and, if available, abdominal ultrasonography for the detection of free peritoneal fluid.
Ideally orthogonal  (right lateral and ventrodorsal views) abdominal radiographs
should be taken and are most useful for identifying gastrointestinal foreign bodies and
obstructions. Thoracic radiographs may be indicated for example where there is
concern regarding aspiration or to look for pulmonary neoplastic metastases. In
addition, they may uncover a megaoesophagus in animals in which regurgitation has
been incorrectly described as vomiting.
Treatment
Clinical Tip
The two most important considerations in the evaluation of an animal with vomiting are:
· Does the animal need parenteral fluid therapy to correct hypovolaemia, dehydration (and
electrolyte or acid-base abnormalities), or both?
 Is surgical intervention indicated and if so, with what urgency?
By collating all of the information obtained from the steps above, the clinician
should be able to decide on the most appropriate management for the patient in
question. This will depend not only on the underlying cause, treatment of which is
clearly essential, but also on the clinical status of the patient with respect to perfusion,
hydration, and electrolyte and acid-base abnormalities. Appropriate management
           
monitoring to hospitalization for aggressive fluid resuscitation and possible surgical
intervention. Treatment of some of the specific causes of vomiting is covered in the
discussion of those conditions elsewhere in this book.
Vomiting as a result of  acute gastritis/gastroenteritis secondary  to dietary
indiscretion usually resolves over 24-48 hours. It is generally recommended to
withhold food for 12-24 hours after the last episode of vomiting. Dehydration may
develop in animals unable to tolerate water, necessitating parenteral fluid therapy.
Small amounts of water and then of a low-fat bland diet are introduced gradually and
offered frequently, and the patient is monitored closely for relapse. Antiemetics (e.g.
maropitant, metoclopramide) are generally not administered until gastrointestinal
obstruction has been excluded and may not be required in all cases depending on the
severity of the vomiting.
12
Cardiac dysrhythmias
Cardiac dysrhythmias are a relatively common finding in emergency patients and
are probably also underdiagnosed in general. Physical examination may generate the
suspicion of a dysrhythmia (e.g. heart rate that is pathologically fast or slow, pulse
deficits), but this can only be confirmed using electrocardiography. A wide variety of
dysrhythmias exist and a full discussion is beyond the scope of this book. This chapter
presents some of the most common dysrhythmias that the author sees, focusing on
dogs, and summarizes the recommendations for their management.
Normal Cardiac Conduction
An impulse is normally generated at the sinoatrial (SA) node which is the dominant
pacemaker. The impulse is conducted from there across the atria to the
atrioventricular (AV) junction and into the AV node; it then passes down the bundle
of His and bundle branches, on to the Purkinje fibres. The overall result is cardiac
contraction. Impulse conduction is reflected as the normal sinus beat (P-QRs-T) and
normal sinus rhythm results from impulses being generated at the SA node at a
normal rate (Figure 12.1).
Figure 12.1
Normal sinus rhythm in a dog showing P-QRs-T complexes (lead 11, 25 mm/s).
(Courtesy of Simon Denn is)
Clinical Tip
· Dysrhythmias can generally be classified into those that are due to primary cardiac disease, and
those that are due to noncardiac systemic disease.
• As a general rule, dysrhythmias are not treated specifically with antidysrhythmic agents unless the
rhythm disturbance itself is deemed to be clinically significant, i.e. associated with haemodynamic
compromise. The emphasis is on treatment of the underlying disorder, and it must be remembered
that antidysrhythmic agents are not benign and may have the potential to be pro-dysrhythmic.
· Haemodynamically significant dysrhythmias may need to be treated specifically prior to diagnosis
of the underlying cause.
Tachydysrhythmias
Supraventricular tachycardia
Supraventricular tachycardia (SVT) may be atrial or junctional in origin and can be
difficult to distinguish from ventricular tachycardia in some cases. On physical
examination both may have rapid weak pulses with pulse deficits. Potential
distinguishing features for SVT (Figure 12.2) on electrocardiography include:
· Tall and narrow QRS complexes in lead II
· Complexes typically uniform.
Figure 12.2
Supraventricular tachycardia in a dog at a rate of approximately 320 beats per minute
(lead I1, 25 mm/s). QRs complexes look relatively normal (tall, narrow, uniform) with a regular R-R
interval.
(Courtesy of Simon Denn is)
   ss e  s    
response to severe hypovolaemia, rarely exceeds a rate of 220-240 beats per minute in
dogs at rest (300 beats per minute in cats); heart rate may exceed this in dogs such as
greyhounds during intense exercise. The finding of a heart rate above this level should
prompt electrocardiography.
Caulses
disorders that result in atrial dilation (e.g. mitral or tricuspid regurgitation). Some
animals present in congestive heart failure.
Indications for treatment
Supraventricular tachycardia should be treated with specific antidysrhythmic therapy
if treatment of congestive heart failure does not improve the dysrhythmia and it is
deemed to be clinically significant.
Treatment
Although conversion to sinus rhythm is preferred, this is not always possible and the
main aim of treatment is to slow the ventricular response rate such that the
dysrhythmia no longer causes haemodynamic compromise. Oral digoxin and
     n n  n n 
The reader is referred to other sources for more information on the uise of digoxin.
            
SVT. This involves carotid sinus massage or applying pressure to the closed eyes. If
vagal manoeuivres fail and treatment of congestion alone is ineffective, then
additional medical therapy may be indicated. Diltiazem (a calcium channel blocker) is
            n 
This agent must be used cautiously in animals with congestive heart failure if at all as
Atrial fibrillation
Atrial fibrillation (AF) (Figure 12.3) is characterized by a chaotic irregularly irregular
· Absent P waves and irregular undulations of the baseline
 Normal-looking (tall and narrow) QRS complexes but an irregular R-R interval (this
is an important diagnostic feature).
AANANALAAAAAAAAN
Figure 12.3
 ' 1  d saa o e  a e ie  e   
 mm/s). QRS complexes look relatively normal (tall, narrow, uniform) but with an irregularly irregular
R-R interval.
(Courtesy of Simon Denn is)
Causes
In emergency practice, AF is typically (although not always) seen in animals with
severe primary structural heart disease, usually involving atrial dilation. The
and there is usually evidence of congestive heart failure (see Ch. 31). Lone AF is used
to describe AF in dogs without evidence of structural heart disease (e.g. some Irish
Wolfhounds). AF does occur in cats but less frequently than in dogs.
Indications for treatment
The approach to AF will depend on the rate, the underlying cause, and whether
congestive heart failure is present. Stabilization of congestive heart failure is the
priority, and treatment to control the ventricular response rate may then be included
in subsequent therapy if still required.
Treatment
Treatment of AF is designed to slow the heart rate (typically to less than 160 beats per
min in dogs) in order to improve cardiac output. However, as animals with severe
heart failure may require some degree of heart rate elevation to maintain cardiac
output, excessive reduction of ventricular response rate may not be desirable.
Conversion to sinus rhythm is difficult and in fact not shown to be associated with
any additional benefit.
Oral digoxin is the usual agent of choice for dogs with heart disease and the reader
 s        s o   
should  also  be  treated  as  required (see Ch. 3l).  Occasionally  additional
antidysrhythmic therapy (e.g. oral diltiazem) is indicated if treatment of congestion
does not provide adequate ventricular rate control but care with dosing must be taken
in animals with congestive heart failure.
Ventricular tachycardia
Ventricular premature complexes (VPCs) and  ventricular tachycardia (VT) are
commonly identified in emergency patients, especially dogs (Figures 12.4 and 12.5).
VT is seven or more consecutive ventricular premature complexes. Complexes are
usually wide and bizarre, and not associated with P waves.
Figure 12.4
Ventricular premature complexes in a dog (lead 11, 25 mm/s); two couplets and a
triplet are present. The QRs complexes are wide and bizarre, and not related to the normal P waves.
(Courtesy of Simon Denn is)
Figure 12.5
Ventricular tachycardia in a dog at a rate of approximately 180 beats per minute
(leads I-II1, 25 mm/s); QRs complexes appear uniform (monomorphic morphology) and R-on-T is not
present.
(Courtesy of Simon Denn is)
Causes
These dysrhythmias may occur secondary to a large number of noncardiac disorders,
but may also be the result of primary heart disease. Causes of VPCs and VT are
summarized in Box 12.1.
BOX 12.1 Causes of ventricular premature complexes (VPCs) and ventricular
tachycardia (VT) in companion animals
Primary noncardiac (systemic) causes
· Intra-abdominal disorders (e.g. splenic disease, GDV, canine HGE)
· Hypoxaemia and tissue hypoxia
* Systemic inflammation (e.g. SIRS/sepsis)
· CNS disease (brain disorders but also, e.g., inflammatory CNS disease)
• Variety of drug therapies
 (Electrolyte abnormalities)
· (Acid-base abnormalities)
Primary cardiac causes
· Variety of congenital and acquired heart diseases
* ARVC in the Boxer
• Dilated cardiomyopathy in the Doberman Pinscher
· Heart failure
• Myocardial trauma, inflammation, ischaemia, hypoxia, neoplasia
· Pericardial effusion
ARVC, arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy; CNS, central nervous system; GDV, gastric
dilation/volvulus syndrome; HGE, haemorrhagic gastroenteritis syndrome; SIRS, systemic
inflammatory response syndrome.
Clinical Tip
• It is very important to distinguish ventricular escape complexes (see Figure 12.9) from ventricular
premature complexes and ventricular tachycardia.
Ventricular (or junctional) escape complexes typically occur  in animals with a severe
bradydysrhythmia and are responsible for maintaining cardiac output and essentially for keeping the
animal alive.
· A ventricular intrinsic escape rate (idioventricular rhythm) of less than 5o beats per minute is
typical in dogs (less than 1oo beats per minute in cats). The ventricular complexes in these cases
must not be treated.
Indications for treatment
Ventricular premature complexes typically do not require specific intervention and
treatment is aimed at the underlying disorder. VT is only treated when one of the
following criteria is met:
Sd   s       s  a
e.g. lethargy, exercise intolerance, collapse
· The dysrhythmia is associated with evidence of sustained systemic hypoperfusion
· VT is sustained (more than 30 seconds) at a rate above 180 beats per minute
· R-on-T phenomenon is identified (ectopic R wave superimposed on T wave of
preceding complex; see Figuire 12.6)
. VT includes (a significant number of) multiform complexes
· Structural heart disease, Boxer arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy or
 s      n s  i 
minute, whether this is sustained or not.
Figure 12.6
R-on-T phenomenon in a dog (lead 11, 25 mm/s); the fourth ectopic R wave (from the
o pa a spem uh soo s xando sanad an jo am I a  pasoadns si (
the ECG strip.
(Courtesy of Virginia Luis Fu en tes)
An accelerated idioventricular rhythm refers to a ventricular rhythm occurring at a
slower rate than VT, typically less than 100-140 beats per minute (definitions vary).
procedures or other trauma, and systemic disease. Accelerated idioventricular rhythm
does not typically cause haemodynamic compromise and therefore does not usually
require treatment.
Treatment
Clinical Tip
 Treatment of ventricular tachycardia in emergency patients is unlikely to result in sustained
conversion to sinus rhythm, at least in the short term; many animals remain in a predominantly
ventricular rhythm or sinus rhythm with frequent ventricular premature complexes.
· Treatment can be considered successful, however, if there is sufficient improvement in terms of
either the haemodynamic compromise resulting from the dysrhythmia or with respect to its
mali gnancy.
Lidocaine is usually the first drug used for VT that is assessed to require treatment.
In dogs, a bolus of 2 mg/kg is administered slowly intravenously; if there is no
response to the first bolus after 2-3 minute, a further three boluses may be attempted
        s n     s  )
started (50-80 μg/kg/min). Lidocaine may be less effective in the presence of
hypokalaemia.
If the dysrhythmia fails to respond to lidocaine, and the clinician is sure that the
dysrhythmia is not in fact an SVT, then alternative agents may be tried; however, this
may be constrained by what agents are available within the practice. Sotalol and
n   s  n n    q  
next choice after lidocaine.
In animals with VT as a result of primary cardiac disease, appropriate long-term
medications are also started and these may include oral antidysrhythmic therapy (e.g.
sotalol, mexiletine). In animals with secondary VT, it is very unusual to need to
provide anything more than a lidocaine infusion for 24-72 hr while the primary
Bradydysrhythmias
Clinical Tip
· Some forms of bradydysrhythmia (e.g. sinus bradycardia, first degree Av block) may occur in
  s              
example when asleep. Clinical signs are typically not associated with the slow heart rate in such
cases and treatment is not required.
Sinus bradydysrhythmias
Sinus bradydysrhythmias occur as a resuilt of decreased impulse generation by the SA
Caulses
Sinus bradydysrhythmias may occur as a result of primary cardiac or noncardiac
although there may be some variation in individual patient response. Sinus
bradydysrhythmias may also occur secondary to administration of a variety of drugs,
some of which are used commonly in emergency cases (e.g. opioids, sedatives);
cardiac causes of sinus bradydysrhythmias typically relate to disease of the SA node
(e.g. idiopathic fibrosis, myocardial disease).
Sick sinus syndrome
Sick sinus syndrome (SsS) refers to a combination of dysrhythmias that typically
include abnormalities in both impulse generation by the SA node and subsequent
conduction. Sinus bradycardia, sinus arrest and sVT occur in variable combinations.
This disorder is usually idiopathic and occurs most commonly in the West Highland
White terrier and the Miniature Schnauzer amongst others. The syndrome has not
been reported in cats thus far.
Indications for treatment
Treatment is typically indicated in all dogs that are symptomatic for SSs. Common
clinical signs of low cardiac output include cardiac syncope as well as exercise
intolerance and variable weakness.
Treatment
 e          s  s s
terbutaline, theophylline) and some clinical improvement may be observed, at least for
 a n   e    i sn s
Atrioventricular block
AV block refers to delayed or failed impulse conduction through the AV node. There
are three types of AV block - first degree, second degree and third degree (see Figures
12.7-12.9) - with some further subclassification.
Figure 12.7
Second degree AV block in a dog (lead I1, 25 mm/s); every third P wave is conducted
and associated with a QRS complex (3 to 1 conduction).
(Courtesy of Simon Denn is)
Figure 12.8
Low-grade second degree AV block in a dog (lead I1, 25 mm/s); the majority of P
waves are conducted and associated with a QRs complex.
(Courtesy of Simon Denn is)
Figure 12.9
Third degree AV block in a dog (lead II, 25 mm/s). There is no P wave conduction
and the QRS complexes are ventricular (wide and bizarre), occurring at a rate slower than the P
(Courtesy of Simon Denn is)
Calses
High vagal tone is a relatively common cause of AV block, which may also result from
hyperkalaemia and excessive doses of certain drugs. As with SA node disease, primary
disease of the AV node (e.g. idiopathic fibrosis, myocardial disease) can also cause AV
block. Third degree AV block is almost always due to heart disease.
Indications for treatment
Specific treatment of AV block is only indicated if the animal is deemed to be
symptomatic from the dysrhythmia. Otherwise treatment is aimed at addressing the
underlying cause. First degree AV block is unlikely to cause clinical signs, but second
degree AV block may be clinically significant. Third degree AV block is almost always
associated with haemodynamic compromise and causes signs such as exercise
intolerance, variable weakness and cardiac syncope.
Treatment
Treatment of AV block is aimed at the underlying disorder if possible. Animals with
 a   r a  s     
permanent pacema ker to be implanted.
13
Collapse
The term ‘collapse' is not specific to any one disorder or body system abnormality.
general, collapsed patients can be thought of in the following terms.
Primary Cardiovascular Disorders Causing Collapse
Cardiovascular causes of collapse centre on a lack of adequate tissue perfusion. This
may be localized (e.g. feline aortic thromboembolism) but is typically generalized with
the potential to cause inadequate perfusion of the brain, spinal cord and muscles. The
· Severe brady-dysrhythmia, e.g. sick sinus syndrome
· Severe tachy-dysrhythmia, e.g. ventricular tachycardia in Boxer arrhythmogenic
Shepherd dog.
Primary Non-cardiovascuilar Disorders Causing Cardiovascuilar Collapse
A wide range of disorders may cause collapse due to severe secondary cardiovascular
compromise. These may include: · Hypovolaemic, maldistributive or obstructive shock
(see Ch. 2) · Severe dysrhythmias, e.g. vagally mediated brady-dysrhythmia due to an
intrathoracic mass, severe ventricular tachycardia due to splenic neoplasia·
34).
Non-cardiovascular Primary Disorder Causing Non-cardiovascular Collapse
This category includes a wide variety of disorders that may be classified as
neurological, neuromuscular, muscular, orthopaedic, metabolic/electrolyte-related,
endocrine and haematological. Depending on the nature of the primary disorder
cardiovascular abnormalities of varying degrees may or may not be expected. For
example: · An animal that is recumbent because of a cervical spinal cord lesion would
not typically be expected to have significant cardiovascular abnormalities (unless the
aetiology is traumatic for example).
· Seizures, unless severe or prolonged, are not expected to cause significant
cardiovascular abnormalities.
· Significant cardiovascular abnormalities would not usually be expected with
         
with consequent brady-dysrhythmia).
· Animals with severe acute haemolytic anaemia may collapse due to a lack of tissue
oxygen delivery. These animals would be expected to show signs of cardiovascular
(and respiratory) compensation for the anaemia.
     n    
cardiovascular abnormalities.
Clearly in any one collapsed patient, the cause may well overlap between these
categories as the body works as a whole unit. For example, cats with aortic
thromboembolism typically have marked neurological abnormalities that are the
manifestations. Animals that suffer severe blood loss are likely to be collapsed due to a
combination  of  marked   hypovolaemia   and  lack  of  oxygen-carrying  capacity.
Nevertheless, considering the causes of collapse in the way described is important as
cardiovascular abnormalities are frequently the most life-threatening and generally
require most urgent treatment.
14
Cyanosis
Clinical Tip
· In most animals, cyanosis indicates very severe hypoxaemia. However, it is essential to remember
that animals can be markedly hypoxaemic and on the cusp of severe deterioration without
manifesting cyanosis; this is especially true in anaemic animals. A false sense of security should not
therefore be derived either from the absence of cyanosis or from normal arterial oxygen saturation
by pulse oximetry. In addition, cyanosis when identified must be treated as an emergency.
Cyanosis is a bluish or purplish discoloration of the muicous membranes or skin and
occurs as a resuilt of an increase in the concentration of uinoxygenated (reduced)
haemoglobin. Reduced haemoglobin must rise above a certain level (5 g/dl) before
           s
cusp of severe deterioration without manifesting cyanosis; this is especially true in
anaemic animals. Causes of cyanosis are typically classified as central or peripheral.
Central cyanosis most commonly occurs  when arterial blood fails  to become
 n sn  s a ee  o  n s m s 
            
methaemoglobinaemia in paracetamol (acetaminophen) intoxication). Inadequate
oxygen saturation may occuir for example due to:
· Congenital cardiovascular anomalies causing right-to-left shunting such that
circulation (e.g. tetralogy of Fallot, reverse patent ductus arteriosus (PDA)). Cyanosis
may also occuir as a resuilt of severe congenital pulmonic stenosis.
sn e s  a   a  s ss   e
pneumonia, bronchopneumonia, pulmonary contusions, neoplastic infiltration) but
also to severe cardiogenic pulmonary oedema. Obstructive lower airway disease
· Severe hypoventilation, for example due to severe pleural effusion or pneumothorax,
central nervous system depression or injury, neuromuscular disease (e.g. myasthenia
gravis, tetanus) or intoxication/drug overdose.
Right-to-left shunting PDA may be associated with so-called differential cyanosis, in
which unoxygenated blood flows to the caudal parts of the body but oxygenated blood
flows to the cranial parts. Cyanosis is therefore only detected caudally in such cases.
Peripheral cyanosis occurs as a result of a disturbance in peripheral circulation.
Slow peripheral blood flow results in a relative increase in the amount of oxygen
extracted by the tissues and therefore the amount of oxyhaemoglobin that is reduced.
The arterial blood in such cases may have normal or reduced oxygen saturation. The
most common   causes are intense peripheral  vasoconstriction  (e.g. severe
hypothermia), low cardiac output, and thrombosis/thromboembolism (e.g. cyanotic
nail beds in cats with feline aortic thromboembolism).
Approach to Cyanosis
Clinical Tip
· Central cyanosis is typically associated with a potentially life-threatening disorder and affected
animals should be considered highly unstable, requiring gentle handling and minimal intervention.
·Many of the causes of central cyanosis (with the particular exceptions of right-to-left
cardiovascular shunts and increased concentrations of non-oxygen-carrying haemoglobin) are
responsive to oxygen supplementation that should therefore be provided from the outset. A period of
 oxygen supplementation prior to further examination/intervention can be invaluable in many cases.
 In the author's experience, severe respiratory disease is the most commonly identified cause of
sd q a - ad pe p - si o sa   ni n  si 1 -
in the same animal at the same time.
Signalment, history
Signalment and history may allow certain differential diagnoses to be viewed with a
greater or lesser index of suspicion. For example, cyanosis in a young animal is more
likely to be due to a congenital cardiovascular abnormality. A chronic history of
Highland White terrier) may point to this as the cause of the cyanosis.
Major body system examination
Physical examination should hopefully allow central versus peripheral cyanosis to be
differentiated. Peripheral cyanosis is more likely to be localized, being confined for
membranes and tongue.
As described above, many of the causes of central cyanosis relate to the respiratory,
cardiovascular or neurological systems. In general, cardiovascular abnormalities in
animals with cyanosis of respiratory origin are likely to be less marked than in
animals with primary cardiac cyanosis. In some animals with primary respiratory
cyanosis, the underlying cause will be readily apparent (e.g. upper respiratory tract
obstruction). Potentially the hardest cases to distinguish are animals that are cyanotic
                
Gjugular venous distension, ascites, pleural effusion) secondary to cor pulmonale,
findings consistent with poor perfusion (poor pulses, pale mucous membranes,
hypothermia), as well as marked cardiac murmurs and severe suspected
dysrhythmias, point to a primary cardiac cause being more likely.
Emergency database
An emergency data base should be performed in all patients presenting with cyanosis
but the timing should be determined by patient stability and response to oxygen
supplementation. Manual packed cell volume may be increased as a compensatory
secondary absolute polycythaemia in response to chronic hypoxaemia. Pulse oximetry
to measure arterial haemoglobin saturation with oxygen (SpO2) should also be
attempted if tolerated; values less than 80% are common in animals with central
cyanosis. If available, electrocardiography is indicated in animals with suspected
dysrhythmias.
Diagnostic imaging
Thoracic radiographs are invaluable in the investigation of pulmonary disease, as well
as for identifying cardiomegaly and evidence of pulmonary congestion or oedema.
S    a  d    do 
appropriate sedation (e.g. low dose butorphanol or morphine) may be helpful in some
cases. If available, thoracic uiltrasonography should be performed first in animals with
suspected significant pleuiral space disease and diagnostic and  therapeutic
  s           
urgency. Referral for echocardiography will be required in animals suspected of
having a congenital cardiovascular anomaly.
Treatment
In all animals with cyanosis, successful treatment ultimately depends on whether the
underlying cause can be addressed. Peripheral cyanosis in itself is not usually life-
threatening although the underlying disorder may have a very poor prognosis.
underlying disorders will not respond to any notable extent. Further emergency
intervention will then depend to a large extent on the underlying cause (see Table
cardiovascular shunts have a more chronic history of cyanosis and do not typically
present as emergency cases. Although there are exceptions, the prognosis associated
with primary lung disease that is sufficiently severe as to cause cyanosis is generally
very poor, with response to medical therapy being variable and often short lived.
Table 14.1 Causes, notable comments and recommended interventions for central cyanosis
Cause
Notable comments
ntervention
Congenital right-to-left
cardiovascular shunt
Emergen cy presen tation un common
Cage rest/restricted exercise
D ifferen tial cyanosis may be presen
Referral for echocar diography an d possible treatment
Primary lung/anway disease
Severe respiratory distress lkely
Oxygen supplementation
Abnormal lung sound s common
Medical therapy (e.g antibiotic, bronchodlator,
glucoc ort icoid, anthelmin thic ) as appropriate
Perfu sion parameters may be n ormal
Cage rest
Cardiogenic cause, includ ing
severe pulmonary oedema
Severe respiratory distress and abnormal lung sounds may be
Oxygen supplementatiocn
 and low card iac output
present (congestion versus low output)
Appropriately aggressive diuresis and other med ical
Perfu sion parameters likely to be markedly abnormal
therapy as indicated (e.g glyceryl trinitrate,
pimobend an, an tidysrh ythmic treatmen t)
Significant cardiac murmur or dysrhythmia likely
Cage rest
Upper respiratory tract
obstru ction
Doins Aoiendsu um ssansp Aoiendsat araaas
Oxygen supplementation
 Dogs in particular may be (severely) hyperthermic
Sed ation
Emergency removal of obstruction (e.g. foreign body) or
creation of temporary airway (end otrach eal intubation,
Dullung ± heart sounds (pleural effusion, pneumothorax)
 Hypoven tilation due to
severe pleural space disease
Oxygen supplementation
Th oracoc entesis (th erapeutic an d diagn ostic)
 Hypoventilat ion due to CNS
 Causes include drug-induced CNS depression, brain stem
or neuromuscular disease
respiratory centre injury, cervical spinal cord or chest wall injury,
Oxygen su pplementation
SIsAieed no Ssa eam aiosnu Ate ndsat araaas
Treatment for primary disord er
General anaesthesia and manual ventilation may be
required (con sid er practic al and financ ial implication s)
Hypoventilation due to
intoxication or drug overd ose
 History may be very helpful
 Oxygen supplementation
 May be related to overdose of anaesthetic drugs
 Admin ister antid ote/reversal agent if available
 En dotracheal intubation and manual ventilation may
be required (consider practical and financial
 implic ations)
 Meth aemoglobinaemia
 Parac etamol (acetamin ophen) intoxication - dietary
 ind iscretion or misguided adm in itration by owmer
 N-acetylcysteine (ascorbic acid)
Treatment of an aemia
 Supportive measures
CNS, central nervous system.
15
Head tilt and nystagmus
The vestibular system is responsible for balance and coordinating movements of the
eyes, trunk and limbs with changes in head position. Head tilt and nystagmus are
typically associated with unilateral vestibular disease and are relatively common
disease with the slow (pathological) phase towards the side of the lesion and the fast
(corrective) phase away from the side of the lesion. Occasionally animals present with
nystagmus due to cerebellar disease (paradoxical vestibular disease) or abnormalities
in visual pathways. Other clinical signs associated with vestibular disease are listed in
Box 15.1.
Box 15.1 Clinical signs of unilateral vestibular disease
• Head tilt towards the side of the lesion
* Nystagmus
· Ataxia
· Wide-based stance
· Circling. leaning or falling towards the side of the lesion
· Vomiting
Types of Unilateral Vesti bular Disease
Vestibular disease may be the result of a lesion affecting either the central or the
peripheral component of the vestibular system.
Central vestibular disease
The central component of the vestibular system is located in the brainstem and
cerebellum. Nystagmus in central vestibular disease can be horizontal, rotatory,
vertical or positional, with the fast phase towards or away from the lesion. Affected
 ssd n         
proprioceptive deficits.
Peripheral vestibular disease
The peripheral components of the vestibular system are sensory receptors in the inner
ear and the vestibular portion of vestibulocochlear nerve. Nystagmus in peripheral
vestibular disease can be horizontal or rotatory, with the fast phase away from the
side of the lesion. Affected animals may have normal mentation or they may be
markedly disorientated; signs of brainstem abnormality are not expected unless there
has been extension of inner ear disease. Paresis and proprioceptive deficits should not
occlir.
Horner's syndrome (third eyelid protrusion, pupillary constriction, drooping of
upper eyelid, enophthalmos) and facial nerve deficits (including ipsilateral drooping
of and inability to move ear and lip, widened palpebral fissure, absent blinking) may
          e s
idiopathic form.
Paradoxical vestibular disease
Paradoxical vestibular disease refers to a syndrome of nystagmus, head tilt and
circling due to cerebellar disease. Head tilt and circling occur contralateral to the side
of the lesion and there are usually other more typical signs of cerebellar disease (e.g.
head tremor, ipsilateral dysmetria).
Causes of Unilateral Vestibular Disease
The most common causes of central vestibular disease are brain tumours and
inflammation (infectious or noninfectious). Trauma and metronidazole intoxication
are other cauises.
The most common causes of peripheral vestibular disease are otitis media or
interna,  and idiopathic vestibular disease. Ototoxicity (e.g.  due to topical
medications), middle or inner ear trauma or tumours, and hypothyroidism are other
possible causes. Nasopharyngeal polyps can cause peripheral vestibular disease in cats.
Clinical Tip
 In the author's experience, idiopathic peripheral vestibular disease is the form of vestibular disease
q siop   aasa s si asa s 'ad  a    
may also affect cats of any age. Diagnosis is made on the basis of compatible history and examination
findings and by exclusion of other causes of peripheral disease. Although patients may present with
really quite severe and often peracute clinical signs, they can improve remarkably over a period of
 several days (typically within 48-72 hours) with adequate supportive care. The prognosis is good
with complete recovery common (may take up to 4 weeks and mild residual signs may persist),
although recurrence may occur.
• As the disease often occurs in older dogs, the major differential diagnosis on presentation is central
vestibular disease secondary to a brain tumour. A thorough neurological examination to differentiate
peripheral versus central signs is therefore essential in order not to inadvertently condemn these
animals to having a worse prognosis. Owners can then be counselled appropriately and reassured
about the rationale of giving their dog some time to improve.
· It is noteworthy that animals with idiopathic peripheral vestibular disease do not usually have
Horner's syndrome or facial nerve deficits. In addition, there is no evidence for a beneficial effect
from corticosteroid administration.
Approach to Unilateral Vestibular Disease
Signalment
Signalment may help to raise or lower the index of suspicion for certain differential
older dogs and congenital vestibular disease is most likely in very young animals.
History
As always, a thorough history should be taken in all cases. Important pieces of
information include:
· Onset and progression - clinical signs are usually progressive with central disease
· History of ear disease
· Clinical signs consistent with ear disease
· Non-vestibular potentially multifocal neurological signs suggestive of brain
involvement
· History of trauma
· Medical therapy (e.g. potentially ototoxic topical therapy, metronidazole)
Major body system examination
In the majority of cases, the neurological system is the only system to be significantly
affected. Animals with central vestibular disease due to a primary brain lesion may
following trauma.
Bilateral otoscopic examination should be performed in animals with peripheral
vestibular signs. The tympanic membrane is often ruptured but if it remains intact it
               
performed both for diagnostic purposes and to collect a fluid sample for cytology and
for a reliable otoscopic examination to be performed.
Emergency data base
The emergency database is likely to be unremarkable in a lot of animals with
vestibuilar disease. Dehydration may be identified in some animals and peripheral
blood smear examination may reveal leucocytosis in some cases (e.g. otitis media or
interna, inflammatory brain disease).
Diagnostic imaging
Central vestibular disease
diagnostic imaging (computed tomography or magnetic resonance imaging) and
cerebrospinal fluid analysis.
Peripheral vestibular disease
Well-positioned plain radiographs of the skull designed to highlight the tympanic
bullae may provide evidence of infection or neoplasia of the middle or inner ear.
However, general anaesthesia is required and this should therefore only be undertaken
modalities are considera bly more sensitive so referral may be appropriate.
Treatment
Treatment of vestibular disease centres on addressing the underlying disorder if this is
possible. For example, administration of toxic drugs should be discontinued and
bacterial otitis should be treated with several weeks of systemic antibiosis (preferably
based on culture and sensitivity testing).
Supportive care is also required with respect to intravenous fluid therapy in animals
that are unable or unwilling to drink. Some dogs may also require assistance for
toileting purposes and other nursing measures including  well-padded bedding.
Symptomatic anti-emetic treatment (maropitant, metoclopramide, ondansetron) is
indicated in animals that are vomiting and may also help with nausea.
Animals presenting with head trauma must be stabilized as required (see Ch. 28).
16
Hyperthermia and pyrexia
Clinical Tip
 a  n     sn n q d   
causes, represent different pathophysiological processes, and require a different clinical approach.
Appreciating this distinction is important so that the most appropriate management can be provided.
Thermoregulation
The thermoregulatory centre is located in the hypothalamus and controls core body
temperature closely around the thermoregulatory set point. This is achieved through a
S           s
conduction, convection and radiation. In people, evaporative cooling is mainly by
amounts of air into contact with the nasal and oral mucosa. Minimal perspiration
occurs through the footpads. Heat dissipation also occurs via radiation and
convection through the skin. Heat gain can be classified as endogenous production
(from metabolic processes and exercise) or exogenous gain (from the environment).
Thermoregulatory mechanisms are summarized in Box 16.1.
BOX 16.1 Thermoregulatory mechanisms in dogs and cats
Heat loss
· Panting
· Cutaneous vasodilation
· Postural changes (e.g. lying prostrate on cool floor)
· Seeking cool environment (e.g. lying out on patio)
* (Perspiration)
Heat gain
· Catecholamine and thyroxine production
· Shivering
· Increased muscle activity
Heat conservation
• Cutaneous vasoconstriction
• Postural changes
· Piloerection
· Seeking warm environment
Marked elevations in core body temperature may have severe consequences, with
  ss o  s  iit e d  
affected, and disseminated intravascular coagulation  (DIC) and multiple organ
dysfunction syndrome (MODS) are possible sequlae.
Hyperthermia versus Pyrexia
In dogs and cats, normal core (rectal) temperature is approximately 38.0-39.0°C,
although some normal fluctuation outside this range is likely during the day. This
range reflects the normal thermoregulatory set point. Core temperature may become
elevated due to hyperthermia and/or pyrexia. An important distinction exists between
n  n        s
management.
Hyperthermia
In hyperthermia the thermoregulatory set point is unchanged and the hypothalamus
         
consequences  occur  when  physiological  attempts  to  cool  the  body  become
overwhelmed and active cooling is therefore appropriate. The most common causes of
Ch. 24). Other causes include malignant hyperthermia, primary brain lesions and
drug reactions.
            
 sn   i s        n 
the cause of temperature elevation and the diagnosis is usually relatively
straightforward.
Management
Clinical Tip
· Wetting the patient with cool water and then applying one or more fans is likely to be the most
effective method of cooling. Placing towels on the patient will impede maximum heat loss and
should be avoided. Applying alcohol to footpads is unlikely to be very effective given the small
 surface area involved. It is very important to cease active cooling when rectal temperature is less
than 39.5*C to prevent rebound hypothermia.
· As the thermoregulatory set point is unchanged in hyperthermic animals, the use of antipyretic
agents is contraindicated.
Wetting the patient with cool water and then applying one or more fans is likely to
be the most effective method of cooling. This will promote heat loss predominantly via
evaporation, convection and conduction. Excessively cold water should be avoided
(see below under ice baths) and although common practice, placing towels on the
patient will impede maximum heat loss and should be avoided. Clipping of fur may be
helpful in some cases although the author has not found this to be necessary and the
time delay in clipping bigger dogs in particular must be borne in mind. Conduction
e  )   e  i a      
The common practice of applying alcohol to footpads is unlikely to be very effective
given the small surface area involved and poses risks with respect to the patient
su bsequently licking the alcohol.
It is very important to cease active cooling when rectal temperature is less than
39.5"C to prevent reboind hypothermia that may persist for a period of several hours
          
production as core temperature declines.
Other methods of active cooling reported include ice water baths, various forms of
lavage and cold water enemas. Ice water may cause intense peripheral
vasoconstriction, thereby impairing heat loss. Shivering may also occur that will
increase heat production and ice water is likely to be uncomfortable to the patient
The use of ice water baths is not recommended. Gastric lavage, peritoneal lavage,
bladder lavage and cold water enemas are labour intensive, carry risks and may affect
monitoring of temperature in the case of enemas. In addition, their use makes it more
difficult to avoid rebound hypothermia and they are only recommended in the most
severe of cases where other measures fail to reduce core temperature satisfactorily.
The author has thus far never needed to resort to one of these methods.
Intravenous isotonic crystalloid  therapy should  also be  implemented in all
hyperthermic patients with the rate and volume used being determined by each
patient's individual circumstances (see Ch. 4). Occasionally colloids may need to be
employed. Intravenous fluids administered at room temperatuire will help to lower core
temperature directly as well as increase peripheral blood flow, thereby encouraging
heat dissipation. Intravenous fluids should not be cooled to lower than room
temperature prior to administration. As the thermoregulatory set point is unchanged
in hyperthermic animals, the use of antipyretic agents is contraindicated because
these agents reduce the set point. Animals that have suffered heat-induced
hypothalamic injury may temporarily lose the ability to compensate for changes in
their thermoregulatory set point induced by exogenous factors such as antipyretic
drugs.
Judicious sedation, using butorphanol and/or acepromazine, can prove useful in
Pyrexia
Clinical Tip
· Although bacterial infection is a common cause of pyrexia, it is not the only cause and others
include noninfectious inflammatory conditions and neoplasia. The automatic use of antibiotics in
pyrexic animals is therefore discouraged due to the ever-increasing problem of bacterial antibiotic
resistance. Antibiosis should be reserved for animals in which bacterial infection is either confirmed
or at least highly suspected on the basis of additional findings (i.e. beyond pyrexia alone). Antibiosis
is also recommended in pyrexic animals with neutropenia
• The reader is also reminded that neutrophilia may occur as a result of noninfectious processes and
its presence in a pyrexic animal is not unexpected regardless of the presence or absence of infection.
Again, neutrophilia alone is not an indication for antimicrobial administration
            s
thermoregulatory set point to be raised. The hypothalamus therefore stimulates heat
S     s a   
of endogenous pyrogens. Exogenous pyrogens may be involved in infectious disorders
(e.g. bacteria, bacterial endotoxins, viruses) as well as for example with intoxication
generated for example in inflammation or with neoplasia.
Management
Clinical Tip
· Pyrexia is a physiological defensive mechanism and active cooling is inappropriate unless
  'it <)  ss a d     a a
 pyrexia should be aimed at identifying and addressing the underlying cause.
Pyrexia is a physiological defensive mechanism and active cooling is inappropriate
unless temperature elevation is severe enough to potentially cause tissue injury
( > 41.5"C). Cooling pyrexic animals may reduce body temperature but this will most
likely cause the thermoregulatory centre to stimulate heat production and
counterproductive. Treatment of pyrexia should therefore be aimed at identifying and
addressing the underlying cause.
a role in the treatment of pyrexia and may contri bute to improving patient morbidity.
However, the potentially beneficial effect of pyrexia must not be discarded and the uise
of NSAIA therapy is not necessarily indicated in all cases. In those animals in which
bacterial infection), or in which clinical signs are not too severe or prolonged, there is
an argument for withholding NsAIA therapy to allow the beneficial effects of pyrexia
to occur. In addition, withholding NSAIA therapy will allow resolution of pyrexia to
be interpreted more reliably as a positive response to treatment of the primary
disorder. In the author's experience, pyrexia resolves satisfactorily in a large
proportion of patients in which the primary disorder is addressed, often with
attention must be paid to other possible contraindications (especially hypovolaemia,
hypoperfusion  from  other  causes,  dehydration,  renal  insufficiency  and
gastrointestinal abnormalities).
17
Hypothermia Hypothermia is a condition in which an
animal's core body temperature falls below the normal
physiological range for that species (approximately less
than 37.5C in dogs and cats). This may occur as a
result of decreased heat production, increased heat loss
or thermoregulatory dysfunction. Some causes of
hypothermia are listed in Box 17.1.
BOX 17.1 Causes of hypothermia
· Inadequate thermoregulation - young puppies and kittens · Prolonged general anaesthesia,
Trauma · Systemic disease (e.g. hypothyroidism, uraemia)
Hypothermia is common in emergency patients and may have a variety of adverse
effects. The severity of these adverse effects is likely to be correlated with the severity
of hypothermia and they are summarized in Box 17.2. Peripheral vasoconstriction
in puppies and kittens, toy canine breeds, geriatric animals, cachectic animals and
cats in general.
BOX 17.2 Potential adverse effects of hypothermia
Cardiovascular system: initial tachycardia then bradycardia, hypotension, dysrhythmias 
Respiratory system: reduced respiratory rate and depth (hypoxaemia, tissue hypoxia; pulmonary
tissue injury) · Neurological system: depressed mentation (mild through to coma) · Acid-base
abnormalities: respiratory and/or metabolic acidosis · Coagulation abnormalities · Cold-induced
gastrointestinal, renal and hepatic dysfunction
Management
Clinical Tip
 Hypothermic animals that present with hypovolaemia should not be actively warmed until volume
resuscitation is underway. This is because warming will lead to cutaneous vasodilation that may
          i
heat loss (e.g. by wrapping in a blanket) is however appropriate.
• Animals that present with hypothermia as a result of cardiac dysfunction typically should not be
warmed because the same concerns apply as for hypovolaemic patients. An increase in temperature
in these cases may be supportive of a positive response to appropriate treatment of the heart disease.
 pn n si la 'se lo u  asa si idu na -
temperature has been improved.
a n     s   s
prior  to addressing the primary disorder as appropriate.  Appropriate  warming
measures depend on the severity and duration of hypothermia as well as the primary
disorder. Passive external rewarming (i.e. wrapping the animal in blankets and
allowing him/her to generate his/her own heat) is likely to be all that is required for
mildly hypothermic patients (36.0-37°C). Active external rewarming is indicated for
animals with moderate to severe hypothermia (32.0-36.0'C) and measuires include the
use of a forced-air warming blanket (e.g. Bair Hugger?, Arizant UK), an incubator, or
warm blankets. If a forced-air warming product is not available, the patient can be
covered with a blanket and a hair dryer used to blow hot air under the blanket.
Active internal or core rewarming may be required in animals with severe (less
than 32'C) hypothermia. This typically takes the form of warm (not hot) intravenous
       s  o  
may also help with rewarming. Hypothermia-induced bradycardia is nonresponsive to
atropine but will resolve as rewarming progresses.
Clinical Tip
· Warmed intravenous fluid bags or gloves filled with warm water can be placed next to the patient.
However, in order to avoid potentially severe thermal injury, it is extremely important to ensure that
  beq a  nd an mq pa sn s a s p no on  a as
(Figure 17.1).
· Caution is also essential when using heat pads and heat lamps to avoid iatrogenic burn injuries that
can have disastrous consequences (Figure 17.2).
Figure 17.1
 Severe cutaneous thermal injury in a dog as a result of a hot intravenous fluid bag
 being placed in direct contact with the skin.
(Ph ot ograph courtesy of Arthur Hou se)
Figure 17.2
Severe burn injury in a dog from a heat pad.
(Ph ot ograph courtesy of Stephen Baines)
18
Jaundice
and cats. This syndrome is characterized by hyperbilirubinaemia and deposition of
bile pigment in tissues. Clinically, jaundice is most readily identified in the sclera,
mucous membranes and nonpigmented hairless skin. A rational approach to the
investigation of jaundice relies on classification of the type of jaundice and then more
specific diagnostic tests to establish a definitive diagnosis. Clearly more than one type
  n   si s  a s n e i as    s
of intrahepatic and posthepatic jaundice.
Types of Jaundice
Prehepatic jaundice
Prehepatic jaundice typically occurs due to haemolytic anaemia. Under normal
circumstances, the majority of plasma bilirubin is derived from the catabolism of
haemoglobin released from ageing or damaged red blood cells that are phagocytosed
by macrophages in the liver and spleen. Acute haemolysis, especially intravascular
haemolysis, may result in hyperbilirubinaemia due to overwhelming of normal
metabolic pathways.
Intrahepatic (hepatocellular) jaundice
Hepatocytes take up albumin-bound unconjugated (free, indirect) bilirubin from the
circulation and then excrete conjugated (direct) bilirubin into the bile canaliculi. The
bilirubin then travels via the bile duct into the gut lumen. Hepatic diseases may cause
 e   s     s
typically involve inflammation of the hepatobiliary system, both acute and chronic.
Examples are listed in Box 18.1.
BOX 18.1 Some causes of hepatic (hepatocellular) jaundice
Dogs
: Cholangiohepatitis
 Chronic active hepatitis
· Cirrhosis/fibrosis
· Leptospirosis
• Neoplasia (primary, secondary)
• Copper-associated hepatitis in Bedlington terriers (and other breeds)
· Drug-induced or toxic hepatitis (e.g. anticonvulsants; paracetamol (acetaminophen))
Cats
• Feline cholangitis/cholangiohepatitis complex
· Hepatic lipidosis
· Neoplasia, especially lymphoma
 Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP)
(acetaminophen))
· Cirrhosis/fibrosis
Posthepatic jaundice
Posthepatic jaundice typically occurs due to obstruction of the larger bile ducts. This
          
combination may occur in any one case. The most common causes of posthepatic
jaundice are pancreatitis and pancreatic neoplasia causing bile duct compression.
Other causes include inflammatory disorders of the biliary system, and obstruction of
bile flow due to inspissated bile or cholelithiasis. Biliary tract rupture may also cause
posthepatic jaundice.
Case example 1
Presenting Signs and Case History
A 5-year-old female neutered English springer spaniel presented with a 24-hour history of
 progressive lethargy, weakness and inappetence. Her owner had also noted her to be jaundiced. No
other significant history was reported. The dog had a complete vaccination history but had not been
vaccinated recently, and she was not receiving any drug therapy.
Major body system examination
On presentation the dog was depressed but ambulatory and responsive. Cardiovascular
examination revealed tachycardia (heart rate 19o beats per minute) buit no murmur
and femoral pulses were hyperdynamic (snappy) with no deficits. Mucous membranes
were very pale and yellow with a capillary refill time of 1 second. The dog was
tachypnoeic (respiratory rate 48 breaths per minute) but lung auscultation was
appropriate for the rate and effort. Neurological examination and abdominal
palpation were unremarkable and rectal temperature was within normal limits
(38.4°C). The rest of the physical examination was unremarkable.
Assessment
P            g
 s      e      
detected. It was therefore suspected that the dog was severely anaemic and showing
signs of cardiovascular compensation. The jaundice was therefore likely to be due
predominantly to haemolysis (i.e. prehepatic) and the dog's breed raised the suspicion
Case management
An intravenous catheter was placed into a cephalic vein and blood taken via the
severe anaemia (manual packed cell volume (PcV) 9%, reference range 37-55%)
which was markedly regenerative on blood smear examination (marked
polychromasia and anisocytosis; see Ch. 3). Moderate spherocytosis was also present
          
haemorrhage) as the cause of the regenerative anaemia. The biochemistry profile
revealed severe hyperbilirubinaemia but was otherwise unremarkable, thereby
reducing the likelihood of a hepatic or posthepatic component to the jaundice
A diagnosis of IMHA and prehepatic jaundice was made and the dog went on to
Case example 2
Presenting Signs and Case History
A 2-year-old female neutered Cocker Spaniel presented for severe vomiting. The dog had a 2-week
 history of occasional vomiting, reduced appetite, mild lethargy and weight loss, but the frequency of
vomiting had worsened on the day of presentation. The vomitus consisted of dark brown liquid and
undigested food. The dog was on a prescription diet for chronic intermittent diarrhoea but no other
significant history was reported.
Major body system examination
On presentation the dog was bright and alert. Physical examination was
unremarkable except for the presence of jaundice and the suspicion of mild
dehydration.
Case management
The lack of pallor and the history in this case were suggestive of a hepatic or
posthepatic cause of the jaundice. An intravenous catheter was placed into a cephalic
vein and blood taken via the catheter for an emergency database and biochemistry
profile. The emergency database showed high-normal PCV and TS suggestive of some
dehydration but was otherwise unremarkable. The biochemistry profile revealed
hyperbilirubinaemia (80 μmol/l, reference range 0-2.4 μmol/), marked elevation in
serum alanine aminotransferase (ALT) (2400 U/l, reference range 13-88 U/l) and
moderate elevation in serum alkaline phosphatase (ALP) (1100 U/l, reference range
19-285 U/).
A working diagnosis of hepatic jauindice with a possible posthepatic component was
made and the dog was started on intravenous isotonic crystalloid therapy at 4
ml/kg/hr (this rate was calculated to achieve replacement of an estimated 5%
dehydration over 24 hours; see Ch. 4). The dog was subsequently referred for further
investigations that resulted in a diagnosis of acute idiopathic hepatitis.
Clinical Tip
· There are two main groups of serum enzymes that can be assessed in the evaluation of jaundice:
 one group (alanine aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AsT)) reflects hepatocellular
damage and consequent enzyme leakage, while release of the other group (alkaline phosphatase
 (ALP), gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT) into the bloodstream is increased by cholestasis.
• It is important to remember that the serum activities of these enzymes are not a reflection of liver
function for which other parameters must be assessed (bilirubin, urea, glucose, albumin,
cholesterol).
Case example 3
Presenting Signs and Case History
A 10-year-old female neutered Miniature Schnauzer presented with a several day history of
vomiting, lethargy, depression and inappetence. The dog had a history of similar episodes that were
milder and self-limiting. No other significant history was reported.
Major body system examination
On presentation the dog was depressed but responsive and ambulatory. Cardiovascular
examination revealed tachycardia (heart rate 132 beats per minute) but was
otherwise unremarkable. Mucous membranes and sclera were obviously jaundiced.
   se        
the mid-cranial region. Mild pyrexia was detected (rectal temperature 39.5°C).
Case management
The lack of pallor and the history in this case were suggestive of a hepatic or
posthepatic cause of the jaundice. An intravenous catheter was placed into a cephalic
vein and blood taken via the catheter for an emergency database and biochemistry
profile. Given the dog's history, signalment, and the presence and location of
abdominal pain, a sample was also submitted for measurement of canine pancreatic
lipase (cPLI) concentration (in-house test not available).
The emergency database showed high-normal PCV and TS suggestive of some
dehydration but was otherwise unremarkable. The biochemistry profile revealed
marked hyperbilirubinaemia (250 μmol/l, reference range 0-2.4 μmol/l), and marked
 )   (         
reference range 19-285 U/l). Hypercholesterolaemia (20 mmol/1, reference range 3.3
8.9 mmol/l) was also identified.
Given the degree of elevation in ALP, it was suspected that there was a significant
posthepatic component to the jaundice in this case. The dog was managed
symptomatically and referred for abdominal ultrasonography that was compatible
with acute pancreatitis with common and intrahepatic bile duct dilation secondary to
obstruction.  Secondary  hepatitis  was  suspected.  Pancreatitis  was  subsequently
confirmed by significantly elevated cPLI concentration (600 μg/l, reference range less
than 200 μg/l).
19
Pallor and approach to anaemia
Pallor
Pallor of the mucous membranes is a common finding during major body system
cats but many of the points that follow are equally applicable. Pallor is most
both processes may be present within the same patient. In addition, hypoperfusion
due to cardiogenic or obstructive shock may also cause mucous membranes to appear
pale, as can thermoregulatory vasoconstriction in hypothermia.
In many cases it will be possible on the basis of historical and physical examination
         
Concomitant hypovolaemia and anaemia are typically seen  where anaemia is
secondary to acuite blood loss and the degree of pallor may be more severe than wouild
otherwise be expected for the degree of hypovolaemia. It is important to remember
that the packed cell voluime may be normal for several hours following acuite blood loss
(  s) (mo g pos sgos po s ng) sop 
Euvolaemic dogs with anaemia of sufficient severity are likely to show
compensatory  cardiovascular   changes   that   may  be   distinguishable   from
hypovolaemia. In particular, capillary refill time (if detectable) is uisually normal in
euvolaemic anaemia. Euvolaemic dogs with acute anaemia may be distinguishable
from chronically anaemic dogs as the former tend to be depressed or moribund while
the latter are often remarkably bright (until a critical end-point is reached), having
had time to adapt to the anaemia. In some cases anaemia is not identified until
packed cell volume/haematocrit is measured.
Anaemia
A rational approach to the investigation of anaemia starts with classification of the
anaemia as regenerative (due to red blood cell loss or destruction) or nonregenerative
(due to reduced red blood cell production). In the emergency setting, this is done on
the basis of peripheral blood smear examination, with regenerative anaemia being
manifested as polychromasia, anisocytosis and a possible increase in nucleated red
blood cells (see Figures 3.3 and 3.5). Regenerative anaemia occurs as a result of
haemolysis or haemorrhage, and additional findings are used to determine which of
these two processes is the likely cause (Figure 19.1).
Pallor
Anaemia
Hypoperfusion
↓PCV
PCVusuallynormal or↑
Euvolaemia and normal CRTlikely
May be anaemic(typically caused
(unless caused by acute haemorhage)
by acute haemorhage)
CRT likely to be abnormal
Regenerative
Nonregenerative
(Erythrocyte loss or destruction)
(Reduced erythrocyte production)
↑Polychromasia,anisocytosis
Polychromasia within normal limits
±↑Nucleated red blood cells
May be preregenerative if within3-5
day lagphase
Haemorrhage
Haemolysis
Normal (or T)total solids(unless other
↓Total solids(total protein)
source of protein loss)
Other evidence of haemolysis:
e.g.haemoglobinaemia,haemoglobinuria,
↑bilirubin
Figure 19.1
Algorithm for pallor and approach to anaemia. CRT, capillary refill time; PCV, packed
cell volume.
Clinical Tip
• There is a lag phase following red blood cell loss/destruction such that a regenerative erythrocyte
response can take 3-5 (or even 7) days to be detectable on peripheral blood smear examination.
Thus an apparently nonregenerative anaemia may in fact be preregenerative, i.e. if insufficient time
has passed since the inciting event for the regenerative response to be detectable.
Regenerative anaemia
Causes of regenerative anaemia are listed in Box 19.1.
BOX 19.1 Causes of regenerative anaemia
Haemorrhage
· Trauma (e.g. haemoabdomen, bleeding in/around pelvis, external blood loss)
· Surgery
· Neoplastic rupture (e.g. splenic haemangiosarcoma)
· Coagulopathy (e.g. anticoagulant rodenticide intoxication, immune-mediated thrombocytopenia,
angiostrongylosis, congenital disorders)
· Gastrointestinal haemorrhage (e.g. gastric/duodenal ulceration, chronic occult haemorrhage from
intestinal tumour, endoparasites)
* Severe flea (or lice) infestation
Haemolysis
Dogs
· Immune-mediated haemolytic anaemia (IMHA) - most common cause (especially primary IMHA)
· Infectious diseases (e.g. ehrlichiosis, babesiosis, mycoplasmosis, dirofilariasis)
· Intoxication (e.g. paracetamol (acetaminophen); members of Allium genus (e.g. onion, garlic); some
heavy metals (e.g. zinc, lead, copper))
· Red blood cell membrane or enzyme defects (e.g. phosphofructokinase (PFK) deficiency (e.g.
English springer spaniels); pyruvate kinase (PK) deficiency (e.g. Beagle, Basenji, West Highland White
terrier, Abyssinian cats))
• Neonatal isoerythrolysis
• Blood transfusion reaction
Cats
· Infectious diseases: especially Mycoplasma haemofelis, feline leukaemia virus (FeLV), feline
immunodeficiency virus (FIV)
- Intoxication (e.g paracetamol (acetaminophen); members of Allium genus (e.g. onion, garlic))
· Immune-mediated haemolytic anaemia (IMHA) - less common than in dogs
Case example 1
Presenting Signs and Case History
An 8-year-old female neutered cross-bred dog presented for acute collapse. The owners reported a
several week history of intermittent self-limiting lethargy.
Major body system examination
Major body system examination revealed the dog to be recumbent and depressed.
Heart rate was 150 beats per minute with no murmur or gallop sound audible.
Femoral pulse was (inappropriately) normal and no pulse deficits were detected;
however, dorsal pedal pulse was only just palpable. Mucous membranes were markedly
            
Respiratory rate was 36 breaths per minute with appropriate effort and auscultation.
The abdomen was tense on palpation with a detectable fluid thrill. Rectal temperature
was 38.5°C.
Assessment
The cardiovascular assessment of this patient was consistent with moderate
S         
normal (i.e. pink) or perhaps mildly pale. The marked pallor in this case was therefore
inconsistent with uncomplicated hypovolaemia and anaemia was therefore also
suspected.
Case management
An intravenous catheter was placed in a cephalic vein and an emergency database
performed that showed a manual packed cell volume (PcV) of 25% (normal range 37-
55%). Serum total solids (TS) were also reduced (34 g/, normal range 49-71 g/l) and
anaemia secondary to blood loss was therefore suspected. Peripheral blood smear
examination demonstrated a regenerative anaemia (moderate polychromasia and
anisocytosis).
The dog was subsequently found to have a haemoabdomen that was the result of
Case example 2
Presenting Signs and Case History
A 6-year-old male neutered Cocker Spaniel presented with a 2-day history of progressive lethargy
and inappetence. The dog had vomited twice the day before presentation.
Major body system examination
Major body system examination revealed the dog to be recumbent and depressed.
Heart rate was 110 beats per minute with no murmur or gallop sound audible. Both
femoral and dorsal pedal pulses were readily palpable and hyperdynamic with no
deficits. Mucous membranes were pale and jaundiced with a normal capillary refill
time. The rest of the major body system examination was unremarkable.
Assessment
The dog was assessed as being euvolaemic and it was suspected that mucous
membrane pallor was due to anaemia.
Case management
An intravenous catheter was placed in a cephalic vein and an emergency database
and icteric serum. Blood smear examination revealed a strongly regenerative anaemia
(marked polychromasia, moderate anisocytosis) with moderate spherocytosis (see
Figure 3.4) and in-saline agglutination testing was strongly positive. A diagnosis of
immune-mediated haemolytic anaemia (IMHA) and prehepatic jaundice was made.
Nonregenerative anaemia
Causes of nonregenerative anaemia are listed in Box 19.2.
BOX 19.2 Causes of nonregenerative anaemia
· Anaemia of chronic disease/inflammation
· Chronic renal failure
· Endocrine disease (e.g. hypothyroidism, hypoadrenocorticism)
 Feline leukaemia virus-associated anaemia
· Bone marrow disorders
- Pure red cell aplasia/erythroid hypoplasia
- Aplastic anaemia
- Myelodysplasia
- Myeloproliferative disorders
- Lymphoproliferative disorders
- Myelofibrosis
Case example 3
Presenting Signs and Case History
A 6-year-old female neutered Boxer dog presented for self-limiting ataxia following a period of
short exercise. This had occurred on two previous occasions in the preceding 2 weeks. The owners
also reported progressive exercise intolerance over several weeks and that pallor of the mucous
membranes had been present for some time.
Major body system examination
       a     
  sa        d s e a 
femoral and dorsal pedal pulses were readily palpable and hyperdynamic with no
deficits. Mucous membranes were pale with a normal capillary refill time. The rest of
the major body system examination was tinremarkable.
Assessment
The dog was assessed as being euvolaemic and it was suspected that mucous
membrane pallor was due to anaemia.
Case management
An intravenous catheter was placed in a cephalic vein and an emergency database
performed that showed PCV 16% (37-55%), serum TS 60 g/l (49-71 g/) and
nonregenerative anaemia on blood smear examination. Subsequently a diagnosis of
pure red cell aplasia was made on bone marrow sampling.
20
Pelvic limb paresis and paralysis
Causes of Acuite Nonambulatory Paraparesis/Paraplegia
Paraparesis and paraplegia most commonly occur as a result of a spinal cord lesion
caudal to the C6-T2 segment (cervicothoracic intumescence). Spinal cord disorders
that commonly cause paraparesis or paraplegia are listed in Box 20.1. In some cases
spinal cord injury is due to a cause with an acute onset (e.g. traumatic disc injury,
fibrocartilaginous embolism) while in others it occurs due to acute deterioration of a
more chronic disease (e.g. neoplasia).
BOX 20.1 Common causes of acute pelvic limb paresis and paralysis
· Type I intervertebral disc protrusion
· Trauma: vertebral fracture, vertebral luxation/subluxation
· Fibrocartilaginous embolism (FCE)
· Inflammatory central nervous system diseases (e.g. granulomatous meningoencephalomyelitis
(GME))
· Discospondylitis
· Neoplasia
· Aortic thromboembolism (typically cats)
* Spontaneous spinal cord haemorrhage (e.g. canine angiostrongylosis)
Approach to Acute Nonambulatory Paraparesis/Paraplegia
Signalment
Signalment may allow certain differential diagnoses to be viewed with a lesser or
greater index of suspicion. For example, chondrodystrophic dog breeds (e.g.
Dachshunds, Pekingese) are classically affected by Hansen type I intervertebral disc
common in older dogs. Spinal lymphoma is always a differential diagnosis in cats.
History
neurological abnormalities prior to acute deterioration may be more suggestive for
example of neoplasia.
The owner should also be asked about urination following onset of clinical signs as
this may help to localize the lesion more accuirately.
Major body system examination
Clinical Tip
· The pelvic limbs are intuitively the focus of the physical examination in animals with paraparesis
 or paraplegia. However, it is important to remember that paraparesis and paraplegia in themselves
are not life-threatening conditions and assessment of cardiovascular status, respiratory status,
mentation and pain should be prioritized. Life-threatening abnormalities, typically the result of
trauma in these cases, should be addressed first.
In the absence of traumatic injury, physical examination findings may help to raise
the index of suspicion for certain differential diagnoses. For example, pyrexia may be
more suggestive of an inflammatory cause rather than intervertebral disc disease. Gait
assessment and testing of postural reactions are clearly not applicable to animals with
nonambulatory paraparesis or paraplegia. Neurological examination of the pelvic
this is a useful prognostic indicator in spinal cord disease. Deep pain perception is
  (m      ) ss   se p
painful stimulus and must be differentiated from limb withdrawal which only
requires an intact local flexor reflex. The withdrawal reflex assesses the integrity of
the L4-S2 spinal cord segments and their associated nerve roots, as well as the femoral
and sciatic nerves.
· Spinal reflexes, typically patellar reflex: may be normal, hyperreflexive (upper motor
· Spinal palpation: normal or painful depending on lesion; intervertebral disc disease,
inflammatory  causes and traumatic  injuries are often  painful, while
fibrocartilaginous embolism is typically considered nonpainful. Neoplasia may or
may not cause spinal hyperaesthesia.
· Perineal reflex: present (upper motor neuron) or reduced to absent (lower motor
neuron).
· Muscle tone: normal, spasticity (increased extensor tone; upper motor neuron) or
flaccidity (absence of normal tone; lower motor neuron).
Clinical Tip
· Assessment of pelvic limb deep pain perception is essential. Deep pain perception is confirmed as a
conscious response to a painful stimulus (e.g. head turning, trying to bite, growling) and must be
differentiated from limb withdrawal which only requires an intact local flexor reflex. It is crucial to
B sd  n a si d d ap    nn
 available on the basis of physical examination.
  n   sa d d aa nn  s  sid a 
but is often poor. Rapid surgical intervention in animals with intervertebral disc disease may,
however, result in a successful outcome. These cases require immediate referral.
Potentially the most important decision that needs to be made by the primary
clinician following neuirological examination is whether the animal requires
immediate referral for advanced diagnostic imaging and surgical intervention if
indicated, or whether referral can be delayed for a short period (e.g. overnight).
Absent or severely reduced deep pain  perception is typically  interpreted as an
indication for immediate referral.
Clinical Tip
 Following initial stabilization of life-threatening abnormalities if present, animals with
paraparesis/paraplegia typically require referral for advanced diagnostic imaging and then surgical
intervention or conservative management.
n   e  n         d a -
those cases that require immediate referral - typically animals that have absent or severely reduced
deep pain perception - from those that may be able to wait for a short period of time prior to
referral. An incorrect decision in this respect can have potentially disastrous consequences.
Emergency database
The need to perform an emergency database in an animal with nonambulatory
paraparesis or paraplegia should be guided by the historical and examination findings
in each individual case. Indications for performing an emergency database would
trauma, or those with a more protracted history of illness. Manual packed cell volume,
serum total solids and peripheral blood smear examination are important in animals
suspected to have suffered haemorrhage.
Diagnostic imaging
of the thoracic and peritoneal cavities at the appropriate time. Plain lateral spinal
radiographs performed under sedation may help to identify obvious vertebral
luxations/subluxations or fractures (Figure 20.1). However, these abnormalities can
sometimes be subtle and may not be detected unless orthogonal views are obtained.
Lateral views should always be obtained first. If a fracture or luxation is identified on
the lateral view, an orthogonal view should not be taken; the animal should be
immobilized as quickly as possible and prepared for referral.
Figure20.1
Right lateral spinal radiograph of a dog showing subluxation of the Tlo-T11
intervertebral joint.
(Photograph courtesy of Holger Volk)
Clinical Tip
· All animals presenting with nonambulatory paraparesis or paraplegia following trauma should be
handled very carefully until a diagnosis can be obtained in order to minimize the risk of further
displacing possible vertebral luxations or fractures.
Myelography is the only additional diagnostic imaging modality that may be
available in some nonreferral practices for investigations of spinal cord disorders. In
general, however, the author does not believe that animals should be anaesthetized for
myelography unless surgical intervention can be offered under the same episode of
anaesthesia if required.
Clinical Tip
 The author does not believe that in general it is appropriate to anaesthetize animals for
intervention if required under the same episode of anaesthesia. Such cases should be referred instead
 to a hospital able to offer both investigations and intervention.
· In particular, the author has seen a number of cases that have been anaesthetized for myelography
in practices that were unable to offer surgical intervention. Aside from the additional episode of
general anaesthesia that could be avoided, it must also be remembered that myelography is not a
benign investigation (possible complications include seizures, cardiorespiratory abnormalities and
deterioration of neurological signs) and is also no longer considered the gold standard imaging
modality for investigation of spinal disorders; financial constraints may, however, clearly influence
decision-making.
Treatment
As always the priority in animals presenting following trauma is to address life-
threatening injuries that may exist alongside the spinal cord disorder. Correction of
        
will also serve to minimize secondary spinal cord injury. Following injury, the spinal
cord is even more dependent on adequate systemic perfusion and oxygen delivery.
Many of the principles are the same as those described for traumatic brain injury (see
Ch. 28).
In the absence of a definitive diagnosis, treatment of paraparesis or paraplegia
thereafter centres on analgesia if indicated and other stabilization measuires as
appropriate prior to referral. Pure opioids (see Ch. 5) are the analgesic agents
indicated   initially  and  nonsteroidal  antinflammatory   agents  should   not be
administered to hypovolaemic or dehydrated animals, or those suspected of having a
coagulation defect. The use of methylprednisolone succinate (or any other
corticosteroid) is no longer recommended in spinal cord injury and is to be strongly
discouraged.  Nonsteroidal  antiinflammatory   agents  should   definitely  not  be
administered to animals that have been treated with a corticosteroid due to a
Animals that have suffered traumatic spinal injury should be transported under
controlled conditions, ideally strapped on to a rigid flat surface (e.g. purpose-built
stretcher, large plank of wood, suitcase). Adequate chemical restraint in the form of
opioid analgesia with or without additional sedation should be provided to ensure the
animal remains calm en route.
Subsequent  treatment of nonambulatory  paraparesis or paraplegia  following
diagnosis may include surgical intervention or conservative management, with or
without long-term analgesia and other medical therapies.
Clinical Tip
* The use of methylprednisolone succinate for spinal cord injury was a longstanding practice in both
human and veterinary medicine. However, it was not based on robust clinical evidence and is no
longer recommended as the standard of care in human medicine. Considering the potential adverse
effects (e.g. gastrointestinal ulceration, increased risk of infection, hyperglycaemia), current
recommendations are that methylprednisolone succinate (or any other exogenous corticosteroid)
 should not be used for spinal cord injury.
· The reader is alerted to the fact that some popular drug formularies and texts continue erroneously
 to recommend the use of corticosteroids for spinal cord injury, mainly because some of these agents
remain licensed for this purpose despite current recommendations.
21
Petechiae and ecchymoses
Petechiae and ecchymoses represent superficial bleeding into the skin or mucous
membranes. Petechiae are small pinpoint haemorrhages and ecchymoses are larger
areas. Petechiae are more commonly identified in mucous membranes, especially the
buccal and gingival mucosa, the prepuce and the vulva. Ecchymoses may be more
evident following venepuncture. Ecchymoses are sometimes difficult to distinguish
from cutaneous erythema on inspection; however, this is readily achieved by pressing
a glass slide on to the affected area - an erythematous lesion will blanch but an
ecchymosis will not. Petechiae and ecchymoses are rare in cats.
Causes of Petechiae and Ecchymoses
Petechiae and ecchymoses are typically the result of severe thrombocytopenia, platelet
function disorders, or a localized or systemic vasculopathy. Thrombocytopenia is the
most common cause in companion animals, and there may be other signs of
haemorrhage such as epistaxis, melaena (see Figure 9.l), haematuria and active
gingival bleeding.
Clinical Tip
· Traditionally petechiae and ecchymoses were said to be the result of disorders affecting so-called
primary haemostasis, while conditions involving coagulation factor deficiencies (e.g. anticoagulant
rodenticide intoxication, liver failure) were said to cause disorders in secondary haemostasis.
· Coagulation factor disorders typically present differently from platelet or vascular disorders, with
 bleeding occurring more commonly into body cavities or as haematomas rather than as mucosal or
cutaneous haemorrhage; these animals are also more likely to bleed excessively following
venepuncture.
· Although in recent years it has been shown that the traditional classification of coagulation is too
simplistic in vivo, the distinction remains very important to avoid misdiagnosis and inappropriate
investigation. In particular, the author is aware of many dogs with petechiae that have been
erroneously investigated or treated for anticoagulant rodenticide intoxication that is extremely
unlikely to present in this way.
Thrombocytopenia
Ihe possibility of spontaneous haemorrhage is said to arise when total platelet couint
falls below 30 x 10° platelets/litre. On peripheral blood smear examination, this
   (e x)   d d    s
must be remembered firstly that this is only a guideline, and secondly that not all
animals with this level of thrombocytopenia will necessarily suffer bleeding.
In the author's experience, clinically significant haemorrhage associated with
thrombocytopenia is most commonly the result of primary (idiopathic) immune-
mediated thrombocytopenia  (ITP)  (see Ch. 33). It is also noteworthy that
thrombocytopenia secondary to haemorrhage is extremely unlikely to be sufficiently
severe as to induce further bleeding.
Platelet function disorders
Platelet function disorders may be inherited or acquired. Inherited thrombopathies
have been identified in several dog breeds (e.g. the Bassett hound, the Otter hound, the
American Cocker Spaniel) and also a small number of cats. Acquired disorders may
potentially occur for example due to uraemia, liver disease or various drug therapies.
Von Willebrand disease (vWD) is the most common inherited bleeding disorder in
epistaxis, melaena and haematuria) and excessive bleeding following surgery or other
trauma. However, ecchymoses (and petechiae) may occasionally occur. Type I vWD
(reduced but measurable levels of vWF) is the most common and is seen especially in
the Doberman Pinscher.
Vasculopathy
Vasculitis may occur as part of the syndrome associated with a number of infections,
tumours, immune-mediated disorders and drug reactions. Pyrexia, oedema and
multiorgan signs are likely.
Approach to Petechiae and Ecchymoses
Signalment
Signalment may help to raise or lower the index of suspicion for certain differential
incidence is reported in a number of breeds (e.g. the Cocker Spaniel, poodles, the Old
English Sheepdog); this disorder is relatively rare in cats.
History
The history in animals with petechiae and ecchymoses is variable depending on the
          
inappetence, and present primarily for investigation of bleeding. In other cases, other
with leptospirosis) and petechiae or ecchymoses are identified almost incidentally.
administration and travel, is essential, and all cuirrent or previous medical problems
should be explored. In particular, the owner should be asked about any previous
episodes potentially consistent with coagulopathy, as well as whether there is a
history of excessive bleeding following surgical or nonsurgical trauma.
Major body system examination
Physical examination findings vary in animals with petechiae or ecchymoses,
depending on the extent and sites of the bleeding and the underlying disorder. In some
cases, evidence of external haemorrhage is the most remarkable finding; in addition to
petechiae or ecchymoses, there may also be epistaxis, gingival haemorrhage,
       
Animals with gastrointestinal haemorrhage may suffer severe blood loss and may
S        
hyperdynamic pulses, tachypnoea; lethargy, depression). In a multisystemic disorder
such as leptospirosis, evidence of bleeding is likely to be only one of the significant
abnormal findings on physical examination.
Emergency database
Clinical Tip
· Extra care with venepuncture is required in animals with petechiae or ecchymoses where a systemic
coagulopathy is suspected. These findings are not an absolute contraindication to the use of the
issod se o s aa pnadad e asn c papa s l inq a n!
· Venepuncture should be performed by experienced personnel, using a small needle, and with
prolonged pressure over the site following sampling. Subcutaneous and intramuscular injections
should be minimized.
An emergency database should be performed in all animals presenting with
petechiae or ecchymoses. An indwelling intravenous catheter is likely to be required
in most of these cases and the emergency database is therefore usually performed on
blood obtained via the catheter at the time of placement. The emergency database
must include peripheral blood smear examination as this is the most reliable means of
manual packed cell volume are suggestive of anaemia secondary to haemorrhage, and
a regenerative anaemia (anisocytosis, polychromasia, increase in nucleated red blood
cells) may be seen on smear examination in such cases.
Animals with petechiae or ecchymoses primarily as a result of platelet dysfunction
may have a normal platelet count or only mild thrombocytopenia. Platelet function is
very difficult to assess reliably in routine practice but measurement of buccal mucosal
bleeding time (BMBT) is typically used. The results of this test can be quite discrepant
depending on the individual performing the test, the technique (including restraint)
used, and the patient's haematocrit. Nevertheless, a severely prolonged BMBT in an
platelet fuinction disorder, vWD or vasculopathy. Normal BMBT in dogs and cats is
generally considered to be less than 4 minutes and less than 2 minutes, respectively.
Clinical Tip
· There is no rationale for performing a buccal mucosal bleeding time (BMBT) in an animal with
(severe) thrombocytopenia and excessive haemorrhage may occur in such cases.
T'reatment
22
Regurgitation
oral cavity, and is most commonly the result of oesophageal disease. Regurgitation is
the most common sign of, but not pathognomonic for, oesophageal disease, and other
differential diagnoses, in particular pharyngeal disorders, must be considered. There
are a large number of possible causes of regurgitation; some of the more common are
listed in Box 22.1. In the author's experience, megaoesophagus and oesophageal
foreign bodies are the most common reasons for regurgitation in emergency patients.
BOX 22.1 Causes of regurgitation related to the oesophagus
Oesophageal obstruction
· Especially foreign body
• Stricture
· Congenital vascular ring anomaly
· Neoplasia
· Extraluminal compression (e.g. mediastinal or cervical mass)
· Hiatal hernia
Oesophagitis
· Gastro-oesophageal reflux (e.g. general anaesthesia, hiatal hernia)
· Drug-related (especially doxycycline)
· Dietary indiscretion (e.g. ingestion of caustic or corrosive substance)
· Secondary to oesophageal disease (e.g. foreign body, megaoesophagus)
Idiopathic (primary) megaoesophagus, congenital or acquired
Secondary megaoesophagus
· Myasthenia gravis, especially focal but also generalized
· Generalized neuromuscular disease
· Neuropathy, peripheral or central
· Hypothyroidism
· Hypoadrenocorticism
Clinical Tip
· Regurgitation must be differentiated from vomiting in particular by careful history-taking and
sometimes actually observing the behaviour. A comparison of the main distinguishing features is
 presented in Table 22.1. Occasionally an animal may demonstrate both regurgitation and vomiting
(e.g. with a sliding hiatal hernia).
· Signs consistent with possible oesophageal discomfort (e.g. pain on swallowing. repeated
 swallowing, arching of neck) are more suggestive of oesophagitis or foreign body obstruction rather
than megaoesophagus.
 Table 22.1  Comparison of regurgitation and vomiting
Regurgitation
Vomiting
 No prod romal sign s, signs assoc iated with pain may mimic nausea
 Prodromal signs of nausea (e.g. hypersalivation,
restlessness)
 Passive (no abdom in al contraction s); postural chan ges associated with pain possible (e.g.
Active with abdominal contractions
stretch ing neck)
 No con sistent relationsh ip with feeding
No con sistent relationsh ip with feeding
ades u te[nqnt uango pooy paisasipun ipinbi o 'poog paissp xo) pasipun
Digested food
 No ble but may contain frothy saliva
Bile may be present
Clinical Tip
· The airway is unprotected by the epiglottis during regurgitation and therefore there is a risk of
inhalation. Aspiration pneumonia is a common and potentially life-threatening complication.
Approach to Regurgitation
Signalment
Signalment may help to raise or lower the index of suspicion for certain differential
diagnoses. Puppies with regurgitation are most likely to be suffering from congenital
(         
and idiopathic megaoesophagus. Oesophageal foreign bodies are more common in
smaller dogs, while some breeds (e.g. Golden Retrievers, German Shepherd dogs) are at
increased risk of megaoesophagus (see below).
History
behaviour in order to differentiate regurgitation from vomiting and even retching or
gagging (see Table 22.1). Other signs consistent with oesophageal disease may also be
 s  s  i   r   ns
In addition, the animal may be exhibiting other clinical signs that will help to raise
     s  s      
          
suspected episode of ingestion of an irritant substance.
Major body system examination
Physical examination findings are largely dependent on the underlying cause and
may be completely normal in animals with localized oesophageal disease. Respiratory
examination may be abnormal in animals with aspiration pneumonia (e.g. dyspnoea.
S           
particular neuromuscular, may be present in some cases, and weight loss occurs with
chronic regurgitation. Puppies with congenital abnormalities are often thin and
stunted.
Emergency database
The emergency database may well be unremarkable in a number of animals with
regurgitation. Manual packed cell volume and serum total solids may be consistent
with dehydration in some cases.  Peripheral blood smear examination may
demonstrate leucocytosis consistent with inflammatory disease, including moderate to
severe oesophagitis, and neutrophils may show toxic changes and band forms with
animals with hypoadrenocorticism (Addison's disease, see Ch. 34) and consistent
abnormalities may be identified (hyponatraemia, hyperkalaemia, hypoglycaemia,
azotaemia; lack of stress leucogram).
Diagnostic imaging
     p   s  
views) are useful in animals with regurgitation and may help to identify
megaoesophagus, radiopaque oesophageal foreign bodies, aspiration pneumonia and
mediastinal masses (Figures 22.1-22.3).
Figure 22.1
Right lateral thoracic radiograph in a dog showing megaoesophagus secondary to
myasthenia gravis.
Figure 22.2
 Right lateral thoracic radiograph in a dog showing a distal oesophageal foreign body
(bone). Oesophageal dilation is present and a bone is also visible in the stomach.
(a)
(b)
Figure22.3
(a) Right lateral and (b) left lateral thoracic radiographs in a dog with severe
aspiration pneumonia. Multiple air bronchograms are clearly visible in the ventral lung fields.
If megaoesophagus is considered a significant possibility, radiographs should be
taken without sedation or general anaesthesia. Aspiration pneumonia is most
commonly identified as an alveolar pattern with air bronchograms in the right middle
lung lobe and ventral parts of the other lobes, especially cranioventrally (Figure 22.3).
Radiographs must not  be prioritized over oxygen therapy and  cardiovascular
stabilization in animals with severe dyspnoea at presentation and these animals
should be subjected to minimum stress.
hooks). Occasionally a lodged foreign body causes oesophageal perforation or rupture
that may be identified radiographically as pneumomediastinum (possibly  with
pneumothorax) (Figure 22.4). Small volume pneumomediastinum is most often
identified as gas lucency within the mediastinum that outlines the tracheal wall.
Figure22.4
Right lateral thoracic radiograph in a dog showing air in the mediastinum
highlighting the tracheal wall.
If plain radiographs do not provide a diagnosis, contrast radiography may be
employed. A water-soluble contrast medium should be used in animals in which
       s    
foreign body. A barium meal can be helpful to identify megaoesophagus or vascular
ring anomalies, strictures and extraluminal compression. Barium meals should not be
attempted in animals that may have compromised swallowing, either due to
dysphagia or severe morbidity.
particular.
Endoscopy
Endoscopy can be extremely useful in oesophageal diseases allowing diagnosis of
mural and intraluminal lesions as well as sites of extraluminal compression. It also
allows therapeutic interventions, especially foreign body removal (Figuire 22.5).
ID.NO:
D.0.BIRTH
OS
COMTENT:
Figure 22.5
Endoscopic appearance of an oesophageal bone in a dog.
Treatment
Treatment of regurgitation centres on addressing the underlying disorder if possible
and an extensive discussion is beyond the scope of this book. Successful management
of the primary disorder may or may not resolve clinical signs of oesophageal disease,
especially if severe oesophagitis is present. Treatment of oesophagitis may include
administration of sucralfate and reducing gastric acidity. The latter is ideally achieved
through the use of a proton pump inhibitor such as omeprazole; however, a histamine
(H2) receptor antagonist (e.g. ranitidine, famotidine) may be used if omeprazole is not
available.
Aspiration pneumonia
Aspiration pneumonia typically requires aggressive intervention that is tailored to the
circumstances of the individual patient. Broad-spectrum antibiosis is essential and is
typically given intravenously initially; subsequent enteral antibiosis may need to be
amoxicillin/clavulanic acid or a cephalosporin; ideally this should be reassessed on
the basis of culture and sensitivity results obtained from samples collected via
transtracheal aspiration, tracheal wash or bronchoalveolar lavage. Fluid therapy may
  a  s s    s   
       s   
arterial blood gas analysis). Regular nebulization (without coupage) and gentle
exercise are also important.
Megaoesophagus
Megaoesophagus is characterized by generalized dilation of the oesophagus with lack
megaoesophagus is most commonly idiopathic or due to a vascular ring anomaly.
Animals with vascular ring anomalies often present shortly after being weaned on to
solid food, at which time the oesophageal obstruction becomes more obvious.
Megaoesophagus in older animals is most commonly idiopathic but may be acquired
as a secondary abnormality of a number of disorders; focal myasthenia gravis is the
mostcommon.
A number of dog breeds appear predisposed to vascular ring anomalies; for example
the German Shepherd dog and the Irish Setter are predisposed to persistent right aortic
arch. Vascular ring anomalies are less common in cats. A number of canine breeds are
predisposed to congenital idiopathic megaoesophagus, including the Great Dane, the
German Shepherd dog, the Irish Setter, the Labrador retriever and the Shar-pei
Congenital idiopathic megaoesophagus is rare in cats but the Siamese may be
certain breeds, including the golden retriever and the German shepherd dog.
Megaoesophagus  is usually  readily  diagnosed by  plain  radiography although
occasionally a contrast study may be required (see Figure 22.1). The dilated
oesophagus may be filled with air, fluid or ingesta. As described above, aspiration
pneumonia is the most common complication of megaoesophagus and may be
screen for a primary inderlying cause.
Clinical Tip
 a         st   
s  i  so  s   o o 
possibility, radiographs should be taken without sedation.
Treatment of megaoesophagus centres on addressing an underlying cause if one is
does not resolve despite treatment of the underlying disorder require long-term
symptomatic and supportive care. Controlled feeding is often the mainstay of
management and usually involves feeding small frequent meals (e.g. four to six meals
 n              ( 
erect posture for 10-15 minutes if possible. It is noteworthy that some animals do
better with food moulded into balls while gruel works better in others; dietary
consistency must therefore be tailored to the individual patient. Treatment of
 sn    oe ps se    d s
term feeding via gastrostomy tube may be the only option.
Oesophageal Foreign Bodies
chicken) are undoubtedly the most common culprits but others include fishing hooks.
balls, toys and dental chews.
Signalment
Oesophageal foreign bodies appear to be a more common problem in certain dog
breeds and the majority of affected dogs are small. In the author's experience in the
White terrier. Oesophageal foreign body obstruction is rare in cats. Most dogs with
History
In the author's experience, in most cases there is a reported history of the dog either
             
S              
before dogs are presented. Sometimes it is only following diagnosis that owners
remember the exact episode when the foreign body was ingested.
vomiting, retching, gagging and hypersalivation. Dogs may be anorexic, may
approach the food and then tuirn away, or may attempt to eat with subsequent pain on
swallowing and/or dysphagia. Repeated gulping or swallowing, restlessness, distress,
coughing and increased respiratory effort may also be reported.
Physical examination and the emergency database may be unremarkable in dogs with
oesophageal foreign body obstruction. In some cases there is evidence of nonspecific
pain on examination and the author has also occasionally identified respiratory
cervical oesophagus from the outside. Fishing line may be identified trapped around
             
identified on examination and emergency database.
Diagnostic imaging
In the author's experience, the vast majority of oesophageal foreign bodies are
radiopaque enough to be detected on plain radiographs; however, occasionally
   ns o    n o   s
entrapment is the caudal oesophagus between the heart base and the cardiac sphincter
(see Figure 22.2). In addition to the foreign body itself, plain radiographs often
demonstrate increased soft tissue density around the foreign body and air in the
oesophagus.
Plain radiographs are also useful to exclude pneumomediastinum (and possible
pneumothorax) as a result of oesophageal rupture, and to identify evidence of
aspiration pneumonia.
Treatment
Clinical Tip
      s        e
foreign body obstructions is very small, either as a result of the foreign body or due to iatrogenic
injury during removal. The potential consequences can, however, be rapidly disastrous and there is
therefore perhaps an argument for referral of all dogs with oesophageal foreign body obstruction to
a hospital where immediate surgical intervention can be offered if required. However, there are clear
financial and practical considerations in this respect and the decision should therefore be made on
an individual case basis in discussion with the owner.
Oesophageal foreign body obstruction should be treated as an emergency and
removal should be undertaken as soon as any initial stabilization that may be
required has been performed. On-going obstruction is associated with an increased
to the wall of the oesophagus depends on the type, size and sharpness of the foreign
body, and the duration of obstruction. If facilities or expertise are not available to
perform removal in-house, immediate referral should be arranged. It is essential to
ensure that animals that have been anaesthetized for radiography are adequately
recovered before being transported.
body from the oesophagus. The author uses flexible endoscopy for this purpose but
orally, typically using large rigid grasping forceps but occasionally other types of
forceps are required. The oesophageal mucosa is evaluated at the time of removal for
          m     
therapy and potentially inform on the risk of possible stricture formation.
Clinical Tip
and results in gastric distension that may compromise respiratory function under anaesthesia. It is
essential to monitor this closely (including using pulse oximetry if available) and decompress the
s  s s   s ns  g
Occasionally it is not possible to remove the foreign body orally, even in little pieces,
and it has to be pushed into the stomach. Many foreign objects will then either
dissolve over time or go on to be passed in the faeces; occasionally, however, surgical
dislodged in either direction; however, in the author's experience, this is rare.
The author typically takes plain radiographs following removal to check for the
there is any doubt, a positive contrast oesophagram using water-soluble contrast
medium may be helpful although interpretation may be difficuilt. Surgical repair via
thoracotomy is traditionally required if rupture occurs given the risks of mediastinitis
and pleuritis. However, if financial constraints preclude this intervention, some dogs
      i i     s
related to the extent of leakage.
Management following removal is guided by the findings in each individual case. In
some cases, no additional medical therapy is required and the dogs can be discharged
once they have fuilly recovered from the procedure and demonstrated an interest in
food. In other cases, hospitalization for on-going analgesia (typically buprenorphine)
and intravenous fluid therapy may be indicated for 24-48 hr. Medical therapy for
and/or a histamine (Hz) receptor antagonist, with the extent and duration of
treatment depending on the individual case. Occasionally some dogs continue to
regurgitate for several days following removal due to moderate-to-severe oesophagitis
necessitating lengthier hospitalization.
The author typically recommends feeding of a soft food for a few days following
discharge. Owners should be warned of the possibility of stricture formation that may
lead to recurrence of clinical signs of oesophageal disease 1-4 weeks later.
23
Respiratory distress
Dogs and cats with respiratory distress are a relatively common presentation to
emergency clinics. These patients are often extremely unstable and a rational
approach to their management can make the difference between life and death in the
initial period following presentation. This is especially true of cats and the bulk of this
chapter will therefore focus on this species. However, many of the principles discussed
are equally applicable to dogs, about which some information is provided at the end.
Approach to Feline Respiratory Distress
Respiratory distress can occur as a result of an abnormality affecting any one or more
of the following areas:
( t ) )    
· Lower respiratory tract (e.g. feline bronchial disease)
· Lung parenchyma (e.g. pulmonary contusions, pulmonary oedema)
· Pleural space (e.g. pleural effusion, pneumothorax)
· Thoracic wall and diaphragm (e.g. traumatic diaphragmatic rupture).
Being able to identify the area affected is extremely important with respect to
patient management.
Clinical Tip
· Abnormal respiratory behaviour can also occur as a result of changes affecting other systems, in
particular the central nervous system and alterations in acid-base physiology.
Signalment, history
It is often possible to make sensible judgements as to the most likely causes of a cat's
respiratory distress on the basis of its signalment and a very brief history. For
example:
· A 1-year-old male domestic short hair with no significant preceding history returns
home with difficulty breathing, pelvic limb lameness and blood on the face. The most
     s      i
pneumothorax and/or pulmonary contusions  (haemothorax and diaphragmatic
rupture also possible).
· A 4-year-old female neutered Abyssinian with no ouitdoor access is found with
severe difficulty breathing on the owner's bed, where she has been all evening. The
most likely causes of this cat's respiratory distress are feline bronchial disease and
pleural effusion due to neoplasia or heart disease. The owner goes on to report that
the cat has had intermittent self-limiting episodes of coughing over the preceding 3
months. This extra information makes feline bronchial disease the most likely
diagnosis.
Following presentation
Clinical Tip
· A cat with respiratory distress is likely to be at its most unstable on presentation. The stress of
being in the carrier, of travelling and of a strange environment is much more significant in a cat with
         n
can be enough to cause some cats to fully decompensate, and a hands-off approach with an initial
period of oxygen therapy is most prudent.
·• The degree of handling is a judgement to be made on an individual case basis but where there is
 any doubt at all, the reader is encouraged to adopt the principle of first doing no harm. The majority
 of cats with respiratory distress will benefit from a period of oxygen therapy before thorough
 evaluation and intervention.
 There is no rational justification for excessive manual restraint of a cat with respiratory distress.
The author's initial approach to a cat that presents with moderate or severe
respiratory distress is as follows.
Observation
The cat is first briefly observed in its carrier as much information can often be
obtained from this approach (see Table 23.1).
Table 23.1 Observations and their interpretation in cats with respiratory distress
Observation
Interpretation
Mental
alertn ess 
an d pupil
size
Respir atory
rate, effort 
Cbserving respiratory patterns can be dificult but may yield very useful information. Reported assoc iations include: mixed (inspiratory and
an d pattern
expiratory) dyspnoea with a fixed upper respiratory tract obstruction (e.g. laryngeal mass); mixed dyspnoea, in particular with prolonged
expiration and an expiratory pu sh, in felin e bron ch ial d isease
Increased abd ominal effort may be seen
P aradoxical abdomin al movement (where the thorax and abd omen move in opposite directions) may occur with severe dyspnoea
Mucous
membran es
Unless severe, pallor of muc ous membran es may be difficult to id en tify from afar
Cyan osis is indicative of severely compromised oxygenation and should prompt rapid intervention
An animal with pink mu cous membranes may stll be severely hypoxaemic and the clinician sh ould not be lulled into a false sen se of secu
Position and
posture
Cats in respiratory distress will usu ally sit in sternal recumben cy or show orthopnoea
Lateral recumbency is often an ominous sign indicating impending respiratory arrest and should prompt rapid intervention
Neck exten sion and open mouth breathing may be seen
External
Raises the index of suspicion for common traumatic causes of respiratory distress(e.g. pulmonary contusions, pneumothorax)
evidence of
trauma
Brief examination
An extremely brief examination is then performed. This is done with the cat in its
carrier, if that is the cat's preferred option and the carrier design allows. Otherwise, it
is done in close proximity to a prepared oxygen cage and only if the cat has not been
distressed in any noticeable way by removal from its carrier. Attention is paid to the
following:
· Sternal cardiac auscultation:
- Is the heart rate subjectively fast or slow? Is there a gallop sound or a murmur?
(Bradycardia in a cat with respiratory distress may be an ominous finding;
           n 
cause but it is noteworthy that the lack of a murmur or a gallop sound does not
rule out heart disease.)
- Are the heart souinds muffled?
- Are the heart sounds in a normal position?
· Lung field auscultation:
-- Are lung sounds audible ventrally? Dorsally?
- Are lung sounds loud or quiet? Harsh? Crackles?
 e  ns   e ss  n  s  s 
of effort? (Apparently normal lung sounds in a cat with marked respiratory effort
may in fact be inappropriately quiet.)
- Are lung souinds symmetrical?
· Chest compliance:
- An intrathoracic mass may reduce the compliance of the chest wall (as may
pleural effusion and the presence of abdominal contents).
· Laryngeal auscultation if appropriate:
-- Is it louder than normal?
-- Is there stridor?
· Femoral pulse palpation:
-- Difficulty breathing per se should not reduce pulse quality.
- The presence of weak or absent femoral pulses may suggest a primary or
concurrent cause of hypoperfusion, such as cardiac disease or hypovolaemic
shock.
Table 23.2 presents some of the more common causes of respiratory distress in cats
and possible associated findings on auscultation. The reader is reminded that normal
lung sounds are quieter caudodorsally and louder cranioventrally.
Table 23.2 Some causes of respiratory distress in cats and possible associated findings on auscultation
Cause of respiratory distress
Possible fin din gs on auscultation
URT obstruction
 Increased URT noise with possible stridor/stertot
 Feline bronchial disease
Harsh lung sounds, wheezes, (crackles)
 Pulmonary oed ema
 Harsh lung soun ds, crackles
Pu lmonary con tusions
Loud/harsh lung soun ds (crackles)
 Pleural effusion
Lung sounds qu ieter ventrally (harsh dorsally); heart sounds may be muffled
 Pneumothorax
Lung sounds quieter dorsally (or diffusely)
Intrathoracic mass
Lung sounds dull (heart sounds displaced)
Diaphragmatic rupture
Lung sounds dull, gut sounds in thorax
URT, upper respiratory tract.
Oxygenation and client discussion
Following brief examination, the cat is placed in an oxygen cage and kept under close
observation. The author uses this time to have a discuission with the owner. The
combination of the cat's signalment, history, observation and brief examination may
well have identified the anatomical location and possibly the specific cause of the cat's
plan, prognosis and costs with the owner before the cat is subjected to further
management. For example:
· It is often possible to identify marked pleural effusion by auscuiltation. The two most
common causes of this in cats are neoplasia and congestive heart failure. The owner
must therefore be made aware that while it is usually possible to improve the
animal's quality of life in the short term, its long-term prognosis is guarded.
Pyothorax is another cause of pleural effusion. Although the prognosis with this
condition is much better, it is expensive to treat.
· Harsh lung sounds following suspected or confirmed traumatic injury are most
likely due to pulmonary contusions from which the vast majority of cats recover. The
owner must be made aware of the possible need for short-to medium-term oxygen
therapy and the costs involved. The possibility of discovering other significant
injuries when the cat is able to be examined more thoroughly should also be
discuissed.
Further management
Clinical Tip
Given the often unstable and precarious status of dyspnoeic cats, it is more important than ever to
subject each proposed intervention to a risk-benefit analysis.
· What is the benefit to the patient?
· What is the stress involved to the patient?
• Will the results of diagnostic testing alter the patient's initial management in any significant way?
The clinician should not be afraid to leave a cat in oxygen for an extended period of stabilization
P   o o a       s  
the costs involved. It is not therefore possible to be too prescriptive here and what
follows is a general discussion of the interventions that may be indicated
A more comprehensive physical examination is required but this is often delayed
lintil intravenous access has been established.
Intravenouis catheter placement
There are a number of benefits of establishing intravenous access as soon as possible,
including more rapid drug administration in a subsequent crisis. Nevertheless, there is
no rational justification for excessive manual restraint of a cat with respiratory
distress and an intravenous catheter should only be placed if the patient is sufficiently
compliant. If a catheter is placed, blood should be obtained for an emergency database
(see Ch. 3).
Venepuncture for in-house laboratory analysis
The results of standard haematology and biochemistry screening are extremely
linlikely to affect the management of a cat with respiratory distress in the initia.
Drug therapy
A number of different drugs may be indicated in the early management of a cat with
P            
immediately forthcoming when presented with a cat in severe respiratory distress, and
administer an empirical combination of agents via the intramuscular route. The
author administers furosemide, dexamethasone and terbutaline by intramuscular
injection in such cases and this is usually accompanied by morphine at a dose rate of
0.1 mg/kg (estimated body weight).
Table 23.3 Drugs that may be indicated in the early management of cats with respiratory distress
Drug
Dose/route
In dications/comments
Furosemide
1-4 mg/kg i.v., i.m. q 1-2 hr until clinical
improvement; then q 1 2 hr
Initial dose may need to be given i.m. depend ing on patient stability
 Indicated for suspected card iogenic pulmonary oedema; unlikely to help with
pulmonary contusions
Contraind icated in hypovolaemia or dehydration
Excessive  administration  can  cause  severe dehydration, electrolyte
abn ormalities an d renal failure
 Glyceryl trin itrate 2%
Apply 6 mm q 6-8 hr topic ally
oin tment
Ind icated for congestive heart failure
Wear gloves when applying, avoid contact with site, rotate application sites,
highlight treatment on kennel/chart
 Morph ine
0.1 mg/kg slow i.v., s.c., q6 hr
aineI lrea y aaSasuoo u JIoie PO uaa e se pue sIsToIxue Iog Pateoi pul
May be given prior to thoracocentesis
Higher doses ind icated in trauma
 Butorphanol
0.1 mg/kg iv., s.c.
Ind icated for anxiolysis or prior to thorac ocentesis
Dexamethasone
0.25 mg/kg i.v., i.m, s.c. q24 hr
Ind icated for feline lower ainrway disease and upper respiratory tract dyspnoea
Aqeis jualed ro s up uadap ur'i uaaia q aeu asop reiliu
Can repeat dose if insuffic ient response
Terbu taline
0.01 mg/kg slow i.v., s.c. q 4 hr
Beta2-agonist bron chodilator ind icated for feline bronchial disease
i.m. injection may be pain ful
Midaz olam
0.1-0.2 mg/kg i.m. or i.v.
May be required for thorac ocentesis
Ketam ine
1-2 mg/kg i.m. or i.v.
May be required for thoracoc entesis
Use judic iou sly if congestive heart failure is suspected as relatively co
ntra ind icated in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
i.m., intramuscular; i.v., intravenous; s.c., subcutaneous.
Pulse oximetry
Although there are potential pitfalls with relying solely on pulse oximetry, it does
provide an easy and non-invasive technique for monitoring compliant cats with
respiratory distress. The probe may be fixed in place (e.g. on the pinna, paw or tail)
 and the monitor left in or out of the oxygen cage as appropriate.
Ultrasonography
Ultrasonography is extremely iseful for respiratory distress in cats, where it is uised to
identify pleural effusion in particular. Even in the most novice hands, it may also be
shortening, and diaphragmatic rupture can also be identified. Following an initial
period of stabilization, it is the author's experience that the vast majority of cats
tolerate this procedure very well. If facilities allow, scanning can be done without
removing the cat from the oxygen cage. Pleural fluid is identified as a predominantly
anechoic or hypoechoic area between the hyperechoic lung margin and the chest wall.
The edges of the lung lobes may be seen to be flapping about in the fluid.
Thoracocentesis
          
readily allows pleural space disease to be identified, and can markedly improve a
patient's respiratory status by evacuating the pleural cavity and allowing the lungs to
   o  s  s      
laboratory analysis. If pleural space disease is suspected, thoracocentesis should be
performed before radiography to improve patient stability and to produce radiographs
that are likely to yield more liseful information.
In non-compliant cats with confirmed pleural space disease, it is preferable to uise
judicious cardiovascular-sparing sedation in order to allow the procedure to be
performed successfully. This is likely to be safer for the patient than repeated attempts,
with the extra potential for complications and greater stress to the cat. If
circumstances allow, the author prefers to administer a low dose of an opioid (e.g. 0.1
              
inadequate alone, midazolam (o.1-0.2 mg/kg i.v. or i.m.) is administered in addition.
If yet more sedation is required, ketamine (1-2 mg/kg i.v. or i.m.) is administered and
topped up as necessary; however, ketamine must be used judiciously in cats with
suspected heart   disease  as it   is relatively   contraindicated  in  hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy.
It is neither possible nor indeed necessary to evacuate the pleural space entirely.
That said, the removal of less than 15-20 ml/kg of pleural space-occupying material is
Radiography
Clinical Tip
· Thoracic radiography is both typically not required for the initial stabilization of cats with
respiratory distress and extremely risky in these critical and highly vulnerable patients. Radiography
performed prior to adequate stabilization is a high-risk test which is likely to have little benefit early
on and the author would strongly discourage its use in all but the most exceptional circumstances.
Thoracic radiography is usually indicated at some point in cats with respiratory
distress that does not emanate from the upper respiratory tract. However, it is
combination of the patient's history, signalment, observation, brief examination and
typically necessary.
         s
minimum stress is no more applicable than in the context of radiography. If
the radiography room and minimal restraint should be used. If tolerated, oxygen
supplementation is provided by mask or flow-by. The intention here is to produce an
image that allows the anatomical area affected to be identified and not to produce the
perfect thoracic radiograph. Even a rotated dorsoventral radiograph can provide more
never be restrained in dorsal recumbency and it is typically best to minimize the
Approach to Canine Respiratory Distress
The approach to canine respiratory distress is very similar to that in cats as described
 ss   s    s     
nevertheless minimal stress, gentle handling and strict rest are paramount. In the
commonly suffering from:
· Upper respiratory tract disease, especially laryngeal paralysis or brachycephalic
airway obstruction syndrome (BAOs) (see Ch. 32)
 s  o       e
24
Seizures
Seizure disorders represent a relatively common reason for emergency consultation
and presentation. Seizures are classified as generalized or partial/focal, and the tonic-
clonic form of generalized seizures forms the basis of the following discussion. In
some animals with generalized seizures, the inciting cause is transient or rapidly
reversible (e.g. intoxication, hypoglycaemia), while in others seizures occur due to a
more long-term abnormality (e.g. chronic brain disorder resulting in epilepsy). The
causes of seizures are typically divided into primary intracranial or extracranial
causes and are summarized in Box 24.1.
BOX 24.1 Caluses of seizuires
Primary intracranial
· Idiopathic epilepsy (especially purebred and large dogs, first onset 1-5 years old)
· Intracranial neoplasia, primary or metastatic (especially older animals)
 Noninfectious inflammatory central nervous system (CNS) disease
· Infectious causes
· Cerebrovascular abnormalities
· Developmental abnormalities, especially younger animals (e.g. hydrocephalus)
· Degenerative disorders (e.g. storage diseases)
- Traumatic brain injury
· Intracranial haemorrhage (e.g. due to systemic hypertension, coagulopathy)
Extracranial
· Hypoglycaemia
· Intoxication (e.g. metaldehyde)
· Hepatic encephalopathy (e.g. portosystemic shunt)
· Hyper-or hyponatraemia
· Hypocalcaemia
· (Uraemic encephalopathy - rare cause of seizures)
Nursing Aspect
Owners quite commonly ring for advice with respect to cats and especially dogs that have suffered
one or more seizures and the duty nurse is often the person from whom this initial advice is
obtained. In the author's opinion, not all animals that have suffered a seizure need to be examined.
The recommendation to examine the animal at the clinic should be guided by the owner's wishes but
also after obtaining adequate information with respect to:
· Current status with respect to postictal abnormalities and recovery
· Number of seizures and their timing
* Nature and duration of the seizure(s)
· Any known history of exposure to possible inciting factors (e.g. toxins, trauma)
• Previous seizure history
· Previous medical and therapeutic history.
In animals that have suffered only one self-limiting (isolated) seizure, that appear to have
recovered satisfactorily, and in which an obvious inciting cause has not been identified, it may be
appropriate for the animal to remain at home for close monitoring. However, owners must be advised
to ensure that the animal is not able to harm him/herself should another seizure occur. They should
also contact the practice again either if another seizure occurs or if behavioural signs suggestive of
prodrome or aura (pre-seizure behaviour) are observed.
It is recommended that animals with cluster seizures (two or more seizures within 24 hours) are
examined as soon as possible, and animals in status epilepticus must be presented to the clinic
immediately.
Approach to Seizures
Signalment
Signalment is important when considering the possible aetiology of a seizure disorder
For example, young animals are more likely to suffer intoxication from dietary
indiscretion or to seizure as a result of congenital anomalies. Hypoglycaemia-induced
seizuires are more common in puppies, especially of toy breeds, while older animals are
more likely to seizure as a result of intracranial neoplasia. Idiopathic epilepsy is more
seizure for the first time at 1-5 years of age. Intracranial tumours are more common
system diseases (e.g. Maltese terriers, Yorkshire terriers, Pugs). True idiopathic
epilepsy is much less common in cats than it is in dogs.
History
Clinical Tip
 It is important to remember that owners may mistake other episodes of abnormal behaviour for
 seizures and this distinction may be crucial in some cases. In particular, animals suffering from
syncope of cardiac origin may temporarily lose consciousness and demonstrate involuntary urination
while recumbent. However, these animals typically return to complete normality within seconds to a
minute of the onset of the episode and this provides a useful distinguishing feature from the
 postictal period associated with seizures. Severe acute vestibular signs may also be mistaken for
seizures (see Ch. 15)
A thorough history is mandatory for all animals with seizures, although the timing
should be governed by the patient's clinical status on presentation. Owners should be
asked to describe the seizure episode(s) as thoroughly as possible, including pre-,
intra-and postictal phases. It is important to establish the number of seizures that
have occurred and their timing, the nature and duration of the seizure(s), any known
or possible exposure to inciting factors (e.g. intoxication; recent feeding with
portosystemic shunt), previous seizure history and previous medical history. If the
patient is already on anticonvulsive therapy, the drugs, dosages and timing of last
administration should be established.  Details of any monitoring of  serum
anticonvulsant levels should be obtained if the owner knows this information.
Major body system examination
Major body system examination may need to be delayed in an animal that presents
actively seizuring. Neurological examination may be normal or severely abnormal in
animals with seizure disorders. Some animals present in the middle of a seizure, some
with postictal abnormalities, while others have fully recovered. A fuill neurological
examination is warranted in any animal with a seizure history but it is sometimes
necessary to wait for postictal abnormalities to resolve before a reliable examination
can be performed. In addition, anticonvulsive medications that may need to be
administered in an emergency will also potentially alter the findings of a neurological
examination.
Cardiovascular examination may be abnormal in animals that have seizured. True
seizures are unlikely to occur as a result of a primary cardiovascular disorder
although  cerebrovascular  abnormalities  may  cause  other neurological  signs.
Cardiovascular  abnormalities  that  may   occur  secondary  to  seizures  include
Furthermore, in some cases the cauise of the seizure may also have direct effects on the
cardiovascular system; this is especially common with certain poisons. In general,
seizures should not cause systemic hypoperfusion but perfusion abnormalities may be
seen following severe sustained seizure activity. In addition, the author has
anecdotally noted a variety of cardiovascular abnormalities in animals with primary
brain disease that have been presumed to be a direct result of the cerebral disorder (a
brain-heart connection has been documented in people). Finally, depending on the
cause of the seizures and their severity and duration, some animals may present with
intracranial hypertension that may be detectable clinically as bradycardia and
systemic hypertension (Cushing's reflex - see Ch. 28). If facilities allow, systemic
blood pressure should be measuired in all animals presenting with active seizures or
marked postictal abnormalities.
S   n        
Seizures are unlikely to occur as a result of a primary respiratory disorder and the
most common respiratory abnormalities identified are panting and tachypnoea.
Cs se       s   
findings are possible in such cases. Neurogenic (noncardiogenic) pulmonary oedema
may also cauise respiratory abnormalities.
Rectal temperature may be normal, decreased or increased in animals with seizures
epilepticus (see below), may result in marked hyperthermia which may need to be
managed specifically (see Ch. 16).
Emergency database
Clinical Tip
· Blood glucose should be checked as a minimum in all animals that present either seizuring or with
marked neurological abnormalities. If blood glucose cannot be checked, it may be appropriate in
some cases to administer conservative empirical glucose therapy where there is a high index of
suspicion for clinically significant hypoglycaemia. Such cases include puppies and kittens, especially
with diarrhoea, and adult dogs with a history that is consistent with a possible insulinoma (e.g.
intermittent self-resolving collapse, generalized weakness or neuromuscular signs, especially during
exercise).
   s q ss a  ae aq  sa ro axa  e
available and of use during initial stabilization of a seizuring patient. Such investigations must not
be prioritized at the expense of emergency treatment.
The need to perform an emergency database in an animal with a seizure disorder
should be governed by the patient's clinical status at the time of presentation. Blood
glucose should be checked as a minimum in all animals that present either seizuring
or with marked neurological abnormalities. In middle-aged to older dogs that present
with clinically significant hypoglycaemia, a blood sample should be collected for
measurement of serum insulin concentration prior to therapeutic administration of
intravenous glucose if possible. Insulinomas are seen most commonly in medium to
large breed dogs and have been identified in dogs as young as 3 years old.
Checking for hyper-or hyponatraemia and hypocalcaemia is also recommended if
possible although  these abnormalities are much  less frequently implicated than
hypoglycaemia as a cause of seizures in small animals.
In animals that are already receiving anticonvulsive therapy, it is recommended to
obtain samples as early on as possible for measurement of serum drug concentrations.
Clinical Tip
· Animals presenting during or after a seizure may have intracranial hypertension. This may be the
result of a primary intracranial cause but also as a consequence of severe seizure activity. Jugular
 vein occlusion should be avoided in such cases and a peripheral vein used for early blood sampling
if required.
Diagnostic imaging
Routine diagnostic imaging is rarely a priority in patients with seizures but may be
required following initial stabilization. For example, respiratory abnormalities may
need to be investigated with thoracic radiography that may show evidence of
aspiration pneumonia (alveolar pattern in right middle lung lobe and ventral parts of
other lobes) or neurogenic  (noncardiogenic) oedema  (caudodorsal interstitial to
alveolar lung pattern). Abdominal radiography may occasionally be of use for example
in some types of intoxication. Referral for more specialist and/or advanced diagnostic
imaging may be indicated in patients thought to be suffering from an on-going
seizure disorder (e.g. abdominal ultrasonography for portosystemic shunt, cerebral
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) for primary brain disorder).
Treatment
Animals presenting in the postictal phase of a generalized seizure do not require any
treatment if physical examination is normal. Patients with persistent postictal
abnormalities may need to be hospitalized for on-going monitoring. This is often
determined as much by owner preference as it is by the patient's clinical status.
Diazepam should be administered per rectum (1 mg/kg: 2 mg/kg if receiving
          
intravenous catheter placement. Proprietary rectal diazepam tubes may be lised, or
injectable diazepam may be diluited with water or saline to increase the volume to be
administered and then infused per rectum. Using injectable diazepam allows more
            
size of the animal, the use of a well-lubricated long intravenous catheter (with stylet
removed), urinary catheter or nasooesophageal feeding tube will allow the diazepam
to be administered more proximally in the rectum. This should minimize spillage from
the anus and maximize drug absorption. The rectal mucosa has an extensive blood
supply and drug absorption should occur readily so long as the solution is in contact
with the mucosa and not mixed into faecal material. Flow-by oxygen supplementation
should also be provided initially.
            s
obtained via the catheter for blood glucose and serum electrolyte measurement and
potentially a more extensive emergency database. Additional diazepam (o.5 mg/kg
i.v.) should then be administered and additional anticonvulsive therapy employed (see
4) and close monitoring should be provided; glucose supplementation may be required
in some cases.
The decision to start oral anticonvulsive therapy should be made on an individual
case basis and will depend on factors such as:
· The identified or suspected cause: Transient? Progressive or non-progressive?
· The number and severity of seizures
· Response to initial parenteral treatment and the extent of parenteral treatment
required
· Previous seizure history.
Oral anticonvulsive therapy is likely to be indicated in animals suspected of having
an on-going seizure focus or those that have suffered severe or sustained seizure
activity necessitating aggressive parenteral treatment. Although completely normal
previously, animals that have suffered severe seizures secondary to intoxication may
s      n   n
induced neuronal damage.
Head trauma may rarely be associated with seizures in the short term. In addition,
animals occasionally develop seizures some time after the traumatic incident and it is
presumed that the seizures are a result of a seizure focus resulting from the prior
traumatic brain injury. On-going oral anticonvulsive therapy is likely to be indicated
in these cases.
Status Epilepticus
Clinical Tip
· Status epilepticus carries a very real risk of both permanent neuronal damage and multiorgan
injury. Immediate and aggressive intervention is essential.
Although older texts describe a longer period of time, the cuirrent definition of status
epilepticus is sustained generalized seizure activity for more than 5 minutes, or
multiple consecutive seizures without retuirn of consciousness in between. Status
     n     
life-threatening consequences (see Ch. 38), and may be associated with significant
cardiovascular abnormalities (often tachycardia and hypertension early on, followed
         
S            
activity and timely and aggressive intervention is warranted. Neurogenic pulmonary
oedema may develop rapidly following sta tus epilepticus.
Treatment
Management of status epilepticus typically starts with rectal diazepam administratior
(1 mg/kg: 2 mg/kg if receiving concurrent phenobarbital) as above to facilitate
Further diazepam administration (o.5 mg/kg i.v.) is then performed in an attempt to
control the clinical signs. However, typically no more than three boluses are
administered before the use of an additional drug is considered. In general, this
involves heavily sedating or anaesthetizing the patient for a variable period of time in
If financial constraints do not exist, a constant rate infusion of propofol is used. The
appropriate dose is administered (2 mg/kg aliquots slowly i.v. to effect), followed by a
constant rate infusion starting at 6 mg/kg/hr and titrating upwards (or downwards)
to effect. The use of a syringe driver here is preferred although a solution of propofol
      sn       
           
ideal, it may therefore be possible to manage them adequately without the use of an
              
capacity. In particular, midazolam has been used either as intermittent boluses (0.1-
0.5 mg/kg i.v.) or preferably as a constant rate infusion (o.1-0.8 mg/kg/hr). The dose
of propofol generally starts to be tapered after 24 hours (e.g. reducing by 25% every 2-
4 hou1rs).
If financial or practical constraints preclude the use of a propofol infusion.
pentobarbital boluses may be a viable alternative. However, to the author's
available and the risks associated with using nonsterile preparations available for
euthanasia must clearly be borne in mind and discussed with the owner. The
recommended dose is 5-20 mg/kg slowly i.v. to effect (e.g. 3 mg/kg aliquots q 90 s).
The use of thiopentone and inhalational anaesthesia may also be considered.
Endotracheal intubation should be performed in all anaesthetized patients to protect
specific indications exist.  Vital parameters should be monitored and recorded
regularly, and fluid therapy administered to maintain hydration and electrolyte
concentrations. In some cases general anaesthesia or heavy sedation is required for 48
hours or more.
Phenobarbital loading should be performed in all animals presenting in status
  s s   ) s  s s  
min, up to total dose of 18-24 mg/kg in 24 hours) are typically reserved for those
it is generally not helpful in controlling signs very early on but its sedative effects are
        n  
measurement should be obtained prior to loading if possible in animals already on
phenobarbital therapy. Following loading, patients are usually maintained on 3-5
mg/kg slow i.v. q 12 hr for 24-48 hours before changing to enteral therapy.
BOX 24.2 Management of status epilepticus
· Administer rectal diazepam (1 mg/kg) using proprietary tube(s) or diluted injectable preparation
· Provide flow-by oxygen supplementation
· Place intravenous catheter and obtain blood for glucose and electrolyte measurement ± more
extensive emergency database:
- ad n e (ai  s oo) ns soa s -
glucose supplementation in such cases
· Administer up to three intravenous diazepam boluses (0.5 mg/kg i.v.)
· Administer propofol (2 mg/kg aliquots slowly i.v. to effect) if diazepam ineffective (pentobarbital,
thiopentone or inhalational anaesthesia may also be considered)
· Perform endotracheal intubation and provide on-going oxygen supplementation if specifically
indicated
· Perform major body system examination and check rectal temperature; provide active cooling
measures if indicated
• Perform intravenous phenobarbital loading (3 mg/kg slow i.v. q 30-60 min, up to total dose of 18-
 24 mg/kg in 24 hours) - obtain blood for serum drug concentration measurement first in animals
 already on anticonvulsant therapy
 s   n  sd   an Pi  a -
required
· Perform close monitoring of vital parameters; be aware of possibility of neurogenic pulmonary
oedema
· Provide standard nursing measures as for any recumbent animal
• Start to taper anaesthetic doses after 24 hours (e.g. reduce by 25% q 2-4 hr)
• Continue intravenous phenobarbital (3-5 mg/kg slow i.v. q 12 hr) for 24-48 hours before changing
to enteral therapy
Nursing Aspect
Standard nursing measures for recumbent patients should be implemented in animals anaesthetized
or heavily sedated to control seizures. These measures include:
• Regular eye lubrication to prevent corneal drying and ulceration; and oral care (q 6 hr)
· Use of well-padded bedding to prevent pressure sores and ensuring bedding is dry, clean and
comfortable
· Regular turning (q 4 hr) to prevent atelectasis (lung collapse)
· Appropriate bladder management: express or catheterize if necessary and prevent urinary soiling
· Minimizing external stimuli (placing cotton wool balls/swabs in the ears; dim lighting and
minimum passage of personnel)
 Deflate and reposition endotracheal tube regularly (q 4-6 hr) if present
25
Sudden loss of vision
Depending on the disorder in question, sudden loss of vision may occur unilaterally
or bilaterally, and there may or may not be changes in the appearance of the eye(s). It
  s s   n      o 
 are in fact afflicted by a chronic slowly progressive disorder with which they had
previously been coping. Often a change of environment brings their loss of vision to
the owner's attention. Some causes of sudden blindness are shown in Table 25.1. In
addition some causes of acute red eye (see Ch. 10) may also result in loss of vision.
Table 25.1
 Causes of sudden loss of vision
Cause
Un ilateral or bilateral blindness
Oth er c omments
Retin al separation
Usually unilateral initially,
(detachment)
poten tially bec oming blatera
Causes include systemic hyperten sion, trauma, neoplasia, immune-mediated disease
exudate caused by inflammatory disease, and con gen ital disord ers; also idiopath ic
Vision may return with early treatment
Sudden acqu ired retinal
 Blateral
degen eration syndrome
Cau se unknown; permanent blindness
(SARDS)
Typically middle-aged to older dogs
Often obese or recent weight gain
Hist ory of polyuria/polyd ipsia common
 In tracran ial lesions
Often bilateral
E specially neoplasia
Add itional neurological signs may be present
Hypoxic brain injury
 Bilateral
Cen tralloss of vision
E specially in c ats following gen eral an aesthesia
Toxicity
 Bilateral
e.g. ivermectin (espec ially Collie breeds); fluoroquinolones in cats (retinal toxic ity cau sing
 permanent blin dn ess)
Optic neuritis
 Often bilateral
Cau se often unkn own
May be related to inflammatory central nervous system d isease or systemic infection
26
Urticaria, angio-oedema and anaphylaxis
Urticaria, angio-oedema and anaphylaxis may occur as a result of a variety of
different stimuli, predominantly immunological but also nonimmunological, that
induce mast cell (and basophil) degranulation. The predominant immunological
mechanism is a type I hypersensitivity (HS) reaction whereby antigen activates mast
cells (and basophils) by binding to immunoglobulin E (lgE) molecules on surface
receptors. Previous exposure to the antigen in question (sensitization) results in an
for binding to mast cells and mediating an abnormally intense response to repeat
antigen exposulre.
Type I Hs is “immediate’ as a reaction occuirs within seconds or minutes of antiger
exposure. This may then be followed by an additional late phase reaction 6-12 hours
later due to the release of mediators from activated eosinophils (and neutrophils).
Nonimmunological mast cell activation does not require prior sensitization and
Clinical signs result from the sudden and excessive release of inflammatory
mediators from mast cells (and perhaps basophils) and subsequently eosinophils. The
severity and location of the response depend on the number and location of the cells
involved that in turn depend on the degree of sensitization of the animal
(immunological), the amount of antigen involved and the route of exposure. Mast cell
degranulation and mediator release can be localized or systemic in more severe cases.
Localized Reactions
exposure. For example:
· Antigens affecting the skin cause localized dermatitis, urticaria (hives) and
angioedema
· Inhaled/aerosolized antigens cause respiratory tract responses; may also contact the
eyes causing conjunctivitis and lacrimation
Urticaria and Angio-oedema
Urticaria refers to local superficial (dermis) lesions grossly visible as discrete
erythematous wheals. Lesions usually develop within 30 minutes to a few hours and
are variably pruritic. Lesions uisually disappear within 24-48 hours (but may be more
chronic). Differential diagnoses for urticaria include:
· Superficial folliculitis
· (Early) erythema multiforme
· Vasculitis
· Neoplasia.
In angio-oedema, subcutaneous tissues and deep blood vessels become affected by
the inflammatory process, resulting in oedema and consequent diffuse swelling that is
eyes, mouth and ears) although other areas, in particular the extremities, may be
involved (Figure 26.1).
(a)
(b)
C
Figure 26.1
(a-c) Photographs of a Boxer dog showing cutaneous erythema, urticaria and
angioedema especially affecting the head.
(Photographs c ourtesy of Filippo de Bellis)
Angio-oedema of the laryngeal or pharyngeal mucosa may cause potentially severe
upper respiratory tract obstruction. Differential diagnoses for angio-oedema include:
· Early juvenile cellulitis
· Early bacterial cellulitis
· Vasculitis
· Neoplasia.
Treatment of urticaria and angioedema is described in the case example.
Systemic Reactions - Anaphylaxis/Anaphylactic Shock
A severe sudden systemic release of inflammatory mediators from activated mast cells
(and  perhaps  basophils) is  the  underlying pathogenesis  of   acute
anaphylaxis/anaphylactic shock. The rate of mediator release exceeds the animal's
ability to compensate for their effects. The majority of mast cell mediators have
vasoactive properties and systemic vascular effects are therefore most prominent.
Maldistributive shock occurs and in addition a marked increase in capillary
       s   
cardiovascular  picture during anaphylaxis  (hypoperfusion that is refractory  to
appropriate fluid therapy) is also a hallmark of maldistributive shock secondary to
systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) or sepsis (SIRS due to infection,
Treatment of anaphylaxis
The aims of therapy in anaphylaxis are to correct systemic hypoperfusion and to
attempt to address some of the underlying pathogenic mechanisms. If appropriate,
suspected inciting cauises must be discontinued and reexposure prevented. Aggressive
individually tailored intravenous fluid therapy and adrenaline (epinephrine) are the
mainstay of treatment, and regular monitoring of cardiovascular and other major
systems is vital. Recommended doses of adrenaline (epinephrine) are:
· 0.01 mg/kg slow i.v. (or i.m., s.c. in less severe cases)
· If intravenous access cannot be obtained:
- 0.01 mg/kg into tongue vein or parenchyma
- 0.02 mg/kg via endotracheal tube (e.g. using a urinary catheter to administer at
the level of the carina).
Adrenaline (epinephrine) should be administered immediately once the diagnosis is
made and administration can be repeated after 20-30 min (or sooner if necessary).
Appropriate fluid therapy and adrenaline (epinephrine) administration should bring
about clinical improvement within minutes.
Corticosteroids may also be administered in the treatment of anaphylaxis (e.g.
methylprednisolone sodium suiccinate 1-2 mg/kg i.v. over 15-20 min; dexamethasone
0.25-1 mg/kg i.v. bolus). However, they should not be used in place of adrenaline
(epinephrine) as they are likely to be much less effective in the immediate life-
threatening phase. Corticosteroids may be helpful, however, in controlling on-going
mediator release following initial stabilization. Additional therapy may include the
use of bronchodilators (e.g.  terbutaline,  aminophylline), furosemide and
antihistamines.
Clinical Tip
· Urticaria, angioedema and anaphylaxis can be thought of as the same disease process with
variations in severity and target organ(s). Dogs are uncommonly affected and cats rarely so.
 Appropriate treatment depends on the severity of the clinical signs and there is a spectrum from no
s-a P iss e a a n s -as P  aa lq a
intervention for anaphylactic shock.
Causes of urticaria, angioedema and anaphylaxis are listed in Box 26.1. There are a
   (so    i  ) s d   
significant  proportion  of  cases the responsible antigen cannot be  identified;
fortunately this does not impact on short-term emergency management.
BOX 26.1 Potential causes of urticaria, angioedema and anaphylaxis in dogs and
cats
Venoms
· Hymenoptera stings (bees, wasps, ants)
· Snakes - including common adder
* Spiders, lizards
Drugs
· Antibiotics - penicillins, chloramphenicol, sulphonamides, cephalosporins, tetracycline
· Nonsteroidal antinflammatory agents - aspirin, ibuprofen
 Anaesthetics/sedatives
 - acepromazine maleate, ketamine hydrochloride, barbiturates, local
 anaesthetics, diazepam
· Parasiticides (generally older or supermarket products)
· Others - opiates, aminophylline; asparaginase; neostigmine; amphotericin B
Hormones
* Insulin
· Exogenous adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH)
• Vasopressin (antidiuretic hormone, ADH)
· Oestrus
· Oxytocin
Miscellaneous
· Food hypersensitivity
• Atopic dermatitis
· Blood products
· Plants
• Heparin
· Vaccines
• Vitamins - vitamin K, thiamine, folic acid
· Dextrans, gelatins
· Radiocontrast dyes
· Sunlight
· Excessive heat or cold
 Peanuts in dogs?
Case example 1
 Presenting Signs and Case History
A 2-year-old male neutered Boxer dog presented for treatment of a suspected allergic reaction. The
dog had been out in the garden with his owners and shortly after returning indoors, he was noted to
have progressive skin changes. The dog's eyes had also puffed up en route to the practice and he
  s  s e  s  ss s  n a  p
 previous year but there was no other significant history.
Major body system examination
On presentation the dog was alert and responsive but appeared mildly agitated.
Cardiovascular examination was unremarkable but the dog was panting. Abdominal
palpation was inremarkable and rectal temperature was mildly elevated at 39.3'C
Facial oedema was present along with diffuse cutaneous erythema and urticaria of the
inguinal region, ventral abdominal and thoracic walls. The lesions were variably
pruritic.
Assessment
systems were unremarkable and there was no evidence at presentation of anaphylactic
shock.
Case management
Although the dog's respiration was normal at presentation, given his breed, there was
            
following the initial signs as well, it was decided to hospitalize the dog for treatment
and observation. As the dog appeared agitated and pruritic, both chlorpheniramine (8
mg total dose i.m.) and dexamethasone (0.25 mg/kg i.m.) were administered
parenterally.
The dog was discharged after 12 hr of hospitalization at which time urticaria and
and comfortable. He was discharged on oral prednisolone (1 mg/kg q 24 hr for 48 hr)
and chlorpheniramine (8 mg total dose p.o. q 12 hr for 48 hr). It was discussed with
the owners that while avoidance and elimination of aetiological antigens are ideal, in
this case - as in many others - it was not possible to identify specifically such an
antigen.
27
Wounds and open fractures
A large variety of wounds may be seen in emergency patients, resulting from a
range of different causes, and an extensive discussion is beyond the scope of this book.
This chapter briefly presents some general considerations and the reader is referred to
other texts for more extensive wound-specific management and surgical closuire.
Clinical Tip
· A large proportion of patients presenting with wounds or open fractures have suffered significant
  issd se e se  aa  s s n   as  s
principles of emergency medicine are not sacrificed at the expense of focusing on the wound(s).
 Major body system examination, cardiorespiratory stabilization and adequate pain relief should be
 prioritized as always; wounds and fractures are rarely life-threatening.
Wound management centres on the following steps:
· Haemostasis is provided if required
· Further contamination should be minimized
· Nonviable tissues should be debrided
· Contaminating material should be removed
· Drainage should be ensured
· A viable vascular bed should be encouraged
· The wound should be closed appropriately.
Providing haemostasis
In most cases adequate haemostasis can be provided by direct pressure over the wound
             
arteriole until further intervention can be performed.
Minimizing further contamination
Traumatic wouinds that receive adequate debridement and lavage within 6-8 hours of
injury may be converted from contaminated to clean. However, a number of animals
presenting with wounds require extensive major system stabilization before such
wound management can be instituted, and stabilization should never be sacrificed
over concerns regarding wound contamination.
Until such time that more thorough wound cleansing can be performed, it is
important to adhere to certain guidelines:· Aseptic technique should be employed
when handling wounds as far as possible.
· As soon as possible, and typically after administration of analgesia, wounds should
be protected using a temporary dressing; sterile swabs soaked in 0.05% chlorhexidine
for example may be used as the primary layer. In some cases, cling film, or a similar
type of wrap, can be used as a rapid short-term means of protecting a wound while
initial patient evaluation and stabilization are performed; the temporary dressing is
then applied. Preventing contamination with potentially resistant hospital bacteria is
essential.
· Depending on the nature and aetiology of the wound, it may be appropriate to take a
bacterial swab from the site and start broad-spectrum intravenous antibiosis
immediately.
Clinical Tip
· Antibiotics are not required for either clean wounds or contaminated wounds that are debrided
Anuy jo sno g-g um Anedodde paeaei p
· If antibiotics are indicated, a broad-spectrum agent that can be given intravenously should be
chosen (e.g. amoxicillin/clavulanate, cephalosporin) and treatment reassessed based on subsequent
culture results.
can be instituted for more thorough wound cleansing. The wound is protected with a
sterile water-soluble lubricant (e.g. KY Jelly?, Johnson & Johnson) and a large area of
hair surrounding the wound is clipped to prevent further contamination. The skin
surrounding the wouind is then cleaned with a surgical scrub solution.
Debriding nonviable tissue
Surgical debridement is performed to remove any tissue that is already obviously
nonviable. In some cases, tissue with questionable viability may need to be left (e.g. if
there is limited tissue availability) and further debridement performed subsequently if
indicated.
Removing contaminated material
Depending on the nature and aetiology of the wound, marked contamination can
occur with a variety of foreign material (e.g. dirt, leaves, hair). The ‘solution to
copious wound lavage must be performed. Wounds are lavaged using warm 0.9%
sodium chloride (normal, physiological saline). Recommendations regarding the ideal
  n     a a     is
author typically uses a 21 gauge needle and a 20 ml syringe. Bacterial swabs are
usually collected once debridement and lavage have been performed.
Ensuring drainage
It is essential to ensure that infected wounds have adequate drainage. In some cases,
this involves leaving (a part of) the wound open; however, passive (or active) drains
are desirable in many cases to reduce dead space and facilitate drainage. Penrose
drains are used most commonly and work by capillary action (passive).
Clinical Tip
• The author would strongly recommend a liberal approach to the use of Penrose drains in wound
management. These drains are cheap, easy to use and associated with few complications, and the
benefits they offer in terms of wound management can be invaluable.
Encourage a viable vascular bed
Debridement and lavage are essential in reducing the risk of wound infection and
encouraging healing. Most wounds are subsequently covered using sterile dressings to
prevent further contamination and patient interference, and to provide a moist
environment for repair. Wet-to-dry dressings should be used to provide on-going
debridement in the early stages if indicated.
Open fractures
All open fractures should be considered to be contaminated as a minimum and
potentially infected (more than 8 hours since injury). The principles of wound
management described above are entirely appropriate for open  fractures and
intravenous broad-spectrum antibiosis should be administered in all cases. Temporary
fracture stabilization  (e.g. splint,  support bandage) may be required to provide
analgesia and prevent further injury pending definitive repair.
Clinical Tip
s m s n  aiss  a  a ae s o m s .
tissue injuries alone, and this must not be overlooked while focusing on their wound(s). In addition,
manipulation for wound management must be done with due concern not to exacerbate the
orthopaedic injury further.
Section 3
Specific Disorders
28
The trauma patient
Trauma is one of the most common reasons for emergency presentation and can
also be one of the most stressful to the patient, owner and veterinary personnel. A
cats, amongst which motor vehicle accidents (road traffic accidents) are very
without appropriate management. The majority of this chapter therefore focuses on
cats although most of the principles and information provided are equally applicable
to dogs.
accidents, animal (especially dog) bite injuries, tail pull injuries and falls from a
height (especially feline high-rise syndrome). Puppies and kittens are also relatively
commonly trodden on and dogs may be kicked by horses. The most common injuries
that occur following motor vehicle accidents are listed in Box 28.1. Cranial, thoracic
and pelvic injuries are especially common in cats.
BOX 28.1 Common injuries following motor vehicle accidents
Head
· Traumatic brain injury
· Ocular injury
· Skull fracture
· Dental injury
Thorax
· Pulmonary contusions
· Pneumothorax
· Haemothorax
· Rib fractures
• Diaphragmatic rupture
Abdomen
• Abdominal wall rupture
· Haemoabdomen
· Uroabdomen
· Bile peritonitis
· Septic peritonitis from gastrointestinal rupture
Spine (vertebral column)/spinal cord
• Vertebral fracture
· Vertebral luxation/subluxation
• Intervertebral disc extrusion/herniation/prolapse
Pelvic fractures
Limbs
· Long bone fracture
* Joint luxation/subluxation
· Tendon/ligament injury
· Degloving injury
Wounds
Traumatic Brain Injury
Theory refresher
Clinical Tip
· The prime aim in the management of traumatic brain injury (TBl) is to limit secondary brain injury.
This is done by ensuring that the brain receives an adequate supply of well-oxygenated arterial
blood.
Minimizing secondary brain injury
The prime aim in the management of traumatic brain injury (TBI) is to limit
secondary brain injury that may occuir as a result of various mechanisms including
hypoxia, ischaemia due to hypoperfusion, raised intracranial pressure (ICP) or active
haemorrhage. Earlier discussions of TBl tended to focus on the detrimental effects of
raised ICP via impairment of cerebral blood flow and the potential for brainstem
          
 p nm   i  n    
Treatment for possible raised ICP is just one part of this therapy.
Ensuring adequate oxygenation and ventilation
Hypoxia must be avoided at all costs and pulse oximetry (and arterial blood gas
analysis if available) should be used. A percentage saturation of haemoglobin with
oxygen (SpO2) on room air of more than 95% is satisfactory. Animals with low SpO2
should be provided with oxygen supplementation immediately and a liberal “if in
processes that may interfere with adequate ventilation (e.g. pneumothorax, pain)
must be addressed appropriately.
Ensuring adequate cerebral perfusion
Cerebral blood flow, and hence oxygen and nutrient delivery to the brain, is driven by
the cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP) gradient between mean arterial pressuire (MAP)
and IcP:
Normal homeostatic mechanisms protecting cerebral blood flow may be lost in TBI
and cerebral blood flow becomes largely dependent on systemic blood pressure.
            n
Mean arterial pressure
The head trauma patient may well present with systemic hypotension (i.e. decreased
MAP). Mean arterial pressure can be measured noninvasively using an oscillometric
Clinical Tip
· Regardless of whether blood pressure monitoring is or is not available, it is essential to ensure that
hypoperfusion  identified on the basis of physical examination  is corrected. Blood pressure
 monitoring is not a substitute for regular assessment of physical perfusion parameters.
Raised intracranial pressure
ICP is the pressure exerted between the skull and the three intracranial compartments
-- brain parenchyma, blood and cerebrospinal fluid. Direct measurement of ICP is not
practical in veterinary medicine at this time and the presence of elevated ICP is
therefore inferred. The Cushing response is the most specific marker available -
bradycardia. These findings should prompt aggressive treatment for raised ICP. Other
linexplained deterioration of mental status, dilated nonresponsive pupils, loss of
physiological nystagmus and decerebrate posturing.
Neuirological examination
Once potentially life-threatening extracranial abnormalities have been addressed, a
2 Pupils: symmetry; size; pupillary light reflexes (PLR), direct and consensual
(a) Normal size pupil with slow PLR (least severe)
(b) Miotic pupil with intact PLR
(c) Pinpoint pupil with no PLR
(d) Mydriatic pupil with no PLR (most severe).
 s   s    s  
tone.
4 Ocuilocephalic reflex: in a normal animal, moving the head from side to side and up
and down elicits physiological nystagmus. At the end of each movement, the head
should be stabilized and cessation of nystagmus noted. An abnormality of this reflex
following head trauma is typically due to a lesion of the brainstem (Box 28.2).
n q n anp s q r id ds a nd s a
including:
(a) Hyperventilation
(b) Cheyne-Stokes respiration
(c) Ataxic respiration (irregular rate, rhythm and excursion)
(d) Apnoea.
6 Motor function and posture: animals that are not comatose should maintain
voluntary motor activity unless trauma has occurred to the brainstem, the spinal
cord, or a peripheral nerve.
(a) Hemiparesis/plegia: unilateral brainstem damage (also some spinal cord
lesions)
(b) Tetraparesis/plegia: more diffuse brainstem damage (also cervical spinal cord
lesion)
(c) Decerebrate rigidity: extreme extensor rigidity of all four limbs with no periods
of relaxation; lateral recumbency and possible opisthotonos; marked changes in
mentation and very grave prognosis
(d) Decerebellate rigidity: extensor rigidity of all 4 limbs but with periods of
relaxation and flexion of the pelvic limbs; mentation may be normal; better
prognosis than decerebrate rigidity.
        e  s   
severe lesion of the spinal cord between T2 and L3. Pelvic limb paralysis
accompanied by extensor rigidity of the thoracic limbs is seen when the animal is
in lateral recumbency.
BOX 28.2 Findings consistent with brainstem injury
· Mentation: comatose
· Bilateral fixed (mid-position) dilated unresponsive pupils
· Absence of gag reflex
· Irregular respiratory patterns or apnoea
· Abnormal oculocephalic reflex
Treatment
Treatment of TBl is summarized in Table 28.1 and illustrated further in Case example
1.
Table 28.1‘
 Treatment of traumatic brain injury
Treatment
Comments
Oxygen
supplementation
Liberal approach encouraged
Maintain SpO2 above 95 %
Idealy intubate and ventilate if SpO2 remains below 90% but there may be practical and finan cial considerations
In traven ous flu id
therapy
 Isotonic crystalloid typical first choice; may n eed synthetic coloid if inadequate response
Hypertonic saline appropriate choice in some cases (see below)
Avoid hypervolaemia as may increase intracranial pressure - but only be conservative once hypovolaemia corrected
 In tracran ial
hyperten sion th erapy
 jugular venepuncture, donot restrain aroun d the neck area)
 Med ical therapy for cerebral oedema:
· Mannitol: hyperosmolar; induces osmotic diuresis reducing cerebral oedema; other potential beneficial effects;
 contrain dic ated in hypovolaemic patients 
· Hypertonic saline (e.g. 7.5% sod ium chloride): especially indicated in hypovolaemic patients with suspected raised ICP to
 both restore intravascular volume and reduce cerebral oed ema; osmotic ally active; other potential ben eficial effects
 Minimize increases in
cerebral metabolic rate
 Antiseizure therapy if ind icated
 Sedate if distressed (flailing, constant voc alization) - use opioids and anticonvulsant medications preferentially
 Treat hyperthermia secondary to brain injury and/or seizure activity
 An algesia
Rapid baseline neurologic al examin ation first
Pure opioid
 May also contribute to sedation
 Nu trition al support
Important once patient is stable an d improvin g - do not start too soon
Avoid syringe feed ing - provides inadequate calorific intake; pote
ation and interferen ce with head injuries
Oesophagostomy tube preferred once stable for anaesth esia
ICP, intracranial pressure; SpO2, percentage saturation of haemoglobin with oxygen.
Prognosis
Some clinicians use a Modified Glasgow Coma Scale (The Small Animal Coma Scale)
as a quantitative way of grading and monitoring brain injury and assisting with
evaluation may be the most practical guide.
Nursing Aspect
Patients with traumatic brain injury may be recumbent for prolonged periods and the value of
adequate nursing in such cases should not be underestimated. The most important measures are as
follows:
· TLC, gentle handling (independent of interventions)
· Minimize stress: be calm and quiet around the patient, provide a dimly lit quiet environment, use
gentle restraint and minimize/group interventions
· Use well-padded bedding to prevent pressure sores and ensure bedding is dry, clean and
comfortable
· Turn every 2-4 hours if recumbent to prevent atelectasis (lung collapse)
• Lubricate eyes every 4-6 hours to prevent corneal drying and ulceration
· Appropriate bladder management: express or catheterize if necessary and prevent urinary soiling
· Tempt to eat if appropriate
       a n sd  d   es
Case example 1
Presenting Signs and Case History
A 3-year-old male neutered domestic long hair cat presented shortly after a presumed motor
vehicle accident. The cat had been healthy prior to going out that evening but had returned home
some time later in respiratory distress. Notable deterioration had occurred in the time it had taken
the owners to bring the cat to the clinic. No other significant preceding history was reported.
Major body system examination
On presentation the cat was stuporous. Heart rate was 160 beats per minute with no
 did  u o sd p p  pos dn  
membranes were pale pink with a prolonged capillary refill time and extremities were
cold. The cat was tachypnoeic but lung sounds were appropriate for the rate and
effort. Percentage saturation of haemoglobin with oxygen (SpO2) on room air was
97%. Abdominal palpation was unremarkable but the cat was mildly hypothermic
left frontal bone and left-sided scleral and nasal haemorrhage was identified. Blood
Assessment
     s    s a  s
hypothermia was not considered unusual in a cat with this presentation. Although the
cat's mental status could in part be attributed to the hypovolaemia, it was felt to be too
severely altered and, given the clear evidence of head injury, a component of TBI was
significant intrathoracic injury nor a central effect on respiration was suspected. At
this stage it was not possible to make a reliable assessment of the cat's pain status.
Emergency data base
An intravenous catheter was placed in a cephalic vein and blood obtained via the
catheter for an emergency database. This revealed low-normal manual packed cell
volume (PCV) (32%, reference range 31-45%) with low serum total solids (TS) (50 g/l,
reference range 61-80 g/l) suggestive of recent haemorrhage. The cat was moderately
hyperglycaemic (15.0 mmol/1, reference range 4.2-6.6 mmol/l).
Clinical Tip
· Jugular vein occlusion for venepuncture should be avoided as far as possible in patients with
raised intracranial pressure as impaired drainage from the brain may significantly exacerbate
intracranial hypertension.
Clinical Tip
· Hyperglycaemia may be identified in dogs and cats following head trauma and is thought to result
from a response involving the sympathetic nervous system and the adrenal medulla. The degree of
hyperglycaemia often correlates with the severity of traumatic injury but a relationship with outcome
has not been shown in dogs and cats
Case management
Clinical Tip
· Treatment of extracranial potentially life-threatening abnormalities is the immediate priority in the
 s  n n   a  n m sd  n
often concurrently achieves the prime aim with respect to intracranial trauma management which is
to limit secondary brain injury, i.e. as primary brain injury (including disruption of blood vessels
 and tearing/crushing of parenchyma) will already have occurred at the time of presentation.
Hypertonic saline was not available and a 20 ml/kg bolus of 0.9% sodium chloride
(normal,  physiological saline) was therefore administered intravenously over 15
minutes. No warming measures were implemented at this time and the cat was kept
in sternal recumbency with his head elevated at a 30° angle to the table. A more
thorough baseline neurological evaluation was performed at this time. Anisocoria was
present with the right pupil larger than the left but a menace response could not be
elicited in either eye. Bilateral pupillary light responses, both direct and consensual,
were intact. Blink and gag reflexes were present and jaw tone was adequate. The cat's
posture seemed appropriate. Oculocephalic reflex was not tested at this time.
A low dose (o.1 mg/kg slow i.v.) of methadone was administered during the initial
fluid bolus. At the end of the bolus the cat's perfusion had improved but he remained
mildly hypovolaemic. A further conservative bolus of 5 ml/kg was administered over
10 minutes, after which the cat was assessed as euivolaemic.
Despite the improved perfusion, the cat's mentation remained inappropriately
reduced and it was therefore suspected that this was the result of raised intracranial
pressure secondary to traumatic brain injury. Mannitol (o.5 g/kg i.v. bolus over 20
minutes) was therefore administered, following which a slow but notable clinical
improvement was detected. The anisocoria resolved and the cat was able to raise his
head voluntarily. Systolic blood pressure at this time was within normal limits (105
mmHg). No free peritoneal fluid was detected on abdominal ultrasound. Thoracic
radiographs were not taken because it was felt that the index of suspicion for
significant intrathoracic injury was too low to justify the additional stress involved
for the cat.
Clinical Tip
 Animals with traumatic brain injury must be monitored very closely, in particular for the following
three developments.
• Seizure activity: seizure activity will increase cerebral metabolic rate, increasing cerebral oxygen
demand and therefore the risk of hypoxic injury. It may also worsen cerebral oedema, thereby
exacerbating raised intracranial pressure (ICP), and can cause hyperthermia. Antiseizure medication
must therefore be administered at the first sign of seizure activity.
· Bradycardia: the onset of previously undetected bradycardia may signal an increase in ICP and
should prompt immediate treatment.
that usually develops within minutes to a few hours of the event. Thoracic radiographs typically
show a caudodorsal distribution of lung field changes consistent with pulmonary oedema (interstitial
to alveolar pattern) (Figure 28.1). Treatment involves oxygen supplementation and minimal stress;
neurogenic pulmonary oedema is likely to be of mixed cause and a single low dose of furosemide
may be rational. Clinical improvement is typically noted within 24-48 hours.
Figure 28.1
 Thoracic radiograph of a puppy with head trauma showing caudodorsal lung changes
 consistent with neurogenic (noncardiogenic) oedema.
Clinical Tip
· Although the use of corticosteroids, in particular methylprednisolone succinate, for traumatic brain
injury has been a longstanding practice in both human and veterinary medicine, it is not one based
on clinical evidence.
· More recent clinical trials in humans have not shown positive effects on outcome and some have
 suggested possible increases in morbidity and/or mortality.
 Considering the potential adverse effects (e.g. gastrointestinal ulceration, increased risk of
infection, hyperglycaemia) of these agents, current recommendations are that corticosteroids should
not be used for traumatic brain injury.
 s  n  a   i  
0.02 mg/kg i.v. q 6 hr), and monitored closely including repeat neurological
examinations. He improved steadily with respect to his neurological status and,
be surgical in nature.
However, the cat remained anorexic and an oesophagostomy tube was therefore
placed under general anaesthesia 3 days after initial presentation. The cat made an
was asked to tempt him to eat but to feed him via the oesophagostomy tube regardless
lintil he was eating satisfactorily on his own. Meloxicam oral suspension was
dispensed, to be administered via the feeding tube initially.
Clinical Tip
or that demonstrate acute deterioration. Although plain skull radiographs may reveal fractures, it can
be difficult to obtain radiographs of interpretable quality and plain radiographs are unlikely to
provide clinically useful information with respect to brain injury. Referral to a specialist centre for
advanced imaging (computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)) should
therefore be considered if affordable and once the patient has been stabilized.
Thoracic Injury
Theory refresher
Thoracic injuries following blunt trauma include:
· Pneumothorax
· Pulmonary contusions
· Haemothorax
· Rib fractures and flail segment
· Diaphragmatic rupture.
 In the author's experience, pneumothorax and pulmonary contusions are the most
common.
Pnelimothorax
Closed pneumothorax usually results from leakage of air secondary to a lesion within
the lung parenchyma, although it may also occur for example due to damage to the
airways or oesophagus (Figure 28.2). Open pneumothorax involves loss of integrity of
the thoracic wall (e.g. following penetrating trauma) while a tension pneumothorax
occurs if a one-way valve is formed at the site of air leakage such that air taken in
during inspiration leaks into the pleural space but cannot be expelled (Figuire 28.3).
The result is a rapid and potentially life-threatening increase in intrapleural pressure
         
(e)
(b)
Figure28.2
(a)  Right lateral and (b) dorsoventral thoracic radiographs of a cat showing
pneumothorax and pulmonary contusions following trauma.
Figure28.3
 Right lateral thoracic radiograph of a dog showing traumatic tension pneumothorax.
The dog underwent cardiopulmonary arrest just prior to arrival at the hospital and the owner did not
want resuscitation to be attempted.
Clinical Tip
 Thoracocentesis is by no means required in all cases of traumatic closed pneumothorax and the air
will be resorbed over days to weeks. The decision to perform thoracocentesis should be guided by
whether the pneumothorax is thought to be compromising respiration in a clinically significant way.
           g
pneumothorax and the air will be resorbed over days to weeks. The decision to
perform thoracocentesis should be guided by whether the pneumothorax is thought to
following thoracocentesis is generally associated with aspiration of 20-30 ml/kg or
more of air although improvement may be noted with removal of smaller volumes in
animals with other concomitant thoracic injuries, most commonly pulmonary
contusions. In the author's experience thoracocentesis does not usually need to be
performed more than twice for traumatic pneumothorax and chest drain placement is
infrequently indicated. The need for surgical intervention is rare.
As well as occurring as a result of trauma, pneumothorax may also be spontaneous
following rupture of pulmonary lesions (e.g. bullae, tumours, subpleural blebs) or
iatrogenic (e.g. following  thoracocentesis  or  fine  needle lung aspiration).
Pneumothorax that occurs spontaneously is often more severe than following trauma,
and chest drain placement and surgical intervention are more likely to be indicated.
Pulmonary contusions
Pulmonary contusions represent areas of alveolar and interstitial haemorrhage and
oedema, and probably represent the most common thoracic injury in dogs and cats
pulmonary contusions may occur with or without other thoracic injuries. Clinical
signs may develop acutely or over several hours, and radiographic changes may lag
behind clinical signs by up to 24 hours. Radiographic abnormalities (patchy or diffuse
alveolar or interstitial lung changes) may persist for a variable period of time despite
A          
analgesia as indicated for concurrent injuries, minimal stress and time.
Figure 28.4
 Right lateral thoracic radiograph of a cat showing pulmonary contusions.
Intravenous fluid therapy does not have to be withheld but caution is advised.
Hypovolaemia is common in patients with pulmonary contusions at time of
presentation and the aim of fluid therapy should be to restore acceptable tissue
perfusion while avoiding excessive fluid administration. It may be acceptable in some
cases to leave the patient mildly hypovolaemic rather than risk worsening pulmonary
contusions. Diuretics are not recommended in the treatment of pulmonary contusions
and are contraindicated in hypovolaemia.
The incidence of bacterial pneumonia following pulmonary contusions is very low
and the indiscriminate use of antibiotics in these cases is not recommended.
Clinical Tip
· In the author's experience clinical signs associated with pulmonary contusions resolve in most
cases (generally within 2-7 days) but their presence may necessitate that management of other non
life-threatening injuries (e.g. long bone fractures) be postponed until respiratory status has improved
adequately.
Haemothorax
Haemothorax is accumulation of blood in the pleural space. It is not uncommon to
detect a small volume of pleuiral effusion following blunt thoracic trauma that is
presumed to be secondary to haemorrhage. However, in the author's experience,
clinically significant haemothorax is relatively rare. The pleuiral space can
respiratory compromise and haemothorax should not be drained unless it is thought
to be significantly contributing to dyspnoea; the blood will be resorbed over several
common following trauma, particularly in cats.
If haemothorax is drained, it is sensible to remove as small a volume (e.g. 20 ml/kg)
that the remainder may be resorbed). Surgical intervention for traumatic
haemothorax is seldom required.
Aside from trauma, haemothorax may also occuir as a result of severe coagulopathy,
in particular due to anticoagulant rodenticide intoxication; other less common causes
are neoplasia, pulmonary thromboembolism, lung lobe torsion and iatrogenic causes.
Rib fractures and flail segment
It is very unusual for rib fractures to occur in dogs and cats without at least one other
significant thoracic injury. Rib fractures are often only diagnosed radiographically
and they typically do not require specific intervention. Rib fractures are, however,
reported to be very painfuil and a liberal approach to analgesia is therefore
recommended in these cases. Ventilation may be compromised in painful animals,
especially if rib fractures are present.
              
dorsally and ventrally, i.e. so that the segment is no longer sta bilized by attachment to
the sternum or spine. This flail segment then moves paradoxically in relation to the
segments typically do not contribute significantly to dyspnoea and stabilization is not
usually indicated. Their significance lies more in the fact that they are typically
and that they are often very painful. These factors are more likely to be responsible for
any respiratory compromise identified.
Case example 2
Presenting Signs and Case History
A 3-year-old male neutered domestic short hair cat presented shortly after a presumed motor
vehicle accident. The cat had been seen sitting in the front lawn by his owner 1 hour prior to
dragging himself through the cat flap. The cat was vocalizing and had increased respiratory effort. His
 owner reported limited movement in the left pelvic limb and tail but no movement in the right pelvic
limb. No other significant history was reported.
Major body system examination
The cat was initially briefly observed in his carrier. He was depressed with an obvious
increase in respiratory effort and had bilaterally symmetrical mid-sized pupils. The
front half was in sternal recumbency. The top of the transport carrier in this case
could be removed and the rest of the initial assessment was therefore performed with
the cat remaining in his carrier. Flow-by oxygen supplementation was commenced.
Heart rate was 220 beats per minute with no murmur or gallop sound heard and the
dorsal pedal pulse could just be palpated.
Clinical Tip
· In animals with suspected pelvic trauma, it is preferable to assess the arterial pulse at sites other
than the femoral arteries (e.g. dorsal pedal artery, median artery). The potential to cause pain must
be remembered when feeling for a femoral pulse in these cases.
was 42 breaths per minute with a marked increase in effort and lung sounds were dull
a      s a ss  
moved his left pelvic limb and tail during this initial examination but no deep pain
perception or withdrawal reflex was elicited from the right pelvic limb. No further
examination was performed at this time.
Assessment
Examination of the respiratory system in this case was highly suggestive of
pneumothorax. The possible increase in harshness in the cranioventral lung field was
        s
pneumothorax. As the dorsal pedal pulse could be palpated, the cat was not thought to
be any more than mildly hypovolaemic and given the concern regarding puilmonary
contusions, it was decided that intravenous fluid resuscitation was not a priority at
this stage.
Clinical Tip
· It is often possible on the basis of observation and auscultation to make reliable judgements as to
the most likely cause of dyspnoea in trauma patients and thoracic radiography is not recommended
 in distressed, painful or unstable patients. This is especially applicable to dyspnoeic cats as they may
decompensate more easily than dogs.
 Where significant pleural space disease (pneumothorax, haemothorax) is suspected, thoracocentesis
may be both diagnostic and therapeutic. This procedure is relatively simple and clinically significant
complications are rare. It is recommended to perform thoracocentesis rather than subject unstable
trauma patients to radiography initially. If radiography is performed, everything should be prepared
before bringing the patient to the radiography room and minimal restraint should be used. If
tolerated, oxygen supplementation should be provided by mask or flow-by. The intention here should
be to produce an image that allows the anatomical area affected to be identified and not to produce
the perfect thoracic radiograph. Even a rotated dorsoventral radiograph can provide more than
   l s    s    
lateral recumbency.
Case management
Methadone (0.3 mg/kg i.m.) was administered and the cat was placed in an oxygen
cage. While in the oxygen cage the cat was observed to urinate voluntarily, voiding a
moderate amount of grossly haematuric urine. Preparation was made to perform
       (     
respiratory status was observed and lung sounds were audible dorsally. It was
therefore decided not to perform repeat thoracocentesis on the other side at this time
The previous suspicion of harsh lung sounds was confirmed, supporting the likelihood
of pulmonary contusions.
As the cat remained compliant, further examination and interventions were
Abdominal   palpation   was uncomfortable  buit  no free fluid   was  detected
ultrasonographically. The pelvis was painful on gentle palpation but there was good
anal tone and perineal reflex.
An intravenous catheter was placed in a cephalic vein and blood obtained via the
catheter for an emergency database that was linremarkable. The cat was returned to
mg/kg i.v. q 4 hr) continued. It was envisaged that the cat would be anorexic but
given the likelihood of pulmonary contusions, only maintenance intravenous isotonic
Forty-eight hours after initial presentation the cat's respiratory status had improved
P    a     s
anaesthesia was performed and pelvic radiography confirmed multiple fractures with
of the pelvic diameter. The fractures were therefore assessed as surgical in nature and
the cat was referred for specialist repair and oesophagostomy tube placement.
Traumatic Diaphragmatic Rupture
Theory refresher
Although listed here as a thoracic injury, acquired diaphragmatic rupture typically
occurs as a result of blunt abdominal trauma.  Circumferential and right-sided
diaphragmatic tears are most common in dogs and cats and the liver is reportedly the
most commonly herniated organ. In addition, the stomach, small intestine and spleen
are often involved in left-sided hernias and the small intestine and pancreas in right-
sided hernias.
Diagnosis
Radiography is commonly used in animals with suspected diaphragmatic rupture and
mediastinal shift, obscuring of the cardiac silhouette, and cranial displacement of
abdominal viscera and gas shadows (Figures 28.5 and 28.6). Orthogonal views are
  s      i   
obscured by pleural fluid or in the absence of visceral displacement. Positive contrast
gastrography or peritoneography may be required in these cases.
(e
(b)
Figure28.5
(a) Right lateral and (b) dorsoventral thoracic radiographs of a cat showing
diaphragmatic rupture.
(a)
(b)
Figure28.6
(a) Right lateral and (b) dorsoventral thoracic radiographs of a cross-bred dog
showing diaphragmatic rupture.
Clinical Tip
· Timing of radiography must be carefully chosen and it is not a priority in unstable patients in
which the additional stress may cause rapid decompensation.
If facilities and expertise allow, ultrasonography provides an alternative, reliable
and less stressful means of diagnosing diaphragmatic rupture. This may be especially
helpful earlier on in unstable patients or in those with significant pleural effusion
obscuring radiographic detail.
Timing of surgical intervention
The timing of surgical intervention for diaphragmatic rupture has been the subject of
some debate, with many authors recommending a delay of more than 24 hours
following trauma to ensure adequate time for stabilization of other concurrent
conditions (e.g. hypovolaemic shock) and injuries (e.g. pulmonary contusions),
thereby reducing the risks associated with general anaesthesia and major surgery.
However, current literature suggests that surgical intervention within 24 hours of
admission in stable patients does not worsen the prognosis and therefore timing of
surgical intervention should be made on an individual case basis.
Clinical Tip
· Diaphragmatic rupture repair is more likely to be associated with a successful outcome when
performed as an elective procedure with adequate staffing and time for thorough planning and
preparation.
· If a prolonged period of stabilization is provided, patients must be monitored very closely for any
 deterioration in clinical status that may for example occur as a result of gastric entrapment and
distension or strangulation of displaced intestine. More emergent surgical intervention may then be
required and needle decompression of the stomach is appropriate in a severely compromised patient
while being prepared for surgery.
Case example 3
Presenting Signs and Case History
A 5-year-old female entire Yorkshire terrier presented a short time after a witnessed motor vehicle
accident. The dog had remained conscious and ambulatory following the incident but she was noted
 to have some increased respiratory effort by her owner, prompting emergency presentation. No other
significant history was reported.
Major body system examination
On presentation the dog was quiet and responsive although she had an unpredictable
heard on the left side of the thorax but were readily audible in the right hemithorax.
Peripheral pulses were hyperdynamic and ocular mucous membranes were pink;
capillary refill time was not assessed. Respiratory rate was 48 breaths per minute with
an increase in effort. Lung sounds were significantly decreased on the left side but
were readily audible and diffusely harsh in the right hemithorax. No further
examination was performed at this time.
Clinical Tip
Although respiratory dysfunction is a common presenting sign of traumatic diaphragmatic rupture,
it may be minimal or even absent in a number of cases. The aetiology of respiratory compromise is
usually multifactorial and may include:
• Loss of mechanical function of the diaphragm (most important muscle for inspiration)
· Pleural space-occupying material causing lung lobe compression and progressive atelectasis. This
 material predominantly constitutes abdominal organs but possibly also air (pneumothorax) and fluid
(haemothorax, transudate)
· Concurrent thoracic injuries (e.g. pulmonary contusions, rib fractures)
· Other factors such as pain and hypovolaemia.
 In some animals with diaphragmatic rupture acute respiratory decompensation may occur as a
result of accumulation of a significant volume of abdominal viscera in the pleural space. In such
cases, holding the animal upright to allow the abdominal contents to return to the peritoneal cavity is
potentially life-saving.
Assessment
The findings on thoracic auscultation in this case were suggestive of possible
diaphragmatic rupture with displacement of intra-abdominal contents predominantly
into the left hemithorax. The harsh lung sounds audible on the right were likely due to
pulmonary contusions. Cardiovascular examination may have suggested mild
hypovolaemia; however, pain, anxiety and signalment were also thought to be
contributing to the tachycardia. Given the concerns regarding pulmonary contusions,
it was not felt that volume resuiscitation was indicated at the outset.
Case management
clipped and EMLA? cream 5% (AstraZeneca, see Ch. 5) applied topically. The sites
and monitored closely for 30 minutes. By the end of this time the dog's heart rate had
reduced considerably and her temperament had also notably improved. Respiratory
rate had reduced but there had been no notable change in effort.
An intravenous catheter was placed in one of the cephalic veins and blood obtained
via the catheter for an emergency database that was unremarkable. Brief
         o
displacement of at least the stomach into the left hemithorax. A small volume of
pleural fluid was detected in the right hemithorax. A moderately sized urinary bladder
was identified with no peritoneal fluid.
The dog was started on replacement isotonic crystalloid at 2 ml/kg/hr and returned
the form of intermittent boluses of methadone (0.2-0.3 mg/kg i.v. q 4 hr).
Thoracic radiography performed approximately 16 hours following presentation
confirmed the presence of diaphragmatic rupture with probable displacement of the
S p  ar   a    ss s 
Clinical Tip
· A thoracostomy tube may be placed intraoperatively prior to closure of the diaphragmatic defect to
-a pioae on lpo u sda smou A lnad a uo paoa aq on re lnpisai mo
expansion pulmonary oedema, some authors recommend only aspirating a proportion of the residual
air immediately postoperatively, i.e. as much as is necessary for satisfactory ventilation to occur,
with the remainder being removed over the subsequent 8-12 hours. A thoracostomy tube will also
allow monitoring for complications such as pneumothorax or haemothorax, as well as repeated
administration of local anaesthesia.
· If a thoracostomy tube is not placed, it is important to remove residual air from the pleural cavity
by other means to prevent respiratory compromise. This is ideally done through the diaphragm
before the final suture is tightened but may be achieved via thoracocentesis during recovery.
Pelvic Fractures
Clinical Tip
 Considerable external force is required to fracture the pelvis and therefore animals with pelvic
fractures are likely to have suffered other additional injuries. These injuries may be confined to the
musculoskeletal system but they may also relate to the abdomen (e.g. urinary bladder rupture),
thorax (e.g. pulmonary contusions, pneumothorax) or nervous system (e.g. lumbosacral plexus
damage). Thus any animal with a suspected or confirmed pelvic fracture must be thoroughly
evaluated for additional extrapelvic injuries.
d    s        
fracture should begin with a major body system examination and initial stabilization
should be provided as needed. Priority must be given to the identification and
management  of  potentially life-threatening extrapelvic injuries.  Radiographic
evaluation of the pelvis must only be done once the patient has received adequate
stabilization, including the provision of suitable analgesia.
Clinical Tip
· In animals with suspected pelvic trauma, it is preferable to assess the arterial pulse at sites other
than the femoral arteries (e.g. dorsal pedal artery, median artery). The potential to cause pain must
be remembered when feeling for a femoral pulse in these cases.
With respect to suspected lumbosacral or pelvic injury, it is important to find out
whether the animal has been seen to walk and whether voluntary urination or
defecation has occurred since the incident. Both pelvic limbs should be assessed for
deep pain sensation and positive withdrawal reflex as a minimum. Anal tone and
perineal reflex should be noted and the tail should be assessed for deep pain sensation
and voluntary movement. Digital rectal examination performed at the appropriate
time may provide information regarding both the degree of displacement of pelvic
fractures and the width of the pelvic canal.
Pelvic fractures in cats most often involve the pelvic floor but sacroiliac luxation
(potentially bilateral) and ilial body fractures are also common. A detailed discussion
is beyond the scope of this book but not all pelvic fractures require surgical
intervention. Conservative management may be appropriate in a proportion of cases
and is more likely to be suitable for cats and small dogs than larger dogs. Surgical
significant narrowing of the pelvic canal, marked pain, neurological deficits or
acetabular involvement.
sciatic nerve. Sciatic nerve damage may manifest as severe pelvic limb paresis as well
as loss of limb sensation to all but the medial aspect (supplied by the saphenous
branch of the femoral nerve) including the medial digit. Lack of deep pain sensation
B         s   n 
recovery. Signs associated with damage to the pudendal, pelvic or caudal nerves may
   s           
voluntary urination, and perineal sensation (see Sacrocaudal and tail pull injuries).
Sacrocauidal and Tail Pull Injuries
The sacro-caudal region of the vertebral column contains the peripheral nerve roots of
the cauda equina rather than the spinal cord. Injury to the sacral and caudal
(coccygeal) nerve roots most commonly occuirs as a result of sacro-caudal fractures or
luxations/subluxations secondary to motor vehicle accidents and bite wounds (Figure
28.7a). Distraction and possible avulsion of the nerve roots may also occur as a result
of a tail pull injury. Complete or partial, reversible or irreversible neurological
(e)
(b)
Figure28.7
Right  lateral  radiographs  showing  (a)  sacro-caudal  subluxation  and  (b)  large
distended bladder and faecal retention in a cat.
The sacral spinal cord segments (S1 to S3) and nerve roots contribute to the pelvic
    s         s
sciatic nerve. The caudal spinal cord segments provide sensory and motor innervation
to the tail via the caudal (coccygeal) nerves.
BOX 28.3 Functions of the pelvic and pudendal nerves
Pelvic nerve
 Transmits sensory information from and parasympathetic motor innervation to the detrusor muscle
 of the bladder
· Transmits sensory information from and parasympathetic motor innervation to smooth muscle of
the descending colon
Pudendal nerve
· Transmits sensory information from the external urethral sphincter, anal sphincter and perineal
area
· Provides motor innervation to the external urethral sphincter and the striated muscle of the anal
sphincter
Sacrocaudal and tail pull injuries are identified most commonly in cats and clinical
findings may include:
· Perineal urinary and/or faecal soiling
· Flaccid distended bladder that is usually easy to express manually due to reduced
urethral sphincter tone; urinary incontinence may occur (loss of the detrusor reflex
may result in overflow of a full bladder with dribbling of urine)
· Sacral nerve injury causes reduced or absent perineal reflex and anal sphincter tone
(dilated anal sphincter) with possible constipation and faecal incontinence (Figure
28.7b); perineal sensation may also be reduced or absent
· Pain on palpation of the tail head
· Reduced or absent tail sensation, motor function or tone
· Concomitant injuries depending on the aetiology
· Pelvic limb weakness, lameness or ataxia - may be due to sciatic nerve involvement
and/or pelvic or pelvic limb fractures.
Prognosis
The prognosis for cats in which only the tail is affected is very good, including
the severity of neurological injury and the most severely affected animals (dilated
anus with no anal tone; absent tail sensation and motor function) may not recover.
Recovery, in particular with respect to tail sensation and motor function, can take
weeks to months to occur. As a guideline, most cats that do not recover urinary
control after 4 weeks are likely to remain incontinent. A discussion of appropriate
management for animals with prolonged recovery is beyond the scope of this book.
BiteWounds
Theory refresher
Although skin lacerations or puncture wounds may be the most visible result of a bite
injury, these lesions should be considered as only the ‘tip of the iceberg'. Crushing,
shearing, tearing and avulsion may occur during biting and may cause extensive and
deep tissue trauma (Figures 28.8-28.11) that may not be readily appreciable from the
outside. It is therefore recommended that all but the mildest of bite wouinds are
explored - but only at the appropriate time following extensive patient stabilization.
Diagnostic imaging should be performed as indicated by the location of the wounds
and positive contrast sinography may be useful in determining whether wounds have
penetrated into body cavities.
(e)
(b)
(C)
Figure 28.8
(a) A West Highland White terrier that had suffered dog bite wounds to the caudal
abdominal, left inguinal and proximal left pelvic limb areas. (b) Traumatic limb amputation and (c) a
puncture wound in the urinary bladder are evident.
(Photographs courtesy of Zoe Halfacree)
Figure 28.9
 Severe perineal and bilateral pelvic limb swelling and bruising in a cat with dog bite
wounds.
(Photograph courtesy of Zoe Halfacree)
Figure 28.10
 Deep penetrating dog bite wound to the flank of a dog.
(Photograph courtesy of Stephen Baines)
Figure28.11
 Extensive trauma to the thoracic limb of a dog following a dog attack.
Bite wounds, whether open or closed, are invariably contaminated with bacteria.
Bacteria may be inoculated deeply into traumatized tissue, with dead space and serum
accumulation creating a highly suitable environment for severe infection to develop.
All but the most superficial bite wounds should therefore be lavaged thoroughly and
adequate drainage ensured. Primary closure of bite wounds without adequate
drainage may result in disastrous consequences with respect to wound dehiscence,
tissue devitalization and the development of sepsis (Figure 28.12).
(a)
(b)
Figure 28.12
Tissue devitalization and wound dehiscence in two dogs in which dog bite wounds
had been closed primarily without ensuring adequate drainage.
(Photograph (a) courtesy of Zoe Halfacree; Photograph (b) courtesy of Chiara Valtolina)
Systemic antibiosis may not be required in mild low-risk bite injuries but should be
provided parenterally (typically intravenously) and then orally in other cases. A
broad-spectrum bactericidal antibiotic  with activity against the most commonly
cultured bacteria (Staphylococcus species, Escherichia coli, Enterococcus species)
should be chosen. Amoxicillin/clavulanate is a good first choice. It must be
remembered that antibiotics are not a substitute for appropriate lavage, debridement
and drainage. Wound culture is recommended to guide further antimicrobial choice
in bite wounds that become infected despite antibiosis.
Systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRs), sepsis and death may result from
multiple or severe bite wounds, especially when not managed appropriately in a
timely fashion.
Case example 4
Presenting Signs and Case History
 A 1-year-old male neutered domestic short hair cat presented shortly after a presumed dog attack.
The owners had been awoken by the cat's howling from outside the house and had gone out to find
the cat cowering under a car with a Staffordshire bull terrier dog nearby. The owners had chased the
dog away and then retrieved the cat from under the car. No other significant preceding history was
reported.
Major body system examinatior
On presentation the cat was distressed but responsive. Heart rate was 240 beats per
minute and no murmur or gallop sound could be heard. Femoral pulses were
hyperdynamic, mucous membranes were pink, and capillary refill time was
 s    i      
effort. Abdominal palpation was unremarkable and the bladder was palpable and
Multiple puncture wounds were identified caudally over the dorsal pelvis and right
thigh. There was severe bruising and swelling associated with these areas. Voluntary
movement and pain sensation were present in both pelvic limbs and in the tail, and
there was good anal tone.
Assessment
              
hypovolaemia, pain and anxiety. The cat's respiratory status was thought to reflect
these abnormalities as opposed to a primary respiratory disorder and trauma appeared
to be restricted to the caudal part of the body.
Emergency database
An intravenous catheter was placed in a cephalic vein and blood obtained via the
catheter for an emergency database. This was consistent with haemoconcentration
(packed cell volume 48%, reference range 31-45%) but total solids were potentially
hyperglycaemic (13.8 mmol/l, reference range 4.2-6.6 mmol/l).
Case management
A 10 ml/kg bolus of an isotonic replacement crystalloid solution was administered
over 15 minutes and analgesia provided in the form of methadone (0.4 mg/kg i.v.).
The cat was also started on intravenous amoxicillin/clavulanate (20 mg/kg i.v. q 8 hr)
and  a brief abdominal ultrasound  was  performed  that revealed no  detectable
subsequently maintained on the same intravenous fluid at 4 ml/kg/hr.
The cat responded well to stabilization and approximately 4 hours following initial
Doppler sphygmomanometry prior to induction was normal (130 mmHg). Thoracic
and abdominal radiography was performed and found to be unremarkable. In
particular there was no evidence of pneumoperitoneum or pneumoretroperitoneum
that was of concern given the location of the puncture wounds. The cat's pelvis was
manipulated thoroughly and no significant abnormalities were detected.
All of the puncture wounds were lavaged with copious amounts of sterile normal
saline. The wounds were variously explored, debrided and closed as appropriate, with
well from general anaesthesia and was initially maintained on buprenorphine (o.02
mg/kg i.v. q 8 hr) and amoxicillin/clavulanate as above. Meloxicam (0.3 mg/kg s.c.)
was administered once the cat was fully recovered and he was subsequently
discharged on oral amoxicillin/clavulanate and meloxicam.
Clinical Tip
· Severe bite wounds may require urgent referral to a specialist centre where suitable management
can be implemented. This is particularly the case where a full thickness injury into the thoracic or
abdominal cavity is considered a possibility.
· If a significant delay in referral is anticipated, and following initial stabilization, brief general
 anaesthesia for rapid initial management (lavage, debridement, drain placement) may be prudent,
  e aq s nd a an  e d aa as  a 
specialist centre.
· The possibility of visceral trauma despite the lack of a skin lesion should be borne in mind and
may occur for example in a *big dog/little dog' scenario.
Feline High-Rise Syndrome
             
   s           
most commonly in younger cats. An extensive list of traumatic injuries has been
reported in cats falling from a height but the most frequently identified include limb
fractures (most cats have only a single fracture), thoracic injuries (especially
been suggested but clearly each case needs to be evaluated on an individual basis.
29
The acute abdomen
Differential diagnoses of acute abdomen are discuissed in Chapter 8 and some of the
most common disorders are discuissed in greater detail here using case examples
Septic (Bacterial) Peritonitis
Theory refresher
Free peritoneal fluid and gas
Abdominal palpation is an insensitive means of detecting free peritoneal fluid.
Ultrasonography is extremely useful in this respect even in relatively inexperienced
hands. Small amounts of free peritoneal fluid are most readily detected at the apex of
the urinary bladder and between liver lobes. If ultrasonography is not available, loss of
body material and obstruction. Radiography will be less useful in this respect if a large
volume of free peritoneal fluid is present due to increased loss of contrast.
In animals without a history of recent (last 3-4 weeks) laparotomy or open system
abdominocentesis, free peritoneal gas suggests rupture of a hollow viscus and is an
indication for emergency surgical exploration. This also applies to animals that have
suffered penetrating injuries as free peritoneal gas implies full thickness penetration
into the abdomen.
Cytology of peritoneal fluid
Depending on the severity of peritoneal contamination, direct smears of peritoneal
effusion may be less rewarding than smears made after centrifugation with respect to
identifying bacteria. However, centrifugation may alter cell morphology, preventing
accurate assessment. The author therefore routinely examines direct smears first and
then smears made following centrifugation if appropriate - typically if no bacteria are
identified on direct smears but there is a high index of suspicion for bacterial
 e  s        
samples obtained via diagnostic peritoneal lavage which are likely to contain only
scant cellular and other material and must be centrifuged prior to cytological analysis.
The identification of even one intracellular (phagocytosed) bacterium is considered
diagnostic for septic peritonitis which is a surgical emergency. Extracellular bacteria
are suggestive of this condition but the possibility of contamination cannot be
excluded and in such cases other considerations must be taken into account in
making a diagnosis.
Case example 1 - surgical gastrointestinal wound dehiscence
Presenting Signs and Case History
A 1-year-old male entire Staffordshire bull terrier presented as an emergency 3 days after
 gastrotomy and enterotomy for removal of a linear foreign body. The dog had initially recovered well
from surgery and had been discharged from the primary care clinic after 48 hours. However, he had
S   d s hi     s a assd a
Clinical Tip
· Clinical signs associated with dehiscence of a surgical gastrointestinal wound are most likely to be
seen 3-5 days following surgery. This period reflects the inflammatory phase of visceral wound
healing.
· The inflammatory phase is followed by the proliferative phase, during which there is a rapid
increase in wound strength and dehiscence becomes much less likely.
Major body system examination
On presentation the dog was ambulatory but depressed. Cardiovascular examination
was unremarkable with no evidence of hypovolaemia. Respiratory examination was
unremarkable and rectal temperature was within normal limits. The dog's abdomen
was rigid and diffusely painful on palpation but a fluid thrill was not detected. Digital
examination per rectum was unremarkable.
Emergency database
An intravenous catheter was placed in a cephalic vein and blood collected via the
catheter for an emergency database. This was unremarkable except for the presence of
a subjective neutrophilia with mild to moderate toxic change (see Ch. 3).
Case management
Morphine (o.3 mg/kg slow i.v.) was administered for analgesia. An abdominal
uiltrasound was performed using a focused assessment with sonography for trauma
both transverse and longitudinal views at each of four sites - just caudal to the
xiphoid process (last sternebra), on the midline over the urinary bladder, and at the
right and left flank regions. Despite this thorough evaluation, no peritoneal fluid could
  s           
high index of suspicion for bacterial peritonitis secondary to surgical gastrointestinal
(see p. 294).
The peritoneal fluid subsequently obtained was centrifuged and smears made from
the sediment. Cytology  demonstrated  degenerate  neutrophils  with  occasional
intracellular rod-shaped bacteria and a diagnosis of bacterial peritonitis was therefore
confirmed. A peritoneal fluid glucose concentration of less than 2.8 mmol/1 is reported
to have high specificity for bacterial peritonitis and was found to be 2.0 mmol/l in
this case.
Intravenous antibiosis using amoxicillin/clavulanic acid (20 mg/kg) was
commenced and an exploratory laparotomy performed. This revealed dehiscence with
leakage from the enterotomy incision that was debrided and repaired. Antibiosis was
continued postoperatively, first intravenously and then per os, and cuilture of the fluid
obtained from the abdomen following DPL revealed a scant growth of Escherichia coli
that was sensitive to amoxicillin/clavulanic acid. The dog made an uneventful
recovery from the surgery and was discharged after 5 days to complete a 2-week
course of antibiotics.
Clinical Tip
· Broad-spectrum bactericidal intravenous antibiosis with activity against both Gram negative and
 Gram positive, aerobic and anaerobic bacteria should be used if the gastrointestinal tract is thought
to be the source of bacterial peritonitis. Amoxicillin/clavulanic acid or a second generation
cephalosporin are reasonable single agent choices initially. Metronidazole may be added to increase
anaerobic coverage.
Case example 2 - uiterine rupture
Presenting Signs and Case History
An 1l-year-old female entire cross-bred dog presented with a 3-day history of intermittent
vomiting and progressive lethargy and inappetence. She had also been panting excessively on the day
    e  aa        
discharge had been noted by her owners prior to presentation.
Major body system examination
On presentation the dog was obtunded. Cardiovascular examination revealed a heart
rate of 2oo beats per minuite with very weak femoral pulses and absent dorsal pedal
pulses. Mucous membranes were hyperaemic with a rapid capillary refill time.
Respiratory examination revealed tachypnoea with appropriate lung auscultation.
The abdomen was tense and painful on palpation but a more thorough examination
temperature 40.4°C) was identified. The vulva was swollen but no discharge was
detected. A brown-tinged serous mammary discharge was present but the mammary
glands were not enlarged or obviously inflamed.
Assessment
The dog was assessed as being in moderate to severe mal-distributive shock that was
most likely secondary to acute abdomen. Given the dog's signalment and history, there
was a high index of suspicion for pyometra. The cardiovascular picture in this case
was highly suggestive of sepsis as the cause of the mal-distributive shock that raised
the index of suspicion for septic peritonitis secondary to uterine rupture following
closed-cervix pyometra.
Clinical Tip
· Closed-cervix pyometra is more commonly associated with pyrexia and is expected to cause more
requires more rapid intervention. Medical therapy is less advisable for bitches with closed-cervix
 p d       s
Emergency database
An intravenous catheter was placed in a cephalic vein and blood collected via the
catheter for an emergency database. This revealed marked haemoconcentration
(manual packed cell volume (PcV) 72%, reference range 37-55%; plasma total solids
(TS) 95 g/l, reference range 49-71 g/l) and a subjective degenerate neutrophilic left
shift.
Case management
Aggressive intravenous fluid resuscitation with an isotonic crystalloid solution was
commenced and morphine (0.3 mg/kg slow i.v.) administered. Abdominal ultrasound
revealed the presence of enlarged uterine horns distended with hypoechoic fluid
consistent with pyometra and peritoneal fluid was detected (Figure 29.1).
Figure29.1
 Ultrasound image of pyometra showing enlarged uterine horns distended with
hypoechoic fluid; the urinary bladder is also visible.
Abdominocentesis (see p. 293) was performed and a sample of the fluid retrieved.
bacteria as well as a considerable number of extracellular bacteria (Figure 29.2). A
diagnosis of bacterial peritonitis secondary to uterine rupture was made. Regrettably,
due to financial constraints, the dog was euthanased
Figure 29.2
Septic peritoneal fluid secondary to uterine rupture; several degenerate neutrophils
with intracellular bacteria are visible.
Haemoabdomen
Causes of haemoabdomen are listed in Box 29.1.
BOX 29.1 Causes of haemoabdomen
Non-traumatic
• Rupture of intraabdominal neoplasm (especially splenic; also hepatic, adrenal and others)
* Coagulopathy (e.g. anticoagulant rodenticide intoxication; Angiostrongylus vasorum infection)
· Splenic torsion
* Splenic infarction
• Splenic haematoma rupture
• Liver disease (including neoplasia, necrosis, amyloidosis, rupture), especially in cats
* Liver lobe torsion
* Gastric dilatation/volvulus syndrome (GDV)
Traumatic (usually causes rupture of intraabdominal viscera, especially liver,
spleen)
· Blunt trauma, especially motor vehicle accident
 Penetrating trauma
Theory refresher
Canine haemangiosarcoma
Canine haemangiosarcoma is most commonly diagnosed in German shepherd dogs
followed by golden retrievers. Other large breed dogs, such as Labrador retrievers and
Boxers, are also over represented. The spleen is the most common site of origin but
right atrial, pericardial and hepatic canine haemangiosarcoma are also reported
  s s  o  n    
theoretically be affected
Haemangiosarcoma is presumed to have metastasized at the time of diagnosis in
the vast majority of cases, regardless of whether or not metastases are detected by
currently available imaging modalities. The prognosis is very poor, with survival
times in the region of 2-4 months reported for splenic haemangiosarcoma following
splenectomy alone; survival may in some cases be improved modestly by additional
chemotherapy and immunotherapy.
          s s
splenic lesion, splenectomy will be palliative and remove the risk of recurrent
haemorrhage in the short term. It should be remembered that the nature (benign or
malignant) of hepatic nodules that may be identified in such cases cannot be
determined based on ultrasonographic appearance and surgical intervention therefore
remains a rational choice. Palliative surgery is unlikely to be an option in primary
hepatic haemangiosarcoma.
Abdominal counterpressure bandage
 e            
intraabdominal
intraabdominal pressure is only likely to be increased sufficiently to exceed venous
not offer any significant advantage and are likely to be associated with greater
complications.
S             
pressure bandage with an elastic material applied on top. In the author's experience,
however, these bandages are more likely to slip and the author prefers to use an elastic
adhesive primary layer despite the inherent difficulties in subsequent removal. The
bandage should be placed starting caudally, approximately at the level of the pubis,
and moving in a cranial direction up to the xiphoid, stopping before the caudal rib
margin.
            
reasonable period. Removal should commence at the cranial end (i.e. in the opposite
direction to how the bandage was placed) and should be staggered by cutting a small
    s         
Abdominal bandages shouild not be used in animals with respiratory compromise or
those suffering from diaphragmatic rupture.
Case example 3
Presenting Signs and Case History
    e    s     
lethargy and exercise intolerance. The dog had been found collapsed and tachypnoeic with a
distended abdomen on the day of presentation.
Major body system examination
On presentation the dog was obtunded. Cardiovascuilar examination revealed a heart
rate of 180 beats per minute with no murmur detected; femoral and dorsal pedal pulses
Respiratory examination revealed tachypnoea with appropriate lung auscultation and
both marked distension and recumbency precluded reliable abdominal palpation.
Assessment
The dog was assessed as being in severe hypovolaemic shock that was most likely due
to acute abdomen. Given the dog's signalment and history, there was a high index of
suspicion   for haemoabdomen  secondary   to  rupture  of  an  intraabdominal
membranes despite the severity of hypovolaemia suggested that severe anaemia was
not present.
Emergency database
An intravenols catheter was placed in a cephalic vein and blood collected via the
catheter for an emergency database. This revealed mild anaemia (PCV 31%, reference
range 37-55%) with a more significant decrease in Ts (40 g/l, reference range 49-71
examination showed the anaemia to be regenerative  (moderate polychromasia
moderate anisocytosis). As a regenerative response often takes a minimum of 3 days
to be detectable clinically in dogs, this suggested one or more prior episodes of
haemorrhage in the days preceding presentation. Platelet count was considered
adequate and a neutrophilia with left shift suspected.
Case management
Aggressive intravenous fluid resuscitation with an isotonic crystalloid solution was
commenced (60 ml/kg bolus via pressure infusor). Abdominal ultrasonography
revealed  the presence of  a large volume of echogenic peritoneal fluid.
Abdominocentesis (see p. 293) was performed and the non-clotting haemorrhagic
fluid was found to have a PCV of 30%; cytology of the fluid revealed red blood cells,
occasional erythrophagocytosis, no platelets and no evidence of sepsis. An abdominal
counterpressure bandage was applied and fluid therapy discontinued as soon as the
dog was assessed as being adequately perfused. The dog remained stable subsequently
and the abdominal bandage was removed gradually over several hours.
The following day the dog was referred for further management. Abdominal
ultrasonography revealed a cavitary splenic lesion and although the liver was
hyperechoic, no focal lesions were identified. Thoracic radiography was performed
liver biopsy were then carried out, from which the dog made an uneventful recovery.
Histopathology confirmed the suspicion of splenic haemangiosarcoma although no
Clinical Tip
     np a s  s  a    -
presenting with clinically significant haemoabdomen and DPL is typically not required. However, if
 shnsa   a  n  ag s  ns  s  nn s
significant haemorrhage
Uroabdomen
Causes
Trauma is the most common cause of uroabdomen:
· Especially blunt abdominal/pelvic trauma - urine leakage usually from the bladder
· Also iatrogenic - especially urethral rupture during urethral catheter placement.
Neoplasia and prolonged urinary tract obstruction are less common causes.
Clinical Tip
· The presence of a palpable bladder does not rule out leakage of urine from the bladder and
definitely does not rule out uroabdomen due to rupture elsewhere in the urinary tract. In addition,
the ability to urinate also does not exclude uroabdomen.
· Leakage of urine from the kidneys or proximal ureters will result in uroretroperitoneum potentially
without uroabdomen
Diagnosis
Animals with uroabdomen typically have severe azotaemia, and variable
hyperkalaemia may be present. Blood urea nitrogen (BUN), creatinine and potassium
measured at the same time. Creatinine and potassium in peritoneal effusion
equilibrate more slowly with the intravascular space and are therefore considered
should be collected within a few minutes of one another and an intravenous fluid
bolus should not be administered in the interim if the peritoneal fluid is collected first
(dilution of plasma BUN, creatinine and potassium by the bolus may create
concentration gradients consistent with uroabdomen and lead to misdiagnosis).
Positive contrast radiography of the urinary system (intravenous urography,
retrograde urethrocystography) is helpful in determining the site of urinary tract
rupture.
Clinical Tip
· Aside from the bladder, surgical repair or management of urinary tract rupture in other sites is
often best done in the hands of a specialist surgeon. As such it may be appropriate to refer animals
with uroabdomen following initial stabilization without performing general anaesthesia for contrast
radiography.
Bile Peritonitis
Causes
Bile peritonitis occurs due to leakage from or rupture of the gallbladder and/or biliary
tract. This may result from:
· Blunt or penetrating abdominal trauma; also iatrogenic
· Inflammation with or without infection (e.g. necrotizing cholecystitis)
· Obstruction (e.g. cholelithiasis, neoplasia).
Diagnosis
Clinical jaundice and hyperbilirubinaemia may be identified in animals with bile
peritonitis, depending on the cause, along with varying degrees of cardiovascular
       n    
pigment are identified. The bilirubin concentration of the peritoneal fluid is
considerably higher than the plasma biliru bin concentration.
Clinical Tip
· Bile peritonitis is a surgical emergency but the author cannot stress strongly enough the importance
potential for disastrous consequences in inexperienced hands.
Gastric Dilatation/Volvulus Syndrome (GDV)
Theory refresher
Risk factors
A large number of risk factors have been suggested for acute gastric
dilatation/volvulus syndrome (GDV). Some are supported by sound clinical evidence;
others are more controversial or anecdotal. The cause of this condition, however,
remains unknown and is likely to be multifactorial. Suggested risk factors are listed in
Box 29.2.
BOX 29.2 Suggested risk factors for gastric dilatation/volvulus syndrome (GDV)
· Large/giant breed
· Purebred
· Narrow and deep chest
· Feeding of single daily meal
· Large amount of food consumed per meal
· Exercise after eating
· Eating quickly, especially if accompanied by aerophagia
· Increasing age
· Fearful/agitated demeanour
· Hereditary factors
· Increased length/laxity of hepatogastric ligaments
· Reduced gastric motility
· Delayed gastric emptying
· Increased gastrin levels
· Abnormal oesophageal motility
Small breed dogs and cats can be affected but this is rare.
Pathophysiology
The pathophysiology of GDV is multifactorial and involves the cardiovascular and
Significant pathophysiological mechanisms are as follows.
· An increase in intraabdominal pressure that compresses the caudal vena cava, portal
vein and splanchnic vasculature. This causes a decrease in venous return to the heart,
progresses, an increasing amount of blood is sequestered in the abdominal
vascullature.
· Myocardial function is further compromised by dysrhythmias and reduced
abdomen as well as ischaemia and acidosis.
 s  n   n s s m s  n  e
capillaries due to raised intraluminal pressuire and a reduced blood supply due to
systemic hypoperfusion. This results in ischaemia, necrosis and potentially
perforation. Intraluminal haemorrhage occurs due to mucosal necrosis.
· The short gastric arteries branch off the splenic artery and supply the greater
curvature of the stomach. They may be avulsed when the stomach rotates during
acute GDV, resulting in potentially severe haemorrhage and further reducing
perfusion to the stomach wall.
· Gastric and intestinal motility is severely diminished and significant volumes of
fluid may be sequestered in the gastrointestinal tract.
· The distended stomach presses on the diaphragm, reducing intrathoracic volume
  s s       
respiratory rate occurs.
Radiography
Acute GDV can usually be diagnosed on the basis of history, signalment and physical
       s  
differentiation of gastric dilatation alone from gastric dilatation with volvulus.
Radiography should not be performed until after fluid therapy and analgesia have
been commenced and only if the patient is compliant as is usually the case.
Radiography may be performed during the initial fluid resuscitation but should not
shown in Figures 29.3-29.6.
Figuure29.3
 Right lateral abdominal radiograph showing gastric dilatation without volvulus.
Figu1re 29.4
 Right lateral abdominal radiograph showing gastric dilatation with volvulus with the
Popeye arm (double bubble, reverse C) configuration.
Figure29.5
 Right lateral  abdominal radiograph showing  gastric dilatation with  volvulus;
compartmentalization by a soft tissue fold is present. Gas-filled intestines are often identified as in
this example.
Figu1re29.6
 Right lateral abdominal radiograph showing gastric dilatation  with  volvulus and
perforation of the stomach wall. Free air is visible within the abdominal cavity.
Thoracic radiography may be indicated in dogs suspected of having cardiac disease
or inappropriate respiratory compromise (e.g. due to aspiration), or to rule out co-
existing disease (e.g. neoplasm) in older animals.
Intra-operative considerations
Patients require close monitoring of vital signs during anaesthesia, and blood pressure
and electrocardiogram monitoring is recommended. Cardiovascular depression can be
crystalloid rate of 10-40 ml/kg/hr is advisable and colloids may be required. 1f
orogastric intubation is performed during surgery, the risk of aspiration of
oesophageal reflux means that use of a cuffed endotracheal tube is mandatory, and
great care must be taken at extubation.
Postoperative considerations
P         n  
  rs n   uq oe  m ss
the nature of the surgical intervention in each case.
Electrocardiogram abnormality has been reported to occuir in approximately 4o% of
and ventricular tachycardia (VT) are the most common, both pre-and postoperatively
           
examination and blood pressure measurement if available. In addition, VT should be
              
phenomenon is identified (see Ch. 12).
Is surgery always necessary?
The aims of surgical intervention in dogs with acute GDV are:
 To decompress, empty and lavage the stomach if this has not already been achieved
· To derotate the stomach if necessary
· To evaluate the viability of the stomach and perform a gastrectomy if indicated
· To evaluate the viability of the spleen and perform a splenectomy if indicated
contents.
In animals in which gastric volvulus persists despite decompression or in which the
presence of volvulus cannot be excluded, surgical intervention is mandatory but
should only be performed when the patient is haemodynamically stable.
As described above, there are compelling reasons for surgical intervention in
patients presenting with gastric dilatation alone. There are cases, however, in which
P            
     s         s
conservatively but the owner must be advised of the risks associated with this
approach, particularly a lack of information regarding the viability of the stomach
and spleen, and the possibility of recurrence both overnight and subsequently
Case example 4
Presenting Signs and Case History
 A 10-year-old male neutered weimaraner presented with a 2-hour history of nonproductive
sd    r  s  e   r   
more lethargic and the owner had noticed abdominal distension.
Major body system examination
On presentation the dog was ambulatory but depressed and drooling. Cardiovascular
examination revealed a heart rate of 160 beats per minute with absent dorsal pedal
pulses and weak femoral pulses. Mucous membranes were pink with a capillary refill
time of approximately 2 seconds. The dog was panting but lung sounds were
appropriate when  this was temporarily stopped. Abdominal palpation revealed
limits.
Assessment
The dog was assessed as being in moderate hypovolaemic shock. The signalment,
history and physical examination findings were highly suggestive of gastric dilatation
with possible volvulus.
Emergency database
blood collected via one of the catheters for an emergency database. This was largely
unremarkable except for hyperlactataemia (4.0 mmol/l, reference range 0.6-2.5
mmol/l).
Clinical Tip
· Intravenous catheters should be placed in the cephalic veins (or a single jugular catheter).
Administration of resuscitative fluids via saphenous catheters will be much less effective due to
 obstruction of the caudal vena cava.
Case management
Aggressive intravenous fluid therapy was commenced with 1 1 of Hartmann's solution
being administered as a bolus via each cephalic catheter using pressure infusors (see
Figure 4.1). Electrocardiography demonstrated sinus tachycardia with occasional
readily accessible, a right lateral abdominal radiograph was taken during initial fluid
The dog's cardiovascular status improved noticeably and fluid therapy was
    se s s s  
mg/kg i.v.) and diazepam (0.5 mg/kg i.v.) and orogastric decompression performed
using a stomach tube (see p. 294). This resulted in a noticeable reduction in
abdominal distension and further improvement in cardiovascular status.
Clinical Tip
 In the majority of cases fluid resuscitation can be achieved through the use of an isotonic
crystalloid alone (e.g. Hartmann's solution). In some cases, the additional use of small volume
resuscitation fluids (colloids, hypertonic saline) may be applicable if available. Examples are:
· Cases that fail to respond adequately to crystalloid therapy alone
· Extremely large dogs where administration of large volumes of crystalloid may take too long
· Animals in which only limited intravenous access has been established.
Clinical Tip
  s  s   m so    o  os s od 
emetic effect, another pure agonist such as pethidine or methadone is recommended initially.
· Nonsteroidal antinflammatory agents should not be used in any animal with hypovolaemia.
Furthermore, the inevitable compromise to the gastrointestinal mucosa during acute GDV warrants
 judicious and delayed use of these agents.
The combination of methadone and diazepam already administered acted as
P        
confirmed 180° clockwise volvulus of the stomach. This was reduced manually after
further decompression and emptying of the stomach contents. Both the gastric wall
pyloric antrum and the right abdominal wall. The abdomen was lavaged thoroughly
prior to closure. Intravenous broad-spectrum antibiosis (amoxicillin/clavulanic acid
20 mg/kg i.v) was commenced preoperatively and repeated during surgery; however,
it was stopped thereafter based on the relatively benign findings at laparotomy.
Clinical Tip
· Although anticlockwise rotation has been reported, the stomach usually twists clockwise. A 180°
rotation - such that the pylorus comes to lie craniodorsally to the body of the stomach on the left of
the abdomen - is most common, but 90", 270? and 360° rotations may also occur. The spleen usually
rotates with the stomach (attached by gastrosplenic ligaments) to a position right of midline.
The dog was monitored closely following surgery, in particular for clinically
significant cardiac dysrhythmia, but made an uneventful recovery. Water was
introduced as soon as the dog was fully recovered from general anaesthesia and food
was offered 12 hours postoperatively.
Small Intestinal Foreign Body
Case example 5
Presenting Signs and Case History
 A 2-year-old female neutered cross-bred dog presented with a 24-hour history of vomiting,
depression and anorexia. The dog was still drinking and no other signs were reported. The dog was
 known to be a notorious scavenger although the owner was unaware of a specific episode of dietary
indiscretion prior to the onset of signs. The dog had had an enterotomy 1 year previously for removal
of a linear foreign body.
Major body system examination
On presentation the dog was ambulatory but depressed. Heart rate was 140 beats per
minute but the dog  was assessed as euvolaemic and not obviously clinically
dehydrated. Respiratory examination revealed tachypnoea but  auscultation  was
unremarkable. Abdominal palpation revealed moderate discomfort but this could not
be localized. The dog was mildly pyrexic (rectal temperature 39.3°C).
Emergency database
An intravenous catheter was placed in a cephalic vein and blood collected for an
       s   s
but was otherwise unremarkable.
Case management
Methadone (o.2 mg/kg i.v.) was administered and plain abdominal radiography
performed. This revealed focal areas of gaseous small intestinal dilatation consistent
with possible mechanical obstruction (Figure 29.7).
Figure 29.7
 Right lateral abdominal radiograph showing focal areas of gaseous small intestinal
dilatation consistent with obstruction.
The options of contrast radiography or referral for ultrasonography were discussed;
           
radiographs, it was decided to perform an exploratory laparotomy. A cloth intestinal
foreign body  was  subsequently  removed  via enterotomy. The dog recovered
uneventfully from surgery.
Clinical Tip
· Linear foreign bodies (e.g. string, thread) may be identified trapped around the base of the tongue;
this finding is more common in cats. Linear foreign bodies may also become fixed at the pylorus.
Pleated or plicated small intestine bunched in the cranial to mid-ventral abdomen may be identified
radiographically. Sacculation and small intraluminal gas bubbles may be present. Surgical removal is
likely to be the safest option in most animals.
Intuissuisception
Theory refresher
Intussusception may involve any part of the gastrointestinal tract but a significant
proportion of published cases in dogs and cats are enterocolic and in particular
ileocolic. Affected animals are often young, especially less than 1 year of age, and a
lesions, foreign bodies) may potentially predispose to intussusception. Acute enteritis
or gastroenteritis has been shown to be the most likely predisposing factor in young
positive contrast studies are often diagnostic. However, in experienced hands
abdominal ultrasonography is the preferred method of diagnosis. A target-like mass
         
section (Figure 29.8), or the appearance of multiple hyperechoic and hypoechoic
parallel lines in longitudinal section, is considered virtually diagnostic of an
intuissuisception.
Figure 29.8
Target-like ultrasonographic appearance of intussusception in transverse section.
(Photograph courtesy of Andrew Parry)
Case example 6
Presenting Signs and Case History
A 13-year-old female neutered domestic short hair cat presented with a 2-day history of anorexia,
 progressive depression and a small amount of diarrhoea. No vomiting had been noted but the cat had
retched once and had been drinking more than normal over the last 48 hours. The cat's diet had been
changed 2 weeks prior to the onset of signs. A small intestinal intussusception had been manually
reduced 1 year previously.
Major body system examination
On presentation the cat was quiet but alert and responsive. Cardiovascular
          
unremarkable.  Respiratory examination was unremarkable. Abdominal palpation
       s -s   n
abdomen suggestive of an intussusception. Rectal temperature was within normal
limits.
Case management
An intravenous catheter was placed into a cephalic vein and blood collected for an
emergency data base that was inremarka ble except for mild hypokalaemia. Abdominal
iltrasonography revealed a small intestinal intussusception (see Figure 29.8) and
exploratory laparotomy was performed
The intussusception was manually reduced and enteroplication performed in an
attempt to reduce the likelihood of recurrence. Multiple full thickness small intestinal
biopsies and several mesenteric lymph node biopsies were taken and the abdomen
and the lymph nodes were hyperplastic with moderate eosinophilic infiltration
The heart murmur in this case warranted caution with intravenous fluid therapy
and the cat was therefore kept on Hartmann's solution at a conservative 3 ml/kg/hr
while under general anaesthesia. Vital parameters, including systolic blood pressuire
were monitored closely throughout and the cat remained normotensive.
Severe Acute Pancreatitis
Theory refresher
Diagnosis
Detection of elevated serum amylase and lipase activities show relatively poor
also for example be seen in pancreatic neoplasia, intestinal disorders and in
association with renal insufficiency/azotaemia. Hyper-lipasaemia may also for
example be seen in pancreatic neoplasia, liver disease (especially neoplasia) and in
severity of elevation during interpretation. It is noteworthy that hypovolaemia and/or
dehydration that may be a feature of some of the differential diagnoses of acuite
  nd   s s    n s
diagnostic test.
         p
pancreatitis but should help to exclude some of the differential diagnoses (e.g.
intestinal obstruction). Signs consistent with acute pancreatitis in dogs include loss of
duodenum and the pylorus, and caudal displacement of the transverse colon.
modality requires considerable expertise.
Analgesia in acuite pancreatitis
Opioids are the mainstay of analgesia in pancreatitis. Some authors have argued that
pethidine is the most appropriate initial choice but this would appear to be based on
theoretical considerations adopted from human literature and is unlikely to be of
clinical significance in dogs and cats. Pethidine cannot be administered intravenously
and has a short duration of action, making it a poor choice for on-going analgesia in
pancreatitis. The author therefore prefers to use morphine, given as intravenous
boluses titrated to effect initially and then as a constant rate infusion. Following
buprenorphine. Again, suggested contraindications of using this agent in pancreatitis
are more likely to be of theoretical concern rather than of clinical significance.
unstable, dehydrated or azotaemic.
Feline pancreatitis
S           s
anorexia and dehydration, with vomiting and abdominal pain featuring less
commonly than in dogs. Testing of serum feline pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity
(fPLI) is available, and concurrent inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and/or
cholangitis-cholangiohepatitis are reported relatively frequently in cats (this is the so-
called ‘triad disease’ of cats); hence icterus is relatively common in cats with
pancreatitis. Serum amylase and lipase activities are of little diagnostic value in feline
pancreatitis.
Treatment of feline and canine acute pancreatitis is similar. However, these cats are
especially vulnerable to developing potentially fatal hepatic lipidosis. Nutritional
support must therefore be emphasized and early feeding tube placement is
recommended. Given the inherent difficulties in reliably detecting abdominal pain in
S      r      
Buprenorphine may be a suitable first line agent in this species although its onset of
action is likely to be slower than that of the pure opioids. Low plasma ionized calcium
concentration may be associated with a worse outcome in cats with acute
pancreatitis.
Case example 7
Presenting Signs and Case History
A 9-year-old female neutered Cocker Spaniel presented with a 1-day history of anorexia,
restlessness, vomiting and intermittently adopting the praying position. No diarrhoea had been noted.
The dog had been seen to scavenge from the rubbish bin several days prior to the onset of signs.
Clinical Tip
· Dogs affected by acute pancreatitis are generally middle-aged or older. Canine breeds most
commonly implicated include the Miniature Schnauzer, the Cocker Spaniel and the Yorkshire terrier,
and affected dogs are often overweight.
Clinical Tip
· The praying position describes the upright posture adopted by some dogs with abdominal pain
whereby the thoracic limbs are extended with the sternum on the ground and the pelvic limbs
upright.
· The proportion of dogs with abdominal pain that are reported or witnessed to adopt the praying
position is low. However, it is a relatively specific sign of significant abdominal discomfort and
should not be discarded lightly when present.
Major body system examination
On presentation the dog was depressed and recumbent. Cardiovascular examination
revealed a heart rate of 160 beats per minute and absent pedal pulses with weak
 a  e   a s   
capillary refill time. Respiratory rate was 80 breaths per minute with a shallow
pattern and abdominal palpation was painful cranially. An abdominal fluid thrill
could not be detected. The dog was moderately pyrexic (rectal temperature 39.7°C) and
had a body condition score of 7/9 (heavy fat cover over ribs, lumbar area and tail
base; absent waist).
Assessment
The dog was assessed as being in mal-distributive shock. Given the history and the
other physical examination findings of tachypnoea and pyrexia, the dog was likely to
S         
           
intraabdominal process was suspected and there was a high index of suspicion of
severe acute pancreatitis given the dog's signalment.
Emergency database
An intravenous catheter was placed in a cephalic vein and blood collected for an
emergency database that showed mildly lipaemic plasma, hyperlactataemia, and a
subjective neutrophilia with left shift. The dog was found to be normocalcaemic.
Blood was also submitted in a serum gel tube for measurement of cPLI concentration.
Clinical Tip
· Lipaemia is a relatively frequent finding in dogs with acute pancreatitis and may artefactually
increase refractometric total solids measurement.
Case management
A 40 ml/kg bolus of Hartmann's solution was administered to which there was a
synthetic colloid (6% hydroxyethyl starch, Voluven?) were then administered,
following which the dog remained stable. The dog was subsequently maintained on a
combination of Hartmann's solution (4 ml/kg/hr) and hydroxyethyl starch (2
ml/kg/hr).
Clinical Tip
• Animals with a severe inflammatory focus, such as septic peritonitis or severe acute pancreatitis,
 are likely to have vasculitis. Decreased plasma total solids due to panhypoproteinaemia may be
identified and is thought to reflect exudation of protein into the peritoneum.
· Colloidal fluid therapy may be required in such cases for effective and sustained correction of
hypovolaemia as crystalloid solutions are likely to be less effective (due to increased vascular
leakage and reduced intravascular oncotic pressure).
Morphine (o.3 mg/kg slow i.v.) was administered for analgesia. The dog was
discomfort. A further dose of morphine (o.1 mg/kg slow i.v.) was administered and
the dog was started on a constant rate infusion of morphine (o.1 mg/kg/hr).
amount of localized peritoneal effusion. There  was hyperechogenicity of the
peripancreatic mesentery. This provided further evidence for the suspected diagnosis
of acute pancreatitis although an inciting cause was not identified, as is often the
case.
        sa  
treatment, and in keeping with more recent recommendations, first water and then
food (low fat) was offered as soon as vomiting had resolved for 12 hours. The dog was
eventually discharged after satisfactory improvement 5 days later. The sample
submitted on the day of presentation showed an elevation in serum cPLI
concentration (650 μg/l, reference range 0-200 μg/l), confirming inflammatory
pancreatic disease.
Canine Parvoviral Gastroenteritis
Theory refresher
  s   s      n  
may occuir in older animals. Existing passive maternal immunity may impair an
effective response to vaccination in very young animals and clinical signs may
therefore occur in vaccinated animals. The enteritis and leucopenia syndrome is the
most common clinical manifestation and diarrhoea usually follows initial clinical
signs by 12-48 houirs.
Antimicrobial therapy
  psea ne si sa sii u po m op Aue r pne A si 1
antibiotic therapy. However, the true clinical significance of this remains to be clearly
elucidated. The author only uses antimicrobial therapy in neutropenic dogs and those
with pyrexia or evidence of sepsis. A broad-spectrum bactericidal antibiotic is used
  s    a   a a 
likely.
Case example 8
Presenting Signs and Case History
A 9-week-old male neutered cross-bred dog presented with a 36-hour history of vomiting and
progressive lethargy and inappetence. Haemorrhagic watery diarrhoea had also been noted on the
 sd e I  as e   a  nd a o g 
 had received the first dose of his primary vaccination course 2 weeks prior to being rehomed.
Major body system examination
On presentation the puppy was recum bent and depressed. Cardiovascular examination
            s
Mucous membranes were mildly hyperaemic with a brisk capillary refill time.
Respiratory examination was unremarkable. Abdominal palpation was not obviously
uncomfortable but fluid flled intestinal loops were detected. Mild pyrexia was
identified (rectal temperature 39.3'C) and moderate dehydration (estimated 8%) was
suspected. Body weight was 4.0 kg at presenta tion.
Case management
Local anaesthetic cream (EMLA? cream 5%, AstraZeneca) was applied to the skin over
both cephalic veins in the consultation room and the sites lightly dressed. While
waiting for the topical anaesthesia to take effect, a rectal swab was tested for faecal
canine parvovirus-2 antigen using an ELISA test kit (SNAP? Parvo Test, Idexx
measuires were immediately instituted.
An intravenous catheter was placed in a cephalic vein and blood collected for an
emergency database. Manual PCV was 43% and plasma TS 65 g/l. Although these
than adult reference ranges in a puppy of this age. These values were therefore
considered consistent with dehydration. The rest of the emergency database, including
        
unremarkable.
The puppy was assessed as mildly hypovolaemic on presentation and a bolus (20
ml/kg) of Hartmann's solution was given initially, after which euvolaemia was
restored. Thereafter the puppy was kept on Hartmann's solution at 13 ml/kg/hr with
regularly. This rate was calculated based on the following assumptions:
· An estimated 8% dehydration
     t      s
· Replacement of existing deficit to be achieved over 24 hours
B s    e     sss  e
this period.
The puppy was also started on anti-emetic therapy (maropitant 1 mg/kg s.c. q 24
hr) and analgesia (buprenorphine (0.02 mg/kg q 6 hr)) and monitored regularly for
possible hypoglycaemia. A nasogastric feeding tube was placed and used to aspirate
stomach contents intermittently (q 6 hr).
   n s a  s t   
the diarrhoea worsened considerably. An emergency database was repeated that
  dod          as
solution was reduced to 8 ml/kg/hr and a synthetic colloid (6% hydroxyethyl starch,
Voluven?) infusion commenced at 1 ml/kg/hr. Broad-spectrum antibiosis was
commenced using amoxicillin/clavulanic acid (20 mg/kg i.v. q 8 hr). A constant rate
infusion of a complete liquid diet was commenced at a rate that would meet a third of
The puppy was monitored closely, including regular weighing and gentle abdominal
was weaned as appropriate and the puppy was eventually discharged 1 week following
presentation, by which time normal faeces had been observed.
Canine Idiopathic Haemorrhagic Gastroenteritis (HGE)
Case example 9
Presenting Signs and Case History
A 6-year-old male neutered Border Collie presented with a 2-day history of vomiting and
diarrhoea. The diarrhoea had become progressively more haemorrhagic and the dog was increasingly
inappetent and lethargic. No significant preceding history was reported.
Major body system examination
On presentation the dog was ambulatory but depressed. Cardiovascular examination
revealed a heart rate of 160 beats per minute with absent dorsal pedal pulses and weak
femoral pulses. Intermittent pulse deficits were identified. Mucous membranes were
pale with a prolonged capillary refill time and the dog's extremities were cold.
Respiratory examination was unremarkable. The dog's abdomen was tense and
painful on palpation but a fluid thrill could not be detected. Mild hypothermia was
identified (rectal temperature 37.0'C) and severe dehydration suspected.
Assessment
The dog was assessed as being in moderate to severe hypovolaemic shock that may in
part have been due to severe dehydration.
Emergency data base
             
  1    )    (  
emergency database also revealed:
the dog was hypovolaemic on presentation, this was considered secondary to sodium
loss in excess of water loss.
· Normokalaemia (4.0 mmol/l, reference range 3.6-4.6 mmol/l); sodium to potassium
ratio 33.5:1
· Mild to moderate azotaemia (urea 17.8 mmol/l, reference range 3.0-10.0 mmol/l;
creatinine 319 μmol/l, reference range 50-140 μmol/l): this was considered most
likely to be prerenal in origin although urine specific gravity could not be determined
prior to commencing intravenous fluid therapy.
· Hyperlactataemia (4.6 mmol/l, reference range 0.6-2.5 mmol/l).
· Unremarkable peripheral blood smear examination.
Electrocardiography revealed sinus rhythm with intermittent uniform ventricular
premature complexes (VPCs) (see Figure 12.4).
Clinical Tip
· In the author's experience, it is quite common for dogs diagnosed presumptively with HGE to
present with a severely elevated PCV (65% or more). In addition, ventricular premature complexes
and ventricular tachycardia are occasionally identified, although in the author's experience it is 
relatively rare for antidysrhythmic therapy to be indicated in these cases.
· The diarrhoea in these cases may contain fresh blood as well as sloughed intestinal mucosa
(raspberry jam appearance).
Case management
Aggressive fluid resuscitation was performed starting with a 60 ml/kg bolus of 0.9%
sodium chloride solution (normal, physiological saline). This produced some
improvement but the dog remained mildly hypovolaemic and a further 20 ml/kg bolus
was administered, after which euvolaemia was restored. Thereafter fluid therapy was
administered at a rate calculated (8 ml/kg/hr) to treat the dog's dehydration, and
perfusion and hydration parameters were monitored regularly. Fluid therapy was
adjusted as indicated and colloidal support was not required.
Abdominal radiography showed mild focal gaseous dilation of the small intestine
and no peritoneal fluid was detected ultrasonographically. Faecal analysis (cytology,
   s ( d  n  
sample was not submitted for clostridial enterotoxin. Although the electrolyte
adrenocorticotrophin (ACTH) stimulation test was performed to rule out atypical
hypoadrenocorticism (see Ch. 34) and found to be unremarkable. A presumptive
diagnosis of canine idiopathic HGE was made based on typical clinical presentation
and progression, and exclusion of other differential diagnoses.
The dog was discharged 4 days after initial presentation following satisfactory
improvement.
Canine Open-Cervix Pyometra
Pyometra typically affects mature bitches but may occur in bitches of any age. Most
present within 12 weeks of the end of the previous oestrus but the condition may
occur at any stage of the oestrus cycle as well as during pregnancy. No association has
reported in nulliparous bitches.
Clinical Tip
 Pyometra should be considered as a differential diagnosis in any sick intact bitch
Diagnosis
Common clinical signs include polyuria/polydipsia and a malodorous mucopurulent
vaginal discharge. An enlarged viscus may be palpable in the caudal abdomen and the
cervix is found to be open on vaginal examination. Neutrophilia is a common finding
and cytology of vaginal discharge reveals large numbers of degenerate neutrophils
with intracellular bacteria.
Clinical Tip
· Many dogs with pyometra have a mild to moderate, normocytic normochromic anaemia (Pcv 30-
35%, reference range 37-55%). However, evaluation at time of presentation may be complicated by
concurrent dehydration.
Abdominal radiography reveals convoluted loops of tubular fluid opacity in the
caudal abdomen with dorsal displacement of the descending colon (Figure 29.9), and
ultrasonography shows enlarged uterine horns distended with hypoechoic fluid
(Figure 29.10).
Figure 29.9
Right lateral abdominal radiograph in a dog with pyometra. Convoluted loops of
tubular fluid opacity are visible in the caudal abdomen.
兰口
Figure29.10
 Ultrasonographic appearance of pyometra. Enlarged uterine horns distended with
hypoechoic fluid are visible in proximity to the urinary bladder.
Treatment
Ovarohysterectomy remains the recommended treatment for pyometra in bitches
without significant reproductive value or when the owner has no particular desire to
breed from the bitch. However, good success rates have been reported with medical
therapy when used in dogs with open-cervix pyometra. Protocols implemented include
the use of prostaglandin, prolactin inhibition and/or progesterone receptor
antagonists. Medical therapy is not recommended for bitches with closed-cervix
       s
Broad-spectrum  antimicrobial  therapy  should be  administered  to  all  cases,
regardless of  whether surgical or medical therapy is used. The bacteria most
commonly   isolated   from   the  uterus  in  pyometra   include Escherichia  coli
Amoxicillin/clavulanic acid, a cephalosporin or potentiated sulphonamide are good
empirical choices. Longer courses will be needed in dogs receiving medical therapy.
30
Toxicological emergencies
Suspected or witnessed poisoning is a common reason for presentation of small
animals to emergency clinics, with dogs being much more commonly affected than
cats. This chapter presents a general approach to the poisoned patient before going on
to describe some of the more commonly implicated poisons in greater detail using a
num ber of case examples.
Approach to the Poisoned Patient
Telephone communication
Initial telephone communication is perhaps no more important than in the
intoxicated patient. The important questions to ask are summarized in Box 30.1.
BOX 30.1 Important questions to ask owners ringing with respect to intoxication
· Was exposure witnessed or is it suspected? If suspected, based on what evidence?
· What poisons are involved? Can the owner provide more specific details - quantity, concentration,
etc.?
· Where appropriate, does the owner have access to the container?
- The owner should be asked to bring this with them if the animal is presented to the practice
· What is the animal's signalment and estimated body weight?
· How long ago did exposure occur?
 By what route did exposure occur?
· Is the animal showing clinical signs? If so, what are they, when did they start and what is their
progression?
· Is the owner sure that this is the only animal to be affected?
· Does the animal have any preexisting medical conditions? Is the animal currently taking any
medications?
Nursing Aspect
Nurses are frequently the first members of staff with whom owners ringing about suspected or
witnessed poisoning will communicate. It is therefore imperative that all nurses are well rehearsed in
the questions that are important to ask (Box 30.1) and advice should be sought from the veterinary
surgeon if there is any concern.
On the basis of the information obtained, a recommendation should be made as to
whether the animal needs to be presented to the practice or may be managed
conservatively at home. In some cases, the animal will be exhibiting marked clinical
practice being the only appropriate recommendation. In other cases, it is necessary to
obtain further information before a recommendation can be made.
Further information
The purpose of seeking additional information about the poison in question is to
ascertain if possible the severity of exposure that has or may have occurred (see Box
30.2).
BOX 30.2 Important addi tional information about specific poisons
 Has potentially toxic exposure occurred?
· Has lethal exposure occurred?
· What are the expected clinical signs?
· Would the animal be expected to have developed clinical signs by now?
· If signs are present, are they reported to be early or late signs of intoxication? Is their progression
typical?
A number of sources of information are available with respect to veterinary
toxicology that includes:
· The Veterinary Poisons Information Service (VPIS) in the United Kingdom (practice
registration required)
· The ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center in North America
· Books on veterinary toxicology (see Further Reading)
·.The internet: only reliable up-to-date sources should be used (e.g.
http://www.vin.com, http://www.ivis.org). The internet  is also useful for
determining ingredients and concentrations in cases where for example only a
proprietary product name is available.
Some information that may be useful when calculating exposure dosages is
presented in Box 30.3.
 BOX 30.3 Useful information for calculating dosage of toxin exposure
· 1 standard teaspoon = 5 ml; 1 standard tablespoon = 15 ml
· 1 fluid ounce (oz) = 29.6 ml; 1 ml = 0.034 0z
· 1 1b = 0.454 kg; 1 kg = 2.2 lb
* 1% solution = 10 mg/ml = 1 g/100 ml
* 1 part per million (ppm) = 1 mg/kg for solid substances, 1 mg/l for liquid substances
* w/w: an abbreviation for *by weight'; used to describe the concentration of a substance in a mixture
or solution. In strict terms, 8% w/w means that the mass of the substance in question is 8% of the
total mass of the solution or mixture. The metric symbol g/g has the same meaning as w/w.
Home management
If the decision is made for the animal to be monitored at home, the owner must be
thoroughly briefed both on what signs to observe the animal for and the typical time
frame for their onset and progression. In general, if there is any doubt as to the
animal's condition, veterinary examination should be recommended. Owners should
          
injury).
Inducing emesis at home
In some cases in which poison ingestion has occurred within a suitable period of time,
it may be appropriate for the owner to induce emesis at home, for example if financial
concerns or practical constraints preclude presentation to the practice. In addition, if a
considerable delay is anticipated prior to presentation, and the owner has ready access
to an appropriate emetic, inducing emesis prior to departure from home may be
advisable to minimize further absorption of the poison in transit. The owner must be
questioned carefully to ensure that contraindications to inducing emesis do not exist;
these are summarized in Box 30.4.
BOX 30.4 Contraindications to induction of emesis
 Significantly altered mentation due to increased risk of aspiration of vomitus; in particular in
depressed animals in whom there may be dysfunction of the gag reflex
· Respiratory distress and preexisting conditions (e.g. laryngeal paralysis) that may predispose the
animal to aspiration
· Animals that are already vomiting
· Ingestion of a caustic or corrosive agent (e.g. acids or alkalis) - emesis will potentially expose the
oropharyngeal and oesophageal mucosa to further injury. Consumption of milk or water should be
encouraged if not contraindicated
Agents that may be used to induce emesis at home are shown in Table 30.1.
Table 30.1 Agents for inducing emesis at home
Agent
OS6
Comments
 Soda crystals (wash ing soda)
1 crystal
 Place on tongue at back of mouth
Emesis usually within 10 minutes
Can be repeated
NB. Not caustic soda (sodium hydroxide)
 Syrup of ipec acu anha (7%)
D: 1-2 ml/kg p.0.
C: 3.3 ml/kg p.0.
Emesis usually within 30 minutes
Can be repeated once
Bitter taste th eref ore poor compliance
Hydrogen peroxide (3%)
D, C: 1-3 ml/kg 
Emesis usually within 10 minutes
 Can be repeated once
Care to avoid aspiration
Table salt (sodium chloride)
 Not recommen ded 
Unreliable
 May induce or exacerbate hypermatraemia with poten tially severe consequ enc es
Ad lib access to water imperative if used
C, cats; D, dogs.
Clinical Tip
• It is very important to make sure that soda crystals (washing soda) are used for emesis, as owners
have inadvertently administered caustic soda (sodium hydroxide) instead. This is very harmful
following ingestion, causing severe injury to the oropharyngeal and oesophageal mucosa with
potentially fatal consequences (Figure 30.l).
Figure 30.1
Severe oral cavity injury in a dog inadvertently given caustic soda by her owners for
 emesis. Severe mucosal injury extended all the way down the oesophagus.
(Photograph courtesy of Tammy Ford)
General Clinical Approach
See Box 30.5.
BOX 30.5 General approach to the poisoned patient
· Perform major body system examination and institute immediate life-saving measures as necessary
* Perform emergency database
· Obtain thorough history at first reasonable opportunity
· Minimize further systemic absorption of poison
· Administer antidote if available
• Promote elimination of any poison already absorbed
• Perform further clinical evaluation as appropriate
· Provide symptomatic, supportive and nursing care as appropriate
          
History
Clinical Tip
· In a patient presents with severe clinical signs (e.g. seizures, severe muscle tremors) history-taking
 should not be prioritized over initial stabilization, especially as specific antidotes are not available
 pa si nan A sodxa ane sn p sop m cn sosd go Ao a 
the patient and not the poison.
All the information in Boxes 30.1 and 30.2 should be obtained at the appropriate
time. In some emergency patients, clinical signs and progression are compatible with
possible intoxication without an immediately suggestive history. In such cases, the
owner must be carefully and thoroughly questioned to establish whether a potential
source of poison exists that the owner has not considered.
Initial management of ingested poisons
As for all emergency patients, a major body system (cardiovascular, respiratory,
neurological) examination (see Ch. 1), including measuirement of rectal temperature,
should be performed and immediate measures taken to correct potentially life-
threatening problems. Intravenous fluid therapy (see Ch. 4) may be required to correct
hypovolaemia and/or dehydration. Fluid therapy is also indicated in the management
of poisons that are nephrotoxic (e.g. nonsteroidal antinflammatory agents) and those
that are largely dependent on renal excretion. Oxygen supplementation is indicated in
patients  with  respiratory compromise,  for example from aspiration following
vomiting, and in the context of certain poisons such as carbon monoxide.
Emergency database
An emergency database (see Ch. 3) for the intoxicated patient shouild consist of the
following if possi ble:
 Manual packed cell volume (PCV) and serum total solids (TS)
· Blood glucose, electrolyte, urea and creatinine concentrations
· Peripheral blood smear examination
· Electrocardiogram (ECG)
· Noninvasive blood pressuire (NIBP).
S            s
include acid-base analysis, urinalysis (e.g. oxalate crystals in ethylene glycol
poisoning) and calcium measurement (e.g. hypocalcaemia may occur in ethylene
glycol poisoning). Abdominal radiographs taken at the appropriate time may reveal
ingestion of items containing heavy metals or certain enteric-coated or sustained-
release drug formulations. Routine haematology and biochemistry profiles may
conditions that may have implications with respect to management of individual
patients.
Treatment of seizures and muscle tremors
A variety of poisons include neurotoxicity amongst their mechanisms of action -
examples include metaldehyde, pyrethroids, strychnine, caffeine, theobromine,
organophosphates and tremorogenic mycotoxins. Seizures and/or muscle tremors are
common signs of poisoning requiring symptomatic treatment (see Ch. 24).
In patients intoxicated with tremorogenic poisons (e.g. metaldehyde, permethrin), it
can be difficult to differentiate severe muscle tremors from seizure activity. However,
if the poison in question is known to be one associated with severe tremors or
sufficient clinical suspicion exists, the use of methocarbamol may be indicated and
may avoid the need for anaesthesia. This is a centrally acting muscle relaxant related
to guaiphenesin whose precise mechanism of action remains unclear. The
manufacturer's recommended dose in dogs and cats is 44-220 mg/kg i.v. with a
typical upper limit of 330 mg/kg in a 24 hour period. However, to the author's
knowledge, an injectable preparation of this agent is not currently available in the
United Kingdom. In the absence of methocarbamol, the management of patients with
tremors is the same as for those with seizures.
Clinical Tip
· The aim of treatment is to achieve adequate control of tremors; complete abolition of tremors is
 s    s    n
          
sedation. Close monitoring of rectal temperature for either development and
appropriate intervention (see Chs 16 and 17) is therefore required.
Gastrointestinal decontamination (GID)
         
frequently  indicated.  This  consists of emptying of the  stomach  followed by
administration of an adsorbent to minimize absorption of any poison remaining in
the gastrointestinal tract.
Gastric emptying
In the absence of contraindications (see Box 30.4), induction of emesis is the most
expeditious means to empty the stomach; feeding a small meal first may increase the
effectiveness of this approach. The author has performed gastric emptying up to 4-6
    s s s o s  n  ss
summarized in Table 30.2.
Table 30.2 Drugs used to induce emesis
Drug
Dose
Comments
Apomorphine
D: 0.04-0.1 mg/kg s.c.,
i.m., ocular
Drug of choice, emesis usually in 5-15 min
Centrally actin g
Sedation,respiratory depression, t axia protracted vomiting pssible rare)
Naloxone reverses sed ative but not emetic effects
Ocular route: apply to conjunctival sac; lavage thoroughly following emesis to min imize drug absorption
C: 0.01-0.02 mg/kg s.c.
i.m.
Use lowest possible dose
Not recommen ded by some due to posible significant sed ation
Medetomidine
C: 20 μg/kg i.m., i.v.
Alph a2-adrenergic agonist
Use atipamezole (50 μg/kg i.m.) to reverse effects once emesis has occurrec
Use very cautiously due to potential cardiorespiratory depression
Xylaz ine
C: 0.4-0.5 mg/kg i.m., s.c
Alph a2-adrenergic agonist
Atipamezole may reverse effects
U se very cautiously due to potential cardiorespiratory depression
C, cats; CNs, central nervous system; D, dogs; i.m., intramuscular; i.v., intravenous; s.c., subcutaneous.
Activated charcoal
Activated charcoal acts as an adsorbent binding to toxins and allowing their passage
through the gastrointestinal tract while preventing or minimizing further systemic
absorption. It is typically administered once gastric emptying has been performed and
should be given as soon as possible. If an emetic has been employed for gastric
emptying, enough time must be allowed for the emetic effects to subside before
activated charcoal is administered. In some cases activated charcoal is administered
initially via stomach tube at the end of gastric lavage. The recommended dose in dogs
and cats is 1-5 g/kg to be repeated as necessary (typically every 4-6 hours) until black
faeces are detected. Doses up to 8 g/kg have been used. Activated charcoal is often
successfully administered in food to dogs. However, compliance is likely to be much
r        s
dosing guidelines, including powdered formulations (e.g. BCK Granules?, Fort Dodge)
that can be added to food or made into a slurry and administered by mouth, and
suspensions (e.g. Charcodote?, Pliva Pharma Ltd).
Different substances are bound to different degrees by activated charcoal. However,
linless contraindicated, the use of activated charcoal in almost all cases of oral
below). Activated charcoal should not be used following ingestion of caustic or
corrosive substances, in patients that are vomiting or seizuring, or where there is any
possibility  of  gastrointestinal  perforation.  Vomiting  and  constipation  following
administration of multiple doses are the main complications reported.
Gastric and colorectal lavage
In patients in which induction of emesis is contraindicated or nsuccessful, gastric
     )       s
contraindicated following ingestion of caustic or corrosive substances and where the
risks of general anaesthesia are considered unacceptable
            
per rectum. Colorectal lavage is continued until clear fluid is returned and activated
             
example for a short period of time to minimize leakage of the activated charcoal.
Topical poisoning
skin; this should also minimize absorption through ingestion following grooming.
s soo  p p  dos   p  s m
with water and then drying the animal as thoroughly as possible. Powdered toxins
may be vacuiumed off before washing. All individuals involved in handling the animal
    o e    s     
contamination. In some cases it may be appropriate for the owner to wash the animal
at home. However, in compromised or noncompliant animals, veterinary care is
recommended.
         
Chemical restraint may be preferable during washing to allow protection of the eyes
           
minimize the risk of aspiration. Vital parameters including rectal temperature should
be monitored closely throughout.
Oily substances may be more successfully removed using commercial hand-cleaning
The use of  activated  charcoal  is  generally  recommended  following  topical
circulation following absorption from the skin and thereby become available in the
gastrointestinal tract.
In cases in which the skin has come into contact with an acidic or caustic
substance, the affected area should be lavaged very thoroughly ('the solution to
pollution is dilution') using normal saline or indeed warm water. The same is true in
cases of ocular contamination and in both cases the animal should be given
performed. Damaged skin is highly susceptible to mechanical injury and gentle lavage
is therefore mandatory.
Diuresis
 m     n      s s
excretion of either the primary intoxicant or its metabolites is a significant feature
employed to promote renal excretion with or without additional diuretic
administration. Isotonic crystalloid therapy is administered at a rate of 1-4 ml/kg/hr
           
monitoring of hydration status and electrolyte concentrations is indicated.
Antidotes
             
made presumptively with the poison in question remaining unknown. Furthermore,
specific antidotes or antagonists do not exist for the majority of potentially poisonous
substances to which dogs and cats may be exposed. That said, the majority of clinical
cases reported are due to a relatively small number of poisons for which, in some
cases, specific treatments are available. These will be alluded to in the discussion of
specific poisons that follows.
Specific Poisons
Pyrethrins and pyrethroids
Theory refresher
(e.g. permethrin) are synthetic pyrethrins. Many topical and household insecticidal
infestations amongst others in dogs and cats. These preparations are widely available
from a variety of outlets.
Clinical Tip
* Synthetic pyrethroid insecticides are now most commonly used in small animal patients as topical
 spot-on formulations and the accidental or misguided inappropriate use of canine products on cats
is the most commonly encountered cause of poisoning. In addition, cats may directly contact or lick
the product once applied to a dog in the same household.
Toxic dose
The toxic dose for permethrin in cats is unknown. Dermal application of 1o0 mg/kg
permethrin may prove life-threatening if untreated.
Mechanism of toxicity
Pyrethrins and pyrethroids alter the kinetics of neuronal sodium channels causing
repeated nerve firing. In addition, some of these compounds may also inhibit gamma
aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptors, resulting in hyperexcitability of nervous tissue.
Glucuronidation is one pathway involved in the metabolism of some of these
compounds and glucuronyl transferase deficiency may be part of the explanation for
the apparent sensitivity of cats to pyrethroids.
Oral exposulre
Oral exposure should be treated by gastrointestinal decontamination if appropriate,
including activated charcoal if patient compliance allows. Pyrethrins and pyrethroids
are highly fat soluble and low fat foods should therefore be fed in the short term to
reduce further absorption.
Case example 1
Presenting Signs and Case History
A 1-year-old female neutered domestic short hair cat (2.5 kg) presented 3 hours after topical
d a a ad d  t  d  e n nn
used was registered for use in dogs only but the owner had thought it would be safe to administer
half of the pipette to the cat. The cat had developed clinical signs within 1 hour of administration
 and at the time of presentation was showing severe muscle tremors.
Clinical Tip
· Clinical signs usually develop within a few hours of exposure. Minor and usually self-limiting signs
include hyperaesthesia, hypersalivation, ataxia, mydriasis, paw flicking and ear twitching. These signs 
may be accompanied by other nonspecific signs such as lethargy or transient vomiting and diarrhoea.
· Severe neurotoxicity resulting from excessive exposure may result in marked depression, ataxia,
potentially violent muscle tremors, seizures and death. Protracted gastrointestinal signs may also
occur.
Case management
      s    
placement and blood was obtained via the catheter for an emergency database to be
performed; this was found to be unremarkable. Major body system examination was
linremarkable except for the muscle tremors that were less severe but still marked.
Intravenous fluid therapy was commenced and anaesthesia was induced using
propofol and maintained using isoflurane. The cat was washed thoroughly in a mild
detergent and dried before being recovered with an Elizabethan collar in place. Muscle
of midazolam (0.2 mg/kg) was administered.
Tremors resolved fully over the next 24 hours, during which time vital parameters,
nursing measures instituted.
Clinical Tip
· The prognosis for full recovery is reasonable despite severe poisoning in animals receiving early
and appropriately aggressive intervention; neurotoxicity is fully reversible. In severe cases clinical
signs may take 72 hours or more to resolve.
Metaldehyde
Theory refresher
Metaldehyde is a cyclic tetramer of acetaldehyde that is commonly used as a pesticide
against slugs and snails (molluscicide). Commercial pellet preparations usually
contain 1.5-8% metaldehyde w/w (see Box 30.3) in a cerea1 base. The pellets are often
S s            
palatable to dogs. Cats as uisual are more discerning and metaldehyde poisoning has
only been reported in a few cases. Liquid preparations containing higher
concentrations of metaldehyde are also available, as are granular and powdered
preparations.  Metaldehyde  baits sometimes  contain  additional  herbicides  and
pesticides, most commonly carbamate insecticides.
Toxic dose
A fatal oral dosage of metaldehyde in dogs of 60 mg/kg body weight has been reported
although some authors quote much higher values. Clinical signs may be expected to
occur at a range of typically much lower dosages. A lethal dose of 207 mg/kg has been
reported in cats.
Toxicokinetics
Metaldehyde may be absorbed intact from the gastrointestinal tract but its subsequent
distribution, metabolism and excretion remain to be fully clarified. Acid hydrolysis
occurs in the stomach producing acetaldehyde which is then absorbed rapidly and
converted to carbon dioxide (probably eliminated via the lungs) or excreted in urine.
             s
unknown in dogs.
Mechanism of toxicity
The precise mechanism of toxicity of metaldehyde remains to be elucidated but it is
known to cross the blood-brain barrier readily and impairment of GABA activity is
decrease in its activity may be responsible for the increased neuirological activity seen
in metaldehyde poisoning. A decrease in the concentration of other neirotransmitters
in the central nervous system (CNS), such as serotonin (5-HT) and noradrenaline
(norepinephrine), may also be involved.
Case example 2
Presenting Signs and Case History
A previously healthy 2-year-old male neutered black Labrador retriever (30 kg) presented
unattended in the garden earlier that afternoon and would have had access to the shed in which the
owner kept slug pellets. One hour after returning inside the dog was found to be twitching and
salivating and the owner had rung the hospital for advice.
Given the dog's signalment and history, there was a high index of suspicion for poisoning and the
owner was advised to come straight down to the hospital (a 15-minute car journey). The owner was
advised not to travel alone and to ensure that the dog was kept cool and protected from injury during
the journey. Meanwhile another member of the family went to investigate the shed where indeed it
was found that the slug bait container had been disrupted. Details from the container were
communicated directly to the practice while the dog was en route. Preparations had been made in the
interim to manage the dog for a suspected diagnosis of metaldehyde poisoning.
Clinical Tip
· Clinical signs due to metaldehyde poisoning often occur quickly (e.g. within 1 hour of ingestion)
n sis Sn s od lid a ade n s las n d an A i
twitching, tremors, muscle spasms and hyperaesthesia, with opisthotonos and seizures (including
status epilepticus) being seen in severe cases.
· Hyperthermia is frequently identified in metaldehyde poisoning and is presumed to occur due to
the marked neuromuscular activity (hence it is sometimes referred to as the ‘shake and bake
presentation.
Case management
After checking the dog's temperature, diazepam (1 mg/kg) was administered per
rectum and an intravenous catheter subsequently placed. A further intravenous bolus
of diazepam (o.5 mg/kg) was administered and a major body system examination
performed. Anaesthesia was then induced using propofol and maintained using
isoflurane following endotracheal intubation. Thorough gastric lavage was performed
and revealed blue-green coloured material. Activated charcoal was then administered
into the stomach. Colorectal lavage was also done and an activated charcoal enema
administered.
Clinical Tip
· Treatment of metaldehyde poisoning should always be instituted as early as possible and should be
   s  as e       ss
preventable irreversible brain injury and potentially respiratory failure.
· Induction of emesis is only appropriate in asymptomatic animals, and dogs showing neuromuscular
 lo  s  n s  za  a o ss
The dog was maintained on a propofol infusion for the next 12 hours, during which
phenobarbital loading was performed (3 mg/kg i.v. q 1 hr for six doses); thereafter the
dog was gradually weaned off propofol (over 4 hours). External stimulation was kept
to a minimum (e.g. cotton wool balls/swabs in the ears, dim lighting, minimal noise
and passage of personnel). The dog remained markedly depressed for the following 24
hours but gradually became ambulatory and although ataxic initially went on to
    ie   e n  n  e 
measures were instituted throughout. Phenobarbital (3 mg/kg i.v. then p.o. q 12 hr)
therapy was discontinued at discharge.
The slug bait container contained 1 kg of blue pellets with a metaldehyde
composition of 4% w/w. Assuming the dog had ingested all 1 kg of bait, this was
equal to 40 mg (i.e. 4% x 1000 mg) of metaldehyde and a maximum dosage of only
1.3 mg/kg.
Clinical Tip
· Clinical signs may persist for 24 hours or more but the prognosis for full recovery is good and
 survival rates are very high for animals that receive prompt and aggressive management and survive
the initial 24-hours period following intoxication.
 au an Qa  ni ai as   io -
blindness and liver failure is a serious but very infrequently reported delayed (2-3 days)
development.
Ethylene glycol
Although ethylene glycol (EG) is a common cause of poisoning in companion animals
in North America, its incidence is significantly lower in the United Kingdom. EG is a
sweet-tasting liquid used primarily as an antifreeze, screen wash and windshield de-
icing agent. Antifreeze ingestion is the most common source of EG poisoning, with
many common preparations containing as much as 95% EG. Companion animal
exposure is generally the result of environmental contamination from improper
early spring when antifreeze usage increases.
Toxic dose
The minimum lethal dose of undiluted EG is reported to be 4.4-6.6 ml/kg in dogs and
1.5 ml/kg in cats.
Toxicokinetics
EG is rapidly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract and distributed systemically. Its
plasma half-life is approximately 3 hours and a variable proportion is excreted
inchanged in urine. The remainder is metabolized predominantly in the liver. The
first step in this metabolism is oxidation of EG to glycoaldehyde by alcohol
dehydrogenase (ADH), a conversion that can be saturated. Glycoaldehdye is ther
            
Calcium binds to oxalic acid, resulting in the formation of calcium oxalate crystals
   s         
crystalluria is a common finding.
Mechanism of toxicity
Clinical Tip
· The effects of EG prior to metabolism are generally relatively minor. However, the metabolites of
EG are highly toxic. Acute renal failure is the most severe consequence of EG poisoning in
companion animals. Most of the metabolites of EG are thought to be toxic to the renal tubular
epithelium and calcium oxalate deposition may cause further damage.
Metabolism of EG generates free oxygen radicals that are potentially cytotoxic to a
variety of tissuies. In addition, the organic acid metabolites produced interfere with
normal cellular processes. Central nervous system (CNS) dysfunction is thought to be
predominantly due to the effects of glycoaldehyde along with calcium oxalate
deposition in nervous tissue. Both hypocalcaemia secondary to binding of calcium to
oxalic acid and metabolic acidosis may contribute further to CNS signs. Metabolic
acidosis may be severe and is due to the accumulation of acid metabolites, most
notably glycolic acid.
Clinical signs
Clinical signs of EG poisoning are dose-dependent and in companion animals occur in
two phases. The first is predominantly associated with EG itself prior to metabolism.
vomiting, and osmotic diuresis with consequent polyuria/polydipsia. In severe cases
seizures, coma and death may occur. In dogs these signs may seemingly resolve with
apparent recovery although they may occur earlier and be more persistent in cats.
The second phase of clinical signs is associated with the highly toxic metabolites of
EG and is predominantly related to acute renal failure. Signs usually develop within
24-72 hours of ingestion in dogs, often earlier in cats, and may include reduced
mentation from depression through to coma, seizures, anorexia, vomiting, and
 t           
post-ingestion.
An intermediate phase between  the two phases already described consists of
cardiopulmonary manifestations (tachycardia, tachypnoea, pulmonary oedema) but
Laboratory tests
Biochemistry, acid-base analysis
Early changes are mainly due to accumulation of acid EG metabolites with
increased anion gap. If plasma HcOs- measurement is not available, reduced
concentration may be reflected as a decrease in total carbon dioxide (total CO2). These
changes may be detectable 1-3 hours following ingestion and a high anion gap may
persist for 12-48 hours. Total hypocalcaemia may occur due to chelation by oxalic
        o s a 
appropriately severe dehydration.
Later  biochemical  abnormalities  reflect renal  injury  and reduced  glomerular
filtration rate with renal azotaemia and hyperphosphataemia. These changes are
Urinalysis
Osmotic diuresis and polydipsia (due to increased serum osmolality) result in reduced
urine specific gravity, typically within 3 hours of EG ingestion. Dogs are usually
isosthenuric (urine specific gravity 1.007-1.015) but urine specific gravity may be
S s  s    s  s   s  
S           n
           
proximal renal tubular damage.
Calcium oxalate crystals may be identified in urine 3-6 hours after EG ingestion.
Calcium oxalate monohydrate crystals (clear six-sided prisms or dumbbell-shaped
(Figure 30.2) crystals) are more common than the dihydrate form (envelopes or
Maltese cross-shaped). Aciduria, haematuria, renal epithelial cells and casts are other
common urinalysis findings.
Figure 30.2
 Dumbbell-shaped calcium oxalate monohydrate crystals in urine.
(Photograph courtesy of Kate English)
Serum ethylene glycol concentration
detectable in serum (or urine) by 48-72 hours post-ingestion. A commercial test kit
(Ethylene
Glycol
Test
Kit?,
 PRN
Pharmacal
Inc., Florida;
EG concentrations based on an enzymatic assay; it is both accurate enough for
clinical use and relatively inexpensive. Results are available within 30 minutes. These
kits have a minimum detectable level of 50 mg/dl of EG in the blood and it is
noteworthy that cats may develop clinically significant poisoning despite serum EG
levels lower than this threshold.
Clinical Tip
· The EG test kit may generate a false-positive result if propylene glycol or glycerol is present in the
 s so      e s   s
 formulations and semi-moist diets. Blood for this test should be drawn before administration of any
preparations that may contain propylene glycol or glycerol.
· False-positive results may also occur following metaldehyde ingestion but do not occur in the
presence of ethanol.
Serum osmolality
EG is an osmotically active substance and ingestion results in an increase in serum
           s
calculated osmolality). Measurement of serum osmolality is useful for identifying
early EG poisoning. However, access to measured serum osmolality is likely to be very
limited in general emergency practice.
Wood's lamp
           
detection of radiator leaks. This dye is excreted in urine following ingestion; excretion
usually only occurs for up to 6 hours post-ingestion (but it can be longer). Urine as
well as the mouth, paws and vomitus can therefore be examined with a Wood's lamp
for fluorescence due to the presence of this dye. However, it is noteworthy that a
negative result does not exclude the possibility of EG ingestion as not all antifreeze
preparations contain sodium fluorescein.
Treatment
it is metabolized rapidly into highly toxic metabolites. Treatment consists of the
following components:
· GID to minimize EG absorption
· Preventing metabolism of absorbed EG to more toxic metabolites
· Promoting urinary excretion of EG and its metabolites with intravenous fluid
therapy
· Correction of fluid, acid-base and electrolyte abnormalities
· Supportive nursing care.
Gastrointestinal decontamination
EG is absorbed very rapidly from the gastrointestinal tract and GID may therefore only
be of benefit very early post-ingestion (1-2 hr). Activated charcoal decreases ethanol
absorption and should not therefore be administered if oral ethanol is being used as an
antidote.
Preventing ethylene glycol metabolism
The prevention of EG oxidation by ADH is the most important component of therapy
and may be achieved in one of two ways: inhibition of the enzyme or provision of a
competitive substrate. Treatment should be administered in all animals presenting
within 36 hours of EG ingestion.
Fomepizole
ADH may be inhibited by the administration of fomepizole (4-methylpyrazole, 4-MP).
This agent is a synthetic competitive ADH inhibitor and has become the treatment of
choice in EG poisoning (Box 30.6). Minimal side effects have been reported following
the use of this agent in companion animals and in particular it lacks the CNS
depressive effects of ethanol (see below).
BOX 30.6 Guidelines for fomepizole administration
Dogs
· 20 mg/kg body weight i.v. for first dose, followed by 15 mg/kg i.v at 12 and 24 hr, and 5 mg/kg i.v.
at 36 hr
· Continue with 5 mg/kg i.v. q 12 hr if recovery has not occurred by 36 hr
Cats
· 125 mg/kg body weight i.v. for first dose, followed by 31.25 mg/kg i.v. at 12, 24 and 36 hr
· Continue with 31.25 mg/kg i.v. q 12 hr if recovery has not occurred by 36 hr
Ethanol
Ethanol may be used in the treatment of EG poisoning as it has a higher affinity for
ADH than EG and therefore acts as a preferential competitive substrate (Box 30.7).
Injectable ethanol should be diluted in saline prior to administration. If a pure
preparation for injection is not available, ethanol may be administered orally using an
alcoholic beverage.
BOX 30.7 Guidelines for therapeutic ethanol administration
Ethanol as intravenous injection
Dogs
· 5.5 ml of 20% ethanol/kg body weight i.v. q 4 hr for five doses then q 6 hr for four doses; or
· Give the same total dose over the same period as a constant rate infusion
Cats
· 5.0 ml of 20% ethanol/kg body weight i.v. q 6 hr for five doses then q 8 hr for four doses; or
• Give the same total dose over the same period as a constant rate infusion
Ethanol as an alcoholic beverage
Dogs
• 4.4-6.6 ml/kg of 40% ethanol alcoholic beverage p.o. q 4 hr for five doses then q 6 hr for four
doses
Cats
+ 4.4 ml/kg of 40% ethanol alcoholic beverage p.o. q 6 hr for five doses then q 8 hr for four doses
Perhaps the biggest disadvantage of the therapeutic use of ethanol is the associated
CNS depression that may necessitate intensive and supportive care, especially with
intermittent bolus administration and in cats. If oral ethanol is being used, direct
administration via orogastric intubation may prove necessary in animals that are too
sedated to swallow reliably.
Clinical Tip
· Other ethanol-containing preparations such as surgical spirit or methylated spirits should be
avoided as they contain methanol.
m di ps se ae ln  sasd s o paase aa nou pious lo -
already have been metabolized by that stage.
Other treatment considerations
         
hypovolaemia and dehydration and to promote diuresis. Potassium and calcium
supplementation should be provided as deemed necessary on the basis of regular
monitoring. Patients presenting with oliguric renal failure should be treated with
intravenous fluid therapy and diuretic agents to esta blish diuresis if possible (see Ch.
36). If adequate diuresis cannot be established, then referral for haemodialysis or
peritoneal dialysis should be considered if available and affordable.
Renal tubular damage caused by EG may be reversible but can take weeks to months
and urine concentrating ability may never return in some cases. Most dogs and cats
surviving the acute renal failure phase of EG poisoning will eventually regain normal
renal function.
Nursing Aspect
Patients suffering from EG poisoning may be severely depressed and recumbent, both from the
should be implemented, including provision of clean, dry, well-padded bedding, regular turning and
  sd e  a  a   e a r  
monitored closely for hypothermia.
Prognosis
Prognosis depends on the dosage of EG ingested, rate of absorption and, most
importantly, the time to institution of specific therapy. The prognosis for dogs treated
with fomepizole within 5 hours of ingestion is good, and most will recover if
treatment is administered within 8 hours of ingestion. The prognosis is reasonable for
However, a grave prognosis for survival is heralded by the onset of oliguric renal
failure in both species and unfortunately most animals present at this late stage.
Grapes/raisins
Theory refresher
           
confirmed cases have been reported in cats at the time of writing but suisceptibility is
suspected. A similar syndrome has not been reported in people.
Clinical Tip
· The same poisoning syndrome may occur following consumption of all types of fresh grapes and
n          
 should be considered in all cases regardless of the dosage consumed.
Toxic dose, toxicokinetics, mechanism of toxicity
Grape/raisin ingestion may be associated with renal toxicity but the toxin or toxins
involved have yet to be identified and the mechanism of toxicity is unknown. There
 s  n   n      sg
and the subsequent renal pathology and clinical progression; an idiosyncratic reaction
is suspected.
Case example 3
Presenting Signs and Case History
 e   ( )   a a    
hour history of acute onset severe vomiting. After extensive questioning the owners revealed that the
dog had eaten 350 g of raisins the day before.
Clinical Tip
• Vomiting is reported in almost all cases, usually within 24 hr of ingestion, and grapes or raisins
may be identified in the vomitus. Vomiting may be related to dietary indiscretion or the development
of azotaemia, but a specific effect of grapes or raisins is also suspected due to the frequency with
which this sign is reported. Subsequently anorexia, lethargy, diarrhoea and abdominal pain have
been reported.
Major body system examination
Physical  examination  revealed  the dog  to  be  very  depressed  and  moderately
dehydrated but was otherwise unremarkable.
Emergency database
An intravenous catheter was placed in a cephalic vein and blood obtained via the
catheter for an emergency database. This revealed severe azotaemia (blood urea
nitrogen 45 mmol/, reference range 3-9.10 mmol/l; creatinine 1250 μmol/l, reference
range 98-163 μmol/l) and moderate hyperkalaemia (6.0 mmol/l, reference range 4.1-
5.3 mmol/l). Dehydration was confirmed (manual packed cell volume 55%, reference
range 37-55%; plasma total solids 75 g/l, reference range 49-71 g/l). The severity of
azotaemia was consistent with a primary renal or postrenal cause but some prerenal
contri buition due to dehydration was also likely.
Case management
A soft indwelling Foley urethral catheter was placed with ease, thereby excluding
lrethral obstruction, and an emergency abdominal ultrasound revealed no free
peritoneal fluid, thus excluding uroperitoneum; both kidneys had grossly normal
architecture. Urinalysis on a sample collected via the urethral catheter revealed a
          
azotaemia was diagnosed as renal in origin (with the caveat that the ureters had not
been imaged to exclude completely a postrenal cause or component). A presumptive
The dog was not felt to be hypovolaemic but moderate dehydration (7%) was
suspected, and he was started on 0.9% sodium chloride (normal, physiological saline)
at 10 ml/kg/hr to provide rehydration and maintenance requirements over
approximately 8 hours. The bladder was emptied via the urethral catheter at the
outset. After 1o hours of fluid therapy, urine output was calculated and the dog was
found to have produced only 0.5 ml/kg/hr of urine. A diagnosis of oliguric acute renal
failure was therefore made. The decision was made at this point to refer the dog.
Despite aggressive diuretic therapy at the referral centre, using furosemide and
mannitol, oliguria persisted and the dog became overhydrated, showing chemosis,
diffuse subcutaneous oedema and mild peritoneal and pleural effusion. Peritoneal
dialysis was considered appropriate in this case (young previously healthy dog with
potentially curable disease) and was performed successfully. Four months following
nitrogen 13 mmol/l, creatinine 190 μmol/l) but the dog was clinically well
Appropriate dietary management and on-going monitoring were recommended.
Clinical Tip
· Acute renal failure does not develop in all dogs following grape/raisin ingestion. Nevertheless, as
should be instituted in all cases following ingestion as early as possible. Gastrointestinal
decontamination including induction of emesis if the animal is not already vomiting and
administration of activated charcoal is performed and intravenous fluid therapy provided for a
minimum of 48 hours.
· Although a beneficial effect of fluid therapy on outcome in grape/raisin poisoning has yet to be
convincingly demonstrated, both the potential benefits of this therapy and the gravity of this
 poisoning syndrome make it a recommended treatment in all cases.
· Serum chemistry and urine output should be monitored for 72 hours.
Clinical Tip
· Outcome is not correlated with the dosage of grapes or raisins ingested. The prognosis for survival
following the onset of oliguric and, in particular, anuric acute renal failure is poor but some dogs
may recover, especially if dialysis is available.
· Clinical signs are expected to resolve fully in recovering dogs while blood renal parameters may or
may not normalize. Normalization of renal parameters, interpreted as resolution of renal
dysfunction, may take several weeks or months.
Lilies
Domestic cats are the only animals thus far reported to be susceptible to lily
nephrotoxicity. Earliest reports involved Easter lily (Lilium longiflorum) but it is now
suspected that all species of the Lilium genera, including Tiger lily, as well as day lilies
(Hemerocallis genera) may be potentially nephrotoxic to cats. All parts of the plants,
including the flowers, are associated with poisoning and exposure is usually via
access to household plants.
Toxic dose, toxicokinetics, mechanism of toxicity
  n  s q     sn s a 
absorption from the gastrointestinal tract is suspected as some cats still develop renal
insufficiency despite early gastrointestinal decontamination. The toxin or toxins
involved have yet to be identified and the metabolism is unknown. The precise
mechanism of toxicity is unknown but renal tubular epithelial necrosis and
subsequent acuite renal failure are known to occr.
Pancreatitis and pancreatic degeneration have also been reported in cats with lily
poisoning, as have seizures of unconfirmed pathogenesis.
Clinical signs
Clinical signs may develop in as little as 5-10 minutes following ingestion. Within 1-3
hours vomiting, salivation, depression, lethargy and anorexia may be apparent.
Polyuria and consequent dehydration occur 12-30 hours following ingestion and this
is followed by anuria.
Anuria typically occurs 24-48 hr following ingestion and death may occur within 7
days of exposure. Renomegaly and abdominal pain may be detected in some cats.
Laboratory tests
Depending on the time elapsed since ingestion, clinicopathological findings are likely
to reflect acute renal failure with azotaemia, hyperphosphataemia and possible
hyperkalaemia. These abnormalities are usually evident within 24-72 hours of
ingestion. Urinalysis may reveal isosthenuria, tubular casts (Figure 30.3), proteinuria
and glucosuria.
Figure 30.3
Tubular cast in urine ( × 200).
(Photograph courtesy of Kate English)
Treatment
      s s s    
minimize absorption. Fluid diuresis should be implemented for 2472 houirs, with
regular monitoring of serum biochemistry  and urinalysis.  Diuretic  therapy
(furosemide, mannitol) may be beneficial in cats with oliguric renal failure but is
unlikely to induce urine production in anuric cats for which referral for dialysis may
be the only treatment option if available and affordable. Mannitol should not be used
in anuric animals.
Prognosis
 sd  n         s
clinical recovery although some chronic renal dysfunction may persist. The prognosis
S         s  a 
for anuric animals receiving dialysis may be favourable but remains to be elucidated.
Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agents
Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agents (NSAIAs) are widely used in human and
           
adverse effects. The following discussion presents general information about NSAIA
intoxication.
Toxic dose
people should not be extrapolated to dogs and cats.
Toxicokinetics, mechanism of toxicity
NSAIAs are direct inhibitors of cyclooxygenase (COX) and cause reduced production
of prostaglandins and thromboxane. Some NSAlAs are reported to be more COx-2
selective; COx-2 is induced during tissue injury and inflammation. However, it is
(constitutive/housekeeping form responsible for physiological functions) and COX-2
inhibition is likely.
NSAIAs are generally readily absorbed following oral exposure. Metabolism is
lisually hepatic. In dogs, a number of NSAlAs undergo enterohepatic circulation.
Adverse effects of NSAlAs have been reported to involve predominantly the
gastrointestinal tract, the kidneys, coagulation, and the liver.
Gastrointestinal tract
Gastrointestinal injury is the most common adverse effect associated with excessive
NSAlA exposuire in dogs and cats. These agents have uilcerogenic effects in the
are important in mucosal cytoprotection and local topical mucosal irritation.
Kidneys
Under normal conditions prostaglandins are of little importance in maintaining renal
blood flow. However, they exert a compensatory vasodilatory effect to maintain renal
perfusion and function in conditions that cause renal vasoconstriction. Thus
nephrotoxicity and consequent renal insufficiency may occur in animals that are
  s        n  s  s
following exposure to massive overdose.
Coagulation
          s
impairing the production of thromboxane. Among other functions thromboxane
facilitates platelet aggregation.
Adverse effects associated with NSAlAs are more likely to occur in animals exposed
to excessive dosages as well as in those with volume depletion, hypotension or
preexisting gastrointestinal or renal disease. Bleeding tendency may be more common
disease). Hepatic injury is not a prominent feature of acute NSAlA intoxication.
Clinical signs
Early clinical signs of NSAIA intoxication in dogs are likely to reflect gastrointestinal
complications and include vomiting, with or without haematemesis, and diarrhoea.
with or without melaena (or haematochezia); inappetence, lethargy, depression,
hypovolaemia may be present. Cats may show gastrointestinal signs less frequently
but tachypnoea may be more common than in dogs. In severe cases gastrointestinal
perforation may occur with subsequent peritonitis that may be accompanied by
abdominal pain and severe cardiovascular compromise.
Animals may also present with oliguric or polyuric acute renal failure.
Laboratory and other tests
Depending on the time elapsed since ingestion, clinicopathological findings may
reflect gastrointestinal blood loss, with anaemia and possible panhypoproteinaemia.
Anaemia may be preregenerative or regenerative (see Ch. 3). Prerenal azotaemia may
be identified and urea may be disproportionately elevated compared to creatinine due
to  gastrointestinal  haemorrhage.  Renal  insufficiency  will likely   manifest  as
azotaemia, hyperphosphataemia,  possible hypercalcaemia and  isosthenuria.
Proteinuria may also be detected.
If gastrointestinal perforation and peritonitis are suspected, additional testing is
mandatory. Abdominal radiography may show loss of serosal detail due to free
peritoneal fluid, and free peritoneal gas. Abdominal ultrasonography may reveal free
 ) i   s     
Alternatively, blind abdominocentesis may be performed. Any fluid obtained should be
perforation has occurred.
Treatment
Depending on the time elapsed since ingestion, routine GID including the use of
fluid  therapy  using  an isotonic crystalloid  solution  is indicated to  correct
hypovolaemia or dehydration and recurrence must be prevented to minimize the risk
of nephrotoxicity.
promote ulcer healing should be provided (Table 30.3). Routine use of antiemetics
may be required.
Table 30.3 Medical therapy for nonsteroidal antinflammatory agent (NSAIA) intoxication
rug
Dose
Comments
Misoprostol
D: 2-5 μg/kg p.o. q8-12 hr
Syn thetic prostaglan din an alogue
Highly effective; treatment of choic
 Contraindicated in pregnant animals
 Not rec ommended for cats
Wear gloves; women of childbearin g age to take extra precau tion s
 Omepraz ole
D, C: 0.5-1 mg/kg slow i.v., p.o. q 24 hr
Proton pump inhibitor thereby suppressing gastric acid productior
Histam ine (H2) receptor antagon ists
Doses as per Append ix 1
 e.g. famotidine, ranitidine, cimetidine
Less effective than misoprostol an d omepraz ole
Sucralfate
D: 0.5-2 gp.0. q 8-12 hr
Coats ulcerated/exposed mucosa and promotes re-epithelialization
C: 0.25 g p.o. q 8-12 hr
Less effective than misoprostol and omepraz ole
Admin istration 30-60 min utes before food is recommen ded
Tablets can be crushed and mixed with water
C, cats; D, dogs; i.v., intravenous; p.o., per os.
Surgical intervention is required in animals with gastrointestinal perforation and
standard management of acute renal failure (see Ch. 36) is indicated in appropriate
cases. NSAlA-mediated acuite renal insufficiency is often reversible with adequate
supportive care.
Aspirin
Toxic dose
    s n    o   s 'so s
vomiting, and haematemesis and gastric ulcer perforation have been reported at 100
300 mg/kg/day for 1-4 weeks. Due to deficiencies in aspirin metabolism, cats are
more susceptible and the toxic dose is lower than for dogs.
Toxicokinetics, mechanism of toxicity, clinical signs
          
readily absorbed and is then metabolized in the liver to salicylic acid. Some local
hydrolysis to salicylic acid also occurs in the gastrointestinal tract. Salicylic acid is the
active form and the form that is absorbed into the circulation. Elimination from the
S        o  
conjugation becomes overwhelmed, resulting in delayed clearance and accumulation
of the active drug. Cats have a defective glucuronic acid conjugation system that
results in prolonged drug elimination compared to dogs and an increased
susceptibility to aspirin poisoning.
Gastrointestinal irritation and injury are the most common adverse effects of
for the majority of clinical signs. The metabolic acidosis in salicylate poisoning is a
 s a      s   sn d  
aspirin ingestion.
Salicylates also have toxic effects in the CNS although the exact mechanism of
      r    ss s  s 
salicylate toxicity. Noncardiogenic pulmonary oedema is the most common cause of
permeability of the pulmonary vasculature. Salicylates inhibit vitamin K-dependent
synthesis of coagulation factors (ll, Vll, IX and X), leading to a prolonged prothrombin
Treatment
Treatment of aspirin poisoning is the same as described for other NSAIAs earlier in
this chapter.
Paracetamol (acetaminophen)
Theory refresher
Paracetamol (acetaminophen in the USA) is used extensively by people and is widely
available over the counter. It is contained in a variety of preparations, either solely or
in conjunction with other drugs, including aspirin and opioids. It is an antipyretic
and analgesic agent. Paracetamol has been used therapeutically in dogs but should not
be administered to cats.
Clinical Tip
    e  sr     e    -
ingestion (most common in dogs) or due to misguided *therapeutie’ administration by owners (most
common in cats).
Toxic dose
A dosage of 100-200 mg/kg has been reported to cauise clinical signs in dogs although
S   s  s       s
             
mg/kg but may occur with dosages as low as 10 mg/kg.
Toxicokinetics
Paracetamol is rapidly and almost completely absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract
and undergoes hepatic metabolism. In dogs, low doses of paracetamol are
produces nontoxic metabolites that are excreted in bile and urine. However, any
Denzoquinoneimine (NAPQl) that is highly reactive and toxic.
NAPQl is usually conjugated with cellular glutathione  to produce nontoxic
saturation of the glucuronidation and sulphation pathways), resulting in greater
production of NAPQl. Glutathione stores, especially in the liver and red blood cells, are
subsequently exhausted, resulting in higher concentrations of toxic unconjugated
NAPQl. At higher doses paracetamol also inhibits glutathione synthesis, further
compromising this metabolic pathway.
Cats are less able to metabolize paracetamol via glucuronidation (and sulphation)
and the end result is greater metabolism via the cytochrome P450 pathway and an
Mechanism of toxicity
    a   d    
consequent liver failure possible.
In cats, red blood cells are most susceptible, with Heinz body formation,
methaemoglobinaemia and haemolytic anaemia possi ble. Feline haemoglobin is more
prone to oxidation than canine haemoglobin. As methaemoglobin is unable to
causing  tissue hypoxia  and  characteristic muddy  brown  mucous  membranes.
Glutathione, deficient in these cases, is also required to reduce methaemoglobin to
haemoglobin.
Clinical signs
      e   
exposures, resulting in muddy/chocolate brown or cyanotic mucous membranes. It is
inusual for methaemoglobinaemia to occur in dogs without subsequent signs of
hepatotoxicity but this has been reported. Mucous membranes may also be pale due to
anaemia secondary to intravascular haemolysis. Oedema of the face and/or paws may
also be identified. Neurological signs may be present with severe liver dysfunction and
hepatic  encephalopathy  and  are also  potentially  associated  with
Isevere
methaemoglobinaemia.
coma is associated with poor prognosis. Icterus may occur and at lower exposures is
predominantly the result of red blood cell lysis. Clinically significant hepatotoxicity
may be seen at higher exposuires.
Clinical Tip
 Both hepatic and erythrocyte-associated poisoning syndromes have been reported in both dogs and
cats. Clinical signs usually develop within 4-24 hr of exposure.
Antidote therapy
Paracetamol is one type of poisoning for which specific antidote therapy is available
and treatment is recommended even if there is a significant delay in institution as a
successful  clinical  outcome  may  still  be  obtained.  N-acetylcysteine  is  rapidly
N-acetylcysteine administration thus attempts  to address cellular gluitathione
deficiency. Glutathione itself cannot be used therapeutically as it is not readily taken
is oxidized to sulphur in the liver, increasing the capacity of the sulphation pathway.
If N-acetylcysteine is not available, or in severe cases of poisoning, additional
sources of suilphur donors may be used. S-adenosylmethionine (SAMe) is one such
product that may also have other additional beneficial effects (see Appendix 1 for
protocol). The use of cimetidine has been recommended in paracetamol poisoning.
This agent can inhibit cytochrome P450-mediated oxidation and may therefore reduce
the formation of NAPQl. Given this mechanism of action, cimetidine would need to be
given very early on to be effective and is considered an adjunctive therapy only.
Methaemoglobin reduction
In addition to the above therapy, treatment designed to reduce methaemoglobin to
typically not readily available. However, ascorbic acid (vitamin C) may be used and
administration in cats. The author has administered ascorbic acid in drinking water
to dogs that were not vomiting. Preparations of ascorbic acid for intravenous use are
available and the treatment regimen is the same as for oral preparations (see
Appendix 1).
Case example 4
Presenting Signs and Case History
A 3-year-old male neutered Beagle was presented as an emergency for suspected paracetamol
poisoning. The owners had been out that evening and had returned to find the dog ataxic with
evidence of probable ingestion of a large number of paracetamol tablets.
Major body system examination
beats per minute) and brown mucous membranes were identified but the rest of the
examination was linremarkable.
Emergency database
An intravenous catheter was placed in a cephalic vein and blood obtained via the
catheter for an emergency database that was fouind to be tinremarkable.
Case management
Additional venepuncture was performed and the dog's blood was confirmed to be dark
brown in colour, suggestive of methaemoglobinaemia (Figure 30.4). An in-house
coagulation analyser was available and prothrombin time (PT) and activated partial
thromboplastin time (APTT) were found to be within normal limits.
Figure 30.4
Dark brown blood from a dog with paracetamol intoxication.
Clinical Tip
• Methaemoglobinaemia is confirmed definitively by measurement using cooximetry. However, this is
not widely available. Nevertheless, its presence can be inferred by putting a drop of the blood on
filter paper; the filter paper stains brown and does not change colour. Alternatively, oxygen can be
bubbled through a tube of the blood; if significant methaemoglobinaemia is present, oxyhaemoglobin
does not form and the blood will not turn red.
Emesis was induced using apomorphine (o.o2 mg/kg s.c.) and the vomitus
contained a minimum of 30 paracetamol tablets (500 mg per tablet). The dog's body
weight was 20 kg and an exposure of 750 mg/kg was therefore possible, although it
was not clear exactly how many more tablets, if any, the dog had ingested. In
addition, the degree of absorption prior to emesis could not be known.
Clinical Tip
The aims of treatment for paracetamol poisoning are:
· Minimize further paracetamol absorption
· Promote elimination of unmetabolized paracetamol
• Minimize NAPQI formation
· Provide oxygen supplementation
· Provide supportive therapy as required.
Initial therapy consisted of intravenous N-acetylcysteine (initial loading dose of 140
mg/kg i.v.; further five doses of 70 mg/kg i.v. q 6 hr) and oral ascorbic acid (vitamin
  (s           o) 
and oxygen supplemented via an oxygen cage.
         s
detected. Mild anaemia was also identified (manual packed cell volume 30%, reference
range 37-55%). A type-specific fresh whole blood transfusion (15 ml/kg over 4 hr)
(see Ch. 40) was administered for the coagulopathy and anaemia, and additional
therapy with S-adenosylmethionine (40 mg/kg p.o.) was commenced.
The dog continued to deteriorate, however, with evidence of haemolysis in the form
of severe haemoglobinaemia and haemoglobinuria, with worsening anaemia despite
blood transfusion, and with progressive severe dyspnoea. A haemoglobin-based
oxygen-carrying solution (Oxyglobin?,  Biopure  Corporation;  see Ch. 4) was
administered (6 ml/kg i.v. over 1 hr) with no obvious clinical effect and the dog was
euthanased approximately 36 hours after ingestion of the paracetamol tablets. A
presumptive diagnosis of fulminant acute hepatic failure and severe haemolysis due to
paracetamol poisoning was made.
Clinical Tip
· The prognosis in paracetamol poisoning depends on the dosage of paracetamol absorbed and the
delay before institution of therapy. Aggressive early intervention is recommended.
Anticoagulant rodenticides
Anticoagulant rodenticides usually contain derivatives of either 4-hydroxycoumarin
(e.g. brodifacoum, bromadiolone, difenacoum) or indane-1,3-dione (e.g. diphacinone,
that may be related to the generation type of the constituent compound. Second
generation compounds are typically longer acting and have largely replaced older first
generation ones. A variety of different commercial preparations are available.
Clinical Tip
· Anticoagulant rodenticide poisoning in dogs is usually primary (direct ingestion of rodenticide)
but clinically significant secondary poisoning due to ingestion of poisoned rodents has also been
Toxic dose
scope of this chapter to detail toxic doses for each individual substance and the reader
is recommended to consult other texts or a veterinary poisons database.
Toxicokinetics
Anticoagulant rodenticides are generally absorbed slowly but substantially from the
gastrointestinal tract. A long plasma half-life potentially of a number of days is
typical, and the duration of action can be very prolonged - even up to several weeks in
some cases. These compounds undergo slow metabolism by hepatic microsomal
mixed-function oxidases to form inactive metabolites that are excreted in urine or
bile.
Mechanism of toxicity
Vitamin K, hydroquinone is required for the conversion of inactive precursor
     s     
hydroquinone is oxidized to vitamin K, epoxide. Following absorption, anticoagulant
rodenticides inhibit hepatic vitamin K, epoxide-reductase which is responsible for the
conversion of vitamin K, epoxide back to vitamin K, hydroquinone. Anticoagulant
rodenticides therefore impair vitamin K, ‘recycling' by the liver, leading to its
depletion as existing stores are exhausted; they thereby prevent conversion of several
inactive coagulation factors to their active forms. The vitamin K,-dependent
coagulation factors are factors I1 (prothrombin), Vl1, IX and X.
Clinical Tip
· Anticoagulant inhibition of vitamin K epoxide-reductase is essentially competitive and reversible;
therefore administration of exogenous vitamin Ki acts therapeutically to reduce inhibition.
A delay in the onset of clinical signs following anticoagulant rodenticide ingestion
is usually seen. This is due to the presence of circulating active vitamin K-dependent
       s    s 
the vitamin K-dependent factors, factor Vll has the shortest plasma half-life. This
factor is traditionally classified as part of the extrinsic coagulation pathway that is
evaluated using the prothrom bin time (PT). This explains the early clinical usefuilness
partial thromboplastin time (APTT) and activated clotting time (ACT) are used to
            
expected to become prolonged subsequently also.
Clinical signs
 n n   a  s e  doa a sns s
than 2 weeks without intervention. Clinical signs reflect bleeding tendency as
described above and may be accompanied by a variety of nonspecific signs such as
lethargy, depression and reduced appetite. Anticoagulant rodenticide poisoning may
manifest with signs of respiratory distress, most commonly due to haemothorax but
reported. Bleeding into the peritoneal cavity and mediastinum is also reported. There
may be evidence of external bleeding (e.g. nasal or gingival) and gastrointestinal
        
Petechiae, ecchymoses and excessive bleeding at venepuncture sites may be identified.
Bleeding in other sites will manifest with expected clinical signs (e.g. lameness
secondary  to bleeding into joints  or  neurological signs  secondary  to  CNS
haemorrhage).
In animals that have become anaemic secondary to blood loss, anticipated physical
hyperdynamic pulse quality will be present. If blood loss is considerable and rapid,
Laboratory and other tests
    s  s   
baseline minimum database should be established. This should include manual packed
cell volume, plasma total solids, peripheral blood smear, and coagulation profile (in
particuilar PT) taken before initiation of therapy (see below). PT is prolonged first in
poisoned patients as factor Vll becomes depleted earliest but prolongation of APTT and
ACT usually also occurs before the onset of clinical signs.
A peripheral blood smear should be evaluated for platelet count and, where anaemia
is identified, for evidence of regeneration. Mild to moderate thrombocytopenia is a
  s         
may also be appropriate. Low serum total solids are expected in anaemia secondary to
blood loss.
Thoracic and abdominal  diagnostic  imaging may identify major sites of
haemorrhage, with the thoracic cavity being the most common site of bleeding.
Thoracocentesis and abdominocentesis will likely reveal a nonclotting sanguineous
effusion with packed cell volume similar to that of the patient's peripheral blood.
Treatment
Treatment of anticoagulant rodenticide poisoning is dependent largely on whether the
patient is showing evidence of bleeding at the time of presentation. Routine GID,
including the use of activated charcoal, is indicated in asymptomatic patients
presenting within an appropriate timeframe. PT should be measured and no
additional therapy is required if PT is within normal limits. Repeat testing of PT
this test is unavoidable, it may be appropriate in individual cases to commence
antidotal therapy with synthetic vitamin K, (phytomenadione) once blood sampling
has been performed and to discontinue therapy if normal results are subsequently
obtained. Guidelines for vitamin K, therapy in anticoagulant rodenticide intoxication
are summarized in Box 30.8.
BOX 30.8 Guidelines for vitamin K, therapy in anticoagulant rodenticide
intoxication
If symptomatic at presentation or prothrombin time (PT) prolonged (or significant delay
anticipated in obtaining PT), administer vitamin Ki 2-5 mg/kg s.c. at multiple sites using the smallest
possible needle. Preferably continue parenteral administration until PT normalizes, then change to
oral administration at same daily dose, i.e. 2-5 mg/kg daily divided into two or three administrations.
Vitamin K therapy should typically be continued for 2-6 weeks depending on the type of
  g s  e  n s n s l 
therapy). If the type of anticoagulant is unknown, a 2-week course of treatment is reasonable. After
this time PT is rechecked and treatment discontinued as long as PT is normal. Prothrombin time is
rechecked 2-3 days after stopping treatment:
· No further treatment is required if PT is normal.
· If PT is prolonged, vitamin K therapy should be restarted and continued for a further 7 days
before repeating the above process.
· Persistent PT prolongation or recurrence of spontaneous haemorrhage may suggest repeat exposure.
 If asymptomatic at presentation and PT within normal limits, withhold treatment; recheck PT
within 3 days.
If vitamin K, therapy is commenced a significant period of time prior to sampling
for testing of PT, subsequent results may be affected and a definitive diagnosis of
coagulopathy secondary to rodenticide poisoning cannot be established. Subsequent
vitamin K, therapy in these cases should then be managed as recommended for
animals presenting with clinical signs of haemorrhage or with prolongation of PT.
Clinical Tip
· Animals with evidence of haemorrhage at presentation secondary to rodenticide ingestion will have
PT prolongation. Nevertheless, it is essential to test PT at presentation, both to support the
presumptive diagnosis and to allow monitoring of response to therapy.
· As with any severe coagulopathy, animals showing signs of haemorrhage secondary to suspected
rodenticide poisoning should be handled gently, subjected to minimum stress and undergo exercise
restriction. Venepuncture should only be performed using peripheral veins and with the smallest
needle possible; adequate prolonged pressure should be applied to the site following sampling.
Replacement of clotting factors may be performed in symptomatic patients by
 a    si s sd  n nss
of fresh frozen plasma but fresh whole blood may be ised to treat severe anaemia as
well as coagulopathy in appropriate cases. Alternatively, a combination of fresh frozen
plasma and packed red blood cells may be employed in these cases (see Ch. 40).
Prognosis
Prognosis is generally good with adequate and timely treatment but is partly
dependent on site and severity of haemorrhage at the time of presentation.
Rodenticides containing vitamin D
          )
  with anticoagulant  agents.
Calciferol/cholecalciferol is metabolized to calcitriol (1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol)
which induces hypercalcaemia via increased intestinal absorption, increased renal
rea bsorption and enhanced bone resorption. Hyperphosphataemia is also consistently
present.
Clinical  signs  of  hypercalcaemia  are most  commonly  associated  with  the
Depending on the preparation consumed, signs may be seen 8-48 hours post-
ingestion.  Treatment of hypercalcaemia involves: promoting calciuresis using
intravenous 0.9% sodium chloride (normal saline) and furosemide; corticosteroid
therapy to suppress bone resorption, reduce intestinal calcium absorption and promote
calciuresis; possible addi tional use of salmon calcitonin; and, more recently, treatment
containing vitamin D may have severe morbidity.
Chocolate (theobromine)
Theobromine is a methylxanthine-derived alkaloid occurring naturally in cacao beans
and found in chocolate, cocoa powder and other products produced from these beans.
In addition, chocolate contains a lesser amouint of caffeine, also a methylxanthine.
Clinical Tip
· The concentration of theobromine varies in different sources, with cocoa powder and plain (dark)
chocolate generally containing significantly more than milk chocolate. The theobromine content of
white chocolate is considerably lower. The literature contains reports of death in dogs following
consumption of chocolate, cocoa powder, cacao bean shells and cocoa bean mulch
Toxic dose
Fatal doses of theobromine are reported to be in the range of 90-250 mg/kg in dogs
and 80-150 mg/kg in cats.
Toxicokinetics
Absorption of theobromine from the gastrointestinal tract is relatively slower in dogs
           
Metabolism is primarily hepatic and enterohepatic circulation occurs. Excretion is
considerably slower than in people.
Mechanism of toxicity
Methylxanthines inhibit cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterases and also act as
adenosine receptor antagonists. As with other methylxanthines, theobromine (and
caffeine) causes CNS stimulation with consequent cardiac and respiratory effects. It
directly stimulates the myocardium and skeletal muscle causing increased
contractility    and    competitively    inhibits   cerebral   benzodiazepine    receptors.
Theobromine also causes smooth muscle relaxation, especially of the bronchi, and
renal diuresis.
Clinical signs
      s      
Signs may persist for 48-72 hours in some cases. Commonly reported clinical signs
include vomiting, abdominal discomfort, restlessness, excitability and hyperactivity,
Urinary incontinence, polyuria and polydipsia may also occur. Severe seizures and/or
cardiovascular compromise are typically reported in fatal cases.
Laboratory and other tests
An emergency database including electrocardiogram is recommended.
Treatment
Routine GID is indicated in appropriate cases. As theobromine is absorbed slowly in
dogs, induction of emesis may be appropriate even after a significant delay; however,
enterohepatic circulation so repeated use of charcoal may enhance elimination. There
is no specific antidote for theobromine poisoning and therapy is otherwise
symptomatic. This may include intravenous fluid therapy, antiemetic administration,
sedation if  excitability  is excessive, and routine  treatment of seizures.
Prognosis
Prognosis is generally good with appropriate treatment but may be worse for animals
Xylitol
Xylitol is a naturally occurring sugar alcohol found in low concentrations in a variety
of fruits and vegetables. It is extracted commercially and used as a sweetener, being
popular for use for example by diabetics and in low-carbohydrate diets. The use of
xylitol has also been increasing due to its effects in reducing the formation of dental
S             
including chewing gum, sweets, toothpaste and other oral care products. Xylitol is also
found in proprietary baked goods and is commercially available as a powder for
baking. Manufacturers are not obliged to specify the xylitol content of products in all
isomalt) is listed.
Clinical Tip
* Xylitol poisoning has been reported in dogs but no information is available at the time of writing
regarding the mechanism of toxicity, this substance is found in some well-known proprietary canine
oral hygiene products.
Toxic dose
Hypoglycaemia has been reported to occur in dogs at dosages greater than 0.15 g/kg
and a dosage of o.5 g/kg has been associated with hepatic failure. However, it remains
uinclear whether the hepatotoxic effect of xylitol is dose-related or idiosyncratic, and
the possibility of hepatic injury at doses less than 0.5 g/kg cannot therefore be
excluded.
Toxicokinetics
Xylitol is a normal intermediate product in the glucuronic acid cycle but excessive
absorption and explain the potentially sustained hypoglycaemia seen in dogs.
Metabolism is predominantly hepatic and occurs rapidly. Virtually no urinary
excretion occurs.
Mechanism of toxicity
In dogs xylitol acts as a potent and dose-dependent stimulator of pancreatic insulin
release (this effect is negligible or only mild in people). It also causes hepatic injury
and probable acute hepatic necrosis by a currently unknown mechanism
Hypoglycaemia may occur as a resuilt of the insuilin release and may be both severe
and sustained. Hypokalaemia may also result  from insulin release. Clinically
significant coagulopathy  is  one  potential  consequence of  hepatic injury  and
consequent dysfunction. Hepatic failure may also contribute to hypoglycaemia and is
thought to be responsible for this finding in dogs that do not show earlier evidence of
hypoglycaemia attributable to insulin release.
Clinical signs
Clinical signs associated with hypoglycaemia often develop within an hour of
altered mentation from depression through to coma, and seizures. Signs associated
A n (n   h n ) s n  a  a a i
occur with or without earlier signs of hypoglycaemia. Coagulopathy may manifest as
petechiae/ecchymoses,l
haemorrhagic  faeces,  and  excessive  bleeding
from
venepuncture sites.
Laboratory tests
Blood glucose should be evaluated as part of the emergency database and may be
normal  or  mildly   to  severely  reduced.  Occasionally   dogs  will  present  with
hyperglycaemia that then progresses to hypoglycaemia.  Regular monitoring is
screening may reveal hypokalaemia that is usually mild or perhaps moderate.
If hepatic injury has occurred, a serum biochemistry profile may reveal a marked
increase in serum alanine transaminase (ALT) activity, a mild to moderate increase in
serum alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity, and hyperbilirubinaemia. Prolongation of
PT and APTT may be detected in coagulopathic animals, and mild to moderate
that are normoglycaemic at presentation.
Treatment
Clinical Tip
· Given the potential for fatal acute hepatic failure following xylitol ingestion in dogs, the author
recommends treating all cases.
Routine GID is indicated in appropriate cases. Emesis should not be induced in dogs
with  marked  neurological  compromise secondary  to  hypoglycaemia.  Activated
charcoal should be administered empirically but may have limited benefit due to low
binding of xylitol (demonstrated in an in vitro study).
Hypoglycaemia is treated using standard parenteral and possibly oral glucose
supplementation therapy that may need to be both aggressive and prolonged. Regular
plasma (FFP) administration (see Ch. 40) and vitamin K, should be administered. As
          
performed using peripheral veins and with the smallest needle possible; adequate
prolonged pressure should be applied to the site following sampling
Empirical use of antioxidant hepatoprotectants such as SAMe, N-acetylcysteine and
           s
hepatic encephalopathy may need to be instituted. Therapy is otherwise supportive
and symptomatic.
Prognosis
The prognosis associated with hypoglycaemia alone from xylitol poisoning is good
with timely and appropriate management. The prognosis for animals with evidence of
hepatic dysfunction is guarded to poor, and grave for acute hepatic failure. Survival
from xylitol poisoning may not be correlated with exposure dosage.
31
Cardiovascular emergencies
Acute Decompensated Heart Failure
Progressive heart disease results in failure of the heart to pump adequately and this
the aorta or pulmonary artery, or congestive heart failure (CHF). In CHF, there is
inadequate emptying of blood from the venous system: left-sided CHF results in
causes congestion of the systemic circulation with ascites and pleural effusion.
Bilateral heart failure presents with a combination of both types of signs.
Failure of the heart to pump adequately may result from systolic dysfunction, i.e.
the ventricles are unable to fill properly. Both mechanisms are often involved and the
end result is reduced cardiac output and a lowering of arterial blood pressure. Systolic
dysfunction may result from failure of the myocardium itself (e.g. dilated
cardiomyopathy), from an increase in ventricular pressure (pressure overload; e.g.
pulmonic stenosis, subaortic stenosis) or from volume overload (e.g. atrioventricular
valve disease). Diastolic dysfunction (impaired ventricular filling) may result, for
example, from ventricular hypertrophy, dilated cardiomyopathy, atrioventricular
valve stenosis or pericardial effusion (cardiac tamponade)
Compensatory mechanisms during heart disease include mechanisms relating to the
heart itself, such as tachycardia, increased inotropy (force of contraction) and
myocardial hypertrophy, and peripheral compensation involving vasoconstriction and
sodium and  water retention.  In time these compensatory mechanisms become
detrimental.
Treatment
of animals with acute decompensated heart failure often needs to be performed
without a definitive diagnosis of the nature of the underlying heart disease.
Management of such cases may involve:
 Oxygen supplementation in all cases (see Ch. 6); minimum stress and intervention
· Reduction of pulmonary venous pressure (hence left ventricular preload), typically
through the use of furosemide to promote diuresis and natriuresis
· Anxiolysis and sedation using an opioid, preferably morphine (also causes
vasodilation)
· Enhancing systolic function (positive inotropy) using pimobendan
· Emergency treatment of severe dysrhythmias (see Ch. 12), although the emphasis is
s     n    
The use of additional agents such as sodium nitroprusside or dobutamine may be
indicated in some cases but is likely to be restricted to referral institutions.
Canine chronic mitral valve insufficiency
Theory refresher
Chronic mitral valve insufficiency is usually the result of progressive valvular
to medium size. The most commonly affected breeds include the Cavalier King Charles
spaniel, terrier breeds and poodles. The disease usually progresses over a period of
years and is the most common cause of CHF in dogs.
In the long term, mitral regurgitation results in  tachycardia, myocardial
hypertrophy and reduced myocardial contractility; left atrial size and pressure
increase, and pulmonary venous congestion and oedema may occur. Coughing may be
the result of left main stem bronchus compression by the enlarged left atrium and/or
pulmonary oedema.
           
insufficiency due to:
· Chorda tendinae rupture
· Onset of atrial fibrillation
· Inadequate therapy of existing heart failure
. Overexertion.
Case example 1
Presenting Signs and Case History
An 11l-year-old male neutered Norfolk terrier presented following an episode of collapse and onset
of severe respiratory distress. The dog had had a number of similar episodes in the 2 weeks prior to
 As e pu  ao nsau is a se as se aaa  a nnq nsd Al 
chronic mitral valve insufficiency and CHF for which he was receiving furosemide, pimobendan and
benazepril. The owner reported a variable appetite recently and admitted that she had not managed
to administer all of the dog's medications as directed. No other significant preceding history was
reported.
Major body system examination
On presentation the dog was alert but clearly in respiratory distress. Flow-by oxygen
supplementation was commenced while a major body system examination was
performed. Cardiovascular examination revealed a heart rate of 160 beats per minute
with a grade Vl/V1 left apical systolic murmur that had wide radiation. Femoral and
dorsal pedal pulses were very weak but pulse deficits were not detected. The jugular
S   s a s s     ss
capillary refill time.
Respiratory rate was 60 breaths per minute and there was a notable increase in
effort. Lung sounds were diffusely harsh bilaterally and focal patches of crackles were
audible. The dog's abdomen was distended with a fluid thrill and rectal temperature
was within normal limits. Blood pressure via Doppler sphygmomanometry was within
normal limits at 130 mmHg.
Assessment
The  dog's   cardiovascular   examination   revealed    tachycardia   and   marked
  s     s  s a s 
the respiratory findings and the dog's history, a diagnosis of decompensated CHF was
most likely. The possible pulmonary oedema suggested left-sided heart failure, and the
fluid thrill may have suggested a degree of right-sided failure as well.
Emergency database
As the dog remained tolerant and compliant with the flow-by oxygen
supplementation, an intravenous catheter was placed in a cephalic vein and blood
obtained  via the catheter for an emergency database. This revealed mild
hyponatraemia (137.0 mmol/l, reference range 140.0-153.0 mmol/l) and a mild
increase in blood urea nitrogen (13.0 mmol/l, reference range 3.0-10.0 mmol/l) but
was otherwise inremarkable.
Case management
Glyceryl trinitrate 2% paste (18 mm) was applied to the inner aspect of the dog's right
pinna and he was then placed into an oxygen cage with continuous
Furosemide (4 mg/kg i.v.) and morphine (o.1 mg/kg slow i.v.) were administered via
an extension line exiting the oxygen cage. Ad lib water was provided.
Clinical Tip
· Glyceryl trinitrate paste can be absorbed through human skin and it is therefore important to take
certain precautions. These include wearing gloves to apply the paste, and making sure that there are
 signs on the kennel and kennel sheet alerting personnel that paste has been applied to the patient.
The site used must also be clearly identified; the paste is typically applied to clipped or hairless skin,
such as the inner aspect of the pinna, and the site used is rotated between applications
One hour later the dog's respiration had improved to some extent and he had also
lrinated. As he was compliant, thoracic radiographs were performed with flow-by
oxygen supplementation throughout (Figure 31.1). These findings were consistent
mitral valve insufficiency but there was also evidence of right-sided heart failure
(a)
(b)
Figuure31.1
(a) Right lateral and (b) dorsoventral thoracic radiographs of a dog with end-stage
mitral valve disease showing cardiomegaly with left atrial enlargement and dorsal displacement of the
caudal part of the trachea, an alveolar lung pattern affecting mainly the cranial lung lobes with air
bronchograms, mild bilateral pleural effusion and hepatomegaly.
Clinical Tip
· Right-sided heart failure is relatively common in dogs with chronic mitral valve insufficiency. This
is presumed to be due to concurrent tricuspid valve insufficiency as a result of myxomatous
venous pressures.
The dog was returned to the oxygen cage and continued to be treated with
intermittent intravenous boluses of furosemide (2-6 mg/kg q 1-2 hr, prn) and
m (    ) sd   ( g     o) 
Although the dog showed some early improvement, his clinical condition
deteriorated again. The owners were offered the option of an emergency referral to a
hospital with a cardiologist and facilities to offer more intensive management but
decided instead to have the dog euthanased which was therefore done in their
presence as soon as possible.
Canine tricuspid valve insufficiency
Tricuspid valve insufficiency is often an incidental finding in dogs and cats. Clinically
significant tricuspid valve insufficiency may be seen with:
· Chronic mitral valve insufficiency
· Bacterial endocarditis
· Chorda tendinae rupture
· Right ventricular dilation due to increased right ventricular pressure -e.g.
Right atrial enlargement may result in supraventricular tachydysrhythmias, and
increased right atrial pressure may result in ascites, pleural effusion, pericardial
effusion, hepatomegaly and splenomegaly. From an emergency perspective, animals
           
concurrent disorder than for primary right-sided heart failure.
Canine dilated cardiomyopathy
Theory refresher
Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is a primary myocardial disease characterized by
enlargement of the heart, reduced systolic function and possible impaired diastolic
function. The disease is seen most commonly in adult large and medium size dogs,
with some breeds being over represented (e.g. the Great Dane, the Doberman Pinscher
the Irish Wolfhound, the Cocker Spaniel). There is significant variation between
breeds with respect to both historical and clinical findings, and rate of disease
progression.
DCM is definitively diagnosed by echocardiography that shows left (and perhaps
bilateral) atrial and ventricular enlargement, and evidence of reduced left ventricular
 a         
dilated left ventricle.
Case example 2
Presenting Signs and Case History
A 6-year-old male neutered Great Dane presented with a 10-day history of inappetence and
retching that was worse when the dog was lying down. There had been some noticeable exercise
intolerance on daily walks and the owner had noticed that the dog had a very fast heart rate
 prompting emergency presentation. The dog had had surgical treatment of gastric dilatation/volvulus
Major body system examination
On presentation the dog was ambulatory but quiet. Cardiovascular examination
            s
heart murmur. Femoral pulses were weak and there were marked pulse deficits: heart
rate 240 beats per minute, pulse rate 114 per minute. Mucous membranes were
hyperaemic with a fast capillary refill time.
The dog was panting but it was decided not to stop this in order to auscuiltate the
lung fields at initial presentation. Abdominal palpation was unremarkable but there
   o  n s     
sphygmomanometry was within normal limits at 160 mmHg.
Assessment
The dog's cardiovascular examination was highly suggestive of atrial fibrillation and
CHF. Given the dog's breed, there was a high index of suspicion for DCM. The mild
increase in rectal temperature was suspected to represent hyperthermia rather than
pyrexia.
Emergency database
          a  s s
catheter for an emergency database. This  was essentially  unremarkable.
Electrocardiography confirmed the presence of atrial fibrillation (see Ch. 12) with a
Case management
The dog was suitably compliant (a gentle giant!) so thoracic radiographs were taken
to look for evidence of CHF and evaluate the size of the cardiac silhouette (Figure
31.2). The dog was subsequently started on furosemide (2 mg/kg p.o. q 12 hr) and
digoxin (0.1 mg/m? p.o. q 12 hr) and referral arranged to a cardiologist for
echocardiography and implementation of further management. This confirmed the
suspicion of DCM with left atrial enlargement and pimobendan (0.125 mg/kg p.o. q 12
hr, 1 hour before feeding) and benazepril (0.25 mg/kg p.o. q 24 hr) were dispensed.
The dog's ventricular response rate had reduced to 160 beats per minute when he was
seen at the referral centre (5 days after digoxin was commenced) and additional
(a)
(b)
Figure 31.2
(a) Right lateral and (b) dorsoventral thoracic radiographs of a dog with dilated
 cardiomyopathy and mild pulmonary oedema. Peribronchial infiltrates are present throughout the
lung, with patchy alveolar infiltrate in the caudoventral lung field.
Clinical Tip
· Most dogs with atrial fibrillation have severe heart disease involving left atrial enlargement, and
are in CHF of variable severity. Unless the dysrhythmia is very severe, the emphasis in these cases is
very much on treating the CHF with furosemide and digoxin. Additional antidysrhythmic therapy is
only indicated if treatment of congestion fails to reduce the ventricular response rate satisfactorily
(conversion to sinus rhythm is very difficult and not necessarily of benefit).
Feline cardiomyopathies
Cardiomyopathy (i.e. primary disease of the myocardium rather than  valvular
disease) is the main form of heart disease in cats and is classified as follows:
· Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM)
 Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM)
· Restrictive cardiomyopathy
· Unclassified cardiomyopathy
HCM is the most commonly diagnosed feline heart disease and is inherited in some
breeds (e.g. the Maine coon). The disease is associated with ventricular thickening
and in some cats systolic anterior motion of the mitral valve is identified on
echocardiography  (so-called  hypertrophic obstructive  cardiomyopathy).  Systemic
thromboembolism is a potential and very serious consequence of HCM in cats (see
below).
Clinical Tip
· Heart failure (or sudden death) may be triggered in a cat with subclinical HCM by significant
stress, general anaesthesia, or surgical intervention.
· In addition, ketamine increases sympathetic tone and may precipitate heart failure in such cats.
Feline DCM may be caused by taurine deficiency (predominantly nutritional but
there may be genetic involvement) but idiopathic feline DCM is now the most
of heart failure are seen.
Congestive heart failure in cats
Due to the difference in lifestyles between the species, cats are more likely than dogs to
present for veterinary attention only when they are in severe heart failure; cats are
not usually exercised directly by owners and often have a more sedentary existence,
therefore clinical abnormalities may be hidden for some time. It is nevertheless
important to remember that the underlying cardiomyopathy will most likely have
been chronically progressive and that subtle signs of heart failure may have been
present for some time.
Pleural effusion is common in cats with CHF but this is rarely due to right-sided
failure alone and the exact mechanism remains unclear. The nature of the pleural
effusion may vary (modified transudate, pseudochylous, chylous) and heart failure is
the most common cause of chylothorax in cats. Most cats have bilateral or left-sided
disease and pulmonary oedema is usually present, even if it is harder to detect due to
the pleural effusion (Figure 31.3).
Figure 31.3
Right lateral thoracic radiographs of a cat with congestive heart failure; cardiomegaly
and pulmonary oedema are present.
In the nonreferral setting, treatment of acute decompensated CHF in cats is similar
possibly morphine. Thoracocentesis is often required and a diagnostic procedure based
on a sufficient index of suspicion is preferable to subjecting the cat to the stress of
radiography; ultrasonography is a much less stressful way to identify pleural effusion,
especially if a mobile machine is available (see Ch. 32).
Clinical Tip
· Cats with acute decompensated CHF are invariably even more susceptible to stress than their
canine counterparts. Minimal stress and intervention and gentle handling are essential
Clinical Tip
· Animals with acute CHF are frequently anorexic initially and may also not drink. These animals
may be dehydrated, and potentially hypokalaemic, at the time of presentation and are at risk of
further exacerbation as a result of aggressive diuretic therapy.
· While dogs often start to drink and perhaps eat as their clinical condition improves, in the author's
experience it is very common for cats to remain anorexic. A balance is then required between the
 desire to withhold fluid therapy due to CHF and the morbidity and risks associated with worsening
dehydration and electrolyte abnormalities, especially hypokalaemia. In such cases conservative use of
fluid therapy may be required - e.g. 0.45% sodium chloride (half-strength, not 0.18% sodium
chloride) given intravenously at 0.5 ml/kg/hr with potassium chloride supplementation, or daily
subcutaneous administration (10 ml/kg).
Feline Aortic Thromboembolism (Saddle Thromboembolism)
Theory refresher
The majority of cats with aortic thromboembolism (ATE) have cardiomyopathy, often
HCM, which most commonly includes left atrial enlargement. Spontaneous echo
         s   n
thromboembolism. Feline ATE may also occur with other forms of heart disease as
well as in association with hyperthyroidism (potentially independently of the cardiac
effects of this disorder) and neoplasia. ATE is more common in male cats,
predominantly due to their greater predisposition to HCM.
Thrombi usually form in the left atrium, become dislodged, and then cause
occlusion at a distal systemic site. Thrombi may also form in the other cardiac
depend on:
· The site at which the embolus lodges
· Whether complete or only partial obstruction occuirs
· The duration of obstruction
· The extent and diameter of any collateral circulation.
Clinical Tip
· In the majority of cases the thromboembolus lodges at the aortic trifurcation, i.e. where the
terminal abdominal aorta divides into the external iliac arteries supplying the pelvic limbs and the
source of the main arterial supply to the tail. In some cases a smaller clot may instead cause
occlusion of one external iliac artery with less severe unilateral clinical signs. Thromboembolism of
a brachial artery and consequent thoracic limb signs may occur and visceral and cerebral arterial
thromboembolism have also been reported.
Treatment
Clinical Tip
• In the author's opinion, thrombolytic agents available at the time of writing should not be used for
feline ATE. If they are used, this should only be done where facilities for intensive monitoring and
aggressive intervention are available, and owners must be adequately counselled regarding the
associated risks and high financial costs.
Thrombolysis
Definitive therapy of ATE has been attempted using exogenous thrombolytic agents
(e.g. tissue-plasminogen activator (t-PA), streptokinase). However, no consistently
haemorrhage, reperfusion syndrome with severe hyperkalaemia and metabolic
acidosis, and sudden death. Mortality rates associated with treatment are high and in
the author's opinion currently available thrombolytic agents should not be used.
Mortality and complication rates are also high for balloon embolectomy, rheolytic
thrombectomy and surgical thrombus removal. In all cases recurrent thrombosis may
occulr.
Anticoagulation
Although there is no evidence for a beneficial effect in feline ATE, aspirin
(acetylsalicylic acid), unfractionated heparin, and more recently low molecular
   s    s    
been used.
Vasodilation
Vasodilatory agents are also often employed in the acute stages in an attempt to
improve perfusion to the affected limbs. Acepromazine is commonly chosen and may
cause hypotension, careful rational dosing is mandatory.
Heart disease and failuire
Medical therapy for heart disease, including appropriate treatment of heart failure,
should be provided as indicated (see above). Initial stabilization in cats suffering from
acute decompensated  CHF must  take  priority  over  therapy   for  aortic
thromboembolism.
Nursing Aspect
Cats with ATE require intensive nursing and suitable husbandry. Bedding should be clean, dry and
well padded. Physiotherapy of the pelvic limbs is essential to minimize the effects of disuse. These
cats may also be anorexic and placement of a nasooesophageal feeding tube may be required.
Placement of other types of feeding tube will necessitate general anaesthesia which is undesirable in
cats with heart disease. As the majority of cats with ATE have heart disease, minimum stress is
important. That said, these cats may also be anxious and distressed by virtue of their predicament and
regular fuss and attention are likely to prove beneficial.
Prognosis
In some cats limb sensation and function return rapidly (within several hours to a few
days) following ATE due to intrinsic thrombolysis. Other cases may regain complete
or partial limb sensation and motor function in time (often weeks to months) with
adequate care. Finally, in a few cats, changes are irreversible, and cutaneous and
Partial obstruction is likely to have a better prognosis than complete obstruction.
The high likelihood of underlying cardiomyopathy, the need for on-going medical
therapy, and the possibility of recurrent ATE must be borne in mind. Nevertheless, a
proportion of cats go on to enjoy an acceptable quality of life for several months (and
occasionally longer) following an initial episode of ATE.
Case example 3
Presenting Signs and Case History
paralysis. The cat was an indoor cat and had seemed normal when last seen by the owner several
hours earlier. The owner's attention had been drawn by the cat's vocalization and the cat had
subsequently been found recumbent next to the chair in which he had been sleeping. The cat was
distressed and was thought to have fallen off the chair.
Clinical Tip
• Although most cats that suffer ATE have heart disease, in a significant proportion there is no
consistent preceding history. Adult cats of all ages may be affected. Especially in cats with outdoor
access, ATE may be mistaken by owners for traumatic injury.
Major body system examination
rate was elevated at 26o beats per min and a gallop sound was auidible; a murmur
could not be detected. Mucous membranes were pale pink with normal capillary refill
     s t   i sa   
at 37.0°C. Abdominal palpation was unremarkable.
Femoral pulse was absent in both pelvic limbs and both paws were cold with pale
digital pads. The quicks appeared purple in colour. Bilateral paralysis was present and
the muscles of the right pelvic limb were swollen and severely painful on palpation.
Pain sensation was absent from the left pelvic limb. An ultrasonic Doppler device for
measuring blood pressure failed to detect blood flow in either pelvic limb and no
active bleeding was detected when a nail in the left pelvic limb was cut back to its
quick.
Clinical Tip
· Obstruction of blood flow to the pelvic limbs is likely to cause ischaemic injury to both the
skeletal muscles and peripheral nerves. Ischaemic myopathy is typically very painful but the pain
should alleviate as limb sensation is lost.
· A diagnosis of ATE is usually made on the basis of consistent clinical signs. In some cases, however,
primary neurological disease can be mistaken for ATE; cutting through the quick in limbs without
pain sensation and using an ultrasonic Doppler device help to increase the certainty of the diagnosis.
Case management
An intravenous catheter was placed immediately in a cephalic vein and analgesia
provided (methadone 0.5 mg/kg i.v.) to alleviate the cat's pain while the examination
findings, presumptive diagnosis and prognosis were discussed with the owner. The
owner was very distressed, especially given the peracute clinical deterioration without
any premonitory signs, but eventually opted for euthanasia to be performed without
further intervention.
Clinical Tip
· Analgesia is paramount in cats presenting with pain and a pure opioid (e.g. morphine, methadone)
is most appropriate initially. At recommended dose rates these agents have minimal
 cardiorespiratory effects. Buprenorphine may be a reasonable alternative in cats but its longer onset
 of action must be borne in mind in animals that present in severe pain.
· In the author's opinion analgesia should not be withheld while the presumptive diagnosis is
discussed with the owner; immediate alleviation of suffering must be paramount regardless of
whether euthanasia is subsequently performed.
Canine Pericardial Effusion
Theory refresher
Pericardial effusion is an abnormal accumulation of fluid in the pericardial sac. The
haemodynamic consequences of this fluid accuimulation depend on the rate of
accumulation results in an increase in intrapericardial pressure that compromises
ventricular filling. The right side of the heart is typically affected more than the left
initially as the myocardium is thinner and intraventricular pressure is lower on the
right side. The most severe clinical manifestation of this cardiac tamponade is
cardiogenic  shock characterized by low  cardiac output failure and systemic
hypotension. With more chronic effusion, signs of right-sided CHF usually
predominate.
Causes
The two most common causes of canine pericardial effusion are neoplasia and
idiopathic pericarditis.  Intrapericardial tumours  include  haemangiosarcoma  and
heart base tumours. Echocardiographic findings may be highly suggestive of tumour
type but histopathology is needed for definitive diagnosis; this is not realistic
antemortem.
Haemangiosarcoma is the most commonly diagnosed canine cardiac tumour and
arises most often from the wall of the right atrium or auricle. It is the most common
cauise of canine pericardial effusion and is assuimed to have metastasized in virtually
all cases at the time of diagnosis; prognosis is very poor. Surgical resection and
adjuvant chemotherapy are offered by some referral centres.
The most common heart base tumours in dogs are aortic body tumours
(chemodectomas). Mesothelioma is a diffuse neoplasm affecting serosal surfaces
including the serous pericardium and does not cause obvious pericardial thickening
on echocardiography. Pericardial fluid cytology is unable to differentiate effusion
secondary to idiopathic pericarditis from effusion secondary to mesothelioma, and
S           
presumed idiopathic pericardial effusion. Although pericardial fluid analysis is of
limited benefit in most cases, cardiac lymphoma may be diagnosed in this way and is
potentially responsive to chemotherapy.
Other caises of pericardial effusion include coagulation disorders, CHF, trauma,
infectious causes and uraemia, although clinically significant effects with respect to
tamponade are unlikely in these cases. Pericardial effusion and cardiac tamponade
secondary to anticoagulant rodenticide toxicity have been reported in a dog and, if
facilities allow, evaluation of coagulation is recommended prior to pericardiocentesis.
Constrictive and effusive-constrictive pericarditis
to pericardial effusion but little or no effusion is subsequently identified. A diagnosis
of constrictive or effusive-constrictive pericarditis due to fi brosis should be considered
in such cases.
Left atrial rupture
in dogs with chronic mitral valve disease. Associated clinical signs include collapse as
well as coughing and dyspnoea, and physical examination findings include a heart
murmur, poor peripheral pulses and muffled heart sounds. Dogs that suffer left atrial
rupture are typically much smaller than those that present with pericardial effusion of
other aetiologies and the presence of an audible heart murmur is another
distinguishing feature.
Only partial drainage of the pericardial effusion is recommended as thorough
drainage may exacerbate bleeding. Regardless of intervention, the prognosis is very
poor with this condition.
Case example 4
Presenting Signs and Case History
 e            t 
intolerance, variable appetite and progressive abdominal distension.
Clinical Tip
· Pericardial effusion is seen most commonly in older large-breed dogs and especially in golden
retrievers.
In addition to the clinical signs in this case, weakness, episodic collapse, polydipsia,
Major body system examination
Major body system examination revealed the dog to be anxious but ambulatory. Heart
rate was elevated at 170 beats per minute and heart sounds were muffled. Peripheral
pulses were weak but dorsal pedal pulses remained palpable and pulse deficits were not
suspected. Mucous membranes were pale pink with a prolonged capillary refill time.
Neither jugular venous distension nor pulsus paradoxus could be readily appreciated.
The dog was panting continuously but lung auscultation was assessed as
unremarkable. Marked abdominal distension with a palpable fluid thrill was detected.
Clinical Tip
· Pulsus paradoxus is a decrease in pulse strength during inspiration, reflecting a decrease in
systemic arterial blood pressure. Pulse quality varies during respiration in normal dogs, becoming
weaker on inspiration and stronger on expiration. However, this normal variation is exaggerated in
cardiac tamponade and may be clinically detectable.
Case management
          a  s s
catheter for an emergency database that was unremarkable. Continuous
electrocardiogram monitoring was commenced and sinus tachycardia identified.
Echocardiography confirmed the clinical suspicion of pericardial effusion (Figure
31.4).
Figure 31.4
Echocardiogram image of pericardial effusion visible as an anechoic space around the
heart; both a collapsed right ventricle and the left ventricle are also visible.
(Photograph courtesy of Tobias Wagn er)
Clinical Tip
· Many dogs with pericardial effusion are found to be in sinus tachycardia. Low voltage QRS
complexes are relatively common and electrical alternans may also be seen. Electrical alternans is
alternate-beat variation in the direction, amplitude or duration of any component of the ECG
waveform, most obviously the QRS complexes (Figure 31.5). Swinging of the heart in the fluid-filled
pericardial sac is one of the causes of this phenomenon.
· In addition to sinus tachycardia, ventricular dysrhythmias (see Ch. 12) are relatively common in
dogs with pericardial effusion and may require specific therapy. Supraventricular dysrhythmias are
identified less frequently.
Figure 31.5
 Electrical alternans in a dog with pericardial effusion showing alternate-beat variation
 in QRS amplitude.
(Ph otograph courtesy of Adrian Boswood)
Clinical Tip
· If available, echocardiography is the imaging modality of choice for confirming pericardial
effusion. It is relatively easy to detect pericardial effusion as an anechoic space around the heart and
ultrasonography is both more sensitive and specific and less stressful to the patient when compared
to thoracic radiography.
· An enlarged globoid cardiac silhouette and an enlarged caudal vena cava may be identified
radiographically but changes may be more subtle, especially in more acute cases. Thoracic
radiography is usually indicated at some point during management of a dog with pericardial
effusion, in particular to evaluate the lung field for neoplastic metastases.
The dog was sedated using butorphanol (o.2 mg/kg i.m.) and midazolam (0.2
mg/kg i.m.) and pericardiocentesis successfully performed (see p. 293). One litre of
sanguineous pericardial fluid was removed and the dog's cardiovascular status
  o       s  
cytology. Ultrasonography showed only minimal residual pericardial effusion.
Clinical Tip
· Pericardiocentesis is the treatment of choice for pericardial effusion and diuresis or other medical
therapy should be avoided.
• Not all dogs suffering from pericardial effusion require immediate pericardiocentesis. Fluid in the
pericardial sac increases the sensitivity for detecting intrapericardial masses; in dogs that are
relatively stable with only mild cardiovascular compromise it may be possible to delay drainage
until comprehensive echocardiography can be performed.
The dog was kept on continuous electrocardiogram monitoring for several hours
but only occasional ventricular premature complexes (VPCs) were noted. Repeat
ultrasonography showed no recurrence of pericardial effusion. The dog was then
referred (along with the fluid samples) for further investigations that failed to reveal
an underlying cause for the effusion. A presumptive diagnosis of idiopathic
pericardial effusion was made.
Feline Pericardial Effusion
Pericardial effusion is much less common in cats and typically occurs as part of a
generalized systemic disorder, in particular CHF. Clinical signs specifically resulting
s            
commonly  associated  with  concurrent  pulmonary  oedema  or  pleural  effusion.
To the author's knowledge a comparable syndrome to that resulting from idiopathic
pericardial effusion in dogs has not been reported in cats. Neoplasia is recognized as a
neoplasm and usually causes pericardial effusion, cytological examination of which
often provides the diagnosis. Pericardial effusion secondary to feline infectious
peritonitis (FIP) has also been reported and a variety of other causes may be
identified.
The procedure for pericardiocentesis in cats is similar to that in dogs. Sedation and
ultrasound-guided aspiration are recommended.
32
Respiratory emergencies
Feline Pleural Effusion
Theory refresher
rational and considered approach to the stabilization of these cats is essential as they
are typically critical and very susceptible to stress. In many cases, the pleural effusion
would have been present for some time with little or no clinical manifestation;
eventually a point is reached where the ability of the lungs to expand becomes so
compromised that the cat is no longer able to cope. In addition, depending on the
underlying cause, there may also be other pathological abnormalities compromising
Causes
Causes of pleural effusion in cats include:
· Neoplasia
· Congestive heart failure
· Idiopathic chylothorax
· Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP)
· Haemothorax, traumatic or nontraumatic
· Pyothorax.
In the author's experience, neoplasia and congestive heart failure (see Ch. 3l) are
the two most common causes identified in cats (see Figures 32.1-32.4).
Figuure32.1
 Right lateral thoracic radiograph of a cat with pleural effusion secondary to a cranial
mediastinal mass.
Figure32.2
 Right lateral thoracic radiograph of a cat with severe pleural effusion (diagnosis not
made).
Figure32.3
 Right lateral thoracic radiograph of a cat with pleural effusion secondary to feline
infectious peritonitis (FIP).
(a)
(b)
A
(c)
(d)
Figure 32.4
Right  lateral  and  dorsoventral  thoracic radiographs of  a cat  with  idiopathic
chylothorax (a, b) before and (c, d) after thoracocentesis. The post-drainage films were taken the day
after under general anaesthesia; an oesophageal stethoscope is visible.
Case example 1
 Presenting Signs and Case History
A 4-year-old male neutered domestic short hair cat presented with acute respiratory distress. The
 owner reported that the cat had a several day history of lethargy and inappetence, and that there may
have been some weight loss in the preceding weeks. When the owner returned from work that evening
she had found the cat to be dyspnoeic and arranged an emergency consultation. The cat had not
previously been tested for feline leukaemia virus (FeLV) or feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV). No
 other significant history was reported.
Clinical Tip
· While awaiting the arrival of a cat reported to have respiratory distress, it is important to make
d r  Pd a  a   aa n e  
indicated drugs and approximate dose rates are to hand, and that equipment for performing
thoracocentesis is readily available
Observation
The cat was initially briefly observed in his carrier. He appeared alert and pupils were
not mydriatic. Respiratory rate was increased with a moderate mixed increase in
respiratory effort (including increased abdominal effort). The cat was not obviously
cyanotic and was sitting in sternal recumbency with no obvious evidence of trauma.
Brief examination
S   s           s 
            
position. Flow-by oxygen supplementation had been started already. Sternal cardiac
auscultation revealed a subjectively normal heart rate and neither a gallop sound nor
a cardiac murmur could be heard. However, the heart sounds appeared muffled. Lung
sounds were very dull ventrally and this appeared bilaterally symmetrical. Femoral
pulses were normal.
Assessment
The brief examination performed thus far was consistent with pleural effusion. Both
the lack of a gallop sound or heart murmur and the presence of normal femoral pulses
suggested that the cat was not in congestive heart failure but this had to be
interpreted with caution.
Oxygenation and client discuission
        s      
compliant, morphine (o.1 mg/kg i.m.) was administered at this point in anticipation
      e    a a  s 
pleural effusion for which the two most common causes in cats are neoplasia,
especially lymphoma, and congestive heart failure; other possibilities in this case
included pyothorax and an idiopathic effusion. The owner was keen to persevere with
trying to stabilize the cat with a view to achieving a definitive diagnosis.
Further case management
  p         
but there was still a marked increase in respiratory effort. Given the suispicion of
potentially therapeutic purposes (see p. 291). The procedure was only performed on
the right side as a large volume of pleuiral fluid was removed (250 ml, approximately
50 ml/kg) and the cat's breathing improved significantly almost immediately. The cat
C          
AstraZeneca - see Ch. 5) to both sites. The pleural effusion was grossly milky in
appearance. In-house cytology revealed that more than half of the cells present were
small lymphocytes, and no bacteria were seen. It was therefore presumptively
classified as a chylous effusion but samples had also been collected into additional
sterile containers for submission to an external laboratory.
S           s
catheter was placed later using minimal restraint and gentle handling. Blood was
obtained via the catheter for an emergency database to be performed that was
essentially unremarkable. As congestive heart failure remained a possibility, the cat
was not started on intravenous fluid therapy at this time and the catheter was kept
patent by regular flushing. Morphine (0.1 mg/kg slow i.v. q 6 hr) was continued but
no other medications were indicated at this stage.
The cat remained stable overnight and it was possible to wean him off oxygen
therapy. He was referred the next morning for further investigations which revealed a
cranial mediastinal mass that was confirmed to be due to lymphoma. The cat was
started on chemotherapy and was doing well at his most recent follow-up
examination.
Feline Bronchial Disease (Asthma)
Theory refresher
Feline bronchial disease is the result of inflammation of the lower airways without an
identifiable cause. A number of different terms have been used in the literature to
refer to the same syndrome, including feline lower airway disease, feline allergic
airway disease and feline asthma. The disease occurs most commonly in young to
middle-aged cats and Siamese cats are overrepresented. Allergens or nonspecific
airway irritants are likely to be involved in initiating or at least exacerbating airway
inflammation. The relationship between respiratory infection and feline bronchial
disease remains to be clarified.
Clinical signs are due to obstruction of the lower airways as a result of bronchial
inflammation and subsequent smooth muscle constriction, oedema, mucous gland
hypertrophy and excessive mucus secretion, and airway hyperactivity. In some cats,
these changes are reversible, while in others chronic inflammation results in
irreversible fibrosis and emphysema.  Eosinophils are typically the primary
inflammatory cells involved in the pathophysiology.
Clinical  signs most  commonly  include  coughing,  and  variable  degrees  of
tachypnoea or dyspnoea. Severe obstruction of the lower airways prevents cats from
exhaling completely, resulting in air trapping and hyperinflation of the lungs; this is
identified radiographically as increased pulmonary radiolucency and a flattened,
caudally displaced diaphragm.
Case example 2
Presenting Signs and Case History
A 6-year-old female neutered Siamese cat presented with acute onset respiratory distress. The
owner reported that over the preceding 2 months the cat had been heard to cough occasionally.
typically at night, but there was no other significant history. The cat was kept exclusively indoors, was
fully vaccinated, and had previously been found to be negative for feline leukaemia virus (FeLV) and
feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV).
Clinical Tip
· While awaiting the arrival of a cat reported to have respiratory distress, it is important to make
 preparations in advance to ensure that oxygen therapy can be provided upon arrival, potentially
indicated drugs and approximate dose rates are to hand, and that equipment for performing
thoracocentesis is readily available
Observation, brief examination
On presentation the cat was in lateral recumbency with dilated pupils, open-mouth
breathing and showing paradoxical abdominal movement. This is an ominous sign
and the cat was therefore immediately started on oxygen supplementation. Very brief
examination was performed that revealed a mild subjective bradycardia with no
gallop sound or heart murmur heard; femoral pulse quality was unremarkable. Lung
souinds were diffusely harsh with some wheezes.
Assessment
The respiratory findings were most consistent with feline lower airway disease,
diffuse cardiogenic pulmonary oedema or pulmonary contusions. However, the
P     n         is
was an indoor cat and there was no history or other suggestion of blunt trauma. Both
the history of coughing and signalment were also supportive of lower airway disease
being the most likely diagnosis.
Case management
The cat was immediately administered dexamethasone (0.25 mg/kg i.m), terbutaline
  s   (  )   (  )
airway disease, furosemide was included in the initial therapy as a single dose is
dehydration, and could potentially be life-saving if significant pulmonary oedema was
in fact present. An intravenous catheter was placed into a cephalic vein and blood
 a d          
essentially inremarkable.
        sa s 
slowly began to show improvement. At the appropriate time, thoracic radiographs
were taken under mild sedation (butorphanol 0.2 mg/kg i.v.) and revealed a severe
diffuse bronchointerstitial lung pattern (Figure 32.5). A diagnosis of chronic
bronchial disease with acute exacerbation was made.
(e)
(b)
Figure 32.5
(a) Right lateral and (b) dorsoventral thoracic radiographs of a cat showing a severe
diffuse bronchointerstitial lung pattern.
The cat was maintained on oxygen supplementation, dexamethasone (0.25 mg/kg
i.v. q 24 hr), terbutaline (0.01 mg/kg s.c. q 4 hr) and maintenance intravenous
isotonic crystalloid therapy (buffered lactated Ringer's solution at 2 ml/kg/hr). She
made a slow but steady recovery and was eventually discharged on oral prednisolone
(1 mg/kg p.o. q 12 hr) and inhaled bronchodilator therapy (albuterol). A plan for
ongoing management, including tapering of oral prednisolone and switching to
inhaled fluticasone, was agreed with the owner. The owners were questioned at length
            s
exposure to them.
Canine Upper Respiratory Tract Obstruction
S    n        
common causes of acute respiratory distress in dogs, especially in warmer weather
following exercise. The two most common disorders are laryngeal paralysis and
brachycephalic airway obstruction syndrome (BAOS). The initial approach to the
· Oxygen supplementation
· Sedation, usually acepromazine
· Intravenous access
. Cooling
· Minimal stress and intervention
· Possible corticosteroid administration, usually dexamethasone.
Occasionally dogs with chronic tracheal collapse present in an acute respiratory
crisis.
Laryngeal paralysis
Theory refresher
Laryngeal paralysis is the result of dysfunction of the recurrent laryngeal nerves that
supply the muscles which move the arytenoid cartilages. It may be congenital or
acquired, and is almost always filateral in clinically symptomatic dogs.
In most cases acquired laryngeal paralysis is presumptively diagnosed as idiopathic;
it may be that some of these cases are in fact due to an otherwise subtle generalised
polyneuropathy. Acquired laryngeal paralysis may also be traumatic or iatrogenic in
orgin.
There is a high incidence of megaoesophagus amongst dogs with laryngeal
paralysis and these animals are also at risk of aspiration pneumonia. Thoracic
radiographs are therefore indicated in all cases and can be taken while the patient is
intubated if applicable. Noncardiogenic pulmonary oedema may also be identified
following upper respiratory tract obstruction, typically in the caudodorsal lung field.
Case example 3
Presenting Signs and Case History
A 9-year-old male neutered chocolate Labrador retriever presented with severe respiratory distress.
The dog had been out exercising a few hours prior to presentation and had developed respiratory
distress that had progressed since returning home. Subsequent questioning of his owner after
 stabilization revealed that he had a chronic history of intermittent coughing.
Clinical Tip
 s  si      s e sisd  d 
 Labrador and golden retrievers. Clinical signs are usually noted in older dogs although younger dogs
may also be affected.
· A chronic history of exercise intolerance, excessive panting. louder breathing, coughing, and a
 aq o   sd    a  
 Some dogs present in acute respiratory distress.
Major body system examination
On presentation the dog was cyanotic, recumbent and extremely anxious. Loud
inspiratory stridor was obvious and there was marked inspiratory effort. Respiratory
rate was 60 breaths per minute. The dog was tachycardic (heart rate 150 beats per
minute) but cardiovascuilar examination was otherwise unremarkable. Rectal
temperature was elevated at 40.5°C and was interpreted as hyperthermia (as opposed
to pyrexia; see Ch. 16).
Assessment
Initial assessment was that the dog's most serious abnormality was upper respiratory
tract dyspnoea that was most likely secondary to laryngeal paralysis.
Clinical Tip
· Laryngeal paralysis is a familiar cause of upper respiratory tract dyspnoea. Marked respiratory
 effort in the face of laryngeal dysfunction can result in hyperthermia that may be extreme.
Hyperthermia and progressive laryngeal swelling contribute to the cycle of respiratory distress seen
in an acute crisis.
Case management
catheter was placed (with collection of blood at the time of placement for an
emergency database) and acepromazine (0.02 mg/kg) and butorphanol (0.3 mg/kg)
administered intravenously. The dog was wetted with cool water and a fan applied,
and he was then subjected to minimal stress.
s    s  s      
improvement in respiratory status. Rectal temperature had reduced to 39.5°℃ and
cooling was  therefore stopped  to avoid rebound  hypothermia.  Oxygen
supplementation  was discontinued and dexamethasone  (0o.25 mg/kg i.v.)
administered.  Intravenous isotonic crystalloid fluid therapy  (3 ml/kg/hr)  was
provided early on and repeat sedation performed as required until the dog's
paralysis was arranged.
Clinical Tip
· On occasion dogs suffering an acute crisis will not respond to the management provided in this
os   rai s s  ss ad   sa p a
be evaluated under a suitably light plane of anaesthesia first before deeper anaesthesia is provided
and intubation performed.
· The laryngeal folds should abduct during inspiration and it may be helpful to have an assistant
 calling out each time inspiration occurs so that laryngeal function can be correlated with
respiration. If significant laryngeal oedema is identified, dexamethasone should be administered
while the patient remains intubated.
· Emergency tracheostomy may be required but in the author's experience this is rarely the case.
Brachycephalic airway obstruction syndrome (BAOS)
Brachycephalic airway obstruction syndrome (BAOS) is the result of poor
conformation that predisposes certain dogs to airway obstruction. Breeds affected by
this condition include bulldogs, the Pekingese, pugs and the Boxer. Components of
BAOS include:
· Elongated soft palate
· Stenotic nares
· Everted laryngeal saccules.
Affected dogs often also have a degree of tracheal hypoplasia. Following emergency
stabilization as required, surgical intervention is usually necessary to improve the
dog's clinical status long-term.
Feline Upper Respiratory Tract Obstruction
respiratory tract dyspnoea. This is most commonly the result of a mass lesion (e.g.
laryngeal lymphoma, nasopharyngeal polyp), although laryngeal paralysis has also
been reported in cats. Although brachycephalic cats may have severe conformational
abnormalities, the author has not seen one of these cats present with an associated
effects of other disorders such as upper respiratory tract infection.
33
Haematological and haemostatic emergencies
Canine Immune-Mediated Haemolytic Anaemia (IMHA)
Theory refresher
Immune-mediated haemolytic anaemia (IMHA) is the result of red blood cell
   s         s
binding of immunoglobulin G (lgG) or IgM antibodies and complement to their
surface. Both extravascular (reticuloendothelial system) and intravascular (causes
haemoglobinaemia, haemoglobinuria) haemolysis may occur.
     o d     
cause is identified, and secondary IMHA, which is associated with an underlying
condition (Box 33.1). Primary IMHA is typically diagnosed in young or middle-aged
adult dogs but can occur in older dogs too. IMHA is especially common in certain
breeds (e.g. English springer spaniel, American Cocker Spaniel). These dogs were
previously classified as having primary IMHA although this classification may no
IMHA, the underlying condition may or may not persist at the time of presentation,
and may or may not be amenable to specific therapy. In the absence of useful
historical information (e.g. with respect to drug administration or vaccination),
thorough physical examination, thoracic and abdominal diagnostic imaging, urine
microbiology and additional investigations as appropriate are required to rule out an
underlying trigger for IMHA.
BOX 33.1 Underlying conditions potentially associated with immune-mediated
haemolytic anaemia
· Drugs - especially antibiotics (e.g. penicillins, cephalosporins, sulphonamides); also nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory agents, methimazole (cats)
· Vaccines - generally within 30 days of injections
· Infection:
- Viral (e.g. FeLV, FIV)
- Bacterial (e.g. leptospirosis, mycoplasmosis), various acute and chronic infections, especially of
urinary tract
- Parasitic (e.g. babesiosis, ehrlichiosis)
· Neoplasia
FeLV, feline leukaemia virus; FIV, feline immunodeficiency virus.
Hereditary erythrocyte enzyme defects should be kept in mind as possible
differential diagnoses  in  dogs of  affected breeds presenting  with  evidence of
haemolytic anaemia. Phosphofructokinase (PFK) deficiency occurs especially in the
English springer spaniel, Cocker Spaniel breeds, and mixed breed dogs. Pyruvate
kinase (PK) deficiency is most commonly reported in the Basenji as well as in several
other breeds including the Beagle, the West Highland White terrier, the Cairn terrier
and the miniature poodle.
Treatment
Medical therapy to decrease erythrocyte phagocytosis, complement activation and
anti-erythrocytic  antibody   production  is  essential  for  primary   IMHA  and
glucocorticoids are the mainstay of acute therapy. Other immunosuppressive agents
may be used in addition to, but not instead of, glucocorticoids (Box 33.2).
  s e  o n s  ss
success is significantly dependent on whether the inderlying condition persists and, if
so, whether or not it is amenable to treatment. Clearly with neoplastic conditions in
particular, it may not be possible or appropriate to treat the patient.
BOX 33.2 Immunosuppressive agents that may be considered in addition to
glucocorticoids in canine immune-mediated haemolytic anaemia (IMHA)
Although there is limited evidence for their efficacy in IMHA, the author typically uses one of 
these agents in all dogs with primary IMHA in an attempt to allow prednisolone therapy to be tapered
more quickly, thereby minimizing side effects. Azathioprine is the cheapest option and is therefore
used where possible. However, it likely has the slowest onset of action with a lag of 7-14 days and is
therefore started as early as possible. Mycophenolate mofetil and especially ciclosporin are more
 expensive but may have a quicker onset of action. They are therefore typically only used in cases in
         s e    e
cyclophosphamide.
Azathioprine: 2 mg/kg p.o. q 24 hr for up to 7-10 days, then q 48 hr long term; monitor for
myelosuppression and hepatotoxicity
Mycophenolate mofetil: 10-15 mg/kg p.o. q 12-24 hr
Ciclosporin: 5-10 mg/kg p.o. q 12-24 hr; monitor trough blood concentrations intermittently to
achieve effective but safe levels
Dogs with IMHA are at increased risk of thromboembolic complications, especially
pulmonary    thromboembolism  (causes
dyspnoea,
tachypnoea,  cyanosis).
Anticoagulant therapy is therefore used in addition to the immunosuppressive
therapy. However, there remains much to be clarified with respect to both coagulation
abnormalities in IMHA and the most effective preventative and therapeutic
treatments. At the time of writing, ultralow dose (0.5 mg/kg p.o. q 24 hr) aspirin
therapy is most widely recommended and discontinued at the same time as
glucocorticoid administration ceases.
Case example 1
Presenting Signs and Case History
A 4-year-old female neutered English springer spaniel dog presented with a 2-day history of
progressive lethargy, exercise intolerance and inappetence. The owner had noticed the dog passing
grossly discoloured urine (pigmenturia), prompting emergency presentation. The dog had last
received routine annual vaccination 6 months prior to presentation, and there was no recent history
of drug administration. There was no notable history of travel and no other significant history was
reported.
Major body system examination
On presentation the dog was ambulatory but weak and depressed. Cardiovascular
examination revealed a heart rate of 136 beats per minute with no murmur or gallop
sound heard. Peripheral pulses were hyperdynamic in quality without deficits, and
mucous membranes were very pale with a rapid capillary refill time. Respiratory rate
was 40 breaths per minute with a shallow pattern and lung auscultation was
appropriate for the rate and effort. Abdominal palpation was unremarkable and the
revealed normal faeces without evidence of melaena or fresh haemorrhage. Peripheral
lymph nodes were normal, and no other abnormalities were detected; in particular,
there was no evidence of jaundice.
Assessment
             
heart rate, peripheral pulse quality and mentation were not consistent with this. It
was therefore suspected that the pallor was predominantly related to anaemia.
         
with anaemia in this case. The dog was therefore suspected to be showing signs of
high index of suspicion for primary (idiopathic) IMHA. Mild pyrexia is a relatively
common finding in suuch cases.
Emergency database
An intravenous catheter was placed in a cephalic vein and blood obtained via the
(manual packed cell volume (PCV) 14%, reference range 37-55%) with raised plasma
total solids (78 g/l, reference range 49-71 g/l); however, the serum was icteric in
appearance. These findings were consistent with the suspicion of haemolytic
anaemia. An in-saline agglutination test was performed (Box 33.3) and found to be
strongly positive (Figure 33.1). Peripheral blood smear examination revealed a
strongly regenerative anaemia with marked polychromasia and anisocytosis and an
increase in nucleated red blood cells; marked spherocytosis was also identified. Platelet
numbers were adequate, and a moderate subjective left-shifted neutrophilia and a
BOX 33.3 In-saline agglutination test for autoagglutination
One or more drops of fresh blood (or blood from an EDTA tube) are placed on a glass slide and an
equal volume of normal saline added. The slide is gently rotated and then examined for evidence of
macroscopic agglutination after approximately 1 minute. The slide is then examined microscopically
as well (Figure 33.l). Saline is added to differentiate true agglutination from rouleaux formation.
Rouleaux are chains of red blood cells stacked like coins, and are especially common in cats and
animals with inflammation. They should be dissipated by the addition of saline.
(b)
Figuure33.1
Microscopic in-saline agglutination (a) x 100 and (b) x 200 magnification.
(Photographs courtesy of Kate English )
Clinical Tip
· In addition to documenting haemolytic anaemia, definitive diagnosis of IMHA requires marked
spherocytosis, spontaneous autoagglutination or a positive direct Coombs’ test to be identified. In
the author's experience, most dogs presenting as emergencies with clinically significant IMHA have
 autoagglutination and/or marked spherocytosis at the time of presentation. The diagnosis can usually
therefore be made on an emergency basis without the delay involved in awaiting the results of a
Coombs' test.
In addition to the emergency database, an in-house biochemistry profile was
performed that revealed hyperbilirubinaemia (total bilirubin 45 μmol/l, reference
range 2-10 μmol/l) and a mild increase in liver enzymes. Free catch urinalysis
revealed a specific gravity of 1.050 and dipstick analysis showed 3 + bilirubin and 2 +
haemoglobinuria; no bacteria were seen and there was a normal number of white
blood cells on sediment examination. In-house blood typing was performed (RapidVet-
H Canine DEA 1.1?; DMS Laboratories, New Jersey, USA) and the dog was suiccessfully
typed as DEA 1.1 positive.
Clinical Tip
· Autoagglutination may interfere with blood typing (and crossmatching) which may not therefore be
administered (see Ch. 40).
· If a blood transfusion cannot be performed, Oxyglobin? (see Ch. 4) may be used instead to provide
 oxygen-carrying capacity and improve clinical signs while allowing time for medical therapy to take
effect. Despite the small bag size of this product, low rates are used (1-2 ml/kg/hr in dogs) which
make this a practical option in small and medium size dogs. A total dose of 15-30 ml/kg is
administered depending on clinical response, resource availability and financial constraints.
Case management
A packed red blood cell transfusion was administered and the dog received a total of
approximately 10 ml/kg over 6 hours. Minimum intervention was performed in the
interim, and by the end of the transfusion the dog's cardiorespiratory and mental
status had improved significantly and predictably. Thoracic and abdominal
The dog was started on immunosuppressive therapy as follows:
u p sadde s1m op a se p I o s th  'ai y 3'o uosx -
vomiting, she was then switched on to prednisolone 2 mg/kg p.o. q 12 hr
· Azathioprine 2 mg/kg p.o. q 24 hr; dosing interval increased to every other day after
7-10 days.
 n   ( t b od y g'o) de  s s   'e 
reduce the risk of thromboembolic disease, and maintenance isotonic crystalloid
The dog made good clinical progress and was discharged after 5 days of
hospitalization at which time PCV was 29%, anaemia was moderately regenerative,
in-saline agglutination remained mildly positive, and hyperbilirubinaemia had
resolved. A comprehensive plan for on-going monitoring and adjustment of therapy
was agreed with the owner.
Feline Immune-Mediated Haemolytic Anaemia (IMHA)
Primary (idiopathic) IMHA is reportedly much less commonly in cats than it is in
dogs. No breed association has been reported and the possibility of PK deficiency as a
differential diagnosis should be borne in mind. This red blood cell enzymopathy has
been reported in Abyssinian, Somali and domestic short hair cats.
for dogs although it is noteworthy that identification of spherocytes in cats is more
difficult due to normal feline erythrocytes often lacking central pallor. Cats must be
blood typed and given type-specific fresh whole blood (see Ch. 40). If this is not
possible, Oxyglobin? (see Ch. 4) is especially useful as a substitute by providing
oxygen-carrying capacity in severely anaemic cats. Cats in general, and especially
   se   a      
a conservative 0.5-1.0 ml/kg/hr for the treatment of anaemia in euvolaemic cats.
Clinical Tip
* As with all anaemic cats, cats with IMHA are likely to be highly susceptible to stress and excessive
 stress may cause marked clinical deterioration. These cats should therefore be handled and
  n   s   sd a   s
• Topical local anaesthesia (see Ch. 5) should be used prior to venepuncture.
Azathioprine should not be administered to cats and chlorambucil (2 mg total dose
to glucocorticoid therapy.
Mycoplasma haemofelis
Mycoplasma haemofelis (previously Haemobartonella felis) infection is a cause of
IMHA in cats which may be addressed specifically. Although treatment does not
typically  clear  infection  completely,  parasitaemia  resolves  quickly  and  clinical
improvement occurs within a few days. Diagnosis typically requires a blood sample to
be submitted for polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay with some delay before the
 e          s
primary IMHA for possible mycoplasmosis until the PCR results are received.
    (        ) 
but may be problematic to administer enterally in cats that are anorexic, especially as
minimizing stress is essential in anaemic cats. If doxycycline is administered directly
by mouth, a small amount (5 ml) of water must be syringed straight after to prevent
the tablet becoming lodged in the oesophagus and causing a potentially serious
oesophagitis. Parenteral enrofloxacin (5 mg/kg slow i.v. diluted, s.c. (or p.o.) q 24 hr)
may be administered instead and is likely to be preferable in a number of these cats;
the potential for enrofloxacin to cause retinal toxicity and permanent blindness in cats
must not be overlooked but this has only been reported at higher doses.
to have mycoplasmosis but can be tapered more quickly than for primary IMHA.
Primary (Idiopathic) Immune-Mediated Thrombocytopenia (ITP)
Thrombocytopenia may be the result of an increase in platelet destruction or
consuimption, a decrease in platelet production, or sequestration. In many diseases, the
actual platelet couint reflects a combination of more than one of these processes
occuirring concurrently.
Caulses
Infectiouis diseases
physical  examination   findings  and   clinicopathological  abnormalities  beyond
thrombocytopenia alone. Examples include leptospirosis, feline leukaemia virus
(FeLV) infection, feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV) infection, ehrlichiosis,
babesiosis and rickettsiosis.
Neoplasia
Thrombocytopenia may occur in association with a number of tumours but is most
myeloma). Thrombocytopenia may also be the result of chemotherapeutic agents
employed in the treatment of neoplasia.
Imm une-mediated thrombocytopenia
ITP may be primary (idiopathic) or secondary to an infectious, inflammatory or
neoplastic process, as well as to a variety of drug therapies. ITP occurs as a result of
antibodies directed against platelet membrane antigens and subsequent phagocytosis
              
especially occurs in females and certain breeds (e.g. the Cocker Spaniel, poodles, the
Old English Sheepdog).
Clinical signs of ITP
   s        
epistaxis, gingival bleeding, melaena, vomiting and possible haematemesis (see Ch.
21). Physical examination may reveal petechiae and ecchymoses, evidence of
other nonspecific signs may be fouind.
Diagnosis of ITP
counts are typically less than 10 x 10° platelets/litre, and peripheral smear
examination may reveal no platelets at all or an average of less than 1 platelet per
high-power (x1oo) field. The diagnosis of ITP is routinely made on the basis of
identifying a thrombocytopenia of this severity in an animal with compati ble clinical
signs. Thereafter, investigations are performed to identify a primary cause and if one
cannot be found, a presuimptive diagnosis of ITP is made.
Occasionally dogs with ITP are also found to have evidence of immune-mediated
  s          
syndrome. Nevertheless, management of these cases is the same as for ITP and IMHA.
Treatment of ITP
  n        s
and is similar to treatment for IMHA; additional immunosuppressive therapies may be
included  (see Box 33.2).  Animals with secondary  immune-mediated platelet
destruction may also require more short-term corticosteroid therapy in addition to
specific treatment for the primary disorder.
Vincristine may be uised to promote the release of functional platelets from the bone
       n       n  
improvement on corticosteroid alone. Human intravenous IgG has also been used but
is very expensive and has limited availability.
Packed red blood cell or fresh whole blood transfusions may be required in animals
with sufficiently severe gastrointestinal haemorrhage. Platelet transfusions are often
discussed and may be provided using fresh whole blood, platelet-rich plasma or
platelet concentrates. The availability of the latter in particular is likely to increase
the transfused platelets are also susceptible to anti body binding and will very likely
have a short lifespan of less than 1 day and perhaps as short as a few minutes only.
The use of platelet transfusions as a short-term, potentially life-saving measure in dogs
with severe bleeding may become more practical in the future.
Clinical Tip
carrying solution) is provided, if required, to allow enough time for a response to occur (perhaps 2-
7 days, can be longer).
· Owners must be warned that, although uncommon, dogs with ITP may suffer a bleed into a vital
            n      
Canine Angiostrongylus vasorum Infection
Theory refresher
Angiostrongylus vasorum (canine lungworm) is a metastrongylid helminth infecting
domestic dogs as well as foxes. Molluscs (snails, slugs) act as intermediate hosts.
p            
ventricle and pulmonary vasculature where they mature to adulthood. However,
extensive aberrant larval migration into many body organs and tissues has been
are continuously being identified in new areas both within the United Kingdom and
globally.
Clinical Tip
  s n a s    n i  a
 excluded as a possible differential diagnosis on the basis of geographical location alone as infections
Clinical signs
A wide variety of clinical signs has been reported but most dogs diagnosed with
clinically significant disease have respiratory signs, bleeding disorders or neurological
signs. Ocular signs, including intraocular larval migration, have also been reported
relatively frequently. However, aberrant systemic dissemination of the larvae means
that additional syndromes as a result of haemorrhage, granulomatous inflammation
or infarction at other sites may well be recognized more commonly in the future.
S  n s        
and to larval migration through the parenchyma. Over time, pulmonary hypertension
may develop, resulting in right-sided cardiac changes (cor pulmonale).
    e o  s  s  s
migration through, or bleeding into, the central nervous system; both abnormalities
depression through to coma, behavioural changes, seizures and loss of vision related
to brain involvement; and spinal and neck pain, ataxia, and paresis or plegia related
to spinal cord involvement.
The mechanism(s) of coagulation defects due to Angiostrongylus vasorum remain
to be clarified. Although many dogs have variably abnormal coagulation tests, the
author has certainly seen cases in which routinely available means of evaluating
activated partial thromboplastin time) have been within normal limits despite clinical
               
dimers/fibrin degradation products (FDPs) and von Willebrand factor levels have been
measured. A chronic intravascular consumptive coagulopathy (chronic disseminated
intravascuilar coagulation  (DlC)) has been suggested as a mechanism by some
authors.
S          
presentations of bleeding, including:
· Excessive bleeding following a surgical procedure - often an elective neutering
procedure in a young dog
· Excessive bleeding following trauma or at venepuncture sites
· Ecchymoses/petechiae
· Haemoptysis
· Spontaneous subcuutaneous haematomas
· Spontaneous intraocular, episcleral or subconjunctival haemorrhage
· Gastrointestinal haemorrhage
· Spontaneous haemoa bdomen
· Spontaneous haemothorax (larvae may be identified in the pleural fluid).
Although neoplastic rupture is the most common cause of spontaneous
haemoabdomen, this typically occurs in older dogs. Angiostrongylosis should therefore
be considered especially in young dogs presenting with spontaneous haemoabdomen
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of canine angiostrongylosis is currently made most reliably by faecal
analysis or cytology on airway samples (transtracheal wash, tracheal wash via
endotracheal tube or bronchoalveolar lavage). In-house faecal smear examination
(Box 33.4) allows diagnosis to be made on an emergency basis and, in the author's
 s  s s n     s  s 
need to be examined (see Figure 33.2). Faecal analysis via Baermann faecal flotation
is currently the most reliable method available although this clearly involves some
delay before results are received. In the author's opinion, treatment should be
implemented before results are received in cases in which there is a high index of
performed.  Serology  for  detecting  antibodies  against Angiostrongylus  vasorum
         
larvae
 In an emergency scenario, faeces for examination is often obtained via manual removal from the
rectum and as such, only a small amount may be available. In such cases, it is most appropriate to
smear the faeces directly on to one or more slides, add a small amount of water to the slide, cover
the slide with coverslips (if available), and examine microscopically using a low ( × 20) magnification
with the condenser down.
If a larger amount of faeces is available, the faeces should be placed in a container to which water
is then added. The solution is mixed thoroughly and multiple smears are then made for microscopic
examination.
Angiostrongylus vasorum larvae have a characteristic appearance and should not be mistaken for
hairs which are straight with a line down the middle (Figure 33.2).
Figure33.2
 Curled up Angiostrongylus vasorum larva (centre), not to be confused with straight
hairs with a line down the middle (lower down).
Treatment
Treatment of canine angiostrongylosis is described in Case example 2. In addition.
 s         
angiostrongylosis and may be sufficiently severe as to require specific intervention
(0.9% sodium chloride diuresis, furosemide). Hypercalcaemia is thought to be due to
granulomatous inflammation and should resolve fully with successful anthelminthic
therapy.
Case example 2
Presenting Signs and Case History
A 2-year-old male neutered English Mastiff dog presented with a 3-day history of progressive
respiratory distress, coughing (haemoptysis), excessive panting, exercise intolerance, lethargy and
inappetence. The dog was known to be a scavenger but no other significant previous history was
reported. Deworming therapy had not been administered since puppyhood.
Clinical Tip
· Although angiostrongylosis can be diagnosed in older dogs, the majority of dogs presenting with
clinical disease are young adults. The disease has been diagnosed in dogs as young as a few months
of age.
· There is no reported breed predilection although many of the reported cases in the United
Kingdom have been in Staffordshire bull terriers.
Major body system examination
On presentation the dog was ambulatory but weak. Cardiovascular examination
revealed a heart rate of 135 beats per minute with good peripheral pulses; heart
sounds could not be reliably heard. Mucous membranes were pink with a normal
capillary refill time. The dog was panting but there was also a notable increase in
respiratory  effort  and lung sounds  were diffusely  harsh bilaterally.  Abdominal
palpation was compromised by the dog's size but no obvious abnormalities were
detected. Rectal temperature was markedly elevated at 39.8°C but rectal examination
was otherwise unremarkable. As much faeces as possible was removed manually at
this time for further analysis. No other abnormalities were detected on physical
examination. Pulse oximetry was attempted but a reliable measurement could not be
obtained. Body weight was 75 kg.
Assessment
The dog was identified as being in respiratory distress and the degree of respiratory
noise obscured auscultation of the heart sounds. However, it was not felt appropriate
H          os 
examination and it was therefore suspected that the dog's respiratory compromise was
more likely to be of primary respiratory rather than cardiac origin. The history of
haemoptysis provided further support for this assessment; while coughing is often the
result of cardiac disease, haemoptysis would be considered unusual. The elevated
rectal temperature could have been the result of both hyperthermia secondary to
respiratory distress, especially given the dog's breed, and pyrexia resulting from the
underlying disorder.
Emergency database
into one of the cephalic veins. Blood was collected via the catheter for an emergency
database that revealed mild anaemia (manual PCV 32%, reference range 37-55%)
with raised serum total solids (80 g/l, reference range 49-71 g/l). Peripheral blood
smear evaluation was suiggestive of a mildly regenerative anaemia (based on the
degree of polychromasia and anisocytosis - see Ch. 3) and showed adequate platelet
numbers, a subjective moderate mature neutrophilia and a subjective mild
eosinophilia. The regenerative anaemia was suspected to be the result of blood loss.
with serum total solids being increased as a result of hyperglobulinaemia, the latter
being relatively common in angiostrongylosis. Facilities were not availa ble to measure
either clotting times or serum calcium concentration.
While the dog continued to receive oxygen supplementation, a direct faecal smear
was examined and found to contain a large number of Angiostrongylus vasorum
larvae (Figure 33.2). The remainder of the faecal sample was submitted for a
Baermann faecal flotation to be performed; this was not to confirm the diagnosis that
had already been made, but rather to assess more accurately the severity of the worm
burden and provide a means of more reliably monitoring response to therapy.
Case management
infestation was made. As the dog was very amena ble, thoracic radiographs were taken
supplementation throughout and revealed a generalized interstitial to alveolar lung
pattern (Figure 33.3). The distribution of the lung changes was considered to be most
consistent with parasitic pneuimonia
(a)
(b)
Figuire3
33.3
(a) Right lateral and (b) dorsoventral thoracic radiographs from a dog with
Clinical Tip
· Although there are no pathognomic radiographic changes for Angiostrongylus vasorum infection,
peripheral and/or multifocal alveolar changes are highly suggestive, especially in a young dog with
compatible clinical signs. The distribution of these changes is not a common feature of other causes
 of alveolar disease (e.g. pulmonary oedema).
· Bronchial thickening is also relatively common in dogs with angiostrongylosis.
The dog was maintained initially on nasal oxygen supplementation using bilateral
indwelling nasal oxygen catheters (see Ch. 6). Given the severity of the parasite
burden, he was treated with both milbemycin oxime/praziquantel (Milbemax?,
Novartis Animal Health, Frimley, UK) at a dose of three tablets (approximately equal
to 0.5 mg/kg milbemycin and 125 mg/kg praziquantel) as a single dose once weekly
for 4 weeks, and imidacloprid/moxidectin (Advocate Spot-on solution?, Bayer plc,
 9 pu pdn y on)  9 go aop aus 5 se ( m
           
            
inflammatory reaction associated with dying Angiostrongylus vasorum larvae.
s   e sa  n    n
over a period of 48 hours. He was eventually discharged after being hospitalized for 7
days with instructions to keep him strictly rested and to prevent scavenging, and went
on to make a full recovery. His owner was advised both regarding on-going
prophylaxis once treatment had been completed and with respect to treatment of the
other dog in the household due to a high likelihood of infection in that dog as well.
Clinical Tip
· Until relatively recently there were no licensed veterinary products for treatment of canine
Angiostrongylus vasorum infection and the off-licence use of fenbendazole was common practice.
· Although licensed for other types of lungworm in dogs and other species, fenbendazole is not
licensed at the time of writing for canine Angiostrongylus vasorum infection. However, two
veterinary products (Milbemax?, Novartis Animal Health; Advocate Spot-on solution?, Bayer plc) are
now licensed for the treatment of canine angiostrongylosis in the United Kingdom and should
therefore be used instead of fenbendazole in accordance with the cascade for drug prescription.
· The author has on occasion continued to use fenbendazole off-licence with owner consent in dogs
with heavy parasite burdens where a satisfactory response to a licensed product was not felt to be
achieved.
Clinical Tip
• Administration of exogenous glucocorticoids is relatively common practice in the treatment of
 canine angiostrongylosis. Death of the worms in response to appropriate anthelminthic treatment
may cause a temporary worsening of inflammation in affected tissues and associated clinical
deterioration. Glucocorticoids are therefore typically administered to dogs in which an inflammatory
reaction to the dying worms may be of particular concern - namely those with significant
      a   -     
regardless of the primary syndrome.
• The author has most commonly administered parenteral dexamethasone (o.1 mg/kg i.v. q 24 hr) for
example for 3-5 days, but oral prednisolone (0.7 mg/kg p.o. q 24 hr) has also been used. Longer
courses may be required and a decision should be made on an individual case basis.
34
Endocrine emergencies
Canine Primary Hypoadrenocorticism (Addison's Disease)
Theory refresher
The adrenal cortex produces corticosteroid hormones, including mineralocorticoids
(primarily aldosterone) and glucocorticoids (primarily cortisol). Naturally occurring
primary hypoadrenocorticism in dogs and cats is thought to be the result of immune-
mediated destruction of both adrenal cortices and is the focuis of this discission
Secondary adrenocortical failure may also occur, either naturally due to diseases of
the brain or as a result of chronic exogenous corticosteroid administration (i.e.
iatrogenic causes).
Primary   hypoadrenocorticism   classically    manifests   with    signs   of   both
mineralocorticoid  and glucocorticoid  deficiency.  Lack  of  aldosterone results  in
hyponatraemia (and hypochloraemia) with concurrent extracellular fluid volume
 s    ss  s    e s 
inadequate dietary intake. Reduced glomerular filtration rate (GFR) results in prerenal
multifactorial and the most deleterious effects occur on cardiac function.
Cortisol affects almost every tissue in the body, and is significantly involved in
haemodynamics and the cardiovascular system, metabolism, inflammation and
immunological function, and gastrointestinal integrity. Its production increases
during times of physiological stress. Lack of secretion may result in gastrointestinal
signs, reduced mentation and activity levels, reduced energy metabolism and fasting
hypoglycaemia, and especially impaired tolerance to stress.
insufficiency.
Clinical signs
Clinical signs are nonspecific and variable in both nature and severity. Most dogs are
chronically affected. However, owners may not have noticed more subtle
abnormalities or may not have considered them significant. Thus some dogs are only
presented for veterinary attention when they suffer an acute Addisonian crisis.
Clinical signs reported in primary hypoadrenocorticism are listed in Box 34.1. These
signs are vague and nonspecific and may also occur in a large number of other
differential diagnosis list for all dogs presenting with any of these signs until a
definitive diagnosis is made.
 BOX 34.1 Clinical signs reported in dogs with primary hypoadrenocorticism
· Depression
· Inappetence/anorexia
· Lethargy
· Vomiting (regurgitation)
· Weight loss
· Weakness, usually episodic
· Diarrhoea (including possible haematochezia or melaena)
· Waxing and waning illness
* Polyuria, polydipsia
· Shaking, shivering or restlessness
· Episodic collapse or syncope
 Abdominal discomfort
Case example 1
Presenting Signs and Case History
A 4-year-old female neutered bearded collie dog presented with a 3-day history of lethargy that
had progressed to noticeable weakness, and occasional vomiting. Her owners reported that her
appetite had been variable over the preceding 3 months and that she had had occasional episodes of
diarrhoea. No other significant history was reported.
Clinical Tip
* Primary hypoadrenocorticism is diagnosed most commonly in young to middle-age female dogs and
breeds at increased risk include Poodle breeds, the Great Dane, the West Highland White terrier (and
other terrier breeds), the bearded collie and the Rottweiler. Mixed breed dogs are most commonly
affected.
Major body system examination
revealed a heart rate of 80 beats per minute with mildly weak femoral pulses and even
weaker dorsal pedal pulses. Mucous membranes were pink with a capillary refill time
of 2 seconds, and the dog's extremities were cool to the touch. Respiratory
examination and abdominal palpation were unremarkable. Rectal temperature was
be in sinus rhythm.
Assessment
The dog's cardiovascular examination was suggestive of moderate hypovolaemia and
her apparently normal heart rate was therefore considered to be an inappropriate
bradycardia. Together with her signalment and history, this finding prompted a very
high index of suspicion for hypoadrenocorticism (Addison's disease) with the
bradycardia thought to be the result of hyperkalaemia and impaired response to
endogenous catecholamines due to glucocorticoid deficiency.
Emergency database
An intravenous catheter was placed in a cephalic vein and blood obtained via the
catheter for an emergency database. This revealed remarkable findings of moderate to
severe hyponatraemia (128.5 mmol/l, reference range 140.0-153.0 mmol/l), moderate
hyperkalaemia (7.0 mmol/l, reference range 3.6-4.6 mmol/), mild hypoglycaemia
(4.0 mmol/l, reference range 4.2-6.6 mmol/l), mild azotaemia (blood urea nitrogen 20
mmol/l, reference range 3-10 mmol/l; creatinine 250 μmol/l, reference range 50-140
umol/l) and mild hyperphosphataemia (2.90 mmol/l, reference range 0.94-2.13
mmol/l). The sodium to potassium ratio was markedly reduced (18.4 : 1, normal range
an absence of a neutrophilia and lack of an obvious lymphopenia (i.e. absence of a
stress leucogram); a subjective eosinophilia was not noted.
Clinical Tip
* Serum sodium to potassium ratio is often, but not always, reduced in primary hypoadrenocorticism.
The majority of dogs presenting in an acute crisis will have electrolyte abnormalities but electrolytes
are normal in a small percentage (atypical primary hypoadrenocorticism). Other causes of
hyperkalaemia and/or hyponatraemia should also be considered as appropriate (see Ch. 3)
 Hypercalcaemia (typically mild) and hypoalbuminaemia are also reported in some cases.
Clinical Tip
 Many dogs with primary hypoadrenocorticism have isosthenuric urine (specific gravity 1.007-
1.015). Increased urine specific gravity is usually expected in the face of prerenal azotaemia;
however, chronic urinary sodium loss disturbs the normal medullary concentration gradient (renal
medullary washout) and therefore impairs water reabsorption.
Although not identified in this case, bone marrow suppression due to
hypocortisolism can result in anaemia that may be mild to moderate in severity. A
normocytic normochromic non-or minimally regenerative anaemia is identified.
However, manual packed cell volume (PcV) at presentation may also be affected by
both haemoconcentration (increases PCV) and potentially also gastrointestinal blood
loss (decreases PcV).
Case management
Clinical Tip
· An acute Addisonian crisis is one of the true canine emergencies with a very real risk of rapid
deterioration and death. Death as a result of an acute Addisonian crisis is more likely to be due to
hypovolaemia and cardiovascular collapse than the effects of hyperkalaemia. While hyperkalaemia
may be common in dogs with Addison's disease, in the author's experience specific intervention
beyond fluid therapy (causes dilution and promotes kaliuresis) is rarely indicated.
· Isotonic crystalloid fluid therapy for hypovolaemia is therefore the most important intervention.
There is ongoing debate regarding the relative merits of 0.9% sodium chloride (normal,
 s s ns  n a a s 
sodium lactate). Ultimately which of these is chosen is likely to be inconsequential in the vast
majority of cases and starting fluid therapy is the priority.
The findings of the emergency database strongly supported the suspected diagnosis
of classic hypoadrenocorticism. The dog was started on intravenous 0.9% sodium
chloride (normal, physiological saline). A conservative bolus of 20 ml/kg was
administered over 20 minutes and a constant infusion of 6 ml/kg/hr was then
provided. As the dog was clinically stable, an adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH)
stimulation  test was performed over 1 hour  prior to the administration of
dexamethasone (o.5 mg/kg i.v. q 6). As hypoglycaemia was only mild,
supplementation was not provided.
Clinical Tip
· A variety of exogenous glucocorticoid preparations may be used to treat an acute Addisonian crisis.
Some authors prefer the use of hydrocortisone or prednisolone as these agents have some
mineralocorticoid activity but their clinical superiority over dexamethasone remains controversial.
· Intravenous therapy is essential in these cases and injectable dexamethasone is the most widely
  e ad  a  s a ' ea ia  n 
test prior to glucocorticoid administration but it is noteworthy that dexamethasone is the only
routinely used agent that does not react with the cortisol assay, thereby increasing the measured
concentration. Dexamethasone can therefore be administered before completion of the test.
· The recommended dose of dexamethasone is 0.5 mg/kg i.v. q 2-6 hr initially and then 0.05-0.1
mg/kg i.v. q 8-12 hr once the patient is stable and until oral medication is possible. Dose
recommendations for other glucocorticoid preparations can be found in Appendix 1.
By the following day, the dog's serum potassium concentration was within normal
limits and only mild hyponatraemia persisted. The dog had made good clinical
progress, becoming noticeably brighter and eating well without vomiting. She was
started on oral mineralocorticoid (fludrocortisone 0.01 mg/kg p.o. q 12 hr) and
   s (     o  
of the ACTH stimulation test received subsequently confirmed the suspected diagnosis
(cortisol concentration both prior to and following administration of synthetic
adrenocorticotrophin was less than 27.6 nmol/l).
The dog was discharged 3 days after initial presentation on oral medication as
above. A good deal of time was spent educating the owner on the disease, including
provision of a client education leaflet, and a comprehensive plan for ongoing
management was agreed. The owner was advised that the dog had a good prognosis
with normal life expectancy as long as lifelong appropriate management was
provided.
Clinical Tip
· Thoracic radiography was not performed in the case described here. Changes secondary to severe
hypovolaemia (especially microcardia and narrowed caudal vena cava) are relatively common in
dogs presenting in an acute Addisonian crisis. However, these findings are not specific to this
disorder and may also result from other causes of hypovolaemia.
· Megaoesophagus is occasionally identified and resolves quickly with stabilization. The exact
pathogenesis remains unclear but may be related to muscle weakness.
Feline Primary Hypoadrenocorticism
Both primary and secondary hypoadrenocorticism are considered rare in cats. Clinical
signs and physical examination findings are nonspecific, and clinico-pathological
findings are similar to those in dogs. An acute crisis is managed in the same way as it
is in dogs; however, as is often the case, cats tend to take longer to show noticeable
clinical improvement (3-5 days in cats versus a matter of hours often in dogs).
Dia betic Ketoacidosis (DKA)
Theory refresher
Diabetes mellitus is due to relative or absolute insulin deficiency and results in
bodies (acetoacetate, β-hydroxybutyrate and acetone) are derived from hepatic
oxidation of free fatty acids and used as an energy source by multiple tissues during
periods of glucose deficiency. However, excessive ketone body production, as occurs in
uncontrolled diabetes mellitus, results in hyperketonaemia, ketosis and metabolic
acidosis.  In addition to insulin deficiency and resistance, counter-regulatory
hormones (e.g. adrenaline (epinephrine), noradrenaline (norepinephrine), glucagon,
cortisol) may also play a role in the pathogenesis.
There is a spectrum from ketonuric animals that are otherwise relatively well,
      e    s
metabolic acidosis and signs of systemic illness (diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA)). The
        
hormone production in addition to other associated adverse effects. DKA is diagnosed
most often in middle-aged to older male cats and female dogs.
BOX 34.2 Common concurrent disorders in small animals with diabetic
ketoacidosis
 Acute/chronic pancreatitis
· Bacterial infection - especially urinary tract infection
· Viral infection (cats)
· Hepatic lipidosis (cats)
· Cholangiohepatitis (especially cats)
* Chronic renal insufficiency
· Other endocrine disorders - hyperadrenocorticism (especially dogs); hypothyroidism (dogs);
dioestrus; acromegaly (cats)
· Exogenous glucocorticoid administration
* Neoplasia
· Pyometra
Obligatory osmotic diuresis, excessive renal and gastrointestinal water and
electrolyte loss, severe metabolic acidosis, hyperosmolality, and dehydration and
hypovolaemia are characteristic of DKA.
Treatment considerations
DKA is most often diagnosed in animals without a prior diagnosis of diabetes mellitus.
These animals will have either been subclinical for the diabetes mellitus or tolerating
their clinical signs until clinical decompensation occurs as a result of another
disorder. Mortality is often related to the presence, nature and severity of a concurrent
disorder.
The importance of having a very thorough and informed conversation with owners
cannot be stressed enough following a diagnosis of DKA. Owners need to be made
aware of the intensive and often prolonged management required in trying to stabilize
patients with DKA. The clinical course can be highly unpredictable depending on the
concurrent disorder and the cost implications of the management required should be
stressed. Assuming it is possible to stabilize the patient, owners also need to be willing
and able to provide lifelong care for a pet with diabetes mellitus, and again the
practical and cost implications of this should be discussed, along with the possibility
of recurrence of DKA; recurrence is more common in cats.
         
monitoring. These animals often have multiple metabolic, electrolyte and acid-base
glucose, potassium and phosphorus supplementation. Multiple blood samples are
required for regular monitoring and the use of a central venous catheter is often
common and feeding tube placement may be necessary. Finally, extensive
investigations may be required to identify any concurrent disorder(s).
With all of this in mind, the author is of the opinion that if finances allow, these
cases should be referred for specialist care once the diagnosis is made. In the author's
 n             
financial expenses by attempting to manage these cases without adequate facilities or
intensive management than those with DKA and may be satisfactorily managed
without referral. The reader is directed to other texts for information regarding the
management of these cases.
Case example 2
Presenting Signs and Case History
A 7-year-old male entire Miniature Doberman Pinscher dog presented with a several day history of
vomiting, polyuria/polydipsia, anorexia and progressive weight loss. He had also started to tremble
on the day of presentation. No other significant history was reported.
Major body system examination
On presentation the dog was ambulatory but markedly depressed. Cardiovascular
examination revealed a heart rate of 160 beats per minute with no murmur heard.
Femoral pulses were mildly hyperdynamic and dorsal pedal pulses were readily
palpable; no pulse deficits were detected. Mucous membranes were pinker than normal
with a capillary refill time of 1 second. The dog was panting but respiratory
examination was appropriate for the rate and effort. Mild discomfort was detected on
       a      
mildly pyrexic (rectal temperature 39.4°C). Severe dehydration (estimated at 10%) was
suspected on the basis of very dry oral mucous membranes and severely reduced skin
turgor.
Assessment
The dog  was assessed as being mildly hypovolaemic  which was suspected
predominantly to be the result of severe dehydration. The tachycardia was likely to be
multifactorial in origin, representing a combination of hypovolaemia, pyrexia and
abdominal discomfort.
Emergency database
An intravenous catheter was placed in a cephalic vein and blood obtained via the
catheter for an emergency database that showed a number of abnormalities. Manual
PCV was 39% (reference range 37-55%); however, plasma total solids (TS) were
that the dog was anaemic but PCV was increased at presentation due to
haemoconcentration. The dog was also found to be severely hyperglycaemic (blood
glucose 29.6 mmol/l, reference range 4.20-6.60 mmol/l). The serum from one of the
haematocrit tubes filled for PCV/TS measurement was therefore used to measure
serum ketones (see Ch. 3) with a urine dipstick and was found to be strongly positive.
Mild to moderate azotaemia was identified (blood urea nitrogen 25 mmol/l
reference range 3-10 mmol/l; creatinine 300 μmol/1, reference range 50-140 μmol/l)
that was suspected to be predominantly prerenal in origin. Serum electrolytes were
included in the emergency database and the dog was found to be moderately
hyponatraemic (132.0 mmol/l, reference range 140.0-153.0 mmol//) before correction
for glucose (Box 34.3) with a mild corrected hypochloraemia. Serum potassium
concentration was within the normal range at presentation. Peripheral blood smear
examination revealed a neutrophilic degenerate left shift (i.e. increased number of
band neuitrophils despite a subjectively normal total neuitrophil count) and no obvious
red blood cell regeneration. A serum SNAP? cPL" Test (Idexx Reference Laboratories,
Wetherby, UK) was performed to measure canine pancreas-specific lipase and found
to be abnormal, suggesting acute pancreatitis.
BOX 34.3 Sodium in diabetic ketoacidosis
 For several reasons, total body sodium content is almost always decreased in patients with DKA;
however, serum sodium concentration is not representative of total body sodium.
 In addition, insulin deficiency causes poor cellular uptake of glucose leading to increased
extracellular (i.e. interstitial and intravascular) glucose concentration. This creates a transcellular
osmotic gradient such that water moves out of the cells and causes a decrease in intravascular sodium
concentration (pseudohyponatraemia). In general, for each 3.4 mmol/l increase in blood glucose
concentration above the reference range, serum sodium concentration decreases by 1.o mmol/l.
Therefore, the corrected serum sodium concentration in this case example (Case example 2) was
132.0 + ((29.6 - 6.6)/3.4) = 138.7 mmol/l.
A urine sample was obtained prior to commencing fluid therapy via urethral
catheterization performed using aseptic technique. Dipstick analysis revealed marked
glucosuria and ketonuria, mild proteinuria and no haematuria. Urine specific gravity
S           
increases specific gravity by 0.008 to 0.010) but even after correction for glucosuria,
the specific gravity was still considered to be increased. This was consistent with
prerenal azotaemia. Urinary sediment was considered benign but the sample was
submitted for microbiology.
Clinical Tip
· Ideally urine specific gravity is measured prior to starting fluid therapy but fluid therapy should
not be withheld if a urine sample cannot be obtained quickly - commencing treatment is the priority
and urine output should increase as hypovolaemia and dehydration are corrected.
Case management
On the basis of the information available a diagnosis of DKA with acute pancreatitis
was made. The dog was given a 10 ml/kg bolus of buffered lactate Ringer's solution
over 30 minutes and the rate then reduced to 6 ml/kg/hr to correct dehydration over
24 hr. Buprenorphine (0.02 mg/kg i.v. q 6 hr) was also administered.
Clinical Tip
· Isotonic crystalloid fluid therapy is very much the first priority in the management of patients with
diabetic ketoacidosis. Although insulin administration is ultimately essential, it should not be
commenced until hypovolaemia is treated and preferably rehydration has been ongoing for a period
  a          
blood glucose concentration.
· It is not uncommon for insulin therapy to be withheld for several hours (2-6 hr) in appropriate
cases. The choice of isotonic crystalloid is unlikely to make any significant difference clinically.
A lengthy discussion was had with the dog's owner about the diagnosis that had
been made and the implications both in terms of short-and long-term management.
The owner was both willing and felt able to provide lifelong management for the dog's
diabetes mellitus and given the need for 24-hour intensive care and frequent
monitoring, it was decided to refer the dog for specialist care shortly after
presentation.
latrogenic Hypocalcaemia following Bilateral Thyroidectomy
Hypoparathyroidism is the most significant postoperative complication associated
with bilateral thyroidectomy. It occurs if the parathyroid glands are either
devascularized, or accidentally injured or removed. Mild postoperative hypocalcaemia
is common following bilateral thyroidectomy but emergency treatment may be
required if the cat becomes symptomatic.
Clinical Tip
· Maintenance of normal calcium homeostasis typically returns, although it can take several days to
months. This may be through recovery of parathyroid function or via nonparathyroid hormone-
related mechanisms.
Hypocalcaemia develops within 1-5 days following surgery and associated clinical
 include  anorexia,   weakness,   depression,  vocalization,
signs
may
nervous/restless/aggressive behaviour, facial rubbing, ataxia, stiffness, muscle
twitching or tremors, tetany and generalized seizures. Third eyelid prolapse may occur
in cats and cardiovascular abnormalities may also be identified.
In the blood, calcium is found in three forms: ionized, protein bound and complexed
(e.g. with phosphate, bicarbonate). Ionized calcium is the biologically active form and
cats  showing  signs  of hypocalcaemia  will have  reduced  ionized calcium
concentration. Clinical signs do not occur if ionized calcium concentration is normal.
However, measurement of total rather than ionized calcium is more widely available.
A correction formula involving albumin for conversion of total calcium to ionized
calcium is no longer recommended for use and is definitely not valid in cats. Although
total calcium may not reliably correlate with ionized calcium concentration, in a cat
with appropriate clinical signs and measured total hypocalcaemia following bilateral
thyroidectomy, it is reasonable to assume that ionized calcium will also be reduced
and to instigate treatment immediately (Box 34.4). The severity of clinical signs
should dictate the aggressiveness of the treatment provided.
BOX 34.4 Treatment of hypocalcaemia
Acute therapy
Calcium gluconate 10% solution (100 mg calcium gluconate/ml, approximately 9 mg elemental
 calcium/ml): give 0.5-1.5 ml/kg i.v. bolus over 5-20 minutes, repeat until signs resolve
* Equivalent to 50-150 mg calcium gluconate/kg (or 4.5-13.4 mg elemental calcium/kg)
· Monitor for bradycardia; electrocardiogram monitoring recommended
Subacute therapy
Calcium gluconate 10% solution: administer 0.3-0.6 ml/kg/hr constant rate infusion (CRI)
* Equivalent to 30-60 mg calcium gluconate/kg/hr (or 2.7-5.4 mg elemental calcium/kg/hr)
· Dilute with 0.9% sodium chloride (normal, physiological saline); using buffered lactated Ringer's
solution for dilution may result in calcium precipitation
Chronic oral therapy
Calcium: 15-100 mg elemental calcium/kg q 24 hr (typically divided into 2-4 equal doses)
· Usually tapered while continuing with more long-term vitamin D therapy
 Calcium carbonate is preferred as it contains the highest concentration of elemental calcium, so
reducing the number of tablets to be administered
Vitamin D
• Dihydrotachysterol: 0.01-0.03 mg/kg p.o. q 24-48 hr
• Alfacalcidol: 0.01-0.05 μg/kg p.o. q 24 hr
* Calcitriol: 0.01-0.03 μg/kg p.o. q 24 hr
Notes:
Serum calcium concentration should be monitored daily initially during hospitalization or more
frequently as dictated by clinical status.
Calcium chloride can be used instead of calcium gluconate but carries a greater risk of significant
tissue irritation if administered perivascularly and is therefore not preferred.
 1 mg elemental calcium is equivalent to 11.2 mg calcium gluconate, 7.7 mg calcium lactate and 2.5
mg calcium carbonate.
35
common and represent some of the conditions with
which many clinicians are both least familiar and
confident. Serious ocular disorders should be treated as
true emergencies as delayed management may in some
cases result in permanent loss of vision or of an eye;
many of the emergency conditions are also associated
with pain that is often severe and must be addressed as
quickly as possible. Referral to a more highly qualified
ophthalmologist is appropriate in many instances and
part of the role of the primary clinician is to
differentiate the cases that require urgent referral from
those in which more delayed referral may be
acceptable. The primary clinician should be familiar
with appropriate stabilization and early treatment that
may be required prior to referral.
Clinical Tip
• In the author's experience, it can be difficult to arrange emergency referral to an ophthalmologist
in the evenings and on weekends. However, a number are happy to provide telephone advice and this
 may be facilitated to an extent by making use of increasingly available technologies to send high
quality photographs.
· Ophthalmology is one of the medical disciplines where being practised at performing thorough
 examinations, having confidence in one's findings, and having access to adequate resources to refer
to is essential.
Clinical Tip
· Many ocular emergencies are traumatic in origin. As always, it is essential to examine and stabilize
the major body systems first before concentrating on the injured eye(s) (see Ch. 1). In particular,
   a  ns m os aq  s  n
hypertension (see Ch. 28).
· Many animals with severe ocular injuries require sedation or general anaesthesia for proper
examination and possible surgical intervention. These animals must be stabilized first, even if this
requires a delay of 24-48 hours (or more); while delayed management of the eye may result in loss
of vision or of the eye, inadequate stabilization of severe abnormalities of the major body systems
may result in death.
· Topical anaesthesia can greatly facilitate conscious examination in some cases and suitable
noninvasive interim measures (such as topical lubrication and antibiosis) should be implemented for
the eye as appropriate.
An extensive discussion of the common ocular emergencies is beyond the scope of
this book and the reader is referred to other more authoritative texts, including the
ophthalmology book in this series. A summary of the findings and treatment for
common ocular emergencies is provided in Table 35.1 and use of an Elizabethan collar
is typically indicated.
Table 35.1 Summary of findings and treatment for common ocular emergencies
Disorder
Cause(s)
Examination findings
Emergency treatment and comments
Traumatic injury
Painful red eye
Acute anterior
Topical:
uveitis
Systemicinfectious disease
Miotic pupil (iridocyclospasm)
Corticosteroid (anti-inflammatory)
Lens-induced (cataract,
Aqueous flare (causes loss of
Atropine（mydriatic,cycloplegic)
luxation)
clarity of anterior chamber)
Antibiosis
Immune-mediated
Conjunctival hyperaemia
Systemic:
Neoplasia (e.g.lymphoma)
Scleral orepiscleral vascular
Possible corticosterold or NSAlA
Idiopathic
congestion
Opioidif required
Abnormal iris
Treatment of underlying cause if
±Loss of vision
identified
±Hypopyon,hyphaema
Reduced10P（<10mmHg)
Acute
Allergic (especally dogs)
Redeye,variablypainful
Topical:
conjunctivitis
Infectious disease (usual
Conjunctival hyperaemia
Corticosteroids if no ulceration and
cause in cats)
Chemosis (conjunctival oedema)
infection not suspected (therefore
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
Ocular discharge
typically contraindicated in cats)
(KCS）in dogs
Noloss ofvision
Antibiosis (cover chlammydial infection in
Foreign body (e.g.grass awn,
Reduced STT in KCS
cats)
seed)
Possible antiviral therapy (cats)
Ciclosporin and artificial tears forKCs
Acute glaucoma
Primary (e.g.Cocker Spaniels,
Painful red eye
Rapid reduction of IOP essential to
Basset Hound, Beagle)
Mydriatic nonresponsive pupil
prevent permanent loss of vision
Secondary (especially cats):
Corneal opacity
Systemic:
Anterior uveitis
Conjunctival hyperaemia
Intravenous mannitol
Lens luxation (e.g. terrier
Scleral or episcleral vascular
Opioid analgesia
breeds)
Topical:
Cataract
Irisnormal
Prostaglandin analogue (e.g.
Hyphaema
Loss of vision
latanoprost)
Intraocular neoplasia
Raised IOP(usually >40 mmHg)
Carbonic anhydrase inhibitor (e.g.
dorzolamide)
Corneal foreign
e.g.plant material,wood or
Visible foreign body plus signs
Superficiat.
Apoq
s
of irritation and inflammation
Topical anaesthesia;gentle copious
sterilesaline lavage to try to dislodge
±lift offusing 25-gauge needle or
cotton-tipped applicator; corneal ulcer
treatment once removed
Deep or ful thickness:
Referral
Corneal laceration
Traumatic injury (especially
Laceration surroundedby
Medical therapy if partial thickness
cat scratch)
comeal oedema
Topical:
Foreign body
May be difficult to identify
Antibiosis
laceration if significant comeal
Atropine if miosis
cedema or hyphaema
Referral forsurgeryifdeeporfull
thickness
Injury to anterior lens capsule and
leakageof lensmaterialmay trigger
severe uveitis
Table 35.1continued
Disorder
Cause(s)
Examination findings
Emergency treatment and comments
Comeal ulcer
Traumatic injury
Painful eye
Topical.
-superficial
Infectious disease
Conjunctival hyperaemia
Antibiosis
Topical iritation
Ocular discharge (lkely
Atropine if miosis
Exposure keratitis
epiphora)
Topical corticosteroid contraindicated
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
Corneal cedema
(delay ulcer healing)
(KCS)
Miotic pupil (reflex uveitis)
Surgicat.
Foreign body
Fluorescein positive
Cotton-tipped applicator debridement±
Entropion
keratotomy (grid or punctuate)in
dogs with indolent(nonhealing)
superficial ulcer
Referral for conjunctival graft (not third
eyelid flap) for deeper noninfected
stromalulcer
Comeal ulcer
As for superficial uler
Asfor superficial ulcer but
Topical.
-infected
discharge may be
Aggressive antibiosis- especially with
stromal (deep)
fluoroquinolone againstpossible
Yellow-white stromal infiltrate
Pseudomonas Infection
seen around ulcer
Atropine
Collagenase inhibitor (autologous
serum, acetylcysteine)if rapidy
progressive (melting ulcer)
Systemic.
NSAIA
Opicid if required
May perforate rapidly (see below)
Surgery if progresses despite aggressive
medical therapy
Comeal ulcer
As for superficial ulcer
As for deep infected stromal
Emergencyreferral forsurgeryaggressive
-descemetocele
uker but Descemet's
medical therapy as for infected stromal
membrane is exposed and
ulcerin interim but only if good
bulging forward;it does not
compliance
retain fluorescein so typically
NB. Cage rest and minimal restraint or
see a corneal ulcer with a
neck pressure (increasing IOPmay
dark centre surrounded by a
induce corneal rupture)
fluorescein-positive rim
Comeal ulcer
As for superficial ulcer
Painful eye
Emergencyreferral forsurgery
-perforation
Corneal oedema
Otherwise as for infected stromal ulcer
Misshapen cornea
plus systemic antibiosis
Misshapen pupil
NB. Cage rest,minimal restraint, gente
Possible fibrin clot over cormeal
handling
defect (pink or red tissue)
Possible irisprolapse
Hyphaema
Traumatic injury
Blood in anterior chamber±
May be only sign of systemic
Uveitis
painful eye
Aypedonbeoo
Glaucoma
VariableIOP
Treatment of underlying cause; blood
Coagulopathy (e.g.
should reabsorb
thrombocytopenia,
May require treatment forsecondary
angiostrongylosis)
uveitis
Neoplasia
Systemic hypertension
Retinal detachment
Continued
Table 35.1 continued
Disorder
Cause(s)
Examination findings
Emergency treatment and comments
Primary anterior
Hereditary condition
Painfuleye
Treatment for glaucoma if indicated
lensluxation
Epiphora
Referral for emergency surgery
Comeal oedema
Consistent with secondary
glaucoma or antenior uveitis
Edge of lens may be visible
Proptosis
Traumatic injuryespecially in
Forward displacement ofglobe
Stabilization ofmajor body systems
brachycephalic dogs
outside orbital socket and
including intracranial hypertension first;
entrapment of eyelids
topicalsterile eye lubrication(q 1-2hr)
Encouraging signswith respect
and antibiosis in interim
tosight preservation include
General anaesthesia for globe
consensual pupillary light
replacement and tarsorrhaphy (or
reflex,miotic pupiland
enucleation if injury too severe);
positive menace response
postoperative topicaland oral antibiosis,
topicalatropine, short course of
corticosteroid
IOP intraocularpressure,NsAlA,nonsteroidal antinflammatory agentSTT,Schirmer tear test.
Normal IOP in dogs (and cats) is 15-25 mmHg. Normal STT in dogs is > 15 mm/min (wide variability in cats).
36
Urinary tract emergencies
Urethral Obstruction
Feline
Theory refresher
Clinical signs associated with the lower urinary tract - in particular dysuria,
stranguria, pollakiuria and haematuria - are a common reason for cats to be
presented both as routine and emergency patients. Lower urinary tract disorders
include urolithiasis, feline idiopathic cystitis, urinary tract infection, anatomical
defects, behavioural disorders and neoplasia. An increased risk of lower urinary tract
6-year-old cats.
Depending on the underlying disorder, complete urethral obstruction may or may
not occur and this clearly has significant implications from an emergency perspective.
Complete urethral obstruction almost exclusively occurs in male cats and is a
potentially fatal condition (see below). Cats presenting with lower irinary tract signs
but without obstruction usually have a small or empty bladder and require
symptomatic medical therapy, analgesia in particular. Many of these cats will have
idiopathic cystitis and will improve within 3-5 days. All these cats require appropriate
analgesia but antibiosis should only be used in cases in which bacterial infection is
documented by microbiology.
Clinical Tip
· Lower urinary tract signs typically suggest a degree of inflammation of the lower urinary tract with
associated irritation and discomfort. However, it must be remembered that only a small proportion
 of cats with lower urinary tract signs have either a primary or a secondary infectious process and the
 the basis of confirmed infection and the choice of agent should be directed by sensitivity testing.
Nuirsing Aspect
On an emergency basis, nurses are often the first members of staff to speak to owners ringing about
cats with lower urinary tract signs. In the author's opinion, emergency consultation should be
recommended for all cats showing dysuria, stranguria, pollakiuria or haematuria. Male cats in
particular may have urethral obstruction which can be rapidly fatal. Both unobstructed male and
female cats require analgesia as a minimum as these clinical signs are typically associated with
varying degrees of pain.
In some cases of urethral obstruction owners report that their cat is straining nonproductively but
are unable to distinguish stranguria from constipation. It is also noteworthy that not all cats with
urethral obstruction show consistent urinary signs, at least earlier on. In some cases, owners ring to
report an abnormal pelvic limb gait that is often presumed to be the result of trauma; alternatively.
the cat may be showing nonspecific vocalization or apparent discomfort, especially when picked up.
       n a    s   
obstruction. As a minimum, the author would strongly recommend examining all male cats with
potential signs of obstruction that either have a history of lower urinary tract disease or that are
confined indoors (at increased risk of urethral obstruction).
Mechanical urethral obstruction is much more common in male cats due to the
narrow diameter of the penile uirethra; it occirs very infrequently in females. Urethral
plugs are the most common cause in male cats but lroliths may also cauise
obstruction, potentially in combination with a plug. Urethral strictures and rarely
tumours are other possible causes. Urethral plugs are often made up of struvite
material in a proteinaceous matrix. The most common uroliths in cats are made of
struvite or calcium oxalate. Unlike in dogs, struvite urolithiasis in cats is not typically
associated with urease-producing bacterial infection.
Prolonged urethral obstruction results in hypovolaemia and systemic hypoperfusion
that may occur for a number of reasons, including the effect of hyperkalaenia and
acidaemia on the cardiovascular system, and dehydration where this is a factor. In
addition to azotaemia, urethral obstruction can result in profound electrolyte and
acid-base disturbances  including metabolic acidosis, hyperphosphataemia and
hypocalcaemia. Hyperkalaemia occurs mainly due to impaired urinary excretion of
potassium. The clinical manifestations of hyperkalaemia reflect alterations in cell
membrane excitability and of greatest concern are the potentially life-threatening
effects on cardiac conduction (Box 36.1).
BOX 36.1 Electrocardiographic findings associated with hyperkalaemia
· Sinus bradycardia (Figure 36.1)
• Prolongation of the PR interval
• Widening and bizarre appearance of the QRS complex, including sinoventricular rhythm
· Decreased amplitude, widening or complete absence (atrial standstill) of the P wave (Figures 36.2
and 36.3)
 Peaked/tall T waves (Figures 36.2 and 36.3)
Figure 36.1
Sinus bradycardia in a cat.
(Courtesy of Virginia Luis Fuentes)
Figure 36.2
Atrial standstill in a cat with hyperkalaemia showing absence of P waves; peaked T
waves are also present.
(From Darke PGG, Bonagura JD, Kelly DK 1996 Color atlas of veterinary card iology. Mosby-Wolfe, London, with permission.)
al
Figure 36.3
Electrocardiogram from a cat with severe hyperkalaemia (a) before and (b) shortly
after administration of calcium gluconate. The pre-treatment strip shows atrial standstill with absence
 of P waves, as well as peaked T waves and ventricular premature complexes (VpCs). P waves are
 visible and there are no VPCs in the post-treatment strip.
Clinical Tip
· The severity of clinical signs resulting from hyperkalaemia does not necessarily correlate with the
 absolute increase in serum potassium concentration. The treatment required is therefore dependent
not only on the cat's serum potassium level but also, very importantly, on whether the hyperkalaemia
is assessed to be clinically significant.
· If treatment is deemed necessary, it should be performed before urethral catheterization is
attempted; treatment is directed at improving the cat's clinical status and not at the serum potassium
concentration per se. In some cases, intravenous fluid therapy and restoring urine production and
 drainage is all that is necessary for hyperkalaemia to resolve. However additional therapy is required
in cases in which hyperkalaemia is assessed to be having clinically significant effects on the
cardiovascular system. Further treatment options for hyperkalaemia are summarized in Table 36.1.
 If serum electrolytes cannot be measured but clinically significant hyperkalaemia is suspected on
the basis of electrocardiography or perhaps physical examination alone, the author firmly believes
that empirical use of calcium gluconate, and potentially insulin with glucose, is appropriate. This
treatment can be life-saving and is unlikely to cause any significant harm if not required.
Table 36.1 Treatment of clinically significant hyperkalaemia
Agent
Dose/route
Comments
 10% calcium glucon ate
0.5-1.0 ml/kg iv. bolus over 30-
60 s
SISII3 e u aoiouo auT sug pue (spuooas May e aq ues) uoioe Jo jasuo pidey
Sh ort duration of action (often 10-15 minutes)
Mon itor ECG during administration
Does not lower serum potassium concentration but restores normal cell membran
excit ability
Will also address possible ion ized hypoc alc aemia
Bolus can be repeated wh ile oth er measures are used to reduce hyperkalaemia directly
 Neu tral (regular, solu ble)
0.1-0.5 IU/kg i.v.
Slower on set of action (can be more than 15 minutes)
insulin
 Glu cose solution
0.25-0.5 g/kg i.v.
pue o mou) snou eaAas so pan nbatAed noeuauadns asosn sno uaanu
adjust accordin gly)
 Sod ium bic arbonate
1 -2 mmol/kg slow i.v. (repeat if
necessary)
Also lowers serum pot assium con centration by moving pota ssium into cells
Effect can persist for several hours
E CG, electrocard iogram; IU, intern ational units; i.v., in tra ven ou s.
Cats with urethral obstruction present with a spectrum of clinical compromise and,
as always, the management provided should be appropriate to the individual case.
With rational intensive management, even the most moribund of patients has an
excellent prognosis for full short-term recovery. Long-term prognosis clearly depends
on the underlying urinary tract disorder.
Case example 1
Presenting Signs and Case History
 A 4-year-old male neutered domestic short hair cat presented collapsed. The owner reported that 
the cat may have been lethargic 24 hours prior to presentation and was inappetent on the morning of
 presentation. The owner was at work during the day and had returned to find the cat collapsed, at
which point she contacted the practice for an emergency consultation. The cat had outdoor access
and the owner had not noticed any clinical signs of lower urinary tract disease. No other significant
preceding history was reported.
Major body system examination
On presentation the cat was obtunded. Cardiovascular examination revealed a heart
rate of 6o beats per minute with no obvious murmur. Femoral pulses could not be
palpated and mucous membranes were very pale without a discernible capillary refill.
Respiratory rate was 36 breaths per minute and lung auscultation was unremarkable
          r
temperature was markedly lowered (33.0°C).
Clinical Tip
· Although rare, urinary bladder rupture may occur due to urethral obstruction and therefore the
absence of a palpable bladder does not exclude this condition. Cats with urethral obstruction and
bladder rupture are very likely to be moribund and severely azotaemic.
Assessment
The cat was assessed as being severely hypovolaemic. While severely hypovolaemic
cats are very often bradycardic and hypothermic, the degree of bradycardia in this
case was inappropriately severe. Bladder palpation was suggestive of urethral
obstruction and the severity of bradycardia was therefore suspected to be partly due to
hyperkalaemia.
Emergency database
An intravenous catheter was placed in a cephalic vein and blood obtained via the
catheter for an emergency database. The most significant findings of this were severe
hyperkalaemia (1o.1 mmol/1, reference range 3.6-4.6 mmol/l) and severe azotaemia
(blood urea nitrogen 80.0 mmol/l, reference range 3.0-10.0 mmol/l; creatinine 1950
μmol/l, reference range 50-140 μmol/l). Facilities were not available to measure blood
pH or ionized calcium.
Continuous electrocardiography was commenced that demonstrated atrial standstill
with a wide-complex sinoventricular rhythm.
Clinical Tip
· Urethral obstruction is a major cause of postrenal azotaemia that frequently is (very) severe.
However, in most cases the azotaemia fully resolves, often within 24 hours, if the obstruction is
relieved so diuresis can occur and adequate fluid therapy is provided.
· Very occasionally, prolonged urethral obstruction and back pressure on the kidneys may result in
- d a a  n p n  e  c s a ln n
However, in the author's experience this is rare in cats with feline urethral obstruction that are
presented for treatment.
· The degree of azotaemia at presentation should not be used as a prognostic indicator and renal
insufficiency must not be assumed until full treatment for urethral obstruction has been provided.
Case management
The cat was started on a 20 ml/kg bolus of 0.9% sodium chloride (normal,
physiological saline) and treated immediately thereafter with 10% calcium gluconate
(see Table 36.1) to which there was a rapid response with respect to heart rate and
rhythm  (see Figure 36.3). Neutral (regular, soluble) insulin and glucose were
administered intravenously at this time. No warming measures were performed
initially in order not to worsen hypoperfusion (see Ch. 17) but the cat was given a low
dose of methadone (o.1 mg/kg i.v.). Another dose of calcium gluconate was also
given, prompted by deterioration of the heart rhythm.
The cat was monitored very closely and continuously reassessed. Perfusion showed
some improvement following the initial bolus, after which the cat was assessed to be
mildly to moderately hypovolaemic. A further smaller bolus (10 ml/kg) of saline was
administered. Serum  potassium concentration  was  rechecked  approximately  30
minutes after the initial emergency database and was improving in keeping with
clinical progress.
Clinical Tip
All cats with urethral obstruction will benefit from intravenous fluid therapy prior to
catheterization. An isotonic replacement crystalloid is the fluid of choice to restore perfusion and
enhance urinary potassium excretion. Normal saline (o.9% sodium chloride) has traditionally been
recommended due to its lack of potassium. However, this fluid may contribute to existing metabolic
acidosis and there is no clinically significant difference between the use of 0.9% sodium chloride
 solution and Hartmarn's (buffered lactated Ringer's solution) which contains a small amount of
potassium. The priority is very much to start the cat on one or other of these solutions at a rate that
is appropriate for the degree of hypovolaemia (see Ch. 2).
• One of the concerns often raised with regard to fluid therapy prior to urethral catheterization is
that of further filling a bladder that may already be quite distended. However, in cats in need of
aggressive fluid therapy, urine production is likely to have decreased significantly and the bladder
will be filling extremely slowly (if at all). This is due to the effects of back pressure transmitted from
the urethral obstruction to the kidneys via the bladder and ureters. In addition, in a cat without
preexisting renal disease, urine output is largely dependent on renal blood flow. In an obstructed cat
with hypotension and consequent renal hypoperfusion, urine production may therefore be further
compromised. There is little rationale in performing bladder drainage before adequate fluid
resuscitation has been instituted.
Stabilization continued in this vain until the cat's clinical condition had markedly
improved with a stable cardiovascular system and much more appropriate mentation.
The cat was then sedated for lirethral catheterization ising ketamine (2 mg/kg i.v.),
midazolam (o.2 mg/kg i.v.) and a further dose of methadone (0.1 mg/kg i.v.).
Intravenous fluid therapy was continued at 6 ml/kg/hr in the interim. A further two
boluses  of  ketamine  were  required subsequently  to  complete  the  procedure.
Catheterization was performed using a 5-French MILA? Tomcat urethral catheter
(MILA International, inc., Erlanger, Kentucky, USA) (Fig. App2.2) that was connected
Halifax, UK) (Figure App2.3) in a closed system (see p. 296).
Clinical Tip
 With respect to chemical restraint for urethral catheterization, the author would caution against the
use of medetomidine in all but the most stable of cats due to the potential for marked
cardiorespiratory side effects.
· The author uses a combination of a pure opioid with ketamine and midazolam to good effect. Being
 a benzodiazepine, midazolam should promote urethral relaxation which is desirable. Ketamine
predominantly undergoes renal excretion in cats and there is therefore the potential for this agent to
accumulate in the occasional obstructed cat in which urinary drainage cannot be re-established in
the short-term.
· Occasionally additional chemical restraint is required and in such cases propofol, alphaxolone or
inhalant anaesthesia can be used. However, it is essential to ensure the patient is as stable as
possible before this.
Clinical Tip
· Some clinicians prefer to perform cystocentesis very early on in the sickest cats with urethral
obstruction in order to provide immediate urine drainage. Cystocentesis is a simple technique to
perform, especially in a full bladder, and allows rapid bladder drainage; this can also facilitate
urethral catheterization by relieving the pressure on the urethral obstruction in some cases. The
procedure also provides uncontaminated urine samples for bacteriology. In a very small proportion
of blocked cats, urethral catheterization is unsuccessful and cystocentesis is a convenient option
pending further management.
· However, whenever cystocentesis is performed, there is a risk of subsequent urine leakage into the
abdomen and uroperitoneum. When cystocentesis is performed on a hard tense bladder, the sudden
release of pressure could potentially significantly increase the risk of urine leakage - the effect may
be rather like popping a balloon. In addition, the integrity of the bladder wall may be compromised
in obstructed cats, increasing the likelihood of bladder wall rupture following cystocentesis. Delayed
urine leakage is more likely in animals in which dysuria and bladder distension recur following
cystocentesis.
· The author has very successfully managed cats with very severe hyperkalaemia and acidaemia due
to urethral obstruction without performing cystocentesis early on and would strongly recommend
that cystocentesis is reserved for those cases in which urethral catheterization cannot be performed.
 If bacteriology is required, the first urine sample collected following urethral catheterization may be
Ulsed.
Following urethral catheterization, the cat was maintained on a 2.5% glucose saline
solution at an empirical rate of 8 ml/kg/hr initially with close monitoring of urine
output and hydration parameters. Analgesia was continued in the form of
buprenorphine (0.02 mg/kg i.v. q 6 hr) and potassium supplementation was provided
as needed. Blood glucose, potassium, urea and creatinine concentrations were
monitored intermittently and glucose supplementation stopped when appropriate. The
lrinary catheter was removed after being in situ for 36 hours, by which time the
azotaemia had also resolved and the urine appeared grossly normal.
The cat was subsequently discharged approximately 24 hours later after he had
demonstrated normal urination. Meloxicam (0.3 mg/kg s.c.) was administered prior to
discharge, at which time the cat had been nonazotaemic for 48 hours.
Clinical Tip
 Intravenous fluid therapy must be continued following urethral catheterization using an isotonic
replacement crystalloid at a rate that is adequate to keep up with urine output, provide for
maintenance requirements and correct any existing dehydration. A postobstructive diuresis often
 occurs early on following urethral obstruction and can result in large volumes of urine being
worsen if adequate fluid therapy is not provided during this period. However, excessive fluid therapy
 is also to be avoided as it may promote renal medullary washout, with the cat temporarily losing the
 ability to concentrate its urine.
· Despite possible hyperkalaemia at presentation, cats with urethral obstruction may develop
hypokalaemia following catheterization as a result of postobstructive diuresis and the likelihood of
anorexia. Serum potassium should be monitored and supplementation provided as necessary. If
insulin was administered prior to catheterization it is important to monitor blood glucose in the
 short term and provide intravenous supplementation (2.5-5%) if necessary.
Clinical Tip
 The routine use of antibiotics is contraindicated in the presence of an indwelling urethral catheter
and this practice is likely to select positively for more resistant bacteria. Antibiosis should only be
commenced if a urinary tract infection has been confirmed.
Clinical Tip
· Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents should typically not be administered early on in cats with
urethral obstruction. These agents are contraindicated in all hypovolaemic or dehydrated patients
(see Ch. 5) and ideally should not be administered to cats with urethral obstruction until azotaemia
has resolved.
· In addition, glucocorticoid administration may be considered during or following urethral
catheterization if significant urethral mucosal inflammation is suspected, and the concurrent use of
both types of agent is contraindicated.
Nuirsing Aspect
Following urethral catheterization, cats require close attentive monitoring and nursing. With
respect to feeding. the priority in the short term is to tempt them to eat and the author is happy to
offer these cats highly palatable foods rather than attempt to enforce a prescription urinary support
diet. However, these cats have many short-term reasons to be inappetent (hospitalization, indwelling
urethral catheter, Elizabethan collar) and force-feeding is both unnecessary and likely to induce food
aversion; it should therefore be avoided.
Indwelling urethral catheters and closed collection systems need to be checked regularly to ensure
that they remain in place, are not leaking and have not become blocked or disconnected. In addition,
usual standards of care with respect to TLC, clean dry bedding and gentle handling are important.
Canine urethral obstruction
Mechanical urethral obstruction is considerably less common in dogs than cats but the
same principles apply with respect to management of the emergency patient. This
section will highlight some notable features of the canine condition.
Canine urethral obstruction may occur due to urolithiasis, blood clots, strictures,
neoplasia, severe urethritis or penile fractures. In male dogs the urinary bladder may
also become trapped in a perineal hernia. Transitional cell carcinoma is the most
common cause of urethral obstruction in female dogs, while obstructive urolithiasis is
more common in males. Uroliths that become lodged in the urethra may be flushed
into the bladder by retrograde hydropulsion for subsequent medical dissolution or
removal (surgical or nonsurgical) (see p. 298); occasionally urethrotomy may be
required.
          s  
associated with urease-producing bacterial infections. Calcium oxalate (radioopaque)
uroliths are more common in male dogs than females, especially if neutered or
overweight. Canine breeds at increased risk of calcium oxalate urolithiasis include the
   n        n 
with various other small breeds. It is noteworthy that many of these breeds also
appear at increased risk of struvite urolithiasis although the latter is also seen for
Urate (radiolucent) uroliths are most often identified in the Dalmatian, but an
  s n o     o   n
breeds may be secondary to a portosystemic shunt causing impaired uric acid and
(radioopaque) uroliths are seen in young to middle-aged dogs and occur most
commonly in the Dachshund, the Staffordshire bull terrier, the English Bulldog and
the Newfoundland.
It should also be remembered that dysuria in dogs may also be the result of prostatic
enlargement, for example due to acute bacterial prostatitis or abscessation.
Haemorrhagic or purulent fluid may drip from the penis and defecatory tenesmus may
S s  a         s  
        
Acute Renal Failure and Leptospirosis
Acute renal failure
Theory refresher
Acute renal failure (ARF) refers to a rapid decrease in glomerular filtration rate (GFR),
the consequences of which include accumulation of uraemic toxins and metabolic
kidneys normally receive 2o% of cardiac output, ma king them especially susceptible to
ischaemic and toxic injury.
Cauises
ARF may occur due to prerenal, postrenal or, most commonly, intrinsic renal causes.
Prerenal renal failure
Prerenal disease is the result of decreased renal blood flow, usually due to generalized
hypoperfusion resulting from severe dehydration, hypovolaemia from other causes, or
other forms of shock. Prolonged prerenal azotaemia may result in structural injury
and irreversible intrinsic renal failure. It is essential to correct prerenal azotaemia
before performing interventions that may predispose patients to further renal injury
(e.g. general anaesthesia, nephrotoxic drugs).
Intrinsic renal failure
Intrinsic renal failure is the result of renal parenchymal injury. It may occur as a
result of ischaemia, glomerular disease or tubular disease, and is characterized by
azotaemia with isosthenuria (urine specific gravity 1.007-1.015). Toxins, including
nephrotoxic drugs, are the most common cause in companion animals, although it is
             
compatible history and the development of ARF) without definitive proof. In some
cases there is no compatible history and the diagnosis remains entirely presuimptive.
Toxins associated with ARF in companion animals include grapes and raisins
(dogs), lilies (cats), vitamin D (ARF due to hypercalcaemia) and ethylene glycol (see
number of other drugs have been implicated. ARF may also occur as a result of
     s  s a     
disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC).
cause of ARF. Pyelonephritis may also cause ARF and most commonly occurs as a
          
Pyelonephritis may also occur secondary to haematogenous spread of bacteria.
Postrenal renal failure
           
Although animals with postrenal abnormalities can have severe azotaemia, in most
cases irreversible intrinsic renal injury does not occur if the cause is treated early.
Ureteral obstruction due to calcium oxalate uroliths is increasingly recognized as a
cauise of ARF in cats.
Phases and progression
ARF is typically classified as being oliguric, anuric or polyuric based on the amount of
urine being produced and this classification is important with respect to both
management and potential prognosis. In an adult animal, oliguria is typically defined
as urine output of less than 0.5-1 ml/kg/hr and polyuria as urine output of more than
2 ml/kg/hr. In general, a normal animal that suffers sufficiently severe renal injury
will first become oliguric, which may or may not then progress to anuria. Conversion
from oliguria or anuria to polyuria does not necessarily equate with recovery of the
kidneys; however, it is an encouraging sign and also greatly facilitates patient
management. In the auithor's experience, polyuria is associated with a better outcome,
Polyuria must be treated with appropriate intravenous fluid therapy to match urine
fluid intake and will become dehydrated. Once the patient is stable, fluid therapy can
be tapered by 10-20% each day as long as uirine output decreases at a similar rate and
azotaemia does not worsen. Animals that survive to discharge are likely to retain a
degree of azotaemia, which may or may not then fully resolve over the subsequent
weeks.
Treatment
   s   s   s    
order to allow as much time as possible for the kidneys to recover. Management
involves:
· Removing or providing specific therapy for the primary cause if applicable
· Providing treatment for azotaemia and correcting fluid imbalances and electrolyte
abnormalities
· Providing intensive supportive care and therapy for other clinical manifestations,
such as vomiting and anorexia
Treatment of ARF is further described in Case example 2.
Clinical Tip
· At the time of presentation, animals with ARF will have already suffered renal injury about which
nothing can be done; in a significant number of cases, recovery will not occur despite aggressive
therapy that may or may not include dialysis. However, the chances of a successful outcome are
maximized by early and intensive treatment and close monitoring: although not entirely essential,
objective monitoring of urine output is invaluable in guiding therapy and maximizing the chances of
 optimal management.
· If not precluded by financial constraints, the author would strongly recommend the referral of dogs
and cats with ARF for specialist care if optimal management cannot be provided within the primary
clinic.
Leptospirosis
Theory refresher
Leptospires are filamentous spirochaete bacteria that are maintained in nature by
subclinically infected wild and domestic reservoir hosts. Direct transmission occurs
through contact with infected urine, venereal and placental transfer, bite wounds or
appropriate antibody  response but recovered   dogs may  excrete organisms
intermittently in urine for months after infection (the organism does not replicate
otside the host).
The    incidence    of    classic    canine    leptospirosis   caused    by Leptospira
icterohaemorrhagiae or L. canicola decreased dramatically with the widespread use of
Clinical cases of leptospirosis in cats are reported infrequently as cats are resistant
Clinical findings
and clinicopathological abnormalities that are likely to be related to the virulence of
signs as well as one or more of the following:
 Hepatic injury and jaundice; possible liver failure
· Coagulopathy: haematemesis, haematochezia, melaena, petechiae or ecchymoses;
thrombocytopenia may be present
· (Vasculitis with associated tissue oedema)
· (Acute lung injury and possible pulmonary oedema)
· (Uveitis).
Diagnosis
Diagnosis of leptospirosis is typically made on the basis of compatible history and
clinical findings, and demonstrating high initial or convalescent serum antibody
titres. Titres (initial) can be negative in the first 7-10 days of acute illness and testing
may need to be repeated once or twice, 2-4 weeks apart (convalescent). It is
noteworthy that dogs with positive titres generally cross-react to a variety of serovars
and the serovar with the highest titre is interpreted as belonging to the infecting
serogroup. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analysis can be performed on urine
collected prior to the instigation of treatment and may provide a more rapid diagnosis.
Clinical Tip
· Interpretation of Leptospira serology can be confusing in some cases and the reader is
recommended to consult with the external laboratory used if there is any uncertainty about the
results obtained; this is especially true in the context of animals presenting following recent
vaccination.
Treatment
Treatment of leptospirosis involves appropriate supportive therapy for the individual
patient (e.g. for dehydration, electrolyte abnormalities, renal failure or hepatic injury)
and specific treatment of the infection. Treatment of leptospirosis is biphasic.
Penicillin-derived antibiotics are used for 2 weeks to treat circulating leptospiral
organisms; preparations for intravenous administration are readily available and are
 se   s s  e   s     
followed by a 2-week course of a tetracycline-derived antimicrobial.
Clinical Tip
· Treatment for leptospirosis should be administered as soon as possible to maximize the chance of
reversing tissue injury; this typically involves commencing treatment prior to confirming the
diagnosis based on a sufficient index of suspicion.
Clinical Tip
 Leptospirosis is a potentially zoonotic disease and appropriate measures must be taken with respect
to the handling of urine in any case in which this disorder is a possibility.
Case example 2
Presenting Signs and Case History
 A 3-year-old female neutered Labrador retriever presented with a 2-day history of lethargy,
depression, anorexia and vomiting. The owner was not sure how much the dog had been drinking:
however, she reported that the dog appeared to be urinating less often. There was no known history
of drug administration and the dog had received appropriate vaccination including against L.
icterohaemorrhagiae and L. canicola. Scavenging was a possibility as the dog received daily walks
during which she was often let off the lead and out of sight, and she also had free access to the
owner's garden. No other significant history was reported.
Major system examination
On presentation the dog was depressed but ambulatory. Heart rate was increased (132
beats per minute) but cardiovascular examination was otherwise unremarkable.
 s           
minute but there was only a mild increase in effort and auscultation was appropriate.
Abdominal palpation was unremarkable and the bladder could not be palpated. Rectal
examination was unremarkable but the dog was mildly hypothermic (37.0*C). Doppler
(systolic) blood pressure was normal at 140 mmHg.
Assessment
The tachycardia, tachypnoea, mild hyperaemia and hypothermia in this case were
suspected to be the result of a systemic inflammatory process but no further
conclusions could be drawn.
Emergency database
An intravenous catheter was placed in a cephalic vein and blood obtained via the
catheter for an emergency database. This revealed high-normal manual packed cell
volume (PCV) (52%, reference range 37-55%) and serum total solids (TS) (66 g/l,
reference range 49-71 g/l). Mild hyperkalaemia (5.8 mmol/l, reference range 3.6-4.6
mmol/l) and mild hyponatraemia (136.1 mmol/l, reference range 140.0-153.0
mmol/l) were identified. Peripheral blood smear examination revealed a moderate
thrombocytopenia, unremarkable red blood cell morphology, and a subjective
moderate mature neutrophilia. The dog was found to be severely azotaemic (blood
urea nitrogen 60 mmol/l, reference range 3.0-9.1 mmol/l; creatinine 900 μmol/1,
reference range 0.8-2.0 mmol/l) with marked hyperbilirubinaemia (95 μmol/
reference range 0-2.4 μmol/l). Brief abdominal ultrasonography revealed a very small
bladder and no free fluid was detected.
Case management
The severity of the azotaemia was consistent with either a severe renal or a postrenal
possible. In addition, the dog was not anaemic as would be expected if she had beer
suffering from chronic renal failure with an acute crisis. Given all the findings in this
case, a diagnosis of ARF was made. There was no evidence of haemolysis and the
hyperbilirubinaemia was presumed to be posthepatic or hepatic in origin. These two
leptospirosis and a sample was submitted for serology.
A soft indwelling Foley urethral catheter was placed under sedation (butorphanol
0.3 mg/kg i.v., diazepam 0.2 mg/kg i.v.) using strict aseptic technique and barrier
nursing, and the bladder emptied. The catheter was connected to a closed urinary
C        
marked bilirubinuria with mild glucosuria, proteinuria and haematuria; and an
increase in red and white blood cells on sediment examination. The dog was not felt to
s sa s e  sa (    r 
           
          
           
   (r  a     
mg/kg slow i.v. q 24 hr) were administered.
After 1o hr of fluid therapy, there had been minimal urine production. The dog was
therefore given a bolus of furosemide (4 mg/kg i.v.), and 1 hour later her urine output
had increased to 1.0 ml/kg/hr. Mannitol (1 mg/kg i.v over 30 minutes) was
administered and the dog was started on a constant rate infusion of furosemide (0.3
mg/kg/hr). The dog was monitored closely for signs of fluid overload, in particular
         g
and blood parameters performed.
Over the following 12 hours, the dog remained oliguric and despite appropriate
tapering of fluid therapy and further diuresis, began to show signs of fluid overload in
the form of chemosis and peripheral subcutaneous oedema. Her azotaemia and
hyperbilirubinaemia also worsened. The dog's owners were advised at this point that
she either needed to be referred for peritoneal dialysis (haemodialysis was not
available) or sadly euthanased on welfare grounds, having failed to respond to
medical management. The owners elected for the latter which was done without
further delay. Postmortem was declined but the results of Leptospira serology were
subsequently received and confirmed the suspected diagnosis (microagglutination test
(MAT) positive for Leptospira copenhageni at 1/3200).
Clinical Tip
· Adequate fluid replacement is essential in managing ARF and it is not possible to draw reliable
conclusions about either urine output or the true severity of azotaemia until this has been achieved.
Initial fluid therapy should be aggressive if hypovolaemia is present and more conservative for
rehydration (see Ch. 2).
· Some animals with ARF will be oliguric or even anuric at the time of presentation and there is
therefore a very real risk of fluid overload, i.e. if fluid therapy is provided but urine is not produced.
However, it is not possible to establish urinary status until adequate fluid replacement has been
 provided. Persistent dehydration is likely to exacerbate renal injury.
· Diuretics are only indicated if adequate fluid therapy fails to restore satisfactory urine output.
Dialysis (peritoneal or haemodialysis) is indicated if fluid therapy and diuretic administration are
unable to establish sufficient urine output such that evidence of fluid overload occurs
37
Dystocia
      sr  r s 
companion animal emergency practice. Owners are often anxious and distressed at
these times and veterinary staff must have a good understanding of normal gestation
and parturition in order to provide sound logical advice.
Theory Refresher
Normal gestation and parturition
The bitch
Normal gestation
            s
correlation between copulation and actual fertilization in the bitch. Once fertilization
actually occurs, the true gestation length is less variable.
Labour
Labour is divided into three stages.
First stage
Stage one occurs 24-48 hours before parturition. Behavioural changes may include
· Nesting behaviour
· Restlessness
· Panting
· Attention-seeking or being seclusive
· Shivering
· Inappetence
· Vomiting.
Physical changes may include:
· Mammary gland changes and lactation 1-7 days before parturition· Marked
decrease in body temperature 8-24 hours before parturition (typically found to be 35-
37°C) · Progressive cervical dilation and vaginal relaxation
· Initiation of subclinical uterine contractions (no abdominal straining).
Second stage
Stage two occurs 3-24 hours before parturition. There are three cardinal signs
indicating that the dam is in stage two although all three signs may not be present in
any individual case.
· Body temperature increases to normal or slightly above normal
· Abdominal contractions begin (concomitant with strong uterine con tractions)
· Clear fluid is discharged from the vulva - this is fluid from the ruptured
chorioallantois and usually signifies delivery of the first neonate within 30 minutes
to 4 hours. Allantoic fluid should precede each neonate.
  s  s ni s  s    s i s   
hours before, with, or after foetal delivery. This discharge is due to placental
separation. Following delivery the dam should remove the amniotic membranes, sever
the imbilical cord, and clean and bond with the foetus.
Third stage
Stage three represents expulsion of placental and foetal membranes and occurs
concurrently with stage two in pluriparous dams. Expulsion usually occurs within 15
         n    
membranes are expelled. Maternal consumption of the membranes may induce
and placental remains may persist for 3-6 weeks after parturition has ended. However
failure to pass the majority of all placentas within 4-6 hours of the end of second stage
labour should prompt veterinary attention.
The queen
A       s    n   
exceptions.
· Normal gestation in the queen is 63-67 days. This narrower range reflects the
induced ovulation that occurs in this species.
· It is not uncommon for a queen to disappear from the home during stage one labour,
leaving owners unaware of the changes occurring.
· Body temperature may decrease in the 12 hours prior to parturition but this is a less
consistent finding.
· In the queen normal vulval discharge due to placental separation is red-brown in
colour (green in the bitch).
Dystocia
The incidence of dystocia in dogs and cats is reported to be approximately 5% and dog
breeds that may be at increased risk include chondrodysplastic and brachycephalic
breeds, especially Pugs and Bulldogs, as well as Scottish terriers, Boston terriers,
Yorkshire terriers and the Chihuahua. Dystocia is most common in short-faced breeds
as well as Devon Rex and Siamese cats. Primary uterine inertia is the most common
cause of dystocia in dogs and cats and is a maternal cause. Other maternal causes
include mechanical obstruction (e.g. due to narrowing of the pelvic canal secondary
to healed fractures), maternal anxiety and systemic illness. Foetal malpresentation is
the most common foetal cause of dystocia in dogs and cats. Others include foetal
oversize, malformation and death.
Clinical Tip
• If a dam is in active labour the stress of transportation and veterinary examination may endanger
 the life of a foetus that is in the birth canal and undergoing normal parturition. Attempting to
progress parturition at home must, however, be balanced with the realization that the sooner cases
that require veterinary attention receive this treatment the more likely it is that a successful outcome
will be achieved (see Box 37.1).
· Prolonged gestation: due date (if known) reached without signs of labour · A history of previous
dystocia
· More than 24 hours of anorexia in the full-term queen
• No signs of labour more than 24 hours after the decrease in body temperature in the full-term
bitch · No signs of labour 12-24 hours after body temperature increases again in the full-term
bitch · More than 4 hours since the onset of second stage labour without a foetus being passed ·
Strong active but nonproductive abdominal contractions for more than 30 minutes
· Flank biting or other signs suggesting severe abdominal discomfort in the dam
• A green (bitch) or brown (queen) vulval discharge without a foetus being born in the subsequent
 2 hours · Sanguineous or malodorous vulval discharge
· Weak irregular nonproductive straining for more than 2 hours
• More than 2-4 hours between foetuses being delivered
· Failure to deliver all foetuses within 24 hours (bitch) or 36 hours (queen) from the onset of
second stage labour · Signs of systemic compromise in the dam
· The presence of a foetus or foetal membranes protruding from the vulva for more than 15
minutes Note that posterior presentation is considered to be a normal variation in dogs and cats.
Oxytocin
Oxytocin is a hormone that is released during labour and that causes uterine smooth muscle
 contraction as well as milk letdown. It is used to treat dystocia due to uterine inertia by increasing
the frequency and strength of uterine contractions which it does by promoting calcium influx into
myometrial cells. Oxytocin also promotes uterine involution after birth as well as reducing uterine
haemorrhage and assisting in expulsion of retained placentas.
Clinical Tip
· The use of oxytocin is contraindicated in the presence of pelvic obstruction, inadequate dilation
of the cervix, vaginal masses or strictures, and inguinal hernias.
Recommended dose rates traditionally have been 1-2 IU/kg i.m. (or s.c.), with a maximum dose of
20 IU in the bitch and 2-4 IU total dose i.m. (or s.c.) in the queen. More recently, however, it has
been suggested that lower doses than those quoted here may be as effective but with less risk of
respond to two or three doses is usually considered an indication for surgical intervention. The
 period of time in between oxytocin doses can be used to prepare for caesarean section.
General anaesthesia
Pregnant animals have various physiological and pharmacokinetic differences that make them more
sensitive and vulnerable to all aspects of general anaesthesia. Furthermore, most injectable and
inhalational agents used for general anaesthesia cross the placental barrier and thereby affect the
  o  a   n se a o   a
dam or by analgesic agents administered to the dam. The aim therefore when selecting a drug
protocol for caesarean section is to choose a protocol that minimizes compromise of the dam and the
foetuses while ensuring that the dam receives adequate analgesia. Numerous protocols are
recommended. Familiarity with the drugs being used is perhaps one of the most important factors in
 protocol selection. Regardless of the drug protocol selected, efficient induction and neonate delivery
are essential (see also Ch. 39).
Clinical Tip
· Due to both pressure on the stomach from the enlarged uterus and delayed gastric emptying and
reduced gastrooesophageal sphincter tone secondary to increased progesterone levels, animals
undergoing caesarean section are at increased risk of vomiting and subsequent aspiration. It is
 sensible to minimize the amount of time these animals spend in dorsal recumbency and to ensure
that a cuffed endotracheal tube is used during general anaesthesia. The use of metoclopramide as
part of the premedication may be rational.
Ovarohysterectomy
 In cases in which the owner does not want to breed from the dam again, ovarohysterectomy may be
performed at the same time. This can be done following delivery via caesarean section although there
is some increased risk of haemorrhage from a more vascular gravid uterus. Alternatively, the uterus
can be removed and handed to assistants en bloc with subsequent delivery of the foetuses; this is
potentially quicker but does rely on sufficient competent assistance. Ovarohysterectomy at the same
time as caesarean section alleviates the need for repeat general anaesthesia and laparotomy in the
future, and does not adversely affect milk production. In some cases ovarohysterectomy may be
indicated to minimize maternal morbidity, for example if the uterus is grossly infected or necrotic.
Case example 1
Presenting Signs and Case History
A 22-month-old female Pug (7.8 kg) presented 6 hours after the onset of second stage labour. She
had had 1 hour of strong nonproductive abdominal contractions initially but these had ceased.
The bitch had undergone planned mating with another Pug 64 days previously. Abdominal
ultrasound had been performed 30 days after mating and had confirmed the presence of live foetuses
and five foetal skeletons had been detected radiographically 45 days after mating. The bitch had been
bright and appetent throughout gestation and had been maintained on a commercial dog food. She
had suffered a previous episode of dystocia during her first pregnancy at 11 months of age for which
 Oxytocin therapy had been required. There was no significant medical history and the bitch had
received routine vaccinations.
Major body system examination
On presentation major body system examination was unremarkable. Abdominal
palpation was comfortable and consistent with possible pregnancy. Good mammary
development was present and milk that was grossly normal in appearance was readily
expressed. Rectal temperature was 38.5°C and digital examination unremarkable. A
clear vulval discharge with a small amount of green pigment was present and gentle
digital examination per vaginam using aseptic technique and copious lubrication
revealed a fully dilated cervix. Auscuiltation of the abdomen revealed several foetal
heart rates of approximately 210 beats per minute; the dam's heart rate was 130 beats
per minute.
Clinical Tip
· Normal foetal heart rate is approximately 170-250 bpm with the higher rates more common in cats
than dogs. Rates lower than 160-170 bpm suggest foetal distress and should prompt a greater sense
Of urgency with respect to intervention.
Case management
An emergency database was performed and the dam was found to be normocalcaemic
and normoglycaemic with a manual packed cell volume (PCV) of 35%. Conscious
right lateral and dorsoventral abdominal radiographs were obtained  that
demonstrated five foetal skeletons all within the abdominal cavity with no obvious
malposition. Obstruction of the pelvic canal was not suspected and a presumptive
diagnosis of primary uterine inertia was made.
Clinical Tip
· Hypocalcaemia should be considered in any dystocic animal with neurological signs. However, it
may also be present in nonneurological animals and can contribute to dystocia by reducing the
strength of myometrial contractions. If facilities allow, serum ionized calcium concentration should
be measured in preference to total calcium concentration.
· Calcium supplementation should definitely be provided if hypocalcaemia is documented and
empirical supplementation may also be appropriate in animals in which oxytocin is ineffective
(adequate calcium availability is required for oxytocin to be fully effective) or in which abdominal
contractions appear to be weak (see Appendix 1).
Clinical Tip
· Mild normocytic normochromic anaemia may be detected in full-term bitches at parturition and is
 a normal finding.
Clinical Tip
· Abdominal radiography may be used to identify the number of foetuses present and to evaluate
foetal presentation and size (Figure 37.1). Evidence of foetal death may also be detected in the form
of intrafoetal gas shadows (can take 6 hours or more after death to appear) or overlapping of cranial
bones and collapse of the spinal column (can take 48 hours or more to appear).
· A dorsoventral radiograph of the pelvis will allow the pelvic canal to be evaluated both for
diameter and for the presence and presentation of a foetus. Radiographs of adequate quality are
usually obtainable without the need for chemical restraint.
Figure 37.1
 Right lateral abdominal radiograph of a pregnant dog: five foetal skulls are visible
lying ventrally in the abdomen.
Oxytocin was administered (2 IU i.m.) and the bitch went on to deliver four puppies
over the next 2 hours. Three were born alive but one was dead. A further dose of
oxytocin (2 IU i.m.) was administered and the fifth puppy was also born alive. Five
sets of placental and foetal membranes were expelled over the course of the whelping
period. The bitch cleaned and nursed the puppies, all of which were suckling well and
she was discharged shortly after.
The owners were advised to monitor the dam for any signs of a purulent
malodorous vulval discharge, active vulval haemorrhage, evidence of mastitis or signs
of systemic illness, and to seek veterinary attention should they be concerned. In
addition, they were asked to seek veterinary attention should the litter fail to thrive.
Case example 2
Presenting Signs and Case History
A 3-year-old female Yorkshire terrier (3.5 kg) presented 3 hours after the onset of abdominal
contractions. A puppy had been noted protruding from the vulva in posterior presentation after
approximately 2 hours but had not been delivered, thus prompting veterinary attention. The bitch had
undergone accidental unwitnessed mating and the owner was unable to provide details regarding the
sire or the timing. No imaging had been performed during gestation. The bitch had been bright and
 appetent throughout gestation and had been maintained on a commercial dog food. This was her first
 pregnancy and there was no significant medical history. The bitch had received routine vaccinations.
Major body system examination
  s    s sa   d 
otherwise unremarkable. Abdominal palpation was comfortable and consistent with
possible pregnancy. Good mammary development was present and milk that was
but digital examination was not tolerated. A puppy was visible protruding in posterior
presentation from the vulva. Auscultation of the abdomen failed to reveal foetal heart
beats.
Case management
The protruding puppy was removed manually using sterile gloves and copious sterile
lubrication. Gentle digital traction using a sterile gauze swab for increased grip was
applied pulling slowly, steadily and without excessive force in a caudoventral
direction. Unfortunately the puppy was found to have died.
An emergency database was performed and the dam was found to be
normocalcaemic but mildly hypoglycaemic. An intravenous catheter was placed and
glucose administered (0.25 g/kg diluted slow i.v. followed by a 2.5% glucose saline
infusion at 4 ml/kg/hr).
Clinical Tip
· The use of copious sterile lubrication is essential during obstetric manoeuvres. It is possible to use
instruments to manipulate and remove a foetus but this practice is discouraged due to increased risk
of foetal and maternal injury. In addition, excessive traction should not be applied to a single
extremity as severe injury is likely to occur.
Clinical Tip
breeds and with large litters.
Right  lateral and dorsoventral  abdominal  radiographs  were obtained  that
demonstrated three further foetal skeletons all within the abdominal cavity. The most
caudal of the foetuses was malpresented, lying in transverse presentation. Abdominal
ultrasound was able to detect at least two different foetal heart rates, both of which
      s      
minute. Given the malpresentation of the most caudal foetus caesarean section was
recommended. Foetal heart rates were acceptable but borderline as an indication of
foetal distress and immediate intervention was therefore recommended (see Box 37.2
for other indications for emergency caesarean section).
BOX 37.2 Indications for emergency caesarean section
Pelvic obstruction
 Oversized (relative or absolute) foetus
Foetal malpresentation
Evidence of foetal distress (heart rate less than 170 beats per minute)
 Failure of the medical approach
 Meconium, excessive haemorrhage or purulent material in vulval discharge
Maternal systemic compromise
Clinical Tip
• Abdominal ultrasonography is relatively simple to perform for the purpose of detecting foetal heart
beats and possibly foetal movements. The bitch may be in lateral recumbency or standing if
preferred and the foetal rib cage should be identified. Within this it is usually possible to identify
the heart and to count the heart rate if appropriate (Figure 37.2).
· If ultrasonography is not available and foetal heart beats cannot be heard on auscultation, it may
be possible to identify them using an ultrasonic Doppler device for measuring blood pressure
applied to the abdomen.
Figure37.2
 Ultrasound image of a canine foetus. The foetal heart is visible within the thoracic
cavity (the left side of the rib cage is visible and associated with acoustic shadowing); the liver is
visible (top of image) as well as the skull (bottom of image).
In addition to the glucose saline infusion the bitch was started on another isotonic
crystalloid solution at 6 ml/kg/hr (making a total surgical infusion rate of 10
ml/kg/hr). Her ventral abdomen was clipped in preparation for surgery and an initial
scrub performed. The bitch was then premedicated using low dose pethidine (2 mg/kg
i.m.) and midazolam (0.1 mg/kg i.v.). After 5 minutes of preoxygenation, anaesthesia
was induced in the operating theatre with intravenous propofol given slowly to effect
(i.e. so that endotracheal intubation could be performed) and then maintained on
isoflurane in oxygen. Prior to performing the final surgical scrub lidocaine (2 mg/kg
diluted with  0.9% sodium  chloride) was infiltrated subcutaneously around the
laparotomy site. Caesarean section was performed and all puppies found to be alive.
a  a  e m (  ) 
was performed. A further dose of lidocaine was infiltrated into the midline during
wound closure. Perioperative antibiosis was not administered.
Clinical Tip
· When calculating dosages for drugs to be administered to pregnant animals, it is important to dose
to an estimate of the nongravid body weight of the dam as using full-term body weight will lead to
relative overdosage.
The bitch recovered well from surgery and nursed her puppies well. Routine
postpartum care was advised and the owners were also asked to monitor the surgical
wouind for evidence of infection, or seroma or haematoma formation. The bitch was
discharged on a reduced dose of carprofen (2 mg/kg p.o. q 24 hr) for 5 days.
38
Heatstroke
Theory Refresher
A spectrum of severity is seen in dogs suffering from heat-induced illness in terms of
both pathophysiological derangements and clinical consequences. It may therefore be
more accurate to employ a gradation of severity from heat stress to heat exhaustion to
heatstroke. Nevertheless, the general term “heatstroke' will be used here.
Heatstroke results from severe hyperthermia, although a specific threshold above
which heatstroke occurs has not been defined in dogs. Cellular injury may occur
above 41°C and permanent brain damage is reportedly possible. Enzyme dysfunction,
 p t oe  a   as pn  
associated with a significant increase in mortality. Further information regarding the
prognosis in dogs with heatstroke is provided in Box 38.1.
BOX 38.1 Prognostic considerations in dogs with heatstroke
The prognosis in heatstroke depends on a number of factors including:
· Duration of exposure
· Highest core body temperature reached
· Pre-existing medical conditions
· Development of secondary complications
· Speed and intensity of treatment
Unfavourable prognostic indicators include:
· Coma or hypothermia at presentation
 Progressive neurological deterioration
· Persistent/refractory hypoglycaemia
· Persistently unstable cardiovascular status
· Worsening azotaemia and oliguria despite appropriate fluid therapy
· Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC)
 In fatal cases, death usually occurs within 24 hours. Death is unlikely to occur in patients surviving
more than 48 hours.
Pathogenesis
Heatstroke occurs when heat gain markedly exceeds heat loss and this is
predominantly due to the cooling mechanisms stimulated by the hypothalamus
becoming overwhelmed. These mechanisms include:
· Direct stimulation of panting to maximize evaporative heat loss - this is the
predominant cooling mechanism in dogs
· Increased cardiac output and peripheral vasodilation to increase delivery of blood to
the body surface - this increases heat loss via convection and radiation.
Heatstroke may occur more readily in dogs suffering from a lack of acclimatization
to warmer weather. The acute phase response and heat shock proteins may also be
involved in the pathogenesis of heatstroke.
Risk factors
           a s
exogenous. Most of these factors impair heat loss and include:
· Exogenous
- Confinement and/or poor ventilation
-- Increased humidity
- Water deprivation
· Endogenous
- Brachycephalic anatomy
- Laryngeal dysfunction
- Obesity
- Darker and/or thicker coat.
Some factors affect heat gain, for example exercise, pyrexia, and especially external
ambient temperature. Measures designed to try to prevent heatstroke are summarized
in Box 38.2.
BOX 38.2 Preventative measures for heatstroke in dogs
Heatstroke can be avoided in the majority of cases if appropriate preventative measures are
employed. Preventative measures are especially important in dogs predisposed to heatstroke (e.g.
brachycephalic breeds, dogs with laryngeal dysfunction, obese dogs) and include:
· Controlling exercise to allow acclimatization as summer approaches
· Avoiding exercise during the hottest times of the day
· Avoiding confinement in a car or other poorly ventilated space
· Ensuring shade is available if the dog is tied up outside
· Ensuring water is always available
· Keeping the coat short during warmer months
Pathophysiology
Heatstroke may be divided into two types. Classic heatstroke occurs due to exposure to
high environmental temperature, for example being locked in a car with shut
windows on a warm day, or being tied up outside without shade/water. Exertional
heatstroke is the result of strenuous exercise. Many pathophysiological derangements
e     q     s 
physiological changes due to hyperthermia. These are summarized in Box 38.3.
Multiple organ dysfunction syndrome (MODS) (Box 38.4) is the most serious potential
sequela of heatstroke.
BOX 38.3 Potential pathophysiological derangements in heatstroke
· Increased metabolic demand
· Circulatory shock
· Hypoxia
· Excessive inflammation
· Coagulation abnormalities
 Endothelial injury and dysfunction
BOX 38.4 Potential components of multiple organ dysfunction syndrome (MODS)
• Circulatory collapse
· Brain dysfunction
· Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC)
• Acute renal failure
• Acute lung injury (ALI)/acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS)
• Acute hepatic failure
· Rhabdomyolysis
* Myocardial injury
 Intestinal injury (ischaemia, infarction)
Nursing Aspect
On an emergency basis, nurses are often the first members of staff to speak to owners ringing about
          a   e 
these cases is often very suggestive and early intervention can be crucial to a positive outcome.
Advice includes:
· Check rectal temperature if possible
· Gently hose/soak the dog with cool (not cold) water; do not cover in wet towels
· Offer water if alert but withhold if vomiting
• Drive to the nearest clinic with the air conditioning on or windows open; do not dry the dog
· Do not administer antipyretic agents (e.g. paracetamol (acetaminophen), ibuprofen)
The possible effect of cooling measures implemented by the owner prior to presentation must be
 borne in mind as some dogs with heatstroke may be normothermic at presentation as a result.
Case example 1
Presenting Signs and Case History
A 2-year-old male neutered Newfoundland dog presented collapsed in the mid-afternoon on a
warm summer's day. The dog had been out for a relatively long period of exercise in the middle of
the day and had started to pant excessively on the way home. On returning home he had drunk a
large volume of water, vomited a short while after, and then collapsed. Following a telephone
conversation with the practice, the dog had been hosed down with cool water and then driven
immediately to the practice with the air conditioning on maximum in the car. No other significant
preceding history was reported.
Major body system examination
On presentation the dog was recumbent, markedly depressed and panting excessively.
Cardiovascular examination revealed a heart rate of 160 beats per minute but it was
very difficult to hear the heart sounds clearly due to the panting. Dorsal pedal pulses
could not be palpated and femoral pulses were weak; pulse deficits were suspected.
        a  
Rectal temperature was 41.8°C and digital rectal examination revealed fresh blood.
Pupillary light reflexes (direct and consensual) and menace responses were intact
bilaterally.
Clinical Tip
The clinical findings in this case are relatively typical for dogs presenting with heatstroke.
However, clinical findings depend on factors such as the severity and duration of hyperthermia,
cooling measures performed prior to presentation, and the delay in presentation. As such a variety of
clinical findings are possible.
Additional or alternative findings include:
· Normo-or hypothermia
· Hyper-or hypodynamic cardiovascular findings
• Ataxia
· Cortical blindness (usually transient)
· Tremors, seizures
· Petechiae/ecchymoses.
Assessment
The dog was assessed as suffering from severe hyperthermia due to heatstroke with
evidence of cardiovascular, intestinal and possible neuirological compromise. Given
that cooling measures had already been started, it was suspected that rectal
temperature would have been higher prior to presentation.
Emergency database
      d s  s  n  
obtained via one of the catheters for an emergency database. This revealed
haemoconcentration (manual packed cell volume 64%, reference range 37-55%;
serum total solids 90 g/l, reference range 49-71 g/l), hypoglycaemia (blood glucose 2.0
mmol/l, reference range 3.3-6.1 mmol/l) and mildly raised blood urea nitrogen
concentration  (13.0 mmol/l,  reference range 2.5-8.9 mmol/l). Blood smear
examination at initial presentation was unremarkable.
Case management
was commenced using an isotonic replacement crystalloid solution. Hartmann's
solution (buffered lactated Ringer's solution) was administered into each cephalic
  t  s)    o   ) g
supplementation (o.5 g/kg slow i.v. diluted) provided. The dog was soaked in cool
water and multiple fans applied. Electrocardiography was performed and revealed
predominantly sinus rhythm with intermittent ventricular premature complexes
(VPCs) (see Figure 12.4).
The dog's cardiovascular status and mentation showed satisfactory improvement on
this initial management. A further 15 ml/kg bolus of Hartmann's was administered
and as the dog continued to pant excessively, butorphanol (o.2 mg/kg i.v.) was
administered with good effect. Cooling measures were discontinued when the rectal
temperature reached 39.5°C to avoid rebound hypothermia (see Ch. 16). The dog was
       
Continuous electrocardiographic monitoring was performed but no antidysrhythmic
therapy was indicated. Free catch urinalysis revealed moderate proteinuria, marked
haemoglobinuria, no detectable glucosuria and an absence of urinary casts.
The dog remained clinically stable but developed widespread petechiation (see Ch
21). Repeat peripheral blood smear examination performed several hours after
presentation revealed marked thrombocytopenia, an increase in nucleated red blood
cells and a mild subjective neutrophilia with some toxic change (see Ch. 3). Given the
concerns regarding coagulopathy, and the lack of both a coagulation analyser and
access to fresh frozen plasma (FFP), it was decided to refer the dog for more specialist
management.
Clinical Tip
Follow-uup
Follow-up information from the referral centre confirmed coagulopathy with marked
prolongation of both prothrombin time (PT) and activated partial thromboplastin
time (APTT). Multiple units of FFP were administered and intravenous glucose
abnormalities consistent with muscle and hepatic parenchymal damage. No further
complications were identified and the dog went on to make a complete recovery with
intensive supportive care.
identified in dogs suffering from heatstroke. These are summarized in Table 38.1. In
the author's experience petechiation is relatively common in dogs with heatstroke, not
all of which are thrombocytopenic. This suggests probable vasculitis or platelet
dysfunction as the cause of the petechiation.
Table 38.1  Possible clinicopathological findings in dogs with heatstroke
Possible findings
 Packed cell volume (PCV)
Increased (haemocon centration) or decreased (haemorrh age)
Serum total solids (TS)
Increased (haemocon centration) or decreased (haemorrh age, leakage through inflamed vessel walls)
 Blood glucose
Low, normal or high
 Electrolytes
Venous acid-base status
Respiratory alkalosis, metabolic acid osis, hyperlactataemia
Arterial blood gas analysis
Hyper-or hypocapnia, hypoxaemia
 Periph eral blood smear
Increased nucleated red blood cells, thrombocytopenia, neutrophilia or neutropenia
Bioch emistry
Azotaemia (preren al, ren al), increased liver enzymes, hyperbilirubin aemia, increased creatine kinase (CK)
 Urinalysis
Haematuria, haemoglobinuria, myoglobinuria, inappropriate glucosuria and casts (indicate renal damage)
Coagulation
 Prolonged prothrombin time (PT), prolon ged activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT)
Section 4
Additional Topics
39
Notes on sedation and general anaesthesia
Shailen Jasani, with, Simon Ripoll
General Considerations
Successful management of the emergency patient frequently requires the use of
sedative and anaesthetic drugs. However, it is in the emergency setting that the
inherent risks and adverse effects of these drugs on patient physiology assume an
increased significance and this should never be underestimated.
Clinical Tip
· Where the patient's condition allows, every effort should be made to delay anaesthesia until the
patient is stabilized.
* Cautious and extremely careful use of agents and techniques with which the clinician is personally
familiar is more important than the choice of any particular agent.
Potential risks of sedation and anaesthesia
Clinical Tip
· Before commencing sedation or anaesthesia, the patient should be assessed in the context of how
the major body systems are likely to cope with the adverse effects of the drugs employed, and also in
turn how the course of anaesthesia is likely to be influenced by the patient's condition. Potential
problems should be anticipated and prepared for in advance.
See Tables 39.1 and 39.2.
Table 39.1 Potential adverse effects of anaesthesia on body systems
Body system
Adverse effects
Cardiova scular
Hypoten sion 
Reversal of peripheral vasoconstriction which the patient may be relying on to maintain perfusion of vital organs Bradycardia c
tachycardia
Card iac dysrhythmia
 Respiratory
Reduced ventilation or apnoea
Ventilation/perfusion mismatch
Hypoxia
Hypercapnia
 Respiratory acidosis
Nervous
Direct central nervous system suppression
Raised intracranial pressure
 Reduced cerebral or spinal perfu sion
 Renal
 Reduced ren al perfusion
Hepatic
Reduced hepatic perfu sion
Gastrointest inal
Increa sed risk of regurgitation an d subsequ ent aspiration
Temperature
Hypothermia
 Table 39.2 Potential effects of patient condition on the course of anaesthesia
Patient con dition 
Effect on anaesth esia
 Cardiovascular
compromise (e.g.
Risk of overd ose (e.g. due toreduced volume of drug distribution, delayed response to intravenous injection) Reduced cardiac output
hypovola emia)
increases rate of inhalation anaesthetic uptake resulting in more rapid inhalation induction Reduced hepatic and renal perfusion
reduces metabolism and elimination of drugs
 Respiratory
 compromise
concentration
Central nervous
 Reduced level of consciou sness increases sensitivity to all sedatives an d anaesth etic agents
 system disease
 Renal disease
 Reduc ed ren al elim ination of drugs, prolon ging duration of effect
 Hepatic disease
Reduced hepatic metabolism of anaesth etic drugs, prolonging duration of effect
 Hypoalbumin aemia
 Increases nonprotein-bound, active con centration of many drugs, increasing sensitivity to these drugs
Hypothermia
Body temperature is likely to fall progressively in proportion to the duration of
anaesthesia and may result in widespread detrimental effects, for example:·
Hypoventilation
· Hypoxaemia
· Cardiac dysrhythmias
 Central nervous system dysfunction
· Slowed drug metabolism, potentiating or prolonging sedative and anaesthetic
effects.
Maximizing patient safety prior to sedation and anaesthesia
· By ensuring vital organ perfusion
- Correct blood pressure
-- Correct hypovolaemia (± correct dehydration)
-- Normalize heart rate
- Correct malignant or premalignant dysrhythmia
· By ensuring adequate blood oxygenation
Restore
volume/haemoglobin content) - Improve ventilation (e.g. drain pleural fluid,
relieve pneumothorax, treat pulmonary oedema)
· In addition
-- Reduce intracranial pressure if suspected to be elevated - Control seizures
-- Correct hypoglycaemia
- Treat acute renal failure, improve urine output in oliguria/anuria, correct
Is general anaesthesia necessary?
C   d  n    
consider may be: · Can general anaesthesia be avoided while still providing sufficient
restraint and insensibility to pain to accomplish the task?
· Will appropriate analgesia, with or without additional sedation, be sufficiently
effective?
· Could local anaesthesia be utilized in combination with sedation to perform a
painful procedure?
· Or in fact, is general anaesthesia the safest option?
Maximizing patient safety during general anaesthesia
1 Select the most appropriate induction method.
2 Establish good venous access.
3 Do anything you1 can do without anaesthesia beforehand to minimize anaesthetic
time (e.g. pre-clip surgical site).
5 Preoxygenate via a facemask or flow-by oxygen until ready to intubate.
6 Adopt a calm, quiet approach - relaxing the patient minimizes the dose of
anaesthetic required.
7 Take preinduction readings of vital parameters.
9 Intravenous fluids. Unless the patient's condition contraindicates it, run isotonic
 s   n  a s   d sd  
subsequently under anaesthesia in general will be based on that already instituted for
depends on: (a) Cardiovascuilar status at induction
(b) Packed cell volume, albumin and electrolyte levels
(c) Expected on-going pathological fluid losses (bleeding, body cavity effusions or
gut sequestration) (d) Intraoperative blood loss.
1 0 Calculate the approximate expected dose of anaesthetic agent required - be
conservative. Consider using an intravenous sedative preinduction to minimize the
effect is reached (usually to allow smooth intubation), allowing plenty of time
between doses if the patient is cardiovascularly unstable. More rapid administration
is a priority.
11 Ensure smooth intubation. Use local anaesthetic spray in cats in a timely fashion
and allow it time to work.
12 Perform an airway, breathing, circulation (ABC) check immediately on intubation
    = a (      
secure the tube in place (b) Breathing = confirm breathing through tube (chest
 s  o    n   q s 
1 3 Use a balanced anaesthetic technique for the maintenance of anaesthesia: use
nitrous oxide in the gas mixture if it is safe to do so, timely opioid analgesia bolus or
constant rate infusion (local anaesthetic techniques, muscle relaxants if familiar with
their use). Minimize anaesthetic concentrations at all times.
Table 39.3 Being prepared for anaesthesia of critical patients
Anaesthetic aspeo
Equipment
In tu bat ion
Laryngoscope
 Ran ge of ET tubes - include several much smaller tubes whiere potential for unexpectedly narrow airway exists (e.g. upper airwa)
obstruction} Tube tie
Local anaesthetic spray for cats
Complic ations of
Face mask
in tu bation 
Alternative narrow endotracheal oxygen delivery device: long narrow bore tube such as urinary catheter which can be adapted tc
connect to oxygen supply ET tube stylets/wire to act as guide and thread tube over in event of partial obstruction of nasopharynx
Suction apparatu s
Emergency trach eotomy kit
Oxygen
adm in istrat ion
and ventilation
Mon itoring
 Pulse oximeter, ECG, blood pressure mon itor, capnograph, thermometer or temperature probe, glucometer
Intraven ou s
Include those that might be required later or in event of patient deterioration: crystallids, collids, Oxyglobin ?, appropriate blood
fluids
sdund uosnu supnou Aqerajaid 'uaudinba uoensi uupe pin aeeae se pue paeipu se sion pod
Temperature
Preventing heat los: blanket, bubble wrap, heat and moisture exchanger on circuit (Thermovent), warm ambient temperature
control
of room Heat sources if appropriate: warm air blanket, warm water bed, hot h and s
Emergency
Atropine, adrenaline (epinephrine), lidoc aine (only indicated if there is continuous ECG mon itoring to characterize nature of card iac
drugs
dysrhythmia)
ECG, electrocardiograph; ET, endotracheal; IPPV, intermittent positive pressure ventilation.
Clinical Tip
· Because anaesthetic drugs cause cardiorespiratory depression in a dose-dependent manner, it is
important to try to minimize the dose used. Anaesthetic administration can be minimized by the
rational use of additional drugs which contribute to the anaesthetic state, without producing
significant cardiorespiratory effects of their own.
· The anaesthetic state consists of unconsciousness, analgesia and muscle relaxation. The
 provision of effective analgesia using opioids and, where possible, local anaesthesia in particular
can go a long way to reducing anaesthetic dosage.
exhaled breath (minus carbon dioxide) and so help to retain warmth and moisture.
15 Monitor appropriately (see below).
1 6 Ensure that intensive patient monitoring and support continue through the
recovery as well.
Patient monitoring during general anaesthesia
Under anaesthesia, the following questions should constantly be asked:
· Is there adequate circulation and perfusion?
· Is the patient adequately oxygenated?
· Is there adequate ventilation to get rid of carbon dioxide from the body?
· Is there adequate kidney function to ensure other waste products are removed from
the body?
parameters, ideally by a member of staff dedicated to this purpose: · Pulse rate and
quality - ideally access to a central (femoral) and peripheral (distal limb, tongue)
pulse. This should be supplemented by heart auscultation by stethoscope or
oesophageal stethoscope· Respiratory rate and quality - observation of chest and
· Core temperature and the temperature of the extremities
· Eye position, palpebral reflex, pupil size, jaw tone.
Clinical Tip
· Recording of measurements every 5 minutes is to be encouraged, primarily to focus the mind and
 alert the recorder to important trends in vital parameters over time.
Clinical Tip
Monitoring such as pulse oximetry, blood pressure measurement, capnography and
electrocardiography should be used as available. There are two golden rules with monitoring: 1 When
in doubt, always look at the patient and rely on your own senses.
2 Do not rely on what just one monitor is telling you; always consider it in the
context of all the other information you have available - from the patient, from other
 s        e   s
anaesthetic, etc.).
Sedative and Anaesthetic Drugs
Benzodiazepines
These are especially useful for sedation or calming in emergency patients when
combined with an opioid; if possible, give the opioid first and allow time for it to take
effect.
· Minimal cardiovascular or respiratory effects at standard doses
· Diazepam is poorly absorbed following i.m. administration; use midazolam.
· Either drug can be combined with a low dose of ketamine to provide more profound
sedation without undue cardiovascular compromise.
Clinical Tip
· A combination of benzodiazepine, opioid and low dose ketamine may provide particularly effective
sedation without needing to use a high dose of any of the individual drugs.
Opioids
Clinical Tip
· Opioids have an important role to play in the anaesthetic management of the emergency patient,
and as a general rule they should be utilized whenever possible.
· It should be remembered, however, that what is an acceptable dose for analgesia in the conscious
See Chapter 5.
Medetomidine and dexmedetomidine
· Potent agonists at alpha2-adrenoceptors in the brain and spinal cord.
· Cause profound and predictable sedation as well as good analgesia.
· Use with caution in the emergency patient because of marked physiological effects.
· Cause widespread peripheral vasoconstriction and significant bradycardia; also
cause a reduction in cardiac output, although perfusion of vital organs is considered
to be well preserved.
· Very low doses of medetomidine (1-2 μg/kg) have very much reduced side effects,
while still contributing to effective sedation in combination with other drugs: -
Combines well with opioids
- Higher doses of opioids or addition of small doses of benzodiazepine can improve
sedation whilst allowing the medetomidine dose to remain low - Combination
some extent.
Contraindications for use
Absolute contraindications
· Any form of shock
· Severe hypotensive state
· Bradycardia or pathophysiological tachycardia
· Cardiac dysrhythmia
· Significant respiratory compromise
Relative contraindications
· Potential to seizure
· Raised intracranial pressure (bradycardia)
· Unstable diabetic patients (hyperglycaemic effects)
Acepromazine
· Anxiolytic agent.
· Arterial hypotensive effects unhelpful in many emergency patients and cannot be
pharmacologically reversed.
· Lacks significant direct respiratory depressant effects; can be useful in calming
injury).
· History of seizures is not a contraindication for judicious use.
Ketamine
· Minimal cardiovascular and respiratory effects at lower doses.
· Can contribute to sedation or general anaesthesia, and is also an effective analgesic
(see Ch. 5).
· Should almost always be combined with another agent (benzodiazepine
medetomidine or acepromazine); addition of an opioid helps to produce smooth
sedation whilst adding to analgesia.
Contraindications
· May increase heart rate which is unhelpful in certain patients, e.g. cats with
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy; any patient with cardiac disease where increased
myocardial oxygen demand would be detrimental.
· May increase intracranial pressure and is potentially pro-convulsant, therefore avoid
in head trauma and seizuring patients.
· Ketamine is excreted primarily unchanged by the kidneys in cats, therefore use
judiciously if there is severe renal dysfunction; primary hepatic metabolism in dogs
Propofol
· Causes dose-related hypotension and respiratory depression so use judiciously.
· Can be titrated to effect and slow, incremental dosing should always be employed: -
Failure to do this in the shocked or severely hypotensive patient can easily prove fatal
-  Cardiovascular-sparing sedative agents should be used  whenever possible to
small sub-anaesthetic doses of propofol can be used to ‘top up' a diazepam/opioid
combination.
           e e
IPPV following intubation but allowance must be made for the possibility of delayed
or difficult intubation: -- Preoxygenate
- Administer propofol slowly
- Use good premedication to minimize propofol dose.
Alfaxalone
· Good alternative to propofol in many situations; can also be used as both a sedative
and general anaesthetic.
· Also produces dose-dependent hypotension and respiratory depression at higher
doses.
· Use of cardiovascular-sparing premedication is recommended to minimize the total
dose of alfaxalone lised.
· Best administered in increments allowing 15-20 s between boluses; given in this
way, it appears to be less likely to produce apnoea than propofol: - May be the
intravenous agent of choice in respiratory compromised patients - Low doses of
alfaxalone, titrated to effect, are useful in head trauma where apnoea and consequent
hypercapnia is particularly undesira ble.
See Tables 39.4 and 39.5 for information on drugs used for sedation and
anaesthesia; see Table 5.1 for information regarding opioids.
Table 39.4 Information for drugs used for sedation and general anaesthesia
DOSERANGEANDDURATIONOFACTION
Notes
Dog
Diazepam
0.1-0.5mg/kg
0.1-0.5mg/kg
Slow i.v. or rectal
Upto1hr
Upto1hr
Cannot mix in syringe with other agents,do not
use in drip lines
Midazolam
0.1-0.4mg/kg
0.1-0.4mg/kg
Slow iv. or i.m.
Up to90min
Up to90min
Medetomidine
1-5μg/kg i.v.
2-10μg/kgi.v
Avoidiardsulstbilityck
5-20 μg/kg i.m.
10-40μg/kg im.
head trauma,renal failure, diabetes
2-3hr
2-3hr
Easily reversible
Dexmedetomidine
Half medetomidine dose
Half medetomidine dose
Avoidifcardioasculainstability,shock,ere
head trauma,renal failure, diabetes
Easily reversible
Acepromazine
0.005-0.05mg/kg
0.005-0.05mg/kg
Avoid if cardiovascular instability, shock, head
4-6hr
4-6hr
trauma,severe renal or hepatic disease
Cannot reverse
Ketamine
Sedation:
Sedation:
Only anaesthetic which is also good analgesic
1-2mg/kgi.v.
1-5mg/kg i.v.
Good preservation of protective airway reflexes
1-5mg/kgi.m.
2-10mg/kg i.m.
Must combine with sedative-poor muscle
30-45min
30-45min
relaxation when used alone
GA (with premed):
GA(with premed):
Avoid in hyperdynamic cardiac disease states,head
2-5mg/kg i.v.
3-10mg/kgi.v.
trauma/seizures
5-10mg/kgi.m.
10-20mg/kgi.m.
Dose conservatively in severe renal disease
Propofol
Sedation:
Sedation:
Always give carefully to effect -no prescribed dose
Up to 2mg/kg i.v.
Up to3mg/kg iv.
Bolus effect lasts5-10minutes
GA (with premed):
GA (with premed):
Higher dosesmay be required for anaesthesiaif
Up to 4mg/kg i.v
Up to 6 mg/kg i.v.
used alone
CRI:3-36mg/kg/hr
CRI:3-10mg/kg/hr
No analgesia
ForCRI without syringe driveradd50ml propofol
to450ml0.9% sodium chloride togive1mg/ml
propofol
Limit prolonged infusion/repeat dosing in cats
(Heinz body anaemia)
Alfaxalone
Sedation:
Sedation:
Always give to effect -no prescribed dose
Up to 1 mg/kg i.v
Up to 2mg/kg iv
Boluseffect lasts5-10minutes
GA (with premed）:
GA (with premed):
No analgesia
Up to 2 mg/kg i.v. but
Up to 5 mg/kg iv. but
typically 1-1.5 mg/kg
typically 3-4 mg/kg
CRl,constant rate infusion;im.,intramuscular;iv.,intravenous; GA.general anaesthetic.
Table 39.5 Reversal agents for sedatives
Reversing
Drug
agent
Dose and route
Medetomidine,
Atipamezole
dexmedetomid ine
 5 X dose in mg/kg of medetomidine (same volume) in dogs Usually given at 2.5 x dose in mg/kg of medetomid ine
(half volume) in cats, but repeat the dose if sedation poorly reversed Licensed for i.m. use, but use iv. in an
emanergency
Full(pure) opioid
 Naloxone
0.01-0.1 mg/kg slow i.v. to effect, i.m.
Diazepam,
Flumaz en il
midaz olam
0.01 mg/kg rapid i.v
 Onset of action 1-2 minutes 
Short duration of action (60 minutes)
Sedative combinations
These may allow a reduced dose of each drug to be used, thus reducing the potential
for side-effects (Box 39.1).
BOX 39.1 Sedative combinations for emergency patients
Very unstable patient, low pain
Butorphanol 0.2-0.3 mg/kg i.v. followed 5-10 minutes later by diazepam/midazolam 0.2 mg/kg i.v.
Unstable patient, high pain
Substitute butorphanol with morphine/methadone 0.1-1.0 mg/kg (dogs) or 0.1-0.5 mg/kg (cats) i.v.
or i.m.; use buprenorphine 0.02 mg/kg i.v. or i.m. if no full opioid
Critical but stable, and not sedated enough or likely to be sedated enough with above
combinations
ADD acepromazine 0.005-0.01 mg/kg i.v.
 OR medetomidine 1-2 pg/kg i.v.
OR ketamine 2-3 mg/kg i.v.
 Choice depending on patient condition, temperament 
Critical but stable, and temperament suggests more predictable sedation required
Leave out diazepam/midazolam, go straight for a triple combination of opioid (as above)
ketamine
 acepromazine  OR medetomidine-
choice depending on patient condition.
Medetomidine combinations will usually give the most profound sedation and should be used with
care
 Lively or aggressive patient with potential critical illness or unpredictable response
to sedatives
Go for medetomidine 3-5 μg/kg + appropriate opioid at above doses i.v. or i.m. Medetomidine can
 always be topped up if there is not enough sedation
Primary clinical problem is respiratory compromise
Acepromazine 0.01 mg/kg i.v. + butorphanol 0.1 mg/kg i.v.
Acepromazine 0.01 mg/kg i.v. + ketamine 2-3 mg/kg i.v.
 Diazepam/midazolam 0.2 mg/kg i.v. + ketamine 2-3 mg/kg i.v.
Acepromazine + diazepam/midazolam + ketamine at same doses if smoother sedation required
Additional notes
· Medetomidine doses may need to be up to two times higher in cats · All combinations can be
mixed in one syringe, except diazepam which must be given separately · These doses are a guide
only, based on personal experience. They are deliberately intended to be for the emergency patient
with critical illness, and so are deliberately conservative 'starter’ doses, on the grounds that it is
better to top up poor sedation as required, rather than to risk destabilization of a patient · In
           
may be safer than any of these sedative combinations
Inhalation Anaesthesia
Induction
· Induction with inhalant agents is generally less desirable in critical patients.
Pa    e ia n ni si hi  hl Pe i e
respiratory compromise, risk of airway obstruction, high risk of regurgitation and
aspiration of stomach contents.
· May be the induction technique of choice in paediatric, especially neonatal and
juvenile, animals.
Maintenance
 Drugs of choice in most critical patients.
· Depth of anaesthesia readily controlled; cardiorespiratory depressant effects readily
reversible because the anaesthetic can be rapidly removed from the body via the
lungs.
· Greatest clinical familiarity.
particular opioids.
· Sevoflurane is the most rapidly responsive form of anaesthesia of the commonly
· Nitrous oxide can be uised to reduce the concentration of inhalant and so help to
reduce the cardiorespiratory depressant effects of these agents: - Avoid if arterial
saturation of haemoglobin with oxygen (SpO2) less than 95%
- Will rapidly diffuse into any abnormal air-filled spaces in the body; avoid in
pneumothorax, gastric dilation and gastrointestinal obstruction in particular.
Considerations in Specific Disorders
Caesarean section
Anaesthetic considerations for dam
· Increased risk of regurgitation/vomiting due to pressure from gravid uterus and not
being starved.
· Anaesthetic doses must be calculated according to estimated non-pregnant weight.
· Inhalation induction more rapid but overdose more likely.
· Displacement of diaphragm by gravid uterus interferes with ventilation.
· Positioning in dorsal recumbency may cause hypotension due to compression of the
caudal vena cava by the gravid uterus.
Anaesthetic considerations for neonates
· Periods of hypotension or vasoconstriction may reduce placental blood flow.
· Anaesthetics cross the placenta and cause neonatal depression.
· Potential for hypothermia.
Example anaesthetic protocol
Premedic ation
Pethidine (1 -2 mg/kg i.m.)
qnios ieoi ins Teilu rogad p ue ua o pqe [e uaa da-aid
Preoxygenate
In duction:
Propof ol
Maintenance
Isoflurane in oxygen/n itrous oxide mixture (d iscontinue nitrous oxide prior to removal of foetuses to avoid potential diffusional hypoxia
wh en they start to breathe)
In traven ous
 Isoton ic crystalloid at 10 ml/kg/hr
fluids:
An algesia:
Lidocaine (diluted with saline) infiltrated into abdominal midline prior to final scrub and at time of laparotomy closure Carprofen 
meloxicam i.v. following delivery
Intractable blood loss: surgery for ruptured splenic haemangiosarcoma
        
cause hypoperfusion of vital organs (brain, heart, lungs).
· Appropriate fluid resuscitation and possible abdominal counterpressure are essential
preoperatively (see Ch. 29) and increase the margin of safety for anaesthesia.
· Packed red blood cell transfusion if indicated; Oxyglobin? may be used but small bag
size so may not be practical for big dogs.
Example anaesthetic protocol
 Premedic ation:
 Full opioid (e.g. morphine 0.3 mg/kg slow i.v.) Pre-clip ven tral abdomen an d perf orm initial surgic al scrub
Induction:
Preoxygen ate
 Diazepam 0.2 mg/kg i.v.
 Propofol or alfaxalon e i.v.
 Maintenance:
 Inhalant anaesthesia in 100% oxygen
 In traven ous flu ids:
 Isoton ic crystalloid at 10-20 ml/kg/hr ± synthetic colloid (5 ml/kg boluses or appropriate infu sion ) as necessary
 An algesia:
 Full opioid premed ication, intra-an d postoperatively Carprofen or meloxicam only wh en cardiovascular status is completely stable
Diaphragmatic rupture
Anaesthesia only indicated following adequate and sustained patient stabilization (see
Ch. 28).
Example anaesthetic protocol
 Premedic ation
Mid az olam 0.2 mg/kg, ketamine 2 mg/kg and acepromazine 0.01 mg/kg i.v.
 Induction:
 Preoxygenate
 Attach pulse oximeter if available
 Propofol i.v.
Lidocaine spray on larynx (cats)
Commen ce IPPV as qu ickly as possible
Maintain initially in sternal recumbency with chest raised above abdomen while the anaesthesia is stablized and good oxygenation
confirmed Clip in lateral and dorsolateral recumben cy with the chest raised above the abdomen
Breathing
 Must allow manu al IPPV (e.g. modified Ayres T-piece for smaller patients)
circuit:
Maintenance:
Inhalant an aesthesia in 1 00% oxygen
In traven ous
 Isoton ic crystalloid at 1 0 ml/kg/hr
flu ids:
 An algesia:
Full opioid immediately after induction i.v. or i.m.; topped up as necessary Carprofen or meloxicam after induction if the cardiovascula
Gastric dilatation and volvulus syndrome
Anaesthesia is only indicated following adequate patient stabilization with fluid
therapy and gastric decompression (see Ch. 29).
Anaesthetic considerations
· Compression of the caudal vena cava is likely to be worse in dorsal recumbency
exacerbating reduced venous return to the heart and depressing cardiac output;
gastric decompression is essential before induction.
anaesthetic agents may sensitize the myocardium to dysrhythmogenic molecules
with a risk of deterioration into malignant and potentially fatal rhythm disturbances.
 s       
hypoventilation with IPpV, and minimizing anaesthetic doses. Monitor and treat if
indicated (see Ch. 12).
Example anaesthetic protocol
Premedic ation
Methadone 0.3 mg/kg slow i.v. (avoid morphine as more emetic)
Induction:
Preoxygenate
Aggressive intraven ous crystalloids as in dic ated (10-40 ml/kg/hr)
Attach ECG electrodes prior to in duction
Diazepam 0.2 mg/kg i.v.
Alfaxalone or propofol i.v. 30
nds late
Maintenance
Isoflurane in 100% oxygen
An algesia:
Meth adone continued regularly
Carprofen or meloxic a
compr omis
Traumatic brain injury
· Only anaesthetize in exceptional circumstances.
particular risk in any patient with significant, symptomatic brain pathology.
· Avoid ketamine.
· Inhalant anaesthetics tend to elevate intracranial pressure; use with extreme
caution; consider propofol infusion instead.
  d      nd  n   es
pressure over the jugular veins as this may worsen intracranial hypertension.
40
Notes on transfusion medicine
There  is  an  increasing  availability  to  nonreferral practices  of  products  for
transfusion through commercial and charitable pet blood banks, and a good
understanding of the basic principles of transfusion medicine is essential. This is to
ensure that the recipient is treated in the safest and most appropriate way, that the
owner's resources are put to greatest use, and that the product which was donated by
another animal, sometimes requiring sedation, is in fact used in the most beneficial
manner. In the author's opinion, the latter is sometimes readily overlooked and
uultimately it must be remembered that animal blood donors do not volunteer for the
task!
Blood Components
Use only the blood product indicated to minimize risk of a transfusion reaction and
reduce the total volume to be administered (Table 40.1).
Table 40.1 Summary of main blood components in veterinary use
Blood
Relevant functional
Indications for use
Other comments
component
constituents
Fresh whole
RBC
Anaemia with haemostatic
pRBCprefered in nomovolaemic anaemia
blood
Platelets
(e.g.IMHA)
Coagulation factors
Hypovolaemic anaemia
FWB is typically used instead of pRBC in cats
(labile and stable)
and small dogs but must be monitored for
Plasma proteins
volume overload
Must be type-specific in cats: preferred but
not necessary for first transfusion in dogs
Typically give10-20ml/kg
Requires transfusion within 6-8 hours of
collection (platelets and some clotting
factors arerapidly inactivated by storage)
Packed red
RBC
Normovolaemic anaemia
Transfuse when dinical signs attributable to
blood cells
Used for nonregenerative
anaemia (e.g.weakness,collapse,
(typically chronic） anaemia
tachycardia,tachypnoea,bounding pulses)
and haemolysis
are present as opposed to PCV threshold
Typically used for medium-to-large size dogs:
type-specific blood preferred but this is not
necessary for the first transfusion
Typically give 10 ml/kg at lowrate over
4-6hours to avoldvolume overload
Intravascular volume expansion should be
provided by intravenous fluid therapy in
hypovolaemic animals (e.g.following
haemorrhage)
Shelf life of35-37 days with added
preservative
Fresh frozen
Coagulation factors
Coagulation factor deficiency.
Typically frozenwithin 6-8hours ofcollection
plasma
(including vWF)
both acquired (e.g.vitamin
Theoretically type-specificproductis
Plasma proteins
Kdeficencyeverelir
preferred in dogs but clinically this is not
disease) and hereditary
necessary, currently not available for cats
Typically give 10-20ml/kg
Not suitable for albumin replacement as
large volumes and repeated transfusions
are required for any clinically significant
effect. The priority is to treat the
underlying disorder and provide nutritional
and synthetic colloid support
After 1 year this material isreclassified as
stored frozen plasma
Stored frozen
Labile coagulation
VitaminK deficiency
Describes plasma frozen more than
plasma
factors (V,Vll) are lost
6-8hours following collection,plasma
Does contain vitamin
stored frozen for more than 1year,orFFP
K-dependent factors
that was thawed and then refrozen
(I,VILK,X)
FFP,fresh frozen plasma;FWB,freshwholeblood;IMHA,immune-mediated haemolyticanaemia;PCV,packed cellvolme;RBC
packed red blood cells;RBC,red blood cells,vWF,vonWillebrand factor;WBC,white blood cells
Anaemia - normovolaemic versus hypovolaemic
Normovolaemic anaemia
· e.g. chronic nonregenerative anaemia, acute haemolytic anaemia.
blood cells (pRBC) only.
· Separation of feline whole blood into components is not commonplace, so cats
typically receive fresh whole blood (FWB) transfusion.
· It is often less wasteful to use FWB for small dogs (although smaller or half-units of
pRBC may be satisfactory).
· Recipients should be monitored for volume overload.
Hypovolaemic anaemia
· Due to blood loss.
· These patients require both intravascular volume expansion and oxygen-carrying
capacity.
· Typically use aggressive isotonic crystalloid or synthetic colloid therapy to correct
            
anaemia.
· Haemoglobin-based oxygen-carrying solutions may have a role in the treatment of
hypovolaemic anaemia (see Ch. 4).
Blood Types
These are determined by species-specific inherited antigens on the red blood cell
surface.
Canine blood types
· Dog erythrocyte antigen (DEA) 1.1, 1.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8 (plus others); positive or
negative for each DEA type.
· DEA 1.1 is extremely antigenic.
      n     e
status.
Clinical Tip
· If blood typing cannot be performed, DEA 1.1-negative blood should ideally be given if available.
However, dogs are not believed to have clinically significant, naturally occurring antibodies against
foreign red blood cell surface antigens (alloantibodies) and therefore the first blood transfusion
between two dogs of opposite blood types is unlikely to cause an acute transfusion reaction.
Therefore DEA 1.l-positive blood can be used for the first transfusion if necessary. However, it will
induce alloantibody production that may then shorten the lifespan of the transfused red blood cells.
· Once a dog has received a blood transfusion, regardless of whether this was type specific or not,
sensitization may occur. It is probably only safe to repeat the transfusion within 4 days before
crossmatching becomes essential.
Feline blood types
Routine testing is carried out for blood types A, B and AB.
Type B
· More common among exotic and pure breeds - e.g. British short hair, Devon Rex,
Cornish Rex, Abyssinian, Persian, Himalayan, Somali and Maine Coon.
      a       -
alloantibodies (from 2 months of age).
· Severe and potentially fatal transfusion reaction is a very real possibility if a type B
cat is given type A blood.
Type A
· The majority are type A.
· A small percentage of type A cats have weak, naturally occurring anti-type B
alloantibodies (from 2 months of age).
· A type A cat receiving type B blood is at risk of a transfusion reaction but this should
be relatively mild and certainly not fatal.
Type AB
· Relatively rare.
· These cats do not possess naturally occurring antibodies to type A or B red cell
antigens.
· They could therefore receive type A or type B (or type AB) red blood cells; however,
because cats typically receive fresh whole blood, a type A donor is preferred as anti-
type A alloantibodies in the plasma of a type B donor cat could result in a transfusion
reaction.
Clinical Tip
· Ideally cats must be blood typed prior to even the first transfusion and receive type-specific blood;
of a haemoglobin-based oxygen-carrying solution (see Ch. 4) should be considered as a readily
 available and often invaluable substitute that does not carry risks with respect to transfusion
 reactions. If this is not available, immediate referral of the case should be considered, although some
severely anaemic cats are too unstable to travel.
• In the exceptional circumstance when an untyped blood transfusion must be given, it is essential to
try to minimize the associated risks by using a donor cat that is likely to have the same blood type as
the recipient (e.g. domestic short hair donor for a domestic short hair recipient as both are likely to
be type A; exotic breed donor for an exotic breed recipient to at least try to increase the likelihood
that both are type B). This situation is far from ideal, especially if the recipient is potentially type B,
and the owner must be warned of the significant risks.
In-house blood typing
All practices likely to perform regular transfusions should invest in this facility. Most
methods involve visualization of an agglutination reaction between a red cell surface
antigen if present and antibodies specific for that antigen.
· Blood-typing cards (RapidVet-H Canine DEA 1.1? and RapidVet-H Feline A, B, AB?,
DMS Laboratories, New Jersey, USA) are currently used most widely · Other systems
are increasingly available and may offer advantages, especially easier interpretation
(e.g. DME VET DEA 1.1? and DME VET DEA A + B?, Alvedia, Lyon, France; DiaMed ID-
Card Anti-DEA 1.1 (Dog)? and DiaMed ID-Card Anti A+B (Cat)?, Bio-Rad
Laboratories, Inc., California, USA).
Crossmatching
This is used to detect existing antibodies to red cell antigens, but does not test for
antibodies against white blood cell or platelet antigens that may cause nonhaemolytic
transfusion reactions. Compatible crossmatches do not guarantee normal red blood
cell survival as delayed transfusion reactions may occur.
  s  s  ea n 
USA) is becoming increasingly available.
Major crossmatch
This tests for alloantibodies in the recipient's plasma to donor red cell antigens. This
type of incompatibility has the potential to be associated with the most severe
transfusion reactions as the recipient plasma volume, and therefore alloantibody
concentration, is large (hence major).
Minor crossmatch
This tests for alloantibodies in the donor's plasma to recipient red cell antigens.
Transfusion reactions are likely to be less severe as the donor plasma volume, and
therefore alloanti body concentration, is smaller (hence minor).
Controls
A donor and a recipient control test is usually also performed that checks for any
reaction between each individual's serum and its own red blood cells.
Transfusion Reactions
Clinical Tip
· All animals receiving a blood component transfusion should be monitored closely for an acute
transfusion reaction, ideally using a dedicated transfusion monitoring chart.
· A number of parameters, including heart and pulse rate, respiratory rate and effort, mucous
membrane colour and capillary refill time, rectal temperature, and mentation are monitored before,
regularly during and for a period after the transfusion. Plasma and urine colour should also be
monitored if possible.
· The reader is referred to other sources for more information on transfusion monitoring.
Transfusion reactions are typically classified as acute or delayed and then further
classified as immunological (haemolytic or nonhaemolytic) or nonimmunological.
Acute haemolytic transfusion reaction
This is a type of immunological reaction (immunoglobulin (Ig) M (or IgG)-mediated
type Il hypersensitivity reaction). It occurs when the recipient has pre-existing
alloantibodies to donor red blood cell surface antigens, and is the most concerning
type of transfusion reaction.
Canine acute haemolytic transfusion reaction
 The normal lifespan of canine red blood cells is 1o0-120 days.
· The half-life of transfused canine red blood cells in the recipient is approximately 21
days.
· It can be as little as 30 minutes with acute haemolysis
Clinical findings
· Tachycardia, tachypnoea or dyspnoea, weakness, collapse, salivation, vomiting and
pyrexia.
· Evidence of haemolysis:
- Intravascular: haemoglobinaemia and haemoglobinuria; may become apparent
within minutes of starting the transfusion - Extravascular: hyperbilirubinaemia
Intervention
· Stop transfusion immediately.
d  n en      e  
· Other symptomatic treatment.
· Corticosteroids are not used in human medicine.
Feline acute haemolytic transfusion reaction
. The normal lifespan of feline red blood cells is 70-80 days.
· The half-life following appropriately matched allogenic transfusion is 29-39 days.
Type B blood given to a type A cat
· A minor transfusion reaction is possible, reducing red cell half-life to approximately
2 days.
· Clinical signs may occur within minutes but should be mild - lethargy, restlessness,
tachycardia and tachypnoea.
 Possible  evidence  of   intravascular   haemolysis, i.e.   haemoglobinaemia,
haemoglobinuria.
Type A blood to be given to a type B cat
· This is likely to cause a severe and potentially fatal transfusion reaction, with red
cell half-life reduced to several hours or less.
· Clinical signs include gastrointestinal signs, salivation, vocalization and marked
cardiorespiratory abnormalities.
· There may be evidence of intravascular haemolysis, i.e. haemoglobinaemia,
haemoglobinuria.
· Systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS), maldistributive shock,
disseminated  intravascular coagulation  (DIC) and multiple organ dysfunction
syndrome (MODS) are all possi ble.
· The severity of the reaction is usually proportional to the amount of blood
transfused but even 1 ml may be enough to trigger a reaction.
Intervention
· Stop transfusion immediately.
· Give appropriate fluid therapy to treat hypoperfusion if it is present.
· Other symptomatic treatment.
· Corticosteroids are not used in human medicine.
Acute allergic transfusion reaction
· This is a nonhaemolytic immunological reaction (type I hypersensitivity reaction,
usually IgE or mast-cell mediated).
· It occurs within seconds to minutes of the transfusion being started.
      s d  n    es
when only plasma is transfused (i.e. despite absence of red blood cells).
Clinical signs
· These are usually mild, self-limiting or readily amenable to treatment and include
erythema, pruritus, urticaria and oedema.
· Occasionally there are more severe anaphylactic reactions with cardiovascular,
respiratory or gastrointestinal signs.
Clinical Tip
P            
reaction and it is therefore important to check for evidence of intravascular (haemoglobinaemia
 haemoglobinuria) and extravascular (hyperbilirubinaemia, bilirubinuria) haemolysis.
Intervention
· Discontinuing the transfusion may be all that is needed
· Restart at a slower rate (e.g. half of the original rate) if the reaction subsides and
monitor closely.
· Intravenous fluid therapy, corticosteroid or antihistamine may be required - judge
(see Ch. 26).
41
Notes on paediatric medicine The term paediatric refers
to animals under 6 months of age that can be further
subdivided into neonates, infants, weanlings and
juvenile animals. Changes in physiology and
haemodynamics occur as animals progress through
these stages. In particular, there are important
pharmacological considerations with respect to
neonates (up to 2 weeks old) and infants (2-6 weeks
old).
Neonatal and infant medicine is one area with which veterinary surgeons and
to commit substantial resources for veterinary care of the sickest neonates and infants
and this lack of familiarity and experience is therefore not surprising.
The Healthy Neonate
· Spends almost all its time nursing or sleeping until 2-3 weeks old.
· Inadequate milk intake usually results in constant crying, failure to gain weight
and reluctance to nurse; supplemental feeding or a healthy vaccinated foster dam
may be required.
Physical examination
Approximate normal physiological parameters are shown in Table 41.1. Healthy
can be made by assessing the following: · Suckling reflex · Rooting reflex (opening and
closing of the lips, moving the head in search for milk) · Righting reflex when placed
e t    s    s   
Adequate weight gain (see below)
· Coat condition: should be shiny
· Bowel sounds: sually auscultable.
Physiologic al parameter
Normal values or find ings
 Heart rate
Pio shaam t uotg sasea ra p iainu rad sieaq osg s uani anu ad sieaq ooz-o L isaiddnd
 Respiratory rate
 20-30 breaths per minute
 Rectal temperature
 Average 36.0*C at birth; adult values by 4 weeks old
 Mean arterial blood pressure
 Consid erably lower than adults; may not normalize until several months of age
Open ing of eyes
Usually by 14 days old (5-14 days)
Vision
 Usually normal by 3-4 weeks old
 Menace response
 May take 2-3 months to develop but can be soon er
 Pupllary light reflexes
ro saam g Aq reu uado isng sara uaum juasand
 Open ing of ear can als
 Usually 6-14 days old
Hearing
Mature by 3-4 weeks old
 Olfaction
Well developed at birth
Pain sensation
 Present at birth
Withdrawal reflex
 Usually develops by 1 week old
 Ambulation
 Usually develops by 2-3 weeks old
Gag reflex
 Usually not present until after 10 days old
Specific problems to examine neonates for include: · Cleft palate
· Umbilical hernia
· Umbilical infection: the umbilical cord usually falls off by 3 days of age and the
umbilicus should be dry. A soft erythematous umbilicus, possibly with a discharge, is
suggestive of bacterial omphalitis · Open fontanelle: may be associated with fading or
future neurological signs. Many toy canine breeds have open fontanelles and small
open fontanelles may be normal in kittens · Cardiac murmur: may be innocent or
the eyelids before they are fully open, with or without a purulent discharge; due to
infection with Staphylococcus sp or other normal flora · Nonpatent urogenital or anal
opening.
Body weight
Birth weight
Canine
· 100-200 g for toy breeds · 400-500 g for large breeds
· More than 700 g for giant breeds
Feline
Average birth weight 90-110 g.
Weight gain
Approximate guidelines for daily weight gain:
· Puppies should gain 2.2-2.7 g for every kg of anticipated adult weight each day, 0r
have a daily weight gain of 5-10% of their birth weight. Healthy puppies usually will
have doubled their birth weight by 10 days of age.
· Kittens should gain a minimum of 7-10 g per day (can be as much as 15-30 g) and
healthy kittens usually will have doubled their birth weight by 14 days of age.
Clinical Tip
· Weight is a very useful parameter to assess in neonates and failure to gain weight is a consistent
early sign of illness.
 Neonates should ideally be weighed daily, and in order to maximize the reliability of these data,
weighing should be done at the same time of the day and at the same time with respect to feeding.
Urination and defecation
· Unable to urinate voluntarily for the first 2-3 weeks of life; urination stimulated by
maternal licking of the genital region.
· Can only defecate when stimulated by maternal licking of anal region: - Meconium
(soft, yellow-brown, relatively odour-free) passed for the first 2 days of life - Faeces
then become light to medium brown in colour and pasty in consistency; typically they
do not become solid until after weaning - Overfeeding by owners is a common cauise
of diarrhoea.
Clinical Tip
· Neonates require maternal licking of the genital and anal regions in order to urinate and defecate,
and this is potentially readily overlooked if neonates are hospitalized away from the dam. In such
cases the genital and anal regions can be stimulated by gentle stroking for example with a warm
moist cotton wool ball.
ClinicalPathology
Clinical Tip
· Venepuncture in neonates is usually performed using a jugular vein and the author would strongly
encourage the prior application of EMLA? cream 5% (AstraZeneca) (see Ch. 5). Both the difficulties
in obtaining samples and especially the small blood volume of these animals mean that it is
absolutely crucial to plan tests carefully so as to coordinate interventions, to take the minimum
volume of blood required, and to run only tests that are essential. Maximum use should be made of
any blood taken and chemistry analysers that only require low volume samples should be used as
much as possible. In addition, peripheral blood smear examination is usually more than adequate
and uses much less blood than performing a full haematology profile.
· At least in the context of clinical pathology that requires blood sampling, it is an unavoidable
reality that neonates are unlikely to receive as intensive investigation or monitoring as an older
animal. This needs to be accepted and embraced from the outset and does not preclude these
patients from nevertheless receiving excellent care. Common sense is very much needed so that for
example empirical glucose supplementation may be provided to sick neonates as they are prone to
hypoglycaemia rather than performing frequent venepuncture for blood glucose measurement.
See Table 4l.2. Reference ranges used for adult animals are not always
      s      
misdiagnosis. In addition, there is limited information available in the veterinary
literature and what is available is regrettably typically based on studies performed on
laboratory or experimental animals.
Table 41.2 Guidelines for interpretation of clinicopathological findings in puppies and kittens
Parameter
Puppies
Kitten
Haematocrit,
packed cell
 With in adult ran ge at birth Decreases thereafter
Within  adult  range  at  birth Decreases thereafter  (usually  decreases
volume
 proportionally less than in puppies) Nadir usually at about 46 weeks old
(PCV)
Nadir usually at about 4 weeks old (coincides with
(coincides with weaning) Normalizes by 3-6 months old
weanin g) Normalizes by 3-6 mon ths old 
Leucogram,
platelet 
Typical as for adult dogs Possible mld lymphocytosi
6-8 Aq asuet inpe uo paseq siso13osnal alqIssod sie3 inpe 1ose Aeaida1
count
based on adult range by 3 weeks old
weeks old
Glucose
 Similar to adult range
 Simlar to adult range
 Albumin
 Lower than adult range at birth Increases thereafter and
Lower than adult range at birth Increases thereafter an d usually n ormalizes
usu ally normalizes by 2-4 mon ths old
by 2-4 months old 
Globu lin 
Lower than adult range at birth Incre
Lower than adult range at birth Incr
 usualy normalizes by 6 months old
by 6 mon ths old 
Biliru bin
May be greater than adult range (perhaps 2-3 times
Aensn (unuxeu saul G sde qiad) auet iinpe ueq ra1eans aq Ae
 maximum) Usualy n ormalizes by 6 weeks old
 normalizes by 6 weeks old
 Alkaline
Greater than adult range (perh aps 40-80 times maximum)
Greater th an adult range (perh aps 3-6 times maximum)
ph osphat ase
(ALP)
Greater than adult range (perh aps 150-500 times
 Similar to adult range
Gamma
 glu tamyl
maximum)
transf erase
(GGT)
ean pooa 
 May be lower th an adult ran ge
May be lower than adult range
nitrogen
(BUN)
Creatinine
 May be lower th an adult ran ge
May be lower than adult range
Calcium,
 In creased due to bone growth
Increased due to bone growth
 ph osphorus
Urine specific
gravity
Isosthenuric (1.007-1.015) for a few days after birth
 Isosthenuric (1.007-1.015) for a few days after birth Increases with age to
 Increases with age to reach n ormal con centrating ability by
reach normal concentrating ability by 8-10 weeks old (can be delayed but
 8-10 weeks old (can take upto 6 months)
less so than puppies)
Glucosuria,
 May be normal in puppies (usually less than 8 weeks old)
May be normal in kittens (usually less than 8 weeks old)
proteinuria
General Treatment Concepts
Nursing Aspect
Very young animals are much less able to cope with illness than older animals and require
much more attentive nursing and monitoring. The role of the nurse is never more important than in
the care of neonates and infants. Although most of the treatment measures implemented are
nonspecific and supportive in nature, these animals are almost entirely dependent on their caretakers
in the absence of their dams.
Treatment of neonates typically consists of:
· Temperature control· Fluid therapy and glucose supplementation· Nutritional
support
· Stimulation of urination and defecation · Infection control.
Hypothermia
· Neonates are highly susceptible, e.g.
- Relatively large body surface area - Reduced subcutaneous fat
inability to shiver until after 1 week of age).
· Causes significant additional energy demand.
· May manifest as unresponsiveness, bradycardia and respiratory depression; may
also promote ileus and cause gastro-oesophageal reflux.
· Common sign of sepsis.
Clinical Tip
se q s sd rn in a     s  
They should not, however, be fed until warmed.
· Warming should be performed slowly and the animal must be able to move away from the heat
source to avoid thermal injury. In addition, it must be remembered that neonates have a lower
normal rectal temperature than older animals and are also unable to pant; they are therefore readily
at risk of being overheated.
Warming
· Ambient temperature of 29-32°C recommended.
· Guidelines for target rectal temperatures at which the intensity of warming can be
reduced: - 1-3 days old: 36.5-37°C
- 4-7 days old: 37-37.5°℃
- > 7 days old: 37.5-38.0°C.
· Warmed (but not hot!) fluids should be administered: warm the fluid line in
relatively close proximity to the patient so that the fluid is still warm when it enters
the body. This is best achieved using an in-line fluid warmer (e.g. Tempcare?
Veterinary Fluid Warmer) but wrapping the line around several hot hands or a hot
water bottle may be satisfactory. You must ensure that the patient is not at risk of
thermal injury.
· Warming of fluid bags is far less effective, as cooling occurs within a matter of
minutes. Even if the fluid bag can be kept warm, cooling is likely en route to the
patient.
Hypoglycaemia
· Neonates are highly susceptible, e.g.
Decreased glycogen stores
- Brain (and heart) are highly dependent on glucose as the energy substrate -
Increased loss of glucose in uirine.
· Causes of hypoglycaemia include:
- Vomiting and diarrhoea due to primary gastrointestinal disease or another
cause - Inadequate food and fluid intake
-- Infection.
· Hypoglycaemia may manifest as lethargy, depression, poor feeding, crying, and a
limp body.
Treatment
· Enteral supplementation · Parenteral supplementation:
Glucose solutions (1.25-5%) made up in 0.9% sodium chloride (normal,
physiological saline) or Hartmann's solution (buffered lactated Ringer's solution)
should be used - A 4% glucose solution in 0.18% sodium chloride is commercially
available but should not be used. This solution is markedly hypotonic compared to
plasma and can cause potentially very serious electrolyte derangements (see Ch
4).
Clinical Tip
· It can be both difficult and potentially undesirable to check blood glucose regularly in neonates.
The author tends to take an empirical approach to hypoglycaemic neonates, providing a conservative
basal level of supplementation with additional treatments being guided by deterioration in the
clinical status more than blood glucose measurements.
· The route of administration depends on whether parenteral access is available. Intravenous
administration is generally preferred, but the author has used oral glucose solutions (e.g. Glucogel?,
BBI Healthcare, Swansea, UK) applied topically to the oral mucosa with good success in a number of
 a a  aa s ns e ao  lan a s s sas
requirements of the patient.
· It is also noteworthy that while hypoglycaemia is clearly undesirable, excessive glucose
supplementation may be more problematic in neonates than it is in older animals.
Fluid therapy
Fluid requirements of very young animals are much higher than for adults, for
example due to: · Higher percentage of total body water · Greater surface area to body
weight ratio · Higher metabolic rate.
 e          
isotonic crystalloid solutions. However, it is noteworthy that excessive fluid
administration may have more serious consequences than in older animals as
immature animals have a reduced ability to dilute their urine and thereby excrete the
surplus fluid. Close monitoring is therefore indicated, although in practical terms this
may be difficult to achieve (e.g. monitoring of packed cell volume and total solids is
very difficult). Monitoring weight may be helpful, especially if weight loss occurs as
these animals should be gaining weight daily and weight loss may be due to
dehydration. Monitoring for an increase in respiratory rate and effort may be the most
practical evidence of fluid overload.
but may also be affected by patient size and compliance, and the expertise of the
personnel.
· Enteral feeding if the patient is normothermic and still nursing; warmed
suiccess of enteral feeding; glucose should not be included in fluids given by these
parenteral routes.
· Intravenous or intraosseous fluid therapy for moderate to severe dehydration or
hypovolaemia.
S           s
may be due to immature compensatory mechanisms; a conservative approach to fluid
resuscitation is recommended. Severe dehydration is the most common cause of
hypovolaemia in the very young.
Drug therapy
· Altered drug absorption, distribution, metabolism, efficacy and elimination are
likely when compared to adults, for example due to: - Greater surface area to body
weight ratio - Reduced body fat and greater water composition  (may affect
which most drugs preferentially bind) - Reduced renal clearance
- Immature hepatic enzyme systems for oxidation and glucuronidation - Greater
permeability of the neonatal blood-brain barrier - Immature autonomic nervous
system.
· Factors change as animal gets older.
    nad   s n e o nd  s e
relatively fast heart rate to maintain cardiac output; use drugs causing
· Try opioids first for sedation; additional drugs should only be added if still required.
Clinical Tip
  e s  as i  ssi  n e  sd o 
up to 12 weeks of age, and older in some cases. The reader is encouraged to consult datasheets and
authoritative drug formularies for more information about specific drugs prior to their use.
· Dose reduction often involves reducing the recommended adult dose by up to 50% and/or
increasing the recommended adult dosing interval by up to 50%.
Antimicrobial therapy
· The intestinal flora is more susceptible to disruption by antimicrobial therapy and
will cope less well with any subsequent diarrhoea.
· Only use antimicrobial treatment if there is a good clinical indication.
· Beta-lactam antibiotics (e.g. amoxicillin/clavulanic acid, cephalosporins) are
usually the first choice and require an increased dosing interval due to the prolonged
half-life.
· Metronidazole is recommended for giardiasis and anaerobic infections; dose
reduction is required.
Analgesia
        n    s
apply as for adults (see Ch. 5).
Opioids
· Can be used very safely.
· Full (pure) opioids are preferred as they can be readily titrated.
· Avoid preconceptions about the required dose, i.e. whether you should use more or
less compared to adults; start at bottom end of the adult dose range and titrate
upwards according to the response.
· Naloxone can be used to reverse the effects.
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents
Avoid at least until the animal is more than 12 weeks of age due to the immaturity of
hepatic and renal systems, and inherent difficulties in assessing volume and hydration
Statuls.
Local anaesthesia
Use lidocaine at reduced doses (due to immaturity of the peripheral nerves)
Clinical Tip
• EMLA? cream 5% (AstraZeneca) (see Ch. 5) is safe in young animals and the author would strongly
encourage its use as extensively as possible.
APPENDIX
MCQS
1 Which of the following is most correct? The major body systems are:
(a) The cardiovascular and respiratory systems (b) The cardiovascular and
neurological systems (c) The cardiovascular, respiratory and neurological systems
(d) The cardiovascuilar, nelirological and musculoskeletal systems
2 Which is the most common type of shock in dogs and cats?
(a) Hypovolaemic (b) Maldistri butive (c) Cardiogenic
(d) Obstructive
3 Which of the following is most correct? The main physical examination parameters
for assessing perfuision are:
(a) Heart rate, mucous membrane colour and capillary refill time (b) Heart rate,
peripheral pulse quality and mucous membrane colour (c) Heart rate, peripheral
pulse quality, mucous membrane colour and capillary refill time (d) Heart rate,
peripheral pulse quality, mucous membrane colour, capillary refill time and skin
tuirgor
4 Which of the following is most true about prerenal azotaemia?
(a) The azotaemia is severe and associated with increased packed cell volume,
plasma total solids and urine specific gravity (b) The azotaemia is severe and
associated with decreased packed cell volume, plasma total solids and urine
specific gravity (c) The azotaemia is mild and associated with decreased packed
cell volume, plasma total solids and urine specific gravity (d) The azotaemia is
mild and associated with increased packed cell volume, plasma total solids and
urine specific gravity
5 Which of the following is correct? In uncomplicated severe hypovolaemia the size of
the initial isotonic crystalloid bolus should be:
 y/1 09-0 s0 101 81/ 06-09 (9) s1 11 10p 0g 101 y/ 0-07 (9)
cats (c) 60-90 ml/kg for dogs, 10-20 ml/kg for cats (d) 20-40 ml/kg for dogs, 40-
60 ml/kg for cats
6 Which of the following opioids has the slowest onset of action?
(a) Morphine (b) Methadone
(c) Butorphanol
(d) Buprenorphine
7 Which of the following causes of acute abdomen is not a surgical emergency?
(a) Perforated gastric ulcer (b) Nonperforated gastric ulcer (c) Uterine rupture (d)
Intestinal obstruction
8 Which of the following is not an indication to treat ventricular tachycardia with
lidocaine?
( a ) Associated  with
1 haemodynamic
Ccompromise (b ) Recurrent R-on-T
phenomenon (c) Multiform complexes (d) Sustained rate of 140 beats per minute
P   r       (
should be treated by active cooling(c) Active cooling should cease when
temperature reaches 39.5°C
10 Which of the following statements about hypothermia is not true?
           
cardiac dysfunction should be warmed aggressively (c) Hypothermic animals
         g
adverse effects on many body systems
11 Which of the following is not associated with hepatic jaundice in cats?
Mycoplasma haemofelis infection (d) Hepatic lymphoma
12 The lag phase for red blood cell regeneration (preregenerative anaemia) following
significant blood loss iss
(a) Up to 3 days (b) Up to 7 days
(c) Up to 14 days
(d) Up to 21 days
13 Which of the following statements is not true about regurgitation?
(a) Regurgitation is most commonly due to small intestinal disease (b)
risk of aspiration pneumonia (d) Regurgitation shows no consistent relationship
with feeding
14 Which of the following statements is not true about lung sounds?
(a) Pulmonary oedema is associated with loud harsh lung sounds and possible
crackles (b) Pulmonary contusions are associated with loud harsh lung sounds
and possi ble crackles (c) Pleural effusion is associated with dull lung sounds (d)
Pneumothorax is associated with loud harsh lung sounds dorsally
15 Idiopathic epilepsy is most likely to be diagnosed in which of the following?
() d -rg  () oa po--ot  (a) aus  Pio-a v (e)
A 6-month-old Yorkshire terrier
           rgs
traumatic injuries including to the head. The cat is found to be hypertensive and
bradycardic. This is most likely due to:
(a) Pain (b) Myocardial injury (c) Raised intracranial pressure (d) Ruptured
urinary bladder
17 Which of the following statements is true following blunt thoracic trauma?
(a) Pulmonary contusions and pneumothorax are the most common injuries (b)
Diaphragmatic rupture is the most common injury (c) Flail segments usually
occur without other injuries (d) Haemothorax requiring drainage is common
18 Which of the following is the most common cauise of haemoa bdomen in dogs?
(a) Gastric dilatation/volvulus syndrome (GDV) (b) Coagulopathy
(c) Rupture of an intra-abdominal neoplasm (d) Trauma
19 Which of the following statements is not true about abdominal counterpressure
bandages?
caudally and moving cranially (c) They should be removed starting cranially and
moving caudally (d) They should not be used in animals with respiratory
compromise
(a) Trauma is the most common cauise (b) Azotaemia is typically mild at the time
of diagnosis (c) Urea, creatinine and potassium concentrations in the peritoneal
fluid are typically higher than concomitant plasma concentrations (d) The
presence of a palpable bladder does not rule out leakage of urine from the bladder
21 Which of the following is not considered a risk factor for gastric dilatation and
volvulus?
(a) Large/giant breed (b) Narrow and deep chest (c) Feeding multiple small meals
daily (d) Fearful/agitated demeanour
22 Which of the following is not a contraindication for induction of emesis following
oral toxin exposure?
(a) Significantly altered mentation (b) Respiratory distress (c) Ingestion of a
caustic or corrosive agent (d) More than 1 hour since ingestion
23 Intoxication with which of the following is not potentially associated with acute
renal failure in dogs?
(a) Metaldehyde (b) Grapes/raisins
(a) II (b) VIII
(c) IX
(d) x
25 Which of the following contains the lowest concentration of theobromine?
(a) White chocolate (b) Milk chocolate
(c) Dark chocolate
(d) Cocoa powder
26 Which of the following has not been reported to occur following xylitol poisoning
in dogs?
(a) Hypoglycaemia (b) Acute renal failure (c) Acute liver failure (d) Coagulopathy
27 Which of the following is not a compensatory mechanism in heart disease?
(a) Tachycardia (b) Increased inotropy (c) Peripheral vasodilation (d) Sodium and
water retention
28 Which of the following is not indicated in all animals with acute decompensated
congestive heart failure?
(a) Oxygen supplementation (b) Digoxin
(c) Furosemide
(d) Low dose morphine
29 Which of the following is the most commonly diagnosed feline cardiomyopathy?
(a ) Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (b) Dilated cardiomyopathy (c) Restrictive
30 Clinical signs in cats with aortic thromboembolism correlate least with which of
the following?
(a) Whether complete or only partial obstruction occurs (b) The duration of
       
severity of the underlying heart disease
3 1 Which of the following tumours is most commonly identified in dogs with
malignant pericardial effusion?
(a) Lymphoma (b) Haemangiosarcoma (c) Chemodectoma
(d) Mesothelioma
32 Which of the following is the least common cause of pleural effusion in cats?
(a) Neoplasia (b) Congestive heart failure (c) Haemothorax
(d) Pyothorax
33 Which of the following statements is not true about feline bronchial disease?
(a) Siamese cats are over represented(b) Antibiotics are indicated in the
to be involved in the pathogenesis (d) Clinical signs are the result of lower airway
obstruction
34 Which of the following statements is not true about canine laryngeal paralysis?
(a) It is usually bilateral (b) In most cases laryngeal paralysis is an acquired
condition (c) There is a high incidence of megaoesophagus in affected dogs (d)
n       n  s
respiratory crisis
35 Which of the following is not considered a component of brachycephalic airway
obstruction syndrome?
(a) Tracheal hypoplasia (b) Elongated soft palate (c) Stenotic nares
(d) Everted laryngeal saccules
3 6 Which of the following is not consistent with immune-mediated haemolytic
anaemia?
(a ) Nonregenerative  anaemia (b) Positive in-saline agglutination test (c)
Spherocytosis
(d) Positive Coombs’ test
3 7 How many platelets do animals with primary (idiopathic) immune-mediated
blood smear examination?
(a) 3-4
(b) 2-3
(c) 1-2
(d) 0-1
3 8 Which of the following is least consistent with primary hypoadrenocorticism
(Addison's disease)?
(a) Hyponatraemia (b) Hyperkalaemia
(c) Hyperglycaemia
(d) Mild azotaemia
39 Which of the following statements is not true about diabetic ketoacidosis?
(a) It occurs most commonly in animals without a prior diagnosis of diabetes
mellitus (b) Most animals have another concurrent precipitating disorder (c)
There is no risk of recurrence following one episode of ketoacidosis (d) It is
diagnosed most often in middle-aged to older male cats and female dogs
4 0 latrogenic hypocalcaemia following bilateral thyroidectomy usually occurs how
many days after surgery?
(a) 1-5
(b) 6-10
(c) 11-15
(d) 16-20
41 Which of the following does not distinguish acute anterior uveitis from acute
glaucoma?
(a) Miotic pupil (b) Painful red eye (c) Abnormal iris
(d) Low intraocular pressure
42 Which of the following statements is not true about feline urethral obstruction?
(a) Mechanical urethral obstruction is much more common in male cats (b)
cats  is  typically  associated  with  a  urease-producing bacterial  infection (d)
Prolonged urethral obstruction results in hypovolaemia and profound electrolyte
and acid-base disturbances
43 Which of the following is the most common cause of acute renal failure in dogs
and cats?
(a) Infection (b) Trauma
(c) Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DlC) (d) Toxins
4 4 Which of the following is not a recognized electrocardiogram abnormality in
hyperkalaemia?
(a) Sinoventricular rhythm (b) Sinus tachycardia (c) Atrial standstill (d) Peaked T
waves
(a) Mechanical obstruction (b) Foetal malpresentation (c) Primary uterine inertia
(d) Maternal anxiety
veterinary attention during parturition?
(a) Weak irregular nonproductive straining for more than 30 minutes (b) A green
(bitch) or brown (queen) vulval discharge without a foetus being born in the
subsequent 2 hours (c) Flank biting or other signs suggesting severe abdominal
discomfort in the dam (d) The presence of a foetus or foetal membranes
protruding from the vulva for more than 15 minutes
47 Which of the following is not good advice to a client ringing about a dog with
heatstroke before bringing the dog down to the clinic?
     ()  ( o)       ()
towels (c) Offer water if alert but withhold if vomiting (d) Drive to the nearest
clinic with the air conditioning on or windows open
        a   
following is incorrect?
(a) There is an increased risk of regurgitation/vomiting due to pressure from the
gravid uterus and not being starved (b) Anaesthetic doses must be calculated
according to the estimated nonpregnant weight (c) Positioning in dorsal
by the gravid uterus (d) Inhalation induction occurs more slowly and overdose is
less likely
4 9 Which of the following statements is not true with respect to feline blood
transfusion?
(a) Most cats are blood type A (b) Blood type B is more common among exotic and
pure breeds (c) A severe and potentially fatal transfusion reaction is a very real
Ss   s        s r     
naturally occurring antibodies to type A or B red cell antigens
50 Which of the following statements is incorrect about a 4-week-old kitten?
(a) Total protein concentration is within the adult reference range (b)
        
concentration is within the adult reference range (d) Vision should be normal
APPENDIX
MCQs - Answers
1 (c) Severe abnormalities in these three systems have the potential to be rapidly
fatal.
2 (a) Hypovolaemia is a reduction in the effective circulating intravascular volume
and is the most common cause of shock in companion animals.
3 (c) Answers (a) and (b) do not include all the perfusion parameters; skin turgor
included in answer (d) is an indicator of hydration, not perfusion.
4 (d) Severe azotaemia is usually postrenal or renal in origin; prerenal azotaemia is
usually due to dehydration which causes increased PCV and TS, and fluid
5 (b)
6 (d) Onset may be up to 45 minutes therefore typically not appropriate as first line
analgesic.
7 (b)
   e  a  s o    ) 
beats per minute is an indication to treat.
9 (a) In hyperthermia the thermoregulatory set point is unchanged and the
hypothalamus attempts to return core temperature to normal limits. Clinically
overwhelmed and active cooling is therefore appropriate. Antipyretic agents reset the
thermoregulatory set point and shouild not be uised.
10 (b) Warming will lead to cutaneous vasodilation that may exacerbate hypotension;
these animals should therefore not be warmed. An increase in temperature in these
cases may be supportive of a positive response to appropriate treatment of the heart
disease.
11 (c) Mycoplasma haemofelis causes haemolytic anaemia that results in prehepatic
jaundice if it occurs.
12 (b)
1 3 (a) Regurgitation is most commonly due to oesophageal disease, especially
1 4 (d) Pneumothorax is associated with quiet lung sounds dorsally (and possibly
diffusely).
15 (a)
16 (c) The Cushing response constitutes raised intracranial pressure giving rise to
systemic hypertension and a reflex bradycardia.
17 (a)
18 (c)
19 (a) Realistically intra-abdominal pressure is only likely to be increased sufficiently
to exceed venous pressure and reduce venous haemorrhage. Therefore excessively
tight bandages do not offer any greater advantage and are likely to be associated with
greater complications.
20 (b) Azotaemia is typically severe at the time of diagnosis.
21 (c) Feeding a single large meal daily is considered a risk factor
22 (d) Induction of emesis is appropriate for several hours following oral exposure.
temporary blindness or liver failure).
24 (b) Factor Vll is the missing vitamin K-dependent factor.
25 (a)
 s     r    
liver failure.
27 (c) Peripheral vasoconstriction occurs to couinter the tendency towards arterial
hypotension in heart disease.
        
heart disease and is inherited in some breeds (e.g. the Maine coon).
30 (d) There is no reported correlation between the severity of heart disease and the
clinical signs of obstruction.
31 (b) Haemangiosarcoma is the most commonly diagnosed canine cardiac tumour
and arises most often from the wall of the right atrium or auricle. It is the most
common cause of canine pericardial effusion and is assumed to have metastasized in
virtually all cases at the time of diagnosis.
32 (c)
33 (b) The relationship between respiratory infection and feline bronchial disease
remains to be clarified. Antibiotics should only be used if infection is documented.
35 (a) Tracheal hypoplasia of variable severity may or may not be present in dogs
with BAOS.
36 (a) IMHA is typically associated with a (strongly) regenerative anaemia
37 (d) The diagnosis of immune-mediated thrombocytopenia is routinely made on the
basis of identifying a thrombocytopenia of this severity in an animal with compati ble
and if one cannot be found, a presumptive diagnosis of ITP is made.
38 (c) Mild hypoglycaemia is a relatively common finding in Addison's disease.
39 (c) There is a constant risk of recurrence in these animals, especially cats
40 (a)
41 (b) Acute glaucoma is also associated with a painful red eye but characterized by
mydriasis, raised intraocular pressuire and a normal iris
42 (c) This is true in dogs but not in cats; antibiotics should not be used without
documenting infection.
43 (d)
44 (b) Sinus bradycardia is recognized
45 (c)
46 (a) Weak irregular nonproductive straining for more than 2 hours is an indication
for  veterinary attention, as is  strong active but  nonproductive abdominal
contractions for more than 30 minutes.
 s  n nn   s sn a      
should be avoided.
48 (d) Inhalation induction occurs more rapidly but overdose is more likely 49 (c)
The answer is the wrong way round; in fact a severe and potentially fatal transfusion
reaction is a very real possibility if a type B cat is given type A blood (as most type B
cats have high levels of strong, naturally occurring anti-type A alloantibodies).
 n   a n (   o) d p ( 
range.
APPENDIX 1
Drug formulary
Agent
Dose/routes of
Indicatlon(s) In
Adverse effect/other comments
administration
emergency patlents
Aminophylline
D:9-11 mg/kg sowty L
Emergency
Im. administration Is loall painfut avoid
(theophyline+
(diluted), (i.m.)
bronchodilauion
iatall possible
ethylenedamine)
C:2-5mg/kg slowly l..
Theophylines relax smooth muscle In the
(dluted), (.m.)
arenose Aueuound pue puouq
Weak chronotropicand Inotropic action
Mild dluretc action
Amlodipine
C:0.625-1.25 mg/cat p.o.q
Hypertension,especially
Calcium channel blocker causes penpheral
12-24hr
inoats
arteriolar vasodilation
D:0.05-0.2mg/kgp.o.q
Relatively slow onset of action (maximum
12-24hr
offect within 7 days)
Amoxicillin/clavulanic
D.C:20mgkg Lvq8hr
Baderial infections
Amoxidlin is bactericidat clavulanic acid Is
acid
12.5-25mg/kgp.0.q8-12hr
abeta-lactamaseInhbtor that increases
the spectrum of activity
Broad spectrum acuvity against some
Gram-positive and Gram-negativo
aerobes:many obligate anaerobes
sasop
Hypersenstvity reactons are occaslonally
reported
Apomorphine
D:0.04-0.1mg/kgs.c,Lm,
Inducbon of emesis
Stimulate dopamine receptors In the
ocular (v)
following oral
chemoreceptor tngger zone causing
C:0.02mg/kg s.c,1.m.
poboning
emess
Highly relable emess in dogs, usually
within5-15mln
Ocularroute: apply to conjunctival sac
lavage thoroughly following emess to
minimlze drug absorptiorc highly
dependenton compllance.Centrally acung
Sedatin,rsraory eson,taa
protracted vomiting
Use In cat notrecommended by some
Ascorbicad （vitaminD,C:30mg/g p.0.q6hr for6Reducton of
ejene ogfe sn Aoy suoneedo
doses
methaemoglobinaemla
treatment regimen as for oral
pmpeyeposse
preparations
paracetamol
(acetamincphen)
poboning
Aspirin (acetytalicyic
C:22-25mg/kgp.0.q48-72hr
Antithrombotc in feline
Reduces platelet aggregation
acidi
75 mg p.o.q 48-72 hr (high
cardiomyopathy:
Benefical effect of high dose regimen has
(esop
prophylaxs of arterial
not been proven
C: 5mg/at p.0.q72hr（low
thromboembolism
Further canfication requlred regarding
(esop
eficacy of low dose regimen
Do not use In dehydrated or hypovolaemic
animals or those with gastrointestinal
disease:use cutlously In renal disease
Gastrointestinal side effect S the most
common
Care needed as cats have reduced ability
to metabolize and oxcrete salicylatos
Agent
Dose/routes of
Indicaton(s) In
Adverse effects/other comments
administration
omergency patients
D:0.5 mg/kg p.o.q 24 hr
Antithrombotcin
despmen
Discontinued at the same tme as
haemolytic anaemla
prednisolone administration ceases
(IMHA)
Aupamezole
D:5xdose n mg/kg of
Selectve alpha
Can give half the quoted doseandrepeat
medetomidine (same volume)
adrenergic antagonist
if poor reversal of sedaton
LmL,SC
oudeeaa-
Avold Ly.adminstration unless in
C:2.5xdose In mg/kg of
medetomidine,
emergency due to possible hypotenslon
medetomidinechalf vclume)
dexmedetomidine
and/or aggression
LmL,SC
Reverses analgesc effect, so ensure
alternatve analgesa b provided
C:50μg/kglm.
Medetomid ine (20μg
kgreversal following
induction of emests
Atropine sulphate
D.C:0.02-0.04 mgkgl.,1.m.
Vagally medlated
Antmuscarinic agent (vagolytic)
s.C
dinically significant
Dose-related pharmacologicalleffects;
bradydysrhythmia
multsystemic adverse effects possible at
hlgh doses
Peak effects within 2-4 min folowing 1.
sdministraton (up to 10 min with i.m.
administratont wart for ful effect before
Apuaeddeue o enp osop bugeeda
poor resporse
Atropine sul phate
D,C1 drop or smalamount of
Mioss in anterior uveris
Causespupllary dilaton and cydoplegia
ophthalmic
ointment q 8-12 hr until pupll
preparation
dlated thenq 24-72hr as
necessary to maintain mydrasts
Azathioprine
D:2mg/kg p.0.q 24hr for up
Immune-mediated
Typlcally used with corticosterold
to7-10 days,thenq 48 hr
haemolytic anaemla
Deayed onset of action (may be up to 6
long-term
(IMHA)
weeks,generally 10-14 days) therefore
Immune-mediated
not useful In Initial stabilization:howevet
thrombocytopenla
provides a long-term corticosterold-
sparing effect and allows a quicker dose
reducuon
Monitor for bone marrow suppression and
hepatotoxicity gastrointestinal signs and
acute pancreatis arealso reported
Do not administer to cats due to a marked
bone marow todcity
Benazeprl
D:0.25-0.5mg/kgp.o.q
Heart lalure
Angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE)
12-24hr
Hyperterslon
Inhibitor, causes vasodilation and
C:0.25-1.0mg/kg p.0.q
Chronic renal falure
decreased salt and water retention
12-24hr
Protein-losing
(decreased aldosterone production)
glomerulonephropathy
Requires hydrolysis in the liver to
benazepnlat for phammacological actiMty
Amlodipine b more effective for
hypertenslon In cats
Monitor for hypotenslon, hyperkalaemla
and renal Impalmment
Agent
Dose/routes of
Indicatlon(s) In
Adverse effects/other comments
administration
emergency patients
Buprenorphine
D:0.01-0.02mg/kg.v,L.m.or
Analgesa for mild to
Partal μ (OP3） agonbt, also has
5.c.q6-8hr
ujed aeepou
suonse sasuobejue
C:0.01-0.02mg/kg1.v,Lm.,
Typically not appropnate as the tirst line
s.c.oro.tm.q6-8hr
analgesc due to its slow onset of acton
(u so dnAensn)
Especially effective in cats
Butorphanol
D.C:0.1-0.6mg/kgLv,Lm.
Sedation (analgesia)
μ(OP3) antagonst, k (OP2) agonst,
ors.cq1-4h,prn
Antitussive effect
Onset of acton 15-20 min
0.05-0.4mg/kg/h CRI
Not approprlate as the sole analgeslc
Calcum gluconate
D.C:0.5-1.5ml/kg1.v.bolus
Clinicaly signitiant
Repeat boluses until signs have resolved
(10%)
over5-20min (equvalent to
hypocalcaemia
Dlute with o.9% sodlum chloride for CRl:
50-150 mg calcium gluconatey
using buffered lactated Ronger's solution
kg.or 4.5-13.4mg elemental
for dilution may result in calcium
(baywnoey
precipitation
Then 0.3-0.6 ml/ko/rCRI
Monitor for bradycardia
lequivalent to3060 mg
ECG monitoning recommended during
calcium gluconate/kg/hr,or
administration
2.7-5.4mg elemental
calcum/kg/hr)
Calcium gluconate
D.C:0.5-1.5ml/kg1.v.bolus
Clinically significant
Given more quiddly than for treatment ot
(10%)
over 30-60 s (equivalent to
hyperkalaemla
hypocalcaemia aIt is a potentially
50-150 mg calcium gluconate
life-saving treatment for cardiotoodcity
kg.or4.5-13.4mg elemental
Rapid onset of acton can be a few
(byunpp)
seconds) and first line cholce in
acrbas
Short duratlon of acton (often
10-15mn)
Monitor ECG during administration
Does not lower serum potassium
concentraton but restores normal cell
membrane excitability
Will also address any possible lonized
hypocalcaemla
Bolus can be repeated whle other
measures are used to Improve
hypentcalaemla drectly
Calcum
D.C:15-100mgelemental
Chronic therapy for
1mg elemental calcium Gequwalent to
calcium/kg/day (typically
hypocalcaamla
11.2mg calcum gluconate,7.7 mg
divided Into 2-d equal doses)
calcum lactate, and 2.5 mg calcum
carbonate
Typically used together with vitamin
D therapy but tapered earler
whle contnuing with long-term
vitaminD
Calcium carbonate prelerred as it contains
the highest concentraton of elemental
calcum,so reducing the number of
tablets to be administered
Contnued
Agent
Dose/routes of
Indication(s) In
Adverse effects/other comments
administration
suaped Aouabjawa
Carprofen
D.s4mgkg Lv,s.c0.m.）q
Analgasla
Nonsteroldal antinflammatory agent;
24 hr (or divided into 2 equal
Antlinfiammatory etffect
preferential COx-2 inhibltor
dosesq 12 hrkredure to
Antipyretic activity
Do not adminster if the patlent has
2mg/kg/day single dose after
dehyd ration or hypovolaemla/
7days
hypoperfusion
C1-2mg/kg s.c,1.sngle
Contraindicated with gastrointestinal and
dose pericperatively
bleeding disorders
Gastrointestinal, renal, hepatic and
coagulopathic adverse effects have been
reported
Donotadminster to animalsless than12
weeks old
Chlorambucil
C:2mg (total dose）p.o.q
Immunosuppresshe
Less toxic than azathiopnne and
24-72r
therapy in cats
cyclophosphamide in cats
2 mg tablets not readily dimdable
hence total doserecommendationc
use lonqer dosing intervab in smaller
ats
Myelosuppression and gastrointestinal
toxidty are the predominant adverse
bueis jaje slep pi-2Aeaueb)ssua
treatment)
Chlorpheniramine
D.2-12mg（maximum0.5mg/
Hypersenstmty (allergic)
Antihistamine (H-receptor antagonist)
kgip.o.q8-12hr,2.5-10mg
disease
Central nervous system depression and
Lm.q8-12hr
gastrointestinal adverse effocts reported
C:2（-4）mgcatp.0.q8-12hr
)
Cidosporin
D:5-10mg/gp.0.q12-24hr
Long-term therapy for
Monitor trough blood concentrations
Immune-mediated
intermilttenty to adhleve effective but
haemolytic anaemla
safe leves
(IMHA)
Primanty adverse gastrointestinal effects
but these are uncommon
Cimouidine
D,C:5-10mg/g p.o. slow.v.
Gastic mucosal injury
Histamine (H)receptor antagonist,
q6-8hr
ulceration
inoreasing gastrkc acid pH by reducing
Gastitis
acid production
Oesophagitis secondary
Inhibits hepatic microsomal enzymes and
togastricrelux
may alter the metabollcrates of other
drugs (e.g.benzodlazepines,
beta-blockers)
Newer agents (e.g.ranitidne,famotidne)
are more effective,have fewer drug
Interaclons and longer dosing
interval
Other agents （e.g.omeprazole）aremore
effective
D.C:5mg/kg sowL.v.q8hr
Paracetamol
Administer aearlypossile for greatest
(acetaminophen)
efficacy
Buuosiod
Agent
Dose/routes of
Indication(s) In
Adverse effects/other comments
uonensuwpe
emergency patients
Dexamethasone
D.C:0.3-0.6mg/gL,s.c
Immune-medated
Cortcosterold with high glucocorticold but
(2mg/ml)
q24hr
haemolyticanaemla
low mineralocorticold activity
(MHA)
Use Initally in animab that are vomiting or
Immune-medlated
anorexic
thrombocytopenia
D.C:0.25-1 mg/kg L.v,Lm.
Feline bronchial disease
Inittal dose may need to be ghen Lm. in
q24hr
Upper respiratory tract
animals with respiratory distress
dyspnoea
Typically start lower and then repeat dose
if there is an Inadequate response
D.C:0.1-1mg/kgi.v.bolus
Urticaria, angloedama,
Choose dose based on the severity of the
anaphylaxds
slgns
Adrenaline administration and aggressive
fluid therapy are the prionity in
anaphylads
D.0.5mg/kgLv.q2-6hr
Aoute
Can be administered prior to or during an
Initally:then 0.05-0.1 mg/kg
hypoadrenocorticism
ACTH stimulation test
1.q8-12hruntil oral
(Addisonlan criss)
medication Ispossibe
D:0.1 mg/kg Lv.q 24 hr for
Angiostrongvus
Administer In conjuncton with antiparasitic
3-7days
vasorum infection
treatment
Intended to reduce inflammatory reaction
assocated with dyng larvae
Typically used In dogs with (marked)
respiratory,neurological or ooular sins,
or those with heavy worm burdens
Dexmedetomidine
Use half of medetomldine dose
Sedatlon
As for medetomldine
Premedication for
Use atipamezole for reversal
anaesthesla
Dlazepam
D,C:0.1-0.5 mg/g slow Lv
Fitst Iine management
Benzodazepine
1-2mg/gp.r:0.1-1.0mg/
of selzures and musde
Rapid onset of acton; duration of action
kg/hr CRI
tremors
lkey to be 15-60mln
Cannot mix in syringe with other agents
May adsorb to plastkc so do not store
drawn up In syringes: consider
midazolam forInfusiors
Higher rectal dose used in anlmab
receMng concurrent phenobarbital
therapy
Acute hepatic fallure has been reported in
cats as an idiosyncratic adverse drug
reaction several days after starting oral
therapy
D.C:0.1-0.5mg/kg slowy l.v
Sedation In combinatlon As above
with an oplold and/or
May cause excitement f used alone
ketamine
Cannot give L.m.
Contnued
Agent
Dose/routes ot
Indication(s) In
Adverse effects/other comments
administration
suaped Aousbjawo
Ditazem!
D: 0.1-0.25 mg/kg slowL.v.
Clinicaly sgnficant
Caloum dhannel blocker.slows
beadajue uw -zJ)
supraventncular
atrioventrioular node conduction and
5-15 min up to maximum totsl
tachycardla
prclongs refractory tmes
doseof0.75mg/kg:0.5-2mg/
Treatment of congestive heart falure If
kgp.o.q8h
present is the first step
C:0.05-0.2mg/g slowL.v
Attempt vagal manoeuvres before gving
(over3mn1.5-2.5mg/kg
wezenip
p.o.q8hr
Minimal negative inotropic effect
Diphenhydramine
D.2-4mg/kgp.0.q8-12hr;
HypersenstMty (allergic)
Antihistamine (H-receptor antagonst)
1-2mg/kgLm.5.c,1.v.q
eseosp
Antipruritic,anttussive and antlemetc
8-12
effects
C:0.5-4mg/kg p.o.q8-12hr:
Central nervous system depression and
1-2mg/kgL.m.,s.c,1.v.q
anticholinergkc effects (dry mouth,
8-12h
urinary retention) are the most common
adverse effects
Doxycycline
C:5-10 mg/g p.0.q24hr for
Mcoplasma haemofels
Tetracycline antibiotic
10-21days
(previously
Direct oral administration must be followed
Haemobartonella fels)
by syringing a small amount (5 ml）of
intection
au Bubp d o em
oesophagus and possible severe
snifeydoseo
Use with caution in pregnant and young
anmals (bone and teeth abnommalities)
EMLAcream5%
D.C:topicallappication of
Skin desensitization for
Recommended especially for use in young
(2.5%ldocaine.
empirical volume
aunpundausa
animab and cts
2.5%pilocaine
Usually covered withan ocdusive dressing
Onset of actlon may be less than the
Minimal if any systemic drug absorption Is
Ikely
Enrofioxacin
C:5mg/kg ow l. dluted，s.c.
Mcoplama haemofels
Fluoroquinolone antbiotic concentration-
p.o.q24hr
(prevlously
dependent bactericidal (Gram negative.
Haemobartonela rels)
Gram posive, not anaerobes)
infection
Minimize use due to increasng resstance
Especially useful for mycoplasmosis when
enteral doxycycline s not possible or too
stresstul
Has been assoclated with permanent
blindness due to retinal toodcity in cats at
higher doses than recommended here
Ethanol (20%)
D.5.5m/kgLv.q4hr for5
Ethylene glycol
Dilute in nomal saline (0.9% sodum
doses then q 6 hr for 4 doses
poisoning
dhlonde)
C:5.0ml/kg lv.q 6hr for5
Central nervous system depression:
doses thenq8hr for 4doses
intensve and supportive care may be
D.C:give the same total dose
as above over the same time
Fomepizole is the treatment of choice
period asa CRI
Agent
Dose/routes of
Indication(s) In
Adverse effects/other comments
administration
emergency patients
Ethanol(40%as
D:44-6.6mL/kg p.0.q4hr for
Ethylene glycol
Central nervous system depression:
alccholc beverage)
5 doses then q 6 hr for 4
poisoning
intenshe and supportive care may be
doses
required
C:4.4m/kgp.o.q6hr for 5
May cause gastic iritation and vomiting
dosesthen q 8hr for 4 doses
Do not use other ethanol-containing flulds
(e.g.surgical spirt)
Fomepizole  the treatment of choice
Famotidine
D:0.5-1mg/kgp.o,5.c.L.q
Gastrc mucosal Injury
Histamine (H)receptor antagonist,
ulceration
Increasing gastric acid pH by redudng
C:0.5-1mg/kgp.o.s.c.q
Gastritlis
aod production
12-24hr
Oesophagits secondary
Longer duration of action and fewer drug
to gastic reflux
interactons than cimetidine
There have been anecdotal reports of
intravasoular haemolysis following I.v.
adminstraton in cats
D: 50 mg/kg p.0.q 24 hr for
Angostrongylus
Benzimldazole antiparasitic with very high
7-28days
vasorum Infection
safety index
Not licensed for canine A. vasorum
infection In the UK
Fludrocortisone
D:0.01-0.02 mg/kgp.0.dally
Maintenance therapy
Mainly mineralocorticoid but also has
(single dose or divided into 2
for pnmary
glucocorticold activity that may produce
(sosopjenba
hypoadrenocorticism
clinicaly significant side effects
C:0.05-0.1mg/cat p.o.q
(Addison's dbease)
Usually start at 0.01 mg/kg p.o. day.
12-24hr
monitor sodum andpotassum leves
q1-2 weeks, and adjust daly dose by
0.05-0.1 mg as appropriate
Flumazenl
D.C:0.01 mg/kg rapld I..
jesjawau aujdazepozuag
Competitve antagonist at benzodiazepine
agent
receptors in the central nerrous system
Onset of acton 1-2 min
Short duration of action (60 min)
Fomepizole
D:20 m/kg Lv.for first dose,
Ethylere glycol
Treatment ofcholce tor ethylene glycol
followedby15mg/kg ..at
poisoning
posoning
12 and 24 hr,and 5 mgg l.v.
Mild dose-related central nervous system
at36hr
depresson may be seen,especially in
C:125 mg/kg L.v for first dos.
cats
followedby31.25 mg/kg I.v
at 12, 24 and 36 hr
apwesoun
D:2-5mg/gLv,Lm.q1-2hr
Aoute decompensated
Initial dose may need to be given Lm.
until dinical impvovement then
congestive heart
depending on patent stabllty
q6-12hr
falure
Loop diuretic:Inhibits sodium and chlorde
C:1-4mg/kgiv,lm.q1-2hr
reabsorption in thick ascending limb of
until dinical improvement: then
loop of Henle - promotes natriuress and
q12hr
reduces water resorption
Resporse usually noted within 1 hr (e.g.
urination)
Ensure ad lib water avallable
Excssive administratlon can cause severe
dehydratlon,electrolyte abnormalbes
and renal falure
Condinued
Agent
Dose/routes of
Indication(s) In
Adverse effects/other comments
administration
emergency patients
D,C:give2mg/kg.v:if no
Oliguric acute renal
Ensure adequate fluld replacement first
significant diuresis after 1hr,
fallure
Contraindicated f there Is complete anurla
I there ls a poor initlal response,y
duress after1 hr,gve 6 mg/
mannitol with the addtional furosemide
kg:if dluress establshed,give
boluses
2-5mg/kgl.vq6-8hror
 the patlent remalns anuric oris severely
0.1-1.0 mgkg/hrCRI
ollguric,needs dalss
D,C:2-4mg/kg1,s.C,p.o.q
Hypercalcaemla
Only administer following volume
8-12hM
exparsion with normal saline co.9%
lapuopp wnipos
Glucose/doxtrose
D.C:0.25-0.5 g/kg dluted slowTreatment of clinically
Frequently noeds to be followed by
(50%)
Lv.(0.5-1.0ml/kg）
significant
Infuslon(see p.289)
hypoglycaemla
Glycery trinitrate 2%
D:2nchq6-8h
Acute decompensated
Systemic venodilator redudng preload and
topical preparation)
C:inchq6-8hr
congestive heart
potentally helping with pulmonary oedema
fallure
Apply to clipped or halrless skinc rotate site
of applicaton (inner pinna. groin, adlla)
Can be absorbed through human skin
-Wear gloves to apply. mark kenne and
kennel sheet deary to alrt other
personnel to its use and indude the site
of applicaton
Heparin-low
C:100-300U/kg5.c.q6-12hr
Prevention of further
Beneticial effect not proven
molecular welght
thrombus fonmation
Much debate regarding dosage ranges and
(tractonated)
following systemic
overall approadh
thromboembolsm
Beware of bleeding (and hypersenstmity
reactors)
Hydrocortisone
D:0.5-0.625 mg/kg/hrCRt
Acute
Perfom ACTH stimulation test prior to
2-4mg/kg 1.v.q3-6hr
hypoadrenocorticism
commendng treatment
(Addsonian) cntss
Mainly glucocorticoid but has some
mineralocorticold actMty
Hydrogen peroodde
D,C:1-3 m/kg p.o.
Inducton of emess at
Ensure no contraindications to induction of
(3%)
home folowing oral
emess(seep.153)
poisoning
Take care during administration to avold
asplration
Emesisusualy within 10 min
May be repeated once
Imidaclopnd+
D:10 mg/kg imidacloprid+
Angiostrongyls
Advocate Spot-on solution(Bayer plc,
moxidectin
2.5mg/kg moxdectin topicaly
vasorum Infection
Newbury. UK) licensed
(equvalent to 0.1m/kg
Irsulin,neutral
D,C:0.1-0.5/kg Lv
Clinically sgnificant
Administer together with glucose
(regular, soluble)
hyperkalaemla
(0.25-0.5g/kglv)
Onset of action can be more than 15min
Lowers serum potassum concentration by
moving potassium Into cells
Intravenous glucose supplementation is
typlcally required for several hours
snipe pue jojuowyApuenbasqns
accordinglyi
Agent
Dose/routes of
Indication(s) In
Adverse effects/other comments
administration
emergency patients
D:1-2 mg/kg 1.v.loading dose
Analgesla
Infuson for analgesia 6not recommended
followedby50-80μg/kg/mn
In cats due to the rsk of significant
CRI
cardlovasoular depression
Mannitd
D,C:0.5-1.5g/kgLv.over
Raised Intracranlal
Osmoticdluretic onset of osmotic effect
10-20min
pressure
15-30mn
Can be repeated every 2-8 hr but no more
than three doses In a 24-hr period
Discontinue therapy if thereno positve
response
Contralndicated In hypcvolaemla,
dehydration,congestive heart falure,
pulmonary oedema and anunc renal fallure
Follow administration wth sotonic
ystalloid to prevent dehydration or
hypovolaemla
Dissolve crystals beforeuseinline flter
D.C:0.5-1.5g/kgLv.over
Oliguric acute renal
As above
10-20mln
falure
Ensure adequate fluild replacement first
If duresis ocours.canrepeatq
Contraindicated in anunc renal fature (may
4-6hr for first 12-24hr of
worcsen fluld overload and pulmonary
treatment
(ewepoo
Discontinue administratlon if there is no
positive response to the first dose
Maropitant
D:1mg/kg s.c.q24hr forup
Antlemetc therapy
Neurokinin (NK) receptor antagonist in
to 5concecutive days
medullary vomiting centre
C:0.5mg/kg s.c.q24hr forup
Suppresses penpheral and centrally
to 5 consecutive days
medlated emess
Injection may be painful: drug refrigeration
may allevlate someacsociated dscomfort
I longer than 5 days treatment needed
allow 48hr washout pelod between
courses (due to drug acoumulation)
Use in cats is extra-label at the time of
writing
Medetomidine
D:1-5μg/kgsowLv:5-20μg/
Sedation In combinaton
Profound dhanges in cardiac output and
kgim.
wihoplold
blood pressure
C:2-10μg/kg1:10-40μg/kg
Bradycardla and peripheral vaso constnicton
LmL
(pale to white mucous membranes)
Resplratory depresslon
Avold use lf cardiovascular instability.
shock, severe head trauma,renal faure
or dlabetes is present
Easily reversble
D.C:2-5μg/kg sowv.or 1m.
Analgesia
Especially useful In anlmas requtring some
prn （oftenq30-90min);
degree of concurrent sedation (e.g. due
1-3μg/kg/hrCRI
to andety or distress)
Cardiovascularandrespiratoryeffectskely
to be minlmal at these mlcrodoses
Dosing interval is significantly increased
with concurrent oplold use
Agent
Dose/routes of
Indication(s) In
Adverse effects/other comments
uonensuwpe
emergency patients
C:20 μg/kg L.m.,Lv: single dose Induclon of emesis
May sedate animal without caus ng emesis
only
following oral
Conservative dosing Is highly
poisoning
recommended
Meloxicam
D.s0.2mg/kg1.,s.Corp.o.
Analgesa
Nonsteroidalantinflammatory agent
once: then s0.1 mg/kg Lv,
Antinflammatory effect
preferental COx-2Inhibitor
5.C.orp.0.q24hr
Antpyretic activty
Do not administer in cases with dehydration
C:s0.3mg/kg1,s.Corp.o.
or hypovolaemla/hypoperfuslon
once; then 0.1 mg/kg Lv.
Use cautiously In cases with hepatic or
s.C.orp.0.q24 hr
renal dysfunction and bleeding disorders
Gastrointestinal,renal and hepatic adverse
effects arereported
Do not administer to animas less than 12
weeksold
Methadone
D:0.1-1.0 mg/g slowLv,Lm.
Analgesa
Fullμ(OP3)agonkst
ors.cq4hr.prn
Premedication
The analgesla B equlpotent with morphine
C:0.1-0.5 mg/g slow Lv,Lm.
Anxolyss
Emsisrarlyoccurs following
ors.cq6hr.prn
administrabon
Panting commonly occurs in dogs
Methocarbamol
D,C:44-220mg/kg Lv:dealy
Intoxication with
Centraly acbing skeletal musdle relaxant
no more than330mg/kg/24 hr
tremorogenic toodns
It may cause sallvation,emess: sodation,
lethargy. weakness and atada
Methylprednsclone
D.C:1-2mg/g L.over
Urticarla, angioedema,
Adrenaline administrationand aggressve
15-20mln
anaphylaxds
fluid therapy are the pnontyin anaphylaxis
D.1-2mg/kg lq2-6hr
Aoute
Negllgible mineralocorticold activity
hypoadrenocorticism
Perform ACTH stimulaton test pnor to
(Addisonlan criss)
starting treatment
Metocloprarmide
D.C:1-2mg/g L.over24 hr
Antlemetc therapy
The antlemetic effect s mainly due to
as CRl:0.2-0.5mg/kgsc.q
Upper gastrointestinal
dopamine eoptor antagonism in the
6-8hr
prokinetc
chemoreceptor tngger zone
Not licensed for antlemetc therapy
(maropitant licensed)
Contraindicated In gastrolntestinal
obstruction
Neurological signs and behavoural
changes may occur as adverse effects:
espedially in cats
Metronidazole
D.C:10 mgkg slow Lv
Appropriate bactenial
Bactericidal,especially for anaerobes:It
q12hr.15-25mg/kgp.0.q
and protozoal
alo has antiprotozoal activity (especially
12hr
infections
(sseipeb
Neurological toxicity Is reported after high
aoute doses or dhronic moderate-to-high
doses mydrass,nystagmus, atada,head
tilt, tremors,selzuresalso anoreda
lethargy.vomlung
D.C:10-15mg/kgp.0.q12 h
Large intestinal
Postulated to have some
diarthoea
Immunomodulatory effects (on
cell-medlated Immune responsos)
Continued
Agent
Dose/routesof
Indkation(s) In
Adverse effects/other comments
administration
omergency patents
D.4-8mg/kg p.o.q8-12hr
Clinically sgnificant
Class 1b antidysrhythmlc agent smlar to
ventricular tadhycardia
lidocaine
Supraventricular
Usually effective In lidocaine-responsve
tachycardia in some
dysrhythmlas
dogs
Advere effects Incude nausea, vomlting,
depresslon and neurclogical sgns
Use In cats Isnot recommended
Midazolam
D.C:0.1-0.5mg/kg1,Lm
Sedation/premedication
Benzodiazepine
s.C:0.1-0.8mg/kg/hrCRI
In com bination wih
Rapid onset of action
an oplold or ketamine
6o1 dn uoneng
(cats)
Unlke dlazepam,It can be given I,m.
Selzures
Preferred over dlazepam In cats because of
Musde tremors
the potential for idiosynratic acute
hepatic fallure In ths spedes
Lactated Ringer's solution should not be
used for CRl preparation
Mibemycin cdme+
D:0.5mgkg mibemycin oxm
Anglostrongyts
Mibemax* (Novartis Animal Health,
praziquantel
+ 5 mg/kg praziquantel p.o.
vasorum infecton
Frimley.UK licensed
weekly for dweeks
Misoprostol
D:2-5μg/kgp.0.q8-12hr
Prostaglandin E,analogue:cytoprotective
antinfammatory
for gastric mucosa
agent (NSAIA)
Most usetul for prevention raher than
intoxicaton
treatment of NSALA-assoclated
Gastic ulcer prophylaxis
gastrointestinal ulceration
and treatment
Most prevalent adverse effects Involve the
gastrointestinal system
Contraindicated In pregnant animals due
to the nsk of abortion
Not recommended for cats
Gloves should be wom when handing and
stricter safety precautions taken in
women of childbearing age
Morphine
D:0.1-1.0mg/kg slow1.v.,lm.
Analgesla for moderate
Fullμ(OP3)agonist
or5.c.q4 hr,pm：0.1-0.5mg/
to severe paln
Gold standard analgesicfor severe pain
kg/hr CRI
Premedication
Onset of action 10-15 min following I.v.
C:0.1-0.5mg/kg slow1.v.,1.m.
administraton
or5.c.q6 hr.pm:0.05-
Vomiting is more likely than with other
0.2mg/kg/hr CRI
oplolds,therefore avold use In cases with
ralsed intracranial or intraooular pressure
and gastric dilatatlon and volvulus
syndrome
Rapld 1.v administration may be assodated
with histamine release (transient
vasodilatlon and hypotension)
D.C:0.1mg/kg slowLv,s.c，q
Dyspnora especlally
Andolysis
6hr
aoute congestve heart
Vasodlaton
fallure
Must gMe slowty if usng the Lv. route to
avold vomiting and vagally mediated
bradycardia
Agent
Dose/routes of
Indication(s) In
Adverse effectv/other comments
administration
emergency patients
Mycophenolate
D:10-15 mg/kg p.0.q 12-24hrLong-term therapy for
Limited veterinary experience at the tme
mofetl
Immune-mediated
of wntng
haemolytic anaemla
No nformation for cats
(IMHA)
N-acetlcysteine
D.C:nitlal loadngde
Paracetamol
Rapidly hydrolysed to cysteine In vivo that
140 mg/kg Lv: further 5-7
(acetaminophen)
5required for intracellular glutathione
dosesof70 mg/kg1.q 6 hr
poisoning
synthesis: glutathione conjugates NAPQI
Administer intravenously undiluted or
dluted in a 5%glucose solution
OraladministratonIspossible there isno
vomitng but this Snot particularly
patient fnendy
Naloxone
D,C:0.01-0.1mg/kg sow L.v.
Oplate antagonist
Reverses the majornty of oplate effecs
to effect Lm. ors.c,pm
Including respiratory and contral nervous
system depression
Does not reverse emetic effoct of
apomorphine butreverses other effects
Short duration of actlon (20-60 min) due
to rapld metabolism, therelore repeat
pajnbaj oqAew sasop
Omeprazole
D.C:0.5-1mg/kg slow1.,p.o.
Gastnic and duodenal
Proton pump inhibltor, reduces gastnc acid
q24hr
ulceration
secretion and raises gastnic pH
Gastnitis
Intravenous use for more than3days is
Oesophagitis secondary
not recommended
to gastrc reflux
Reduce dose In patlents with severe
hepatic or renal disease
Ondarsetron
D.C:0.1-0.2mg/g slowL.q
Antlemetc and
Serotonin type 3receptor antagonst
6-12hr
antinausea therapy
Expensive: try if response to other drugs
(e.g.maropitant is Inadequate
Oxytodn
D:1-2 U/kg Lm. (or s.c.).
Dystocia due to primary
Lower doses may be equally etfective
maxmum dose 20U
uterne Inertla
Contraindicated in cases with pehc
C:2-4U total dose 1.m.(or 5.c.)
obstruction,inadequate cercal dllation,
vaginal masses or strictures, and in those
with Inguinal hemias
Repeated doses may be given every
20-30mln
Fallure to respond to 2-3 doses is considered
an indication for surgical intervention
Checkserum calcium concentration:
perhaps supplement empirically If
oxytocin ineffective
Paracetamol
D:10-15mg/kg p.0.q8-12 hr
Analgesa
Should never be admintstered to cats
(acetaminophen)
Antipyretic activity
Poor antinflammatory actiuity
Minimal gastrointestinal side etfects
May be used In conjunction with
conventonal nonsteroidal
antinflammatory agents
Hepatotoxcity s possiblo
Continued
Agent
Dose/routes of
Indication(s) in
Adverse effects/other comments
administration
omergency patlents
Pentobarbital
D.C:5-20mg/lg slowtylv.to
Selaures and musclo
Barbiturate
effect (e.g.3mg/kg allquots q
tremors refractory to
Aim for deep sedation rather than a
beada oipeu fe s06
dlazspam if propofol
4-8hr
cannot be used or
Monitor dosely for excessive respiratory
depression
The sterile preparation sno longer
dinically avalable in the UK
Pethidine
D:2-10mg/kgLm,5-15mg/kg
Analgesla for moderate
Full μ(OP3) agonist
s.Cq1-2h,pn
pain
vonpe po lasuo pidey
C:5-10mg/kgLm.,8-15mg/kg
Premedication
Not suitable for maintenance analgesla as It
s.cq2hr,prn
cannot be given intravenously(caries
signiicant risk of severe histamine reactioni
May provide useful sedaton
Phenobarbital
D.C3mg/kg sow1..q
Rapid loading in
Barbiturate
30-60min,up to totaldose of
management of status
Onset of acton likely to be 15-30 min
18-24mg/kg in24hr;then
eplepticus or severe
Sedation ocours commonly
3-5mg/kg sowLv.q12hr
tremorogenkc
Other (long-term) side etlects Indude
for 24-48 hr before enteral
intoxicaton
polyuna/polydipsia,liver Injury and
therapy
Crarely cytopenias
Pimobendan
D:0.1-0.3mg/kgp.0.q12hr
Congestive heart fallure
Positive Inotrope and vasodilatory
give 1 hr before feeding
secondary to dilated
propertles
cardlormyopathy or
Contraindicated in hypertrophic
mitral vahe
cardiomyopathy and where cardiac
Insuficiency
output cannot be enhanced by Increased
contractility (e.g. aortic stenosis)
Bloavallabllity s sigrificantly reduced in the
presence of food
A variety of nonspecific adverse effects are
reported
D:2mgkg p.o.q 12 hrIntiay
Immunosuppression
Common adverse effects include polyuna/
then tapered gradualy
polydipsla,Ingeased appetite,pantng
C:2-4mg/kg p.o.q 12 hr
(dogs). musde wastage
Ajenpeib paade ueun Aenu
Adverse etfects are often worse In larger
dogs necesstating lower doses
C:1-2mg/kg p.o.q12hr
Oral treatment for feline
Can start to taper (ower 2-3 months) after
brondhial dsease
7-10 days if there s a satistadtory
following initial
resp-onse
stablization
D:2-5mg/kg1.vq3-6 hr
Acute
Perfom ACTH stuimulation test prior to
initaly. then 0.1-0.2mg/lg
hypoadrenocoracism
startng reatment
p.0.q12-24h
(Addsonian) cnss
Mainly glucocorticoid but has some
mineralocorticold acumty
D:0.7 mg/kg p.o.q 24 hr for
Angiostrongyks
Administer in conjunction with antiparasitic
3-7days
vasorum infection
treatment
Intended to reduce the inflammatory
reaction assodated with dying larvae
Typically used in dogs with (marked)
resplratory, neurologlcal or ocular sigrs,
or those with a heavy worm burden
Agent
Dose/routes of
Indication(s) In
Advere effects/other comments
administration
emergency patlents
Procalnamide
D:6-10mg/kg sowLv
Ventricu lar tachycardia
Class 1a antidysrhythmic agent
25-50μg/kg/mn CRI
Aavenbapeui
Use with caution in cases with sgniicant
8-20mg/kgp.o.q6hr
responsive to maid mal
hepatic or renal diseace or with
C:1-2mg/kg slow1.v:
lidocalne therapy
congestive heart falurg
10-20μg/kg/mnCRI3-8mg/
Adverse effects are generally related to
kgp.o.q6-8 hr
blood drug concentration and are mainly
gastrointestinal or cardlovascular
Propofol
D:up to 2 mg/kg I.
Sedaton
Ahways ghe carefuly to effect -not a
C:up to3 mg/kg1.x
Bolus effect lasts 5-10 min
Causespenpheral vasodilation and
myocardial depresson, so use cautiousy
if there Is cardicvasoular instabiity
Signiflcant respiratory depresslon is possible
No analgesla
D:up to 4mg/kg 1.v:3-36mg/
General anaes thesa
As above
kg/hr CRI
with premedicaton
For CRl without syinge dnver, add 50 ml
C:up to 6 mg/kg1.v.:3-10mg/
propofol to 450 ml normal saline (0.9%
kg/hr CRI
sodum chloride) to givo 1 mg/ml
propofol
Limit prolonged Infuston/repeat dosing in
cats(Heinz body anaemla)
D.C: 2 mg/kg alquo sow I..
Selzures and muscle
Asabove
to effect CRl starung at 3 mg/
tremors refractory to
kg/hr and tirating upwards as
diazepam
necessary
Ranitidne
D:0.5-2mg/kg slowlq
jeuaponp pue suseg
Histamine (H receptor antagonist.
8-12 hr 1-2mg/kg p.o.q
ulcers
increasing gastric acid pH by redudng
12hr
Gastits
addproducton
C:2.5mg/kg dowLvq 12 hr
Oesophagits secondary
Preferred over dmetdine as lt has fewer
3.5mg/kg p.o.q 12 hr
xa e
drug interactions and less frequent
Prokinetic activty
busop
S-Adenosymethlonine D:initialdose of 40 mg/kg p.o.
Paracetamol
The feline protocol has only been reported
(SAMe)
then 20 mg/kg p.0.q 24 hr for
(acetaminophen)
expenmentally
sfep6
polsoning
C:180 mg (total dose)p.o.q
12 hr for3days:then 90mg
p.o.q 12 hr for 14 days
Soda crystals
D. C: one crystal on tongue at
Induction of emesis
It is extremely important to make sure that
(epos Guye)
badk of mouth
following oral
caustic soda (sodlum hydroxide) is not
May be repeated
poisoning
used by accident
Emesis usually within 10 min
Sodium bicarbonate
D, C:1-2mmol/kg sow Lv.
Clinically sgniicant
Can repeat dose ifnecessary
hyperkalaamla
Lowers serum potasum concentration by
movngpotasslum nto cells
Effoct can persist for seweral hours
Access to cn-ateacid-bae analyser 
muhprefered
Conbinued
Agent
Dose/routes of
Indication(s) In
Adverse effects/other comments
administration
emergency patlents
Sotalol
D:1-2mg/kg slowI. （over
Ventncular tachycardla
Nonsalectve beta-blocker and Class l
5mink 1-2.5mg/kg p.o.q
inadequately
12hr
The maln concerns are Its potential for
C: 1mg/kg sow l.v.(over 5 min)
Iidocaine therapy
negative inotropy and prodysrhythmkc
effects
Sucralfate
D:0.5-2g/dogp.0.q8-12h
Oral,oesophageal,
Tablets can be crushed and mbed with
C:0.25-0.5g/catp.0.q8-12hr
leuaponppue nseb
waler
ulcer treatnent
Administration 30-60 mn before food 
Gastnc ulcer prophylaxis
recommended
Inhigh rsk cases
Coats ulcerated/exposed mucosa and
Oesophagitis
promotes reepithelializaton:possible
cytoprotective effects
Syrup of ipecacuanhaD:1-2 ml/kg p.o
Inducton of emesis at
Ifemesisinduced,it usualy ocours
(7%)
C:3.3ml/kg p.o.
home followingoral
within30mn
May be repeated once
poisoning
Bitter taste therefore potential problems
with compliance
Terbutaline
C:0.01mg/kg sowLv.s.cq
Feline bronchial disease
Beta-adrenergic agonist bronchodlator
4hr.0.312-1.25 mg/cat p.o.q
Parenteral administration b essential In an
8-12hr
emergency patlent
Adverse effects are dose related and are
usually mlld and translent
D:0.005-0.01mg/kgl.m.,s.cq
Cinically ggnificant
Due to stimulatlon of cardiac
4-6 hr.1.25-5 mg/dog p.0.q
sinus
beta-receptors
8-12hr
bradydysrhythmla
Improvement is ugually only partial and
C:0.005-0.015 mgkg Lm,s.c
shortlived
q 4-6 hr.0.625-1.25 mg/cat
p.0.q8-12hr
Tramadol
D.C:1-5mg/kgp.o.,1q
Analgesia (anstussive
Syntheticmu-receptor oplate agonst:abo
6-12hr
adivity)
Inhibits serotonin and noradrenaline
(norepinephrine) uptake
Themain clinical adverse effects are
easneu pue uonepas
Naloxone wll partially antagonize its
effects
Start at upper end of dose range and
upper end of dosng intenvals in cats
Avold oral preparations containing
paracetamol (acetaminophen) n cats
Vitamin D
Dihydrotachys terol:
Chronic therapy for
The daly dose S usualy dMded Into 2
0.01-0.03mg/kgp.o.
hypocalcaemla
equal doses adminstered intially
q24-48hr
together with oral caldum
Alfacalcidol:0.01-0.05μg/kg
supplementation but the latter S
p.0.q24hr
usually tapered whle vitamin D s
Calcitnot 0.01-0.03μg/kg p.o.
continued
q24hr
Agent
Dose/routes of
Indication(s) In
Adverse effects/other comments
administration
emergency patients
VitaminK,
D.C:2-5mg/kg s.c.inmuiple
Treatment of
Some preparatons are licensed for Lv.
(phytomenad ione)
stes,p.o.q 24 hr (dMde Into
luejnbeoonue
administrationc anaphylads has been
2-3administrations)
rodenticide poboning
aasociated with the Lv administraton of
Treatment of
some preparatlons
coagulopathy
I.m.administration Isnotrocommendedin
secondary to aoute
coagulopathic animab as ths may induce
hepatic fallure (e.g.
painfu and potentially severe
xylitol poisoning)
haemonhage
Full haemostaticbenefit lelywithin 12 hr
Bloavallabillty oforal vitamin K,Is
Increased when ghen with fatty (e.g.
poo(peuues
Xylazine
C:0.4-0.5mg/gLm,5.c
Induction of emesis
Sedation,resplratory depression
poisoning
ACTH.adrenocorticotrophkc honmone:C,cats Cox-2.cydooxygenase-2: CRl,constant rate Infuson D,dogs:ECG
electrocardlogram;Lm.,Intramuscular I.o.,Intraosseous:IU,Internatonal units:Lv,Intravenous:NAPQl,N-acetyl-para
benzoqulnoneimine:o.Lm.,oral trarsmucosal:p.o.,per os:p.E,per rectum pn,pro re nata （as needed:s.c,subcutaneousy.
Agent
Dose/routes of
Indicatlon(s) In
Adverse effects/other comments
administration
emergency patients
Ketamine
D,C:0.1-1mg/kgL.prn(often
Analgesa for moderate
An N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor
q30minj or followed by
nom ued aewasol
antagonst
0.1-1.0mg/kg/hrCRI
profound sedaton
Varable cardovasoular effects:Ingease In
typically In
heart rate, cardiac output and blood
combinatlon with an
pressure may occur (centraly mediated
oplold
sym pathetic response and endogenous
catecholamine release)
Avold if hyperdynamlc cardliac disease is
present
Primarly exgeted unchanged by the
kidneys in cats, therelore use judiciously
ifthere Is renal dysfuncton
Cleared by primary hepatic metabolism In
dogs
Should not be used alone,especlally In
stop
D:1-2mg/kgLv:1-5mg/kg
Sedation
As above
1.m:q30-45mln
Typically combined with a benzodiazepine
C:1-5mg/kgLv:2-10mg/kg
and often an opiold
1.m.:q30-45min
o-5
General anaesthesia
As above
L.m.
with premedicaton
Dissodative anaesthetic
C:3-10mg/kgl.v:10-20mg/
The only anaestheticwhich  also a good
kg Lm.
analgesic
Good preservation of protectivealrway
reflexes
Must combine with sedative - poor muscle
telaxation when used alone
Cats'eyes remain open after ketamine
administration so lubnicate
Ldccalne (2%)
D:2mg/kg 1.v.bolus:50-80μg/
Clinically sgnificant
Class 1b antdysrhythmic actlons
kg/min CRI following successful
wentrioular dysrhythmlaAltematve therapy ls usually attempted
bolus administraton
asatsfactory improvement not noted
C.0.25-0.75mg/kg1.v.bolus
after the maximum dose of 8mg/kg In
repeat in0.25-0.5mg/kg
dogs, 4 mg/kg in cats
Increments:10-40μg/kg/min
Effective bolus adminlstration Is usualy
CRI following successtul bols
followed by CRt cats more susceptible to
administration
adverse effects with Infuson
Sigrs of tooccity Include vomiting.
depresslon, hypersalivation and
neurological signs
Itmay be less effective wth hypokalaemla
D:2 mg/kg topical applicatlon orLocal anaesthesa during
Causes revergble blockade of sodium
Infltraton: mac dose 12 mg/kg
surgical intervention
channels
C:2mg/kg topical applicaton of
Rapld onset of acton (may be as short as
Infiltraton; max dose 6 mg/kg
(UwS-E
Short duration of action(1-2hr)
Especially recommended as an abdominal
mildine block during caosarean section
Conthued
Additional Useful Information
Intravenous glucose supplementation
SIZE OF ISOTONIC CRYSTALLOID FLUID BAG
Gluc ose solution requ ired
500 ml
1000 ml
Volume to be removed and ad ded
1.25% (1 2.5 mg/ml)
12.5 ml
25 ml
2.5% (25 mg/ml)
25 ml
50 ml
 5% (50 mg/ml)
50 ml
100 ml
7.5% (75 mg/ml)
75 ml
150 ml
10% (100 mg/ml)
100 ml
200 ml
This table presumes the use of a 50% (500 mg/ml) glucose (dextrose) solution and
either 0.9% sodium chloride (normal saline) or buffered lactated Ringer's solution
(Hartmann's solution, compound sodium lactate).
The volumes listed are the amount of fluid that should be removed from the
isotonic crystalloid bag, and then replaced by an equal volume of 5o% glucose solution
in order to make a glucose solution of the desired concentration.
For example, to make a 5% glucose saline solution, remove 50 ml from a 500 ml
bag of 0.9% sodium chloride and then add 50 ml of 50% glucose solution to the bag
Intravenous potassium chloride supplementation
erum potassium con cen tration (mmol/l)
Per 500 ml fluid
Per 1000 mlfluid
3.5-5.5
10
20
3.0-3.5
15
30
2.5-3.0
20
40
2.0-2.5
30
60
< 2.0
40
80
Note: 1 mEq of potassium is equivalent to 1 mmol of potassium.
This table is one example of a number of similar tables presenting comparable
guidelines. These guidelines are very much empirically derived and clearly the
amount of potassium delivered to the patient depends on the fluid rate as much as the
not achieved, the actual rate of potassium administration should be calculated and
used to guide subsequent therapy.
Potassium supplementation should not exceed a rate of 0.5 mEq/kg/h and the use
of enteral supplementation shouild not be overlooked. In the exceptional circuimstance
where it is necessary to exceed this rate, continuous electrocardiogram monitoring
should be used if available, and great care must be taken to alert all staff to the use of
          
administration that could well be fatal. This rate of potassium supplementation must
      s     s s  
boluis!'.
Conversion factors
1% solution = 10 mg/ml = 1 g/100 ml 1 mmol = 1 mEq divided by the valence of
the ion (e.g. 1 +, 2+) ·e.g. valence of sodium is 1 (i.e. Na1+) so 1 mmol of sodium =
1 mEq divided by 1 = 1 mEq of sodium · e.g. valence of calcium is 2 (i.e. Ca2+) so 1
mmol of calcium = 1 mEq divided by 2 = 0.5 mEq of calcium
1 standard teaspoon = 5 ml; 1 standard tablespoon = 15 ml 1 fluid ounce (oz) = 29.6
ml; 1 ml = 0.034 oz 1 lb = 0.454 kg; 1 kg = 2.2 lb 1 part per million (ppm) = 1
   n s      s  
1 kg = 1000 g ·1 g = 1000 mg
·1 mg = 1000 μg
APPENDIX 2
Procedures - equipment and techniques
InDwelling Nasal Oxygen Catheter Placement
Equipment required
· Topical local anaesthetic solution (e.g. proxymetacaine drops)
· Appropriately sized red rubber catheter or soft flexible paediatric feeding tube (8-
      (       
available · Some means of marking the tube (e.g. piece of tape, appropriate pen)
· Butterfly tape and suture material, skin stapler or skin glue
· (Elizabethan collar)
Procedure
· Elevate the patient's nose and drip a small amount of local anaesthetic solution into
the nostril.
· Allow enough time for the local anaesthetic to take effect (e.g. 10 min).
· Measure the catheter from the tip of the nose to the medial canthus and mark it.
· Lubricate the tip of the tube.
· Hold the animal's head with the nose pointing upwards and insert the catheter
along the ventromedial aspect of the nasal cavity until the mark is reached; being too
forceful here can cause epistaxis.
· Fix the catheter in place, first to the lateral aspect of the nose and then to the skin,
    s            
catheter is out of the animal's visual field. The catheter may be fixed using tape tags
that are sutured, using skin staples or with skin glue.
· Loop the catheter along the animal's neck (dorsally or laterally depending on how it
has been fixed) and bandage over it with a light dressing. This will help to minimize
traction on the fixation. An intravenous fluid line or some other form of tubing may
be used to extend the catheter if it is too short to reach the neck.
commercial or improvised Y-connector can be used to connect both catheters to the
same oxygen tubing.
· Use of an Elizabethan collar may be indicated in some patients.
· Local anaesthetic drops may be reapplied as necessary.
Additional notes
A nasopharyngeal oxygen catheter is placed in the same way but the catheter is
premeasured to the ramus of the mandible.
Thoracocentesis
Equipment required
· Clippers
· Surgical scrub equipment
· Sterile gloves
· Appropriately sized butterfly needle (typically 21 or 23 gauge for an adult cat or
small dog), or intravenous catheter (14-20 gauge depending on the size of the
patient) and extension tubing. The size of the needle or catheter is guided both by
patient size and the nature of the material to be aspirated · Sterile three-way tap
        e    s   
(s8op
· Sample containers (sterile EDTA, serum and additive-free containers)
· Jug, bowl or other collection vessel
· Ideally a total of three people
Procedure
· The animal is allowed to stand or to sit in sternal recumbency as preferred and
gently restrained by one individual; minimal restraint often works best. Lateral
recuimbency may be acceptable for pneumothorax.
· A patch of fur is clipped in the 7th, 8th or 9th intercostal space on both sides of the
may be guided by auscultation, ultrasonography or a dorsoventral radiograph if one
has been obtained). If pleural fluid is suspected, an area in the ventral third of the
thorax is chosen for aspiration; if pneumothorax is suspected, an area in the dorsal
third of the thorax is chosen; if pleural space disease has yet to be confirmed, an area
half-way up the thorax is chosen.
· The location for needle insertion should lie just cranial to the rib to avoid the
involves inserting the needle in the middle of the intercostal space.
· Depending on the animal in question, and wearing sterile gloves, a suitable butterfly
needle, or an intravenous catheter attached to extension tubing, is attached to a
three-way tap and then to a 20 ml or 60 ml syringe (Figure App2.1). Note that the
three-way tap is therefore located away from the patient
· The needle is inserted by a second person gently but briskly into the pleural space at
a right angle to the chest wall with the bevel facing dorsally - lingering on the skin is
undesirable as this is often a highly sensitive area.
· Gentle suction is applied to the syringe by a third person as the needle is inserted
into the pleural space. Once in the pleural space the needle can be angled caudally or
ventrally to lie flat against the chest wall to reduce the risk of lung trauma.
being scratched by the needle.
· It may be necessary to reposition the needle (and sometimes the patient) gently
either initially or during the procedure to maximize the amount of material removed.
· Samples of pleural fluid are collected in sterile EDTA, serum and additive-free
containers for cytology, haematocrit measurement, culture and sensitivity or other
analyses as appropriate.
· The total volume of material removed is recorded.
 The procedure may need to be performed on both sides of the thorax - this is decided
based on the results of the procedure on the first side and the individual patient's
          ss
reabsorbed?
-- Is additional material likely to accumulate?
- Are there concurrent intrathoracic abnormalities that make the animal less
tolerant of residual material?
Figure App2.1
 Equipment for thoracocentesis. Butterfly needle attached to 20 ml syringe for cats
and small dogs (left); intravenous catheter; extension tubing and 60 ml syringe for larger dogs.
Additional notes
Clinically    significant   respiratory   compromise   is   generally   associated  with
approximately 20 ml/kg or more of pleural air or fluid. Removal of a smaller volume
than this is therefore unlikely to cause significant clinical improvement although
smaller volumes may be of greater significance in the presence of concurrent injuries
(e.g. pulmonary contusions). If clinical signs do not improve following aspiration of
an appropriate volume of pleural air or fluid it suggests that another abnormality
exists and is predominantly responsible for the dyspnoea.
This may be the case for example in an animal that has suffered blunt thoracic
injury resulting in both pneumothorax and pulmonary contusions. Aspiration of 20
  s s   sd      
contusions are significantly involved in the dyspnoea noted. Nevertheless, therapeutic
  rq  n       n ig
expansion of the already compromised lungs.
Pericardiocentesis
Equipment required
· Sedative agents (e.g. butorphanol ± midazolam) - not required in many cases
· Lidocaine 2% solution (without adrenaline), 2 ml syringe, 23 gauge needle - for
local anaesthesia
           
significant ventricular dysrhythmia
· Clippers
· Surgical scrub equipment
· Sterile gloves
· Sterile no. 11 blade
· Over-the-needle BD Angiocath"m 14 or 16 gauge, 3% or 5 inch (a variety of other
instruments including central venous catheters and small chest drains may be used
for pericardiocentesis; the latter may be left in situ in the pericardial sac for repeat
drainage short-term) · Three-way tap
· Extension tubing
· 60 ml syringe
· Sample containers (sterile EDTA and additive-free containers)
· Jug, bowl or other collection vessel
Procedure
· Place and secure a peripheral intravenous catheter.
available, ensure electrocardiogram (ECG) monitoring is in place.
· Clip an area ventrally (from sternum to mid-thoracic level) extending from the 3rd
to 8th intercostal space.
· Identify the site at which the Angiocath will be inserted: this is usually cranial to
the rib (to avoid the intercostal artery in particular that lies caudal to the rib) at the
level of the costochondral junction in the 4th, 5th or 6th intercostal space.
Ultrasonography can be used to help identify the best site.
· Infiltrate lidocaine (1 ml of 2% solution) at the chosen site subcutaneously and
down to the parietal pleura.
· Perform a surgical scrub of the clipped area.
            s  e
S    -   s      
   e      
Ultrasonography may be used to guide catheter positioning but is usually not
required.
· Advance the Angiocathrm uintil the pericardial sac is penetrated - it may be possi ble
S   a         
within the pericardial sac and is therefore expelled forcefuly once the pericardium
has been penetrated. Pericardial effusion may be mistaken for pleural effusion that
can have a very similar appearance. However, the latter should not be expelled
forcefully through the catheter.
· Advance the catheter over the stylet slightly further and then remove the stylet.
                 
assistant who should then connect the three-way tap and the 60 ml syringe.
· Pericardial fluid is then aspirated until no further fluid is returned or the patient is
no longer compliant.
s s  n   n   s ss  
containers.
· The catheter is then removed and there is usually no need to cover the insertion site.
Additional notes
The ECG should be monitored for significant ventricular dysrhythmia (see Ch. 12)
throughout - if this is noted, it may be that the catheter is making contact with the
myocardium and it should be withdrawn slightly. If the dysrhythmia is very severe or
if it does not improve when the catheter is withdrawn slightly, the catheter should be
removed completely. Lidocaine (start with 2mg/kg bolus) should be administered
intravenously if a ventricular dysrhythmia is haemodynamiacally significant and
fails to improve with catheter withdrawal.
A sample of pericardial effusion withdrawn at the start of the procedure should be
checked frequently for clotting while the procedure progresses. Pericardial effusion is
devoid of platelets and clotting factors and will not clot unless it is from active or very
recent haemorrhage. If the catheter has inadvertently punctured a cardiac chamber or
there is rupture of a sizeable vessel, blood will be aspirated and will clot. The
haematocrit of pericardial fluid is usually less than that of the patient. In addition
drainage of pericardial fluid is typically associated with a rapid improvement in
patient status.
Abdominocentesis
Equipment required
· Clippers
· Surgical scrub equipment
· Sterile gloves
· Appropriately sized hypodermic needle (20, 21 or 23 gauge; X or 1 inch long) and
syringe (2 or 5 ml) · Sample containers (sterile EDTA, serum and additive-free
containers)
Procedure
· Restrain the animal in right lateral recuimbency (or standing)
· Clip and scrub the ventral abdomen around the umbilicus - the site chosen is
typically just caudal to the umbilicus and lateral to the midline; alternatively
ultrasonography may be used to guide the site of aspiration.
· Wearing sterile gloves attach the needle to the syringe.
· Advance the needle perpendicular to the abdominal wall into the abdomen in one
gentle but purposeful motion.
· Aspirate intermittently as the needle is advanced further.
n s  s  an nn    s e
Additional notes
· Lateral recumbency is preferred as it reduces the likelihood of splenic injury.
· If aspirated fluid is grossly suggestive of blood, it should be observed for clotting. In
contrast to blood accidentally aspirated from the spleen or a vessel, sanguineous
effusion is devoid of platelets and clotting factors and will not clot unless it is from
active or very recent haemorrhage.
· An over-the-needle catheter may be used instead of a hypodermic needle.
· An open system using one or more needles inserted into the abdomen without
syringes attached may be used to retrieve peritoneal fluid and may be more
rewarding in some cases (reduces likelihood of omentum or viscera occluding the
needle). However, this technique allows air to leak into the abdominal cavity which
may confuse subsequent diagnostic imaging.
the three other abdominal quadrants (four quadrant abdominocentesis). If free
peritoneal fluid is still not obtained, diagnostic peritoneal lavage should be considered
(see below).
· Abdominocentesis is not recommended in coagulopathic patients.
Miannetia Doritoneal I aaoo
Liagusuit r Ciitucai La vagc
Equipment required
· Clippers
· Surgical scrub equipment
· Sterile gloves
· Sterile no. 15 blade
· Appropriately sized long over-the-needle intravenous catheter (16, 18 or 20 gauge)
· Closed fluid administration system - the precise system will depend on the patient in
question (e.g. a single 60 ml syringe may be adequate for a small cat; a fluid bag,
infusion set and three-way tap may be needed for a big dog) · 10-20 ml/kg of warmed
sterile normal saline (0.9% sodium chloride soluition)
· Standard abdominocentesis equipment (see a bove)
Procedure
· Restrain the animal in lateral recumbency (or standing).
· Clip and scrub the ventral abdomen around the umbilicus - the site chosen is
typically just caudal to the umbilicus and lateral to the midline.
sized over-the-needle intravenous catheter using a scalpel blade. In order not to
weaken the catheter, the holes should not be longer than 50% of the circumference of
the catheter and should not be made opposite each other.
· Insert the catheter in a caudodorsal direction into the abdomen in one gentle but
purposeful motion.
· Once the abdominal wall has been penetrated, advance the catheter over the stylet
and then remove the stylet. Connect the fluid administration system.
 Infuse 1o-20 ml/kg of warmed sterile saline into the abdomen under gravity or via
gentle injection pressure.
· Allow a dwell time of several minutes (20-30 min if possible) and gently agitate the
above).
Additional notes
It is common to retrieve only a small proportion of the lavage fluid originally infused
(the remainder will be absorbed via the peritoneum or removed at surgery).
Due to dilution, fluid obtained via diagnostic peritoneal lavage cannot reliably be
subjected to biochemical quantitative analysis; the main uses are cytology and
microbiology.
Gastric Decompression - Orogastric Intubation
Equipment required
· Roll of tape or mouth gag
· Appropriately sized stomach tube, preferably with multiple fenestrations
· Lubricant for stomach tube
· Means of marking the stomach tube (e.g. piece of tape, suitable marker pen)
· Bucket (or similar) for collecting gastric effluent and lavage fluid
· Funnel and jug for performing lavage
Procedure
· Ideally have the patient in sternal recumbency but allow to adopt his/her preferred
position.
    n   n  (       e
· Premeasure the stomach tube from the tip of the nose to the last rib and mark it.
· Lubricate the tube well and pass it through the roll of tape down the oesophagus; the
oesophagus starts dorsal to, and to the (patient's) left of, the larynx. Some resistance
is usually encountered as the tube is passed through the distal oesophageal sphincter
Excessive force is to be avoided to reduce the risk of gastric perforation.
· Collect the effluent and examine it grossly for evidence of haemorrhage or gastric
mucosal sloughing suggestive of more severe ischaemia.
· Lavage the stomach several times with warm water (20-50 ml/kg/lavage).
Additional notes
In addition to the opioid that should already have been administered, sedation with
an agent that is cardiovascular sparing may be needed for orogastric intubation to be
performed (e.g. diazepam to effect).
It must be remembered that the ability to pass a stomach tube does not exclude
the presence of some degree of gastric volvulus in gastric dilatation/volvulus
syndrome.
Gastric Decompression - Percutaneous Needle Decompression
Equipment required
· Clippers
· Surgical scrub equipment
· Sterile gloves
· 16 or 18 gauge over-the-needle intravenous catheter (or similar sized hypodermic
needle)
Procedure
· Restrain the patient in sternal (or left lateral) recumbency.
and percuss the area for tympany to ensure the stomach and not the spleen lies
beneath.
· Clip and aseptically prepare the chosen site.
· Insert the intravenous catheter percutaneously into the stomach at the chosen site
and remove the stylet. Gas with a characteristic smell is released immediately through
the catheter.
Additional notes
Needle decompression is a quick and easy procedure that is effective in relieving
gaseous distension. However, it does involve blindly placing a needle through a gastric
           
reserved for the following types of cases:· Animals that are intolerant of orogastric
intubation despite appropriate sedation
            
unstable to sedate
· Animals in which a stomach tube cannot be passed.
Nasooesophageal Feeding Tube Placement
Equipment required
· Topical local anaesthetic solution (e.g. proxymetacaine drops)
· Appropriately sized soft flexible paediatric feeding tube (8-French for most dogs, 3.5
to 5-French for most cats and small dogs)
· Some means of marking the tube (e.g. piece of tape, appropriate pen)
· Lubricant gel, preferably containing local anaesthetic
· Appropriately sized syringe (2.5-10 ml) filled with sterile saline or water for
injection
· Butterfly tape and suiture material, skin stapler or skin glue
· (Elizabethan collar)
Procedure
· Elevate the patient's nose and drip a small amount of local anaesthetic solution into
the nostril.
· Allow enough time for the local anaesthetic to take effect (e.g. 10 min).
· Measure the feeding tube from the tip of the nose to the 9th intercostal space and
mark it.
· Lubricate the tip of the tube.
· Hold the animal's head with the nose pointing upwards and insert the tube along
the ventromedial aspect of the nasal cavity. The tube should be inserted in short
   s        s 
increase in resistance is likely to be encountered in the mid-nasal region.
· Once the tube has passed through the nose, lower the head and continue to advance
the tube until the mark is reached. If the animal coughs during placement, the tuibe is
potentially in the trachea and should be withdrawn and the procedure recommenced;
no tube placement is contraindicated in patients unable to cough (e.g. due to reduced
mentation).
· Inject 2.5-10 ml of saline/water down the tube followed by an equal amount of air -
if the animal coughs, the tube is potentially in the trachea.
 Fix the tube in place, first to the lateral aspect of the nose and then to the skin, either
between the eyes or to the side of the face. It is important to ensure that the tube is
   d         s  n i
sutured, using skin staples or with skin glue.
· Confirm correct tube placement radiographically; the end should lie in the distal
oesophagus.
· Loop the feeding tube along the animal's neck (dorsally or laterally depending on
how it has been fixed) and bandage over it with a light dressing. This will help to
minimize traction on the fixation. An intravenous fluid line or some other form of
tubing may be used to extend the feeding tube if it is too short to reach the neck.
Additional notes
Correct tube placement can also be checked by connecting the feeding tube to a
capnograph. If the tube is in the oesophagus, end-tidal carbon dioxide should be
ETCO, and a capnograph waveform.
· Use of an Elizabethan collar may be indicated in some patients (typically young
animals and cats).
· The small diameter of feeding tubes mandates the use of liquid diets.
Gastric Lavage
Equipment required
· Roll of tape or mouth gag
· Large bore stomach tube with terminal fenestrations
· Means of marking the tube (e.g. piece of tape, suitable marker pen)
· Lubricant
· Bucket (or similar) for collecting gastric effluent and lavage fluid
· Funnel and jug for performing lavage
Procedure
· General anaesthesia is mandatory (unless the patient is unconscious)
· The use of a cuffed endotracheal tube is mandatory.
· Position the animal in sternal (or right lateral) recumbency with the head lower
than the thorax.
· Insert the roll of tape (or gag) into the mouth to facilitate stomach tube passage.
· Premeasure the stomach tube from the tip of the nose to the last rib and mark it.
  a   s   h sid   a    es
opening of the oesophagus lies dorsally and to the (patient's) left of the trachea.
· Some resistance is usually encountered as the tube is passed through the distal
oesophageal sphincter; excessive force should be avoided to reduce the risk of
iatrogenic damage.
 Lavage the stomach with warm water (or normal saline) until the returning effluent
is clear (20-50 ml/kg lavage).
· If appropriate, administer activated charcoal via the stomach tube.
Additional notes
· Great care must be taken throughout and especially during stomach tube removal to
prevent aspiration.
· The majority of commercial stomach tubes are likely to be too big for use in cats.
      q   s    g
tubing from an oesophageal stethoscope into which terminal fenestrations are cut.
Urethral Catheterization of Male Cats with Urethral Obstruction
Equipment required
· Minimum of two individuals usually required
· Clippers
· Surgical scrub equipment
· Sterile gloves
· Sterile lubricant
· Lidocaine 2% solution (without adrenaline)
· Feline uirethral catheter - typically 3-to 5-French
· Lacrimal irrigation cannula (Figure App2.3) or over-the-needle intravenous catheter
with needle withdrawn
· Warmed 500 ml bag of 0.9% sodium chloride (normal, physiological saline)
· Fluid administration set
· Three-way tap
· 20 ml syringe
· Sterile additive-free containers
· Jug, bowl or other collection vessel
· Urine collection system
Figure App2.3
 Three types of feline urethral catheter (from top to bottom): red rubber catheter;
    s   r   '     
rubber catheter and the Slippery Sam?. A lacrimal irrigating cannula is shown at the bottom.
Procedure
· Generously clip around the preputial opening
· Position the cat in lateral or dorsal recum bency.
· Set up the fluid bag, administration set, three-way tap and 20 ml syringe.
· Perform a surgical scrub of the clipped area.
· Mix 2 mg/kg of lidocaine thoroughly with a small amount of sterile lubricant; use
this to coat both the irrigation cannula and the urethral catheter.
 n s      m sd   e
palpate the distal urethra for evidence of obstruction. If the obstruction is very distal,
the tip of the penis may have a blue appearance and it may be possible gently to
massage the obstructing material out.
· Gently insert the irrigation cannula or over-the-needle intravenous catheter (with
the needle withdrawn to act as a stylet) into the urethra. If the cannula passes, it can
be  withdrawn and  the urethral catheter  inserted.  Otherwise flushing should
commence.
· It is usually necessary to flush the urethra in order to facilitate catheter placement.
Inject the warmed saline in short sharp bursts with the catheter being simultaneously
gently advanced in a twisting motion. In addition, once the catheter has passed a
short distance from the external orifice, it is essential to release the penis back into
the prepuce and straighten the normal bend in the feline urethra in order for the
    d  a  s  ssd  
dorsally).
· Once the catheter has been fully inserted, the bladder should be thoroughly lavaged
with warmed saline using the fluid administration set, three-way tap and 20 ml
syringe. The urine can be markedly haematuric and lavage is ideally continued until
the fluid returning from the bladder is clear. However, this is dependent on the
patient's compliance and a risk-benefit assessment of the level of chemical restraint
    d     s    
be kept for analysis as required.
· Connect the urethral catheter to a urine drainage bag in a closed collection system
              )
subsequently in order to minimize pull on the urethral catheter.
· Apply an Elizabethan collar to the cat to prevent interference with the urinary
catheter
FigureApp2.5
 si s   s     s 
Drainage Set (Drainset)?, Infusion Concepts, Halifax, UK) via a blue Little Herbert? adaptor.
Additional notes
           
flushing and much patience to achieve catheterization in some cases, in the author's
experience it is almost always achievable.
A number of different types of feline urethral catheters are available (Figures
App2.2 and App2.3). It is usually necessary to use a rigid catheter to unblock the
     s     s   
freezer, a rigid catheter suich as the Portex? Jackson Cat Catheter (Smiths Medical
International Ltd, UK) which is widely available in the United Kingdom is typically
         o    
catheterisation further. However it is preferable not to leave a rigid catheter in situ as
there is a greater likelihood of exacerbating urethral and bladder mucosal damage and
discomfort. The Jackson catheter is also not very long and can be too short to drain
   s    s     
S  m     s  s     
KY USA) are provided with optional stylets; they can therefore be used for unblocking
and then left in situ. They have wings which can be separated from the catheter tube
then repositioned at the appropriate length on the catheter once it has been measured
against the cat. The two pieces are then attached together with a suture at each end of
the wings, and the wings are sutured to the prepuce using dedicated suture holes
(Figure App2.4). As such the catheter is essentially flexible in length. It is also soft and
open-ended. Red rubber urethral catheters (3.5-or 5-French; e.g. Kendall SovereignrM,
Tyco Healthcare Group LP, Massachusetts, USA) may also be used and are both soft
S s  s  s         
(SurgiVet, Smiths Medical Inc., Wisconsin, USA) urethral catheter can be readily
S              
(e.g. Little Herbert?, SurgiVet, Smiths Medical Inc., Wisconsin, USA). However this
catheter is not intended to be left in situ - the warning from the manuifacturer at the
time of writing is that the catheter and silicone hub are not permanently affixed to
each other and it is advised not to leave the catheter in place for more than 6 hours.
F0
FigureApp2.2
MILA International, Inc. Tomcat Urethral Catheters.
FigureApp2.4
MILA International, Inc. Tomcat Catheter with suture wing.
Advantages of a  closed urinary  collection system  include reduced risk of
ascending infection, avoiding urine scalding of the perineal region, and overall
is not available, one can be improvised using an intravenous fluid administration set
attached to an empty fluid bag. The chances of success with such an improvised
system can be maximized by prefilling the administration set (as when setting up an
intravenous drip) before it is connected to the urinary catheter and by minimizing the
amount of air that gets into the line subsequently. If a closed collection system really
cannot be made to work reliably, the urethral catheter can be bunged and the bladder
that this is done regularly. If for some exceptional reason the uirethral catheter must be
left open, it is recommended to leave a short length of tubing connected to the catheter
such that the voided urine will collect at a site away from the cat's perineum.
Retrograde Urohydropulsion in Male Dogs with Urethral Obstruction
Equipment required
· Four individuals usually required
· Clippers
· Surgical scrub equipment
· Sterile lu bricant
· Multiple syringes prefilled with sterile 0.9% sodium chloride (normal, physiological
saline) - for dogs weighing less than 12 kg, each syringe should contain 5 ml/kg of
saline; full 60 ml syringes should be used for dogs weighing more than 12 kg.
Procedure
· Place the dog in lateral recumbency.
· Clip fur from around the preputial opening as required.
 d    sd  a  s  e
gently to the level of the most distal obstructing calculus; this is often at the level of
the os penis.
· The third individual should insert a lubricated finger into the rectum and compress
the urethra (lies ventral to the rectum) against the pubis via pressure through the
           sn   e
rectal pressure is released by lifting off the finger and an attempt should then be made
to advance the urethral catheter further. This will be possible if the build up and
sudden release of pressure have dislodged the calculus, flushing it into the bladder or
at least more proximally.
· The above procedure may need to be performed several times before successful
catheterization is achieved. The bladder should be monitored for overdistension as a
result of saline that may enter the bladder with each attempt.
· Once the obstruction is relieved, it may be appropriate to leave a soft urethral
catheter connected to a closed collection system in situ.
Additional notes
sedation and must therefore only be attempted once the patient has received adequate
stabilization of cardiovascular, electrolyte and acid-base status.
Retrograde hydropulsion is intended to flush urethroliths into the bladder and not
p            
catheterization to minimize urethral trauma and avoid rupture.
Further reading
Books
              
Textbook of veterinary internal medicine. St Louis: Saunders; 2005:1850-1874.
iy J.D., Johnson L.R. Feline bronchial disease/asthma. In: King L.G., editor. Textbook of respiratory
disease in dogs and cats. St Louis: Saunders; 2004:388-396.
S             
medicine. St Louis: Saunders; 2005:1722-1727.
iBartola S.P. Disorders of sodium and water: hypernatremia and hyponatremia. In: DiBartola S.P., editor.
Fluid, electrolyte, and acid-base disorders in small animal practice. St Louis: Saunders; 2006:47-79.
iBartola S.P., Autran de Morais H. Disorders of potassium: hypokalemia and hyperkalemia. In: DiBartola
S.P., editor. Fluid, electrolyte, and acid-base disorders in small animal practice. St Louis: Saunders;
2006:91-121.
endricks J.C. Brachycephalic airway syndrome. In: King L.G., editor. Textbook of respiratory disease in
dogs and cats. St Louis: Saunders; 2004:310-318.
ittleson M.D. Systemic arterial thromboembolism. In: Ettinger S.J., Feldman E.C., editors. Textbook of
veterinary internal medicine. St Louis: Saunders; 2005:1098-1104.
         s   
eterson M.E., Talcott P.A. Small animal toxicology, second ed. St Louis: Saunders; 2006.
:haer M. Diabetic ketoacidosis and hyperglycemic hyperosmolar syndrome. In: Ettinger S.J., Feldman
E.C., editors. Textbook of veterinary internal medicine. St Louis: Saunders; 2005:424-428
lley L.P. Essentials of canine and feline electrocardiography. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger; 1992.
obias A.H. Acquired pericardial disorders. In: Ettinger S.J, Feldman E.C., editors. Textbook of veterinary
internal medicine. St Louis: Saunders; 2005:1107-1118.
estropp J.L., Buffington C.A.T., Chew D. Feline lower urinary tract diseases. In: Etinger S.J., Feldman
E.C., editors. Textbook of veterinary internal medicine. St Louis: Saunders; 2005:1828-1850.
illiams D.A., Steiner J.M. Canine exocrine pancreatic disease. In: Ettinger S.J., Feldman E.C., editors.
Textbook of veterinary internal medicine. St Louis: Saunders; 2005:1482-1488.
illiams D.A., Steiner J.M. Feline exocrine pancreatic disease. In: Etinger S.J., Feldman E.C., editors.
Textbook of veterinary internal medicine. St Louis: Saunders; 2005:1489-1492
Articles
S n  xo s e g a s  s  r ' ss
and cats. In Practice. 2008;27:399-405.
tkins C.E. Disorders of glucose homeostasis in neonatal and juvenile dogs: Hypoglycemia - Part I.
Compendium on Continuing Education for the Practicing Veterinarian. 1984;6:197-208.
S  -            
Compendium on Continuing Education for the Practicing Veterinarian. 1984;6:353-364.
eal M.W. Approach to the acute abdomen. Veterinary Clinics: Small Animal Practice. 2005;35:375-396.
oag A.K., Hughes D. Assessment and treatment of perfusion abnormalities in the emergency patient.
Veterinary Clinics, Small Animal Practice. 2005;35:319-342.
   s   n        s  
initial stabilisation. In Practice. 2004;26(9):476-483.
oothe D.M. Special considerations for drug and fluid therapy in the pediatric patient. Compendium on
Continuing Education for the Practicing Veterinarian. T992;14(3):313-3T7.
oswood A. Rationale for the use of drugs in the treatment of cardiovascular disease 4. Antiarrhythmic
drugs. In Practice. 2001;23(2):63-73
oysen S.R., Rozanski E.A., Tidwell A.s., et al. Evaluation of a focused assessment with sinography for
trauma protocol to detect free abdominal fluid in dogs involved in motor vehicle accidents. Journal
of the American Veterinary Medical Association. 2004;225(8):1198-1204.
onnally H.E. Cytology and fluid analysis of the acute abdomen. Clinical Techniques in Small Animal
Practice. 2003;18(1):39-44.
avidson B.J., Paling A.C., Lahmers S.L., et al. Disease association and clinical assessment of feline
          r   
Continuing Education for the Practicing Veterinarian. 2007;29(9):551-563.
  s             
2008;30:136-142.
erold L.V., Devey J.J., Kirby R., et al. Clinical evaluation and management of hemoperitoneum in dogs.
Journal of Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care. 2008;18(1):40-53
umm K., Goggs R., Hughes D. Fluid therapy in small animals 2. Crystalloid solutions. In Practice.
2008;30:85-91.
itkowitz L.A. Reproductive emergencies. Veterinary Clinics: Small Animal Practice. 2005;35:397-420.
S              s
17 cases (1995-2001). Journal of Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care. 2004;14(1):30-40.
athews K.A. Management of pain. (Ed.). Veterinary Clinics: Small Animal Practice, 30;4. 2000:703-970.
               s
Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care. 2005;15(4):273-284.
     d          
Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care. 2005;15:273-284.
cMichael M.A., Dhupa N. Pediatric critical care medicine: physiologic considerations. Compendium on
Continuing Education for the Practicing Veterinarian. 2000;22(3):353-359.
Continuing Education for the Practicing Veterinarian. 2000;22(4):353-360.
cittie J. Canine parvoviral enteritis: a review of diagnosis, management, and prevention. Journal of
Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care. 2004;14(3):167-T76.
ush J.E., Keene B.W., Fox P.R. Pericardial disease in the cat: a retrospective evaluation of 66 cases.
Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association. 1990;26:39-46.
yan S.D., Wagner A.E. Cesarean section in dogs: physiology and perioperative considerations.
Compendium on Continuing Education for the Practicing Veterinarian. 2006;28(1):34-42.
    s   s   e  s
Education for the Practicing Veterinarian. 2006;28(1):44-54.
chacter S., Norris C.R. Laryngeal paralysis in cats: 16 cases (1990-1999). Journal of the American
Veterinary Medical Association. 2000;216(7):1100-1103.
chaer M. The treatment of acute adrenocortical insufficiency in  the dog. Journal of Veterinary
Emergency and Critical Care. 200l;11(1):7-14.
nith S.A., Tobias A.H. Feline arterial thromboembolism: an update. Veterinary Clinics: Small Animal
Practice. 2004;34:1245-1271.
)attini G., Rossi F., Vignoli M., Lamb C.R. Use of ultrasound to diagnose diaphragmatic rupture in dogs
and cats. Veterinary Radiology and Ultrasound. 2003;44(2):226-230.
erstegen J., Dhaliwal G., Verstegen-Onclin K. Mucometra, cystic endometrial hyperplasia, and pyometra
in the bitch: advances in treatment and assessment of future reproductive success. Theriogenology
2008;70:364-374.
eisse C., Soares N., Beal M.W., et al. Survival times in dogs with right atrial hemangiosarcoma treated by
means of surgical resection with or without adjuvant chemotherapy: 23 cases (1986-2000). Journal
'orth  A.J.,  Machon  R.G. Traumatic diaphragmatic herniation: pathophysiology and management.
Compendium on Continuing Education for the Practicing Veterinarian. 2005;27(3):T78-191:
oran D.L. Pancreatitis in cats: diagnosis and management of a challenging disease. Journal of the
American Animal Hospital Association. 2006;42:1-9.
Pyrethrins and pyrethroids
ansen S.R. Pyrethrins and pyrethroids in dogs and cats. Compendium on Continuing Education for the
Practicing Veterinarian. 1994;16:707-712.
             
American Veterinary Medical Association. 1999;215:198-202.
ichardson J.A. Permethrin spot-on toxicoses in cats. Journal of Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care
2000;10(2):103-106.
hittem T.  Pyrethrin and pyrethroid insecticide intoxication in cats. Compendium on  Continuing
Education for the Practicing Veterinarian. 1995;17(4):489-492.
Metaldehyde
rth A.M. Part 1: Treatment of snail bait toxicity in dogs: literature review. Journal of Veterinary
Emergency and Critical Care. 1992;2(1):25-30.
rth A.M. Part 2: Treatment of snail bait toxicity in dogs: retrospective study of 56 cases. Journal of
Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care. 1992;2(1):31-36.
ichardson J.A., Welch S.L., Gwaltney-Brant S.M., et al. Metaldehyde toxicoses in dogs. Compendium on
Continuing Education for the Practicing Veterinarian. 2003;25(5):376-380.
as-Natan E., Segev G., Aroch I. Clinical, neurological and clinicopathological signs, treatment and
outcome of metaldehyde intoxication in 18 dogs. Journal of Small Animal Practice. 2007;48:438-
443.
Ethylene glycol
onnally H.E., Thrall M.A., Forney S.D., et al. Safety and efficacy of 4-methylpyrazole as treatment for
American Veterinary Medical Association. 1996;209:1880-1883.
Compendium on Continuing Education for the Practicing Veterinarian. 1999;21(11):1014-1021.
   '          
1999;21(12):1124-1133.
rauer G.F., Thrall M.A., Henre B.A., et al. Early clinicopathologic findings in dogs ingesting ethylene
glycol. American Journal of Veterinary Research. T984;45:2299-2303.
S              
intoxication. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association. 1984;184:37-41.
Grapes/raisins
     s           d s
or raisins: a retrospective evaluation of 43 dogs (1992-2002). Journal of Veterinary Internal
Medicine. 2005;19:663-674.
azzaferro E.M., Eubig P.A., Hackett T.B., et al. Acute renal failure associated with raisin or grape
ingestion in 4 dogs. Journal of Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care. 2004;14(3):203-212.
Lilies
mgston C.E. Acute renal failure caused by lily ingestion in six cats. Journal of the American Veterinary
Medical Association. 2002;220(1):49-52.
Nonsteroidal antinflammatory agents
aacs J.P. Adverse effects of nonsteroidal antinflammatory drugs in the dog and cat. Australian
Veterinary Practitioner. 1996;26:180-186.
ore A.M. Toxicology of nonsteroidal antinflammatory drugs. Veterinary Clinics: Small Animal Practice.
1990;20(2):419-430.
ees P., May S.A., McKellar Q.A. Pharmacology and therapeutics of nonsteroidal antinflammatory drugs
Paracetamol (acetaminophen)
ronson L.R., Drobatz K. Acetaminophen toxicosis in 17 cats. Journal of Veterinary Emergency and
Critical Care. 1996;6:65-69.
    o  s      n 
for the Practicing Veterinarian. 2000;22(2):160-170.
'allace K.P., Center S.A., Hickford F.H., et al. S-adenosyl-Lmethionine (SAMe) for the treatment of
acetaminophen   toxicity in  a dog. Journal of the  American  Animal  Hospital  Association
2002;38:246-254.
'ebb C.B., Twedt D.C., Fettman M.J., et al. S-adenosylmethionine (SAMe) in a feline acetaminophen
model of oxidative injury. Journal of Feline Medicine and Surgery. 2003;5:69-75.
Anticoagulant rodenticides
urphy M.J. Rodenticides. Veterinary Clinics: Small Animal Practice. 2002;32:469-484.
leafor S.E., Couto C.G. Anticoagulant rodenticide toxicity in 21 dogs. Journal of the American Animal
Hospital Association. 1999;35:38-46.
leafor S.E., Couto C.G. Clinical approach to a dog with anticoagulant rodenticide poisoning. Veterinary
Medicine. 1999;94(5):466-471.
Xylitol
 unayer E.K. Hypoglycemia following canine ingestion of xylitol-containing gum. Veterinary and Human
Toxicology. 2004;46(2):87-88.
unayer E.K. New findings on the effects of xylitol ingestion in dogs. Veterinary Medicine. 2006;101:791-
798.
S  s         
ingestion in eight dogs. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association. 2006;229(7):1113-
1117.
odd J.M., Powell L. Xylitol intoxication associated with fulminant hepatic failure in a dog. Journal of
Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care. 2007;17(3):286-289.
Index
Notes: Page numbers in bold refer to boxes, figures and tables.
A
abdomen, acute, 46-47
causes, 46
definition, 46
look-alikes, 46-47see also specific causes
abdominal counter pressure bandage, 138
abdominocentesis, 293-294
equipment, 293
in haemoabdomen, 139
procedure, 294
in uterine rupture, 137
accelerated idioventricular rhythm, 60-61
acepromazine
dose range and duration of action, 247
laryngeal paralysis, 192
uses, 245
acetaminophen See paracetamol
acid-base analysis, ethylene glycol poisoning, 161
activated charcoal, 156-157
ethylene glycol poisoning, 162
metaldehyde poisoning, 159
activated clotting time (ACT), 171-172
activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT), 171-172
acuite renal failure (ARF) See renal failure, acuite
Addisonian crisis, 206-207
Addison's disease See hypoadrenocorticism
adrenaline, anaphylaxis/anaphylactic shock, 110
Advocate Spot-on solution?, 203
alanine aminotransferase (ALT), 175
aldosterone, 204
alfaxalone, 246, 247
alkaline phosphatase (ALP), 175
allergic transfusion reaction, acute, 255
allodynia, 30
amylase, 146
anaemia, 79-82
algorithm, 80
in bitches at parturition, 231
classification, 79
in hypoadrenocorticism, 206
hypovolaemic, 251
immune-mediated haemolytic See immune-mediated haemolytic anaemia (IMHA)
nonregenerative, 81, 81
normovolaemic, 251
regenerative, 79, 81
anaesthesia
general See general anaesthesia
inhalation, 246
local See local anaesthetic agents
analgesia, 29-37
in acute pancreatitis, 146
agents, 30-37(see also specific analgesic agents) in aortic thromboembolism, 183
in gastric dilatation/volvulus syndrome (GDV), 142, 143
in neonates, 261
nonpharmacological measures, 37, 37
in traumatic brain injury, 120
anaphylaxis/anaphylactic shock, 109-111
causes of, 111
treatment of, 110-111
angioedema, 109-110, 110
case example, 111-112
causes of, 111
Angiostrongylus vasorum infection, 199-202
case example, 201
assessment, 201
emergency database, 201
major body system examination, 201-202
management, 201-202
presenting signs and case history, 201
clinical signs, 199-200
diagnosis, 200
treatment, 200-201
anterior uveitis, acute, 212-214
anti biotic therapy
in acute diarrhoea, 50-51
in acute renal failure, 226
in bite wounds, 132-133
in canine open-cervix pyometra, 151
in canine parvoviral gastroenteritis, 149
in leptospirosis, 225
in neonates, 261
in septic (bacterial) peritonitis, 136, 136
in urethral obstruction, 222
in wounds, 113
anticoagulant rodenticide poisoning, 171-173
clinical signs, 172
laboratory and other tests, 172
mechanism of toxicity, 171-172
prognosis, 173
rodenticides containing vitamin D, 173
toxic dose, 171
toxicokinetics, 171
treatment, 172-173
anticoagulation
aortic thromboembolism, 182
immune-mediated haemolytic anaemia, 195
anticonvulsive therapy, 105
antidotes, 157
anxiolysis, 176
aortic body tumours, 184
aortic thromboembolism, feline, 181-183
major body system examination, 183
management, 183
presenting signs and case history, 183
prognosis, 182-183
treatment, 182
apomorphine, 156
ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center, 152
aspiration pneumonia, 55, 90, 91-93
aspirin poisoning, 168
clinical signs, 168
mechanism of toxicity, 168
toxic dose, 168
toxicokinetics, 168
treatment, 168
aspirin therapy, immune-mediated haemolytic anaemia, 195, 197
asthma See bronchial disease (asthma)
atipamezole, 248
atrial fibrillation (AF), 58-59, 59, 179
atrioventricular (AV) node, 57
atrioventricular block, 62-63, 63
autoagglutination, immune-mediated haemolytic anaemia, 196-197, 196
azathioprine, 195, 197
azotaemia, 11-12
in acute renal failure, 226
in grape/raisin toxicity, 164, 164
in nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agents toxicity, 167
postrenal, 12
 prerenal, 11
renal, 11-12
severe, 55-56
in rethral obstruction, 220, 220
B
benazepril, 179
benzodiazepines, 244
bile peritonitis, 140
biochemistry, ethylene glycol poisoning, 161
bite w0unds, 131-134, 131-133
assessment, 133
emergency database, 133
major body system examination, 133
management, 133-134
presenting signs and case history, 132-133
bladder
palpation in pelvic limb paresis and paralysis, 84
rupture in urethral obstruction, 220
blood components, 251
blood glucose concentration, 10-11
seizures, 104
xylitol poisoning, 175
blood loss, intractable, 249
blood transfusion, 251-255
blood components, 251, 252
blood types, 251-253
canine, 251
feline, 253
in-house typing, 253
crossmatching, 253-254
in immune-mediated haemolytic anaemia, 197, 197
in immune-mediated thrombocytopenia, 199
reactions, 254-255
acute allergic, 255
acute haemolytic, 254-255
blood types, 251-253
canine, 251
feline, 253
in-house typing, 253
blood urea nitrogen (BUN) concentration, 12
body fluid compartments, 5
body weight
gain, 256-257
kittens, 256
puppies, 256
brachycephalic airway obstruction syndrome (BAOS), 193
bradycardia
opioid side effects, 31
in traumatic brain injury, 121
bradydysrhythmias, 62-63
brain injury, traumatic See traumatic brain injury
bronchial disease (asthma), feline, 190-191
assessment, 190
brief examination, 190
management, 190-191
observation, 190
presenting signs and case history, 190
buccal mucosal bleeding time (BMBT), 88-89
buffered lactated Ringer's solution See Hartmann's solution
buprenorphine, 31, 32
acute pancreatitis, 146
diabetic ketoacidosis, 209
Buster ICU cage, 40-41, 40
butorphanol, 31, 32
in Angiostrongylus vasorum infection, 201-202
in heatstroke, 236
in laryngeal paralysis, 192
in pericardial effusion, 186
in respiratory distress, 99
C
caesarean section, 230, 232-233
anaesthesia, 246-250
for dam, 246
example protocol, 247-249
for neonates, 246
indications for emergency, 232
calciferol in anticoagulant rodenticides, 173
calcium, 15-16, 15
supplementation, 210
in dystocia, 231
in ethylene glycol poisoning, 163
calcium gluconate, 210
in hyperkalaemia, 219
in urethral obstruction, 220
calcium 0xalate, 161, 161
cardiac conduction, normal, 57, 58
cardiac dysrhythmias, 57-63see also specific dysrhythmias
cardiac tamponade, 184
cardiogenic shock, 6, 6
cardiomyopathies
dilated See dilated cardiomyopathy
feline, 180-181
hypertrophic, 180
cardiovascular system
causes of collapse, 64
examination, 3
central nervous system examination, 4
central vestibular disease, 68-70
cerebral perfusion, 118
chemodectomas, 184
chest compliance, respiratory distress, 97
chlorambucil, 197
chocolate (theobromine) poisoning, 173-174
clinical signs, 174
laboratory and other tests, 174
mechanism of toxicity, 174
prognosis, 174
toxic dose, 173
toxicokinetics, 174
treatment, 174
cholecalciferol in anticoagulant rodenticides, 173
ciclosporin, 195
cimetidine, 169
closed-cervix pyometra, 137, 137, 137
coagulation
in Angiostrongylus vasorum infection, 199-200
in nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agents toxicity, 166-167
coagulation factor disorders, 87
collapse, 64
primary cardiovascular disorders causing, 64
primary noncardiovascular disorders causing cardiovascular, 64
colloids
in acute pancreatitis, 147, 147-148
in hypovolaemia, 21-22
in pulmonary pathology, 25
synthetic, 20
congestive heart failure (CHF), 176
feline, 180-181, 181
conjunctivitis, acute, 212-214
constant rate infusions, opioids, 33
cooling, 72-73, 72
cornea
foreign body, 212-214
laceration, 212-214
ulcer
descemetocele, 212-214
infected stromal (deep), 212-214
perforation, 212-214
superficial, 212-214
corticosteroids
in anaphylaxis/anaphylactic shock, 111
in immune-mediated thrombocytopenia, 198
in traumatic brain injury, 122
cortisol, 204
cranial nerves, 118
crossmatching, 253-254
crystalloids, 19-20
in dehydration, 24
in immune-mediated thrombocytopenia, 199
isotonic See isotonic crystalloids
Cushing response, 118
cyanosis, 65-67
central, 65-67, 65-66, 67
definition, 65
diagnostic imaging, 66
emergency database, 66
history, 66
major body system examination, 66
peripheral, 65-66
signalment, 66
treatment, 66-67
cyclooxygenase (COx), 34, 166
cystocentesis, urethral obstruction, 221-222
cytology of peritoneal fluid, 135
D
decerebellate rigidity, 119
decerebrate rigidity, 119
deep pain perception assessment, 84, 84
dehydration, 8-9
additional measures of, 9
assessing hydration status, 8-9, 9
fluid therapy, 19, 23-24, 27-28
dexamethasone
in Angiostrongylus vasorum infection, 202, 203
in feline bronchial disease (asthma), 190-191
in hypoadrenocorticism, 207
in immune-mediated haemolytic anaemia, 197
in laryngeal paralysis, 192
in respiratory distress, 99
dexemedetomidine, 245, 247
contraindications, 245
dextrans, 20
diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA), 207-209
case example, 208-209
assessment, 208
emergency database, 208-209
major body system examination, 208
management, 209
presenting signs and case history, 208
common concurrent disorders, 207
sodium in, 209
treatment considerations, 207-208
diagnostic imaging
in acute diarrhoea, 50
in acute vomiting, 56
in anticoagulant rodenticides poisoning, 172
in cyanosis, 66
in oesophageal foreign bodies, 94
in pelvic limb paresis and paralysis, 84
in regurgitation, 91-92, 92-93
in seizures, 104
in unilateral vestibular disease, 69-70see also specific modalities
dialysis, acute renal failure, 227
diaphragmatic rupture, traumatic, 126-129
anaesthesia, 249
case example, 128-129
assessment, 128
major body system examination, 128
management, 128-129
presenting signs and case history, 128
diagnosis, 126, 127
timing of surgical intervention, 126-127
diarrhoea, acute, 48-52
diagnostic imaging, 50
emergency database, 50
history, 49
large intestinal, 48, 48
major body system examination, 49
signalment, 49
small intestinal, 48, 48
treatment, 50-51
diazepam, 247
in gastric dilatation/volvulus syndrome (GDV), 143-144
in metaldehyde poisoning, 159
reversal agent for, 248
in seizures, 105
in status epilepticus, 105, 106
digoxin
in atrial fibrillation, 59
in dilated cardiomyopathy, 179
in supraventricular tachycardia, 58
dilated cardiomyopathy
canine, 179
assessment, 179
emergency database, 179
major body system examination, 179
management, 179, 180
presenting signs and case history, 179
feline, 180
diltiazem, 58
diuresis, 157, 161
diuretics, acute renal failure, 227
doxycycline, 197-198
drug therapy
neonates, 261
respiratory distress, 99-100, 99see also specific disorders specific drugs
dyspnoea, postural adaptation to, 4
dysrhythmias See cardiac dysrhythmias; specific dysrhythmias
dystocia, 228-233
case examples
major body system examination, 230-232
management, 231-233
presenting signs and case history, 230, 232
general anaesthesia, 230
incidence, 229
indications for veterinary attention, 229
normal gestation and parturition, 228-229
ovarohysterectomy, 230
oxytocin, 229-230
dysuria, 45
E
ecchymoses, 87-89
causes of, 87-88
emergency database, 88-89
history, 88
major body system examination, 88
signalment, 88
treatment, 89
echocardiography, pericardial effusion, 185-186, 185, 185
electrocardiography
in canine haemorrhage gastroenteritis, 150
in gastric dilatation/volvulus syndrome (GDV), 142-143
in hyperkalaemia, 216, 216-218
in pericardial effusion, 185-186, 185
emesis
clinical approach See gastrointestinal decontamination
contraindications to induction of, 153
drugs inducing, 156
inducing at home, 153, 153, 154
EMLA? cream, 35-36
endoscopy in regurgitation, 92, 93
enrofloxacin, 197-198
enteral feeding, neonates, 260
ethanol, 163, 163
ethylene glycol poisoning, 160-164
clinical signs, 161
gastrointestinal decontamination, 162
laboratory tests, 161-162
mechanism of toxicity, 160-161
preventing metabolism of, 162-163
prognosis, 163-164
serum concentrations, 161-162
toxic dose, 160
toxicokinetics, 160
treatment, 162-163
Ethylene Glycol Test Kit?, 161-162
eye
ocular emergencies, 211
painful, 53
red, 53
F
faecal smear, Angiostrongylus vasorum infection, 200-201, 200
feline high-rise syndrome, 134
femoral pulse palpation, 98
fenbendazole, 203
flail segments, 124-125
flow-by oxygen, 38-39
fluid therapy
in neonates, 260-261
parenteral See parenteral fluid therapy see also specific fluids
flumazenil, 248
fluticasone, 191
focused assessment with sonography for trauma (FAsT) protocol, 136
fomepizole, 162-163, 162
foreign bodies
corneal, 212-214
oesophageal See oesophageal foreign bodies
small intestine See small intestinal foreign body
fractures, open, 114
fresh frozen plasma, 252
fresh whole blood, 252
furosemide
in acute renal failure, 226-227
in canine chronic mitral valve insufficiency, 177
in dilated cardiomyopathy, 179
in feline bronchial disease (asthma), 190-191
in respiratory distress, 99
G
GABA, 159
gastric and colorectal lavage, 156, 296
gastric decompression
orogastric intubation, 294-295
percutaneous needle decompression, 295
gastric dilatation/volvulus syndrome (GDV), 140-144
anaesthesia, 249-250
case example, 143-144
assessment, 143
emergency database, 143
major body system examination, 143
management, 143-144
presenting signs and case history, 143
intraoperative considerations, 141-142
pathophysiology, 140-141
postoperative considerations, 142
radiography, 141, 141-142
risk factors, 140, 140
surgical intervention, 142
gastric emptying, 155-156
gastroenteritis
canine haemorrhage See haemorrhage gastroenteritis (HGE), canine
canine parvoviral See parvoviral gastroenteritis, canine
gastrointestinal decontamination, 155-156
activated charcoal, 156
anticoagulant rodenticides, 172
chocolate (theobromine), 174
emesis inducing drugs, 156
ethylene glycol poisoning, 162
gastric and colorectal lavage, 156
gastric emptying, 155-156
xylitol poisoning, 175
 gastrointestinal tract, nonsteroidal antinflammatory agents toxicity, 166
gelatins, 20
general anaesthesia
drugs for, 244-246, 247
in dystocia, 230
effects of patient condition on, 242
general considerations for, 241-244
monitoring during, 244
need for, 241-242
potential adverse effects of, 242
potential risks of, 241
preparation for critical patients, 243
safety during, 242-244
safety prior to, 241-242
gestation
abnormal See dystocia
normal
bitches, 228-229
queens, 228-229
glaucoma, acute, 212-214
glucocorticoids
in Angiostrongylus vasorum infection, 203
in hypoadrenocorticism, 204, 206
in immune-mediated haemolytic anaemia, 194-195, 197
in Mycoplasma haemofelis, 197-198
in urethral obstruction, 222
glucose, 15
in hyperkalaemia, 219
supplementation
in dehydration, 27
intravenous, 289-290
in urethral obstruction, 220
glucosuria, 17
glutathione, 168-169
glyceryl trinitrate
in canine chronic mitral valve insufficiency, 177, 177
in heart failure, 176
in respiratory distress, 99
grape poisoning, 164
emergency database, 164
major body system examination, 164
management, 164-165
mechanism of toxicity, 164
 presenting signs and case history, 164
toxic dose, 164
toxicokinetics, 164
gross plasma appearance, 10, 11
H
haemangiosarcoma
canine, 137-138
pericardial effusion, 184
ruptured splenic, anaesthesia, 249
haematochezia, 51
haematuria, 16-17, 18, 45
haemoabdomen, 137-139
abdominal counter pressure bandage for, 138
in canine haemangiosarcoma, 137-138
case example, 138-139
assessment, 139
emergency database, 139
major body system examination, 138-139
management, 139
presenting signs and case history, 138
cauuses of, 138
haemoglobin-based oxygen-carrying solutions (HBOC), 20-21
haemoglobinuria, 16-17, 18, 45
haemolysis, regenerative anaemia, 81
haemolytic transfusion reaction, acute, 254-255
canine, 254
feline, 254-255
haemorrhage, regenerative anaemia, 81
haemorrhage gastroenteritis (HGE), canine, 149-150
assessment, 149
emergency database, 149-150
major body system examination, 149
management, 150
 presenting signs and case history, 149
haemostasis, 113
haemothorax, 124
Hartmann's solution, 19
in acute pancreatitis, 147
in canine parvoviral gastroenteritis, 149
in diabetic ketoacidosis, 209
in heatstroke, 236
in hypovolaemia, 206
in urethral obstruction, 220-221
head tilt, 68-70
head trauma
and seizures, 105 See also traumatic brain injury
heart disease
fluid therapy, 26-27
treatment, 182
heart failure
acute decompensated, 176-181
congestive See congestive heart failure (CHF)
low-output, 176
treatment, 182
heat conservation, 71
heat gain, 71, 71
heat loss, 71, 71
heatstroke, 234-237
case example, 235-237
assessment, 236
emergency database, 236
follow-up, 237
major body system examination, 236
management, 236-237
presenting signs and case history, 235-236
multiple organ dysfunction syndrome, 235, 235
pathogenesis, 234-235
pathophysiology, 235, 235
possible clinicopathological findings, 237
preventative measures, 235
prognostic considerations, 234
risk factors, 234-235
hemiparesis/plegia, traumatic brain injury, 119
hepatocellular jaundice, 76, 76
histamine receptor antagonists, 167
hydrocortisone, 207
hydrogen peroxide, 154
hydroxyethyl starches, 20, 147
hyperalgesia, 30
hyperamylasaemia, 146
hypercalcaemia, 16, 16
hyperglobulinaemia, 10
hyperglycaemia, 10-11, 121
hyperkalaemia, 14, 15
in urethral obstruction, 216-219, 216-219, 216-218, 219
hyperlipasaemia, 146
hypernatraemia, 15
hypersensitivity reaction, 109
localized, 109
type I, 109
hypersthenuria, 17
hypertension
intracranial See intracranial hypertension
with seizures, 103-104
hyperthermia, 71-72
management, 72
in metaldehyde poisoning, 159
versus pyrexia, 71-73
in toxicological emergencies, 155
hypertonic saline, 19
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, 180
hyphaema, 212-214
hypoadrenocorticism
acute vomiting, 55-56
canine primary, 204-206
assessment, 205
clinical signs, 204, 204
emergency database, 205-206
major body system examination, 205
management, 206
presenting signs and case history, 205
differentiating from acute abdomen, 47
feline primary, 207
hypoalbuminaemia, 10
hypocalcaemia, 16, 16
in dystocia, 231
iatrogenic, following bilateral thyroidectomy, 209-210
treatment, 210
hypoglycaemia, 11
in neonates, 260
periparturient, 232
in xylitol poisoning, 175
hypokalaemia, 14
after urethral obstruction, 222
in xylitol poisoning, 175
hyponatraemia, 15
hypoparathyroidism, 209
hypoperfusion, 3, 5-6
causes of, 5-6, 6
fluid therapy, 22-23
hyposthenuria, 17
hypothermia, 74-75
during anaesthesia, 241
causes of, 74
definition, 74
management, 74-75, 75
in neonates, 258-260
potential adverse effects of, 74
in toxicological emergencies, 155
hypotonic saline, 19-20
hypovolaemia, 3, 6-8, 6
in acute diarrhoea, 49
assessing perfusion and volume status, 6-8
in cats, 7
compensatory phase of, 7
in dogs, 7
fluid therapy for, 19, 21-23
pain management for, 8
in vomiting, acute, 55
hypovolaemic shock, 5
icterus See jaundice
imidacloprid, 202
immune-mediated haemolytic anaemia (IMHA)
canine, 194-197
case example, 195-197
assessment, 195-196
emergency database, 196-197
in-saline agglutination test, 196, 196
major body system examination, 195-196
management, 197
presenting signs and case history, 195
classification, 194
immunosuppressive agents, 195
treatment, 194-195
underlying conditions associated with, 194
feline, 197-198
immune-mediated thrombocytopenia, 87-88
causes, 198-199
clinical signs, 198
diagnosis, 198
primary (idiopathic), 198-199
treatment, 198-199
immunosuppressive therapy
immune-mediated haemolytic anaemia, 194-195, 195
immune-mediated thrombocytopenia, 198, 199
infusion pumps, 22
inhalation anaesthesia, 246
in-saline agglutination test, 196, 196
insulin
deficiency, 209
in hyperkalaemia, 219
in urethral obstruction, 220
intracranial hypertension
fluid therapy for, 26-27
in traumatic brain injury, 120
intracranial pressure, raised
fluid therapy for, 26
in traumatic brain injury, 118
intrahepatic jaundice, 76, 76
intravenous catheter placement, 99
intussusception, 145-146, 145
major body system examination, 145
management, 145-146
presenting signs and case history, 145
isosthenuria, 17
isotonic crystalloids, 20
after urethral catheterization, 222
in bite wounds, 133
in cardiac disease, 27
in dehydration, 23, 27
in diabetic ketoacidosis, 209
in feline bronchial disease (asthma), 191
in gastric dilatation/volvulus syndrome (GDV), 143
in heatstroke, 236
in hyperthermia, 72
in hypoadrenocorticism, 206
in hypovolaemia, 21-22, 22
in laryngeal paralysis, 192
in neonates, 260
in pulmonary pathology, 25
in traumatic diaphragmatic rupture, 129
in urethral obstruction, 220-221
J
jaundice, 76-78
assessment, 77
case examples, 77-78
major body system examination, 77-78
management, 77-78
types of, 76
K
ketamine, 36, 245, 247
contraindications, 245
in respiratory distress, 99
in urethral catheterization, 221-222, 221 See also morphine, lidocaine and
ketamine (MLK)
ketoacidosis, diabetic See diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA)
ketone bodies, 207
ketones, 17, 17
kidneys, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agents toxicity, 166
L
labour
abnormal See dystocia
normal
bitches, 228
queens, 228-229
laryngeal auscultation in respiratory distress, 98
laryngeal paralysis, 191-192
assessment, 192
major body system examination, 192
management, 192
presenting signs and case history, 192
left atrial rupture, 184
lens, primary anterior luxation, 212-214
leptospirosis, 224-225
clinical findings, 225
diagnosis, 225
treatment, 225
lidocaine, 35-36
in ventricular tachycardia, 61 See also morphine, lidocaine and ketamine (MLK)
lilies poisoning, 165-166
clinical signs, 165
laboratory tests, 165
mechanism of toxicity, 165
prognosis, 166
toxic dose, 165
toxicokinetics, 165
treatment, 166
lipaemia, 147
lipase, 146
local anaesthetic agents, 35-36
in neonates, 261
localized reactions, 109
lower urinary tract disorders, 215, 215
lung field auscultation in respiratory distress, 97
lungworm, canine See see Angiostrongylus vasorum infection
M
maldistributive shock, 6, 6, 8, 55, 110
mannitol, 226-227
mean arterial pressure, 118
medetomidine, 36, 245, 247
contraindications, 245
for emesis, 156
reversal agent for, 248
megaoesophagus, 93-94, 192
congenital, 93
diagnostic imaging, 91, 93-94
emergency database, 91
idiopathic (primary), 90
secondary, 90
treatment, 94
melaena, 51-52, 51, 52
meloxicam, 134
mentation in traumatic brain injury, 118
mesothelioma, 184
metaldehyde poisoning, 158-159
case example, 159-160
management, 159-160
presenting signs and case history, 159
mechanism of toxicity, 159
toxic dose, 159
toxicokinetics, 159
methadone, 31, 32
in bite wounds, 133
in gastric dilatation/volvulus syndrome (GDV), 143-144
in small intestinal foreign body, 144
in thoracic injury, 126
in traumatic diaphragmatic rupture, 128-129
in urethral obstruction, 220
methaemoglobinaemia, 169, 170
methaemoglobin reduction, paracetamol poisoning, 169
methaemoglobinuria, 16-17, 45
methylprednisolone succinate, 85, 86
midazolam, 247
in pericardial effusion, 186
in respiratory distress, 99
reversal agent for, 248
in urethral catheterization, 221-222, 221
Milbemax?, 203
milbemycin, 202
mineralocorticoids, 204, 206
misoprostol, 167
mitral valve insufficiency, canine chronic, 176-177
assessment, 177
emergency database, 177
major body system examination, 177
management, 177-178, 178
presenting signs and history, 177
morphine, 31-32, 31
in acute pancreatitis, 148
in canine chronic mitral valve insufficiency, 177
in respiratory distress, 99
in septic (bacterial) peritonitis, 136
morphine, lidocaine and ketamine (MLK), 33, 34
motor function in traumatic brain injury, 119
motor vehicle accidents, 117, 117
moxidectin, 202
multiple organ dysfunction syndrome (MODs), 235, 235
muscle tone in pelvic limb paresis and paralysis, 84
muscle tremors in toxicological emergencies, 155
mycophenolate mofetil, 195
Mycoplasma haemofelis, 197-198
myelography in pelvic limb paresis and paralysis, 85
myoglobinuria, 16-17, 18, 45
N
N-acetylcysteine, 169
N-acetyl-para-benzoquinoneimine (NAPQ1), 168-169
naloxone, 31, 31, 248
nasal cannulae (prongs), oxygen supplementation, 39, 39, 291
nasooesophageal feeding tube placement, 295-296
neonates, 256-257
body weight, 256-257
physical examination, 256
physiological parameters, 257
lirination and defecation, 257
neutrophils, 12-13, 13-14
nonambulatory paraparesis/paraplegia, 83-86
causes of, 83
diagnostic imaging, 84-85
emergency database, 84
history, 83
major body system examination, 83-84
signalment, 83
treatment, 85-86
nonregenerative anaemia, 81, 81
nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agents (NSAIAs), 33-35
in acute pancreatitis, 146
effects of, 34
in gastric dilatation/volvulus syndrome (GDV), 143
in gastroduodenal injury, 34
in neonates, 261
in pelvic limb paresis and paralysis, 85
poisoning, 166-168
clinical signs, 167
coagulation, 166-167
gastrointestinal tract effects, 166
kidneys, 166
laboratory and other tests, 167
mechanism of toxicity, 166-167
toxic dose, 166
toxicokinetics, 166-167
treatment, 167-168, 167
in pyrexia, 73
in renal injury, 34-35
side effects/contraindications, 34-35
in urethral obstruction, 222
nystagmus, 68-70
0
obstructive shock, 6, 6
ocular emergencies, 21lsee also specific emergencies
oculocephalic reflex, 118
oesophageal foreign bodies, 90-91
diagnostic imaging, 94
emergency database, 94
history, 94
major body system examination, 94
signalment, 94
treatment, 94-95
oesophageal obstruction, 90
oesophagitis, 90
omeprazole, 167
open-cervix pyometra, canine, 150-151, 151
open fractures, 114
ophthalmology, 211
opioids, 31-33, 31, 245
in acute pancreatitis, 146
constant rate infusions, 33
in neonates, 261
in pelvic limb paresis and paralysis, 85
reversal agent for, 248
titration, 32-33see also specific opioids
ovarohysterectomy
in canine open-cervix pyometra, 150-151
in dystocia, 230
oxygen supplementation, 38-41
in Angiostrongylus vasorum infection, 201-202
in feline bronchial disease (asthma), 191
in heart failure, 176
in heatstroke, 236
indications for, 38
in laryngeal paralysis, 192
methods of, 38-41
flow-by oxygen, 38-39
mask supplementation, 39
nasal cannulae (prongs), 39, 39
nasal/nasopharyngeal catheters, 40, 40
oxygen cage, 40-41, 40
oxygen collar, 39
nasal catheter placement, 291
in pleural effusion, feline, 188
in respiratory distress, 98
in status epilepticus, 106, 106
in thoracic injury, 126
transtracheal, 41
in traumatic brain injury, 118, 120
in traumatic diaphragmatic rupture, 128-129
Oxyglobin?, 20-21, 21
in hypovolaemia, 21-22
in immune-mediated haemolytic anaemia, 197, 197
oxytocin, 229-231
P
 packed cell volume (PCV), 10, 11
packed red blood cells, 252
paediatric medicine, 256-261
clinical pathology, 258, 259
general treatment concepts, 258-261
drug therapy, 261
fluid therapy, 260-261
hypoglycaemia, 260
hypothermia, 258-260
healthy neonate, 256-257
body weight, 256-257
physical examination, 256
physiological parameters, 257
urination and defecation, 257
pain
assessment, 29
in companion animals, 29-30
disadvantages associated with on-going, 29
eye, 53
pathway, 30
relief See analgesia
sensitization, 30
signs in dogs and cats, 30
pallor, 79
algorithm, 80 See also anaemia
pancreatitis, severe acute, 146-148
analgesia for, 146
case example, 147-148
assessment, 147
emergency database, 147
major body system examination, 147
management, 147-148
presenting signs and case history, 147
diagnosis, 146
feline, 146
panting, 4
paracetamol, 35
poisoning, 168-169
antidote therapy, 169
case example, 170-171
emergency database, 170
major body system examination, 170
management, 170-171
presenting signs and case history, 170
clinical signs, 169
mechanism of toxicity, 169
methaemoglobin reduction, 169
toxic dose, 168
toxicokinetics, 168-169
paradoxical vestibular disease, 68
paralysis, pelvic limb See pelvic limb paresis and paralysis
parenteral fluid therapy, 19-28
in acuute renal failure, 226-227, 227
after urethral catheterization, 222
in anaphylaxis/anaphylactic shock, 110
in bite wounds, 133
in canine haemorrhage gastroenteritis, 150
in canine parvoviral gastroenteritis, 149
case examples, 24-28
in diabetic ketoacidosis, 209
in feline bronchial disease (asthma), 191
in gastric dilatation/volvulus syndrome (GDV), 142-143, 143
in haemoabdomen, 139
in heatstroke, 236
in hypoadrenocorticism, 206
in laryngeal paralysis, 192
in neonates, 260-261
plan, 21-24
in traumatic brain injury, 120
in traumatic diaphragmatic rupture, 129
types of fluid, 19-21
in urethral obstruction, 220-221
in uterine rupture, 137see also specific fluids
paresis
pelvic limb See pelvic limb paresis and paralysis
traumatic brain injury, 119
parturition
abnormal See dystocia
normal
bitches, 228
queens, 228-229
parvoviral gastroenteritis, canine, 148-149
antimicrobial therapy, 148
case example, 148-149
major body system examination, 148
management, 148-149
presenting signs and case history, 148
pelvic fractures, 129-130
pelvic limb paresis and paralysis, 83-86
causes of, 83
diagnostic imaging, 84-85
emergency database, 84
history, 83
major body system examination, 83-84
signalment, 83
treatment, 85-86
pelvic nerve, 131
pentobarbital boluses, status epilepticus, 106
pericardial effusion
canine, 184-186
causes, 184
constrictive and effusive-constrictive pericarditis, 184
left atrial rupture, 184
major body system examination, 185
management, 185-186, 185
presenting signs and case history, 184
feline, 186
pericardiocentesis, 293
equipment, 293
in pericardial effusion, 186, 186
procedure, 293
pericarditis
constrictive, 184
effusive-constrictive, 184
perineal reflex, 84
peripheral blood smear examination, 12-14, 12, 172
peripheral vestibular disease, 68, 70
peritoneal fluid
cytology of, 135
free, 135
peritoneal gas, free, 135
peritoneal lavage, diagnostic, 294
peritonitis
bile, 140
septic (bacterial), 135-137
case examples
surgical gastrointestinal wound dehiscence, 135-136
emergency database, 136
major body system examination, 136
management, 136
presenting signs and case history, 135
uterine rupture, 136-137
assessment, 137
emergency database, 137
major body system examination, 136-137
management, 137
presenting signs and case history, 136
cytology of peritoneal fluid, 135
free peritoneal fluid and gas, 135
petechiae, 87-89
causes of, 87-88
emergency database, 88-89
history, 88
major body system examination, 88
signalment, 88
treatment, 89
pethidine, 31
phenobarbital loading
in metaldehyde poisoning, 160
in status epilepticus, 106, 106
phosphofructokinase (PFK) deficiency, 194
pigmenturia, 45
pimobendan, 179
plasma, fresh frozen, 252
plasma appearance, 10, 11
plasma electrolytes, 14-16
plasma total solids (TS), 10, 11
platelet function disorders, 87-88
platelets, 13-14, 14
platelet transfusion, immune-mediated thrombocytopenia, 199
pleural effusion, 98
feline, 181, 187-190
assessment, 188
brief examination, 187-188
causes, 187, 188-189
chylous, 188-189
client discussion, 188
management, 188-190
observation, 187
oxygenation, 188
presenting signs and case history, 187
pneumonia, aspiration, 55, 90, 91-93
pneumothorax, 122-123, 123-124, 125
poisoning See toxicological emergencies; specific poisons
pollakiuria, 45
polydipsia, 161
polyuria, 224
posthepatic jaundice, 76
postrenal azotaemia, 12
posture, traumatic brain injury, 119
potassium, 14
to sodium ratio in hypoadrenocorticism, 205
supplementa tion
in dehydration, 27
in ethylene glycol poisoning, 163
in gastric dilatation/volvulus syndrome (GDV), 142
potassium chloride, intravenous supplementation, 289-290
praziquantel, 202
prednisolone
in Angiostrongylus vasorum infection, 203
in feline bronchial disease (asthma), 191
in hypoadrenocorticism, 207
prehepatic jaundice, 76
prerenal azotaemia, 11
procainamide, 61
propofol, 245-246, 247
in metaldehyde poisoning, 160
in status epilepticus, 105-106, 106
proptosis, 212-214
prothrombin time (PT), 171-172
pudendal nerve, 131
pulmonary contusions, 123-125, 123-124
fluid therapy, 25-26
lung sounds, 98
pulmonary pathology, fluid therapy for, 25-26
pulmonary venous pressure reduction in heart failure, 176
pulse oximetry, 38, 100
pulsus paradoxus, 185
pupils in traumatic brain injury, 118
pyelonephritis, 224
pyometra
canine open-cervix, 150-151, 151
closed-cervix, 137, 137, 137
pyrethrins/pyrethroids poisoning, 157-175
case example, 158
management, 158
presenting signs and history, 158
mechanism of toxicity, 158
oral exposure, 158
toxic dose, 157
pyrexia, 72-73
versus hyperthermia, 71-73
management, 73
pyrogens, 73
pyruvate kinase (PK) deficiency, 194
R
radiography
in gastric dilatation/volvulus syndrome (GDV), 141, 141-142
in pregnancy, 231, 231
in respiratory distress, 100
in traumatic diaphragmatic rupture, 126, 127see also specific conditions specific
modalities
raisin poisoning, 164
emergency database, 164
major body system examination, 164
management, 164-165
mechanism of toxicity, 164
presenting signs and case history, 164
toxic dose, 164
toxicokinetics, 164
red blood cells, 12, 12
red eye, 53
regenerative anaemia, 79, 81
regurgitation, 90-95
causes related to the oesophagus, 90
definition, 90
diagnostic imaging, 91-92, 92-93
emergency database, 91
endoscopy, 92
history, 91
major body system examination, 91
megaoesophagus, 93-94
oesophageal foreign bodies, 94-95
signalment, 90-91
treatment, 92-93
versus vomiting, 90, 91
renal azotaemia, 11-12
renal failure, acute, 223-225
case example, 226-227
assessment, 226
emergency database, 226
major system examination, 226
management, 226-227
presenting signs and case history, 226
causes, 223-224
classification, 224
intrinsic, 224
phases and progression, 224
postrenal, 224
prerenal, 223
treatment, 224-225
renal injury, nonsteroidal antinflammatory agents, 34-35
respiratory depression, opioid side effects, 31
respiratory distress, 4, 96-101
canine, 101
feline, 96-100
brief examination, 97-98
causes, 98
client discussion, 98
drug therapy, 99-100, 99
following presentation, 96-98
history, 96
intravenous catheter placement, 99
management, 98-100
observation, 97, 97
oxygenation, 98
pulse oximetry, 100
radiography, 100
signalment, 96
thoracocentesis, 100
ultrasonography, 100
venepuncture, 99
traumatic brain injury, 121
respiratory effort, 4
1    1  
respiratory rate, 3-4
respiratory system examination, 3-4
retrograde urohydropulsion, 298
rewarming/warming
in hypothermia, 74-75, 75
of neonates, 258-260, 258
rib fractures, 124-125
Ringer's solution, buffered lactated See Hartmann's solution
rodenticides, anticoagulant See anticoagulant rodenticide poisoning
R-on-T phenomenon, 60, 61
S
sacral nerve injury, 130, 130
sacrocaudal injuries, 130-131, 130
saddle thromboembolism See aortic thromboembolism
S-adenosylmethionine (SAMe), 169
Schiff-Sherrington phenomenon, 119
sedation, 36-37
drugs, 244-246, 247
general considerations, 241-244
potential risks, 241
reversal agents, 248
safety prior to, 241-242
sedative combinations, 246, 248
seizures, 102-107
causes of, 103
classification, 102
diagnostic imaging, 104
emergency database, 104
history, 103
major body system examination, 103-104
signalment, 102
in toxicological emergencies, 155
in traumatic brain injury, 121
treatment, 104-105
sensitization, 30
serum osmolality, ethylene glycol poisoning, 162
shock, 5-6
cardiogenic, 6, 6
hypovolaemic, 5
maldistributive, 6, 6, 8, 55, 110
obstructive, 6, 6
sick sinus syndrome (SsS), 62
sinoatrial (SA) node, 57
sinus bradydysrhythmias, 62-63
Small Animal Coma Scale, 119
small intestinal foreign body, 144
emergency database, 144
linear, 145
major body system examination, 144
management, 144, 144
presenting signs and case history, 144
soda crystals, 153, 154
sodium, 14-15
in diabetic ketoacidosis, 209
in hypoadrenocorticism, 205
sodium bicarbonate, 219
sodium chloride, 19, 20
in canine haemorrhage gastroenteritis, 150
in hypoadrenocorticism, 206, 206
in urethral obstruction, 220, 220-221
sotalol, 61
spherocytes, 12, 13
spinal cord lesions, 83
spinal pain, 46-47
spinal palpation in pelvic limb paresis and paralysis, 84
spinal reflexes in pelvic limb paresis and paralysis, 84
status epilepticus, 105-107
sternal cardiac auscultation in respiratory distress, 97
stored frozen plasma, 252
stranguria, 45
sucralfate, 167
supraventricular tachycardia (SVT), 57-58, 58
surgical debridement, 114
surgical gastrointestinal wound dehiscence, 135-136
emergency database, 136
major body system examination, 136
management, 136
 presenting signs and case history, 135
synthetic colloids, 20
syrup of ipecacuanha, 154
systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRs), 132
T
table salt, 154
tachydysrhythmias, 57-62see also specific dysrhythmias
tail pull injuries, 130-131, 130
terbutaline
feline bronchial disease (asthma), 190-191
respiratory distress, 99
tetraparesis/plegia, 119
theobromine See chocolate (theobromine) poisoning
thermoregulation, 71, 71
thoracic injury, 122-126
case example, 125-126
assessment, 125
major body system examination, 125
management, 126
presenting signs and case history, 125
haemothorax, 124
pneumothorax, 122-123, 123-124
pulmonary contusions, 123-124, 123-124
rib fractures and flail segment, 124-125
thoracocentesis, 125-126, 291-293
equipment, 291, 292
in pleural effusion, feline, 188-189
in pneumothorax, 123, 123
procedure, 292
in respiratory distress, 100
thoracostomy tube, 129
thrombocytopenia, 87
(idiopathic) immune-mediated, 87-88
thrombolysis, aortic thromboembolism, 182
titration, opioids, 32-33
topical poisoning, 157
total body water, 5
toxicological emergencies, 152-175
antidotes, 157
calculating dosage of toxin exposure, 153
diuresis, 157
emergency database, 155
emesis
clinical approach See gastrointestinal decontamination
at home, 153, 153, 154
further information, 152-153, 153
gastrointestinal decontamination, 155-156
activated charcoal, 156
emesis inducing drugs, 156
gastric and colorectal lavage, 156
gastric emptying, 155-156
general clinical approach, 154-157, 154
history, 154-155
home management, 153
initial management ingested poisons, 155-156
specific poisons, 157-175
telephone communication, 152-153, 152
topical poisoning, 157
treatment of seizures and muscle tremors, 155 See also see also specific poisons
toxins
intrinsic renal failure, 224see also specific toxins
tramadol, 32
transtracheal oxygen supplementation, 41
trauma, 117
causes of, 117see also specific anatomical region
traumatic brain injury, 117-122
anaesthesia, 250
case example, 119-122
assessment, 120
emergency database, 120-121
major body system examination, 119-120
management, 121-122
cerebral perfusion, 118
mean arterial pressure, 118
minimizing secondary brain injury, 117-118
neurological examination, 118-119
oxygenation and ventilation, 118
prognosis, 119
raised intracranial pressure, 118
treatment, 119, 120
triad disease of cats, 146
tricuspid valve insufficiency, canine, 178
U
ultrasonography
in pregnancy, 233, 233
respiratory distress, 100
unilateral vestibular disease
causes of, 68-69
diagnostic imaging, 69-70
emergency database, 69
history, 69
major body system examination, 69
signalment, 69
signs, 68
treatment, 70
types of, 68
upper respiratory tract obstruction
canine, 191-193
brachycephalic airway obstruction syndrome, 193
laryngeal paralysis, 191-192
feline, 193
lrethral catheterization
equipment, 296, 297
procedure, 296-297
in urethral obstruction, 221-222, 221, 223, 296-298
l1rethral obstruction, 215-223
canine, 223
catheterization See urethral catheterization
feline, 215-219
assessment, 220
complete, 215-216
electrocardiographic findings in hyperkalaemia, 216, 216-218
emergency database, 220
major body system examination, 219-220
management, 220
mechanical, 216
presenting signs and case history, 219
prolonged, 216-219
treatment of hyperkalaemia, 219
retrograde urohydropulsion, 298
urethral plugs, 216
urethral strictures, 216
urinalysis, 16-18
dipstick analysis, 17
gross discoloration, 16-17
sediment examination, 17-18
specific gravity, 17
rinary bladder See bladder
urine specific gravity, 17
in diabetic ketoacidosis, 208-209, 209
l1roabdomen, 139-140
causes of, 139
diagnosis, 139-140
urohydropulsion, retrograde, 298
uroliths, 216, 223
uirticaria, 109-110, 110
case example, 111-112
causes of, 111
uterine rupture, 136-137
assessment, 137
emergency database, 137
major body system examination, 136-137
management, 137
presenting signs and case history, 136
vagal manoeuvres, 58
vascular ring anomalies, 93
vasculitis, 88
vasculopathy, 88
vasodilation, aortic thromboembolism, 182
venepuncture, 88
in neonates, 258
respiratory distress, 99
traumatic brain injury, 121
ventilation, traumatic brain injury, 118
ventricular escape complexes, 60
ventricular premature complexes (VPCs), 59-60, 60-61
ventricular tachycardia (VT), 59-62, 59-60, 61
vesti bular disease See unilateral vestibular disease; specific types of vestibular disease
Veterinary Poisons Information Service (VPIS), 152
vincristine, 199
visual loss, sudden, 108, 108
vitamin D
in anticoagulant rodenticides, 173
supplementation in hypocalcaemia, 210
vitamin K-dependent factors, 171-172
vitamin K, hydroquinone, 171
vitamin K, therapy, 172, 173
vomiting
acute, 54-56
causes of, 54, 55
diagnostic imaging, 56
emergency database, 55-56
history, 54-55
major body system examination, 55
signalment, 54
treatment, 56
in grape/raisin toxicity, 164
versus regurgitation, 90, 91
von Willebrand disease (vWD), 88
W
warming See rewarming/warming
washing soda, 153, 154
white blood cells, 12-13, 13
Wood's lamp, ethylene glycol poisoning, 162
wounds, 113-114
bite See bite wounds
debriding nonviable tissue, 114
dehiscence See surgical gastrointestinal wouind dehiscence
encouraging a viable vascular bed, 114
ensuring drainage, 114
minimizing further contamination, 113-114
providing haemostasis, 113
removing contaminated material, 114
X
xylazine, 156
xylitol poisoning, 174-175
clinical signs, 175
laboratory tests, 175
mechanism of toxicity, 175
prognosis, 175
toxic doses, 174
toxicokinetics, 174-175
treatment, 175