Cancer
Chemotherapy
for the Veterinary Health Team
Kenneth Crump and Douglas H.Thamm
WILEY-BLACKWELL
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.com
Table of Contents
Cover
Title page
Copyright page
Contributors
Preface
Acknowledgments
1 Dispelling the Myths of Animal Cancer and Its Treatment
Introduction
General information, pretreatment diagnostics, and staging
Cancer surgery
Chemotherapy
Radiation therapy
Summary
2 Cancer Basics
Introduction
Tumor yersus cancer
Multistep carcinogenesis
Metastasis
Cancer classifications
Grade and stage
Conclusion
3 Preparation for Chemotherapy Administration
Introduction
Drug preparation
Equipment and supplies
Prepare your workspace
Drug administration
Equipment and supplies
Prepare your workspace
Conclusions
Appendix 3.1 Body surface area conversion chart
4 Assessment of the Chemotherapy Patient
Introduction
Patient history
The introduction
Asking questions
The information
Physical examination
Laboratory tests
Imaging
Assessment of tumor response
Appendix 4.1 Oncology patient recheck history form
Appendix 4.2 Oncology body map
5 Chemotherapy Handling, Safety, and Disposal
Introduction
Standard operating procedures (SoPs)
Commercially prepared agents
Storage
Limiting exposure
Safe drug preparation
Safe drug administration
Safe waste disposal
Standards for waste handling
6 Workflow for Chemotherapy Administration
Introduction
The greeting
Pretreatment examination
Restraint for chemotherapy
Drug administration
Chemotherapy flow sheet
Afterward
Appendix 6.1 Sample chemotherapy flow sheet
Appendix 6.2 Sample client discharge instructions
7 Chemotherapy Agents
Introduction
Actinomycin D
Asparaginase
Carboplatin
Chlorambucil
Cisplatin
Cyclophosphamide
Cytarabine
Doxorubicin
Lomustine
Melphalan
Mitoxantrone
Vinblastine
Vincristine
8 Management of Chemotherapy Side Effects
Introduction
Client education
Why side effects from chemotherapy happen
Hypersensitivity (allergic reactions)
Extravasation
Gastrointestinal effects
Neutropenia and sepsis
Acute tumor lysis syndrome
Appendix 8.1 Sample chemotherapy owner handout
9 Compassionate Client Communication
Introduction
The grieving client
Moving through grief
Children and grief
Supporting clients
Ouality of life decisions
End-of-life decision making
Preparing children for pet illness and loss
Follow-up communication
Cost of caring
Team-care strategies
Self-care strategies
Glossary
Index
Cancer Chemotherapy
for the Veterinary
Health Team
Edited by
Kenneth Crump and Douglas H.Thamm
WWILEY-BLACKWELL
A John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Publication
This edition first published 2011 @ 2011 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
            
global Scientific, Technical and Medical business with Blackwell Publishing.
Registered office: John Wiley & Sons Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West
Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
Editorial offices: 2121 State Avenue, Ames, Iowa 50014-8300, USA The Atrium, Southern
Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, UK
For details of our global editorial offices, for customer services and for information about
how to apply for permission to reuse the copyright material in this book please see our
website at www. wiley.com/wiley-blackwell
Authorization to photocopy items for internal or personal use, or the internal or personal
use of specific clients, is granted by Blackwell Publishing, provided that the base fee is paid
directly to the Copyright Clearance Center, 222 Rosew0od Drive, Danvers, MA 01923. For
those organizations that have been granted a photocopy license by CCC, a separate system
of payments has been arranged. The fee codes for users of the Transactional Reporting
Service are ISBN-13: 978-0-8138-2116-0/2011.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as
trademarks. All brand names and product names used in this book are trade names, service
associated with any product or vendor mentioned in this book. This publication is designed
to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to the subject matter covered. It
is sold on the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering professional
services. If professional advice or other expert assistance is required, the services of a
competent professional should be sought
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Crump, Kenneth, 1952—
P. ; cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index
ISBN 978-0-8138-2116-0 (pbk. : alk. paper) 1. Tumors in animals-Chemotherapy. 2.
Veterinary oncology. I. Thamm, Douglas H. HI. Title
[DNLM: 1. Neoplasms-drug therapy. 2. Neoplasms-veterinary. 3. Drug Therapy- methods.
4. Drug Therapy-veterinary. SF 910.T8]
SF910.T8C78 2011
636.089'6994-dc22
2011002196
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
This book is published in the following electronic formats: ePDF 9780470960042; ePub
9780470960059; M0b19780470960066
Disclaimer
The publisher and the author make no representations or warranties with respect to the
accuracy or completeness of the contents of this work and specifically disclaim all
warranties, including without limitation warranties of fitness for a particular purpose. No
warranty may be created or extended by sales or promotional materials. The advice and
strategies contained herein may not be suitable for every situation. This work is sold with
the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering legal, accounting, or other
professional services. If professional assistance is required, the services of a competent
 professional person should be sought. Neither the publisher nor the author shall be liable
for damages arising herefrom. The fact that an organization or Website is referred to in this
work as a citation and/or a potential source of further information does not mean that the
author or the publisher endorses the information the organization or Website may provide
or recommendations it may make. Further, readers should be aware that Internet Websites
listed in this work may have changed or disappeared between when this work was written
and when it is read.
Contributors
Erin Allen, MSsW, Argus Institute, Clinical Sciences Colorado State University, Fort
Collins, CO
Richard Allen, RPh., Diplomate TCVP, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO
Gail Bishop, BS, Argus Institute, Clinical Sciences, Colorado State University, Fort
Collins, CO
Kenneth Crump, AAS, AHT, Payson, AZ
Douglas H. Thamm, VMD, DACVIM (Oncology), Associate Professor of Oncology,
The Animal Cancer Center, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO
Preface
More than 1 .2 million dogs are diagnosed each year with cancer, a number that trails not far
behind the American Cancer Society's estimate of 1.4 million people diagnosed with cancer
annually. Animals today have many of the same options for cancer treatment that people
consider when treating their own cancers. And every year, more and more devoted owners
begin the financial and emotional battle to keep their beloved pets alive
General practice veterinarians, who may have referred clients to a veterinary cancer
specialist in the recent past, now work directly with specialists to offer a convenient and
          
chemotherapy administration in smaller local practices, the industry now offers safer and
Because these devices can be easily integrated into a practice, training can be completed
easily and in a timely manner.
There is great disparity, however, in advanced training opportunities available to
veterinary technicians when compared with opportunities available in the human cancer
nursing field. Nurse practitioners can seek an advanced degree in oncology nursing and
pursue further specialization with certification programs. Oncology nursing students are
exposed to the latest approaches to cancer prevention and early detection. Their classroom
instruction is supplemented with clinical experiences led by experts in their field. By
contrast, virtually every veterinary technician, whether working in a large referral specialty
practice or in a small rural general practice, learns to administer chemotherapy on the job.
Cancer Chemotherapy for the Veterinary Health Team is the first handbook of its kind.
designed to provide veterinary technicians, and those working as veterinary technicians,
concise practical details about the management of the veterinary cancer patient. We have
summarized up-to-date information about the patient, the disease, the oncology client, and
 s      n o o  
chapters. Key points are included at the beginning of each chapter to facilitate easy access
to practical information.
This manual  is a comprehensive reference guide to the safe administration of
communication and education, ensures the safety of personnel, and reinforces the value of
quality medical care. Veterinary technicians play a central role in the treatment of pets
diagnosed with cancer. Whether you see a few cancer patients each hour or a few cancer
patients each year, this book details practical and important information you need to
unwind the cycle of unpleasant expectations and create a successful chemotherapy
experience for the pet, the owner, and the hospital staff.
Kenneth Crump
DouglasH.Thamm
Acknowledgments
This book would not be possible without the team effort of many people and reflects the
direct and indirect contributions of a number of doctors, technicians, and owners dedicated
to the treatment of pets with cancer. In addition to our talented contributors, the authors are
Atencio, Jay Oaks, Charlie Kerlee, and “"Samantha” for their assistance with photography,
as well as Chelsey Walden-Schreiner and Erica Judisch of Wiley-Blackwell for their
enthusiastic guidance and encouragement.
1
Dispelling the Myths of Animal Cancer and Its
Treatment Douglas H. Thamm
Key Points
 Cancer is a disease we can sometimes cure
The four most dangerous words in cance
atmentare "Let'sjust watchit."
Obta ining a diagnosis prior to surgery is important
·Often, the part of the tumor that we can see and feel is only the "tip of the iceberg."
● Pets experience chemotherapy differently from huma ns.
● Fewer and less severe side effects
●Most dogs and cats do not lose a lot of hair from che motherapy
●The sooner we start chemotherapy, the better chance the drugs have to do their job.
● Radiation therapy is a form of local therapy.
a, fatigue, or bone marrow suppression do not occur
 Pets are not radioactive after treatment
Introduction
There is a great stigma attached to a diagnosis of cancer. It is natural for owners of pets with
own treatments, that of their friends, or their family members. Understanding how cancer
treatment in animals differs from cancer treatment in humans is critical when informing
owners about cancer and discussing treatment options. Pet owners want to make an
informed decision when selecting treatment for their dogs or cats with cancer, and the
This chapter describes many of the common questions that owners have about animal
cancer and its treatment, and some ideas on how to answer those questions. It is presented
in a “question-and-answer format, with explanations and additional information following
the answers.
General Information, Pretreatment Diagnostics,
and Staging Client: Is cancer really a problem in
animals?
Technician: Unfortunately, yes. It is the leading “natural' cause of death in adult dogs
and the second or third leading cause in cats. Up to 50% of dogs and 30% of cats will be
affected by some type of tumor in their lifetime.
Client: Why does it seem like there is so much more cancer in pets these days?
Technician: Better health care = longer life. Cancer is an old-age disease, and more pets
are living long enough to get old-age-related illnesses.
Explanation We are getting so good at managing
other husbandry-related conditions in our pets
(nutrition, infection, parasites, keeping pets indoors
and on leashes) that they are now living long enough
to develop more old-age conditions, such as heart
disease, kidney disease, endocrine disease, and
cancer. Furthermore, now that there are more
cancer specialists and options for treating cancer in
pets, it is being reported more frequently.
Client: Did something in the environment play a role in Sparky's cancer? Was I feeding
the wrong food?
Technician: For most forms of cancer, we don't know of any specific causes
Explanation There have been some relationships
suggested between certain types of cancer and the
environment. For instance, some suggest a
relationship between canine lymphoma and certain
farm chemicals or living in urban areas. Canine
mesothelioma has been linked to asbestos. Second-
hand smoke has been a suggested contributor to
feline gastrointestinal lymphoma. But in most cases,
such associations do not hold up to further
investigation. Thus, based on what we currently
know, food additives, lawn chemicals, pesticides, or
cosmic rays do not seem to significantly increase a
pet's risk of most cancers.
Client: What is the difference between "cancer" and "tumor"?
Technician: There is no practical difference. Both refer to abnormal masses in the body
that occur as a result of cell growth that has become disorganized and no longer responds to
the normal signals telling them to stop growing.
Client: What is the difference between "benign" and "malignant"?
Technician: Malignant tumors are those that have the ability to invade surrounding
tissues deeply and/or spread to other parts of the body. Benign tumors do not spread and do
not invade very deeply. Small surgery is much more likely to permanently fix a benign
tumor than it is to fix a malignant tumor.
Client: Why should I treat my dog's cancer?
Technician: Cancer is a disease that we can sometimes cure. Diseases like heart disease.
diabetes, and other endocrine diseases, as well as cancer, can all be thought of as chronic
diseases. We treat many animals with chronic diseases that are never cured. Even in cases
with treatment.
Explanation Owners may question why a fine needle
aspiration or biopsy of a mass needs to be
performed, rather than simply monitoring the mass
for change. In general, delay in diagnosis only
increases the difficulty of treatment because delay
allows the tumor to grow. This may mean a larger,
more complicated, more risky, or more expensive
surgery. Larger tumor size is associated with worse
outcomes for several important veterinary cancers.
The lump you are dealing with may be benign, but if
it is malignant, the time to find that out is now.
due, aoun au ayp Ksdoq do uonndsn apaau auf p suuofad iusaoa u
and increase the risk of spread?
Technician: No. There is no risk of increased spread from a fine needle aspiration or
biopsy.
Explanation Exceptions to this rule are the
following:
sap s yanoue asaan ausy o anp uonedse apaau aug e aumoo apaeu, aosaq Au shoum (a jseu auos (
bany way. increase the spread. This is rarely serious and can be treated or prevented with an antihistamine, such as
(2) Needle aspiration/needle core biopsy of splenic and bladder masses is not recommended due to the risk of local tumor
after bleeding (spleen) or the body wall as tumor cells are dragged through it by the needle (bladder). Cytocentesis for urine
aioae aq asma rnoys iaoueo appeg aay o umouy io poadsns suaed u uooao
(3) It is important that needle aspirations and biopsies of cutaneous/subcutaneous ma sses are planned so that the biopsy tract can be
removed when the tumor is removed. This wil prevent regrowth along the tract
Client: Why don't we just take the tumor off? Why do we need to do a fine needle
aspiration or biopsy first?
Technician: Knowing what we are dealing with before surgery lets us know how big a
  s           n 
beforehand.
Explanation Obtaining a diagnosis prior to surgery
lets the veterinarian know whether additional tests
are indicated prior to surgery and helps to plan the
surgical approach. This helps avoid situations like
"Why didn't you take X-rays before surgery?" and
"Why should I have to pay for a second surgery if
you *didn't get it all' the first time?" If surgery is
used to obtain a diagnosis, it is important that the
o     n ssn
diagnostic test. Based on what is learned from a
diagnostic surgery, more tests or treatments might
be necessary.
Client: We already did surgery. Isnt that enough? Why can't we just wait and see if it
grows back?
Technician: If a malignant tumor has been incompletely removed (the so-called dirty
cut), the likelihood of regrowth may be high. Tumors that grow back can be much harder to
treat.
Explanation Additional treatment, such as more
surgery or radiation therapy, is often recommended
if a tumor has been incompletely removed. Locally
recurrent tumors (tumors that grow back after
surgery) are associated with a worse prognosis in
certain diseases, such as canine mast cell tumor and
oral melanoma, and are suspected of being worse in
others. For this reason, if a tumor is incompletely
removed, the time to be aggressive is the very first
time the tumor occurs.
Client: Why can't we wait and see if it spreads, instead of treating now?
Technician: The sooner we start chemotherapy, the better chance the drugs have to do
  s     io   s   
nodes, and can delay the appearance of spread. It is much harder for these drugs to shrink
big tumors than it is for them to kill microscopic tumor cells.
Explanation In general, the goal of chemotherapy
treatment of cancer at high risk for spread is to
improve and prolong a pet's quality of life.
Chemotherapy works best against microscopic
tumor cells. For example, the average survival time
for dogs with osteosarcoma that had an amputation
and began chemotherapy right away, is twice as long
compared with those that had an amputation and
then waited until the tumor has spread to receive
chemotherapy.
Cancer Surgery
Client: Why do you have to do such a big surgery for such a litle lump?
Technician: Often, the part of the tumor that we can see and feel is only the "tip of the
iceberg."
Explanation Many malignant tumors are able to
extend microscopic "fingers'” of the tumor away
from the main tumor mass (Figure 1.1). If a small
surgery is performed to remove only the visible or
palpable tumor mass, these fingers are left behind
to regrow. Taking not only the main tumor mass but
also a generous margin of normal-appearing tissue
all around the tumor (including underneath)
increases the likelihood that all of the tumor cells
will be removed. This minimizes the likelihood of
tumor regrowth.
Figure 1.1 Diagram of growth of a malignant tumor Drawing a figure
such as this for owners considering cancer surgery can be very helpful to
explain the need to remove a wide margin of normal-appearing tissue. (A)
Away from the main tumor mass, which can be seen and felt, "fingers" of
microscopic tumor tissue can grow. If a small surgery is performed that
only removes the part that can be seen and felt (shown in B), the fingers on
the edges have the potential to regrow over time (shown in C). If a large
e-u o r  n s m d si s
tissue around the tumor and underneath as well, the chances of removing all
tumor tissue, including the microscopic fingers, is maximized. This
approach is shown in D.
A
C
B
D
Client: Why should I pay for histopathology? Why don't you just take it off and throw it
away?
Technician: If we don't know what we removed, then we wouldn't know the prognosis.
We don't know how likely the tumor is to grow back or spread, or whether we should be
thinking about additional tests or treatments right now.
Explanation If it's worth removing, it's worth
submitting for microscopic evaluation. See "just
submit it for histopathology if it recurs" approach.
Similarly, it is important to submit the entire mass
that was removed rather than just parts or a section
of a mass. This doubles the useful information you'll
receive from the pathology report because surgical
margins can be interpreted.
Chemotherapy
Client: My great-aunt Harriet had chemotherapy, and she felt miserable all the timeI'd
never do that to my dog!
humans receive. However, animals get much lower doses and fewer combinations of drugs
at the same time, to minimize the risk of side effects.
Explanation Less than one third of animal patients
experience unpleasant side effects with the
chemotherapy protocols in common use today. Less
than 5% experience a severe side effect. The risk of
a serious side effect is even less in cats than it is in
dogs. If a side effect requires the pet to be
hospitalized, it is usually home and feeling better in
24-72 hours. When unpleasant side effects do occur,
doses can be reduced, drugs can be substituted, and
additional medications can be dispensed to prevent
them from happening again. These changes in a
patient's chemotherapy protocol are effective 90%
of the time. The likelihood of a chemotherapy-
related death is less than 1 in 200 patients. See
Chapter 7 for additional information about
chemotherapy side effects.
Client: OK, suppose my pet is the one that has a side effect? What kind of things are we
likely to see?
Technician: It's variable, but the most common side effect to see at home would be a
few days of digestive upset—some decreased appetite, mild nausea/vomiting, or loose
stool. Some animals can develop problems related to a decrease in the white blood cell
count. We check this often to make sure that it does not get dangerously low.
Explanation The likelihood and type of side effects
seen varies by drug. In general, the most common
side effect is related to the digestive tract. By way of
see with an animal that got into the garbage.
Animals experiencing this might need to eat bland
food for a few days or take antinausea or
antidiarrhea pills at home. Usually, this doesn't last
for more than 3-5 days. A few patients may develop
very severe vomiting/diarrhea (can't keep anything
down, getting weak/dehydrated). Some patients have
the potential to develop a low white blood cell count.
We check this quite frequently, and most of the
time, it is not low enough to be dangerous. A
dangerous decrease of the white blood cell count
puts pets at an increased risk for bacterial
infections. In some cases, a patient might need to
take oral antibiotics at home. A chemotherapy
treatment might be delayed for a few days so the
white blood cells can recover. See Chapter 7 for
more information about chemotherapy side effects.
Client: I don't want Fluffy to go bald!
Technician: Fortunately, most dogs and cats do not lose a lot of hair from chemotherapy
Explanation It is true that some dog breeds can lose
large amounts of hair from chemotherapy. The
breeds that usually lose hair are those that have
continuously growing hair coats and require regular
grooming (poodles, schnauzers, etc.). The hair loss is
rarely total. Most other breeds experience little or
no hair loss. That being said, owners may find more
hair around the house, and long-haired breeds have
the potential for excessive matting. Regular
brushing helps to prevent this. Cats can lose
whiskers as well as the long, stiff guard hairs from
their coats. In dogs and cats, areas that are shaved
may regrow hair more slowly than expected. Hair
loss from chemotherapy is a purely cosmetic change
and is not itchy or painful. Hair that is lost will
typically begin to regrow about a month following
the completion of therapy.
Client: I don't want Tiger's last weeks/months/years to be in and out of the hospital, like
they were with Uncle Mac when he had cancer.
Technician: Almost all veterinary chemotherapy treatments are done in an outpatient
setting, and the whole visit only takes a few hours. Most treatments involve quick injections
 s         s  
almost never necessary. Many protocols involve a series of treatments, followed by careful
observation. Giving chemotherapy forever is not usually the plan.
Client: Will my family/guests/house/other pets be contaminated?
Technician: Urine and feces pose little risk to owners. Few drugs are excreted for longer
than 48-72 hours. Common sense is usually sufficient protection for your household.
Accidents in the house during the first 48-72 hours should be thoroughly cleaned using
detergent and water. Wear gloves when cleaning the urine or feces, and flush the excreta
down the toilet. Normal daily activities are very important in maintaining your pet's good
quality of life. Interactions such as grooming, playing, petting, or handling food and water
bowls pose no real risk.
Client: Sam loves to swim in the pond by our house. Can he still do that if he is getting
chemotherapy?
Technician: Absolutely. There are no restrictions on activity while pets are receiving
chemotherapy. They can swim, hike, jog, go to dog parks, and so on. We want our pets to
still be able to do all the things that make their quality of life good!
Client: I have chemotherapy pills to give at home. Is there anything special I need to do?
Technician:  It  is  important  to  wear  gloves  when  handling oral  chemotherapy
medications, and chemotherapy pills should never be crushed or split, nor capsules be
opened. Similarly, oral chemotherapy should never be administered in liquid form. All of
these things increase your risk of exposure to the drugs.
Client: But what about her age? Isn't she too old for treatment?
Technician: Most of the patients with cancer that we treat are older dogs. Everything we
know about effectiveness, survival, and tolerability of cancer therapy is from treating older
patients.
Explanation Age is not a disease! Far more
important than age in years are the patients'
general health (e.g., heart, liver, kidneys) and how
they are feeling. We often spend extra time and
money to check the overall health of our cancer
patients (blood tests, chest X-rays, etc.). This is
partly to make sure that there are no other age-
related diseases present that could complicate
cancer therapy or be more of a problem to the
patient than the treatment of the cancer.
Client: Is there any special food we should be feeding Rusty?
Technician: We usually recommend that you keep feeding the same food that he has
always been getting. Diet changes may increase the chances for stomach upset.
Explanation There are no diets that are known to be
better for cancer patients. Occasionally, we may
suggest a food that is higher in calories for a patient
that has been losing weight over time. Raw meat
diets should be avoided in patients receiving
chemotherapy. While the risk of sickness from
bacterial contamination of raw meat is thought to
be low (but not zero) in normal animals, it may be
considerably higher in an animal receiving
chemotherapy.
Client: So what are our choices? We either do chemotherapy or put him to sleep?
Technician: There are usually a lot of different choices for treatment. Some may be more
complicated or more expensive than others, but there isn't one thing that works for every
pet or every owner.
Explanation Cancer therapy, in general, is usually
not a single, “all-or-nothing" proposition. For many
tumor types, a number of treatment options are
available, depending on the patient's overall health.
family travel concerns, finances, and risks of side
effects. For example, treatment choices for canine
lymphoma include prednisone alone; prednisone
plus doxorubicin; a combination of
cyclophosphamide, vincristine, and prednisone; or a
multiagent injectable protocol such as the
University of Wisconsin (UW)-Madison protocol.
All differ in cost, risks of side effects, and number of
visits required for treatment. They also differ in
how effective they are.
Radiation Therapy Client: What about radiation
therapy for my dog's tumor?
Technician: Radiation therapy is a local treatment. We can use it to treat local diseases
when the spread is unlikely. This includes tumors that cannot be removed, or tumors that
have not been completely removed and are likely to grow back. We can also use radiation
 o s s     
Explanation Radiation therapy can be very useful
for certain tumors. It is a localized treatment used
most often to treat a local disease. Local disease
means tumors with a high likelihood of aggressive
local infiltration and regrowth, but has a low risk of
spreading to other parts of the body. There are four
main ways that radiation therapy can be used:
(1) after surgery for tumors that have been incompletely removed. Examples include low-or intermediate-grade mast cel tumors,
r that is very large or invasive eas
,suc
uality otlife
ome highly
metastatic tumors, such as osteosarcoma and ma lignant
Client: So how does radiation therapy work?
Technician: Radiation therapy is usually like a super-high-energy diagnostic radiograph.
The radiation beam is created by electricity and aimed specifically at the tumor. In many
cases, a large number of small radiation doses needs to be used to give the normal tissues in
the area a chance to heal while doing as much damage as possible to the tumor tissue.
Explanation Most “definitive' or "full-course"
radiation therapy protocols involve a series of 10-25
treatments, given either Monday through Friday, 0r
3 days per week for several weeks. Although these
treatments can be done on an outpatient basis, many
animals will spend some of the time in the hospital
for travel-related reasons. Most "palliative" or
"coarsely fractionated" radiation therapy protocols
will involve one to six weekly treatments, given on
an outpatient basis.
Client: But won't she be horribly sick from radiation?
Technician: Radiation therapy is a form of local therapy. The radiation is only delivered
to the site of the disease. Thus, side effects like nausea, fatigue, or bone marrow
suppression generally do not occur. However, each treatment does require a very short
anesthesia or heavy sedation to make sure that the radiation is delivered to the correct spot
There could be adverse systemic effects as a result of the anesthesia, but they are very rare
in an otherwise healthy patient.
Client: What about radiation burns?
Technician: It's true that animals receiving radiation therapy can develop a sunburn-like
reaction at the radiation site but this is temporary. These “acute effects? usually do not start
until the second or third week of treatment and are gone 2-4 weeks afer radiation therapy
is finished.
Explanation The local side effects from radiation
can range from mild redness and itchiness to moist,
oozing, painful, or ulcerated skin. Many animals
need to wear an Elizabethan collar to prevent self-
trauma. They may also receive oral antibiotics
and/or pain medications during this period. After
completion of the course of radiation, the radiated
skin may be permanently hairless or the hair may
only partially grow back. Also, the hair in the
radiated area may simply turn white. Long-term
side effects of radiation are rare, with the exception
of the eyes of animals receiving radiation therapy
for nasal, oral, or brain tumors. Eyes in the
radiation field may develop cataracts,
keratoconjunctivitis sicca (dry eyes), or both.
Client: Will Lucky be radioactive when he comes home?
Technician: No, dogs pose no risk to their owners when they come home.
Explanation The standard form of radiation therapy
in animals is external beam, which means radiation
is shined down from an external source, not that
different from a diagnostic X-ray. The radiation
beam is created by electricity. When the machine is
turned off, there is no radiation left behind. Animals
undergoing radiation therapy pose no health risks to
their owners. They are not radioactive.
Summary
It is natural for owners to have many questions about treatment for their pets with cancer.
Having a discussion about animal cancer and its treatment can be a very important way to
help owners make decisions about how to best treat their pets. Many owners will need to
o  o  o,  o  ou a ssns s n  mo
Sometimes, pet owners will ask technicians more questions, or different questions, than
they will to their veterinarians. Being able to educate owners about cancer and its treatment
will help increase the likelihood that pets receive the treatment that they need to remain
happy and healthy for as long as possible.
Additional Reading
Chun R, Garrett L, MacEwen EG. 2001. Cancer chemotherapy. In: Withrow SJ, MacEwen
EG (eds.), Small Animal Clinical Oncology (3rd Ed.). Philadelphia: Saunders, Pp. 92-118.
approach to diagnosis, treatment and euthanasia. In: Withrow SJ, MacEwen EG (eds.),
Small Animal Clinical Oncology (3rd Ed.). Philadelphia: Saunders, pp. 672-82.
Moore AS. 2002. Radiation therapy for the treatment of tumours in small companion
animals. Vet J 164(3):176-87.
Thamm DH, Vail DM. 2o07. Aftershocks of cancer chemotherapy: Managing adverse
effects. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 43:1-7.
Thrall DE. 1997. Biologic basis of radiation therapy. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
27(1):21-3.
Withrow SJ. 2001. Why worry about cancer in pets? In: Withrow SJ, MacEwen EG (eds.),
Small Animal Clinical Oncology (3rd Ed.). Philadelphia: Saunders, pp. 1-3.
2
Cancer Basics
Kenneth Crump
Growth for the sake of growth is the ideology of the cancer cell.
-Author and environmentalist,Edward Abbey
Key Points
 Not all tumors are cancer
· A tumor can be benign, pre matignant, or malignant.
·Cancer is, by definition, malignant.
● Cancer is characterized by three criteria: uncontroled growth, invasion, and metastasis
· The process by which normal cells become cancer cells is called multistep car cinogenesis.
pue voood vome sisuaaouraieo dasnnu on sdas oisg aan aie aaui ·
progre ssion.
When cancer spreads to other locations in the body, beyond just localized tissue invasion, it is called metast asis
A cancer must overcome the body's defenses and complete multiple steps in order to
me tastasize
uanean io ueld aup loedu Apueoguais yog asesp ai jo aaeis aup pue loum e jo apea aul
The grade of a tumor indicates how closely it resembles the tisue from which it is
derive d.
Stage refers to the extent of the cancer based on the size and location of the primary
tumor, the number of tumors, and the degree of tumor spread into lymph nodes o
be yond.
Introduction
In general, cancer is defined as an uncontrolled growth of cells. In order to better
understand cancer, it is helpful to know how tumors form. Usually, cells grow and divide in
a controlled and orderly manner. Under normal circumstances, the balance between cell
reproduction and internally programmed cell death (called apoptosis) is maintained by the
many natural mechanisms of the body. The body tightly regulates both processes to ensure
healthy organs and tissues. Sometimes, however, cells continue to reproduce even when
new cells are not needed. Alterations and mutations in cell DNA can disrupt the orderly
balance of cell reproduction and cell death, causing changes in the normal regulatory
process. As a result of unregulated growth, a mass of tissue, called a tumor, can then
develop. Virtually any type of normal cell may undergo the changes that eventually create a
tumor.
Although every cancer may be considered a tumor, not every tumor is cancer (also called
malignant). In this chapter, we explore what makes a tumor malignant, the steps cells take
to become a cancer, the different classifications of cancers, how they spread, and how a
cancer's grade and stage help predict its progress and its eventual destruction with
treatment.
Tumor Versus Cancer
Although any type of cell can eventually create a tumor, not all tumors become malignant
or cancerous. Countless mutations and alterations of cell DNA occur continuously in the
body. The cell's ability to recognize and repair these genetic errors prevents the majority of
potential mutations from persisting. However, when a solid tissue mass is formed by the
continued abnormal growth of cells, it is called a tumor. Tumor is not synonymous with
cancer. A tumor can be benign, premalignant, or malignant. Cancer is, by definition,
malignant.
A benign tumor grows in a limited, nonaggressive manner, and does not invade
surrounding tissues, nor does it spread to other parts of the body. The term “benign"
implies a mild and nonprogressive disease, and most benign tumors are harmless to a
patient's health. However, some benign tumors may still produce negative health effects by
B s   oi si   s sd  n   ss, e 
position of the tumor. An example of mass effect is a large benign tumor that has grown at
the base of a dog's tail, obstructing normal defecation. The tumor itself poses no threat to
the patient's health, but its size and position impact normal daily function. The general
criteria for removing seemingly benign tumors in animals are as follows: (1) if the tumor is
growing rapidly, (2) if it bothers the patient, or (3) if it bothers the owner.
A premalignant tumor is a tissue that is not yet malignant but is poised to become
malignant. If left untreated, premalignant tumors are generally associated with a
significantly increased risk of cancer. Often, the multiple genetic changes that transform a
premalignant tumor into cancer take years to accumulate. During this time, its biological
behavior slowly changes from that of a normal tissue to more cancer-like properties.
Clinical and laboratory tests are designed to identify premalignant tissue while it is still in
early stages, thereby preventing the development of cancer. Appropriate treatment depends
on the particular premalignant tumor detected.
Malignant tumors typically become progressively worse and could result in death. They
are characterized by three criteria: uncontrolled growth, invasion, and metastasis:
· Malignant tumors fundamentally alter the regulation of their own growth. In order for
normal cells to become malignant, the genetic makeup of the cells regulating cell
growth must be altered. Natural tumor suppressor genes, which inhibit cell division
and survival, are often disabled by these alterations. ln this way, the malignant cells
become immortal, resu lting in uncontrolled growth.
· lnvasion refers to the intrusion into and destruction of adjacent tissues. Whereas a
benign tumor may produce a “mass effect,” impacting a patient's normal daily life by
its size or position, a malignant tumor actually infiltrates its surrounding tissues. The
infiltration results in the destruction of surrounding normal tissues, which can lead to
pain; fixation of the tumor, restricting mobility; or organ dysfunction. Tumor
  n       n   sg
· Metastasis describes the spread of a tumor to another location in the body, beyond
the primary site. The path it takes and its metastatic destination are both determined
by the cell type from which the tumor is derived.
· The word cancer is synonymous with malignant tumor.
Multistep Carcinogenesis
It is not easy for a normal cell to transform into a tumor cell. Transformation into a cancer
cell is even more difficult. The process by which normal cells are transformed into cancer
cells is called carcinogenesis. Carcinogenesis results from mutations of the DNA of normal
cells. More than one mutation is usually necessary for carcinogenesis. In fact, the
transformation is called multistep carcinogenesis because a series of mutations is usually
required before a normal cell can become a cancer cell. There are three basic steps to
multistep carcinogenesis: initiation, promotion, and progression.
Step One: Initiation
The first stage, initiation, results in an irreversible change in the DNA of the cell. This may
an initiating event, if the cell's repair mechanisms do not repair the DNA damage, then the
cell is more prone to becoming a tumor cell. An example of an initiating event might be
years, the forgotten sunburn you had at summer camp could have initiated a population of
skin cells. However, by itself, the initiating event is not sufficient to transform a normal cell
into a tumor cell.
Step Two: Promotion
During the second stage, promotion, the initiated cell is stimulated to grow and divide
faster. It then becomes a population of cells. Only after repeated exposure to the promoting
agent does it induce changes in the cell's shape and structure, and increase the rate at which
it reproduces. ln human cancers, cigarette smoking can act as a promoting event. Happily.
the promotion stage of multistep carcinogenesis is usually reversible, as evidenced by the
Step Three: Progression
The third stage of multistep carcinogenesis is called progression. This step is the "point of
no return” for a normal cell. During progression, further irreversible changes are made to
tumor cells. Here is how Hanahan and Weinberg describe the characteristics of malignant
tumor cells in their article "The hallmarks of cancer":
Tumor Cells
· acquire their own growth signals, leading to unchecked replication;
· ignore normal antigrowth signals, also leading to unchecked replication;
to grow, despite DNA errors;
· can build blood vessels, which provide oxygen and nutrients, allowing a tumor to
expand beyond the limitations of feeding on sidestream nutrients;
· invade neighboring tissues;
· spread to other locations in the body, beyond localized invasion (metastasis); and
· lose their capacity to repair DNA errors, leading to genetic instability, which
accelerates all the other changes.
Therefore, in order for a normal cell to transform itself into a tumor, it must go through
and once again in the progression phase. The promotion phase is reversible but alters an
 q   a a   oo  s  s a e  n  
progression phase
Metastasis
When a malignant tumor (cancer) spreads to other locations in the body, beyond just
localized tissue invasion, it is called metastasis. The process of metastasis is a complex
game of survival, which rivals any television reality show. The metastasizing tumor cells
must survive, overcome a host of challenges, and complete complicated tasks before it can
cancer to succeed, it must overcome all of the body's defensive strategies and complete all
seven necessary steps.
Step One: Detachment
The first step in the metastatic cascade is for the tumor to detach a cell from the primary
tumor mass. This cell must be able to survive without contact with its neighbors, which is
very difficult for most normal cells.
Step Two: Invasion
Once detached, the tumor cell must find a way to enter either the blood or the lymphatio
circu latory system.
Step Three: Evasion of Host Defenses
Within the vascular or lymphatic channels, tumor cells must then withstand the assault by a
barrage of cells from the body's immune system.
Step Four: Arrest
Having survived the immune system's attack, metastatic tumor cells must come to rest in
the small blood vessels and capillaries of their target organs. Different types of cancers have
different metastatic target organs.
Step Five: Attachment
Once the metastatic tumor cells have rested, they must find a way to stick to the walls of the
vessels where they have been resting.
Step Six: Extravasation
Fully rested and attached, the tumor cells must begin working their way through the
protective vascular or lymphatic walls and into the soup of extracellular matrix. This
process 1s similar to step two, but in reverse.
Step Seven: Establishment of New Growth
Once they have emerged through the vessel walls and into the extracellular matrix, the
cancer cells must survive and proliferate into another tumor. A lot of replication has
occurred before any tumor can be detected. For instance, it requires one billion cells to
make a tumor the size of a garbanzo bean (about 1 cm).
Cancer Classifications
Cancers are classified by the type of cell that is presumed to be the origin of the tumor.
Common cancer categories in veterinary medicine are carcinomas, sarcomas, and
hematopoietic tumors.
Carcinoma
Carcinomas are malignant tumors that arise from epithelial cells. In the body, epithelial cells
either cover a surface, line a cavity, or form glands. Examples of epithelial cells are skin
cells and cells that line the intestines, as well as cells that form the mammary and salivary
glands. Carcinomas represent the most common cancers seen in humans and generally
spread (metastasize) first to the lymph nodes draining the tumor area, and then beyond.
Common human carcinomas include cancers of the breast, prostate, lungs, and colon.
Sarcoma
Sarcomas are malignant tumors derived from connective tissues, such as fat, muscle.
cartilage, and bone. Sarcomas usually metastasize through the circulatory system. Common
examples  in  veterinary  medicine  include  osteosarcoma,  hemangiosarcoma,  and
fibrosarcoma.
Hematopoietic Tumors
These are malignant tumors derived from blood-forming cells. These include lymphoma,
leukemias, and mast cell tumors.
Generally speaking, benign tumors and malignant tumors use different suffixes in their
names, giving visual clues of their risks of spreading. For instance, names of benign tumors
most often contain the suffix -oma. Therefore, if a patient presents with a large tumor
q s o a  au  go  q n o oa nod e s pso
Malignant tumors are generally named using -carcinoma or -sarcoma as a suffix. So, a
diagnosis  of osteosarcoma gives you the visual clue that the disease is malignant.
Unfortunately, some names do not follow these rules. For instance, melanoma and
lymphoma use the benign suffix -oma, but are, in fact, malignant tumors.
Grade and Stage
Cancer is further classified using grade and stage to help predict its behavior, its rate of
spread, and the prognosis for the patient. Having a pathologist grade a tumor and
determining the stage of the disease both significantly impact the plan for treatment.
Grade
The grade of a tumor indicates how closely it resembles the tissue from which it is derived.
The more a tumor cell microscopically resembles the normal cells of its "parent" tissue, the
more likely it will act like its parent tissue. The extent of resemblance to parent tissue is
called differentiation. The more differentiated the tumor cells appear, the more they
resemble their parent tissue
Based on the microscopic appearance, pathologists commonly describe tumor grade by
four degrees of severity: Grades 1, 2, 3, and sometimes 4. Cells of a Grade 1 tumor are well
differentiated. With a close resemblance to their parent tissue, they are likely to grow slowly
and only minimally invade surrounding tissues. The cells of a similar tumor with a higher
grade  would  display  poorly  defined  cell  architecture  and  would be  considered
undifferentiated. This tumor would likely grow rapidly and aggressively invade normal
tissues. Generally, a lower grade indicates a better prognosis.
Stage
The grade of a cancer is often confused with the stage of a cancer. Cancer stage refers to
the extent of the cancer based on the location of the primary tumor, the tumor size, the
number of tumors, and the degree of tumor spread into the lymph nodes or beyond.
Roman numerals I, 1I, IlI, and sometimes IV are used to describe the stages of cancer.
The higher the numeral, the more advanced the disease has progressed. For instance, Stage
I disease indicates the cancer has remained localized to only one part of the body. In Stage
IV, the disease has progressed to other organs, or metastasized throughout the body.
Naturally, a Stage I disease carries a better prognosis.
Conclusion
Cancer describes many malignant tumors, which destroy normal tissue and impair normal
function. To the veterinary professional, cancer is simply a word used to describe a variety
of conditions of uncontrolled cell growth. We study it, categorize it, and classify it by a
number of criteria. However, few words create more fear in the imagination of pet owners.
To the layperson, cancer is the beginning of the end of a relationship with a loved one. It is
an uncle who lost a leg or a cousin whose hair fell out. It is a grandmother who has had too
many surgeries or a father who lost the battle entirely. Most people's perception of cancer,
patient with cancer, overcoming the owners? fear and guilt is the first job for every member
of the veterinary team. We must approach the topic of cancer in an educated, encouraging.
and compassionate manner.
AdditionalReading
   3  ss 1  o   1 a 
(eds.), Small Animal Clinical Oncology (4th Ed.). St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, pp. 31-
53.
Hanahan D, Weinberg RA. 2000. The hallmarks of cancer. Cell 100(1):57-70.
Henry CJ. 2007. The etiology of cancer: Chemical, physical and hormonal factors. In:
Withrow SJ, Vail DM (eds.), Small Animal Clinical Oncology (4th Ed.). St. Louis, MO:
Saunders Elsevier, pp. 12-9.
Modiano J, Breen M. 2007. The etiology of cancer: Genetic factors. In: Withrow SJ, Vail
DM (eds.), Small Animal Clinical Oncology (4th Ed.). St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, pp.
3-12.
Onn A, Fidler IJ. 2002. Metastatic potential of human neoplasms. In Vivo 16(6):423-9.
3
Preparation for Chemotherapy Administration
Kenneth Crump
Key Points
 Risks of accidental exposure to cytotoxic drugs
·The greatest risks are during preparation and administration
· Compounding pharmacies are ofen contracted to prepare drugs for administr ation.
sanup Adeiaypouayo jo uoneiedaid au lo saddns pue juaudinbg
· Closed-system devices or medication containment de vices like Pha Seal@ and Onguard@
are now available.
· W or kspace pre paration for the preparation of che motherapy drugs
· The minimum requirement is a clean workspace in a small area with good ventilation
and minirmal traffic
 Minimizing erors to protect your cancer patients
 Six ste ps to increase awareness and pr ote ct patients from chemotherapy-related errors
● Equipment and supplies for the administration of chemotherapy drugs
·● Choosing the right cathe ter for the job
· Wor kspace preparation for the a dministration of chemotherapy drugs
· Overcoming accidents and errors often related to the workspace layout and commol
distractions
Introduction
It is common for members of a veterinary healthcare team to regard themselves as immune
from any harm arising from their work. As a result, many of us inadvertently expose
ourselves and others to hazardous substances while practicing every precaution to ensure
that the substances themselves are protected from contamination. However, even
Cytotoxic means toxic to cells. Treating cancer cells with a cytotoxic compound can
result in a variety of cell fates. The cells may lose cell membrane integrity, rupture, and die
force them to activate a program of controlled cell death, called apoptosis. In all of these
cases, the cytotoxic chemotherapy compounds cannot tell the difference between the
 s  s         
exposed to these substances could, over time, suffer any of these cell fates.
Nurses working in human cancer wards can sometimes experience many of the
chemotherapy side effects noted by their patients. These may include nausea, dizziness,
chronic headaches, hair loss, and dermatitis. More significant side effects like menstrual
cycle irregularities, liver damage, infertility, and even miscarriage have also been reported.
These side effects can all arise through careless handling and administration of the
chemotherapy drugs.
An oncology nurse working in a human cancer ward was accidentally exposed to a
solution of the chemotherapy drug carmustine. When the tubing system fell out of an
infusion bottle of carmustine, all of the solution poured down her right arm and leg, and
onto the floor. Although she wore gloves, her right forearm was unprotected. The
solution also penetrated her clothing and stockings. She immediately washed her arm
and leg with soap and water, but did not change her clothes. A few hours later, she
began to experience minor abdominal distress and profuse belching. That was followed
by intermittent episodes of diarrhea with cramping abdominal pain. Profuse vomiting
followed, and then she felt better. Carmustine is known to cause gastric upset, and her
symptoms were attributed to systemic absorption of the drug through her skin.
The risk of accidental exposure to chemotherapy agents is greatest during drug
preparation and administration. The primary routes of exposure are by inhalation, direct
provide an overview of the equipment and supplies necessary to safely prepare and
administer chemotherapy in a veterinary setting. Additionally, we will examine ways to
prepare your workspace in order to minimize the risk of accidental exposure.
Drug Preparation
According to the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH), all
chemotherapy drugs should be drawn up, reconstituted, crushed, or otherwise prepared
inside  a biological safety cabinet (BSC) or in a negative pressure total exhaust
    sa    n   
from the worker, as opposed to horizontal airflow that moves air away from the product and
toward the worker. Vertical airflow protects the worker, while horizontal airflow is designed
to protect the sterile product from contamination. Air leaving a BsC is filtered and vented to
the outdoors. An "isolator” is basically a glove box with external venting (see Chapter 4).
However, for many veterinary practices, such specialized equipment is cost prohibitive.
Compounding cytotoxic chemotherapy drugs is especially  hazardous if done without
proper safety equipment. Furthermore, the drug preparation may be complex and requires
special equipment or supplies that are not readily available in most veterinary clinics. For
these reasons, compounding pharmacies are offen contracted to prepare these drugs for
administration and/or to dispense prescriptions for at-home administration by the client.
When a compounding pharmacist prepares chemotherapy for you, ask that a material
safety datu sheet (MSDS) and the drug package insert accompany the prescription. The
MSDS provides you with procedures for handling the drug in a safe manner. The MSDS,
the package insert, and the pharmacist are all valuable resources of information regarding
emergency procedures in the event of accidental exposure to the drug, as well as the
potential side effects, drug interactions, precautions, or contraindications associated with a
particular drug.
While preparing a vincristine prescription, a pharmacy technician accidentally inhaled
an aerosolized mist of the solution. His reaction included sneezing, hot flashes, swollen
eyelids, shortness of breath, chest tightness, and congestion. He immediately sought
medical attention in the emergency room. He was treated, and by the following
morning, all of his symptoms were gone.
Preparing chemotherapy drugs in your practice is a procedure not to be taken lightly
when  used  properly.  Closed-system  devices  or  medication  containment  devices  like
PhaSeal? (Baxa Corporation, Englewood, CO) and Onguard? (B. Braun Medical Inc.,
Bethlehem, PA) are now available in the United States. They consist of several components
free drug transfers, and provide for a “dry spike” of an intravenous (IV) bag. Studies have
demonstrated the effectiveness of these devices  in reducing surface and personnel
contaminations.
Equipment and Supplies
Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) Manual
An SOP manual is used to ensure safety and consistency in the performance of repetitive
tasks. Although it may contain seemingly redundant checks and rechecks of details like the
patient's name and the drug's name and dose, the safety of your team and your patient is
administration of chemotherapy is thorough, understandable, and can be followed by any
qualified member of your team. When preparing a chemotherapy SOP, consider the
following:
individual or committee.
● It is concise. Use a step-by-step, bulleted approach rather than a running narrative.
practice.
● It includes a flowchart or checklist as a visual picture of the steps and how they relate
to one another.
· A good chemotherapy SOP is reviewed and rehearsed before it is put into practice.
Personal Protective Equipment (PPE)
Imagine the consequences to a professional football player who neglects to wear a helmet,
pads, or other PPE. The PPE required for preparing and administering cytotoxic drugs in
our profession includes the following:
● gown—disposable, made of fabric that has a low permeability, with a closed front
and elastic cuffs;
· gloves—powder free; made of latex, nitrile, or neoprene; double glove or use gloves
labeled and tested for use with chemotherapy drugs;
· face and eye protection when splashing is possible; and
· a respirator when there is a risk of inhaling drug aerosols.
Drug Preparation Supplies
The supplies for cytotoxic drug preparation are as follows:
· absorbent pad with nonporous backing
· labels
· appropriate reagents for dilution or reconstitution
 see drug package insert
· Luer lock syringes and needles
Luer lock fittings securely joined by means of a tabbed hub on the female
fitting, which screws into threads in a sleeve on the male fitting
·● PhaSeal or Onguard (or similar) chemotherapy preparation supplies
● Chemo-spill kit (see below)
· sealable transfer bag
。
a bag to transfer the drug from where it is prepared to where it is to be
administered
  d,  e 
● appropriate chemo-waste disposal container
see Chapter 4.
Prepare Your Workspace
The optimum place to prepare chemotherapy drugs is inside a BsC or a negative pressure
total exhaust compounding aseptic containment isolator In the absence of either a BSC or
an isolator, designate a specific area within your hospital for this task. All that is required is
a clean workspace like a countertop in a small area with good ventilation (but no drafts) and
minimal traffic. Since one of the primary routes of exposure is ingestion, eating, drinking.
chewing gum, and storing food are all prohibited in the preparation area. Many practices
use their small animal isolation ward as their designated area for preparing chemotherapy
drugs. It is usually a small area, away from the general flow of traffic through the clinic,
and most of the PPE for isolation is similar to that used for chemotherapy preparation. Post
   s x dd  o m sno o d  s
traffic through your work area.
Chemo-spill kit
Keep a clearly labeled chemo-spill kit near the site where chemotherapy drugs are mixed
and where they are administered. Chemotherapy spill kits are commercially available or are
easy to assemble and maintain on your own. Each spill kit contains at least the following:
· a respirator or heavy-duty mask
· eye protection
● two pairs of gloves
powder free; made of latex, nitrile, or neoprene
· gown
disposable, made of fabric that has low permeability, with closed front and
elastic cuffs
 absorbent pads
disposable diapers work well
· two large ziplock chemo-waste disposal bags.
When a spill occurs, contain and absorb the spilled liquid with absorbent pads or kitty
litter. While wearing gloves, absorb the remaining liquid with paper towels. Place the paper
Then, clean the contaminated area with water and detergent.
Drug Administration
Experts estimate that as many as 98,0o0 people die in any given year from medical errors
that occur in hospitals. That is the equivalent of a jumbo jet airliner crashing each and every
day of the year, which is more than the number of people who die annually from motor
vehicle accidents, breast cancer, or AIDS.
Although there are no studies regarding the number of animals who die in any given year
from medical errors, the statistics on human medical errors underscore the need for
responsibility for the welfare of each patient, then any single member of the team can
protect a pet from being harmed by a medical accident.
A technician with more than a decade of experience in a large multidoctor referral
hectic and she had begun to fall behind schedule. When she received the patient's
chemotherapy from the in-house pharmacy, the technician rechecked the patient's name
and dose on the chemotherapy bag. Both were accurate. Finally, she confirmed with the
doctor that she should begin administration. Afterward, when the technician updated the
patient's record, she realized that the dog should not have received chemotherapy on
that visit. He was scheduled only for a blood test. The “system' had failed that patient
in several ways. However, if the technician had simply reviewed the patient's record
before administering chemotherapy, she could have prevented significant risk to the
dog's health.
As an integral part of a veterinary healthcare team, the veterinary technician stands as the
last line of defense between what could happen to a patient and what does happen to a
patient in the hospital. Here are some simple steps you can take to increase your awareness
and to protect your patients from being harmed by a chemotherapy-related error.
(1) Review the patient's record.
+
before you begin a treatment. Things to look for in the record:
What disease does this patient have?
Why is the pet here today?
。
What other therapy is the pet receiving?
。
Is there anything about this case that you do not understand?
(2) Recheck the patient's blood test results.
     s  s    
many of them interfere with the body's ability to make white blood cells.
Neutrophils (also called "segs") are the most abundant of the white blood
cells and form an integral part of the immune system
An insufficient number of neutrophils could be a cause to postpone a
chemotherapy treatment. Your clinic will establish a minimum acceptable
number of neutrophils for treatment. Be sure you know that number.
(3) Recheck the drug name and dose.
After reviewing the record, be sure the drug name and the dose you are
about to administer make sense to you. If you discover an inconsistency,
or something you do not understand, ask the doctor for clarification.
(4) Recheck the dose calculation.
Math errors are the most frequent and are often the most dangerous of
medical errors. They are also the most preventable. Take a moment and
match someone else's answer, stop everything until the error is found.
patient's body surface area, rather than its weight. Refer to the meter
squared (m?) chart in Appendix 3.1 to convert pounds or kilograms to
body surface area.
(5) Ask questions.
Your knowledge and understanding are the two greatest assets you offer
to your patients and to your veterinary practice. Still, we are likely to ask
more questions when ordering a meal than we do during a busy day in the
clinic. Asking questions may slow your efficient pace, but when you ask
questions, you get answers that help you make better decisions. And
S      s  n  s 
Use these quick tips to make it easier to A.S.K.
。
· We all react defensively to questions that begin with
"why."
Stay on topic.
■ Avoid vague open-ended questions. Make your questions
specific and concise.
Keep it simple.
· Ask the question. Get the answer. Move on.
(6) Keep accurate records.
The information in your patient's record should be easy for everyone to
understand and use. It must also be reliable, accurate, and consistent if the
information that it supplies is to be relied on. Be clear. Be concise. Be
accurate.
Body Surface Area
Body surface area is equivalent to the surface area of the skin. It is difficult to measure the
surface area of the skin, so it is commonly estimated on the basis of formulas that use body
weight as part of the equation. The most commonly used formula was published in 1916.
The practice of using body surface area to calculate cytotoxic drug doses began in 1966
and has been handed down through generations of clinical oncologists. Why do we still use
body surface area? Hippocrates instructed us to do no harm. It is extremely difficult to treat
our patients using drugs that have such a narrow therapeutic index like anticancer drugs
and still do no harm. Doses calculated on the basis of body surface area give us a greater
sense of accuracy and safety. Use the chart in Appendix 3.1 to convert the body weight of
dogs and cats from kilograms to their meter squared (m?) surface area. Remember that each
kilogram equals 2.2 Ib (lb ÷ 2.2 = kg).
Equipment and Supplies
Catheter Decision
We are all creatures of habit. Fortunately, committing some routine tasks to habit increases
our efficiency. However, to protect the cancer patient receiving chemotherapy, more than
any other patient you serve, it is important that you avoid reaching for the catheter you
habitually use and take that extra moment to make a conscious decision to select the best
catheter for the job.
Why  is selecting  the appropriate catheter  so  important  to a  patient  receiving
chemotherapy? Because many of the cytotoxic drugs used to treat cancer are yesicants. A
vesicant is a substance that causes tissue blistering. Vesicants are highly reactive chemicals
that combine with proteins, DNA, and other cellular components to result in destructive
cellular changes. Vesicant drugs cause no damage to veins; however, when vesicant
medications leak out of a vein and make contact with the surrounding tissue, the damage
begins. The severity of the damage depends on the kind and the amount of drug that has
leaked out of the vein. Tissue damage can range from mild skin irritation to gaping necrotic
wounds, requiring multiple surgical repairs.
Catheters used in veterinary medicine for peripheral venipuncture come in two styles:
butterfly catheters and over-the-needle catheters (Figure 3.1) . Butterfly catheters have a
steel needle attached to flexible plastic wings and a short piece of extension tubing.
Butterfly catheters are usually not taped in place for longer-term infusions because the
needle will lacerate the vein when the patient moves about. An over-the-needle catheter is
used for longer infusions into peripheral veins. Unlike the butterfly catheter, after the needle
of an over-the-needle catheter is inserted into a vein, the catheter is then slid over the needle
into the vein and the needle is withdrawn.
Figure 3.1 Butterfly catheter (left) and over-the-needle catheter (right).
Although not all chemotherapy drugs are vesicants, there is wisdom in treating them all
as though they were. The style of catheter you choose for chemotherapy administration is
determined, in large part, by the volume of drug you intend to administer. For volumes less
than 1 mL (cc), a butterfly catheter is appropriate. For a drug volume more than 1 mL (cc),
a securely placed over-the-needle catheter will significantly reduce the risk of injury to the
patient.
When selecting an over-the-needle catheter, it is easy to be lured into a false sense of
 s         s  
to place a smaller gauge catheter into a vein, it is more difficult to keep one there. Smaller
gauge catheters (22 gauge and smaller) come in very short lengths—usually less than an
inch. Animal skin is very elastic, and as an animal patient moves, that elastic skin could pull
a shorter catheter out of the vein, leaving it to lie alongside the vein, just beneath the skin.
Infusing a vesicant drug through such a dislodged catheter is an invitation to injury.
Remember, when it comes to over-the-needle catheters, length does matter.
Supplies for Chemotherapy Administration
The following are the supplies needed for chemotherapy administration:
● catheter setup (Figure 3.2)
 butterfly catheter (21 gauge or 23 gauge) or over-the-needle catheter (18
gauge 0r 20 gauge, 2 in)
PhaSeal or Onguard injection adapter
。
。
two syringes of normal saline
。
4 × 4 gauze sponges
。
tape
antiseptic cotton balls
surgical prep
。
gloves
· PPE
details
● an absorbent pad
place a disposable plastic-backed absorbent liner under the connection site
during chemotherapy administration.
· appropriate chemo-disposal bag
see Chapter 4
 Chemo-spill kit
Keep a clearly labeled chemo-spill kit near the site where chemotherapy
drugs are mixed and where they are administered.
Figure 3.2 Over-the-needle catheter setup.
Prepare Your Workspace
Opportunities for accidents and errors are often related to the workspace layout and
common distractions. These opportunities can be overcome with careful attention to your
workspace design, your process design, and the development of SOPs for the
to prepare an appropriate workspace to administer chemotherapy:
· A busy treatment room is the least suitable place for a chemotherapy treatment.
Administer chemotherapy in a room that is away from the flow of traffic and where it
  o no   d  m  
· Install an eyewash station where cytotoxic drugs are handled or administered.
Affordable eyewash nozzles can be attached to most industrial faucets
· Post signs to inform your colleagues that you are administering cytotoxic drugs.
· Restrict unnecessary personnel from the immediate vicinity where chemotherapy is
being administered.
Clients often wish to "help"” or watch a chemotherapy treatment. For the
safety of the client, the patient, and the staff, it should not be allowed
● Protect your team and animal care staff from inadvertent exposure to chemotherapy
drugs and metabolites excreted in the urine, stool, and blood, or into the beddings of
cancer patients by labeling the patient's cage.
Instruct staff members to wear PPE when cleaning potentially contaminated
cages.
Conclusions
The reality of chemotherapy for animal cancer patients is much different from that for
human cancer patients. For animals receiving chemotherapy, quality of life for the patient is
a primary concern. Doses of drugs and treatment schedules are calculated to minimize the
discomfort to the patient while providing the most effective defense against the disease.
Cytotoxic drugs can be lifesaving for patients with cancer, but they can also be dangerous
to the staff members who handle and administer them. The risk of accidental exposure is
greatest during drug preparation and administration, with the primary routes being
inhalation, direct contact, and ingestion of improperly handled drugs. Two other routes of
exposure important to a veterinary team and their clients include handling discarded items
that have come in contact with chemotherapy (syringes, catheters, gloves, etc.) and contact
with urine and feces from patients recently treated.
Each member of a veterinary healthcare team stands between what could happen to a
patient and what does happen. It takes more time to prepare and follow clinical safety
policies, and it can sometimes be inconvenient to slow down and recheck our work. The
goal of veterinary oncology is to provide for the medical and nonmedical needs of the
cancer patient and the client, and to improve the quality of life for both. Protecting the
a s   s  s     s  
that goal. Remember, none of us is medically bulletproof. Doing more things faster is no
substitute for doing the right things.
Appendix 3.1 Body Surface Area Conversion
Chart
Body surface area conversion chart (body weight in kilograms
to meters squared)
kg
m²
kg
m²
kg
kg
m²
kg
m²
s
0.5
0.064
10.0
0.469
20.0
0.744
30.0
0.975
40.0
1.181
1.0
0.101
11.0
0.500
21.0
0.759
31.0
0.997
41.0
1.201
2.0
0.160
12.0
0.529
22.0
0.785
32.0
1.018
42.0
1.220
3.0
0.210
13.0
0.553
23.0
0.817
33.0
1.029
43.0
1.240
4.0
0.255
14.0
0.581
24.0
0.840
34.0
1.060
44.0
1.259
5.0
0.295
15.0
0.608
25.0
0.864
35.0
1.081
45.0
1.278
6.0
0.333
16.0
0.641
26.0
0.886
36.0
1.101
46.0
1.297
7.0
0.370
17.0
0.668
27.0
0.909
37.0
1.121
47.0
1.302
8.0
0.404
18.0
0.694
28.0
0.931
38.0
1.142
48.0
1.334
9.0
0.437
19.0
0.719
29.0
0.953
39.0
1.162
49.0
1.352
50.0
1.371
Weight to body surfacearea conversion chart-cats
kg
m²
kg
m²
kg
m2
kg
m?
kg
m2
0.1
0.022
1.4
0.125
3.6
0.235
5.8
0.323
8.0
0.400
0.2
0.034
1.6
0.137
3.8
0.244
6.0
0.330
8.2
0.407
0.3
0.045
1.8
0.148
4.0
0.252
6.2
0.337
8.4
0.413
0.4
0.054
2.0
0.159
4.2
0.260
6.4
0.345
8.6
0.420
0.5
0.063
2.2
0.169
4.4
0.269
6.6
0.352
8.8
0.426
0.6
0.071
2.4
0.179
4.6
0.277
6.8
0.360
9.0
0.433
0.7
0.079
2.6
0.189
4.8
0.285
7.0
0.366
9.2
0.439
0.8
0.086
2.8
0.199
5.0
0.292
7.2
0.373
9.4
0.445
0.9
0.093
3.0
0.208
5.2
0.300
7.4
0.380
9.6
0.452
1.0
0.100
3.2
0.217
5.4
0.307
7.6
0.387
9.8
0.458
1.2
0.113
3.4
0.226
5.6
0.315
7.8
0.393
10.0
0.464
Additional Read
Aboumatar HJ, Winner L, Davis R, Peterson A, Hill R, Frank S, Almuete V, Leung TV,
Trovitch P, Farmer D. 2010. Applying Lean Sigma solutions to mistake-proof the
chemotherapy preparation process. Jt Comm J Qual Patient Saf 36(2):79-86.
Connor TH, Anderson RW, Sessink PJ, Spivey SM. 2002. Effectiveness of a closed-system
device in containing surface contamination with cyclophosphamide and ifosfamide in an
I.V. admixture area. Am J Health Syst Pharm 59:68-72.
  s       i      
and weight be known. Arch Intern Med 17:863-71.
            
of toxicity of anticancer agents in mouse, rat, hamster, dog, monkey, and man. Cancer
Chemother Rep 50:219-31.
Kohn LT, Corrigan JM, Donaldson, MS. 2o00. To Err Is Human: Building a Safer Health
System. Washington, DC: The National Academy Press.
Labuhn K, Valanis B, Schoeny R, Loveday K, Vollmer WM. 1998. Nurses' and
pharmacists’ exposure to antineoplastic drugs: Findings from industrial hygiene scans and
urine mutagenicity tests. Cancer Nursing 21(2):79-89
McDiarmid M, Egan T. 1988. Acute occupational exposure to antineoplastic agents. J
Occup Med 30(12):984-7.
NIOSH. 2004. NIOSH Alert: Preventing occupational exposure to antineoplastic and other
hazardous drugs in healthcare settings. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Institute for Occupational Safety and
Health. [http://www.cdc. gov/niosh/docs/2004-165/]
Skov T, Lynge E, Maarup B, Olsen J, Rorth M, Winthereik H. 1990. Risk for physicians
handling antineoplastic drugs. Lancet 336:1446.
Skov T, Maarup B, Olsen J, Rorth M, Winthereik H, Lynge E. 1992. Leukaemia and
reproductive outcome among nurses handling antineoplastic drugs. Br J Ind Med 49:855-
61.
Sotaniemi EA, Sutinen S, Arranto AJ, Sutinen S, Sotaniemi, KA. 1983. Liver damage in
nurses handling cytotoxic agents. Acta Med Scand 214(3):181-9.
Valanis BG, Vollmer WM, Labuhn K, Glass A. 1997. Occupational exposure to
antineoplastic agents and self-reported infertility among nurses and pharmacists. J Occup
Environ Med 39:574-80.
Med 41:632-8.
Vandenbroucke J, Robays H. 2001. How to protect environment and employees against
cytotoxic agents, the UZ Ghent experience. J Oncol Pharm Pract 6(4):146-52.
Wick C, Slawson MH, Jorgenson JA, Tyler LS. 2003. Using a closed-system protective
4
Assessment of the Chemotherapy Patient
Kenneth Crump and Douglas H. Thamm
Key points
oaao s auu ainsua on osy suaed e auur ngo nog wasis pazueano juasisuoa e asn
● Ask open-ended questions that are nonjudgmental.
sioaid pue aiea isounn ym uam ag pous pue juanop ela e s ponal au Aieuaiaa aui 
● Prior to administering che motherapy, ensure that the patie nt shows no significant changes since the last recheck.
● The temperature, pulse, and respiration ( TPR) is the foundation of a good physical examination.
● Re ctal temperature mea sur eme nt is optimal.
● Heart rate and pulse rate may share the same numeric value, but they are not the same
 pie ce of infor mation.
● Animals displaying normal respiratory effort appear comfortable and lack any
abdominal effort.
● Never estimate a cancer patient's weight.
· Calipers are critical to accurately measure tumor size.
● Most commonly, the longest dimension of a tumor is mea sured.
A complete blood count ( CBC) is perfor me d imme diately prior to each chemotherapy trea tme nt.
●White blood cells called ne wtrophits are most likely impacted by chemotherapy.
● Most chemotherapy drugs do not a ffect platelets.
Aaya suaiaaai sea ue shop ur wagod reua e faiei s ea 
ed mau e uo Adeiayoaya suils anojag panoad aie sasieun pue sagod Ansayg wns
·Aditional imaging tests (e.g., radiographs, ulrasound) may be used to determine how wella teatment is working.
● Imaging is not performed at every visit but may be assessed periodically.
· Response to therapy is assessed by comparing tumor measureme nts over time.
· Complete response ( CR) is the disappearance of all evidence of cancer.
·Partial response (PR) is significant tumor shrinka ge, but not CR
Stable disease (SD) means the disease has not improved, nor has it worsened.
 Progressive disea se (PD) means the disea se has gotten * significantly" worse.
Introduction
The veterinary technician who can obtain a complete and accurate patient history and can
perform a quality physical examination plays a critical role in a busy veterinary practice. As
          
history and current physical status, you free your veterinarians to complete other necessary
work. The time it takes to do these tasks well increases the efficiency of the entire team.
However, inaccurate or incomplete information can be worse than no information at all.
Faulty information regarding a patient's history or physical parameters can lead to
unnecessary tests, useless treatments, and the loss of trust by your clients and your
veterinarians.
Patient History
Despite its importance, obtaining a thorough history is often overlooked by veterinarians as
well as veterinary technicians. Obtaining a thorough patient history in a clear and organized
manner can sometimes be challenging. For example, there are owners who either talk too
little or talk incessantly about unrelated issues. The process can be time-consuming, and
sometimes even the most efficient people feel as if they are running behind schedule.
Remember though, one of the biggest enemies of good time management is poor planning.
The more rushed you feel, the less thorough you will be. The more frantic you are, the less
accurate you will be. Using a consistent, organized system for obtaining a patient history is
important to ensure that nothing is overlooked. The goal of this section is to describe an
 s no s nd n  o e ao r  p
presented for the cancer patient and addresses specifically tailored cancer-related questions,
TheIntroduction
The first step in obtaining a medical history is to introduce yourself to the client and to
explain what you are doing. Mentioning your name, even to a client you have seen many
times before, relieves the client of the responsibility of remembering your name from one
visit to the next. This can be particularly important in a larger practice, where clients may
see one of several different team members on any given visit.
Always be certain to have reviewed the patient's record and that you know the client's
name, and the pet's name and sex before you begin your interview, to prevent awkward
mistakes when referring to the client or the pet. In situations where the pet has been taken
away from the client before obtaining a history (e.g., taken to the treatment area during an
emergency), it is essential to reassure the owner about the pet's status before beginning the
interview. If the client is worried that his or her pet is in danger, he or she may not be able
to focus on your questions nor provide you with the information you need.
AskingQuestions
The most important aspect of acquiring a history is to recognize the pet owner's level of
understanding and to respect it. The majority of owners do not understand medical jargon.
Many can become confused by the acronyms and medical terminologies you use daily; so
you must carefully strike a language balance that is appropriate for each client, one that
neither confuses them nor insults their intelligence. For instance, while the term PU/PD may
have meaning to you, it is likely to be unfamiliar to a client, yet asking if their pet "makes
tinkle a lot"’ may seem an offensively juvenile way to speak to an adult.
It is also important to ask open-ended questions rather than leading questions. An open-
ended question is one that requires the client to fill in the information themselves. A leading
question is one that can usually be answered with a “yes" or “no" and seems to guide the
client to an appropriate answer. For example, if you are trying to determine the activity
level of a patient since its last chemotherapy treatment, it is better to ask the client to
e     in o s n  h  s  
"Has Fluffy been acting more tired and lethargic since your last visit?" When leading
questions are asked, clients sense which response the interviewer prefers, and they are
likely to give it. Pet owners are anxious to help resolve their animal's problems. Although
you are trying to gather accurate information about their pet, they may feel it helpful to try
to guess the right answers to your questions.
Another pitfall in interviewing clients is asking questions that seem judgmental of their
care or their management of their pet's disease. Questions that suggest a judgment can
cause them to feel uncomfortable about giving truthful answers. For instance, when
questioning an owner about their pet's continued vomiting and diarrhea, it would not be
helpful to ask, “You didn't forget to give Fluffy her medicine, did you?" Faced with that
question, an owner is very likely to respond, “No, of course not,” even if the medication
had been forgotten. It would be better to ask, "How often do you give Fluffy her
medicine?" or “What times of day does Fluffy receive her medication?" Allowing clients to
feel comfortable with their answers will improve the chances that you receive accurate
information.
The key to history taking is to obtain accurate information by asking enough of the right
questions. In asking questions, be aware of your own assumptions. For instance, an owner
may tell you that their dog does not have diarrhea, when in fact they do not normally
observe their dog defecating. At times, it may be better to ask more than one question: "Do
you observe your dog when it defecates?" and if so, "Does your dog have diarrhea?""
In a classic scene from a 1960s Pink Panther movie, the bumbling Inspector Clouseau
notices a small dog in the lobby of a hotel. He asks the clerk, "Does your dog bite?" The
clerk responds, "No." However, when Clouseau reaches to pet the dog, the little dog tears
 ihq sou sop op o 1s no no I, 'ss nso is p si o
clerk looks up from what he is reading and says, "That's not my dog.
The Information
Medical information is useless unless it is written carefully, neatly, and accurately in a
structured medical record form. A standardized history form allows efficient recording of
the information gathered from your interview. Additionally, forms that prompt you remind
you to obtain key pieces of information. Record the information in real time and directly
into the medical record to prevent any subsequent misunderstandings. Write legibly, in an
veterinary medical records are not subject to the federal and state regulations that are seen
in the human medical field, the veterinary medical record is still a legal document, and, as
        o    s 
reference for the veterinary healthcare team as it implements and revises its treatment plans
for the patient. The history form used at the pet's initial presentation differs from a recheck
history form. Upon initial presentation, you gather more extensive background information
about the pet's overall health, diet, behaviors, and living conditions. It also includes any
pertinent medical history, such as vaccinations, allergies, and previous surgeries. A recheck
history form is more focused and generally gathers information from one appointment to
  n      o      
initial presentation of a cancer patient. An example of a useful patient history form for
The following provides a general list of important information to obtain at each visit from
a chemotherapy patient. After you introduce yourself, it is useful to begin with a broad.
open-ended question that allows the client to voice any general concerns they have. For
instance, “How have things been going since the last treatment?"
Once you have noted their response, go more specifically through the patient's behavior.
Ask questions about:
· appetite
· attitude
● activity level
● any nausea/vomiting/diarrhea
· anything else
。
breathing problems
lameness
。
changes to injection site of previous treatments
。
other pertinent information.
These questions can then be followed by questions about medications:
· What medications is the pet currently taking?
· Do they need any refills?
Finally, confirm with the client what will happen at this visit:
· tests that will be performed,
· drugs that will be administered,
· how long it is all likely to take, and
● discuss the owner's plan for pickup
o  Will they stop back? At what time?
o Do they expect a call when the treatment is complete?
Before ending the patient history interview, be sure to ask the client if there are any
questions or concerns they would like to discuss with the doctor at this visit. If the client has
concerns to be discussed, explain to the client whether those concerns will be discussed
before or after the treatment.
Physical Examination
Prior to administering chemotherapy, it is critical to ensure that the patient's overall health is
good and that there have been no significant changes since the last recheck. Although a
thorough physical examination is always performed by a veterinarian, some of the most
critical pieces of the physical examination are often performed by the technical staff, and it
is important that abnormalities be pointed out to the veterinarian prior to chemotherapy
administration.
Temperature, Pulse, and Respiration (TPR)
The TPR is the foundation of a good physical examination. These values provide a quick
reference to a substantial amount of information about the patient. Different parts of the
TPR may be altered in a chemotherapy patient, depending on the drugs they received and
when, as well as their underlying disease. See Table 4.1 for the normal TPR values for the
dog and cat.
Table 4.1 Normal TPR values for the dog and cat
Rectal temperature (F)Pulse/heart rate
Respiratory rate
Dog
100.0-102.2
60-160/min（smaller
16-32/min
dogs =higher rate)
Cat
100.0-102.2
140-220/min
20-42/min
Temperature
Rectal temperature measurement is optimal; however, an axillary (armpit) or aural (ear)
temperature may be used in patients with swelling or pain in the rectum or surrounding
anatomy. These sites are less accurate than a rectal measurement and should only be used
when absolutely necessary.
Neutropenia (a low white blood cell count) can sometimes be observed following
chemotherapy administration (see below). If the neutrophil count falls too low (typically at
1 week following treatment), the patient becomes at increased risk for infection and may
run a fever. Although some dogs present with elevated temperatures as a result of stress or
serious infections can have a normal or low body temperature, so the absence of a fever
does not completely rule out infection. See Chapter 7 for additional information about side
effects.
Pulse Rate and Heart Rate
In a normal healthy animal, the pulse rate and heart rate are the same number. Although
can be determined with a stethoscope in the ears of a highly trained medical professional,
but a patient's pulse rate and subjective pulse quality are not among them. Those values are
best determined with your fingers.
Palpate the peripheral pulses on every patient to determine the pulse rate and pulse
quality. The femoral arteries are generally palpated for this and are located high on the
medial thigh of dogs and cats. Finding and using the femoral arteries to determine a
patient's pulse rate and quality is a learned skill, and requires practice to gain proficiency.
    s    s     s
using your fingertips. Some degree of pressure is required to feel the pulse; however,
excessive pressure could compress the artery, occluding the blood flow. Count the number
    t q      s      
the pulse rate per minute.
Figure 4.1 Obtaining a femoral pulse. Apply light pressure over the femoral arteries using
your fingertips.
It is also important to auscultate (listen to) the heart while palpating pulses (Figure 4.2). It
may be difficult to coordinate holding a stethoscope over the heart of a dog or cat while
trying to palpate its pulses at the same time (especially if the pet loses interest), so you may
want to take and record the pet's pulse before you try this. The heart rate and the pulse rate
should be identical, and there should be a pulse of near equal quality produced by every
heartbeat. The absence of a palpable pulse (or significant change in pulse quality) with an
audible heartbeat  is  called a pulse deficit. Pulse deficits usually  indicate a  cardiac
abnormality and should be brought to the attention of a veterinarian.
Figure 4.2 Palpating the pulse and auscultating the heart simultaneously. It is important
to auscultate the heart while palpating the pulses. There should be a detectable pulse for
each heartbeat.
Tachycardia (high heart rate) can be a sign of anemia, excitement, pain/discomfort, or
other illness. An irregular heart rate can be a sign of disturbed electrical activity in the heart
Certain drugs, such as doxorubicin, should not be given to dogs with some kinds of heart
disease, and thus, additional tests might be necessary to further investigate an abnormal
heart rhythm prior to chemotherapy.
Respiratory Rate/Effort
Respiratory rate and effort should be noted in all patients. Rate is generally done visually
first, and then by auscultation to actually hear the lung sounds. The determination of
respiratory effort is more subjective. Animals displaying normal effort appear comfortable
and lack any abdominal effort.
Depending on the type of tumor a pet has, an increase in respiratory rate or effort could
   sh n  o s    s  o s  
the chest), or a change in treatment might be necessary. An abnormal respiratory rate or
effort should be brought to the attention of the veterinarian.
Weight
A cancer patient's weight must never be estimated, and must be measured and recorded at
every visit. An accurate body weight is critical for accurate chemotherapy dosing. A small
inaccuracy in weight measurement can result in a higher risk of toxicity or reduced
effectiveness of treatment. For clarity, it is a good idea to measure a cancer patient's weight
in both pounds and kilograms, and to clearly label both in the patient's record. Most
many  cancer-related  medications  are  dosed using  weight  measured  in  kilograms.
Remember also that most chemotherapy doses are calculated based on the patient's body
     ( s     r s    
and decreased food intake, and changes in nutrition might be indicated. If weight is very
different from the previous visit, this could indicate an inaccuracy in weighing, and the
patient should be weighed again.
Tumor Measurements
Although often performed by a veterinarian, sometimes tumor measurements are performed
by the technical staff as well. This is the main way to tell whether treatments are working or
disappearance of all measurable disease is expected. For other tumor types, partial
shrinkage or absence of any growth is a very acceptable outcome. Investment in calipers
(Figure 4.3) is critical for accurate assessment of tumor size. These can be purchased at
most hardware stores, as well as from various veterinary/surgical supply vendors.
Figure 4.3 Different styles of calipers. Calipers can be purchased at most hardware stores.
Most commonly, the longest dimension of a tumor is measured (e.g., if the tumor is
longer than it is wide or deep, then the length is recorded). Sometimes, tumors are measured
in two or three dimensions. It is helpful to have a separate sheet that keeps track of tumor
measurements over time to make comparisons easier. In animals with multiple masses, it
    o o s  s s     p  
such a map is included in Appendix 4.2.
Laboratory Tests
While blood tests are an important part of the management of the chemotherapy patient,
they are rarely used in animals to determine if the treatment is working: This is usually
determined with tumor measurements. However, blood tests are critical to establish that
almost always drawn from the jugular vein, rather than from a peripheral vein. This
preserves the peripheral veins for chemotherapy administration and reduces the likelihood
of chemotherapy being extravasated from a prior venipuncture site.
Complete Blood Count (CBC)
A CBC is almost always performed immediately before each and every chemotherapy
treatment, and sometimes in between treatments as well. While it is optimal to have a CBC
performed in-house on the same day as the chemotherapy, it is acceptable to have a CBC
performed the day before (not earlier) if the test needs to be sent out to a referral laboratory.
If a CBC is performed any earlier than the day before treatment, the results may not be
reliable as values may have changed enough to impact treatment decisions
White Blood Cells
Of all the cells that are evaluated on a CBC, the one most likely to be impacted by
chemotherapy is a subset of the white blood cells called neutrophils. Neutrophils are the
body's first line of defense against bacteria, and a decreased number of neutrophils increase
              
important that treatment decisions be based on the absolute neutrophil count rather than on
the total white blood cell count or the percentage of neutrophils. Most drugs can be
      s     
neutrophils may need to have their treatment delayed for a few days. If the neutrophil count
is low but greater than 1oo0/μL, the risk of infection is small. However, if the neutrophil
count is less than 1ooo/μL, the risk of infection is higher, and careful monitoring at home,
as well as oral antibiotics, is typically recommended until the neutrophil count recovers.
It is important to let owners know that if the neutrophil count is low, it typically recovers
quickly. Also, inform owners that delaying a treatment for a few days until the neutrophil
treatment.
Platelets
         s      
(usually with long-term use), most do not. Thus, severely low platelets are not often
encountered in animals receiving chemotherapy. However, a treatment delay and additional
tests may be required in animals with less than 50-75,000 platelets/μL. For this reason, it is
important that a manual platelet count, not just a platelet estimate, be obtained. One of the
most common reasons for a platelet count to be reported as decreased is due to platelet
clumping (Figure 4.4). Platelet clumping can be assessed as the cause for a low platelet
count by scanning the blood smear, looking for clumps. The risk of clumping can be
- a e m s rnn u e a  si as po  e n
gauge needle.
Red Blood Cells
Unlike in human cancer patients, anemia is rarely a clinical problem in dogs and cats
receiving chemotherapy. Mild, cumulative anemia can be observed, but it is extremely rare
for it to be severe enough to require intervention. If a large or sudden drop in red blood
cells is noted, it could indicate a different serious problem that requires attention (internal
bleeding, ulcer, etc.).
Biochemistry and Urinalysis
Serum biochemistry profiles and urinalyses are almost always performed before starting
chemotherapy on a new patient, to ensure that organ function is adequate to tolerate
chemotherapy and to rule out any other serious medical problems that might be just as
important to treat as the cancer is. Occasionally, biochemistry profiles or individual tests
may be performed throughout treatment, depending on the disease and the chemotherapy
being received.
In dogs that present with a high blood calcium (also called paraneoplastic hypercalcemia or
hypercalcemia of malignancy), periodic rechecks of calcium can indicate how well the
cancer treatment is working. Calcium will usually return to normal in patients whose disease
is removed surgically, or those in which complete remission is induced with chemotherapy.
Conversely, a rise in blood calcium levels may indicate a relapse of the patient's disease.
Liver Values
Some chemotherapy drugs, specifically lomustine, can cause elevations in liver values with
chronic use. Thus, in addition to a CBC, liver values (especially alanine aminotransferase
[ALT]) are usually checked before each treatment in dogs and cats receiving lomustine.
KidneyValues/Urine Specific Gravity
Some drugs, specifically cisplatin in dogs and doxorubicin in cats, as well as nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs like piroxicam, are capable of causing kidney toxicity. For this
reason, kidney values (blood urea nitrogen and creatinine), as well as urine specific gravity,
are usually checked before administration of these agents. Sterile urine is not required for
Imaging
In some cases, additional imaging tests (e.g., radiographs, ultrasound) may be used to
determine how well the treatment is working. Imaging is usually not performed at every
visit due to cost considerations but may be assessed periodically.
If the only measurable disease happens to be inside a body cavity, sometimes repeated
imaging to evaluate the size and number of lesions is the only way to know whether a
treatment is effective or not. When being used to assess response, imaging is often repeated
after two treatments with a given drug (approximately 6 weeks, for most drugs), and then at
approximately the same intervals thereafter. Sometimes imaging is performed to ensure that
        o  o    s  
for spread following surgery. Examples of tumors that fall into this category include
melanoma, hemangiosarcoma, osteosarcoma, anal sac carcinoma, and mammary gland
carcinoma. In these situations, imaging may be repeated every 2-3 months after surgery to
make sure that the disease remains under control.
Radiographs (X-Rays)
Radiographs are commonly used to assess changes in the lungs and the surrounding
structures in cancer patients (Figure 4.5). Most of the time, tumors in the lungs are easy to
measure with calipers, much in the same way as tumors on the outside of the body can be
measured. Radiographs can also be used to assess changes in bones. Radiographs are less
Figure 4.5 (A) Thoracic radiograph from a 10-year-old male castrated springer spaniel
with a primary lung tumor Changes in size of this tumor can be measured serially to
e as   e   r (   ss ss
Labrador retriever with lung metastases from a bone tumor (osteosarcoma). Arrows indicate
       s s n
amputation, and chemotherapy was performed.
Ultrasound
Ultrasound is an excellent test for evaluating and measuring tumors in the abdomen (Figure
4.6). It is commonly used to look at tumors in organs like the bladder, liver, spleen, and
abdominal lymph nodes. Most ultrasound machines have measurement devices built into
them so that abnormal structures can be measured digitally.
Figure 4.6 (A) A dog in dorsal recumbency undergoing an ultrasound examination of
the abdomen. (B) A splenic mass in an 8-year-old male castrated golden retriever.
Measurements can be obtained digitally on the images collected. (C) A bladder mass in an
11-year-old female spayed Scottish terrier Changes in the size of this mass can be assessed
over time as an indication of how well treatment is working.
12812010
:55:31AM
Y10
LGK9LIVE
FX9-4
201.0
RS1/9C1
PEVVEOTT
SPLEEN SAG
B
-D=28.8mm
D=18.9mm
Fr68
SIEMENS
2/102010
220:17PM
M11
LGK9LIVE
FX
M:1.1
BVEOTT
RS1/5C1
+D=8.5mm
UB TRANS
-D=14.2mm
口
+D=22.4mm
xD-15.1mm
 Fr482
SIEMENS
Computed Tomography (CT) and Magnetic Resonance Imaging
(MRI)
Advanced imaging tests such as CT and MRI can be very useful for the initial diagnosis and
treatment planning for certain tumors, such as those of the nasal cavity and brain. CT and
MRI are rarely used for the serial assessment of tumor response due to their high expense
and the need for general anesthesia or heavy sedation.
Assessment of Tumor Response
Although it is primarily the job of the veterinarian to determine how well the treatment is
working, it sometimes falls to the staff to interpret for the client what the veterinarian means
by terms such as "partial response” or “stable disease." An understanding of how treatment
or the veterinarians make over time. This can be done by comparing either the maximum
tumor diameters or the tumor volumes, calculated by multiplying measurements in two or
three different dimensions.
Complete Response (CR)
CR means the complete disappearance of all evidence of cancer: Obviously, this is the
"Holy Grail for cancer treatment. In addition to all the measurable disease going away, all
             ss 
news for any client, it is important for owners to know that this does not necessarily mean
"cure." There are some cancers, such as lymphoma, in which we can induce CR in 75-
90% of patients; however, in all but 5% of the cases, the disease eventually comes back.
Cure is hard to define in veterinary oncology. For many types of cancer in humans,
"cure” means being disease free for longer than 5 or 10 years. Our patients are typically
older at the time of diagnosis and would usually have other age-related problems before
reaching the 5-or 10-year mark. So, for our patients, cure may mean that the cancer stays
away long enough for the patient to die of an unrelated problem.
Partial Response (PR)
disease. Technically, this term means that all measurable disease decreases by more than
50% in volume or more than 30% in maximum diameter and without the development of
any new lesions. This is the next best thing to seeing a CR.
Stable Disease (SD)
SD means that the disease has not improved significantly but also has not worsened. In
other words, tumors have shrunk by less than 5o% in volume or less than 3o% in maximum
diameter, but have grown by less than 25% in volume or less than 20% in maximum
diameter, and no new lesions have appeared. As mentioned above, we certainly strive for
for which "not growing" is a very acceptable outcome. If we can give a treatment that is
well tolerated and preserves an excellent quality of life, and if we can make tumors stop
growing, then that can be a very good outcome for the pet and the client, and a very
rewarding outcome for the veterinary team
Progressive Disease (PD)
PD means that the disease has gotten “significantly” worse. Technically, this means that all
measurable disease has increased by more than 25% in volume or more than 2o% 1n
maximum diameter, or that new lesions that have not been previously seen, have appeared.
In most cases, this is an indication to either discontinue the treatment or try something
different, depending on the alternatives, the quality of life of the patient, and the owner's
interest in continuing treatment.
Additional Reading
Bassert JM, McCurnin DM. 2o09. McCurnin s Clinical Textbook for Veterinary Technicians
(7th Ed.). Philadelphia: Saunders.
Ogilvie GS, Moore AS. 2001. Feline Oncology. Yardley, PA: Veterinary Learning Systems
Ogilvie GS, Moore AS. 2006. Managing the Canine Cancer Patient: A Practical Guide to
Compassionate Care. Yardley, PA: Veterinary Learning Systems.
Withrow SJ, Vail DM. 2007. Withrow and MacEwen s Small Animal Clinical Oncology (4th
Ed.). Philadelphia: Saunders.
Appendix 4.1 Oncology Patient Recheck History
Form
PLEASE ANSWER ALL QUESTIONS
Date:
Pa tient:
Case Number
When will you return to pick up your pet?
12-1 PM  1-3 PM  3-5 PM  5-8 PM □ 8-10 PM 
Telephone # where you can be reached  Work  Home  Cell
Which best describes your pet's health since last visit?
Excellent  Good  Fair  Poor 
Please describe each item according to your dog's behavior since the last appointment.
A ppe tite
Compar ison of appetite compare d to the last appointment.
Amount of time that your dog spends seeping, compared to the last appointment.
Sleeping
Current activity level compared to the last appointment.
Activity
eatlvde
eatlyino
layfulne
lavfulnes
Greatly decrease
Increased Greatly increas
Accidents
Greatly decreasedDecreased  No change Increased Greatly increased
Amount of panting compared to the last appointent
Panting
General responsiveness compared to the last appointment.
Response
Greatly decreased Decreased  No chane
General health compared to the last appointme nt.
Health
General health compared to before your dog's diagnosis of cancer.
Dverall
Greatly decreased Decreased No change  Increased Greaty increase
Describe any concerns you have about your pet since last visit (ie., loss of appetite,
vomiting, diarrhea, cough).
When did these problems occur? Have the problems resolved?
What questions or concerns you would like to discuss with your pet's doctor?
What medications have you given since your pet's last visit?
Need refill?
Howoften (1x/day,
Medication
Dose—#ofpills
2x/day,etc.)
Number of days
No
Yes
Appendix 4.2 Oncology Body Map
Right
Left
DATE
Right
Left
Left
Ventrum
Dorsum
6
2
f
8
9
10.
5
Chemotherapy Handling, Safety, and Disposal
Richard Allen and Kenneth Crump
Key points
 Che motherapy drug preparation standard operating proce dures ( SOPs)
A generic SOP is suggested.
 Storage of cytotoxic drugs
· Separale che motherapy drwgs from other medications.
·He ipfut websites for governmentat guidelines
· Safe drug preparation
· State-of-the-art protective equipme nt
·Preparing chemothe rapy drwgs in a smaller c linic
· Safe drug administration 
. Use a dedicated catheter.
· Compounding powde red chemothe rapy drugs
·Splitting tabtets
●Safe waste disposal
·Seven government agencies regulate the handling of hazardous waste.
· Laws pertaining to handing hazardous waste are stric ty enforced.
 Standards for waste handling 
·It is important to recognize the different classifications of hazardous waste
· Waste receptactes are color coded
Hazardous waste can onty be transported by licensed "hazardous waste handters.
Introduction
The decision to treat patients with chemotherapy must not be taken lightly. There are many
specialty clinics that prepare and administer chemotherapy on a large scale, with well-
trained staff and safety equipment on-site. So, the option for your clinic to avoid handling
these medications through referral is always available. However, when the decision is made
to treat cancer patients in your practice, there are many considerations that must be
recognized to ensure the safety of the personnel administering the agents, as well as the
patients being treated. Studies have linked workplace exposure to hazardous drugs with
health effects, such as skin rashes, adverse reproductive outcomes, and possibly cancer.
The degree of health risk is influenced by the extent of exposure, the concentration of the
agent, and the toxicity of the agent being used. This chapter reviews the proper measures to
The goal is to assure maximum protection for all involved.
Chemotherapy treats both human and animal cancers. These drugs are toxic to both
cancerous and normal healthy cells. Individuals who prepare and administer chemotherapy
must be protected from contact with these medications. The veterinarian will develop a
treatment plan for each patient based on the type of cancer and the stage of its
development. Many factors are taken into consideration for the selection of drugs, doses.
and treatment intervals. Because these drugs are cytotoxic, double or even triple check the
choice and doses of medications before they are administered to the patients. To be
successful, each protocol must allow the maximum therapeutic effect with minimal side
effects to the animal. If, as a result of treatment, the pet is constantly lethargic, nauseated, or
has severe bouts of diarrhea, the owner may perceive it as causing more suffering than the
disease.
Below is a short list of common chemotherapy drugs and their uses in veterinary
medicine:
· carboplatin
Q
used in a variety of veterinary and human cancers, including squamous cell
carcinomas, ovarian carcinomas, and adenocarcinomas;
· doxorubicin
。
 used for lymphomas, carcinomas, leukemias, and sarcomas;
· vinblastine
。
 used for lymphomas and mast cell tumors;
· vincristine
used in combination-drug protocols for lymphoid cancers and cancers of
the blood.
All of these drugs require preparation before they can be administered to a patient. Some.
such as vincristine, only need to be drawn into a syringe. Others, such as doxorubicin, must
be diluted with an electrolyte solution and either added to a bag of fluids or drawn into a
large syringe. However, neither preparation should be made without the use of personal
protective equipment (PPE).
Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs)
If your clinic has made the decision to prepare and administer chemotherapeutics, an SOP
needs to be established and implemented. If a chemotherapy hood or an isolator (described
below) is not available, drugs can be prepared in a small designated room with low airflow
and minimal traffic. This room should be scrubbed down regularly. Technicians need to
wear PPE and use some type of protective system such as PhaSeal? or Onguard? to
minimize contamination of the surroundings and personnel. Once prepared, place the drugs
in a ziplock chemo-transport bag. The sealed chemo-transport bag will contain any leakage
that may occur while the drug is moved from one room to another. Used supplies are then
disposed of in a yellow chemo-waste receptacle.
Designate a work area.
biological safety cabinet (BSC)
small room (minimum)
。
 good ventilation (no drafts)
。
low traffic
allow only essential personnel in room during preparation
well-lighted counter for preparation
place an adsorbent pad with nonporous backing on the work
surface
Gather PPE.
+
face mask with respirator
disposable gown with elastic cuffs
latex or nitrile exam gloves
Make sure all drugs are labeled.
Verify patient's name, product name, and dosage.
This is an extremely important step. Make sure all preparations
are labeled with the drug name, concentration, and dosage that
each syringe or intravenous (IV) bag contains. Drugs like
vincristine and vinblastine have similar names, yet very different
doses and effects on the treatment outcome. Have at least two
people calculate the dose. Remember, you cannot remove an
incorrect drug once it is in the patient.
Use only Luer lock syringes.
 Luer lock syringes screw and lock onto a needle or catheter.
Use Phaseal or Onguard or other drug containment devices.
Have a chemo-spill kit available to handle any accidents.
A chemo-spill kit contains chemotherapy protective gloves, eye
protection, disposable gown, absorbent towels, and collection and
disposal bags.
Procedure
(1) Prepare the product to be administered.
(2) Clearly label it with the patient's name, drug name, and drug concentration.
(3) Place in a sealed chemo-transfer bag.
(4) Dispose of all waste in proper receptacles.
Commercially Prepared Agents
There are some pharmacies that will prepare chemotherapeutic agents for your patients and
deliver or ship them directly to your clinic. Although this eliminates the necessity of
someone in your clinic having to prepare the dosage, handling of the drugs at the time of
delivery and handling of waste must still be considered.
· Be sure to employ PPE and other protective precautions to assure minimal exposure
to personnel.
          s   o
or spill. To clean a spill:
Wear PPE.
Absorb liquid in towels or absorbent pads.
If a dry spill, wet the towels to limit the creation of dust.
Place broken vials and other waste in a plastic bag.
。
Dispose of used plastic waste bag, towels, and absorbent pads in a chemo-
waste container.
Deactivate and decontaminate the spill area with bleach solution
。
Clean spill area with detergent solution.
· Once again, it is important to have a written SOP for handling prepared
chemotherapy drugs and that all personnel are familiar with the procedures
Storage
Whether stored at room temperature or refrigerated, segregate chemotherapy drugs from
other medications. A separate refrigerator to store these agents is ideal, or at least prepare a
designated container within a drug refrigerator. Apply a warning sign to the door of the
refrigerator to indicate that hazardous drugs are stored there. Also, identify chemotherapy
drugs stored on shelving units with warning signs. Chemotherapy drugs are usually shipped
in a ziplock bag or a sealed container. Wear gloves when carrying these sealed containers
to their storage area to prevent contamination. When removing a bottle or vial from the
sealed container, wipe it down with alcohol or diluted bleach, not for disinfection but for
deactivation and decontamination. Botles and vials may be exposed to broken bottles
during shipment, or may have overfilled and back-splashed at the time of manufacture.
Notify   every employee  in  your practice  that  chemotherapy  preparation  and
administration will be performed and educate them on the risk factors. Pregnant personnel
or those trying to become pregnant should avoid handling, preparing, or administering
these drugs. Post the written SOP you have established, and verbally present them to the
staff to avoid any misunderstanding as to how the drugs are handled. Also, review what to
do in case of a spill or an adverse reaction. Since health risks are influenced by the extent of
H oud e si sin oxoto  o sodxo  np e po ouod pu sodxa
few of the many governmental agencies regulating the distribution, protection of personnel,
and disposal of these hazardous products are listed below. Each has helpful websites that
can guide you to prepare and implement an SOP for your clinic:
· Occupational Safety Health and Safety Administration (OSHA),
· National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH), and
· Department of Transportation (DOT).
Limiting Exposure
       o     
been many devices developed to attempt to accomplish this. Unless your clinic is a large
oncology treatment center, it is unlikely that you will have access to what most agencies
consider an optimal piece of equipment necessary for protection: a Class HIA vertical
laminar flow BSC or a negative pressure isolator. The BsC hoods establish sterile airflow
from the top of the hood to the bottom, with the air splitting near the bottom of the unit.
flowing into the front and rear intakes (Figure 5.1). The air is then vented through high
efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filters into a dedicated venting system to the outdoors.
This process not only establishes a sterile environment but, when used properly, also allows
the operator to prepare hazardous compounds safely. The BsC allows minimal exposure to
the individual preparing the drug. However, the hood alone may not provide all the
protection needed to safely prepare cytotoxic drugs.
Figure 5.1 Class IlA, vertical laminar flow biological safety cabinet. Although this
cabinet is very long, much shorter cabinets are made, which can easily fit into smaller
spaces.
The operator should also wear PPE including a lint-free, long-sleeved gown; gloves
(special heavy long-sleeved chemotherapy gloves, latex gloves, or nitrile gloves); and eye
safely vent vials when mixing. These devices allow compressed air escaping from the vial
to be either filtered or vented into a containment envelope.
Equipment more recent than the older vertical laminar flow hood is called a “negative
          ss
also costly and not intended for a clinic that seldom administers chemotherapy. These units
are basically glove boxes with external venting through HEPA filters. Isolators are made up
of two chambers. Items are placed in the antechamber after being sprayed with sterile
alcohol. After entry, it takes about a minute for the air in the antechamber to become sterile
again. Then items are transported into the working chamber. The operator inserts his or her
gloved hands into the sleeved portion of the working chamber to prepare the chemotherapy
drugs. It is still necessary to use devices to limit aerosolization so the interior of the
chamber is not contaminated, but the only PPE required are latex or nitrile gloves. The
totally contained chamber system allows zero exposure to the operator and the
environment. Because of the waste ports at the floor of the chamber that open into chemo-
waste containers stored under the unit, the operator is never exposed to empty vials,
syringes, or other wastes. These waste ports are sealed with plastic covers. When full,
another plastic plug is locked in place before the waste container is removed. Strict
guidelines are set for pharmacies in the “"USP 797” protocol.
Figure 5.2 Negative pressure isolator.
00-
Because of the low volume of chemotherapy preparations, these guidelines are not yet
imposed on smaller veterinary clinics. However, as you will see in the Safe waste disposal
  s        s o  s no 
these agents during preparation, storage, handling of waste, and disposal for all veterinary
practices.
Safe Drug Preparation
Never attempt to mix a chemotherapy agent without some type of protective device to vent
the vial during reconstitution or dilution. Additional safety equipment is available for the
veterinary setting whether you have an isolator, a BsC, or just a small room for preparation.
One of the first types of safety devices was called a chemo-safety pen. The pen allowed air
expelled from a vial by liquid displacement to exit through a 0.22-μm filter. This was
thought to be a safe device until tests showed that particles escaped through the filter and
contaminated the immediate area.
Many studies have been published connecting the potential toxicity of chemotherapeutics
effects, as well as cancer in healthcare workers handling these agents. When mixed in a
BSC, the hood removes the atomized particles with its HEPA filters. However, without a
BSC, you may contaminate the work area and create the opportunity for personal exposure
Studies demonstrated that even while using the chemo-safety pen, chemotherapy agents
show up on work surfaces, surrounding areas, and the operator's gloves. Since most
chemotherapy drugs are manufactured in vials at sea level, there is positive pressure inside
the vials at higher elevations. When a needle, chemo-safety pen, or other device penetrates
the vial, it will expel air and particulates from the vial into the surrounding area. Caution
should be used, and all precautions should be in place to prevent exposure when
penetrating a chemotherapy vial.
Two new systems for mixing chemotherapeutics are now available. One system
(PhaSeal) is considered a “closed-system drug transfer device." The other system (Onguard)
is a “contained medication system.” Both are superior to the early chemo-safety pens. Yet,
as good as they are, OSHA considers them to be even safer when used inside a BSC or an
Isolator.
The Onguard system uses a locking cap that attaches to the drug vial, with a spike that
penetrates the vial's rubber closure. This cap contains a 0.22-μm filter and a secondary
filter made up of activated charcoal. The activated charcoal absorbs toxins that might
escape through the membrane filter. A special syringe adaptor screw-locks onto the vial cap
to prevent leakage. A diluent is introduced into the vial, and the displaced air escapes
through the filters. So air still leaves the vial, but it is double filtered. The system allows a
positive-lock needleless connection to an IV set for administration to the patient. The
needleless aspect of this system is attractive because it eliminates the potential for accidental
injury or contamination by needlesticks.
Unlike the Onguard system, the PhaSeal system totally prevents air and particulates from
escaping into the surrounding area. The PhaSeal device has a spike connected to a protector
cap that penetrates the rubber membrane of the vial. When pressed through the membrane.
a balloon chamber on the side of the spike inflates, capturing air and particles that are
displaced from the vial. Then, a needle is pushed out of its protective barrel and down
through double membranes, into the vial. The needle portion of this Luer lock injector is
designed so the needle is never exposed, preventing accidental needlestick injuries. It is
contained in a plastic chamber that telescopes into the barrel (Figures 5.3 and 5.4). The
in contact with the rubber membrane of the vial, creating a dry connection. When the
needle 1s withdrawn from the vial, it retracts into its plastic barrel chamber. Because the
rubber membranes are locked together in a dry connection, there is no chance of drug
particles escaping the vial during preparation. If the drug is diluted into a larger volume,
such as a 150-mL bag of electrolyte solution, a different infusion adaptor connects to the IV
administration set and allows the drug to be added to the bag, using the same locking
closed system. A similar docking device is used for the administration of the medication.
An adapter is Luer-locked onto the catheter, and a needle again penetrates the double
membrane of the dry connection. The four-part PhaSeal system provides maximum
protection  for  the  technician  or  pharmacist preparing  and  administering  a  dose of
chemotherapy. The cost of these closed or contained systems is reasonable for the practice
that occasionally administers chemotherapy and can be passed directly on to the client.
Figure 5.3 PhaSeal components necessary for chemotherapy preparation. (A) Injector:
attaches to a syringe to allow safe extraction of chemotherapy drug from a vial. (B,C) Two
sizes of protectors. These absorb positive pressure and aerosols from a vial and allow drug
extraction without aerosol exposure risk.
C
A
A
Figure 5.4 PhaSeal components necessary for chemotherapy administration. (A) Flush
syringe with the injector attached. (B) Luer lock connector. This attaches to the catheter
attachment on the patient with a locking mechanism that prevents drug exposure.
A
B
Safe Drug Administration
Always place a new, dedicated catheter  for the administration of chemotherapy.
Administering IV chemotherapy through only a needle with syringe leaves your patient
(and yourself) vulnerable to accidental exposure. The patient may pull away from the
holder and cause the needle to come out of the vein, risking a needlestick injury or topical
  ss        g
perivascularly. Flush the catheter immediately before administration to confirm its patency
and immediately after administration to assure that the catheter is clear of any drugs before
removal. That way, the patient receives its entire intended dose and no drug remains in the
catheter when it is removed.
Many cancer drugs can be administered orally by the owners on an outpatient basis.
These drugs can be dispensed by your clinic or prescribed to a pharmacy. Instruct owners
to wear gloves when handling these medications, and caution them that their pet's saliva,
urine, and feces may be contaminated with chemotherapy drugs or their metabolites for a
period of time. There may be times when splitting a tablet to achieve the proper dose of
chemotherapy for an animal patient seems unavoidable. Having tablets compounded is one
way
y  to avoid   the risks associated  with splitting them.  Compounding powdered
chemotherapy drugs into capsules should not be attempted by a veterinary clinic without a
powder containment glove box. It is similar to the isolator chambered system, except that a
powder containment glove box has prefilters to prevent its HEPA filters from becoming
clogged with powder. To compound a human cancer drug, which veterinary patients
require in very small doses, the drug is pulverized and mixed with other powder fillers and
toxic dust created by this compounding process, protecting the surroundings and personnel.
Although unadvisable, if a patient's chemotherapy tablet must be split, and the owner is
willing to do it at home, instruct the owner to wear a mask and gloves, and to carefully cut
the tablets with a tablet cutter. If a technician, veterinarian, or pharmacist routinely divided
tablets for their cancer patients, they would take unacceptably high risks of being exposed
to much higher levels of toxicity. The pet's owner will also be exposed by cutting his or her
pet's tablets, but his or her exposure will be nominal. Supply the owners with protective
latex or nitrile gloves, and teach them how to minimize their risk of contamination as they
split and administer chemotherapy tablets to their pets.
Safe Waste Disposal
Proper disposal of hazardous waste is important to all of us and is the mission of the
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and other government agencies. Recent studies
demonstrate that our drinking water contains measurable levels of drugs that have not been
filtered out by current water treatment systems. The highest levels of drugs are hormonal-
type steroids classified as “endocrine disruptors." They are, in large part, from prescriptions
work their way through the body and end up in our wastewater. Antibiotics, pain
medications, tranquilizers, antidepressants, and chemotherapeutics are also detected. It has
long been common practice to dispose of excess or expired drugs like these by flushing
them down the drain
When administered to humans, chemotherapy drugs are also excreted in their urine or
feces over time and, ultimately, end up in the wastewater system. Chemotherapy drugs
to 5 days. The veterinary cancer patient presents additional concerns about waste. Since
pets rarely use toilets, there is increased potential for direct exposure to humans and other
animals. Inform owners that waste from their pets may be hazardous and to avoid contact
with urine, feces, or vomit. Instruct them to protect small children and pets by picking up
and disposing of their cancer patients' feces in plastic bags, and washing urine spots with
 a  ss o   s  n  sa  
agencies, and all are concerned with how your veterinary clinic disposes of hazardous
waste. They are
·EPA,
· OSHA,
· Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA),
· US Nuclear Regulatory Commission (USNRC),
· State Department of Public Health and Environment,
● NIOSH, and
· DOT.
These organizations are most interested in  waste generated by human medicine
However, it has come to their attention that veterinary clinics also have the potential to
cytotoxic waste products. And they impose the same guidelines on veterinary clinics for the
disposal of these agents. Inspections by any of these governmental agencies can take place
unannounced to determine your compliance with laws pertaining to waste handling.
Standards for Waste Handling
Standards have been set for handling hazardous waste, and they apply to veterinary clinics
as well as human clinics. Special color-coded containers are manufactured to collect
hazardous waste. The colors indicate the type of waste that they store. Yellow designates
chemotherapy waste, red is for infectious waste, and black containers are specific for
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) waste. These standards were initially set
trickled down to end users like medical and veterinary clinics. For instance, the practice of
clinics working together to gather their chemotherapy waste and dispose of it from a central
location violates both state and federal laws governing the transport of hazardous materials.
Now, only licensed "hazardous waste handlers" can transport these wastes. If you were to
and it was discovered in your car, you could face imprisonment and a fine for illegally
transporting hazardous waste without a license.
The RCRA classifies hazardous waste using letter designations. Hazardous drugs are
designated by the letters “p" and “U." Products that fit into these two categories are
with a "p that might be found in your clinic are
· heartworm medication,
· epinephrine,
· nitroglycerine, and
· warfarin.
Most chemotherapeutic agents are designated in the "U listing of RCRA.
It is important for veterinarians and technicians to recognize the classifications of
hazardous waste and to know how to handle them in the clinic. There are specific
guidelines for the disposal of these agents, as well as specific types of containers that must
 s  e  a       s    s
classified as letter "p" and "U" must be disposed of in these containers.
The waste generated by chemotherapy preparation and administration is designated as
either concentrated waste or contaminated waste. Concentrated waste includes the original
drug vial, or a syringe and needle that came in contact with the concentrated drug during
preparation. These should be disposed of in a black RCRA container. Contaminated waste,
such as gloves, gowns, administration sets, and IV bags, is disposed of in yellow chemo-
waste containers. Yellow is the designated color for incidental chemotherapy waste.
Veterinary clinics that handle any of the RCRA drugs or chemotherapeutics must
contract with a licensed hazardous waste handler. Waste containers can be purchased from
the same suppliers who offer sharps containers. They have a sealable lid and are to be
accessed only when adding more waste. Nothing should ever be removed once it is placed
in a container. The RCRA and yellow containers may be stored on-site for 30 days or more
until arrangements can be made for pickup. Licensed waste handlers will pick up your
containers, replace them with empty ones, and transport the waste to their collection sites.
Contracting with a waste-handling service is the only way for a veterinary clinic to comply
s a      sx  se   s  s 
regarding this process.
The EPA has designated state governments to enforce the proper handling of medical
waste. State agencies are always looking for sources of hazardous waste contamination.
They already inspect human hospitals, pharmacies, and medical clinics. They are beginning
to look at veterinary clinics as possible contaminators. They have the authority to come into
your clinic and observe how you handle hazardous waste. If you have the proper color-
coded containers and a contract with a licensed waste handler, your clinic is in compliance
and should have no problems with an inspection. All of these protective measures add up
and are expensive, but we must all be good custodians of our environment.
Additional Reading
 o o    s  
transportation violations can be found at the DOT, Office of lnspector General (OlG) web
site. [http://www.oig.dot. gov/oversight-areas/criminal-investigations/hazardous-materials-
pipelines].
Harrison BR. 1989. Exposure to hazardous drugs: Time to reevaluate your program? Am J
Health Syst Pharm 56(14):1403.
National Institute of Safety and Health (NIOSH). Safe Handling of Hazardous Drugs for
Veterinary Healthcare Workers, 2010. [ http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/docs/wp-solutions/2010-
150/pdfs/2010-150.pdf].
Occupational Safety Health and Safety Administration (OSHA). Prevention of Employee
Exposure, 1999. [http://www.osha.gov/dts/osta/otm/otm_vi/otm_vi_2.html#5].
Skov T, Maarup B, Olsen J, Rorth M, Winthereik H, Lynge E. 1992. Leukaemia and
reproductive  outcome  among  nurses  handling  antineoplastic drugs. Br  J  Ind  Med
49(12):855-61.
U.S. Pharmacopeia (USP). USP797, Guidebook to Pharmaceutical Compounding: Sterile
Preparations, 2008 . [http://www.usp.org/products/797Guidebook/].
6
Workflow for Chemotherapy Administration
Kenneth Crump
Key points
paa au pue iad au loy suooadxa jueseadun jo aloa e aeain ueo orua ap oi sisa pue jaoues jnoge Aaxuy
· A beha vior al history is impor tant at initial prese nta tion
 Mark the front of an unpredictable patient's record, cautioning others of the pet's
 questiona ble behavior.
● Blood samples are drawn from the jugular vein of che motherapy patients.
● It is impor tant to protect the inte grity of peripheral ve ins
● A busy treatment room is not a suitable place for chemotherapy administration.
● The dec ision to use se dation is made by the veterinarian, with the informed consent of the owner
uaed au jo lonuoa u ureu o aanuadu s uone nsupe Adeiayoaua uunp anbruyoa unsa adoid 
● Practice soft sk ils to ensure a successful chemotherapy experience for the pet.
paae moosip fauons si anp Adeiaupouaya Aue jo uonensuupe apaau-au-o
● Placement of a catheter for chemotherapy must be perfect on the first attempt.
Available chemo-administration systems offer increased safety and decreased accidental exposure.
Introduction
The proportion of owners willing to pursue advanced diagnostics and treatment for their
     n    s   
that veterinary practices gain expertise in the administration of chemotherapy. With the
advanced safety devices available today, many chemotherapy protocols can be performed
easily  in a private practice setting  with  minimal  specialized equipment.  Veterinary
technicians play a central role in the treatment of pets diagnosed with cancer It is essential
to take all necessary precautions to minimize the risks to the animal, as well as to the
veterinary healthcare team. However, a successful chemotherapy experience for the pet, the
owner, and the hospital staff requires more than careful attention to technical expertise. It
also requires employing the soff skills of customer service.
The Greeting
One of the ways clients judge the quality of a veterinary hospital, its staff, and the services
it provides is by how their animals respond to being treated. In other words, how much their
pet enjoys its visits to the hospital can be as important to the client's feeling of success as
the efficacy of the treatment itself
Visiting a veterinary clinic is stressful for some pets and therefore for their owners.
Couple that with the anxiety that often accompanies a diagnosis of cancer in a loved one
and a cycle of unpleasant expectations can begin to form. The owner may anticipate a
chemotherapy visit with apprehension. Their pet will likely respond to its perception of the
s  sr n   s o  o ,   
S            
Considering that most chemotherapy protocols require multiple visits to the clinic, it is to
everyone's benefit to help the owners and the patients feel relaxed at your veterinary clinic.
One place to begin is during the initial patient history, when the pet first presents for cancer
treatment. Getting to know a pet's personality and behaviors in the beginning can go a long
way toward preventing stress from mounting from one visit to the next. A behavior
assessment should be a routine part of every pet's history upon initial presentation.
Studies show that only 25% of veterinary practices routinely discuss behavior issues with
clients. It is important to realize that an owner may never think to discuss his or her pet's
behaviors with you because he or she may not see how behaviors relate to cancer.
Therefore, it is vital that you ask questions about his or her pet's personality as part of your
patient history. A behavior assessment can detect situations and can identify potential
problems before they impact the quality of future visits. Consider questions similar to the
following:
· Is there anything you are reluctant to do with (or to) your pet?
· What sorts of things frighten your pet?
· How does he or she react when he or she is afraid?
● How does he or she react to new people or situations?
Obtain behavioral descriptions, not interpretations. Owners often describe their pets'
behavior in vague subjective terms like, “He goes crazy when the doorbell rings."
Encourage a more specific description by asking, "What does that look like?"
Also, take note of the pet's demeanor in the clinic. Record any observed occurrences of
fearful, threatening, or aggressive behavior in the patient's record, and share that
information with other team members. It is a good idea to mark the front of an
unpredictable patient's record, cautioning others of the pet's questionable behavior. Discuss
behavior concerns with the doctor, so the doctor can discuss the pet's behavior with the
       o       n   
making recommendations or referrals for appropriate treatment of behavior problems
without approval from the veterinarian. In some cases, a script can be written for a difficult
conversation with an owner, so as to discuss only the pet's behavior and to avoid giving the
impression that the pet is "bad."
A veterinary technician can do a lot to calm a tense “first experience” for a pet receiving
chemotherapy. Technicians know to avoid the behaviors most people use to greet dogs,
which could be misunderstood by dogs as threats. A dog in a strange, emotionally charged
  o   s s sso  o,   n
approach, reaching toward or over them, and leaning forward. Cats may find them equally
threatening. Instead, when approaching a dog, turn your side toward the animal and try to
 s n n o r   n o s-    ns n  
     s          
other simple techniques may be employed to ease a patient's stress by keeping your
behavior less threatening. When clients see their pets are calm and accepting of the new
  s        o  
Throughout your interactions with a chemotherapy patient, assume the role of the pet's
favorite “aunt" or “uncle,” doting on them and liberally rewarding the slightest positive
behavior. Your goal is for the pet to drag its owner from the car to the front door of the
clinic at every chemotherapy appointment.
Pretreatment Examination
Initial friendliness is not always predictive of how an animal will react to restraint and
handling. Do not assume an animal will be tolerant of being handled for examination and
other procedures. Careful observation of an animal's posture is the best way to assess its
emotional state and its intentions. Cancer patients are quite often older animals and may
tolerate handling better if they are examined on the floor, rather than lifted onto a table. See
Chapter 4 for details on the importance of a quality temperature, pulse, and respiration
(TPR) and physical examination.
Many chemotherapy drugs affect the bone marrow's ability to make cells, so blood is
drawn from chemotherapy patients at nearly every visit to evaluate their white blood cell
count. White blood cells called neutrophils form an integral part of the immune system. A
low number of neutrophils could be a cause to postpone a chemotherapy treatment. Your
clinic will establish a minimum acceptable number of neutrophils for treatment. Be sure you
know that number.
 ss  n   si   soa  
they leak out of the vein, it is important to protect the integrity of peripheral veins as much
as possible. Therefore, draw all blood samples for routine blood tests from the jugular vein.
Drawing blood from the jugular vein is an acquired skill and takes practice to perfect
One simple way to gain confidence in finding the jugular vein on a variety of sizes and
shapes of animals is to raise the jugular vein of every patient you see. A successful blood
draw from the jugular is rarely a matter of hitting the vein; it is usually a matter of finding
the vein. Once it can be located, palpated, and visualized, you discover that it is larger than
any other vein you can access. Sliding a needle into it is relatively easy.
Positioning the pet on the floor or on a table largely depends on the size of the animal.
Have the handler restrain the patient in a manner that exposes its neck, yet still prevents the
pet from backing up or trying to scratch you with its front or rear claws (Figure 6.1). If you
are apprehensive about the pet's behavior at all, use a muzzle to keep from having to divide
your attention between the pet's neck and its teeth.
Figure 6.1 To expose the jugular vein, hold the animal's head in a near normal position.
With the animal's head in a near normal position, no more than slightly above a 900
angle from the neck, the jugular vein generally runs along a line from the base of the ear to
the thoracic inlet. A quick visualization and palpation of the jugular vein of every patient
you see, regardless of whether or not you draw blood from it, will increase your confidence
remarkably when you need to use it.
Restraint for Chemotherapy
One of the first decisions to be made when preparing to administer chemotherapy is
whether or not chemical restraint is indicated and appropriate. Sedatives and tranquilizers
depress the central nervous system and reduce anxiety and struggling. They can help
minimize stress during the administration of chemotherapy and reduce the need for physical
restraint. The decision to use sedation is made by the veterinarian, with the informed
consent of the owner. Although your patient's disease usually does not merit any particular
consideration when selecting the drugs to use for sedation, cancer patients are generally
older animals and may have other age-related issues. When necessary, the ideal sedative for
a chemotherapy patient has a rapid onset and short duration. The drug or drug combination
should have minimal negative side effects and be reversible if possible. The rationale for
    s       g
than single-drug treatment regimens. When drugs are used in combination, several
important points should be kept in mind:
· Each drug in the combination should be effective when used alone.
· Drugs with overlapping toxicities should be avoided.
· The drugs should be dosed in combination to produce the maximal effect, with the
least side effects.
· Combined sedative drug regimens are most effective when they have different
mechanisms of action and act at different receptor sites.
As mentioned earlier, we are all creatures of habit. And although our habits usually serve
us well, it is important that you avoid just reaching for your usual sedation protocol and
take that extra moment to make conscious decisions regarding sedatives for patients
receiving chemotherapy. Whether or not to sedate and the choice of drugs to use are
ultimately the veterinarian's decisions to make. However, your awareness of the need to
possibly divert from your usual sedation practice will go a long way toward enhancing the
cancer patient's chemotherapy experience.
A busy treatment room is the least suitable place for a chemotherapy treatment. Select a
room that is out of the flow of traffic and is easy to regulate personnel moving in and out of
the room. Clients often wish to "help" or watch a chemotherapy treatment. For the safety of
the client, the patient, and the staff, this should not be allowed. See Chapter 3 for more
Older, larger cancer patients may better tolerate receiving chemotherapy on the floor
rather than being lifted onto a table. But lifting a pet onto the examination table is usually
the first step in the administration procedure. Lifting smaller animals is usually fairly
routine; however, larger animals present challenges. Their weight may be prohibitive, their
bulk makes them awkward, and they are not used to being lifted. Also, their joints may be
     m   s   s e  
both. For these reasons, it is better to have two people lift and position a larger pet onto the
examination table for chemotherapy administration.
With two people, a larger patient can safely be lifted and positioned in one smooth
motion. The two-step process of lifting the dog onto the table and then positioning it offers
another opportunity for the patient to feel insecure and unstable standing on a slippery steel
table. So the preferred method for a larger dog is to lift and position into lateral recumbency
(lying on their side), all in one motion. Many large breeds of dogs are too deep-chested to
adequately restrain for a chemotherapy infusion while positioned in sternal recumbency
(lying on their chest). But lateral recumbency affords even the smallest handler the ability to
safely and securely restrain the patient.
Before lifting the patient, decide which lateral recumbency is preferred for infusion: right
or leff. Then both handlers stand side-by-side, facing the side of the pet to be infused.
Bending at the knees, both handlers then squat facing the dog. The handler near the pet's
head places an arm in front of the forelimbs across the sternum and the other arm in a
forklift position about halfway down the abdomen. The other handler places an arm behind
the hind legs and the other arm in a forklift position about halfway up the abdomen. Both
handlers hold the dog securely against their own bodies and then lift and roll the pet onto
the table into lateral recumbency, in one motion (Figure 6.2). The handler near the head
remains in position over the dog, holding it in place on the table, while the second handler
for an infusion.
Figure 6.2 Two handlers hold the dog securely against their own bodies and then lift and
roll the pet onto the table into lateral recumbency.
To properly restrain a dog in lateral recumbency, the holder stands at the dog's back
o,  sn   m  s  sso ss   
foreleg, which lies against the table. The other forearm presses across the dog's flank, and
the “down" hind leg, which lies against the table, is held in a similar manner (Figure 6.3).
As mentioned before, if you are at all apprehensive about the pet's behavior, use a muzzle.
With a muzzle on the animal, you will be less concerned with the need for rigid restraint,
and your hold will be more relaxed. It is finesse over force; animals respond better to being
held securely rather than forcefully. Also, dogs who are not accustomed to being muzzled
are often distracted by having a muzzle placed.
Figure 6.3 The proper technique to restrain a dog in lateral recumbency.
Held in sternal recumbency to use a cephalic (forelimb) vein for the infusion, the holder
stands (or kneels) beside the dog facing the venipuncturist. Place one arm under the dog's
neck, and using the hand of that arm, hold the dog's head against your shoulder, with the
muzzle pointed away from your face. At the same time, wrap the other arm over the back of
the dog and use that hand to encircle the patient's foreleg. Cup the patient's elbow in the
palm of that hand and cover the cephalic vein with your thumb. Push slightly with your
palm so the pet cannot withdraw its leg from the venipuncturist, and rotate your hand while
pressing with your thumb to present the engorged cephalic vein to the most anterior (top)
aspect of the foreleg (Figure 6.4). Once the catheter is seated in the vein, stop holding the
vein with your thumb but continue to cup the elbow in your palm to maintain control of the
patient's leg.
Figure 6.4 Proper restraint to expose a cephalic vein. Note that the elbow is cupped by
the holder's palm to prevent withdrawal of the limb and that the dorsum of the forelimb is
rotated laterally by the thumb so that the vein runs directly over the top of the limb.
Whether in sternal or lateral recumbency, using proper restraint techniques during
cytotoxic drugs used to treat cancer are vesicants. Vesicants are highly reactive chemicals
that combine with proteins, DNA, and other cellular components, resulting to destructive
cellular changes. When vesicant medications leak out of a vein and make contact with the
surrounding tissue, the damage begins. Tissue damage can range from mild skin irritation to
gaping necrotic wounds, requiring multiple surgical repairs. See Chapter 3 for more
information about managing vesicant drugs.
             
administer chemotherapy to the animal cancer patients. Neither job is more or less
important than the other. Each person relies on the other to be focused and attentive to his
or her responsibilities. Each is the star of the show. When the team is confident and relaxed.
the patient will also be. But a successful chemotherapy experience for the pet does not end
       r     s
comfortable and wanting to do it again, the medical team must practice soff skills as well
Soft skills refer to the intangibles that contribute to a positive experience. In a veterinary
clinical setting, these intangibles include the sights, sounds, and smells of the environment.
Avoid wearing strong-scented cologne or perfume. Create a quiet atmosphere away from
slamming doors, barking dogs, and stressed cats. Also, remember that pets, especially dogs.
are companion animals. They interact with all people, not just their owners. That means
your demeanor can affect their comfort. While administering chemotherapy, keep in mind
conversations with one another while holding a patient and administering chemotherapy.
motions?), sound (Are people shouting over the sound of a centrifuge?), and feel (Is
someone recounting an angry conversation?). Assuming the perspective of a pet while
administering chemotherapy is one way you can further unwind the cycle of unpleasant
expectations for your patients' visits.
Drug Administration
Oral Chemotherapy
Oral administration of chemotherapy drugs can be convenient, noninvasive, and,
sometimes, economical. However, there are situations when drug delivery by this route is
not possible. Follow these basic recommendations when dispensing or administering tablets
or capsules:
● Never crush or break tablets and never open capsules.
。
Although ill-advised, if a patient's chemotherapy tablet must be split, and if
the owner is willing to do it at home, instruct the owner to wear a mask and
gloves, and to carefully cut the tablets with a tablet cutter.
Provide owners with mask and gloves.
。
Inform owners of the potential hazards associated with splitting and
administering chemotherapy tablets.
Have owners return unused medications  to your practice  for proper
disposal.
capsule.
· When a capsule or tablet is administered in a food bolus, make sure the food bolus is
completely consumed.
It is a good practice to follow the drug-containing food bolus with a second
"empty” food bolus to ensure ingestion of the first.
· When a capsule or tablet is administered directly per os (PO, in the mouth), take care
to avoid dissolution of the outer protective coating of the tablet, and make sure the
tablet or capsule is swallowed.
o It is a good practice to follow with a tidbit of food to ensure ingestion
· Always wash hands after handling drugs.
· See Chapter 5 for more details on handling chemotherapy tablets and capsules.
Intravenous Chemotherapy
It should go without saying that eating, drinking, smoking, chewing gum, and applying lip
balm  are all  prohibited in  chemotherapy administration areas.  Before administering
injectable chemotherapy to any patient, review these simple steps to increase your
(see Chapter 3):
(1) Review the patient's record.
(2) Recheck the patient's blood test results.
(3) Recheck the drug name and dose.
(4) Recheck the dose calculation.
(5) Ask questions.
(6) Keep accurate records.
IV drugs can be administered through a traditional dedicated over-the-needle catheter or
a butterfly-style catheter. Off-the-needle administration of any chemotherapy drug, no
   so s       s ao 
the cephalic and lateral saphenous veins in the dog, and the cephalic and medial saphenous
veins in cats. The larger veins of the forelimb (cephalic veins) are often chosen, as many
style catheters are used to infuse volumes of greater than a couple of milliliters. See Chapter
3 for criteria for selection of an appropriate style of catheter and for supplies to have ready
Placing a catheter for chemotherapy requires a level of skill greater than “novice."
Although a novice can likely place a catheter successfully, a seasoned veteran should stand
     s        
catheter for the administration of chemotherapy. Shave the area of the insertion site
  d       n on o  so
scrub and solution. A full surgical prep (rather than a swipe with alcohol) and aseptic
technique are both important because chemotherapy may lower a patient's resistance to
catheter-related  infections. Repeated  catheterization of an immunocompromised  cancer
patient courts disaster. Local anesthetic block is rarely indicated because the injection of
Ignore the general catheterization rule that suggests you start your first attempt distally
and proceed proximally. The placement of a catheter for chemotherapy must be perfect on
      a   q   o   a
where you have the best view of the vessel and the best chance of success. Should you fail
an attempt, move to a different leg entirely. In this manner, you best protect your patient
from being injured by vesicant drugs leaking from a vessel. You also minimize damage to
any one vessel that might occur during multiple unsuccessful attempts to catheterize 1t.
immediately after administration to assure the catheter is clear of any drugs before removal.
Check patency with 0.9% sodium chloride solution. Avoid heparin-saline solution for
flushing because it can precipitate some drugs, especially doxorubicin. Tape an over-the-
needle catheter firmly in place. Do not tape a butterfly catheter in place (see Chapter 3).
Leave the catheter uncovered to better visualize it during administration. Wear PPE during
drug administration and check the catheter site often. If at any point you feel resistance to
flow through the catheter, or see swelling or other reactions, stop until you have confirmed
the catheter is displaced or until you are confident that the catheter is flowing as it should.
After the infusion is complete, flush the catheter with at least 10 mL of 0.9% saline solution
clear of any drugs before removal. That way, the patient receives its entire intended dose
and no drug remains in the catheter when it is removed. Then, remove the catheter
immediately, place all materials into a sealed plastic bag, and discard as cytotoxic waste.
Figures 6.5-6.17 demonstrate the step-by-step chemotherapy administration in a dog with
lymphoma.
Figure 6.5 Review the record and check the drug to be administered. Do you have the
right patient? Do you have the right drug? Do you have the right dose?
Figure 6.6 Shave the catheter site. A small shaved area is acceptable
Figure 6.7 Prep the catheter site. A full surgical prep and aseptic technique are both
important to prevent catheter-related infections.
Figure 6.8 Ensure that all necessary supplies are close by and ready to go. This includes
tearing strips of tape, opening catheters, T-ports, and protective supplies, and preloading the
catheter and T-port with saline. Note the absorbent pad in place under the limb into which
chemotherapy is going to be administered.
Figure 6.9 Insert the catheter Remember the “one-and-done" rule for catheter attempts
for chemotherapy administration!
Figure 6.10 Attach the T-port. This allows the limb freedom to move without risk of the
catheter being pulled out.
Figure 6.11 Tape the catheter securely in place.
Figure 6.12 Flush the catheter to ensure patency. Watch carefully for blebs or swelling
under the skin and note resistance to flushing, which could indicate that the catheter is
improperly placed or is outside a vein. Check for a flashback of blood to ensure proper
catheter placement.
Figure 6.13 Attach the PhaSeal adapter or similar protective device to the tip of the
extension set.
Figure 6.14 Administer chemotherapy. Speed of administration will vary depending on
the agent.
Figure 6.15 Flush thoroughly with saline after chemotherapy administration. This
ensures that no chemotherapy drugs remain in the catheter, which could damage the skin or
subcutaneous tissues upon catheter removal.
Figure 6.16 Remove the catheter and place the bandage. This usually consists of a small
piece of flexible veterinary wrap or adhesive tape, and a cotton ball or folded gauze
sponge.
Figure 6.17 Dispose of all waste that came in contact with chemotherapy (catheters,
syringes, T-ports, absorbent pad, etc.) in an appropriate cytotoxic waste container.
Two systems for administering chemotherapeutics are now available. The PhaSeal?
system is considered a "closed-system drug transfer device." The other system, Onguard?
is a "contained medication system." Both systems offer increased safety for the hospital
staff  and  decreased  accidental  chemo-exposure.  Both  systems  have  four  primary
integrated into your current practice, training can be completed easily and in a timely
manner (see Chapter 5)
The rate of administration for chemotherapy is determined by the type and volume of
drug to be administered, as well as the protocol designed by the veterinarian. Vincristine,
for instance, is usually in small volumes and can be delivered in seconds by slow push
through a butterfly catheter Drugs, such as doxorubicin, that have higher extravasation risk
o d s      s n   
catheter. The administration of cisplatin, however, involves a prescribed IV prehydration,
followed by a long infusion of the drug, which is then followed by a prescribed IV
Subcutaneous/Intramuscular Chemotherapy
   s        
administered either subcutaneously (SQ) or intramuscularly (IM). They present additional
contamination concerns to you because, although they can be reconstituted and the doses
drawn into syringes using the PhaSeal or Onguard protective devices, a bare needle is
required for subcutaneous or intramuscular injections. An unprotected, bare needle offers
the opportunity for accidental drug spill, errant injection, and needlestick injuries. Be aware
that you, your colleagues, and your facility are at their most vulnerable for contamination. It
is imperative you wear PPE when administering chemotherapy drugs either SQ or IM.
When a subcutaneous injection is administered, tent a fold of skin and insert the needle at
its base, parallel to the long axis of the fold. If the needle is inserted perpendicular to the
fold, the needle may penetrate both sides, and you may empty the contents of the syringe
into the pet's hair Aspirate slightly and check the needle hub for blood or air bubbles.
Blood in the needle hub indicates that you have penetrated a vessel. Air in the hub is an
indication that you have penetrated both sides of the “tent." Either indicates you must
reposition the needle.
Chemotherapy drugs are most often administered IM into the lumbar muscles, lateral to
the dorsal spinous processes. Wearing PPE, uncap the 20-to 22-gauge needle attached to
the syringe and isolate the muscle between your fingers and thumb. Slide the needle into
the muscle and aspirate, checking the needle hub for blood. If blood is observed, withdraw
the needle and insert into another spot. Once the proper needle placement into the muscle
or under the skin is verified (no blood or air in the hub upon aspiration), slowly inject the
drug. Then withdraw the needle.
A word of caution about needlestick injuries. The National Institute for Occupational
Safety and Health (NIOsH) estimates that 62% of all reported needlestick injuries happen
with hypodermic needles, and 42% of those injuries occur after the needle has been used
and before its disposal. This means that the risk of a needlestick injury, and the
consequential self-contamination with a cytotoxic drug, is very high as you withdraw the
   n   ss so n n      
needlestick injuries occur when recapping a used needle. The Occupational Safety and
Health Administration (OSHA) prohibits recapping needles by hand, unless no other
with extreme care and attention.
Chemotherapy Flow Sheet
A flow sheet is an effective way to track a patient's individual progress through the course
of chemotherapy. It consolidates the pertinent information from each visit into a single chart
for easy reference. An example of an effective chemotherapy flow sheet is in Appendix 6.1.
It contains
· the date,
· doctor's name,
· patient's weight,
· drug name,
· dose,
· route of administration,
· leg used,
· adverse reactions,
· name of the person who administered the drug, and
· drugs and doses of sedation if used.
Afterward
People don't care how much you know until they know how much you care.
This often quoted statement by author John C. Maxwell holds an elemental truth with
regard to medicine. A follow-up telephone call several days after each chemotherapy
treatment goes a long way toward showing your clients how much you care for their pets
and for them. It can also give you an early indication of how your patient tolerates
chemotherapy and give you an opportunity to address complications before they become
serious.
Providing clients with a one-page written overview of each treatment for them to take
home also removes a layer of anxiety that many people feel about cancer therapy. An
example of a posttreatment client information sheet can be found in Appendix 6.2. Such an
overview includes
· an indication that a staff member will call in a few days for an update
· the name of the drug the pet received during that visit,
· a list of the side effects that may be seen and how to manage them, and
 reminders on chemo-safety-related issues of concern at home.
Appendix 6.1 Sample Chemotherapy Flow Sheet
Chemotherapyflowsheet
Client, patient
Case#
Diagnosis
Date
Clinician
Weight (in pounds)
Parenteral agent
Dose (calculation)
Route
Leg used
Adverse reaction
Administered by
Drugs for home use
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
Sedation required
NO
NO
NO
NO
NO
NO
NO
NO
Drugs used for
sedation
COMMENTS:
Appendix 6.2 Sample Client Discharge
Instructions
In the next few days, a member of our staff will call for an update on your pet and to
address any questions or concerns you may have. Below is information about the
Vincristine (Oncovin?)
Vincristine (Oncovin) is an active chemotherapy drug used to fight many forms of cancer.
The IV administration of vincristine usually takes only a few minutes. The procedure is
any form of sedation.
Although serious adverse effects can occur with any chemotherapy, there is less than 5%
chance that your pet will be hospitalized with side effects and less than 1% chance of
fatality. As the owner, you play an important role in recognizing side effects, managing
them at home whenever possible, and alerting the doctor if side effects persist. Listed below
are some potential side effects of vincristine. Please consult your pet's doctor with any
questions you may have about this chemotherapy.
Potential Side Effects of Vincristine
● Hair loss (alopecia)
 Hair loss in pets is rare.
● Reduction in the number of white blood cells (neutropenia)
· Stomach or intestinal (gastrointestinal) discomfort
Many patients experience some form of stomach or intestinal discomfort 2-
 7 days after a chemotherapy treatment.
vomiting) or loss of appetite, administer the medicine your doctor
prescribed for nausea.
If your pet shows signs of diarrhea, administer the medicine your doctor
prescribed for diarrhea.
Keep water available at all times.
Call your veterinarian if you have concerns, or if the condition persists for
more than 24 hours.
· Tissue injury
If irritation of the chemotherapy administration site appears in the form of
pain or redness that persists for more than 24 hours, call your veterinarian.
Safety
The chemotherapy your pet received requires that you take special safety precautions after
each visit. For 72 hours after each chemotherapy visit, your pet's urine and feces should be
considered contaminated. For your safety, please follow these guidelines:
· If you are pregnant or nursing, avoid cleaning the litter box or handling any other
materials that may be contaminated.
· Wear gloves when cleaning urine or feces from the litter box, cage, and so on.
       n   s    
a      a os  o r,    o  o
Then wash the area with detergent, followed by a second rinsing with water.
· Soiled linens should be washed once separately prior to routine laundering
● If accidental skin exposure occurs, wash with soap and water immediately.
7
Chemotherapy Agents
Douglas H. Thamm
Key points
● Che motherapy is the only form of cancer therapy that teats the entire body
● Chemotherapy drugs are classified according to their mechanism of action, and if they interfere with cellular
repr oduction.
· Cell-cycle phase specific
●Cell-cycle phase nonspecific
 Combining cytotoxic drugs is an efective strate gy.
· Reduces drug resistance
· Knowing the route of administration (*routes"), rate of administration ("duration"), and specific contraindications
("special precautions") are key factors for succes
Introduction
Unlike surgery and radiation therapy, chemotherapy is the only form of cancer treatment
that can work throughout the body, rather than in a local area. Although chemotherapy in
animals is designed to have a lower risk of side effects than chemotherapy in humans, side
important part of chemotherapy in pets (see Chapters 1 and 8 for additional information).
Although other chapters in this book cover owner education, pretreatment assessment,
administration techniques, and strategies for managing side effects, the purpose of this
uses, toxicities, and routes and techniques for administration. For detailed information about
doses and schedules of administration, additional references are provided at the end of this
chapter.
Chemotherapy drugs are classified according to their mechanism of action and the point
in the cell's life cycle at which they interfere with cellular reproduction. Drugs that are
active only during a specific phase of the cell's life cycle are called cell-cycle phase
specific. Drugs that are active regardless of the cell's life cycle phase are called cell-cycle
death of both resting and cycling cells. Following cell death, resting cells are “awakened"
into the reproduction cycle and are then more susceptible to future chemotherapy
treatments. The awakened cell will then die as it attempts to reproduce itself. The cell kill
rate of various drugs is related to the concentration of the drug in the body and to the
degree of tumor cell exposure over time.
Combining cytotoxic drugs is an important, effective strategy in chemotherapy. When
drugs are used in combination, they offen enhance the activities of each other. Drugs are
also combined to minimize their dose-limiting toxicities. Combination drug chemotherapy
also helps reduce the development of drug resistance in the tumor cells, since cells resistant
to one drug in a combination may be sensitive to another drug within that combination.
Treatment dose and schedule depend on the type of cancer and chemotherapy method.
In many cases, periodic chemotherapy is necessary to control the cancer for the rest of the
pet's life. For maximum therapeutic effect, a dose of a drug or a drug combination should
be used, which causes minimal toxicity with maximal effectiveness. Many chemotherapy
drugs have a very narrow therapeutic index. This means that the most effective dose of
chemotherapeutic agents is often very close to the toxic dose.
For the information below, the risk for neutropenia and gastrointestinal (GI) toxicity are
i h uooo ao st ++, pue au s! o, eum (++ '+ o) os uod-e e uo pp
important to note that even for those drugs where the risk is “++,”" less than one third of
animals become sick
Actinomycin D
Other names: dactinomycin, Cosmegen Uses: Canine (rarely feline) lymphoma Routes:
intravenous (IV) only!
Duration: 2-to 5-minute slow push. Can be diluted with sodium chloride before
administration.
Toxicities: Neutropenia: +/++ GI toxicity: +
Special precautions:
· Can cause severe tissue damage if even a slight amount is administered outside the
vein.
Asparaginase
Other names: Elspar, L-spar Uses: Used with other drugs for the treatment of canine and
feline lymphomas and leukemias.
Routes: subcutaneous (SQ) or intramuscular (IM). Should never be given intravenously!
Duration: Bolus
Toxicities: Neutropenia: 0 GI toxicity: 0
Special precautions:
· Hypersensitivity reactions can occur following administration. These can be fatal if
the asparaginase is given intravenously. Patient should be monitored in the clinic for
60 minutes after 1njection.
Carboplatin
osteosarcoma,   feline   vaccine-associated   sarcoma Routes:  IV; occasionally  given
intralesionally (directly into a tumor) or into a body cavity Duration: 5-to 10-minute slow
 :ixn  t+ do ixo 
Special precautions:
● Use with caution in patients with reduced kidney function.
· Smaller dogs may be at increased risk for diarrhea.
Chlorambucil
Other names: Leukeran
Uses: Chronic lymphocytic leukemia and low-grade lymphomas in dogs and cats.
Occasionally used for lymphomas in place of cyclophosphamide.
Routes: per os (PO) only Toxicities: Neutropenia: + GI toxicity: 0/+
Special precautions:
· Thrombocytopenia (low platelet count) can sometimes be observed with long-term
use.
Cisplatin
Other names: Platinol, CDDP
Uses: Canine osteosarcoma and various carcinomas Routes: IV; occasionally given
intralesionally (directly into a tumor) or into a body cavity.
Duration: 2o-minute infusion. Must be given along with high rates of V fluid diuresis
before and after administration.
Toxicities: Neutropenia: + GI toxicity: ++
Special precautions:
  a  s r n a     as s  o
before and after administration. Check kidney function before each dose.
· Vomiting or severe nausea is common immediately after administration. Patients
Cyclophosphamide
Other names: Cytoxan
Uses: Used with other drugs (doxorubicin, vincristine, asparaginase) for the treatment of
canine and feline lymphomas. Sometimes used for the treatment of sarcomas in
combination with doxorubicin. Can also be used as an immunosuppressive drug in dogs
and cats.
Routes: IV and PO
Duration: 3-to 5-minute slow push (IV) Toxicities: Neutropenia: + GI toxicity: +
Special precautions:
· Sterile hemorrhagic cystitis (an irritation of the bladder causing signs similar to a
urinary tract infection) can occur rarely. Cyclophosphamide is often given along with
the diuretic drug furosemide (Lasix) to dilute the urine and encourage excretion of
the by-product that irritates the bladder.
Cytarabine
Other names: cytosine arabinoside, Cytosar, AraC
Uses: Canine and feline lymphomas: Occasionally used for the treatment of
Routes: IV and SQ
Duration: 30-minute to 24-hour infusion (IV) Toxicities: Neutropenia: + GI toxicity: +
Special precautions:
injection, and needlestick injury.
Doxorubicin
Other names: Adriamycin Uses: Canine and feline lymphomas, leukemias, carcinomas, and
Routes: IV only!
Duration: 10-to 20-minute IV infusion or slow push. Often diluted in sodium chloride
before administration.
Toxicities: Neutropenia: ++ GI toxicity: ++
Special precautions:
● Can cause severe tissue damage if even a slight amount is administered outside the
vein.
· Hypersensitivity reactions can occur during administration. Monitor patients for
reddening of mucous membranes/skin, head shaking, facial swelling, or hives during
administration.
· Damage to the heart can occur in dogs if more than six doses are administered.
· Damage to the kidneys can occur in cats if with multiple doses. Check kidney
function in cats prior to each treatment.
Lomustine
Other names: CCNU, CeeNu Uses: Canine and feline lymphomas, mast cell tumor,
histiocytic sarcomas, occasionally brain tumors Routes: PO only
Toxicities: Neutropenia: +/++ GI toxicity: 0/+
Special precautions:
● Thrombocytopenia (low platelet count) can sometimes be observed with long-term
use.
· Elevations in liver enzymes can be observed with long-term use. Liver values should
be checked before each treatment.
Melphalan
Other names: Alkeran
Uses: Canine and feline multiple myelomas. Occasionally used for lymphomas.
Routes: PO only in veterinary medicine Toxicities: Neutropenia: + GI toxicity: 0/+
Special precautions:
· Thrombocytopenia (low platelet count) can sometimes be observed with long-term
use.
Mitoxantrone
Other names: Novantrone Uses: Canine and feline lymphomas, bladder tumors, anal sac
tumors Routes: IV; occasionally given into a body cavity Duration: 10-to 20-minute
infusion or slow push. Dilute with sodium chloride before administration.
Toxicities: Neutropenia: +/++ GI toxicity: 0/+
Special precautions:
· Mild tissue damage can occur if given outside a vein
Vinblastine
Other names: Velban
Uses: Canine and feline mast cell tumors; occasionally used for lymphomas.
Routes: IV only!
Duration: 1-to 2-minute push
Toxicities: Neutropenia: +/++ GI toxicity: 0/+
Special precautions:
● Moderate tissue damage can occur if given outside a vein
Vincristine
Other names: Oncovin
Uses: Canine and feline lymphomas, transmissible venereal tumor. Sometimes used in
combination with cyclophosphamide and doxorubicin for the treatment of canine sarcomas.
Can also be used to help increase platelet count in dogs with immune-mediated
thrombocytopenia.
Routes: IV only!
Duration: 20-second to 1-minute push Toxicities: Neutropenia: + GI toxicity: 0/+
Special precautions:
● Moderate tissue damage can occur if given outside a vein
Additional Reading
             
(eds.), Small Animal Clinical Oncology (4th Ed.). St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier, pp.
163-92.
Moore AS, Frimberger AE. 2009. Anticancer drugs and protocols: Traditional drugs. In:
Bonagura JA, Twedt DC (eds.), Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XV. St. Louis, MO:
Saunders Elsevier, pp. 305-10.
Plumb DC. 2008. Plumb's Veterinary Drug Handbook. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Blackwell
8
Management of Chemotherapy Side Effects
Douglas H. Thamm
Key Points
ncernedar
lsetul.
● Identify and treat immediate side effects
· hypersensitivity ( allergic responses) and
● tisue damage fr om extr ava sation ( drugs a dministered outside a ve in).
● Identify and treat delayed side effects:
●questions to ask clients when handling phone call about side effects,
· nause a/vomiting/diarrhea,
neutropenia ( low white blood cell count), and
· acute tumor lysis syndrome
Introduction
Studies that have looked at clients’ opinions of medical treatment for cancer generally
report a positive experience; most owners felt that the treatment was worthwhile, that it
resulted in improvement in the well-being of their pet, and that quality of life during
treatment was good.
Although uncommon, some side effects can have serious consequences for the pet and
the owner. These include
· decreased quality of life,
· increased cost (hospitalization and treatment),
· delay or changes to future treatments, and
· reduced enthusiasm for continuing treatment.
It is the veterinary team's job to make sure that clients understand the goals of therapy
and the risks of side effects before treatment is started. The use of client education handouts
explaining the potential side effects, how to manage them at home, and when to become
concerned is encouraged. An example of such a handout is included at the end of this
chapter (Appendix 8.1).
Even in practices where chemotherapy is not used, general and emergency/critical care
practices may be called upon to deal with side effects from chemotherapy that has been
given at another practice. Thus, a general familiarity with the identification and treatment of
chemotherapy side effects is useful for most general practices.
Client Education
Owners may be very frightened by the idea of giving chemotherapy to their pet, based on
           n     s
how cancer chemotherapy in animals differs from cancer chemotherapy in people (see
Chapter 1 for more information). Most common veterinary chemotherapy protocols are
made to have a low risk of side effects. In general, less than one in three animals will have
an unpleasant side effect and only about 1 in 20 will have a significant side effect, one that
requires hospitalization. Most pets will spend less than 72 hours in the hospital for the
treatment of a serious side effect.
With effective treatment, the risk of a chemotherapy-associated death is less than 1 in
200. Should a serious side effect occur, doses can be reduced, drugs can be substituted, or
other medications can be given to reduce the chance of further side effects. These changes
are effective 90% of the time.
Why Side Effects from Chemotherapy Happen
Most cancer drugs work by damaging rapidly dividing cells. The most commonly
encountered side effects, neutropenia (low white blood cell count) and digestive tract upset,
with chemotherapy treatment is to attack the tumor cells, which are among the most rapidly
dividing and are also the cells that are least able to repair themselves. However, both bone
marrow stem cells, which make new white blood cells, and gastrointestinal crypt cells,
which provide the lining for the intestines, are rapidly dividing and thus are sensitive to the
effects of chemotherapy. Additional acute effects that can happen and may require
treatment, include allergic reactions and accidental drug extravasation (administration of
drug outside a vein).
Hypersensitivity (Allergic Reactions)
reactions in patients. The most common drugs that can cause these reactions are
asparaginase and doxorubicin. The shock organs of the dog are the intestinal tract and the
skin, and these two organs are most severely affected during and immediately after
administration. The lung is the shock organ in the cat.
Asparaginase can result in severe anaphylaxis, usually within 60 minutes of injection
Milder reactions can occur up to 24 hours following treatment. Therefore, animals should
be monitored in the hospital for signs of anaphylaxis for 60 minutes following drug
administration. The likelihood of these reactions increases with multiple asparaginase
injections. If a hypersensitivity reaction to asparaginase does occur, it most commonly
shows as facial swelling or development of hives. Occasionally, severe, acute collapse can
occur.
Hypersensitivity reactions to doxorubicin can include itchiness, facial swelling, hives,
reddening of the skin and the mucous membranes, head shaking, vomiting, restlessness, or
difficulty breathing. These typically occur while the drug is being given. For this reason, it
is helpful to note the color of the skin (the inside of the ear is a good spot to look) and
mucous membranes before the treatment is started, and then check for increased redness
several times during the doxorubicin administration.
If a mild or moderate hypersensitivity reaction occurs, stop drug administration and give
diphenhydramine and dexamethasone sodium phosphate (SP). For very severe or life-
threatening hypersensitivity reactions, epinephrine may need to be given. See Table 8.1 for
dosages and routes of administration for these medications. When the reaction improves,
administration can be restarted at a slower rate. For animals that have previously had a
hypersensitivity reaction, it usually can be prevented during subsequent treatments by
pretreating with diphenhydramine and dexamethasone SP, 15-20 minutes before the
chemotherapy drug is given.
Table 8.1 Hypersensitivity drugs, routes, and dosages
Drug
Dosage (mg/kg)Route
Diphenhydr amine3-4
Intramuscular
Dexa me thasone SP0.5-1
Intra venou:
Epine phrine
0.001-0.0]
Intra venous
Extravasation
Several cancer drugs (doxorubicin, vincristine, vinblastine, actinomycin D) can cause tissue
damage if accidentally given outside of a vein (extravasated). Administration of these drugs
needs to be through a dedicated, perfectly placed ("first stick'") intravenous catheter (see
Chapter 5 for additional information). Patients undergoing infusions of these tissue-irritant
drugs should be constantly observed until completion of the infusion to ensure that the
Most catheter leaks are noticed right away. A bleb or swelling appears immediately next
to the catheter site. Some animals experience immediate discomfort and will squirm, cry
out, or struggle. If an irritant drug is known to have been extravasated, stop the delivery. As
much drug as possible should be aspirated back through the catheter, as well as through a
series of 25-gauge needlesticks into the surrounding tissue, then withdraw the catheter.
Following that, cold-packing 15-20 minutes four times per day is recommended for 48-72
hours. Prevent licking and chewing at all costs, through the use of an Elizabethan collar
Additionally, the application of 99% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) topically every 8 hours for
2 weeks may forestall some of the effects.
While most catheter leaks are noticed right away, the skin ulceration may not appear for
several days or even weeks. It has been demonstrated that doxorubicin can persist in the
tissue for at least a month. If allowed, the pet will start licking at the catheter site. Then pain,
swelling, inflammation, desquamation, and limping may occur and may continue to worsen
for months
Doxorubicin is a very commonly used cancer drug and is also an extremely potent tissue
irritant (Figure &.1). It is disheartening to realize that no currently applied procedures
adequately  prevent the devastating tissue damage that arises from doxorubicin
extravasations. Surgical treatment, including immediate surgical removal of the affected
tissues and, potentially, amputation may be required. The free-radical-scavenging drug
dexrazoxane (Zinecard?; Pfizer, New York, NY), marketed for the prevention of
Intravenous administration of dexrazoxane at 1o times the dose of doxorubicin within 3
hours, and again at 24 and 48 hours after extravasation, may significantly reduce local
 si nxop  s   s d o op sno Aa sso f nss
in your practice, it is recommended that a source of dexrazoxane (local human hospital or
oncology clinic) be identified, so that it can be obtained quickly if needed
Figure 8.1 Severe skin damage following accidental extravasation of doxorubicin in a
dog. Months of nursing care, skin grafts, and, sometimes, amputation can be necessary to
manage these types of injury.
More effective treatments for extravasation of drugs like doxorubicin continue to be
explored. Interestingly, due to obvious similarities to some types of snakebite, a simple
approach with a snakebite extractor kit has been applied to humans with extravasation
injuries. In one study of human patients, three doxorubicin extravasations were encountered
  a          s g  
immediately discontinued, and the catheter was removed. Then the specific area of
cm in length, were made through the full thickness of the skin. A clear snakebite extractor
suction cup with a syringe was then applied directly over the incision. As the cup filled with
showed prompt and complete resolution within a week. A similar technique called the
‘modified Villalobos snakebite slit technique" is also reported to be a highly effective
treatment in animal cancer patients
Gastrointestinal Effects
While many pets receiving chemotherapy may experience 1-2 days of mildly decreased
appetite, a few pets receiving chemotherapy (one in three or less) may have more
unpleasant digestive side effects such as more prolonged loss of appetite, nausea/vomiting.
or diarrhea. Most are mild and self-limiting; however, more severe episodes are sometimes
Seen.
Presenting Complaints
Most  commonly,  gastrointestinal  effects  are delayed,  often  2-5  days  following
  go s     ss   
slightly soft stools to severe vomiting or large amounts of watery or bloody diarrhea.
History
Careful medical and medication history helps to determine if the signs are likely to be
S         
information is often communicated over the phone and can be useful to determine whether
a patient needs to be seen or can be managed at home (Table &.2). Questions to ask include
the following:
· What type of cancer does the pet have?
o  Could the signs be related to the cancer rather than the treatment?
· What drug was given most recently and how long ago?
 Intestinal signs would be rare in a dog that received chemotherapy 2 weeks
ago, but would be much more likely in a dog that received chemotherapy
2-5 days ago.
· How many times has the patient vomited?
A single episode of vomiting in a bright, eating patient is probably OK.
Animals that have vomited more than three times in 24 hours, are vomiting
a  (op n d )      
without eating or drinking (retching, dry heaving) should be evaluated by a
veterinarian.
· ls he or she willing to eat and drink?
。
 Not wanting to eat for a day or two is often OK, but not drinking for any
period of time can be very serious, as dehydration can result quickly.
Animals that are not drinking should be evaluated in the hospital and might
need fluid therapy.
· How severe is the diarrhea (if any)?
Mild loose stool is probably OK. Dogs with severe watery or bloody
diarrhea should be evaluated by a veterinarian.
· How are they acting?
Bright, happy animals with mild signs can offen be managed at home.
Animals that are very weak, lethargic, or depressed should be evaluated in
the hospital.
Table 8.2 When should an animal with gastrointestinal signs be seen?
Vomiting more than three times in a 24-hour period
Vomiting every tme they eat or drink (cannot keep anything down)
Retching or dry heaving
Unwiling to eat for more than 2 days: unwiling to drink fo more than 18 hours
Severe watery or bloody diarrhea
Severe wea kne ss, ethargy, or depression
Treatment
Many animals with mild signs may respond to conservative therapy, for example, brief
withholding of food and water followed by a bland, high-fiber diet over a short period of
time. Oral antinausea medications like metoclopramide (Reglan?; UCB, Brussels,
Belgium), prochlorperazine (Compazine?; GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park, NC),
or maropitant (Cerenia?; Pfizer) can be prescribed for home use if vomiting is rare and the
patient is bright and alert. Oral medications for diarrhea, such as loperamide (Imodium?;
McNeil Consumer and Specialty Pharmaceuticals, Fort Washington, PA), metronidazole
(Flagyl?; Pfizer), and/or tylosin (Tylan?; Elancon, Greenfield, IN), may be prescribed as
well.
Animals that are weak, lethargic, dehydrated, or with severe signs should be hospitalized
so that fluid, acid-base, and electrolyte disturbances can be addressed. These animals
should be kept without food and water until vomiting resolves, and injectable antinausea
drugs can be administered. Then, carefully rebuild the patient's digestive tract with bland
food and transfer to oral antinausea drugs after a patient has not vomited for 12-24 hours.
If hospitalization is necessary, most animals will need support for 24-72 hours. After this
period of time, the intestinal cells have usually had sufficient time to regenerate, and the
pet's clinical signs should improve. Vomiting that persists longer than 72 hours indicates a
reason to look for other causes, such as pancreatitis, foreign body, or tumor spread to the
digestive tract.
Neutropenia and Sepsis
Neutropenia (decreased number of neutrophils, one of the white blood cells) is a relatively
common side effect of chemotherapy in both pets and humans. Neutropenia and associated
infections can be extremely variable, from clinically insignificant to overwhelming and
occasionally fatal.
Presenting Complaints
Many animals may have mild to moderate neutropenia, yet show no outward signs of
illness. Most pets have a low risk of infection if their neutrophil count remains greater than
100o/uL. It is important to remember that the likelihood of infection and treatment
decisions should be made based on the absolute neutrophil count, not the percentage of
neutrophils nor the total white blood cell count.
   s       
weakness, and poor appetite. They often have a fever, but a normal or decreased
temperature does not rule out the presence of a serious or even life-threatening infection
History
An accurate medication history is very important, as the timing of the last chemotherapy
treatment can help to determine if neutropenia is likely. Neutropenia is most commonly
Diagnostics
As mentioned, septic patients usually, but not always, have a fever. Other physical
abnormalities could include increased heart rate, injected mucous membranes, slow or
prolonged capillary refill, or weak pulses. Initial minimum database should include a
complete blood count (CBC) and platelet count with a manual differential, serum
biochemistry profile, and urinalysis. The results of these tests will direct the veterinarian
toward other necessary diagnostic tests and treatment.
Treatment
Bright patients without a fever and with less than 1ooo neutrophils/μL can usually be
outweighs the benefit of hospitalization. Treatment may be a 5-to 7-day course of a broad-
spectrum oral antibiotic such as trimethoprim-sulfa or enrofloxacin. Instruct the owner to
monitor the patient's temperature once or twice daily at home. If the patient becomes
clinically ill or the temperature exceeds 103.5°F, hospitalization may be required. Clinically
normal animals with mild neutropenia (>1ooo/μL) generally require no treatment.
Febrile or systemically ill patients should be hospitalized for 24-hour observation and
care. Intravenous fluid therapy is the first line of treatment for these patients. It is common
for fever and clinical signs to improve significantly after several hours of fluid therapy.
The second line of defense is antibiotic treatment. Most bacteria that cause illnesses in
septic veterinary cancer patients are sensitive to commonly used antibiotics. Intravenous
coverage for both gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria should be used. Medications to
reduce fever are rarely necessary, and may make the interpretation of response to treatment
difficult.
Most patients respond rapidly to therapy, and neutrophil counts may also rise very
              
on oral antibiotics when they no longer have a fever and have neutrophil counts that are
climbing.
Acute Tumor Lysis Syndrome
Acute tumor lysis syndrome is a life-threatening metabolic emergency associated with
      s      s s
             
rapid death can result.
Many factors contribute to the development of acute tumor lysis syndrome. Tumors that
carry the highest risk of the development of acute tumor lysis syndrome are large and
bulky, and are comprised of rapidly dividing cells. In addition, tumors that respond well to
treatment are associated with acute tumor lysis syndrome because successful treatment may
result in the death of a large number of cells all at once. Most often, the syndrome is
associated with blood-based diseases, such as lymphoma and acute leukemia. Usually.
acute tumor lysis syndrome develops after the administration of combination chemotherapy
regimens, but it may also occur spontaneously or as a result of radiation or prednisone
nausea and vomiting, and may become dehydrated. Without optimal hydration, waste
products build up and cannot be excreted in the urine fast enough. As a result, significant
serum electrolyte imbalances can occur.
Treatment is aimed at prevention and supportive care. The main goal of treatment is to
prevent renal failure and severe electrolyte imbalances. High-risk patients should receive
           s
monitoring after therapy. Prior to initiating cancer therapy, a high-risk patient's hydration
status and electrolyte levels are to be carefully evaluated. If there are abnormalities, a
treatment delay may be considered, although this may not always be an option. The effects
of acute tumor lysis syndrome can be devastating, but sometimes the life of a patient with a
high tumor burden is more at risk without cancer therapy. The risk assessment makes acute
tumor lysis syndrome the more attractive outcome when compared with the likelihood of
death, if the cancer remains untreated.
Appendix 8.1 Sample Chemotherapy Owner
Handout
All of the chemotherapy protocols in common use for veterinary patients are designed to
have a fairly low risk of causing unpleasant side effects. With most treatments, 7o% of
patients will have very fittle in terms of side effects, except for perhaps some slight tiredness
25% of patients that may experience some type of mild side effect and 5% that can
experience a side effect severe enough to require hospitalization. We cannot usually predict
which patients are likely to experience a serious side effect.
Most chemotherapy drugs work by targeting rapidly dividing cells. Although cancer cells
are typically the most rapidly dividing and this is why they are preferentially killed, other
  s     s a s    s  n
bone marrow, and hair follicle cells are rapidly dividing cells, and damage to these cells is
responsible for most of the side effects we encounter
Digestive Tract
One of the side effects that can be seen with certain medications is digestive tract upset, in
the form of unwillingness to eat/drink, nausea/vomiting, or diarrhea. In most cases, these
signs are mild and will go away by themselves within a short period of time. These side
than 48 hours. It is important, however, that your pet continues to drink. Unwillingness to
drink water for more than 24 hours and prolonged, complete unwillingness to eat are
problems that should be reported to your veterinarian.
Some animals can develop nausea, which can lead to vomiting. Vomiting is not a cause
for undue concern if it occurs less than three times. Should your pet vomit, withhold food
and water for approximately 12 hours, to give the digestive tract a “rest.?" Then slowly
reintroduce water first. If no vomiting occurs several hours after water is given, then a bland
food can be offered in small amounts. This may consist of boiled chicken or lean ground
beef mixed with starch like rice, pasta, or potatoes. We may sometimes prescribe oral
antinausea medications that can be given to relieve mild nausea, inappetance, or vomiting.
Repeated vomiting, vomiting after every meal ("can't keep anything down"), or repeated
nonproductive retching (dry heaving) should be reported to your veterinarian. Animals
that experience these effects will need to be evaluated for dehydration, and may need
hospitalization for intravenous fluids and antinausea medications.
 o s s  t   s e s  s oe  
from mild soft stools or increased frequency of defecation, to profuse, watery diarrhea that
may contain blood. Mild diarrhea in a bright, eating pet can be treated with the bland diet
described above. Some oral medications can also help to resolve diarrhea. Severe, watery
diarrhea, blood in the stool, or diarrhea associated with lethargy, weakness, depression, or
unwillingness to drink should be brought to the attention of your veterinarian.
White Blood Cells
If the rapidly dividing cells in the bone marrow have been affected by the chemotherapy, a
low white blood cell count can develop. This side effect is most commonly seen Z-10 days
after chemotherapy is given. We check the white blood cell count prior to each and every
chemotherapy treatment, to insure that it is not too low for another treatment to be safely
given. Occasionally, the white blood cell count may dip low enough that we need to delay a
treatment for a few days. Such a brief delay will not affect the overall success of your pet's
chemotherapy protocol.
It is uncommon for the white blood cell count to drop low enough that an increased
susceptibility to infection is a concern. However, if your pet has a very low white blood cell
count and is eating and drinking normally, does not have a fever, and is otherwise acting
normally, we will often prescribe a broad-spectrum antibiotic for you to give at home. We
would then recommend that your pet's temperature be taken once or twice per day to
ensure that they are not developing a fever. Taking a pet's temperature is easy. A standard
glass or digital thermometer that you buy at the store is used. If a glass thermometer is used.
make sure to shake it down well first. Lubricate the thermometer with a small amount of
Vaseline or K-Y jelly, and insert it approximately one half inch into the rectum. For a glass
thermometer, it should be left in place for approximately 2 minutes. Most digital
thermometers will beep when the temperature is recorded. A normal dog or cat's
 si  i o  e  e iq  os u  
      s  ss os   h 
please call. Hospitalization may be necessary.
If your pet has a low white blood cell count and has a fever, or is depressed, lethargic, or
not eating, hospitalization for intravenous fluids, antibiotics, and very careful monitoring is
recommended. Most animals will improve rapidly with this treatment, and hospitalization is
rarely necessary for more than 72 hours. They are ready to go home when their temperature
has become normal and their white blood cell count is no longer in a dangerously low
range.
If serious side effects are seen after a treatment, we always try to make changes to the
may include decreasing the dose of chemotherapy given for subsequent treatments, adding
some medications to help prevent adverse effects, or switching to an entirely different drug.
It is always our goal to make it so that serious side effects are not encountered more than
once.
AdditionalReading
Bronden LB, Rutteman GR, Flagstad A, Teske E. 2003. Study of dog and cat owners?
perceptions of medical treatment for cancer. Vet Rec 152:77-80.
Laing EC, Carter RF. 1988. Acute tumor lysis syndrome following treatment of canine
lymphoma. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 24:691-6.
x       -s    
extravasation with intravenous dexrazoxane in a cat. J Vet Intern Med 21:872-3.
 so   ss    so    
of life during palliative chemotherapy for lymphoma. J Small Anim Pract 44:100-3.
effects. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 43:1-7.
Vickery KR, Thamm DH. 2007. Successful treatment of acute tumor lysis syndrome in a
dog with multicentric lymphoma. J Vet Intern Med 21:1401-4.
Villalobos A. 2006. Dealing with chemotherapy extravasations: A new technique. J Am
Anim Hosp Assoc 42:321-5.
9
Compassionate Client Communication
Erin Allen and Gail Bishop
Key Points
Supporting the grieving clie nt
●Clients experience grief before, during, and after a loss
● Grief occurs on physical, intellectual, social, and spiritual levels.
Children grieve too.
● Children express grief differently from adults due to shortened attention spans and varying intellectual levels of
understanding of death and loss.
● The death of a pet is often a child's first experience with loss
Supportive cormunica tion skills
● Clients rely on the veterinary healthcare team for support during the time of their pet's illness or death.
communica tion, empa thy, reflection, and self-disc losure are vita l skills to master.
Quality of life discussions
●Objective tools to help clients de fine quality of life for their pet
●Pain versus suffering
End-of-life decision making
●Guidelines in helping clients make an end-of-life decision
● Euthanasia versus natural death
● Helping clients create a plan
Self-care and team care
●Compassion fatigue, how to identify it, and how to avoid it
●Six strategies to utilize in taking care of yourself
● Debriefing cases and promoting closure reduce the chance of compassion fatigue
Introduction
More than three quarters of pet owners report a strong relationship between their ability to
cope with grief for a pet and the support they received from their veterinary team. People
develop very strong atachments to the animals in their lives. These days, pets are more
often than not considered as family members. This generates greater client expectations for
compassionate veterinary care and respectful communication from the veterinary team. The
majority of clients are deeply affected by a terminal diagnosis of their pet, and many will
experience severe grief, beginning well before their pet dies.
The focus of this chapter is to provide you with some insight to what the client may be
an examination of how this type of work can personally affect you, emphasizing the
S           
is unique, this chapter takes a general approach to creating and maintaining compassionate
relationships with clients during difficult times.
Ms. Sandra Brown came into the hospital today with her 8-year-old bassett hound,
Barkley, for the first of many chemo treatments for Barkley's lymphoma, diagnosed last
week. Usually a chatty person, Sandra is very quiet after she checks in for her
appointment.
The Grieving Client
   a  o  e    s n   s
process, you will witness a broad spectrum of emotions with each client. These emotions
are likely related to the impending loss of the animal and the client's grief. Grief is not only
experienced after a loss. Anticipatory grief begins when someone realizes there will soon
be a loss, resulting in a drastic change of day-to-day life. It is often during this period of
anticipation that people begin to experience the  various feelings and manifestations
commonly associated with grief (Figure 9.1).
Figure 9.1 Anticipatory grief, which is often experienced at the time of a terminal
diagnosis, can also occur as a pet grows old.
Receiving a diagnosis of cancer has been compared with watching a fireworks show:
numbing, deafening, and overwhelming. One of the most common feelings during this
period is an increase in anxiety, which can intensify as the time of death draws closer. This
strong feeling can be quite overwhelming for people, especially those who have little
experience with how to manage it. The grief process is unique for each individual, and
intense emotions often ebb and flow as a client works through his or her grief and begins to
adjust to the idea of his or her impending loss.
This can set in motion a roller coaster of very painful and confusing feelings, most of
which are very difficult to cope with. The intensity of this experience depends greatly on
the strength of the bond between the client and his or her pet. Many pets are viewed as
sources of emotional and social support, eliciting feelings of strong atachment from the
  o      s    on s 
experience intense grief emotions. This tremendous attachment can occur for several
reasons, such as when clients believe their pets "got them through" a difficult period of life,
have relied on their pets as their most significant social support, or have anthropomorphized
the animal. Some may view the pet as a symbolic link to significant people no longer part
of their lives (i.e., children, parents, and friends who have died or moved away) or
significant times in their lives (i.e., childhood, ended marriage). In such cases, losing this
pet may be symbolic of other previous losses. Knowing this may help you appreciate your
client's experience.
  roo shl s oa r, 'ss s os o s  a shn 
be just an infection?" You offer her some tissue and after a moment, she says, "Why
did this have to happen? He is too young for this. Was it something I did? I just don't
know what to do."
You respond soffly, “I'm sorry to say that he does have lymphoma, not just an
infection. I wish I knew why dogs get cancer. I can assure you it isn't anything that you
did. This is a difficult time, and it's natural to feel overwhelmed and scared."
Through each encounter with a grieving client, you may witness many different grief
expressions. Remember that these commonly occur well before the death of a pet. These
manifestations occur on physical, intellectual, emotional, social, and spiritual levels. Before,
during, and after loss, grief may appear as, but not limited to, the following forms:
Physical: crying, sobbing, wailing, shock and numbness, dry mouth, a lump in the
throat, shortness of breath, stomachache or nausea, tightness in the chest, restlessness.
fatigue, exhaustion, sleep disturbance, appetite disturbance, body aches, stiffness of
joints or muscles, and dizziness or fainting.
Intellectual: denial, confusion, inability to concentrate, feeling preoccupied by the
impending loss, a need to reminisce about the loved one and to talk about the
circumstances of the loss, a desire to rationalize or intellectualize feelings about the
loss, and thoughts or fantasies about suicide (not accompanied by concrete plans or
behaviors).
Emotional: sadness, anger, guilt, depression, anxiety, relief, loneliness, irritability, a
desire to blame others for the loss, resentment, embarrassment, self-doubt, feelings of
being overwhelmed or out of control, feelings of hopelessness and helplessness, and
behaviors and emotions that seem inappropriate for the situation (nervous smiles and
laughter).
Social: feelings of withdrawal, isolation, a greater dependency on others, a rejection of
others, a reluctance to ask others for help, change in support system, a desire to
relocate or move, and a need to find distractions from the intensity of grief (to stay
busy or to overcommit to activities).
Spiritual: bargaining with God in an attempt to prevent loss, feeling angry at God,
renewed or shaken religious beliefs, feelings of being either blessed or punished.
searching for a meaningful interpretation of a loved one's death, visions or dreams
concerning a dead loved one, wondering what happens to loved ones after death, and
the need for a purposeful ending or closure to the relationship (a funeral, memorial
service, last rites ceremony, or goodbye ritual)
Moving Through Grief
Individuals move through their grief at different rates, and the course of grief varies greatly.
Some people have extreme difficulty accepting the impending death of a loved one. Clients
who are having difficulty coping with an impending loss may not know how to handle their
emotions. They may attempt to intellectualize or rationalize the experience in some way or
close to the patient in attempts to overmanage the patient's medical care. It is very
important to recognize that the person's grief is most likely compelling these emotions.
Having an awareness of what your client may be experiencing can help you alleviate any
reactions you may have to their behaviors and emotions by validating that their actions are
brought about by their grief. This can play a key role in redefining a “difficult client’ as
truly a “grieving client' (Figure 9.2)
Sandra rushes in the door with Barkley, an hour late for the appointment. “No one told
me that he had to be here early. I expected a call to remind me of the appointment and
didn't get that either."
You respond sofly, "Yes, I realize how complicated Barkley's treatment schedule is.
Having him here early helps us get him back home with you sooner. Let's work
together to make this as smooth as possible. How can I help?'
Figure 9.2 People can exhibit grief in many ways, including anger, frustration, and
blame, as they adapt to the news of a cancer diagnosis. This can make a client come
across as “difficult" when, in reality, they are simply grieving
While leading grief theorists may describe the process of grieving a bit differently, they
all involve an initial period of shock or denial, a middle period of emotional pain and
finally acceptance and recovery. In 1969, Kubler-Ross pioneered these studies and
described five stages through which one processes grief: denial, anger, bargaining.
depression, and acceptance. Since her work, Kubler-Ross' stages have been explained as
not sequential, but dynamic in nature, with a person often moving between different phases
  s s           
expected, the moment of death can still be shocking. When working with your clients.
William Worden's four tasks of mourning, described as a path to processing one's grief,
  s o   n   s
· The first task involves accepting the reality of the loss. The acceptance takes time,
considering it is not only an intellectual acceptance but also an emotional one. This
reality is tested quite often following the death of a pet, with established habits such
as calling the pet's name at dinnertime, as one begins to create new routines to
replace old ones.
· The second task is to work through the emotional pain of grief. Many clients may
believe that their grief pain is wrong or “crazy” in some way, especially since their
emotions are induced by the loss of an animal, not a person. In general, society does
not encourage grief for pet loss as it does for human loss, making the process
difficult or even embarrassing for some.
· Worden's third task is to adjust to an environment in which the deceased is missing
It involves coming to terms with changes resulting from the pet's death. This
adjustment is unique to each client and the role the animal played in his or her life
Depending on how active a role this was and how responsible the client was for the
pet's health care and well-being, the client may also adjust to a change in his or her
Own sense of self and purpose.
● The final task of mourning is to emotionally relocate the deceased. This can be the
most difficult part of the grieving process. This involves developing a relationship
with the thoughts and memories of the deceased versus a physical relationship,
allowing the person to continue on with life after the loss.
Pain of the loss can resurface during certain events, such as birthdays and anniversaries
Although there is no certain time line for grief, when a person can think of the deceased pet
in fond memories, with less disruption in his or her daily life and feel hopeful for the future.
the person is moving in a healing direction.
Children and Grief
The death of a family pet is often a child's first experience with loss. Children experience
grief also, though their age and development levels influence their grief reactions. They
express grief differently than adults do, due to shortened attention spans and varying
across levels of development, so the following overview should be used only as a guide.
Please see the Preparing children for pet illness and loss section for recommendations in
helping families with children.
Children Ages 1-2
Instead, they respond to their caregiver's emotions and behaviors. They may express grief
as irritability, changes in sleep and eating patterns, and quietness. For caregivers, supportive
actions include continuing nurturing interactions and maintaining routines.
Children 2-6
For children at these ages, death is like sleeping. Death is temporary and perhaps reversible,
           d    
questions, such as "When will he be back?", "Where did he go?", or "What will he eat in
the ground? They may also believe that their own magical thinking can have realistic
results. At this stage, children can be very focused on the concrete details, often very
curious of the physical aspects of the dead body. Still, they are very sensitive to their
      s       
regular patterns, regression, and acting out behaviors. The maintenance of schedules is
important. Children often process their emotions through play, so themes of death, dying,
n    s  s      s 
eni dodde p ds tsn n suosnbs
"Barkley is sick and suffering with cancer.'
"We will have the doctor give Barkley medicine that only animals can have to help him
to die."
"When Barkley dies, his body will still be here but he will not be alive anymore.""
S h o sd e   s   n oe si ss
not only helps the child identify what they are feeling themselves, but also creates a sense
Children 6-12
Children in this age range begin to understand death as final. They may be curious of the
physical and biological aspects of the deceased. In the earlier years of this developmental
phase, children may believe that death 1s something that occurs only to the old and only to
others. Soon an understanding will occur that death can happen to anyone, as well as
  sos    n s o  o   o  sas
exhibited. Social development is occurring so children may imitate how others around them
respond to death. It is important for parents to continue to model appropriate behaviors and
to be honest and factual with children.
Teenage Children
These young adults are able to think abstractly about death. They understand it is the end of
a physical life. At this age, teenagers are searching for identity and are attempting to find a
balance between independence and dependence on their caregiver. They may struggle with
needing support and not wanting it. lt is 1mportant to help them find personal ways to
express their grief, such as writing, drawing, and talking.
greatly impact their children's ability to grieve. It is an important time for parents and other
adults to teach children how to express grief in emotionally healthy ways free of shame or
embarrassmentlessons carried 1nto adulthood.
Supporting Clients
Comfort with one's own grief comes from a variety of sources and can be greatly increased
by the support from those close to the situation, such as you and your medical team.
Research shows that almost all clients believe that the veterinary team should provide some
sort of emotional support at the time of the pet's illness and death. It is not suggested that
P  o s  o    so   o 
client's grief. Grief is an experience best handled in cooperation with others, where support
and understanding is available.
In providing support to clients, it is essential to employ compassionate support skills to
emphasize your care and enhance the client's experience with you. You and your team can
pick up cues from your client to read what the client is experiencing and tailor your efforts
to his or her needs. Effective support begins with effective communication.
There are several simple communication techniques that you can keep in mind as you
seek to support your clients. To master these skills, you must simply be compassionate and
respectful. Using the word “we" when talking about treatment and decision making will
help your client feel a sense of partnership from you. It will create rapport with your client
   s   s   o   g
relationship can be emphasized in other ways also. Experts believe that only 7% of
communication happens verbally, so at times, no words are needed.
Nonverbal Communication
communicating with clients. Facial expressions, vocal tone and inflections, and the use of
touch and personal space all exhibit communication messages. Think of facial expressions
as the famous quote “a picture is worth a thousand words." It is important to maintain an
awareness of what message you are sending through the expressions you display. The way
you wrinkle your forehead, smile, frown, and tilt or nod your head can translate into many
different messages, some of which may not be what you want to portray. Eye contact is
essential in displaying support and understanding. It also invites trust from your client.
important to not try and fill the empty space when silence occurs, but rather, be comfortable
and sit, wordlessly, for a while. When you speak, do so softly and slowly so you convey
empathy and compassion while remaining appropriate to your client's needs and responses.
Speaking loudly and fast-paced can be perceived as rushed and uncaring, creating a
separation between you and your client.
9.3). Touch can soothe an emotional client. Neutral areas to touch are the arms and
shoulders. Placing a hand on someone's shoulder can demonstrate a great deal of empathy
If you use touch to comfort clients, remain aware of the client's nonverbal reactions. If you
sense that he or she is uncomfortable, or if you are uncomfortable, you can support the
client verbally instead or focus your caring touch on the pet. Personal space and body
position also send a message to your client. If you are sitting with your client, face and lean
a bit toward him or her to show your engagement in the conversation. Some men may be
more comfortable having conversations sitting side by side, while women may prefer facing
one another. If you lean away or stand at a different level from your client, you give the
impression of someone uncomfortable, unconcerned, or uncaring with the situation. It also
becomes difficult to use touch as a supportive gesture. Any compassion or empathy you try
to convey may be lost
Figure 9.3 A compassionate touch is a supportive gesture to show your concern for
your client.
Empathy
words. Empathy is not sympathy. Being empathetic is to stand in your client's shoes and to
have an emotional and intellectual comprehension of what they are experiencing without
taking on the actual feelings yourself.
about Barkley. What a heartbreaking diagnosis this is. I know what a sweet boy he is
and it must be hard to see him feeling badly.'"
Reflection
Another skill to use in creating support for your client is reflection. When reflecting, you
are focusing not only on the content of the conversation but also on the feelings your client
expresses. Your client is assured that his or her message was heard when you paraphrase or
reflect what he or she has said, creating a mutual understanding. There are many ways to
begin a reflective statement, many of which you use in day-to-day conversations. Examples
Sush c." si bueay uI ieum, pue  -" yonou se suaas i,  "" ayll spunos iI, ‘ae
 s  n n   a a  s  a sm o s
the client that you comprehend his or her feelings and care about what he or she is going
through.
Sandra tells you, "I just don't know what I'm going to do when the chemo isn't
working for Barkley anymore.'?
s s  n o i  a no r n o I, s 
progression and how to prepare yourself."
Self-Disclosure
Self-disclosure is another communication tool that can help you relate to your clients
Sharing a similar experience you have faced can help your client feel less isolated and can
normalize his or her emotions. It is important to keep in mind that sharing this information
is for the benefit of your client, not for your own therapeutic purpose. This helps create
rapport, builds trust, and enhances your relationship.
You tell Sandra, "My dog had the same kind of cancer last year. lt was really hard on
me too.'
She asks, "What did you do when he was gone?"
You tell her, “I cried for a long time, which is normal. It took me a while to get used to
not having him with me.""
or her pet, remember to consider the client's privacy. If the information that the client
shares would be helpful to understand his or her perspective, it is respectful to ask
permission to share it with the medical team.
Quality of Life Decisions
When you have been working with your client for so long to manage his or her pet's
illness, it can be very difficult for your client to switch gears from striving for quality of life
to preparing for quality of death.
Sandra says, "I don't want Barkley to suffer. How will I know when it's time to say
goodbye?"
This question can come up when the client begins to prepare for the end of his or her
pet's life. This is something that you will be asked many times throughout your career in
   s    a   n    
pets' quality of life and making a heartbreaking decision on their pets' behalf for euthanasia
(Figure 9.4). Quality of life is the degree of well-being felt by the animal. It consists of two
components: pain and suffering. In helping your client make this important assessment for
his or her pet, it can be helpful to provide some ideas to distinguish the two and to evaluate
them objectively. The veterinary team can also provide input and perspective.
Figure 9.4 Difficult conversations around end-of-life topics can go more comfortably
when  you utilize  your  supportive  communication  skills,  such  as  compassionate
nonverbal cues, reflection, and empathy.
Pain is a physical and emotional sensation that can be complicated to assess. Keep in
mind that a pet's reaction to pain is dependent on the animal's personality and the degree of
 pain experienced. It is important to educate your client that his or her pet may display these
signs to indicate pain:
· trembling or shaking,
· panting,
· slow to rise,
● whining or lack of vocalization,
· decreased or absent appetite,
· acting out of character,
● being restless or unable to get comfortable,
· sitting or laying abnormally,
● bearing little or no weight on affected limb.
● hesitant to be touched in painful areas, and
· changes in energy level.
Suffering is more than solely physical attributes and involves the ability to enjoy living
life. When your client says he or she wants to prevent suffering, it is important to help the
client define and understand what suffering would look like in his or her pet. To start this
conversation, encourage the client to define quality in terms of basic functions:
· Does he eat and drink normally?
· Can he relieve himself on his own?
· Can she move around on her own?
● Is she interested in the activities around her?
● Is he withdrawn much of the time?
As the client assesses these areas, you may then encourage them to gain a deeper
understanding from the pet's point of view. Some objective tools you can share are the
following:
· Suggest that your client create a list of the pet's unique qualities:
chasing a ball,
playing with other pets,
scratching on a post,
。
rubbing on your legs,
barking at a neighbor, and
。
enjoying daily walks.
As the disease progresses and these qualities fade, have the client mark them off the list.
  s n  o q o  s  mo  nm 
animal's day to day life.
· Suggest that your client keep a good day/bad day calendar
Evaluate what a good day would be for the pet, and also what a bad day
looks like. Each evening, recall the day and decide if it was a good or bad
day, marking a calendar with a  or ?. Decide how many bad days in a
row occur before quality is compromised.
· Suggest that your client keep a journal or daily record of events in the pet's life.
This can be helpful in looking back to reflect on changes that occur and
how the animal's and client's life are affected.
These tools can help your client decide if important qualities are diminishing or are no
longer present in the pet's life. This may help the client to define what suffering would be
for his or her pet. It is important to empower your client to also rely on his or her special
relationship with the pet and trust that the decision will become clear with time.
End-Of-Life Decision Making
Sandra tells you, "I think we're getting close, but not there yet. I am so scared of when
that day comes because I don't think I'll know what to do."
You reply, “Yes, this can be a scary time. Let's talk about what will help to prepare you
and your family so that you know what to expect."
When a pet's death is impending, some individuals have a religious or spiritual belief
system that does not support euthanasia. For others, it is a thoughtful decision and is
considered a humane option. It is important to determine your client's perspective as you
discuss end-of-life issues. When a natural death is the client's choice, some 1ssues to discuss
are
● the client's expectations of the natural dying process,
· physiological effects of the dying process (disease specific),
· pain management, and
· available hospice care.
The decision to euthanize a beloved pet is probably the hardest decision your client will
have to make regarding the pet's care. Uncertainty surrounding the euthanasia can be
extremely frightening. One way you can provide support and help alleviate fear is to
encourage the clients to plan what is important for them on that day. Planning ahead is in
no way equivalent to giving up, but rather, it is a means of taking care of one's self and
one's pet during a very emotional and exhausting time. It is also a way to have some
control where there has been little thus far by planning their pets' last day. Knowing that
plans: one for how they would wish the day to go and another for crisis situations.
 In an emergency, some concerns you want your clients to be aware of are as follows:
· Will they have assistance to manage the pet physically? (i.e., a 12o-lb dog with
pathological bone fracture, unable to stand)
● What veterinary hospitals are available? (location, hours)
● Who can the client call for help? (child care, other pets, transportation)
In determining a plan for a day that goes as the client hopes, encourage your client to
consider these issues:
● Where would the client prefer the euthanasia to occur? (at home, in the hospital,
outdoors)
 sd a   d         m e
friends, other pets)
· Which doctor would the client prefer?
natural death include the following:
· body care (cremation, burial, other options available) and
· memorializing object (paw print or hair clipping)
As you help the client identify the answers to these questions, you can also gain an
understanding of what circumstances need to be in place for this to occur. You may need to
determine specific details, such as the doctor's schedule and choices available for
euthanasia location, body care, and memorializing objects. You can help facilitate financial
issues prior to the euthanasia if billing is not preferred nor even an option. It is appropriate
and important to inquire if your client has experienced euthanasia of a pet previously. If no
such experience has occurred, a client may be very fearful of the unknown. Regardless of a
client's experience, it is very important to explain what your hospital's euthanasia protocol
is and educate the client about what to expect. Use layman's terms during these
conversations. Words such as reflexes, muscle twitches, and sighing can be less scary than
reactions, muscle spasms, and agonal breathing. While the responsibility of these
conversations often falls on the doctor, the client may ask you to discuss end-of-life
concerns.
Preparing Children for Pet Mlness and Loss
"What do I tell my kids about Barkley?" Sandra asks you.
o   no xa dr  sdx s n  p n s  s
They may also ask your help in preparing their children for the loss of a beloved family pet
 n pr si h n  s    ( )
             
educating them about how children grieve (please see the Children and grief section), you
Figure 9.5 Involving children in the dying process of their pets can help them gain an
understanding of and alleviate some fear about death.
Some helpful ideas you can share are the following:
· Be as honest as possible. Encourage parents to be open and honest with their children
about a pet's illness and death. Even when done out of a desire to protect children.
fabrication can result in a loss of trust and anger when the truth is uncovered. Young
children can believe the death resulted from their own thoughts or actions.
Falsehoods such as "he ran away" or "we had to find him another home'" can leave
children wondering what they did wrong or blaming themselves for the animal
leaving and provides no resolution.
· Avoid euphemisms like “put to sleep." These can be frightening and confusing
especially to young children.
q on nou si pn u ro sso nuouis e si nd e go sso  ie pusnun o
trivialized or minimized.
· Be prepared to answer many questions, often repeatedly, depending on the child's
age.
· Include children as much as possible in decisions and discussions about the pet's
illness and death. Allow children to have a choice if they want to be present for the
 s x       o    
help a child gain an understanding of the death.
· Do not encourage replacement of pets.
· Encourage parents to involve their children in a goodbye ceremony and in
memorializing the pet.
· Help children find ways to express their grief. This can include talking, drawing.
sharing memories, writing poems or stories, or creating shadow boxes.
Your practice may want to consider having some books on children's pet loss to offer
parents facing this challenging time. There are many that are available for various age
groups. These books can be used as a starting point for discussions regarding illness, death.
and euthanasia.
Follow-Up Communication
Follow-up contact after a death, such as a phone call, a condolence card, or a memorial
acknowledgment, is a meaningful gesture to support clients. This shows your continued
 s o o  o so s m s o o  s  
relationship with the pet and family. When writing on a condolence card, everyone who
cared for the pet is encouraged to sign. Personalized messages convey your empathy much
Dear Mr. and Mrs. Brown,
You are in my thoughts since you said goodbye to your beloved boy, Barkley. He was
such a brave boy through his treatments, always jumping up to say hello to everyone in
the clinic. I will always remember him with a stuffed toy in his mouth, like he carried
around here so often. You took such wonderful care of him, throughout his entire life
and especially as he battled the cancer. 1 know it will be very hard to be without him
though I hope you can take some comfort from knowing you did all that you could, and
made a heartbreaking decision to spare him any pain or suffering. He was lucky to have
you love him so much.
Sincerely,
Even when speaking from a heartfelt place, there are some phrases to avoid when
supporting a client:
such as “Be strong now, "Try and stay busy,” or "Don't cry." These can stall a
· Do not encourage immediate replacement of the deceased pet or removal of the pet's
belongings. Each individual will come to these decisions in his or her own time and
for his or her own reasons.
· Do not try and cheer up a grieving client by giving advice or pep talks such as “He
lived a long life” and “You still have other pets." Validating and normalizing the
          e  
appropriate.
Your client may ask for pet loss support or resources, so it is helpful to be familiar with
resources, such as professional pet loss support groups, counselors, and pet loss websites.
Cost of Caring
o a  u sh on du non ons  u suon o go n on
important ways. You acknowledge their grief and often grieve with them. You help them
adjust to the changes that losing a pet brings. You impart compassion and care through
difficult and sad times. Providing such support takes effort and great strength. In this field,
veterinary professionals experience death of patients five times more often than physicians
for humans. Even with this statistic, you are in this field because of your desire to care, not
only for the animals but also for the clients that you build relationships with. The
compassion it takes to care for terminally ill patients and their families can come at a price.
Depletion of your emotional resources can leave you with no way to continue caring for
your patients, your clients, or yourself.
Compassion fatigue is often mistaken for burnout. The easiest way to distinguish the two
 o n o o n   s e  s  oo  s
caused by where you do it. While each may seem similar, they are actually very different
 s   i    s   
policies, procedures, and bureaucracy. It often involves feelings of hopelessness and
onset. They can reflect the feelings that your work makes no difference and are often
   o   s      
S            
exhaustion that one experiences.
with someone in an emotional event, such as cancer treatment, compels you to “stand in
their shoes,” compassionately wishing to ease their pain somehow. As stated before, the
key to empathy is to not take on the other person's feelings. When you experience someone
else's emotions repeatedly, it can become hard not to suffer the feelings yourself. The chain
     s      s      
cases, but you can begin to feel the pull at your compassion “strings." Be aware of these
pulls and identify when you feel them getting stronger. If unattended, you run the risk of
fatiguing yourself completely and developing a list of problems, such as
● dissociation or “checking out" mentally,
● numbness in emotional situations,
· isolation,
● hypervigilance and heightened alertness,
· sleep problems,
● tearfulness, and
·  avoidance and/or obsession.
Other signs are a loss in sense of humor, loss of fulfillment from previously enjoyable
activities, overreacting, ongoing feelings of sadness, and self-medication with drugs, food.
or alcohol. The ability to cope with this emotional stress is unique to each member of the
   ssao   s    aa  a 
balanced team can help every member reduce the chances of compassion fatigue, while an
unsupportive team environment can foster negative emotional effects.
Members of the veterinary healthcare team often experience intense situations repeatedly.
without stopping to mentally or emotionally rest. Some may overcommit to clients and
patients. Putting in late hours to care for patients when others are available, sharing personal
contact information with clients to remain in touch, and allowing breeches of hospital
protocol for particular clients, such as after-hour visits and discharges, all begin to wear on
the team as well as the individual. Technicians often experience less control over their work
situations and feelings of powerlessness, and frustration can result. You may begin to feel
isolated in your devotion to your patients—another setup for compassion fatigue. You
your patients. Research has shown that behaving in an empathic way with patients leads to
a better level of care, whereas remaining detached leads to stress and emotional exhaustion.
It does not take much time working in the veterinary field to realize the attachment you
will form with many of your clients. When you work with oncology clients and patients,
you can expect to experience your own sense of grief and loss when the pet dies. You will
not only have lost a relationship with that patient that you have cared for and nurtured
throughout treatments, but also the client whom you have stood beside throughout the
         s  e  
professional caregivers are similar to those experienced by the families with whom they
worked. Your grief, though it will be shorter and less intense than your client's, is of great
importance and worthy of the same care that you give to your clients. When you
 e io   o so      s   oa o
workplace, you will be at less risk for compassion fatigue.
Figure 9.6 Technicians often grieve not only the loss of the patient but also their
relationship with the client. Allowing time to process one's grief is important to
maintaining a healthy self-care regimen.
Team-Care Strategies
Employing strategies within  the work environment can enhance teamwork and
communication as a way to reduce the chance of compassion fatigue:
· Debrief cases: Meeting as a group to discuss case specifics as well as the emotional
components experienced can act as a release for team members. These discussions
can provide opportunities to share perspectives of the case, affirm personal
contributions, and identify the needs of the team. This is especially important for
ongoing and emotionally charged cases.
personal life. It can be something that the team does together or individually before
leaving for the day or when a case ends. Closure can also occur when you sign a
closure a step further and acknowledge the patient and client in your own way. Some
ideas are to have a special place or journal where members of the veterinary team can
write their favorite memories of the patient, allow time during debriefing or staff
meetings to share heartwarming stories of clients and patients, or plan a memorial to
commemorate all the animals you have worked with. The only requirement for
creating a purposeful ending is that it has meaning for you and the team. This will
     sa n sd o no d
Self-Care Strategies
When you begin to care for yourself appropriately, you create a balance between life and
work, and are able to enjoy each separately. Instead of treading down the path to
            sg
strategies to prevent it.
  (    n    s s  
be difficult to start many new practices at once. Try out different ones to see which fit best
o du on (spu pue A) uisss poddns nno yse oi poo oq uo h isfl noa u!
continue these practices.
you protect your time. Boundaries include the following:
Work a full day and then go home.
Avoid going into work on your days off or checking work e-mails.
。
Refrain from sharing personal phone numbers with clients.
When you are home, turn off your “work" thinking.
Trust your coworkers to take care of patients in your absence so you can
 Reconnect with yourself: Remember the things that you loved to do before your life
  o  s   so   o   
plant a garden, read a book, exercise, watch the sunset, and so on. Each person has
specific activities that fulfill them. It is important to identify what they are for you and
commit to nurturing yourself.
· Reconnect with others: Schedule fun social events or outings with your family.
friends, or pets. Make a point to interact in events not related to work
· Care for your body: Maintaining a healthy diet is important for keeping your immune
    sn s ss  o n  s  s s
things you enjoy. Exercise is a natural way to relieve stress by raising endorphins, the
feel-good chemicals in your brain. Exercise also reduces anxiety and promotes good
sleep. Research shows that it is a proven mood enhancer. Eating healthy and creating
a daily exercise routine can help maintain balance in your life and mood.
· Take a break: When you begin to feel that emotional pull of compassion at work,
check that your patient is being cared for and allow yourself to step away for a short
break from the situation. Walk outside or go to a break room. Wherever you go,
breathe deeply and use positive self-talk and imagery as a way to rebalance yourself
emotionally.
· Talk to a professional: Sometimes, caring deeply can be too much to handle on your
own. Seeking out the help of a professional therapist or counselor is nothing to be
ashamed of. It can even set an example for others in need of help. Talking with
           i
Figure 9.7 To maintain a healthy work-life balance, it is good to identify what hobbies
and activities are helpful.
Your work is meaningful to many, including yourself and your clients. You have the
   s          s  
you remember to care for yourself as you do for your patients and clients, you will continue
to enjoy a fulfilling career.
Additional Reading
animal death in 177 clients from 14 practices in Ontario. J Am Vet Med Assoc 217:1303-9.
Arnetz BB. 1997. Physicians' view of their work environment and organization. Psychother
Psychosom 66:155-62.
Bartholomew J, Morrison D, Ciccolo JT. 2o05. Effects of acute exercise on mood and well-
being 0n patients with major depressive disorder. Med Sci Sports Exerc 37(12):2032-7.
Cohen S. 2002. Can pets function as family members? West J Nurs Res 24(6):621-38
Cohen S. 2oo7. Compassion fatigue and the veterinary health team. Vet Clin North Am
Small Anim Pract 37:123-34.
Figley CR, Roop RG. 2006.Compassion Fatigue in the Animal-Care Community.
Washington, DC: Humane Society Press.
Kubler-Ross E. 1969. On Death and Dying. New York: Collier Books/Macmillan
Lagoni L, Hetts S. 1990. Bereavement. In: McCurnin D (ed.), Clinical Textbook for
Veterinary Technicians (2nd Ed.). Philadelphia: Saunders.
Lagoni L, Butler C, Hetts S. 1994. The Human-Animal Bond and Grief. Philadelphia:
Saunders.
Mehrabian A. 1972. Nonverbal Communication. Chicago, IL: Aldine-Atherton
Mitchener K, Ogilvie GS. 2002. Understanding compassion fatigue: Keys for the caring
veterinary healthcare team. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 38:307-10.
Swanson TR, Swanson MJ. 1977. Acute uncertainty: The intensive care unit. In: Pattison
EM (ed.), The Experience of Dying. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, pp. 245-51.
Worden, JW. 1991. Grief Counseling and Grief Therapy (2nd Ed.). New York: Springer.
Glossary
Acronym:
Acute tumor lysis syndrome: A condition brought on when tumor cells break apart
releasing their contents into the bloodstream. The result is a dangerous, sometimes fatal,
alteration in the normal balance of serum electrolytes.
Adenoma:
A benign tumor derived from the skin, the linings of the digestive or urinary tract, or
glands.
Anaphylaxis:
An acute, multisystem severe allergic reaction
Anemia:
A decrease in the normal number of red blood cells or less than the normal quantity of
hemoglobin in the blood.
Anthropomorphize:
To attribute human characteristics to animals.
Anticipatory grief:
The realization that there will soon be a loss, resulting in a drastic change of day-to-day life.
Apoptosis:
Active cell death.
Auscultate:
To listen, specifically to the sounds produced by the body
Benign:
A tumor which is self-limited in its growth, is not capable of invading into adjacent tissues,
and is not capable of spreading to distant tissues (metastasizing).
Biological safety cabinet (BSC):
An enclosed, ventilated workspace for safely working with materials contaminated with
dangerous substances or disease-causing organisms.
Body surface area:
Equivalent to the surface area of the skin. It is difficult to measure, so it is commonly
estimated on the basis of formulas that use body weight as part of the equation.
Butterfly catheter:
 A steel needle attached to flexible plastic wings and a short piece of extension tubing.
Cancer:
A class of diseases in which a cell or a group of cells display uncontrolled growth, invasion
of local tissues, and sometimes metastasis.
Carcinoma:
A malignant tumor derived from cells of the skin, the linings of the digestive or urinary
tract, or glands.
Cephalic vein:
A large superficial vein of the anterior lower forelimb.
Coarsely fractionated radiation therapy:
A total dose of radiation broken into large fractions, allowing fewer treatment sessions.
Compassion fatigue:
A gradual lessening of compassion over time. Sufferers can exhibit several symptoms
including hopelessness, a decrease in experiences of pleasure, constant stress and anxiety,
and a pervasive negative attitude.
Complete blood count (CBC):
A blood test that looks at numbers, size, shape, and appearance of red blood cells, white
blood cells, and platelets.
Complete response (CR): The disappearance of all evidence of cancer.
Concentrated waste:
Waste generated by chemotherapy preparation and administration including the original
drug vial, or a syringe and needle that came in contact with the concentrated drug during
preparation.
Contaminated waste:
Incidental waste generated by chemotherapy preparation and administration such as gloves,
gowns, administration sets, and intravenous bags.
Contraindication:
A factor that increases the risks involved in using a particular drug, carrying out a medical
procedure, or engaging in a particular activity.
Cystitis:
Inflammation of the bladder.
Cystocentesis:
A urine collection procedure whereby a needle is placed into the urinary bladder through
the abdominal wall of an animal and a sample of urine is removed.
Cytotoxic:
Toxic to cells
Department of Transportation (DoT):
A government agency in North America devoted to transportation. The largest is the United
States Department of Transportation, which oversees interstate travel. All US states,
Canadian provinces, and many local agencies also have similar organizations.
Desquamation:
The shedding of the outermost membrane or layer of a tissue, such as the skin.
Diluent:
A diluting agent, often water, saline solution, or dextrose solution.
Dorsal spinous process:
The bony protuberance of the spine that sticks up in animals.
Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA):
A law enforcement agency under the United States Department of Justice, tasked with
combating drug smuggling and use within the United States.
Electrolyte solution:
A solution containing any of various ions, such as sodium, potassium, or chloride, required
by cells to regulate the flow of water molecules across a cell membrane.
Empathy:
The ability to stand in someone else's shoes and have an emotional and intellectual
comprehension of  what  they are  experiencing  without taking  on  the actual  feelings
yourself.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA):
An agency of the federal government of the United States charged with protecting human
health and the environment.
Extravasation:
The flow of blood or the administration of a drug outside of a blood vessel.
Febrile:
Having a fever.
Fine needle aspiration:
A technique to draw a sample of cells from a tumor using only a thin, small needle.
Grade:
Tumor grade is a system used to classify cancer cells in terms of how abnormal they look
under a microscope and can be predictive how quickly the tumor is likely to grow and
spread.
Gram-positive/gram-negative:
the stain; gram-stain-negative bacteria do not.
Hemangiosarcoma:
A malignant tumor derived from the blood vessels.
Hemorrhagic:
Characterized by the presence of blood.
High efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filter: A type of high efficiency air filter designed to
filter out airborne microorganisms and particles.
Histamine release:
Histamine is involved in local and systemic immune responses. As part of an immune
   s  sr sse  s   ssn
inflammatory response.
Hypercalcemia:
Abnormally high blood calcium levels.
Intralesional:
Into a lesion, usually refers to the injection of a drug directly into a tumor
Intramuscular (IM):
Into a muscle, usually referring to a drug injection.
Intravenous (IV):
Into a vein, usually referring to a drug injection or infusion.
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca:
Dry eyes—its literal Latin translation is “dryness of the cornea and conjunctiva.'
Lateral recumbency:
The patient is lying on its side.
Lateral saphenous vein:
A large superficial vein on the lateral (outer) aspect of the lower hind limb.
Leukemia:
Cancer of the blood cells affecting the bone marrow or blood.
Luer lock:
           
medical and laboratory instruments,  including hypodermic syringes, stopcocks, and
needles. Luer-Lok is a registered trademark of Becton Dickinson.
Lymphoma:
A malignant cancer of lymphocytes; one of the white blood cells.
Malignant:
A malignant tumor is not self-limited in its growth, is capable of invading into adjacent
tissues, and may be capable of spreading to distant tissues (metastasizing)
Mast cell tumor:
A malignant tumor, usually of the skin or subcutaneous tissues, derived from white blood
cells called mast cells.
Medial saphenous vein:
A large superficial vein on the medial (inner) aspect midway along the hind limb.
Melanoma:
          n 
skin and mucous membranes.
Mesothelioma:
A malignant cancer of the cells lining the abdominal and thoracic organs.
Metabolite:
Any substance produced by a metabolic reaction in the body, including chemicals formed
by the metabolic transformations of a drug.
Metastasis:
The spread of cancer from one part of the body to another
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIoSH): The US federal agency
responsible for conducting research and making recommendations for the prevention of
work-related injury and illness.
Neutropenia:
s
Neutrophils:
 u s   e ou s,  r ss, no o
the nucleus); the most abundant of the white blood cells and form an integral part of the
immune system. They are especially important in protecting against bacteria.
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug:
A drug with pain-controlling, fever-reducing, and anti-inflammatory effects, which is
neither a steroid nor a narcotic.
Normal saline:
The commonly used term for a solution of 0.9% sodium chloride
Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC):
A US government agency that oversees nuclear reactor safety and security, reactor
licensing and renewal, radioactive material safety, security and licensing, and spent fuel
management.
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OsHA): An agency of the United States
occupational fatalities by issuing and enforcing standards for workplace safety and health.
Osteosarcoma:
A malignant tumor arising from bone cells.
Over-the-needle catheter:
Used for longer infusions into peripheral veins. After the stylet needle of an over-the-needle
catheter is inserted into a vein, the catheter is then slid over the needle into the vein and the
needle is withdrawn.
Palliative treatment:
Treatment given to relieve the clinical signs and reduce the suffering caused by cancer and
other life-threatening diseases.
Paraneoplastic syndrome:
A disease or clinical sign that is the consequence of the presence of cancer in the body, but
it is not due to the local presence of cancer cells.
Partial response (PR):
Patency:
The state of being open and unblocked
Per os (PO):
By mouth.
Perivascular:
Around a blood vessel.
Personal protective equipment (PPE):
Equipment used to protect the user from health risks associated with the handling of
potentially dangerous substances..
Platelets:
Blood cells involved in the clotting cascade
Polydipsia:
Increased thirst
Polyuria:
Increased urination, usually as a result of excessively diluted urine
Progressive disease (PD):
A significant worsening of cancer.
Pulse deficit:
The absence of a palpable pulse (or significant change in pulse quality) in conjunction with
an audible heartbeat. Pulse deficits usually indicate a cardiac abnormality and should be
brought to the attention of a veterinarian.
Quality of life:
The degree of well-being felt. It consists of two components: pain and suffering. Pain is a
physical and emotional sensation. Suffering involves the ability to enjoy living life.
Recheck history form:
A history intake form, more focused than an initial intake history form, used to gather
information from one appointment to the next.
Red blood cell:
The cell in the blood responsible for carrying oxygen to tissues.
Reflection:
To paraphrase back to the clients what they have said, focusing not only on the content of
the conversation but also on the feelings the clients express.
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA): The principal federal law in the United
States governing the disposal of solid waste and hazardous waste.
Sarcoma:
A malignant tumor derived from connective tissues. Such tissues include bone, cartilage,
fibrous connective tissue, fat, muscle, and the linings around the nerves and blood vessels.
Self-disclosure:
Sharing with your client a similar experience you have faced, which can help clients feel
less isolated and normalize their emotions.
Septic:
Experiencing a whole-body inflammatory state with the presence of infection.
Serosanguinous fluid:
A fluid containing both blood and serum.
Soft skills:
The cluster of personality traits, social graces, communication, language, personal habits,
friendliness, and optimism that characterize relationships with other people; the ability to
Stable disease (SD):
A situation in which a cancer has not improved but has also not worsened significantly.
Stage:
A description (usually numbers I to IV) of how much the cancer has spread through the
body.
Standard operating procedure (SOP):
Detailed, written instructions to achieve uniform performance of a specific function.
Sternal recumbency:
The patient is lying on its chest.
Sternum:
The long flat bone or set of bones located at the center of the chest.
Subcutaneous (SQ):
Under the skin.
Surgical margin:
When a tumor is biopsied or surgically removed, the surgeon also takes out some normal
ss pu  go  no   ss o q s o s pn ss
and the tumor itself is called the surgical margin
Tachycardia:
An abnormally high heart rate.
Therapeutic index:
The amount of a drug that causes a therapeutic effect compared with the amount that causes
drug toxicity.
Thrombocytopenia:
An abnormally low platelet count.
Tumor:
A swelling caused by an abnormal growth of cells, which can be benign or malignant.
White blood cell count:
The number of white blood cells in the blood
Venipuncture:
The process of obtaining intravenous access for the purpose of intravenous therapy or
obtaining a sample of venous blood.
Vesicant:
A substance that causes tissue blistering. Vesicants are highly reactive chemicals that
combine with proteins, DNA, and other cellular components resulting in destructive cellular
changes.
Index
acute tumor lysis syndrome
administration of chemotherapy actinomycin D
Adriamycin. See doxorubicin adverse effects
age, chemotherapy and alanine aminotransferase Alkeran. See melphalan alopecia
ALT. See alanine aminotransferase anal sac carcinoma
anemia
antibiotics
anticipatory grief
anxiety, owner and pet apoptosis
appetite
AraC. See cytarabine asparaginase
auscultation
behavior assessment Benadryl. See diphenhydramine biochemistry profile biological safety
cabinet biopsy
bladder tumors
blood tests. See laboratory tests body map
body surface area
brain tumors
butterfly catheter. See catheters calcium
calipers
capsules
carboplatin
carcinogenesis
carcinoma
cataracts, radiation-induced catheter
CCNU. See lomustine CDDP. See cisplatin CeeNu. See lomustine cell cycle
cephalic vein
Cerenia. See maropitant cisplatin
chemo-safety pen
chemotherapy administration intramuscular
intravenous
oral
setup for
subcutaneous
children
chlorambucil
client information sheet combination drug chemotherapy communication
compassion fatigue
Compazine. See prochlorperazine complete blood count (CBC) complete response
compounding
condolence card
contaminated waste
Cosmegen. See actinomycin D
crying
CT. See computed tomography cure
cyclophosphamide
cystitis, sterile hemorrhagic cystocentesis
cytarabine
Cyto sar. See   cytarabine  cytosine  arabinoside. See
 cytarabine
Cytoxan. See
cyclophosphamide dactinomycin. See actinomycin D
death, chemotherapy-related dehydration
denial
dexrazoxane
diarrhea
diet
"difficult client'"
dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) diphenhydramine
disposal of chemotherapy drugs diuresis
doxorubicin
Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA) electrolytes
Elspar. See asparaginase Elizabethan collar
empathy
end-of-life  decisions  endocrine  disruptors  environment,  cancer  development  and
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) epinephrine
euthanasia
exposure, to chemotherapy extravasation
eye contact
eyewash station
facial expressions
fever
fine-needle aspiration Flagyl. See metronidazole flow sheet
flushing, of catheter furosemide
gastrointestinal (GI) toxicity. See also diarrhea; nausea; vomiting gloves
good day/bad day calendar gown
grade
granulomatous meningoencephalitis grief
children and
stages of
hair loss. See alopecia “Hallmarks of Cancer?
handouts. See client information sheet hazardous waste
heart, damage to
heart rate
hemangiosarcoma
HEPA filter
histiocytic sarcoma histopathology
history
hospice
hypercalcemia. See calcium hypersensitivity reaction imaging
Imodium. See loperamide initiation, in carcinogenesis invasion
isolator
jugular vein
keratoconjunctivitis sicca, radiation-induced kidney values/function Kubler-Ross, Elizabeth
L-asparaginase. See asparaginase laboratory tests
Lasix. See furosemide lateral recumbency
leukemia
Leukeran. See chlorambucil liver values
lomustine
loperamide
Luer-lock syringes
lymphoma
magnetic resonance imaging mammary gland carcinoma margins, surgical
maropitant
mast cell tumor
Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS) measurement, of tumor size medical records
melanoma
melphalan
metoclopramide
metronidazole
mesothelioma
metastasis
mitoxantrone
MRI. See magnetic resonance imaging muzzle
myeloma
nasal tumors
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) nausea
needle stick injuries neutropenia
neutrophils
nonverbal communication Novantrone. See mitoxantrone Nuclear Regulatory Commission
(NRC) nursing
Occupational Safety and Health Administration  (OSHA) Oncovin. See vincristine
Onguard TM
open-ended questions oral chemotherapy drugs oral tumors
osteosarcoma
over-the-needle catheter(s). See catheters pain
pancreatitis
Paraplatin. See carboplatin partial response
perianal tumors
personal protective equipment (PPE) PhasealTM
physical examination platelets
Platinol. See cisplatin prednisone
pregnancy
premalignancy
 preparation of chemotherapy prochlorperazine
progression, in carcinogenesis progressive disase
promotion, in carcinogenesis pulse
 pulse deficit
quality of life
radiation therapy
radiographs
recapping of needles red blood cells
reflection, as communication Reglan. See metoclopramide Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act (RCRA) respirator
respiratory rate/effort response assessment restraint for chemotherapy saphenous vein
sarcoma
sedation
self-disclosure
sepsis
side effect(s). See adverse effects snake bite kit
soft skills
soft-tissue sarcoma spleen, tumors of
spill kit
stable disease
stage
Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) sternal recumbency
storage, of chemotherapy drugs suffering
surface area. See body surface area surgery
tachycardia
temperature
therapeutic index
thrombocytopenia. See platelets touch, as communication TPR
 ssn   sa n s  a ss
tylosin
ultrasound
urinalysis
urine specific gravity USP 797 protocol
vaccine-associated sarcoma. See soft-tissue sarcoma Velban. See vinblastine vesicant drugs
Villalobos technique vinblastine
vincristine
vomiting
waste disposal container weight
white blood cells
lowering of, see neutropenia Worden, William
1  X-rays. See  radiographs   Zinecard. See
dexrazoxane
Cancer
Chemotherapy
for the Veterinary Health Team
Kenneth Crump and Douglas H.Thamm
WILEY-BLACKWELL