ColourReviewof
Self-Assessment
LEARN·REVISE·REINFORCE
Small Animal
Soft Tissue
Surgery
StephenD Gilson
Clinicalcases
Problem based
Full colour
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.com
Self-Assessment Colour Review of
Small Animal
Soft Tissue
Surgery
Stephen D. Gilson
DVM, Dipl ACVS
SonoraVeterinarySurgery
Phoenix,Arizona,USA
Manson Publishing/The Veterinary Press
Reprinted 2001, 2006
Copyright  1998 Manson Publishing Ltd
ISBN:1-874545-64-2
ISBN:978-1-874545-64-4
All rights reserved.No part of this publicationmay bc reproduced, storcd in a
retricval system or transmittcd in any form or by any mcans without the writtcn
permission of the copyright holder or in accordance with the provisions of the
Copyright Act 1956 (as amended), or under the terms of any licence permitting
limited copying issucd by the Copyright Liccnsing Agency, 33-34 Alfred Place,
London WC1E 7DP.
Any person who does any unauthorised act in relation to this publication may be
liable to criminal prosecution and civil claims for damagcs.
A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from thc British Library.
For full cletails of all Manson PublishingLtd titles please write to:
Manson PublishingLtd,73 Corringham Road,Iondon NW11 7DL
Tel:+44(0)20 89055150
Fax:+44(0)2082019233
Email: manson@mansonpublishing.com
Wcbsite:www.niansonpublishing.com
Text cditing:Peter Beynon
Typcsctting, design and layout: Paul Bennett
Colour reproduction: Tenon &Polert Colour Scanning Ltd,Hong Kong
Printed in India
Preface
This title provides a bricf but broad ovcrvicw of all aspccts of gcncral surgcry for
simall animals. Likc other titles in the Self-Assessment Colour Review series, the
questions arc divided into multiple parts and most are accompanied by an illustration,
diagnostic image or clinical photograph. The answers are of moderate length and are
designed to provide the reader with specific considerations for the management of the
discase process presented. The content and format of the cases are presented in a man-
ner akin to clinical cxpcrience, and will appeal equally to veterinary students,practi-
tioners with an intcrest in surgery and surgeons in training. They also provide a
spcctrum of challenge ranging from sinple to difficult, with most of the questions
beingmoderately difficult.
The cases were provided by an international group of authors. Surgery is an in-
hercntly controvcrsial topic,so the reader may find variations to the diagnostic and
trcatment recoimmendations with which they are familiar. I have attempted to dampen
points of controversy, but ask the reacler to consider some of the different approaches
prcsented herein with an open mind.
This text is the culmination of many hours of work,and my hope is that you enjoy
the book and that you are surgically more learned having rcad it.
Stephen D. Gilson
3
Contributors
Ana Mayenco Aguirre,DVM
Mercedes Sanchez de la Mucla,DVM
Universidad Complutense de Madrid
Universidad Complutense de Madrid,
Madrid,Spain
Madrid,Spain
Fidel SanRoman Ascaso, DVM, DDS, MD
Maura G.O'Brien,DVM,Dipl ACVS
Universidad Complutense de Madrid
VCA West Los Angeles Animal Hospital,
Madrid,Spain
l.os Angclcs, California,USA
R. Avery Bennctt, DVM, MS, Dipl ACVS
DeboraJ.Osuna,BS,DVM,Dipl ACVS
University of Florida,Gainesville,Florida,
Franklin Veterinary Services Referral
USA
Centre, Papakura, New Zealand
Bernard Bouvy,DVM,MSc,Dipl ACVS
Pilar Llorens Pena, MD
&FCVS
Universidad Complutense de Madrid
Cliniquc Veterinairc Fregis, Arcueil,
Madrid, Spain
France
Betina C.Rama,DVM
Phyllis Ann Cickot,DVM,MS,Dipl
Iams Company, Buenos Aires, Argcntina
ACVIM(Oncology)
LeonardoJ. Sepiurka,DVM
Sonora Veterinary Surgcry and Oncology:
College of Veterinary Medicine,Bucnos
Scottsdale,Arizona,USA
Aires,Argentina
GillesDupr,DVM,Dipl ECVS
NickSharp,BVctMed,Ph1）,Dipl ACVS
CliniqueVeterinairc Frcgis,Arcucil,France
ACVIM&ECVS,MRCVS
North Carolina State Univcrsity,Raleigh,
Paloma Garcia Fernandez,DVM
Universidad Complutense de Madrid
North Carolina,USA
Madrid, Spain
Mark M.Smith,VMD,Dipl ACVS
Virginia-Maryland Regional College of
Stephen D.Gilson,DVM,Dipl ACVS
VeterinaryMedicine,Blacksburg,
Sonora Veterinary Surgcry and Oncology,
Scottsdale,Arizona,USA
Virginia,USA
Joseph Harari, DVM, MS, Dipl ACVS
MarkJ.Soderstrom,DVM
Oklahoma State University,Stillwater,
Rowley Mcmorial Animal Hospital,
Springfield,Massachusetts,USA
Oklahoma,USA
Elizabeth M.Hardic,DVM,PhD
Jesus Rodriguez Quiros,DVM
Universidad Complutense de Madrid,
Dipl ACVS
North Carolina State University,Ralcigh.
Madrid, Spain
North Carolina,USA
Sharon Ullman, DVM, Dipl ACVS
Vetcrinary Surgical Associates, Concord,
Dudley E.Johnston,BVSe,MVSc,AM,
California,USA
Dipl ACVS &ECVS
Hebrew University of Jerusalem,Rchovot,
Katherine Wells,DVM
Israel
MetroplexVeterinary Center,Irving
Jolle Kirpensteijn, DVM, MS, Dipl
Texas,USA
ACVS&ECVS
C.D.van Zuilen,DVM
University of Utrccht, Utrecht,
University of Utrccht, Utrecht,
The Netherlands
The Netherlands
4
Acknowledgements
I would first and foreimost likc to thank the international group of contributing authors
and the staff at Manson Publishing for their outstanding and timely efforts -I realize it
was often a challenge collaborating with an overworked editor in a differcnt timc zone.
Without the co-authorsI could not have assembled a text with this quality of content;
and without thc organizational skills,guidance and persistent prodding of Jonathan
Gregory, Clair Chaventre and Paul Bennett at Manson Publishing I could not have
assembled it in this century!
On a broader scale I want to give long ovcrduc thanks to my fricnds and colleagues:
Don Morshead for providing the spark that began ny interest in surgery; Peter Schwarz
who encouraged and guided me through my internship; and long-timc fricnd and
mentor Elizabeth Stone who,in addition to providing several of the photographs uscd
in the text, has had the greatest impact on my professional development. Thanks also to
who you are and more importantly I know who you are.
The following gave their permission for the following figures to be rcproduccd in the
book(identified by question numbers):
13 Courtesy of Mary Mahaffey,DVM,MS,Dipl ACVR
28b Reproduced with permission from Smith, M.M.and Waldron, D.R. (1993)
Approach to the hard palate.In: Atlas of Approaches.for General Surgery of the
Dog and Cat. Eds Smith, M.M. and Waldron, D.R. WB Saundcrs, Philadelphia,
pp.72-73.
168a-c, 176a, b, 192, 209a Copyright  1988, United States Surgical Corporation. All
rights rcscrvcd.Rcprintcd with the permission of the United States Surgical Corpor-
ation.
172Reprinted with permission of the Journal of the American Animal Hospitals
Association.
Abbreviations
AGIDAgar gel imumunodiffusion
HCG Human chorionic gonadotrophin
bpm Beats per minutc
i/m Intramuscular
BUN
Bloodureanitrogen
ivI
Intravenous
CBCComplete blood count
LH Luteinizing hormone
ECG Electrocardiogram
MIC Minimum inhibitory
ELISA
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent
concentration
assay
PCVPacked cell volume
FcLV
Feline leukemia virus
p/oPer os (by mouth)
FTVFelineimmunodeficicncy virus
b
Every
GnRH
Gonadotrophin-releasinghor-
s/c
Subcutaneous
mone
tid
Ter in die（three times a day)
5
Classification of cases
Analgesia 41,64,70,71,79,124
Surgery (continued)
Anesthesia 13,70
hcrnia rcpair4,26,35,182,196
intestinal 85,89,90,102,132,139,
Diagnostic tests 40,55,77,96,97,128,
158,181
150,164
ovariohysterectomy 41,47,113,150,
tumor staging19,44,55,69,116
160,161,178,212
Dressings 72, 83, 125
palate2,53,100,137,190
pancreatic17,107,205
Imaging1,12,26,36,40,68,73,105
prostate74,81
116,141
renal11,56,93,104,151
abdominal18,36,47,56,91,96,161,
staples 168,192
180,207,212
testicular 39,128
renal96,104
thoracic29,34,60,66,136,152,155,
ultrasound 36,40
208
tumor excision19,42,68,69,80,
Non-surgical management 1, 7, 9, 15,
109,146,167,177,179,183,212
17,22,54,56,58,61,67,78,105,
224
113,120,136,145
lreteral14,36,104,114,151
antibiotic therapy 51, 58
urethral45,49,106,110
chemotherapy 117,146,157,212
vaginal 160,180
enteral feeding 2, 52
Surgical instruments 8,23,24,119,121,
fluid management 6,33,223
176,209
radiation therapy 19,43,55,69,109,
forceps 75,153
157
retractor27,217
stapler25,218
Postoperative management 71, 79, 86,
sterilization 122, 148
98,107,114,133,171
Sutures10,14,38,4689/92,95,103,
Pre-surgical management 5, 86
106,111,125,140,168,181,192,
219
Surgery1,3,16,20,21,22,23,24,30,
patterns 59,147,202
32,40,95,115,140,142,154,169,
purse-string 110,132,214
204
abdominal97,117,120,130,132,
Wound management 10,15,30,31,65,
135,166,172,175,203,210
76,82,87,94,111,123,149,221
amputation 99,115
burns 199,200
cardiac42,143,185,191,195,214
debridement 123,149
castration 45,55,167,172
degloving 162,163
cystostomy 41,114,133
dehiscence 95,100,113
ear129,171,198
inguinal 173,174
gall-bladder186,187,220
skin flaps 173, 174,200
gastric5,20,33,44,62,102,201
skin grafts 101,163
hcad and neck13,28,48,61,103,
tissue adhesives 63,127
105,116,156,165,226
6
1-3:Questions
1a
1b
1 A six-month-old Cairn Terrier is presented for acute onset of drooling,rcgurgi
tation,anorexia and cervical pain.An esophageal foreign body is dctcctcd by plain
radiography of the cervical region.
i.Name common locations for esophageal foreign body entrapment.
ii. Describc somc non-surgical altcrnatives and list the advantages of these methods.
ii. Namc several indications for surgical intervention.
iv.Describe thc suurgical proccdurc shown (1a,b).
2 A surgical procedure underway in the
oralcavity ofa four-month-old,malc
Bulldog is shown (2). The owncrs
complaint is that the dog has a chronic
mucopurulent nasal discharge,coughs
when eating or drinking,and has not
hecn gaining wcight at a rate equal to
that of his litter mates. Hle also has a
foul odor from thc oral cavity.
i.What is the diagnosis?
i.What secondary complication may
be associated with this defect?
ili. What are three principles to be fol-
lowed during surgical repair of this
problem?
3Describe four ways tissues can be cut/incised. What are thc advantages and dis
advantages of each?
7
1-3:Answers
1 i. Foreign body entrapment caused by limited ability of the esophagus to dilate at
certain locations is most common at the pharynx, thoracic inlet, base of the heart and
just beforce the cardia.
i.Non-surgical managcment consists of foreign body retrieval by forccps under
guidance of a rigid or flexiblc cndoscope, or by the Foley catheter techniquc.Non-
surgical removal of foreign bodics results in lower morbidity and shortens hospital-
ization in uncomplicated cases. A recovery rate of 98% is rcported after foreign body
removal without surgery.
ii.Conservative treatment is attempted prior to surgery, exccpt whcn therc is evidence
of esophageal perforation,large areas of necrotic tissue,or immobility of the foreign
body.Clean lacerations that do not extend through thc full thickness of the
esophagcal wall may be left to heal secondarily.Endoscopy allows direct visualization
of thc forcign body and esophageal mucosa.
iv. Cervical esophagotomy. Thc csophagus is visualized beside the trachea after a
ventral midline skin incision and scparation of the sternohyoideus and sterno-
removed. Closure of the esophagus is by simple interrupted suturc in thc mucosa and
submucosa, followed by a second interrupted layer in the muscularis adventitia.
2 i. Congenital cleft of the hard and soft palates (seconclary palatal defect).
i.Aspiration pncumonia is often a complication of secondary palate defects. Thc
animal should be evaluatcd with thoracic radiographs and treated appropriately prior
to surgical correction of the palatc defect.
ii.Repair flaps should be larger than the primary defect to reduce tension on suture
lincs. Connective rissue and vascular supply is preserved by limited meticulous dis-
section (avoid the palatine artery) and gentle tissue handling.Tissuc flaps are apposed
gostomy or gastrostomy tube should be considered to bypass the oral cavity during
wound healing (see also 190).
3
Advantages
Disadvantages
1. Scalpel blade
Cheap,least raumatic,good for
Poor for loose tissucs,no
dense tissue and tissue under
hemostasis,difficult to usc for
tension.Gold-standard for tissue
fine dissection around vessels
incision
andncrves
2.Electroscalpcl
Decreased blood loss (coagulation),
Variable thermal necrosis atwound
dccrcascd forcign material
edges, delayed wound healing,
(ligature),decrcascd operating
decreased resistancc to infection
time
3.Scissors
Good forloose tissues,provides
Crushing damage to tissue, difficult
somc hemostasis by crushing,
to usc in dense tissue
good depthcontrol for cutting
and dissection
4.Iaser
Less thermal injury than
High equipment cost and
clcctroscalpel,resulting in
maintenance, delayed wound
decreased postoperative cdcina,
healing from thermal injury;
drainage and pain; provides
rcquires special training and
no-touchtechniquc andprecise
safety mcasurcs
tissue vaporization for meticulous
dissection
8
4-6:Questions
4A latcralabdominal radio
graph of a three-month-old,
fcmale cat is shown (4). The
animal was born with a swell-
ing in the umbilical region that
is easily reduced manually.
i. What is your diaguosis?
ii. Do you need any other tests
to confirm the diagnosis?
ili. What is the treatment of
choice?
5 An eight-year-old St. Ber-
nard is prcscnted with signs of
depression, abdominal disten-
sion and non-productive
vomiting(5).
i.What is the most likely
diagnosis?
ii.Describe thc initial prcsurgi
cal thcrapy.
ii. Describe the surgical cor-
rection of the problem, and
name different surgical tech-
niques to preventrecurrence.
of anorcxia,vomiting and dcprcssion.The owner suspects the puppy may have
swallowed a small plastic toy. On examination, the puppy's temperature is 37.2°C,
heart ratc is 150 bpm and pulscs arc weak.
i.You have assessed the puppy to bc scvcrely dehydratcd. By what routes can fluid
therapy be administered?
ii. The abdomen is slightly distended and painful to palpation.Abdominal
radiographs indicate there is an intcstinal obstruction and a moderate amount of
pcritoneal effusion.Relevant hemogram and scrum chcmistry valucs are:PCV 0.6 1/1
(60%); serum protein 75 g/l (7.5 g/dl); glucosc 2.5 mmol/1 (45 mg/dl); urca
6.64mmol/l(BUN 40 mg/dl);potassium 3.0mmol/1 (3.0 mEq/l).Exploratory
laparotomy is planned to treat the gastrointestinal obstruction.What replacement
fluids are used to rehydrate this puppy? What considerations are made prior to
administration? What rate of administration is appropriate?How is overhydration
prcventcd?
9
4-6: Answers
4 i. A congenital umbilical hernia containing omentum and small intestine.
ii. In this case it is not necessary to perform other diagnostic tcsts.‘Thc radiographs
show air-filled tubular structures, typical of small intestinal loops,outside the
abdominal wall. In other less obvious cascs it may bc uscful to perform a bariun study
or, if the prcsence of a herniated parenchymatous organ (e.g. liver, spleen) is suspected,
then sonography can bc uscd.
ii. Treatment is by surgical reduction of the hernial contents and suturing closed the
defect edges. Due to the size of this particular hernia, ir is not recommended to wait for
spontancous rcsolution; small hernias will often bc harmlessly occluded by falciform
ligament or omentum.Iarger hernias present the risk of bowel obstruction or visccral
Organ strangulation and are best repaired by early surgery.
5 i. Gastric dilatation-volvulus.
i. Initial trcatmcnt consists of gastric decomprcssion and treatment of shock. Gastric
dccomprcssion is achicvcd by passing a stomach tubc, percutaneous needle trocariza-
tion or temporary gastrostomy.
ii. A srandard midline laparotomy is performed and the stomach is repositioned and
decompressed. Stomach contents are removed using a large stomach tube or through a
gastrotony incision.The viability of the stomach is evaluated and non-viable parts arc
resected. The spleen is repositioned and inspected. Splenectomy is performed if viability
isindoubt.The stomach is secured in a normalpositionby attaching thcpyloric antral
region to the adjacent right abdominal wall. Gastropexy techniques include tube
gastrostomy and circumcostal, bclt loop and incision gastropexy.
6i. In animals younger than six weeks of age, use of skin turgor is not accurate to
estimate dehydration.Evaluation ofmucous membrane moistness and urinc color are
more accurate. The urine of puppies at this age should be clear and colorless. Any color
tinting indicates dehydration.
ii. In vcry young animals, fluids can be administered i/v through the jugular or cephalic
vcins, and intraosseously into the long bones. An intraosseous needle can be readily
placed in the femur, tibia, humerus or ulna. Flow rates of up to 11 ml/min can be
achieved with gravity flow through an intraosseous catheter.
ii. A replaccmcnt fluid such as Ringcr’s solution with 5% dextrose is utilized best by
young animals. To treat acute hypoglyceinia, replace glucosc with 1-2 ml/kg of
10-25% dextrose solution; maintain plasma glucose concentration at 4.5-11.2 mmol/l
(80-200 mg/dl).Fluids arc warmcd prior to administration, and potassium chloride is
added if scrun1 potassiun concentration is less than 2.5 mmol/1 (2.5 mEq/l).A basal
fluid administration ratc of 10-20 ml/kg/hour isrecommended during anesthesia to
prcvcnt hypovolemia and maintain renal perfusion. To prevent overhydration,
rcgularly asscss for cardiopulmonary abnormalities such as tachypnea, dyspnea and
cough. Weigh animals 34 times daily to monitor weight gain. Chemosis, cxophthal-
mos and restlessness are other signs of overhydration.
10
7-9:Questions
7 A four-year-old cat is diagnosed with hypcrtrophic cardiomyopathy.
i.What is a common vascular complication associated with this discase process?
ii. What are three commonly noted clinical or physical examination findings asso-
ciatcdwith this condition?
ii. Is surgery uscful for treatment?
iv. What is the prognosis?
8 i. Identify this instrument
(8).
ii. What is its use?
ii. what are some examples
ofalternativeinstruments?
9An exploratory laparotomy
is performed on a six-year-old
dog with peracute signs of de-
pression and hematochezia (9).
i.What is the diagnosis?
i.What breed is presumably
predisposed, and what is the
prognosis?
ii. What disease syndrome
may ensue after rescction of
more than 70-80%ofthc
small intestine? Give the most
common clinical signs of this
syndrome and what thcrapy
should be instituted
11
7-9:Answers
7i.Aortic thrombocmbolism.Thromboemboli commonly lodge at the aortic trifurca-
tion and extended into the branchcs. Pcriphcral thrombocmboli may originate from
cardiac thrombi which dislodge and pass into the aorta. Occasionally, cardiac thrombi
are detected using ultrasound.
ii. Common abnormalities include paraparesis, pain, hypothermia and ischenia of the
hindlimbs; and auscultation of a murmur, gallop sound or arrhythmia. Absent or
wcak fcmoral pulscs indicatc prcscncc of a thrombus. Dyspnca and tachypnea may
alsobe obscrvcd.
ili. Trcatment includcs supportivc therapy with fluids and diuretics, use of a vaso-
dilator such as acepromazinc, and an anticoagulant such as heparin, aspirin, or
warfarin. Hcparin is gcncrally uscd in thc acutc phasc, and warfarin for long-term
anticoagulant therapy. Clot dissolution has been achieved using streptokinasc and
urokinase.
Surgical removal of aortic thromboemboli has not been rewarding.It is best per-
formed within four hours of embolization.Amputation of the left atrial appendage
has also been suggested to eliminate the nidus for thrombus formation. In most cases,
iv.A rccent study showed that affccted cats had a 34% chance of surviving the initial
thrombocmbolic cpisodc; thosc that did had an avcragc survival of 11.5 months. Re-
cimbolization was common.Prognosis varics with thc scvcrity of thc embolic event,
degree of ischemia, evidence of abdominal organ infarction and scvcrity of the under
lying cardiae disease
8 i. Pointed bone reduction forceps.
ii.Maintenance of reduction during fixation of fractured bones.
i. Richard’s and Verbruggc bonc holding forccps arc uscd for maintaining reduction
Or manipulation of fragnents.These forceps are usually restrictcd to use on tubular
bones because of their shape.
9i.Mesentericvolvulus.
ii. German Shepherd Dog. The prognosis of mesenteric volvulus is extremely poor
because of the peracute nature of the disease and the rapid total occlusion of blood
supply to a large part of the intestinal tract.
iii. Short bowcl syndromc.Thc most common clinical signs include chronic diarrhea,
stcatorrhca,wcight loss andmalnutrition.Medical therapy consists of feeding multiple
simall meals per day of a fat-restricted diet, oral antibiotics for bacterial overgrowth,
cimetidine for gastric hypersecretion and vitamin supplementation.
12
10,1l:Questions
10 With many types of sutures currently available, proper sclection may be difficult.
Certain principles are considered when choosing a suture material.
i. How strong should sutures be and,ideally,how rapidly should they lose strength
while being absorbed?
ii. Can suture materials enhance a wound’s ability to rcsist infcction?
1la
11b
11 An 11-ycar-old, spaycd fcmalc Poodle (11a) presennted with a history of polyuria
and polydipsia, bilatcrally symmctrical alopecia and a pot-bellied, pendulous
abdoinen.A diagnosis of hyperadrcnocorticism was madc aftcr pcrforming the follow-
ing tests: CBC, serum chenistry profile, urinalysis, ACTH stimulation test and high-
dose dexamethasone suppression test. Abdominal radiography and ultrasonography
were used to examine the adrenal glands.An enlarged left adrenal gland (11b,
arrowed) was found.Ihe right adrenal gland could not be visualizcd.A unilatcral
adrenal tumor was suspcctcd as thc cause ofhyperadrenocorticism in this patient.
i. What treatment options are available for this condition? What are the mechanisms
of action of medical treatments?What are the bcncfits and disadvantages of these
treatments?
ii.What are some anesthetic and surgical considerations in pcrforming adrenal.
ectomy foranadrenal tumor?
13
10,Il:Answers
10 i. Suturcs should bc at lcast as strong as thc normal tissuc through which they are
placed. The relative rates at which sutures lose strength and the wound gains strcngth
should be compatible.The mechanical properties of sutures should closely match
those ofthetissue tobe closed.
ii.No,sutures potentiate wound infection.IThe ability of sutured tissue to resist
infection varies, dependling on the physical and chemical configuration. of the suture.
Howcver, cvcn thc lcast rcactive suture material will inpair a wound’s ability to resist
infection.The ability of a suturc matcrial to potentiate acute infection appears to
parallel the inflammatory rcsponse caused by that suture.Wound infections usually
begin around suture materials lcft in the wound. Therefore, suture use should be
minimizcd in contaminatcd wounds.Monofilament sutures withstand contamination
better than multifilament sutures of the same material. Synthetic sutures are superior
to natural sutures. Polyglycolic acid, polyglactin 910, monofilament nylon and poly
propylene have the lowest incidence of infection when uscd in contaminatcd tissucs.
11  i. Surgical exploratory and adrcnalcctomy is preferred to trcat non-invasive
adrenal tumors; howcvcr, it is not without risk. In one report, 1more than 50% of
patients undergoing adrcnalcctomy dicd of complications (e.g. thromboembolism,
renal failure and infcction), or wcrc cuthanatized due to metastatic disease at the time
of surgcry. Patients with adrenal adenomas had a significantly greater chance of
surviving than did dogs with adenocarcinomas.
Mitotane (op'-DDD)is cytotoxic to the cortisol producinglayers ofthe adrenal
treating pituitary depcndent hypcradrcnocorticism than for adrenal cortical tumors,
but at higher doses (50-150 mg/kg daily) somc rcsponsc is rcportcd for both adrcnal
adenomas and adenocarcinomas.
Ketoconazole administrationinhibits cholesterolsynthesis andblocks cortisol
formation. It is safer than mitotane since it is not cytotoxic to adrenal cortical cells,
but because it does not destroy the cortisol sccrcting cclls it must be administered for
life.It was shown to have bettcr cfficacy in trcating adrcnal dependent hyperadreno-
corticism as comparcd to mitotanc.
ii. Hypcradrenocorticism can. result in fluid and electrolyte imbalanccs, infcction, poor
wound hcaling,pancrcatitis and thromboembolic diseasc. All fluid and clcctrolytc
imbalances are corrected prior to anesthesia. Antibiotics are administered in the peri-
operative period and the surgeon should rigidly adhere to principles of aseptic surgery.
Some surgeons feel that due to poor wound healing and nuscle atrophy in these
paticnts, a flank laparotomy may bc a bcttcr surgical approach to the affected adrenal
gland.Although the latter does not provide exposure to the cntirc abdominal cavity,
the flank incision is subject to less tension than a ventral abdominal incision.Adrenal-
ectomy may result in sucdden decrease of serum cortisol levels and corticostcroids are
administered perioperatively to avoid an acute Addisonian crisis.
14
12,13:Questions
12
12 A 13-year-old, castrated male cat was presentcd with a history of weight loss
despite a ravcnous appetitc.A cervical nodule was palpated during physical examina-
tion. Hyperthyroidism is a differential diagnosis in this patient.It is now becoming
more commonplace to diagnosc and treat hyperthyroidism in its early stages prior to
development of these classic symptoms.
i. What diagnostic tcst is representcd (12, thyroid adenomas arrowed)?
ii.What other diagnostic tests arc reported to help diagnose occult or carly hyper-
thyroidism?
iiWhat other concurrcnt conditions are frequcntly present in cats diagnosed with
hyperthyroidism?
13 You are presentcd with a
13
cat in sevcrc respiratory dis-
tress.The cat was hit by a car
two wecks previously and was
treated by an emergcncy clinic.
Because chest trauma was
present,thoracic radiographs
are made (13).
i.Based on thc radiograph,
what is your diagnosis?
ii.Describe how this injury
occurs.
iii.Does this cat most likely
have inspiratory or cxpiratory
dyspnea,and why?
iv.Describe thc surgical man-
agcmcnt of this problem.
15
12,13:Answers
12 i. Radionuclidc imaging.Radioactive technetium-99m is administered intra-
radioactive material and in the normal patient thyroid glands show the same degree of
reactivity as salivary glands.Hyperfunctioning thyroid glands show increased uptakc.
Racionuclide imaging also detects metastatic and ectopic lesions.
ii.Serum concentrations of thyroxine (T4)and triodothyronine(T3) may beelevated;
increascd T4 concentrations arcmore reliable for diagnosinghyperthyroidism.
T3 suppression test-serum T3and T4concentrations arc determined before and
aftcr T3(oral preparation: liothyronine) is administered for three days. In normal cats
T4 concentrations decrcase markedly;in cats with hyperthyroidism the glands
function autonomously and are not responsive to negative feedback of thc thyroid
hormone axis, thcrefore suppression of T4 is minimal.
Thyrotropin-relcasinghormone(TRH) stimulation test-serum T4 conccntration is
measured beforc and after administration of exogenous thyrotropin releasing agent. In
normal cats T4 concentration incrcases; in hyperthyroid cats T4 concentrations stay
the samc or only increase slightly. This test is not yet widcly available and needs
further study.
ii.Hypcrtrophic cardiomyopathy is a common sequela of hyperthyroidism. Cardiac
changes induced are revcrsible in the majority of cats successfully treated for hyper-
thyroidism.Other common concurrent conditions of older hyperthyroid cats include
chronic renal discase and hepatopathies.
13 i. Tracheal avulsion, rupture or transection are terms uscd to describe this
condition.The intrathoracic trachea is transected.
i.The trachea is rapidly and scvcrely stretched.Ihe carina and lungs are fixed in their
location and as the trachea is stretchcd,it tears just cranial to the carina.Tissucs
surrounding the trachea usually do not tear and pneumothorax does not occur.As
hcaling progresses and scar tissuc matures, stenosis or displaccment of the trachea
result in respiratory distress.
ii.Expiratory dyspnea is most prominent, because as the patient exhales,intra-
thoracic prcssure increases and tends to collapse the pseudotrachea formed around the
defect.During inspiration,there is negative intrathoracic pressure which tends to open
thisarca.
iv.The challenge for surgery is to maintain anesthesia and controlled ventilation
during thoracotomy.The endotrachcal tube must be long enough to reach the carina
It is wise to have a sterile cndotracheal tube and breathing circuit which can be placed
into the aborad portion of the trachea once the thoracotomy is performed.Aright,
4th intercostal lateral thoracotomy is madc.The azygous vein may need to be ligatcd
for adequate exposure.The defcct is identified and,if possible,thc cndotracheal tube
placcd per os is guided into the aborad segment.If the tubc cannot be quickly
advanced into the aborad segment, the pseudotracheal tissuc is incised and a sterile
endotracheal tube is inscrted and connected to a sterile breathing circuit.The
pseudotrachea is exciscd and the trachea prepared for anastomosis.The per os
endotracheal tube is now advanced into the aborad segment and the trachea anasto-
mosed in a routinc manner.After anastomosis,if thcre is a leak,a mediastinal pleural
patch is suturedaround the anastomosis toprovide adequateseal.
16
14,15:Questions
14a
14A lateralradiograph of a ten-year-old Miniature Schnauzer prescntcd with a his
tory of anorexia,lethargy and dysuria for three days is shown (14a).On physical
cxamination thc dog was depressed,lethargic and febrile (39.4°C/103°F).It had a
history of chronic urolithiasis and had undergone two cystotomies,and prescrotal
urethrostomy in the past three years.
i.Give your diagnosis.
i.What diagnostic tests would you consider before taking this dog to surgery?
ii.What are treatment options for this disease?
iv.To perform ureterotomy for calculus removal,would you incise the ureter proxi-
mal or distal to the calculus,andwhich suture material wouldyou use to close the in-
cision?Would you temporarily stent the ureter?
15 This is a wound complica-
15
tion that occurred four days
after surgery for osteochondri-
tis dissecans of the humeral
head (15).
i.What is the complication
and the basis for its occur-
rence?
ii.How does this lesion affect
wound healing?
i.What are treatment options
and prognosis?
17
14,15:Answers
14 i.A uretcral calculus is
14b
suspected in addition to stones
in the bladdcr.
ii.A CBC,serum chemistry
profile and urinalysis are indi-
cated to rule out urinary tract
infection andevaluate renal
function.
An cxcretory urogram or
ultrasound cxamination is
performed to confirm ureteral
stones are present.
ii. One option is to do serial
radiographs and see if the ureteral calculus passcs on its own.In a canine experimental
study, solid spheres of 2.3 mm passed freely,2.8mm spheres became firmly impacted,
and those of 3.9 mm or more could not even be introduced into the uretcr. Given the
size of the calculi here, the chances of it passing naturally are small.
If no irrcversible damage is prcscnt in the kidney or ureter (e.g. marked hydro-
nephrosis or hydrouretcr) a ureterotomy is performed to remove the calculus,and
ventral cystotomy is performed to remove the bladder stones andflush theureters.An
intraoperative view of hydroureter with multiple calculi is shown (14b).Treatiment
with antibiotics (based on culture and sensitivity) and appropriate diet modification
(bascd on calculi analysis) is indicatcd.After two wecks of ureteral obstruction an
affected kidney will regain only 50-60%of its pre-obstruction function.With scvere
urcteral dilation,hydronephrosis or pyelonephritis,uretcronephrcctomy is considcred.
iv.Incise the uretcr proximally because in most instances it is dilated and ureterotomy
is easier; to close use simple interrupted or simple continuous sutures.Although gut,
polyglycolic acid or polyglactin 9 have been used with success in the urinary tract,
absorhable,5-0 to 6-0,monofilament suture,such as polydioxanone（PDS,Ethicon)or
polyglyconate (Maxon,Davis and Geck),with a swagcd-on necdle is rccommended.
Thesematerialsprovide less tissue drag,bettcr strength ata smaller size andvariedpH,
and induce less inflammation.
Stenting the ureters allows re-epithelialization if trauma has occurred.Howevcr,its
use is controversial whcn good apposition is obtained.Any foreign body will increase
local inflammation and ascending infection which both incrcase the risk of stenosis.
The author(B.Bouvy) does not stent urcters routinely.
15 i.A seroma caused by: inadcquate hcmostasis or dead space closure; excessive
tissue trauma from surgery orpostoperative activity;or in this instancc,failure to close
the scapulohumeral jointcapsule incision.
i.Seromas delay wound healing by disruption of tissues; inhibition of reparative cells
by local hypoxia,poor nutricnt delivery and waste removal; and by scrving as a
mcdium forbacterial infection.
ii.Treatmcnt options include open or closed drainage, pressure bandage support, and
reduction of activity.Persistent lesions may require reoperation and surgical obliter-
ation of dead space with sutures.Cytologic examination of the fluid is useful to rule
out concurrcnt infection. The prognosis for recovcry is good.
18
16,17:Questions
16a
16 This five-year-old, female, mixed-breed dog is presented three days after routine
ovariohysterectomy(16a).
i.What is the presumptive diagnosis?
ii.What diagnostic tests could be performcd to confirm the diagnosis?
iii.Whcn is emergency surgery indicated?
17A fivc-ycar-oldWeimaraner
17a
(17a) presents with episodic
weakness and is diagnoscd as
havingpersistent hypoglycemia
(serumglucose<2.2mmol/l
(<40 mg/dl).This patient ex-
hibits Whipple's triad’, and an
insulin secreting tumor is sus-
pected.
i.What is‘Whipple’s triad’?
Why are determinations of
serum concentrationsofboth
insulin and glucose helpful in
ruling out other sources of
hypoglycemia and diagnosing
hyperinsulinemia?
ii. Describe surgcry for an in-
sulin secreting tumor.
ii.What medical alternatives
are availablefor the treatment
of islet cell tumors?
19
16,17:Answers
16b
16 i.An abdominal wall dehisccnce(16b).
i. Digital palpation of the mass may reveal a
hernia ring or allow the abdominal contcnt
tobe reduced into the abdomen.Radio
graphy and ultrasonography may prove
valuablc in confirming the diagnosis of
incisional dehiscence and herniation of
abdominal organs.Fine-needle aspiration
biopsy helps rulc out other soft tissue masscs.
ili. Emergency surgery is indicated in cases
that deteriorate despite mcdical supportive
therapy,if the herniated organs show signs of obstruction or incarceration or when
external wounds or fistulation are present.
17b
17 i.Whipple's triad consists of: symptoms
after fasting or excrcise; serum glucose con-
centration <2.8 mmol/1 (50 mg/dl); symp-
toms relieved by the administration of glu
cose. Hypoglycemia may bc caused by con-
ditions othcr than an insulinoma (e.g.non-
pancreatic neoplasms,pregnancy,hepato-
pathy,nconatal hypoglycemia).Hypogly.
cemia normally suppresses insulin secretion
proportional to severity; islct cell tumors
secretc insulin rcgardless of scrum glucose
concentrations. By finding concurrent low
scrum glucose and high insulin concentrations,one can determine whether or not
hyperinsulinemia is present.
ii.The pancreas is carefully evaluated (17b) since islet cell tumors can be quite small
(<0.5 cm). A detectable mass is excised by partial pancreatectomy.Metastatic disease is
present at the time of surgery in as many as 45% of cases, and the liver is the most
common site.Theregional lymph nodes,liver and spleen arc evaluated and excisional
biopsy performed to evaluate for presence of metastatic disease and reduce tumour
burden.If surgery is successful (complete excision of the islet ccll tumor),thcn
hypoglyccmia should resolve.In one study58% of patients became normoglyccmic
postopcratively and 27%remainedhypoglycemic.
ii.Frequent fecdings to maintain serum glucose levels and reduce exertional activity.
Diazoxide inhibits insulin secretion,promotes hepatic gluconeogenesis resulting in
increased glucose production,and stimulates the beta-adrenergic system reducing
glucose utilization by antagonism at the cellular level.It is not cytotoxic to the neo-
plastic pancreatic islet cells and does not decrease insulin production.Streptozotocin
selectively destroys pancreatic beta-cells and can be used for islet cell tumors but is
potentially nephrotoxic.Glucocorticoids antagonize the effects of insulin at the cellular
level and promote hepatic glycogenolysis resulting in incrcased serum glucose.
Glucocorticoids are not cytotoxic but are useful in controlling the effects of hyper-
insulinemia.Propranolol,a beta-adrenergic blocking agent,reduces insulin secretion
by regulation of the beta-adrenergic nervous system. Unfortunatcly, it may also
promote hypoglycemia byblocking hepatic gluconeogcnesis.
20
18,19:Questions
18a
18b
18 An abdominal sonogram (18a) of an
18c
11-ycar-old, female,mixed-breed dog
that presented with an abundant serosan-
guinousvulvar secretion ofonemonth's
duration.Onsct was concomitant with
late estrus.The sonogram shows cystic
formations within a tubular structure.
Polydipsia or polyuria was not present. A
hemogram showed significant anemia
andmoderateleukocytosis（PCV0.2071/1
(20.7%);Hb63 g/1(6.3 g/dl);total
protein70g/l(7.0g/dl);RBCs2.28x
1012/1 (2.28×10%/mm²);lcuk0cytcs 29.4×109/1 (29,400/mm²);neutrophils 91%).A
lateral abdominal radiograph of the dog (18b) and the affected organ after surgical
excision(18c) are shown.
i.What is the affected organ?
i. What is your diagnosis?
19 Amandibularlesion was
19
notedduring oral examination
of a ten-year-old,mixed-breed
dog (19).The owner was con-
cerned after seeingblood tinged
saliva ncar thc dog's watcr
bowl.
i.What are the differcntial
diagnoses for this lesion?
ii.What diagnostic tests would
you perforrm?
ii.What treatment wouldyou
recommend?
21
18,19:Answers
18 i. The fluid-filled structure in the caudal abdomcn is the uterus. The presence of
thin-wallcd cysts in the organ lumen is not a normal finding. When a contrast
hystcrogram is performed (18b), the uterus is visible as a dilated, fluid-filled mass
occupying the caudal abdominal cavity. It is grcatly distended and fluid in the lumen
has diluted thc contrast media (Iohexol -300 mg I/ml). In the same image a small
inguinal hernia is also evident.The radiographic image could be mistaken for a
uterine perforation.
i.Based on history, clinical signs,hemogram (neutrophylic leukocytosis and anemia
from uterine hemorrhage) and radiograph and sonogram images, a diagnosis of cystic
endometrial hyperplasia was made.Histologic cvaluation of the uterus diagnosed
TypeII cystic endomctrial hyperplasia.Type I hyperplasia is not associated with any
particular phase of cstrus and has minimal concurrent inflammatory response in the
uterinc wall.Type II hyperplasia is charactcrized by a utcrine wall thickcned from
inflammatory cell infiltrates,cyst formation, occurrencc during diestrus and a sero-
sanguinous discharge (non-purulent).Type Il hyperplasia is associatcd with marked
inflammation (often purulent) and is the most common typc associated with
pyometra, and Type IV is chronic endomctritis.
19 i. Squamous cell carcinoma, amelanotic mclanoma, fibrosarcoma and epulis.
Ostcomyelitis is not usually associated with a mass lesion.Squamous cell carcinoma
often appears as a flat,ulcerated,sessile lesion with a granular appearancc such as this.
sizc and invasiveness based on clinical cxamination,rcgional radiographs, and some-
times computed tomography are used to determine thc stage of the primary tumor (T).
Incisional biopsy of oral tumors usually provides adequate tissuc to determine thc
histologic diagnosis.For easily reached,protruding tumors on the labial sides of the
mandiblc and maxillaamoderately deep wedge can be takenwithout anesthesia since
tumors contain no nerves.
Regional lymph node mctastases may occur in palpably normal lymph nodes.
Regional nodes are asscssed with a combination of palpation, fine-nccdle aspiration
and cytology, and biopsy for histologic analysis(N).Lymph nodcs with afferent drain-
age in this region are the mandibular, parotid and medial retropharyngeal nodes.
Ventrodorsal and right and left lateral thoracic radiographs of the chest are used to
assess for the presence of thoracic mctastases (M).A general health screen is also indi-
catcd torule out concurrent disease which may affect prognosis or treatment strategy.
ii.Histologic diagnosis was squamous cell carcinoma,and staging showed the tumor
was confined to the mandible (T2NOMO).Treatment options include surgical resection
achievcd in approximately 98% of cases and scveral reports claim total cure with a
mean follow-up of 17 months after surgical cxcision.With radiation therapy, control
ratcs of >50% at one year arc reported. There is long-term risk of secondary malig-
nancies after radiation therapy.
22
20,2I:Questions
20
20An cxploratory laparotomy is performcd on the dog in question 5.The stomach is
repositioned, and the stomach wall is evaluated for viability.
i.The discoloration of the stomach wall (20) is often associated with what type of
injury? Describe two possible surgical techniques to climinate the problem.
ii.What clinical criteria are uscd to assess the presence and extent of ischemic injury to
the stomach?
ii.The use of fluorescein dye to asscss the gastric viability is controvcrsial.What is the
main rcason for this controversy?
21 This openulcerated lesion (21a)is
21a
present on the latcral aspect of the meta-
tarsus in a six-year-old Great Dane.The
lesion has been present for two ycars and
has grown steadily over this period. The
dog is not lame and the lesion is not irri-
tating.
i.What is this lesion?What is the cause?
ii.How can it be treated? lf surgery is
necessary,describc the selected procedure.
23
20,2I:Answers
20 i. Pale grecn to gray serosal areas are attributed to arterial or arteriovenous
disruption and generally indicate ischemic or necrotic areas of the gastric wall that
require surgicalresection or partial gastric invagination.
ii.The criteria often used to cvaluate the extent of gastric wall injury include serosal
color and perfusion, gastric vascular patency and gastric wall tcxture.Active bleeding
of thc gastric wall after full thickness incision is used as the main criterion to
determine the margin of rcscction.
ii. The use of fluorescein dye is not recommended because subserosal hemorrhage and
corresponding serosal discoloration can block tissue fluorescencc,resulting in a false
positive diagnosis ofischemic damage.
21b
21c
21 i. Pressure sorcs can develop
ovcr bony prominences in largc
breed dogs. The lesion typically
progrcsscs from skin edema and
surface inflammation to a large
raised ulcer from unsuccessful
attempts of tissucs to heal by
contraction and epithelializa-
tion.
ii.With early pressure sores,the
lesion is treated by protectivc
bandagc and soft bedding. If
ulceration is limited,a callus
will devclop in many dogs.A
large ulcer will not heal. Im-
portant considerations for cor-
rection are the limited amount
of local skin and need for full
thickncss skin replacement
because of continued pressure.
The simplest effective pro-
cedure is selcctcd;a relaxing
incision will allow closure of the
large wound rcsulting from
excision of the ulcer.An incision is made medially and cxtended until the surgeon
determines that skin tension is not excessive (21b).This proccdure has the additional
advantage that the skin used to close the defcct is from the local arca and therefore
resembles the original skin.
The relaxing incision,a bipedicle advancement flap,is used when the original defect
must be closed with full thickness skin at the expense of an adjoining area.For this case
the defectrequired strong,healthy skin and a scar on the medial aspect of thc leg is not
subjected to pressure.Most relaxing incisions heal well in animals by contraction and
scarring is minimal.The relaxing incision is shown at day 25(21c).Because of continued
prcssure on this area,recurrence of the ulcerated lesion is likcly without continuous
monitoring and trcatment of the pressure sore beforc ulceration occurs.
24
22-24:Questions
22
22 This dog (22) was presented for persistent erection. The penis cannot be rcduccd
into the prepuce.No other physical abnormalitieswere found on examination.
i.What are thc causes of this condition?
i.What is thc treatiment for each of thc above causes?
23a
23 Name this instrument (23a) and dcscribe how it is uscd in vascular surgery.
24Electrocautery is an extremely useful tool to thc surgeon for rapid convenient
hemostasis of small vessels. It provides a cleaner, blood-frcc field facilitating identi-
fication of anatomic structures,and reduces blood lossfrom thepatient(particularly
important for very small animals). Describe how it works.
25
22-24:Answers
22 i. Paraphimosis, the inability to retract thc erect penis following sexual stimula-
tion,maybe caused by an abnormally narrowpreputial orifice（phimosis）,a short pre
puce,constriction by preputial hair,or trauma; strangulation resulting from placement
of rubbcr bands or othcr constricting substance around thcbase of the erect penis; and
priapism associatedwithlocalinflammation or,more commonly,spinal cord injuryor
disease.
i.Paraphimosis is treated by cleaning and lubricating the penis and replacing it in the
prepuce. Application of hyperosmolar solutions or warm packs are useful for shrink-
ing the penis to facilitatc replacement.For phimosis, surgical enlargement of the pre-
putial orificc or partial penile amputation may be requircd to prevent recurrence.
Strangulation is trcated by removing the strangulating object and trcatment of the
traumatized ischemic tissues.Catheterization may be needed to cnsure urethral
patcncyuntil resolution of penile cdema.
The pathogencsis of priapism in man and dogs is not currently understood and
trcatment is limited.Treatment must be prompt and consists of preventing drying and
sclf-trauma, and addressing the inciting cause (e.g. spinal fracture fixation). Injction
of alpha-adrenergic drugs or benztropine, and anticholincrgic drugs,into the corpus
cavernosum penis to induce detumescence has been reported in man and a stallion.
Surgical treatment in man is by crcating a communication between thc corpus caver-
nosum penis and thc glans penis, and this may be an option in breeding animals.
Potential sequelae to chronic penile prolapsc include penilc nccrosis and urethral
obstruction.In these cases, partial or completc pcnile amputation is indicated.
23 Satinsky vascular clamp. It
23b
is uscd to partially occlude
atraumatically a bloodvessel
such as the vena cava allowing
the surgeon to pcrform a lat-
eral vcnotomy.The clamp is
placed as dcmonstrated (23b）
allowing blood to flow around
the portion of the vein isolated
by the clamp. The surgcon
may then perform a vcnotomy
for an end-to-side anastomosis
orremovalofanintraluminal
mass such as a thrombus or
tumor.Following closure of the venotomy or anastomosis, this atraumatic clamp is
removcd,thus re-establishing circulation.
24 Flectrocautcry works by passing high frequcncy alternating current through thc
body of the animal.The tissues provide resistancc to current flow and a portion of
the energy is converted to heat.Two electrodes of different sizes arc used (the hand-
piece and the ground plate)to concentrate currcnt flow and provide greater energy
density, and hence heat, at the smaller clcctrode. In bipolar cautcry,both electrodes
are in the hand piccc and there is virtually no stray currcnt allowing for morc precise
coagulation.
26
25, 26:Questions
25 i.Identify this instrument
25
(25).
ii. List common uses for this
device.
iii.Are there alternativc deviccs
for some or allof these proce-
dures?
iv. List the steps taken when
using this instrument.
6a
26b
26 You are presented with a two-year-old, spayed
female Cocker Spanicl with a history of lethargy
and anorexia.Survey thoracic radiographs are
shown(26a,b).
i.Describe the radiographic findings.
ii.What is the most likely diagnosis?
iii.How could you confirm this diagnosis?
iv. Describe the pathophysiology of this condition.
v.Describe the surgical treatment of this condition.
vi. What is the long-term prognosis following
surgery for this patient?
27
25,26:Answers
25 i. Thoracoabdominal(TA) surgical stapler.
ii. Complete or partial lung lobectomy, atrial tumor resection, uterine stump ligation,
partial hepatectomy,partialprostatectomy,enterotomy closure,gastrotomy closure
and partial splencctomy are all common uses for this devicc.
ii.The gastrointestinal anastomosis (GlA) surgical staplcr may be used for similar
purposes. This stapler places a double row of staples and contains a blade to incise
tissucbetween thestaples.
iv. (1) Engage safety catch. (2) Open approximating lever. (3) Insert staple cartridge.
(4) Stapler is placed ovcr tissue to be stapled,approximating levcr is closcd.(5)
Alignment is ensured, safety catch is disengaged and staple trigger is depressed. (6)
Scalpel blade is used to cxcise tissue distal to the staple linc and staplcr is removed.
(7) Staple line is inspectcd and additional sutures are placcd as needed.
Some surgeons prcfer to place a line of simple continuous suture over the line of
staples for added security, especially when largc vascular pedicles are present.
26c
26 i. The cardiac silhouette is en-
larged and contains opacities consis-
tent with soft tissue and fat.Thc
trachea is displaced dorsally.The liver
shadow is not identificd in the abdo
mcn and loops of gas-filled intestine
are in contact with the diaphragm.
The diaphragm becomes indistinct
ventrally.
ii.Peritoneopericardial diaphragmatic
hernia.
ii. Echocardiography is best to con-
firm the diagnosis by imaging ab-
dominal viscera such as spleen and liver within the pericardial sac. An upper gastro-
intestinal contrast radiographic study could also be used.In this case (26c) contrast
approached the diaphragm but did not enter the pericardial sac; however, intestinal
proximity to the diaphragm confirms the diagnosis,as normally the liver is inter-
posed between thesc structures.
iv. Peritoneopericardial diaphragmatic hernia is usually congcnital resulting from
incomplete closurc of the diaphragmatic septum transversum.Although present at
birth, it often does not cause clinical signs until latcr in life and may be discovered
incidentally. This defect is considcrcd a developmental, not genetic or inherited,
defect. Symptomatic paticnts generally have signs referable to the cardiopulmonary
or gastrointestinal systems.
v.The hcrnia is accessed by ventral midline celiotomy.To rcducc the hcrnia,the
defect may need to be enlarged as thc contcnts may be swollen.Adhesion of the
hernia contents to the pericardium or epicardium is rare. Once reduced, the defect is
closed using interrupted or continuous suturcs with an absorbable material.Dorsal
closure is sufficient and it is not necessary to separate the pericardium from the peri-
toneum.Air is removed from the pericardial sac by aspiration through thc suturc
line.This is especially important when the hernial sac is large and pncumopericar-
dium could impair pulmonary cxpansion.
vi.Prognosis following herniorrhaphy is excellent.
28
27-29:Questions
27 i. Identify this instrument
27
(27).
ii. What is its use?
ii What precautions should
be taken in using this instru-
ment?
28 This is an oral view show-
28a
ing a chronic oronasal fistula
in a dog (28a).
i.What are expected clinical
signsassociatedwiththis
lesion?
ii.How could this problem
have been prcvcnted?
ii. What arc thc surgical
principles that maximize the
incidence of a successful
outcome?
29The structures accessible through an intercostal thoracotomy vary with the
intcrcostal space through which the approach is made.Identify the intercostal spacc
and side of the chest most appropriatc for an intercostal thoracotomy approach for
surgical access to the following:
(a)Ductus arteriosus (patent ductus arteriosus or persistent right aortic arch).
(b)Caudal csophagus.
(c）
Caudalvena cava.
(d)Feline thoracic duct.
(e)Canine thoracic duct.
（f)
Cranial lung lobe.
(g）
Intermediate lung lobe.
(h)Caudal lung lobc.
(i)
Cranial esophagus.
i)
)Pulmonic valve.
29
27-29:Answers
27i.Balfour self-rctaining abdominal retractor.
ii.Retraction of the abdominal wall to provide adequatc visualization of the
abdominal organs during surgery.
i.The abdominal wall should bc protected from drying and from bladc trauma by
using saline-soaked laparotomy sponges.Also, care must be taken to prevent
cntrapment of intestinal structures between the sideblades and the abdominal wall.
28b
28 i. Chronic rhinitis.
00
ii. Chronic oronasal fistula in
this location is common sec-
ondarytoextraction or spon-
taneous loss of the maxillary
canine tooth. Minimal cleva-
tion of perialveolar muco-
gingival tissue and primary
wound closure usually prevents
oronasal fistula.
iii.A two laycr closure is
recommended for oronasal
fistula repair. The first layer
must provide an epithelial sur-
facc for the nasal cavity. This
may be accomplished by cleva-
ting the periphery of the fistula
and folding thc oral epithelium
inward.Thc second layer may
bc a buccal mucosa flap or a hard palatc mucoperiosteal flap, providing the oral
Submucosal surfaccs must be in apposition for healing; cpithelium does not heal to
epithelium.
29 (a)Left fourth intercostal space.
(b)Left or right 7-9th intercostal space.
（c）
Right 7-9th intercostal space.
(d)Left 8-10th intercostal space.
(e)
Right 8-10th intercostal space.
Fifth intercostal spacc on the right or left side for the appropriate lung to be
evaluated. In some cases,the 4th intercostal space may provide better access.
（g）
Right 5th intercostal space.There is no intcrmediatelohe on theleft sidc.
（h）
Fifth intcrcostal space on the right or left side. In some cases, the 6th intercostal
space may bc used.
(i)
Right 3rd or 4th intercostal space.The cranial csophagus cannot easily be
accessed from theleft side.
Left 4th intercostal spacc.
30
30-32:Questions
30A six-month-old, male Labrador Retriever puppy was brought to you for treatment
of a closed femur fracture. The owner returns with the dog after ten days for suture
removal.He comments that the dog has not been putringmuch weight on the lcg.Vital
signs are normal, with the exception of a body temperaturc of 40°C (104°F). On
palpation, there is a fluid pocket present and the surgical incision appears red and
inflamed. The dog rcscnts palpation of the region.
i.What diagnostic tests would you use to confirm or deny the prcsence of a surgical
wound infection?
i. Describe in detail how you would perform those tests.
ii.What percentage of clean,closed fractures develop wound infection after surgery,
and what organisms are most likely to be involved?
iv.What prophylactic antibiotic is recommended to decrease the incidence of infcction
in such a case?
31
31The lateral aspect of the forelimb one week after repair of a humeral condyle
fracture(31).
i.Surgical apposition of tissues with sutures or staples immediately after wounding is
classified as what type of wound closure or healing?
i.This type of wound healing is characterized by what biological stages?
32 Paticnt hypothermia is a hazard that occurs during longer surgical procedures.
i. Which animals are at greatest risk?
ii.Describe several preventive measures.
31
30-32:Answers
30 i.The most uscful test to confirm for infection at the surgical sitc is sterile
aspiration of the fluid, cytologic examination and culture. A CBC might show evidence
of inflammation,given that fever is present.
i. In order to perform sterile aspiration, an area adjacent to the incision and outside the
attached to a 6 ml syringe is directed through the surgically prepared skin into the fluid
pocket.Fluid is withdrawn into the syringe and thc ncedle withdrawn.The fluid sample
is(1) placed into a vial containing transport media for bacterial culture, and (2) placed
on glass slides for staining.The CBC is performed on blood drawn in a routine fashion.
ii.In a scries of 1,399 clean fractures of the long boncs and pelvis, an infection rate of
3.5% was documcnted.The organisms cultured most often from small animal surgical
wounds arecoagulase-positivestaphylococciandEscherichiacoli.
iv. Cefazolin (20 mg/kg given i/v at the start of surgery and s/c six houurs later) is
recommended for prophylaxis.This regime maintains the drug concentration at the
surgical site above theMIC90 for coagulasc-positive staphylococci and Escherichia coli
for12hours.
31i. Primary or first intention wound healing. With primary wound healing there is
minimal wound contraction,epithclialization and scar formation.Also,because wound
size is smaller,hcaling is more rapid. Second intention healing (or wound granulation)
and third intcntion wound healing (delayed surgical closure of a granulating wound)
are other forms of healing. They offer a potential advantage in infected wounds or
where tissue is inadequatc for primary closure, at the cxpense of greater scar tissue
formation and longer healing time.
ii.Primary wound healing is charactcrized by the stages of inflammation (days 1-3),
rcpair (days 4-14) and maturation (two weeks-many months). 1he inflammatory stage
is characterized byneutrophil and macrophagc influx to remove contaminants and
cellular debris.Macrophages also producc essential cytokines that induce wound
healing. The repair stage is characterizcd by capillary growth,fibroblast proliferation
and collagen production.During therepair phase,wound strengthis rapidly incrcasing
Thcmaturation phase is characterizedbyremodelling of thc scar,alignment of collagen
fibers along lines of stress, and reduction in capillary density.The rcsult is a more
`cfficient’scar.
32 i. Small animals arc at greater risk bccause of their relativcly larger body surfacc
area.Animals undergoing thoracic or abdominal surgery loscmore heat becausc cx
posed viscera incrcase the surface arca for radiation and cvaporative heat loss, and criti
cally sick animals often have subnormal tempcratures before surgeryrequiring special
measures to prevent further hcat loss.
ii.Helpful measures include:
·Use of a hcat pad (water blanket preferred).
·Warming intravenous fluids before administration or running the i/v line through hot
water.
●Use of warim saline for body cavity lavagc.
·Reducing surgical preparation time.
Covering abdominal viscera with a sterile plastic bag to eliminate evaporation.
·Maintaining the animalon a closed or semi-closed anesthestic circuit toreduce
vcntilatoryheatloss.
32
33,34:Questions
33a
33 A radiograph of the abdomen ofa nine-month-old,domestic shorthair cat that
has a history of severe vomiting for three days (33a).
i. The radiographic diagnosis is gastric foreign body. What laboratory tests would
you pcrform, and what abnormal findings would you expect in a case like this?
ii. Dcscribe the surgical technique for gastrotomy.
iii.What docs theimmediate after-care entail?
34 Thelarynx of a four-year-
34
old, male Pug presented to the
emergency clinic for dyspnea
and cyanosis (34).
i.What is the diagnosis (be
specific),and what is the cause
of this problcm?
ii. What other abnormalities
may be present along with this
condition in brachycephalic
breeds?
iii. What trcatment(s) arc avail-
able, and what additional sur-
gical proccdurcs should be
performed?
33
33,34:Answers
33b
33i.Severe vomitingoftcn
lcads to dehydration and clcc-
trolyte and acid-base disturb-
ances.The most common ab-
normality is metabolic acidosis
caused by fluid loss and de-
creased fluid intake.Routine
laboratory cvaluation should
include mcasurement of hema-
tocrit,electrolytcs,acid-base
status,BUN and crcatinine.
ii. The gastrotomy incision is
perforrned along a hypovascu-
lar region of the stomach,
preferably on the ventral aspect
of thc gastric body midway bctwcen the grcater and lesser curvatures.Stay sutures are
placcd at cach cnd of thc incision and the stomach is isolated with moist laparotomy
sponges to contain spillage. The length of the incision depends on the size of the foreign
hody,for it must allow passage without tearing.Either a onc-laycr or a two-layer
technique may be used to close the incision (33b). Use of synthetic, absorbablc,
monofilament material is preferred.
ii.Electrolyte solutions are administered intravenously to correct electrolyte and acid
basc abnorimalitics.Water can bc offered directly after surgery and feeding small
amounts of food can bc started as soon as 24 hours after surgery,if oral fluids are
retained.The use of an antienetic or of antimicrobialprophylaxis is usuallynot
required.
34i.Evcrtcd laryngeal saccules.This occurs secondary to chronic respiratory com-
promise of the uppcr airway.Incrcascd respiratory effort from airway obstruction
increases negative pressure at the glottis during inspiration, leading to eversion of the
mucosa of the laryngeal saccules. This in turn exacerbates respiratory stridor.
i.Brachycephalic airway syndrome is characterizcd by stcnotic nares, elongated soft
palate and everted laryngeal saccules arising from severe foreshortcning of the skull in
these breeds of dogs.Respiration can be further compromiscd by hypoplasia of the
trachea.These primary factors may be accompanied chronically by sccondary laryngeal
collapse
ii. Correction of everted laryngeal sacculcs is accomplished by grasping the cvertcd
saccule with a forcep (Babcock or Allis tissue)and surgically excising it with an
instrument such as a tonsil snare,electroscalpel or scissors.Rescction is simple and
rapid, and improves breathing.Temporary tracheostomy can be performed to facilitate
surgcry and improve ventilation in the immediate postoperative period. Other surgical
procedures performcd conicurrently include soft palate resection and correction of
stenotic nares.If tonsilar cnlargcmcnt and eversion has occurred,tonsillectomy is
performed.
34
35-37:Questions
35 The inguinal area of a one-
35
year-old,male Bassct-hound is
shown (35).The owner noted
thc mass only hours bcfore
when the dog was licking the
area. Thc mass is soft and is
associated with marked pain
onpalpation.
i.What are the diffcrcntial
diagnoses for this mass?
ii.What is the best trcatment
for this abnormality?
36
36A 13-month-old,femalc English Bulldog is presented with a history of chronic re
current urinary tract infection.In the past,clinical signs of pollakiuria and hematuria
resolved when the dog was trcated with antibiotics,but quickly rccurred when
therapy was stopped.
i.What diagnostic tests should be performcd?
i.An cxcretory urogram and negative contrast cystogram for this animal is shown
(36).What is the diagnosis?
iii.What is thc treatment for this abnormality?
37i.Dcscribe placement of a thoracostomy tube including the number ofholes thc
tube should contain,the size of the tube,thc location of the skin incision,thc
location of the thoracostomy, and the direction of insertion.
i.What pressure should be used for aspiration through a thoracostomy tube?
ii.How much effusion docs such a tube alone produce, and how does this influence
a decision to remove the tube?
35
35-37:Answers
35i.Differential diagnoses include testicular torsion, orchitis, testicular neoplasia and
scrotal hernia. Definitive diagnosis is made by palpation, ultrasound cxamination and
cxploratory surgery.This dog has a scrotal hernia.
ii.Treatment for scrotal hernia involves reduction of hernial contents and imbrication
of the vaginal process and inguinal ring: bettcr still is to perform castration and
complete closurc of the vaginal process, and imbricate the inguinal ring allowing spacc
only for the external pudendal vcsscls and genitalnerve to pass.Rccurrcncc of scrotal
hernia is common if castration is not performed.The most common complications of
hcrniorrhaphy and castration arcscrotal dermatitis andhematoma formation.
36 i. Urine culture and sensitivity are performed to confirm infection and
characterizc antibiotic sensitivity.Unusual infections with mycoplasma or resistant
bacterial strains must be considercd, given the chronic rccurrent history.
Imaging of the urinary tract is performed to rule out anatomic abnorrmalities,
urinary calculi and prostatic disease in males whcre infections can be chronically har-
bored.Imaging choiccs include ultrasound cxamination and contrast radiography
such as excretory urography and cystography.Ultrasound is gcncrally morc useful
for kidney,bladdcr and prostate evaluation; contrast radiography is most helpful for
ureteral, bladdcr and urethral abnormalities.
ii.The abnormality seen on the radiograph is a ureterocele. This is a cystic dilatation
of the submucosal segment of the intravesicular ureter.
ii.T'reatmcnt for this abnormality is by surgical resection of the affected ureter and
bladder wall, and reimplantation of normal, more proximal ureter into the bladder
wall further cranial. If concurrent generalizcd hydroureter and advanced hydro-
ncphrosis is present,ncphroureterectomy is performed.
37 i.The tubc should be approximatcly the diameter of the mainstem bronchi and
should contain at least five holes.The skin incision is made at thc dorsal third of the
10th,11th or 12th intercostal space.The tube is tunncled bluntly subcutaneously in a
cranioventral direction to the level of the 7th or 8th intercostal space. The tube is
introduced firinly in cithcr the 7th or 8th intercostal space and fed into the cranio-
ventral pleural space.
ii.The pressure used to aspirate through the tubc should be between 10-20 cmH,O.
F.xcessive pressurc can damage lung tissuc.
ii.A few days aftcr being placed, the prcscnce of the tube alone will stimulatc the
production of 2-4 ml/kg/day of fluid.Red rubber tubes producc morc than com--
mcrcially available chest tubcs. Once fluid production drops to this level,the clinician
can assume that the fluid is a result of the tube and not the disease process. The tubc
can then safely be rcmoved.
36
38-40:Questions
38 The external sheath of the
rectus abdominus muscle of
38
the dog shown (38) was closed
with a simple continuous
suture pattern. Compare the
advantages and disadvantages
of this method of closure with
simple interrupted suturcs.
39 i.What is the diagnosis of the condition
39
illustrated (39)?
ii.Where is the undesccnded testiclemost likely
locatcd?
i. What are four methods for rctrieving an
abdominallylocatcd testicle?
iv. List thrce reasons for removing cryptorchid
testicles?
40A six-year-old, female Boxcr was presented for evaluation of a chronic draining
tract on the left flank. The owncrs report a history of exposure to plant awns and the
dog was normal when spayed at another hospital thrce weeks previously. On physical
cxamination thc dog's tcmperature was 39.6°C (103°F) and the abdominal wall tissues
in the left flank were indurated and tender.Hcmogram abnormalities included WBC,
27× 109/1 (27,000/mm²): 87% neutrophils, 5% lymphocytcs and 8% monocytcs.
i.What are the differcntial diagnoses for this lesion?
i.What additional dliagnostic test would be helpful?
ii.Whar is the treatment?
37
38-40:Answers
38A sinple interrupted suture pattern is classically used to close the external rectus
sheath.Advantages of this technique include a safe, secure closure and corrcct appo-
sition of the tissue borders.Disadvantages include time rcquired for placement of the
sutures, amount of suture material left in the wound and decreased suture economy.A
simple continuous suture pattern has bccn more recently advocatcd for closure of the
cxternal rectus sheath because of adequate safety,decreased surgical time,decreased
suture material left in the wound and increased suture economy.In one study evalua-
ting simple continuous closure of the external sheath of thc rectus abdominus muscle
the incidence of dehiscence was 1/550 or 0.18%.Recommended suturcs are monofila-
ment polypropylene or polydioxanone,and sizcs are 3-0 for patients under 2.5kg,2-0
for paticnts from 2.5-10 kg, and 0 for paticnts over 10 kg.Care is takcn with either
methodofclosure toinclude only the externalrectus shcath asitis theholdinglaycr
of thc abdominal wall,and inclusion ofmuscle in the suture line leads to necrosis and
failure of the tissue to hold sutures.
39i.Unilatcralcryptorchidism.
ii. The most comimon location of a cryptorchid testicle is in the abdominal cavity. It
can be located anywhcre along the fetal tract of migration from a position near the
cranial pole of thekidncy to the cxternal inguinal ring.
ili. The four methods are:
·The ductus deferens is traced from the prostatic termination to the testes.
The testicular artery is traced from the aorta to the testicle.
The testicular vcin is traced from its termination on thc caudal vena cava or left
renal vein to the testicle.
·The gubernaculum testes is retrieved with a Snook hook,in the samc manner as
rctrieving a uterine horn,and traced to the testicle.
iv.The three rcasons are:
·Intact cryptorchid males are 13.6 times more likely to develop testicular tumors
(Sertoli cell tumors, seninomas) than non-cryptorchid males.
·Cryptorchid males are more likely to develop testicular torsion.
The trait is heritable.
40i.A fistulous tract-foreign body reaction due to either a plant awn such as a
foxtail that has migrated into the body wall, or use of braided non-absorbable suture
(e.g. caprolactam) to ligate the ovarian pediclcs during ovariohysterectomy.
i.A contrast fistulogram can aid identification of the size,location and source of
origin of thefistulous tract.Occasionally,a foreign body can be seen asa filling defect
in the contrast shadow.Ultrasound is also reportcdly useful for idcntification of
fistulous tracts and detection of foreign objects.
ii.Treatment of fistulous tracts can be difficult and frustrating. If the source of thc
lesion is identifiedandremoved by surgicalexploration,routine drainage andwound
management will resolve the clinical signs.For a fistulous tract arising from ovario-
hystercctomy,exploratory laparotomy is performed and the inciting ligature removed.
If the source of a tract cannot be identified, cn bloc removal of all affectcd tissues is
indicated;recurrent tracts are common and owners must be adviscd that multiplc
surgeries may be requircd when the primary cause is not definitively identified.
38
4l-43:Questions
41 You are planning to perform a cystotomy on a six-year-old, castrated male
domestic shorthair cat.
i. What preoperative/operative pain control drugs will you choosc?
i. How will you monitor for postoperativc pain?
ii.What postoperativc pain control therapy will you provide?
42 You are presented with a
42
seven-year-old English Spring-
er Spaniel with a history of
exercise intolerance and *pass-
ing out'.On physical exam-
ination the dog is alert and
active. On auscultation of the
heart you determine that there
is bradycardia (heart rate 55
bpm). The lead II electro-
cardiogram (ECG) you rccord-
ed for this patient is shown
(42).
i.Name the arrhythmia and
describe its features.
ii.What are the potential
causes of this arrhythmia?
ii. If this dogs electrolytes arc normal, how would you treat it?
43 A mass on the flank of an eight-ycar-
43
old mixed-breed dog is shown (43).The
owners first noted the mass onc month
previously and it has grown approx-
imately 25% in size sincc that time. The
dog has no clinical signs related to the
mass.
i.What are the differential diagnoses,
and what procedure will establish the
definitive diagnosis?
ii.If this mass was diagnosed as a
hemangiopcricytoma what treatments
could be considered,and what are the
risks and benefits of each?
ii. If surgery was chosen for treatment,
describe specifically how you would
manage the case.
39
4l-43:Answers
41i.Oxymorphone (0.05 mg/kg i/v,i/m or s/c),butorphanol(0.4mg/kg i/v,i/m or
s/c) and xylazinc (1 mg/kg i/m) all provide some degrce of analgesia.The first two
drugs would be more appropriate for a cat undergoing a major abdominal surgery,
sincc there arc fewer cardiovascular side-effects.
i.Cats are difficult to monitor becausc their behavioral rcsponse to pain is that of a
solitary animal: they lie still and dissociate from their cuvironmcnt. If provoked by
palpation or manipulation,they may vocalizc or become vicious.Ideally,the cat
should rcmain calm, be able to slcep comfortably and display normal greeting bc-
havior after ovariohystcrectomy.High hcart rates after surgery may be due to pain,
but can also be from other stresscs (hospitalization, cardiovascular instability).
ii.Oxymorphone (0.05 mg/kg i/v, i/m or s/c, q 3-4 hours) can bc used. If narcotic-
induced delirium occurs, administer accpromazinc (0.025-0.05 mg/kg i/v, i/m or s/c,q
3-4 hours). Butorphanol (0.4 mg/kg i/v,i/m or s/c,  1-2 hours) may be used, but the
sedative cffects oftcn last 3-4 hours,which confounds patient monitoring.
42i. This ECG is consistent with atrial standstill.The featurcs of atrial standstill are
bradycardia (usually less than 60 bpm),absence of P waves inall leads and normal
appcaring QRS complexes initiated from a supravcntricular focus.
ii.Hyperkalemia associated with Addison’s disease,oliguric renal failure and obstruc-
tivc uropathy can cause atrial standstill. Other rule outs include digitalis toxicity and
persistent atrial standstill.Persistent atrial standstill occurs most commonly in English
Springer Spaniels. Its etiology remains undetermined; however, an underlying mus-
cular dystrophy has been described in some dogs with persistent atrial standstill.These
dogs demonstrate atrial standstill on ECG,but have normal elcctrolytes and the ratc
does not incrcase after the administration of atropinc.
i.The treatment of choice is permanent ventricular pacemakcr inplantation.
43i.Differential diagnoses include neoplasia,abscess,granuloma,hcmatoma/scroma
and abdominal hcrnia.Spccificneoplasms to considerinclude soft tissue sarcoma,
mast celltumor,fibroma and lipoma.Definitive diagnosisis reached by a combination
of palpation,fine-needle aspirate,and biopsy if a solid mass is identified and fine-
nccdle aspirate was not helpful.
ii.Treatment options for hemangiopericytoma include wide surgical rescction (local
control 85-90%)and radiation with or without adjuvant hyperthermia.Because
metastatic rates for hemangiopericytoma are less than 10%,treatment with systemic
chemothcrapy is not warranted.Local tumor control rates are approximately s0%
with radiation.The main risk of surgery is incomplete rcsection; for radiation it is the
poorerresponserates and occurrence of sccondarymalignancies(<1o%).
lii. Surgical resection of a soft tissue sarcona requircs wide or radical margins. Thesc
tumors are prone to extensivelocal invasion.Tumors arcremoved completely
contained within an envelopc of normal tissue. Collagen-rich, vascular-poor tissues
(e.g. fascia, carilage etc.) arc utilized as biologic barriers to cnsure complete tumor-
free lateral and deep margins.The surgical wound is closcd primarily or,if the wound
is large,with a combination of polypropylene mcsh,muscle flap and axial pattern skin
flap as necded to ensure a tension-free closure.
40
44-46:Questions
44 A tumor locatcd in thc
44
greater curvature of thc stom-
ach of a dog is shown (44).
i.What is the most common
type of stomach tumor found
in dogs?
ii. What other types of tumors
are included in your differen-
tial diagnoses?
ii.What is the prognosis for
this dog after complete exci-
sion of the tumor?
45 A six-year-old,castrated
45
male Golden Rctricver was
presented with a four week
history of progressive strang-
uria.A partial obstruction was
appreciated on catheterization
of the urethra.A urethrogram
confirmed a well circun-
scribed mass in thc prescrotal
urethra.
i.What is the surgical pro-
cedure shown (45)?
ii.Describe a surgical trcat-
ment for this mass if the lesion
was benign, and another if it
was malignant.
ii. Describe any special postoperative requirements for thcsc surgical proceclures.
46 When sclecting sutures for different tissuc types,what are the preferred typcs and
siZ.cs:
i.For skin?
ii. For subcutis?
ifi. For fascia?
41
44-46:Answers
44 i. Gastric adenocarcinoma (comprises 42-72% of stomach tumors in dogs).
i. I.ciomyosarcoma,lymphoma,fibrosarcoma,leiomyoma and adcnoma.Diagnosis is
madeby cndoscopic or surgical biopsy.
ii.The prognosis is poor whcn there is invasion to the serosal surface.Metastatic sites
include regional lymph nodes (50-70%),livcr (10-30%) and othcr sites such as lungs,
of late stage disease results in survival time of 5-12months.Farly detection,accurate
staging and complete en bloc resection of all tumor is important to providing the best
outcoime
45 i. A prescrotal urcthrotomy.
ii. If the mass was benign, as in this case, excision or permancnt urethrostomy
proximal to the site of obstruction is considered.If the lesion was malignant, then
segmental urethral cxcision or penile amputation is recommended.
In dogs,urethrostomy can be performed in the penile（prescrotal),scrotal,perineal
or antepubic urethra.Urinary scalding is common aftcr perineal urethrostomy in dogs
and is probably best avoided.
Whcn performing urcthral incision or resection,meticulous technique is important
to prcvent stricture and minimizc hemorrhage. Urethral epithelium is carefully
apposed (whcther to itself for urethrotomy, or to the skin for urethrostomy) with 4-0
or 5-0 monofilament suture in a simplc interrupted pattern. Castration is performed
on intact animals undergoing permancnt urethrostomy to prcvent erection.
ii.After urcthrostomy the most common complication is hemorrhage or self trauma.
An Elizabcthan collar is uscd until the time of suture rcmoval. Hemorrhagc is mini-
mized by using cold packs and scdation tominimizc exciteiment.The surgical site is
not clcaned and no attempts are made to remove blood clots or crusts.
After urcthrotomy or segmcntalresection, stricture and dchiscence are the most
common complications.A soft indwclling urinary cathcter can bc placed for 7-10
days to provide urinary bypass and stenting if thc surgeon is concerned.If the urcthral
tissues are healthy and epithelial apposition is good, thcn no cathcter is needed. If
there is detrusor atony, bethanecol (5-30 mg p/o q 8 hours) is administered.
46i. Monofilament nylon and polypropylene are the preferrcd sutures for skin.
Braided materials or sutures that are reactivc should be avoided. In selecting suture
size,one should choosc the smallest size suture possible that has strength comparablc
to the tissuc being sutured. Use of too large a suture results in cxcessive forcign
material in the wound and needlessly alters thc architecture of the sutured tissue.3-0
or 4-0 is the appropriate size for skin in small animal surgery.
i.Monofilamcnt absorbable sutures are preferable for subcutis. 3-0 or 4-0 is thc
appropriate size.
ii.Monofilament nylon and polypropylene, as wcll as surgical gut and synthetic
absorbablc sutures,have also bcen used effectively in fascia,although thc latter two
materials do not have prolonged suture strength.Appropriate sizes for simall animals
range from 0 to3-0.
42
47-49:Questions
47
48
47 A scvcn-year-old, female,mixed-
breed dog is presented with a distcnded
abdomen,polydipsia/polyuria and pro-
gressive anorexia and lethargy. At this
48A mass in the naso- and oropharyn-
time there is no vulvar secretion but the
gcalregion in a 11-month-old cat is
owncrs recall the dog having a thick
shown(48).
ycllowish discharge 10-12 days pre-
i.What would be the prcdominant
viously that quickly disappearcd. Last
clinical sign?
estrus was ten weeks ago.A caudal
ii.What is the diagnosis and why isit
abdominal sonogram is shown (47).
often misdiagnosed?
i.What is the suspccted diagnosis?
ii. What diagnostic tests should be
ii.What other procedures would you
performed to determinc the extent of the
consider to confirm thc diagnosis?
lesion?
iii. What is the treatment of choicc?
49 A five-year-old, male domcstic shorthair cat is presented for urinary obstruction.
It is the fourth episode in six months.The owners report difficulty conplying with
dietary and medical recommendations previously prcscribed for feline urolithiasis
syndromc (FUS),and are becoming frustrated by thcir frequent trips to thc veterin-
arian to treat thc obstructions.
i.What surgical trcatment is available?
ii. Briefly describe the proccdure.
ii.What are the potential complications?
43
47-49:Answers
47i. Closed pyometra.The history of purulcnt vaginal discharge and the time since
weeks aftcr estrus when the utcrus is under progestcrone influcnce from an active
corpus lutcum.The sonogram shows a dilated,fluid-filled utcrus typical of pyometra.
i.The sonogram in this casc is sufficicnt for diagnosis.A hemogram, scrum chemis-
philia and mild anemia) and allow cvaluation of hydration status,electrolyte balance
and renal and hepatic function.Up to 50% of animals have concurrent nephropathy
orhepatopathy,and most dogs have concurrcnt bacterial cystitis.
ii. Ovariohystercctomy. Usc of antibiotics and prostaglandins (PGF2) is not advised in
this casc becausc of the extcnsive uterine dilation and closed cervix. This treatment can
causc peritonitis from utcrine rupture or reflux of purulent material up the uterine
declines ovariohysterectomy because they desire to breed the bitch.
48 i.Chronic rhinitis.
i. Nasopharyngeal polyp. The common misdiagnosis is viral upper respiratory
infection. Usually viral infcctions rcsolve with time and appropriatc supportivc care.
When symptomatic therapy is discontinued in patients with a nasopharyngeal polyp,
the clinical signs rccur.
ili.Nasopharyngcal polyps originate in the dorsomedial compartment of the tympanic
bulla.The lesion may extend down the Eustachian tube to enter the nasopharynx or
up the external ear canal. Otoscopic examination and bulla radiographic scries aid in
assessing the invasiveness of the polyp.Ihc pharyngcal and aural componcnts may be
avulsed manually and removed. Howevcr, if there is radiographic evidencc of a soft
tissue mass in the bulla,exploratory vcntral bulla osteotomy is incicatcd. Surgery for
nasopharyngcal polyp may be associated with transicnt ipsilateral Horncr’s syndrome.
49i. Perincal urethrostomy. Owners should bc advised that perincal urethrostomy
will prevcnt. urinary obstruction but will not resolve signs of FUS,and that adjunct
medical managemcnt will still be required.
i.An elliptical incision is made around the prepuce and scrotum and thc penis is
dissectcd free from thc subcutaneous tissues.The ischiocavernosus muscles arc
transccted and the pelvic ligaments bluntly dissected to free thc penis to the level of
the bulbourethral glands whcre the urcthral diameter is significantly larger.The
retractor penis musclc is reflected and the urethra is incised dorsally.The urcthral
mucosa is meticulously apposed to the skin with small (4-0 or 5-0) interrupted non-
absorbable sutures, creating a ncw,largcr stona that will allow the passage of
urethral plugs and small stones.The penis is amputated distally leaving a shortdrain
board'of urethral mucosa ventral to the orifice.An Elizabethan collar is placed until
the time of suture removal.
ii.Reported complications arc persistent hemorrhage, dehiscence, self-mutilation,
cystitis and urethral stricturc if the urcthra is not opened at the level of the bul-
bourethral glands or if the skin and urethral mucosa are not meticulously apposcd. If
the cat has been chronically obstructed, prcoperativc diuresis for management of
azotemia may be requircd to minimize anestheticrisk.
44
50, 51:Questions
50a
50 A 12-year-old,castratcd
50b
maleKeeshound with recurrent
urinary tract infections is
identified as having cystic
calculi (50a).Cystotomy was
performcd and calculi analysis
identificd thc stones as calcium
oxalate (50b).A preoperative
serum chemistry profile re-
vealed hypercalcemia.
i.What are themostcommon
pathologic conditions that
result in hypercalcemia?
ii.Dcscribc a systematic ap-
proach to determining the
cause of hypercalcemia?
51 You arc prcscntcd with a four-year-old,female domestic shorthair cat that is
anorcxic,depressed and febrile. She has vomited occasionally ovcr the last wcek. On
palpation of the abdomen you feel the intestines bunched and crowded into the
be a thin ridge of granulation tissue on thc ventral aspcct (sce also 194）.
i.What condition is bcing described and what is the most likely reason for the
depression,anorexia and fevcr?How would you confirm or denyyour suspicions?
ii.What contaminating organisms are likely to be associated with this condition?
ii.What antibiotic therapy is instituted before surgical correction of the problem?
45
50, 51:Answers
50 i. Renal failurc (acute and chronic); humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy (e.g.
lymphoma,anal sac apocrine gland adenocarcinoma);hypoadrenocorticism;osteolytic
conditions (e.g.ncoplastic, osteomyelitis);hypervitaminosis D;primary hypcr-
parathyroicdism (parathyroid adenoma, hyperplasia).
ii.History is uscd to rule out vitamin toxicoses,dietary imbalances, or rodenticide
ingestion inducing hypcrvitaminosis D.Physical cxanination is performed to identify
any neoplasia (e.g. lymphadenopathy, painful bone lesions, anal gland tumors,etc.).
Clinicopathologic testing includes a CBC, serum chemistry profile and urinalysis.A
CBC is helpful to diagnose lymphoma or leukenia.The serum chemistry profile and
urinalysis are cvaluated for signs of renal failure,hepatopathy,electrolyte imbalance
(hypoadrenocorticism) or hyperglobulinemia and protcinuria(multiple myeloma).
Further evaluation for multiplemyeloma includes protein electrophoresis,bone
marrow cvaluation and survey radiography to check for lytic bone lesions can be
pursued.Hypoadrcnocorticism is confirmed by pcrforming an ACTH stimulation test.
Thoracic and abdominal imaging hclp to identify internal lymphadcnopathy or
skeletal changes inducing hypercalccmia of malignancy. If all tests arc normal,
primary hyperparathyroidism is considered and a parathyroid hormone assay is
perforimed. Surgical exploration of thc parathyroid glands can be both diagnostic and
therapcutic.
51 i. Peritonitis secondary to
51
lincar foreign body.The ridge of
granulation tissue at the base of
the tonguc is associatcdwith a
string cutting deeply into the tis-
sues. Thc bunching of the intes-
tines is due to plication over the
string(S1).Peritonitis occurs
when the string,which cmbeds
into the mescnteric side of the
intestine, cuts or erodes through
the intestinal wall. Vomiting is
due to both obstruction and peri-
toneal irritation, while anorexia
and fever are most likely associated with peritonitis. Prognostic tests of value includc
CBC,survcy abdominal radiographs to look for signs of plication,and contrast (iodinc
or barium) enterogram if survey radiograph results are cquivocal. If perforation is sus-
pectcd, abdominocentesis or abdominal lavage is pcrformed to rccover a sample for
cytologic analysis.
ii.A mixture of organisims including anaerobes such as Bacteroides,Clostidium and
Fusobacterium and Gram-negativc enteric organisms and enterococci are usually
prcsent.Bactcrial concentrations arc normally 5-6 log values higher in the lowcr
gastrointestinal tract than in the upper tract,although this ratio narrows under con-
ditions ofobstruction
ii.Cefoxitin (30 mg/kg, i/v,q 5 hours, given slowly to avoid vomiting) or cefotetan (30
mg/kg, i/v, q 8 hours) havc activity against anaerobes and Gram-negative cnteric bac-
tcria,but less activity against enterococci. Combinations of an aminoglycoside (genta-
micin,amikacin),plus an anti-anaerohe drug(clindamycin,metronidazole),plus or
minus ampicillin (which has activity against cnterococci) can also be used.
46
52-54:Questions
52 What is the advantage of initiating early enteral fceding in animals after surgery?
53 This is a postoperative oralview of a
53
surgery site for cleft hard palate repair in
a dog(53).
i.What is the name and basis for the
surgical proccdure performed?
ii.Will lateral oronasal defects secondary
tomcdialmovcment ofpalate muco-
periostcum hcal without further surgery?
ii. What is the prognosis for this disease?
54 You are presented with a five-year-old, spayed female Shetland Sheepdog which
has just been hit by a car.During your physical examination, crackles within the lung
fields are heard on auscultation. Additionally,you notice that a section of the chest
wall in the same area seems to movein during inspiration and out duringexpiration
i.What is your tentative diagnosis based on this paradoxical respiratory ovement,
and what is themechanism for this paradoxical motion?
ii.How should this condition be managed?
47
52-54:Answers
52 The advantage of feeding soon after surgery (evcn for animals undergoing
gastrointestinal tract surgery) is that it promotes metabolic anabolism and a hcalthy
intcstinal mucosa.It is important to prevent systemic catabolism because calorics and
amino acids in an unfed animal are soon derived from endogenous sources.Since there
are no naturalprotcin stores in the body,functionalresources(e.g.immune and vis-
ceral proteins)arc used,resulting in rcduced immune defense,metabolisin and wound
healing.In humans,nutritional support is documcnted to rcduce postopcrative
morbidity and mortality for many procedures.Entcral feeding is important to
cnterocyte nutrition,promotion of healthy intestinal mucosa,andreduced bacterial
translocation from the gut (an important source of postoperativc sepsis).Enterocytcs
receive 40-70%of their nutrition from the gut lumcn and thc balance from the
systemic blood supply. Colonocytcs prefercntially usc short chain fatty acids and small
intestinal enterocytes use glutamine obtaincd from the lumen for sustenancc.
53i. The surgery performed in this dog was a modified Van Langenbeck technique.
The surgical basis for this technique is the development of lateral relief incisions to pre-
vent tension on the sutured defect.Thc defect is sutured in two layers (see 190).
ii.Iateral oronasal defects may be prescnt postopcratively,especially in dogs with wide
defects of the maxillary boncs.Thesc defects gcnerally hcal spontancously without the
need for further surgery.
ii. The prognosis for surgical closure of cleft hard palate is good, however owners
should bc made aware that multiple procedures may be requircd to attain complcte
defect closure.
54i.Flail chest.This occurs whcn multiple rib
54
fractures rcsult in a frec unsupported section of
thoracic wall (54). When thc patient inhales, thc
chest expands and as negative intrapleural pres-
sure is generated the free scction is pulled inward,
opposite to the direction of the remainder of the
chest.When the patient cxhales thc chest col-
lapscs generating a positive intraplcural pressure,
and the free segment is forced outwardwhile the
rcmainder of the chest collapses.
ii. In most cases, flail chest is associated with
severc chest trauma and thc patient should be
stabilized prior to treatmcnt. Hypoxemia is often
sccondary to ventilation/perfusion nismatch and
the presence of pulmonary contusion.An ex-
tcrnal splint maybe uscd for temporary or defini
tive treatment of flail chest.An aluminum bar
splint is fashioned to fit around theneck and
alongthc sides ofthe chest connected over the
lumbar spine. A suture is placed blindly around
the ribs of the free section and secured to the
splint.If this treatment is to be the definitive trcatment, the splint should be left in
place for 4-6 weeks to allow the ribs to hcal. Alternatively, the ribs may be ap-
proached surgically,reduced and stabilized primarily.
48
55-57:Questions
55 The testicles of a ten-year-
55
old dog thatpresented for tes-
ticular enlargement are shown
(55).The testiclewasfirmand
non-painful on cxamination.
The remainder of the physical
cxamination was normal
i.What are the differential
diagnoses?
i. What additional diagnostic
tests or staging procedures arc
indicated?
iii. What is thc prognosis?
56 A nine-year-old, male Miniature Poodle prescnts with intermittent hematuria, foul
smelling urine and lumbar pain.‘Thc dog's appctitc is poor. Although you suspect
cystic or urethral calculi, urethral catheterization and contrast cystourethrography
appear normal.
i.Are urinary calculi definitcly ruled out? If not, what type of calculi is suspected?
i.Upon morc carcful scrutiny of abdominal radiographs you suspect radiopaquc
structures are present in the kidneys.Is this diagnostic? Which tests are now indi-
cated?
ii.Having diagnosed bilateral nephroliths, moderate rcnal failure and pyelonephritis,
should you treat this animal medically or surgically?
57 A four-ycar-old,castrated
57
male domestic shorthair cat
that presented for this ulcera-
tivelesion on the upper lip is
shown (57). The lesion is non-
painful and non-pruritic. What
is the diagnosis and list one dif-
ferential that should be con-
sidered?
49
55-57:Answers
55 i. Sertoli cell tumor, seminoma and interstitial cell tumors are the most common
testicular tumors,although fibrosarcoma,granulosa cell tumor,hemangiosarcoma,
leiomyoma,schwannoma,undifferentiated sarcoma/carcinoma andgonadoblastoma
have been reported.Other causes of testicular enlargement (e.g.torsion,orchitis,
scrotal hernia) are excluded because the testes are not painful on palpation.
i.A CBC is pcrformcd sincc testicular tumors, cspccially sertoli cell tumors, can pro-
duce estrogens and may cause blood dyscrasias such as anemia, thrombocytopenia
and pancytopenia.Metastasis of the most common testicular tumors is rare (9%
Sertoli cell tumors, 4% seminomas and 0.6% interstitial cell tumors) and usually
affccts thc sublumbar and inguinal lymph nodes. Staging includes at least palpation
andperhaps ultrasound examination of these nodes.Fine-needle or other type biopsy
isperformed if lymphadenopathy is detected.
ii. Sertoli cell tumors, seminomas and interstitial cell tumors without blood dyscrasias
or lymph nodc involvcmcnt warrant a good prognosis following castration. Blood
dyscrasias worscn thc prognosis bccause they may persist for months after thc tumor
isrcmovcd.Radiation thcrapy forlymph node metastasis has been successful for thcsc
tunors.
56i.Although uncommon (1.34% of canine urinary calculi),uroliths can be in the
renal pelves (2.5% bilaterally) or ureters.When present in the upper urinary tract,
concurrent calculi of thelower urinary tract occur in 47%of male and 23% of female
phosphate) and often have no associated clinical signs.
i. Other radiopaquc structurcs may resemble nephroliths on abdominal radiographs
(e.g. intestinal contcnt, calcificd lymph node,mineralization of renal divcrticula), and
stones with low calciun content are radiolucent (e.g. urates, silicates). Abdominal
ultrasonography is used to confirm nephrolithiasis and rule out secondary hydro-
nephrosis or concurrent pyelonephritis. Excretory urography is an alternative if ultra
sonographyis not available.It requires uncompromised renal blood flow and function
to excrete iodine contrast in enough concentration toproduce agood quality study.
Urinalysis,hemogram,and scrum chcmistry profilc arc indicatcd to evaluate renal
function and test for urinary tract infcction. Othcr uscful tests include urine culturc
and urine protein quantitation.
ii. Detection of nephroliths alone is not a direct indication for surgery. Removal is
indicatedwhen thereisrefractory infection,obstruction of therenal pelvis,progressive
enlargement or failed attempts at medical/dietary dissolution of stones, or deteriora-
tion of renal function.Other special circumstanccs whcrc surgery may be indicated are
in growing animals because the safety of low-protein/low-magnesium dicts is not
proven, and in males where acute urethral obstruction is a risk.
57 i.Feline eosinophilic granuloma complex (EGC)-eosinophilic or rodent ulcer.
This lesion should not be confused with eosinophilicplaques which are most com-
monly found over the abdomen and groin, or linear granulomas (eosinophilic col-
lagcnolytic granulomas)which arcmost common inyoung cats and are found over the
caudal thighs and in a nodular form in the oral cavity.Iincar granulomas also occur
On the nose, chin, lips, pinnae, foot pads or paws. Important differential diagnoses to
consider are oral squamous cell carcinoima,plasma cell stomatitis-pharyngitis and oral
gingivitis,periodontitis and stomatitisfrom viral infections.
50
58-60:Questions
58Withregard to thecat in qucstion57:
i.What test(s) will be most uscful in confirming the diagnosis?
ii.List three treatmcnts that are available for management of this syndrome?
59
59The dog illustrated (59) had a cystotomy for removal of a struvite urolith that
waspresentforsixmonthis.
i. What suture material is appropriate for closurc of this cystotomy?
ii.What suture matcrials are inappropriate for closure of this cystotomy?
ili.What suture patterns are acceptable for closing this cystotomy?
60 An intraopcrative photo-
60
graph is shown of a five-year-
old,female Schnauzer with a
two month history of cough-
ing and weight loss that has
been non-rcsponsive to anti-
biotic therapy (60).A tenta-
tive diagnosis ofpulmonary
absccss has been madc.
i.What is the surgical course
ofaction?
ii. Are there any concerns with
this?
i. What is the prognosis?
51
58-60:Answers
58 i. Tissue biopsy,hcmogram (periphcral eosinophilia is most commonly seen with
cosinophilic plaques and linear granulomas),serum titers forFeLV andFIVvirus,and
elimination dict to rule out food allcrgy as the cause. IHistopathologic analysis will
identify specific tissue patterns to differentiate each of the subclinical divisions Of
EGC,andwill rule out neoplasia and plasma cell stomatitis-pharyngitis.
i.Corticosteroid therapy: mcthylprednisolonc acetate (i/m) or prcdnisone (p/o).Anti-
histaminc therapy: chlorphcniramine and hydroxyzine hydrochloride are most com
monly uscd when atopy and flea allergy arc considered contributory.Food antigen
management:is implemented after determining a dietary sourcc of allergy.Hyposen-
sitization has little cfficacy in the cat but some cascs of EGC due to fcline atopy may
rcspond.Antibiotic therapy is used to treat secondary pyoderma.Antibiotics commonly
used include trimethoprim-sulfa, amoxicillin-clavulinate and cephalosporins.Progcs-
terone compounds are not recommended because of associated side effects.
59i.Absorbable suturcs are used whcnever possible in the urinarybladder to reduce
risk of adhesions,infection and urolith production.Struvite urolithiasis is indicative of
a bactcrial infection; in one in vitro report evaluating suture strength in infected urine,
polydioxanone retaincd greatest brcaking strength.
i.The above study showed that no suture material retains excellent breaking strength.
Polyglactin 910, polyglycolic acid and chromic gut did not retain sufficient strength to
allow healing in urine infected with Proteus spp. Braided suture material can act as a
wick for infcction and is inappropriate for this case. Non-absorbable suture is also
inappropriate(seei.above).
ii.The suture pattern selected for closure of the urinary bladdcr should be watcrtight,
technically simple to perform,provide anatomic reconstruction,avoid penctrating the
mucosa,and not cause significant decrcase in lumen size.Simple interrupted closure
incorporating the submucosa in one layer and seromuscular layers in another,
accomplishes these goals. This suture pattern has sinilar bursting wall strength to
double layer inverting patterns,but with more anatomic alignment of tissues and lcss
decrease in lumcn diameter. Double layer invcrting closure is probably better suitcd to
closure of defects when the healing capacity of the bladder is questionable.A single
layer appositional closure is adequate for a hcalthy bladder.
60 i. Complete pulmonary lobectomy of the abscessed lobc is performed.The lung
lobe or lobes are submitted for histopathologic and microbiologic analysis to define
thc ctiologic agent. Surgical stapling cdevices are ideal for performing lobectomy as
they minimize operative time and manipulation of the affccted lung.Extcnsive
manipulation of the absccssed lung can cause drainage ofpurulent matcrial into
adjacent unaffected lobcs, and potentially cause occlusion of major airways and life-
threatening complications.
ii.Every effort is madc to manage this condition via antimicrobials and supportive
therapy.A mortality rate of 20.3% was noted in onc study, and dogs treated medi
cally for more than 1.3 months prior to surgcry had a significantly greater survival
ratc.Also,a significant increase in mortality was notcd with increasing numher of pul
monary lobes removed.Intcrestingly,the ctiologic agent isolatcd did not have a signi-
ficant effcct on the final outcome.
ii. The prognosis is fairly good for animals surviving the perioperative period:
approximately 25% mortality ratc,50% have complete resolution with surgery, and
25%unresolved or recurrent pneumonia.
52
6I-63:Questions
61 An 18-year-old,spayed female cat is presented for bilateral thyroidectomy.The
cat has been managed nedically with mcthimazole therapy; however, the side-cffccts
have becomc intolerable.On examination,hcart ratc is 150 bpm,respirations are
normal and the cat is well hydrated. The following prcopcrativc laboratory results are
obtained: PCV 0.36 1/1 (36%); scrum protein 62 g/l (6.2 g/dl); urea 10.46 mmol/l
(BUN 63 mg/dl); glucose 10 mmol/l (180 mg/dl); potassium 5.0 mmol/1 (5.0 mEq/).
i. What is your pre-anesthetic fluid regimen for this paticnt? What important factor is
considcrcd with this endocrinopathy and the cardiovascular systcm?
i.Twenty-four hours after surgery and an uncvcntful recovery from anesthesia, sud-
dcnly thc cat has repeated bouts of tetanic convulsion.What is thc most likely
ctiology?
ii.Serum calcium is mcasurcd at 1.05 mmol/1 (4.2 mg/dl).What is the immcdiatc and
long-term treatment for this condition?
62a
62h
62 Two forms of chronic gastric outflow obstruction(62a)are encountered clinically
in.dogs.
i.Describe thesc two disorders.
i. What breeds arc commonly affected?
ii.A surgical technique used in the past to alleviate the clinical signs is shown (62b).
Namc the procedure, and the cisadvantages of this technique.
63 Cyanoacrylates arc uscd cxtensively as tissue adhesives.
i.List three common uses.
i.List three applications wherc cyanoacrylate would not be a good choicc for tissue
closurc.
53
61-63:Answers
61 i. Renal insufficiency is present. To help maintain renal perfusion during surgery,
diuresis is induced with i/v administration of saline (0.9%) at 10-20 ml/kg per hour,
and mannitol at 0.25-1 g/kg.This reverses arteriolar vasoconstriction,expands intra-
vascular fluid volume and decreases renin secrction.
Hypertrophic cardionyopathy often occurs with hyperthyroidism.Assessment of
cardiac function by thoracic radiographs, electrocardiogram and echocardiogram is
performcd before surgery. Carc is taken to prevent volume overload of the hcart.
i.Tetany from hypocalcemia occurs from iatrogenic injury to the parathyroid glands
during bilateral thyroidectomy.
ii.If hypocalccmia is severe (scrum calcium <1.5 mmol/l (<6 mg/dl), supplemen-
tation with slow i/v boluses of calciun chloride or calcium gluconate (calciun glu-
currently for arrythmias. Calcium chloride (1 g/250 ml of maintenancc fluids) is useful
to maintain normal scrum calciun.Calcium supplements must not be added to lac
tatc, acetate or bicarbonate solutions since precipitates may occur. Calcium supple-
mentation is temporary until parathyroid gland function rcturns,or vitaminD therapy
isinitiated for long-tcrm management ofhypocalcemia.
62i. Congenital pyloric muscle hypcrtrophy. Luminal obstruction is caused by con-
centric hypcrtrophy of the circular smooth rnuscle. Clinical signs often appear shortly
after wcaning.
Acquired antral hypcrtrophy is usually encountcrcd in small middle-aged dogs and
rcsults from hypertrophy of the circular smooth muscle,hyperplasia of the mucosa,or
both.
ii.Congenital form: brachycephalic breeds,including Boston Terrier,Boxer,Bulldog
Acquired form: Lhaso Apsa,Shi Tzu,Pckinese,Poodle.
ii.Fredet-Ramsted (FR) pyloromyotomy. Neither exposurc of the mucosal surface
nor obtaining a full-thickncss surgical biopsy is possible in this procedure.The pyloric
lumcn after FR pylorotomy is not significantly larger than thclumen of control dogs
aftcr a healing period of 34 weeks and may actually bc less because of scar forma-
tion.Y-U pyloplasty morc cffectively enlarges the lumcn, but gastric antral resection
and gastroduodcnal anastomosis (Billroth I) is now more commonly performed to
treat this abnormality.
63i. Monomers of cyanoacrylatc are converted from a liquid to a solid state by poly-
mcrization,catalyzed by minutc amounts of water on the tissuc surface.Three com
i.Cyanocarylatcs arc not recommended for closure of hollow organs(cg.bowel or
bladder incisions),closure of fascial incisions or as a method of stabilizing fractures.
54
64, 65: Questions
64You are presented with a two-ycar-old, spayed female Beagle that has becn hit by
Any manipulation of the pelvis or left femur causes the dog to writhe in pain and
attempt tobite.
i. How will you manage this dog's pain while you continue to stabilizc her and asscss
the full extent of her injurics?
ii. How will you manage pain during the opcrativc and immediate postoperative
period, assuming that pelvic and femoral fractures are present?
ii. How will you manage pain once you send thc animal homc after surgery?
65a
65b
65c
65 The opcn wound shown on the hindllimh of this large mixed-brecd dog (65a)
started as a large nccrotic lesion,probably toxic epidermal necrolysis or the result of
a spider bite. An outlinc of carc was given to the owner. The wound progressed well
and is shown three weeks later (65b).At this timc,rcconstructive surgery was recon-
mended.The dog was not returned for further care for four months when it had
dcvclopcd thc problcm shown (65c). Most of the open wound has healcd; however,
thehock and stifle cannot bc cxtcnded or flexed because of the tight band of scar
tissue that extends from thc stiflc to thehock.
i. What has happened to the leg?
ii.What canbe done?
55
64,65:Answers
64i. Immediate pain control is achieved by i/v administration of oxyrmorphone in
boluses of 0.0.5 mg/kg each time. Wait fivc minutes between doses to assess the degrcc
of pain control: stop aclministration of oxymorphone whcn thc dog will allow sone
manipulation of the injured limb. Pain is controlled until surgcry by scveral methods:
intermittent administration of morphine (0.5-1 mg/kg i/m or s/e, q 2-6 hours) or oxy
morphone (0.05-0.1 mg/kg i/v or i/m, q 3-4 hours) can be uused, or more easily a
transdermal fentanyl patch (50 μg/kg/hour patch) is placed on the neck under a
tions,duringwhich timc tapcring administration of oxymorphone or morphine can be
used. The patch is active for at least three days.
i. If a fentanyl patch was used, it will provide analgcsia during surgcry.Emergence
delirium is pronounced with fentanyl patches and a singlc dosc of oxymorphonc
(0.05mg/kgi/v)shouldbegivenjust before extubation to facilitaterecovery.Alterna
tive methods include epidural administration of a mixture of bupivacaine (0.2ml/kg
of a 0.25% solution) and morphine (0.1 mg/kg), or intcrmittent parenteral administra-
tion of morphine or oxymorphone.
ii. Pain can be controlled using oral drugs once the animal is scnt homc. Mixtures of
codeine and acetaminophen are available (codeine dose of 1-2 mg/kg p/o q 6-8 hours)
in several strengths and may be used unless there is evidcncc of liver disease. Buffered
aspirin (10 mg/kg p/o q 12 hours)or carprofen (2 mg/kg p/o q 12 hours)may also bc
Lisedl.
65d
65 i.'This open wound has healed by contrac
tion and cpithelialization. Unfortunately, surgery
was not done whcn recommended and further
wound contraction has led to contracture de-
formity. The open wound on thc lateral aspect of
the leg above the hock has stopped contracting.
i. The line of scar tissue is tight and inflexible. In
this instance, Z-plasty will release the tension
along the linear cicatricial contracturc,it will
changc thc scar from a straight line to a Z and it
will bring adjaccnt skin into the area.An incision
is made along the linear cicatricial contracture
and a second and third incision arc made at 60°,
one on the medial side and thc other on the
latcral sidc of the leg. The resulting triangular
flaps are dctached and undermining is done as
necessary to allow transposition of the flaps. The
large open wound below thc arca of contracture
has been grafted (65d).The line contracture
deformity is removed and immediatcly there is
considerable mobility in the stifle and hock.
Z-plasty is used to increase the distance
between two points by bringing adjacent tissue
into the ccntral linc of the Z and transforins the scar into a Zwhich can be stretched.
The procedure is also useful to incrcasc the circumference of a circle as in a constricted
anus followingperianal infections.
56
66, 67: Questions
66a
66 This is a lateral radiograph (66a) of the cervical rcgion in a four-year-old, male
Gcrman Shephcrd Dog thatpresented for acute onset ofhypersalivation,gagging,and
retching.Thcre is no history of trauma and he is an indoor/outdoor dog withno othcr
animals in the household.
i. Based on the history and radiograph what is thc most likcly diagnosis?
ii.If thoracicradiographs demonstrate pneumomediastinum,pneumothorax orpleural
cffusion, what has most likely happened?
ili.Describc how to resolve this problem and what complications might be
encountered later?
67i.What is the urinary ap-
paratus shown (67),and what
arc the indications for its use?
ii.Whatarcalternativesto use
of this system?
ii. Describe the clinical man-
agement of this system.
57
66, 67: Answers
66b
66 i. Thc radiograph shows a linear,
radiolucent foreign body lodged in the
hypaxial musculature dorsal to thc
cervical esophagus and ventral to the
second and third cervical vertebrae.
The radiopaque structure ventral to
the esophagus is an endotracheal tubc.
The foreign body was a piece of wood
(66b).
i. If any of the above findings were
cvident on thoracic radiographs, tra-
cheal perforation should bc suspected.
iii.If the foreign body is protruding
into the pharynx or csophagus,an attempt is made to retrieve it per os or by endos
copy.The area is then surgically cxplored for rcsidual pieces of wood left behind. De-
vitalized tissucs are debrided,the wound copiously lavaged, and suitable drainagc is
provided. If the foreign body is not visiblc from the pharynx,the muscles vcntral to
the cervical spine are explorcd via a ventral midline approach.
In this case the entry wound in the pharynx was not visible. The cervical hypaxial
musculaturc was approached,the wound was cleaned and debricled,and a Penrose
drain placed. This dog made a good rccovery, although the general prognosis should
be guarded for this problem.Forcign material is often difficult to find, and one study
mediastinitis.
If an csophageal laceration is present, tissue viabiliry is assessed and nccrotic tissue
debrided. Tension-frcc apposition is rcquired to achicvc primary healing of the
csophagus. The submucosa is thc strength layer in the esophagus and there is no
scrosa which is important for forming a fibrin seal to prevent leakagc and dehiscence.
Complications of esophageal tears includc dchiscence,stricturc formation and
infection.
67i.This is a closed indwelling urinary drainage systcm made from a used i/v fluid
bag,a fluid administration set and red rubber feeding tube.Polyvinyl,latex or silicone
catheters can bc used but stiff polyethylene catheters cause urethral damagc. Foley
catheters can be used in female dogs.
Indications for use of this system include: urcthral obstruction; dctrusor atony or
dysyncrgia; assessment of urine production; collection of urine after chemothcrapy;
collection of urine from paralyzed patients; selected urethral and prostatic surgerics.
i.Intermittent catheterization, cystocentesis or manual expression of the bladder are
alternatives. Micturition is concurrently assisted by pharmacologic thcrapy: sphincter
relaxation is promoted with phenoxybenzaminc (2.5-10 mg daily) and detrusor tone
is increased with bethanecol (2.5-30 mg tid).
ii. Indwelling catheters are uscd for the shortest possible time. The drainage system is
opcned using only ascptic technique, and the collection bag is ncvcr inverted or raised
above the level of the bladder.Antibiotic therapy and bacterial culture arc not
routinely pcrformed while thc catheter is in placc unless the patient shows signs of
illness. Urinc culture and scnsitivity is performcd at the time of catheter removal;
appropriate antibiotic therapy is acdministered for 10 days.
58
68-70:Questions
68
68 A mass on the ventrum of a 12-year-old, fcmale,mixed-breed dog that presented
after six months for evaluation of a slow growing mass (68). On palpation a hard,
irregular mass is detected in the left inguinal region. The mass is approximately 12
cm long and related to the mammary tissue.
i.What is your diagnosis?
i. What additional diagnostic or staging tests are indicated?
iii. What is the treatnent?
69 This dog (69) is a six-year-
69
old Miniature Schnauzer with
a history of chronic neck pain.
The dog holds its neck in a
guarded position similar to
patients with cervical inter-
vertebral disc protrusion. The
right mandibular lymph node
is palpably enlarged.
i. What is the diagnosis?
il. What procedure would you
perform to confirm the diag-
nosis?
ili. What is the prognosis?
70You are serting up a standardized ancsthcsia/analgcsia protocol for performing
ovariohysterectomics in dogs at a large multiveterinarian hospital.
i. Is postoperative pain control part of your protocol?Why or why not?
ii.What prcoperative drugs will you recommend?
59
68-70:Answers
68i. Manumary tumor. Differential diagnoses are mastitis and steatitis/cellulitis.
ii.Thoracic radiographs(ventrodorsal and both right and left latcral views) are evalu-
ated for the presence of pulmonary metastases and screening laboratory work (hemo-
gram, serum chemistry profile and urinalysis) for concurrent diseascs. Fine-needle
aspiration for cytologic analysis is not particularly helpful because of low sensitivity
and spccificity (97-100% and 64-78% respectively) and bccause 30-40% of dogs
with multifocal masscs will have both benign and malignant tumors. Histologic
analysis is bcst pcrformed on an excisional biopsy unless inflaimmatory carcinoma is
suspccted.
ii. If thoracic radiographs show no evidence of metastases, surgery is rccommended.
Thc prcfcrred procedureis surgical resection that will result in complctc cxcision of all
cancerous tissue.This may bc simplc lumpectomy for a small well localizcd tumor,
mastectomy for alarger tumor, or bilatcralradical mastectomy for multiple largc
tumors.
If histopathologic analysis confirins neoplasia,re-exanination cvcry 3-4 months is
rccommcnded.If the tumor is malignant,thoracic radiographs （thrcc views)are also
made and adjuvant treatment with chemotherapy or radiation is considcred. Fifty
percent of caninc mammary tumors are benign and approxirnately half of malignant
tumors can be rcmovcd before they spread; thus effectively, a cdurable remission can be
achieved for 75% of caninc mammary tunors with early aggressive surgery.For thc
remaining 25% of cascs,mctastasis and death will occur on average within a year
(range2-24+months).
69i. Tonsillar squamous cell carcinoma.Patients with tonsillitis usuaily have bilateral
tonsillar eulargcmcnt and the tonsils do not have a fleshy appearance as in this dog.
i.Classification using the TNM system as in 19 with the principlc diagnostic test
being excisional biopsy of the tonsil.
i. The prognosis for this disease is poor. With surgical excision alone, survival is
oftcn <2 months.Radiation therapy following surgical resection improved survival
timcs to 4-5 months but most dogs still died of distantmctastases.
70 i. Drugs to control postoperative pain are not traditionally uscd afrer ovariohys-
terectomy in dogs.Most dogs appear to recover quickly after this surgery and anal-
gesics are not thought to bc nccded. In blind studies comparing the postoperative
recovery of dogs undergoing ovariohystercctomy with or without analgesics, dogs
treated scored lower on pain scalcs and had more rapid return of normal bchavior.A
good guide is that if a procedure is painful for humans, it is assumed to be painful for
animals and analgesic drugs should be used.
i.Pain is controlled better by prevention,than by treatment after exposure.Preopera-
tive drugs that act as both analgesics and sedatives incluce morphine (O.5 mg/kg s/c),
oxymorphone (0.05 mg/kg i/v, i/m or s/c) and butorphanol (0.4 mg/kg i/v, i/m or s/c).
Carprofen, a non-steroidal anti-inflanmatory drug, acts as an analgesic and provides
good pain control after ovariohysterectony. Thc dose is 4 ing/kg p/o once, one hour
bcforc surgery.
60
71-73:Questions
71With regard to the protocol for perforiming ovariohystcrcctomies in dogs at the
large multiveterinarian hospital in question 70:
i. How will you monitor for postoperative pain?
iil. What postoperative pain control therapy will you recommend?
72i. A steam sterilized pack,double wrapped in Quarpel treated 270 pima cloth,is
considered sterile for how long?
ii. How is this time altered if the pack is wrapped in paper?
iii. How is the time altered if ethylene oxide sterilization is used?
73 This is a skull radiograph
73
of a fivc-ycar-old, male Ger-
man Shepherd Dog that pre-
sented for chronic sanguino-
purulcnt nasal dischargc, ulccr-
ation of the external mares and
intermittent epistaxis (73).
i.Based on this radiograph,
what is the diagiiosis and what
signs enable you to be con-
fidlent of your diagnosis?
ii.What other diagnostic tcsts
would be uscful to pcrform?
ii. Describe the most non-inva-
sive treatment for this condi
tion.Why does this therapy
provide a better prognosis, and
what complications can occur?
61
7l-73:Answers
71 i. Veterinarians traditionally use gross behavioral evidence of pain (vocalization,
vocalization on manipulation,lameness,refusal to move,obvious difficulty inrising,
etc.) to monitor animals. These signs occur when the animal has rcached the extreme
limits of pain tolerancc.Healthy animals not given analgesics after ovariohystercc-
tion, they stay awake the night after surgery, and thcy do not come to thc front of the
be due to pain, but are more often related to cardiovascular instability.
ii. Morphine (1 mg/kg i/m or s/c, q 2-6 hours), oxymorphone (0.05 mg/kg i/v, i/m or
s/c,q34hours)and butorphanol(0.4mg/kg i/v,i/m or s/c,q1-2hours)allprovide
analgesia. ‘Thc sedative effects of butorphanol last longer than thc analgesic effects,
which confounds patient monitoring.Carprofen does not need to be redosed until 12
hours after surgery. Flunixin meglumine (0.5-1.0 mg/kg i/v once) may be uscd for
pain control after surgcry in healthy dogs, but should not be used preopcratively due
to increased risk of inducing renal comproimise during surgery.
72 i. Forty ninc days in an encloscd cabinet or 21 days on an open shelf.
i. The time is cxtended to 56 days minimum in a cabinet and remains 21 days on an
open shelf.
ii. It is shortened to 15-30 days for cloth and 30-60 days for paper wraps. Plastic
wraps extend safe storage times to 90-100 days if tape sealed and up to one ycar if
heat scaled.
73i.Mycotic rhinitis due to Aspergillus spp.(A.fumigatus is the most common
isolate) or Penicillium spp. is typical of the pattcrn present on radiographs. There is
marked turbinate destruction and an overall radiolucency of theleft nasal chamber.
Other diagnostic considerations include intranasal foreign body (although increased
opacity is commonly scen around the objcct) and neoplasia (aggressive destruction of
turbinates, vomer bone and/or facial bones is seen,but usually with a homogeneous
increase in opacity of the nasal passagcs).
i.Rhinoscopy may reveal white, yellow or green fungal plaques on the nasal mucosa;
concurrent biopsy samples are taken for histologic analysis, culture and cytologic
between Aspergillus spp. and Penicillium spp. may make them hard to differentiate by
this method.
i. Treatment of nasal aspergillosis is by infusion of enilconazole or clotrimazole
through an 8 Frcnch polypropylenc catheter placed through the external narcs mid-
way along thc dorsal nasal mcatus on each sidc. The nares and nasopharynx are
recumbcncy.After injection of the agent, the animal is placed in ventral recumbency
and the nose tipped to allow drainage of excess fluid.Complications of this procedure
include recurrence from incomplete distribution of the antifungal agcnt (although less
likcly to occur than with the surgical tcchnique), and aspiration pneumonia or
csophagitis from leakage of the agent if occlusion of the nasopharynx is not performcd
properly.
62
74-76:Questions
74
74 The figure (74) shows an cight-year-old male dog at exploratory surgcry.Thc
mass adjacent to thie bladder was thinwalled and filledwith clearyellow fluid.Thcrc
were several adhesions to thc prostatc,but an anatomic communication with thc
gland was not identified.
i. What is the most likely diagnosis?
i.What anatomic structure is thought to be involved in this proccss?
i. What are the surgical treatments for this abnormality, and what are the
advantages and disadvantagcs of each?
75 Match the hemostatic for-
75
ceps illustrated (75) with their
intended use.
i. Control of small bleeding
vessels.
ii. Control of large bleeding
vessels.
i. Control of large bleeding
vessels and ligation of a large
pcdiclc.
76A swelling is present on the neck of a thrce-ycar-old, male cat that was bitten by
another cat two days previously.The swelling is turgid and markcd pain is present on
palpation.
i. How would you treat this wound?
ii. ls it necessary to have any kind of postsurgical drainage?Why or why not?
ii.If you were to use a drain for this case,what are thc basic rules of drain placement?
63
74-76:Answers
74 i. Periprostatic cyst. Thc size of the cyst and the absencc of communication with
the prostatc make this the most probable diagnosis.
ii.Periprostatic cysts are thought to arise fron the uterus masculinus, a remmant of the
Mullerian duct system. Serosal cysts and hemorrhagc can also result in periprostatic
cyst formationl.
ii. Cyst resection is curativc if the origin is identified. Disadvantages include more
cxtensive prostatic manipulation needed to identify the origin of the cyst and recur-
rence in the case of inadequate resection.A rccent report dcscribed good succcss using
omcntalization of the cyst remnant after subtotalresection.
Marsupialization provides continuous drainage, and prostatic manipulation is mini-
mized reducing thelikelihood of damagc to the prostatic neurovascular supply.The
cyst is anchored to the parainedian rectus abdominus muscle. The cyst mcmbrane is
incised and the fluid drained and cultured.The cyst wall is then sutured to the skin to
form a scmi-permanent stoma.Disadvantages include difficulty in mobilizing thc cyst
to rcach the abdominal wall and prolonged drainage. Resection is required if the cyst
cannot be mobilized sufficicntly. The stoma usually closcs spontaneously by eight
wecks postoperativcly. Biopsy of the prostatc and cyst wall and castration are per-
formed at the time of resection or marsupialization to idcntify neoplasia and prevent
recurrence ofprostatic disease by inducing involution.
75 i. Halsted mosquito forccps (right).
li. Kelly hemostatic forccps (center).
ii.Rochester-Carmalt forceps (left). These are the hemostatic forceps most commonly
used in veterinary surgery.Mosquito forceps arc suitable only for control of small
bleeding vessels and are not designed for clamping large vesscls or bundles of tissue.
Kelly forceps are slightly larger than mosquito forceps and are designed for ligation of
mcdium sized vcssels.Rochcster-Carmalt forceps are designed for ligation of large
tissue pedicles and vessels, and havc longitudinal grooves that prevent tissues from
slipping through the clamp under traction. Improper use of tissue forccps leads to
failure at the box lock. This may be tested by lightly rapping thc instrument on a
surface; a functioning box lock will not spring opcn whereas an improperly function-
ingboxlockwill.
76 i. The absccss is lanced and drained, and the wound lavaged and dcbrided.
Iacerations should be suturcd closed and drainage maintained for 3-5 days.
ii.Drainage must be established. This is an infected wound with a large amount of
necrotic cellular debris.Wound hcaling cannot progress beyond the inflammatory
phasc until wound debris is eliminated by surgical debridemcnt or host phagocytes.
ii.Drains must span the extent of dead space crcated by the wound. The smallest and
fewest numbcr of drains neccssary are uscd for the shortcst possible time. For non-
suction drains,the exit end of the drain must be depcndant tofacilitatc gravity flow
and prevent poolingin thc wound spacc.Drains should not enter or exit through a
suture line; they are placed through separate stab incisions. Conduit drains (e.g.Pen-
rose) should not be fcncstrated.Fluid flow is related to surface area and fenestrations
decrease surfacc area and hencc fluid flow. In contaminated areas (e.g. perineum) the
clinician must bear in mind that crains provide a venue for contaminant transport
both out of and into a wound.Drain opcnings are managcd aseptically, clipped free of
hair and cleaned daily.
64
77-79:Questions
77 This ten-year-old cat pre-
77a
sents with signs ofgastrointcs-
tinal obstruction （77a）.An cx-
ploratorylaparotomy is per-
formcd and a jejunal mass is
found.A fine-needle aspiration
biopsy is performed and micro-
scopic cvaluation reveals nco-
plastic epithelial cells often
forming acini.
i.What is your diagnosis, and
what are the differcntial diag-
noses?
ii.What diagnostic tests could
be used to confirm the prelim-
inary diagnosis?
ii.Name a brccd that is reported to bc commonly affccted,and what is the prognosis
for this type of tumor?
78 Clinical signs for this dog(78） in-
78
clude halitosis and rcluctance to eat or
drink.
i.What is thc diagnosis?
i.What are the possible ctiologies for
this lesion?
ii. What would be an appropriatc treat-
ment plan?
79 You arc planning to repair a ruptured cruciatc liganent in a tcn-ycar-old, spaycd
female Golden Retricver. She is at least 7 kg overweight.
i.What local techniquc might you use to control pain after surgery?
ii.What systcimic drugs do you plan to use aftcr surgery?
ii. Will the use of analgesics make the dog more likely to use the leg prematurcly
after surgery, cndangering your rcpair?
65
77-79:Answers
77b
77 i.Differential diagnoses
include malignant lymphoma,
adenocarcinoma, mast cell
tumor,leiomyoma and leio-
myosarcoma.Based on the de
scription given, adenocarci-
noma is most likely, although
lymphoma is the most common
tumor type in cats.
ii.Histologic evaluation of
frozen or formalin-fixed biopsy
material of the tumor and en-
larged lymph nodes.
ii. Siamese cats. Morc than
70% of cats with intestinal
adenocarcinoma have gross or
histologic evidence of metastatic discase at the time of diagnosis. In cats the most
common abdominal metastatic sites are abdominal serosa, lyniph nodes (77b), lung
and liver.However,average survival times up to 15 months are reported after complete
surgical excision.
78 i. Oral mucosa and gingival necrosis.
ii.Thermal, chemical or clectrical trauma
iii. Attempt to determine any other systenmic manifestations of the trauma such as
pulmonary edema (clectrical) or esophageal dysfunction (chemical). Superficial
debridement of devitalizedmucosa.If vitality is in doubt,donot resect;thc dead tissue
will slough.Warm water lavage performed by the owner will aid debridcment. If the
patient does not eat, consider placement of a nasocsophageal feeding tubc or percu-
taneous endoscopic gastrostomy tube. Monitoring of bone and dental integrity using
physical and radiographic examination will aid determination of delayedeffects on
othcr tissues.Finally, check the maxilla for associated lesions.
79 i. Placing 0.5 ml/kg of a 0.5% bupivacaine solution in the joint at the conclusion of
the repair is an effective method of reducing pain after cruciate surgery in the dog.
i. Carprofen, morphine, oxymorphone or butorphanol would each provide some
degree of analgesia after surgery. Buprenorphine (0.005-0.02 mg/kg i/v or i/m, q 4-12
hours) might also be used.
ii.Analgesic therapy may result in early postoperative use of the limb.If the limb is
painful, the animal is less likely to place weight on the limb. However, pain can also
make the dog step awkwardly on the limb,which could also strain the repair. If the dog
appeared inclined to be overly active after surgery,judicious use of tranquilizers would
be a more humane method of cnforcing rest than pain.
66
80, 8l: Questions
80 A 12-year-old, castrated male Kees-
80
hound dog presents with hypcrcalcemia
and calcium oxalateuroliths(see50)and
is diagnosed with primary hyperpara-
thyroidism.Exploratory surgcry of the
cervical region was performed and a
parathyroid adenoma(80) was found
the hemostat is pointing to the enlarged
cranial parathyroid gland. The other
parathyroidglandswcre too small to be
identificd during surgery. The cnlarged
parathyroid gland was surgically cxcised.
i.What are the benefits and risks of
resection for a parathyroid adenoma?
i.How is hypocalcemic tetany treated
and how can one prevent severe hypo-
calcemia from developing after para-
thyroidectomy?
81A dog presentcd for
81
lethargy, tenesmus and inap-
petence. A diagnosis of pros-
tatic abscess was made on the
basis of the physical examina-
tion,hemogram, serum chen-
istry analysis,urinalysis and
ultrasound examination.At
surgery pus was readily aspir-
ated from the enlarged gland
(81).
i.Name four surgical treat-
ments for this discase.
ii.What are the complications
of the listed surgical treat-
mcnts?
ii.What other surgical procedures are indicated in addition to management of the
abscess?
67
80,81:Answers
80 i. Surgical excision of a parathyroid adenoma rcsults in rapid resolution of hyper-
calcemia,and is considered curative in most cascs.The most scrious complication
associated with the removal is postoperativc hypocalcemia. The remaining para-
thyroid glands are atrophicd due to thc ncgative feedback of chronic persistent hyper-
calcemia.
ii.Hypocalcermia gcnerally occurs within the first week after surgcry.Tetanic con-
(0.5-1.5 ml/kg i/v administered slowly over a pcriod of 15-30 minutes). To prevent
hypocalcermia,vitamin D and calcium is supplcmented after surgery.Dihydrotachy
sterol (0.03 mg/kg/day p/o for two days, then 0.02 mg/kg/day for two days and thcn
0.01 mg/kg/day)is the vitaminD supplement most often used due toits quick onsct of
action.Calcium is supplementcd at a dose in dogs of 1-4 g/day p/o divided and in cats
of 0.5-1 g/day p/o divided.Calcium concentrations arc rc-evaluated weckly until the
remaining parathyroid glandsresumc their normal productivity.
81i. The surgical trcatments arc:
Partial prostatectomy/abscess resection
Penrose tubc drainage.
·Prostatic omentalization
·Totalprostatectomy.
i.Coplications of surgical treatment for prostatic absccss inclucle sepsis, reabsces-
sation,urcthral rupturc and fistula formation, hemorrhage, and urinary incontinence.
rupture and furthcr release of bacteria and endotoxin into thc peritoneum.Early
idcntification, prompt treatmcnt and intraopcrative containment of pus and fluid is
important tominimizemorbidity and mortality.
Partial prostatectomy is effective if thc abscess is focal. Resection results in a low
incidence ofincontinence,rcabscessation and urethralrupture.However,thc majority
ofprostatic abscesses arc diffuse and not easily amcnable to resection,and if an
animalis septic at the time of surgcry,this techniquc can be time consuming and norc
risky to the patient.
Penrose tubc drainage can be performed rapidly providing a decided advantage
when considering anesthesia of the septic paticnt.Recurrenccs are most common with
drainage,and rupture of the prostatic urethra during drain placement and urcthral
fistulae formation are potcntial complications.Incontincnceisleast common with
prostatic drain techniques.
Prostatic omentalization is as effcctive as prostatcctomy in preventing recurrencc
and has a very low incidcnce of postoperative complications. In this techniquc an
omental flap is passcd around the urethra through the prostatic parenchymal absccss
to provide additional blood and lymphatic supply and scrvc as a biologic drain. Be-
causc the surgeon must clissect dorsal to the urcthra,care is taken to prevent urethral
rupture.
Prostatectomy is very successful in preventing recurrence and urerhral rupture,but
has an unacceptably high incidencc of postoperativc incontinence (up to 90%).
ii.T'wo procedures are performed as addirional managemcnt of prostatic absccss:
biopsy is necessary because multiple prostatic diseases can occur concomitantly (e.g.
abscess and ncoplasia); castration is pcrformed becausc prostatic hypertrophy and
sccretions are androgen stimulated.
68
82-84:Questions
82
82The dorsal perineum and caudal lumhar regions of a Cocker Spanicl is shown
(82).Surgical and mechanical (bandage) debridement werc used to trcat a non-
healing, infected bitc wound.
i.What is the name and composition of the red exposcd tissues?
i. How could this wound bc reduced for progressivc healing to occur?
83There arc three laycrs in the construction of a typical bandage. Briefly describe
the layers and thcir function, and give a spccific example or two of each layer type.
84 A thrcc-year-old,female
84
English Bulldog (84) is pre-
sented for suspected dystocia.
It is 67 days since the first
brecding and 65 days since the
second.On examination the
dog has marked manimary en-
largement withminimalmilk
production,and a distcnded
abdomen.No othcr abnormali-
tics are noted.
i.Givc several causes of dy
stocia.
ii. Does this dog have primary
or secondary utcrine inertia?
ii.What is the trcatment, given
your diagnosis?
69
82-84:Answers
82i. A healthy bleeding bed of granulation tissue which is composed of capillary and
lymph vesscls,fibroblasts, small amounts of collagen and macrophages.This tissuc
serves as a barrier against infection,a bed for epithelialization and a source for wound
contraction and support. Granulation tissue is the hallmark of the repair stage or
second phase of wound healing.
i.With a healthy granulation bed present,wound closure is easily achieved using free
skin grafts (usually meshed) or ncighboring pedicle skin flaps. Granulation tissue is
highly resistant to infection and provides a ready source for ncovascularization,
enhancing the survival of transposcd tissue.
83 Primary layer (matcrial apposed to the wound) - can be used to dcbride tissue or
provide a non-stick surface for wound granulation and cpithelialization.The primary
layer shouldwick fluid away from the wound to the secondary layer,be semi-per-
mcablc to moisture and oxygen, and conform to the wound surface.Primary bandage
laycrs include: saline soaked gauze pads as uscd in a wet-to-dry bandage, and pet-
roleum impregnated gauze as used in a non-stick bandage.Secondary layer (middle
layer) is used for absorption,padding,Or rigid support.The most common secondary
layer is cotton,and different thicknesses can be applied depending on the desired func-
tion. Splint material (plastic,metal,fiberglass,etc.) is incorporated into this layer for
immobilization.Tcrtiary layer (outside covering ofbandage)for protection from the
environment. Ideally it is rugged cnough to withstand wear and tear initiated by the
animal, and provides some dcgrce ofwaterresistancc.For each layer the ideal bandagc
matcrial should be easy to apply, wrapping around contours with good fit,be non-toxic
to tissues preventing delayed wound healing, and bc cost effective to use.
84 i. Dystocia is considered when: a bitch shows signs of toxicity or cxhaustion;20
minutes of strong labor or 2-3 hours of weak labor has failcd to produce a puppy;
more than four hours has elapsed betwccn puppies; there is abnormal vulvar discharge;
or there is prolonged gestation of more than 70 days. Causcs include primary uterine
inertia (lack of sufficient uterine contractions to expel a normal fetus from a normal
birth canal) and secondary utcrine inertia (lack of sufficicnt contractions because of
exhaustion from prolongcd labor or metabolic abnormality).Secondary incrtia is
caused by maternal factors (c.g. vulvar or pelvic obstruction; uterine torsion or rupturc;
and uncommonly from hypocalcemia or hypoglycemia),and by feral factors such as
oversize fetuses (commonly with small litters and brachycephalic brccds), congenital
disorders (e.g monster puppies and hydrocephalus), fetal malpositioning and dead
fetuses.
ii. This dog docs not have dystocia at this tine. While the averagc bitch whelps around 63
days from the time of breeding, gestational length is variable ranging from 56-72 days.
This dog has shown no clinical signs of active labor or whelping abnormality ruling out
sccondary inertia as a problem and has not yct exceeded the gestational timc range
considered normal for ruling out primary uterine inertia.
ii.Treatment is nothing more than close obscrvation over the next few days for signs
of whelping. Rectal temperature is monitored: less than 37.7°C (100°F) indicates
declining serum progesterone concentration and impending parturition (usually within
24 hours).If fetal viability is suspect,radiographs or sonography are performed.After
69-70 days from the time of the second breeding (or ideallyLH peak),primary uterine
inertia is considercdpresent,and diagnosis and treatment for dystocia initiatcd.
70
85-87:Questions
85An eight-month-old Weim-
85a
araner is presented with signs
of ileus. The cause of the ileus
is shown (85a).
i.What is thc clinical diagno-
sis, and what arc predisposing
factors?
ii. Name in decreased order of
frequency the most common
sites for occurrence of this dis-
ease process.
ii. What surgical technique is
reported to prevent recurrence
of this discase proccss?
86 When considering interventional nutritional support for a surgery patient, what
are the relevant points for deciding thc routc of feeding?
87 An ulcerating lesion of ap-
87
proximately two years dura-
tion on the back of a four-year-
old Dobcrman Pinscher is
shown (87). Many unsuccessful
attempts wcrc madc to closc
this defect and biopsies were
taken to rule out neoplasia.
The lesion originally extended
down both flanks and the
prcscnt sizc is the result of
wound contraction. Scar tissue
is palpated extending into thc
flanks and the skin surround-
ing the lesion is extremely
tight.
i.What reconstructive proce-
durcs can bc considered to cor-
rect this abnormality?
ii.After alternatives are considercd, a decision is made to use a tissue expander. What is
the physiologic mechanism by which this device providcs sufficicnt skin to cover a
defect?
71
85-87:Answers
85b
85 i. lntussusception. Abnor-
mal intestinal motility caused
by viral and bacterial infec-
tions;intestinal parasitism; and
acute inflammatory disorders
including ncoplasia, divcrticula,
and chronic infiltrative disease
may prcdisposc to intussuscep-
tion formation.
i. lcocolic junction, ileum, je-
junum, ccum and duodenum.
ii. Entcroplication of the je-
junum and ileum (85b).The
intestine is folded into loops from the distal duodenum to distal ileum.The latcral
borders of each loop are sutured to the adjaccnt loop with simple interrupted mono-
filamcnt suture matcrial.
86 Fecding should bc as close to physiologically nornal as the affccting disease process
allows. If an animal will toleratc oral feedling (forced or drug stinulated),itr is best
used. The disadvantage is that adcquate intake is difficult to maintain ini an anorcctic
animal; they do not reaclily tolcrate forced fceding and cffcctive drug stimulation is
usually transicnt. Drug stimulation is best for cases of partial anorexia. If vomiting is
not occurring and oral intake is inadequate, esophagcal or gastric tubc fceding (e.g.
nasogastric,pharyngostomy,esophagostony,gastrostomy) is indicated.With most of
thesc methods (except nasogastric tube) a large borc tube is placcd for adninistration
into the stomach.Hyperosmotic, calorie-densc diets can be used, and intermittent
feeding is toleratcd because of the stomach's rcservoir effect.The disadvantagc is that
anesthesia is required to placc sone feeding devices (pharyngostomy and gastrostony
tubes).lf vomiting is present, a jejunostomy feeding tube is nceded. Disacdvantages are
that surgical placement is nceded and,bccause of the smaller tube bore and enteric
administration,continuous infusion of isosmotic liquid diets is required.If malabsorp-
tion is present or ancsthesia is not fcasible, parentcral nutrition is nccded.The disad-
vantage is the high cost and labor intensiveness of parcnteral feeding.
87i.Skin surrounding thiswoundis exceptionally tight solocal skin mobilization.is not
possible.Skin grafting is avoided on the body because of problens with immobilization.
An axial pattern flap using the deep circunflex iliac vcssels can be uscd to cover the
lesion,but is not selectcd because of possible involvemcnt of these vessels in the original
wound. Use of a tissue cxpander and single pedliclc advancement flap is preferred.
ii. Skin is capablc of expanding over slowly enlarging masses (c.g. tumor or an
cnlarging abdomen). Controvcrsy exists but cvidence is that mitotic activity occurs in
thc cpidermis and that it retains its original thickness; the dermis and panniculus
carnosus muscle, however,bccome thinner. Whcn skin over thc cxpander is harvcsted
for transfer, the thick fibrous capsule which forms over the expander is transferred with
the cpidermis and dermis to restore the original thickncss. Skin can necrose, especially
ovcr bone, if thc cxpancler is filled too rapidly. Skin flaps creatcd by expansion havc
improved survival when compared to acutely raised flaps bccause of the^delay phe-
nomenon² (if blood circulation to skin is compromised, collateral or remaining vcssels
expand in rcsponse).
72
88,89:Questions
88 With rcgard to thc tissue expander discusscd in 87,how is this device uscd?How
rapidly is thc cxpander distcnded?When is the final surgical proccdure done?
89a
89h
89 A two-year-old, mixed-breed dog is presentcd with a two-day history of vomiting
and diarrhca.A jejunal foreign body is found during abdorminal exploratory surgcry
(89a). The foreign body is removed by intestinal rescction and end-to-end ana-
stomosis (89b).
i.Describe four suturc techniques for cnd-to-end anastomosis.
ii.Name the major disadvantage of cach techniquc.
ii.What are the advantages and disadvanrages of stapling techniqucs?
73
88, 89: Answers
88a
88 The expander device in-
cludes an inflatablc bag (ex-
pander) connccted by tube to a
dome-shapcd filling reservoir,
Expander size and shape can
vary, and ready-made and cus-
tomized expanders are avail
able. The expander is surgically
placed close to the recipient
area, and the incision is made
with care so that it does not
interfere with the final donor
flap. The filling reservoir is
placcd distant to the cxpander
to avoid becoming covered and
inaccessible for needle punc-
88b
ture. The dome of the filling
reservoir is easily palpable
under the skin.
The expander is filled with
saline slowly over six weeks or
more.In acute wounds there
are practical difficultics.In one
experimental report, expanders
were filled in scven days and
skin flaps werc harvested.
There werc some negativc
cffects and more investigation is
needed.
In this dog the expander was
filled oncc weekly,using no
scdation or analgcsia,with approxiimately 60 ml of sterile normal salinc.The filled
s
are shown on the skin to indicate the incisions of a single pedicle advancement flap
utilizing the loose skin made available.The finished flap is shown (88b).
89 i. Inverting, everting, crushing and approximating surure patterns.
i.Inverting suturc pattern: decrcasc of luminal size. Everting suture pattern: incrcase in
incidence of adhesion formation.Crushing suture pattern:increase in tissue necrosis
and disruption of blood vessels during the first week after surgery.Appositional
techniquc: mucosal evcrsion between sutures.
ii.The advantages of stapling techniques includc greater speed,greater blood flow
through the anastomosis, greater bursting strength and less inflammatory reaction com-
pared to certain suture techniques. Stapling cquipment is morc expensive compared
withconventional suturingtechniques.
74
90, 91:Questions
90 Anexploratory laparotomy
90a
ina two-year-old Geriman
Shepherd Dog with a history of
intermittent hematochezia and
soft stools is shown (90a).
i.What is your diagnosis?
ii.What breed predilection has
been suggested, and what eti-
ology has been suspected to
play a role in the pathogenesis?
ii.What diagnostic test should
be performed?
iv.What is the surgical thcrapy?
91 This is a one-year-old, female Terrier-
91
mix breed presented for intermittent drib-
bling since its acquisition at thrcc months
of age (91). This dog periodically voids
the bladder normally.
i. What diagnosis is suggested by the
contrast study?
i.What are five morphologic variations
of this anatomic anomaly?
ili. What arc the methods of choice for
assessing the ureteral pathway and its
termination?
75
90, 91: Answers
90b
90c
90i. Partial cecal inversion(90b)
P06
ii.Young, large-brced, malc dogs arc pre-
disposed. Weimaraner dogs are suggcsted
to have a higher risk.Trichuris worms
are reportcd to be a causative agent.
iii. Plain abdominal radiographs often
are not diagnostic. Pneumocolonography
and colonoscopy are more succcssful in
detcrmining the diagnosis.
iv. Typhlectoiny is the trcatment of
choice for a partial cecal inversion (90c,
d).Total cecal invcrsion is treated by sur-
gical resection of the ileocolic junction.
91 i. The excrctory urogram shows ureteral cctopia; hcre the dilated lefr urcter drains
into the urethra. It is a congenital disorder wherc one (70-80% of dogs) or both
ureters (most cats) terminate and drain at a site other than thc urinary bladder,most
often in the urcthra or vagina. The condition occurs most frequently in Siberian
Huskics, Newfoundlands,Terriers, Golden and Labrador Rctrievers and Toy Poodles;
the mode of inheritance is unknown.
ii.The fivemorphologicvariations of this anatomic anomaly are:
Intramural uretcr with the opening distal to the bladder sphincter. This is thc most
common typc of ectopicureter.
●Intramural ureter with no distal opening.
● Intramural ureter with two distal openings - one abovc and one below the bladder
sphincter.
Intramural urcter with a normal opening and a urcteral trough continuing distal to
the sphinctcr.
Extramural ureter that enters directly into the vagina or urcthra without penetrating
the bladdcr wall.
ii.An excrctory urogran in conjunction with pneumocystogram is useful to assess the
presence or absence of an cctopic ureter.Vagino-urethrography is also useful for
cvaluating the termination of the urcter.Radiography cannot be uscd to identify the
morphologic typc of ectopic ureter.
76
92,93:Questions
92The dog shown(92) had an
92
esophagotomyforremoval of a
bone.There was mild eso-
phagcal mucosal hemorrhagc
and crosion but the muscular
tunic was intact.There was no
evidence of esophagcal perfora-
tion.
i. What is the most appropriate
suture pattcrn for closuire of
the esophagotomy wound?
ii.What is the holding laycr of
the csophagus?
ii. If the incision margins have
questionablc viability,what
options exist for rcinforcement
of the incision?
93a
93 A lateral abdominal radiograph of a five-year-old,male Beagle is shown (93a)
Diagnostic evaluation of this dog identified pylonephritis (urinc culrure grew Escheri
chia coli) and mild azotcmia (urea 6.97 mmol/1 (BUN 42mg/dl)), turine spccific
gravity 1,020). Surgical removal of the calculi is planned.
i.Which surgical tcchnique is least dclcterious to renal function?
ii.If the techniquc from (i.) is not applicable, which tcchnique is most commonly
uscd?What are the conscqucnces on renal function?
ii.What should be thought of less invasive proccdures such as lithotripsy for animals?
77
92,93:Answers
92 i. The ideal suture pattern is easily performed, sufficiently strong to resist dehis-
cence,provides a watertight seal,does not result in stricture andprovides anatomic
alignment of the tissues.This is best accomplished by a double layer simple inter-
rupted suture pattern in the submucosa/mucosa and the muscularis/adventitia.Simple
interruptcd single layer closure has similar strength and can be performed more
quickly, but provides poor anatomic alignment of tissues. Simple continuous patterns
are placed quickly and have similar ultimate (28 day) wound strength,but result in
poor anatomic alignment of tissues and inhibit luminal distension.
i.The submucosa contains the most collagcn and is thereforc the holding layer of the
esophagus.Previously, several investigators maintained that the mucosa was the
holding layer of the csophagus because it is thicker and has a substantial lamina
propria. Sutures in the submucosa have equal tensile strength to mucosal/submucosal
sutures and comparable strength to full thickness sutures.
ii.A vascularized omental or pericardial flap can be used to deliver blood and lym-
phatic supply to the esophageal wound and to bridge defects.Muscular reinforcement
of esophageal anastomosis using the sternohyoideus (cervical esophagus) or pcdicled
intercostal muscle (thoracic csophagus) can be used; the disadvantage is decrcased
distensibility and they cannot be used to bridge esophageal defects.
93b
93 i.If renal calculi are within a dilated proximal
ureter or the extra-renal portion of the renal pelvis,a
dorsal pyelolithotomy is preferred (93b).Advantages
of this technique are that there is no destruction of
nephrons and it does not require rcnal vascular occlu-
sion because the surgical incision is made in the pelvis
ratherthan throughrenalparenchyma.
ii.When calculi are deep into the renal pelvis or when.
therc are many small calculi, bisection nephrotomy
allows better visualization of the renal pelvis and
diverticulae facilitating removal of stones. Disadvan-
tages are destruction of functional nephrons (patients
are often azotemic) and more prolific hemorrhage
than pylolithotomy (patients arc often anemic). Hemo-
stasis is improved by obstructing the renal artcry with
a bulldog vascular clamp (occlusion should not exceed
20 minutes).Bisection nephrotomy decrcases renal
function in operated kidneys by 30-50%(direct in-
cisional effect,indirect devascularization) and transfix-
ing sutures further compromise glomerular filtration
rate.Intersegmcntal nephrotomy offers no significant
protective effect for preservation of kidney function.
In the case of advanced pyelonephritis or hydro-
nephrosis,ureteronephrectomy is recommended.
ii.Lithotripsy is not currently an option in companion animals given the relative
hardness of the stones,the risk for kidney and lung parenchyma damage and the pro-
hibitive cost and inaccessibility of equipment. Experimental percutaneous nephro-
lithotomy has been described in the dog but is not yet clinically practical.
78
94-96:Questions
94a
95
94 The wound illustrated (94a)resulted
95 The stifle joint area of a Labrador
from removal of a mast cell tumor in a
Retriever treated thrcc months earlier for
dog. There is amplc skin for closure of
a cranial cruciate ligamcnr injury is
thc defect.
shown(95).The limb is non-functional
i. Name three suture techniques that can
and an open, draining wound has been
be used to repair this circular wound.
present for nearly a month.
ii. Placement of the initial sutures resulted
i.How would this wound bc classified
in a ^dog ear'. List three methods of cor-
with respect to contamination?
recting this fold.
ii.What are the treatment options and
prognosis?
96A cat is presented two days after being hit by a car.Although recovering rapidly
from initial hypovolemic shock,the cat's condition has been deteriorating for 24
hours. The 13th rib is fractured on the left side.Gross hematuria is present and
serum urea nitrogen is elevated. Abdoninal radiographs show good peritoneal con-
trast; however, the left retroperitoneal area is opaque and the kidney not readily
visible.
i.What diagnoses are suspected?
ii.Which clinical tests will likely lead to a definitive diagnosis?
79
94-96:Answers
94b
94i.
Creatc a fusiform
2
3
defect by removing triangles
of skin from opposite edgcs
ofthe circlc(1.5 tiimes the
30°
diameter of the circle)(94b
1).The incision is then closcd
with
simple interrupted
suturcs. This is an excellcnt
technique but is restrictcd to
areas whcre there is ample
6
skin for reconstruction.The
4
woundmaybe closcdwitha
three point intradermal suture
to create a Y-shaped defect
Y
(94b, 2). Each leg of the Y is
closcd with simple inter-
YYY
rupted sutures. This closure
may rcsult in ^dog ears’ that
must be addressed.
OtoZclosuremay bcusedwhen closureunder tension or dcviation of tissucs will
have advcrse consequenccs (e.g. around the nares or eycs) (94b, 3). With this tcchnique,
curvilinear incisions are ade in opposite directions on opposite sides of thc circle.The
rcsulting flaps arc undermined and brought togcthcr to result in a Z-shaped closure.
ii.
The skin incision may be extcnded through the‘dog ear’and two triangles of
affccted skin rcmoved(94b,4);incision along the base of one dog carand extension
of thc incision through thedog car’(removal of the resulting skin triangle results in a
curvcd end to the incision) (94b,5); extension of a fusiform incision to include thc
affectcd skin with closure of thc defect routincly (94b, 6).
95 i. The surgical incision has undlergone dehiscence. lhis wound is a chronic, open,
dirty lesion consisting of excessive granulation tissuc, exposed bone and necrotic
purulcnt debris.
ii.Surgical treatmcnt is by tissuc debridement, wound lavage, removal of infcctcd
latcral imbricating sutures, and partial closurc to recduce contanination and permit
evaluation of granulation tissue formation.Because of potential joint involvcment by
the wound,broad-spectrum bactericidal antibiotics are administered bascd on culture
and sensitivity testing. Prognosis for normal recovery is poor due to thc chronic and
severe nature of the joint injury.
96i. Hemo- or uroretroperitoncum is likely. At this point, a ureteral tear cannot be
distinguished from renal or othcr retroperitoncal trauma.
i. Excretory urography is the diagnostic test of choice to diagnose and distinguish renal
versus uretcral trauma. Look for an accumulation of contrast material in the area of
suspected lcakage. lodine-based contrast is administered intravcnously (325 mg
iodinc/kg) and radiographs are takcn at 0,5 and 10 minutes.Ultrasonography may be
helpful to celincatc renal integrity.Pulsed Doppler echography can help detcrmine
whcther renal arteries are patcnt, and is less invasive than renal arteriography.
80
97-99:Questions
97a
97 This is a right lateral abdominal radiograph of a nine-year-old,domestic short
hair cat (97a). Clinical signs includcd fever,vomiting, depression, anorexia and diarr
hea for two days. Pain is elicited by palpation of all areas of the abdomen.
i. Describe your radiographic interpretation and most likely diagnosis.
ii.What diagnostic tests should be performed, and what is their accuracy?
iii. Intracellular bacteria are found on cytologic analysis of the abdominal fluid. An
cxploratory laparotomy is performed and the colon is found to bc rupturcd.Thc
colon is resected. What technique is used to cstablish cffcctive peritoneal cavity drain
age,and what is the prognosis?
theniselves, their bandages or other surgical appliances.
99 Digit Ml on the right rear foot of a ten-year-old, female Gernan Shepherd Dog is
enlargcd.The owncrs first noticed the toe was swollen approximately four weeks
prior to presentation.In the interim time the swelling has increased in size and a
small ulcerative area has developed on the medial surface of the digit. On palpation
the digit is moderately firim and the poplitcal lymph nodc is cnlargcd and firm.A
radiograph of the foot shows lysis of thc third pharynx of thc affccted digit.
i.What arc thc diffcrential diagnoses?
ii.What diagnostic procedures will establish a definitive diagnosis?
ill. Assuming this is a bacterial osteomyelitis, what is the appropriate treatment and
associatedprognosis?
iv. Assuming this is a neoplasm, how would trcatment and prognosis bc diffcrcnt
81
97-99:Answers
97b
97i. The usually sharp outline
of the abdominal organs is
hazy and blurred because of
fluid accumulation in the ab-
dominal cavity. The most likely
diagnosis is peritonitis. Free gas
may be seen if there is gastro-
intestinal perforation (97b).
ii. Most cases of septic peri-
tonitis are diagnosed accurately
by cytologic examination of
fluid obtained by paraccntcsis
or lavage.Intra-abdominal
injury or disease was accurately
detected by needle paracentesis in 47%and by lavage in 95%of cases in a clinical
evaluation of 129 dogs and cats.
iii. Incomplete abdominal closure (open abdominal drainage). A mortality rate of 48%
has been reported. Other techniqucs of peritoncal drainage are less successful in
draining the abdominal cavity.
98 The four devices arc:
●Elizabethan collar or plastic restraint collar (the collars must be big enough to pre-
vent rcaching peripheral body parts such as feet and tail, or inhibit neck flexionj.
▪Body brace or side bars for animals that will not tolcrate a collar (aluminun rods
secured to the side of the body to inhibit neck and body flexion).
● Hobbles to prevent animals from scratching.
·A wire muzzle (will protect from self-trauma and allows the animal to drink).
99i.Bacterial or fungal osteomyelitis, squamous ccll carcinoma,malignant melanoma,
apocrinc gland (sweat) adenocarcinoma, sevcrc paronychia and dermatofibrosis
associatedwith renal adenocarcinoma in GerimanShepherd Dogs.
i. Biopsy of the digit and culture (bacterial and fungal) of tissue samples. Histologic
analysis should include spccial stains to identify a potential infectious etiology.In this
case,excisionalbiopsy or amputation of the digit is prcferrcd since it s also the initial
phase of therapy for all differential diagnoses being considered. In endemic areas fungal
titers (e.g. coccidioidomycoses,histoplasmosis,etc.) are performed. Concurrent fine-
needle aspirate or cutting needle biopsy of the popliteal lymph node is indicated.
ili.Excision of affected tissues and a short course of postoperative antibiotics (bascd on
culture and sensitivity results). The bone changes present in phalanx Ml arc so severe
that resolution of clinical signs is unlikely without amputation. The prognosis is
cxcellent for complete resolution.
iv. Digit amputation is the initial therapy. Lymph node biopsy and thoracic radiographs
are performed to stage the tumor. Thc most common tumor types at this site are
squamous cell carcinoma,malignant melanoma and sweat gland adenocarcinoma.All
three of these tumors have a propensity to metastasize to the regional lymph node and
lungs. Because of this expected behavior pattern, adjuvant chemotherapy or radiation
are often implemented for best results.Small tumors limited to the local area have a
especially for squamous cell carcinonia and malignant melanoma of the nail bed.
82
100,10l:Questions
100The facialview ofa 16-
100a
week old Boston Terrier is
shown (100a).
i. What is the diagnosis?
i. What are the principles of
surgical repair?
ii. What problems may occur
postoperatively, and what is
the prognosis for successful
surgical correction?
101a
101b
101 This open wound (101a) in a young mixed-breed dog was sustained in an auto-
mobile accident.Extensor tendons are exposed. No fractures are present.
i. What is the immcdiate plan for this wound and what is the long-term goal?
The opcn wound is shown thrce weeks after trcatmcnt (101b).All tcndons arc
covcred by healthy granulation tissue and a zone of epithelialization is seen surround-
ing the granulation tissue.
ii. What is done now?
83
100, 10l: Answers
100b
100 i. Prinmary cleft palatc or harclip'
ii. Closuure of the floor of the nasal orifice,
modified Z-plasty for cutanieous closure,
the mcdial cleft margin is used to recon
struct the philtrum area, adcquate flap sizc
for good vascularity and low tension on
the suture line. The dorsal suture advanc
ing the laterally created flap medially to
the bed of the medially created rotation
flap is shown (100b). Thc ventral suture
rotates the medial flap ventrolaterally to
the ventral aspcct of the lateral advancc-
ment flap bed.
ii.Postoperative problems include wound dehisccnce from excess tension or licking of
suturcs. If the size of the dchiscence is 3 mm or less, healing by second intention is
usually adequate.lf dehisccnce disrupts thc repair, a period of 23 wceks is allowed for
healing and decreased inflammation before furthcr surgery. Generally, the prognosis is
good for successful repair and acceptable cosmcsis.
101c
101i.The wound is clcancd and debrided
Because of considcrable tissue loss,primary
closure or dclaycd primary closure cannot
be considered. The wound is trcatcd open,
allowing it to contract and cpithelialize,
and making further decisions weekly as the
wound heals. Contracture deformities must
bc avoided and large areas of new thin epi-
thelium are not ablc to withstand daily nor-
mal trauma.A rcconstructive procedure is
done without delay if one or both of thcsc
101d
conditions start to occur.
ii.After three weeks thcre is a clean,
healthy wound. It bccomcs apparent that
further contraction will affect the digits,
and furthcr cpithclialization will produce
a large arca of thin, delicate epithclium on
the front of the paw (101b). The simplcst
and quickestway to covcr this wound is
by frcc skin graft. A largc single sheet of
full thickness or thick split thickness skin is used because strong skin with good hair
growth is desired.This is an excellent wound for grafting.The surface is flat, smooth
and well vascularized.A rim of epithclium and one millimeter of the surface granulation
tissuc is removed.The graft is obtained from the latcral body wall and draped ovcr thc
wound with hair follicles pointing ventrally (101c).The graft is sutured looscly so that it
Overlaps the skin at the margins of the wound. The graft is bandagcd with a non-stick
prirnary laycr bandage. The graft is shown at three days whcn 100% take is expected
(101d). Full thickness grafts survive, have good hair growth and do well when a
howcvcr,they tend to be dry and devoid of hair.
84
102,103:Questions
102
102 An eight-month-old, male English Bulldog is prcsented with a history of
hypersalivation and regurgitation. On physical examination, mild dyspnca is noted.
A contrast csophogram is performed and a lateral view radiograph is shown (102).
i.What is the diagnosis and what are the different types or catcgorizations of this
abnormality?
ii.What is the surgical treatment for this problem?
ili. What is the proguosis?
103 A cervical tracheal lacera-
103
tion caused by a dog fight in a
two-ycar-old,castrated male
Dachshund is shown (103).
The endotracheal tube is intro-
duced through a temporary
tracheostomy and the lacera-
tion is distal to the tracheos-
tomy. Thc laceration involves
approximately three tracheal
segments.
i. What are the cxpccted pre-
senting clinical signs?
ii.After confirming the diag-
nosis what steps are taken to
stabilize the patient?
ii. Describe your approach to treatment (include suturc patterns and suture type).
iv.What complications might occur?
8.5
102,103:Answers
102 i. Hiatal hernia. These hernias are classified as congenital or acquired (in animals
most are congenital), and as a type I sliding hernia or type Il periesophageal hernia (in
animals most are type I).With rype I hernias the phrenicoesophageal ligament is
stretched,allowing the gastrocsophageal junction to herniatc back and forth into the
thorax.With type II hernias the gastrocsophageal junction remains stationery and the
gastric fundus herniates through the csophageal hiatus alongside the csophagus.
ii. This condition is rare in animals and the best surgical approach remains
controversial. Successful treatment of thrce animals with hiatal hernia using a com-
bination of three surgical techniqucs has been described.A modificd Nissen fundo-
plication is perforined to reduce gastrocsophageal reflux, in conjunction with suturc
reduction of the esophageal hiatus and placement of a left fundic tube-gastropexy. Thc
gastrostomy tube provides the additional advantages of allowing nutritional support,
bypass of the esophagus and surgcry site,and facilitates decompression of the stomach
in the early postoperative period. Gas distension, presumably from an inability to
bclch, can cause discomfort after surgery.
ili. The prognosis for complete relief of clinical signs is guarded. A review of reported
cases shows approximatcly 25% success, and a mortality rate of 64%.
103 i.Expected clinical signs include dyspnea,subcutancous emphyscma,air trans-
gression through the open wound and pneumomediastinum.
iTracheal laceration and rcspiratory distress is treated as an cmergency. Stabilizing
measures include intubation or trachcostomy to provide a patent airway,and oxygcn-
ation. The cuffed end of the tube must pass beyond the site of the laceration.
i. Perioperative antibiotics are administcred and a ventral midline approach to the
cervical trachea is performed. Surrouunding tissues are assessed and debrided as neces-
sary.Recurrent laryngeal ncrves are identified during exploration.
The affected tracheal cartilage and mucosa is debrided and realigned. Approx
imately 5o% of the trachea can (in theory) be rcsected in adult animals heforc stenosis
and dehiscencc (due to tension) become a major concern. Suturcs are limited to the
number necessary to reappose the trachea without excessive tension.A simple intcr-
rupted suture pattern which penetratcs the cartilage of tracheal rings adjacent to thc
laceration is best.The suture material should be non-absorbable and monofilament
with theknots on the external surfaces.
Other techniques include cncircling trachcal ting sutures rather than penctrating
sutures,suturingof theannular soft tissue,and techniques such asfibrin glueor argon
laser welding.To relieve tension, encircling suturcs may be placed two to three rings
placed through the tracheal rings in a horizontal mattress pattern. The site is lavaged
and surrounding soft tissues sutured over the anastomosis to providc a seal and elim-
inate dead space.If dcad space or wound contamination is excessive,a Penrose drain
is placedl.
iv.Potential complications includc infection or abscess formation, dehiscence and
stricture.All animals with injuries to the cervical region are assessed for laryngeal
paralysis. This patient had bilateral laryngcal paralysis which required arytenoid
lateralization twowccks after tracheal anastomosis.
86
104,105:Questions
104 A nine-year-old,male Golden Retriever has abdominal enlargement, a palpable
central abdominal mass and gross hematuria.Abdominal radiographs show only one
normal kidney and a large mass.You suspect a kidney tumor.
i.What is the diagnostic imaging tcst of choice to confirm your clinical suspicion?
ii.What type of renal tumors are most frequent?
ili. What is the surgical technique of choice for rcnal tumor excision?
105
105 A seven-year-old,male domestic shorthair cat is presented for chronic bilatcral
mucopurulent nasal discharge. There is no concurrent facial deformity or epiphora. On
oral examination,moderately severc dcntal tartar formation and pyorrhea is secn.
i. What are several possible causes for the nasal discharge?
ii.What tests will help deterimine the diagnosis?
The frontal sinus exposcd at surgery is shown (105); the cotton applicator shows thc
viscosity of the discharge prescnt.
iii. What are two surgical treatments for this animal assuming the diagnosis is chronic
sinusitis?
87
104,105:Answers
104i. Ultrasonography is probably the most informativc and cost effective imaging
technique to bc combincd with survcy radiographs for suspected renal tumors.
Ultrasonography allows invcstigation of both kidneys, para-aortic lymph nodes, liver
and vena cava for signs of tumor involvement.Excretory urography is an alternative if
ultrasonography is unavailable.Computed tomography or magnctic rcsonance
imaging is also extremely useful to evaluate local and regional tumor involvenient.
i. Canine primary renal tumors affcct older males more than females and 90% are
malignant. Tubular adenocarcinomas arc most frequent, and are often bilateral.
Metastases are present in >50% of cascs (lymph nodes, lungs, liver, bones) at the time
of diagnosis. Tumors can also be of mesenchymal (20%, c.g. fibrosarcoma) or
embryonal (10%, c.g. nephroblastoma) origin. Lymphoma is the most comnion renal
tumor in cats.
ii.Unilateral renal cancer is best trcatcd by complete ureteronephrectomy,and
retroperitoneal muscle rescction if capsular extenision has occurrcd.Thc renal vein is
ligated early in the disscction process to minimize the potcntial for metastases.Partial
nephrectomy is sometines used for surgery of bilatcral renal tumors in which a benign
histologic diagnosis is made.Survival times >10 months are reported for 20-30% of
dogs with renal tumors treated by surgery alone. Dcath is usually fron metastasis.
Renal lymphoma is best treated with chemotherapy.
105 i. Chronic sinusitis,bactcrial rhinitis (usually secondary to mycotic infcction or
neoplasia), foreign body, tooth abscess, oronasal fistula and cleft palatc.Important
characteristics that often indicate etiology include pattern and typc of discharge,
whcther discharge is unilateral or bilateral, and the presence of facial deformity or
cpiphora.
i.Open-mouth ventrodorsal(orintraoral dorsoventral) and rostrocaudal skyline radio
graphs of the skull are made in addition to standard views. Changes such as turbinate
destruction and airway opacities arc oftcn subtle. Perfect positioning and exposure are
mandatory,thercforc ancsthesia is required.Computed tomography or magnctic
resonance imagingis also useful if available.
Copious retrograde nasal flush is perforimed using a Foley catheter placed in the
nasopharynx.All discharged material is carcfully cxamined for foreign matter.
Rhinoscopy is used to inspect for forcign material and neoplastic or fungal lesions,
and to gather cytology and histology samples.
Nasal biopsy is performed by curette, endoscopic biopsy instrument, or taking a corc
biopsy blindly with the plastic sleeve of an i/v catheter or large urinary cathctcr.
ii.Lavage and surgical crainage into the nasal cavity or sinus obliteration.The sinus is
trephined with an intramedullary pin and a small diameter tuhe is placed percu-
taneously into the hole, through the sinus, and out to the nasal cavity to establish
drainage.If the sinonasal apcrture is blocked or narrowed, the sinus is opened and the
apcrturc widencd.
Obliteration is indicated if drainage cannot be established or sinus discasc rccurs.
The frontal sinuses and caudal nasal cavity are exposcd. The mucosal lining is debrided
away (preferably with a powcr burr), thc sinus is packed with fat graft and the wound
is closed over a drain.
88
106-108:Questions
106
106 A four-year-old, castratcd male Siamese cat was presented for a third cpisodc of
urethral obstruction. A Wilson and Harrison perineal urethrostomy was performed
(106)
i.Assuming the cat is clinically stable,what radiographic proccdure may be indicated
beforc surgcry is performed?
ii.Dcscribe two methods of transecting the ischiocavcrnosus muscle (ICM) (arrow in
106) to avoid excessive intraoperative hemorrhage.
ii.What are potential postoperative complications and their predisposing factors?
iv.What are suitable suture matcrials for urcthral suturing?
107 An cight-ycar-old, spayed female Poodle is treated for necrotizing pancrcatitis by
partialpancreatectomy.
i.What, if any, special considerations are madc for postoperative nutritional support?
i. Whether you decide this animal needs special nutritional support or not, what type
of diet will you choosc to fccd after surgery, and when will you begin feeding?
108 i. What are two important variablcs for autoclave sterilization, and what are the
minirnu values for effectiveness?
ii.Why is steam addcd to the system?
ini.List two methods of monitoring sterilization,and advantages and disadvantagcs
ofcach
8.9
106-I08:Answers
106i.A positive contrast urethrogram is used to rule out another site of urinary
obstruction if one is suspected clinically.
ii.Elevation of the ICM from its origin on the ischium;ligation of each ICM and
transcction near its insertion on thc ischium.
i. Rough dissection predisposes to urinary incontinence if branches of the pudendal
nerve arc damaged.Failure to incise thc penile urethra to the level of the bulbourethral
glands,incomplcte release of tension on the urcthra from inadequate transcction of the
ICMs (arrow in 106) or ventral ligament of the penis, self-mutilation to the urethra
postopcratively and use of an indwelling catheter predispose to urcthral stricture.
Exccss hemorrhage occurs if the ICM is transected in the muscle belly,if there is
inadequate ligation of the corpus cavernosum penis after penile amputation,and if the
rethiraisnotincised on the dorsalmidline.
iv. Small gauge (4-0), synthetic, monofilament non-absorbable sutures on a swaged on
taper-cut needle are preferred. Absorbable sutures are not recommended because
absorption of these sutures when exposedto air causes an inflammatory reaction and
possiblegranuloma formation.
107i.Anorexia and vomiting are likely postoperative sequelae to this case.Because of
discasc severity and the magnitude of the surgery, energy requirements for this animal
willbe high.Nutritional support after surgery is needed to maintain an anabolic state.
Because vomiting is likely to occur and the gut aboral to the pancreas is functional,
placement of a jejunostomy feding tube is indicated.Adequate nutrient intake cannot
likely be maintained with oral, csophageal or gastric feedings.
ii.Diet type is chosen based on: special nutritional needs of animal, route of feeding.
and convenicnce factors (i.e. cost, availability, palatabiliry,etc). This animal has
moderate to marked metabolic stress and is subjct to glucose intolerance. Calorics
should bemostly derived from protein and fat. Bccausc of poor pancreatic function fat
sources should be less in quantity and highly digestible.Postoperative gastrointcstinal
ileus predisposes to small intcstinalbacterial overgrowth; fructooligosaccharide supple-
ment will help reduce pathogen overgrowth. Because a jejunostomy tube is chosen for
fccding, a liquid isosmotic diet is selected.Maldigestion is probably present to a degree,
so a monomeric diet is a better selection than polymeric diet.
108 i. Time and tcmperature. Higher temperatures requirc less time for sterilization.
Recommended settings are 120°C for 13 minutes.Five to tcn minutes are sufficient to
destroy most microbes and 3-8 minutes are recommended as a safcty margin. Unwrap-
ped instruments maybe autoclavcd at 131°C for three minutes.
i. Steam is more effective than dry heat for sterilizing materials. Stcam must directly
contact surfaces of microbes. Heat is transferrcd to the organism and water condcnses,
resulting in protein denaturation and microbe destruction.Dry heat destroys microbes
by oxidation and rcquires more time and higher temperaturcs.
ii. Chemical indicators (autoclave tape or indicator strips) undergo color change at. a
specific temperature. They arc casily used and are inexpensivc,but they provide no
indication of time at a given temperaturc. Chemical indicators are best uscd as a sign
that a pack has completed an autoclave cyclc,not that it is sterile.Biologic indicators
use the temperaturc resistant spore of Bacillus stearothermophilus.After autoclaving
the indicator is cultured and assessed for signs of growth. This is most accuurate and
reliable,but is more time consuming and expensive.
90
109-11l:Questions
109
109 The hemimandible from a ten-year-old dog that presented with a mass in the
oral cavity and a foul odor in the mouth is shown (109).
i.List the three most comnon malignant canine oral tumors.
ii.Which of these tumors carries the most favorable long-tern prognosis for survival
and which has the worst?
ii. This particular tumor was histologically diagnosed as a fibrosarcoma.What is the
treatment?
110 This dog(110)waspre-
110
sented for persistent licking of
the penis and redness of the tip
of the penis.
i. Naime the condition pictured.
ii.Which breeds are most com-
monly affcctcd?
ili.How does the condition
occur?
iv.How wouldyou treat the
condition?
will result in tcnsion on thc wound margins.List thrcc suture pattcrns that alleviatc
tension and the advantages and disadvantages of each.
91
109-I1l:Answers
109 i. Malignant melanoma, squamous cell carcinoma and fibrosarcoma (in order of
prevalence).In the cat,squamous cell carcinoma and fibrosarcoma are the most
prevalent.
ii.Squamous cell carcinoma has thc bcst long-term prognosis in dogs. Local invasive
ness of this tumor is limited and the incidence of distant metastasis is low. Malignant
melanoma has thc poorest long-tcrm prognosis.Although local control can be effec
tively achieved in approximatcly 90%of cases, the incidence of metastasis to thc lungs
andregionallymph nodes is 80-90%.Median survival time is 7-8months (25%alive
at one year) from the time of diagnosis.
ii.Fibrosarcoma has a highly invasive growth pattern and a low propensity for distant
metastasis (approximately 20%). Completc resection can be difficult, especially when
the tumor is on the lingual side of thc miandible or crosses midline on the maxilla.With
aggrcssive resection local control is achieved in approximately 55% of cases. Median
survival timc is 78months (40% alive at 1ycar).Neoadjuvant radiation can be uscd
to shrink tumors before surgery, and adjuvant radiation used to treat incompletc resec-
tion margins. Oral fibrosarcomas gencrally have limitcd response to chemothcrapy.
‘The bcst way to improve treatment success is to diagnosc this turmor-typc carly and
treat it aggressively.
110 i. Urethral prolapse.
ii.The condition occurs almost cxclusively in the Fnglish Bulldog.
ii.Urethral prolapse can occur following irritation from genitourinary tract infection
or exccssive sexual stimulation.
iv.Treatment is dirccted toward elimination of underlying infection and surgical man
agement of the prolapse. Initial therapy involves rcduction of the prolapsc using a lubri-
cated catheter, and placement of a purse-string suturc. The suture is tied tightly enough
to prevent recurrence but not tight cnough to result in obstruction.The suture is
removed in fivc days.If prolapse rccurs,or if there is nccrosis and drying of the mucosa
initially,amputation of the affected mucosa is indicated.Excision is performed by
incising the penile and urethral mucosa for half the circumferencc of the penis.lhe urc
thral mucosa is sutured to the penile mucosa with simplc interrupted sutures of fine
(c.g. 4-0) absorbablc material. Once half of the prolapse is incised and sutured, the
remaining urethra is excised and suturcd in a similar manner.Incising half of the cir-
cunferencc initially prevents retraction of the urctbral mucosa and climinates the need
for stay sutures.
111Horizontal mattrcss sutures placed at a distance back from the wound and over a
stent will relicvc tcnsion on the primary suture line. The disadvantages of this suturc are
that it may cut through tissue (this is less likely with a stent) and it reduccs circulation
at the wound cdge.
Vcrtical mattress suturcs placed at a distancc back from.the woundmargins will also
relievc tension on the suture line.Vertical mattress sutures allow increased circulation
to the wound edgc as compared to horizontal mattress sutures, and they should be
placed over a stent to prevent tissue tearing.
less compromise to circulation than horizontal mattress sutures and lcss tendency to
tear tissue than either mattress pattern.
92
112,l13:Questions
12a
112b
112A15-year-old,spayed female CockerSpanielundcrwcnt abdominal ultrasonography
(112a) to evaluatc a mass that was detected on abdominal radiographs located in the area
of the lcft kidney and adrenal gland. Ultrasonography revealed a large adrcnal mass
cranial to the left kidney closely associatcd with the aorta.A necropsy specumcn of an
adrenal mass (open arrows) invading the caudal vena cava (thrombus delineated by white
arrows) in another paticnt is illustrated (112b).Both paticnts had exhibited signs of rest-
lessness and wcight loss,and were diagnosed with hypcrtension.
i.What is the most likely kind of adrcnal tumor in both these patients?
il. Aggrcgates of extra-adrenal chromaffin cclls usually are located near sympathetic gan-
glia.When tumors of chromaffin cells occur in these extra-adrcnal sitcs, what are they
also known as?
ii.Signs associated with adrcnal mcdullary tumors are vague in animals and often go un-
noticed,explaining why many of these tumors are diagnoscd on postmorten exam-
ination. Clinical signs arc due to the tumors' ability to produce and secrete excess cate-
cholamincs. These signs can be persistcnt but arc usually paroxysmal, complicating diag-
nosis. Other symptoms reported arc rclated to the invasive nature of somc of these
tumors.What clinical signs or rclated conditions are associated with this tumor?
iv. What pharrmacological agents can be used to lesscn the effects of excess catecho-
lamine release in patients with pheochromocytomas in ordcr to prepare them for sur-
gery or for mcdical management of the symptoms?
113An owncr calls to tellyou that three days aftcr youperformed ovariohystercc
tomy on her six-month-old Dalmatian, thc incision split open and intestines wcrc
dragged through the grass. ‘lhc owner sensibly grabbed the dog and wrapped the
intestines and abdomen in a clcan towel. She is calling on her car phone to tell you
that she is coming to your clinic.
i.What is your initial treatment of this dog?
ii.What factors other than too much cxercisc might lead to dehiscence?
iii. How will you close the abdominal wound this time?
iv.Arc antibiotics indicated, and if so,what will you administer?
93
I12,113:Answers
112 i.Pheochromocytoma.
li.Paragangliomas or extra-adrenalpheochromocytomas.
ii.Episodic release of excessive amounts of catecholaminies can induce hypertension
congestive heart failure, cardiac arrhythmias,rcstlcssncss,wcakness,polyuria, poly
s
obstruction postcrior to the tumor leading to abdominal distension, ascites and hind-
limbedema.
iv. Pharmacologic agents uscd for trcatmcnt of cxcess catecholamine secretions are
alpha- and beta-adrenergic blocking agcnts. Phenoxybenzamine, a long-acting alpha
adrenergic blocker, is the preferred drug bccausc it is givcn orally and is effective.
Prazosin, a selective alpha-1 antagonist, is not a good choice due to its short duration
of action.Phentolamine, another alpha-adrenergic antagonist, can be given i/v and is
useful in the perioperative period to controlhypertension.Propranolol,a bcta-blocking
agent, is useful in emergency control of tachycardia. However, to avoid a severe
hypotensive episode due to unopposcd alpha-adrenergic vasoconstriction of peripheral
vcsscls, thc usc of a bcta-blocker must be preceded by an alpha-blocker.
113 i.Prepare the following supplies: sterilc drapcs, surgical glovcs, warm crystalloid
lavage solution,a sterile bowl,stcrilized surgical supplies and an i/vcatheter.The dog is
anesthctizcd and the towel is unwrapped. Wearing sterile gloves, the intestines are
placed on a sterile drape, copiously lavaged to remove gross contamination, replaced in
the abdomen, and the abdominal wall rapidly closed with a continuous suture. The
skin is aseptically prepared and the dog taken to surgcry for thorough clcaning of the
intcstines and wound repair.
ii.Sincc dchisccnce happened after only three days, wound healing abnormalities are un
likely in this case.Potential surgical technique errors include: too small a suture size,too
much space between interrupted sutures, using chromic gut in a continuous pattern in
the abdominal wall, placing fewer than 5-7 throws at the ends of a continuous suture
line,handling the suturewith needleholders,and incorrectlyplaced sutures inthelinea
alba.Removal of sutures by the animal might also have contributed to dehiscence.
ili. Abdominal wall laycrs are difficult to recognize even three days after surgery. Sub-
cutaneous tissucs are adhered to the cxternal rectus fascia and must be dissected free.
Rather than trying to recognize the linea alba or external rectus fascia, it is easier to
place wide sutures that incorporate the entire abdominal wall. Since the field is
potentially contaminated,monofilament suture,either absorbable ornon-absorbable,s
interrupted sutures, placed 1 cm apart, reduce the chancc of suture breakage should the
dog continue to be overly active.The subcutaneous tissue and skin are closed routinely,
and an Elizabethan collar is used.
iv. A broad-spectrum antibiotic suich as cephalexin (20 mg/kg p/o tid) is incdicated due
to the risk of peritonitis developing.
94
114,115:Questions
114
114 In the dog in 91, the ureter can be visualized extramurally as it courses along the
lateral side of the bladdcr (114).
i.List the different treatment options for this casc,and for other morphologic types of
ureteral ectopia.
ii.As far as continence is concerned, what prognosis is expected after treatmcnt of cc-
topic urerer? What are the causes and treatment options for postoperative inconti
nence?
ii. What are the major complications of ureteral ectopia surgery and how are they
avoided?
115 The tail and perineum of
115
a two-year-old, female English
Bulldog is shown (115).Thc
owners report a one year his-
tory ofodor and moist dis-
charge from the area. Previous
cvaluation by another veterin-
arian diagnoscd anal sacculi
tis. The dog was trcatcd with
cephalexin and topical anti-
biotic ointments, and the ow-
ners reported a good response
initially. More recently, medi-
cal management has had limit-
cd success.
i. What are several differential diagnoses?
i. Physical examination reveals deep furrows in the skin around the tail filled with a
purulent discharge. A pelvic radiograph of thc dog shows deformity of the coccygeal
vertebrac.Whar is the definitive diagnosis?
ii.What are the medical options for treatnent of this problcm,and what are the
shortcomings?
iv.What are the surgical options for this problem?
95
I14,115:Answers
114i.If severe unilateral hydroureter and hydronephrosis are present, ureteronephrec
tomy is considcrcd.
Uretcroncocystostomy is uscd for cxtramural cctopic ureter.The ureter is
reiniplanted into the trigone after its distal extremity has been severed.Microsurgical
technique is often necessary for the cat because of the small ureteral lumen.
To treat intramural ectopic ureter,ventral cystotomy is performed.A normal
ureteral opening is seen on one side of the trigone and a subimucosalridge caused by
the ureter coursing undler the mucosal surface is seen on the other. The bladder mucosa
andureteralwallareincisedlongitudinally.Themucosaledgesofthebladderand
ureter are apposed uising 4-0 to 7-0 absorbable material (monofilament is preferred).
The distal portion of the ureter is occluded by passing sutures aroundit from the
serosal surfacc of thc bladdcr wall.
Surgical corrcction of urcteral trough is by excision of a strip mucosa from each side
of the trough and then closure with a simple continuous pattern of 4-O absorbable
material.
ii. Surgical treatment of intramural ectopic urctcrs has a bcttcr prognosis than
extramural ureters. Studies report that about 5o% of animals rcmain incontincnt aftcr
surgery. Urethral incompetence, reduced bladder capacity and failure to ligate the distal
ureter adequately arc possiblc causcs. Urcthral prcssurc profilc and cystomctrogram arc
rccommcnded prior to surgcry, cspecially in Siberian Huskics, Phenylpropanolaminc
therapy (alpha agonist) can eliminate or significantly reduce sphincter incompetence in
about 50% of cases.
ii. Stomal stenosis can occur causing hydroureter and hydronephrosis. Good surgical
tcchnique using magnification and small size suturcs hclps prevent this complication.If
transplantation is done close to the bladder neck, an indwelling catheter can be used as
a stent for 4-6 days until inflammation and edema has subsided. Concurrent urinary
tractinfectionis commonandshouldbetreatedadequatelybasedoncultureand
sensitivity.
115i.Anal sacculitis,perianal fistulac, tail fold pyoderma, vulvar fold pyocerma.
ii.Tail fold pyoderma secondary to deformity of thc coccygcal vertebrae.This abnor-
maliry is known colloquially as acorkscrew tail'.
ii. Tail fold pyoderma can be treated medically like any other pyoderma: broad
spectrum systcmic antibiotics (first generation cephalosporin,amoxicillin-clavulanic
acid or trincthoprim-sulfa) and topical wound care by clipping the hair, clcansing the
skin foldswith an antibactcrial shampoo and application ofa topicalantibiotic
ointment and cdrying solution.Thc difficulty is this therapy does not treat the primary
problem, and rapid recurrence of signs is common after discontinuing medications.
Medical management is useful before surgery to rcducc infection and the often copious
inflammatory discharge.
iv.Surgical treatment for tail fold pyoderma includes resection of the skin folds,with or
without tail amputation.Most surgeons perform concurrent tail amputation because
without it the problem often fails to resolve.An elliptical incision is madc around the
affected arca and the tail folds are resected en-bloc with the coccygeal vertebrae.Drains
are placed as nccded to vent dead space that can not bc closed by suturing.
96
116-1l8:Questions
116 This is an oral view of a
116
ten-year-old Labrador Re-
triever with a smooth well de-
lineated mass on the premax-
illa (116). The owners first
noted the mass approximately
six months earlier and they
report it has grown in size
about 50% since then,
i.What are the differential
diagnoses for this lesion?
ii.What diagnostic tests
would you perform?
ili.What treatment do you
recommend?
117 A 10-year-old, male German Shepherd Dog is presented for acutc collapsc. Thc
owner reports mild weight loss, and increased lethargy over last month. Abnor-
malities noted on physical exaimination are pale mucous membranes and weak
pulses. The abdomcn secims distcnded and tcnder on palpation.
i.What diagnosis do you suspect?
il. What further diagnostic tests are indicated?
iii. Surgery is performed and the diagnosis is splenic hemangiosarcoma.What is the
prognosis?
118a
118b
118 This 12-year-old,spayed
female Poodle(118a)presented
with a history of wcakncss,
lcthargy and cxcrcisc intolcr-
ance of two years duration.
The owner's current concern is
the abdominal distension. Yout
notice the engorged state of the
epigastric veins (118b)and
rccommcnd abdominal ultra-
sound. The sonogram demon-
strates a right adrenal tumon
which appears to be invading
the caudal vena cava.
i.What is the most likely diag-
nosis?
ii. What clinical findings would support this diagnosis?
ii.What laboratory test would confirm the diagnosis?
iv.Explain the ascites and venous congestion.
97
116-118:Answers
116 i.Epulis, tumor of dental origin,fibrosarcoma and osteosarcoma.Thcsc tumors
tend to havc a smoothmucosal surface and are often wcll delincatcd.Rostral position
and a slow growth history are most typical of an cpulis.Epulides are classified as
acanthomatous,ossifying and fibromatous cpulis.Alfare benign hut tend to be locally
invasive.
ii.Intraoral radiographs arc used to deterimine bone margins needed for rcscction.If a
diagnosis of malignancy would alter the owner's desire to trcat thc animal, an
incisional biopsy is performed. If malignancy is diagnosed,the tumor is stagcd
according to the TNM system.
ii.Rostral maxillectomy is the treatmcnt of choice for this lesion regardless of histologic
morbidity.The diagnosis was acanthomatous epulis (thc most invasive form of epulis),
and requircs wide resection for complete removal. Tumors of cental origin and epulides
have an excellent prognosis (100% local control) following complere rescction. Epulides
can also be successfully treatcd by radiotherapy; however, there is a small chance for
delayed secondary malignancy at the irradiated site. Bc awarc that histologically,
acanthomatous epulis can be confuscd with squamous cell carcinoma and vice versa.If
there is doubt about the histologic diagnosis, the pathologist should be consultcd.
117 i. Hemoabdomcn and secondary hypovolemia from a rupturcd splenic hemangio-
sarcoma,hcmangioma or hematoma.
ii.Abdominal radiographs are helpful to confirm peritoneal effusion, splenomegaly or
hepatomegaly.Thoracic radiographs arc made to rule out pulmonary mctastascs.A
hemogram may revcal rcgcnerative anemiaif hemorrhage has bccn chronic,thronbo-
cytopenia,or the prcscncc of schistocytes or other fragmented rcd blood cells.Themost
helpful diagnostic test is four-quadrant abdominocentcsis;recovery of fresh blood is an
indicationfor surgcry
ii. The long-terim prognosis for ruptured splcnic hcmangiosarcoma is considered poor;
mcdian survival after splenectomy is less than three months. Surgery followed by
adjuvant chemotherapy provides a median survival of 3-6 months. The combination of
vincristine,doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide (VAC) appears to bc thc most effective.
In a recent study, mcdian survival time was approximately 190 days using the VAC
protocol after surgical cytoreduction.
118i. Pheochromocytoma is most likely but adrcnal adenocarcinoma cannot be ruled
out without further investigation.
i. Clinical laboratory data are often normal, although hypercholesterolemia is common.
Most dogs with phcochromocytoma are hypertensive(blood pressurc clevations
164-325 mmHg systolic,and 110-198mmHg diastolic),and othcr causes in dogs are
few.Pheochromocytoma should be suspected in animals with hypcrtension,anxiety and
hypercholestcrolcmia.
ii.Dogs with pheochromocytoma may have high levcls of circulating catecholamines.
Because of difficulties evaluating blood catccholamine concentrations,urine catechola-
mincs and their metabolites are measurcd for definitive diagnosis.Urine is collected for
24 hours and 15 ml of 6N hydrochloric acid added. Epinephrine,norepincphrine, meta-
nephrine,normetanephrinc and vanillylnandelic acid concentrations are determined.
iv.Ascites and congcstion of the cauclal superficial epigastric veins are most likely from a
tumor thrombus occluding the cauclalvena cava (scc 112b).
98
119-12l:Questions
119 With rcgard to the female Poodle in 118, describe how you would removc thc
mass.
120
120 A five-year-old, domestic shorthair cat was presented with signs of obstipation,
anorexia, vomiting and weight loss. A. latcral abdominal radiograph of this paticnt is
shown (120).
i. What is thc diagnosis?
ii. Describe the medical and surgical therapy.
ili. What is the quality of enteric function of cats after surgical treatment for this
problem?
121 Name this instrument (121) and
121
describc its usc.
99
119-12l:Answers
19a
119b
119If thc tumor thrombus within the vena cava is small, a Satinsky clamp is used to
isolate the area for venotomy.In this case,the tumor thrombus was large and flow
through thevcna cava was occluded using Penrose drains (119a,b) or Rumcl tourni
qucts placcd around the vena cava cranial and caudal to the tumor.With these tourni
qucts comprcsscd, flow through the cava is suspcnded allowing vcnotomy and tumor
renoval. In order to re-establish flow through the vena cava quickly,a Satinsky clanp
is applied across the venotomy after tumor removal.The tourniquets are then released
and circulation re-established.With the Satinsky in place,the venotomy is closed
routincly.
120 i.Acquired(idiopathic)megacolon.
i. Medical therapy provides only temporary relief, but should be utilized first and
until it is no longer effective.Acute episodes of constipation are treated with laxatives
and enenas. Chronic treatment is provided by use of stool softeners, increasing
dietary fiber content and treatment with motility modifiers (bisacoclyl, cisapride). Sur-
gical trcatmcnt is by subtotal colcctomy.The ileocccocolic valvc can be spared
(colorectal anastomosis) reducing bacterial reflux into the small bowel, or it can be ex-
ciscd (ilcorcctal anastomosis) reducing the likclihood of rcdistcnsion of the colonic
remnant.
ii. In one study no subclinical or clinical evidence of abnormal bowel function was
found in normal cats after subtotal colectomy. Bowel movements occurred only
slightly more frequently compared with normal cats, and the only significant dif-
fcrcncc bctwccn thc two groups was a highcr scrum cobalaminc concentration in the
cats in which colctomy was performcd.
121Finochietto rib spreader.It is used during intercostal thoracotomy to spread the
ribs.The blades are placed between the ribs and the lever is turned; since there is no
quick release mechanism to remove the rib spreader, the lever must be turned counter-
clockwise until thc arms comc togcthcr. Finochictto rib spreaders are available in
various sizcs including a child sizc with 38× 45 mm bladcs and a 152 mm sprcad, and
standard sizes with 48x 65 mn blades and 203 mm, 254mm and 305 mm sprcads. A
Finochietto Debakey infant rib spreader is also available with a blade size of 19 x
21 mm and an 85 mim spread.
100
122-124:Questions
122 i. What three variables affect sterilization by ethylene oxide?
i.A red rubber polypropylene and Teflon cathctcr have just bccn sterilized with
cthylcne oxide gas. How long should each item be aerated prior to contacting tissue,
and why is acration ncccssary?
ii.How can ethylene oxide sterilization bc monitorcd? List two methods and the
advantages and disadvantages for each.
123The proxiinomedial aspect of the
123
hindlimb of a dog,thrcc wccks aftcr an
abrasive, degloving injury,is shown
(123).
i. What type of wound healing is occur-
ring?
ii.What arc thc charactcristics of this
hcaling pattcrn?
ii. How could this wound be treated to
cnhancc wound hcaling time?
124You are planning to renove a 1.5 cm diametcr basal ccll tumor located in the
flank region of a six-year-old, male Labrador Retricver. Thc dog will go home with
the owner two hours aftcr surgcry.
i.What pain control mcthod will you use?
ii.What pain medication will you advise the owner to give the dog, if needed, once the
dog is home?
101
122-124:Answers
122 i. Concentration, temperature and humidity. Doubling ethylene oxide concen-
tration decreases sterilization timc by approximately one-half.Activity of ethylene
oxide doubles for every 10°C increase in tcmperature.I'welve hours should bc allowed
for room temperature sterilization(25°C) by cthylenc oxide,and four hours at a tem-
peraturc of 55°C.Minimum relative humidity of33%is esscntial for ethylene oxide to
enter cells, where it causes alkylation of proteins and blocks mctabolic reactions.
ii,
Mechanical aeration
Natural aeration
Rcd rubber catheter
18 hours
55hours
Polypropylene tubing
12 hours
48hours
Teflon cathetcr
48hours
168 hours
Aeration is needed because ethylene oxidc bccomes trapped in rubber and certain
plastics and is toxic to mammalian cells.Time is allowcd after sterilization for the
molccule to diffusefrom exposedmaterials.
ii.Chcmical indicators show a color change after exposure to a minimum concen-
tration of cthylcne oxide.They do not indlicate gas exposure.for the rcquircd steriliza-
tion time,and are best used as a sign of exposure to ethylenc oxide, and not a marker
of stcrilization.
Biologicindicators use spores ofBacillus subtilisvar globigii becausc this organism is
resistant toethylene oxidc.This is the most reliable and accurate indicator,but is
expensive and cultures takeup to seven days.
123i. Sccond intcntion wound healing.The large,purulent cutaneous dcfcct is allowed
to close by granulation, wound contraction and epithelialization without surgical
appositionby suturcs or staples.
ilThis type of healing is charactcrizcd by granulation tissue formation,myofibroblastic
contraction producing centripctal movement of the skin, and peripheral rc-cpithelializa-
tion to achieve complete wound coverage. Thcsc processes begin after the inflammatory
phase, approximately three to five days after wounding.
Drainagc is optimal with this type of wound hcaling, making infections rare.While
the time and expcnsc of surgcry are avoided, wound managcmcnt is prolonged by
slower healing time.Disfigurcment or loss of function fron exccssive wound contrac-
ture should be considered in the decision to manage a wound by second intcntion
healing.
ii. Debridement and lavage of exposed tissucs, and surgical closure of the wound (third
intention wound hcaling)by skin graft,skin flap or prinary apposition,would shorten
healing timc.A wound drain is placed if there is concern for continued infection or
excess fluid production.
124 i. Regional infiltration of the surgcry site with bupivacaine (2-3 mg/kg) bcfore the
surgical incision is made will prevent sensitization of the spinal neurons, thus reducing
postopcrativc pain. Additional pain control could bc achieved by using oxyimorphonc
(0.05mg/kg i/v) as a prcmcdicant.
i. Buffered aspirin (10 mg/kg p/o q 12 hours) can be adininistcred by the owner at
home.
102
125-127:Questions
125 The dogshown(125)has
125
severed his superficial and
deep digital flcxor tendons
jumping through a plate glass
window.
i.What type of suturc ma-
terials are best suited for repair
of the tendon?
ii.Name three suture pattcrns
that are well suitcd to this
repair and the advantages and
disadvantagcs of each.
ili. What postoperative treat-
ment will this dog receive?
126Thisisanoralviewofanl
126
cight-month-old dog with
multiple, prolifcrative lesions
of thelabial mucosa (126).The
patient was asymptomatic.
i. What is the diagnosis?
ii.What treatment would you
perform?
127Cyanoacrylatcs are used successfully as a tissue adhesive.Isobutyl-2-cyano
acrylate has been used as a tissue adhesive for closure after feline declaw. Namc thrcc
desirablc properties of this adhesivc and one disadvantage. What are somc potential
complications related to the use of tissuc adhesives for feline declaws?
103
125-127:Answers
125 i. Monofilament non-absorbable suture. Monofilament suturc is preferred because
of clecreascd tissue drag and lcss destruction of the tendon's intrinsic blood supply. Non-
absorhable suturc is used becausc tcndon healing is oftcn prolonged (>5 weeks).
Polypropylene or nylon are preferred for their mininal tissue reaction; stainlcss steel is
susceptible to cyclic loading and failure,or cutting through tissucs.
ii.Thc Bunnel-Meyer suture pattern has exccllent strength and rcsists suture pull out,
but it decreases intrinsic blood supply to thc tendon resulting in prolonged wound
healing. The Modified Kcssler suture (locking loop suture) has cqual strength to thc
Bunel-Meyer without disruption of the intrinsic blood supply,and decreases tendon
gap formation at thc anastomotic site.The thrce-loop pulley suturc pattern has greater
strength than the locking loop suture and effectively prevented gap formation in one
study. The disadvantagc of this suture is that a largc amount of suturc material is
exposcd andmaycontribute to adhcsion formation.
ii. In humans, early passive motion cnhances tendon healing. In animals, we cannot
linit activity to passive motion. The anastomosis is protected by cxtcrnal coaptation
(Robert Jones bandagc or cast) for three to four weeks,after which limited weight
bearing is bcgun.By five weeks, the tcndon has approximatcly 56% of its initial
strength.This is well above the 25-33% strcngth neecled for walking activity,but is not
sufficient for activities such as running or jumping.
126i.Oralpapillomatosis.
i. Thcsc lesions resolve spontancously and no specific trcatment is necessary. Howcvcr,
confirmation of the disease is appropriatc and may help assurc particularly concerncd
clients.A small disscction scissor may be uscd to ‘snip of one of thc lesions, which is
submitred for histopathologic asscssment.
127 Desirable propertics of tissue aclhesives includc a long shelf life; can be stored at
room temperature; good handling properties such as thc ability to be spread casily to a
achieve a short curc time; and the ability to produce a flexibleyct strong bond.Most ad-
hesives are non-toxic and non-antigenic,and they can be sterilizcd in ethylene oxide.
The major disaclvantage is slow biodegradation. ln experimcntal studies, moderatc
aniounts of adhesive could bc dctccred in the dermis for several months after appli-
cation.
Potential complications of tissue adhcsives include wound infcction,fistulation,dchis
cence, tissuc toxicity,granuloma formation and delayed hcaling.lhese complications
are more likely to occur if the tissue is ischemic,contaminatcd, infected or otherwisc
compromised. If tissue is compromised to the point that it will not heal with sutures, it
will not heal with tissuc adhesives. Disconfort to the pet may result from the presence of
foreign matcrial in a wound locatcd on weight-bearing surfaces such as fcline declaw
wounds. Lamcness had been reportcd after aclhesive usc for feline declaw.
104
128-130:Questions
128 A four-year-old, cryptorchid malc dog is prescnted with a history of vomiting,
lethargy and pain in the lumbosacral region. On abdominal palpation,a firm,painful
caudal abdominal mass was identificd.There was no evidence of pain elsewhere and
thc remainder of thc cxamination,including rectal cxamination, was norimal. Abdomi
nal radiographs revealed a soft tissue mass in the caudal abdomen. Sonography
showed a hypoechoic mass was present cranial to the bladdcr. The kidneys and
prostate were normal.
i. What are the differential diagnoscs for this dog?
ii.What additional diagnostic tests are incdlicated?
ii. What is the most probable diagnosis?
iv.What is the treatmcnt for this condition, and what is the prognosis?
129 The postoperativc view of
129
a surgical procedure performed
on the ear of a dog is shown
(129).
i. Name the surgical procedurc.
ii. Describe the procedure. Be
sure to includc anatomic land-
marks that arc used when per-
forming this surgcry to ensure
that it is done correctly.
ii. Iist indications for this sur-
gery (be spccific).
130 A 12-month-old,male
130
Poodle was prescntcd for re-
current E.coli urinary tract
infcctions.
i.What diffcrcntial diagnoses
are considcred,and what dliag-
nostic plan wouldyou pro-
pose?
As part of the evaluation an
cxcrctory urogram was per-
formcd (130).
ii.What is thc radiographic
diagnosis?
iii. Describe the surgical and/or
medical management of the
abnormality seen (130).
10.5
128-130:Answers
128i.Differcntial diagnoscs includc tcsticular ncoplasia,tcsticular torsion,gastro-
intestinal neoplasia and infected periprostatic cyst.
i.Hemogram and serum chemistryprofile to evaluate for signs ofconcurrent systemic
disease (e.g. anemia, uremia, hypoproteinemia). Urinalysis is indicated to identify
urinary tracr infection and neoplasia and to assess urinc concentrating ability.Radio-
graphs can be used to identify organ of origin,but ultrasound is most useful to identify
the mass and diffcrcntiatc parcnchymal consistcncy,
ili.Testicular torsion is most likely in this case becausc of thc prcsence of pain, crypt-
orchidism, and the animal's young age.Radiograph and sonogram.results also support
this diagnosis.
iv.Treatment is cxploratory laporatomy and orchidectomy.Testicular torsion occurs
primarily in young to middle-aged cryptorchid male dogs and neoplasia is frequently
associated with torsion (6/13 dogs in one report). '1he prognosis is good for full re-
covery in the absence of testicularneoplasia withmetastasis or anemia (secondary bone
marrow suppression warrants a guardcd prognosis).
129 i. Lateral ear canal resection (modificd Zepp procedure).
i. Important landmarks include the tragohelicine incisurc (rostral to the tragus) and the
intertragic incisure (caudal to the tragus).Incisions arc madc parallcl to onc another
originating from each of the incisurcs, continued ventrally for 1.5 tines the length of
the vertical ear canal, and the skin reflected dorsally.The incisions are carried through
the subcutancous tissue, and the parotid salivary gland is identified and reflectcd vcn-
trally if ncccssary.The blade of the scissors is placed into the vertical ear canal and two
parallel cuts (again originating from the incisurcs) arc made through the cartilage
extending to the horizontal car canal. The lateral wall of the vertical canal is reflected
ventrally and approximately 1-2 cm is left attached to the base to form a drain board
(theremainder is exciscd).Thc drainboard is sutured to the adjacent skin ina simple
interrupted pattern making surc to pcnctrate the cartilage.
ii. Indications include removal of inflammatory polyps in the external ear canal, mild
chronic otitis externa limitedly responsive to medical therapy or where owners have
difficulty medicating the ear, and for thickening of the external ear canal that does not
involve or obstruct the horizontal ear canal.Contraindications arc chronic otitis
externa where the horizontal ear canal is obstructcd or calcified,or as the sole treat-
mcnt for tumors/polyps of the middle ear.
130 i. Differcntial diagnoses include urolithiasis, pyelonephritis, prostatitis, urachal
diverticulum and neoplasia.Diagnostic tests of valuc includc urinalysis,cxcrctory
urogram, cystogram and ultrasound evaluation of the urinary tract.
i. Radiographs show a small divcrticulum fillcd with contrast at the apex of thc
bladder. Congenital vesicourachal diverticulum is a remnant of the embryonic conduit
bctwccnthcbladdcr andtheallantoicsac.Theconduitnormallycloses completelyin
the newborn. If it remains patent, it is called a persistent urachus and urine is seen
dripping from the umbilicus.lf it closes partially,a urachal diverticulum is formed as
shown (130). The diverticulum acts as a blind pouch which harbors bactcria in a
sanctuary siteisolated from cxposurc to antibiotics.
ili.Surgical trcatmcnt consists of cxcision of thc urachal tube including the bladder
apex and umbilicus.Urine culture and sensitivity are performed at the time of surgery,
and infection is treated with an appropriate antibiotic.
106
131-I34:Questions
131 If the paticnt in 130 was a cat, how would the treatment be different?
132 A German Shepherd Dog
132
is presented with rectalpro-
lapse (132).
i.Name the predisposing fac
tors or diseases.
ii.What are thc trcatment
options?
133 A nine-year-old Minia-
133
ture Schnauzcr was presented
with a four month history of
dysuria and hcmaturia unre-
sponsivc to antibiotics.As part
of the initial cvaluation,survey
abdominalradiographs were
taken (133).
i. Describe how these calculi
would bc surgically removed.
ii.What postopcrative proce-
dure is recommended to ensure
succcssfulremovalofallthe
calculi?
ili.Describe the short-tcrm
managerment of this dog.
134 i. Calculate thc ongoing calorie requirements for a 15 kg dog suffcring from
extensive third degrcc burns.
ii. What are the protein requirements for this animal, and how would they be changed
if the dog had concurrent protein losing glomerulopathy or hepatic insufficiency?
107
I31-134:Answers
131 In cats, diverticula are frequently dctcctcd only after urethral obstruction.Diver-
ticula often regress after resolution of the urinary obstruction, so surgcry is not always
neccssary.Cats are re-evaluated radiographically and by urinalysis four wccks aftcr re-
lief of obstruction to deterimine if the diverticulun is persistent and surgery is necessary.
132 i. Prcdisposing factors or diseases include cystitis, dystocia, prostatomegaly, peri
ncal hcrnia, colitis, rcctal forcign bodics, proctitis,rcctal or anal tumors, urolithiasis,
parasites and postoperative tenesmus.
i. lf the rectal tissue is viable,the prolapse is cleaned and reduced, and a purse-string
retention suture of non-absorbable material isleft in place for 3-5 days.Alternatively.
colopexy can be performed via routine caudal midline laparotomy.Colopexy is best
uscd for rccurrcnt prolapsc aftcr rcmoval of an anal purse-string suture, or for chronic
intcrmittcnt rccurrcncc.Rectal amputation and anastomosis is used when the viability
of the rectal tissue is questionable.
133i.The bladder is isolated from the abdomen with laparotomy pads.Retention
sutures are placed at the apex of the bladder and at each side of the cystotomy incision.
Calculi are removed, and thebladder and urethra are flushed with saline to dislodge
any remaining calculi. Ventral cystotomy affords better visualization of the trigone and
ureteral openings, and easier access to the urethra than does a dorsal cystotomy.lhere
is no greater risk oflcakagc or adhcsion comparcd to a dorsal cystotomy.Thc cysto-
tomy is closcd in onc laycr with 3-0 or 4-0 synthetic absorbable suture.Suture material
should not penetrate into the lumen of thebladder.
i.Imnediate postoperative raciographs are done to detect any calculi remaining in the
urinary tract. In studies, up to 15% of dogs and 20% of cats had calculi remaining in
the urinary tract after surgery.
ili.Immediatcpostoperative managcmcnt rcquircs thcbladdcr bc kcpt empty for several
days; the patient must be allowcd to urinate frequently,be catheterized or have a closed
indwelling urinary collection system placed. Urine is submitted for culturc and scnsi-
tivity, and the calculi submitted for mineral analysis. Prophylactic antibiotics are con-
tinued until urine culture results are returned.
(kg)0.75 × 70 = kcal/day, i.c. in this casc: 150.7s × 70 = 534 kcal/day. This is multiplied
by a disease factor of 1.28 for burn injury; so for this case 684 kcal/day arc rcquircd. If
the intended dict contains 1.2 kcal/g, then 684 kcals + 1.2 kcal/g, i.c. 570 g of food,
needs to be fed per day. An individual animal’s requirements can vary, so clinical moni-
toring is important to refine thisguideline-value'.
i. The guideline for protein requirement in the dog is 4 g/100 kcal of metabolizable
cncrgy in thc choscn dict, and for thc cat is 6 g/100 kcal.
For this animal, 4 g/100 kcal x 684 kcal = 27 g of protcin arc rcquircd pcr day. 1his
value would be increased for animals with ongoing protein loss (6 g/100 kcal for dogs,
8 g/100 kcal for cats) such as glomerulopathy, and decreased for aninals with protcin
intolcrance (2 g/100 kcal for dogs, 4 g/100 kcal for cats) such as hepatic insufficiency. If
a dict ration dcsigned for animals is being used,the protein requirements are likely to
be already balanced in thc dict.If a human cntcral foodproduct is being used, supple
mentation with a protein module may be rcquircd.
108
135,136:Questions
135
135
5A seven-month-old,female Yorkshire Terrier is diagnosed with a single
extrahepatic portocaval shunt. Clinical,hematologic and transcolonic nuclear
i.What are the three surgical options availablc for managcmcnt of a singlc
cxtrahepatic portosystemic shunt?
i.Which of the three techniques described was utilized in this dog (135),and what
are the advantages ofusing this procedure for shunt occlusion?
i. What are several potential pitfalls with the procedure illustrated above?
136 A four-year-old,spaycd fcmale
136
domestic shorthair cat is presentcdwith a
history of cxcrcisc intolerance and
lethargy of several months duration.
Thoracic radiographs reveal marked
pleural effusion.Thoracocentesis pro-
duced the white fluid pictured (136).
i.What is the most likely diagnosis and
how can this be verificd?
ii. What are four possiblc ctiologics?
ili.What treatment options are available
and what response would you expect?
109
135,136:Answers
135 i. Complete shunt ligation is idcal but can result in fatal portal hypertension.
When the shunt cannot be completely occludcd,partial ligation is performed while
monitoringportal blood pressure using amonometer andevaluating the splanchnic
viscera for signs of congestion.Recently a new tool,an ameroid constrictor ring,has
bccomc available togradually occlude the shuntingvessel.
ii. Ameroid constrictor ring. This is a circular metal band with a casein lining and a kcy
mechanisin that allows it to be placed around the shunting vessel. The lining of the ring
slowly expands, gradually occluding the shunting vessel between 28-35 days aftcr
placement.With gradual occlusion portal flow through the liver slowly increases
avoiding development of severe portalhypertension.The ameroid constrictor also
eliminates a second surgery to occlude completely the shunting vessel as is often done
following'partial ligation.
i. Disadvantages to using an ameroid constrictor include increased expense ($40-S60),
placc, and depending on the extent of vessel manipulation during placement venous
thrombosis may occur.The ameroid ring is in the early stages of clinical application
and long-term evaluation of its efficacy is not available.
136i. Chylothorax or pyothorax. Chylous fluid is a white or pink,opaque fluid that
will not clear when centrifuged.‘The predominant cell type on cytologic analysis is the
lymphocyte.An cthcr clcarancc tcst can bc uscd to vcrify fluid typc, although a morc
objectiveway is to compare the cholesterol and triglyccride content of pleural fluid and
serum. Chylous fluid has a higher triglyceride content than serum and a normal or low
cholestcrol content.Fluid associated with pyothoraxmay appear similar but often has a
foul odor. Cytologically, neutrophils and bacteria are usually abundant.
ii. Etiologies for chylothorax include: trauma, cranial mediastinal mass, cardio-
myopathy,lung lobe torsion and heartworm infection. When no obvious underlying
disorder is found, the term idiopathic chylothorax is used.
ii. Treatment depends on etiology; if possible, the inciting cause is eliminated or
treated. Medical imanagement is dircctcd at decrcasing chyle forimation by fccding a fat-
frec dict and draining the pleural space. Medium chain triglycerides are used as dietary
fat supplenent since they are absorbed directly into the portal system and not trans-
ported in chylomicrons by the lymph system.The pleural space is drained via thora-
costomy tube and continuous suction.
Surgery is indicated in cats that do not have underlying disease and when medical
management has failcd.Options includc thoracic duct ligation, shunting procedurcs
（pleurovenous or pleuropcritoncal) such as the Dcnver shunt,passivc pleuroperitoneal
drainagc through a diaphragmatic mesh, or pleurodesis. Medical and surgical therapy
of this disease can be frustrating. Reported success rates for cats treated with thoracic
duct ligation are variable (20-40%).Potential complications of chylothorax include
lobe torsion, pleural fibrosis and intrathoracic infcctions.
The best approach for trcatmcnt is a combination of dictary managcmcnt to decrcasc
the formation of chylc,and surgical ligation of the thoracic duct combined with passivc
plcuroperitoneal drainage through a diaphragmatic mesh.
110
137, 138:Questions
137 A two-year-old,female
137
Pekingese is prcsented for
cvaluation of stcrtorous breath-
ing. The owners report the
dyspnea becomes worse when
the dog is excited. On oro-
pharyngeal cxamination, the
soft palatc cxtcnded through
the rima glottidus (137).
i. What is the diagnosis?
ii. What is the treatment? De-
scribe the procedure in detail.
ili. What are the potential com-
plications?
138 This is a fivc-ycar-old,spayed
138
female, mixed-breed dog that presented
for reluctance to eat and the presence of a
swelling and draining sinus ventral to the
medial canthus of her eye (138).
i. What is the diagnosis and list possible
causes for this problem?
ii. List tests helpful to confirm the diag-
nosis, and what you would expect to find
for each result?
ii. Discuss two options for treatment of
this problem?
111
137,138:Answers
137 i. Elongated soft palate. The palate should not interfere with the rima glottidis.
Elongated soft palate is often one component of brachycephalic airway syndrome.
BAS consists of stenotic nares,elongated soft palate,everted laryngeal saccules and oc
casionally hypoplastic trachca.
ii. Treatment is by staphylcctomy or surgical rcscction of the obstructing portion of
thc palatc. Thc soft palatc should slightly overlap the epiglottis but not interfere with
thc rima glottidis. At surgery, stay sutures are placed in the lateral aspects of the soft
palatc and it is rctractcd rostrally.Thc palate is resected using a cut-and-sew tech-
niquc: cxccss palatc is cxcised in one-third portions and inmmediately oversewn with
absorbable suture material.Fnough palatc is rcsccted to prevent interference with the
larynx, but should not be resected beyond the caudal aspect of the tonsils (136).If
BAS is present, concurrent rhinoplasty,tonsillectomy and laryngeal sacculectomy is
performedl.
iii. The most common postoperative complication is pharyngcal cdema. This is mini-
mized by using gentle techniquc, avoiding clcctrocautery, and adininistering an anti-
inflammatory dose of corticostcroids (c.g. dexamcthasone 0.1 mg/kg) before surgery.
Hemorrhage is best controlled by limitcd incision and rapid suturing of the mucosal
edges; pressure is applicd if hcmorrhage persists after suturing. Excessive palate
removal may cause nasal rcflux by failurc.to cover the nasopharynx during swal-
lowing.
138 i.(arnassial tooth abscess (malar abscess,facial fistula or sinus), although other
extension of a dccp periodontalpockct, or concussive disease of theroot apex.
i.Oral cxamination for fistula formation; color of the tooth crown as an indication of
viability;palpation of the apex for swelling; and percussion of the root to assess the
animal’s rcsponsc.Percussion may confirm extension of infection into the periodontal
ligament space as accumulation of fluid in this space increases pressure and produces
pain on percussionl.
Radiographs are indicated but may not always give the diagnosis; overlying
structurcs can impair cvaluation (foraminac and bony trabcculae can mimic endo-
dontic lcsions). Common radiographic signs of tooth abscess are changes in the shape
and continuity of the lamina dura, and the width and shape of the periodontal liga
ment, indicating periodontal and pulpal necrosis. In chronic cases an apical osteolytic
lesion may be evident. Accurate positioning is imperative, and if there is question
about apical lucency, the view is repeared and the contralateral tooth radiographed for
comparison.
ii.Trcatmcnt of carnassial tooth absccss is by cither root canal thcrapy or cxtraction.
Indications for root canal thcrapy are:cxposure of the pulp cavity from tooth fracture,
attrition or caries; facial swelling; intraoral or extraoral fistula; gingival inflammation
with pocket formation in a combined periodontal/endodontic lesion; extraction is per
formed when financial constraints are imposed. Recurrence is possible if a root tip is
left in placc.
Concurrcnt antibiotic therapy for anaerobes and Gram-positivc acrobic cocci is
instituted.Appropriate choices include tinidazole,metronidazole,clindamycin or
amoxicillin-clavulanate.
112
139, 140: Questions
139 This is a rectal polyp in a
139a
tcn-ycar-old,male,mixed-
breed dog (139a).
i.What is the surgical thcrapy?
ii.What is the prognosis?
iii.What preoperative prcpara-
tion may be beneficial in this
patienr?
140 The perineum of a nine-
140
year-old,male Doberman
Pinscher is shown (140).1hc
doghashadaoncmonth
duration of tenesmus and soft
stools.lhe owners notedthe
pcrineal swelling approxi-
mately two wccks earlier, and
they report thc dog has had no
difficulty urinating.
i. What is the diagnosis, and
what is the cause of this
abnormality?
ii.whatare two common
surgical tcchniqucs for repair
ofthisproblem?
113
139, 140:Answers
139h
139c
139 i. Small polyps are removed per rectum using electrocautery, surgical cxcision
(139b, c),cryosurgery or simple ligation.Larger polyps or tumors invading thc mus-
ii.Prognosis is excellent after complcte excision, but recurrence can occur with largc
lesions and new polyps can develop. Concurrent colitis or other source of chronic irri-
tation must be treated. Dogs arc pcriodically rechecked throughout their life to asscss
for and treat new polyp formation.Malignant transformation occursinhunans and
probably dogs, although it has not hecn provcn.
lii.Prcopcrativc preparation is by withholding food for 24 hours and administration of
enemas and laxatives. Use of enemas on the day of surgery is not advisable since it
increases the risk of contamination from spillage of liquid feces.Preoperativc cnteric
and systemic antibiotics may decrease bactcrial contamination of the wound.
140 i. Perineal hernia. Hcrniation occurs when abdominal contents (fat, prostate,
bladder, etc.) rupture through to the perineum, generally betwccn thc levator ani and
cxtcrnal anal sphincter muscles, from straining against the weakened pelvic diaphragm.
Prostatomegaly,colitis or constipation often cause the straining,and a weakencd pclvic
diaphragm occurs from atrophy (neurogenic,senile,hormonal or metabolic) of muscles
forming the barrier.
i.Theclassic’ techniquc is performed by apposing with preplaccd chromic gut sutures
(sizc 0 or 1) the levator ani (coccygcus muscle is used if the levator ani musclc is
atrophicd),external anal sphincter and intcrnal obturator muscles.The difficulty with
this tcchniquc is the muscles can be severely atrophicd and the sutures are undcr
moderate tcnsion aftcr closure,particularly ventrally,predisposing the herniorrhaphy
to dehiscencc and failure (up to 4s% incidence). The sccond technique is transposition
of the internal obturator musclc.‘The obturator muscle is elevatcd from the ischiu,
transposed dorsally and suturcd to the external anal sphincter and levator ani or coc-
cygcus muscles. The advantage is the obturator muscle provides a wider patch’ for the
hernial rcnt,and consequently sutures are under lcss tension upon conpletion. Thc
reported incidcnce of failure is 5% for this tcchnique. Care is taken to protect thc
pudlendal vessels and ncrvcs which are closely adljacent to thc transposed muscle flap.
A variation for hoth techniqucs is to place lateral sutures in thc sacrotuberous ligament
the oftcn atrophied muscles, but greater carc must be taken to avoid penetrating the
caudal gluteal vesscls and sciatic nerve.
114
141.142:Questions
141 This is thc radiographic
141a
image of an eight-year-old, fe-
male Poodle presented for evalua-
tion of a distended abdomcn and
difficulty breathing （141a).On
examination,symmetrical alo-
pecia of the flanks, dorsum and
perineal region was present. Sero-
sanguinous fluidwas collected on
abdominocentesis. On sono-
graphy of the mid-abdomen the
animal had hyperechoic nodular
masses caudal to both kidneys. A
mass of 4.4 cm diameter with a
cystic formation of 2.6 cm di-
amctcr is shown（141b)
141b
i.Is thc radiograph hclpful in the
diagnosis?
ii. From the information provided
on the sonogram, what organ is
affected?
iii.What are the most common
tumor types for this organ?
75DR40
AF
85
HR31
142Masses removcd from thc
142
middle ear and horizontal canal
of a ninc-month-old Siamcsc cat
are shown (142).
i.What is the correct diagnosis,
and how is this made?
i. List four common presenting
clinical signs for this condition?
ili. Describe the procedure for re-
moval of these masses, and what
is the prognosis for this cat?
115
141,142:Answers
141 i. No. The only abnormality seen is a large amount of peritoneal fluid obstruct-
ing the view of most of the abdominal organs. It is impossible to dctcrmine the origin
of the fluid.Ultrasound cxamination is indicated to study the organs not visible on the
radiograph.
i. The ovary and caudal kidney. This image, combined with thc clinical signs, is indi-
cative of a horimone-producing ovarian neoplasia. Cytologic analysis of thc pcritoncal
effusion revealed neoplastic cells.
i. Ovarian tumors are uncommon in dogs and cats, presumably because animals arc
so frequently neutered. Epithelial cell tumors such as papillary or cystadenoma/car
cinomas are most common (40-50%),followed by sex-cord stromal tumors such as
teratoma (30-50%) and germ cell tumors such as granulosa cell tumor (6-20%).
Ovarian tumors oftcn causc no clinical signs until thcy bccoime large enough to create
a space-occupying_cffcct. Mctastascs can affcct the lungs, liver, lymph nodes and
adjacent kidncy. Ovarian carcinoma cau. cause malignant effusion and intra-ab-
dominal sccding, and frequently affects both ovaries. In general,metastatic rates are
low for ovarian tumors(<20%) and complete surgical excision often results ina cure.
Once mctastascs occur the long-term prognosis is poor, although short-term responses
havc bccn rcportcd following chemotherapy.
142 i. Bilateral inflanmatory polyps (middle ear polyps, nasopharyngeal polyps).
Polyps are common in cats and may be congenital. Thcir presence is confirmcd by oto-
scopic examination of the ear canals, and examination of thc oropharyngcal rcgion by
rctraction of thc soft palatc rostrally using a spay hook. Radiographs of the pharynx
and skull may show the mass, increased opacity of the osseous bullae, thickening of
the bullae wall,and sclerosis of the petrous temporal bone.This cat had no evidence
of nasopharyngeal polyps.
i.Aural discharge; a visible mass in the horizontal canal on otoscopy; signs of otitis
Inedia or interna; dyspnea or dysphagia if there is extension into the nasopharynx.
i. Surgical removal of inflammatory polyps is based on polyp location.For naso-
resection may be necessary, and those located in the middle ear are excised by ventral
bulla osteotomy. These polyps were removed from the horizontal canal following a
lateral wall resection, and a ventral bulla osteotomy was performed since the polyps
were arising from the middle ear.
For bulla ostcotomy the cat is placed in dorsal recumbencywith theneck elevated.
Thc bulla is palpatcd caudal and slightly mcdial to the vcrtical ramus of thc mandiblc.
A paramcdian skin incision is madc ovcr thc bulla.By scparating the digastric muscle
from the hyoglossal and styloglossal muscles, the ventral bulla is visualized. The hypo-
glossal nerve must be avoided. A Steinman pin is inserted into the bulla and the
opening enlarged using rongeurs. The cat bulla is divided by a septum that must be
performcd and a drain placcd prior to closurc. Prognosis is cxcellent long term, but
recurrence is likely if the enitire polyp is not removed.
116
143,144:Questions
14.3a
143b
143c
143 These illustrations demonstrate the surgical cor-
143d
rection of a cardiac defect (143a-d).
i.Name the condition.
ii.What breeds arc prcdisposed to the development of
this condition?
iii. Describe thc surgical approach used for this ex-
posure.
iv.What structurc is bcing retracted ventrally with a
stay suture, and what structure is identified by thc
arrowin 143a?
v.Which ligature is tightencd first, and what is the
Branham reflex?
144Many surgery paticnts ill fron trauma or disease suffer from protein-calorie
malnutrition.Nutrient deprivation adverscly affcctshumoral and cell mediated im-
munity and wound healing, putting animals at incrcascd risk for sepsis and other
complications.Nutritional asscssmcnt and support is of paranount importancc
bccause no patient benefits from starvation.
How do you asscss thc nutritional status of animals? Discuss history,physical
examination,laboratory findings,treatiment and diseasc rclated factors,and special
nutritional status tests.
117
143,144:Answers
143 i.Patcnt ductus arteriosus(PDA).
i.Miniaturc Poodles,Pomeranians,Keeshonds, Collies,Shetland Shccpdogs,German
Shepherd Dogs,Brittanys and Cocker Spaniels.
ii.A left 4th intercostal latcral thoracotomy.The skin incision is made parallel to the
ribs at the caudal border of the scapula.‘The latissimus dorsi muscle is incised parallel
to the skin incision and thc intcrcostal spaces are couuntedusing a hemostat inserted
cranially uncler the latissimus. The inscrtion of the scalenus muscle is inciscd lcaving
cnough for the muscle to be reapposcd at closure. The serratus ventralis muscle is
separated parallel to the dircction of the muscle fibers.The intercostal muscles are
incised in the middle to avoid damaging the intercostal vessels and mervc along the
caudal margin of each rib. Once the plcura is incised, ventilation is assistcd. The
opening is cxtcndcd dorsally to the tubercle ofthe rib andventrallyto the internal
thoracic artery which is visualized and avoiced.A Finochietto rib spreader is used to
maintain exposure. The Ieft cranial lung lobe is packed into the cauidal rcccsscs of the
surgical field with a moist sponge or laparotomy pad. The PDA is identified betwcen
the pulmonary artery and the aorta.
iv.The vagus nerve is being retracted with thc stay suture, and the phrenic nervc is
identifiedwith the arrow.
v.The aortic side ligature. Once this ligature is tightened, the blood pressurc incrcases
and the heart rate decreases -the Branham reflcx.Aftcr a couple of minutes the sizc of
the pulmonary artery decreases and the ligature on the pulmonary artery side may be
tiecl.
144 Clinicians should gauge nutritional status by assessment of history and dict,
physical cxamination, medical and surgery status and sclected clinical chenistries.
History: owncrs are questioned about quantity and quality of food intake by thc
animal (if intakc is reduced the duration of decrcased intake) and about sources of
nutritional loss such as vomiting and diarrhea.Physical examination:animals are
inspected for loss of lcan body mass,poor coat quality,limb cdema and pressure
sores.Special care is taken in overwcight/obese dogs that may still havc lost lean body
gestive of protcin-calorie malnutrition.Albunin is a poor indicator of actue protcin
malnutrition bccausc concentrations change slowly;it is more useful for determination
of chronic malnutrition.Transfcrrin, an iron bincing and transport protein,reflects
lymphocyte count of less than 8o0/mm is an indicator of immunc suppression and, if
duc to malnutrition,predominantly involvcs T-cells.Abnormal values such as these
arc interpreted with care since disease proccsses besides malnutrition can result in
sinilar changcs.Treatmentand disease related factors:nutritionalintake can bc
adversely affected by oral and gastrointestinal surgery, chemotherapy and other
factors (iatrogenic or discasc induced) that cause vomiting, diarrhea or decreased
appctite. Special tests: in the future, more accurate tests such as calorimetry and
nitrogen balance will beused to more accuratcly and quantitatively asscss nutritional
status.
118
145-147:Questions
888888
145 A Gcrman Shepherd Dog
145
is presented for clyschezia and
excessive licking of the peri-
anal region (145).
i.What is the diagnosis, and
what is thc signalment of a
typical patient?
ii. Name several treatment
options and their approximatc
success rates.
iii.List themost common
potential complication (and its
approximate incidence) for
cach therapy.
146 This is a view of the
146
labial mucosa in a 12-year-old
Labrador Rctricver (146).‘Thc
Owncr bccame concerned upon
noticing blood-tingcd saliva
hanging from theleft chcck
commissure.
i. What is the diagnosis?
ii.What would be considered a
palliative surgical procedure
forthislesion?
iii.What would be considcred
a more definitive surgical pro-
cedure for this lesion?
147 Suturc material is used in a variety of patterns.There are advantagcs and disad-
vantagcs to each closure pattcrn. The surgeon should choose a suture pattern that
i.When closing skin, is an inverting or cvcrting suture pattern morc desirable?
i. When closing a wound, what are the advantages and disadvantages of interrupted
and continuous suturepatterns?
119
145-147:Answers
145 i. Perianal fistulas. Male, two years of age or older, Gcrman Shepherd Dogs or
other largc brccds are ost commonly affccted.
ii.Medical treatment can be administered by oral and topical antibiotics,local clean
ing and topical antiseptics; results are at best temporary rclief of clinical signs. Surgical
excision with or without primary closure has a success rate of 60-80%. Cryotherapy
or chemical cauterization of the fistulas is successfulin 80-90% ofreported cascs.
Dcroofing and fulguration has a 60% reported success rate and tail amputation used
alone an 80% success_ratc.Rcccntly, successful treatment had been reported with
immunosuppressive drug therapy (steroids, cyclosporin).
ii.The most frequently recognized complications are: surgical cxcision -recurrence
and incontinence (20-60%); cryotherapy - recurrence and stenosis (10-45%); chemi-
cal cauterization, deroofing and fulguration,tail amputation-recurrence (20%).
146 i. Malignant melanoma. Benign hyperplasia of pigmentcd mucosa would be a sig
nificantly lesslikcly differential diagnosis.
ii.Submucosalrcscction of the mass for excisional biopsy will provide short-tern
resolution; howcvcr, tumor recurrence locally,regionally (lymph nodcs) or at distant
sites (lungs) is likcly. The long-term prognosis is poor regardlcss of treatiment for large
(>2 cm) mclanomas. Small (<2 cim) melanomas often havc a good long-term prog-
nosis.
ii.A sinilar diagnostic work-up as in 19 is recommended for all patients with oral
neoplasms.Full-thickness resection of the cheek commissure and a modified neck
dissection to rcmove regional lymph nodes (mandibular, parotid and medial retro-
pharyngeal) is a comprchcnsivc procedure in an attempt to removc as much tumor
mass as possible. Cheek reconstruction using a caudal auricular axial pattcrn flap will
provide excellent cosmcsis.Follow-up adjunctive chemotherapy may be indicated.
This procedure may provide a grcatcr tumor-free interval and improve the prognosis
from poor to guarded.
147 i. Skin margins tend to invert as healing procceds hcnce surure patterns that
create slight cvcrsion are preferable. Simple interrupted, intcrruptcd cruciate and Ford
interlocking are all acceptablc pattcrns for derimal closure.
ii.‘Ihe primary advantagc of intcrrupted patterns is the ability to prcciscly adjust ten-
sion at each point along the wound in accordance with variable spreading forccs along
itsmargin.With an interrupted pattern,each suture is a scparate entity,and failure of
onc suture may be inconsequential. The major disadvantage of interrupted patterns is
the incrcascd timc ncccssary to tie many individual knots.There is also more foreign
material left in thc woundwhen sutures areburied.
The primary advantage of continuous patterns is speed of closurc. Lcss suture
material is used and fewer knots are prcscnt. This reduces both operative timc and the
amount of foreign material in the wound. Continuous pattcrns also form a more watcr-
tight or airtight scal.The major disadlvantage of continuous patterns is the potential for
suture breakage and disruption of the entire line of closure. There is also less precise
control of suture tension and wound approximation. The Ford interlocking pattcrn is a
good compromise; it can be applied rapidly, yet provides fairly accuratc adjustment of
tension atmultiplepointsalongthcwound.
120
148-150:Questions
148 List the steps for proper carc of surgical instruments prior to sterilization.
149Thc inguinal and cranial
149
thigh regions of a German
Shorr-haired Pointer presentcd
for treatment 48hours aftcr
vehicular trauma are shown
(149). The dog's vital signs are
stablc and limb function is
unaffected except for the soft
tissue wounds.
i.In terms of wound classifi
cation based on duration of in-
jury and cxpected level of con-
tamination,how would this
wound bc categorized?
ii.What are the treatrment op-
tions for this case and progno-
sis for recovery?
150 A nine-year-oldl, female Doberman Pinscher is prcscnted for ovariohysterectomy.
Aftcr routine venipuncture your technician notcs that the dog continucs to bleed.
Upon questioning thc owner, there is no previous history of surgery othcr.than cos-
metic otoplasty and tail docking as a puppy. Dclayed hemorrhagc at the incision areas
was noted at that timc by the owner.Examination of the dog is othcrwise normal.
i.What is a quick,immecliate asscssmcnt of this patient's coagulation ability that you
can perform in the clinic?
ii.What diagnostic proccdures do you wish to perform to further evaluate coagulation
status in this dog?
ii.What is the most likely diagnosis, and what prcsurgical treatment can be used in
this paticnt to temporarily corrcct the coagulation abnormalitics?
iv.What endocrine abnormality can you screen for, which may have important impli
cations for future managemcnt of this coagulopathy?
121
148-150:Answers
148 Instruments are: (1) rinsed in a weak detergent; (2) cleancd ultrasonically; (3)
rinscd in instrument milk;(4)examined to dctcrmine working condition.Instruments
arefirst soakedin warm waterwith aweakdetergenttoloosen driedbloodand debris.
Gross contamination is rcmoved before placing the instrumcnts in an ultrasonic
behind alkaline residucs.Ultrasonic cleaning works via cavitation,whcrcby minute air
bubbles are created, expand and implodc.This process is more effective at removing
tightly adhered soils than othcr mcthods of cleaning and is strongly recomumcnded for
routine cleaning of instrumcnts.Following rinsing and drying, instruments are quickly
rinsed in instrument milk to lubricatc moving parts and help prevent corrosion and
staining. A final inspection for damagc is made whcn instruments are placed in the
pack in an orderly fashion. Sterilization indicators are added for gas or stcam steriliza
tion,asappropriatc,prior to wrapping.
149 i. An open, contaminated wound of grcatcr than six hours duration,and con-
reported infection rate for these wounds is 18%.
ii.Treatment for this injury includes: debridement of necrotic tissue; copious wound
lavage with sterile salinc or antiscptic solution (dilutc povidone or chlorhexidine);
reduction of dead space; drainage of contaiminated tissuc pockets;and wound closure.
Systemic antibiotics are notrequiredunless signs of systemic discasc such as fever,inap-
pctcncc,toxcmia,cellulitis or degenerative leukocytosis are present.Tissue approxima
tion can bc by primary or delayed primary wound closure using an adjacent pedicle
graft. The prognosis for recovery is fair to good and dcpends on local and systenic
tissue health factors,and the efficacy of surgical trcatmcnts.
150 i. The cuticle bleeding time can rapidly determine if a coagulation defect is present.
If the cuticle bleeding time is normal (less than six minutes), then significant bleecling
during surgcry is unlikely; if prolonged,a prinary hemostatic defcct is prcscnt,i.e. vas-
culopathy, thrombocytopcnia or plateler dysfunction.
i.Examination of a blood smcar and platelet count determination.Activated coagu-
lation time (evaluates the ability of whole blood to clot with the contact activator dliato-
defccts:activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT),one-stagc prothrombin time
(OSPT);fibrin split products (ISP); and factor VIII-related antigen (FVIIR:Ag) for Von
Willcbrand’s disease (VWD). Bleeding time in this dog was eight minutcs, Von Wille
brand’'s factor was siguificantly decreased and all other coagulation tests were normal.
ii.VwD is associated with prolonged bleeding time, decreased values for Von Willc
brand’s factor and norrmal APTT, OSPT and FSP valucs.Prcsurgical treatment with
cither fresh whole blood,fresh plasma （5-10 ml/kg)or frcsh frozen plasma
(5-10 ml/kg), and desmopressin acetate at a dose of 1 mg/kg s/c will tcmporarily
ameliorate bleeding tcndancics.FVIlIR:Ag can be increased in collected blood by prc-
treating donors with desmopressin acctate.
iv.Hlypothyroidisin increases bleeding tendencies in VWD patients.Decreased platelet
adhesion and prolonged bleeding times have bccn notcd in patients with low thyroid
hormone levels alone.
122
151-153:Questions
151 With regard to the cat in 96, you diagnose renal trauma. Is surgery a reasonable
consideration and how wouldyou proceed with it?
152a
152b
152 These thoracic radiographs (152a,b)wcrc
made cluring a routine preopcrativc work-up on a
nine-year-old,spaycd female rabbit.
i. What is your radiographic diagnosis?
A sonogram demonstrated a multilocular, cystic
structure in the cranial mcdiastinum.On cytologic
evaluation, a fine-needle aspiratc of thc mass was
highly cellular with the majority of cells bcing
maturelymphocytes.
i. What is your cytologic diagnosis bascd on thesc findings?
ii. What surgical approach would you use to treat this condition?
iv.What major anatomic structures wouldyou encounter and how wouldyou dcal
with them?
v.What clinical laboratory data arc cxpcctcd to bc abnormal with this condition?
153 This is a microsurgical tis-
153
sue forceps (153).It has several
features making it suitable for
usc during microsurgery.De-
scribe these features and their
importance formicrosurgery.
123
151-153:Answers
151
151 If an animal with diagnosed renal/
ureteral trauma docs not improve with
supportive therapy, if severe damage to
the kidney is suspected and significant.
hemorrhagc continues, or a urethral tear
is diagnosed,exploratory laparotomy is
pcrformcd. The retroperitoneum is en-
tercd via vcntral midline laparotomy.In
this case, left kidney trauma with second-
ary hemoretropcritoncum is shown (151).
Attempts are made to prcscrvc all viable
renal tissule andwhenever possible partial
nephrectomy is performed. Compensatory
hypertrophy of remaining glomerulae will occur.The renal artery is occluded with a vas-
cular clamp and partial nephrectomy is pcrformcd by cxcising all terminally damagcd
renal tissue. Arcuate arteries are ligated and the renal pelvis is sutured closed (4-0
absorbable monofilament).Exposed renal parenchyma is covcrcd by omcntum suturcd
to the capsule. Ihe kidney is replaced and nephropexy performed. For severe trauma
ureteronephrectomy is performed. lf a ureteral tear or avulsion is present it is primarily
rcpaircd, or urctcronephrcctomy is performed if injury is severe.
152 i. A cranial meciastinal mass is evicdent. There is loss of cranial cardiac waist, ele-
vation of the trachea and the cranial lung fields are replaced by the tissue dense mass.
ii.'Thymoma.
ili. Median sternotomy is used for renoval of a large mediastinal mass.
iv.Thc internal thoracic artery and vein are avoided along the intcrnal surface of thc
sternebrae. In large dogs where a saw is used to cut the sternebrae,a flat metal instru-
ment such as a malleable retractor is inserted along the internal surface to protcct
intrathoracic structures from the saw. Other important structures to identify and
avoid include the cranial vena cava and phrenic nerves present along the craniodorsal
aspcct of the mass. In somc cascs the tumor surrounds a phrenic nerve and it must be
sacrificed. The thymic artery is also found nearby as well and must be ligated to allow
removal of the thymoma.
v. Clinical laboratory findings are generally normal. In some patients a mature lympho-
cytosis (>20 x 10*/1 (>20,000/mn²) may be present. Hypercalcemia has been docu-
mented in some cases and is suspected to be a result of pseudohyperparathyroidism.
153The back cnd of the forceps is wcightcd so the instrumcnt balances in the groove
of the hand created by the thumh and first finger. This allows the surgeon to use the in-
strument without having to grip it preventing muscle fatigue and tremors. The handles
are round which allows the surgeon to roll the instrument between the fingers.During
microsurgery, the fingers manipulatc thc instrument with almost no movement ori-
ginating from the arms and hands. If the handles are flat, the rolling action performed by
the fingers is jerky, while if the handlles are round, rolling produces a smooth motion. at
very fine structures during microsurgery; however, the overall lengthof the instrument is
maintained.Many ophthalmic instrumcnts have an overall short length and must be
held between the thumb and first fingcr. This rcsults in muscle fatigue and tremor.
124
154,155:Questions
154 The perianal area of a spayed female
154a
MalteseI'erricr is shown (154a).
i.Givc thc diagnosis,and describe the
surgical therapy.
ii.Name common postoperativc compli-
cations.
155
155 A six-year-old, malc Samoyed presents with a history of an acutc onsct of dyspnea
and cyanosis. Thoracic radiograph is shown (155).‘1here is no history. of antecedent
trauma.
i. What is the radiographic diagnosis?
i. What is the suspected disease process and its ctiology?
ili. How should this dog be trcated, and what is the prognosis?
125
154,155:Answers
154b
154c
154i. Ruptured anal sac abscess.Surgical excision is the therapy of choicc.Prcopcra-
tive administration of antibiotics may reducc the inflammatory component and facili-
tate surgical removal.All anal sac epithclial lining must bc removed to prevent recur-
rences (154b).The wound is flushed thoroughly and may bc closcd primarily (154c),
over a Penrosc drain,or left open for healing by secondary intention.
i.Fecal incontincncc,chronic draining tracts, tenesmus,stricture formation and dys
chezia.
155 i. Pneumothorax is cvident bascd on elevation of the cardiac silhouette and col-
lapse of the caudal lung lobes.Pneumothorax can be traumatic or spontaneous; in this
case spontaneouspneumothorax is mostlikely.
i. In a serics of 21 dogs with spontaneous pneumothorax, all had underlying pulmon-
ary pathology notcd grossly or histopathologically. Bullous enphysema is most com
mon and it is likely that a blcb or bulla associated with this condition ruptured causing
pncumothorax.
ii.Although thoracocentesis may be effective in trcating traumatic pneumothorax,
more than two thoracocenteses are requiredwithin 24hours,tube thoracostomy is per-
formed and continuous suction applied for several days to kcep pulmonary and chest
wall tissues apposcd allowing an adhesion to form.An effective adhesion is often
difficult to maintain and rccurrcnce following conservative treatment is high.If
pncumothorax persists and there is radiographic cvidcncc of the source,thoracotomy is
considered.With bilateral involvement of thc pulmonary parenchyma,median
sternotomy is performed for partial or complete pulmonarylobectomy toremove
diseased tissue.
The prognosis is guarded. Recurrence rates for spontaneous pneumothorax in dogs
treated by thoracocentesis or tube thoracostomy is 80% or higher, and with surgcry
recurrence approaches 25% as other arcas of lung can develop bullae which subsc-
qucntly rupture. Adjunct procedures such as mechanical or chemical pleurodesis may
further incrcasc thc cffectiveness of surgical management.
126
156,157:Questions
156 A ninc-ycar-old,malc Yorkshire Terrier is presented for a chronic,non-
productive cough. The cough occurs primarily when thc dog gcts cxcited, and until
recently it was manageable with medical therapy.A lateral thoracic radiograph takcn
during mid-inspiration showed narrowing of the cervical trachea near the thoracic
inlct. The radiograph takcn at mid-cxpiration was normal. Screening laboratory
work was unrcmarkablc.
i. Why were radiographs taken at mid-inspiration and cxpiration?
ii. What other diaguostic tests are indicated?
iii. Are there any surgical treatments for this abnormality? Providc dctails.
iv.What are the success rates and complications of surgical treatment?
157 A ten-year-old,male Col-
157a
lie presented for swelling of the
nose (157a). The 0wners noted
an intermittent mucopurulent
nasal discharge from the left
nostril.You suspect a nasal
tumor due to the dog's age and
presenting clinical signs.
i. List thrcc tumors of thc nasal
cavity.
ii.A'CT scan was performed
on the nasal cavity of the dog
(157b). Describe the findings.
Do you still suspect a nasal
tumor?
ili.lfthistuumorisdiagnosedas
157b
thcmostcommonnasaltumor
found in the canine, what is the
prognosis and list three avail-
able treatments?
127
156,157:Answers
156a
156b
156i.Tracheal collapse occurs from degeneration and weakening of the cartilaginous
tracheal rings (156a). The result is narrowing and dynamic collapse of the large airways
(trachea, mainstem and lobar bronchi); the severity and location varies with the phase
of respiration. Collapse is more sevcrc in the cervical trachea during inspiration because
of thc negative intraluminal airway prcssure, and in the intrathoracic trachea and lobar
bronchi during expiration bccause of the positivc cxtraluminal airway pressure. The
phase specific changes in prcssure induce a dyuamic collapse that is more apparcnt
radiographically when cxposures are madc during mid-inspiration and mid-expiration.
i.Fluoroscopy providcs visualization through all phases of respiration and is superior to
radiographs. Bronchoscopy is also useful to evaluatc the location and severity of
collapse,and to allow inspection of laryngeal function and lobar bronchi.
ii. Surgical treatmcnts include chondrotomy, trachealis muscle plication, tracheal
resection and anastomosis, and intra- or extraluminal tracheal ring prostheses. Of
these, extraluminal polypropylenc C-shaped or spiral ring prostheses provide the best
results (156b). Prostheses arc placed along the collapsed section of trachea (results
are poor if thcre is concurrent lobar bronchi collapse bccausc they cannot be stcntcd)
and the wall is sutured to the stent restoringluminal diamcter.
iv. Placement of ring prosthcses (C-shaped stents) provided elinination or significant
improvement of clinical signs in over 60% of trcated animals in onc rcport. Animals over
six years of age did worsc probably due to an incrcased incidence of underlying disease,
such as infection, collapse of the mainstem bronchi and heart discasc. Common postopera
tive complications included persistent cough or dyspnea, and laryngcal paralysis.
157 i.Nasal adenocarcinoma (most. common), squamous cell carcinoma, fibro-
sarcoma, chondrosarcoma,osteosarcoma,lymphosarcoma,hemangiosarcoma and
transmissiblevenercaltuumors.
ii.There is a large soft tissue mass in the left nasal passage.There docs not appear to be
bony lysis nor is thcrc a shift of the nasal septum. Do you still suspect tumor?
ii. If diagnoscd as nasal adenocarcinoma, thc prognosis is guarcled. Eighty pcr cent of
nasal tumors arc malignant and are pronc to carly local invasion and recurrencc aftcr
therapy. Treatments include radiation (external beam or brachythcrapy),photo
dynamic thcrapy,cryotherapy,immunothcrapy and chemotherapy.Radiation therapy
is the best treatiment. Mcan survival time of dogs treatcd with surgery and ortho-
voltage, or cobalt irradiation is 25 months (approximatcly 60% alive at one year and
40% at twoyears).Othcr therapies are considered only palliative.
128
158,159:Questions
158 Tumors locatedin the caudalpart
158a
Of therectum can bc trcatcd surgically by
various techniques, depending on thc cx-
rent oftumor involvement.
i.Name and describe this technique
(158a):
i. Namc two altcrnativc approaches that
can bc uscd for rcctal lcsions not involv-
ing the anus.
ili. Nane the major disadvantages of
each technique.
159
A fivc-ycar-old,fcmale Boxcr is
15
presented for this protrudingvulvar mass
(159).
i. What are three differential diagnoses
for thc abnormality shown?
ii. How can these thrce abnormalities bc
dlifferentiated?
129
158,159:Answers
158b
158c
158 i. Rectal pullthrough procedure.An incision is madc in the skin surrounding the
anus or anocutaneous junction, depending on the extent of the tumor. Blunt dissection
and caudal traction are performed along thc adventitial surface of the rectum. The
abnormal part of the rectum is amputated (158b)and the rectal end is sutured to the
skin (158c).
i. The ventral approach using pubic symphysectomy or pubic osteotomy to gain
access to the pelvic canal, or the dorsal perineal approach.
i.Rectal pull-through: postoperative complications include incontinencc, stricture
formation and dehisccnce. Ventral approach: complicated access to the rectum and
postoperativc morbidity associated with the ostcotomy tcchnique. Dorsal perineal
approach: linmited access and extensive dissection.
159 i. Vaginal hyperplasia (vaginal edema), vaginal prolapse and neoplasia.
i.Diagnosis is based on signalment, history of estrus,vaginal cxamination and
urinary catheterization. Vaginal neoplasms occur in older (median age 10-11 years)
intact nulliparous fcimales, and are not necessarily related to cstrus. Masses are often
firm and pedunculated; leiomyoma and fibroma arc most common and can arise from
any surface of the vagina.Vaginal hypcrplasia and prolapse usually occur during the
follicular phase of estrus and are associated with physiologic(or pathologic) clevations
of estrogen. Hyperplasia is usually seen at the first heat cycle and commonly rccurs;
prolapsc can occur at any age and is most often associatcd with straining.Vaginal
hyperplasia occurs from marked thickening of the vaginal floor cranial to the urethral
papilla. The indurated tissue protrudes from thc vagina, appearing as a red fleshy
mass. The urethra does not become exteriorizcd and can be readily catheterized by
reflecting the mass dorsally and visualizing the papilla. Vaginal prolapse presents as a
doughnut-shaped mass from cversion of the complete vaginal circumfercncc. Thc
urethral papilla is commonly cxtcriorized and is catheterized by visualizing thc papilla
in the center of the ^doughnut.
130
160-163:Questions
160 With regard to the Boxer in 159, how docs the treatiment differ for the three
diagnostic cosiderations?
161 The abdominal radio-
161a
graph of an 11-year-old,
female, mixed-breed dog pre-
sented for evaluation of polla-
kiuria is shown (161a).The
paticnt was previously diag-
nosedwith a‘fibroma”in the
neck of the uterus and the
owner elected no treatment at
that timc. On clinical examina-
tion the dog had a visibly dis-
tended abdomen and on palpa
tion a large firm mass was
occupying the mid and caudal
abdomen. There was no va-
ginal dischargc,hcmaturia or
hematochezia. Rectal examination was normal. On screening laboratory evaluation
only a mild leukopenia and eosinophilia were prescnt.
i.What other diagnostic or staging tests are indicated?
i.What is the treatment and likely prognosis?
162 Adeglove injury on the hindlimb of a
162
three-year-old,mixcd-breed dog is shown (162).
The lateral collateral ligaments of the hock have
been avulsed,the interior of the joint is cxposed,
and scvcral small bone fractures are present.
There is 360° of skin loss from below the stifle
to the digits.
i. This is obviously a scrious wound. What proh-
lems and solutions arc discusscd with the
owner?
ii.How can this wound be managed?
131
160-162:Answers
160Treatment of vaginal hyperplasia is by surgical cxcision of redundant vaginal
tissue;without concurrent ovariohystcrcctomy recurrence is likely at parturition or the
taneous regrcssion will occur in diestrus. For more severe cases whcrc the prolapscd
tissues are suffering from cxposure or strangulation, the tissues are reduced using a well
lubricated obturator such as a syringe case (episiotomy may facilitate this), a urinary
catheter is placed and thc vulvar labia are temporarily closed with sutures. If the
prolapsed tissues arc devitalizcd, then circumferential resection is performcd. Ovario-
hysterectomy induccs permanent regression of vaginal prolapsc. Surgery is the treat-
ment of choice for vaginal tumors except transmissible vencrcal tumor(TVT).Excision
generally cures the most common vaginal rumors; TVTs can be cured with chemo-
therapy.
161 i. The prcscncc of a large mass occu-
161b
pying practically the whole abdomcn and
preventing visualization of othcr organs is
best evaluated by sonography. Ultra-
sound allows determination of the af-
fected organ, thc naturc of parenchymal
consistcncy,and is useful to obtain
guided needle aspirate or biopsy samples.
If this diagnostic tool is not available at a
primary care or referral facility, cxplora-
tory laparotomy for direct observation,
biopsy sample collection or surgical rescc-
tion is the next best choicc. In this case a
uterine mass was confirmcd by ultra
sound cxamination.There was no evi
dence ofabdominal metastases.Three-vicw thoracicradiographs (ventrodorsalview
and both right and left lateral vicws) wcre evaluated for metastases and none were seen.
ii. Treatment for uterine neoplasia is ovariohysterectomy (161b). In dogs most utcrinc
tumors arc benign (55-90% leiomyomas)and causc no signs.Complctc resection is
gcncrally curative. Leimyosarcoina was diagnosed in this casc.This uncommon tumor
type (10% incidence) is more prone to local invasion into adjacent organs, and distant
mctastasis to the lymph nodes, liver and lungs.With complete resection and no evi-
dence ofmetastasis,the prognosis is good for tumor control.
162i.There is no quick treatment of such a wound. The owner must understand thc
complexity,length and cost of management.Treatment will require 30-50 days and the
hock joint will likely be stiff, however it should be possible to salvage the lcg.
il.A clean, healthy, granulating wound surface is first produced to cover all joints,
tendons and bones. The wound is clcancd, debrided, and covered by a non-occlusive
dressing as a primary laycr. The limb is bandaged with an absorptive secondary laycr
and an external splint is incorporated.With proper care a healthy wound is obtaincd in
about 25 days (scc 163).
132
163, 164:Questions
163With regard to the injury on. the hindlimb
163a
of the dog in 162,the wound is shown after 2.S
days of treatment (163a).
i.What alternatives arc considered for defini-
tive care of this wound?
ii.Describe in detail the chosen method.
164This is a ventralview of a
164
five-ycar-old, mixed-breed dog
with aventral cervical mass
(164).The mass,which had
been enlarging during a six
week period,was fluctuant
and non-painful:A cervical
mucocele is suspected.
i.What is the simplest diag-
nostic test?
ii.How would the affccted
side be determincd?
133
163,164:Answers
163b
163 i.No loose available skin
is adjacent to the wound.Heal-
ing by contraction and cpithe-
lialization,or undermining and
mobilization of skin edges is
rulcd out.Free autogenous skin
grafts can be used; however, a
largc wound in an area difficult
to bandagc can require multi-
ple grafts, and the healed area
is usually a mixture of skin and
cpithelialized scar tissue casily
damaged by normal trauma.
163c
Axial pattern flaps are not use-
ful for this large 360°distal
wound.Free microvascular
transplantation of a flap re-
quircs a suitable artery and
vein at thc rccipient site and
special expertise and equip-
ment.A method uscd success-
fully and recommended by this
author (D.E.Johnston) for
largc distal open wounds on forclimbs and hindllimbs is a direct bipedicleflap from the
lateral body wall.
ii. The leg is placed against thc abdorminal wall in the conscious animal to determine
that thc joints have adequate flexibility and that the animal does not resent the
mancuver. The skin is marked where incisions are made for entry and cxit of the leg.
Tissue is exciscd from the edge and surface of thc granulating wound and hemostasis
obtained.The leg is inscrtcd beneath the undernined skin through the two incisions,
and the abdominal skin is sutured to the leg (163b). The Icg is then fixed (here an insuf-
ficicnt amount of the paw was availablc forfixation by a bandage,so the leg was fixed
to a body bandage by nylon sutures inserted into the pads).The bandage is changed in
seven days and the leg detached in 14 days (163c). Sufficiently large flaps arc mcasured
and remnoved to wrap around the medial aspcct of the leg by fashioning a wound
teinplate beforc the leg is placedunder thc body wall skin.This method is technically
simple and results in full thickness skin replacemeut in 14 days. No muscular or ncural
problems have been sccn by this author in six reported cascs and no dog that requircd
this procedure has been ruled ineligiblc because of temperament,
(stringy, sometimes blood-tinged fluid with low cell numbcrs), and to rule-out infcc-
tious or inflammatory lcsions.
i. Mucoceles often lateralize whcn the patient is placed in dorsal recumbency.If the
affectcd side is still equivocal,historical reference towhen the mucocelewas smaller or
sialography may provide information as to the affected side. Sialography can be dif-
ficult and tinic consuming to perform; it is challenging to find and caumulate the sub-
lingual and/or mandibular salivary duct.
134
165-167:Questions
165 With regard to the dog in 164:
i.What is the surgical trcatment of choice?
i. Can mucoccles be life-thrcatening?
166 A two-year-old,castrated
166
male cat was presented for
anuria and azotemia after a cat
fight. Thcre was marked swell-
ing of the perineal tissues and
groin area.A cystogram and
urethrogram were performcd
as part of the evaluation (166).
i.What arc three surgical op-
tions for treatment of this in-
jury?
ii.The most common compli-
cation of urethral trauma is
stricture. Which treatmcnt op-
tion would have the least
chance of causing urethral
stricturc? Which would have
the most?
ii. Describe the after-care of this paticnt?
167 A 12-year-old,intact
167a
malc Yorkshire Terrier is pre-
sented with signs of tenesmus.
i.The perianal area is shown
(167a).Give the most likely
diagnosis and list somc dif
fercntial diagnoses.
ii. This tumor is hormone
depcndent. What hormone is
involved,and what disease has
been reported to cause this
tumor in spayed female dogs?
ii.List three different thera-
pics for this diseasc.
135
165-167:Answers
165 i. Resection of thc mandibular and sublingual gland/duct complex to a point near
the lingual nerve. Mucoceles secondary to saliva leakage from a gland/duct defcct
rostral to the lingual nerve rarely occur.If the defcct is not observed during dissection
(oftcn the casc) and the affected side was not determined prcopcrativcly,rather than
perform morc diagnostic tests or wait to see if the mucocele recurs, the opposite man-
dibular and sublingual gland/duct complex maybe concurrently rcsccted.Xerostomia
is not a problem following bilateral mandibular and sublingual gland rescction as dogs
still havc bilatcral parotid and zygomatic salivary glands.
i. Ycs. Pharyngcal mucocclc may cause airway obstruction. This is an emergency situa
tion requiring aspiration of the mucocele and marsupialization, Definitive surgery for
this type of nucoccle is also rcscction of the mandibular and sublingual gland/duct
complex.
166 i. Primary rcpair of the urethral rent via pubic osteotomy, with 4-0 to 5-0 syn-
thetic absorbable suture. An intraurethral catheter and closed urinary collcction system,
or urinary divcrsion using a Stamey or Foley cystostomy cathctcr,is indicated for 5-7
days after surgcry.
Secondary hcaling around a soft intraurethral catheter with closcd urinary collection
systenm for 7-21 days depcnding on the size of the laceration and degrce of urcthral
tissue injury.Pubic osteotomy is not ncccssary in this case.
Prepubic urethrostomy might be required if urethral damage was extensive.
i. Surgical repair and primary healing over a soft intraurethral cathctcr would have the
least chance, using a catheter alone and allowing secondary healing would have the
most chance of causing urethral stricturc.
ii.A urinary catheter is maintained for scvcral days to weeks depending on the trcat-
ment chosen. In most animals this rcquires an Elizabethan collar, side bracc, or incor
poration of the catheter system into a body bandage.The catheter is regularly checked
for patency. Urinary tract infections arc controlled with use of a closed urinary collcc-
tion system, and at the time of catheter removal urine is cultured and appropriate anti-
biotic therapy prescribed.
167b
167 i.Pcrianal gland adenoma.Differ-
cntial diagnoses include perianal adeno-
carcinoma,anal sac adenocarcinoma and
non-tumorous diseases of the perianal
area (anal sac abscess, perianal fistulas,
etc.).
ii.Testosterone, pituitary-dependent
hypcradrcnocorticism.
i. Surgical rcscction,cryotherapy (167b)
and castration. Thc prognosis for control
of perianal adenoma with all three treat-
tments is excellent.
136
168-170:Questions
168 A three-year-old,male
168a
Labrador Retriever undergoes
exploratorylaparotomy for
intussusception (168a).The in-
tussusception was non-redu-
cible and a portion of jejunun
was resected.
i. What suture pattern would
you use to anastomose the je-
junal ends?
ii. What surgical stapling
cquipmcnt could be used to
anastomose the jejunalends?
169A fluid filledmass over the ole-
169
cranon of a one-year-old, male Great
Dane is shown (169). The owners first
noted the mass two weeks previously and
thcy report it has become approximately
25% larger since that time. It is non-
painful.
i. What diagnostic test(s) would be useful
to further define this abnormality?
ii.What are two possible treatments for
this abnormality, and their significant
relatcd complications?
i. What important management or hus-
bandry change is needed to facilitate
treatment andpreventrecurrence?
170 A four-ycar-old,fcmale
170
Weimaraner developed this
swelling 0vernight (170). The
doghas nohistory of otitis
and does not scratch hcr cars.
Thc owner reports the the dog
is kept in a fenced-in yard and
enjoys running up and down
the fenice-line with the neigh-
bor's dogs.
i. What is the diagnosis?
i. List threc potential causes
for this condition.
137
168-170:Answers
168c
168b
168d
168 i. Appositional sutures such as a Gambcc, simple interrupted or simple continuous
pattern are preferable.The Gambee suture is less susccptiblc to wicking of bowcl con-
tents than siniple interrupted. Inverting or cvcrting pattcrns can bc uscd; however, they
can compromise bowel lumen size and incrcasc adhcsion formation respectively.
ii. An anastomosis can be created with the GIA and TA 55 stapling instrumcnts (United
States Surgical Corporation Norwalk, CI) (168b). The antimcscntcric borders of the
segments are apposed and the stapler is fircd, crcating two double-staggcred staple lines
to join thc bowcl. Simultaneously, the knife blade cuts between the double staple lines
to crcate a stoma. Sutures are placed to close serosal and mucosal surfaces at the edge
of the single opening that has been created. A. TA 55 (168c) is applied across thc intcs
tinal edges, locked and activatcd. Exccss tissuc is trimmed using the cartridge edge as a
guide(168d) to complete the anastomosis,
169i. Sterile preparation of the skin and fine-necdle aspiration of the mass to confirm
serous fluid and a diagnosis of bygroma.If the fluid is purulent,culturc and sensitivity
is performed.
i. Drainage by fine-needlle aspiration and placeiment of a pressure relieving ('donut*
padded) bandage for 2-3 wccks, or open drainage by lancing and placcmcnt of Pcnrosc
drains for 10-14 days, followcd by padded bandaging for another 10-14 days. Sig
nificant complications of aspiration are iatrogenic bacterial contamination,and hy
groma recurrence.Complications for surgical drainage are more extensive fibrosis and
a cosmetic blemish over the elbow, and a small but possible chance for recurrence.
Aspiration is most useful for smaller acute hygromas,and surgery for larger more
chronic ones. Excision is not appropriate since hygromas are not true cysts. They are
more akin to seromas,and the best treatment is one that facilitates the tissue layers
healingbacktogcthcr.
ili. An important management change is to alter the surface the animal lies on.
Hygromas are generally caused by repetitive trauma fron kenneling animals on hard
surfaces and change to a softer surface such as carpet or grass is important for resolu-
tion and to prevent futurerecurrence.
170 i.Aural hcmatoma: blood accumulation bctwccn the cartilagc laycrs of thc pinna
froin ruptured branches of the great auricular artery on the inside of the auricular car
tilage.
i. Causes include trauma, parasites, otitis, aural foreign body, and ear canal tumors or
polyps. This dog's hematoma was duc to trauma.
138
171-173:Questions
171 With regard to the dog in 170,describe several procedures to corrcct this
problcm.Make sure to discuss postoperative managenent.
172 A one-year-old,male Miniature
172
Poodle was presented for simultaneous
urination from the anus and urethra,
hematuria and cystitis.A latcral fluoro
scopic image of the contrast cystogram
and retrogade urethrogram is shown
(172). Contrast is shown passing from
the urethra at the pelvic brim into the
distalrecrum (arrowed).
i. What is the diagnosis?
ii.Describc the best surgical approach to
the anomaly.
ii. What othcr surgical procedure is
recommcndcd to be done atthe same
time?
iv.What is the potentially scrious con-
sequence if this condition is left un-
treatcd?
173 An open wound of two
173
years duration in the inguinal
arca of a five-year-old cat is
shown (173).History indicates
that the original wound rc
sulted from trauma.Repeated
unsuccessful attcmpts were
madc to repair this wound
with bandages, sutures and
antibiotics.
i.What is the basic reason why
the wound has not healed?
ii. Hlow could this wound be
repaired?
139
171-I73:Answers
171 Therc arc numerous ways to repair aural hematomas. (1) Simple drainagc of the
hematoma with a large gauge needle and bandage the ear. Multiple aspirations may be
nccdcd over a period of days to wccks (greater chance for recurrcnce).(2)Lance the
hcmatoma on the concave surface of the pinna with a scalpel blade.Clot and fibrin arc
removcd and mattress sutures arc placed parallel to the incision. The incision edges arc
not rcapposed and sutures should penetrate the full thickness of the ear.Knots are ticd
On thc convex surface of the car.Thenumber of suturcs is determined by the amount of
dead space that must be closcd.Postoperatively, ears may or may not be bandaged.Thc
bandage is removed after 5-7 days and the suturcs in 21 days. Other ncccssary pro-
tective devices that may bc uscd are Elizabethan collars,neck shields or stockinette
placed over the cars. (3) A sutureless technique involves elliptical incision over the
swelling with.rcmoval of the clot and fibrin.The ear is bandagcd over a roll of gauze or
cast padding positioned on top of the head, making surc that the incision is open and
exposcd. The incision is covcrcd with a dressing and changed as necessary. Thc incision
heals by second intention and thc car is left bandaged for three weeks.(4) Placemcnt of
a bovine teat cannula through a stab incision into the hematoma.Fluid and fibrin are
removed and the teat cannula is sutured in place with a figure-of-eight pattcrn. The
owncr is instructed to massagc the ear twice daily and force fluid out of the hematoma.
Thc cannula is left in place for three weeks and, as a minimum, an Elizabethan collar is
placed to avoid self-trauma to the area.
172 i. Congcnital urethrorectal fistula and large cystic calculus.
ii. Exposure to the fistula is by caudal ventral abdominal incision and pubic ostcotomy.
The catheterized fistula is casily identified by palpation, and it is excised after ligation
of its attachments to thc urethra and rectum with 4-O synthetic absorbable material.
Ventral cystotomy is performed to rcmove the cystic calculus (scc 133).
iii.Castration is recommended as the inheritance of this anoimaly is unccrtain.
iv.If left untreated, chronic cystitis will result in pycloncphritis. Other less serious
sequelae include perianal dermatitis,urolith formation (as in this case)and chronic
diarrhea.
granulomatous panniculitis caused by mycobacterial infcction, abscesses from bite
wounds,indolent ulcers and other lesions are described.In this cat,biopsics and
cultures did not identify a cause.Wounds in the inguinal and axillary region are subjcct
to movement and tcnsion,and this likely caused thc open non-healing wound in this
cat.
i. For all reconstructive procedures thc surgeon should select the simplest and quickest
proccdure. Undermining and mobilization of skin adjacent to thc wound is rarely suc-
cessful in this area. Free skin grafts are easier and morc successful in cats than in dogs,
and a graft could bc uscd.An axial pattern flap from the opposite superficial cpigastric
artery or from the ipsilateral cleep circumflex iliac artery should be successful.A simpler
tcchnique is an advancement or transposition flap. Skin fold advanccment flaps in this
region have been described recently. This author (D.E. Johnston) prcfcrs a transposition
flap of readily available skin craniodorsal to the wound.
140
174, 175: Questions
174 With regard to the repair of thc wound in the cat in 173,describe in dctail thc
selected method.
175a
175 A right lateral abdominal
175b
radiograph of a 12-year-old,
domcstic shorthair cat (175a)
and theresult ofan explora-
tory laparotomy（175b)are
shown.
i. Give your differential diag-
noses for primary liver tumors
in the cat.
ii. Dcscribe two partial liver
lobc resection techniques.
ii. How much of the livcr can
be resected without significant
clinical dysfunction?
141
174,175:Answers
174a
174b
174c
174 The cat is shown in lateral recum
bency after thc wound margins are de-
brided (174a). Thc transposition flap is
Outlined by incisions in the skin.Meas-
urcmcnts were made to ensure the flap
length and width correctly approximatc
the defect. The flap is transposed and
sutured in place with subdermal absorh
able simple intcrrupted sutures (174b)
Sincc thc subdermal fascia is strong and
rcsistant to ischemic necrosis,simple
intcrrupted skin sutures are insertcd if
needed;they wcrc not needed in this case.
Flaps are not transposed beyond 90° to
avoid interference with blood supply.
This flap is transposed to the 1maximum
degree and this crcated some skin folds in the base of thc flap. These folds disappcar
rapidly without treatment.
In all flaps taken from the body wall the pattern of hair growth in the flap resemblcs
that of the donor site, as can bc scen in this flap at one year (174c).
175 i.Hepatocellular adenoma,hcpatocellular adenocarcinoma,bilc duct adenocar
cinoma,focalhepaticmalignantlymphoma.
i. Liver lobectomy can be performed using thc finger-fracture or suture-fracture
technique.An incision is made in the liver capsule.The livcr parenchyma is separated
by digital pressure to isolate thc blood vessels and large intralobar bile ducts.The blood
vesscls and bile dlucts are ligated. Alternatively, the liver lobe can bc resected using a
for hcmostasis.
ii. Up to 75% of a normal liver can be resected without clinical dysfunction.
142
176,177:Questions
176a
176b
176 i. Identify this instrument (176a).
ii. Name two advantages to using this type of device (176b).
iii. Name rwo disadvantagcs to using this type of device.
177
177 A 15-year-old,domcstic shorthair cat was treated for hyperthyroidism by sur-
gical removal of a thyroid adenoma (177). More than 90% of thyroid tumors in cats
are adenomasand7o%occurbilaterally
i.What arc thc benefits and complications of bilateral thyroidectomy?
i.What are the different techniques used to perform bilateral thyroidectomy?
iii.What treatnent options arc availablc for feline hyperthyroidism other than
surgery?
143
176,177:Answers
is disposable and can be sterilized in cthylcne oxide.
ii.The major advantage of using skin staples for wound closure is the potcntial
decrease in operating time.Stapling is thc fastcst mcthod of closure for long skin inci-
sions or lacerations.Decreased operating timc, ancsthctic administration and patient
morbidity are resultant advantages of siurgical stapling.
ii.Most surgical staples are made of 316I. stainless steel which causes minimal reac-
tion;however,they prodluce artefacts in computed tomography and should not be used
in animals that will undergo this procedure in the immediate postopcrativc pcriod. Dis-
advantagcs of stapled skin closure include occasional malfunction (mostmanufacturers
will replace any malfunctioning product) and increased cost. Staples are contra-
inclicated if there is less than 4.0-6.5mm betwccn undcrlying bone or viscera and the
skin to be closed.
177 i. Benefits of surgery include good success, low expcnsc,rcquires less hospi-
talization and is more widely available than radioiodine therapy.Disadvantages are
that hyperthyroid cats tend to be geriatric, cachectic and havc concurrent cardiac or
renal conditions making them poor candidates for anesthcsia.Rccurrent hyperthyroid-
ism,hypocalcemia and hypothyroidisn can develop and hyperactivc cctopic thyroid
tissue may be misscd.
ii.Extracapsular. The cranial and caudal thyroid artcries are ligated and the gland
rcmoved with its capsule intact.The cranial parathyroid gland is spared,but there is
7%) but hypocalccmia occurs in up to 82% of patients.
Intracapsular. Thc capsule is opened and the thyroid gland is scparated and re-
movcd from within.The cranial parathyroid gland and its blood supply arc preserved.
The capsule left bchind may contain residual thyroid tissue, and an 8% rccurrence
rate-of hyperthyroidism is reportcd.Hypocalcemia occurs in 15-22% of paticnts.
Modified extracapsular.The cranial thyroid artcry is not ligated and the para-
thyroid gland is carefully spared. The thyroid gland and capsule is removed. Hyper-
thyroidism recurred in 4% of cases and hypocalcemia occurred in 23% of cases.
Modified intracapsular.Aftcr intracapsular thyroidectomy, the majority of the
capsule is also removed except ncar thc cranial parathyroid gland. This techniquc has
a 34-47% incidence of hypocalcemia.
Staged bilateral thyroidectomy by any combination of the intracapsular, modificd
cxtracapsular and modified intracapsular mcthods. Thyroidectomies are separated by
scvcral wceks to minimize the incicdence of hypocalccmia.
ii.Administration of mcthimazole, which blocks thyroid hormonc synthesis but is not
cytotoxic to neoplastic thyroid tissue.Administration is maintained for lifc or until
alternative therapy is undertaken.Radioiodine therapy is a curative and safc mcthod
of trcatmcnt and is effective against ectopic thyroid tissuc.Iowever,it is often expen-
sive,involves a 1-2 wcck period of hospitalization and is not widely available.
144
178-|80:Questions
178 An 11-ycar-old,female Cocker
178
Spaniel was presented for evaluation of
a abundant,persistent serosanguinous
vulvar discharge following estrus. Thc
animal was nor polydypsic/polyuric, and
hemogram and serum biochcniistry tests
were normal,with the exception of a
slight leukocytosis(WBC 12.5×10/1
(12,500/mm²).Vaginal cytology showed
large numbers of stratified squamous epi-
thclial cells and serum progesteronc con-
centration was 3.84nmol/1(120 ng/dl).
Abdominal ultrasound was performed
and the arca caudal to the left kidney is
shown (178).
i.What round structure is being measured
by the calibers in the image?
il. What do the signs of proestrus reflect
that is occurring physiologically?
i. What is the diagnosis, and what treat-
ment is advised?
179This is an oralview of a
179
cystic mass of the right hemi-
mandible in a 12-week-old
Boxer (179).The patient was
asymptomatic.
i.What is thc tcntative diag
nosis?
ii.What test(s) would be most
helpful in providing diagnostic
information?
iii. What is the surgical trcat-
ment of choicc for this lesion?
180A 2-ycar-oldWeimaraner is presented forreproductive evaluation after failure
to brccd. The owners report the dog would allow the male to mount, but would not
allow intronission.The owners report no other abnormalities with the dog.
i.What two specific things should be done on physical examination to further
evaluate this problem?
ii.You suspect a vaginal stricture.What two diagnostic tests are used to furthcr
define thc abnormality?
ii. What is the trcatnient?
145
178-I80:Answers
178 i. Thc left ovary with ovarian follicles that have not ruptured. Non-ovulation is
confirmed by the animal's clinical signs and by the low scrum progesterone concen-
tration present. Cysts can be single or multiple and can affcct one or both ovarics.
i. The clinical signs of persistent procstrus arc causcd by cstrogcn production from thc
ovarian follicular cysts.'These cysts occur from Graafian follicles that have not under-
gone atresia. Other commonly associated clinical signs inclucdc nymphomania,roam
ing,aggressiveness and mammary hyperplasia. Often these cysts are incidental
finclings at the time of routine ovariohystcrcctomy.
ment depends on thc owners desire to maintain the reproductive function of the
animal.If reproduction is of no concern to the owner,ovariohysterectomy is indi
cated; if breeding is desired, then medical managcment with GnRH or HCG is indi-
cated to induce follicle rupture.
179i.'Tumor of dcntal cpithclialorigin.
il. Radiographs of thc mandiblc and analysis of fluid obtained from the mass using
fine-needle aspiration. Radiographs showed bony lysis of the mandible and cytology
did not indicate a neoplasm. In this patient, incisional biopsy was performed to deter-
minc thc diagnosis (odontoma).
.Rostral unilateral hemimandibulectomy.Rarely,tumors of dental cpithclial origin
may resolve following curettage of the lesion. This lattcr proccdure was performed in
this patient at the time of incisional biopsy, The cystic mass recurred and rostral uni-
lateral hcmimandibulectony was performed.
180i.Digital examination of the vagina and rectal palpation.Vaginal palpation is
performed first and is most useful toidentify stenosis,persistent hymen,vaginal neo-
plasia or other intraluminal abnormalities.The most common location for congcnital
anomalies is the vestibulovaginal junction just cranial to the urcthral papilla. Digital
palpation is somewhat easier during estrus due to relaxation of the vagina.Rectal
examination is most useful to define larger vaginal masses and extravaginal causes of
obstruction.
i. Vaginoscopy and contrast vaginography. Vaginoscopy is pcrformcd using a spccu-
lum,otoscopc or cndoscope.A small, singlc opcning suggcsts annular stenosis; two
small openings indicate a vertical septal band or double vagina are present.Vagino-
scopy is hclpful to cvaluate the cranialpart of the vagina,but lesions at. the vesti
bulovaginal junction can be overlooked. Vaginography is performed by placing a
Foley catheter and inflating the cuff just caudal to the vestibulovaginal junction.
Radiopaque contrast is infused and radiogtaphs are made.Vaginography may reveal
vaginal scptac, double vagina or vaginal masses, or it may outline a vaginal stricture,
ii.Surgical cxcision or vaginoplasty. The urethra is catheterized to identify its location
and prevent accidental injury. Septal bands are best identified and excised by
episiotomy;themucosal defcct is closcd with absorhablc suture.Annular constrictions
are best exposed by a dorsal perineal approach to the vagina and managed by vagino-
plasty (Y-U plasty or transvcrsc closurc of a longitudinal incision). It is important to
evaluate thc diamcter of thc vaginal lumcn beforc wound closure.Breeding is not
allowcd for a minimum of two weeks.
146
181,182:Questions
181a
181 This cat (181a) has been diagnoscd with mcgacolon that is unresponsive to
mcdical therapy. Subtotal colectomy is recommended for management.
i. What suture patterns are recommcnded for the colon?
ii.What suture material is appropriate for this anastomosis?
ii. What methods are available for managing thc sizc disparity between ascending
colon and rectum?
182 A six-ycar-old,feniale
182
Basset-houndispresented
with a soft doughy mass in
the inguinal region (182).
Vulvar enlargement typical of
estrus is also noted.
i.What arc thc differential
diagnoscs for this niass?
ii. What are the anatomic,
hormonal and metabolic fac-
tors that contribute to thc
occurrence of this problem?
iii. What two surgical ap-
proaches can be made for
rcpair of this problem?
147
181,182:Answers
181b
181 i.Because of the size dis-
parity, difficulty suturing in the
cranial pelvic canal and the
need for distensibility and
watertight apposition,simple
interrupted sutures are com-
monly used. Surures are placed
to penetrate the submiucosa and
not the mucosal layer. In a
canine model, simple inter-
rupted appositional, crushing
and inverting sutures had simi
lar wound healing character-
istics.
ii. Monofilamcnt non-rcactivc
suture on a taper needle is recommended. Polydioxanonc, polypropylenc and nylon
incite minimal inflammation and are all good choiccs.Polydioxanonc has thc addcd
advantage of being absorbable.
ii. Small variations in size arc managcd by placing sutures closcr togcthcr on thc small
lumen side and slightly furthcr apart. on the large lumen side. Moderate variations in
sizc arc managed by cutting the smaller diameter bowel segment at an angle towards
the antinesenteric side creating a larger lumen.Modcrate to largc disparitics arc
managed by ‘fish mouthing’ the small diameter segmcnt, incising thc antimcscnteric
border (181b), or by suturing the scgmcnts routincly until the antimesenteric border of
the small segment is reached and the rcmaining unsutured large segment is closed in an
inverting pattern. Care is takcn to cnsurc thc anastomosis at thc antimcscntcric surfacc
of the small segmcnt is sccurc.
182 i. Differential diagnoses include inguinal hernia,abdominal wall hernia,
seroma/hematoma and neoplasia.Diagnosis is determined by palpation (contents
rcducible), radiographs (tangcntial vicw of abdominal wall to look for discontinuity)
and, if thc above tests are inconclusive, fine-needle aspirate can be considered. The
abnorimality shown in this dog is an inguinal hernia.
ii.A large inguinal opening is considered the primary risk factor for herniation.
Anatomically, females are predisposed because the inguinal canal is larger and
shorter than in males; estrogen probably also plays a role by changing the strength
and character of connective tissues,resulring in an enlarged canal.Most inguinal
hernias occur in estral or pregnant bitches; an acquired inguinal hernia has not bccn
reported in a spayed female. Weakness of the abdoninal wall may also occur from
an alterednutritional or metabolic state.Obese animals seem to be predisposed.
ii. Surgical repair can be by direct incision over the hernial sac and inguinal canal, or
by ventral midlinc approach and rcduction and closurc of the inguinal canal from
inside the abdomen. The midline approach avoids incising through mammary tissue
in thc lactating dog, and allows inspcction of both inguinal canals. Midlinc incision is
also a more familiar approach for most surgcons.
148
183, 184: Questions
183a
183b
183 A 12-year-old,spayed female Cocker Spanicl
was presented with a history of chronic hematuria,
stranguria and pollakiuria.Previous urine cultures
wcrc negative.Excretory urogram showed a large
bladder mass involving the trigone and causing
unilateral hydrourctcr (183a,b).An exploratory
surgery was pcrformcd.Impression smears of thc
Imass were consistcnt with transitional cell carcinoma.
i. How else could the diagnosis have been made preopcratively?
i.What are the surgical options if the turnor involves thc trigone and both ureters?
Whatoptions are available if thc trigone isnotinvolved?
iii.What are complications of urinary diversion techniques?
184 Name and dcscribe the three components of
184
the cardiac pacemaker pictured(184).
149
183,184:Answers
183i. Preoperativc diagnosis of a bladdcr mass can be made by ultrasound guided
fine-needle aspiration. Thc clinician must bewarc of rumor seeding. Cclls can also be
collcted by exfoliation into urine sediment eithcr naturally or iatrogenically by large
bore urethral catheter. Howcvcr, this technique can bc highly unreliable. Cystoscopy is
most useful in deternining thc cxtent of tumor involvement and for collection of biopsy
samples.It is the gold-standard for staging and ciagnosis of bladder cancer in hunans.
ii. Sincc most transitional cell carcinomas involve the trigonc rcgion,ureterocolonic
anastomosis (UCA) is usually the surgical treatment of choice.If the trigone area is not
involved, partial cystectomy or trigonal colonic anastomosis can be pcrformed.Contro-
versy continues over the role of surgery in the management of bladdcr cancer (see ii
below).
ii.The most common complication of surgery is tumor recurrcnce.Urinary diversion
procedures alone donot significantly increase the lifespan of paticnts.In a study of ten
cascs of UCA,nine dogs survived from 1-5 months after surgery. Othcr complications
included pyelonephritis and hypcrchloremic metaholic acidosis,hypcrammonemia and
clevated serun creatinine conccntration.Electrolytes,acid-basc status,renal biochem-
istry tests and urinalyses must be rcgularly monitored.
184 i. Pulse generators can be synchronous or asynchronous.Asynchronous pace-
makers gencratc an impulse at a continuous,fixcd rate and are not synchronizcd with
the heart. They are relativcly incxpensive, reliable, long lasting and are not very sen-
sitivc to external electromagnetic radiation.They may create conpctitive rhythms if the
natural rhythm returns.Synchronous pacemakers sense spontancous cardiac activity
and either inhibit impulse generation, or delivcr impulses synchronously during natural
rhythms and asynchronously in thc abscnce of natural rhythm,prcvcnting occurrence
of compctitivc rhythms.A three-lettcr codc is usecd to icdentify thc modc of generator
operation. The first letter identifies the arca of the heart being paced (A = atriun, V =
ventricle, D = both). The second represents thc area sensed (A = atriun,V = ventricle,
O = neither). The third lettcr represents the mode of response (I = inhibited, T =
triggcred, O = neither). A VVI paccmaker is most comnonly uscd in veterinary surgery.
Potwer sources can be mercury-zinc or lichium.Lithium cells have a longcr life span
(8-16 years compared with 3-6 for mercury-zinc) and fail by gradual decay; the mer-
Electrodes can bc cndocardial or epicardial. Endocardial (cransvenous) electrodcs arc
placed into the right ventricle through a branch of the cranial vena cava, and rcquire a
higher thresholdpotcntial to stimulate a beat.Epicardial-myocardlialelectrodes arc
either sutured or scrcwcd into the myocarclium of the ventriclc.Less energy is required
to initiate a heartbeat and the lifespan of the power source is incrcased. Lither type of
electrodcmaybe unipolar orbipolar.
150
185,186:Questions
185 Describe a transdiaphragmatic approach for implantation of the cardiac
pacemaker in 184.
186a
186 A right lateral raciograph of thc cranial abdomen of a ten-year-old, fcmale
Schnauzer is shown (186a).
i. What is the diagnosis?
ii. This discase is often insidious and asymptomatic in dogs. List the most conimon
clinical signs in dogs that are symptomatic.
iii. The pathogenesis of this disease in dogs is unknown. Sevcral causes have been
proposed. Namc the most likely ones.
iv. Describe the surgical therapcutic options, and givc the therapy of choice.
151
185,186:Answers
185a
185b
185c
185 Transdiaphragmatic paccmaker
implantation is performedvia vcntral
midline ccliotomy. The diaphragm is
incised just left of midline and the peri-
cardium identified and incised to cxpose
the cardiac apcx. A unipolar screw-typc
lead isimplantedinto the myocardium
being careful to avoid the coronary
artcries (185a). No suturcs are required
but the Dacron pledget must contact the
epicardium to allow fibrous tissuc in-
growth to anchor the electrode in placc.
The leadwirc is connected to the pulsc
gcncrator which when placcd against the body wall becomes grounded, and the
paccmaker begins to function. The lead may exit through the incision in the dia-
phragm or is passcd bctween the diaphragm and body wall using the tunneler (185b).
The diaphragm is closed and air is evacuatcd from the chest. The pulse generator is
placcd in a muscle pocket crcatcd between the muscles of the body wall (185c).'This
approach is rapid, cosmetic and lcss painful than a thoracotomy approach.
186b
186.i.Cholelithiasis (186b)
ii.Vomiting, anorexia,weakness, poly-
uria/polydypsia,weightloss,ctrus,v
and signs of abdominal pain arc the most
conmon clinical signs in dogs with symp-
tomatic cholelithiasis.
iii.Proposed causes include trauma,
biliary stasis,diet alterations,cholecysti-
tis, and parasitic and bacterial biliary in
fection.
iv.The treatnent for cholelithiasis is chol-
elithotomy via cholecystotomy,cholccys-
tectomy or choledochotomy. Cholecys-
tcctomy is indicated in dogs with cholelithiasis and concurrent cholecystitis and should
he regardcd as therapy of choicc.
152
187-l89:Questions
187 An exploratory lapar
187
Otomy is performed on a five
year-old cat with signs of
vomiting and anorcxia for two
wccks (187).
i.What is this unusual abnor-
mality?
ii. Biliary diversion techniques
can be used to circumvent bile
dhct obstruction that cannot be
relieved. List the two mcthods
most commonly used.
ili.Describe techinical consid
erations that inprove the out-
come of the surgical techniques
listed under (ii).
188 An18-month-oldBorder
188
Collic crossbrccd was present-
ed for treatment of a nasal his-
tiocytoma. Cryosurgery was
uscd to treat this tumor (188).
i.To maximize cell destruction
what speeds should be used for
the freeze and thaw cycles, and
how many cyclcs arc rccom-
mended?
ii. Describe the preparation of
a site for cryosurgery.
iii.List contraindicationsfor
the use of cryosurgery.
189 A six-week-old, male Boxer puppy with dyspnea is presented. On physical
examination you derermine the puppy has dorsoventral compression of the chest
with a dorsal deviation of the sternum into the chest:
i.What is this condition called?
i. Describc how the frontosagittal indcx and the vertebral indcx are determined.
i.How are these indices used?
iv.Describe the technique that is currently recommended for treatment of this
condition.
153
187-189:Answers
187 i. Vcsica duplcx (doublc gall-bladder).
ii. Cholecystoduodcnostomy and cholecystojejunostomy.
iii. The gall-bladder should be mobilized fron its hepatic fossa to decrcase tension at
the stoma site.Stoma sizes of 2.5-4 cm have been recoimmended to prevent obstruc-
tion caused by contraction of the stoma during maturation of the wound. Spillage of
bile and duodenal contents should be prevented during the surgery.Proper suture
placement using amucosalappositiontechnique and oversewingthe serosa willpre-
vent leakage and subsequent peritonitis.
188i.Two cycles of rapid freezing (to-20°C/-4°F or coolcr)and slow thawing arc
recommended to achieve optimal cell destruction. Rapid frcezing results in small intra-
cellular icc crystals which cause rupture of cell membranes. Large ice crystals, which
causc cefl damage by their size alone, forrm during a slow thaw.
ii. Preparation of the surgical patient is not as involved as for traditional surgery. Hair
is clippcd around the lesion to allow easier visualization of the iceball and recognition
of run-off of liquid nitrogen. Skin is cleaned if needles are to be used; however,
sterility is not necessary. When a freeze is induced by spraying liquid nitrogcn onto a
lesion (as opposed to freezing by touching a probe to a lesion) surrounding tissucs arc
protected by a thick layer of petroleum jelly.
ifi.Contraindications for cryosurgcry include mast celltumors and tumors with bone
involvcmcnt. Mast cells release heparin and histanmine when lysed. Cancellous bone
does not freeze well and cortical bone becomes weakcncd after frcczing and can form
a sequestrum.Large vessels that pass through treated tissue are ligated prcopcrativcly
189 i.Pectus excavatum.
ii.Frontosagittal index: chcst width mcasured across the 10th thoracic vertebra 0u a
ventrodorsal radiograph dividcd by the distancc hctween the sternal deformity and
vcntral aspcct of the closest vertebral body measured from the lateral radiograph.
Vertebral index: distance from the dorsal surface of the vertebral bodies to the nearest
point ofthe sternal defect as mcasured from alatcral radiograph dividcd by thc
diaimeterof thcsamcvcrtcbralbody
ii. A frontosagittal index of <2 and vertcbral index of >9 is considered mild pectus
cxcavatum.A frontosagittal index of 2.0-3.0 and a vertebral index of 6.0-9.0 are con-
sidered moderatc and a frontosagittal indcx of >3.0 and a vertebral index of >9.0 are
using these indices. Surgery is indicated based on severity and the presence of clinical
signs. These indices are also useful to determine improvement postoperatively.
iv.An external splint of a thcrmoplastic(VTP [IMEX VeterinaryInc.]or Orthoplast
[Johnson and Johnson]) is cut and molded to a normal shape of the patient's chest.
Holes are created in the splint separated by a distance slightly greater than the width
Of the sternebrae. Under general anesthesia,situres are placed around the sternebra
and through the holes in the splint.They are tightened to pull the sternum and chest
to conforim to the splinr and arc tied with bows so thcy may bc adjustcd as nccded
postoperatively. The bows are tapcd to thc splint for sccurity. Thc splint is left in placc
for 6-14 days. Contact irritation may occur under the splint.
154
190, 19l:Questions
190Two small oronasal fistulae near the
190
junction of the hard and soft palate are
shown (190). Thc patient had multiple
surgeries to close this area following the
original trauma of foreign body (stick)
penetration.
i. What are the expecred clinical signs at
this tirme?
ii.What is the likcly rcason for failure of
previous surgerics?
ii. Dcscribe a surgical repair that would
avoid this problem.
191 You arc prescntcd with a
191
12-wcek-old,male Weimar-
aner puppy with a history of
regurgitation noticed shortly
after the puppy was purchased
from thc brccder. On physical
cxamination the puppy is thin
but alert and active. The ow-
ncrs report that he does not re-
gurgitate liquids. Survey radio-
graphs of the chest and abdo-
men are normal. ‘Ihc barium
swallow results arc shown
(191).
iWhat is the rmost likely diag-
nosis?
ii. Describe the pathophysiology of this condition.
ii. How should this dog bc managcd prior to surgcry, and when should surgery be
performed?
iv. Describc the surgical management of this condition.
v.What is the long-term prognosis for this dog,and how should it be managed post-
operatively?
1.55
190, 19l:Answers
190 i. Clinical signs in this dog were mild, intermittent sneezing and gagging
cspccially after drinking water. Since this lesion is caudal, the dog did not have clinical
signs of rhinitis.
i. Inappropriatc tcnsion at thc surgcry sitc. Failurc to immobilize tissues aclequately
and dccrcasc tcnsion at thc suturc line is the primary reason for failure of cleft palate
iii.The bridgc of tissue bctwcen thc two defccts was exciscd.Thc pcrimctcr of the
defcct was incised to provide two separatc layers.Relief incisions of thc oral mucosa
were made from the middle of the soft palate, along the dental arcade, and ending
between the second and third premolars. Submucosal dissection plane was developed
with a perisoteal elevator resulting in bilateral contiguous soft palate mucosa and hard
palate mucoperiosteal flaps.Dissection and undcrmining was performed from the
lateral aspects (relief incisions) to the midlinc defcct.Thus, in effect, two bipedicle
mucosal flaps wcrc devcloped with the midline comiponent consisting of the defect.
Thc dcfcct was thcn suturcd in two laycrs (nasopharyngcal mucosa, oral mucosa)
using simplc intcrrupted polyglactin 910. Thc knots of the oral suture linc wcrc buricd
to prcvcnt licking causing knot disruption.
191 i. Vascular ring anomaly. Persistent right aortic arch is most likely. A breed pre-
disposition is identified for Weimaraners,Great Danes,Irish Setters and Doberman
Pinschcrs.
i. Persistent right aortic arch results from failurc of thc left aortic arch to devclop as
the dominant structure in the fetus; instead, thc right aortic arch devclops. Cardio-
vascular physiology is normal but the ligamentum arteriosum (ductus arteriosus of the
fetus) connects the right-sided aorta to the pulmonary artery creating thcvascularring
entrapping the esophagus and trachea. The primary clinical sign is regurgitation at
weaning. Emaciation and aspiration pneumonia may occur secondarily.
ii. Surgery is performed as soon as possible. If aspiration pneumonia is present, it is
treated first. If surgery is delayed, thc csophagus may develop permanent loss of
muscle tone and neurologic dysfunction.Prior to surgery,thc puppy is fed a liquid of
grucl diet (small amounts frequently, from an elevated position) which will pass
through the vascular ring.
iv. Surgery involves transection of the ligamentum arteriosum and freeing the
csophagus from its entrapment within the vascular ring.Theligamentum arteriosum,
approached via left lateral 4th intercostal thoracotomy, is idlentified caudal to the
esophagcal dilation and dissccted frcc from attachments to the esophagus.Because it
can be patent,the ligament is double ligatcd and transcctcd between ligatures.A large
orogastric tube is inserted into the esophagus and passed through the constricted area;
any tissue preventing distension is dissected free allowing the tube to pass easily.
poorer the prognosis. Postoperative managenent is identical to preoperative manage-
ment. Four weeks following surgery the puppy is gradually rcturned to a normal diet.
If regurgitation occurs, a barium swallow is repeated to detcrminc the status of the
esophagus.
156
192-194:Questions
192Name two different modalities for vascular ligation.
193 This isa ventrodorsalview ofa
193
cranial abdominal radiograph (193).
i.What diagnostic study has been per-
formed, and what is the diagnosis?
ii.What other diagnostic tests could
have bccn. pcrformcd to obtain a defini-
tivc diagnosis?
ii. Name the potential postoperative
complications associated with the sur-
gical correction of this discasc.
194This is an oralview ofthe sub
194
lingual area in a five-year-old,mixed-
breed dog (194). Ihe patient has a his-
tory of anorexia and intermittent vomit-
ing.Thc paticnt was undcrgoing an cx-
ploratorylaparotomy when the sublin-
gual arca was cxamincd.
1. What diagnostic test(s) indicated sur-
gery was necessary?
ii.Why was the sublingual area specifi-
cally examined?
ii. If the patient had not had clinical
signs of gastrointestinal disease, name an
additional differential diagnoses?
1.57
192-194:Answers
192
192 Vascular ligation can be
performed with sutures or
surgical staples. Suture pat-
tcrns acceptable for ligation
includc a simplc ligaturc, Hal-
stcad transfixation ligature,
modified transfixation liga
ture and tissue ligature.
Double ligatures are recom-
mendedfor large isolatedves-
sels,especially arteries.Knot
security is invcrsely propor-
tionalto suture diameter;
therefore the smallest suture
providing adequate strength
is uscd.
Vascular clips arc an altcrnative for ligation of small vessels (192). Advantages are
thcy can bc applicd rapidly and accuratcly,easily applied in poorly accessible areas
where suture ligation is difficult, and metal clips are radiopaque and can serve as
landmarks of the surgical site on radiographs.lhe disadvantage is that clips are more
clips, dissect as much surrounding tissuc as possible from the vessel to be occluded.The
diamctcr of thc vcsscl to bc ligatcd should bc no largcr that two-thirds the length of the
clip. The vascular clip is applied several millimeters from the cut end of the vessel to
avoid slippagc. An artcry and its accompanying vein are clipped separately.
193 i. Jejunal vein portography. Extrahepatic portosystemic shunt from the portal
vein to the caudal vena cava.The extrahepatic location of the shunt is deduced from
thc fact that the shunt is locatcd caudal to thc 'I'13 vertebral body.
i. Splenoportography; cranial mesenteric portography; celiac arteriography; intra-
venous, transcolonic, and intrasplenic nuclear scintigraphy.All imaging studies are
diagnostic of portosystemic shunt if contrast material (radiopaque or nuclear)is
detected to bypass the liver and directly enter the systemic circulation.
ii.Postoperative complications following shunt ligation include portal hypertension,
portal vein thrombosis, ascites, delayed wound healing, hemorrhage, hypoglycemia,
infection,seizures and death.
194 i.Abdoninal radiographs and ultrasound showed ‘pleatingof small bowcl sug
gestive of a stringforeign body.
i. The sublingual area is always examined in patients with a string foreign body. This
patient indeed had an intestinal string foreign body which could not bc removcd by
enterotomy until the portion around the tongue had been cut. Intestinal string forcign
body which is caught at the tonguc will ‘sawinto the frenulum causing inflammation
and exuberant granulation tissue as in this dog.
158
195, 196: Questions
195 An cight-ycar-old,male
195
Great Pyrenees presents with a
history of a gradual onsct of
weakness, lethargy and cough-
ing.Recently,the owners
noticed abdominal distension.
On physical cxamination you
dcterminc there is ascites, and
muffled hcart sounds on
thoracic auscultation.Radio-
graphs reveal a dramatically
enlarged cardiac silhouette.A
cardiacultrasound is shown
(195).
i.What is your sonographic
diagnosis?
You collcct a samplc for
cytology and it consists of a
sterile,non-clotting fluid with
erythrocytes, macrophages and reactive mesothelial cells. There is no cvidencc of
neoplasia on ultrasound examination or on cytologic evaluation.
ii. What is your definitivc diagnosis?
iii What trcatmcnt is recommended for this condition?
iv. What histologic changes would you cxpcct to find?
v.What is the long-tcru prognosis with surgical management?
196This is a lateral radio-
196a
graph of a three-year-old, fc-
male domestic shorthair cat
madc at the local emergency
clinic (196a). Thc cat is your
patieut and was hit by a car
the night beforc, trcatcd at thc
emergency clinic and referrcd
to you for further treatinent.
The cat is painful and some-
what dyspncic.
i. What is your diagnosis bascd
on this raciograph?
ii.What treatment would you
recommend?
159
195, I96:Answers
195 i. Pericardial effusion.Thc sourcc and charactcr of cffusion cannot be determined
without further testing.
i. In the absence of infectious or neoplastic disease, a definitive diagnosis of idiopathic
hemorrhagic pericardial effusion (IHPE) is made based on cytology.
ii. Treatment for IHPE is intermittent pericardiocentesis, or total or partial peri-
cardiectomy. Many clinicians attempt pericardiocentesis and recommend pericardiec-
tomy if the condition recurs. The disadvantage of pericardiocentesis is that acute car-
or subtotal) removes much or all of the discased pericardium and allows any produced
to drain into thc thoracic cavity and be absorbcd without risk of tamponadc.This pro-
ccdure is contraindicated in cascs of infcctious pericarditis.
cardiac surface of the parietal pericardium usually has the most active lesions.Changes
can include hemorrhage, congestion, neovascularization, inflammation and fibroplasia.
Lymphocytes and plasma cells predominate though macrophages are prominent in
some cases. Marked mesothelial proliferation may also be present.
v. Though the etiology remains unknown, thc prognosis is good; most dogs arc normal
following pericardiectomy.
196b
196 i. Traumatic diaphragmatic hernia. The
heart and lungs are displaced dorsally by what
appears to be the liver. There is no distinct
separation between the abdomen and thorax. A
thoracotomy tubc has bccn placcd.
ii. First, the paticnt is stabilizcd and trcatcd for
shock.Highmortality ratcs occur whcn surgcry
is performed within the first 24hours (33%)
dlue to shock, organ failure and the stress of
anesthesia and surgery. Surgery (diaphragmatic
herniorrhaphy) is performed as soon as the
patient is stable.
Anesthesia is induced quickly, the patient
intubated, and ventilation controlled until the
hernia is repaired and negative pressure estab-
lished in the pleural space. For acute hernia,a
ventral midline celiotomy is recommended
(196b). Othcr approachcs (a ninth intercostal
thoracotomy, a median stcrnotomy and a trans-
sternal thoracotomy)are indicated only if adhe-
sions are present.Abdominal viscera are return-
cd to thcir normal position.A mallcable retrac-
tor is used to keep viscera reduced allowing inspection and closurc of thc diaphragm.
Even with chronic tears,it is not necessary to dcbridc thc cdgcs of the hernia.An
absorbable material such as polygalactin 910 or polydioxanone is prcfcrrcd and thc
pattern may be either continuous or interrupted. Closure is initiated dorsal (dccp) and
160
197-199:Questions
197With rcgard to thc cat in 196with trauimatic diaphragmatic hernia:
i.Which side,if either,is more commonly involved?
i. What are the major postoperative complications associated with this procedure?
Discuss re-expansion pulmonary edema.
198 An cight-year-old, spayed female Cocker Spaniel is presented for treatment of
chronic otitis externa. The dog has had otitis for ycars and in the past, medical man-
agement would palliate the dog. Currently the dog is so painful shewill not allow the
i.What are thc surgical treatments for chronic otitis externa?
ii. What critcria are used to choose the appropriate procedure?
iif. What additional diagnostic tests can be performcd before surgery to fully evaluate
theears?
199
199 1his five-year-old, mixed-brccd dog (199) reccived a burn from a hcating pad
during surgery approximately three months ago. The dog is systenically healthy and
there is no evidence of infection,electrolyte abnormalities,protein loss, etc.In ad-
dition to the arcas of hair loss and epithelialization,there are three wounds;thelargest
of these is in the caudal thoracic and cranial abdominal area and is a square wound
alnost entirely covered with a tightly adherent cried eschar (l). Cranial to this wound
over the shoulder and upper arm is a second major wound also covered with an
adherent dried eschar (2).ihc third is thc opcn granulating wound ovcr thc stiflc and
thigh (3). Is this a typical hurn wound? Describe the nature of thesc individual
wounds,
161
197-199:Answers
197i. Reports vary, but when put together there is an even distribution bctween right-
sided and left-sidcd diaphragmatic hernias. In dogs, about 40% have peripheral tcars.
40%have central tears and 20%have a combination.In cats,about 60%have peri
pheral tcars, 20% havc ccntral tcars and 20% have a combination.
ii. Hemothorax, pucumothorax, hypoventilation due to pain, ascites from increased
hepatic vcnous prcssurc and re-expansion pulmonary edema.Re-expansion edema
occurs when lung, atclcctatic for a prolongcd period, is rapidly re-expanded.
Chronically atalectatic lung should bc gradually reinflated. If the lung does not inflate
with pressures of 20-30 cmHO,further attempts are not madc.A chcst tube is placed
and the lung expanded gradually over hours or days. Corticosteroids may have a
protective role in preventing pulmonary edema.Treatment is with ventilation and
diurctics but is frcqucntly unrcwarding.
198 i. Lateral ear canal resection cxposcs thc vcrtical and horizontal canals via exci-
sion of the lateral portion of the vertical cartilage.lt is used to relieve stenosis of the
vcrtical canal, and cxpose the horizontal canal improving drainage, air circulation, and
application of topical mcdications.
Vertical canal resection is pcrformcd if scvcre chronic otitis is limited to the vertical
canal or a small tumor or polyp is present. The horizontal canal mucosa is apposed to
theskin.
Total ear ablation is performed to remove the entire cartilaginous ear canal.It is
most oftcn combincd with latcral bulla osteotomy since otitis media is a common com-
plication of scvcrc,chronic otitis cxtcrna.
i. Criteria used to choose the appropriate proccdurc arc the extent and severity of
disease.Mild to moderate chronic otitis cxtcrna without marked epithelial hyperplasia
often responds better to medical therapy aftcr latcral car canal resection. Lateral canal
resection is indicated only if the horizontal canal is patent.If the vertical canal is
severely affected or a tumor is present,and the horizontal canal is patcnt,vcrtical ear
canalablation is indicatcd.Complcte ear canal ablation is indicated if hyperplastic or
neoplastic tissue extends to thc horizontal canal orbulla
iii.To properly determine the severity and extent of car discasc, physical, neurologic and
otoscopic (may need to be performed after anesthesia) examinations are performed.
Radiographs are madle of the bullae, including left and right lateral oblique views, and
an open-mouth rostrocaudal view. Changes seen include calcification of the external ear
canal, thickening of the bullae walls and increased opacity of the bullae chambers.
199 Burns from hcating devices used during surgery occur from prolonged contact
with a moderate heat source.Burns usually occur with solid pad heating elements and
very rarely with flowing warm water pads.Pad temperaturc should not exceed 42°C
andimmobile animals are movedreguularlyto avoidprolongcd contactbetween one
area of skin and the heat sourcc.‘Ihclimb wound (3)is a mixture of first,second and
third degree burus. The first and sccond degree burns have healed, causing areas of
hairlessness and epithelialization. All three third degree burns were originally covercd
with a coagulum of scab and dricd skin.This eschar was removed from the hindlimb
wound (3) and it is now healing by contraction and epithelialization.Because of
adequate loose skin in this area,healing will be complctc and contracture deforinity
will not occur. The other two wounds are covered with a leathcry cschar which pre-
vents wound contraction.Early in care, dried eschars are removed slowly by lifting the
eclges as much as the patient allows on a rcgular basis.
162
200,201:Questions
200 With regard to the dog in 199,what is the definitivc therapy?
201a
201b
201 A gastric outflow rcscction procedlure is shown (201a, b).
i.Name the proccdure.
ii.Describe an alternative technique.
ii. What are the complications associated with both techniqucs?
163
200,20l:Answers
200a
200 The eschar in the cranial
wound is cxciscd and this
wound is sutured easily. The
caudal granulating wound is
healing and is allowcd to con-
tinue to do so.Availablc skin is
saved for the major wound in
the middle.The eschar in the
middle wound is excised, creat-
inga square defect on the
latcral body wall (200a). I.oosc
skin on thc right side is easily
transferrcd to the Ieft by mcans
of a bipedicle advancement
200b
flap or H-plasty. Four inci-
sions arc requircd:two inci-
sions continue the sides of the
square defect dorsally over the
back of the dog and two inci-
sions are made in the same
manncr vcntrally undcr thc
abdomen. The flaps are under-
mined, lcaving loose subcu
taneous tissue and large vessels
attachcd to the skin to prcserve
blood supply. The incisions are
extended and undermining is
continued until the free edges of the flaps can be advanced across the defect (200b).
Divergence of the incisions as thcy arc madc prcvcnts thc basc of thc flap bccoming
narrowcd when it is advanced. Survival of a bipedicle flap is dcpcndent on random
blood vessels entering the flap,and in this case is almost assured because of the many
vessels over the trunk and the wicth to length ratio of the flaps is more than 1:1.If the
width to length ratio is less,an attempt is made to devise an axial pattern flap instead.
201 i. Pylorectomy and gastroduodenostomy (Billroth I).
ii. Gastrojejunostomy (Billroth II). Following pylorectomy the pyloric and antral
stumps are closcd using an invcrtcd two-laycr suturc pattcrn.Full-thickncss longi
tudinal incisions are made in the stonach and jejununi. The jejunum and stomach arc
then suitured together using a two-layer closuure technique.
ii. Incisional leakage and dehiscence, hemorrhage, pancreatic or common bile duct
injury,pcrsistent gastric outflow obstruction, marginal ulccration and stricture of the
stoma.
164
202-204:Questions
202 Thc buried continuous intradermal closurc technique (also called subcuticular
or intradermal pattern) has gaincd popularity in veterinary surgical procedures. In
which of the following cases is this suturc pattern appropriate as an alternative to
skin sutures?
(a) A five-year-old, male Labrador Retriever undergoing a routine castration.
(b)A ten-month-old,malc Doberman Pinscher with an infected skin laceration
requiring cebridemcnt and closure.
(c)A six-month-old,female Siamese undergoing a routine ovariohystercctomy.
(d) A ten-year-old Husky with a large mass at the lateral aspect of thc stifle.
203a
203b
203 A seven-month-old cat is presented with intermittcnt behavioral and neuro-
logical abnormalities (203a). The abdominal cavity of this cat during exploratory
[aparotomy is shown (203b).
i.What is thc diagnosis?
i. Describe the surgical therapy.
ii. What is the prognosis following surgery?
204 A 12-year-old, feimale Husky cross-
204
brccd was presented for treatmcnt of a
tonsillar mass.A carbon dioxide (CO)
laser was used to excise the tumor.
i. What arc advantages and disadvan-
tages of CO,laser excision comparcd
with scalpel excision?
ii.What are the patient safety prccau-
tions illustrated (204)? Name anothcr
safety precaution not shown.
iii. What safety precautions are taken by
the surgcon and assistants?
165
202-204:Answers
202 Both (a) and (c) are appropriate cascs for using intradermal closure pattern alonc
This closure pattern is best not used alone if wound cdgcs are under tension, in con
taminated or infected wounds,or wounds rcquiring drainage.‘Ihe buried continuous
intradcrmal closure technique is ideal for electivc vctcrinary surgical procedures be-
cause it eliminates the need for suture removal.Absorbable,inert,light-colored sutures
with a swaged needle are preferred.Appropriate sizcs rangc from 3-0 to 6-0,depending
on the incision location and cosmetic consideration; 4-O size is usually preferred.
Suturcs should be placed superficial enough to hold skin edges togcther but deep
enough so that thcy arc covcrcd by a healthy epitheliallayer.Knots are buried cntircly
beneath the dermis to avoid intcrfcrence with dermal coaptation and suture extrusion.
203c
203 i. Extrahcpatic portosystemic shunt
(see 193).
ii. The anomalous vcsscl is identified and
a ligaturc isplaccd as close to the vena
cava as possible (203c). Portal vein pres-
sure is monitored during attcnuation of
the vessel, and visual inspection of the
splanchnic viscera is used to evaluatc
circulation and look for signs of passive
congcstion. The anomalous vessel is
partially or totally closcd, depending on
the rise in portal pressure and the quality
ofvisceral perfusion.Morc rcccntly,re-
ports of shunt occlusion using an ameroid
ring havc shown good results with limited morbidity and mortality (scc 135).
ini.The prognosis following surgcry for portosystemic shunts in cats is less favorable
than in dogs because postopcrative improvement is less predictable. Pcrsistence or
rclapse of clinical signs after initial improvemcnt is common and is caused in sone
cases by development of multiple acquired portosystenic shunts after surgery.
204 i. The CO laser controls hcmorrhage better than scalpel surgery.This is desirable
patients with coagulopathies.The CO,laser seals lymphatics, theoretically minimizing
dissermination of tumor cclls during surgery. Disadvantages of CO laser include cost of
equipment and specialized training of staff.
ii.The endotracheal tube is covered with crinkled aluminum foil to prevent laser
penctration and potential ignition of gas vapors and plastic. Surrounding soft tissues
are protected from reflcctions with saline soaked gauzes. Not shown is suction for
removal of the plume (smoke) that can cause respiratory irritation of both patient and
surgeon. It is possible for viral particles and viablc DNA from the target tissue to be
transportedin thepluume.
ii.Safety glasses are necessary to protect all pcrsonnel from stray laser reflections that
can cause ocular damage.A CO,fire extinguisher and a bucket of water for quenching
flaming drapes, etc. should be available.A lascr cmblem logo is posted outside the
operating room to alert staff of potential danger and to advise personnel entering the
room that eye protection must bc worn. Personnel must be trained in thc safe operation
of laser equipment before it is used.
166
205, 206: Questions
205a
205b
205 A seven-year-old, malc Golden Retriever is prcscnted with a history of acute
vomiting, depression, anorexia and diarrhea.A large, painful mass was dctccted by
abdominal palpation.The findings during abdominal exploration are shown (205a, b).
i.What arc the differential diagnoscs?
ii.What is thc recommended therapy for this dog?
ii.Partial pancreatectomy can be performed by two techniques.Name these techniqucs
andtheiradvanntagcs.
206 When considering renal biopsy to gain a specific diagnosis:
i.What arc some important contraindications, complications and perioperative
considcrations?
i. Which biopsy needle is most commonly used and why?
ii. Name four different approaches to the kidneys, and the advantages and
disadvantages of cach.
167
205,206:Answers
205 i.Pancreatic abscess,pancreatic pscudocyst,pancreaticncoplasm.
i. Removal of the mass by partial pancrcatcctomy.Debridement and open abdominal
drainage is recomucnded in septic dogs with pancreatic abscesses.Jcjunostomy feeding
tube should be placed if prolonged anorexia or vomiting is anticipated after surgery.
ii. The dissection and ligation technique and the suture-fracture techuiquc.The former
procedure allows precisc identification and ligation of vessels and ducts, and causes less
inflammatory reaction. The lattcr procedure is less precisc but requires less timc. It is
more uscful for resection of a distal limb of the pancreas.
206
206 i.Contraindications for
renal biopsy include coagu-
lopathies, marked hydrone-
phrosis, suspected absccss,
shrunken end-stage kidncys,
and clinicians unfaniliar with
thc technique or lacking appro-
priatc cquipment. Complica-
tions include non-diagnostic
specimcns,gross or microscopic
hematuria(3%),hcmorrhagic
shock(3%)and hydroncphro-
sis from renal pelvis obstruction
by blood clots.Platclct count,coagulation time
and preferably renal sonography are evaluatcd
before biopsy.
biopsy needle (206). The closed needle is advanced to the kiduey capsule, and directed
away from the pclvis.At least two samplcs are obtained. Tangential cutting needle
corcs or a thin wedge biopsy taken frorn the kidncy polc provides good samples of cor-
tex and mcdulla with minimal risk to renal pelvis.If the approach allows, pressurc is
applied to thc biopsy site for 2-5 minutes.Eight to twelve hours of diuresis after biopsy
helps prevent formation of blood clots in thc renal pelvis.Automated biopsy needles
such as the one shown are now available; these render manualimmobilization of thc
kidney unnecessary.
ili.A blind percutaneous approach is outdated due to inadequate lesion localization,
rcnal immobilization,hcmostasis and specimcn acquisition success ratc.Key hole tech-
nique is simple and reliable, but allows access to only one kidney at a timc.This
approach is made by a 45° skin incision at the craniodorsal corner where the last rib
meets the sublumbar musculature. Muscles arc separated along thc axis of their fibers
and thc peritoneum incised. A finger is inserted to palpate and stabilize thc kidney for
percutancous cutting needle biopsy.
exploration of the entire urinary tract (or abdomen) is necded.
Percutaneous ultrasound-guided biopsy using an automatcd cutting needle devicc
can be perforimed under sedation.Precisc location of the area to biopsy is provided and
morbidity is mininal. Ultrasound examination also allows evaluation of the entire
urinary tract.
168
207-209:Questions
207a
207b
207 A seven-year-old, female German Shepherd Dog
presented for consultation was previously diagnosed
with acutc cystitis.Its last cstrus was ninc wccks ago.
On clinical examination a seropurulcnt vulvar sccrc-
tion was observed. A contrast radiographic study is
shown (207a) together with an ultrasound image of the patient's caudal abdomen
(207b).
i.What contrast techniques have bccn used?
ii. Is the appearance of the studied organs normal?
iii. What is the diagnosis?
208 A nine-year-old,maleLabracdor Retriever is presented on emergency for acute
onset of dyspnea. The owners report the dog was breathing heavily all day, but this
evening became much worse. On presentation the dog has marked inspiratory stridor
and is cyanotic. Body tcmperature is 40.6°C (105°F).
i.Wherc is the location of the obstruction, and what is the most likcly causc?
i.What emergcncy treatment is required?
ii. Briefly describe the needed emergency surgical procedure.
209 i.What are these instruments
209a
(209a)?
i. Namc thrce proccdurcs that are
performed using thcse instruments.
169
207-209:Answers
207i. Double contrast hysterography (air and iodine contrast) and double contrast
cystography. The contrast material used was Iohexol (300 mg I/ml) at a dose of 1 ml/kg
body weight.
ii.No. The bladdcr wall is thickcncd and its outlinc irrcgular. The uterine outline is
irregular in both horns. Urinalysis showed inflammatory sediment, and urine culture
grcw Escherichia coli.Corpora lutca wcrc sccn on ultrasound cxamination of the
ovaries and serum progesterone concentration was 80 nmol/l (25 ng/ml).
lii. Cystitis and cystic endometrial hyperplasia. Treatment for cystitis is antibiotic
therapy based on urine culture and sensitivity. Treatment for cystic endometrial
hyperplasia, if syrnptomatic, is ovariohysterectomy or perhaps chemical luteolysis by
prostaglandin therapy.
208i. Inspiratory stridor is caused by uppcr airway obstruction. Givcn signalmcnt,
history and physical cxamination findings, laryngeal paralysis is likely.
decreasing laryngcal inflammation and cdcma with corticostcroids, and breaking thc
'strcss-dyspnca² cycle with sedation and oxygen therapy. If the auimal decompensates
in spite of mcdical treatment or presents in a life-threatening condition, as this dog is, a
patent airway is established by temporary tracheostomy.
m. Depending on the cegree of urgency, the patient is best prepared and draped for
aseptic surgery. In critical cascs the hair is clipped and skin only swabbed with
antiseptic. A ventral midlinc approach is made to the larynx. Thc annular ligament is
transccted one-half to two-thirds the circumfcrcncc of the trachca betwccn two rings
(usually rings 3 and 4) being careful not to damage the recurrent laryngeal nerves.
Altcrnativcly, a vertical incision can be made through the trachcal rings. The tube is
placed and secured with umbilical tape around the neck.A long, non-absorbable stay
suture is placed around the distal tracheostomy ring and left in place to expose the
trachea by applying traction, in the event the tube needs to be replaced urgently.
Musclc, subcutis and skin arc closed to the level of the tube. Antiseptic ointinent is
placed at the open incision site.
209b
209 i.End-to-end anastomosis (EEA)
stapling instrument (United States
Surgical Corporation,Norwalk, CT) and
corresponding ovoid sizers.The EEA
applies a circular double row of staples,
crcating a truc two-layer inverting anasto-
mosis.A circular blade within the car-
tridge simultaneously cuts the redundant
‘doughnut-shaped’ ring of tissue from
cach bowcl cnd to create a new lumen.
The ovoid sizers are used to determine lu
menal diameter and hence which size
EEA cartridge is uscd.
ii.Common uses of the EEA stapler include: colorectal rescction and anastomosis
(209b), end-to-end gastroduodenostomy, end-to-side gastroesophageal anastomosis,
andesophagealandcolonicanastomoses.
170
210,211:Questions
210 A lethargic nine-year-old,male
210
German Shepherd Dog is presented with
abdominal distension and an abdominal
mass. Plain radiography confirms spleno-
megaly and a splenectomy is performed.
The enlarged spleen is shown (210).
i.Name the different causcs of localized
splenomegaly.
if. What laboratory tests should be per-
formcd before surgery?
i. List four predictors of splenic neo-
plasia.
iv.A malignant tumor derived from
blood vessels is diagnoscd by histologic
examination.What is the prognosis?
211A 12-year-old, female Lhasa Apso is admitted to your hospital for cvaluation of
chronic weight loss,vomiting and diarrhca.On prcscntation, the dog is depressed,12%
dehydrated,tachycardic,has wcak femoral pulscs and its respirations are labored.Body
tcmperature is 40.6°C (105°F) and the abdonen is tense and painful. Hemogram and
serumi chemistry abnormalities include:WBC 42×109/1 (42,000/mm3);PCV0.52V1
(52%); albumin 19.0 g/l (1.9 g/dl); platclers 75 × 10*/1 (75,000/mm²); urca 7.97 mmol/l
(BUN 48.0 mg/dl); glucose 2.9 mmol/1 (52 mg/dl).Elevations of scrum crcatininc,
alkaline phosphatase, bilirubin, amylase and lipase are noted, as well as hypokalemia
and hypochloremia. Abdominocentesis recovers purulent fluid (WBC 55 × 109/1
(55,000/mm?)), with degenerative neutrophils and bacteria prcscut. Amylasc and lipasc
conccntrations in the fluid are greater than those found in the serum. On sonography a
pancreatic mass with a mixed echo pattern, possibly an abscess, is seen. Suspecting
septic shock from a pancreatic abscess, you initiate treatinent.
i. What are the fluid therapy options for acute restoration of intravascular volume?
Which is preferred for paticnts in septic shock, and why?
ii. Thoracic radiographs show mild pulmonary edema and moderate plural effusion.
This paticnt has no history of cardiopulmonary disease. What changes in the labora-
tory values could account for these findings, and why? What treatnient is used to
rcverse this process?
ili.Arterial blood gas analysis indicates metabolic acidosis is present.Why does this
occur in septic shock, and how is it treated?
iv. Exploratory laparotomy is pcrformed and a pancreatic abscess is diagnosed. Post-
operativcly, what steps besides i/v crystalloid thcrapy are considered to support this
patient nutritionally?
171
210,21l:Answers
210 i. Splenomegaly can be caused by primary neoplasia (hcmangiosarcoma,lympho-
sarcoma,leiomyosarcoma,fibrosarcoma,plasma cell tumor,mast cell tumor and
hemangioma),metastic disease and non-neoplastic discasc (hyperplasia and
hcmatoma).
i. Routine laboratory tests should include hemogram, BUN, crcatininc and livcr
cnzymes. Hemostasis should be investigated before surgery because splenic hemangio-
sarcoma is associatcd with diffuse intravascular coagulation at the time ofpresenta-
tion in up to 50% of cases.
ii.Anemia, nucleated red blood cells, abnormal red blood cell morphology and
splenic rupture were found to be associated with a significantly grcatcr chancc of
splenic neoplasia in dogs.
iv. A splenectomy is often life-saving in dogs with hemangiosarcona, but a cure is
seldom obtained. Hemangiosarcoma is associated with an average survival time of 2-3
months after splenectomy.
211 i. Fluid therapy options for this patient include: balanced electrolyte solutions
such as lactatcd Ringcr's or similar (90 ml/kg/hour); 7.5% saline (4-8 ml/kg); colloid
thcrapy with. dextran (dose 20 ml/kg)or hydroxyethyl starch (dose 20 ml/kg).Because
largevolumes of crystalloid solutions arc rcquircd in scptic shock torestore microcir-
culation, concurrent use of colloids or hypertonic saline during resuscitation is rccom-
mended to reduce the amount of crystalloid required by 40-60%.
i. Serum proteins, especially albumin, provide oncotic pressure in the normal animal.
Hypoalbuminemia exacerbates fluid leakage into the interstitium,promoting
periphcral and pulmonary cdcma.Administration of colloids can reduce or prevent
cdema from forming.When albumin concentration is less than 20 g/l, fresh frozen
plasmaoralbuminarethccolloidsofchoicc.Onceserumalbumin isabove2Og/l
synthetic colloids such as dextran 70 or hydroxycthyl starch arc used. 1he oncotic
activity of dextran is stronger but not as long lasting as hydroxyethyl starch.
ili. Mctabolic acidosis results from hypotension, poor tissue perfusion and local
hypoxia; this stimulatcs anacrobic glycolysis and excess lactic acid production.Im
proving microcirculation and tissue blood flow is most important in treating meta-
bolic acidosis.
iv.'The nutritional needs of the scptic paticnt cannot be overemphasized. The im-
mediate goal of nutritional support is to prevent further catabolism of the body's own
nutrient stores. Enteral feeding is preferred in septic paticnts - disuse of the bowel pro-
motcs cntcrocyte degradation,breakdown of the blood-bowel barricr and furthcr bac
terial translocation.In this patient,placement of a jejunostomy tube and feeding a
balanced enteral formula will hclp rcstore normal metabolism.
172
212,213:Questions
212a
212 An 11-ycar-old,fcmale Fox Terrier was presented for evaluation of marked
weight gain ovcr thc last three months, in spite of decreased appetite during that period
of timc. There were no other significant clinical signs. An abdominal radiograph of thc
dog is shown (212a).
i. Is the radiograph normal?
ii.What are the differential diagnoses for the noted abnormalities?
iii.What other diagnostic tools would you use before proceeding with exploratory
laparotomy?
213 You are presented with a one-year-
213
old, fcmale Giant Schnauzer for its an-
nual vaccinations.On auscultation of the
chest you detect a murmur. Pait of your
diagnostic evaluation includes a selective
right ventricular angiogram. Thc radio-
graph pictured demonstratcs the lcsion
(213).
i.Name the cardiac lesion, and identify
the area outlined by arrows.
i.Describe the murmur you would hear
with this type oflesion.
ii. What ECG findings would you cxpect
with this lesion?
iv. What therapy would you recommend,
and what would determine ifmedlical or
surgical therapy were indicated?
173
212,213:Answers
212b
212 i. No. A largc round mass (ap-
proximately 10 cm diamcter) is visiblc
in the cranial abdomcn.The splccn is
not visible,and a tubular structure of
fluid opacity is present in the caudal
abdomen, compatible with an en-
larged uterus.
ii. The cranial mass could be associ-
atcd with thc splcen byposition and
bccause thcnormal shadow ofthe
organ is not visible in this view. Dif-
ferential diagnoses include a mass on
the kidney, adrenal gland, mesenteric
lymph node or ovary. The caudal
mass is compatible with a pyometra.
ii. In this case, sonography provides
data of great value. The spleen was normal in size, and the cranial mass was identified
as an ovarian tumor (212b). The pyometra was readily visualized on the sonogram.
The remaining abdominal organs and contralatcral ovary wcrc normal, and thoracic
radiographs(thrcc vicws) showed no evidence of mctastases.Ovariohysterectomy was
performed. Histologic evaluation of the ovary identified a papillary adenocarcinoma.
This is the most comimon ovarian tumor type in bitches. They can spread to the lungs
or seed throughout the abdomen causing carcinomatosis.Careful inspection and biopsy
of suspiciouslesions on the contralateral ovary and all peritoneal surfaces is warranted
at the time of laparotomy. Treatment is by surgical resection. The prognosis is good if
metastasis has not occurred. Chcmothcrapy may bc cffcctivc for disscminatcd tumors.
213 i. Subvalvularpulmonic stenosis with muscular infundibular stenosis.The arrows
outline the poststenotic dilation of the pulmonary artery.
i. Crescendo-decrescendo systolic murmur heard best on the left side at the base of the
heart.
ili. ECG changcs would bc consistcnt with right-sided cardiac cnlargcment and right
axis deviation. Tall P waves, S wavcs grcater than 0.35 mV in lead II and greater than
0.05mV in lead I,presence of S waves in leads I,II, II and aVF,and dccp Q wavcs
(>0.S mV) in leads I, II, III and aVF are consistent with right-sided cardiac cnlargcment.
iv.The decision between medical and surgical managenment of pulmonic stenosis is
generally based on the pressure gradientbetween theright ventricle and the pulmonary
artery.A cathctcr is placcd through the right vcntriclc into thc pulmonary artcry, and
pressures are nionitored as the catheter is withdrawn through the stcnosis. The pressurc
in the pulmonary artery is lower than that of the right ventricle because of obstructed
flow. Surgery is recommended in adult dogs if right ventricular systolic pressure is
120 mmHg or greater (in immarure dogs greater than 70 mmHg), or if the gradient
across the stenosis is greater than 100 mmHg.
No specific medical therapy is indicated for the managemenr of pulmonic stenosis.
Many dogs arc asymptomatic and those with clinical signs generally have pressure
gradients which warrant surgery. If left untreated, signs of right-sidcd hcart failure
develop and may be managed medically.
174
214-216Questions
214Withregard to the dog in 213with pulmonic stenosis,what surgical options arc
available for trcatmcnt of thclcsion?
215 A 14-year-old,mixed-
215a
breed dog is presented because
of progressive abdominal en-
largerment.A positive undula
tion is found andparacentesis
is performcd. Cytologic cxam-
ination of the abdominal fluid
rcvcals rcactivc mcsothelial
cells.
i. The greater omcntum (215a)
and the abdominal wall (215b)
arc shown. What is your pre-
sumptive diagnosis?
ii.The healing of acute
peritoneal defects is rapid and
215b
often completewithin5-7 days
rcgardless of thc sizc of thc
defect.Characterize this heal-
ing process.
ili. Suturing the peritoneum is
not advisable. Explain why.
216 You are planning to remove several lipomas (24 cm in diameter) from a healthy
cight-ycar-old, spaycd fcmalc Cockcr Spaniel. The dog has moderate dental calculus
and periodontitis, and the owner requests that the tccth be clcancd at thc same time so
that the dog will only have to undergo anesthesia once. You agree to perform both the
lipoma rcimovals and the dental cleaning/prophylaxis at the same time.
i.What potential cornplications should you warn the owner about?
ii. Would you usc prophylactic antibiotic therapy to prevent wound infection in this
dog?
ii. If you choose to use a prophylactic antibiotic, what drug would you use and when
wouldyou administer it?
175
214-216:Answers
214Pulmonic stenosis with infundibular muscular stenosis carries the poorest prognosis
and is the most clifficult to treat surgically. Options for treating this type of stcnosis arc
the modified Brock procedure,patch graft technique and right ventricle-pulmonary
artery conduit. Techniques such as valvc dilation and pulmonary arteriotomy are not
sliccessful at resolving the muscular component of this condition.
The modified Brock techniquc involvcs placing a purse-string suture and Rumel tour-
niquet in the right vcntriclc and a right ventriculotomy incision is made.An infundibular
rongeur is inserted and thc Rumel tightened.The subvalvular stenosis and infundibular
musclc is rcmoved.When complete, the purse-string is tied off to closc thc vcntriculo-
tomy. The patch graft technique involves placing a patch ovcr thc pulmonary outflow
suture is used to cut the outflow tract, allowing blood to fill the patch and the widened
outflow tract.This technique enlarges the outflow tract and allows blood to flow more
easily to the pulmonary artery.Ihe conduit tcchnique accomplishes the same goal as the
patch graft by bypassing the pulmonary outflow tract; a synthetic vascular conduit is
placed between the right vcntriclc and the pulmonary artery. Conduits are available with
orwithoit avalve toprevcntrcgurgitatioil.
215 i. Neoplastic cffusion caused by a metastatic tumor, most likely a mesothelioma or
gastrointcstinaladenocarcinoma.Widespread peritoneal dissemination likc this is also
known as carcinomatosis.
ii. The healing process of the peritoncum is called reperitoncalization and occurs by
deposition of mesothelial cells on the denudcd surfacc, ccntripctal proliferation ofmeso
thelial cell from the wound cdgcs,and adherence ofnearby structures that have a
mesothelial surface.
iSuturing the pcritoneum is not advised because if it is left unsutured, there is less ad
hcsion formation and no increase in dehiscence or delay in wound healing.Furthermore,
suturing of the peritoneum does not increase the strength of a wound.
216 i. Potcntial complications of lipoma removal include hematoma, seroma, wound
infcction and dehiscence associated with inadvertent early reinoval of sutures or staples.
Potcntial complications of dental cleaning/prophylaxis include pain or bleeding while
cating and bacteremia. Conmon organisms associated with periodontal disease include
anacrobes (Porphyromonas spp., Actinomyces spp.), streptococci and enterococci.
Dental cleaning results in bacteremia, and high numbers of organisms are present in
blood at the lipoma removal sitcs; the risk of wound infection may bc highcr than usual.
i.In a healthy dog with moderatc dental calculus and pcriodontitis,it may not be neces
sary to usc prophylacticantibiotics.Ifyouchoose to use antibiotics toreduce the chance
ofwound infection, short-term perioperative use is recommended.
ii.High blood concentrations of antibiotics are required at the time blood is sccping into
the surgical wound and are continucd for a maximum of 24 hours.The antibiotic should
be effecrive against the organisms prcvalcnt in pcriodontal discase.The drugs of choice
would be ampicillin/sulbactam (20 mg/kg, i/v,q 6 hours) or amoxicillin/clavulinic acid
(11-22 mg/kg, p/o, q 8 hours). Alternative drugs would be clindamycin (11 mg/kg, p/o
or i/v,q12hours)or tinidazole (30 mg/kg,p/o,q 24hours, in dogs; 15 mg/kg, p/o,q24
hours, in cats).(Tinidazole is currently available in Europe and is awaiting approval in
the USA.) Intravenous drugs are administered at thc timc of ancsthctic induction, while
Oral drugs arc administercd scvcral hours beforc surgery.
176
217-219:Questions
217 i. Identify this instrunent
217a
(217a).
ii. What is its usc?
ili.What are examples of
alternative instruments that
can be used for the samc pur-
pose?
218 Alung lobectomy is
218a
beingperformcd to renove a
pulmonary abscess in the
affectcd lobe (218a, b).
i.What instrument is being
used?
ii. Describe how the devicc
functions, and name onc other
application for this devicc.
218b
219For what timc durations do the following suture materials provide useful
strength for wound closure and remain present in the surgicalwound?
i. Chromic gut.
ii. Polygalactin 910 (Vicryl) or polyglycolic acid (Dcxon).
ii. Polydioxanonc (PDS) or polyglyconate (Maxon).
iv. Nylon.
v. Polypropylene (Prolene) or polybutester (Novafil).
177
217-219:Answers
217b
217 i. Senn retractor.
ii.To facilitate exposure and maintain
retraction of adjacent or overlying
tissues while thec primary procedure is
performed.
iii.Army-Navy, Rakc, and Malleable
retractors are all examplcs of common
hand held retractors (217b).Thcsc in-
strumcnts are an essential part of a
well equipped surgical pack. They are
valuable for rctraction of large and
small tissue, and allow a surgical field
uncluttered by fingcrs. The main dis-
advantage of hand hcld retractors are
that they requirc a surgical assistant.
Self-retaining retractors such as Gclpi,
Weitlaner and Balfour retractors maintain tissue separationwithout assistance.
218 i. A surgical linear stapling device. TP 90, TP 60 and TP 30 (Ethicon Endo-Sur-
gery), and TA 90 and TA S5 (United States Surgical Corporation) are examples of
linear stapling devices. The numeric designation refers to the length in millimeters of
the rows of staples placcd when discharged.They place a doublc row of staggered
staples which allows circulation between the staples, assuring viability of the 2-4 mm
of tissue remaining distal to the staplcs.
ii. Tissue to be removed is placcd in the jaws of the stapler and they arc closcd. The
adjusting knob is set to the desired amount of tissue compression.For thick and
friable tissues such as liver,less compression is used to avoid cuutting the tissues. The
safety catch is rclcascd and the trigger is squeezed until it locks into thehandle, sealing
the tissue with staples.The devicc has a cutting guide for a scalpel to transect the tis-
suc distal to the staples.The jaws arc released and the instrument removcd. Thc stump
isinspectcd for leakage.The stapler allows application deep within body cavities for
such proccdures as resection of the right atrial appendage,pulmonary lobectomy or
pneumoncctomy,hepatic lobectony,prostatic cyst resection, partial splenectomy,
uterine or ovarian pedicles, and similar procedurcs.
219 i. 33% loss of strength at seven days; 67% loss at 28 days; complete absorption
at 60 days(shorter if infection/inflammation present).
i. Polygalactin 910: 50% loss of strength at 14 days, 80% at 21 days; complete
absorption at 60-90 days. Polyglycolic acid: 37% loss of strength at seven days, 80%
at14 days;complete absorption at 120 days.
ii. Polydioxanone and polyglyconatc: 19-26% loss of strength at 14 days, 41-42 %
at 28 days, 86% loss at 56 days; complete absorption at 180-182 days.
iv. Biologically inert; 30% loss of strcngth at two years; never completcly absorbed.
v. Strcngth is permanently retained aftcr implantation; never absorbed.
178
220-222:Questions
220
220 A five-year-old West Highland White Terrier developed jaundice, anorexia and
abdominal distension onc week after a dog fight. Radiographic cxamination of the
abdomen revealed the presence of free fluid.Abdominal paracentesis revealed a dark
brownish-red fluid. Thc cxploratory laparotomy findings are shown (220).
i. What is the most likely diagnosis?
i. Name sevcral surgical procedures to eliminate the prinary problem.
ili. What supportive therapy should bc institutcd?
221A two-year-old,castratcd male domestic shorthair cat is brought to your clinic
after having been gone from home for a week.A 5 cm diameter open wound is
present on the dorsum at thc base of the tail. The wound surface is dry and thcrc is
leaf litter, gravel and dirt cmbedded in the surface of the wound.
i.What immediatcwound care doyou recommend formanagemcnt of contamina
tion and infection?
ii.What is your long-term plan for treatment of the wound?
ili. Do you administer antibiotics?
222 Describe thc double valve Denver shunt,its components,functions,method for
implantation and clinical applications.
179
220-222:Answers
220 i. Bile peritonitis secondary to extrahepatic biliary tract rupture, gall-bladdcr rup
ture, or cxtensive liver trauma.
i.Primary closure or anastomosis of tears in thc gall-bladder or bile ducts, closurc of
bile ducts over aT-tube orY-tube,bileflow diversion techniques (cholecystoduodeno-
stoimy or cholccystojejunostomy),reimplantation of the avulsed bile duct and serosal
patch grafting.
ii.Supportive therapy consists of peritoneal lavage, systemic antibiotic therapy,fluid
and electrolyte replacement, and corrcction of any acid-base imbalance. Opcn ab-
dominal drainage should be considered if thcrc is bactcrial peritonitis. Sterile bile peri-
tonitis has a much better prognosis than bacterial contaminated bile peritonitis.
221i. If there is a delay in wound care while you stabilize thc cat,the wound is cover-
edwith a watcr-miscible antibiotic ointment and a sterile dressing. Oncc stable,the
cat is ancsthctized,the wound surgically prepared,andnecrotic tissue and gross dehris
is removcd. The wound is lavaged with isotonic crystalloid solution.Bacterial con-
tamination may be furthcr reduccd with 1.0% povidone iodine solution (1 part povi-
done solution:10 parts crystalloid) or 0.05% chlorhexidine diacetate solution (1 part
chlorhexidine diacetate solution:40 parts crystalloid). The wound is managed opcn
under bandages that are changed 1-2 times daily for 3-5 days. The use of a wet-to-dry
bandagc facilitates debridement and promotes developmcnt of a viable vascular bed.
The tail basc is an idcal place to use a tie-over bandage.
i. Options includc sccond intention healing; chronic skin strctching using ‘walking
suturesuntil delayed primary closure is achieved;a local flap; or an axial pattern flap
based on the dorsal or vcntral branch of the deep circumflex iliac artcry.
ii. Short-term use of a systemic antibiotic will aid in reducing the bacterial contami-
nation of wounded tissues,which speeds hcaling.A broad-spectrum antibiotic such as
cephalexin (20 mg/kg p/o tid) is appropriatc.Topical antibiotics/antiseptics can also
be used although most agents delay wound healing.The clinician must weigh therisks
and benefits of treating infcction and delayingwound healing by applying topical sub-
stances.
222 The Denver shunt is a pleural/peritoncal-venous shunt for treatiment of chronic
ascitcs or pleural effusion.It consists of an cffcrcnt catheter, two one-way valves and an
incision.Thc cathctcr is tunneled under the skin along thc body wall to the cervical
region. The pump is suturcd in place over a rib so that external prcssure compresses the
punp diaphragm against a firm surface.The afferent catheter continues subcutaneously
to the jugular vein and is inserted intravascularly to the level of the right atrium.A liga-
ture is tied around the catheter to secure it in place and aproximal ligature is tightened
to ligate the jugular pcrmancntly.With the catheter in place, fluid is pumped through
the one-way valve system from the chest or abdomen into thc right atrium.Denver
shunts are used to treat ascitcs secondary to chronic protein losing enteropathy (the
proteinrich fluid is returned to circulation）,and chylothorax（thc shunt is reversed and
placed so thatfluid is drained from the thoraciccavity into the abdomcn).
180
223,224:Questions
223 A nine-year-old, 30 kg German Shephcrd Dog is presentcd for acute collapse. On
physical exanination, the dog is recumbent, tachypneic,tachycardic and has obvious
abdominal distension.Mucous membranes are pale and dry,and capillary refill tine is
prolonged.Femoral pulse is weak and rapid.Abdominal radiographs show peritoneal
effusion.Hemogramyields thc following information:PCV 0.2 /1 (20%); serum
protein 41 g/l (4.1 g/dl)
infusion?How doyou monitor the animals'sresponse to trcatment?
ii.Abdominocentesis is performed and bloody fluid is obtained (PCV 0.14 /1 (14%);
protein 38 g/1 (3.8 g/dl), confirming the presence of intraperitoneal hemorrhage. What
criteria are used to decide if a transfusion is needed? What type of blood product
(whole blood,packed red cells,plasma,etc.), and volume would you infuse？
ii. Despitc aggressive fluid therapy and blood transfusion, the animal’s condition
deterioratcs. Exploratory laparotomy is performcd and a hemorrhaging mass is found
in the spleen.A liter of blood is removed from the abdominal cavity.Do you utilize
this fluid to autotransfuse this patient, or continue with whole blood transfusions?
224
224 A. tcn-year-old, male Labrador Retriever is prcsented for evaluation of this
tongue mass (224). The owners report no associated clinical signs; thc lcsion was
noted incidentally when thc dog was panting.
i.What are the differential diagnoses?
ii.What further tests are indicated?
ii. What is thc treatment for this abnormality?
181
223.224:Answers
223 i. Crystalloid agents are adequate to restore circulating volumc initially. An ideal
replaccmentsolutionis sodium-bascd,isoosmolar(canine normal290-310mOsm/),
has a physiologically balanced electrolyte composition, and a bicarbonate precursor
such as lactatc.Lactated Ringer's solution closely matches these charactcristics.The
rate for fluid restoration in circulatory shock is 90 ml/kg/hour for dogs and
60ml/kg/hour for cats.Hypertonic saline (7.5%) and colloids such as hydroxycthyl
starch (Hetastarch, Dupont Critical Care) and dextran 70 (Gcntran 70, Baxter Health
Care) increase intravascular volume by raising serum osmolarity and activating fluid
shifts from the interstitium to thc vascular space (canine dose - 4-8 ml/kg for 7.5%
saline and 20 ml/kg for colloids). Use of an osmotic agent decreases the volunc of cry-
stalloid solution required to restore pcrfusion.Restoration of intravascular volume is
recognizcd by normalization of heart rate, respiratory rate, pulse quality, mucous
membranc color and capillary refill time.
ii.Animals rcquire red cell replacement for acute hcmorrhage when 25-30%of blood
volune is lost (blood volume in this dog is 90 m1/kg,i.e. 2700 ml), when PCV declines
acutely below 0.2 /1(20%) andwhen clinical signs indicatc cardiovascular function is
compromised.Packed red blood cclls with crystalloid fluids, or wholc blood are best
administered;whole blood has the advantage of replacing clotting factors.Red cells
are administered to maintain PCV above 0.15 11 (15%); a guidelinc of 10-20 ml of
blood/kg body weight or one unit of blood (s00 ml) per 20 kg animal can be used.
ii.Autotransfusion is contraindicated due to the likclihood of spreading or seeding
tumor cells system wide.Use ofwhole blood transfusions is prcfcrrcd for this patient.
Ideally, cross-match is performed prior to all transfusions; hcre the need for multiple
transfusions requires it.
224 i. The most common caninc tongue neoplasm is squamous cell carcinoma. Other
common tumor types are granular cell myoblastoma, melanoma and mast ccll tumor.
Sarcoimas occur less commonly,and a variety of other carcinomas and benign tumors
have occasionally bccn rcported.
ii. The tongue is biopsied by wedgc cxcision from the center of the mass. The surgeon
must be careful not to extend the tumor margin at the time of biopsy. Regional lymph
nodes arc aspirated to stage the tumor,and if melanoma or squamous ccll carcinoma
is suspccted, thoracic radiographs are pcrformed (left and right lateral, and ventrodor-
sal vicws) to search for metastasis.
ii.Surgical cxcision is the treatment of choice for most lingual tumors. Granular cell
local control (65%) can bc achicved with melanoma.Long-tcrm survival(>18
months) often occurs with lingual melanomas as metastases sccm to occur more
slowly than for melanomas at other sites.Squamous cellcarcinoma and mast cell
tumor have a poor prognosis for one year survival (25% or lcss); local recurrence and
lymph node metastases arc common.In general,tunors of the rostral tongue have a
bctter prognosis. Adjuvant chcmotherapy and radiation arc recommended for in-
opcrable tumors, when lymph node metastases are present or likely to occur (mela-
noma,squamous cell carcinoma, mast cell tumor), to shrink tumors before surgery,
and to manage metastases.
182
225,226:Questions
225This ten-year-old Golden
225
Rctriever(225)had a history of
weakness,restlcssncss,exercise
intolerance, seizures and col-
lapse.Hypoglycemia was
found by scrial measuremcuts
of plasma glucose.
i. What is the diagnosis?
i.Name two othcr primary
pancreatic neoplasms.
iii. Give the prognosis for this
dog after surgery and discuss
some prognostic factors.
226a
226b
226 This is an intraoral endoscopic picture of an eight-year-old, spayed fcmale Labra
dor Retrievcr that presented to the emergency clinic for dyspnea (226a).The owners
reported an acute onsct of respiratory distrcss; upon further questioning, you learn
that the dog has also had a changc in herbark and shc sccmed tohave respiratory dif-
ficulties last summer as well.
i.Based on the history and illustration, what is your preliminary diagnosis?
i.How will you confirin the diagnosis?
ii. Name three surgical procedures that can be uscd to correct this problem and what
complications might be cncountered with each?A postoperative intraoral endoscopic
view of this animalis shown(226b)
183
225,226:Answers
225 i. Insulin-secreting islet ccll neoplasm (insulinoma). Diagnosis is confirmcd by
measuring ahigh serum insulin concentration concurrcnt with a low blood glucose
(sce 17).
ii.Exocrine pancreatic adenocarcinoma and gastrinoma.
ii.Thc short-term prognosis is very good for relief of signs of hypoglycemia,however
highly mctastic behavior of the tunor.Relapsc of clinical signs can be expectcd 10-14
months aftcr surgery in about 95% of the cases.Poor prognostic indicators include
age at tine of diagnosis, high preoperative insulin concentrations and the presence of
distant metastases at timc of surgery.
226 i. Laryngeal paralysis. Idiopathic laryngeal paralysis is usually sccn in large-breed
dogs (Retrievers, Saint Bernard, and Siberian Husky) over nine years of age. Other
ctiologies include trauma, hypothyroidism and congenital paralysis. Clinical signs
dyspnea,cyanosis or even syncope.
i.Diagnosis is by laryngoscopic observation of thc arytenoids under sedation light
enough that the gag reflex remains present. Failure of the arytenoid cartilages to
abduct during inspiration or cough is diagnostic. Cervical and thoracic radiographs
arc made to rule out other possiblerespiratory diseases.
iii.Three surgicalprocedures are:
·Unilateral arytenoid lateralization.Variations of this procedure include thyro
arytenoid andcricoarytenoid cartilagelateralization.The most common complica
tions are aspiration pneumonia and postoperative edema or hematoma.It is possible
to penetrate the laryngeal mucosa during dissection, contaninating the surgical field
from thc oral cavity and risking absccss formation at the surgical sitc.In this
authors opinion (N.J.H. Sharp), this technique is the treatment of choicc.
·Partial laryngectony is perforimed per os after temporary tracheostorny intubation
(this allows unencumbered visualization of the pharynx).Hemorrhage and sub-
sequent aspiration of blood can occur with this procedure, and swclling and edema
may lead to airway obstruction,Aspiration pneumonia can occur if too much of the
larynx is cxcised and the epiglottis is incapable of covering the airway.The most
severe complication is laryngeal webbing and stenosis weeks to months after
surgery.
 Castellated laryngofissure widens the lumen of thc glottis by apposition of a stair-
stepped incision in the thyroid cartilage.The vocal folds are also resected and nat-
tress sutures are placed through thc arytenoid and thyroid cartilages to stabilize the
arytenoid cartilagcs.Iracheostomyis recommcnded prior to this procedurc.Com
plications reported include edema, aspiration pncumonia and stenosis at the surgery
site.
184
227-229:Questions
mechanisin of action, advantages and disadvantages of cach.
228
228An additional diagnostic technique has been used to help delineate this tumor
during surgery (228).
i.Name this technique.
ii. What deleterious side-effects can occur from an cxccssive dose?
ii. Name another type of tumor in which this technique is helpful.
229 A three-year-old,castrated male domestic shorthair cat is presented for emer
gency evaluation after being hit by a car. Prior to the accident thc cat was normal.
Outwardly, the cat appears normal on clinical examination except for a heart rate of
185 bpm and a respiratory rate of S5 breaths per minute.
i. What type of ^occult’ injuries can be present that may not be readily apparent on
routine physical examination?
ii.You are concerned the cat may havc a ruptured bladder. How will you assess this
further?
ili. What is the treatment for a ruptured bladder?
185
227-229:Answers
227 Chlorhexidine alters bacterial cell wall permeability causing precipitation of
cellular proteins and cell death.Advantages include rapid onset of action (99% kill
rate within 30 seconds), broad spectrum of activity (most bacteria and many fungi),
prolonged residual activity,and continued activity in the presence of organic matter
and alcohol. Disadvantagcs includc dccrcascd cfficacy against some Pseudomonas
spp.,minimal viricidal and sporicidal activity,and,rarcly,contact dermatitis.
Povidone slowly releases free iodine which binds to bacterial cell walls crcating frcc
radicals that result in cell death. Advantages include rapid onset of action (similar to
chlorhexidine) and broad spectrum of activity (most bacteria,any viruses,fungi, some
protozoa,and sporicidal after prolonged exposure).Disadvantages include inactiva-
tion in the presence of organic matter,minimal residual activity, skin irritation and
staining.
Isopropyl alcohol reacts with lipids in bacterial cell meimbranes leading to altered
permcability and cell death. Advantagcs include broad spectrum of activity, rapid
onsct, ability to rcmove the detergent left by other agents (c.g. chlorhcxidinc scrub.
povidonc scrub) and incrcased eficacy of chlorhexidine and povidonc when uscd with
alcohol. Disadvantages include slower onset of action and less efficacy than chlor-
hexidine or povidone iodine when used alone,little residual activity,and tissue injury
andnecrosisinopenwounds.
228 i. Methylene blue (3 mg/kg body weight) can be given intravenously to delineate
insulinomas and their metastases. Methylene blue appears to stain spccifically the pan-
crcatic islet-cell tumor cells,facilitating visualization of smiall masscs at surgcry.
ii.Side-effects include pseudocyanosis,hemolytic anemia with Heinz body formation
and red blood cell morphology changes, disseminated intravascular coagulation and
hemoglobinephrosis.
iii.Parathyroidgland tumors.
229 i. Oecult thoracic injuries from trauma include pncumothorax, pulmonary con-
tusion, diaphragmatic hernia (especially in cats)and rib fractures. Occult abdominal
injuries include splenic and hepatic contusion or laceration,biliary tract rupturc,and
urinary tract injury or rupture.
ii.Four-quadrant abdominocentesis is performed and recovered fluid is grossly
parison is made with systcmic PCV,serum protein concentration and serum urea
nitrogen.High conccntrations of urea nitrogen and the presence of significant
amounts of blood in abdominal fluid indicates urinary tract rupture. If urine is idcnti-
fied in the abdomen, the animal is further evaluated by excretory urogram and con-
trast cystourcthrogram to asscss the integrity of the kidneys,ureters, bladder and
lurethra, and identify the location of leakage bcforc surgcry.
ii. If the animal is not inmediately stable for surgcry, a peritoneal and urinary
catheter are placed to drain urine from the abdomen and bladder. Fluids and other
medications are administered to stabilize and diurese the animal. Surgical repair is per-
formed when the patient is stable and azotemia is decreased; in somc cascs this may be
24-72 hours after presentation. A caudal ventral midline laparotomy is made and thc
lrinary tract is inspccted for signs of injury. The bladder rent is debrided as necessary
and sutured with a single or double layer closure using absorbablc suture.If the rent is
large or bladder wall integrity is questionable,a urinary catheter is left in place for
several days aftcr surgcry.
186
All refcrcnccs are to question and
body bracc 98
answer numbers
bone reduction forceps, pointed 12
brachycephalic airway syncdrome 34, 137
abdominal drainagc, open 97
bradycardia 42
abdominal rctractor,Balfour 27
Branham reflex143
abdominoccntesis 117
Brock techniquc, modified 214
absccss
bulla osteotomy 142
anal sac154
Bunnel-Meyer suture pattern 125
carnassial tooth 138
bupivacaine 79, 124
drainage 76
buprenorphine 79
pancreatic 205, 211
buried continuous intradermal closure 202
prostatic81
burns 134, 199
acepromazine 41
acidosis,metabolic 33
butorphanol41,71,79
Addison’s disease 11, 42
calcium oxalate uroliths 80
adrenal mcdullary tumor 112
calcium supplementation 61
adrenal tumor 11
calculi
adrenalectomy 11
cystic 50, 172
ameroid constrictor ring 135,203
urctcral14
anastomosis
carcinomatosis 215
colorectal120
cardiac murmur 213
end-to-end 89,209
cardiac pacemaker 184,185
cardiomyopathy,hypertrophic 7, 12
gastrointestinal25
carnassial tooth abscess 138
ileorectal120
carprofen 71,79
jejunal168
castration35,45,55,167
ureterocolonic183
catecholaminc cxccss 112,118
antibiotics 30,$1,73,115,216
cecal inversion, partial 90
antral hypertrophy, acquired 62
cervical miucocele 164,165
ascites 222
chemotherapy 117,146, 157,212
Aspergillus73
chlorhexidine 227
aspiration,thoracostomy tube37
cholecystectomy 186
aspirin,buffered124
cholecystoduodenostomy187
atrial standstill 42
cholecystojejunostomy 187
aural discharge 142
cholelithiasis 186
aural hematoma 170,171
chondrosarcoma, nasal 157
Bacteroides 51
chondrotomy 156
bandagc
chromaffin cell tumors 112
laycrs 83
chromic gut 219
Robert Jones 125
chyleformation reduction136
basal cell tumor 124
chylothorax 136
bile duct adenocarcinoma 175
cleft palate 2, 53,100
biliary tract rupture 220
Clostridium 51
biopsy needle, renal 206
CO,laser 204
bipedicle flap, direct 163
coagulation status 150
blood
colectomy, subtotal 120
dyscrasias SS
colloid agents 223
transfusion223
colonocytes 52
187
colorectal anastomosis 120
feline urolithiasis syndrome (FUS) 49
conduit technique 214
FcLV 58
corkscrew tail115
fentanyl patch 64
corticosteroids 11
fibrosarcoma 109
cryosurgery167,188
nasal157
cryptorchidism39
oral 116
crystalloid agents 223
fine-needle aspiration
cyanoacrylates 63,127
hygroma drainage 169
cyclophosphamide117
pcrcutaneous 164
cystitis 207
ultrasound guided 183
cystoscopy183
Finochictto rib spreader 121
cystostomy 41,133
fistulous tract 40
catheter 166
FIV virus 58
cystotomy 59
flail chest 54
cytokines32
fluid replacement6,223
flunixin meglumine 71
dehydration 6
fluorescein dye 20
dental calculus 216
food allergy 58
Denvcr shunt 136,222
Ford interlocking suture pattern 147
detrusor atony 67
foreign body 33, 51
diaphragmatic hernia 26, 196, 229
cervical region 66
digital flexor tendon,severed125
esophageal 1, 92
disinfectants 227
fistulous tract 40
doxorubicin 117
jejunal89
dysphagia 142
string 194
dyspnea7,13,137,142,189,208
fracture, wound infection 30
dystocia 84
Frcdet-Ramsted pyloromyotomy 62
frontosagittal index189
ear
ablation 198
Fusobacterium51
canal resection 129,198
gall-bladdcr,double187
hematoma170,171
Ganbee suturc 168
clectrocardiogram 42
gastric adenocarcinoma 44
clcctrocautery 24
gastric antral resection 62
clcctrodes,pacemaker 184
gastric decompression 5
electrolyte solutions 33
gastric dilatation-volvulus5
Elizabethan collar 98
gastric invagination, partial 20
end-to-end anastomosis 89
gastric outflow obstruction62
stapling instrument 209
gastric viability assessment 20
endometrial hyperplasia, cystic 22, 207
gastric wall injury 20
cntcral feeding 52
gastroduodenal anastomosis 62
cnterocyte nutrition 52
gastrointestinal adenocarcinoma215
cpigastric vein,caucdal superficial118
gastrointestinal anastomosis 25
cpulis,acanthomatous 116
gastrointestinal obstruction 77
eschar, burns 199,200
gastrojcjunostomy201
Escherichiacoli32,93,130
gastropexy5
esophageal foreign body 1,92
gastrostomy33
esophageal laceration 66
genitourinary infection 110
esophagotomy1,92
granulation tissue82
ethylene oxidc 122
granuloma,linear 57
felinc cosinophilicgranuloma complex57
Halsted mosquito forceps 75
188
hare lip 100
interstitial cell tumor 55
hemangiopcricytoma 43
intcstinal adenocarcinoma 77
heimangiosarcoma 117,210
intussusception 85,168
hematoma,aural 170,171
islet cell tumors 17,225
hemimandibulcctomy,rostral 19,179
isopropyl alcohol227
hemoperitoneum 96
jejunal anastomosis 168
hepatic malignant lymphoma 175
jejunal vein portography 193
hepatocellular adenoma/adcnocarcinoma
175
Kelly hemostatic forceps 75
hernia
Kessler suturc, modified 125
diaphragmatic 26, 196, 229
ketoconazole11
hiatal102
laryngeal collapse, secondary 34
perincal 140
laryngeal paralysis 226
scrotal35
laryngeal saccule,everted 34
umbilical 4
leiomyoma 77
herniation, abdominal organs 16
leiomyosarcoma 77, 161
herniorrhaphy 26,35
lipoma 216
hobbles98
liver tumors 175
Horner's syndrome 48
lymphoma,malignant 77
humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy 50
hydronephrosis 114
macrophages, inflammation 31
hydroureter 114
malignant melanoma
hygroma 169
of digit 99
hyperadrcnocorticism 50
oralmucosa146
hypercalcemia 50,80,1.52
prognosis in dogs 109
hypercholesterolcmia118
mammary tumor 68
hyperinsulinemia 17
mandible, squamous cell carcinoma 19
hyperkalemia 42
mast cell tumor 77, 94
hyperparathyroidism50
megacolon
hiyperthyroidism 12,177
acquired idiopathic 120
hypervitaminosis 150
subtotal colectomy 181
hypoadrenocorticism 11
mesothelioma 215
hypocalcemia 61
metabolic anabolism 52
hypoglycemia 17,225
metastases
hypothermia,long surgical procedures 32
intestinal adenocarcinoma77
hypothyroidism 1.50
lingual tumors 224
hysterogram,contrast18
mammary tumor 68
methylene blue delineation 228
ileorectal anastomosis 120
neoplasticeffusion 215
ileus 8.5
ovarian tumors141
imnunosuppressive drugs 145
pancrcatic ncoplasms 225
incision split113
regional lymph node 19
incisional dehiscence 16
renal tumors104
incontinence, postoperative 114
stomach tumor 44
inguinal hcrnia 182
testicular tumors 55
inguinal mass 35
thoracic 19
inguinal ring 35
methylene blue 228
inspiratory stridor208
middle car, inflammatory polyps 142
insulin secreting tumor 17
mitotane11
intermal obturator muscle transposition140
monofilament suture 14,46,106,125,181
interruptcd cruciate suture pattern 147
morphine 71, 79
189
muzzle,wirc98
pericardial effusion,idiopathic
hemorrhagic 195
nasaladenocarcinoma157
pericardiectomy195
nasal cavity tumor 157
histiocytoma 188
perineal hernia 140
nasopharyngcal polyp 48, 142
perineal urethrostomy 49,106
periodontal disease 216
nephroliths,bilateral 56
periprostatic cyst 74
neutrophils 31
nutritional status assessment 144
peritonitis51,97
bile 220
nylon sutures 42, 219
persistent right aortic arch 191
oral mucosal and gingival necrosis 78
pharyngostomy 2
oral papillomatosis 126
phenoxybenzamine 112
oral tumor, malignant 109
phentolamine 112
oronasal fistula 28,190
phenylpropanolamine 114
osteochoncdritis dissecans 15
pheochromocytoma 112,118
osteolytic conditions 50
pleural effusion 66,222
osteomyelitis,bactcrial99
pleurodesis 136
osteosarcoma,premaxillary116
pleuroperitoneal drainage 136
otitis cxtcrna 198
pncumomediastinum 66
otitis mcdia 142
pncumonia,aspiration.2
ovarian folliclc, pcrsistcnt 178
pneumothorax66,155,229
ovarian follicular cyst178
polybutester sutures 219
ovarian tumor141,212
polydioxanone suturcs 18,181,196,219
ovariohysterectomy 16,40,47,70,71
polyglactin sutures196,219
113,150
polyglycolic acid sutures 10,219
dehiscence 16,38,113
polyglyconate sutures 18,219
fistulous tract 40
polypropylene sutures 14,46,219
ovarian follicular cyst 178
portocaval shunt, extrahepatic135
ovarian tumour212
portosystemic shunt,extrahepatic193,203
uterine neoplasia 161
povidone227
vaginal prolapse 160
prazosin 112
overhydration6
pregnancy 84
oxymorphone 41,64,79,124
pressure sores 21
priapism 22
pacemaker implantation 185
propranolol112
pain control41,64,70,71,79,124
prostate,periprostatic cyst 74
palatal defect, secondary 2
prostatic abscess 81
pancreatic abscess 205,211
protein requirement, third degree burns
pancreatic neoplasm 205,225
134
pancreatic pseudocyst 205
protein-calorie malnutrition 144
pancreatitis,necrotizing 107
pseudohyperparathyroidism 152
panniculitis, pyogranulomatous 173
pubic osteotomy158,166
paraganglioma 112
pubic symphysectomy 158
paraphimosis 22
pulmonary abscess 60
parathyroid adenoma 80
pulrnonary contusion 229
parathyroid gland tumors228
pulmonary edema 197
patent ductus arteriosus 143
pulmonary lobectomy 60
pectus excavatum 189
pulmonic stenosis,subvalvular 213
Penicillium73
pulse generator184,185
perianal fistula 145
pyelonephritis 56,93,172
perianal gland adenoma 167
pylorectomy andgastroduodlenostoiny201
190
pyloric muscle hypertrophy 62
soft tissue sarcoma 42, 111
pyodcrma
sphincter incompetence 114
secondary 58
splenectomy5,210
tail fold 115
splenomegaly 210
pyometra 47,212
splenoportography 193
pyothorax136
splint, pectus excavatum 189
radiotherapy
splinting, flail chest S4
squamous cell carcinoma
fibrosarcoma 109
of digit 99
squamous cell carcinoma 19
nasal157
rectal polyp 139
prognosis in dogs 109
rectal prolapse 132
stapler, thoracoabdominal surgical 25
rectal pull-through procedure 158
staples
rcctal tumors 158
removal176
rectus abdominus musclc,cxternal sheath
vascular ligation192
closure 38
stapling89,168,209,218
red cell replacement 223
steam stcrilization108
relaxing incision 21
stcnting,urctcr 14
renal biopsy 206
stcrilization
renal calculi93
autoclave108
renal failure 50, 56
chemical indicators 108
renal insufficiency 61
dressings 72
renal trauuma 151
ethylene oxide 122
renal tumors104
surgical instruments 148
rcsting cnergy requirement 134
sternum,dorsal deviation 189
restraint devices 98
stomach
retractors
ischemic injury 20
Army-Navy 217
tumor 44
Malleable 217
surgical field disinfectants 227
Rake 217
surgical gut sutures 46
Senn217
sutures10,14,38,46,59,78,89,92,95
rhinitis 28,48,73
103,106,111,113,125,140,181,192
rib fractures 54
sweat gland adenocarcinoma 99
rima glottidis 137
synthctic absorbable sutures 46
Rochcstcr—Carmalt forccps 75
rodentulccr57
tail fold pyoderma 115
root canal therapy 138
technetium-99m 12
Rumel tourniquet 214
testicular torsion 128
testicular tumors 39,55
Satinsky vascular clamp 23, 119
tetany 61
seminoma 55
hypocalcemic 80
sepsis, nutritional needs 211
thoracoabdominal surgical stapler 25
septic shock 211
thoracocentesis 155
seroma 15
thoracostomy tube placeiment 37
Sertoli cell tumor 55
thoracotomy,intercostal29
short bowel syndrome 9
thromboembolism, aortic7
simple interrupted suture pattern 147
thymoma 152
sinusitis,chronic 105
thyroid
skin flaps 173, 174,200
hyperfunctioning 12
skin grafts 101, 163
tumors177
soft palate, elongated 137
thyroidectomy, bilateral 61, 177
191
tissue
urethrostomy 45
adhesivcs 63,127
perineal49
cxpandcr 87,88
prepubic166
flaps 2
urethrotomy, prescrotal 45
tongue squamous cell carcinoma 224
urinary bladder
tonsillar squamous cell carcinoma 69
ruptured229
tooth cxtraction 138
transitional cell carcinona 183
trachea
urinary calculi 133
avulsion13
urinary drainage systcm, indwelling 67
hypoplasia34
urinary obstruction 49
tracheal collapse 156
urinary tract infection36,50,130
tracheallaccration 103
urethral stricturc 166
trachealresection and anastomosis 156
urolith 56,80,59
tracheal ring prostheses 156
urolithiasis 14,59
trachcalis muscle plication 156
urorctroperitoneum96
tracheostomy, temporary 34
uterinc ncoplasia 161
transfusion 223
uterus,fluid-filled 18
trauma78
vaginal hyperplasia 159, 160
chcst54
vaginal neoplasia 159
degloving 123,162
vaginal prolapse 159, 160
diaphragmatic hernia 196,197
vaginal stricture 180
inguinal region 149
vaginography 180
occult injuries 229
vaginoplasty180
open wound 101
VanLangcnbeck tcchnique 53
renal 151
vascular clamp 23
renal/urctcral injury 96
vascular ligation 192
ruptured bladder 229
vascular ring anomaly 191
tracheal laccration103
vcnotomy23
Trichuris worm90
vcntricular pacemaker implantation 42
tubc thoracostomy 155
vesica duplex 187
tubular adenocarcinona 104
vesicourachal diverticulum,congcnital 130
tumor
vincristine 117
of dental origin 116,179
volvulus, mesenteric 9
staging19,44,55,69,116
vomiting33,109
thrombus 118,119
Von Willebrand’s diseasc 150
typhiectomy 90
Whipple’s triad 17
umbilical hernia 4
punoM
upper airway obstruction208
contraction 65
urachal diverticulum 130, 131
dehiscence 95
urachus, persistent 130
infection 10
ureteral cctopia 91, 114
wound closure
lureterocclc35
soft tissuc sarcoma resection 111
ureterocolonic anastomosis 183
trauma149
urcterotony 14
wound healing
urcthral obstruction 67, 106
burns 199
urachal diverticulum 131
second intention 123
urethral prolapsc 110
urethral stricturc166
stages 31
urethral tcar 151
Z-plasty 65
urethrorectal fistula, congenital 172
Zepp proccdurc, modificd 129
192
Compiled by an international group of authors using clinical case
presentationsand illustratedwithsuperb-qualitycolourphotographs,imaging
and diagrams, thisbook covers all aspects of sof tissue surgery,including peri-
operativepatientmanagement,andsurgicalpreparationandtechnique.
Therandomizedself-assessmentformatisusedtoenablereaderstothink
beforethediagnosisandasuggested treatmentplan isrevealed.Thisbook
providesanexcellent interactiveresourceforveterinarystudentsand forpractising
veterinariansintheircontinuingprofessional development.
“ commend the authors for compiling a representative group of questions .. and an
enjoyablemental challenge...especially useful for students or residents preparing
for board exams or practitioners wanting to gauge their knowledge.
JournaloftheAmericanVeterinaryMedicalAssociation(JAVMA)
Alsoin theSelf-AssessmentColourReviewseries:
Brown&Rosenthal,Smal/Mammals
Forbes&Altman,AvianMedicine
Freeman,VeterinaryCytology
Frye&Williams，ReptilesandAmphibians
Keeble&Meredith,Rabbit Medicine&Surgery
Kirby,Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Lewbart,OrnamentalFish
Lewis,Parker&Bloomberg.SmallAnimal Orthopaedics
Mair&Divers,EquineInternalMedicine
May&Mcllwraith，EquineOrthopaedics&Rheumatology
Moriello,SmallAnimal Dermatology
Pycock，EquineReproduction&StudMedicine
Sparkes&Caney,FelineMedicine
Tennant,SmallAnimal Abdominal&MetabolicDisorders
Verstraete,VeterinaryDentistry
ISBN1-874545-64-2
1
781874545644