Manual of
British
Canine and Feline
Small Animal
Veterinary
Association
Haematology and
Transfusion
Medicine
Edited by
Michael Day
Andrew Mackin
Janet Littlewood
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.co m
BSAVA Manual of
Canine and Feline
Haematology and
Transfusion Medicine
Editors:
Michael J. Day
BScBVMS(Hons)PhDFASMDipECVPMRCPathFRCVS
Department of Pathology and Microbiology
School of Veterinary Scicnce,University of Bristol
LangfordHouse,Langford,Bristol BS405DU
Andrew Mackin
BScBVMSMVSDVScFACVSeDSAMDipACVIMMRCVS
College ofVeterinaryMedicine
Mississippi State University
Mississippi Statc,MS39762-9825,USA
Janet D. Littlewood
MAPhDBVSc(Hons)DVRCeriSADMRCVS
Department of Clinical Studies
Animal Health Trust,LanwadesPark
Newmarket,SuffolkCB87DW
Published by:
ERS
British Small Animal VeterinaryAssociatior
Woodrow House,Telford way.
WaterwellsBusinessPark,Quedgely.
Gloucester GL24AB
A Company Limited by Guarantce in England.
Registered Company No.2837793.
Registered as a Charity.
136313
Thecleavdhoannytllatnntversh
Chapters 1and 6 are copyright AXIOMVeterinaryLahoratories.
All rightresrvdoartf thispuliationmyreproduedsredi
retrieval sytmrranitdmryanyaslrnicmchan
potoeopyingrecordingortherwisewihmtpriorwritenpermissone
copyright holkler.
A cataloguerecord for thisbook isavailable from theBritishLibrary.
ISBN0905214390
The publishersandcontributorscanot takeresponsiilityforinformatn
previdedn dosagesandehodsofapplieationofrugs entionedinis
publieatDetailsisindmustverifedbyindivisersfo
appropriatelierature.
Typeset yusionDsinordingridgeHaphreK
Printed byookersUpton,Pocle,DorsctUK
MITRA
636./8.09
DAYb
Other titles in the BSAVA Manuals series:
Manual of Advanced Veterinary Nursing
Manuai of Canine and Feline Emergency and Critical Care
Manual of Canine and Feline Gastroenterology
Manual of Canine and Feline Nephrology and Urology
Manual ofCompanion Aninai Nutrition andFeeding
Manual of Canine Behaviour
Manual of Exotic Pets
Manual of Feline Behaviour
Manal of Ornamental Fish
Manal of Psittacine Birds
Manuai of Rabbit Mcdicine and Surgery
Manual of Raptors, Pigeons and Waterfowl
Manual of Reptiles
Manual ofSnallAnimal Anaesthesia andAnalgesia
Manuai of Snatt Animat Arthrotogy
Manual of Small Animal Clinical Pathology
Manual of Small Animal Dentistry, 2" edition
Manuai of Small Animal Dermatology
Manual of Small Animal Diagnostic Imaging
Manual of Snall Animal Endocrinology, 2"d edition
Manual of Snall Aninal Fracture Repair and Management
Manual of Small Aninal Neurology, 2nd edition
Manual of Small Animal Oncology
Manuai of Small Animal Ophthainology
Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Neonatology
Manual of Veterinary Care
Manual of Veterinary Nursing
Coming soon:
Manual of Canine and Feline Infectious Diseases
For further information on BSA VA publications, visit our website at: www.bsava.com
1
1
List of contributors
V
Foreword
vii
Preface
vili
Part 1
Haematology
1
Overview of haematological diagnastic techniques
3
Andrew Torrance
2
Collection and interpretation of bone marrow samples
19
Dorothee Bicnzie
3
Anaemia
29
Jenry Mills
4
Polycythaemia
43
Elizabeth Villiers
5
Erythracyte disorders: selected topics
Iron deficiency anaemia
53
Mike Stone
Anaemia of chronic renal disease
59
Andreas Hans Hasler
ii
Immune-mediated haemolytic anaemia
67
Andrew Mackin
iv
Haemobartonellu felis
79
Darren Foster
Canine babesiosis
85
Remo Lobetti
6
Disorders of leucocyte number
93
JohnDunn
Disorders of leucocyte function
105
>
Michael J. Day
8
Leucocyte disorders: selected topics
1
Neutropenia
117
AnthonyAbrams-Ogg
Eosinophilia
131
Krystyna Grodecki
iii
Leukaemia
139
Joanna Morris and Jane Dobson
iv
Feline retrovirus infections
155
Andrew Sparkes and Kostas Papasouliotis
iv
Part 2
Haemostasis
9
Overview of haenostasis
165
Mary F. McConnell
10
Haemostatic diagnostic techniques
173
Mary F. McConnell
11
Disorders of platclet number
183
David C. Lewis
12
Disorders of platelet function
197
Tracy Stokol
13
Disorders of secondary haemostasis
209
Junet D. Littlewood
14
Disorders of haemostasis: selected topics
i
Inmune-mediated thrombocytopenia
219
David C. Lewis
i1
von Willebrand's disease
229
Tracy Stokol
111 
Haemophilia A
237
Janet D. Litlewood
iv
Anticoagulant rodenticides
243
Andrew Mackin
Disscminated intravascular coagulation
253
Steven A. Holloway
Part 3
Transfusion Medicine
15
Practical blood transfusion
263
Anthory Abrans-Ogg
16
Blood groups in cats
305
Andrew Spurkes and Tin Gruffydd-Jones
Appendices
Reference values for haematology and haenostasis
309
2
List of abbreviations
311
Index
313
Contributors
Anthony CG Abrams-Ogg DVM DVSc DipACVIM
Department of Clinical Studies, Ontario Veterinary Callege, University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario,
Canada N1G 2W1
Dorothee Bienzle DVM MSc PhD DipACVP
Canada
Michacl J. Day BSc BVMS(Hons) PhD FASM DipECVP MRCPath FRCVS
Langford House, Langford, Bristol BS40 5DU
Jane Dobson MA BVetMed DVetMed DipECVIM-CA MRCVS
Department of Clinical Veterinary Medicine, University of Cambridge, Madingley Road, Cambridge CB3 OES
John K. Dunn MA MVetSc BVM&S DipECVIM DSAM MRCVS
AXIOM Veterinary Laboratories Ltd, George Street, Teignmouth, Devon TQ14 8AH
Darrcn J. Foster BSc BVMS PhD FACVSc
Veterinary Specialist Centre, Comer Delhi and Plassey Roads, PO Box 307, North Ryde, NSW I670, Australia
Krystyna Grodccki DVM DVSc MRCVS
Departement de Pathologie Clinique, Faculte de Medecine Veterinaire, Universite de Montreal,
3200 rue Sicotte, C.P. 5000, Saint-Hyacinthe, Quebec, J2S 7C5, Canada
Tim Gruffydd-Jones BVetMed PhD DipECVIM MRCVS
Department of Clinical Veterinary Science, University of Bristol, Langford House, Langford, Bristol BS40 5DU
Andreas Hanis Hasler Dr.vet.nmed. DipACVIM DipECVIM
Tierarztliches Uberweisungs Zentrum, Hauptstrasse 21, CH-4456 Tenniken, Switzerland
Stevelr A. Holloway BVSc PhD MVS MACVSc DipACVIM
Small Animal Medicine Department, University of Melboume Veterinary Clinical Centre, Princes Highway:
Werribee, Vic 3030, Australia
David C. Lewis BVSc DipVetClinStud PhD DipACVIM
Antech Diagnostics, 12616 SE Stark, Portland, OR 97233, USA
Janet D. Littlewood MA PhD BVSc(Hons) DVR CcrSAD MRCVS
Department of Clinical Studies, Animal Health Trust, Lanwades Park, Newmarket, Suffolk CB8 7DW
Remo Lobetti BVSc MMedVet DipECVIM
Department of Companion Animal Medicine, Faculty of Veterinary Science, University of Pretoria,
Private Bag X04, Onderstepoort, 0110, South Africa
Andrew Mackin BSc BVMS MVS DVSc FACVSc DSAM DipACVIM MRCVS
College of Veterinary Medicine, Box 9825, Spring Street, Mississippi State Uriversity, Mississippi State,
MS 39762-9825, USA
Mary F. McConnell BVSc DipClinPath PhD
VETPATH Laboratory Services, PO Box 18, Belmont, WA 6984, Australia
V1
Jennifer N. Mills BVSc DipVetClinPath MSc PhD
Division of Veterinary Clinical Sciences, Murdoch University, South Street, Murdoch, WA 6150, Australia
Joanna Morris BSc BVSc PhD FRCVS
Department of Clinical Veterinary Medicine, University of Cambridge, Madlingley Road, Cambridge CB3 OES
Kostas Papasonliotis DVM PhD MRCVS
Department of Clinical Veterinary Science, University of Bristol, Langfurd House, Langford, Bristol BS40 5DU
Andrew Sparkes BVetMed PhD DipECVIM MRCVS
Department of Clinical Veterinary Science, University of Bristol, Langfurd House, Langford, Bristol BS40 5DU
Tracy Stokol BVSc PhD DipACVP
Department of Population Medicine and Diagnostic Science, College of Veterinary Medicine,
Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853-6401, USA
Michael Stone DVM DipACVIM
Tufts University School of Veterinary Medicine, Departnent of Small Animal Medicine, 200 Westboro Road,
North Grafton, MA 01536, USA
AXIOM Veterinary Laboratories Ltd, George Street, Teignmouth, Devon TQ14 8AH
Elizabeth Villiers BVSc CertSAM CertVR MRCVS
Department of Clinical Veterinary Medicine, University of Cambridge, Madingley Road, Cambridge CB3 OES
vii
Foreword
The demands of modern small animal practice, and the greater under-
standing by clients of what can be achieved for their pets requires more
 in depth knowledge by the veterinary surgeon working in primary health
care and in refenral practice,
Taking a blood sample for haematological analysis is one of the most
common diagnostic procedures in practice, either for analysis within the
practice or outside the practice in specialist laboratories. Corect interprc-
tation of the results is essential.
The BSA VA Manuai of Canine and Feline Haematology and Trans-
fusion Medicine combines buth clinical pathology ant the diagnosis and
 managenment of a range of haematological diseases. It also includes those
diseases that may become more commonly diagnosed in the UK with the
introduction of the PETS Travel Scheme.
The final section of the manual gives detailed practical guidance on
blood transfusion techniques in the dog and cat including collection,
storage, blood typing, cross matching and administration.
The Editors and the BSAVA Publishing Manager are to be congratu-
lated on this excellent manual. They have drawn together the specialist
knowlcdgc of authors fron around the world for this comprehensive
guide. The chapters are fully illustrated with tables, diagrams antl colour
 photographs and those on technique will be of particular use to many of
us in practicc.
We have waited some time for this manual but I am sure you will agree
with me that our patience has been amply rewarded with this very
wclcomc new addition to the BSAVA maual series.
Lynn Turner MA VetMB MRCVS
BSAVA President 2000-2001
viii
Preface
The BSA VA Manual of Canine and Feline Haematology and Transfusion Medlicine is
a unique publication that bridgesthe disciplines of clinical pathology, internal medicine
and critical care in a single volume.
 Haematological analysis is probably the single most conmonly performed labora-
tory diagnostic test in small animal practice, so much so thiat many practices have now
established in-hiousc analysis facilities. Moreover, in recent years more sophisticated
haematology analytical techniques have also becoinc available througlh specialist
laboratories. This book reviews the basics of sample collection, test performance and
intcrprctation for routine haematology, together with assessment of haemostatic
function and bone marrow analysis. In adlition, ncwcr developments such as the
application of flow cytometry to the phenotyping of leukaemias, and molecular
 gcnctics to the diagnosis of haemostatic disorders are discussed.
 Howcvcr, this volume is more than just a clinical pathology manual. The diagnosis
 and management of a selected range of major haeimalological diseases are discussedl by
 specialists in intermal medicine and oncology. These chapters cover the major infec-
lious, immunc-mediated and neoplastic diseases of the haemopoietic system. Of
 particular relevance to UK practitioners is the realization that 'new hacmalological
diseases such as babesiosis, ehrlichiosis and leishmaniasis will be increasingly recog-
nizcd in their country following the lifting of quarantine. Indeed, in the first months of
the Pet Travel Scheme, two cases of canine babcsiosis have been documcnlcd in thc
Veterinary Record, and this manual specifically includes a chapter on this disease. The
 growing specialty of feline medicine is reflected by the inclusion of a number of
chapters dedicated to conditions specific to the cal.
The final section of the manual is devoted to the field of transfusion medicine. These
chapters provide a detailed and very practical guide to performing blood transfusion inl
thc dog and cat - including donor blood collection and storage, blood typing and cross-
 matching, administration of the transfusiou and management of transfusion reactions.
This manual is the sum of a series of excellent contributions from internatioually
rccognizcd specialists from Europe, the United States, Canada, Australia and South
Africa. Each chapter is designerl as a self-conlainerl rcview, and there is inevitably some
limited overlap in content. However, as this is often presented from a different 
by tables, diagrams andl colour photographs. Thc photographic guides to performing
bone marrow collection, catheter insertion and blood transfusion will be of particular
valuc inl the practice setting.
The BSA VA Manual ofCanine and Feline Haematology and Transfusion Medicine
has been a long time in gestation, and the Edlitors are grateful for the patience of all
contributors who readily updated their chapters in the few months preceding publica-
tion. This has meant that the final product is very much a state-of-the-ar volume that
 po slns d p i a o on s  n sieu aars 
 manual are due in no small pat to the dedication and efforts of Marion Jowett (BSAVA
 Publishing Managcr), Liz Payne (copy editor), Jill Greenway (proof reader) and
Graeme Kowalewicz (design and layout) who have worked beyond the call of duty in
the last months.
Michael Day
Andrew Mackin
Janet Littlewood
August 2000
PART ONE
Haematology
CHAPTER ONE
Overview ofHaematological
Diagnostic Techniques
AndrewTorrance
INTRODUCTION
collection of blood from a peripheral vein tests the
resilience of blood cclls andencourages platelet aggre-
Haematological diagnostic techniques arc an csscntial
gation.Extraction withconsistentvacuum froma large
parl of the data base for diagnostic investigation.The
central vein is less damaging and therefore preferable.
haematological profileincludeshaemoglobin,haemat
Jugular venepuncture is casy in dogs (Figures 1.1 and
ocrit or packedcellvolume (PCV),red cell indiccs,total
1.2)and cats (Figures 1.3 and 1.4),is often less stress-
cell counts, differential counts and comments by a
ful than the use ofperipheralveins and undoubtedly
veterinary haematologist on the morphology of the
yields the most reliable results.
erythrocyte, leucocyte and platelet populations.
Microscopic cxamination of a blood film alone may
Requirements
revealthediagnosis nsomecases.Moreoften,nterre
Needles: 18-21 gauge 2 cm needles
tation of thehaematologicalprofileinconjunction with
Syringe: 5-20 ml or evacuated tubes 2-5 ml
biochemistry,urinalysishistoryand hysicalfinding
Positioning and preparation
directs the clinician in the selection of subsequent,
ultimately diagnosticimaging andsampling techniques.
Most dogs willsit for this procedure. Large dogs
Dogs and cats exhibit a wider range of hacmatological
should be placed with their back to a wall. The
holder usually stands astride the dog with his or her
pathologythanotherspecies,making diagnostichaema-
legs behind the dog's shoulders. The sampler squats
tologyparticularlyimportant in small animal medicine.
in front of the dog. Small dogs will usually sit near
thc cdge of the table. Clip the hair over the jugular
BLOODSAMPLINGANDTHEUSEOF
groove and prepare the skin for venepuncture.The
ANTICOAGULANTS
dog's head is tipped back, exposing the jugular
groove, and the samplcr occludes one jugular vein
To be of diagnosticvalue,a sampleof bloodmust truly
just cranial to the thoracic inlet
reflectthe impact of disease processes ontheblood cells
Procedure
and platelets.The composition of blood is constantly
In most cases the vein is located by palpation rather
changing and there isarapid response to physiological
than by sight. The vein is raised and lowered, and
phenomenasuchassplenic contractionordemargination
the jugular groove is palpated to locate the vein.
of neutrophils.Thesc proccsses are readily induced by
The needle is inserted with the tip pointing
stressing the patient at the time of sampling and will
cranially,and bloodis withdrawnbygentle suction
produce physiological alterations that may confuse in-
terpretation of the haematological profile. Stress-in-
Figure l.I:Jugular venepuncture in dogs.
duccdneutrophiliamaybemistakenforaninflammatory
Figure 1.2:Jugular
leucogram in cats and increasedPCVby splenic con-
venepuncture in the dog.
traction may be mistaken for dehydration in dogs.
(Courtesy of Jacob Hayes
Sedativesandanalgesicshaveprofound haematological
and Karen Gerber.
effects,which mask disease processes.
Laboratories.)
Physical damage toblood constituents duringcol-
lection is the most common and frustrating cause of
poor blood samples. The fragility of erythrocytes and
the aggregability of platelets are quite unprcdictablc
and vary between individuals and pathological pro-
consistent,excellent technique.The slow flow and
application of variable vacuum that occurs during
4
Manual of Canine andFeline Haematologyand Transfusion Medicine
poor andWright's-stainedfilms developablueback-
Requirements
ground,whichimpairsevaluationofmorphology.Basic
Needles:21 or 20 gauge 1-2 cm needles
crythrocyte counts and indices,however,can be as-
Syringe: 5-10 ml or evacuated tubes 2-3 ml
scssed in heparinized samples.
Positioning and preparation
Bring the cat to the edge of a table.Hold thc front
legs down over the edge of the table.Tip the neck
BASICQUANTIFICATION
back and the nose up. The front legs and neck up
TECHNIQUES
to the point of the mandible should then make a
vertical plane.Clip the hair over one jugular
ThemeasurementofPCVand cell counts can be
groove and prepare forvenepuncture
performedmanuallybyusingmierohaematocrit tubes
Procedure
and ahaemocytometer.
The blood sampler takes a position in front of the
Microhaematocrit
cat and occludes one jugular vein by compressing
The microhaematocrit method for calculating PCV is
the jugular groove. The needle is then inserted
the simplest way to assess red cell mass manually. It is
with the tip pointing cranially, and gentle suction
widely used in practices,intensive care units and
is applied as soon as the tip of the needle enters
haematologylaboratories.ThePCVis determined by
thelumen of thevein
centrifuging anticoagulated blood ina small capillary
Figure 1.3:Jugular venepuncture in cats.
tube to separate cells from plasma.The PCV is calcu-
lated bydividingthelengthofthepackederythrocytes
Figure 1.4:Jugular
venepuncture inthecat.
by the total length of thepacked erythrocytes,buffy
(Courtesy of Jacob
coat and plasma.Various simple devices are available
Hayes and Karen
to perform this measurement (Figure 1.5).
Veterinary
Laboratories.)
Figure1.5:Sliding deviceformeasuring thehaematocritin
amicrohaematocritube.(AXIOMVeterinaryLaboratories.)
Evacuated tubesorsyringes are equallyefficient in
skilled handsbutshouldnotbeusedtogether.Samples
Theminimalerrorsthatoccurwithmeasurementof
are ruined when blood is extracted with a syringc and
microhaematocritare usuallyassociatedwithcentrifu-
needle and theneedlepushed through the cap of an
gation.Microhacmatocrit centrifuges operate at high
cvacuatcdtube.Bloodcells arethenforced throughthe
speeds(11,500-15,000rpm),which ensure adequate
lumenof theneedletwiceunder prcssurc,and damage
packing oferythrocytes.Multipurposecentrifugesmay
results.When blood has been collected intoasyringe,
notrotate fastenoughtopack thecells,and increased
the needle should be removed and the blood gently
duration of centrifugation will not compcnsate for this.
pushed out into an open tube containing the appropri
Adequate cell packing is achieved with 5 minutes of
ate anticoagulant.Thetube should then becappcdand
centrifugation at the appropriate speed.At a PCV
rolled gently to ensure adequatemixing.
above50%,packingisnotascompletc aftcr5minutes,
The anticoagulant of choice for thehaematological
leading to overestimation of red cell mass.In such
profile is ethylenediamine tetra-acetic acid (EDTA)
cases an additional periodof5minutes centrifugation
because it preserves cell morphology.Tubes contain-
atapproprialc spccd may benccessary.Overfilling the
ing sodium citrate arc used for any tests involving
microhaematocrit tubebymore than75%of itslength
clottingtimesand clottingfactors.Bothsodiumcitrate
will alsoreduce therate ofpackingandincrease the
and EDTA prevent coagulation by complexing cal-
centrifugation time.When thePCV is bclow25%,the
cium,butsodiumcitrateisfavoured fortestsofcoagu
packing of erythrocytes willbe tighter and may cxag-
lationbecausecalciurnbinding ismorereadilyreversed
gerate the decrease inPCV,making the animalappar
by addition of calcium. Heparinized blood is of little
more anacmic thanitreallyis.Small variationsinPCV
use for haematology because leucocyte staining is
may alsooccurwith different anticoagulants.
Overview of Haematological Diagnostic Techniques
5
Manual cell counts
 anticoagulated samples renders automated counts use-
 Manual ccll counts are done with an improvcd Neubauer-
less, and will also block thc counting channcls in sone
ruled haemocytometer, calibrated coverglass, dispos-
 analysers. Damaged erythrocytes often swell during
 able capillary pipette and plastic reservoir chamber
 storage and transport, and this may increase the MCV
 containing a premeasured volume of dihuent.
measured by automatic counters, which in turn will
Thc haermocytometer is a transparcnt glass cham-
artefactually incrcase the calculalcd hacmalocrit.
ber that holdsa cell suspension beneath the microscope
Samples that contain large numbers of
for counting. The chamber is 0.l mm deep and has a
metarubricytes and rubricytes (nucleated red blood
well defined space of knowll volume. The volume is
cells or nRBCs) will tend to causc artefaclually clc-
subdivided by a grid of 9 x 1 square min engraved on
vated leucocyte counts because the counter will mis-
the base of the chamber. The central l mm square of the
take nRBCs for leucocytes. In such cases, manual
grid is further subdivided into 25 squares of suitable
examination of the film will be required to produce
size for counting red cells at an appropriate dilution.
corrected leucocyte counts. This correction is done if
Blood is diluted to achieve appropriate density of
more than 5 nRBCs are noted while counting 100
cells for counting with the diluent container. Foreryth-
leucocytes in a differential count. The leucocyte cout
rocyte counting the dilution is l:200, for leucocytes
is corrected as follows:
1:20 and for platelets 1:100. The total counts are then
calculated by using a correction factor that takes into
Corrected
mucleated
leucocyle
100
account the counting volume and the dilution factors.
x cell count
count
100 + nRBCs
The count is performed in duplicate on different
(automated)
 Poor sample collection and sample ageing may
leucocyte counts from the two sites should only vary
result in platelet aggregation, and the platelet clumps
by 20% and 10%, respectively, if performed correctly.
may he countcd as rcd or whiic cells, or misscd
If the two cell counts are consistent, the average of the
altogether, leading to an erroneous platelet count. For
 two is multiplied by tlhe conversion factor to obtain the
this reason, it is always recommended that platelet
coumt per litre.
counts are checked by manual cstimation, and abnor-
Manual counts with a haemocytometer have a
 mal counts from automatic cell counters should always
significant error compared with automated counts (±
be regarded with suspicion. Variations in platelet size
may also lead to erroneous platelet counts. This was
 tant in monitoring changes in leucocyte number over
conspicuously shown inl a sludy of brccd-associatcd
time, for example a change of 20% can simply be an
 thrombocytopenia in Cavalier King Charles Spaniels
intercount variation rather than a trne alteration.
in which manual platelet counts and automated counts
werc discordant. Affectcd dogs had a combination of
large platelets (macrothrormbocytes) and mild thrombo-
AUTOMATED QUANTIFICATION
cytopenia. The automated counts exaggerated the
TECHNIQUES
thrombocylopcnia by counting macrotlrormbocytcs as
erythrocytes thus artefactually decreasing the platelet
Mcasurcment of crythrocylc counis, haemoglobin,
count (Ecksell et al., 1994).
haematocrit, mean cell volume (MCV), mean cell
haemoglobin (MCH), mean cell haemoglobin concen-
Haemoglobin
tration (MCHC) and leucocyte counts are now fully
Three methods for measuring haemoglobin are cur-
autonaterl in most laboratories and in rmany practices.
rcntly uscd by different hacmatology analysers. The
 Differential leucocyte counts are usually assessed visu-
cyaumethaemoglobin method has been used as the
ally because of the diversity of leucocyte patterns in
 international standard for many years, but the reagent
dugs and cats. Examination of a bloorl film for thc
conlains potassium cyanidc, which can causc proh-
differential leucocyte count also provides an opportu-
lems with disposal and handling.
nity for the haematologist to comment on erythrocyte
The oxyhaemoglobin method tends to underesti
murphology andl the presence of any abnormal ccils.
 mate total hacmoglobin becausc it only mcasurcs the
The diagnostic value of the haematological profile is
oxyhaernoglobin fraction. This can cause problems
seriously compromised when cell counts are inter-
with extermal quality control because the oxyhaemo-
preted without such morphelogical. examination, or
globin in samples converls to methaeimoglobin with
vice versa. Interpretive comments programmed into
time. This is also a problem in samples from patients
automated analysers are frequently irrelevant and can
with significant methaemoglobinaemia.
loc cxiremely misleading.
Recently, the use of a less toxic reagent, sodium
Factors affecting the quality of automatic counts
lauryl sulphate (SLS), has replaced the cyanmethae-
include analyser type, sample damage, sample ageing,
moglobin method. The erythrocytes are lysed, haemo-
 platelet aggregation and abnorrnalities in plateletsize.
globin isconverted to SLS-haemoglobin by a four-step
The presence of microclots in·damaged and puorly
reaction and then quantified colorimetrically.
6
Manual of Caninc and Feline Haematology aud Transfusion Medicine
Blood cell counts
 Compared witlh Coulter techniques, this method pro-
Three major principles are currently used for cell
vides greatly expanded information about each cell
type. The great advantage of laser counters is that the
tronic cell counting by the Coulter principle, elec-
size andi haemoglobin concentration of each erythro-
tronic-optical counting using laser detection systems
 cyte is measured and then presented in a scattergram,
and quantitative buffy coat analysis (QBC).
which shows the distribution of MCV and haemo-
 globin throughout the erythrocyte population rather
The Coulter principle
than just providing a mcan value. The shape of the
A stream of red blood cells (RBCs) diluted in electro-
 o r sn n
a ss ae ue no py s nos a
 about erythrocyte morphology, and exposes hidden
there is an electric current. As each individual cell
subpopulalions of cells that wouldl othcrwisc disappear
passes through the aperture, the electrical resistance
into the mean value.
increases, gencrating a pulse. The pulse height is
Laser counters are also able to perform differenntial
 proportional to the cell volume (MCV), and the pulse
while ccll counis and scattergram distributions on thc 
frequeney is proportional to cell numbers. Cumulative
basis of cell size and cytoplasmic characteristics, such
pulsc height dcteclion cnables computation of tie
as peroxidase content of granules. This can cause
haematocrit. MCH and MCHC are then computed as
 problcins when assessing leucocytes from different
follows:
specics due lo variablc pcroxidasc contcnl. The elimi-
 nation process with lysing reagents, described previ-
MCH (pg) = hacmoglobin X
10
ously for Coulter techniques, is used in conjunction
RBC coun.
with lascr counling techniqucs in some analysers.
100
Quantitative buffy coat analysis
The QBC analysis syslcm is based on the principle that
erythrocytes, leucocytes and platelets will layer ac-
In this system the haenmatocrit is a calculated vari-
cording to density upon centrifugation. The various
able and therefore should not be referred to as the PCV.
laycrs arc cxpanded by a plastic floatand are identified
The PCV measured by the microhaematocrit method
by their acridine orange staining patteins as observed
and the calculated haematocrit often differ slightly. If
under blue-violet light. The widths of the various
the variation is grcalcr than 3-5%, a technical problem
layers or bands are measured and used to predict the
should be suspected. The Coulter counter identifies
total leucoeylc counl, the absolulc non1-granulocyte
cells to be counted from electronic thresholds, which
and granulocyte counts, the plateler count and the
depend on cell sizc. This causes errors when counting
PCV. The accuracy is excellent for PCV, total leuco-
erythrocytes of different sizes from different species.
cyte count and granulocylc counl, good for non-
Most analysers that are calibrated for human use are
 granulocyte count and fair for platelets (Tvedten and
 adequale for caninc use because the MCVs of tlhese
Weiss, 1999). The precision (based on coefficient of
 two species are similar. Cats have much smaller eryth-
variation) is bcttcr than that for mamual counts but
rocytes and more platelet clumping, which leads to
worse than that forelectronic counters. Indistinct sepa-
significanl errors on Coulter counters calibrated for
ration of the granulocyte and erythrocyte layers occurs
human use.
in sonc cascs, especially with leucocytosis, and in
The same principle is applied to Coulter leucocyte
these circumstanccs leucocytcs cannot be counted.
 counts. Minor adjustments must be made to electronic
The QBC system cannot detect left shifts, morphologi-
thresholds in conversion of human counters for feline
cal leucocyte abnormalities or red blood cell morphol-
 and canine use. Macrothrombocytes and nRBCs may
 Ogy. Manual cxamination of a blood filn in addition to
be erroneously counted as leucocytes. Differential
tlhie QBC screen is, therefore, essential.
leucocyte counts can. be pcrformcd by some of these
analysers by a process of elimination. Samples of
blood are treated withreagents that lyse specific leuco-
BLOOD FILMS
cyte types. Alkaline diluent,for cxample, will lyse and
enucleate neutrophils, monocytes and lymphocytes
Whencver blood cannot bc analysed within 2-3 hours
while leaving eosinophils intact due to the stability of
it should be refrigerated at 4°C because erythrocyte.
 eosinophil granules in alkaline conrlitions. Thc count
 is then performed on the eosinophil-rich sample.
ture increases the PCV and MCV and lowers the
MCHC. These variables are unchanged for at least 24
Laser cell counters
hours in refrigerated blood. Samples sent to a labora-
Laser cell counters use an electronic-optical lascr
lory by post can be expected to have artefacts due to
detection system to measure the size and internal
RBC swelling. The magnitude of thesc artefacts is
cornplcxily of each cell on the basis of light scatter.
unpredictable and in many samples changes are mini-
OverviewofHaematological DiagnosticTechniques
mal. Exposure to high or vcry low temperatures and
Diff-Quikisa simple haematologicalstaintouse in
damage during collection are highly detrimental to
practice. It is not strictly a Romanowsky stain but
stored and transported blood samples.Samples must
works ona similarprinciplebyusing blueandorange
never befrozen because the thawing process com-
dyes to give appropriatc staining characteristics.The
plctcly destroys the cells
two dyes are in separatejars,and the intensity of blue
Production of high quality blood smears (Figure
and orange staining can be altered manually with the
1.6)is a skill that can only be acquired with constant
number of dips of the slide in cach stain.
practice and is a matter of pride formost haematolo-
One further stain that is frequently used in haema-
gists.Evenly spread blood films are an absolute neces-
tology is 1%newmethyleneblue incitrate saline.This
sity for generating reliable differential cell counts.
isavitalstain,whichprecipitatesanddyesthcresidual
Veterinary surgeons are encouragcd to submit a blood
RNA in immature red cells identifying them as
film (fixed by air drying) to accompany the EDTA
reticulocytes.Blood anticoagulated with EDTA is
sample.Although these films tend to have variable
mixedwith newmethyleneblue and allowed to stand
thickness andarerarely usedfor differentialcellcounts,
for 15-20 minutes.The blood is then rcmixcd and
they can be extremely uscful for distinguishing be-
smeared for examination.RNA within reticulocytes
tween changes in cell morphology due to sample
stains blue-black,whereas mature erythrocytes stain
ageing and genuine diagnostic findings.
pale green.
Examination
Bloodfilms areroutinely scannedwithout a coverslip
with a20Xdry objective and then examined in detail
with a50X oil immersion objective.Details of intrac-
ellularmorphology,such asredcellparasitesandtoxic
granulation in the cytoplasm of ncutrophils, may re-
quire a 100X oil immersion objective.
Routine differential leucocyte counts are based on
100 cells counted in a specific arca of thc film.Thc area
of the film selected is critical because different sized
cells spread at different rates and the largest tend to be
found in the tail of the smear.The cclls arccountedin the
Figure1.6:A tray ofwell madeblood smears stainedwith
body of the filmwhere the smear is one cell thick and
Wright's stain.(AXIOMVeterinary Laboratories.)
where theindividual cellsare sufficiently separated to
make individual cell morphology and abnormal aggre-
Staining
gation absolutely clear.he rest of the smear, including
Blood films are stained with Romanowskystains such
the tail,is then scanned for atypical orneoplastic cells
as Leishman’s stain or Wright’s/Giemsa. Staining
and platelet clumps.The percentage differential leuco
must be consistentbecause the learned skills involved
cyte counts aremultiplied by the totalnucleated cell
in morphological interpretation depend on examina-
count to obtain the total differential counts.
tion ofvery largenumbers offilms stained inexactly
Morphological comments on erythrocytes and
the same way.Staining can be done manually,but in
lcucocylcs are recorded as an annotation to the
laboratories with high turnover this becomes imprac-
haematological profile.Usually only abnormal mor-
ticaland automatic stainers are used.Automatic stain-
phological features are noted.
ing is consistent as long as blood smcars arc wcll made
and homogeneous.
The Romanowsky stains are compound dyes con-
BLOODCELLMORPHOLOGYAND
sistingofa mixture ofmethyleneblue andeosin,with
INTERPRETATION
sevcral contaminating dyes that can alter staining
characteristics.Methylene blue stains the acidic cell
Erythrocyte morphology
components such as nuclei and cytoplasmic RNA.
The size,colour, shape and stage of devclopmcnl of
Eosinisredand stainsmore basic components suchas
erythrocytes can all be assessed microscopically and
haemoglobin.The dyes are dissolved in methyl alco-
have great interpretive and diagnostic significance.
hol,which also acts as a fixative.Contamination of
methyl alcoholwithwaterwill spoil thefixation and
Macrocytes
lead to loss of cell detail. The stain solutions must
Macrocytesare largeerythrocytes.Theyareoften hypo-
thereforebekept absolutely free ofwatervapour in
chromic (deficient in haemoglobin)(Figure 1.7)imma-
storage.This isafrequent cause of poorquality smears
ture erythrocytes producedinaregenerativeresponse to
inlaboratories where stains are made up in damp
blood lossorhaemolysis.Breed-relatedmacrocytosisis
glassware and not stoppered
a normal finding in some poodles.Macrocytes can be
8
associatcd with feline leukaemia virus (FcLV) sub-
Anisocytosis
groupAinfectioninkittens andwithmyeloproliferative
Anisocytosisisatermapplied when theerythrocytesin
disorders of both dogs and cats.Abnormal numbers of
a film are ofvariable,rather than consistent,volume.
macrocytes can be seen in damaged or aged samples as
This is frequently seen in both regenerative and non-
an artefact of erythrocyte swelling.
regenerative anaemias.
Figure 1.7:Three
Spherocytes
polychromatic
Spherocytes are small, densely staining spherical
macrocytesina
regenerative response
erythrocytesdenoted by lackof central pallor(Figure
from adogwith
1.9).These cells adopt a spherical shape after reduc-
immune-mediated
tionin thecell membrane area(and hence surface to
haemolytic anaemia
volumeratio)duetopartialphagocytosisby mononu-
(Wright'sstain;original
magnification×1000).
clear phagoeytes. The presence of spherocytes in a
(AXIOMVeterinary
smear implies that the erythrocyteshave surface
Laboratories.)
bound antibody orcomplement,whichisrecognized
by cell surface receptors on phagocytes.Sphcrocytes
Microcytes
are less deformable than normal erythrocytes and
Microcytes are smallerythrocytes.They may be normo-
consequently are osmoticallyfragile.The presenceof
chromicorhypochromic.Microcytcswith a normal
spherocytes is a sensitive indicator of immune-medi-
haemoglobin content occur in anaemia of chronic
ated haemolytic anaemia in dogs.Feline RBCs have
inflammation.Hypochromic microcytes (Figure 1.8)
a lower MCV and less appreciablecentral pallor than
areimportantmarkersof altered iron mctabolism and
canine RBCs. Consequently spherocytes are rarely
are present in dogs with iron deficiency and also in
recognized in cats.
dogs with portosystemic shunts.The most common
cause of iron deficiencyindogsis chronic occult blood
loss from the gastrointestinal tract. The abnormality of
ironmetabolism in portosystemic shunts is currently
E
underinvestigation.Akitashaveunusuallysmalleryth-
ISph
rocytes and also have a particularly high potassium
content compared with other dog breeds.
ISph
Sph
CC
ISph
ISph
ISph
PM
PM
Figure 1.9:One spherocyte(Sph)and five erythrocytes
showingvariousstagesofincompletespherocyteformation
(ISph)(reducing areaof centralpallor)accompaniedby two
normal erythrocytes(E),one crenated cell(CC)andtwo
polychromatic macrocyles (PM)(Wright's stain;original
magnificationx1000).(AXIOMVeterinaryLaboratories.)
Codocytes(targetcells)
春
Codocytes are bell-shaped erythrocylcs which,
OGD
when viewedin two dimensions,have a dense centre
surrounded by a clear area and a peripheral haemo-
globin rim (Figure 1.10). This bizarre shape is adopted
because ofincreases in the cholesterol:phopholipid
ratio within the cell membrane.Codocytes are
seen in iron deficiency anaemia,liver disease with
cholestasis and after splenectomy in dogs.
Q0
Reticulocytes have increased surface to volume
ratio and can also appear as target cells in two
Figure1.8:Microcytic hypochromic cellsfroma case of iron
dimensions,but this is not indicative of any under-
deficiency ina dog(Wright's stain:(a)original
magnification×1000,(b)originalmagnification×500).
lying process other than the presence of rcd blood
(AXiOMVeterinaryLaboratories.)
cell regeneration.
Overvicw ofHacmatologicalDiagnosticTechniques
9
microvascular angiopathies and are seen in patients
with immune-mediated anaemia,thrombosis,
splcnichaemangiosarcomahypersplenism,glomeru
lonephritis,congestive heart failure,valvular heart
disease,doxorubicin toxicosis andmyelofibrosis.
TC
4
Figure 1.10:A target cell (codocyte)(TC)(Wright's stain;
originalmagnijficationx1000).(Courtesy ofAxIOM
Veterinary Laboratories.)
Acanthucytes
Acanthocytes are irregularly spiculated erythrocytes
with a fewunevenly distributed surface projections
of variable diameterandlength(Figure 1.11).Similar
Figure 1.12:Schistocytes (S)(Wright's stain;original
to codocytes,acanthocytes may occur as a result of
magnification×1000).(AXIOMVeterinary Laboratories.)
alterations in the cholesterol:phospholipid ratio
of the cell membrane but can also be scen in associa-
Eccentrocyles
tion with RBC fragmentation.Acanthocytes are
Eccentrocytes are erythrocytes inwhich oxidative
seen in dogs with diseases of capillary beds such
damage causesfusion of opposingcell membranes on
as splenic haemangioma/haemangiosarcoma,diffuse
one edge of the erythrocyte (Figure 1.13).This has
liver disease or portosystemic shunts. They have
the effect of squeezing haemoglobin into a smallcr
also been observed in association with high choles-
volume.Whenviewed in two dimensions the fused
terol diets.
membranes appear as a clearzone whereas the com-
pressed haemoglobin appears cccentric and darker
than normal.Eccentrocytes are a sensitive indicator
AC
of oxidative damage in dogs, and eccentrocytic
anaemias are often associated with onion poisoning
in this species. Cats are more sensitive than dogs to
AC
oxidative erythrocyte damage,which ismanifested
by the formation ofnumerousHeinzbodies rather
than eccentrocytes.
AC
AC
Ecc
AC
Figure 1.11:Acanthocytes (AC)(Wright's stain;original
Ecc
magnification×1000).(AX10MVeterinaryLaboratories.)
Ecc
Echinocytes (Burr cells)
Echinocytes are regularly spiculated erythrocytes,
Ecc
Ecc
which usually arise as an artefact due to crenation.
Echinocytes that are not due to crenation are seen in
somc dogs with lymphoma, chronic renal disease,
glomerulonephritis or chronic doxorubicin toxicosis.
Figure 1.13:Eccentrocytes(Ecc)(Wright's stain;original
magnification×1000).(Ax1OMVererinaryLaboratories.)
Schistocytes
Schistoeytes are irregular crythrocyte fragments
Erythrocyteinclusions
resulting from mechanical trauma to circulating
Erythrocyic inclusions ofimportance include para-
erythrocytes (Figure 1.12). They are markers of dis-
sites,Howell-Jolly Bodies,Heinz bodies and baso-
seminatedintravascular coagulation(DIC)andother
philic stippling.
10
Manual of Canine andFeline Haematology and TransfusionMedicine
Haemobartonellafelis:Haemobartonellafelisor
rocytes) cytoplasm.Rubricytes,which have a round
ganisms arehighlypleomorphic and stainwith vari-
viable nucleus and are largerthan themetarubricytes,
able intensityapearingaschainsdscsorrodsn
arc sometimes seen.
surface of erythrocytes (Figurc I.14).
Thc presence of nRBCs in circulation is always
important (see Figurc 1.15).Mctarubricytes appear dur-
ing bone marrow regenerative responses to haemolysis
mcdullary haematopoiesis in thc rcticuloendothelial
system.They are typically present in dogs with splenic
haemangiosarcoma and also occur in splenectomized
individuals.Thepresence of earlicr crythrocylc prccur-
sors (rubricytes/prorubricytes) in circulation usually
implies quitesevere bone marrow orreticuloendothelial
diseasebut can occasionallybeseenin association with
verymarked regenerative responscs.
Figure 1.14:Haemobartonella organisms (arrowed) in the
erythrocytesofaferretwithfatalhaemolyticanaemia
(Wright's stain:original magnification x1000).
(AXIOMVeterinary Laboratories.)
Babesia:Babesia is an intracellular parasite of canine
erythrocytes,which causes major morbidity in tropical
and subtropical areas of the world (see Chapter 5). It is
transmitted by various species of tick,particularly
Rhipicephalus sanguineous.It is not endemic in the
United Kingdom but is likely to be of increasing
importance in imported dogs.
Figure1.15:Anerythroblastoidcell(primitive nucleatedred
bloodcell)intheperipheralbloodofacatwithmyelodysplasia
duetoFeLVinfection(Wright's stain:originalmagnification
Howell-Jollybodies:Howell-Jolly bodies are deeply
x1000).(@AXIOMVeterinaryLaboratories.)
staining spherical structureswithin the erythrocyte.
They areremnants of the incompletely extruded
Reticulocytes
metrarubricyte nucleus and usuallyreflectreticulo-
The normal morphological response to blood loss is a
endothelial dysfunction.
regenerative pattern with reticulocytes and metarubri-
cytes.Inanormal Wright's/Giemsa-stainedbloodsmear
Heinz bodies:Heinz bodies are small highly refractile
reticulocytes appearas large polychromaticcclls.Whcn
bodies that stain poorly with Wrights stain and well
stainedwithnewmethyleneblue,thereticulocytesshow
with supravital stains.They are eccentrically located
an internal reticulated pattern of nuclearmaterial and
beneath the erythrocyte cell membrane or protrude
condensed organelles.The ncwmethyleneblue-stained
through it.Heinz bodies are formed by irreversible
smear is used for the reticulocyte count,which is an
precipitation of oxidativelydenaturedhaemoglobin.
objective index of the degree of regeneration.
They are markers ofoxidative damage,forexamplein
Incats,reticulocytesshow punctate (dots) oraggre-
paracctamol toxicosisin cats.
gate （clusters and lincs) pattcrns of condcnscd
organelles.This is aunique feature of thematuration of
Basophilic stippling:Basophilic stipplingoferythro
reticulocytesinthecat.Infelineregenerativeresponses,
cytcs and ctarubrieytcs occurs in lcad poisoning and
aggregatereticulocytcs arereleased first.Aficra short
is characterizedby thepresence ofpunctate orreticu-
maturation time of around 12hours,the aggregate
latedbasophilicgranules（clumpedribosomes)within
form becomes a punctate reticulocyte,which has a
thc crythrocyte, Basophilic stippling may also be a
maluration timeof 10-12days.Aggregatercticuloeytes
feature of marked regenerative responses in cats.
therefore reflect active regeneration whereas punctate
reticulocytes reflectrecent cumulativeregeneration.
Nucleatedredblood cells
The nRBCs seen most frequently in the peripheral
Leucocyte morphology
circulation aremetarubricytes.They haveacondensed
Importantmorphological features of leucocytes in-
pyknotic nucleus and abundant polychromatic (bluish
clude immaturity,abnormal cytoplasmic granulation
staining) or orthochromic(thecolour of mature eryth-
and infectious inclusions.
Overview of Haematological DiagnosticTechniques
11
Neutrophils
system iscopingwith theinflammatory orinfectious
Matureneutrophilshave a long thin scgmcntcd/lobu-
process.If thcimmature forms outnumber themature
latednucleus,unevenbutwelldefinednuclearmargins
forms, the left shift is termed degenerative,and is a
andabundant,lightlybasophilicoreosinophilic,slightly
poorprognostic sign.The combination of alowmature
granulatedcytoplasm.Immature neutrophilsare termed
neutrophil count with a degenerative left shift is a
bands and are recognizable because the nuclcus is
grave prognostic sign. Toxic cytoplasmie changcs in
elongated but parallel-sided andnotlobulated (Figure
mature andimmature neutrophils are oftenpresent at
1.16).Metamyelocytes may also be seen;these are
the same time as a degenerative left shift and fre
larger than maturc ncutrophils and havc a similar
qucntly indicate an overwhelming septic process.The
cytoplasm but thenucleusiskidney bean-shaped and
appearance of metamyelocytes in a left shift suggests
not lobulated (Figure 1.17).Metamyelocytes can be
a potent inflammatory or regenerative stimulus. If
difficulttodistinguishfrommonocytesbutin general
are smaller andmore discrete.
erative disease and other disorders ofbonemarrow
should be suspected (Figure 1.18).
Figure 1.16:Two neutrophilicbands.These cells are
showing evidence of toxic change;note the coarse basophilic
foaminess’of the cytoplasm(Wright's stain;original
Figure1.18:Twomyeloblasts(smallerroundcelis)andtwo
monobiasts froma myelomonocyticleukaemiaina dog
magnificationx1000).(AXIOMVeterinaryLaboralories.)
（Wright'sstain;originalmagnificationx1000).(AX10M
Veterinary Lahoratories.)
M
Regenerative left shifts are nearly always associ-
atedwith systemic inflammation but under certain
conditions this interpretation may be mislcading.Thc
observationthatanaemiaswithmarkedregeneration,
such as immune-mediated haemolytic anaemia,are
very frequently accompanied by a significant left
shift has often been interpreted as areflection of non-
specific stimulation of the granulocyte cell line by
mediators of RBCregeneration.There is continuing
debate about this,but current research suggests that
the left shift is actually associatedwith neutrophil
Figure1.17:Ametamyelocyte(M)anda band (B)witha
consumption due to tissue damage and the systemic
foldednucleus.Thesecellsare showingevidence of toxic
inflammatory response which either initiates,oris
change:note the coarse basophilicfoaminess'of the
induced by,the haemolyticanaemia(McManusand
cytoplasm (Wright's stain:originalmagnificationx1000).
(AxiOMVeterinary Laboratories.)
Craig, 1999).
Occasionally, the regenerative response to an in-
The presence of inmaturc ncutrophils (band
flammatory stimulus is so excessive that enormously
neutrophils and metamyelocytes)in the peripheral
highneutrophil countswith aprimitiveleft shift are
circulation is termed aleft shift’ and is either a
generated.This is termedaleukaemoid response²and
response to increased neutrophil consumption by in-
can beimpossibletodistinguishfrommyeloid leuk
flammatory and infectious processcs or an abnorimal
aemia on morphological grounds alone.
increase in neutrophil production.When mature
Toxic changeisa collcetive term formorphologi-
ncutrophils greatly outnumberthe immature forms and
cal features that develop in neutrophils as a result of
the mature neutrophil count is incrcased,theleft shift
disturbedcellularmaturationinthebonemarrowasso-
is termedregenerativeandindicates that theimmune
ciatedwithmarked inflamrmatoryorsepticprocesses
12
Manual of Canine and Feline Haematology and TransfusionMedicine
(Figure 1.19). The spectrum of toxic changes in dog
Eosinophils
and cat neutrophils approximately correlates with the
Eosinophils have veryrecognizablemorphology with
severity and duration of the stimulus.One of the
bright pinkish-red uniformly stained cytoplasmic
earliest changes is the presence of Dochle bodies
granules and a polymorphic nucleus,which is
(lamellar aggregates of rough endoplasmic reticulum)
smootherandlesssegmented thanthatofa neutrophil
in the cytoplasm(Figure 1.20).Astoxicity'becomes
(Figure 1.21).Feline eosinophils usually have rod
more severc,the eytoplasm ecomesmore basophilic
shaped granules.Canine eosinophils often have an
and develops a foamy appearance.Intensely stained
orange huc and may havevacuolatcd granulcs. Grey-
primary granules may also be apparent.Finally, the
hound eosinophils are highly vacuolated.Occasional
nucleus swells and the nuclear envelope appearsrag-
canine eosinophils have very large red cell-sized
ged.Doehlebodies are less useful for indicating early
granules. Toxic cosinophils sometimes have pur-
toxicityincatsthanindogsbecause they canbe present
plish-black granules.
in up to30%of normal cat neutrophils.
Figure1.19:Two toxicbands.Notethecell withthe‘doughnut
nucleus;thisisafeatureofabnormalnuclearmaturationand
ispart of thespectrumoftoxicity.Bothcellsshowcoarse
basophilicfoaminessof the cytoplasm(Wright's stain;original
magnificationx1000)(AXIOMVeterinaryLaboratories.)
Figure 1.2l:(a)A feline eosinophil:(b)a canine eosinophil
(Wright's stain;originalmagnification×1000).(AXIOM
Veterinary Laboratories.)
Basophils
Figure 1.20:Threetoxic bands containingDoehlebodies
(Wright's stain; original magnification ×1000).(AXIOM
Dog and catbasophils have rather unusual morphol-
VeterinaryLaboratories.)
ogy and can easily be missed by inexperienced hae-
matologists.The canine mature basophil is usually
Hereditary abnormalities ofneutrophils occur oc-
larger than a neutrophil andhas alobulated orstrap-
casionally in dogs and cats.Pelger-Huct anomaly has
like nucleus.The cytoplasm is basophilic with occa-
been reported inboth species. This is a failure of the
sional large dark purple granules (Figure 1.22).
normal nuclear maturation of neutrophils.The mature
Immature basophils tend to havemoremarked granu-
cells have a parallel-sided nucleus and mimic bands.
lation. Canine basophils can be mistaken for highly
Chediak-Higashi syndrome has bccn rcportcd in Per-
toxicneutrophils,leading toerrors in interpretation.
sian cats and is characterized by poorly functioning
Feline basophils have similar nuclear features but the
neutrophils with giantintracytoplasmic granules.Vacu-
cytoplasm contains large numbers of pale grey gran-
olationof neutrophils may bc seenin storage disorders
ules that can be mistaken for eosinophil granules
such as a-mannosidosis.
(Figure1.23).
Overview ofHaematologicalDiagnosticTechniques
13
(a)
Figure1.24:Afelinemonocyte.Note theropy/lacy
chromatin pattern(Wright's stain:original magnification
x1000).(AXIOMVeterinarylaboratories.)
Lymphocytes
Circulating lymphocytes have very variable size and
morphology.They can be small,medium or large,
withnuclei varying fromroundtoclcavcd and convo-
luted (Figure 1.25).The most consistent features of
lymphocytes are the coarsely clumpedchromatin
patterm and the presence of small quantities of baso-
philic cytoplasm.
Figure 1.22:(a) A canine basophil (Wright's stain:original
magnificationx7000).(h)A canine basophil(B),neutrophil
(N)and eosinophil(E)inthe samehigh powerfield.Note
therelative sizes of thecells(Wright’s stain;original
magnificationx500).(AXIOMVeterinary Laboratories.)
Figure1.25:Cleavedlymphocytes inadogwith lymphocytic
leukaemia(Wright's stain;original magnificationx1000).
(AxiOMVeterinaryLaboratories.)
The typical small lymphocyte has a round-or
bean-shaped nucleus approximately the diameter of
an RBC,with a thin rim of basophilic cytoplasm.
Figure 1.23:Afeline basophil (Wright's stain;original
Reactive lymphocytes (Figure 1.26) are larger and
magnification×1000y.(AXIOMVeterinaryLaboratories.)
have an increasedvolume of more basophilic cyto-
plasm than quiescent lymphocytes.Large granular
Monocytes
lymphocytes(Figure 1.27)in low numbers are also a
Monocytes are large cells with variable amoeboid
norimal finding.Thcschave incrcased lightly baso-
morphology,which can be differentiated from other
philic cytoplasm containing small azurophilic gran-
largebloodcellssuchasmetamyelocytesby theirblue
ules and are thought to represent cytotoxic T cellsor
ground-glass cytoplasm and reticulated orribbon-like
natural killer (NK) cells.
nuclear chromatin (Figure 1.24). Transformation of
Lymphoblasts are large lymphocyles containing
monocytestoactivevacuolatedmacrophagcsincircu-
one or more prominentnucleoli(Figure1.28)and their
lation can be seenin severe chronicinflammatory
presence in the peripheral circulation is always abnor-
processes such as bactcrial endocarditis.
maland usually due to stageV lynphoma or lymphoid
14
Manual of Canine andFelineHaematology andTransfusion Medicine
Platelet morphology
Platelets are anucleate structures,whichhavealightly
basophilic granular stainingpattern andrangefrom 2
to4pm in diameter.Thcy have poorly defined cyto-
plasmicmargins and often appear to have small hair-
like projectionsfromthesurface.Giantplatelets,often
larger than RBCs,occur in platelet regenerative re-
sponses and are a normal finding in some brecds,
notably the CavalierKing CharlesSpaniel.Platelets
(cspccially feline platelets) tend to form clumps in
anticoagulantssuchasEDTA,whichcauseartefactually
lowautomatedplateletcounts.Thepresenceofplatclet
Figure1.26:Areactive lymphocyte.This isa medium sized
clumps in the tail of a bloodfilmis anindication that
lymphocytewithincreasedcytoplasmicvolume and
the automated platelet count may be erroneous.
basophilia.Thepale area closeto the nucleusis theGolgi
zone.(Wright's stain;originalmagnification x1000.)
Unclumpedplatelets arenormallyscatteredamongthe
(AXIOMVeterinary Laboratories.)
otherbloodcellsinthefilm.Feline plateletsare larger
(twice the volume)than most canine platelets.
Figure 1.27:A lorge
granularlymphoeyte
(Wright's stain;original
magnificalionx1000).
INTERPRETINGTHE
HAEMATOLOGICALPROFILE
Laboratories.)
Thehaematologicalprofileincludesmeasurementsofthe
variables listed in Figure 1.29. The profile must be
interpretedasawhole,notingnormalaswellasabnormal
values.A systematic approach to interpretation is im
portant,aided byconsistcnt presentationof the informa-
tion.Data in anunusual format can lead to humanerror.
Figure1.28:Two
lymphoblasts in the
circulationofacat with
Variable
Units
stageV lymphoma
(Wright's stain;original
Haemoglobin concentration
g/1
magnification×1000).
Haematocrit (or packed cell volume;
1/1 or%
(AXIOMVeterinary
PCV)
Laboratories.)
Erythrocyte count (RBC)
x1012/1
Mean corpuscular volume (MCV)
Mean corpuscular haemoglobin (MCH)
pg
Mean corpuscular haemoglobin
g/1
leukaemia.Ncoplastic lymphocytes canbe fragile and
concentration (MCHC)
areoftendamagedduringblood film preparation.Thc
Platelet count
x10/1
damagedcellsarereferredtoassmearcells'orbasket
Nucleated RBCs
%
cells’and should be viewed with suspicion when
Total nucleated cell count (WBC)
x109/1
observed in large numbers.
Segmented neutrophils (% and total
x109/1
Infectious inclusions in leucocytcs
count)
Infection by Leishmania spp.,Ehrlichia spp.,
Band neutrophils (% and total count)
x10/1
Hepatozoon spp.or canine distempervirus canlead to
Lymphocytes (% and total count)
x10/1
the presence of recognizable inclusions in leucocytes.
Monocytes (% and total count)
x10°/1
Ehrlichia spp. form cytoplasmic bodies known as
Eosinophils (% and total count)
1/601x
morulae,which occurin monocytes and sometimes
neutrophils.Leishmania spp.parasitize monocytes
Basophils (% and total count)
x109/1
and macrophages but are more often seen in bone
Erythrocyte morphology and comment on count
marrowand lymph node samples thanin blood smears.
Leucocyle morphology and comment on count
Canine distempervirusforms distinctivepurplecyto-
Platelet morphology and comment on count
plasmic inclusions in neutrophils and alsoinRBCs.
Hepatozoon spp.occur as large lozengc-shaped non-
Description of any abnormal cell
staininginclusions thatfillthe cytoplasmofneutrophils.
Figure 1.29:Components of the haematologicalprofile.
Overviewof Haematological DiagnosticTechniques
15
Erythrocytevariablcs
RPI=%reticulocytes x
patient haematocrit
First note the haemoglobin concentration as this is the
species haematocrit
most direct assessment of anaemia.Then check the
haematocrit.If the haematocrit is increased,compare
correction factor
with the erythrocyte numbers and MCV.Gcnuine
Species haematocrit
polycythaemia is unlikely if the erythrocyte numbers
Dog 45%
arewithin thereferencerange.IncreasedMCVis quite
a common cause of an incrcascd hacmatocrit and is
Cat35%
typical of aged samples with erythrocyte swelling.
Correction factors:
Frequcntly,increaseofthehaematocritisduetohaemo
PCV >35% =1
concentration (splenic contraction) or dehydration.
PCV 25-35% = 1.5
Anaemia is present if the haemoglobin concentra-
PCV15-25%=2
tion is below the reference range regardless of the
PCV<15%= 2.5
erythrocyte numbers and the haematocrit,but in the
A rcticulocytc produetion index >2 is indicative
majority of anaemias all three variables will be low.If
of an adequate regenerative response.
anaemiaispresent,attempttoclassifyitbystudyingthe
Figure1.30:Calculationandinterpretationofthereticulocyte
MCV,MCHCand the comments onerythrocytemor
production index(RPI).PCV,packedcell volume.
phology.Many standard texts use thc MCV as the
primaryindex forthe presence orabsence of regenera
tion.hiisurisingincethisvarisunreitabl
TheMCHCisa calculatedvariableexpressing the
with sampleageing,andmanyregencrative anamias
mcan haemoglobin concentration per erythrocyte.
do not have MCVs above reference intervals.
.The
Hypochromic anaemias will have a low MCHC. The
prcscnce or absence of polychromasia in the stained
MCH is a calculatedvariable expressing the mean
smearisamuch morereliable index ofregeneration.If
quantityof haemoglobinpererythrocyteanddoesnot
there is polychromasia, then regeneration is prescnt.
takc into account thevolume of the erythrocyte.Thus
The amountofpolychromasia and thenRBC count
microcyteswill automatically have lowMCHbut may
usuallyreflect the adequacy ofregeneration accurately,
not be hypochromic.
but in occasional cases a reticulocyte count will bc
Carcful assessmentofthemorphology oftheeryth-
needed to provide an objective index of regeneration.
rocytes is of critical importance in the classification of
It isnow customary touse the absolutereticulo-
anaemia.Morphological abnormalities such as the
cyte count for the quantitative assessment of rcgcn-
formation of spherocytes and acanthocytes are highly
eration in dogs and cats.In cats the aggregate
sensitive indicators of underlying diseases such as
reticulocyte count is used toindicate currentregen
immune-mediatedhaemolyticanaemiaandhaemangio-
eration,whereas the punctate reticulocyte count is
sarcoma.The blood film examination also checks the
more indicative of the recent history of regeneration.
interpretivcvalidityofchanges intheRBCindices;for
Reticuloeyte counts above 60 x 10°/1 in dogs and 50
example,iftheMCHCandMCVarelowthenthefilm
x 10°/laggregate rcticulocytes in cats indicate regen
should containmicrocytic hypochromic erythrocytes.
eration.Thedegree of regenerationisapproximately
Erythrocyte morphologyshouldalsobe noted when
proportionaltothe absolutecount,and theadequacy
anaemia is notpresent.Polychromasia and nRBCs
of regeneration is intcrprcted in the context of the
may indicate ongoing mild blood loss,which is bal-
RBCvariables and the clinical features ofeach case
anced by erythrocyteproduction and therefore does
of anaemia.The adequacy of regeneration in any
not decrease the haemoglobinconcentration and PCV
individual case canalsobc asscsscd quantitatively by
below the reference range.The presence of nRBCs in
using the reticulocyte production index (RPI),which
the absence of anaemia may alsobe an indicator of
isaratio examining thereticulocytecount inrelation
splenic or bone marrow disorders.
to the haematocrit (Figure 1.30).
In most regenerative anaemias,MCV is normal or
Automatedplateletcount
high.One exception to this is the special situation of
If the automated platelet count is low,thc tail of the
chronic blood loss in which the patient begins to
blood film should be examinedfor thepresence of
become iron deficient. Such cases will have mixed
platelet clumps,which are a common cause of
pseudothrombocytopenia.Thepresenceoflargeclumps
usually indicates a normal plateletcount.When plate-
ofmicrocytic cells.The MCV in such cases may be
below the reference interval. In non-regenerative
(100x) field indicates adequate platelet nunbcrs in
anaemias MCVis usually normal or low.Rare cases of
dogs.Macrothrombocytesmay alsocause erroneously
non-regenerative anacmia with increased MCV may
low counts.Genuine thrombocytopeniararely causes
be associated with myeloproliferative diseasc, cspe-
the classic signs of petechiation and ecchymoses un-
ciallyFeLV-related disease in cats.
less the count is below 30 x 10°/1.
16
 Manual of Canine and Feline Haematology and Transfusion Medicine
Thronmbocytosis occurs rclatively frcquenlly in
clude hypersensitivity, parasitism, eosinophilic dis-
 both dogs and cats and may be due to several different
eases and syslcmic aslocytosis. Eosinophilic dis-
processes. Mild tlhrombocytosis is often non-specific
eases of importance in dogs include eosinophilic
and seems io bc associated with inflammatory
bronchitis and enteritis. The cat shares these discascs,
processes. In dogs it is also a feature of thie
with hc addition of the cosinophilic granuloma com-
haematological paftern of iron deficiency, and
plex. German Shepherd Dogs often have eosinophil
erythrocyte variables should be checked carefully
counts above the reference range for other breeds. The
for evidence of hypochromia and microcytosis.
 cause of this phenomenon is not known, but the in-
Thrombocytosis is the first change seen in some
crcased cosinophil counts rarely seem to have any
cases of myeloproliferative disease.
clinical importance.
Total lcucocyte count
Stress patterns
Stress leucograms are associated with the influence of
It is important to remember that the leucocyte count is
actually a count of nucleated cells, and large numbers
stress hormones such as caiccholamincs and
of nRBCs can produce an erroncously incrcased count.
 glucocorticoidis. During acute stress, cats may develop
 Ifa high percentage of nRBCs is present, the leucocyte
lymphocytosis and/or neutrophilia, due to cateclio-
count is corrected by the appropriate factor.
lamine release. Lymphopenia may subscqucnly dic-
vclopas aresult of corticosteroid relcasc dluringchronic
Differential leucocyte counts
stress. Dogs are less prone to catecholamine-induced
 Differential leucocyte counts should always be inter-
haematological responses than cats but are more sen-
sitive to glucocorticoids. The caninc strcss leucograml
preted as total counts rather than percentage counts.
 has several patterms. Perhaps the rmost common pattern.
Pcrcenfage counts should be regardcd as a incans for
calculating the total counts, and have little inherent
is absolute eosinopenia, followed by lymphopenia and
then a combination of both. Less frequenuly, dogs can
interpretive value. Each differential leucocyte count
develop quite massive mature neutrophilia in response
shoull first be classified as normal, incrcascd or dc-
creased (e.g. absolute neutrophilia or neutropenia),
to glucocorticoids, and this response may mimic a
then the overall leucocyte pattern can be assessed. The
chronic inflammatory pattern. It is qaite common for
 dogs to have combined inflammatory and stress
major palicrns arc the inlammatory leucogram, the
stress lencogram, the lenkaemoid response, various
leucograms (e.g. neutrophilia with a left shiff, mono.
cytosis, lymphopenia and eosinopenia).
cytopenias and genuine leukaemias. Leucocyte counts
and morpliology must be assessed together.
Cytopenias
The stress leucogram, described above, is the most
Leucocyte patterns
common cause of lymphopenia and eosinupenia.
Neutropenia is a highly significant haematological
Inflammatory patterns
finding. The short intravascular life span of neutrophils
The classic inflammatory pattern is neurrophilia with a.
(7-14 hours) imakes them carly 1narkers of bone marrow
left shift and monocytosis. This pattern is typically seen
dysfunction. The combination of non-regenerative
 in sepsis, severc localizcdinfccions and lissuc nccrosis.
 anaemia, tlrombocytopenia and granulocytopenia is
 Neutrophilia with a left shift but no monocytosis often
terned pancytopenia and is invariably associatcd with
reflects a less well established or inore acute inflanuma-
 severe bone marrow disease. Cytopenias involving
tory process. In longstanding inflanmatory and/or in-
any two cellinesshould also be regarded as suspicious
fectiuus processes such as granulomatous disease and
of bone marrow disease.
draining sinus tracts, the inflammatory pattern may
 Neutropenia is a feature of acute viral infections
evolve into a mature neutrophilia without a left shift but
(e.g parvovirus or distemper). Non-specific reversible
with monocytosis and lymphocylosis. Occasionally hc
 neutropenia occurs quite commonly in dogs with gastro-
only evidence for chronic inflammation is monocytosis.
enteris and is probably associatcd with margination
Regenerative anddegenerative leftshifts and leukaemoid
of neutrophils in the gastrointestinal tract in response
respunses dliscussed are above. The presencc or abscncc
to the presence of local enterotoxins. Neutropenia can
 of the morphological signs of neutrophil toxicity'′ is
also be scen in palienis with scvere degenerative lcfl
critical in patients with inflammatory leucograms be-
shifts due to overwhelming infectious orinflammatory
cause toxicity is quite a reliable marker for the presencc
 processes. Insuch cases neutrophils often exhibit toxic
of underlying bacterial infection. Toxicity is also a
morphology.
significant prognostic factor.
Absoluie cosinophilia is an inflammatory pattern
Lcukaemia
with several different associations. Eosinophilia can
Acute leukaeimia can usually be differentiated from an
be seen as an adjunct to neutrophilia, left shift and
 inflammatory response by the presence of blast cclls in
 monocytosis in non-specific inflammatory processes,
 peripheral circulation, although occasionally leu-
particularly in cats. Other causes of eosinophilia in-
 kaenoid responscs may also have blast cells.
OvcrviewofHacmatological DiagnosticTechniques
17
Genuineleukaemiamayalsopresentarathermono-
tonous leucocyte morphology,often with inappropri-
ate numbersof cells at eachstage of maturation (Figure
1.31).Chronic granulocytic leukaemia can be indistin-
guishablefrom aleukaemoid response onthe basisof
haematological features alone.
REFERENCESANDFURTHER
READING
EksellP,HaggstromJ,KvatCandKarssonA（1994)Thombocytopenia
(a)
in the CavalierKing Charles Spaniel.Journal ofSuallArimai
Practice35,153-155
Gigcr U et al.(200o) Haematology and Immunology Scction In:
TextbookfVriarIalMedicieeddJEtng
and ECFelan,.17841857.WBSauders.Philadla
Jain NC (1993) Examination of he blood and bone marow. In:
EssentisfVerinarHamtologyedndCJan.
19. Lea and Febiger, Philadelphia
Latimer KS (1995) Leukocytes in health and disease. In: Textbook of
Veterinary Internai Medicine,4edn,ed.SJ Etinger and EC
Feldman,pp.1892-1929.WB Saunders,Philadelphia
MeManusPand Craig L (1999) Correlation betwcen leukocytosis and
nccropsy findings in canine immuncmediatcd hacmolyticancmia
mit
(IMHA)patients.Veterinary Pathology 36,484
Tvedten H (1994） The complete blood count and bone narrow
examination:general coments andselected techniques.In:Smal
Aninol ClinicalDiagnosis by Lahoratory Methods2dedn,ed.
MDWillardHTvtnandGwaldp131Baus
Philadelphia
(b)
Tvedten Hand Weiss D(1999) Small Animal Clinical Diagnosis by
Figure I.3l:(a) A monoblastand(b) two monoblasts,one of
LaboraoryMehodsednd.MDWilard,HTdtnand
Turnwald.p.20.wB Saunders,Philadelphia
whichisundergoing mitosis(mit).inthecirculationofa dog
withmonocytic leukaemia(Wright's stain;original
fVeiryMie,4ddIEtngeandC
magnificationx1000).(AXIOMVeterinaryLaboratories.)
Feldman,pp.1864-1891.WBSaunders.Philadelphia
CHAPTERTWO
Collection and Interpretation
of Bone Marrow Samples
DorotheeBienzle
INTRODUCTION
Persistent and unexplained changes in one cell
line
Bone marrowis a complex andhighly specialized
 Decreased cell number (anaemia, neutropenia,
tissue thatgives rise to cells with such discrete func
thrombocytopenia)
tions as distributionofcssentialoxygen,defcncc against
Increased cell number (polycythaemia
microbial agents, confinement of haemorrhage, and
neutrophilia, lymphocytosis, thrombocytosis)
initiationofwoundhealing.Itisauniquetissuewhereby
undifferentiated precursor cclls perpctually gcnerate
Any change affecting more than one cell line, e.g.
myriads of newcells.These cellsmature in an orderly
anaemia and thrombocytopenia,anaemia and
sequence through anintricate environment of cells and
neutropenia
growthfactorstobecomematurefunctional erythro-
Abnormal cellsin circulation:
cytesleucocytes,andlateletsTerminallydifferenti
Rubricytosis in the absence of a responsive
atedcells arereleased into thecirculationwhere they
anaemia
execute theirvariedfunctionsuntil theirpredestined
Left shift (increased immature neutrophils)
short life span hasbeen reached and they areremoved
without neutrophilia or toxic changes
by the haemophagocyticcomponent of the spleen.The
Immature cells of any cell lineage
bone marrowis in a dynamic equilibrium with the
 Mast cells, macrophages, neoplastie, or
requirementsof the animalandcontinually andrapidly
unidentifiable cells
adjusts to variable demands.Impairment of any ele-
ment of the bone marrow has distinct and severe
Fever of unknown origin
clinical manifestations,and lack of a functional mar-
Suspected systemic ehrlichiosis, leishmaniasis or
row is incompatible with life.
nycotic infection
Staging of mast cell tumours,lymphomas or
INDICATIONSFORBONEMARROW
carcinomas
EXAMINATION
Hyperproteinaemia or monoclonal gammopathies
In contemporaryveterinary medicine a haemogram or
that may be associated with multiple myeloma,
complete blood count(CBC)is part of the routine
feline plasmacytoma,ehrlichiosis,leishmaniasis,
evaluationofsmallanimalpatients.Any abnormalities
pyoderma, lymphoma, systemic fungal disease
that arc dctected may be appropriate responses to a
or feline infectious peritonitis
diseasanothertisseuhasanosinophiliat
in some allergic responses or a responsive anaemia
Unexplained hypercalcaemia
secondary tobloodloss.Where deviationsfromrefer-
Figure 2.1:Indicationsforexamination of bonemarrow.
encevaluescannotbeaccounted for,furtherinvestiga-
tion is required. In general,when haematological
or immunosuppressed patients,and softissue trauma
abnormalitiesinan animal cannot becorrelatedwith
should beminimized in animals with coagulation
deficiencies.Sedation,analgesia oranaesthesiashould
be evaluated.Figure 2.1 outlines specific indications
be tailored to the temperament of the patient or com-
for examination of the bone marrow.
pletely omitted in debilitated animals.Although pro
Thedecision to examinebone marrowisusually
found thrombocytopenia may seemtobea
based on findings on the CBC or on potential involve-
contraindication for bonemarrowbiopsy,clinically
ment of the marrow in a systemic disease process.
significant bleeding in such cases is rare. Once an
Contraindicationsforthe procedurearefew and canbe
indicationfor examinationofthebonemarrowhas
addressedwith special precautions:particular attcn-
been established,cssentially the procedure can be
tion should bepaid tosterileprocedure in neutropenic
performed in all patients
20Manual of Canine and Feline Haematology and Transfusion Medicine
COLLECTINGABONEMARROW
SAMPLE
Types of sample
Two types of bone marrow sample can be collected: a
cellular aspirate of the non-adherentbone marrow
elements（these canbe smeared similarly to a blood
smear) or a solid core oftissue consistingofbony
trabeculae,fat and haematopoietic tissue.Thelatter
biopsy requires fixation and processing like other
tissue samples containing bone (Weiss,1987).For
complete evaluation both samples are required, al-
though sometimes a diagnosis may be established
fromacellularaspiratealone.Exceptions arecytopenias
in the blood,which frcqucntly reflect lack of the
corresponding precursor cells in the bone marrow. In
thesecases an aspirate may contain insufficient cellsto
yield a diagnosis,and a bone marrowcorebiopsy is
Figure2.2:DisposableIllinois sternal/iliacbonemarrow
necessary.Similarly,focallesionsorcancermetastases
aspirationneedle(bottom)withstylet(middle),and
are best evaluated by core samples, which should
disposablebonemarrowbiopsy/aspiration needte(top).
ineorporate arcas that are shown as lyticon radio-
graphy in addition to apparently unaffected bone mar-
row.Furthermore,bone marrow disorders such as
myelofibrosis or osteosclerosis frequently preclude
be obtained from this site.For the purposes of this
suceessful aspiration,and thc diagnosis depends on
chaptcr,landmarksforaspiratesfromthepelvis,proxi-
examinationofatissuecore.Onthe otherhand,inves-
mal humerus and femur will be described. Operator
tigation of blood sampleswith abnormal or excessive
familiaritywithoneparticularsiteislikelytobejustas
numbers of cells or the scarch for an infectious organ-
important as the actual origin of the sample.
ism can oftenbeperformed satisfactorilyby cytologi-
The biopsy site is clipped and surgically prepared.
cal examination alone.Finally,inability to aspirate
If the patient is awake,a small area of skin and the
bone marrow may indicate improper needle placement
periosteum at the chosen siteareinfiltratedwith local
or a structural abnormality, and necessitates acquisi-
anaesthetic containing adrenaline (epinephrine), with
tion of a core sample.
a 25 gauge needle.A small skin incision is made with
the tip of a hypodermic needle or with a scalpel blade,
Biopsy needles
and thc bone marrow needle is inserted through the
Figure 2.2 shows the types of needles commonly used
skin.Theedlewitstyletfimly inlace,ss
for collecting biopsy specimens. The large combina-
tioned against bone and then gradually advanced into
tion needles may bc uscd for aspirates as well as
thc marrow cavity using a *drilling’ (forth and back)
biopsies.The smaller needles are less expensive,but
motion and steady pressure.For needle placement into
can be used only for bone marrow aspirates.As solid
thefemurtheanimalshouldbeplacedinlateralrecum-
corticalboneispenetratedforcollectingabonemarrow
bcncy, the greater trochanter palpated and the needle
sample,it is important touse appropriate and sharp
insertedmedial tothe trochanter andparallel to the
needles.A 13 gauge 9 cm(3.5 inch) combined aspira-
shaft of thefemur.Humeral samples are collected by
tion and biopsy needle or a 15 gauge 4.8 cm (1 ′/inch)
palpating the greater tubercle and inserting the needle
aspirationneedle is adequate for most small animal
lateral tomcdial on theflatsurfaccof thecraniolateral
patients,andthedisposabletypescanbesterilizedand
aspect,distal to the greater tubercle.Aspiration from
reused.
theiliac crest is accomplished by making the animal
stand squarcly or placing itin sternal rccumbency
Biopsy techniques
(Tigure 2.3),palpating the crest and introducing the
Active bonemarrowis distributedequally throughout
needleparalleltothe longaxis ofthe wing oftheilium.
the body, and many sites are suitable for collecting
Thewing oftheilumitselfcan bcaspiratedinasimilar
samples (Gulati et al.,1988).In elderly animals the
fashion, keeping the needle angled slightly ventral.
marrowcavity of longbonesismore likely toconsist
The ilium can be aspirated anywhere it is clearly
of fattytissuc,hcncc samplingflat bones such as the
palpablebutbecausetheboneisflattheneedleshould
pelvis or sternum may provide a better yield.Aspirates
be oriented nearlyparallel tothc bonc surface.Needlles
from the costochondral junction may be useful for
and stylets thatare seated properly in bone should feel
evaluationoforganismsinfectingmarrowmacrophages
as if they are cemented in placeand should be
(e.g.Leishmania spp.);however,core saples cannot
difficult to move.
Collection and Interpretation of Bone MarrowSamples
21
Figure2.4:Needle capremoved,styletwithdrawn and
syringeattached.
Figure 2.3:Aspiration needle firmly placed inthewing of
Figure 2.5:Several forceful aspirationswith syringeyield
theiliuinofadoginsternalrecumbencyand diagran
thick sanguineous fluid.
showingplacementof needleindetail.Diagramreproduced
fromAllen(199i) Small Animal Medicinewiththe
permission of LippincoWilliams&Wilkins.
Smear preparation from marrow aspirates
As bone marrow samples clot more quickly than pe-
ripheral blood, equipment for preparing smears should
be ready before a sampleis collected:sixtoeight glass
slidcs on absorbent paper,sterile gloves and asterile
field) and a jar with fixative.
Once the aspiration needle is firmly seated in the
marrow cavity,the stylet is removed (Figure 2.4) and
Figure2.6:Thick drops of bonemarrow are placednear
a 12 ml syringe is firmly attached to the needle hub.
frostededgeofglass slides.
Bone marrow(whichnormallyresembles thick blood)
should appear in thehub of the syringe after several
rapidandforcefulaspirations(Figure 2.5).Whcnabout
0.5ml of bone marrow hasbeen collected,the syringe
isdetached and the stylet replacedin the aspiration
needle which has remained in the bonc marrow.One
large drop of bonemarrowisplaced oneachof about
five glass slides (Figure 2.6).The slides are tilted
sidewaysto45 degreestoallowexcessbloodtorunoff
on to the absorbent paper,leaving marrow particles,
which are adherent to the glass (Figure 2.7).A clean
glassslide isbacked into theremainingbone marrow
and the marrowis allowed to spread along the edge of
the spreader glass slide, which is then swiftly pushed
Figure2.7:Slides aretiltedto allowbloodtorunoffonto
forward toproduceathinsmearwith afeatherededge
absorbent tisse paper,leavingmarrow aticleatahd
(Figure 2.8). Two further smears are prepared by
toglass.
22
Manual of Canine and FelineHaematology and TransfusionMedicine
Figure 2.8:Another glass slide is backed into theremainder
Figure 2.9:Another set of smears is prepared by gently
ofthebonemarrowdrop,andthetopglassslideisswiftly
layingaglassslideatrightanglesacrosstheremainderof
pushedforwardtoproducesmearswithfeatherededges.
thebonemarrowdrop,pullingtheslidesapartandrapidly
Smears are air driedquickly.
drying them in air.
removing excess blood in the same manner,laying a
biopsy needle is completely redirected after aspiration
clean glassslideat right angles ontop of theremaining
or that another site is sampled.The biopsy needle is
drop of narrow (Figure 2.9) and gently pulling the
insertedintobone in the same manner asfor an aspi-
slides apart.All smears should be quickly air dried.
rate.Again,the needle,with stylet in place,is seated
The goal of preparing bone marrow smears is to
firmly in cortical bone.The stylet is removed and the
conccntratethemarrowcomponentsand toremove
needle is advanced with a gentledrilling’motion and
much of the contaminating blood. Rapid drying of
steady pressure.The sharp edge of the biopsy nccdlc
smearsgreatly preservescytologicalfeatures.Because
cuts acylinderoftissue consistingofthin bony spicules
thesamlelotquicklyedisssentialandpr
with interspersedmarrow.Once theneedlehasbeen
ration of all the smears should take lessthan one minute.
advanced about 2.5 cm (a little less in cats and small
Alternatively,thebonemarrowneedle and syringemay
dogs and more in large dogs),the needle is moved
berinsedwith10%ethylenediamine tetra-acetic acid
swiftly sidewaysafewtimestobreakoffthe distalpart
(EDTA),or the whole aspirate may be mixed with
of the core biopsy and is then retracted.Biopsy nccdles
EDTAin a3ml tubebeforepreparing the smears
have tapered tips to retainthe core inside thelumen of
A satisfactory aspirate is characterized by the pres-
theneedle asitiswithdrawn.Toretrieve thespecimen
cnce of small granules,which areparticularlyvisible
with minimal distortion, thebluntended (probe) part of
afterexcessblood has been drainedofftheslide.These
the biopsy needle should bc inscrted in a rctrogradc
are the marrow particles.Fat globules are frequently
fashion and the core should becarefullypushed from
noted and are a normal component ofbone marrow
the tapered endbackwards to thehub of theneedle
aspirates.Inability to aspirate bone marrowis often
(Figure 2.10). If an aspirate was not obtaincd,thc corc
due tobone ormuscle fragments occluding theneedle
maybe gently rolled on a glass slidefor a cytological
or the needlebeing lodged in cortical bone.Retracting
imprint,andthenplacedinbuferedformalinorfreshly
the needle a small distance may permit sample collec-
prepared B-5 fixative.Formalin provides adcquatc
tion.Alternatively,the needle should be removed,
fixation,but B-5 fixative is preferable for optimal
inspected for blockage and clots and reinserted,with
histological preparation (Weiss,1987).An adequate
stylet firmlyinplace,ata different site.Myelofibrosis
bone marrow core should be at least 1.5 cm long,
or certain neoplasms involving the bone marrowmay
prefcrably 2.5 cm (Figure 2.11).If onlya smallsample
preclude successful aspiration,yielding hypocellular
is obtained,another core specimen should be col-
smears despite a hypercellular marrow.
lected.Allslidesandbiopsysamplesshouldbelabelled
Air-dried smears may be either submitted to a
and submitted.
laboratory forstaining andevaluation by apathologist
or stained dircctly. Romanowsky-type stains are most
Figure2.10:
Bonemarrow
core in lumen
adequate staining in many instances. Smears of bone
ofbiopsy
marrow arc gcnerally of sufficicnt ccllularity to re-
needleis
quire prolonged exposure to stain or two staining
pushedout
backwardswith
cycles in an automated stainer.
the blunt stylet
tominimize
Obtaining a core biopsy
distortionofthe
Asmarrow architecture is distorted in the immediate
sample.
vicinityofan aspirate,itisimportant that either the
Collection and Interpretation of BoneMarrowSamples
23
megakaryocyteshaveincreased cytoplasmicvolume
show more eosinophilic staining and have a granular
cytoplasm. On average 5-10 megakaryocytes are as-
sociated with a particlc,although occasionally
megakaryocytes are present only at the feathered edge
ofasmear.Accurate estimates of megakaryocytenum-
bers are best derived from biopsy specimens,as the
variable cellularityof aspiratesmay preclude objective
evaluation.Megakaryocyte hyperplasia is commonly
observedwithimmune-mediatedthrombocytopenia
(IMT) (Lewis and Meyers,1996) whereas a lack of
megakaryocytes has been reportedin cases ofIMT
Figure 2.1l:Normal bonemarrowcore appears red and
should measure at least 1.5cm.
where the immune response is thought to be directed
againstbothplatelets andtheirprecursorsinthemarrow
Inconclusion,acompletesubmissionforexamina-
(Williams andMaggio-Price,1984).Iron stains dark
tionof bonemarrow consists ofanexacthistory,three
brown toblackwithWright'sstain and should be
to six prepared smears, a bone marrow core and a
evident onmarrow smearsfrom adult dogs,butnot
concurrentbloodsampleforaCBC.Thehistoryshould
cats. Lack of stainable iron is a consistent finding in the
include details on drugs,physicaland laboratoryfind
marrow of animals with iron deficiency (Weekset al.,
ings and previous or current illness.
1987). Increased iron stores have been associated with
anaemia of chronic disease.Finally, an area of the
smearwherethecellsarespreadapart,usually thetail
INTERPRETATION OFBONE
ofa particle,should beselected forcloserexamination.
MARROWSAMPLES
High magnification
Proficicnt interpretation of bone marrow samples re-
Normal erythropoiesis and myelopoiesis are charac
quires a thorough knowledge of haematopoiesis, the
terized by a predominance of the maturing stages of
stages of cell development, and different disease ro
cell development. Granulocyte maturation proceeds
cesscs.Thc skillrequired for accurate interpretation of
bone marrow is difficult to acquire with only occa-
sionalpractice.Practitionerswantingtoexaminesmears
Low magnification
themsclvcs are advised to seek confirmation from
Assess adequacy of specimen
Detailed description of interpretative principles is
Estimate cellularity of marrow particles
beyond the scopeof this text;however,basic concepts
Estimate megakaryocyte numbers and maturity
and deviationsfrom nornal findings arereviewed.
Assess iron stores
To evaluate bone marrow samples accurately,
Identify areas for further examination
smears must be examined ina systematic and consist-
ent manner.All normal marrow componcnts are as-
High magnification
sessed sequentially,changes are described,nusual
Assess erythroid and myeloid numbers,
elements arenoted and then a composite interpretation
 morphology and synchronicity of maturation
and correlation withthe hematological and clinical
Determine myeloid to erythroid ratio
picture are formulated.Figure 2.12 outlines the princi-
ples of interpretation.
Identify other cell types: plasma cells,
lymphocytes, histiocytes
Low magnification
Identify abnormal cells: mast cells, neoplastic
An adequate marrow smear should have several parti
cells
cles and areas where the cells are sufficiently spread
Identify infectious agents: fungal elements,
out to enable morphology to be evaluated. Marrow
Ehrlichia spp.
particles from young animals are very cellular, but
Assess the presence of myelofibrosis, necrosis
with age thcre is progressive replacement of the active
and inflammation
marrowwithfat:particlescontaining25-75%cellsare
considered normal for adult animals,whereas those
Interpretation
containing 80-90%fat are typical forhealthyelderly
Correlate bone marrow with results from the
animals (Weiss, 1986). On smears prepared with
complete blood count, and with other physical
Wright's stain megakaryocytes are readily identifiable
and laboratory findings
as giantmultinucleatedcelis,whichhavea darkbaso
philic cytoplasm if young.With progressive maturity
Figure 2.12:Evaluation of honemarrow smears.
24
4Manual of Canine andFelineHacimatology and TransfusionMedicine
fromundlifferentiatedroundmyeloblastswithnucleoli
to promyelocytes containing azurophilic granules to
myelocytes with gradually decreasing nuclearsize and
incrcasing chromatin condensation.Metamyelocytes
have indented nuclei that progress to become band
shaped and eventually segmented as in mature
neutrophils (Figure 2.13). The three stages of
metamyeloeytesandband andseginented neutrophils
normally comprise70-80%of all cells in themyeloid
series and are the maturing stages of myelopoiesis.
Myeloblasts,promyclocytes andmyclocytes are able
to undergomitosis and therefore constitute theprolif-
eratingcomponent.Developmentfrom rubriblast to
Figure 2.15:Bone marrow smear of myeloid hyperplasia
metarubricyte is distinguished by a progressive de-
witha predominanceofthematuring stagesand an
crease incell size,lossof cytoplasmiebasophilia,and
increasedmyeloidto erythroid ratioas seenin chronic
suppurativedermatitis.Scatteredplasma celisandrubricyles
increased haemoglobin synthesis,imparting the char-
areohserved.
acteristic pinkcolour ofmature redcells(Figure2.14).
Thenucleusgradually condenses and is cxtruded from
metarubricytes before the polychromatophilic eryth-
Anappropriatemarrowresponsetoperipheraltissue
rocytestageandexitfromthemarrow.Whererubricytes
demand for increasedneutrophils or erythrocytes is
andmetarubricytes comprise about 90%of all cryth-
characterizedby an overall increase in the proportionof
roid cellswith the later stages predominating,this
theparticularcellline,concurrentwithretainedorderly
indicates synchronicity of maturation. The ratio of
maturation and a predominancc ofmaturing stages
myeloidtonucleatederythroidcells(M/Eratio)ranges
(hypcrplasia). Therefore, the marrow of a dog with a
from 3:1 to 5:1 in hcalthy dogs and cats.
responsive anaemia has a decreasedM/Eratio and an
absolutencreaseinrythroidcellsbutapredominance
of late stagerubricytes.A chronic inflarmmatory disease
with suppurationsuchaspyodermancreasestheM/E
ratioby stimulatingincreasedneutrophil production,
albeit that most of the granuloeytes will be
mctamyelocytes andband andsegmentedneutrophils
(Tigure 2.15). However, early recovery from a non-
specific cytotoxic insult to the bonc marrow (canine or
feline parvoviral infction,chemotherapy orradiatin
consists ofincreased proportions of immature forms
that are easily mistaken for a neoplastic process. My-
eloidcellswillbemost affectcd,asthelonger life span
ofred cells entails a slowerrate ofproduction.In these
surroundingarubriblast.Roundnuclei,aprominent nucleolus
cases,resamplingbone marrow afteroneweek should
andlackofgranulescharacterizemyeloblasts.Promyelocytes
indicateaprogressivereturnloorderlymaturation,with
have azurophilicgranuleswhereasmyelocytegranules are
poorlyvisible.Metamyelocyteshaveindentednucleithat
accumulation of late erythroid andmyeloid cells.
Pure red cell aplasia is characterized by profound
progresstobecomebandshapedandeventuallysegmented.
anaemia,near complete lack of crythroid cells in the
bonemarrow,normalmyelopoiesisandthrombopoiesis
and a profoundly increased M/Eratio.Aplastic anae-
mia,however,manifests as a reduction in all cellular
elements.andcommonlyonlyreticularcellsandplasma
cellsareobserved inthe bone marrow(Figure 2.16).In
myelofibrosis, proliferation of the stromal compo-
nents inthebonemarrow,withexcessive productionof
extracellularmatrix,leadstogradualdestructionofthe
normal haematopoietic space.Myelofibrosis may ac-
company or precede ncoplastic diseases of the bone
marrow (Blue,1988) or may occur subsequent to
chronically stimulatederythropoiesis in some cases of
Figure2.14:Bonemarrow smeurwitherythroid maturation
severe haemolytic anaemia Reagan,1993).Aspirating
stages.Increasingnuclear condensationand acquisitionof
anorangecytoplasmiccolour concurren withhuemoglobin
marrowin these instances is difficult orimpossible,and
synthesis indicatesprogressive maturity inrubricytes.
the diagnosis is based on histopathological findings.
Collectionand Intcrprctation ofBoncMarrowSamples
25
Figure 2.16:
In contrast,chronicleukaemiasfrequentlyresem-
Histological section
ble an overaccumulation ofmorphologically benign
ofaplastic anaemia
and relativelymaturecells.Changes onthe haemogram
inacatwithlackof
haematopoietic
consist of amoderate tonoticeable increasein cellsof
precursor cells.
the neoplastic lineage,and possibly mild anaemia,
Reticular and
ncutropenia or thrombocytopenia.A bone marrow
plasma celis are
aspiratemaybedifficult toobtain in caseswhere the
present.
core biopsy
nevertheless shows profound
hypercellularity.Morphologically,maturation of the
affected cell line may be synchronous;however,the
M/E ratio will benoticeablyincreased owing to an
Neoplasms of haematopoieticcells
absolute increase in cells of the neoplasticlineage.
Neoplasms of the haematopoietic cells are broadly
Granulocyticandlymphocyticleukaemias(Figure2.19)
divided into acute and chronic leukaemias(Jain et al.,
with gradual progressionhave been described insmall
1991).Generally,acute leukaemias manifest with pro-
animals.Most chronic lymphocytic leukaemias in
found cytopenias in the peripheral blood, and bone
dogs morphologically are large granular lymphocytes
marrowaspirateshave apredominanceofimmature
(LGL)and express a T-cell receptor (Vernau and
(blast)cellsFigure2.17)that are ifficult oclassifyby
morphological criteria.Remnants of normal haemato-
count ofmore than30%in thebloodorbonemarrow
poiesis may be present, and the M/E ratio may be
indicates an acute leukaemia,whereas a count of less
normal,but the synchronicity ofmaturation of the
than 30% in the bonemarrow suggests chronic lcuk-
neoplastic cell line will be severely disturbed.
aemia,myelodysplastic syndrome or a leukaemoid
Immunophenotypically,most canineacute leukaemis
reaction(Jain el al.1991).Compared with humans,
seem tobcofgranulocyticorigin(Figure2.18),followed
however,dogs and cats generally present at a later
bylymphocyticandundifferentiatedllcukacmias(Vernau
stage of the disease process,and distinctionofacute
and Moore,1999).In most cases special cytochemical
from chronicleukaemia may be difficult.Survival
orimmunochcmical stains or electronmicroscopy are
times exceeding fourycars havebeenreported indogs
required to identify the origin of the ncoplasm.The
with chronic lymphocytic leukaemia treated with
prognosis foracute leukaemias in small animalsisgrave.
chemotherapy (Leifer and Matus,1986;Vernau and
Mo0re,1999)
Figure2.17:Bonemarrow smearwithprofound
hrypercellularityconsistingofimmatureblastcells.Theog
had acute leukaemiaandmanifestedwithpancytopeniain
the haemogran.
Figure2.19:Bonemarrow smearwith predominant small
lymphocytessimilarinsizetoredcels.Thereisarelatve
paucityofmyeloid anderythroidprecursors.The dog had
chronic lymphocytic leukaemia andonlymildanuemia.
Erythremicmyelosis and polycythaemia
Erythremicmyelosis is a neoplastic prolifcration of
rubricytes observedin catsinfectedwith felineleuk-
aemia virus (FcLV) presenting with a rubricytosis
withvariableleucopeniaandthrombocytopenia.Bone
marrow simears indicate profoundly disturbed eryth-
Figure 2.18:Higher magnification of Figure 2.17.Most of
roid maturation, granulocytopenia and severely de-
thecellsareblastswitha small perinuclearclearing(Golgi
zone).Twocellsare inmitosis andnormal haematopoietic
creasedM/Eratios.Chronic tissuehypoxia andectopic
elements are severelyreduced.
production of erythropoietin result in physiological
26
Manual of Canine andFeline Haematology and TransfusionMedicine
and parancoplastic polyeythaemia,respectively.The
Lymphoma
peripheral blood picture is characterized bypersist-
Lymphoma in the doghasbeenreported toinvolve the
entlyincreasedredcellcountsandconcomitanteryth
bone marrowin about50%of cases,regardless of the
roidhyperplasia in the bone marrow.Primary
histological type (Raskin and Krehbiel,1988).There-
polyeythacmia vera is.howcvcr,a neoplastic proli-
forc, staging of dogs with lymphoma includes assess-
feration of either erythrocytes or all mature bone
ment ofbonemarrowinvolvementand should ideally
marrow elements,independent of erythropoietin
bebased on histologicalevaluation of core biopsiesin
stimulation (Khanna and Bienzle,1994).In the latter
order to detectfocalinvolvcment and architectural
case, the bone marrow is profoundly hypercellular
changes. Concurrentevaluation oftheprimary tumour
owing to a relatively synchronous increase in all
helps to identify neoplastic lymphocytes as a small
cell lineages(Figure 2.20),which is reflected by an
numberof benignlymphocytcs arc common innorimal
increasedhaematoerit andgranulocytosis and throm-
haematopoietictissue. Low-grade diffuse involvement
bocytosis in the blood.The myelodysplastic syn-
of the marrow in lymphoma is difficult to detect,and
drome encompasses a variety of abnormal
the clinician ought to beaware that morphological
evaluation ofonemarrowbiopsyis not a sensitive
penia with abnormal cell maturation,myelofibrosis
indicator of neoplastic involvement.
and a blast cell count of less than 30% in the bone
marrow (Jain et al.,1991). The syndrome occurs
Mastcell tumours
prcdominantlyinFeLV-infected cats,andfrequently
Mast cell tumours in the dogmay metastasize via the
precedes acute leukaemia (Blue,1988).
haemolymphatic systemto thebonemarrow(Rogers,
1996).Buffy coat smears andbone marrow aspirates
Figure 2.20:
are commonly examined todetect systemicmalignant
Histological
mastocytosis.Morphologically indistinguishable be-
section of
nignmastocytosis may,however,occurinavarietyof
lryperceltular
non-neoplastic conditions (Bookbinder et al.,1992;
bonemarrow
Walker et al,1997）.Hence,a diagnosis of metastatic
froman
1l-year-old
mastcell tumourmust bebased on the detection of
catwith
clusters of mast cells in bonc marrow biopsies or
polyeythaemia
aspirates in the absence of inflammatory diseases such
vera.All
as dermatitis or enteritis,which have been associated
haemopoietic
elementsare
with benign mastocytosis(Figurcs 2.21 and 2.22)
present,and the
myeloidto
Figure 2.21:Bone
erythroidratio
marrowsmear
was.3:1.
showingtwomast
cells(arrowed)
and myeloid cells.
Non-haematopoietic neoplasms in the bone
This sample
marrow
originated froma
dogwitha
Multiple myeloma
cutaneousmast
Clonal proliferation of immunoglobulin-producing
cell tumour.
plasmacellsin the bone marrow,with a monoclonal
gammopathy and lytic bone lesions,characterizc
most forms of multiplc mycloma (Matus et al.,1986).
The diagnosis of the neoplasm is based on identifying
Figure 2.22
Histological
clusters of monomorphic plasma cells in aspirates or
sectionfromthe
core biopsics from lytic bone lesions,the presence
casedescribedin
of monoclonal immunoglobulin in serum,or
Figure 2.21
monoclonal light chains in urine.Haematologically
showingfociwith
normal animals may have5%to10%plasma cells in
increasedcellular
density consisting
the marrow,and increased proportions of plasma
ofmast cells.The
cellshave been observed in myelofibrosis,anaemia
doghadmast cell
of rcnal failure, and aplastic anacmia (Weiss, 1986).
tumoursinthe
In cases of anaemia of renal failure and aplastic
bonemarrow.The
anaemia,however,the plasma cells are morphologi
extentofthe
metastatic process
cally mature and dispersed throughout the marrow,
wasnot apparent
and lytielcsions arc not obscrved.
on aspirates.
Collection and Interpretation of Bone Marrow Samples
27
Histiocytosis
REFERENCES AND FURTHER
The bone marrow commonly is involved in proliferative
READING
diseases of histiocytic cells. Clusters of large vacu-
olated, frequently multiucleaterl, cells with pagocy-
apus sedspax a s u ssoqao (asr) r ang
and acute myclogenous leukenia.Veterinary Pahology 25,
 tosed red cells or haemosiderin in the bone marrow and
154-160
othcr tissues are characteristic of malignant histiocyto-
Bookiinder PF、 Butt MT and Harvcy HJ (1992) Determnination of the
sis. This dlisease must be distinguished from the
cytological specimens frotn dogs. Journal af zhe Americaa
 haemophagocytic syndrome, which is a rare prolifera-
Verernary Medical Asseciation 200, 1648-1650
 tion of morphologically normal histiocytes observed in
Duncan JR, Prasse KW and Mahaffey EA (1994) IIematopoietic
neoplasm3. In: Veterinary Laborarory Medieine, 3" edn, cd. JR
association with systenic infcctious discases (Walten el
Duneun, Kw Prassc and EA Malhaffey, Pp 63-73. Iowa State
al., 1996). Whereas malignant histiocytosis has a rap-
Uiversity Prcss, Anes
Gtindem CB (19s9) Bone marow biopsy and cvaluation.Veterinary
idly progressive disease course, the haermophagocytic
Clhics of North America 19, 669-696
syndrome may spontaneously resolve. Histiocytic hy-
Gulati GL, Ashon IK and Hyun BII (198s) Struchute and function of
perplasia is observed in rmycatic, protozoal or mycobac-
thcbanc marowand henatopoiesis, Hemgiology/Oncology Clhtics
 terial infections that induce granulomatous inflammation,
of Norrh America 2,495-511
Jacols RM and ValliVEO (1988) Bone marrow biopsics: principles and
 and in storage diseases resulting in cytoplasmic accu-
Jerspectives of interpretation. Serirars in Veterinary Medieine
mulation of non-degradable metabolic products.
wd Sargery 3, 176-182
Jain NC, Blue JT, Grinden CB, Harvey JW, Kocia GJ, Krehbiel JD,
Latimer KS, Raskin RE, Thrall MA and ZinkI JG (1991) Proposed
Metastatic carcinomas
criteria for classification of acue myeloid lcukemia in dlogs and
Lastly, neoplasms of epithelial origin may metastasize
cats. Veterinary Clinica! Parology 20, 63-82
Klhanna C and Bicnzlc D (1994) Polycythcmia vera in a cal: bone
to the bone marrow, although this seems lo be an
marrow culture in erythropoietin-deficicnt mcdiun. Journal ofrhe
infrequent or a clinically inapparent occurrence in
American Animai Hospitat Associaton 30, 45-49
 animais. Clusters of adherent non-haematopoieticcells
Leifer CE and Matus RE (i986) Chronie lyuphweytie leukemia in the
dog: 22 cases (1974-1984]. Journa! f he Amerien Vererinary
in smears or histological sections of marrow suggest
MediealAssociation89,214217
metastatic carcinoma. The prognostic significance of
Lewis DCand Meyers KM(1996)Caninc idiopathic hrombocytopenia
parpura. Journal of Veterinary fterna Medicie 10,207-218
netastatic carcinomas is undetermined for most small
Matus RE,LeigerCE,MacEwen EG and HurvitzAI(198G) Proghostic
 animal neoplasms.
factors for multiple myeloma in the dog. Jowrnat of rhe Americat
 Involvement of the bone marrow in metastatic neo-
Veterinary Medical Associarion I88, 1288-1292
plasia affects prognosis and treatment. Most attempts to
marow in malignant lymphoproliferative disorders. Veierinary
diagnose metastasis rely solely on morphological iden-
Pethology25.83-88
Reagan WI (1993) A review of myelofibrnsis in dugs. Torieologiea?
tification of neoplastic cclls and tlus are liuniltcd by the
Parhelogy 21. 164-169
size of the sample, the relative presence of the neoplastic
Rogers KS (i996) Mast cell rumors. Vererinary Clinies of North!
 cell population and the expertise of the pathologist.
America 26, 87-102
Vernau W and Moore PF (1999) An imamunoplcnorypic sturly of canine
Ncwcr diagnoslic methods that are currently nol rou-
leukemias and prelitminary asscssmcnt of clonality by polymerasc
tinely available such as immunostaining and assessment
chainrcaction.Vererinaryhnmmofogyunfruruopaihoiogy 69,
 of immune receptor clonality or chromosomal abnor-
145-164
Walker D, Cowell RL, Clinkenbeard KD, Feder B and Meinkolli IH
malities, will greatly aidin deriving anaccurate diagnosis.
onsele m shop ni eselodau nn sur ao amg (a)
anenia.Veterinry Clmical Pathology 26,106.111
Wallon RM, Modiano I, Wheeler S and Thrall MA (1996) Bone
SUMMARY
narrow cytological fiudings in 4 dogs and a cat with
hernophagoeytic syndrome. Journal of Veterinary fnternal
Examination of thc bone marrow is an essential tool in
Medicine 10, 7-13
thc diagnosis of most haematological dliseases, and aids
Wecks BR, Smith JE and Northrop JK (1987) Relationship of serum
feritinandironconcenrationandscrumtotaliton-bindingcapacity
in the assessinent of rmany other systemic and neoplastic
to nonhemc iron stores in dogs. Americun Journat of Vererinary
conditions. Proviling adcquate specimens is pararmcunt 
Research 50,198-200
WcissDJ (I98o) Histopathology of cauinenon-neoplastiebonemurTuw.
 d pe  an o
Veterinary Clinicut Puthotogy I5, 7-1
must be inferpreted in conjunction with physical and
Weiss DI (1987) A review of the lechnigues for yreparation of
laboratory lata, and with the peripheral blood pichure.
histepatlologic sections of bone marow. Veterinary Cliricei
Pathology 16, 90-94
Communication between the clinician and the patholo-
Williams DA and Maggio-Price L (l984) Canine idiopathic
 gist is an invaluable component in deriving a diagnosis
thrombocytopenic purpura: clinical observations and long-tcrm
Follow-upin54cascs.JonrnioftheAmeriean Vererinary Medicai
from a bone marrow sample.
Associarion 185, 660-663
CHAPTERTHREE
Anaemia
Jenny Mills
INTRODUCTION
RED CELLPRODUCTION
Anaemia is a common clinical and laboratory tcst
Theprocess oferythropoiesisinvolves the threebasic
finding,whichinitself doesnotconstitutea diagnosis.
componentsfstemcellytokinesandanappropriat
The ultimate aim for theveterinarypractitioner is to
microenvironment.The latterincludesfactors such as
determine the pathogenesis of the anaemiain orrler to
supplyfoxygen,nutrintsironand amino acidsg
deliverthemostappropriatetherapyforthepatient and
ure 3.1). In adult nammals,crythropoiesis proceeds
toinstigatestepsthatmayprevent the conditionoccur-
within thebonemarrowunder theinfluence of specific
ring again.
cytokinewhichactdirectlyonsurfacereceptorsofthe
This chapter looks at ways of unravelling the
erythroid sten cclls: BFU-E (burst-forming unit
enigma of anacmia in dogs and cats. Steps are
erythroid) and CFU-E (colony-forming unit-eryth-
described to diagnose the pathogcnesis of anaemia
roid).These cytokines include interleukin 3,“burst-
in a patient. The astute diagnostician uses various
foriming activity’and erythropoietin.The effect of
clinicaland laboratory cluesfromthehaematological
erythropoietin is to increase thenumber of committed
report and the blood film to arrive at a useful
erythroidstemcells,toenhance the survivalofdevelop-
pathological diagnosis of the underlying problem.
ing erythroid cells,to promote the release of maturing
If the initial blood test is not fully revealing,
red cells and to ultimately incrcase the number of red
the clinician mayneedto undertake further tests
cells produced by the bone marrow.The effect of
to achieve a more definitive diagnosis. This
crythropoietinonstemcellsismodulated andenhanced
chapter describes the process of investigation of
byotherhormonessuchasandrogcns,thyroxine,growth
anaemia.
hormone,corticosteroids and prostaglandins E,and E
Figure3.l:Three essentialcomponents
Marrow Production
requiredforhaematopoiesisarestem
cells,cytokinesandanappropriate
marrowmicroenvironment.Thelustmay
consist of anadequate supplyofoxygen
Stem cells
andrientssuchasironaninoacids
glycine andvitamins B12,B6and folate.
Thenutrientsrequired forred.cell
productionmaybeconsideredintwo
categories,thoseneeded fornucleotide
synthesis and thosefor haemoglobin
synthesis.Theendroductmaturered
cells,arethenreleasedintote
peripheralbloodcirculation by
migrationthroughvascular sinusoids.
Cytokines
Marrow
microenvironment
30
Manual of Canine and Feline Haematology and Transfusiom Mcdicine
Othcr factors act to inhilbit erythropoiesis by
The regenerative response
down-regulating the expression of receplors on the
The physiological limit on the extent of the bone
surface of the erythroid stem cells. Suppressive
     s  
factors inelude interleukin l and turnour necrosis
cightfold or even tenfold increase in red cell produc-
faclor (TNF), both of which are releascd from
tion. The greatest regenerative responses are seen with
 macrophages during inflammation. Oestrogen and
haemolytic anaenia (six- to cightfold increase), and
prostaglandin F2。 also suppress crylhropoiesis. In
1moderate rcgcncrative responses are usually seen with
cats, the pl5E component of the feline lcukacmia
haemorrhagic anaemia (two- to fourfold incrcase).
virus also acts to inhibit erythropoiesis.
Exceptions do, lhowever, occur. Anaemias seen within
3 to 4 days after blood loss or haenolysis will show no
signs of regeneration in peripheral blood, because of
DEFINITION OF ANAEMIA
the 4-day production time for red cells. Such condi-
tions are termed prercgenerativc. An absencc of
Anaemia is defined as a situation in which the total
reticulocytes in an ongoing alaemia indicates n defect 
erytliron mass in peripheral blood is depleted below
leference values for aninals of the same spccies that
in production and warrants further investigaticn. The
degree of polychromasia and the reticulocyte count are
are of similar age. The three basic variables of the
used to assess thc extent of the regenerative response
erythron that determine whether an animal is anaenic
of the erythron, subjectively and objectively, respec-
arc haemoglobin, packcd cel volume (PCV) or hae-
tively. The reticulocyte count is detcrmined by using a
matocrit and red blood cell (RBC) count.
 ln interpreting any laboratory valucs, an awareness
supravital stain and by quantifying those red cells tha.
contain blue-staining RNA in a reticular network. This
of factors thal influence the results is needcd. Of the
is usually done manually, but somc haematological
variables above, RBC count is likely to be the least
instruments have the capacily to quantify these cells
accurate because of the method of imcasurement. The
directly. The percentage reticulocyte count is then
cunccntration of haemoglobin will be falsely high in
compared to, and adjusted for, the dlegree of anaemia,
lipaemic samples. Haemoglobin concentration, PCV
and conclusions are dlrawn on the adequacy ofthe bonc
and RBC count will be affected by the total plasma
volumc of thc animal. Dchydrated animals will have a
marrow response to the anaemia.
The degree of response is represcnted by the cor-
contracted plasma volume and therefore may show
rected reticulocyte count, Thc most reliable method af
haemoconcentration and high erythron values. If the
cxpressing this count is to calculate the absolute reticu-
resting erythron values were originally low, a dehy-
dratcd animal rnay havc a masked anaemia, with the
centage by the total RBC count. This calculation
contracted plasma volume masking the measurement
expresses the response per umit volume of whole blood
of low haenmoglobin concentration, PCV or RBC count
to the cxtenf that these variables may fall within
value. The normal absolute reticulocyte count fora dog
reference range.
is about 60 x 10/1. Increases to 360 x 10°/l will
Anaemia may be relative or absolute. In relative
therefore represent a sixfold increase in erythroid
anaermia, therc is a norinal total red cell mass but an
production in the bone marrow.
expanded plasma volunie. Examples of relative anaemia
Cats differ from dogs in that they may have pume.
 are haemodilution after administration of intravenous
tate reticulocytes, as well as normal aggregate or
fluids ancd sequcstration of rel cells due to splenomegaly.
reticular forms. The punctate forrms represent aged
In absolute anaemia the total red cell mass is decreased
reticulocytes, but unly the aggregate forms should be
whife the plasma volume is normal. The remainder of
 counted when assessing the regenerative response.
this chapter deals only with absolute anaemia.
Red cefl indices
Red cell indices define the quality of the red cells
VARIABLES THAT CHARACTERIZE
ANAEMIA
and average red cell haemoglobin content (MCHC). In
Once the presence of anaemia is cstablished from thc
a very regenerative rcsponse, a macrocytie (high MCV)
primary hacmatological examination, the first step in
hypochromic (low MCHC) population of red cels is
 defining the pathophysiology of the problem involves
expected. Microcytic (low MCV) hypoclhromic (low
assessing:
MCHC) populations, howevcr, are likely to occur in
 conditions of defective haemoglobin synthesis such as
 The regenerative response, reticulocyte count 
iron deficiency.
 Red cell indices; mean corpuscular volume
Macrocytosis may also bc secn in myclodysplasia
(MCV) and mean corpuscular haemoglobin
in cats, in association with the administration of
concentration (MCHIC)
 antiepileptic drugs, and rarely in some Poodles (toy
· Red cell morphology on a blood simear.
 aud miniature brecds) as a dyscrasia rescmbling
Anaemia
31
vitaminB12 and folate deficiency in humans.The
condition in Poodles docs not require treatment.
Microcytosis may be seen normallyin theJapanese
Akita and Shiba Inu breeds of dog and in some dogs
with portosystemic shunts.
Production
Red cell morphology
Red ccll morphology is evaluated by examination of a
stained blood smear.Any changes in shape from the
classic biconcave discareidentifiedandsemiquantifiedl
and may lead to a specific diagnosis or interpretation
(a)Normalstatus
(Figure 3.2). Comparcd with red cells from a dog those
fromacataresmaller,notasbiconcave and showless
central pallor on smears.
Feature
Interpretation
Production
Large numbers of
Immune-mediated
spherocytes
haemolysis
Increased
Schistocytes
Intravascular red cell
destruction or
(fragmented cells)
injury
increased los
Keratocytes (horn
Intravascular red cell
shapes)
injury
(b)Haemorrhage orhaemolysis
Heinz bodies
Heinz body haemolysis,
oxidant injury
Dacryoeytes
Iron deficiency,
(tear-drop shape)
myelofibrosis
Echinocytes (burr cell)
Renal azotaemia,
chemotherapy
Acanthocytes (spur
Splenic ncoplasia, liver
Production
cells)
disease, etc
Figure3.2:Examples of changes inred cell morphology
fromtheclassic biconcavediscand theirinterpretation.
(c)Production defect
Figure3.3:Anaemia occurs when there isun imbalance
hetween production and loss of redcells.(a)Normal status.
ERYTHRONDISORDERSWITHOUT
（h）Withhaemolysisorhaemorrhage,therateofloss orysis
usuallyexceedstherateofincreaseinproductionforatime,
ANAEMIA
before equilibrium isrestored.(c)With production deficits,
suchasaplasticnuemia,theraieoflossisnormalbut
Anaemia occurs whcn the rate of red cell loss or
exceeds therateofproduction.
destruction exceeds the rate ofred cellproduction
(Figure 3.3).
Changes in red cell production and/or loss may
ciatedwithnormal erythronvalucs,bcfore anaemia
Occur without significant reductions inPCV,haemo-
develops.This condition will be described latcr. Ex-
globin concentration or RBC count. Compensated
amples in this category are lead poisoning,folic acid
anaemia maybe seeninsomehaemolyticstateswhere
and vitamin B12 deficiencies and iron deficiency.
therate of production matches therate of red cell
The spleen plays a rolein thered cellife eyclc,in
destruction.In these cases,there are obvious signs of
thatinmost domesticanimalspeciesitcontainsnarrow
erythroid rcgeneration in the peripheral blood,with
vascularsinusoidsthrough whichtheredcellstraverse
highlevels of reticulocytes andpossibly some mor-
(Figure3.4).Senescentred cellslosetheirdeformability
phological change in the red cells. Examples of this
and consequently are phagocytosedby macrophages
have beenrcportedwithimmune-mediatedhaemo-
in the splcen.In this way the spleen acts as therubbish
lysis(Mills,1997)andinanhereditary defectinthered
sorter’ of blood, removing other particles such as
cells of a dog (Mills and Marsden,1999).
Howell-Jolly bodies or nuclei of immature red cells.
Defects inbone marrowproduction and disorders
Consequently,enlargement of the spleen for any
affecting the haemoglobinization process,whichlead
reasoncan traporsequesteroreredcelscontru
toineffectiveerythropoiesis,maytemporarilybeasso-
ingtoanapparentanaemiaduemainlytoredistribution
32
Manual of Canine andFelineHaematology andTransfusionMedicine
Splecn
RBC circulation
Figure3.4:Foliowingproduction,theredceliscirculateinperipheralblooduntilthey aredestroyed bymacrophagesinthe
spleen,aftertheirnominal lifespan(about70daysinthecat and120days inthedog).Any enlargement ofthespleenmay cause
sequestrationof blood or increaseddestructionofredcells.
of the cells in this organ. However,the effect of
Figure 3.5 shows an outline of causes of anaemia
adrenalin release in causing splenic enlargement is
based on diagnostic decisions or observations.
minor in the dog and cat compared with that in the
horse,where up to30%of the bloodvolume may be
Anaemias ofboncmarrow dysfunction
trapped in an enlarged spleen.However,the spleen of
The basicrequirements forproductionof red cells are
cats does not contain a sinusoidal structure,thereby
stem cells,cytokines and an appropriatemarrowenvi-
permitting longer survival of particles such as Heinz
ronment,which includes blood supply,oxygen and
bodies within red cells.
nutrients. When any of these components are lacking.
If therate of redcell productionexceedstherate of
erythropoiesis will be affected.
loss, a statc of erythrocytosis (secondary polyeythae-
mia)with high PCV,haemoglobin concentration or
Reduced red cell production
RBC count may eventually develop.Increased eryth-
Anaemias in this category will be non-regenerative,
roid production - and conscqucntly reticulocytosis--
normocytic(normalMCV) andnormochromic(nor-
may occur in response to the high erythropoietin
mal MCHC). A concurrent leucopenia and thrombo-
concentrations thatfollow tissue anoxia.Conditions
cytopenia shouldalert thecliniciantothepossibilityof
associatedwitherythrocytosisincludeobstructivepul-
aplastic anaemia ormyelophthisis.Inthese two condi-
monary disease,cardiovascular disorders(ventricular
tions,multipotential stem cells may be injured, sup-
septal defects,patent ductus arteriosus),high altitude
pressed (aplasia; no growth) or displaced
states or renal hypoxia or renal abnormalities (e.g.
(myelophthisis; marrow wasting). Some of these ef-
embryonal nephroma,renal cysts).Autonomouspro-
fects may be mediated by cytokincs or regulatory
ductionofmatureredcells,rrespectiveoferythropoi-
lymphocytes, which may alter the marrow
etin concentrations,represents a neoplastic state of
microenvironment.These anaemiascanbesevereand
haematopoiesis known as polyeythacmia vera (pri-
ifficult iotrcat,butin someinstanccs theadministra-
mary polycythaemia).
tion of cytokines has been found to be helpful in
promoting cell development and maturation.Exam-
ples of causcs of marrow aplasia include the injurious
CLASSIFICATIONOFANAEMIA
effects of irradiation, toxic plants (bracken fern in
cattle),viruses (feline leukaemia virus;FeLV),hor-
The classification of anaemia according to basic
mones (oestrogen, particularly in dogs), drugs (e.g.
pathophysiological mechanisms provides a useful ap-
phenylbutazone, chloramphenicol, sulpha drugs),
proach to the diagnosis of the underlying problem.
chemicals that accumulate in fat (e.g.DDT, trichlor-
Anaemias ofbonemarrow dysfunctioninvolve
ethylene,cyclichydrocarbons andtheinfectious agent
reduced red cell production,defects in nucleotide
Ehrlichia canis.
synthesis,defects in haemoglobin synthesis and
myclodysplastic syndromes.Anacmias of increased
in bonemarrow that inhibits or displaces normal hae-
red cell destructioninvolvehaemolysisofnormalred
matopoictic cells.Examples are marrow neoplasms,
cells orhaemolysis dueto either geneticdefects ofred
leukaemias, metastatic neoplasms (carcinomas,
cells or acquired defects of red cells.Anaemias of
melanomas),myelofibrosisandgranulomatousinflam
increased red cell loss involveinternal or cxternal
matory diseaseofmarrow,suchas systemicfungal
haemorrhage.
infections,histoplasmosis and miliary tuberculosis.
12-24
Decreased
Hacmo-
hours aftcr
develops
ANAEMIA
conccnltaii
baenorbage
Dtus!
sked bly
CONCEPT
Dchydration
MAP OF
ANAEMIA
Regenerative
Modified
Non - regenerative
regenerative
RPI 23
RPI <3>1
RPI ≤1
nornocytic
normocylic
Horuwehronie
normochronic,
Ineffective
erythropoiesis
maerneylic
hypnchrotnic
maybe
Haemolysis
Haemorrhage
normocytie
microcytic
Redluced
Reduced
macrocytic
hypochronic
RBC
{erythropoietic
Erythrop
proctuction
factors
anCTLasCtvO
a cightfold
1o threetol
8
External)
Internal
Defects of
Defects of
Aptasia
gnthisis
mucleotide
Myetofibrosis
nfamrararydisease(nrixeil
haemoglobin
synthesis
s
E/V
ivsis
HyTO
B12defei
Fotate deficency
emicatlysus
Myetodyspiaxia
Dufeuts
Defeel
(nsr paipar
of
of
BacterictdPy'sirs
globi
haem
Haemnobartonellat
mediated (igM)
c.g.Thalassaemia
e.8.
·WtamiEdeficier
Leurtpu
Porpiyrta
Figure 3.5: Concept map of anqemia illustrating a pathway for diaguosing anaenia. Linking woreds are italicized. RBC, red btood celt: RPl, reticuloeyte prodaction tndex; Cu, copper: Co.
cohatt; i/V,intrvascutar; E/V,extravascutlar.
3
34
 Manual of Canine and Feline Haematology and Transfusion Medicine
The development of myclofibrosis may be idiopathic
to combat the infection. Under the influence of IL-1,
or occur after prolonged marrow stimulation or as a
storage iron is converted from ferritin to the less
terminal event in myelproliferative disease. Myelo-
available form of haemosiderin; iron is tightly bound
fibrosis is considered to be associated with megakaryo-
to haptoglobin and lactoferrin in leucocytes at the site
cyte-derived growth factors, and marrow mastocytosis
of infection, becoming unavailable for both red cell
may be seen in these patients.
production and bacterial use. The concentration of
 Pure red cell aplasia refers to reductions in commil-
circulating serum iron is consequently reduced but so
ted (unipotential) erythroid stem cells only. Lcucocytes
is its transport protein,transferin. In addition,red cells
and plalclcis are umaffected. This condition may be
from affected patients bind incrcased surface immu-
caused by FeLV, by direct suppression of BFU-E stem
noglobulin and consequently have a shortened life
cells or may be immune-inediated in dogs, in which
span, being phagocytosed more readily than normal.
antibody may be specifically directed at cpilopcs on
 Othcr condiions causing non-rcgenerative anac-
the immature erythroid cells. In the last case, some
mia include dietary protein deficiency or suppression
spherocytes may be seen in peripheral blood, and the
 of erythropoiesis by TNF in some parasitic infections.
 Coombs' test may give a positive resnlt.
 An example of the latter occurs'in irypanosomiasis
Reductions in the concentrations of erythropoietin
(Trypanosoma congolense) where expression of eryth-
 or cytokines affecting erythropoiesis have a role in
ropoietin receptors is reduced (Suliman et al., 1999).
thc production of non-regenerative anaeinias associ-
 Chronic liver disease may also be associated with
ated with chronic renal failure or endocrine dysfunc-
anaemia for a variety of reasons but usually there is a
tion (e.g. hypothyroidism, hyperoestrogenism,
degree of red cell regeneration, possibly associated
hypoadrenocorlicism or pituitary hypofunction). The
with some haemorrhagic loss and rcd cell injury.
 dog is particularly prone to suppression of haemato-
 In about 60% of dogs with portosystemic shunts,
poiesis by oestrogen, from eifher hyperoestrogenism
microcytosis may be evident. Disturbances to iron
in sertoli cell tumours or after excessive stilboestrol
metabolism, copper storage/toxicity and chronic in-
administration. The suppression is mcdiated by an
flarmmationare likely to contribute to the pathogenesis.
 inhibitor produced by the thymus in response tooestro-
 of the anaemia in chronic liver disorders. Poikilocy-
gen and which suppresses haematopoiesis at the sten
tosis (abnormal erythrocyte shape) is expected in
cell level (Brockus, 1998).
hepatic discase, with acanthocytosis anrl ovalocytcs
 The anaemia of chronic renal failure is usually mild
(elliptical erythrocytes) seen in many cats with
to moderate and non-regenerative. It is primarily due to
hepatic lipidosis.
the inabiljly of erythropoictin to be produced fron thc
kidneys. Other factors that contribute to the anaernia of
Defects in nucleotide synthesis
chronic renal failure include:
In conditions of this category, stem cells and cytokines
are adequate, hul the microenvironmcnt is deficient,
 Reducedl half-life of red cells due to uraemic
lacking a supply of nutrients essential for nucleotide
toxis
synthesis. Erythropcietin concentrations are increased
 Haemorrhagic loss from gastrointestinal ulcers
and cell production proceeds abnormally. Defects in
 Increased bleeding lendency due to reduccd
 DNA or RNA synthesis causc dclays in nuclear syn-
 platelet function
thesis, resulting in asynchrony in cell development.
 Suppression of erythropoiesis by high
 Consequently, nuclear development lags belhind cyto-
concentrations of parathyroid hormonc
plasmic dcvclopinent and the cells proxluced may bc
 Reduced nutrient intake due to inappetance
large or regaloblastic. Many cells are recognized as
Injury of red cells due to glomerular pathology
abnormal and are destroyed in the bone marrow. This
and renal fibrosis.
rcsults in ineffective erythropoicsis, The problem cx-
tends to all cells attempting to undergo mitosis.
Echinocytes and some schistocytes or keratocytes
Examples of this form of anaemia occur with defi-
 Can be sccn in lhe anaeinia of renal failurc.
ciencies of folie acid, vitamin B12, cobalt and intrinsic
 The anaemia of inflammatory disease - the com-
factor. These conditions are rare in animals but may be
monest form of anaemia in domestic animals - is
induced by administration of folate antagonists such as
associalcd with both acute and chronic inflaunnation.
methotrexatc or may occur in palients with malignan-
The pathogenesis involves a coinplex of changes trig-
cies, in which the slores of these nutrients may be
exhausted. Administration of sulpha drugs and
and interleukin-1 (IL-1) released from activated
potentiated sulpha drugs can inhibit folate metabolism
macrophages. These prcinflammatory cytokines sup-
and thymidline synthcsis. Long-term administration of
press erythropoiesis by downregulating the surface
antiepileptic drugs (mysoline, phenobarbitone and
erythropoietin receptors of conmitted erytlhroid stem
 dilantin) can also deplete serum folate concentrations.
cells. At the sarne time, othcr cytokines stimulate
Macrocytosis may bc founel in humans with these
granulocyte production to produice leucocytesrequired
conditions but has rarely been described in animals.
Anaemia
35
Defects in haemoglobin synthesis
 but there is no concurrent anaemia or polychromasia.
 In a similar way. defects in the production of compo-
Basophilic stippling may be seen in about 30% of
nents essential for haemoglobin imanfacture canl
affected dogs but is not a specific finding.
lcad to ineffective crythropoiesis. In this case, cyto-
 Hereditary porphyria has been reported in anacmic
 plasmic developiment lags behind nuclear develop-
Siamese cats as a dlominant trait anrl in some non-
ment. These conditions may be considlcred as defccis
anaemic tlomestic shorthaired cats. Affected aninals
of either hacm or globin synthesis. Examples of
will have ineffective erythropoiesis in which largc
defects of globin synthesis are the genetic abnormali-
quantities of isomer I of protoporphyrin arc produced
ties affecting the production of the α or β amino acid
instead of isomer I. Isomer I is unable to combine
chains of haemoglobin, thalasscimia and sickle cel!
normally with iron to form haem. There may be some
anaeimia in humans; uonc of which have been
haemolysis of red cells with 'port wine'-coloured
recorded to date in animals. There are nany variants
urine, photosensitization, and fluorcsccnce of teeth
of thalassenia in humans, which may result in red
and urine in ultraviolet light due tooxidized porphyrins
cels being rmore fragilc ilhan normal, having a short-
in these tissues. It is interesting to note that hcreditary
ened lifespan, being abnormal in shape and showing
 porphyria in humans is lhought 1o have gi vcn rise to the
microcytosis and hypochromasia. Similarly, red cells
legends of werewolves.
of patients with sicklc ccll anaemia have abnormal
 crescent shapes and a shortened life span.
Myelodysplastic syndrones
Iron deficiency anaemia is a classic cxample of
These conditions are characterized by dysplasia (ab-
a defect in hacm synthcsis. In this condition erythro-
normal development in one or more haematopoietic
 poietin concentrations are high and stem cells are
cell lines in a hypcrcellular bone marrow, with concur-
rent cytopenias in peripheral blood. By definition,
adequate, but the lack of available iron lcads to
there will be fewer than 30% blastic cells in the bone
delayed and defective cytoplasmic maluralion of
rcd celis. The developing cells may undergo an
marrow in this condlition. Myclordlysplasia is often
additional mitosis at the basophilic rubricyte stage 
while awaiting the haemoglobinization proccss,
mia, and the cells produced may be dysfunctional.
 In dogs, the conlitions may be primary, resulting
hypochromic. The resulting cells are more fragile
fronl a genetic trausformation in a multipotential stem
than normal, some show lcar-drop shapes
cell, or secondary and associated with administration
of a drug. The secondary conditions usually resolve on
(daeryocytes) antl many are dlestroyed prematurely.
About 50% of patients with iron deficiency anae-
withdrawal of the offending drug. The primary condi-
tions are considered unlikely to respond satisfactorily
mia may have concurrent thrombocyiosis, witlh large
numbers of srmal! platelets and consequently a ten-
to haematopoietic cylokincs acting as maluration fac-
dency to form microthrombi. Thrombocytosis may
tors, allliough oneexception hias been described (Boone
at al., 1996). Some cases may transform into overt
 Occur in patients that have concurrenl chronic cxicrnal
blood loss, wlich has led to the development of the
leukaemia at a later datc (McManus and Hess, 1998)
iron-deficient state. Reducedi intake of iron may be
but many do not.
 These conditions need to be distinguished from
seen in young animais around the time of weaning, in
older animals with defective function of the
ineffective erythropoiesis due to nutrient deficicncics
(vitamin B12, folic acid, iron), lead toxicity or drug
gastrointestinal tract or in animals with neoplasins of
the gastrointestinal ract, affecting absorption of iron
reaction by bone marrow examination, biochenmical
 assays and clinical history.
and other nutrients.
 Deficiencies of copper and vitamin B6 may show
Myelodysplasia is rare in clogs andl therefore is
similar haematological signs to iron deficiency in
incompletely categorized. It is clear that the condition
humans, with microcytosis and hypochromasia, but
does not fit well into the French-America-Brilish
rarely cause anaemia in animals. Copper in the enzyme
classification of myelodysplasia for humans. One of 
ferroxidase (ceruloplasmin) is essential for the utiliza-
the recently proposed systens of classification for
tion of iron, convcrling ferrous to ferric iron, in which
myelodysplasia in dogs (Weiss and Lulich, 1999) is
form it is transported by transferrin to the bone mar-
sunmarized as:
row. Within the marrow it is converted back to the
Dyserythropoiesis
ferrous form to be incorporated in red cell production
 Sideroblastic dyserythropuiesis
at tlhe haem synthetase step.
 Dyserytlropoiesis with an excess of blasts
Other conditions leading to defects in haem synthe-
Myelodysplasia
sis in snall animals are lead poisoning and erythropoi-
Sideroblastic myelodysplasia.
etic porphyria. Lead blocks sulphydryl groups within
enzymes involved in haem synthesis. Characteristi-
 It is possible that some of tlhesc categorics may
cally, large numbers of metarubricytes are found in the
represent progressive levelopmental stages of the
 peripheral blood of animals with acute lead poisoning.
disorder.
36
 Manual of Canine and Feline Haemalology and Transfusion Medicine
 In cats, myelodysplasia is often associated with
are no signs of haermnoglobinaemia, haemoglobinuria
FeL V infection and may manifest with a macrocytosis.
  a  osnsn   n
Bone marrow examination is essential to characterizc
ofhacmolysis. In addition,jaundice is rare inextravas-
the pathology. A refractory anaemia with a1 excess of
cular haemolysis.
 myeloblasts but no marrow granulocyte reserve lhas
The anaemia in haemolytic conditions will usually
been described in young cats with FeLV infection.
 be very regenerative, with large mumbers of polychro-
 Secondary infections may occur.
eight- to tenfold increase in red cell production, as
Myelofibrosis and myeloid metaplasia: In this
detected by the absolute reticulocyte count. In the long
dysplastic condition tlere is hyperplasia of the
lcrrm, howcvcr, continued haemolysis and marrow
myeloid and mcgakaryocytic series, with asynchrony
 stimulation, particularly with hereditary haemolytic
in the early developmental cells but maturation
disorders, can eventually lead to myelofibrosis and in
through to the end-stage cells. The erythroid cells
some cascs oslcosclerosis.
are reduced and many dacryocyles appear in the
 peripheral blood. Ineffective granulopoiesis occurs
Haemolysis due to genetic defects of red cells
leading to leucopenia. In due course, fibrosis of the
marrow develops and is closcly associated with
Mechanisms: In thiese rare conditions, red cells may
megakaryocytc hypcrplasia. Mast cells are usually
 have an abnormal shape or membrane (elliptocytes,
plentiful in the marrow in this condition. Core biop-
stomatocytes) or a biochemical defect (c.g. deficicncy
sies of marrow may be more revealing than marrow
 in pyruvate kinasc, phosphofructokinase, methaemo-
 aspirates once myclofibrosis rlcvelops.
 globin reductase, calcium pump ATPase), which acts
to shorten their lifespan. Other inherited hacmolytic
Anaemias of increased red cell destruction
conditions may bc associaterl with copper storage
Haemolysis may be considered the result of an intrin-
 defects, malabsorption of vitamin B12 and hepatic
sic or extrinsic defect of the red cell, which causes the
disorders.
cells to be destroyed at a higher rate than normal.
Consequently these cels havc a short half-life antl may
Breeds affected: Hereditary stomatocytosis has been
show some morphological change. Specific changes in
described in some dwarf Alaskan Malarmutcs, and
red cell shape may provide clues to the cause of the
hereditary elliptocytosis has been reported in a cross-
haemolysis. Examples include immune-mediated
bredline ofdogs anda Silky Terrier (Millsand Marsden,
haemolytic anaemia (IMHA; sphcrocytes), signs of
1999). Both conditions were associated with either
intravascular injury (schistocytes, keratocytes), bio-
 minimal anaemia or compensated anaemia and werc
cheimical change (Heinz bodies; poikilocytes) orcellut-
discovered incidcntally.
lar parasites (e.g. Haemohartonella, Babesia). The
 Pyruvate kinase deficiency of red cells has been
mechanisin of destruction of the red cells may be by
described in Basenjis, Beagles, West Highland Whilc
direct lysis within the blood stream (intravascular
Terriers, a Cairn Terricr antl an Abyssinian cat. Af-
 ssrdo  eonaa q no (sisi
fected cells are unable to maintain normal shape, lose
the spleen, liver, marrow or lymph nodes (extravascu-
 potassium and have reduced oxygen affiniiy. Thcy
Iar haemolysis), or both.
become sphero-echinocytic and have a lifespan re-
Clinically, intravascular hacmolysis may have a
duced to about 20 days. Pyruvate kinase concentra-
more deleterious cffcct on the patient than extra vascu-
tions in red cells of affected dogs are reduced to about
lar haemolysis, as, in addition to the effects of low
half that of normal dogs.
tissue oxygenation,there are also fragments of fre red
A non-spherocytic haemolytic anaemia of Beagles
cell membranc in circulation, which nay trigger dis-
is due to a defect in the ATPase calcium pump system.
seminated intravascular coagulation (DIC). The pres-
The defect affects older red cclls morc than young
ence of free haemoglobin released from red cells is
cclls. Other uon-spherocytic anaemias have been re-
injurious totissucs and some nay appear in urine when
corded in Miniature Poodles and Beagles. In those
concentrations exceed renal thresholds. In addition,
cases, chronic haemolysis Icd to imyclofibrosis and
 the rate of destruction of cells may also exceed thc
ostcosclcrosis.
capacity af thc liver to prucess bilirubin, and combined
A compensated intravascular haemolysis and bili-
with poor oxygenation, reduced liver function contri-
rubinuria have been described in fwo male English
 butes to the appearance of clinical jaundice in many
Springcr Spanicls with phosphofructokinase (PFK)
patients with intravascular haemolysis.
deficiency of red cells. The affected cells showed
Extravascular haemolysis may proceed within
increased fragility in alkaline conditions.PFK isa ratc-
limiting enzyme in glycolysis. A separate polysystemic
quently splenic enlargement due to haemosiderosis
lisorder involving dyserythropoiesis, polymyopathy.
may be dctcctcd on abclouminal palpation. Although
megaoesophagus and cardioniegaly has been describcd
affected patients show all the signs of anaemia, there
 in English Spaniels. The cxact mechanism causing
Anaemia
37
these defects has not been defined.
Parasites: infection with intracellular or
Methaemoglobin reductase deficiency has been
extracellular parasites such as Babesia canis or
described in a cat and two dogs (Miniature Poodlc
Haemobartonella felis or H. canis will cause
and Toy Alaskan Eskimo bitch). The affected
haemolytic anaemia, which may be compoundcd
animals showed persistent cyanosis of mucous
by immune-mediated haemolysis.
membranes aid occasional seizures. Methaemoglobin
concentrations were increascrl to 19-25% of total
Biochemical changes: Prolonged exposure to oxidant
haemoglobin concentration. In contrast to the
drugs or chemicals may learl to cxhaustion of reduced
condition in humans, these dogs did not respond
glutathione and the rate-limiting enzyme, glutathione
 to oral riboflavin. therapy.
G-phosphate dehydrogenase, within red celis, causing
Macrocytosis may be seen in some toy and mini-
denaturation of hacmoglobin. As a result, Heinz bod-
 alure Poodles, with MCVs of 85-95 fl (normal range
ies form in the older red cells first, making them more
60-77 fl). Although marrow cxamination will reveal
rigid than normal, and these cells are either phagocy-
abnormal nucleated erythrocytes and incomplete mi-
toscd as they pass Ihrough thc splenic sinuses or lysed
losis with some dyserythropciesis, no therapy is indi-
directly within the circulation. Heinz bodies are 0.5- 1
cated. Similarly, Japancsc Akita and Shiba Inu dogs
μm in diameter and their presence may be shown by a
will have smaller red cells than other breeds with
supravital stain such as new methylene blue. The
MCVs as low as 55-64 fl. Their red cells contain a
methaemoglobin rcductasc (diaphorase) system is also
higher level of intracellular potassium than those of
vulnerable to oxidant injury, resulting in the formation
other dogs, thercby causing spurious hyperkalaenia in
of methaemoglobin. In this state, iron within red cells
haemolysed blood samples.
is oxidized to the ferric forrm, which canot transport
 A congenital selective malabsorption of vitamin
oxygen. As a result, affected animals may not only
 B 12 in Giant Schnauzcrs has been reported to cause a
have severe anaenia but also hypoxaemia. Ingestion
non-regenerative anaemia with poikilocytosis ankd nell-
of onions and garlic arc common causes of Heinz body
 tropenia with hypersegmentation. The condition was
formation in dogs. The toxic agent in the onions and
inheritedl as an autosomal reccssive trait. Affected
 garlic is n-propyl disulphide. High doses of vitamins
 dogs showed a dramatic response to injections of
K 1 and K3 havc also rcsulted in Heinz body formation.
vitamin B12. A similar condition in Border Collies was
Cats are more prone to Heinz body formation
characterized by hacmatological abnormalities with1
because their haemoglobin molecules contain eight to
other metabolie disturbances and kclonuria.
ten sulphydryl groups conpared with only two or three
groups in other species. Howcvcr, the spleen in cats is
Haemolysis duc to acquired defects of red cells
non-sinusoidal, alowing longer survival of red cells
Acquired defects of rerl cells arc thc rmost common
containing Heinz bodies. Cats with diabetes mellitus,
cause of haemolysis. The ultimate mechanism of lysis
lymphuma and hyperhyroidism havc a higher inci-
is usually either direct membrane injury or osmotic
dence of Heinz bodies than normal cats and this is
lysis. Morphological changcs to red cells are usually
exacerbated in cats fed a semisolid diet of tinned food
seen in haemolytic anaemia. Causes include:
containing thue preservative, propylenc glycol.
Cats are particularly prone to haemolysis associ-
 Biochemical changes (Heinz bodics.
ated with severe hypophosphataemia (Adams et al.,
hypophosphataemia)
1993). For this reasou, phosphate supplcmentation is
Exposure to chemical haenolysins (heavy metals
recommended for cats with serun phosphatc conccn-
such as lcad, zinc, silver; arsenicals; excessive
trations less than 0.48 mmol/l.
copper and cyclic hydrocarbons)
Bacterial, animal or plant haemolysins (such as
Immune-mediated haemolysis: Anacrmias in this cat-
lysins from Leptospira icterohaemorrhagica,
egory are mediated by antibody and/or complement on
Closridiun haemolyticum; some spider and
thc surface of red cells. Erythrolysis may occur either
snake venoms, particularly black snake; and the
within the bloud stream or exlravascularly. Intravascular
ricin from castor oil beans, which causes direct
lysis is more likely to be associated with IgM antibody
lysis)
or with high concentrations of IgG antibody, and more
Coating of red cells by antibody and or
severe clinical sigus. The distinguishing fcaturcs of
complernent (this will shorten their lifespan and
immune-mediated haemolysis include a biphasic popu-
lead to IMHA, with the appearance of markerl
lation of red cells (many small spherocytes and large
spherocytosis and anisocytosis)
polychromatic cels), a positive result with a direct
Mechanical injury of red cells (cell injury that
Coombs' test and, in some cases, gross agglutiuation.
Occurs while in circulation may result in
Spherocytes form as a result of loss by phagocytosis of red
intravascular haemolysis: examples are
cell mcmhranc and attached imnune complexes. The
conditions associated with vascular and valvular
injured cell is able to reseal its membrane without loss of
lesions or some malignancics)
internal contents but loses surface area in the process.
 38 Manual of Canine and Feline Haematology and Transfusion Medicine
In some cascs, the antibody is directed against
regenerative anaemia with increased metarubricylcs,
immalure develcping red cells within honc narrow.
Howell-Jolly bodies, poikilocytes and usually a mild
rather than against mature erythrocytes. Patients with
thrombocytopenia.
this phenomenon will have little polychromasia, but
sone spherocytes should be observed within the peri-
 Anaemias of incrcased red cell loss
pheral blood. This condition is equivalent to pure red
Haemorrhage is a passive loss of whole blood and
cell aplasia.
may involve internal or exteral blood loss, or both.
Some animals with IMHA may also have antibody
Both forms can be severe and life fhreatening
specific for platelet cpilopes, aud in thesc cascs de-
depending on the cxlent of the blood loss. Loss of
structicn of red cells and platelets (immune-mediated
 30-40% of total blood volume leads to hypovolaemic
thrombocytopenia) resuits in both haemolytic and
shock, and death is likely after loss of morc than
1
lhaemorrhagic anaemia.
40% of total blood volume. Total bloodi volume in
Anti-red cell antibody may be actively produced by
dogs is about 84 ml/kg (range 78-88 ml/kg) and in
the patient or acquired passively by transfusion or
cats 64 ml/kg (range 62-66 ml/kg)
colostral ingestion. The appearance of antibody may
In intcrmal haemorrhage,most red cellsare reabsorbed
 be genetically modulated and occur spontancously or
via the lymphatics within a few days and re-enter the
 may follow cell injury or adsorption of foreign proteins
circulation in a slightly damaged forn. Other cells are
or haptens on the red cell surface. Examples of the
phagocytoscd and their iron recycled via haemosiderin
latter are virus particles, drugs (c.g. antibiotics, tran-
deposition in the macrophages. Exicrmal liaemorhagc
quillizers), chemicals or red cell parasites. In condi-
involves loss of both iron and plasma protein from the
tions in which a specific causative agent or underlying
body, thercby depleting body stores of iron aid dinin-
disease process cannot be idcntified, the tcrm
ishing the potential for the cryllron to rcgenerate suc-
 autoimmune haemolytic anaemia rnay be applied.
cessfully in thc long term. The availability of iron is a
 Conditions in which a causative agent or underlying
rate-limiting step in red cell production. Consequently.
 disease can be identified are termed immune -mediated
in managing animals with external haemorrhagc, the
haemolytic anacmia.
administralion of iron should be consideredl.
 The immune-mediated haemolytic condition in the
 Compared with haemolysis, patients with haemor-
dog may be classified into one of five categories on the
rhage show noticeable changes in haemodynamics.
basis of the typc of antibody prescnt. Class I and IH arc
After a peracute haemorhagie episocde there may bc
associated with gross agglutination and intravascular
hypotension with a normal PCV. Anaemia and hypo-
haernolysis, respectively, and require aggressive
proteinaemia may not develop until 4-24 lours after
therapy. Class If is the most common, does not spon-
the haermorrhagic episade, following haemodilution
tancously agglutinate and requires a Coombs' test for
from fluid shifts. Interstitial fluid shifts occur within a
verification of the diagnosis. Class IV and V involve
few hours, causing mild reductions in erythron values
cold-reacting antibodies, causing agglutination and
after 4 hours. Significant reductions in plasma protein,
lysis, respcctively, at 4°℃.
PCV and haemoglobin conccniration occur after
12-24 hours, when plasma volume has expanded to
Mechanical injury: Mechanical injury of red cells was
approximately normal levels.
recognized in humans receiving lhe early hearl valve
Hacmorrhagic anacinia is classically regenerative,
transplants that consisted of a mechanical ball valve
but this response is seen only after 3-4 days. In the
 prosthesis. Cells were damaged as they collidedat high
interin period, the anaemia may be considered
velocity with the cbstacle in thcir path. Injured cclls
prcrcgenerative. Thc degree of rcsponse depends on
were recognized on the blood film as fragmented
the availability of iron. Iron is less readily available in
schistocytes and keratocytes. Sinmilar cells may be
the ferric form in haemorrhagic anaemia than in hacmo-
found in animals with DIC, severe heart worm infec-
lytic anaemia. This accounts for the lowcr avcrage
tion, vasculitis, splcnic haemangiosarcoma, patent
increase in red cell production of two- to fourfold
ductus arteriosus, myelofibrosis, malignancies, the
normal seen in haemorrhagic anaemias, as assessed by
haemolytic-uraemic syndrome and, to some extent,
absolute reticulocyte counts. Exceptions to these gen-
glomcrulonepbritis. Many of these conditions are as-
 cral guidelines will occur. Peak reticulocyte counts
sociated with microangiopathy.
may be seen a week after the haemorrhagic episode.
Plasma protein concentration will be reduced in
Haemolysis of norimal red cells
 haemorrhagic patients, paticularly those with extemal
Any condition that results in hypersplenism may be
haemorrhage. A decrease in plasma protein concentra-
associated with increased phagocytosis of red cells by
tion may occur as early as 4 hours after hacinorrhage.
splenic macrophages. The microenvironment within
A persistenlly low plasma protein concentration should
an cnlarged spleen will expose cells to higli pH and low
lead to a suspicion of ongcing extemal haemorrhage.
glucose concentrations, resulting in premature ageing
 After a single episode of severe haemorrhage. plasma
of the cells. Patients with this condition will have a
 protein should return to normal levcls by 57 days.
Allaemia
39
Platelets in patients with haemorrhage initially dc-
In short, marrow biopsies are recommended if any
defect of production of cells is suspected, with cither
tosis is usually expected in haemorrhagic anaemia of
excessive or insufficient numbers of mature cells. Core
severaldays'duration. Thrombocytosisisinitiallycauscd
 biopsies are particularly recommended in patients sus
by movenentof platelets fromthespleendue to adrenalin
 pected of having myelofibrosis, as aspiration biopsies
response, but general marrow stimulation orstimulation
may be unrewardling.
of the crythroid and megakaryocytic cell lines may
 Occur. Leucocyte numbers arc noI decrcased in hacmor-
aoe ur paseoui oq on Ajeyl aie poey u pue srui
HAEMATOPOIETIC NEOPLASIA
hacmorrhage dueto adrenalin effects. Mild neutrophilia
may occur in. the rlog concurrcntly with a marked
 Neoplasia of the haematopoietic system involves hae-
regenerative erythron response. This may be due to
matopoietic cell lines in bonc marrow that have under-
marrow stimulation by haematopoietic cytokines.
gone a genetic neoplastic transformation and are
 Some very regencralivc anacimias may be macro-
proliferating autonomously. The end result is leukae-
cytic and hypochromic in the early stages. With con-
mia. The cells produced may accumulate in bone
tinuing external haemorrhage,the anaemia is classically
marrow before appearing in the circulation. There is
 normoeytic aurl mormochromic and protcin concentra-
evidence to suggest that some leukaemic cells have a
tion remains low;, andl if iron rleficicncy dcvclops due
longer life span in circulation than normal and may
to continued external haemorrhagic loss, the anaemia
have functional defects such as allercd adhesive prop-
may become microcytic and hypochromic.
 erties, reduced phagocytic and bactericidal capabili-
Causes of haemorrhagic anaemia include:
ties and altered chemotaxis (in the case of neoplastic
nentrophils). Neoplastic plaiclets may have reduced
Trauma
adhesive and functional properties, paradoxically re-
Parasitism: intermal/exlcrnal, e.g. flcas, ticks,
sulting in bleeding.
lice, Ancylostona, Uncinaria (dogs)
Clinical signs of hacmalopoielic ncoplasia may
 Coagulation factor defect: haematomas,
 include generalized bone pain, lethargy, anorexia, vom-
 haemarthroses and hacmorrhagc into body
iting, diarrhoea, weight loss, fever and bleeding. On
cavities (diagnosis may be aided by fine-needle
clinical exarninalion, affected animals may have pale
aspiration of the masses, paracentesis and
mucous membranes, splenomegaly and hepatomegaly.
mcasuring coagulation profiles)
These last two changes are likely to be due to meta-
 Platelet defects: petechial and ecchymotic
static spread to spleen and liver and may provide
haemorhages, often flecks of blood in faeces,
diagnostic clues to the condition, which otherwise has
cpistaxis and hyphaema
poorly specific signs. Other metastatic sites occasion-
 Ruptured neoplasm, aneurysm, e.g.
ally affected are lymph nodes, lungs and meninges.
haemangiosarcoma
Neurological sigus may occurin cascs of rmetastases to
the central nervous system or with hyperviscosity
syndrome, as seen in some cases of multiple myeloma.
WHEN TO COLLECT BONE MARROW
From a haematological pcrspeclivc, ncoplasms of
SAMPLES AND DO FURTHER TESTS
the haematopoietic system may be suspected when
either blastic haenatopoietic cells appear in circula
Bone marrow aspirates or core biopsies are advocaterl
tinn or an unexplained pancytopenia or bicytopenia or
in the following situations:
a marked leucocytosis is present in peripheral blood.
The presence of haematopoietic neoplasia will cause
Cases of pancytopenia
variable degrecs of myelophthisis, and consequently
 Non-regenerative or poorly regenerative
the peripheral blood will show some ciegrcc of cyto-
anaemias
 penia and mild to moderate poorly regenerative anae-
 Neutropenias or thrombocytopenias where tht
1nia. Myclophthisis may be due to the physical presence
cause is not obvious
of the neoplasm as well as the effects of marrow
 Cases of suspected hacmatopoictic neoplasia,
suppressive factors associated with the tumour. Throm-
 myelodysplasia or marrow dysfunction as
bocytopenia may also occur due to reduced platelet
indicated by ineffective cytopoiesis or
 production and some splenic sequestration, resulting
erythropoiesis
in haemorrhage.
 Cases in which the degree of regencralivc response
Figures 3.6 and 3.7 shoy a system of classification
is insufficient for the degree of anaemia.
of haematopoictic neoplasms. In general terms.
haematopoietic neoplasms may be myeloproliferative
 Marrow biopsy can also be uscd to assess the
(covering erythroid, granulocytic, monocytic, meg-
amount of storage iron and to evaluate the regenerative
akaryocytic cells) or lymphoproliferative (lymphoid
erythroid responsc.
leukaemia). Some visceral lymphomas may metastasizc
40
Manual of CanineandlelineHaematology andTransfusionMedicine
tobonemarrow andblood at alate stageofdisease
immunosecretory and producc a paraprotein
(leukaemic lymphoma).Somc lymphoid tumours
(monoclonalgammopathy).Notethatneoplasticplasma
(multiple myeloma,B-cell lymphoma)may be
cells rarely circulate in multiple myeloma.
Type
Findings in blood and bone marrow
AUL
Acute undifferentiated leukaemia:blast cells non-reactive formyeloid orlymphoid cytochemical
markers or antibodies
M1
Myeloblastic leukaemiawithoutmaturation:type I myeloblasts are>90%of all nucleatedcells in
bonemarrow
M2
Myeloblasticleukaemiawithmaturation:mycloblastsare30%to>90%ofall nucleatedcells
M3
Promyelocytic leukaemia:abnormal promyelocytes are>30%of nucleated cells inbone marrow
M4
Myelomonocyticleukacmia:myeloblasts and monoblasts are>30% of all nucleated cells in bone
marrow
M5
Monocyticleukaemia:monocytic cells are>80%inbonemarrow.Twoforms exist:M5a>80%
monoblastsandM5b<80%monoblastswith apredominanceofdifferentiatcd monocyticcells
M6
Erythroleukaemia:marrow erythroid cells are>50%of nucleated cells inbone marrow,
myeloblasts and monoblasts are<30% inblood but >30% in bone marrow.Avariant,M6Er,is
defined bya predominance ofrubriblasts(>30%)in theerythroid component
M7
Megakaryoblastic Icukacmia: 1megakaryoblasts are >30% of all nucleated cells in bone marrow.
Myelofibrosis may be present in marrow core biopsies. Abnormal megakaryoblasts may be found
inblood
Figure3.6:Classificationof acutemyeloidleukaemias.Based ontheFrench-American-British(FAB)Schemeand Nationa!
Cancer InstituteCriteria of classification..lainet al.(1991)
Type
Findings in blood and bone marrow
MDS:
Blast cells are <30% of all nucleated cells, with <50% erythroid cells. Marrow
may be normocellular to hypercellular, with dyshaematopoiesis. Blood shows
refractory anaemia, offen with inereased mean corpuscular yolume in cats,
and leucopenia. A variant, MDs-Er, is defined by a prcdominance of
erythroid cellsinbone marrow
CMLs:
Blast cells are <30% of all nuclcated cells,and erythroid cells are 50% in
marrow. Absence of dyshaematopoiesis and presence of noticcable
lcucocytosis in blood. Several variants exist:
Chronic myelogenous leukaemia (CML):neutrophils with a disorderly
leftshift
Chronic monocytic leukaemia (CMoL): absolute monocytosis
Chronic myelomonocytic leukaemia (CMMoL): absolute monocytosis
and ncutrophilia, with disorderly left shift (may have dysplastic
granulocytes and megakaryocytes and mayhave<20%blast cells)
Other leukaemias:
Primary thrombocythaemia (also calledessential thrombocythaemia).Maturc
platelets are noticcably increased;marrow dysplasia present.
Polycythaemia vera (also called primary polycythacmia). Mature red blood
cells are noticeably increased,with increase in white blood cell and platelets
numbers.
Eosinophilic leukaemia
Basophilic leukaemia
Mast cell leukemia
Lymphoid leukaemias:
Acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL): predominantly lymphoblasts
Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL): prcdominantly lymphocytes
Granular lymphocytic leukaemia: neoplasm of granular natural killer cells or
cytotoxic T cells, which contain metachromatic cytoplasmic granules. These
patients usually have an abdominal or thoracicmass containingneoplastic
largegranular lymphoid cells(LGLs)whichmay be of splenic origin
Multiple mycloma: plasma cell tumour usually located throughout the bone
marrow, secreting an immunoglobulin (Ig) or component of Ig, causing a
monoclonal gammopathy (the neoplastic plasma cells rarely circulate in this
condition)
Figure3.7:Classificationof myelodysplastic syndrome(MDS)and other leukaemias.
Anaemia
41
 Identification of the neoplastic cell line involved is
ratios for ALL and CLL are 3:2 and 2:1, respectively.
based on a variety of cclular attributes sucl: as mor-
Lymphoproliferative disease is ten times more com-
 phology, surface antigenic markers, biochemical con-
mon than myeloproliferative disease in the dog. In a
tent, histochemicalstain reactions, electron microscopic
 survey of 30 dogs with ALL, 27 % were of the German
 morphology, isocnzymcs and chromosomal changcs.
Shepherd breed.
The last two features are rarely used in veterinary
 Ionizing ratlialion is known to lead to ALL and
 medicine at this time. Morphological identification
 chronic myelogenous leukemia but not to CLL. There
alouc is frequeutly insufficient for a specific diagnosis.
is a suggested association between genetic factors,
 as neoplastic celis may be poorly diffcrentiated.
autoimmune rlisorders and CLL.
 Haematopcietic neoplasms are classified as either
 acutc or chronic on the basis of the maturity of the cells
 involved. Acute leukacmias are defined as having more
CAUSES OF ANAEMIA IN
PERSPECTIVE
than 30% blastic cells in bone marrow, and the cells
show maturation arrest. Acute leukaemia generally has
The commonest cause of anaemia in all domestic
 a rapidl clinical coursc of 1-2 months and carries a poor 
 animal species is thc anaemia of inflammatory disease.
 prognosis. Chronic leukaemias have less than 30%
This usually canses only a mild to moderate anaernia
blastic cells in bone marrow and involve well differen-
 and is normocytic, normochromic and non-regenera-
tiated cells with no maturation arrest. Chronic leuk-
tive. Published survcys lhave show1 that dogs are likely
aemia generally has a slower clinical course of
to have non-regenerative and haemorrhagic anaemias
1-3 years. For example, the life expectancy of patients
 in about equal proportions, whereas about 70% of
with acutc lymphoblastic leukaemia is about 65 days
 rcported anacrmias in cats are non-regenerative. It is
compared with 450 days for patients with chronic lyml-
 possible that this may be associated witlh factors uniquc
phocytic leukaemia. An animal with chronic leukaemia,
 to the cat such as the prevalence of viral infections,
parlicalarly clronic myelogenous leukaemia may de-
shorter life span of the red cells and reduced amounts
of iron stored in thie bone marrow.
The stem cell giving rise to the neoplastic clone in.
acuic and chronic lcukaemia is different. In humans,
REFERENCES
chronic myelogenous leukemia has been shown to
originate from tlhie pluripotential stem cell, and patients
Adams LG, Hardy RM, Weiss Dl and Bartgcs JW (1993)
with this condition have similar chromosomal (Phila-
Hypopiosphatemia and hemnlytic anetmia associated with diabetes
delphia chromosome) and biocheimical (G6PD) changes
mellitusand hepatic Hipidosis incats.JournalofVererirary hnterna!
Medieine 7, 226-271
in the neoplastic cell populations. In contrast, acute
withFmctionalcysticovaricsinadog. VeterinuryCltricalPathotogy
myelogenous leukaemia was found to originate from
27, 55-56
the commifted granulocyfic slcnm cell.
Boone L, MorianoJ and Knauer K (1996) Treamen of dyscrythropiesis
 One Ainerican study has shovm the incidence rates
with rcfractory anueui and exeess of blasts ina dog using haman
rccobintryrpuiet(absact).VeterryPaology33,573
for all leukaemias per 100 000 cats or dogs to be 224
Jain NC, Blue JT, Grinden CB, Harvey IW, e! al. (J991) Propnsed
and 30, respectively. Cats had 6.1 times morc lyimpho-
criernaorclassification of ace myeloid leukaemia in riogs and
mas, including leukaemias, and 15.7 times more
cats. Veterirery Clinica! Pathology 20, 63-82
MeMamus PM and Hess RS (1998) Myelodysplastic changes in a dog
myeloprolifcrative disorders than dogs. Neutered ani-
with suhsequent acute nryeloid leukacmia. Vererinary Clinica!
 Imals, particularly neutered quecns and castraicd dogs.
Pathology 27, 112-115
 liad the lowest risk of leukaemia.
Mills JN (1997) Compensated hacmolytie anaenin in a dog. Anstralicn
Vererinary Journal 75, 24-26
 Leukaeinias can occur in animals of any age, but 
Mills Nand Marsdcn CA (1999) Presuned hereditary cllipoeylosis in
a dog. Australian Vererinary Jourual 77, 15-16
aculc granulocytic leukaemias arc more comumon in
Suliman H, Logan-Henfrey L, Majiwa P, Ole-Moiyoi O and Feldman
young dogs (average age 3-5 years). Acute lympho-
B (1999) Aualysis of erythropoietin aned erythropoieclin receptor
blastic leukcinia (ALL) is seen in middle-aged dogs
geresexpressionincatlecluringacntcinfection withTrypanosona
congolcnse infection (ahstract). Vererinary Clinical Pathofogy 28,
(avcragc age 6.2 years) whereas chronic lymphocyiic
118-119
leukeinia (CLL) is a disease of relativcly oller dogs
Verneau W and Moore PF (1999) An inmmunophenctypic study of
(average age 9.4 years), Many CLLs in dogs are of T
caninc leukacinias and prelininary assessnent of clonality by
polymcrase cluin reaetion.
Veterinary Immanology and
cell lineage (Veneau and Moore, 1999).
Inopahoiogy69,145-164
Weiss DJ and Lulich J [1999) Myelndysplastic syndrone with
The lyinphoid leukaemias of dogs are more com-
siteroblasticlifferentiatinninadogVeterinaryCliricalPathology
 mon in males than females; male to female incidence
28, 59--63
CHAPTER FOUR
Elizabeth Villiers
INTRODUCTION
Thus the packed cell volumc (PCV) is increased, but
the total mass of circulating red blood cells (RBCs) is
      si 
Hormal. Relative polycythaenia may arise in animals
 packed cell volune, red blood cell count and haemo-
with acute diarrhoea, cxlcnsive bures, hcat stroke or
globin concentration. It may be relative (owing to
diminished plasma volune) or abscluic. Absolute
walcr deprivation, and clinical signs of dehydration are
usually obvious. The PCV is mildly increased and
polycytlaernia may result from increased concentra-
there is an accompanying increase in plasima proteins
tions of erythropoietin (secondary polycythaemia) or
fromthcmyeloprolifcrativedisease,polycyihaemia vera
(umless plasima protein has been lost, as in burn injul-
ries). Occasionally, relative polycythaemia may result
(primary polycythaemia). The term polycythaemia
from splenic contraction after stress (c.g. severe pain)
 or cxcitement. Splenic contraction leads to the release
cell lncs, and humans with polycythacmia vera have
of large numbers of red cells into the circulation.
erytlirocytosis accompanied by neutrophilia and
thrombocytosis. However, dogs and cats with poly-
 Relative polycythacnia resolves aficr rehydration or
removal of the cause of splenic contraction.
cythaemia vera usually have normal neutrophiland plate-
let counts and so the term prinary erythrocytosis may be
more appropriate.
SECONDARY POLYCYTHAEMIA
ERYTHROPOIESIS
 Secondary polyeythaemia results from incrcased EPO
 In the bone marrow the pluripotent stem cell gives rise
production. This may bc a physiclogically appropriate
to the coummitted erythrocyle progenitor cell known as
response to systernic hypoxia or may occur in the
a burst-forming unit, which divides and differentiates
absence of systemic hypoxia, known as physio-
into colony-forming units. These in turn divide and
logically inappropriate polycythaemia. This condi-
differentialc into erythroblasts, which continue to
tion occurs most commonly in association with renal
divitle into early, intermediate and then late
neoplasia. in animals with secordary polycythaemia,
normoblasts. Reticulocytes are formed whcn the
 serum EPO concentrations arc usually increased.
nucleus is cxiruded froin lalc normoblasts and the red
cells reach full maturation in the blood stream. The key
Physiologically appropriate secondary
regulator of erythuropoiesis is erythropoietin (EPO).
polycythaemia
Tlis hormone is procduced in the kidneys and acts by
 Two uf the most common causes of tissue hypoxia
stimulating the colony-forming units and, to a lesser
 are chronic pulmonary disease (e.g. felinc allergic
extent, the burst-forming units (Giger, 1992). EPO
bronchitis) and right-to-lef shunting carliovascular
 also hastens the rclease of reliculocytes into the bloccl
disease. Right-to-left shunting rmay occur in patent
stream. The synthesis of EPO is not regulated by the
ductus arteriosus. Initially there is a left-to-righi shunt
leading to increased blood Mlow in the pulmonary
number of circulating red cells but by tlic dcgree of
rcnal hypoxia. Hypoxia triggcrs an increased rate of
 artery. Pulimonary hypertension and compensatory
 production of EPO, whereas high tissue oxygenation
right ventricular hypertrophy result in incrcased
results in a reduccd rate. Othcr hormones such as
pulmonary arlery pressure, and when this exceeds
corlicasteruids and thyroxine (T4) stimulate the pro-
the aortic pressure the direction of blood flow in the
 duction of EPO but have no intrinsic EPO activity.
patent ductus reverses. Thus dlcoxygenated blood is
dcliveredl into thedescending aorta resuling in hypoxia
in the caudal half ofthe body and a subsequent increase
RELATIVE POLYCYTHAEMIA
in EPO production. Right-to-lcft shunting rnay also
Relative polycythaemia arises when the plasma
occur in aninals with a coexisting atrial septal defect
volume is dlecrcased, usually as a resull of fluid loss.
and pulmonic stenosis;, and in tetralogy of Fallot in
44
 Manual of Canine and Feline Haermalology and Transfusion Medicine
which there is a large ventricular septal defect and
both cortisol and thyroid hormone stimulate increased
pulmonic slenosis.
production of EPO.
Physiologically apprcpriate polyeythaemia may
also occur in animals living at high altitude. In humans,
polycythaemia may be caused by massive obesity and
PRIMARY POLYCYTHAEMIA
hacimoglobinopathies. Obesity has not been recog-
Primary polycythaemia (polycythaemia vera, pri-
nized as a cause of polycythaemia in chogs and cals.
 (mary erythrocytosis) is a chronic myeloproliferative
 Haemoglobinopathies such as methaeinoglobin re-
disease characterizedl by neoplastic proliferation of
ductase deficiency may cause polycytlhaemia (Hasler
 erythroid precursors, which mature into functionally
and Giger, 1996), but these clisorrlers arc rarc in dogs
and morphologically normal RBCs. The prolifera-
and cats.
respond to normal feedback mechanisms. In animals
Physiologically inappropriate secondary
with prinmary polycythaemia, serum EPO concentra-
polycythaemia
tions are normal or low.
The most common cause of physiologically inappro
 In the dog. secondary polycythaemia is more
priate secundary polycyihacmia is renal neoplasia.
common than primary polycythaemia. In the cat, pri-
 Polycythaemia has been reported in association witl
mary polycythaenmia is the more common form, and
renal adenocarcinoma (also kown as renal cell carci-
although infiltrative rcnal discascs such as lymphoma
noma) (Scott and Patnaik, 1972; Peterson and Zanjani,
and feline infectious peritonitis are common in the cat,
1981; Waters and Pruelcr, 1986; Crow et al., 1995).
tliese diseases rarely result in polycythaemia.
Polycythaemia has also been reported in association
with renal lymphoma and renal fibrosarcoma (Nelson
el al., 1983; Gorse, 1988).
CONSEQUENCES OF
The mechanism of inappropriate EPO production
POLYCYTHAEMIA
is not fully understood. It may be due to increased
 prorluction/secrction of EPO or an EPO-like substance
An excessive number of RBCs results in increased
from the tumour, or it may result from local tissuc
blond volume and increased blood viscosity. The
hypoxia in the kidney, which is caused by a disruption
blood visccsity increases dispropurtionately with
of the renal microvasculaiure by the tumour.
 increases in the PCV above 50%. Blood capillaries
In humans, several cxlrarcnal tumours have bee
and veins are distended to accommodate the in-
associated with secondary polycythaeinia, including
creascd blood volume, and tlhis results in erythema-
hepatoma, uterine leiomyoma, ovarian carcinoma
tous mucous membranes. Bleeding episodes such
 and phaeochromocyloma. Polycythaemia secondary
as epistaxis, haematuria and haematemesis may
 to extrarenal neoplasia is uncommon in the dog
occur, and result from mechanical rupture of capillar-
ese e im sop e u pojodai neeg sey no 'reo pu
ies due to overdistension. Hyperviscosity learls t0
fibrosarcoma (Couto et al., 1989). In this case the
sludging of blood in small vessels, which leads to
tumour was found to have high EPO activity.
tissue hypoxia. The three organs most affected by
 suggesting that the tunour cells produced EPO.
increased blood viscosity are the central nervous
The polycythaeimia rcsolved after resection of the
system (CNS; in particular the cerebral cortex),
tumour.
the kidncys and the heart. Disorders of the CNS
Non-neoplastic renal diseases such as renal cysts
such as scizurcs, lethargy, weakness, ataxia, de-
 and hydronephrosis are well recognized causes of 
mentia, depression and coma may be seen.
 secondary polycythaemia in laumans. However, in 
Glomerulonephropathy may result from glomernular
dogs and cats only small numbers of such cases have
and interstitial capilary hypoxia and lead to protein-
been documented. Hasler and Giger (1996) reported
uria and clinical signs of polydipsia and polyuria.
Hyperviscosity and increased vascular resistance
capsular effusion and in a second cat with fatty
resull in incrcascd cardiac effort, and there may
infiltration of the kidney. EPO concentrations were
be an associated myocardial hypertrophy, which
noticeably increased in these two cais, confirming
secondary polycythaemia. In a report by Waters and
Ocular abnormalitics including distended tortuous
 Prueter (1986), polycythaemia in a Labrador was
blood vessels (Figure 4.1), and occasionally retinal
thought to be assuciated with pyelonephritis duc to
haemorrhage may be present. The sluggish blood
Cryptococcus neoformans infection. However,in this
flow that results from hyperviscosity may predispose
 case, EPO concentrations were not determined, and
to thrombus formation. Iliac thrombosis has bccn
thc polycythaeimia could have been unrelated to the
reported in a dog with primary polycythaemia
renal disease.
(McGrath, 1974). Figure 4.2 summarizes the
Mild polycythaemia may result from hyperadreno-
clinical signs that may bc seen in polycythaeimic
 corticism in dogs and hyperthyroidism in cats, since
dogs and cats.
Polycythaemia
45
Oncc polyeythaemia is recognized, subsequent
evaluation is aimed at determining whether the poly-
cythaemia selative,primaryrsecondary.elative
polyeythaemiaisidentificd whenthe PCVisincrcased
but thc red ccll mass is normal.The red cell mass can
be measured using an isotope dilution technique
whereby RBCs are removed from the patient and
labclledwithradioactivechromium.Theradioactivity
of the labelled red cells ismeasured before they are
reinjected into the patient,and the radioactivity of
blood samples taken 20 and30minutes afierinjection
is measured.In practice it israrely necessary to meas-
Figure 4.1:Distended and tortuous retinaibloodvessels
ure the red cell mass,because animals withrelative
resutting from hyperviscosity.(Photographcourtesy of NT
polycythaemia usuallyhave obvious clinical signs of
Gorman.)
dehydration,and thePCV rcturns tonorinal when the
patient isrehydrated.In addition,increased plasma
Hyperaemic mucous membranes
proteinconcentration andamild degree of polycythae-
Not always seen
mia both suggest relative polyeythaemia.
Neurological signs
Once relative polycythaemia has been excluded,
Disoricntation
investigations are aimed at distinguishing primary
Depression, stupor, coma
from sccondary polycythaemia.This is achieved by
Seizures
searchingforpossible causes of secondary polycythae-
Weakness
mia (e.g.cardiopulmonary disease or renal disease)
Blindness
and by cvaluation ofEPOconcentrations.
Ataxia
Clinical signs of respiratory disease (e.g. coughing,
Renal signs
dyspnoea) or cardiac disease (e.g. cardiac murmur.
arrhythmia,cyanosispoint towardssecondaryapro-
Polydipsia/polyuria
priate polycythaemia. Thoracic radiography.
Bleeding episodes
Epistaxis
in diagnosing pulmonary or cardiac disease.If ablood
Haematemesis
gasmachine isavailable (e.g.at the local hospital), the
Haematuria
partial pressure of oxygen in arterial blood (PaO)
Hacmorrhagic diarrhoea
should bemeasured.Thefemoral artery orthe dorsal
Oeular signs
metatarsal artery are suitable sampling sites.Thc nor-
Tortuous distendedretinalvessels
mal PaO in a dog or cat breathing room airis 85-100
Retinal haemorrhage
mmHg.In cases ofphysiologically appropriatepoly-
Distended scleral vessels
cythaemia the PaO,is usually noticeably reduced (c.g.
<60mmHg).A pulseoximetermay beused tomcasure
Splenomegalyis occasionally seenin catswith
primary erythrocytosis
the arterial haemoglobin saturation (SaO).The nor-
Paroxysmal sneezing is quite cominon in dogs
mal SaO,is 97%.As with thc PaO,the SaOis
(owing to increased blood viscosity in nasal
mucosa)
cythaemia.Animals with primarypolycythaemia may
havemildlyreducedSaOandPaO,whichmay beduc
Figure 4.2:Clinical signsofpolycythaemia.
to blood hyperviscosity resulting in poor tissue
perfusion.
LABORATORYFINDINGSAND
If systemic hypoxia has been ruled out,the investi
DIAGNOSIS
gation is aimed at scarching for potcntial causes of
inappropriate polycythaemia.This is most commonly
Aninercasc in the packed cell volume(>55%in dogs
due to renal neoplasia,althoughnon-neoplastic renal
and >45% in cats) indicates polycythaemia. In dogs
discase shouldalso be considered.Acranial abdominal
andcatswithabsolute polycythaemia the PCVis often
mass orrenomegalymaybe obvious on clinical exami-
as high as 70-90%,whercasinrelativepolycythaemia
nation or may be detected on plain radiographs.An
the PCV is usually mildly increased (e.g. 60%). In
intravenousurogram and/or anultrasoundcxamination
absolute polycythaemia there maybe a mildreticulo-
of the kidneys are used toidentify neoplasia or other
cytosis,and microcytosis is sometimes seen in dogs,
renal disease (Figure 4.3).Ultrasound examination is a
which occurs due to a relative iron deficiency in an
convenientscreening test.Whenrenalabnormalitiesare
active bonemarrow.Primary polycythaemia is some-
detected,a fineneedle aspiratc ortrucut biopsy maybe
times accompanied by amild thrombocytosis.
obtained.Other tests such as biochemical screening and
Manual of Caninc andFelineHaematology and TransfusionMedicine
urine analysis are helpful.Serum urea and creatinine
Glomerulonephropathy may be caused by poly-
concentrations are usually normal in cases of renal
cythaemia as a result of renal hypoxia due to
neoplasia unlesshothkidncys are involved.In cases of
hyperviscosity (Page et al.,1990; Quesneland Kruth,
renal neoplasia,urine analysismayreveal proteinuria,
1992).Renal discascs such as pyelonephritis may
haematuriaandanactivesediment.Proteinuriamayalso
causc sccondary polyeythaemiaThus it maybe diff-
be duetoglomerulonephropathy,whichmaybesecond-
cult to determine if non-neoplasticrenal disease is a
ary to polyeythaeimia.
consequence ofprimarypolycythaemia or if it is the
undcrlying cause ofthe polyeythacmia,and in this
situation serum EPO concentrationsshould always be
evaluated.
A diagnosis of primary polycythaemia is made if
causes of secondarypolycythaemia have been ex-
cludedandifserumEPOconcentrations arelowor
normal.Asprimarypolycythaemiaislargely adiagno-
sisofcxclusion,the accuracyof this diagnosis depends
on the extent of the clinicopathological investigation.
Figure 4.4 summarizes the diagnostic approach to
polycythaemia.
SerumEPO concentrations
Assessment of serumEPOconcentrationsis helpful in
Figure 4.3:Ulirasound examinationof thiskidneyrevealeda
distinguishing primary from secondary polyeythae-
large iumour(openarrows)distorting the medulla(closed
arrow)andcortex(arrowhead).(Photographcourtesy of
mia,because high values point towards secondary
MEHerrtage.)
polycythaemia and low or normal values are consistent
Figure 4.4:Approach to
IncreasedPCV
thepolycythaemic patient.
PCV,packed cellvolume;
EPO,erythropoietin.
Signs of dehydration
Nosignsofdehydration
Normaipiasma proteins
Relative polycythaemia
Absolute polyeythaemia
Thoracicradiogrcpiy
No abnormalities
Hypoxia
Secondary appropriate
polycythaemia
Intravenous urograply
oplastic
No abnormalities
renal discase
Secondary inappropriate
polycythaemia
EPOassay
EPO essey
Incre
Normal/low
Renal disease unrelated
Secondary
Primary
to,or causedby,
polycythaemia
polycythaemia
oe
Secondaryinappropriate
polyeythaemia
Reoplasmelsewhere
Polycythaemia
47
with primary polycythaemia.EPO can bemeasured by
using bioassays that detect the hormone’s activity or
by immunoassays that detect the EPO antigen(Giger,
1992).Bioassays arc not sensitive enough to detect
normal or reduced conccntrations of EPO,and can
only detect increased EPO activity.Anotherdisadvan-
tagc ofbioassays is that laboratory animals are used in
the test.Two immunoassays that have been validated
for use in dogs and cats are the EPO-Trac I25I radio-
immunoassay (IncstarLtd)(Cook and Lothrop,1994)
and the Medac ELISA (Medac Diagnostics)(Hasler
and Giger,1996).Dogs and cats with primary poly-
cylhaemiahave low or low-normal concentrations of
Figure 4.5:Bonemarrow aspiratefroma dogwith primary
EPO;and a low or normal serum EPOvalue in an
polycythaemia showingerythroid myperplasia(E.early
animal with no signs of sccondary polycythaemia
normoblast;1,intermediatenormoblast;L,latenormoblast).
supports a diagnosis of primary polycythaemia.High
The erythroidcelisaremorphologicallynormilandbone
Conccntrations of serum EPO are only seen in second-
marrowcytologydoesnothelptodifferentiateprimaryfrom
ary polycythaemia.A studyusing aradioimmunoassay
secondary potycythaemia.(Photograph courtesy ofJ KDunn.)
in polycythaemic dogs found that serum EPO concen-
trations were slightly to moderately increased in dogs
withcongenital heart liscase and pulmonary disorders
TREATMENT
and moderately to noticeably increased in dogs with
renal tumours(Giger,1991).However,notall casesof
Polycythaemia
secondary polyeythacimia are associatedwith high
The freatment of polycythaemia depends on the under-
serum EPO concentrations.In two reports,cats with
lying cause of the disease.Animals withrelativc poly-
renal tumours hadnormal serumEPOconcentrations
cythaemia should be treatedwith fluid therapy to
(Cook and Lothrop, 1994;Hasler and Giger, 1996).
correct dehydration.Initial treatment of absolute poly-
Possibleexplanationsforthisarcthattherenal tumours
cythaemirecivftcaused
may have produced an EPO-like substance that was
ing the blood viscosity by reducing the number of
not recognizcd by the assay or thatEPOproduction
circulating red cells.This is achieved by performing a
was cyclic.EPO concentrationsmay also be normal in
phlebotomy,removing 20 ml/kg of blood and replac-
animals with polycythaemia secondary to chronic
ing the removed bloodvolumewith 0.9%saline.This
hypoxia (Cook and Lothrop,1994; Hasler and Giger,
results in a decrease in thc PCV by about 15%.The
1996). The animal may in tine adapt to hypoxia,
jugular vein is usually used. In dogs, blood may be
resulting in a gradual decrease in EPO production.
collected by using a blood transfusion collection sct,
Hence EPO concentrations should always be inter-
whcrcasincatsa 60mlsyringeanda19 gauge butterfly
preted in conjunction with the clinical findings and
needle are useful. In animals with polycythaemia sec
should never replace a thorough clinicopathological
ondary to chronic hypoxia,a more cautious approach
is recommended because sudden removal of a large
cvaluation.
In theUnited Kingdom,EPO concentrations in the
amount of blood may exacerbate the hypoxiaand may
dog and cat may be assayed at Cambridge Spccialist
result in hypotension. Therefore 5 ml/kg of blood is
Laboratory Services Ltd (PO Box 967, Stapleford,
removcd atone time,andrepeated asneededuntil the
Cambridge CB25XY).A serum sample or plasma
PCV has decreased to 55-60%.
collected in ethylenediamine tetra-acetic acid may be
In animals with polycythaemia secondary to surgi-
used.
callyresectable renal tumours,itisimportant to carry
Bonemarrowcytology
is associated with an increased risk of thrombosis
Bone marrow aspirates are oftenobtainedaspart ofthic
and/or excessive haemorrhage. Renal adenocarcino-
investigation of polycythaemic animals,but they do
masmay be containedwithin the renal capsule ormay
invade surrounding structures such asthevcna cava
cythaemia and are generally not useful.In both pri-
and may not be amenable to surgical excision. Occa-
mary and secondary polyeythaemia the bonemarrow
sionallyothkidneysmay beaffected.Indogswith
is usually hypercellular and thc myeloid:erythroid
renal adenocarcinoma,metastases to regional lymph
ratiomaybenormalordecreased owingto hyperplasia
nodes,liver,lungs and bone are present in more than
of thc erythroid series.Although primary polycythae-
half the cases at the time of diagnosis (Baskin and
mia is amyeloproliferative disease,the red cells and
DePaoli,1977).In those cascs where surgicalexcision
theirprecursors aremorphologicallynormaland do
is possible,meansurvival times afersurgery are0
not appear neoplastic (Figure 4.5).
months(Kleinet al.,1988),although survival times of
48
 Manual of Canine and Feline Haemalology and Transfusion Medicine
several years have been reported (Withrow, 1996). In
Hydroxyurea is the cytotoxic drug of choice and is
three dogs with polycythaermia secondary to renal
adenocarcinoma thal undervent nephrectonmy, poly-
ible bone marrow suppression by inhibiing DNA
cythaemia did not adversely affect thie prognosis (Scott
syuthcsis without affccting RNA or protein synthesis.
 and Patnaik, 1972; Peterson and Zanjani, 1981; Waters
After an initial phlebotomy, a loading dose of 30 mg/
and Prueter, 1986).
kg/day is given for 7--10 days, followed by a inainte-
nancec dose of 15 mg/kg/day. Haematology is moni-
Primary polycythaemia
tored at 7- 14 day intervals until the PCV is stable and
Three treatment modalities have been used in the
within the normal range, and then every 6-8 weeks. If
Arcalincnt of primary polycythaernia: repeaterl phle-
thc PCV incrcascs while the animal is on maintenance
botomy,chemotherapy in the form of hydroxyurea and
therapy, phlebotony may be repeated and/or the dose
radioactive phosphorus. Combinations of phlebotomy
of hydroxyurea may be increased for 7-10 days, after
and hydroxyurea, or phlebotomy and radicactive phos-
which tinie the dose is reduced to the maintenance dose
phorus, have alsa been used.
again. Since the drug causes bone marrow supprcssion
 In humans, phlebotomy alone is usually used as the
it has the potential to cause thrcmbocytopenia, which
first line of treatment, except in elderly patients Or
may result in spontaneous bleeding, and neutropenia,
hosc with thrombotie complications. The main disarl-
which may rcsult in life-threatening sepsis. It is thcrc-
vantage of phlebotomy is an increased lisk of thrombo-
fore mandatory to monitor the patient's haematology
sis, which is unrelated to the platelet cout and thought
regularly while on maintenance treatment. If tlhrombo-
to be due to the poor stability of the hacmalocril.
cytopenia or ncutropenia occurs, hydroxyurca treal-
Therapy with aspirin to try to prevent thrombosis has
ment should be temporarily suspended until the counts
not been widely successful and imay result in
return to normal and then reintroduced at a lower dose.
haemorrhagic complications (Tartaglia, 1986). An-
Antibiotics should be given while the patienmt is neulro-
other disadvantage of phlebotomy is a risk of early
penic. Other potential side effects in the dog include
progression to myelofibrosis and myeloid spleno-
 anorexia, vomitingandsloughingof the claws (Peterson
megaly, which is sometimes scen as a latc complica-
and Randolph, 1982). In practice, such side cffccts arc
tion of the disease in humans (Najean er al., 1994).
rarely seen,
 Frequent phlebotomies may lead to iron deficiency.
Hydroxyurea issupplied in SO0 mg capsules. These
which in turn lcads lo the devclopment of microcytic
capsules should not be broken open as this would
red cells. Since the red cclls arc smaller, the PCV
expose the handler to a potentially mutagenic anl
remains in the normal range for a longer period, and
teratogenic substancc. Thcreforc lhe total number of
iron supplements are not routinely given unless there
 milligrams required for a set period should be calcu-
are signs of severe iron rleficicncy. Both radioactive
lated and the capsules spread evenly over that pcriod.
phosphorus and hydroxyurea chemotherapy are effec-
For example, a cat wcighing 3.5 kg would require a
tive and well tolerated, with a lower incidence of
daily maintenance dose of 52.5 mg, which is one 10th
thrombotic complications. Tlcy are, however, associ-
ofa tablet. Therefore, one tablet should be given every
ated with an increased incidence of leukaemia and, in
10 days. This bolus-typc dosing may occasionally
the case of radioactive phosphorus, other cancers
result in an adverse reaction in cats, leading to met-
(Weinfeld er al., 1994; Najcan et al., 1996). Rarlio-
hacmoglobinaemia and haemolytic anaemia with Heinz
active phosphorus is often used in elderly patients
bodies (Watson et al., 1994). Early rlctecticn of such a
because leukaemia is unlikely to occur in their lifetime.
Aoi e suai Ae sq paaaroe an pinoo uo
In dogs and cats tlhere arc few reported cascs of
 dosc more frequently (which would entail splitting
 primary polycythaemia treated by phlebotomy alone.
capsules). Watson et al. (1994) recotnmended giving
In one report a cat survived more than 20 months
cats 125 mg every other day for 2 weeks, then 250 mg
(Foster and Lothrop, 1988),and in another report a dog
Iwicc a week for 2 weeks, then 500 mg once a week.
survived a year and was generally free of clinical signs
The cat could be admitterl to lospilal before each dose
(Meyer et al., 1993). Providing that the procedure is
increment. Blood taken at the tirme of the initial phle-
well toleratcd, this method of treatment is safe and
botomy should be stored in case a severe methaemo-
effective, although the risk of thrombosis may be
globinacmia develops.
increased as it is in humans. In the report by Meyer ef
Radioactive phosphorus (P'P) bas been used in
al. (1993) the dog died suddenly, and the authors
small numbers of dogs with polycytlhaemia. After
postulated that this may have been due to thrombosis.
atlninistration, 2Pis taken upby bone where it dccays.
 The frequency of phlebotomies is determined by
thereby irradiating the adljacent baemopoietic cells in
the PCV, which, together with the clinical response,
the bone marrow, It is well tolerated and associated
should be monitored frequently (e.g. monthly). If
with miaimal short-term side effects, alilhough the
phlebotomy is required more frequently than every
potential carcinogenic effects secn in human patients
 4-6 weeks, myelosuppressivetherapy is rccormmended,
 presumably also affect the dog. In a report by Smith
and this is usually in the forn of cheamotherapy.
and Turrcl (1989), a single treatnent resulted in long-
Polycythaemia
6
term control in ahout 40% of cascs, although 25% of
Najean Y, Dresch C and Rain JD (1994) The very long lerni course uf
polyeythacnia: a conplenent to the previously published data of
cases showed no response. The main disadvantage of
the Polyeythaemia Vera Studly Group. Rritish Journa! of
this lrcatment is the requirement for isolation of the
Haewarology 86. 233-235
animal in purposc-built preniscs.
(1996) Risk of lcukacmia, careinou and myclofibrosis in 2p- or
chemotherapy-treated patients with polyeythaemia vera: u
prespeclivearulysisof 682 cases. The Frencl Co-operative Group
For the Shudy ofPolyeylhaemias. Lekem mnd Lynpoma. 22
REFERENCES AND FURTHER
(suppl 1), I 11-- 119
READING
Nelson RW, Hager D and Zanjani ED (1983) Renal lymplhosarcoma
with inappropriate crythropoietin production ina dog.Journal of
the American Vererinary Medical Associarion 182, 1396-1397
Baskin GB and DePaoli A (I977) Prinary rcnal ncoplasms of the dog.
Page RL, Stiff ME, McEntee MC and Walter LG (1990) Trunsien
Vererinary Pathology 14, 591-605
glomerulonephropathyassociatedwithprimarycrythrocytosisina
Canpbel KC(1990) Diagncsis and nunagemcnt of polyeyaeniu is
dog.Journaiofte Ameriean Veterinary MedicaiAssoeietion 196,
dogs. Compendium on Contiming Edteafion for the Practicing
620-622
Veterinarim 12,543-550
Peterson ME and Randolph JF (1982) Diagnosis of canine primaury
polycythaemia and managcnent with hydroxyurea. Jorrnai ofte
measurel by radioirnmunaassay in normal, polycythaenia and
Americaar Vererimary Medical Associarion 180, 415-418
anaemic dogs and cas.Journal of Veterinary fuernat Medicine 8,
 Peterson ME and Zanjani ED (1981) Inappropriate crythropoietin 
18-25
production from a renal carcinoma in a dog witlh polyeyihacnsia.
Couto CG, Boudricau RJ and Zanjani ED (1989) Tumour associated
Joumal ofthe American Veterinury MedicalAssociaion 179,995-
erythrocytosis in a dog with nasal fibrusarcoina. Journal of
996
Veterinary fauermal Medieine 3, 183-185
Quesnel AD and Kruth SA (1992) Polycytlhaemia vera and
Crow SE, Allen DP, Muephy CI and Culbertson R (1995) Concurrent
gloneruleneplritis in a dog. Canacdian Veierinary Jonrna! 33.
renal adlenucarcinonu amd polycythacmia ina dog. Journai ofthe
671-672
Anterer Anat Hospitei Association 31, 29-33
 Scolt RC and Patnaik AK (i972) Renal carcinoma with secondary
Fuster ES and Lathrop CD (t988) Polycythaemia in a cat with cardiac
polycythaemia in a dog. Jornal ofthe Ameriean Antmai Hospital
hypertrophy. Journat of the American Veterinary Medica?
Association 8, 275-283
Association192, 1736-1738
 Smith M and Turrel JM (1989) Radioplhosphorus trcatment of bonc
Giger U (1991) Serum crythropoictin conccntrations in polycythacnnic
tmarrov disorders in dogs: 11 cases (1970-1987). Journai of the
and anaemic dogs. Proceedings of the y American Colfege
Ameriean Vererinary Medieal Associarton 194, 98-102
Vererinary lmernat Medicine Forum, Pp. 143-145. New Orieans,
Taraglia AP(1986) Adversueffectsofanti-aggregating platelet therapy
Louisiana
in tereatment f polycytamia vera.Senrsn Haenatology
Giger U (1992) Frythropoietin and its clinical usc. Conpendiau of
23, 172-175
Continring Eaducatianfor the Practicing Veterinarien 14, 25-34
Waters DJ and Preter JC (1986) Secondary polycythaemia associated
Gorse M I (1988) Palycythaemia associated with renal fibrosarcoma in
with renal disease in the dog: rwo case reports and review of
a dog. Journai of the Anerican Vererinary Medical Associarion
literature. Journal of the Americm Animat Hospitat Associarion
192, 793-794
31, 29-33
Hasier AH and Giger U (1996) Scrum erytlropaictin values ial
WatsonADJ, Moorc ASand Helfuml SC (1994) Primary eryllroeytosis
polycythacmie cuts, Journai of the Anerican Aninei Hospia!
in the cal: μrentnent will hydroxyurea. Journet of Suoil Arit
Associarior32,294-30
Pructice 35, 320-325
Kicin MK, Cockrell GL and Wilrow SJ (1988) Cauue primary renal
Weinield A, Swolin B and Westlin I (i994) Acute lenkaemta after
teplassaospcivereviwf5casJo
hydroxyrethalycyhamveandalddisrde:
Americ Anmal Hospitei Association 24, 443-452
McGrath CJ (1974) Polyeythaemia veraindogs.Jouualofthe Americar
implications (1994). Earopean Jonrnal of Hlaenmology 52, 134-
Veterinary Medlical Association 164, 1i17-1121
139
MeyerIP, Slappcnde RJand Grcydanaus-van de Putien SWM(1993)
Veterinary Quarterly 14, 108-111
Saundlers, London
CHAPTER FIVE
Erythrocyte Disorders: Selected Topics
CHAPTERFIVE
(i) Iron Deficiency Anaemia
MikeStone
INTRODUCTION
vealedan ovoidfillingdefect inside a dilated loop of
small intestine (Figure 5.2).A second transfusion of
Iron deficiency anaemiain small animalmcdicine is
packed red cells was given, and an ulcerated leio-
most commonly seen as a result of insufficient intake
myoma was surgically removed from the mid-jeju-
oflietary iron or chronicblood loss.Thefollowing
num.The dog was discharged two days after surgery,
case history is an example of iron deficiency anaemia
with aPCVof31%.On day15thePCVwas23%.but
in a dog. An 8-year-old mixed breed dog weighing 29
there wcrc 10.8%reticulocytes in the blood.Although
kgwas cvaluated for melaena and anaemia.Haema
iron deficiencywas suspected,ironwasnot givcn,on
tology revealed microcytic hypochromic non-regen-
the assumptionthat thebloodtransfusions anddiet
erative anaemia (Figure 5.1, day 1). On physical
would supply adequate iron forhaematopoiesis.On
examination thepatientwastachypnoeicand hadpale
day29,however,thereticulocyteresponsehaddropped
mucous membranes. On rectal cxamination there was
to 0.7%,with a PCVof 22%.Ferrous sulphate was
black stool,which gave a positive test result foroccult
begun at 100mg orally twice daily,and after 3weeks
blood.Tachypnoea resolved afterthe dogreceived one
thePCVhadincreased to 41%.Iron therapy was
unit of packed red cells,and thc packed ccll volume
continuedoncedailyfor4months.Thedogcompletely
(PCV)increasedfrom14%to21%.Radiographstaken
recovered and continued to do well after iron therapy
after the oral administration of barium sulphate re-
wasdiscontinued.
Day1
Day 3
Day15
Day29
Day54
Reference
values
Packed cell
14
21
23
22
41
37-56
volume(%)
Mean corpuscular
44
64
55-77
volume (fl)
Mean corpuscular
307
320
337-365
concentration (g/l)
Retieulocytes(%)
0.8
5.1
10.8
0.7
<2
Red cell
3+ polychromasia
3+polychromasia,
1+polychromasia
morphology
2+ hypochromasia,
2+ anisocytosis,
11nucleatedred
cells/100 white cells
57
62
63
68
72
50-80
Totalprotein(g/l)
Total nucleated cell
30.7
51.2
16.7
15.2
10.8
5-15
count (x 10°/)
24.3
39
13.4
10.6
8.4
3.9-12
Segmented
neutrophils (x10²/1)
Band neutrophils
1.5
1.9
1.0
2.3
0.5
0-1.0
(x10/1)
Lymphocytes
4.9
1.4
1.5
0.9
0.8
0.8-3.6
(x10/)
Eosinophils (x 10°/)
0
4.2
0.3
0.8
0.5
0-1.8
Platelets (x10°/)
Increased
520
Incrcased
200-500
Figure5.1:Haematology ofa dogwithirondeficiency anaemia.
54
Manual of CanineandFelineHaematologyandTransfusionMedicine
Figure 5.2:
tured in the liver, and liver iron stores may regulate
productions iron stores areincreased,less tranf
radiograph showing
rin is produced. Iron bound to transferrin circulates in
ovoid filling defect
the plasma and ultimately ends upin the bonemarrow
in small intestine
(arrow) ofa dog 30
where iron is released into the developing red blood
minutesafteroral
cell.Haemoglobin production controls red cell divi-
administrationof
sion andreleasefrom themarrow.Inthenormalstate
barium.
theredcellisreleased fromthemarrowwhen a critical
concentration ofhaemoglobin is reached inside the
cell(about 33%).With iron deficiency,insufficient
haemoglobinproduction occurs and thered cellscon-
tinue to divide in order to approach the necessary
haemoglobinconcentration.Although the33%hae-
moglobin concentration point is neverreached(result-
ing inhypochromie cells),the cxtra division produccs
smaller (microcytic) cells.Thus the typical red cells
produced duringperiods ofiron deficiencyarehypo
chromic and microcytic.
Haemoglobin in red cells circulates until the red
cell's life span is reached. Old red cells are phagocy-
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
tosed by cellsof thc mononuclcar phagocytic system
(MPS), and the haemoglobin is degraded to yield iron.
Sixtyfivepercentofbodyironoccurs in haemoglohin,
When there are abundant body stores,iron is stored
intracellularly asferritinor haemosiderin.Ferritin is
storage forms of haemosiderin and ferritin. During
themore labileof the two storagc forms and can more
iron deficieney,iron storcs are depleted first, while
readilyrelease its iron when required.Water-soluble
bloodhaemoglobinconcentrationsarerelatively spared.
ferritin molecules will denature if not used and form
Once iron deficiency has progressed to the point of
large water insoluble aggrcgalcs callcd hacmosiderin.
causing anacmiabody stores of iron willhavebeen
Haemosiderin can be seen on examination of bone
completely depleted.With iron replacement therapy,
marrow andinhistologicalbiopsy samples withspecial
haemoglobinconcentrationsincrease beforebodystores
staining.Because ferritin is watcr solublc, it is lost
are replenished. Therapy for iron deficiency must
during the staining procedure and cannot be seen.Iron
therefore becontinuedwell beyond thetime it takes to
obtainedfromthebreakdown ofhaemoglobinmaybe
return thehaematocrit to normal.
rclcasedfrom theMPS cell,bound to transferrin,taken
Dietary iron is absorbed primarily in the upper
back to the bone marrow and reutilized to producc
small intestine and is carricd in the plasma bound to a
haemoglobin.Figure 5.3 shows this route ofiron
carrier protein, transferrin.Transferrin is manufac-
conscrvation.
Ferritin
Hac
siderir
Iron+transferrin
Bilirubin
Red hloodcell
Red blood cell
Red
Globin
blood
cell
Mononuclear phagocyticcell
Bloodstream
Bone
Figure5.3:Thebody isabletoreutilize ironfrom thebreakdown of haemoglobinwithinmononuclearphagocyticcells.Theiron
bindstotransferrin and isreturned to thebonemarrow andused toproducemore haemoglobin.
IronDeficiency Anaemia
55
The body is extremely efficient at iron conserva-
Iron deficicncyinolderanimalsismostcommonly
tion, and only small amounts of iron are lost in the
caused by chronicbloodloss.Parasites,bleeding nco-
urine,faeces,hairand squamous cells.Thetotal daily
plasms orulcers andrepeatedphlebotomies arepoten-
iron loss is about1 to2mg and intestinal absorption
tial causcs of iron deficiency (Comer, 1990).To create
casily equals that amount.Bloodis a rich source of
iron deficiency,blood loss must be chronic as body
iron,and chronicblood loss can therefore create ron
ironstorescan correctasinglebleedingepisodc.Blood
deficiency.Blood contains about 0.5mg of iron per
lossmust also be external to create iron deficiency.
millilitre.Thus abloodlossof10ml will create an iron
Bleeding intobody cavities(haemoperitoneum,
deficit of5mg,whichisgreater than twicethebody’s
haemothorax,haematoma formation)or hacmolysis
normal daily loss.
will not cause iron depletion as thered cellswill be
phagocytosed and their iron reutilized.
Erythropoietintherapymayinducea profounderyth-
CAUSESOFIRONDEFICIENCY
ropoiesis and increased demand foriron.Patients who
have rcnal failure,borderline nutritional status and
The major causes of iron deficiency in animals are
poor responsc to crythropoietin therapymay benefit
summarized in Figurc5.4.Iron deficiency is quite
from iron supplementation.
common inyoung animals andis acceptedasa normal
phenomenon.Studiesofnormalbloodvaluesinkittens
and puppies havc cstablished that the PCVis normal at
TESTSOFIRONMETABOLISM
birthbut soon decreases,and amicrocytichypochro
mic anaemia develops.After animals are weaned,the
A common approach to the anaemicpatient should
PCV andred blood cell indicesreturn tonormal.The
include acompleteblood countwithreticulocyte and
development of anaemia in kittens canbe lcssened by
platelet counts,biochemical profile,urinalysis and
giving iron, suggesting iron deficiency as its cause
faecal flotation.If the cause of anaemia isnot readily
(Weiser and Kociba,1983).
graphic barium study and testing for faccal occult
blood should be considered,as the gastrointestinal
Insufficient intake
systemis the nost common site of occult blood loss
(Comer,1990). Tests that are helpful to confirm the
Newborn animals
diagnosis of iron deficiency are listed below (Stone
Blood loss
and Freden,1990).
 Intcrnal parasitism (e.g. severe hookworm
Haematology
infestation)
With irondeficicncy the development ofamicrocytic
External parasitism (e.g. severe flea infestation)
hypochromic anaenia is classic.The mean corpuscu-
Bleeding gastrointestinal neoplasm or ulcer
lar volume(MCV) decreasesmore reliably than the
Repeated phlebotomies from blood donors or
mcancorpuscularhaemoglobinconcentration(MCHC)
polycythaemic patients
(Weiser and O'Grady,1983;Fulton et al.,1988).A
histogram graphically depicts the varying sizes of red
Rapid erythropoiesis
cells and may be amore sensitive indicator of iron
Erythropoietin therapy of anaemia
deficiency than a singleMCVvalue.Iron deficiency is
shown by anincreasein thered cell distribution width
Figure 5.4:Causes ofiron deficieney.
(RDW),as shown in Figure 5.5. In humans,RDW is
the firstabnormal paramctcrtodevelopafterdepletion
Iron deficiency in young animals is common be
ofbone marrow iron,occurring bcfore serum iron
causemilk is lowin iron.Frombirth until weaning.
concentration decreases (Oski,1993).Red cells be-
aninalsfcd exclusively ona milkdietmustrely upon
comc less deformable during iron deficiency, and
their own stores ofiron to crcatc haemoglobin.In
erythrocytefragmentationmay thcrcforebepresent.
piglets,supplementationof iron at birthis economi
Thrombocytosis has frequentlybeen observedwith
callyiportant toincreasegrowthrate,ncreaseresist
iron deficiency andmaybe associatedwithchronic
ance to infctionand decreasemortality,but thishas
blood loss (Schloesser et al.,1965).
not seemed necessary in other domestic species,evn
thoughirondeficiencyisrecognized(Mahaffey,1986).
Serum iron concentration
In humans,iron deficiency in childhood may have
Serumiron concentrations areexpected tobc lowwith
damaging long-term consequences and should be pre-
irondeficiency.Serum iron will,however,alsobelow
vented(Lozoff etal.,1991;Oski,1993).Further stud
with acute or chronicinflammatoryreactions,hypo-
iesneed toaddressthc potentialimportance of neonatal
thyroidism and renal disease.Increased serum iron
iron deficiency in small animals.
concentrationshavebeen associatedwithglucocorti-
56
Erythrocyte protoporphyrin
Incrcascd protoporphyrin concentrations are expected
MCV G5 fl
RDW 13%
with iron deficiency. Protoporphyrin is an intermedi-
ate step in the production of haemogiobin, and wlien
 iron is limited, concentrations of this compoundl in-
crease (Weeks et al., 1990). Protoporphyrin concen-
trations may also be increased by lead poisoning and
frequency
chronic inflammation.
美
Serum ferritin
Ferritin is a protein which stores iron. It is especially
Relative :
found in cells of thc MPs in the livcr, spleen and bonc
MCV 60 f!
marrow. A small amount of circulating ferritin has
RDW 22%
been discovered and is believed to originate from the
liver and splccn. The exact function of circulating
ferritin is not known, but the serum concentration has
 been found to correlate well with total body iron stores
(Weeks et al., 1989). When iron stores arc dccrcased
the serum ferritin concentrations are low. Ferritin is an
-l aq Aeu suuuo pue ud asud anon.
creased by an acute inflammatory insull. Incrcased
Cell volume
 concentrations have also been found in association
with certain neoplasms (Newlands et al., 1994).
Figure5.5:ldealizedhistogramsofnormal(above）andiron
deficient (below) canine erythrocytes. The widening ofthe
Bone marrow iron
curve in iron deficient erythroeytes represenis u bipoputation
Bone marrow smears can be evaluated for iron stores
of mierocytic and nornrocytie red celis. MCV, mean
corpuscular votume; RDW, red cell distribution widi.
with special staining. Bone marrow macroplages
store iron if body stores are adequate. Bone marrow
 iron will be absent if iron depletion has progressed
coid administration, parenteral iron therapy and liver
to the point of causing anaermia. This is the most
disease (Kaneko, 1980; Simith, 1992). Concentrations
accurate method of estinating body iron slorcs bul
Of serum iron also fluctuate on a daily basis.
has the disadvanfage of being an invasive test. Bone
marrow in the cat may not contain stainable iron in the
Total iron binding capacity and transferrin
normal state (Harvey, 1997).
saturation
In summary, the lypical anaemia of iron dleficicncy
 Total iron binding capacity (TIBC) is the amount of
is microcytic and hypochromic or normochromic with
iron that may potcmtially be held in the bound state
increased erythrocyte fragmentation, increased plate-
in a givenl amount of blood. This value is an indirect
let numbers, low scrum iron concentration, normal 10
measure of the amount of transferrin in the blood
increased TIBC, low transferrin saturation, increased
since transfcrin is the major protein carrying iron.
erythrocyte protoporphyrin concentration, low serum
TIBC can be measured by flocdling a blood sample
ferritin concentration and iron absent from the bonc
with iron, removing the unbound portion, and deter-
marrow.
mining the scrum iron concentration. The per cent
saturation of transferrin is calcalated with TIBC
and serum resting iron concentration. In the normal
TREATMENT OF IRON DEFICIENCY
animal, serum iron concentration is about 100 μg/dl
and TIBC is about 300 μg/dl, thereforc the normal
The therapeutic dose of iron is 2 to 10 mg/kg per
pcr ccnt saturation of transferrin is 100/300 or
day, based on the iron conlcnt of the preparation.
around 33%.
Ferrous sulphate, ferrous fumarate and ferrous
 Iron deficiency causcs scrum iron concentralion
 gluconate may all be effective, however ferrous
lo dccrcase and transferrin saturation to fall. Less
sulphate has been recommended as the treatment of
 than 15% transferrin saturation is highly suggestive
choice for iron deficiency (Harvey et al., 1982). Food
of iron deficiency (Wciscr and O'Grady, 1983).
rcduccs absorption of iron in humans and it may be
Serum TIBC is higher than normal in humans with
preferable to give iron in the fasting state, even if the
iron deficiency due to increased hepatic production
dose must be reduced (Hillman, I990). Side effects
of transferrin, but in thc dog, lransferrin production
of giving iron orally are primarily gastrointestinal
 does nol seem to increase with iron deficiency
and may includeabdominal pain, vomiting. diarrhoea
(Weeks et al., 1990).
or constipation.
Jron Deficiency Anaemia
57
 Injcctable iron dextran may be indicated in patients
Fulton R, Weiser MG, Freshman JL, Gasper PW, Fetman PW (1988)
with malabsorptivc disease or when intolerance to oral
Elcctronic and rnorpholagic characterization of crythrocytes of an
adult cat with iron deficiency anemin. Veterinary Prthology 25,
iron prevents effective therapy. Pain at the injection
521-523
Harvey JW (1997) Bonc marrow exainiuation. 1n: Proceedings 0f rhe
site may be prolonged and therefore intramuscular
IArmatCollege ofVererinary ternt Medicine Forum.p.12
injection is discouraged unless specifically indicated.
Harvey JW, French Tw, Meyer DJ (1982) Chronic iron leficieney
Iron dextran is givcn at 50 mg per cat i.m. for 18-day-
anenia in dogs. Journal of the American Aniunl Hospitn!
Association 18, 946-960
old kittens (Weiser and Kociba, 1983) or 10 mg/kgi.m.
Hillman RS (1990) Dnugs effective in iron deficiency and other
 as a single dose for adult dogs and cats (Mahaffey.
bypachromic anemias, In: The Pharmacofogicai Basis of
1986). Humans that are not coumpliant with oral. therapy
Therapentics, 8" edt, cd. A Guodiman Gilman er al., pp. 1282-
1292. Pergatnun Prcss, New Yorlk
 may be given iron dextran intravenously (Andrews,
Kaneko J (1980 lron metabolism. In: Clhical BioehemisryofDomestic
1999) but the author has no experience with this
Aimals, 3 cdir, ed. JI Kaneko, Dp. 649-669. Academic Press,
New York
method of administration in animals.
Lozoff F, Jinencz E, Walf AW (1991) Long-tertn dcvclopmental
Response to therapy can be evaluated by increases
utcone of infants with iron deficiency. Nev Engiand Jornat of
in PCV and may be evident as early as 4 to 7 days after
Medicure325,687-694
Mahaffey EA (1986) Disorders al irou metabolisn. In: Currenr
beginning iron therapy. The PCV should be normal or
Vererinery Therapy, 9* euin, ed. RW Kirk, Pp. S21-524. WB
nearly so within 4 weeks of therapy. If the response is
Newlanls CE, Houstuh DM, Vasconcelns DV (1994) Hyperferritincnia
inadequate by this time, the diagnosis should be
assnciated with malignant histiocytosis in a dog. Jorrnal of the
reconsidered.
Aerican Veterinary Medical Associationr 20s, 849-851
Oski FA (1993) Iron deficiency ininfancy and childhood. Nev Eng/and
Duration of thcrapy is govcrned by flhe nccd to
Journa!ofMedicine329,190-193
 replace iron stores. If iron therapy is stopped after the
Schloesser LL, Kipp MA, Wenzcl FJ (1965) Tlronboeytosis in iron-
 hacrmatocrit has returned to normal, but before replen-
defcicneyanenia.Journai of Laborutoryand Cinicut Medicine
66, 107-114
ishment of iron stores, the animal is at risk of rccur-
Simith JE (1992) Iron metabolism in dogs anel cals. Compendiur o!
rence of iron deficiency should further bleeding occur.
Conimaing Edaealionfor the Practicing Veterinarian 14, 39-43
 Iron supplementation is therefore recommended for 
Stone MS,Freden GO(1990) Differentiationofanenmiaofinflammation
from anemia of iron deficiency. Compendim of Conriing
4-9 months to adequately replace body stores
Education for the Practicing Veterinarian 12, 963-967
(Mahaffey, 1986). Iron stores could be evaluatcd by
Weeks BR, Smith JE, Norhrop JK (1989) Relationshipof serum feritin
and iron correntrations and serun total iron-bining capacity to
monitoring concentrations of serum ferritin or bone
nonleme iron stores in dogs. Americen Journat of Vererinary
 marrow iron if deemed necessary.
Research 50,198-200
Weeks BR, Smith JE, Stadler CK (1990) Effect of dietary iron content
on hematologic and other measures of iran adequacy in dogs.
Jourtal of the Anerican Veterinary Medicnl Associarion 196,
REFERENCES
749-753
Weiser G, O'Grady M (1983) Erythrocyte volume distribution aualysis
Andrews NC (1999) Disorders of iron metabolism. New Englancd
and hematologic changes in dogs with iron deficicncy anemia.
.ournal of Medicine 341, 1986-1995
Camer KM (i990) Ancmia as a featurc of pritmary gastrointcstinal
Wciscr MG, Kociba Gi (1983) Sequenlial changes in erylroeyte
neoplasia.ConpendiamofContiing Edaeaiorforhe Pracricing
volunedistbutionandnicrcytosisnssocintedwithirmdeficiency
Vererimuriw 12, 13.19
in kittens. Veterinary Pathnlogy 20, 1-12
CHAPTERFIVE
(ii) Anaemia of Chronic Renal Disease
AndreasHansHasler
INTRODUCTION
lelsthedegree ofhypoxia.In non-uracmicpatients,
serum EPOconcentrations areinversely corrclatedwith
Anaenia is a common problem of cats and dogs with
the haematocrit,which meansthatEPO concentrations
chronic renal disease (CRD).As the condition
increaseinproportion tothe severityofanaemia(Figure
progresses towardsend-stagekidney disease,anacmia
5.7).EPO acts in the bone marrow as both a growth
develops in virtually every patient (Cowgill, 1992).
factorandadifferentiatingfactorforerythrocyteprecur-
The severity of the anacmia correlateswith the degree
sor cells.The stimulation of erythropoiesisresults in an
ofrenal disease as expressedby the creatininc and/or
increase in circulating red cells,and as a consequence
the urca concentration (King et al.,1992).The signs
oxygen-carrying capacity is enhanced.The improved
and symptoms ofanacmia inpatients with chronic
renal oxygenation is detected by the oxygen sensor in
renal failure (CRF) do not differ from thosc scen in
the kidney,and renal EPO production decreases.
otherpatientswithchronicanaemia,andincludepallor
ofthemucousmembranes andskin,tachycardia,tachy-
BoneMarrow
pnoea,lethargy,weakness and anorexia.
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Erythropoietin
Redcell mass
The pathophysiology of anaemia in animalswith CRD
is complex andmayinvolve bonemarrowfailure,
blood loss orhaermolysis.Failure oferythropoiesis due
Preduction of
Oxygen
todeficiency oferythropoietin(EPO)production by
crythropoietin
sensor
diseased kidneys is the major contributing factor in
Kidney
both human and veterinary patients (Cowgill,1992).
Figure 5.6:Synthesis andregulation oferythropoietin.
Erythropoietin deficiency
A classic cndocrine feedback system tightly regulates
0001
Dogs with anaenia of
the red cell mass under norinal circumstances (Erslev,
chronicrenal failure
1990).EPOis thekeyfactorintheregulationofredcell
Normal dogs and
mass and crythrocyte production (Figure 5.6). It is a
anaemia
polypeptidehormone that bclongs to the group of hae
100
matopoietic growth factors.It has a high degrcc of
aminoacidsequence homologyamongmammals,which
explains the intcrspccies crossreactivity ofhormone
assaysand theuseofheterologousrccombinant human
EPO (rHuEPO) in replacement therapy.Renal tissuc
EPO
hypoxiautnothcnumberorassofcirculatingred
cells,stimulatestherenalproductionofEPOandrelease
ofthehormonetotheplasma.Whentheoxygentension
is sufficiently low, thc oxygen sensor (believed to be a
10
20
30
40
50
Packed cell volune (%)
member of the haem protein family) is in the deoxy
conformationand triggersthesynthesisof EPO.The sitc
Figure 5.7:Serum erythropoietin(EPO)concentrations
ofproductionof EPOinthekidneyhasbeen localizedto
inhealthy dogsandanaemic dogscomparedwithdogs with
anaemiaofchronicrenalfaiture.ReproducedfromGiger
theinterstitialcellsof the innercortex laying adjacent to
(1992)Erythropoierin and its clinicai use.Compendium on
the proximal tubules.Cells that proclucc EPO may be
ContinuingEducation for thePracticingVeterinarian 14,
active orinactive,and thenumberof activecellsparal-
25-35,with permission.
60
Manual of Caninc and Fcline Haeinatology and Transfusion Medicine
 By contrast, uraemic patients have an impaired
acid produclicn lcarling to imucosal irritation, ulcers and
 regulatory loop and their ability to produce EPO in
 consequently haemorrhage. Gastrointestinal blccding
response to tissue bypoxia is abolishcd or decreased.
may go undetected for a long time and, if persistent, can
 Numerous studies in humans and animals have shown
cause iron1 deficiency. Uraemia also has a directeffect on
 that serum EPO concentrations in uraemic patients are
 platelet function and hence may lead to haemorrhage.
erence values (Figure 5.7). Anaemic dogs with CRF
Iron deliciency anaemia
generally have low or normal plasma EPO conccnira-
Many dogs and cats with CRD have subiiormal serum
tions. Mildly increased EPO concentrations may occa-
iron conceutration and transferrin saturation bclow
sionally be found but are often inadequately increased
15% (Cowgill, 1992). It is not clear whether this is
 in view of the degree ofthe anaermia (King ei al., 1992).
related to decreased iron intake, diminished iron ab-
 In an experimental model of decreased renal mass, the
sorption or exccssivc iron loss.
 EPO rcsponsc paralleled the renmaining functional re-
nal mass (Oishi et al., 1993). It has yet to bc cstablished
whether the decrease in plasma EPO concentration is
CLINICAL EVALUATION
duc to an impaired oxygen-sensing mechanism, a
decreased synthesis of EPO or both.
The minimal database for anaemia of CRD consists of
history, physical examination, complete blood count
Myelofibrosis and hyperparathyroidism
(incluling red cell indices and reticulocyte count) and
Secondary hyperparathyroidism is a common
a complete serum chemistry panel including albumin,
sequela to CRD. An increase in parathyroid hormone
phosphate, blood urea nitrogen (BUN), creatinine,
(PTH) concentration may lead to myelofibrosis (Rao
calcium and a complete urinalysis (Figure 5.8). Stool
et al., 1993), and the fibrotic bone marrow has a
 analysis for parasites and occult blood may be helpful
 decreased erythropuietic potential. Further, a direct
to exclude gastrointestinal bleeding. The diagnosis of
  i    e 
CRD should bc based on findings consistent with the
 proposed. One study showed that anaemic dogs with
disease. It must be remembered that other (liseases
CRD had significantly higher PTH values when
(e.g. hypoadrenocorticism) may cause concurrent azo-
compared with non-anaemic dogs with CRD (King et
taemia, isosthcnuria and anaemia.
al., 1992). PTH seems to influence erythrocyte
survival time, as decreased survival tine has been
Complete blood count
 shown in dogs with surgically inrhuced renal failure,
Packed cell volume (PCV) is commonly used to
which normalized after parathyroidectomy (King et
assess anacmia in veterinary medicine. The RBC
al., 1992). In addition to the role of PTH and myelo-
count or the haemoglobin concentration. can also be
fibrosis in the pathogenesis of thc anacmia of CRD,
used to document anaemia, but for simplicity only
there is much interest in the relationship between
PCV is mcntioncd in the following discussion. The
PTH, myelofibrosis and response to replacement
 degree of anaemia should be re-evaluatedl once the
therapy with exogenous EPO. Hyperparathyroidism
animal is rehydrated. Patients with CRD are often
 and myelofibrosis are thought to be one reason for
 dehydraied, and the hacimoconcentration' may mask 
EPO resistance, and correction of hyperparathy-
the full extent of the anaemia. As normal values for
 roidism has been shown to inprove thc rcsponse to
cats are lower than for dogs, the terms mild, moderate
exogenous EPO (Rao et al., 1993).
and severe anaeimia inply different values in each
species (Figure 5.9).
Increased osmotic fragility
 Red cell indices characterize the anaemia accord-
 Osmotic fragility of erythrocytesis incrcascd in humans
ing to size and haemoglobin content of the erythro-
with CRD, however a single study of osmotic fragility
cytes. A normocytic-normochromic pattern occurs
in dogs with CRD did not find changes in this param-
in the anaemia of erythropoietin deficiency. Any
eter (King et al., 1992). These resulis suggest that
 other pattern suggests a different form of anaemia
altered osuotic fragility is not a major contributor to
(e.g. microcytic-hypochromic anaemia due to iron
thc anacmia of CRD in dogs.
deficiency).
Gastrointestinal and other bleeding
Reticulocyte count
Blecding into the gastrointestinal tract may be the most
The presence of a regenerative anaemia (Figure 5.9)
 common cause ofblood loss anacmia in uraemic patients
rules out lack of EPO, and other causes of anaemia
and be manifest clinically as haematemesis,
must be evaluated (e.g. haemolysis, gastrointestinal
 haematochezia or melaena. Gastrin has been implicated
bleeding). Bone marrow cxamination is generally nol
in the devclopment of gastric ulcers. Gastrinl concentra-
indicated for primary evaluation of anaenmia of CRD.
tion is increased as its metabolism in the dliseased kidney
Thc cxccption may be to document myelofibrosis or
is reduced. The resulting hypergastrinaemia increases
the presence of rHuEPO-antibodies.
Anaemia of ChronicRenal Disease
61
contirm
Rchydrate
Evaluate for other problens
Absent
Anaemia
Present
Rcgencrative
anaemia
No
Yes
Present
Normocytic-normochromic
Haemolysis
Determinecause
Yes
No
Absent
Erythropoietin deficieney
Evaluate for
Evaluate for
but also check for
iron deficiency
hlood loss
anaemia of chronic disease
gastrointestinal bleeding
anaemia of malignancy
other endocrine deficiencies
Figure5.8:Algorithmfordiagnostic evaluation of anaemia of chronic renal disease.
PCV (normal range)
PCVwith anaemia
Reticulocyte count in
Mild
Moderate
Severe
regenerative anaemia
Dog
35-55%
30-35
25-30
<25
>60x 10/1
Cat
27-45%
23-27
18-23
<18
>50x10%/1
Figure 5.9:Definition of the severity ofanaemia in the dogand cat.
PCV,packed cell volume.
Blood loss
69%of dogswith CRD(Polzinetal.,1995).However,
Any blood loss should be investigated.A concurrent
thereis a transatlantic debate as towhetherhuman
hypoalbuminaemia may suggcst blood loss, or a high
values should be applied to dogs and whether hyper-
BUN:creatinineratiomay suggest gastrointestinal bleed-
tensionin dogs with CRD is a substantialproblem
ing.Although parasites(e.g.fleas,hookworms)inother-
(Michell,1996).Althoughovert clinical signs such as
wise healthy animals rarely cause significant anaemia,
tortuousretinalvessels will alert the clinician,silent
they may contribute toanaemiain the patient with CRD.
hypertensionoftengocs unnoticed,asmeasuring blood
pressure and interpretation of the results can be chal-
SerumEPO concentration
lenging in cats and dogs.Pre-existing hypertension is
It is not necessary to determine serum EPO concentra-
a relative contraindication for thc administration of
tions to diagnose EPO-deficient anaemia of CRD.To
rHuEPO and if present should be controlled before
the author'sknowledge thereisnostudy that suggests
such therapy.
that EPO concentration isa useful prognostic indicator
of the progress of the anaemia of CRD or the response
to treatment.The finding of an appropriately increased
TREATMENT
EPO concentration in an anacmic animal may.how-
ever,direct the clinician to search for other causes of
The anaemia of CRD ismultifactorial,and treatment
anaemia (e.g. blood loss).
must therefore be tailored to the underlying disease.
The approach should be practical and cost effective.
PTH concentration
The initial management should aim to minimize blood
Determinationof plasmaPTHconcentrationmay some-
loss,whereas subsequent therapy should be directed
times be helpful in cases of CRD,for cxample those
towards increasing red cell mass.
animals that may be treated with calcitriol.
Gastrointestinaland otherbloodloss
Hypertension
Patients with CRDrequire close monitoring and hence
Arterial hypertension is a common complication of
frcqucnt blood sampling is nceded forlaboratory tests.
CRD,which may occur in up to93%ofcats or up to
Repeated blood collectionmay quicklyrendercats and
62
Manual of Caninc and Feline Haenatology and Transfusion Medicine
small dogs anaemic. Testing should therefore be
optinized and restricted where possible. Intestinal
inentcd in both hurnans and animals (Erslev and
 parasites (e.g. hookworms) and flea infestation should
Besarab, 1997; Cowgill, 1995). The gain in appctite
be addressed with proper therapy. Gastric ulccration
improves nutritional status, and resolution of hypo-
may be alleviated with the use of H,-blockers (e.g.
kalacimia is reported in cats (Cowgill, 1995).
cimetidine 5-10 mg/kg tid).
Iron deficicncy is Ircaled with oral iron sulphate.
Indications
Starting doses of 100 to 300 mg/day for dogs and
Treatment with rHuEPO is indicated in palicnts
with moderate to severe anaemia caused by EPO
Side cffccis of oral iron supplementation include
 deficicncy and where clinical judgement suggests a
vomiting and diarrhoea. Therapy should be evaluated
possible benefit.
 by monitoring plasma iron concentrations and trans-
ferrin saluration.
Contraindications
Therc are relative, but no absolute, contraindications
Blood transfusions
to the use of rHuEPO in rlogs and cals, one such case
 Prior lo the availability of rHuEPO, the anaemia of
being animals with mild anaemia. Although these
CRD was treated by transfusion of whole blood or
animals might benefit from an increased PCV and
packed red blood cells. This approacl rcmains the
cxhibit the same increase in welbeing and quality of
modality of choice in an acute situation where rapid
life, the potential for rlcvclopmcnl of the major side
inprovcmcnt is a necessity. However, there are sev-
effect (the possible development of antibodies) and the
eral inherent problems associated with such transfiu-
cosl of therapy should be considered and discussed
sions, which make this procedure unsuitable for
with the owner.
 long-ferm management:
rHuEPO preparations
Even with careful crossmatching:
1HuEPO is available as epoietin alpha (Epogen@,
 incompatibilitics may develop with repeated
Amgen Inc., USA; Eprcx@, Cilag, Switzerland) or
transfusions, and prohibit further use
epoietin beta (Recormon@, Boehringer, Mannheim,
 Few veterinary clinics have reliable access to
Gcrimany). The former preparation uses human albu-
blood products
min as a carrier whereas the latter does not. Some
It is nearly iupossihlc to restore the PCV to the
forms of rHuEPO require rcconslifulion with saline.
normal range in animals with anaemia of CRD,
 All preparations must be stored refrigerated. Most
thus the patient remains anaemic.
[rcatments in animals have been withi epoietin alpha
(EpogenO). All commercial rHuEPO preparations are
 Recombinant human EPO
not licensed for use in animals, and it is advisable to
 Following the discovery that the major determinant of
Icccive written consent fron the client.
lraemic anaemia is a relalive or absolute deficiency of
EPO, treatment has focused on replacement with cxo-
Injection
 genous EPO. Since the first trial in human medicine in
The subcutaneous route is most often used in veterj-
1985, using rHuEPO, a hugc body of literature has
nary mcdicine as it is easy to use and can therefore be
shown the efficacy and benefits of treatnent with EPO
administered by owners at loinc. Owners should be
in humans and animals. rHuEPO has emerged as the
instructed on how to inject rHuEPO (similar to insulin
mainstay for correction of uraemic anaenia in humans
injections). lt is conceivable that injection over the
(Erslev and Besarab, 1997),
lateral chcsl and abdomen area leads to the most
reliable absorption (similar to insulin injections).
Benefits
Treatment with rHluEPO produces a dosc-dependent
 Starting treatment
 Replaceiment lhcrapy can be divided into an initiation
Besarab, 1997). I can hc cxpected that the PCV will
 and maintenance phase. The iniliation phase is charac-
increase by 0.5-1% per day, and usually thc red cell
terized by an increase in PCV, and the dose is higher
mass can be restored within a month (Cowgill et al..
during this phasc (Figure 5.10). The recommended
1998). Thrombocylosis, but not leucocytosis, may
dose is l00 U/kg three timcs a week. This has beenl
 accompany thc incrcasc in PCV. It is unclear whether
 shown to promote an erythropoietic response in most
this is a sign of iron deficiency or a direct effecl. of
animals. In cases of hypertension or less scvere anae-
mia, the smaller dosc of 50 U/kg three times a week can
In addition to inmprovcments in PCV, the most
be given. This dose is continued until the PCV has
impressive benefits of effective rHuEPO therapy arc
reached the lower end of the target value (30-40% for
significant subjective improvements in wellbeing, in-
cats and35-45% for dogs), whichsignals the end ofthe
Anaemia of ChronicRenal Disease
63
Anaemia ofEPOdeficiencyconfirmed
Degree of
anaemia
Mild
Moderate/severe
Weighbenefits against
side effects/costs
Hypertension
Present
Absent
Address hypertension
Start r-HuEPO
(100 U/kg sc
3 times weekly)
Measure PCV
after2weeks
Response
No
Yes
Check for signs of
Continue and reassess
iron deficiency
wcckly/biweekly
hypcrtension
other side effects
Yes
Adequate response
Absent
Present
No
Evaluate for
Continue until target
Address
concurrent disease
PCV is reached
hypertension
hyperparathyroidism
Weekly/biweekly
iron deficiency
anti-rHuEPO antibodies
check-up
other side effects
Figure 5.10:Algorithmfor treatment ofanaemia of erythropoietin(EPO)deficiency withrecombinant human EPO(rHuEPO.
PCV,packed cell volume.
initiating phase （usually within 4-8 weeks).At this
to increase, the dose should be reduced to 75 U/kg
point,thedose and intervalisreduced and thentitrated
once weekly.If the target PCV is not reached within
toeffect(Figure5.11).Thereactiontochangesindose
8-12 weeks,thc dose can be titrated in steps of25-50
orintervalisslow,and thercfore it takes about3weeks
U/kg.Besides increasing the dose, a thorough evalu-
to assess the impact of a different regincn.Hcnce,
ationforresistance shouldbe undertaken.The stimu-
changes in rHuEPO dose or interval should not be
latederythropoiesisputsahighdemandoniron
made more than once every 3 weeks.
stores,which makes concurrent supplementation a
Once the lower cnd of the target interval is
necessity.Dosages of oral iron sulphate of 100-300
reached,theinterval can bereduced to twice weekly,
mg/day for dogs and 50-100 mg/day for cats have
with the same dose(100 U/kg).If thePCVcontinues
been recommended.
64
Manual of Canine antl Feline Haematology and Transfusion Medicine
Figure 5.1I: Response to treatment
with recombinan hunan
erythropoierin (rHuEPO). rHuEPO
50
was given to a fenale American
Cocker Spaniet with clinicai and
laboratory evidence of anaemia due to
chronic renel disease. The starfing
30
dose was 300 U/kg/veek dividel three
fimes weekly, aud the packed ce!!
20
volume (PCV) started to inerease after
pmou  paiua pn yom so
1
1
0
00zHtEPO
range within 3 weeks. The PCV
00 U/kg
200U/kg/week
continued ro increase above 50%,cndi
+++1....
rhie dose was reduced to 100 U/kgy
6
week. A stahle PCV in the nornal
Werks
range vas reached, bur fhe dnse had to
he increased to 200 U/kg/veek.
Safety and side effects
 refractory anaemia) in two of three dogs that were
There is no evidence that treatment with rHuEPO
 treated for more than 90 days and in five of seven cats
 accelerates the progression of renal disease in lumans
that were treated for more than 180 days (Cowgill et
(Jacobs, 1995). Local pain at the injcction site of
al., 1998; Cowgill, 1995). Tlhese results show thal.
epoetin alpha (but not beta) is reported in human1
long-term treatment with rHuEPO is associated with
studies.
a highi degree of antibody stimulation. Although most
The most detrimental side effect. of trcalment is
authors clain that the antibodics disappcar upon
 the development of antibodies against the rHuEPO
withdrawal, the memory immune response prohibits
molecule, which bind to both exogenous and endo.
a second trial with rHuEPO. These patients will
 genous EPO. Consequently, the body becomes resist-
become dlependcnt on blood transfusion. Thc major
ant to rHuEPO with time, and a progressive decline
 sign of antibodies is resistance to treatment after a
of PCV will occur (Figure 5.12). Antibodies do not
preliminary response. Unfortunately, there is no com-
coimnonly appcar until thc fourth wcck of treatment.
mercial test for detcrmining anti-rHuEPO antibody.
but may occur at any time thereaffer. Whcrcas the
Bone marrow exaininatiou with a 1nyeloid:erythroid
overall incidence of anti-rHuEPO antibodies may
ratio of greater than eight is suggestive of resistance
only be 30%, such antibodies developed (along with
to EPO (Cowgill, 1995).
50
40
30
PCV
20
10
300 rHuEPO
U/kg/week
200 U/kg/wcck
300 U/kg/weck
400 U/kg/wuck
心
Q
1011
：12131415161718192021222324
Weeks
Figure 5.12: Developmen of anti-recombinant human erythropoietin (ati-rHuEPO) antibodies.Treatment with rHuEPO 300
UgwkwasiitedinayearidpayeMinituechaerwithaifhronicrenadiseaseAferniitl
response and normalization of anaemia (packed cell volume (PCV) of 47%), rhe dose of rHuEPO was reduced. The PCV
decreased, and when α PCV of 38% was reached rhe dose of rHuEPO was increased to rhe initiation dose. No response was
noted, and the rfuEP was increased ferrher to 40o U/kg/veek. The PCV contimued tn decrease. As no other cause for rHuEPC)
resistance was found, antibody formation against rHuEPO was suspected and treammen disconinued.
Anaemia of Chronic Renal Disease 
65
Overshiooting treatment (dose too high or intervals
concerning the commercial release of1CaEPO is avail-
too frequent) may result in absolute polycythaemia.
 able. As long as heterologous EPO is uscd, a commer-
Treatment shouldi be withheld, and phlebotomy may
cial assay for anti-rHuEPO antibodies would improve
 be necessary. This is one reason why incremental dose
thie assessment of antibody status and resistance.
tlierapy is recommended.
The correction of anaenia might improve qualily
Systemic hypertension caln develop in patients with
of life and alleviate some of the uraemic problcms bul
no prior recordof bloodl pressure problems. The mecha-
it does not stop progression of renal disease, and other
       s
 aspects of the uraemic syndrome may dictate euthana-
pressure include increased blood viscosity, loss of
sia. Haemodialysis is not generally available for thc
hypoxic vasoxlilation and a direct vascular effect via
management of renai disease in dogs and cats, but with 
increased synthesis of endothelin and other vasoactive
 more widespread use, life span and quality of life could
substances (Mashio, 1995). Whether hypertension is
 be inmproved. Renal transplantation in cats and dogs is
responsible for the seizaures seen in animals treated
restricted to only a few places. The problems to cver-
with rHuEPO is unclear.
come are initially of an ethical nature. Successful renal
 transplantation will, however, be a major advancement
Resistance lo treatment
 and will resolve the anaemia of CRD along with other
Some patients may require much higher doses of
uraemic problems.
rHuEPO than others, creating the concept of EPO
resistance, which parallels the insulin resistance
that may occur in the therapy of dliabetes mellitus
REFERENCES
(Figure 5.13).
Cowgill LD (1992) Pathophysiology aud managenent of anaemia in
chronic pogressiverenal failure, Seuirars in Veierinary Medicire
 Devclopmcnt of amti-rHuEPO amliborlics
and Srrgery Smaff Animal 7, 175-182
Cowgill LD (1995) CVT Update: Use of recombinant human
Iron deficiency
erythropoietin. lr: Currenr Veterinery Therapy, 12 edm, cd. JD
Neoplastic disease
Bonagura and RW Kirk, pp. 961-962. WB Saunders, Philadclplhia
Cawgil LD, Jaincs KM er al. (1998) Usc of rccombinant-human-
Sccondary bypcrparathyroidism
 Inflammatory states, infection
retul failure. Jowrnal of the American Veterinary Medicat
Malnutrition
lswociuion 212, 521-530
Erslev AJ (1990) Eryhrooietin. Leakemia Resruret 14, 683--688
Erstev AJ and Besarab A (1997) Erythropoictin in 1hc patliogcnesis and
Figure 5.73: Possihie causes of resistance fo human
treaiment ofthe anemia of chronic renalfailure [editorial].Kidney
recomhinant erythropoietin (rHuEPO).
Dnternatonat 51, 622-630
Jacobs C (1995) Starting r-HuEPO in chronic renal failure: wlcn, why,
and how? Nephrology Dialywis Transyplantation 10(suppl 2), 43
King LG,Giger Uete. (1992) Amniaf chronierenal filure indos.
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
Jonrna! ofVeterinary hternal Medicine 6, 264-270
Maclend IN, Tetreanlt JW et al. (1998) Expression and bioactivity of
 Replacement therapy with rHuEPO has limitations
recombinantcanineerythropoietin.American.fumal.ofVererinary
Rerearch59,1144-1148
owing to the heterologous nature of the molecule.
MashioG (1995) Erythropoieinandsystemichypertension. Nepuralogy
Developiment of antibodies against rHuEPO is not a
Dialysis Transpilauarion 10(suppl 2), 74-79
feature of replacement treatment in humans, and lhence
Michcll AR (1996) Renal insufficicncy and hypertcnsion in dogs. In:
Proceedings ofthe o Anuat congress ofthe EuropeanSociery of
it is conceivable that use of a homologous product for
Veterinary nternat Medieine, ed. NL Veldlhofen, I Rothuizen et cl.
dogs (recombinant canine EPO) and cats (recombinant
p.50-51
OishiA,SakamtHetl(1993）Evalatinoferytopicinpredution
feline EPO) would prevent the induction of antibodies
in rlogs with reduced functional renal tissus. .Journaf ofVeterinary
 against EPO. The EPO genc in dogs has been cloned,
Medicai Schence 55, 543-548
Polzin DJ, Osborme CA, eral. (1995) Chronic renal failure. In: Texrbook
and its activity in vitro and in vivo has been proven in
of Veterimary fmternai Mecticine, 4lh edn, cd. SI Etinger and EC
 a 1mouse model (Macleod et al., 1998). Clinical studies
Feldman, pp. 1734-1760. wB Saunders, Pliladclplia
Rno DS, Shih Met al. (1993) Effeet of serun purutlhyroid hormone and
lone narrow fibrosis an the response to erythropuietin in uremia.
tions in the United States, however no information
New EnglandJoura!ofMedicine328,i71175
CHAPTERFIVE
Immune-Mediated Haemolyt
Anaemia
AndrewMackin
INTRODUCTION
Drugs
Immune-mediated haemolytic anaemia(IMHA)is one
Trimethoprim/sulphonamide*
of the most common causcs ofanaemia in small
Penicillins
Cephalosporins
animals and is also one of the most prevalent immune-
mediated diseases.AIthough IMHA is often rewarding
Levamisole (dogs)*
to treat,itis also oftenfatalifmisdiagnosed ortrcated
Propylthiouracil (cats)*
inappropriately,and practitioners are advised to de-
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs such as
velop a working familiarity with the clinical signs,
phenylbutazone
diagnosis and treatment of the condition.
Dipyrone
IMHA can be subdivided into two main types:
Quinidine
primary,idiopathic or autoimmune haemolytic
Chlorpromazine
anaemia(AIHA) and secondary LMHA.AIHA is a
Infectious/parasitic
classic autoimmune disorder with no recognized
Feline leukaemia virus infection*
underlying cause.It is the most frequent form of
Haemobartoncllosis (especially H. felis in cats)*
IMHA in dogs and also occurs in cats, albeit less
Babesiosis*
commonly.Although AIHA can occur in dogs of any
Ehrlichiosis
age, breed and sex,the condition typically affects
Leishmaniasis
young adult andmiddle-aged animals and is particu-
Dirofilariasis
larly common in ccrtain breeds of dog such as Cocker
Spaniels,English Springer Spaniels,Poodles, Old
Neoplastic
English Sheepdogs and Collies (Day and Penhale,
Lymphoproliferative diseases (especially
1992;Klag et al.,1993; Day,1996;Rcimer et al.,
lymphoma, leukaemia)*
1999).Most studies report that the condition is more
Haemangiosarcoma
Miscellaneous
no sex predilection (Jackson and Kruth,1985;
Halliwcll and Gorman, 1989; Klag et al., 1993;
Post vaccinal*
Thompson,1995;Reimer et al.,1999)
Bec sting envenomation
IMHA can also occur secondary to a wide range of
Immunological
pathological processes, so called secondary IMHA.
Many different inectious,allergic,inflammatory and
Systemic lupus erythematosus*
Transfusion reactions*
neoplastic causes of secondaryIMHA havebeen sus
Neonatal isoerythrolysis (especially in cats)*
pected in dogs and cats (Jackson and Kruth,1985;
Jones and Gruffydd-Jones,1991;Cotter,1992;Lifton,
Antilymphocyte globulin therapy (transplantation
1999; Noble and Armstrong, 1999), based predomi
patients)*
nantly on associationswith discase andextrapolation
Figure 5.14:Potentialcauses of secondary immune-
from similar phenomena in humans, although com
mediatedhaemolyticanaemia.*Underlying causes thatare
eitherwelldocumentedinthedog andcatorstrongly
plete proof of causation is usually lacking.Relatively
suspected onthebasis of conpelinganecdoral evidence.
well documented causes ofsecondaryIMHAinclude
feline leukaemia virus (TeLV) or infections with
Haemobartonellafelisin cats (Miller,1999),andre
SecondaryMHAaffectsanimalsfanyagereer
cent vaccination or haemolymphaticneoplasia(par
tieularly lymphoma) in dogs.Certain drugs may also
ingwith a signalment atypical forAIHA,such as geri
trigger IMHA in small animals.Figure 5.14 lists the
atric animals.Unlike the dog,IMHA in the cat is most
potential causes ofsecondaryIMHA.
commonly secondary (Halliwell and Gorman,1989).
68
Manual of Canineand leline HIaematology and Transfusion Medicine
Distinguishing between primary and secondary
tovariouscomponentsoftheRBCmembrane,particu
IMHA is important for trcatment to be effective.Al-
larly (but not cxclusively)glycophorins (Barkcr et al.,
though both conditions canbe similar clinically and
1991; Barker and Elson,1995).
diagnostically,secondaryMHAwill notrespond well
In IMHA,antibody attachment to themembranes
to treatment unless the underlying cause is eliminated
of RBCs triggers their destruction by several different
and willrccur during remissionunlessrepeat cxposure
mechanisms(Cotter,1992;Jain,1993).Inseverc cases,
to the cause is avoided.Practitioners,however,prob-
withhigh levels of antibody attachment and comple-
ably overdiagnoseprimary or idiopathicIMHAbe-
ment fixation,membranes may be so damaged that
cause,withoutmeticulousattentiontoistory,hyical
extracellular water leaks into thc cytoplasm,causing
examination and diagnostic testing,the underlying
swelling andrupture of theRBCwhileit is stillin the
causes of secondaryIMHA may bemissed.
circulation,socalled ntravascularhaemolysis(Figure
Although transfusion reactions and neonatal
5.15).Since IgM is better thanIgG at complement
isoerythrolysis aretypesof IMHA theyarenot covered
fixation,intravascular haemolysis is more likely in
in this chapter (see Chapters 15 and 16).
IgM-mediated IMHA.In less severe cases of IMHA,
antibody attachment and subsequent cell membrane
MECHANISMSOFREDCELL
damageleadsto an acceleratedrate of dcstruction of
DESTRUCTION
affected crythrocytes by tissue macrophages within
the mononuclear phagocytic system (MPS),a process
The mechanism underlying typical cases of IMHA is
that occurs outside the circulation (cxtravascular
antibody-mediated cytotoxic (type IIhypersensitivity)
haermolysis).Destruction of erythrocytes by the MPS
destruction of circulating erythrocytes.Aithoughmost
is mediated by Fc receptors on the macrophage sur-
cases share this common mcchanism,the disease is
face,which bind the Fc component of the antibodies
otherwise heterogeneous:in AIHA, the nost studicd
attachcd to the RBC membranes (Figure 5.16). Bc-
form of IMHA.both the pattern of immunoglobulin
cause the MPS is located throughout the body,extra-
and complement involvement in destruction of red
vascular haemolysis can occur in many organs but
bloodcells(RBCs)and thesilcofantibody altachment
typically is mostpronounced inthe liver and,particu
to RBC membranes varies widely between patients.
larly, the spleen.In somc patients with high levels of
Although themost commonimmunoglobulin type
anti-RBC antibodies,manyindividual antibodiescan
involved in AIHA is IgG,less commonly IgM or
eachbindtotwodifferenterythrocytes,aprocessthat
(rarely) IgA may also be implicated, along with vari-
causes thccellstoclumptogether (agglutinate).Patients
ableinvolvementofcomplement(Jackson andKruth,
with significant RBCagglutination typically have an
1985; Jones et al., 1990; Barker et al.,1992,1993;
increasedrateofextravascularhaemolysis,sinceclump
Klag et al.,1993;Day.1996).Antibodies may attach
ing of RBC facilitales their removal by the MPS.
Figure5.15:Mechanisms ofintravascular
Water
Complement
haemolysis.High levels of antibodyattachment
andcomplementfixationcancauseseveredamage
tocirculating redbloodcell(RBC)membranes.
Because RBC contents such as haemoglobin are
osmoticallyactive,theresultant increasein
membrane permeabiliry allows extracelularwater
toleak across anosmoticgradientintothecell,
leading tointravascularswellingandruprure of
affected cells.
Antibody
Osmotic cell lysis
Figure5.16:Mechanisms ofextravascular
Antibodies
haemolysis.TheFecomponent of anti-redblood
cell(RBC)unibodies atiachedtoRBCmembranes
isrecognized and bound by Fereceptors located
onthesurface of tissuemacrophageswithin the
MPS.Althoughcell destructionby theMPS is part
ofthenormalprocess bywhich thebody removes
ageingredcellsfomtecrcuatonhghlevelf
antibody-mediatedmacrophage-RBCbindingin
FcRe
patientswith IMHA leads toagreatlyincreased
Erythrocyte
rateof extravascularRBCdumageund
phagocytosisbytissue macrophages
(ervthrophagocylosis).
Immune-Mcdiated Haemolytic Anaeial
69
Typically, IMHA is caused by antibodies directed
Inconplete antibody (warn antibody type): anti-
against circulating mature RBCs, withi the bone inar-
RBC antibodies cause extravascular haemolysis.
row moumting a lhealthy regcnerative response to thc
withoul detectablc auloagglutination or
resultant anaemia (Jones and Gruffydd-Jones, 1991).
haemoglobinaemia/haemoglobinuria (disease
In some patients, however, anfibodies may also be
onset is often chronic or subacute, and resultant
directed against RBC precursors in thc bone marrow at
anacimia varies from mild to severe)
any stage in their development (Jonas et al., 1987;
Aggiutination (cold antibody type): anti-RBC
Weiser, 1992). Haemolytic anaemia with an inappro-
antibodies are only reactive at cold tenmperatures,
priately poor rcgenerative responsc will develop if
alnd agglutination does not occur al body
antibodies are directed against cell membrane compo-
teperature. Agglutination can, however, occur
nents that are present both on mature RBCs and their
within the vasculature of the extremities,
marrow precursors. By contrast, if antibodies are
particularly in colder weather. Obstruction of the
directcdagainst mcmbrane componcntsthat are prcsent
blood supply to the periphcral vasculature due to
 only on RBC precursors in the bone marrow and not on
agglutination and thrombus formation can lead to
 mature RBCs, non-regenerative anaemia will develop
ischaemic necrosis of the ear or tail tips, the end
withoul periphcral haemolysis. Purc red cell aplasia
of thc nose, anrl the foot. pads
(PRCA), in which all stages of RBC precursor in the
Non-aggtutinaring huenolysis (cold antibody
bone rmarrow are noticeably reduced or absent, is the
rype): antibodies are only reactive at cold
most cxtreme form of this process (Jones and Gruffydd-
temperatures, and haemolysis does not occur al
Junes, 1991).
body temperature (in cold weather, however,
 In AIHA, autoantibodies are directed against com-
ponents of the membranes of the patient's own RBCs.
vasculature of the extremities, whicli manifcsis
Although the same prucess can occur with sccondary
clinically as transient haemoglobinaemia and
IMHA,antibodies may alternatively be directed against
haemoglobinuria).
a forcign antigen (such as a drug or virus) that is
Although the above categorization systen is de-
brane components of the RBC that are antigenically
rived by extrapolation from human medicine, all five
 similar to non-RBC antigens that are associated with
categories of IMHA have bcen reporled in small ani-
the underlying diseasc process or against membrane
mals. Fortunately (since both cause severe, acute and
components that are normally hiden but are exposed
life-threatening disease) the agglutimating and intra-
by the underlying disease.
vascular haemolysing warm antibody types of IMHA
are relatively uncommon in small animals, and the
CATEGORIES OF IMHA
 predominates. Agglutinating and (especially) haemo
lysing cold antibody types of IMHA arc rare int both
Typical IMHA is caused by antibodies that exert their
dogs and cats (Halliwell and Gorman, 1989).
effects at body temperature, so called warm reactive
antiborlics. Somc animals, however, have anti-RBC
antibodies that are only reactive at much lower tem-
CLINICAL SIGNS
peratures, Although such cold reactive antibodies
usually cause minirmal harmful effects, their prcscnce
Clinical signs typically associated with most cases of
IMHA reflect the presence of both moderate to severe
IMHA has been subdivided into five main categories
anaemia (lethargy, weakness, pale mucous membranes,
(Halliwell and Gorman, 1989; Stewarl and Feldman,
baemice hcart murmur) and compensalory responscs
1993a; Thompson, 1995) based on the thermal
caused by tissue hypoxia and stimulation of the sympa-
reactivity of the anti-RBC antibodies and their
thetic nervous systen (tachyploea, tachycardia, bound
major clinical effects at optimal teinperature. These
ing pulses) (Klag etal., 1993; Reimer et al., 1999). Some
calegories are:
patients may also show clinical signs of an ongoing
inmmunological orinflammatory process, such as pyrexia,
Aggluttination (warm antibody type): high levels
 anorexia and, uncommonly, lymphadenopathy (Klag et
of antibody lead to detectable autoagglutination
al., 1993). Surprisingly, sincethe MPS withinihespleen
 of RBCs (agglutination is usually associated with
and liver is usually the main site of RBC destruction,
acute severe extravascular haemolysis)
splenomegaly and/or hepatonmegaly are only variably
Intravascular haemolysis (warm antihody type):
present in animals with IMHA (Jackson anrl Kruth,
intravascular haemolysis, usually associated with
1985; Klag et al., 1993; Reimer er al., 1999).
high levels of antibody and complement fixation,
Patients withi IMHA of acute onset tend to be
causes an acufe severe anaemia with dctectablc
scvcrely affcctcd by thcir anaemia and are often de-
haenoglobinaemia and haemoglobinuria
pressed, weak or even collapsed. Transient hyper-
70
Manual ofCanine andFelineHaematology and TransfusionMedicinc
bilirubinaemia,bilirubinuria and tissue jaundice Fig
downofRBCsJacksonandKruth,1985;Weiser,1992;
ure5.17)may occasionallybeseenduringacutc severe
Jain,1993;Day,1996).Occasionally,whitecell counts
episodes of IMHA whereas. because intravascular
can be high cnough to mimic myelogenous leukaemia,
haemolysis is uncommon,haemoglobinaemia and
a reaction somctimcs called a lcukaemoid response.
haemoglobinuria arc observedinfrequently.Patients
Plateletcounts are usuallynormalunlessthe animalalso
withextravascular haemolysisdue to subacute or
has immune-mediated thrombocytopenia (IMT). Con-
chronicIMHAcancompensatetosomeextent fortheir
currcnt IMHAandthrombocytopenia,aconditionknown
lack of crythrocytes and may be bright despite the
asEvanssyndromemayaffectuptoabout10%ofdogs
presence of severeanaemia.In these paticnts,the liver
with IMHA (Klag et al.,1993).
can often copewith theextrabilirubinreleased bythe
Hacmatology can often give clues that suggest a
breakdown of RBCs,and jaundice does not occur.
specificaetiological diagnosisnamlypherocytosi
agglutination and other RBC abnormalities.
Spherocytosis
Spherocytesaresmallsphericalerythrocyfcsthat,when
present inhighnumbersstrongly suggest a diagnosis
ofIMHA(HalliwellandGorman,1989;Weiser,1992;
Thompson,1995).Spherocytcs arc formed when
macrophages remove a piece of RBC membrane with-
out cell destruction or a significant loss ofcytoplasmic
contents (Figure 5.18).
Figure 5.17:Severe extravascularhaemolysisinadog that
presentedwith severeIMHA.Acuteextravascular haemolysis
andresultantbilirubinproductionoverwhelmedhepatic
mechanismsofbilirubinuptakeconjugationandexcretion,
leadingtoprofoundtisuejaundice.Thedogwusseverely
anaemic,weakand depressed.
Pulmonary thromboembolismis awell recognized
complication of IMHA,and is particularly common in
those animals with acute severe anaemia that arc
receiving high-dose glucocorticoids (Bunch et al.,
1989;Klag et al., 1993; Day, 1996). Pulmonary
Removalofapiece
ofRBCmembrane
thromboembolismshould alwaysbesuspectedin anae-
micpatients that suddenly developsevere andpersist-
cnt dyspnoea.Disseminated intravascular coagulation
(DIC) can also complicate scvcre cases of IMHA
(Cotter,1992;Klag et al.,1993).
Spherocyte
DIAGNOSISOFIMHA
Hacmatology in patients with IMHA typically shows a
Normaldiscoid
RBCS
moderate tosevereanaemia,which ismost commonly
extremelyregenerative,withanisocytosis,polychroma-
sia,ahighcorrectedreticulocytecountand,sometimes,
Figure 5.18:Spherocyteformation.(1) Antibody coated
increased numbers of nucleated RBCs.Reticulocyte
erythrocytesarerecognized andbound byFereceptorson
countscanoweverometimesbeinappropriatlw
macrophages.(2)Rather than phagocytose and destroy the
erythrocytecompletely，themacrophagethenrenovesa
(Jones and Gruffydd-Jones,1991;Klag et al.,1993),
piece ofRBCmembrane beforereleasingthecell back into
eitherbecause anaemia isperacute (since it takes about
the circulation.(3)Because the unchangedvolume of RBC
5 days for the marrow tomount a strong regenerative
cytoplasmmust nowbe containedwithinalesseramount of
response)orbecauseantibodiesarealsodirectedagainst
membrane,thecelladoptsasphericalshape.Spherocytes
RBCprecursors.White cell andneutrophil counts are
arerecognizedona blood smear as a small denseRBCwith
a lossofcentral pallorandmay beregistered by automated
often moderately to profoundly increased,probably in
haematology analysers asa decreaseinmeancorpuscular
response to both non-specific marrow stimulation and
volume.Spherocytesaredifficulltoidenifyinthecatasnormal
the inflaminatoryprocessassociatedwiththebreak-
RBCstendtobemuchsmalleranddenserthanthoseinthedog.
Immune-Mediated HaemolyticAnaemia
71
Agglutination
can occur in normal animals,especially cats.Practi-
Examination of blood smears mayshow microscopic
tioners should therefore perform a slide agglutination
autoagglutination（clumping)of erythrocytes.Such
tcst (Figures5.20and 5.21) to differcntiate rouleaux
agglutination can form large rafts of RBCs that,on
fromgcnuine autoagglutination(Halliwclland Gorman,
close inspection of a tube containing anticoagulated
1989;Cotter,1992;Thompson,1995).A positive test
blood,are visible to the naked eye as multiple red
result with slide agglutination is highly suggestive of
spcckles (Figure 5.19)Similar spcckles can,however.
IMHA and also suggests that the condition is likely to
be created by rouleaux formation,a phenomenon that
be acute and severe.Anegative testresult,however,is
the most common result in patients with IMHA since
most animals have non-agglutinating antibodics.
Automatedhaematologyanalyserssometimesregis-
ter a clump of agglutinated erythrocytes as a single
cell, often of a size too large lo cven be recorded as a
RBC(Weiser,1992).Resultant erroneous results may
include an artifactually highmeancorpuscularvolume
(MCV) or, if clumped cells are not recognized as
crythrocytes,lowering ofthe calculated hacmatocrit
(Cotter,1992).Since the haemoglobin within alleryth-
rocytes is still measured by the analyser,this leads to
an erroneouslyhigh estimationofmeancorpuscular
haemoglobin concentration (MCHC).When aggluti-
nation is suspected to be the cause of a lower than
Figure 5.19:EDTA-anticoagulated blood sample froma dog
expectedhacmatocrit,packedcellvolume(PCV),which
withsevereIMHAshowingtheappearanceofgross
autoagglutination. Large ctumps of agglutinated red cels
is not affected by RBC clumping,should be monitored
arevisibleto thenakedeye asredspecklesliningthe
by microhaematocrit tube centrifugationrather than an
vacutainer tube.
automated analyser.
Figure 5.20:Agglutination is associated with a
Antibody-mediated agglutination
high level ofanti-red blood cell(RBC)antibody and
is caused by antibodiesthatattachtomore thanone
Saline added
RBC,thereby drawingtheceltstogetherintoone
large clump.(a) Large clumps are visible as
specklingorgranularityinadropofanticoagulated
bloodplacedonamicroscopeslideandviewed
against awhitebackground.Persistence of such
visiblegranudarityfor 1to2minutes afier theblood
husbeenmixedwithasmallamountofnormal
salineisconsideredtobeapositivetestresultwith
slide agglutination.(b)Rouleaux,r stackedRBCs
canalsoappearasspecklestothenakedeyebut
888888888
the granularity clearswithinafewmimutesof
addingsaline,ataratioofonedropofsalinetoone
Gross granularity
Persistent granularity
dropofbloodindogsandrwoorthree dropsof
(a)
saline to one drop of blood incats.A negative test
Positive test result
resuitwithslide agglutinationisindicatedbyeither
anahsence ofgranularity orclearance of
Rouleaux formation
granularity afterthe cdditionof satine.Slide
agglutinationis bestperformedatroom
Saline added
temperature or above.False positives can occur at
lowertemperaturesalthoughaposiivetestresut
at4Cinan animalwithnecrosis ofextremities
supports a diagnosisof coldagglutinatingIMHA.
After completionofa slideagglutinationtesta
Coverslipmaybeplacedovertheblood/salinemix
and theslideexaminedmicroscopically to confirm
the presenceof RBC agglutination.
Gross granularity
Loss of granularity
(b)
Negative testresult
72Manual of Canine and Feline Haematology and Transfusion Medicine
of jaundice for more than3-5 days(evcnin profoundly
anaemic animals) usually indicates concurrent hepatic
disease orbiliary obstruction.Haemoglobinaemia and
haemoglobinuria are uncommon transient events that
indicatesevereintravascularhaemolysis(Weiser,1992).
Immunological testing
Specific immunological testingcanbe used to support
a tentative diagnosis of IMHA. The most widely used
test is the direct antiglobulin test (DAT) or Coombs*
test (Halliwell and Gorman, 1989),which detects
antibodics and/or complemcnt bound to RBCmem-
branes (Figure 5.22).A standard DAT as provided by
Figure5.21:Tpicalappearancefapositivetstresutwih
most laboratories typically uses a mix of antibodies
slide agglutination.
directed against IgG,IgM （to a variable extent) and
complcmcnt,andisperformed atbodytemperature
Otherredbloodcellabnormalities
(Jones et al.,1990; Cotter,1992;Thompson,1995).
Careful exanination of RBCmorphology may suggest
Modificationsof theroutinescreeningDAT thatmay
increaseitsdiagnosticvalue includerunning the tcst at
immunologicalhaemolysis.Diagnosticallyuseful RBC
different temperatures,using individual antibodies
abnormalitics inelude detection ofparasites such as
against IgG,IgM,IgA and complement as well as the
Haemobartonellafelis(whichmaycause secondary
standardpolyvalent antibody/complementmixand
IMHA),Heinz bodies (suggesting haemolysis second-
fully titrating these reagents (Jones et al., 1990; Day,
ary tooxidative damage)andschistocytosis(suggesting
1996). Positive DAT results at 4°C, however, are of
a microangiopatlhic hacmolytie process such as DIC).
minimal diagnostic significance unless thepatient has
Serum biochemistry and urinalysis are often normal
clinical signsconsistent with coldantibodytypcagglu-
in dogs with IMHA.Potential abnormalities in some
tination or intravascular haemolysis (Halliwell and
patients include mild to moderate increases in concen-
Gorman,1989; Cotter, 1992; Weiser,1992).
trations of liver enzymes (thought to indicate hepatic
Strietlyintcrpreted,apositiveDATresultsupportsa
hypoxia secondary to severe anaemia) and variable
diagnosis of IMHA, whereas a negative test result
hyperglobulinaemia (Klag et al., 1993). Since serum
suggests a non-immunological cause of haemolysis.
albumin is usually normal,hypoalbuminaemia is an
Nuncrous studies,howcver,have shown that a DAT
unexpected finding that may suggest anaemia is due to
can often be of only mediocre diagnostic accuracy:
occult blood loss rather than haemolysis, or that the
althoughsensitivityandspecificityimprove with meticu-
paticnt has aconcurrentilness.Mildtomoderate hyper-
lous attention to test methodology,both false positive
bilirubinaemia and bilirubinuriamay occur transiently
and falscncgativercsultsdooccurrelatively commonly
in animals with acute severe anaemia.Since the liver is
(Jones etal.,1990;Cotter,1992;Weiser,1992;Stewart
and Feldman, 1993b; Thompson, 1995; Miller, 1999).
whelmingloadsofbilirubinproducedby acute severe
Practitioncrsshouldthereforebc awarethatsinceIMHA
haemolysis,severehyperbilirubinaemia or persistence
can occurin the presence ofa negative DATresult and,
Figure 5.22:Direct antiglobulin(Coombs)test.
Species-specific antiserum containingantibodies
Antiserum with
antibodiesagainstlgG
directedagainsteitherdogorcatimmunoglobulin
andcomplementaddec
(IgG,IgMand,sometimes,gA)andcomplemen,
eitherindividuallyor asapolyvalent mixture,is
added toawashedsuspensionoferythrocytesfrom
thepatient.Whenthepatient'scells arecoated
withantibody and/orcomplement,theadditionof
antihodiesdirectedagainsttheseparticular
components causes visible red blood cell(RBC)
agglutination(u positive testresult）.In this
exampleillustratingatypicalcaseofIMHAina
dog,thepatient'scells are coatedwithboth
antibody(IgG）andcomplement.Whena standard
antiserum containing antibodies against dogIgG
andcomplementisaddedtothewashedredcells
Gross agglutination
andthemixturesincubatedantibodiesbindo
(Positive test result)
IgGorcomplementatached tomore thanone
RBC,thereby causing cell clumping andvisible
agglutination.
Immune-Mediated Haemolytic Anaenia
73
conversely, a positive test result does not absolutely
Bone marrow analysis
prove the presencc of IMHA, sometimes a dliagnosis
Bonc marrow analysis (aspiration cylology and/or
 rmust be based on clinical judgement despite the pres-
core biopsy histopathology) is also indicated in all
ence of an apparently discrepant DAT result. Perform-
patients with suspected non-regenerative forms of
ing a DAT is, however, stillrecommended in all patients
IMHA. PRCA is characterized by a relative or con-
with suspected IMHA cven if criteria such as sphcrocy-
plete lack of RBC prccursors within the bone marrow.
tosis or a positive test result with slide agglutination
whereas cytclogical or histopathological evidence of
already strongly suggest a diagnosis, since a positive
jo auapuodaid) sane uoeimu, pioa ue
DAT resull will add support to the diagnosis and char.
immalure RBC precursors, with an abscnce of morc
 acterize the tlisease further by determining the involve-
mature RBC precursors) suggests that, rather than
ment of various immunoglobulin types and complement.
being directed against early sterm cells, antibodies are
Various other immunological tests for detecting
 anti-RBC antibucy have been reported, including an
the bone marrow (Jonas et al., 1987; Holloway and
enzyme-linked inrmuosorbent assay (Campbell and
Meyer, 1990). Marrow cytology and/or histopath-
George, 1984) and a direct enzyme-linked antiglobu-
ology may also reveal macrophages phagocytosing
lin tesl (Barker et al., 1992; 1993). Although some of
erylhrocytes or RBC precursors (Holloway and Meycr,
these tests may arguably be more sensitive than the
1990). In such patients, techniques such as immuno-
DAT, they are not commonly available. Regardless of
fluorescent or inumunoperoxidase staining of bone
whethcr a DAT or an altermalive test for anti-RBC
 marrow samplcs may confirm the prescnce of antibod-
 antibody is used, however, clinicians should be aware
ies directed against RBC precursors (Stewart and
that a positive test result merely records the presence of
Feldman, 1993b).
antibody and docs not determine whethcr IMHA is.
primary (AIHA) or secondary.
Uncommonly, 1MHA (with or without LMT) will
MANAGEMENT OF IMHA
be merely one component of systemic lupus erythema-
losus, a mnltisyslcmic immunological disurbanrcc.
The cornerstonc of the management of IMHA is im-
Measurement of serum antinuclear antibody (ANA) is
munosuppressive therapy, particularly with
therefore indicated in those patients displaying in-
glucocorticoids. The major mechanisms of inmmuno-
volveimenl pf morc than one body systen, such as MT,
suppressive thcrapy in gencral are to decrease anti-
glomerulonephritis, polyarthritis, polymyositis or
 RBC antibody synthesis, decrease the binding affinity
immune-mediated skin disease. By contrast, ANA is
between antibodies and erythrocytes and decrease
not indicated (and is usually ncgative) in those patienis
desIruclion of antibody-coalcd cels by thc MPS (Millcr,
suspected of having uncomplicated IMHA.
1992) (Figure 5.23). Even if new anti-RBC antibody
synthesis by plasma cells is arrested immediately, pre-
Identification of underlying disease
existing immunoglobulins may survive in the circula.
Sincc IMHA is often sccondary, patlicularly in cats
tion fora wcek ormore, therefore rcductiou of antibody
and in dogs with atypical signalment, confirmation of
synthesis is usually not an important part of the initial
IMHA is not necessarily the end of the diagnostic trail.
treatment of IMHA.
Primary or AIHA can only be dliaguoscd with absolute
certainty once potential hidden underlying causes have
 Initial immunosuppressive therapy
been thoroughiy investigated. Unfortunately, this
 Initial immunosuppressive therapy for dogs and cats
presents practiioners with a dilemma: although IMHA
with IMHA usually consists of oral prednisolone (or
is unlikely to be treated effectively unless underlying
prednisone; not licensed for veterinary use in the UK)
causes have been identified and eliminated, a complete
at a starting dose of 2 to 4 1mg/kg/day, given once daily
search for such causes can be lime consuming, expcil-
or split twice daily (Stewart and Fcldinan, 1993b).
sive, potentially invasive and, in the case of primary
Some authors recomrend commencing treatment
IMHA, ultimately fruitiess. Standard and relatively
with an immediate intravenous dose of injectable
inexpcnsive screening tests for underlying disease that
 ghucocorticoids (most conmonly dexamethasone at a
ideally should be performed in all animals with IMHA
dlose of about 0.1 to 0.2 mg/kg) before conimencing
include haematology (with careful exanmination of a
oral drugs (Thompson, 1995), but there is little evi-
blood sincar), serun biochemistry, urinalysis, thoracic
dence that this hastens rcsponse to thcrapy. The most
and abdominal radiography and, in cats, testing for
important short-term effect of glucocorticoids is in-
retroviruses (particularly FeLV). Further tests that
hibition of the MPS, sometimes termed a 'medical
might bc considered in somc patients, particularly
 splenectomy'. Treatment response is rarely innedi-
elrlcrly anunals in which underlying neoplasia (espc-
ate: when glucocorticoids alonc are efective, an
cially occult lymphoproliferative disease) is a real
increase in PCV usually occurs 3-7 days after com-
possibility, include abdominal ultrasonography, lymph
 mencing therapy but can be delayed for as Iong as one
nodc aspiration cytology and bonc marrow analysis.
month (Stcwart and Feldman, 1993b).
74
thioprine is amuch safer drug forlong-term use and.
since there isminimal clinical evidencetosupport the
(a)Decrease antibody
contention thatthis drugislessefficacious orslowerto
synthesis
effect than cyclophosphamide in dogs with IMHA
（Cotter,1992）,ii is probably the immunosuppressive
agent of choice.
Evenwhennotcommencedduringtheinitialtherapy
ofcanineIMHA,cyclophosphamide or azathioprine
often needstobe added within a fewwccks of starting
treatment with corticosteroids(Stewart andFeldman,
(b)Decrease
antibody-cell
1993b).Indications for concurrent immunosuppres-
bindingaffinity
sive agents are a failure torespond to glucocorticoids
alone or intolerable side effects to steroids,such as
polydipsia,polyuria,polyphagia and tachynoea
dlitionoftheseagentsoften enablesamorerapid
reductionin corticosteroid doses.
(c)Impair cell
Cats do not tolerate immunosuppressive agents as
destructionof the
mononuclear
wellasogs,anditisoftendifficulttobreakstandard
phagocyticsystem
tabletsdown tosizessmall enough tosafely dosecats.
Cats are,however,tolerant of long-term high dosesf
glucocorticoids,and most cats withIMHA will re-
spondtosteroids alone.Forthisreason,azathioprine
(atareduced doseof0.3mg/kg/day)orcyclophospha-
mide(same dose asrecommended for dogs)israrely
needed.
Figure5.23:Immunosuppressiveagents canreduceimmune-
Supportive/ancillary therapy
mediated destructionofredbloodcelis(RBCs)by several
different mechanisms.(a)Many agents eventually reduce
Paticnts with severe anaemia have generalized tissue
antiRBCsynthesisbyplasma celisalthoughsince
hypoxia and benefit frornreducing oxygen demand by
immunogiobulinshave a circulating half-lifeofmore thana
instituting strictcagerest until anaemiaresponds to
week,thiseffctisrarelymmediatelybeneficial.Several
thcrapy. Severely compromised patients can also be
other processes may bemore rapidly effective:(b)some
supported withoxygen supplementation.Haemoglobin
agentsmay reduce thebindingaffinityof anti-RBC
antihodiesto theerythrocytesurfacemembrane，（c)whereas
oxygensaturationhowever,alreadynearmaxinal
manydrugswillbyvariousmechanismsmpairBC
and supplementation with oxygen therefore increases
destruction ofthemononuclearphagocyticsystem.
saturation only minimally.Oxygen supplementationis
Glucocorticoidshemostmortantmunosuppressive
also laborious and expensive.Because patients with
agentsusedotreatIMHAexerttheirbeneficialeffectsy
haemolytic anaemia have a normal blood volume,
allof theillustratedmechanisms.
fluid therapyisof little benefit andmay contribute to
volume overload.
Many dogswith IMHA donot respondadcquately
Patients with IMHA are prone to pulmonary
toglucocorticoidsalone andrequire additionalimmu-
thrombocmbolism and DIC （Cotter,1992;Lifton,
nosuppressive thcrapy. Commencing treatment with
1999),particularlythosewithseverc anacmia and/ora
glucocorticoids and concurrent azathioprine (starting
positive testresultwithslide agglutination and those
dose 2 mg/kg/day orally) orcyclophosphamidc (start-
requiring transfusion, therefore some clinicians rec-
ing dose50mg/m²every second day orally)isrecom-
ommend heparin be used prophylactically duringthe
mended at the time of diagnosis in those dogs with
hospitalizationofseverelyaffectedanirmals(Thompson,
clinicalevidenceofsevere MHA(Cotter,1992;Lifton.
1995).The true efficacy of such prophylactic therapy
1999) such as profound anaemia (PCV of less than
is,however,unknown(Miller,1999）.A safelow dose
10%), signs of major clinical compromise (particu-
of heparin that does not cause spontancous blecding
larly weakness,stupor and collapse),a positive cst
and does notrequirecareful monitoringof coagulation
result with slideagglutinationand jaundice orhaemo-
parameters is 75 to 100 U/kg three to four times daily
globinaemia/haemoglobinuria.
subcutaneously(Cotter,1992;Stewart and Feldman,
Some authors prefercyclophosphamide toazathio-
1993b).
prine,primarilybecause cyclophosphamidemaybea
more potent and rapidly acting immunosuppressive
Transfusion
agentHowever,cycloposphamidc predisposesdogs
Cage rest and standard immunosuppressive drugs arc
tosevereandrefractory sterilehaemorrhagic cystitis
succcssfulinmostdogs andcats withnon-life-threaten-
and is thereforenot suitable for chronic therapy.Aza-
ing IMHA.However,initial response to therapy can
Immune-Mediated Hlaemolytic Anaemia
75
sometimes be sluggish (a week or nore), particularly
unpredictably myelosuppressive, therefore whitc cell
in those animals with poor bone marrow responsive-
counts should be regularly monitored throughout
 ness due to either peracute anaemia or immune-medi-
therapy (Cotter, 1992). Furthermore, as azathioprine
aled damage to RBC precursors. In the meantinc,
can (rarely) cause an idiosyncratic hepatotoxicity, liver
 {ransfusion may be needed to support those patients
cnzymes should also be monitored rcgularly for
with life-threatening acute and severe anaemia (PCV
increases far beyond those expected with glucocorti-
less than 10% or signs of severe conpromise, such as
coid therapy alone.
collapse or stupor). Transfuscd red cells oflen have a
Ouc simplc approaclh lo tapering therapy in stable
very short lifespan (days or even hours) in patients with
 patients with IMHA is to recheck PCV about every 2
IMHA, and transfusions may actually increase the rate
weeks and then, if anaemia is still in remission, to
uf haemolysis (Halliwell and Gorman, 1989). For this
reduce thc dose of onc drug by 50% after each visil. In
 reason, transfusions should be avoided when possible
animals receiving several immunosuppressive agents,
instable patients with IMHA (Thompson, 1995; Miller,
the drug that is causing the nost side effects is tapered
1999). In lose patienis that are sevcrely compro-
firs. In most instanccs this means thal prednisolone is
mised, however, transfusions are life-savingandshould
tapered first and, once steroid doses are low enough to
not be withheid (Klag et al., 1993; Miller, 1999).
cause no side effects, then the other drug is similarly
Whole blood may be safely transfuscd at a ralc of
tapcrcd. Once a well toleratedl maintenance closc of all
up to 20 ml/kg/h, usually at a maximum daily volume.
drugs is attained, therapy should ideally be continued
 of 20 ml/kg. Multiple transfusions as often as every
for at least a further 3 months, with monthly monitor.
 rs   r  s o  
 ing of PCV. Presuming that an underlying cause of
animals. Since patients with IMHA are normovolaemic,
MHA has not been identifiedand eliminated, tapering
volume overload after transfusion can become a sig-
therapy too rapidly increases the risk of a life-threaten-
nificant risk in animals that have alrcady reccntly
 ing rclapse. Clinicians should bc aware lhat chronic
receiverl high volunes of blood or other fluids. In these
azathioprine therapy can cause a mild non-regenera-
patients, blood transfusions should be given slowly
tive anaemia (PCV greater than 30%) in dogs. This
(maximum rate of 4 ml/kg/h). When available, packcd
causcs no patienl compromise, and persislcncc of a
RBCs arc preferable to whole blood. Since crossmatches
mild anaemia in patients on this drug is not a reflection
 are often positive in patients with IMHA (because the
 of inadequate treatment.
animal has antibodies against its own RBC and can
Once anaemia has been in reimission for 3 to G
even *crossmatch' positive against its own anl donor
 months, therapy can be cautiously withdrawn. Haem-
blood), conpatible donors should be used if blood
 atocrit should be monitored regularly over the monthis
typing is available (sec Chapters 15 and 16). Bovinc
following cessation of therapy. Patients with a poor
polymerized haermoglobin has recently becoine avail-
regenerative response, particularly those with severe
 able as a safe and effective (although often prohibi-
immune-mediated marrow disease such as PRCA, can
tively expcnsive) altcrnative means of providing
takc many months lo respond to1herapy (Coller, 1992).
Such animals should be supported with an initial blood
 mic patients.
transfusion followed by standard immunosuppressive
therapy (Jonas et cal., 1987). Bccause destruction of
 Monitoring response to therapy
 peripheral erythrocytes is often minimal in animals
Haematocrit should be monitored daily until an appre-
with inmunological marrow disease, donated red cells
ciable responsc io iminunosuppressive therapy is oh-
may survive in the circulation for up to several months.
served and the PCV increases above about I5% in cats
Although immunosuppression may not cause an in-
and 20% in dogs, after which PCV should be rmoni-
 crease in PCV for up to 3 months, response to therapy
lored at least wcekly unil anaemia rcsolves con-
can be detected carlicr by carcful monitoring of serial
pletely. Given an adequate treatment response, drug
reticulocyte counts or bone marrow samples.
therapy should be gradually tapered to an acceptable
maimienancc rlose that can be given safcly long termn
Advanced emergency therapy
withount significant side effects. In dogs, prednisolone
 Despite appropriate standard therapy and multiple
I 01 s'o oi paadi eg yon uano uo adojze p
 transfusions, some patients with IMHA succumb to
mg/kg cvery second day, a maintenance dose that is
aculc severe aaemia during the first week or two of
usually well tolerated. Similar maintenance doses of
treatment. Beneficial treatment options in an emer-
prednisolone may be achievable in cats although, as
gency include high-dose human intravenous
sile cffccts fron slcroids are typically ninimal, highcr
gammaglobulin, plasmapheresis and splenectony.
doses are also usually acceptable. Since cyclophos-
phamide therapy can eventually cause sterile cystitis
High-dose human intravenous gammaglobulint
(which can be irrevcrsible) or cvcn bladder neoplasia,
High doscs of intravcnous gammaglohulin have bccn
there is no safe maintenance dose of this particular
shown to occasionally caluise rapid (and sometimes
drug. Both cyclophosphamide and azathioprine can be
sustained) remission of various immunohaemato-
76Manual of Caninc and Feline Hacmatology and Transfusion Medicinc
logical disorders in humans,includingIMHA (Miller,
Chronic refractoryIMHA
1992) (Figure 5.24). The product used in humans, as
An initial adequate response to standard immunosup-
a 12 hour intravcnous infusion at doscs ranging from
pressive therapy does not ncccssarily guarantce that
0.5 to1.5 g/kghasbeenshowntohavethe same cffect
patients withIMHAwill be sinple tomanage in the
in some dogs,withoutapparent sideeffects (Kellerman
longer term.In some patients anaemia relapses as
and Bruyette,1997; Scott-Moncrieff and Reagan,
therapy is tapered.Persistence with higher than main-
1997).The product can,however,be prohibitively
tenancedoses ofglucocorticoidsandotherimmuno-
expensive, especially in large dogs.
suppressive agents is,however,not an acceptable
alternative due to drug side effects. In these patients,
additional treatments that may then permit an accept-
able dose reduction of the standard drugs include
Anti-RBC
Humar
danazoland cyclosporin.
Danazol
Danazol (an impedcd androgen),in combinationwith
other immunosuppressive therapy,hasbeen reported
tocause an eventualpartialor completeremission of
IMHA in some dogs (Stewart and Feldiman,1993b).
Danazolmay therefore beworth considering(ata dose
of5mg/kgtwoto threetimesdailyorally)inchronic
cases that are refractory to standard trcatment alone
(Stewart and Feldman,1993b).Results of a recent
Figure5.24:High dose gammaglobulin is a blood product
detectably respond to the drug (Miller,1999).The
createdbyextractingconcentrating and pooling a'soupof
most important mcchanism of action of danazol is
many differing antibodiesfromnumeroushumandonors.
probably to reduce the MPS Fc receptor/antibody
One proposed mechanismofactionis that,since such a wide
and heterogenousrange ofimmunoglobulins are contained
binding affinity.Side effects,which are uncommon,
withinhighdosegammaglobulin,theproductmay actually
includemasculinization of bitches and idiosyncratic
containantibodiesthatarespecificatly directedagainstthe
hepatotoxicity. Danazol is expensive,however,and
recipientsownanti-redbloodcell(RBC）antibodies,thereby
evenwheneffective can take months to achieve maxi-
bindingand inactivating them(blackarrow).However,the
maineffectof highdosegammaglobulinisto saturate theFc
mum cfficacy (Stcwart and Feldman,1993b).
receptors of themononuclear phagocyticsystemwithexcess
donatedantibodiesleaingfewreceptorsavailabletobind
Cyclosporin
to thepatient'sown anti-RBCantibodiesattached totheRBC
Cyclosporin A, a selective T-cell immunosuppressant
surface membrane.
that blocks amplification of thc immune response,has
been used to treat dogs with refractory IMHA (Miller,
1992; Gregory, 1999). Initial oral daily doses of
Plasmapheresis
cyclosporin ofeither 10-25mg/kg（olive oil-based
Plasmapheresis is an effective method of rapidly re-
suspension) or 4-15 mg/kg(microemulsion) are ad-
moving unbound anti-RBC antibodies from the circu-
justed to attain trough whole blood concentrations of
lation, although antibodies that are already bound to
the drug of at least 500 ng/ml (Gregory, 1999).
RBCmembraneswill persist and may cause ongoing
Cyclosporin A is expensive and can cause
disease (Matus et al.,1985;Miller,1992).
gastrointestinaldisturbances,gingivalhyperplasiaand,
uncommonly.nephrotoxicity or hcpatotoxicity.
Splenectomy
Sometimes, one of the emergency treatments for
Asthe spleen isusually the majorsiteof RBC destruc-
IMHA,such as splenectomy or intravenous
tioninIMHA andisoftenalsoan importantsiteof
gammaglobulin,may‘kick startrefractory chronic
antibodyproduction,splenectomy canbe effective at
cases and render standard therapy more effective.
attaining rapid remissions in patients with life-threat-
Splenectomy,in particular,may on occasion permit
ening disease (Millcr, 1992). Thc procedure is risky,
subsequent significant reductions in immunosupprcs-
especiallyinunstablepatients,andresponserates are
sive drug dosage. This beneficial effect is, however,
highlyunpredictable(JacksonandKruth,1985),prob-
inconsistent and unpredictable.
ably because other organs inthe MPs (particularly the
liver) continue to destroy red cclls.Furthermorc,for
SecondaryIMHA
therernainderof theirlives splenectomized animals
Whenever an underlying cause of IMHA can be iden-
will have anincreased susceptibility tosystemicinfec
tified andeliminated,ongoingspecificdrug therapyis
tion and blood-borne parasites such as Haemobar-
ofien not neccssary.In contrast,drugs are unlikely 1o
tonella (Thompson,1995).
be ableto be discontinued while theunderlying disease
Immune-Mediated Haemolytic Anacmia
77
 process persists. Drugs or vaccines given over the 4-6
Veterinary nmunology and Immanopathology 34, 1-20
week period before onscl of IMHA should be avoided
Bunch SE, Metcalf MR, Crane SW and Cullen JM (1989) Idiopathie
 pleural effusion and pulimonary thrornboembolisim in a dog with
in the furure whenever possible. Whenn IMHA is ot
autoinununchcmolyticancmia.JournaloftieAmerican Veeriary
Medieal Associafion 195, 1748-1753
associated with recent vaccination, however, there is
Campbell KL aned Gcorge 3W (1984) Applieationof le enzyme-linlked
 probably no nced to modify or avoid routine vaccina-
immunusarlen assny to detect canine erythrocyte antilcdies.
tions in the future.
Aerieun Jonrnat of Veierinary Research 45, 747-752
CotterSM (1992) Autoinmune hemolylic anenia in dogs. Comypendiur
In the cat, IMHA is often secondary to infection
ofContiming Edacartonfor the Practicing Veterinaria 14,53-59
with cither FcLV or Haenobartonella felis (Halliwell
Day MJ (1996) Serial monitoring of clinical haematological and
 and Gorman, 1989). Cats with IMHA should therefore
inmunological parancters in canine autoimmunc huemoiytic
anaeimia. Journal of Smait Aningl Pracrice 37, 523-534
always be tested for FeLV. Cats with IMHA that are
Day M1 and Penlaie WJ (1992) Immune-mediated diseasc in 1he old
English shcepdog. Researeh in Veterinury Seienee 53,87-92
ard immunosuppressive therapy, although long-tern
Gregory,CR (1999) hmmunosuppressiveagents.In: Crren! Veterirary
Therapy XI: Small Arimu! Practice, ed. JD Bonagura, Pp. 509-
 prognosis is poor. Cats with H. fetis infection typically
S13, WB Sannders, Pliladelphia
Halliwell REW and Gorman NT (1989) Antoimnume blood dliseascs.
prcsent with recurring episodes of haeimolytic anae-
In: Veterinary Clinical Immunology, ed REW Halliwell, pp. 308
mia. During anaemic crises, organisms may not hc
336. WB Saunders, Philadelphia
apparent, as affected cells are either destroyed or
IIoloway SA and Mcycr DJ (i990) Prednisolonc and danazol for
  tn p-a a n
 scquestered in the spleen. Organisms reappear on red
ineffeetivccrythroid rcgcnerationinadog.fournalofmheAmerican
cells during remission of anacinia and are discovered
Veterinary Medicul Associaion 197, 1045-1048
Jackson ML url Kiuth SA (1985) Immune-medialed hemoly1ic anenia
by serial blood smears. Cats with IMHA. should prob-
and thronbocylopenia in the dog: aretrospective stuly of 55 cases
ably reccive oral telracycline or oxytetracycline at a
diagnosed from 1969 through 1983 at the Westeru College nf
dose rate of 20 mg/kg three times daily, evcn if organ--
Veterinary Medicinc. Camarian Veteriuuy .Jorml 26, 245-250
Jain NC(1993) Hemolyicanetmias of noninfectiousorigin In: Essentials
isms are not seen on initial smears. Concurrent immuno-
of Vererinary Hemaroiogy, ed. KC Jain, Pp, 193-209. Lea and
suppressive therapy in cats with H. felis infection is not
Febiger, Philadclphia
Jonas LD,ThrallMAand WeiscrMG (1987）Nonrcgenerativc fornf
 contraindicated. In fact, as anaemia due to H. felis
imuunc-mediated hemoiytie unenia in dogs. Jorrna of the
infection has an immune-mediated component.
AnericanimtHospiteAssieion23201-204
glucocorlicoids are indicated during acute crises.
consequencesofimmue-mediateanaemiainthedng.Compratve
Haemaiotogy hnternatianai I, RG-90
Jones DRE, Gruffydd-Jones TJ, Stokes CR and Bourne FJ (1990)
PROGNOSIS
Investigation inta facters influencing performance of the canine
antiglobulin test.Research inVererinary Science 48,53-58
Kellerman DL und Bruyette DS (l9g7) Intravenuus luman
Published mortality rates for IMHA are often high,
inmnunoglobulin for the treatment of iumune-mediated henolytie
tanging from about one-third to one-half of all pre-
anemia in 13 dogs. Jourrat of Veterinery Herral Medicine 11,
sented cases (Jackson and Kruth, 1985; Halliwell and
327-332
Klag AR, Gige Uand Shofer FS (1993) Idiopathic immne-mediated
Gorman, 1989; Cotter, 1992; Klag cr al., 1993; Reimer
hemalytic anemia in dlogs: 42 cases (1986-1990). Journa! af the
et al., 1999), with death/euthanasia usually attribut-
Anerican Veterinary Medical Association 202, 7B3-788
Liton SJ (1999) Managing immune-mediated hemolytic anemia in
able to either severe anaemia or pulmonary thrun-
dogs. Vererinary Medicine 94, 532-545
boembolism during the initial acute crisis, or persistent/
Matus RE, Schvrader LA, Leifer CE, Gordon BR and Hurvitz AI (1985)
rccurrent discase Or unacceptable drug side effects
Plasinapheresis as aljuvant therapy for autoiumune lemolytic
uneniain twu dogs.JorrntfiheAmerica VererinaryMedicut
during chronic therapy. Negative prognostic indica-
Associcnion/ 186, 691-693
tors include thie presence of profound jaundice or
Miller E (1992) Immmnosuppressive therapy in thetreatment of immune-
meliateddisease.oraofVeterinary hueraiMedicin6,206-
hacmoglobinacmia/hacmoglobinuria, a poor regen-
213
erative response, and a positive test result withi slilc
MillerE(1999) Diagnosis anlircatmentofimmune-mediated hemolytic
agglutination (Klag etal., 1993). As our understanding
anemia.n:CurrentVeteraryTherapyXIl:SmaAnmalPractice,
ed. JD Bonagura, pp, 427-433. WB Sauuders, Pliadeiphtia
 Of IMHA incrcases and our trealinent options cxpand,
 Noblc Sl and Armstrong PJ (199g) Bce sting cnvcnomation rcsulting in1
 deaths due to this disease should become lessfrequent.
sccondary immune-ucdiated huwlyticancmiuintwo dogs. Journa!
oftheAmericarVeerinaryMediclAssociio2141026-1027
Reiner ME, Troy GC and Wamick LD (1999) Immune-mediated
henolytic anemia: 70cases (1988-1996). Journai ofthe Americna
REFERENCES
AinctHospitalAssociation35,384-39!
Scott-Moacrieff JC and Reagan WJ (1997) Human intravenous
Barker RN and Elson CJ (1995) Red bluod cell glycoploriuns as B and
inmunoglobalin therapy. Seninars in Vererinary Medicine and?
T-cell antigens in canine autoimmune baemolytie anaemia.
Srgery (Smail Animai) 12, I78-18S
 Slewart Af and Feldman BF (1993a) Immune-mediated hemolytic
Bauker RN,Gruffydd-Jones TI and Elson CJ (1993） Red cell-hound
inmuogiohulins andcomplement measuredby an enzyne-linked
for the Pracrieing Vererinariax 15, 372-381
antiglobulin test in dogs with autoimmume haemolysis or other
 Stewart AF and Feldinan BF (1993b) Iemnume-1uediated henolytic
aracmias. Research in Veterinary Sctence 54, 170-178
aemin, part I., Clinical entity dagnosis and treatinent theory.
Barker RN, Gruffydd-Janes TJ, Stokcs CR and Elson CI (1991)
Compendiun of Continaing Edneation for the Praericing
Idemification of autoantigens in canine autoimnunc lacinolytie
Vereririar 15, 1479-1491
anacmia.ClinicaiandExperinentaImmmotogy85.33-40
Thompsn JP(1995) Inumunologic diseases. In: Texrhook ofVeterinary
Batker RY, Gruffydl-Joncs TJ, Stokes CR and Elson CJ (1992)
Autoinmune huemolysisin the dog: relationship belween anaennia
2002-2029. WB Saunders, Plhiladelphia
und the levels of red blood cell lound immunoglobulins and
complenenl measuretd by an cnzyme-linked antiglohulin test.
int Vererinary Medicine and Surgery (Smalt Animal) 7, 31I-314
CHAPTER FIVE
(iv) Haemobartonei
Darren Foster
INTRODUCTION
selected, the cyclical nature of the parasitaemia, thc
existence of carrierstates, the presence of ectoparasites,
Haenobartonella felis is a mycoplasma (previously
and the ability of a given laboratory to identify the
classified as a rickettsia) that parasitizes the red biood
Organism. The recurded prevalence of the organism
cells (RBCs) of cats. It hasa worldwitle disiribution. The
varies from 4.9% to 23.2% (Carney and England,
clinical condition with variable signs, including regen-
1993). All surveys undoubtedly underestimate the true
eralive anaemia, pyrexia and malaise, is referred to as
prevalence.
haemobartonellosis or feline infectious auacmia (FIA).
 The prevalence of the disease is unknown owing to the
Predisposing factors
lack of a serological test for the organism and because
 No age, brecd, orsexsusccptibility has beenshown with
chronic carriers cannot be easily identified. The major
H.felis infections, although some authors believe young
mode of transmission is believed to involve blood-
tmale cats (Hayes and Priester, 1973), especially those
sucking insects (particularly the flea), transplacental
with high flca burdens, may be more at risk (Nash and
and transmarmmary infection and iatrogenie inoculation
Bobade, 1986). Cats with feline leukaemia virus (FeLV)
via blood transfusions. Treatment generally involves
 infection have long been thought to be at increased risk
thie use of antibiotics and corticosteroids combined with.
of infectiou with H. felis (Nash and Bobade, 1986).
supporlive care. Prinmary haenmobartonellosis carries a
 good prognosis.
lion itself, it may result in more severe parasitaemia,
anaemia and clinical signs. Other risk factors include
recent ilness, lack of vaccinations, roaming outdoors,
THE ORGANISM
 and a young age (Grinden er al., 1990).
H. felisis an epicellular mycoplasma that parasitizes the
 Incubation period
RBCs of cats. I1 can cause disease as a primary pathogen
 The reported incubation period (the time frorm inocu-
or by opportunistic infection as a sequclac to other
lalion to the first appearance of parasites in the periph-
diseases, particulatly those where immunosuppression
eral circulation) ranges from 2 to 34 days (Harvey and
is α fcature. Thrcc forms of the organism have been
Gaskin, 1977; Van Steenhouse et al., 1993), although
identified on the surface of RBCs: rods, cocci and rings.
(hc average is 6 to 17 days (Maede and Hata, 1975).
These may occur singly or in rows or clusters. All forms
are firrnly adheren. 1o ihe surfacc of the RBC and are
Carrier status
partially embedded in the membrane. These forms were
It is generally believed that the carrier status can be as
previously tlhought to represent different stages in the
 long as 2 years bul may in fact be much longer. Some
life cycle of the parasie, although recently it has been
authors describe a relapse of the acute stage that may
shown by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) ihat these
(ccur with immunosuppression or stress from disease,
forms represent morphologically and genetically dis-
although later work failed to confirm this finding (Harvey
tinct strains of the organism (Folcy ct al., 1998). Rarely,
 and Gaskin, 1978). Stress does increase the numbcr of
Organisms are found free in the serun, probably repre-
 parasites but not necessarily clinical disease (Harvey
senting accidental detachment.
and Gaskin, 1978). Treatment of anaemia with anti-
biotics or corticosteroids does not prcvcnt occurrenceof
EPIDEMIOLOGY
the carrierstate, and prior exposure to the organisin docs
not induce immunity (Pedersen, 1987).
Prevalence
 The reported prevalence of infection varies greatly.
Spread between individuals
Several factors will influence the outcounc of surveys.
H. felis can be transmitted experimentally via the oral,
These include prcvalence in a given area, types of cats
intraperitoucal, subcutancons or intravenous route by
80
 Manual of Canine and Feline Haematalogy and Transfusion Medicinc
using infected whole blood. Whether any orall of these
macrophages and reticular cells) occurs. After
modes of transmission are inportant in the field situ-
removal of parasites, thc RBCs are returned to the
ation is debatable.
circulation in Jarge mmbers. For this reason, the
 packed cell volume (PCV) can decrease quickly and
lnoculation
then return to within normal limits with the same
Sulcutaneous inoculalion via cat bites is considered
rapidity. This process may occur within hours (Harvey
unlikely as lirtle blood is fransferred betwecn cats,
and Gaskin, 1977). Although the PCV may return to
even with the presence of severe gingivitis and stoma-
normal, the lifespan of the RBC is considerably
titis, and saliva is not considered infectious (Harvey
reduced owing to the developiment of a Coombs'
and Gaskin, 1977). Oral transmission has becn shown
positive anaenia (Zulty and Kociba, 1990) and in-
 to occur experimentally, but considering the large
creased fragility after loss of membrane and mem-
valumes of blood required (2-5 ml), it is extremely
brane phospholipids (Maede, 1980).
doubtful that this rcpresenis a real risk in thc normaf
 spread of infection. Intraperitoneal inoculation with
The recovery phase
 infected blood has been a conmon way of transmitting
The recovery phase follows the acute phase. In the
infection under cxperimental concditions (Harvey and
recovery phasc, parasilc numbers decrease and the
Gaskin, 1977) but would be unimportant in naturally
PCV increases. The PCV increases more slowly than
acquired infections, Iatrogenic infection via whole
the rapid decrease in the number of parasites. The PCV
blood transfusion is a real risk.
remains within normal limits during this phase, Most
(if nol all) cats hecome chronic carriers. Thcse cats
Ectoparasites
have normal PCVs, and parasites may be intermit-
Ectoparasites, particularly fleas, have long been
tently found in small numbers.
innplicalcd as a possible mode of transmission. Con-
 sidering the widespread occurrence of this parasite
Mechanisms of anaemia
and the difficulty in horizontal transmission by other
The mechanism of anaemia in haemobartonellosis is
means, the existcnce of an cctoparasite vcctor would
 complex. An understanding of the processcs involvcd
seem likely.
will lead to a more rational treatment regimen. Anae-
mia occurs via four major mechanisms: sequestration
Vertical transmission
 of RBCs, antibody-mediated laenolysis, erytlhrophagia
Vertical transmission via transplaccntal infcction has
 and a decreased lifespan due to hacmolysis.
been shown by thie fact that kittens as young as 3 hours
have been found to be infected with the organism
Sequestration of RBCs
(Harbull, 1963). Infection of killcns via suckling is
RBCs are held within lhic spleen until parasites are
also considered possible but there is no conclusive
removed via pitting by splenic macrophages and reticular
evidence for this.
cells (Maede, 1979). The removal of the parasite results
in a quick returm of the RBCs to the circulalion. This
Natural infection
process explains the rapid fluctuations in PCV that
Natural infection probably occurs mainly via insect
occur during the acute phase of infection.
vectors (particilarly fleas), although iatrogcnic infec-
 tion after blood transfusion and vertical transmission
Antibody-mediated haemolysis
in utero and via suckling. although less important,
A large proportion of the anaemic process is due to the
should be considered.
occurrence of a Coombs' positive anaemia and
autoaggluination. This may be the dircct resull of the
parasite or reflect damage to the erythrocyte membrane
PATHOGENESIS
during parasitism or pitting, resulting in exposure of
lidden antigcns to the itnmunc systern or changcs in the
Movement within the cat
antigen structure of the RBC membrane. Electron
microscopical studies reveal permanent erosions in the
The acute phase
RBC membrane after removal of the parasite (Jain and
Once inside the cat, H. felis remains within the
Keaton, 1973). Coombs' positive anaemia may also
bloodstream and associated organs such as the spleen.
result frorm decreased cholesterol and phospholipids in
The period from the first appearance of the parasite to
the RBC membrane (Maede, 1980).
the last parasitaemic episode is referred to as the
acute phase of the infection. Clinical signs develop
Erythrophagia
during this period and can be rnild and inapparcnt or
Erythrophagia within both the spleen by splenic
result in severe anaemia and even death. RBCs and
macrophages and the blood from transforined
 associated parasites are held within the spleen until
monocytes has been shown (Maede, 1978, 1979).
piting' (the removal of organisins by splenic
Splenic erythroplagia is more important than pcri-
Haemobartonellafelis
81
pheral phagocytosis. Spherocytes and RBCs that arc
Acute
Chronic
attached to each other (autoagglutination) are less
Lethargy
Weight loss
pliable thannormal cells andwillberemovedby the
Anaemia
Mild anaemia
complexreticularnctworks of the spleen.
Hepatomegaly
Intermittent pyrexia
Splenomegaly
Decreased lifespan due to haemolysis
Whole body tenderness
Although thc parasite is epicellular it seems that
H.felis causes irreversible changes toRBCs that result
Tachypnoca
Dyspnoea
in increased osmotic fragility (Maede,1975,1980;
Pyrexia
Maede and Hata,1975).This isrelated to a decreased
Jaundice
concentration oferythrocyte lipids,almost certainly
dueto theloss ofmembrane after removalof the
Figure5.25:Clinical signsofhaemobartonellosis.
parasite (Macde, 1980).
Recovery phase
CLINICAL SIGNS
Although thePCVreturns tonormalparasitescane
identified during therecovery phase.Most (if not all)
Clinicalsignsvary dependingonthestage of parasitae-
cats then become carriers.
mia and the existence ofintercurrent diseases,which
may contributc to the clinical signsorresultinmore
Chronic carrier phase
severe parasitaemia and anaemia.Should the
Parasites may be found during the chronic carrier
haemogram reveal anaemia and I. felis organisms
phase,and thc PCV may fluctuate from normal to
without cvidnce ofegenerationheclnician should
slightlybelownormal.This may last for 2 or more
ask two important qucstions.Firstly,has there been
years.Relapse of clinical signsis possible but should
adequatetmeorrenerationandsconllyarh
be consideredrare,asit hasbeen difficult toreproduce
any underlying diseases present that are preventing
relapse under cxpcrimental conditions (Harvey and
regeneration (c.g.FeLV,myelofibrosis,myelophthisis
Gaskin,1978). Figure 5.25 lists the signs of chronic
or toxic insult)?Cats that develop acute anaemias will
haemobartonellosis.
showmore severe clinical signs than cats thathave
anaemia of gradual onset.
Three categories of clinical presentation havc bcen
DIAGNOSIS
reported(Carneyand England,1993),but noteverycat
will fall into one of these major categories:
The lack of awidely available specific scrological
test,thetediousnature ofexamining bloodsmearsfor
Kittens and some adult cats with peracute
the parasite and the high incidence of falsepositive
anaemia,with sudden weakness,pallor and
andnegative resultsmake diagnosis difficultDefini
hypothermiathatwcreothcrwisenormalbefore
tive diagnosis rests on identification of the organism
the onset of clinical signs
(Figure 5.26).The clinician must pay attention to
Otherkittens andmost adult cats thatshow
sampling techniqucs and the cyclicnature of the
sudden and significant fevcr, acute anaemia,
parasitaemia,which may increase the chance of a
weakness,pallor,cardiacmrmur,splenomegaly,
positive diagnosis.
diffusebody tenderness,dyspnoea and
tachypnoea
Adult cats that are slightly anaemic,with mild
fever,lethargy and weight loss.
The clinical state is generally divided into the
acute,recovery and carrier phases.
Acute phase
The acute phase is the stage from the first to thelast
parasitaemic cpisode (Van Steenhouse et al.,1993).
Anaemia and other clinical signs occur during this
period. The haematocrit will fall initially and then
quickly rise as RBCs are returned to the circulation.
Most cats show a varicd mixture of signs,none of
Figure5.26:Haemobartonella felis observedon thesurface
which are specific.
ofred blood cellsfroma cat by usingaRomanowskystaining
Figure 5.25 lists the acute clinical signs.
method.
82   Manual of Canine and Feline Hacmatology and Transfusion Medicine
The timing and frequency of sample taking is
Ancillary tests
important. As the anaemia progresses the number of
  u s s jo ae sis 
Organisms decreases, 1naking diagnosis nore difficult.
infections to rule out underlying diseascs. Testing for
Organisms are said to disappear from the circulation
FeLV and feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV) is
quickly on beginning treatment, necessitating diagno.
useful. FeLV has previously been considered an
sis before treatment is initialed.
important predisposing factor for the devclopment
of H. felis infection, and up to 46% of cats withi
Blood samples
H. felis have been reported to be positive for FeLV
Making sinears of peripheral blood samples immedi-
(Cotter et al., 1975). These percentages are probably
ately affter blourl collection is ihc preferred rmcthod.
no longer correct.
Some authors favour the auricular vein as the site for
Although alterations to the serum biochemical
venepuncture whereas others prefer the jugular. Antico-
screen are non-specific, they may alert the clinician to
agulants (particularly ethylcnediaminetetra-aceticacid)
thc presence of underlying rliseases thal may influencc
may dislodge the parasite frorm the surface of the RBC.
the treatment or prognosis. In moribund cats, blood
which dramatically reduces the chance of finding the
 glucose concentration should be monitored, as Haemo-
organism (Harvey and Gaskin, 1977). This is particu-
bertonella in other species (particularly micc) causcs
larly truc if the sample is left statding. Multiple smears
fatal hrypoglycaemia by unknow mechanisms (Harvey
taken over several days 1nay be required to identify the
and Gaskin, 1977). Severe life-threatening hypothier-
 Organism, especially if the anaemia is severe.
mia is also common.
Recently, detection of tlic organism by PCR and
Staining techniques
western blot analysis has been described (Rikilisa et
 Staining techniques for identifying H. felis classically
al., 1997; Berent et al., 1998; Foley ct al., 1998;
involve Roinanowsky mcthords, although aeridine or-
Alleman et al., 1999). The availability of this tcst may
ange is considered superior (Bobade and Nash, 1987).
 Suiuepi yo Xex aemooe ue mole pue aseaioul
The disadvantages of staining with acridine orange are
infected or carrier cats.
that it rcquircs 24 hours for fixation and uses ul1raviolct
The aim of the diagnostie iavcstigation should
light microscopy which is not always readily avail-
be to determine if H. felis is acting as a primary
able. Therefore, not all veterinary laboratories use this
pathogen or a secondary opportunist, as the latter
Imcthod, and in cases with a high clinical suspicion itl
carries a worse prognosis, especially if the under-
would be wise to find a laboratory that is experienced
Jying disease is lifficult to treat. Although this dis-
in looking for H. felis. False positives are commonly a
tinction may not always be possible, clinicians
result of protein prccipitates, background debris or
should do their best to differentiate primary from
Howell-Jolly bodies. Stains should be freshly made
secondary haemobartonellosis.
and preferably filtered to prevent some of these prob-
lems. False megatives are common and may be as high
as 50% in some cases (Carmey and England, 1993)
TREATMENT
Owing to the cyclical nature of the parasitaenmia and
incxperiencc of the investi galor.
Tle need for and the type of treatment required will
Haematology
vary depending on the case. Trealment should uot be
Haematology generaHy reveals a regenerative anae-
considered as an all or nothing approach but as a
mia with anisocytosis, macrocytosis and reticulocy-
custom-made plan depending on the severity of anae-
 mia and rclated clinical signs anrl the presence of
tosis. Many cats become Coombs' positive during the
course of the infection. Spontaneous autoagglutination
underlying disease.
may also occur, and whicn it dloes a Coombs' test is not.
As idiopathic haemolytic anaemia is rare in the cat,
necessary. Autoagglutinarion must be differentiated
it may be pradent 1o treat for Haemobartonella even if
from rouleaux formation, which is common in nor-
 organisms cannot be identified in cats with suspected
mal cais. The anaemia also waxes and wanes consirl-
immune-mediated RBC destruction.
erably during the course of infection and, whereas the
fumber of circulating RBCs may decrease dramati-
Antibiotics
cally owing 1o sequesiration in the spleen, RBC
Antibiotics, partieularly the tclraeyelines, have bcen.
tumbers can also quickly recoverafter removal of the
considered the drugs of choice by many authors,
parasite. The haemogram sliould be checked fre-
although others have found them to have little or no
quently for signs of rccovery or deterioralion. Moni-
effect in eliminating or reducing the parasitacinic
toring the haemogram and the progression of clinical
state (IHarvey and Gaskin, 1978; Bobade etal., 1988).
signs closely will enable the clinician to make more
No known treatment prevents the carrier status. Doxy-
accuralc judgcmenls as to thc nced for blourl trans-
cyclinc, oxyictracycline and lctracycline are consil-
fusion or other changes in therapy.
ered the drugs of choice.
Haemobartonellafelis
83
Chloramphenicol isalsoreported as an effective
anaemia.Blood typing is imperativebefore undertak-
treatmcnt but can severely depress erythrogenesis,
ing transfusion.
which isimportant in recoveryfrom this condition.In
addition,chloramphenicol can cause vomiting,ano-
rexia,ataxia,neutropenia and sudden death in cats
PROGNOSIS
(Reid and Ochme,1989).
Enrofloxacin hasbeen anecdotallyreported tobe
The prognosis for haemobartonellosis is generally
effectivein the treatment of haemobartonellosis.The
regarded as fair to good, as 65% of affected cats
rcportedsuccessofenrofloxacincomesfrom demon-
recoverfrom infectionwithout treatment (Harvey and
strating cessation of parasitaemia.Thismay not be a
Gaskin,1977)and75%of cats survive if treatmentis
true treatment success,but may reflect the cyclical
given (Bobade et al.,1988).Prognosis depends on the
naturc of thisinfection.Enrofloxacin maybeconsid
presenceofunderlying diseaseandtheeasewith which
ered as a treatment choiceeitheralone orincombina-
it canbe treated.
tion with tetracyclines and immunosuppressive
therapy, especially in cats that do not respond to
tetracyclinc antibiotics.
FURTHERCONSIDERATIONS
Thiacetarsemide sodium
Immunosuppression and tumourigenesis
Anecdotal evidence suggests that thiacetarsemide
Some evidence suggests that ‘anaemic stress’ after
sodium can be used to treat haemobartonellosis.
H.felis infection can be oncogenic and result in an
Although this may be true,detailed trials regarding
increased incidence ofleukacmia and lymphoma
the safety and efficacy of this drug are unavailable.
(Priester and Hayes,1973;Kociba et al.,1983).
Thiacetarsemidesodiumishepatotoxic,causestissue
Although association is not proof,anaemic stress
necrosisif given perivascularly and is unlicensed for
leadsto the devclopment ofmyelogenousleukaemia
use in the cat.
in rats and mice (Priester and Hayes,1973). Indeed,
Corticosteroids
H.felis may itself lead to immunosuppression,as
As the pathogenesis ofanaemia in H.felis infection
theincidence ofFeLVinfection afterH.felisinfec-
tion is reported to be inereased (Kociba et al., 1983).
is due tomore than the parasite itself,and involves
immune mechanisms,immune suppression with
Although thiswasa small survey and it is possible
corticosteroids is consideredvaluable andperhaps
that early FeLV infection may not have been de-
tected,this is an interesting obscrvation.
the most important aspect of treatment.The exact
timing for the withdrawal of corticosteroids is
Blood donors
debatable and depcnds on the rapidity of recovery.
A potential source of infection with H. felis is via
Once the PCV returns to normal,therapy should
be tapered within 1-2 weeks while monitoring
iatrogenic inoculation after blood transfusion.All
closely for relapse.Figure 5.27 lists the treatment
cats that are blood donors should test negative for
FcLVand FIV and have several blood smears
regimens.
examined for the presence of H.felis.Considerable
Wholeblood transfusions
controversy exists as to whether blood donors
Whole blood transfusions may benecessary in se
should be splenectomized to enhance detection of
verely anaemic cats showingclinical signsof acute
the parasite.
Drug
Dose
Doxyeycline
1-3 mg/kg bid for 21 days
Oxytetracycline
25 mg/kg tid for 21 days
Tetracyclines
22 mg/kg tid for 21 days
Enrofloxacin
5 mg/kg sid for 21 days
Any of the above in combination with either prednisolone or dexamethasone:
Prednisolone
 2 mg/kg bid for 2-3 treatments then 1 img/kg bid for 4-6 treatments and
1 mg/kg sid for 4-6 treatments
Dexamethasone
0.3 mg/kg sid for 2-3 days then 0.15 mg/kg sid for 2-3 days and
0.15mg/kg sid for 2-3 days
Figure 5.27:Drugs commonly usedforthe treatment of haemohartonellosis.
 Manual of Canine and Feline Hacmatology and Transfusion Medicine
REFERENCES
Jain NC and Keelon KS (1973) Scanning clectron microscopie fcatues
ofHaemobartuaellafelis. AmericanJourratof Veterinary Research
34, 697-700
Alleman AR, Pate MG, Harvey JW, Gaskin JM and Barbet AF (1999)
Kociha GJ, Glade Weiser M and Olsen RG (1983) Enhanced
Weslers immwobiot analysis of the antigens of Haenobartonelta
susceptibilitytofelinelenkaeniavisincatswithHaemobartonella
felis infection. Leukaemia Reviews Intertational 1, 88-89
Microbiology 37, 1474-1479
Maedc Y (1975) Studies on haemobartonellosis, IV. Lifcspan of
Berent LM, Messick JB and Cooper SK (1998) Dcteclion of
crythrocytes of cuts infceted with Haenobaronetlafelis. Japunese
Haemobarronellafelisincatswith experimentally induccdacue
Juwmof of Veterinary Seience 37, 461-464
andchronicinfccons,singapolyeascchinrcactin.mer
so  iss  a
Journal of Veterinary Reserreh 59, 12 15-1220
in cats infectcd with Haenohartonelta felis. Japmese Jonrnai of
Vererinary Science. 40, 141-146
of acrirline orange and sone Romanowsky staining procedares in
Maede Y (1979) Scquestration and phagocytosis of Haemoborronells
the demonstration of Haenrobartoaella felis in feline blood.
Vereriaary Parasitology 26, 169-172
601-695
Bobadc PA,NashASandRogersonP(I988)Fclinehacmoburoncllosis:
Maede Y (I980) Studies ont lhaemabartonellosis, VI. Chunges of
clinicalhanologicalandpathlgialstudicsinmaturalnfecns
eryibrocyte lipids coucentration and ther retation fo osmotic
and the relationship lo infeetion with feline leurkaenia virus.
fragility.JapaneseJournat ofVeterinry Science42,281-288
Vererinry Recore! 122,3236
Maede Y and Hata R (1975) Studies on haemobartonellosis. I1. The
Caney HC ant Englaud J (1993) Feline haenolanonellosis. In.
Veteriaery Clinies of North Anmerica: Fetine fnfectiors Diseases,
llaemobarroneita felis. Japatese Journa! of Vererinary Science
37,49-54
Catier SUM, Hardy WE and Essex M (1975) Associatlion of feline
Nash AS andi Bobade PA (1986) Hacmobartonella felis infcction in cats
leukaemiaviruswithymplosarcomaanotherdisordersinthccat.
from the Glasgow area. Vererunary Record 11y, 373-375
Journal of the Vererinary Medieal Associarion 166, 449-454
Pedersen NC (1987) Basicaud elinieal innuology In: Diseases ofthe
Folcy JE, Harrus S,Poland A,Choncl B and Pederson NC (1998)
Cut: Medieine ant Surgery, Vol I, ed. I Holzwortlh, pp.169. 170.
Molecuar, clhinical, and pathologic cornparison of two listinet
WB Sauders, Philarelphia
strainsofHeenoburtonetafelisincomesticcas.AunericunJorrat
 o y a  s e a 
uf Vereriaury Reseurch 59, 1581-1588
leukaemia affcr feline infecticus anaemia. Jorrnal ofrhe Nariona!
Grindem CB, Corbet WT aud Tonkins MT (i990) Risk factors for
Concer tsrire 51,289-291
Haenohartonella felis infectior in cats. Jourmai of the Vererinary
Rcid FM and Oclimne FW (1989) Toxicoses. In: The Car: Diseases umd
Medical Association 196, 96-99
Clinicat Menagemenf, ed. RG Shcrding. p. 203. Churehill
Harbut PR (1963) A clinical appraisal of fclinc infectious unacmiu und
Livingstone, New Yurk
its transnission under natural conditions. Ansrraicn Veterirary
Rikilisa Y, Kawahara M, Wen B, Kociba G, Fuerst P, Kawamori F,
Jowrnal 39, 401-405
Suto C. Shibata Sand Futolashi M (1997) Westeyn blotanalysis of
Harvey JW aru Gaskin JK (1978) Feline hemolartonellosis attempes
Haenobortonella uuris and conparison of 16S rRNA gene
to inluce relapses of clinieal disease in chronically infecterl cats.
sequenceof If.uris, I.felis,and Eperyrhrozoo suis.ournal of
JournetfeAmerirAnialHospiaAssociari13,28-38
Clirical Microbfology 35, 823-829
Harvey IW and Gaskin JM (1977) Experimental feline
Van Stccnhouse JL, Miliard JR and Taboada J (i993) Fclinc
haemohartonellosis. Jonrna! of the American Aninai Hospiral
hacmobartoncllosis,ConpendiumofConrimring Edrcarionfor rhe
Assaciationn 13, 28-38
Praetising Veterinarian 15, 535-545
Hayes HM and Priester WA (1973) Fclinc infcctious annemia.Riss by
Zulty JC and Kocibu GI (lu9oy Cold agglutinins in cais with
agc, sex and breod; prior discase; scasonal oecurrence; mortality.
haenobartonellosis.Jouruat ofte Veterinary Merlical Associaion
Journat of Smail Animat Practice 14, 797-804
6, 907-911
CHAPTER FIVE
(v) Canine Babesiosis
Remo Lobetti
INTRODUCTION
B. canis vogeli and B. gibsoni by Rhipicephaius san-
gtineus and B. canis rossi by Haenophysalis lcachi.
Canine babesiosis is a tick-bone disease of worldwide
B. canis ca affect dogs ofall ages, although masl cases
inmportance, which ranges in severity from relatively
are in young dogs. A seasonal variation occurs, with
inild to fatal. Although haemolytic anaemia is the
the highest incidence in the sumer months. The
hallmark, several variations and complications ca
souree of infcction is carricr ticks, or ticks feeding on
 Occur, The causative organism of canine babesiosis is
 dogs that are either ill or incubating the disease and
eithcr Babesia canisor Babesia gibsoni. Three subtypes 
then feeding on a susceptible dog (Lobetti, 1998).
or strains of B. canis are recognized, namely, B. canis
Other possible sources of infcction are carrier dogs and
canis, B.canis vogetiand B.canis rossi.B.canis canis
blood transfusions.
and B. canis vogeli occur in Europe and North Africa
respectivcly, whereas B. conis rossi occurs in southern 
Africa (Uilenberg et al., I1989). B. gibsoni occurs in
PATHOGENESIS
Asia, North America and North and East Africa
(Taboada, 1998). The gcnus Babesia was named after
The incubation period after exposure to a tick is 10-21
Victor Babes, who in 1887 established the aetiology of
days. Intracryfhrocyfic parasitaemia causcs hoth intra-
 the disease in cattle in Romania. The first report of
vascular and extravascular haemolysis, resulting in
canine babcsiosis was in South Africa in 1885 by
regenerativeanaemia,haemoglobinaemia,haenoglob-
Hutcheon; however, the parasites were only recog-
inuria antd bilirubinuria. Pyrexia also devclops, which
nized much later by Purvis in 1896 and Koch in 1897.
is attributed to the release of endogenous pyrogens
after erythrolysis, destmuction of the parasite and/or
activation of inflaminatory mediators. Splenomegaly
LIFE CYCLE
occurs as a result of hyperplasia of the monouuclear
phagocytic system, The haemolytic crisis that devel.
In theadult tick,schizogony coccurs in the gut cpithelial
ops results in anacmic hypoxia, anaerobic metabolism
cells, resulting in the formation of large merozoites.
andl mctabolic acidosis. Conpounding the problcm is
These then undergo successive cycles of schizogony
the fact that the remaining haenoglobin is not func-
within a variety of cefI types, ineluding the oocytes. In
tioning optimally, thereby exacerbating the anaenic
the salivary glands, schizogony results in the forma-
hypoxia (Taylor et al., 1993).
tion of small infective merozoites. After the tick has
 The many and varied clinical manifestations of
aftached tu a dog (the host) and feeds, the mcrozoites
canine babesiosis are difficult to relate to ani organism
in the tick'ssaliva enterthe dog'serylhrocytes with the
that is solely restricicd to the erythrocyte. Although thc
aid of a specialized apical complex. Once inside the
clinical manifestations are diverse, the mechanisms
erylhrocyte, the mcrozoite transforms into a tropho
promoting them are probably more uniform. Multiple
zoite, from which further merozoites develop by a
-oai mou si (s) aouas uomsp uea1o
 process of merogony. Once divided, they leave the cell
 nized as the cnd result of tissue inflammation initiated
to enlcr other erylhrocytes. Trans-stadial and
 by several different conditions, including hypovolae-
transovarial transmission can occur, and it is thouglht
mia, septic shock and infectious organisms. Babesiosis
that a tick can remain infective for several generations.
can causc severe tissue hypoxia, with consequent wide.
spread tissue damage and probable release of inflam-
matory mediators. Widespread inflammation and
EPIDEMIOLOGY
multiple organ darmage can thus occur (Jacohson and
Cla1k, 1994). The systeumic inflammatory response
Babesiosis is solcly a tick-horne disease, with B. canis
syndrome (SlRS) that precedes MODS is caused by
canis being transmitted by Dernacentor reticulatus.
cxcessive relcase of inflammatory medialors. This
86Manual of Canine and FelineHacmatology andTransfusionMedicine
syndrome is broadly defined and considered tobe
the renaltubularepithelium,enzymuria,proteinuriaand
present if two or more of the following occur: tachy
cardia,tachypnoea orrespiratory alkalosis,hypothr
overtacuterenalfailure(ARF),althoughARFwasalso
mia orhyperthermia andleucocytosis orlcucopenia
documentedin sevcral dogs in the same study (Lobetti
with a neutrophilic left shift (Cipolle er al.,1993）.By
el al.,1999).Acute renal failure in babesiosis typically
this definition,most cases of babesiosis have SIRS.
presentswith anuria or oliguriadespite adequaterehy-
Inone study,87% of cascs were posilive for SIRS,
drationbutis an uncommon complication.Anincreased
52%showed single organ damage and 48%had
concentration of serum urce alone is an unrcliable
multipleorgandamage(Welzletal.,1999).Although
indicator of renal insufficiency in babesiosis,as a dis-
outcomewasnot affected bywhetheroneormultiple
proportionate increase in urea,comparedwith creati
organs showed evidence of damage, specific organ
nine,concentrationoccurs,whichhashcenrelatcdtothe
involvement significantly affected outcome:risk of
catabolism of lysederythrocytes.Renal failure is diag-
death incrcascd57-fold and fivefoldwith involve-
nosed on the basis of ongoing evaluation of urine
mentofthe ccntralnervoussystem andrenal dysfunc-
volume,urine analysis and degreeof azotaemia
tion,respectively.Liver or muscle damage did not
affect outcome.
Cerebral babesiosis
Cerebralbabesiosisis definedasthe presenceof concur-
rent ncurologicalsignsinananiinal with babesiosis.The
CLINICALMANIFESTATIONS
presentation is typically peracute,with clinical signs
being a combination of incoordination,hindquarter
Canine babesiosis can be clinically classificd into
paresimuslemorytagmus,nisocori
uncomplicatedandcomplicatedforms.Uncomplicated
mittentossofconsciousness,seizures,stupor,coma,
cases typically present with signs relating to acute
aggression,paddling or vocalization (Jacobson and
haemolysis,includingfevcr,anorexia,ression,ale
Clark, 1994).Pathological changes in the brain are
mucousmembranes,splenomegaly andwaterhammer
congestion(Figure5.28),haemorrhage and/or ncerosis
pulse.Thisformisfurther dividedintomild,moderate
(Figure 5.29) and sequestration/pavementing of
Or severe discase,according to the severity of the
parasitized erythrocytes in capillary beds (Figure5.30).
anaemia.A case of milduncomplicated babesiosis can
progress tobecome severeuncomplicated, when anae-
Coagulopathy
mia becomcs lifethreatening.The complicatedform of
Themost consistent haemostatic abnormality inbabe
babesiosisrefers to clinical manifestations that are not
siosis isprofound thrombocytopcnia,which is a rou-
easilyexplained bythehaemolyticprocess alone.Rare
tine finding in both complicated and uncomplicated
complications include gastrointestinal disturbances,
cases.Despite the degreeof thrombocytopenia,clini
myalgia,ocularinvolvement,pperrcspiratorysigns,
cally apparent haemorrhages are relatively rare. Al-
cardiacinvolvement,necrosis of theextremities,fluid
(hough disscminated intravascular coagulation (DIC)
accumulation or diseasewith achronic clinicalcourse.
has beenreportedincanine babesiosisconfirmationof
Ovcrlap betwcen the differcnt categorics of the com-
DICis difficult because ofthenature of the underlying
plications can also occur.
disease proccss and thc rcported unreliability of the
human fibrin degradation product test (Jacobson and
Acuterenal failure
Clark,1994). Clinical signs of DIC are difficult to
Evidence of renal damage is common in both cornpli-
recognize until hacmorrhages develop in the
cated and uncomplicated cases but doesnotnecessarily
hypocoagulablephase,where signs arerelatedtoorgan
prcdict renal failure.A recent study showed celluria of
dysfunction induced by microthrombi (Figure5.31).
Figure5.30:Histopathological section
fromabrainofa dogthatdiedfrom
Figure 5.28:Brain ofa dog that died
Figure 5.29:Brain ofa dog that died
cerebral babesiosis,showing capillary
fromcerebralbabesiosisshowing
fromcerebralbabesiosis,showingfocal
bloodvesselscontaining sequestrated
generalized congestion.(Courtesy of
areas of necrosis.(Courtesy of
parasitized erythrocytes.(Courlesy ofDr
DrAnne Purdini,Departnent of
Dr AnnePardini,Department of
AnnePardini,DepartmentofPathology.
Pathology,FacullyofVeterinary
Pathology,FacultyofVetrinary
FuculiyofVeterinaryScience,
Science,University ofPretoria.)
Science,Universiy ofPretoria)
University of Pretoria.)
Canine Babesiosis
87
Acuterespiratory distress syndrome
Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS)isasevere
andfrequentlycatastrophic complication ofbabesiosis.
Typical clinical signs are a sudden increase inrespira
tory rate (although this may be caused by otherfactors,
such as pyrexia and acidosis),dyspnoea,moist cough
and blood-tinged frothy nasal discharge.The diagnosis
ofARDSisbased onthepresence of diffuse pulmonary
infiltrates on thoracicradiographs,hypoxaemia due to
ventilation-perfusion mismatch,normal pulmonary
capillary wedge pressure and reduced pulmonary
compliance(FrevertandWarner,1992).Inmostclinical
Figure5.31:Scleral haemorrhage ina dogwith babesiosis
complicatedbydisseminatedintravascularcoagulation.
situationspumonarywedgepressurebloodgasanaly
sis and compliance cannot bemeasured.Thusthediag
Icterus and hepatopathy
nosis of ARDS depends on the recognition of risk
In some cases of babesiosis,icterus and increased
factors for ARDS,thoracic radiographs (Figure 5.33)
concentrations of liver enzymes and bile acids occur,
and theexclusionof othercauses ofpulmonary oedema,
which are indicative of aliver insult (Miller,1999).
especially cardiogenic causes and fluid overload, the
Whether the insult is due to inflammatory cytokines,
latterparticularlywhereoliguricrenalfailureispresent.
hypoxic damage ora combination of these isnot
Fluid loads that canbe tolerated bynormal dogsmay
known.As theicterus(Figure5.32) doesnot seem to
fatallyexacerbatepulmonary oedema inARDS.
be due tohaemolysisalone,liver dysfunctionseems
tobeatleast,contributory.Histopathologicalchange
usually associatedwithicterusincludeboth diffuse
and periportal lesions,whereas icteric dogs with
babesiosis show a centrilobular lesion.Hypoxic
insults can cause diffuse hepatocellular swelling.
and thus thehypoxia in severe babesiosis may be
severe enough to cause a hepatopathy
Figure 5.33:
Lateraland
dorsoventral
radiographs fromu
dogwith babesiosis
complicatedby
acuterespiratory
distress syndrome,
Figure 5.32:Dogwith severe icterus due to babesiosis.
showing severe
puimonary oedema.
Immune-mcdiated haemolytic anacmia
Immune-mediated haemolytic anaemia (IMHA)is
the increased destruction of erythrocytes due to
antibodies against the erythrocytemembrane,which
can be either primary (in which the membrane is
normal) or secondary (in which the membrane is
altered and recognizcd as foreign').Secondary
IMHA is assumed to be the case in babesiosis.The
cardinal feature of babesiosis-associated IMHAis
continuinghacmolysisdcspitcsucccssfulantibabesial
Haemoconcentration
treatment.Diagnosis isby thein-saline agglutination
The paradoxical phenormenon of severe intravascular
test and/or detection of spherocytosis.The Coombs
haemolysis combined with haemoconcentration con-
testis not diagnostic as both uncomplicated cases
stitutes the syndrome known as“red biliary'.Clinical
and cases complicated with IMHA give a positive
features are congested mucous membranes,visible
Coombs'testresult.
haemoglobinaemia and/orhaemoglobinuria and high
88Manual of Canine and Feline Haematology andTransfusion Medicine
to normal or increased haematocrit (Jacobson and
been reported.In the Philippines,the only abnormal
Clark.1994).Hacmoconcentration has been associ-
ity reporied was mild anacmia.In Nigeria,peracute
ated with othercomplications,such as cerebral babe
casesshowedsevere anaemia.neutrophilia,lympho-
siosis,DIC,ARFandARDS.Hacmoconcentrationin
cytosis and eosinopenia,acute and chronic cascs
babesiosis is thought to be due to reduction in blood
showed only moderate anaemia,and onlymild anae-
volume,because of fluid shiftsfrom thevascular to
mia was prescnt in the chronic cases. In South Africa,
the extravascular compartment.As plasma protein
severe anaemia,neutrophilia,monocytosis,cosino-
concentrations are normal,plasma,rathcr than a fil
penia and thrombocytopenia have been reported
trate ofplasma,is shifted from the vasculature.The
(Rcyerset al.,1998).Themostremarkable differences
widespread incrcasein capillarypermeability,which
observed between these reports were dcgrec of anae-
occurs in SIRS,may play an important role in the
mia,macrocytosis(representing reticulocytosis)and
pathogenesis of *red biliary'.
leucocytosis in general,but particularly neutrophilia.
Urine analysismay showhypersthenuria,bilirubin-
Hypotension
uria,haemoglobinuria,proteinuria,granular casts
Dogs with severe and complicated babesiosis arc
and epithelial cells of the renal tubule. Alterations
frcquently presentedina state of collapse and clinical
in biochermical parameters varies depending on the
shock,the latterresembling the hyperdynamic phase
severity of thecase.Typically,uncomplicated cases
of septic shock.In one study,hypotension occurred
can have no biochemical changes. However,an
frequcntlyinbabesiosis,and the presence and sever-
increased livercnzymeconcentration,hypokalaemia
ity of hypotension increased with severity of the
(in more severely affected cases) and an inereased
disease (Jacobson et al., 1999). The presence of
serumurea concentrationwith anormal serum creati-
hypotension in dogs with complicated babesiosis is
nine concentrationmay be evident.In complicated
consistent with the hypothesis that inflammatory
cases,biochemical changes reflcct the underlying
mechanisms play a major role in this disease and can
complication.
result in a sepsis-like stateIt is likely that hypoten-
The most commonly reported acid-base distur-
sion in babesiosis is a combination of vasodilation,
bance in dogs with babesiosis and severe anaemia is
reducedvascularvolume due toincreasedvascular
metabolic acidosis.However, studies by Leisewitzet
permeability and/or dehydration,and myocardial
al.(1999)suggestthat amixed acid-base disturbance
depression.Hypotension can playarole in the patho-
is present in many cases,which would reflect a more
physiologyofthediseaseasithasbeenhypothesized
complex pathophysiology than previously assumed.
to facilitate parasite sequestration.
Dogswithseverebabesiosiscan show a combination
ofabnormalitics,including hyperchloraemicmeta
bolic acidosis (low strong ion difference,SID),high
CLINICALPATHOLOGY
anion gap metabolic acidosis (probably due to
hyperlactataemia),hypoalbuminaemic alkalosis
The primary haematological abnormalities in canine
and hyperphosphatacmic acidosis,dilutional acido-
babesiosis are anaemia,thrombocytopenia and leu-
sis and respiratory alkalosis.Respiratory alkalosis
cocytosis(Figure5.34).However,thehaematological
occurs as frequently as metabolic acidosis, and arte
profile varies in different parts of the world:in
rial blood pH is a poor indicafor of the complexity
France,mild anaemia and thromhocytopenia have
of the pathology.
Parameter
Mean
Standard deviation
Range
Normal
Haematocrit
20.24
12.81
3-70
35-50%
Reticulocyte count
9.19
7.12
0.1-44.6
<1%
White cell count
20.09
15.82
0.4-109.6
6-15 x 10°/1
Neutrophils
9.318
9.864
0-75.58
3-11.5 x 10/1
Band cells
3.453
4.839
0-49.32
0-0.3x 10°/1
Lymphocytes
2.439
2.022
0-23.07
1-4.8 x10/1
Monocytes
2.419
2.676
0-22.062
0.15-1.35x 109/1
Eosinophils
0.143
0.354
0-4.088
0.1-1.25 x 10/1
Platelets
65.12
78.88
1-726
200-500x10°/1
Figure5.34:Haematological parametersfrom921casesofbabesiosisduetoBabesiacanisevaluatedattheOnderstepoor
VeterinaryAcudemicHospital.
Canine Babesiosis
68
DIAGNOSIS
moderateuncomplicatedcasesrequireonlyantibabesial
thcrapy, severe uncomplicated cases require
The diagnosis of babesiosis is made by demonstrat-
antibabesial therapy and blood transfusions, and the
ing the presence of Babesia organisms within
complicatedforms of the discaserequire additional
infected erythrocytes byusing Romanowsky-type
therapy aimed at treating complications(Figure5.37).
stains.Large (2x 5 μm)pear-shaped organisms
Inmild tomoderateuncomplicated cases,noticeable
(usually present in pairs）are indicative of infection
signs of recovery can be expected within 24 hours of
with B.canis (Figure 5.35),whcrcas B.gibsoni
specific treatment.
appears as smaller (1 x 3 μm) single round to oval
organisms (Figure 5.36).Parasites can be detected in
Antibabesialtherapy
blood smears from peripheral blood aswellascentral
The threerecommended and recognized antibabesial
blood.Serologyis amorereliablemethod for detcc-
drugs are diminazene aceturate,midocarband trypan
tion of occult parasitaemias in less endemic areas.
blue.Otherdrugsthat have beenused are amicarbalide,
However,as there is serological crossreactivity
euflavine,phenamidine,quinoronium sulphate and
betweenB.canis and B.gibsoniidcntification of the
chloroquinc.However,due to their poor efficacy
parasite is still necessary.
and/or additional adverse cffects,these drugs
havebeen either discontinued or infrequently uscd
(Swan,1995).
Diminazene
Diminazene is the drug of choice and is givcn
intramuscularly at a dosage of 3.5mg/kg once only.
The drughas arapid action andashort-livedprotective
effect, making it unsuitable for chemoprophylaxis.
Diminazene has a lowtherapeuticindex,with toxicily
resultingin dpressionortupor,continuous vocaliza
tion,ataxia,pisthotonos,extensorrigidity,nystag
mus and seizures.Nervous signs usually occur24 to48
hours afteran ovcrdose and are irreversible and poten-
tiallyfatal
Figure5.35:Blood smearfromperipheral blood showing
multipleBabesia canis parasites.Dif-Quik?stain.
Imidocarb
Imidocarb canbc given eitherintramuscularly or sub-
cutaneously at a dosc of 6mg/kg.Toxicity can cause
severe renal tubular and hepatic necrosis.
Trypan blue
Trypan blue supprcsses parasitaemia and alleviates
clinical signsbut does noteliminate infcction.Conse-
qucntly,it is often followed up with diminazene
orimidocarb in an attempt to sterilize the infection.
It is also used inrepeatedrelapses aficr treatment
with cither diminazene or imidocarb.As the drug is
irritant to tissues,it is given strictly intravenously
as a 1% solution,at a dosc of 10 mg/kg.Treatment
canberepeatedif necessary.Premunitymay develop
Figure5.36:Blood smearfromperipheral blood showing
in some dogs.but relapses can occur at any stage
multipleBabesia gibsoni parasites.DiffQuik stain.
owing to stress.
Blood transfusions
Transfusions are usually indicated in severe uncom-
THERAPY
plicated cases and in complicated cases that have a
life-threatening anaemia.The decision to transfusc is
The primarytherapeuticaiminthe treatmentof babesio-
based on clinical signs,history and haematological
sisisthereversalof life-thrcatening anaemia viablood
testing.Clinical signs thatwould indicate theneed
transfusions,and elimination or suppression of the
for transfusion are tachycardia,tachypnoea,
parasite with specific anti-babesial drugs.Mild to
watcrhammerpulse,weakness and collapse.Although
06
Manual of Canine andFelineHaematology andTransfusionMedicine
Classification
Clinical signs
Therapeutic principles
Uncomplicated
Mild to moderate
Acute haemolysis
Antibabesial
Mild/moderate anaemia
Severe
Acute haemolytic crisis
Antibabesial
Life-threatening anaemia
Blood transfusion
Complicated
Acute renal failure
Oliguria, anuria or polyuria
Antibabesial
Fluids
Diuretics
Dopamine
Cerebral babesiosis
 Collapsed
Antibabesial
Nystagms
 Oxygen supplementation
Seizures
Barbiturate sedation
Semi-coma, coma
Diuretics
Elevation of thehead
Coagulopathy
May be clinically silent
Antibabcsial
Bleeding tendency
Fresh frozen plasma
Shock, organ dysfunction
Heparin
Icterus and hepatopathy
Profound bilirubinaemia and bilirubinuria
Antibabesial
Yellow discolouration ofmucous
Blood transfusion
membranes
Fluids with potassium and
dextrose
Immune-mediated haemolytic
Persistent in-saline agglutination
Antibabcsial
anaemia
Worsening anaemia despite eradication
Blood transfusion
of parasites
Corticosteroids
Azathioprine
Cyclophosphamide
Intravenous human
gammaglobulin
Acutc respiratory distress
Sudden onset tachypnoea
Antibabesial
syndrome (ARDS, ‘shock lung')
Severe dyspnoea
Oxygen supplementation
Cough
Diuretics
Blood-tinged frothy nasal discharge
Pentoxifylline
Colloids
Haemoconcentration ('red
Peracute onset
Antibabesial
biliary')
Often collapsed
Fluids at double
Severe intravascular haemolysis with
maintenance rates
normal or high haematocrit
Colloids
Hypotension
May not be ‘classic’ shock
Antibabesial
Congestion
Blood transfusion
Bounding pulse may be present
Fluids
Colloids
Figure5.37:Clinicat manifestations of babesiosis and therapeutie principles.
the haematocrit isthe most commonly used indicator
lower.The degree of parasitaemia is not an important
ofanacmia.erythrocyte count and haemoglobin
decidingfactor,asit often bearslittle relation to the
concentration canalso beused.Thereis no set haema-
degrce of anaemia.
tocrit at which a transfusion should be given, as it
Packed redblood cells arethe component of choice
must be evaluatedin conjunction with the clinical
for babesiosis.The administrationof theplasma com-
signs and history.Generally,a transfusion is consid-
ponent ofwholeblood is unnecessary in most dogs
ered when the haematocrit is 15% or lower and
with babcsiosis and can place the patient at risk of
alwaysindicatedwhen thehaematocrit is10%or
volume overload.If rehydration is required,crystal-
Canine Babesiosis
91
 loid replaceinent solutions are preferable. A blocxl
REFERENCES AND FURTHER
transfusion not only has a favourable effect on oxygen
READING
slatus and acid-base balance in dogs with babesiosis
 but also replaces the subfunctional hacimoglobin with
Cipulle MD, Pasquale MD and Cena FB (1993) Seconrtary organ
functional haemoglobin.
dysfiunction: from clinical perspectives to molecular mediators.
Crinica! Care Clinics 9, 261-298
Supportive therapy
acute lung injury in the veterinary patient.Journat of Veterinary
Iernal Medicine 6,154-165
Supportive therapyshoull be basedon thorough paticmt
Jaeobson LI and Clark H( 1994) Thue pathophysiology of canine bahesiosis:
 assessment and ongoing monitoring, appropriate labo-
new approacles 1oan ofd puzzle. Journalof the Sonth African
Veteriary Association65,134-145
ratory testing and accepted therapeutic principles for
 Jacobson L., Lohetti R and Vaughan-Scott T (1999) Hypoicnsion: a
the complications that may be prescnt: aculc renal
conumon event in canine babesiosis. In: Proceediungs of a Canine
failure, immune-mediated haemolytic anaemia, DIC,
Babesiosis and Ehrlicltiosis Synposim, Facully of Vcterinary
Science, Lniversiy of Prctoria, pp. 50-54
hepatopathy, shock and pulmonary oedema.
Lciscwitz A, Jacobson L, Dec Morais H ant Reyers F (1999) Tle 1nixed
a-basedisrbaeoseverecanbalesissI:Proreed
ofa Canine Babesiosis end Ehrlieltiasis Synposiun, Faculty of
Veterimary Science, Universiy of Pretoria, pp, 37-44
Lewis BD, Penzhorn Bl. and 1opez-Rehollar LM (1995) Immune
PREVENTION
responses to South African Bahesia canis and the develapment of
a preliminary vaccine. Journal of the Southt African Veterinary
 Thc primary means of disease prevention is the control
Associarion 66,61-65
Lobetti RG (EDy8) Canine babesiosis.Conpendium on Conriating
 of the vector tick by routinely dipping or spraying pets,
Educauion for ihe Pructieing Veterinwian 20, 418 .431
by using tick collars or spot-on preparations and by
Lobetti R, Jacobson Land Vauglhan-Scott T (1999) Theeffect of canine
babesiosis on renal function. In: Proceedingsofa Canine Bahesinsis
cnvironmental control by spraying the premises. The
and Ehrtichiosis Sympasiym, Faculty of Veterinary Science,
 newer ectoparasitic agents (such as fipronil) arc also
University of Pretoria, pp. 55-61
effective.
Miller D (1999) Thc yellow patient. In: Procedirgs of α Canie
Dabesiosisand Elrlichiosis SyapositFaculty ofVctcrinary
A vaccine against a specific avirulent strain of
Scicnce,University ofPretoriapp.1-83
canine babesia is available in France; howcvcr, cross
JoumalofteSouthAfricnVeterinryAsscion65346-352
imnunity between thie different strains of babesia
Reyers F, Leisewitz AL, Lubeui RG, Milner RJ, Jacobson LS and Van
sccims not to occur. It has recently been shown that
 Zyl M (1998) Canine babesiosis in South Africa: more than one
 protective immunity to a virulent strain is possible,
diseasc. Does this serve a model for falcipanum malaria? Annris Qf
Tropical Medicine and Parasirolngy 92, 503-511
thus making vaccines from different parasite strains
Swan GE (1995) Antibabesial drugs for usc in dogs aud cats. In:
feasible (Lewis et al., 1995).
Proceedings of a Canine Babesiosis Symposium, Faculty of
Veterinary Seienee, University of Pretoria, pp. 64-68
Premunity has been recognized as important in
Taboada J (1998) Babesiosis. In: Iryections Diserses of dhe Dog and
controlling clinical signs of the virulent form of the
Cat, 2"" edit, el. CG Greene. pp. 473-481. WB Saunders,
disease in endemic areas. Therefore complete eradica-
Philadelphia
Taylor IH, Guthrie AJ, van der Walt IG and Leisewitz A (I993) The
tion of parasitcs from infected animals may not be
haemoglobin oxygen dissociation curve. Journal of rhe South
African Veterinary Associarion 64,141-143
to sterilize the infection may be undesirable (Penzhorn,
UilcnbergG,ranssenF,PerieNMandSpangerA(1989)Thrcc groups
1994). The role tha1 prcrmunity plays in areas with less
of Babesia canis distinguishcd and a proposal for nomcnclaturc.
Veterinary Quarrerly 11, 33-40
virulent strains is not known.
Welzl C, Leisewiz A, Jueobson L, Myburglt E aud Vauglu-Seolt T
As babesial organisms can be transmited by blood
(1999) The systenic inflaunnaory response and mulliple organ
transfusions, it is imporlant thal all blood donors are 
dlysfuuetionsynlromes in canine balesiosis.In: Procetings of
Canine Babesiowis and Ehrlichiosis Symposin, Facully of
 negative for babesiusis.
Vctcrinary Science, Universily of Pretoria, pp. 27-31
CHAPTERSIX
Disorders of Leucocyte Number
JohnDunn
INTRODUCTION
Granulopoiesis
Granulopoiesis involvcs the productionof neutrophils,
Total and differential white blood cell(WBC) counts
eosinophils and basophils (Figure 6.1). Granulocylc
can behepfulinassessingthecause,severity,duratin
life spanhas three phases:an intramedullary phase,an
and prognosis of a disease process.Abnormalities in
intravascular phasc and a tissue phase.The intramed
leucocyte number should always be interpreted in
ullaryphaseconsistsofastemcellpool,aprolifcrating
associationwiththehistory,clinicalexamination,othr
pool (myeloblasts,promyelocytes and myelocytes)
componcnts of the routinehaemogram(red cell para-
and a maturation or storage pool (metamyelocytes,
meters,reticulocyte and platelctcounts)andresults of
band andsegmented granulocytes). The stem ccll pool
additional diagnostic tests.
consists of a population of pluripotent stem cells,
Accurate interpretation ofWBCcountsrequires a
which give rise to committed progenitor cells known
basicknowledge of leucocytekinetics,pathophysio-
as colony-forming units (CFU).Neutrophils and
logy of disease,normal cellular morphology and the
monocytesoriginate from the same progenitorcel,h
effects of species and other non-disease variables on
colony-forming unit- granulocyte-macrophage(CFU-
variouslcucocyte parameters.Interpretationshould be
GM), which differcntiates into unipotent CFU
based on absolute numbers rathcr than the relative
(CFU-G and CTU-M) which produce neutrophilic and
percentage of each cell type.
monocytic precursors,respectively (Figure6.2).There
are separate progenitor cells for eosinophils (CFU-
Eos) and basophils (CFU-Bas).
TOTALWHITEBLOODCELLCOUNT
Variationsin leucocyte number may involve altera
tions intherate ofproduction,release,distribution and
circulating lifespan of cells.Leucocytosis is the term
used to describe an increase in the total number of
circulatingWBCs.Inmostcasesleucocytosisiscaused
by an increase in the total number of neutrophils
(neutrophilia). Leucopenia (decreased total WBC
count)isless common thanleucocytosis andis usually
caused by neutropenia.
Total WBC counts are generally higher in young
(B)
animals owing to an absolutc increase in the number of
lymphocytes.The number of lymphocytes gradlually
declincs to adult values by 6-9 months of age.
Figure 6.1:Canine eosinophil(Eos),neutrophil (N)and
hasophil(B).(AXIOMVeterinary Laboratories.)
GRANULOCYTES
Neutrophils
Granulocytes are WBCs that possess specific (second-
ary) granules in their cytoplasm.These granules form
Neutrophil production
at themyelocyte stageof maturation and their distinc
tive colour identifies the cell as a ncutrophil,eosino-
Intramedullaryphase:Thematurationorstorage pool
phil orbasophil.Inaddition,themature granulocy is
in thebonemarrowprovides abufferbetween supply
characterized by the presence of a segmented nucleus
anddemand andprevcnismarrowdepletion of
with clumped nuclear chromatin.
neutrophils in situations when there is a sudden in-
94
 Manual of Canine and Feline Haenatology aud Transfusion Mcdicine
 Pluripotent haematopoietic stem cell
STEM CELL POOL
r
Myeloid stem cell (CFU-GEMM)
...
：：
CFU-GM
CFU-M
CFU-G
CFU-Eos
CFU-Bas
Myeloblast
Pronyelocyte
PROLIFERATING
POOL
..:.
Myclocyte (3 generations)
中
 Metamyelocyte (neutrophils, eosinophilic, basophilic)
Band cell (neutrophilic, cosinophilic, basophilic)
MATURATION
POOL
 Segmented granulocyte (neutrophil, eosinophil, basophil)
CIRCULATING/MARGINAI. POOLS
TISSUE POOL
Figure 6.2: Phases of graumtlocyte differenriationt and maturation. Colony-forming itnit (CFU) precursors are commnitted
G, granudocyte; Eos, eosinophit; Bas, basnphil.
creased rate of utilization. This reservc pool conains
mately twice daily, and the averagc circulating cell
 about a 5-day supply of cells. Neutrophils move rap-
 lifespan varies from6- 14hours. Thecirculatinglifespan
 idly from thc bone marrow to sites of acute inflamma-
 is shortened during acute infecticns as neutrophils pass
tion. In response to a suddlen increascd demand for
rapidly into tissues. Neutrophils are normally lost in
neutrophils, there is a lag phase of 3-4 days before
the lungs, saliva and urine and into the gastrointestinal
incrcased granulopoicsis occurs.
tract. They are also phagocytosed by macrophages in
 the spleen, liver and bone marrow.
Intravascuiar phase: Neutrophils leave the bone
The absolute neutrophil count obtained at any one
marrow after 3-5 days' maturation. Once in the blood
time does not reflect the dynamics of production and
vessel they may enter one of two functional comparl-
 release of the cells. The absolute neutrophil count is
ments: they either remain in the circulation (circula-
influenced by the rate of granulopoiesis, the rate at
tory pool) or adhere fo the walls of small vessels
which cells leave the bone marrow and enter the
primarily in the spleen, lungs and splanchnic rcgion
circulation, the shift of cells between the marginal and
(marginal pool). Neutrophils in the marginal pool can
circulating pools and the rate at which cells leave the
be mobilized quickly in response to physiological
circulation and enter the tissucs.
stimuli (stress, exercise, excitement) and pathological
stimuli (infection, inflammation). The marginal and
Tisshe phtase: Neutrophils randomly leave the circula-
 circulating pools are approximatcly equal in the dog. In
tion and enter the tissues and body cavities. In healthy
the cat, the marginal pool is about two lo three times
 animals there is no major lissue pool. Once in the
larger than the circulating pool. There is continual
tissues, neutrophils cannot re-enter the circulation, i.e.
exchange of cells berween the two compartments. The
1hcre is no cxchange of cells between the tissue and
total blood pool uf neulrophils is replaced approxi-
circulating pools.
Disorders ofLeucocyteNumber
95
Neutrophil function
physiological stimulus.The neutrophilia is alsomore
The primary funetion of neutrophils is the phagocyto-
likely to be associatedwith a significant left shiftif an
sis and killing of nicroorganisns. Neutrophils also
infectious agent is involved (some chronic inflamma-
havecytotoxic,parasiticidalandtumouricidalropr-
tory lesionsmay have normal neutrophil counts).Other
ties and may havearoleinthe coagulation andfibrino-
causcs of rcactive neutrophilia,usually with a less
lytic pathways.Accumulation of neutrophils and the
pronounced left shift,includehaemorhage (cspecially
release of their various bioactive products,togcther
intoa bodycavity),haemolysis,malignancy andrecent
with activation of complement components,resultsin
surgcry (resulting in tissuedamage)Certainmyelopro
incrcasedvascularpermeability and enhanced tissue
liferative disorders,for example,aculc or chronic
damage at sites of acute inflammation.
myeloid leukaemia,may result in the release of in-
crcascdnumbersofmatureand/orimmature neutrophils
Neutrophilia
into the circulation.
Neutrophiliamay resul from incrcasedmovement of
neutrophils from themarginal to the circulating pool,
Neutropenia
increased release of neutrophils from the storage pool
Neutropcnia is the most common cause of leucopenia
into thecirculation ordecreasedeffluxfrom the circu-
in small animals.It may occur as a result of decreased
lationinto the tissues.Increased numbers of circulat-
neutrophil survival or reduced or ineffective granulo-
ingneutrophilsmay occurinresponse tophysiological
poicsis (Figure 6.4).
and pathologicalstimuli (seesectiononcommonwhite
blood cellresponses and Figurc 6.3).Neutrophilia is a
Decreased neutrophil survival:
common physiological response to stress (resulting in
Peracute bacterial infections especially those
incrcased circulatinglevels of cortisol) and exercise,
resulting in septicacmia or endotoxaemia
fear or excitement (resulting in increased release of
Pyometra
adrenaline).
Peritonitis
Aspiration pneumonia
Physiological:
Acute salmonellosis
Adrenaline release
Ineffective or reduced granulopoiesis:
Stress (endogenous or exogenous
Acute viral infections (canine parvovirus,
corticosteroids)
feline panleucopenia, feline
Reactive:
immunodeficiency virus,infectious canine
Acute or chronic inflammation
hepatitis)
 Bone marrow supprcssion (e.g. later stages
Infectious (localized/systemic)
of oestrogen toxicity)
Non-infectious:
Myelodysplasia (often associated with feline
Immune-mediated discasc
Surgery (tissue damage/stress)
leukaemia virus infection)
Myelophthisis (e.g. rmyeloproliferative and
Tissue necrosis
lymphoproliferative disorders)
Haemorrhage or haemolysis
Early stage of oestrogen toxicity
Drug-induced (e.g. cyclophosphamide,
Acute pancreatitis
adriamycin)
Radiation
Neoplasia:
Canine cyclic haematopoiesis (grey collies)
Large necrotic tumours
Myeloproliferative disorders (e.g. acute or
Figure 6.4:Causes of neutropenia.
chronic myeloid leukaemia)*
Figure 6.3:Causes ofneutrophilia.*Sone myeloprotiferative
Decreasedneutrophil survival:Peracute bacterial
disordersmaypresentwithanormal leucocyteprofile.
infcctions,particularly those associated with Gram
negativesepsisandndotoxacmiaresultnanvr
Neutrophilia isalso a feature ofmost acute and
whelming demand for neutrophils and a marked
chronic inflammatory disease processes.Haematological
decrease in their circulatory lifespan. The neutro-
evidenceofinflammationdoesnot,however,necessar
peniais usually associated witha severe degenerative
ily imply an infectious aetiology as manynon-septic
left shift.Animals that are endotoxaemic may also
disorders,for example,acute pancreatitis,immune-
be thrombocytopenic.If the animal survives the
mediated polyarthritis and lesionsresulting inasignifi-
peracute phase,the neutropenia usually gives way
cant dreeof tissuenecosirquently liitsmiar
to a neutrophilic leucocytosis after 72-96 hours.
neutrophilicresponses.Themagnitudeofthe ncutrophilia
Possible infectious causes ofneutropenia include
caused by an acute inflammatory lesionis generally
peritonitis,pyomctra,aspiration pneumonia and
greater than that caused by chronic inflammation or a
acute salmonellosis.
96
Manual of Canine andFelineHaematology andTransfusionMedicine
Reducedorineffective granulopoiesis:The peracute
phase of certain viral infcctions such as canine
parvovirus,feline panleucopenia and infcctious ca-
nine hepatitisis associatedwith depressed myelopoi-
csis and severe neutropenia. Affected animals, in
addition to being neutropenic,are also frequently
lymphopenic.Aplastic anaemia is characterized by
generalizedbonemarrow suppression,anaemiaisthere-
foreusually associatedwith severe neutropenia and
thrombocytopenia.
Aplastic anaemia may occur as an idiopathic dis-
ease enlity ormaybe associated with hyperoestrogen-
ism (e.g. functional Sertoli cell tumours or
administration of exogenous oestrogens) and chronic
Figure 6.5:Canine neutrophil showing cytoplasmic
Ehrlichia canis infection.Neutropenia may also be
basophilia and vacuolation.Note the ingested bacterial rod.
caused by disordcrs thal disrupt normal granulocytic
(AXIOMVeterinary Laboratories.)
maturation, for example,mycloproliferative or
lymphoproliferative diseases (particularly acute my-
eloid or lymphoid leukaemia),myelodysplasia (often
induced by feline leukaemia virus in the cat) and the
administration of certaincytotoxic agents,most nota-
bly cyclophosphamide and adriamycin. In cats,neu-
tropenia may also be associated with feline
immunodeficiency virus infection.A less common
cause of neutropenia is canine cyclic haematopoiesis,
which occurs in grey collies.
Morphological abnormalitiesofneutrophils
Toxic changes: The release of bacterial toxins may
result in morphological changes in circulating
Figure 6.6:Canine bandneutrophit showing toxic changes.
neutrophils (Figures 6.5 to 6.7). Non-bacterial toxins
Note theDoehlebodies andcytoplasinicvacuolation.
(e.g. cytotoxic agents) and other foxic products of
(AXIOMVeterinary Laboratories.)
tissue necrosis may result in similar toxic changes.
These changes are often subtle and reflect abnormal
maturation and differcntiationofneutrophilprecur-
sors in the bone marrow.These foxic changes can be
described as follows:
Toxic granulation:reddish ormetachromatic
granules appear in the cytoplasm
Diffuse cytoplasmic basophilia
Vacuolatedfoamycytoplasn
Presence of Doehle bodies (remnants of
reticuloendoplasmicreticulum);these large
met
bluish intracytoplasmic inclusions are more
common in thecat
Giantncutrophils withbizarrenuclearmorphology.
Figure 6.7:Canine metamyelocyte(met),plus band and
segmented(seg)neutrophils showingtoxic changes.Note the
The severity of these toxic changes is usually
smalt redcytoplasmiegranules.DoehlebodiescanbeseniR
graded by using a scale from 1 to 4.
themetamyelocyte.(AXIOMVeterinuryLaboratories.)
Abnornalities of cytoplasmic granulation:Abnor-
Abnormalitiesofnuclearmorphology:Hypersegmenta-
mally large granules can be seen in the cytoplasm of
tion of polymorphogranulocyte nuclei indicates pro-
cats (particularly blue smoke Persians)with the rare
longed survival time in the circulation (Figure 6.8).
inherited disorder known as Chediak-Higashi syn-
Hypersegmented neutrophils may be found with corti-
drome (Latimer and Robertson,1994)These granules
costeroid therapy,hyperadrenocorticism and during the
are reddish pink in colour
later stages of certain chronic inflammatory disorders.
Disorders of LeucocyteNumber
97
extremely short (about 30 minules in the dog).On
leaving the circulation,eosinophilsrandomly enterthe
tissues where they may survivefor several days.
Eosinophil function
Eosinophils aremobilized tosites of antigen-antibody
complexdepositionvia activatedcomplementcompo-
nents and a range of chemotactic molecules of thc
chemokine group (e.g.eotaxins 1 and 2).They are
important regulators ofhypersensitivity/immune
mediated and inflammatory reactions. Eosinophils
contain histaminase andit hasbeenproposed that they
combat the effects of histaminereleased from IgE
Figure 6.8:Canine neutrophil (N)and basophil (B).The
sensitized mast cells in immediate type 1 hypersensi-
tivityresponses.Theyalsohaveaparasiticidalfunction,
prolongedcirculating survival time.Note thecharacteristic
purple cytoplasmicgranutesandcorvolutednucieus of
whichis antibodyorcomplement dependent,but have
the basophil.(AXiOM Veterinary Laboratories.)
limited phagocytic and bactericidal properties.
Hyposegmentation of neutrophil nuclei is seen
Eosinophilia
withPelger-Huetanomaly,ararenheriteddisorderof
In most cases eosinophiliais associated with the in
dogsand cats (Latimer,1995).The neutrophilsassume
creasedproductionandrelease ofeosinophilsfrom the
the appearance of bands or metamyelocytes (Figure
bone marrow (Figure 6.10). Other mechanisms that
6.9); the leucogram may thereforebe misinterpreted as
may contribute to increased numbers of circulating
evidence ofasevere degenerativeleftshift.Neutrophil
eosinophils are thepreferentialredistribution of cells
function isnormal.Aequirednuclearhyposegtnentation
from the marginal pool and prolonged intravascular
(pseudoPelger-Huet anomaly) can be associated with
survival. Causes of eosinophilia are given in Figure
bacterial infection,drug therapy,granulocytic leuk-
6.11.Eosinophilia is a feature of many hypersensitiv
aemia or feline lcukacmia virus infections (Latimcr
ity reactions and parasitic infections.Eosinophilia in
and Tvedten, 1999).
response to parasitism represents a hypersensitivity
response toprotein products released by theparasite.
Figure 6.9:Pelger-Huet anomaly.The nucleiof these wo
canineneutrophilsarehyposegmentedandthecellshavethe
appearance of metamyelocytes.(AxIOMVeterinary
Laboratories.)
Eosinophils
Eosinophil production
Eosinophils and basophils may share a common pro-
genitor cell.Theproductionandmaturationofbothcell
types occurundertheinfluence of interleukin5(IL-5).
The storage pool of eosinophils in the marrow is mini-
Figure 6.10:(a) Canine band and segmented eosinophils.
Note thetyicudround pinkcyloplasmicgranues.(b）Flie
mal.Accelerated production and release ofeosinophils
cosinophil.Note that thegranules aremore rod-shaped
occur in response to parasitic infections and allergic
compared to thoseincanine eosinophils.(AXIOM
conditions.Eosinophil half-life in the circulation is
Veterinary Laboratories.)
98Manual of Canine andFelineHaematology and TransfusionMedicine
ECF-A when released into tissues result in the local
Hypersensitivity/immune-mediated reactions:
accumulationofeosinophils.Conversely,eosinophils
Atopic dermatitis
also infiltrate tissues in which there is a high concen-
Feline bronchial asthma
tration of mast cells (Jain,1993a).
Pulmonary infiltrate with eosinophils
Food allergies
Basophil function
Flea allergy dermatitis
The biologicalfunctionsofbasophils arethoughttobe
Pemphigus foliaceus
similar to those ofmast cells.In addition tohistamine
Parasitism:
andECF-A,basophilscontainothersubstancessuchas
Ancylostoma spp.
heparin,platelct activating factor,thromboxane A
Oslerusosleri
(TxA,)and leukotrienes,which are important media-
Angiostrongylusvasorum
torsofallergic andinflammatoryreactions.Basophils,
Dirofilaria immitis
likemast cclls,degranulate after the interaction of
Eosinophilic gastroenteritis
antigen with specific cell-bound IgE.Heparin,re-
Eosinophilicmyositis
leased inresponse topostprandial lipaemia,promotes
Eosinophilic granuloma complex
thercleaseoflipoproteinlipasefronvascular endo
thelialcells,whichfacilitatestriglyceridemetabolism
Canine panosteitis (common in German Shepherd
and clearing of chylomicrons from the circulation.
Dogs)
Feline hypereosinophilic syndrome
Basophilia
Eosinophilic leukaemia or eosinophilic variant of
Basophils arerarely prescntin theblood of healthy dogs
chronic granulocytic leukaemia (rare)
and cats (hence basopenia is of noclinical significance).
Adrenocortical insufficiency
Basophilia (sceFigures 6.1 and 6.8)is thereforcnearly
Oestrus in some bitches (?response to histamine
alwaysimportant.Conditionsthatcausebasophiliatend
tobe associatedwithincrcasednumbers of circulating
release)
eosinophils.Basophilia is one of themore consistent
Tumour-associated eosinophilia in cats can be
haematological features of dirofilariasis.Rarer causes
associated with myeloproliferative disease,
includethe basophilicvariant ofchronicgranulocytic
lymphoma,mast cell tumour and transitional
leukaemia and hyperlipoproteinaemia.
cell carcinoma
Figure 6.1l:Causes of eosinophilia.
Mast cells
Mast cells are not normally prescnt in the blood of
healthy dogs and cats.Incats the presenceof circulat-
Eosinopenia
Eosinopenia ismost frequently associatedwith acute
ing mast cells (Figure 6.13) is most frequently associ-
physical oremotional strcss and is mediated by the
atedwithmastcelltumoursinvolvingthespleenorthe
releascofendogenousglucocorticoids.Assuch,eosin-
intestinal tract.Other causes of mastocythaemia in
penia may be a fcature of many acute infectious,
clude disseminatcd mast cell neoplasia (systemicmas-
inflammatoryormetabolicdisorders.Causesofeosino-
tocytosisinvolvingthescenliver,lymphnodesand
penia arc given in Figure 6.12.
bonemarrow),mastcellleukaemia andsevereinflam
matory disorders (Latimer and Tvedten,1999).
Stress (relcase of endogenous cortisol)
Hyperadrenocorticism
Glucocorticoid therapy
Acutc infection or inflammation (stress)
Figure 6.12:Causes of eosinopenia.
Basophils
Basophil production
It is unclcar whether basophils and tissuc mast cells
share a common progenitor cell (Meyer and Harvey,
1998a).Bone marrow storage of basophils is minimal.
Basophil and eosinophil kinetics are closely related.
Figure 6.13:Feline mast cell (MC)and neutrophit (N).The
Basophil granulescontain histamine andafterantigenic
mast cellcontains purplecytoplasmicgramules.Thenucleus
stimulation the cells synthesize eosinophil chemotac-
isrounduniiketheconvolutedaucleusofthebasophil.
tic factor of anaphylaxis(ECF-A).Both histamine and
(AXIOMVeterinaryLaboratories.)
Disorders of Lcucocyte Number
66
MONOCYTES
Inflammatory conditions:
Monocyte production
Subacute or chronic inflammatory
conditions particularly those characterized
Monocytes areproducedfrom committed stemcells
common to granulocytes (CFU-GM).Monoblasts and
by suppuration, tissue necrosis or
promonoeytes are the earliest recognizablemonocyte
pyogranulomatous or granulomatous
inflammation.
progenitor cells in the bone marrow.Maturation to
The monocytosisis frequently
monocytes occurs under the influence ofnumcrous
growth factors,nost notably granulocyte-monocyte
accompanied by a mild to moderate
colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF),M-CSF and
neutrophilia with or without aleft shift
IL-6.The production of monocytes increascs in rc-
(e.g.subacute bacterial endocarditis or
chronic pyelonephritis).
sponse toincrcased demand.Thereisnobonemarrow
storage pool of monocytes.
Circulating monocytes may show
rcactive or 'toxic’ changes in dogs with
Monocyte function
severe bacterial infections and/or
Monocytes arereleased into the circulation as soon as
endotoxaemia.
they are produccd.Likeneutrophils,they are distib
Reactive monocyteshavemore
uted in the circulation between circulating and mar-
cytoplasm,the nuclei become more
ginal pools.After a short period in the circulation,
lobulated and convoluted,andpinkish
monocytesmigrateintotissuestobecomemacrophages.
Circulating monocytes (and their precursors in the
Feline immunodeficiency virus infection:
bone marrow) and tissue macrophages comprise the
Monocytosis is one of the more common
mononuclear phagocytic system (MPS).The primary
haematological abnormalitiesincatswithfeline
function of tissue macrophages is the phagocytosis of
dead cellsand foreignparticulatematerial.Theyphago
immunodeficicney virus infection
cytose intracellular organisms,particularlythosethat
Immune-mediated discase, e.g. autoimmune
elicit a granulomatous inflammatory response (e.g.
haemolytic anaemia or immune-mediated
Actinomyces spp.,Nocardia spp.,Mycobacteriaceae
polyarthritis
and fungi),and secrete numerous biologically active
Glucocorticoid therapy, hyperadrenocorticism
substancesuhasI6uoucrsisar,
and acute stress, especially in the dog
Macrophagespossessreceptors forimmunoglobulin
Malignant tumours,especially large tumourswith
and complement and thcrefore have the potential to
necrotic centres
phagocytose antibody-coated and/or complement-
Monocyticormyelomonocyticleukaemia:
coated red cells and platelets.
Persistent and marked monocytosis,
Monocytosis
particularlyif associated with the presence
Mononuclcar phagocytes accumulate at sites of acute
of immature monocytic precursors in the
and,particularly,chronicinflammation.Monocytosis
circulation or decreased numbers of other
is typically afeature ofthesubacute orchronic inflam-
blood cell types, is highly suggestive of acute
matory response (Figure 6.14).Causes of monocytosis
or chronic monocytic or myelomonocytic
are given inFigure 6.15.
leukaemia
Figure 6.15: Causes of monocytosis.
Mon
Monocytopenia
Monocytopenia occasionally occurs in response to
acute infection orinflammationbut isusually of little
clinical importance.
LYMPHOCYTES
Lymphocytes can be classified morphologically
as small (Figure 6.16),medium or large. On a func-
Figure 6.14:Canine monocyte and neutrophils.The
monocyte(Mon)is larger compared to the bandneutrophil
tional basis thcy are classified as T lymphocytes.
imnediately below it.Notealso theblue/grey cytoplasm.
B lymphocytes or null cells (non-T,non-B
(AXIOMVeterinary Laboratories.)
lymphocytes).
100Manual of Canine and Feline Hacmatology and Transfusion Medicine
stimulation or after vaccination.A small number of
lymphocytes containing purple cytoplasmic granules
may be present in the blood of norimal animals (Fig-
ure 6.18).Increased numbers of these large granular
lymphocytes (which are thought to be natural killer,
NK,cells) can be seen in both non-neoplastic and
neoplastic conditions (Meyer and Harvey, 1998b;
Reagan et al., 1998). Large granular lymphocytic
leukaemia is a relatively rare lymphoprolifcrative
disorder of both dogs and cats.
Figure6.16SmallymphocytesinfeliebloodThesecel
haveanarrow rimofcytoplasmandroundnucleiwhichare
notchedorslighttyindented.(AXiOMVeterinary
Laboratories.)
Lymphocyteproduction
All lymphocytes arise from a common bonemarow
precursor. Inmature T lymphocytes are exported to
the thymus where they undergo maturation beforc
being released to populate the secondary lymphoid
tissues(e.g.lymph nodes, spleen and mucosal lym-
phoid aggregates).Itisbelievedthatone subpopulation
of T cells may undergo development in thc gut.
Figure 6.17:Reactive lyinphocyte in canine blood.Note the
B lymphocyte development occurs in the bone
increased amount of dark basophiliccytoplasm.These cells
marrow,but in some specics （including the dog)
are sometimescalledimmunoeytes'Inereasednumbers
some B-cell maturation may occur within the
can be seeninresponse toantigenic stimulation such as
follows vaccination.(AXIOMVeterinary Laboratories.)
gut.Mature B cells are released from these sites
ofprimary development to populate secondary
lymphoid tissues.Anatomically,Tcells predominatc
in the thymus,lymph nodes and thoracic duct lymph
whercasthe spleenandbonemarrowcontaina
higher percentage of B cells. The distribution of
lymphocytes in peripheral blood is about 70% T cells,
20%Bcells and 10% null cells.Mostcirculating
lymphocytes are thercfore T cells,which are either
antigenically naive (previously unexposed to anti-
gen) or of the‘memory’ subset （retaining memory
of previous cxposure to antigen). Both T and
B lymphocytesrecirculate between lymphoid and
non-lynphoid tissues of the body by utilizing both
vascular and lymphaticpathways.
Lymphocyte function
Figure 6.18: Large granular lymphocyte in feline blood.
Antigenic stimulation ofB cells resultsin their
Note thereddish/purplecytoplasmic granules.Lownumbers
blastic transformation to plasma cells,which are
of these celismay be seeninnormal cats and dogs.
capable of synthesizing and releasing immunoglobu-
(AXIOMVeterinaryLaboratories.)
lin.Antibodyproduction occurs primarilyin second-
ary lymphoid tissues.Plasmacellsarenotnormally
T cells play an important role in cell-rediated
present in the circulation;plasma cell leukaemia is
inmunity.They alsomodulate thehumoralimmune
an uncommon manifestation ofmultiplemyeloma.
response; disturbances of T-cell function have been
Reactive lymphocytes (immunocytes) (Figure 6.17)
associated withimmune-mcdiated discasessuch as
can be present in low nurabers in both healthy and
haemolytic anaemiaandthrombocytopenia.Cytotoxic
ill animals. Increased numbers can be seen in
Teellscan killtumour cells orcellsinfectedwithvirus.
young animals and in response to chronic antigenic
NK cells areconsidered tobethcdominant formofnull
Disorders of Leucocyte Number1
101
cell and are important in immunc survcillancc.
Systemic stress:
Antigenic stimulation ofTcells,and to alesserextent
Physiological lymphopenia is a feature of
B cells,results in the production of cytokines,which
thc stress leucogram and is typically
play animportant rolein the pathogenesis of immuno-
associated with a neutrophilia and
logicaland inflammatory responses.Therc are several
eosinopenia
families of cytokines thathave numerous roles in
Endogenous or exogenous glucocorticoids:
leucocyte development,activation,chemoattraction
Hypcradrcnocorticism and glucocorticoid
and function
administration result in haematological
The number of lymphocytesin the circulation de-
changes similar to those described above
pends on their rate of production,utilization and de
for thc stress leucogram
siruction.Since lymphocytes are continually
recirculating,an increase or decrease in the number of
Viral infections:
circulating lymphocytes may not necessarily reflect
Lymphopenia is associated with the acute
altered lymphopoiesis.
phase of most viral infections (e.g. canine
distcmper virus, infectious canine
Lymphocytosis
hepatitis).
Lymphocytosis refers to an absolute increase in the
Neutropenia may also occur in cats
number of circulating lymphocytes.Causes of lym-
infectedwith felineleukaemiavirus or
phocytosis are given in Figure 6.19.
feline immunodeficiency virus
Chylothorax:results in the loss of efferent lymph
Lymphopenia
Lymphangiectasia: results in the loss of afferent
Causes of lymphopenia are given in Figure 6.20.
lymph
 Immunosuppressive therapy or irradiation
Hereditary or acquired immunodeficiency
Physiological lymphocytosis:
syndromes, e.g. acquired feline leukaemia
With a concomitant neutrophilia this occurs
virus-related immunodeficiency or feline
in healthy animals in response to exercise,
immunodeficiency virus infection
excitement and forceful handling.
Figure 6.20:Causes of lymphopenia.
 This type of response is induced by
adrenaline and is particularly common in
fractious cats
COMMONWHITEBLOODCELL
RESPONSES
Age:
Young animals have higher lymphocyte
Physiological responses
counts than adults. An increased number of
reactive lymphocytes (immunocytes) may
be present, especially after vaccination
Age-related changes in leucocyte number
Total leucocyte counts tend to be higher in young
Chronic infections, particularly those which elicit
animals of less than 3 months of age,primarily as a
an antibody response.An increased number of
result of an absolute increase in the number of
reactive lymphocytes may be present
lymphocytes.Young animalstherefore have a greater
Hypoadrenocorticism: the lymphocytosis may be
tendency to developphysiological lymphocytosis
accompanied by an eosinophilia
than adults.The total number of lymphocytes
decreases gradually reaching normal adult values
Lymphocytic leukaemia:
by 3-6 months of agc.
Malignant proliferation of lymphoid cells in
the bone marrow occurs with acute
Adrenaline-inducedphysiologicalleucocytosis
lymphoblasticleukaemia and chronic
Physiological lcucocytosis,mediated by the release of
lymphocytic leukaemia, and in some cases
adrenaline,occurs inresponse to exercise,excitement
of lymphoma.
and fear.This type of response occurs more frequently
It is worth remembering, however, that
incatsthanindogsandismore commonlyseeninyoung
the presence of neoplastic lymphoid cells
animals.Increased blood flow results in a shift of cells
in the bone marrow may not necessarily
from the marginal to the circulating pool,and the
result in the presence of similar cells in the
development ofa mild neutrophiliawithout a left shift
peripheral blood and that some affected
AlterationsinWBCnumber oecurrapidlybut thcre-
animals may have normal or even low
sponse is transient,with WBC numbers returning to
lymphocyte counts
normal within30minutes ofremoval of the stimulus.In
Figure 6.19:Causes of lymphocytosis.
catspaticulalyeeutrophilisfnaecpanid
102Manual of Canine and FelineHacmatologyand TransfusionMedicine
bya lymphocytosis (absolute lymphocyte count may be
Regenerative left shift
as high as 10.0 x 10/). Eosinophil and monocyte
A regenerative left shift is defined as an absolutc
numbers areusuallywithin normal limits but occasion-
increase in the total number ofmature segmented
allymaybe slightly increased.
neutrophilswhichis accompanied by the appearance
ofimmature neutrophilprecursors in the circulation
Leucocyte response to stress or glucocorticoids
（the number of immature forms is usually less than
(stress leucogram)
10%of the totalnumber of segmented neutrophils).A
Stressfulstimulintheformofpaintrauma,surgical
reactivc neutrophiliawitha leftshift(Figure6.21) can
procedures,extremes ofbody temperature andsevere
be observed in variousinflammatory disease stalcs
debilitatingisordrssuchasspsistoxamia,severe
thatresult inanincreasedtissue demand forneutrophils.
anaemia or metabolic disease,cause the release of
Theleft shift that accompanies a reactiveneutrophilia
endogenous glucocorticoids from the adrenal cortex.
is usuallyrderlyandpyramidalIncontrasttheu
A similar stressrcsponse may alsooccur during late
trophilicleft shift that may occurin casesof acute or
pregnancy in bitches.The WBC changes that occur in
chronicmyeloid(ormyelomonocytic) leukaemiaoften
response to stressmimic those that occur with sponta
seemslcssorderly,reflecting abnormal cellularmatu-
neous hyperadrenocorticism or following the admini
ration and differentiation.The extent of the left shift
strationofexogcriousglucocorticoidpreparations.The
generally reflects the severity of the inflammatory
stressleucogramischaracterizedbymildneutrophilia,
response (or leukaemic process),whereas the magni
usuallywithnoleft shift,nassociationwith eosino
tude of the total cell count reflects the ability of the
penia,lymphopcnia andoccasionallymonocytosis
marrow tomeet the increased demand for cells.
(lymphopenia and eosinopenia are themost consistent
indicators of 'stress’ or hypercortisolaemia and may
occurin the abscnce of a neutrophilia).Neutrophilia is
caused by a shift ofmarginated neutrophils into the
circulatingpool,ncreasedreleasefrombonemarrow,
increased circulating lifespan(neutrophilsmayappear
hyperscgmented) and decreased diapedesis of cells
into the tissues.This type of physiological response is
morechronic’than the adrenaline-induced response
After the administration ofexogenousglucocorticoid
band
preparations,alterations to WBC numbers can be
band
expected within hours.The duration of this response
depends onwhcther theglucocorticoidpreparation is
short or long acting. Although the magnitude of the
neutrophiliamay decrease with time,eosinopenia and
lymphopenia persistforaslongas thecirculating level
of glucocorticoid remainsincrcased.
Figure 6.21:Neuirophiliawithalefshijfincanine blood.
Band neutrophils and a metanyeloeyte(met) can be seen.
Physiological leucocytosis should be differenti-
Notealso that thesecellsare shcwingtoxic changes.
ated from reactive leucoeytosis,which occurs inre-
(AXIOMVeterinary Laboratories.)
sponse to disease (sce below).
The left shift can be graded dcpending on the
Physiological leucopenia
relativenumbers ofbandneutrophils andyounger
Reduced blood flowin the anaesthetized animal may
stages present in the blood: mild (bands only present),
result in margination of circulating ncutrophils and a
modcrate(bands andmetamyelocytes present)orsevere
physiological leucopenia.
(bands,metamyelocytes,myclocytesandoccasionally
promyelocytes and myeloblasts present;leukaemoid
Inflammatory responses
response).
Inflammatory WBCresponsesmay beinitiated by
infectiousor non-infectious diseaseprocessesthatresult
Degenerative left shift
in an increased demand forleucocytes in tissues.The
A degenerativeleft shift occurswhen thenumber of
productionandreleaseofneutrophilsfrom bonemarrow
immatureneutrophils exccedsorisgreatcrthan10%of
increases to compensateforincreased tissue demand,
the total number ofmature neutrophils.The total
causinganeutrophilia.Asthestoragepoolofneutrophils
number ofmatureneutrophilsmay be decreased,nor
becocsdepletedbandneutrophilsorearlierprccursor
mal or slightly increased.A degenerative left shift
stages are released into the circulation (left shift).
indicates depletion of thebone marrowreserveof
Dependingonthetypeofantigenicstimulus,monocytes
segmented neutrophils.In contrast to a regenerative
andeosinophilsmay also beproduced andreleased in
left shift,a degencrative lefi shift constitutes a less
increased numbersinto the circulation.
favourable prognostic sign.
Disorders of Leucocyte Number 103
Peracute inflanmatory response
 tissue necrosis). These haenatological features are
The pcracnte inflammaiory rcsponsc is usually a
typical of the classic chronic inflamrmatory responsc
 consequence of severe overwhelming infection, par-
that occurs, for example, in dogs with subacute
ticularly Gram-negative sepsis associated with endo-
bacterial endocarditis or pyelonephritis.
toxaemia (e.g. a bitch with coliform septicacmia and
In some cases, however, the continued excessive
cndotoxaemia resulting from a closed pyoumctra). Neu-
demand for ncutrophils rcsults in exhaustion of the
trophil production and release is unable to meet the
 storage pool and the development of leucopenia (neu-
 sudden increased demand for neutrophils, resulting in 
tropenia) and a degenerative left shift (i.e. a
ncntropenia and a degenerative left shift, which may he
hacmatological picture resembling a peracute inflan-
acccmpanied by stress-induced lymphopenia and eosino-
matory response). The prognosis in such cases is
penia. If the animal survives this peracute phase, the
usually more guarded (see below).
total WBC count should return to normal and then start
to increase within. 24-48 hours so that the WBC picture
Prognostic indicators
 resembles that of the acute inflammatory response.
The following haematological abnormalities occur-
ring singly or in combination may be regarded as less
Acute inflaninatory response
favourable prognostic indicators:
The classic WBC response to an acute inflammatory
focus is characterized by a neutrophilia with a left shift.
Normal or low total leucocyte count with a
A similar type of WBC pieture can occur postopera-
degenerative left shift
tively in response to fissue damage and stress, A more
Persistent neutropenia
pronounced neutrophilia occurs with localized infec-
 Persistent lymphopenia and/or eosinopenia
tions. The production and release of neutrophils in-
Leukaemoid response
crease to compensate for increased tissue demand.As
Toxic changes present in neutrophils.
the marrow storage pool becoines depleted, band
neutrophils or earlier maturation stages are released
into the circulation.
HAEMATOPOIETIC NEOPLASIA
INVOLVING WHITE BLOOD CELLS
Leukuemoid response: A leukaemoid response is
characterized by an intense neutrophilia accompa-
The term leukaemia describes the neoplastic prolifera-
   n pd e  
tion of one or more haematopoietic cell lines in the
soine cases the total leucocyte count may exceed
bone marrow. The neoplastic cells usually enter the
80 x 10/l, and the left shifi frequently includes
circulation and may also infiltrate other organs, most
metamyelocytes and myelocytes. Most Ieukaemoid
notably, the spleen, liver and lymph nodes. Therefore
responses are associated with localized infections
 most leulkaemias, including myeloproliferative disor.
(c.g. closed pyometra, pyoihorax or peritonitis) and
ders involving the granulocytic, monocytic, erythroid
must be differentiated from chronic myelogenous
Or megakaryocytic cell lines, either singly or in combi-
(granulocytic) leukaeimia. In some cases a leukaemoid
nation, and some lymphoproliferative disorders (pri-
rcsponse inay involve ofher lcucocyte types such as
 mary lymphoid leukaemias and cases of lynphoma
lymphocytes or eosinophils.
that involve the bone marrow) are chiaracterized by an
increased total WBC count.
Leucoerythroblastic reaction: A leucoerythroblastic
Leukaemias are classified as acute or chronic de-
reaction typically occurs in response to acule blood
pcnding on the degrce of cellular diffcrentiation and
loss or haemolysis. Nucleated red btood cells
maturation (see Chapter 8). Acute leukaemias are
 (normoblasts) and inimature granulocyte precursors
 generally characterized by a large number of abnormal
appear simultancously in increased numbers in the
circulating blast cclls and, in addition to a mild to
circulation. Other causes include disseminated hae-
moderate leucocytosis, affected animals are often con-
mangiosarcoma and myeloproliferative disorders such
currently anaenic and/or thrombocytopenic. Sone
as erythroleukaemia.
acute leukaenmias, particularly acute lymphoblastic
leukaermia, may present with normal or even low total
Chronic inflammatory response
WBC counts (a situation paradoxically referred to as
Progression uf an acute inflammatory response
aleukaeinic leukaeimia) or thcrc may bc only a few
depends on the ability of the bone marrow to meet
 blast cells present in the circulation (subleukaemia).
the continued tissue demand for neutrophils. If the
In comparison, chronic leukaemias are character-
ized by the production of well differentiated cells.
tissue demand a steady state situation occurs. Thc
Thcy almost invariably present with a pronounced
neutrophilia may be relatively mild and may be
leucocytosis (the predominant cel type depends on the
associated with a variable left shift and absolute
particular cell line involved) and other cytopenias, if
 monocytosis (the latter is more indlicative of ongoing
 present, are usually less severe. Diaguosis of chronic
 104  Manual of Caninc and Fcline Hacmatology and Transfusion Medicine 
myeloid (granulocytic) leukaemia is often difficult
Jauiu NC (1993b) Inerpretationo leukocyte pararueters. In: Essenials
of Veierirary Haemaroiogy. Pp. 295-306. Lea and Febiger,
 hecausc granulocytic maturation remains orderly and
Philadelphia 
nsually progresses to coinplclion. Affccted animals
.atimer KS (1995) Leukocytes in health and diseasc. In: Textbook of
- ps at e im sisonaionl peououd e aa
VeterinaryntertaMedicine:DiseasesoftheDogaaC,4edn,
ed. SJ Etinger and EC Feldman, pp. 1892-1929. WB Saunders,
volving myelocytes and,in some cases, promyelocytes.
Philadelphia
which must be diffcrcntiaicd from an inflammatory
LatimerKS and Roberson SL (1094)Inhcrited leukoeytedisorlers.:
ConshnsinFelin terna Medicine 2edJRAugustpp.
leukaemoid response.
503-507. WB Sautders, Philadelphnia
e  s g t   p s 
Animat Clinica? Diagnosis hy Laborrtory Merhuds, 3edn, ed. MD
Willard, H Tvedten and GH Turnwaldl, pp. 52-74. WB Saumders,
REFERENCES AND FURTHER
Philadelphia
READING
MeyerDJandHarvcy IW(1998a)Haematopoicsisand cvaluating bone
nuow.I:VeterinaryLaberatory Medieine:nerpretationmd
Coles EH (1986) Leukocytes. In: Vererinary Clinicai Purhotogy. 4a
Diagrosis, pp. 23-42. wB Saumders, Philarlelphia
erhn,pp. 43-79. WB Saunders, Pliladclphia
Meyer DJ and Harvey JW (1998h) Evaluation of lenkocyte disorders.
Duncan JR, Prasse KW and Mahaffey EA (i994) Leukocytes. In:
In:VetrinaryLaboratoyMedicineterpretationandDiagnosis,
Veterinary LaoratoryMedicine.cn,p.37G2.wa State
pp.83-109.W Satnders,Philadelphia
Univcrsily Press, Ames
Reagan WI, Sanders TG and DeNicola DB (1998) Lymphoproliferative
Juin NC(1993u) Thebasophisanduastcells.l: EssewntiaisofVeterinary
anrl nyeloproliferative disorders. In: Veterinwy Heernuology:
Haeo/ogy,p.258-265.Lea andFebiger,Philadclpia
Atlas of Comnont Domesric Species, pp. 49-57. Mauison, London
WW
CHAPTERSEVEN
Disorders of Leucocyte Function
MichaelJ.Day
INTRODUCTION
Neutrophil function
The present chapter considers disorders in which an
Neutrophil chemotaxis
animalmayhavepersistentinflammatoryorinfectious
Neutrophil phagocytosis and killing
disease associated withfunctionally defective periph-
Neutrophil respiratory burst after phagocytosis
eral blood leucocytes.Such disorders of leucocyte
Monocyte-macrophage function
function maybe broadly dividedinto those that are
Macrophage phagocytosis and killing
acquired in adult animals and those that are congenital
Lymphocyte function
diseases ofyounger animalswhich are likely tohave
an inherited basis.The former group are relatively
Mitogen-driven lymphocyte proliferation
more common and occuraspart ofawidespectrum of
Antigen-driven lymphocyte proliferation
mctabolicorinfectious diseases,or secondary to drug
Cytokine protein or mRNA production by
therapy. By contrast, well documented examples of
stimulated lymphocyte cultures
congenital defects in leucocyte function in small ani-
Antibody production by stimulated lymphocyte
mals are rarely encountered.
cultures
Cytotoxie killing of labelled target cells
reflect the lackofwidely availablemeans to diagnose
Figure 7.1:Tests of leucocyte function.
thcm.Tests of leucocyte function are generally only
available in aresearch context and,as such,access to
Tests of neutrophil function
them by veterinary surgeons in general practice is re
Theneutrophil undertakesavarietyof activitieswhile
stricted.Despitc this poor availability,it is generally
participating in the inflammatory response in vivo.
inadvisable to submit samplesfrom such animals to
These cells must be mobilized from the bloodstream
laboratoriesthat dealprimarilywithdiagnosisinhumans.
intoextravascular tissuevia molecular interactions
There are specific requirements for the isolation of
mediatedbyadhesionmoleculesandare attracted
aninal leucoeytes and thcperformance of invitro test-
alongchemotacticgradientstosites ofinflainmation.
ing, and the interpretation of such assays is best per-
cles or microorganisms and perform intracellular kill-
The preferredsamplefortestingoflcucocytefunctionis
ingofsuchorganismsviametabolie pathwaysinvolving
blood in preservative-free heparin,and a minimum
oxygen-dependent andindependentmechanisms.Each
volume of 10mlis generallyrequired.In most instances
of these major functions of the neutrophil can be
thelaboratorywillrequirecontrol samplesfrom onc or
assessed by in vitro assay.
two clinically normal,age-matchedanimals,whichwill
be run in parallel with the test samples.
Isolation of neutrophilsfrom peripheral blood
This chapter considers the range of in vitro assays
Several methodshave been described for the isolation
that have been established for the assessment of the
of neutrophils from peripheral blood.A study by
function of neutrophils,monocyte-macrophages and
our laboratory has compared theviability andyield
lymphocytes insmall animals.The situationsin which
of neutrophils obtained afterpercoll gradient centrifu-
abnormal function may reflect an acquired problem
gation,dextran sedimentationfollowedbycentrifuga-
are reviewed and the documented instances of primary
tionoverficollorcentrifugationthroughcommercially
congenital defects of leucocyte function discussed.
available medium for isolating neutrophils (Shearer
and Day,1997).The optimum protocol was that in-
TESTSOFLEUCOCYTEFUNCTION
volving dextran sedimentationfollowed byficoll cen-
trifugation,which yielded about 65% of the total
Figure 7.1 summarizes the range of tcsts available for
numberof neutrophilsinthc whole blood samplc,with
assessing leucocyte function
a viability of98%andneutrophilpurity of 99%
106Manual of Canine and Feline Haematology and TransfusionMedicine
Neutrophil chemotaxis
Figure7.2:Neutrophils
Isolated neutrophils can migrate along chcmotactic
isolatedfromthe
peripheral bloodofa
gradients established invitroby the use ofvarious
normaldogwere
chemical agents,serum,cytokines,complement
incubatedwith
components or other inflammatory mediators
(a)Staphylococcus
(Nagahata et al.,1991;Thomsen et al.,1991).The
intermediusopsonized by
福
fresh dog serum or(b) S.
Boyden chamber or the under agarose assay is the
intermediuswithoutprior
mostcommonlyused means of assessing chemo-
serum opsonization.Afer
taxis.In the former,neutrophils are placed into one
10minutesthereactions
side of a chamber separated from the chemotactic
were stoppedby the
agent by a millipore filter through which the agent
additionof formalsaline,
will diffuse.Neutrophils migrate towards,and are
a
and theprepurations
werecytocentrifuged.
trapped within,the filter,which can be stained and
Theneutrophils
cxamined microscopically.In the under agarosc
effectivelyphagocyrosed
assay,neutrophilslacedintoonewellinanagarose
largenumbers of
gel will migrate towards a chemoattractant placed in
opsonized organisms in
a second well by moving underneath the gel.This
(a),withahigh
proportionofneutrophils
movement is again assessed microscopically
containing staphylococci
(Nagahata et al.,1991).
anda significantnumber
ofstaphylococciper
neutrophil.By contrast,
Neutrophil phagocytosis and killing assays
the unopsonized
In neutrophil phagocytosis and killing assays,iso-
staphylococciin(b)were
poorly phagocytosed.
latedneutrophils are incubated under specific condi-
tions with a known number ofparticles (e.g.latex
beads,yeast,bacteria),which havc been previously
opsonized with serum antibody and/or complement.
Autologous serum from the same animal should be
used in parallel with normal scrum to detect any
deficiency in the presence of opsonins.After a sct
period of incubation,phagocytosis can be assessed
by stopping thereaction and cxamininga stained
preparation of cytocentrifuged cells.The number of
ncutrophilscontainingingestedparticlesorthenumber
of particles per ncutrophil can be measured.Studies
Nonmal dog
in our laboratoryhave addressed thc effect of
Test dog
opsonization on the phagocytosis of Staphylococcus
intermedius by ncutrophils in the dog (Figure 7.2;
Shearer and Day, 1997).
In vitro assays for the intracellular killing ability
of neutrophils in the dog have alsobeen reported.We
have developed a microplate assay in which purified
caninc neutrophilsare incubated withaknownnumber
of opsonized S.intermedius overa90-minute period.
2
After phagocytosis has occurred (10 minutes),extra-
cellularbacteria arelysedbythe additionofspecific
enzymc (lysostaphin), and at various time points
thereafter(0,30,60 and90minutes using quadrupli-
cate samples) intracellular bacteria are relcased by
osmotic lysis of the neutrophils.Serial dilutions of
30
9
Time after phagaeytosis (minutes)
theviableintracellularbactcria are thenplatedon
nutrient agar and thenumberof colonies determined.
Figure 7.3:Assessment of invitro neutrophil killing of
Thenumber ofviable intracellular organisms at each
Staphylococcus intermedius.OpsonizedS.intcrmediuswere
time point is defined by a fraction of the original
incubatedwithneutrophilsfromanormaldogundadogwith
asuspecteddefectofeutrophilfunction(testdog).
number of phagocytosed organisms(100%),allow-
Phagocytosed organismswereprogressivelykilled bythe
ing a curve of intracellular killing kinetics to be
neutrophilsfrom thenormal dogover 90minutes,but
produced (Figure 7.3).
defectiveneutrophilswereunabletokillthephagocytosed
staphylococci.
Disorders of Leucocyte Function 107
Assessment ofneutrophilrespiratory burst
The respiratory burst of neutrophils after phagocytosis
ofparticles can be assessed using thc nitroblue
tetrazolium (NBT) test or chcmilumincsccnce assay.
In theformer,thereisreductionof thecolourlessNBT
dye to dark blue formazan,which can be assessed
Dilued plasma
Diluted whole
spectrophotomctrically,andinthelatertherclcasof
Centrifugation
Meronueleareell
light during the oxidative burst is measured by a
chemiluminometer orscintillationcounter.
Ficoll-hypeque
Ficoll-hypaqu
Tests of monocyte-macrophage function
e s
granulocyles
Peripheral blood monocytesdifferentiate tobecome
adherent macrophages during in vitro cullurc. The
ability of these macrophages to phagocytose and kill
Figure7.4:Isolationofperipheral bloodmononuclear cells
organisms can be examined ina similarmanner to the
by separation overficoll-hypaque.Adiluted blood sample is
neutrophil assays described above. An in vitro assay
overlaid onto densitygradientmedium(ficoll-hypaque,
typical specific gravity 1.077). Afer centrifugation,
for the ability of canine macrophages to phagocytosc
separationoccursandthemononuclearcellsattheinterface
andkill thespores of AspergilluswasdescribedbyDay
can be aspirated with a Pasteur pipette.
(1987).Peripheral blood mononuclear cells were ob-
tained by density gradientcentrifugationandplatcd on
Lymphocyte proliferation assays
glassinculture medium.After5-10daysof culture the
Lymphocyte proliferation assays assess the ability of
adherent population were pure macrophages.Equal
lymphocytes torespond to invitro stimulation by
numbers of fungal spores and macrophagcs were
cocultured for2hoursaferwhichextracellularsporcs
mitogcns or antigens by measuring the incorporation
of radiolabelled thymidine (H-thymidine) into the
were removed by aspiration,and osmotic lysis of
DNAof dividing cells.Mitogens are substances(often
macrophageswas performed torelease adherent and
plant derived) that non-specifically stimulate multi-
phagocytosed spores.The percentage killing was then
calculated.A similar phagocytic assay using Candida
ple clones of lymphocytes by binding to surface
carbohydrate molecules. Some mitogens seem to
albicans has also been described for canine
prefercntially activateT lymphocytes(concanavalin
macrophages (DeBowes and Anderson,1991).
A,phytohaemagglutinin) whereas others will have an
effect primarily on B lymphocytes (pokeweed
Tests of lymphocyte function
mitogenbacteriallpopolyaccharide,staphylococ-
cal protein A). Lymphocytes are cultured with mito-
Isolation of lymphocytes from peripheral blood
genfor48-72hours andH-thymidineis added tothe
Mononuclearcells canbereadilyisolatedfrom periph
cultures during the final 18 hours. The cells are
eral blood by the process of density gradient ccntrifu-
harvested and the proportion of radiolabel taken up
gation, which involves layering diluted blood on to
by dividing cells determined,to give an index of
medium suchasficoll-hypaque (Figure 7.4).The cells
stimulationrelative to control cultures ofmononu
collected from the resulting interface are amixturc of
clearcellsfromclinically normalanimals(Kristensen
Tand B lymphocytes and monocytes,and the relative
etal.,1982)
proportions of each canbe assessed by flow cytometry
In recent years such assays have been extended to
after labellingwithmonoclonal antibodiesspecificfor
enable in vitro stimulation using spccific antigens
unique surface markers of these cells (Cobbold and
that selectively activate antigen-specific lymphocyte
Metcalfe,1994).These populations can also be used
clones through recognition of peptide antigen pre-
forin vitrofunctional studics.In the first instanceit is
sented by accessory cells to the T-cell receptor.The
normal to perform preliminary assays on whole
kinetics of such cultures can bccxamincd to detcr-
unfractionatedmononuclearcellpreparations,andsome
mine whether a primary or secondary (memory)
assayshave also bccn adapted forwhole blood culture
immune response has been made (Bishop,1995).An
(Angus and Yang,1978)elminating theneed forprior
altermative mcthod of stimulating peripheral blood
mononuclearcellenrichment.Formorerefinedassays,
mononuclear cells relies on the response to
itispossibletoselcctivclypurifyTandBlymphocytes
recombinant interleukin2(IL-2)included in the cul-
or subsets of these cells by methods such aspanning.
ture (Helfand et al.,1992;Lawrence et al.,1995).
passage throughnylon woolorimmunoglobulin anti-
Other indicators of cellular activation may be as-
immunoglobulincolumns,erythrocyterosetting,mag-
sessed by phenotypic analysis of the stimulated cells
netic bead separation, cytotoxic depletion or cell
after culturc.For cxample,activated T lymphocytes
sorting using the flowcytometer(reviewed by Mason
have greater expression of the IL-2 receptor (IL-2R)
etal.,1987)
(Helfand et al.,1992)
108Manual of Canine and Feline Haematology andTransfusion Medicine
Release of cytokines or immunoglobulins by
Physiological
stimulatedlymphocytcs
Age of animal
WhenT lymphocytes are stimulated in culture,they
Diurnal variation
will releasesoluble factors(cylokines)to the culture
Dietary factors
medium,which can be harvestedby collection of the
Hormonal factors (e.g. endogenous corticosteroid,
culture supcrnatant and quantified by enzyme-linked
 pregnancy hormones)
immunosorbant assay (ELISA) or bioassay.The latter
Drug therapy
involves the ability of the supernatant to support the
growth of a cytokine-dependent celline (Lawrence et
Immunosuppressive drugs
al.,1995）.Cytokines suchasIL-1,IL-2,IL-6,tumour
Chronic disease
necrosis factor (TNF) and interferon gamma (IFNy)
Demodicosis
havc bccn measured in the cat (Lawrence et al.,1995;
Deep pyoderma
Rottman et al., 1995) and dog (Mizuno et al.,1993;
Anal furunculosis
Yamahita et al.,1994;Rivas et al.,1995).Alterna
Viral infection
tively,the cells can be collected from culture after
Neoplasia
stimulation and the presence of cytokine-specific
Deficiency of opsonins (e.g. immunoglobulin,
mRNAwithin the cytoplasm determined bypolymer-
complement)
ase chain reaction (PCR)(Rottmanet al.,1995).There
is notnccessarily correlation between theidentifica-
Figure7.5:Acquired defects of leucocytefunction.
tion of cytokinemRNA and secretion of themature
protein product. Such information provides accurate
cells(Angusand Yang,1978)Ditaryfactors,partiu
asscssment of the normal functioning of lymphocytes
larlyvitaminintake,may affectlymphocyteresponses
invitro and whethcr there is preferential activation of
to mitogens (Degen and Brcitschwerdt,1986a). The
hormonal effects of pregnancy on leucocyte function
specific antigen (Pinelli et al.,1994).
have not been well characterized in smali aninals.
In the case ofB lymphocytes,invitro stimulation
maylead todifferentiation toplasmacellsandrelease
Drug therapy
ofimmunoglobulin into the culture mcdium.Such
Immunosuppressiveandimmunomodulatory drugs have
antibody productioncan bedetected byexaminationof
pronouncedeffectson theimmunesystemand these
the culture supernatant by ELISA (Rivas et al.,1995).
may be mirrored in the resulis of in vitro functional
testing of leucocytes.For this reason,it is optimal to
Assessment of cytotoxic function
havewithdrawnsuchtreatmentforseveralweeksbefore
The functionof cytotoxic lymphocytes or natural killer
taking samples forfunctional studies.Corticosteroids
(NK) cells can be assessed in vitro by culturing periph-
have widerangingeffects onthcfunctionofgranulocytes,
eral blood lymphoid cells with specific radiolabelled
monocytesandlymphocytes Degenand Breitschwerdl,
(chromiumisoftenused)targetcellpopulations,which
1986a:Cohn,1991;DeBowes and Anderson,1991;
mayincludelong-termcellinesofknownsusceptibility
Weiss,1991),and it has recently been shown that
to NK cells,virally infected,histoinconpatible or
cyclosporin can have potent suppressive effects on
tumour cclls.Specific ratios of target cells to cytotoxic
lymphocyicproliferation,evenafterabsorptionfollow
cellsare used and thereleasc of radioisotopeby dam-
ing topicaladministrationforkeratoconjunctivitissicca
aged targetsmeasured after a period of culturc Brown
(Gilger et al., 1995).
et al., 1995; Nakada et al.,1995).
CD4T lymphocyte balance
Recent work with experimental animal models has
ACQUIREDDEFECTSOFLEUCOCYTE
found thatpolarizationofimmuneresponsestowards
FUNCTION
humoral (antibody-mediated) or cell-mediated activity
is regulated by the preferential activalion of subsets of
Figure 7.5 summarizes the acquired defects of lcuco-
the CD4'T-cellpopulation (Th2 andTh1,respectively).
cyte function rccognized in small animals.
This phenomcnonofimmune deviationmay alsohold
for particular disease states in domestic animals.For
Physiological
cxampl,dogs that are susceptible tovisceral leishma
Tests of leucocyie function should be interpreted in
niasismakehighconccntrations of antibodybutweak
light of theage,breed and sexof the animal and with
cell-mediatedresponseswithreducedinviroprodu
a view to temporal factors.It has been shown that
tion of cytokines such as IL-2 and TNF.Dogs resistant
mitogen-driven lymphocyte proliferation varieswith
tothe disease havethe reverse profile of immunological
the age of dogs (Gerber and Brown, 1974) and the
activity (Pinelli et al.,1994). Such preferential activa-
season(Shifrineetal.,1980),and thal thcrcisapparent
tionofspecificfacetsof theimmuneresponsemaybc
diurnalvariation in theresponsiveness oflymphoid
driven by numerous factors including the nature,dose
Disorders of Leucocyte Function109
androute ofantigenexposureandthelocaltissuemilieu
(hormones and cytokines) at the site of exposure.
Chronic disease
Animals with chronic infectious, inflammatory or
neoplasticdisease oftenshowreduced leucocytefunc
tion in vitro.In the past this has sometimes been
poses theanimal toxpressionof thediseasebut 
nowconsidered morelikelythattheinflammatory and
immune responses active in chronic disease them-
selves cause depression of leucocytefunction.There
are numerous examplesof such observations through-
out the literature,some of which have been misinter-
Figure7.6:GermanShepherdDogwithlate stagedisseminated
pretedas primaryimmunodeficiency.
aspergillosis.Suchanimalsmayhavedepressionoffunctionof
Dogs with demodicosis often have depressed
lymphocytesandneutrophilsinvitro,howeverthesefindings
lymphocyteproliferationand earlystudiessuggested
are likely tobesecondary to chronicalyhighconcentrations
that thiswas related to a suppressive factor found in
ofinflammatory mediators andcytokinesorto therelease of
fungal immunosuppressivemetabolites(Day,1987).
autologous serum (Scott et al.,1974;Hirsch et al.,
with concurrent bacterial pyoderma (Barta and
Turnwald,1983),andithasbeenproposedthatserum
immune conplexes of antibody and staphylococcal
antigen may act in this manner (DeBoer, 1994). More
recent work has extended these observations by show-
ing decreased production of IL-2 and decreased ex-
7
pression ofIL-2R by stimulated lymphocytes from
dogs with demodicosis (Lemarie et al.,1994).Simi-
10/1
larly,decreasedneutrophilchemotaxishasbeenshown
cytes（x
6
when neutrophils from normal dogs were incubated
with serum from dogs with demodicosis (Latimer et
al,1983).erumfactors abletouppress proliferative
lvmp
responses of autologous lymphocytes have also been
identified in Basenji dogs with immunoproliferative
Stim
small intestinal disease(Barta etal.,1983)and arange
ofothcr disorders (Barta and Oyekan,1981).
3
Some breeds of dog are susceptible to deep pyo-
derma,and immunodeficiency hasbeen proposed as an
underlyingcausc.Suchanimalsdooflenhavedecreased
2
lymphocyte proliferation (Miller,1991) but this is 
likely to be a primary event.Recent studies have sug-
gested thatmoresubtelcucocytcabnormalitissuchas
failure of homing of cutaneous T lymphocytes (Day,
0
1994) or an imbalance of CD4:CD8 T cells (Chabanne
0
20
30
Ct
50
etal.,995),mayoccurnsusceptibledogs.Decreased
Days after initial presentation
chemotaxis of neutrophils has been found as a second-
ary event in dogs with pyoderma (Latimer et al.,1982)
Similarly, dogs with anal furunculosis may have
depression of mitogen-induced lymphocyte prolifera-
Figure7.7:Data from a GermanShepherdDogwith
tion,but theseresponsesreturn to normal afterrecov
disseminatedaspergilosis showingserialmonitoringof
blood lymphocytecount andresponseto stimulationof
ery from the disease (Killingsworth et al., 1988).
purifiedmononuclear cellswith phytohaemagglutinin in
German Shepherd Dogs with nasal or disseminated
vitro.Thereispersistent lymphocytosiswiththetotal
aspergillosis are recorded as having depression of
lymphocytecount fluctuatingbetween5.0and8.5x10/
lymphocyte proliferation (Barrett et al., 1977; Day et
(normalrange1.0-4.8x10/l).Thestimulationindexrelative
al.1986;Day,1987) andneutrophil NBT reduction
to culturesoflymphocytesfroma control dogis inirially
normalbutdecreasesterminally,despiteincreasingnumbers
(Day et al., 1986) but these observations arc again
ofperipheral blood lymphocytes.This terminally depressed
likely tobe due to chronic depression of cell-mediated
lymphocytefiunctionislikely toreflect thepresenceof
immunity (Figures 7.6 and 7.7).
chronic multisystemic inflammation.
110Manual of Canine and Feline Haematology and TransfusionMedicine
MiniatureDachshundlssccm to bepredisposed to
Immunodeficicncy ofWcimaraners
respiratory disease caused by Pneumocystis carinii,
In 1980 a colony of Weimaraners was described with
and an underlying immunodeficiency hasbeen postu-
growthhormone deficiency,thymic aplasiaand failure
lated to cxplain this association Farrow et al.,1972;
of peripheral blood lymphocytes to respond toT-cell
Copland,1974; Botha and van Rensburg, 1979;
mitogens (Roth et al., 1980). Affected dogs had a
McCully et al.,1979).Despite this,few published
wasting syndrome and increased susceptibility to in-
studies havebeen performed.Two cases dealt with by
fection.Since1984,an apparently separate syndrome
this author had no cvidence of depressed lymphocyte
of chronicrecurrcnt infection inyoungWeimaraners
response to mitogen.
has beenrecognizedinAustralia(Studdertelal.,1984;
Viral infection may cause acquired abnormalities
MIDay,unpublished observations),theUnited States
ofleucocyte function.Catswith feline immunodefi-
(Coutoetal.,1989),Belgium (Hansenetal.,1995)and
ciency virus infection have depressed response of
the United Kingdom (Dayet al.,1997).These dogshad
peripheral bloodmononuclearcells toT-andB-cell
a left shifteutrophilia,with neutrophil dominated
mitogens (Bishop,1995;Callanan,1995) associated
inflammatory lesions at postmortem examination.A
with reduced production ofIL-2(Lawrence et al.,
range of immunological tests has been performed on
1995), and there is reduced ability of thcse cells to
these populations.Intheinitial seriesofdogs there was
respond to primary or secondary stimulation with
no apparent abnormality in neutrophil or lymphocyte
antigens in vitro (Bishop,1995）. Canine distemper
function(Studdertetal.,1984),butsubsequent studies
virus,canine parvovirus and felinc Icukaemia virus
by Couto et al.(1989) suggested that a primary defect
infectionsmayalso suppresslymphocyte proliferative
in neutrophil function (chemiluminescence),in the
responses to mitogens (Krakowka et al., 1975; Degen
face of normal function oflymphocytes,monocytes
andBreitschwerdt,1986a).
and NK cells, was present in these dogs. A single case
In the case of neutrophils and macrophagcs,
reported by Hansen et al.(1995) showed defective
apparent dysfunction of chemotaxis or phagocytosis
neutrophil phagocytosis in vitro despite normal re-
may be attributablc to underlying deficiency of
sponses to chemotactic agents. More consistently,
opsonins such as serum immunoglobulin or comple-
reduced concentrations of serum IgG have bccn docu-
ment.Serumfrom dogswith deficiency of thethird
mented in these animals (Couto etal.,1989;Hansenet
component of complement (C3) was inefficient at
al.1995;Day et al.,1997).but there is debate as to
opsonizing Pneumococcus for phagocytosis by
whetherthisis a primaryevent orsecondary toimmune
neutrophils from normal dogs and failed to effec-
complex formation. The syndrome of hypertrophic
tively attract such neutrophils afterzymosan activa-
osteodystrophy that isrecognized inWeimaranerpup-
tion (Winkelstein et al.,1982).In the dog.the
pies may have some overlap with this immunodefi-
adherence ofneutrophils to nylon wool has been
ciency disorder, and one group of dogs with
shown tobedecreasedinthosewithpoorly controlled
methaphyseal lesionswere reported to have concur
diabetes mellitus (Latimer andMahaffey,1984）and
rent systemic discasc and hypogammaglobulinaemia
thismay have a role in the occurrence of secondary
(Abeles et al.,1999).
infectionsinthis disease.Adeficiencyof granulocyte
myeloperoxidasc has been documented in lead-
Granulocytopathy of Irish Setters (CLAD)
intoxicated dogs (Caldwell et al., 1979).
In1975anIrishSetterwithchronicrecurrentinfcction
associated with pyrexia and neutrophilia was investi-
gated forsuspectedinmunodeficieney.Abnormalities
CONGENITALDISORDERSOF
in the bactericidal activity of neutrophils following
LEUCOCYTEFUNCTION
normal phagocytosiswere discovered,and the disease
wasreported tobeinheritcdin an autosomal recessive
Figure 7.8 summarizes the congenital disorders of
manner (Renshaw et al.,1975,1977).The disorder
leucocyte function recognized in small animals.
was termed canine granulocytopathy syndrome. Sub-
sequcnt studies showed that neutrophils from the
affecteddoghadreducedglucose oxidation by the
Immunodeficiency of Weimaraners
 Granulocytopathy of Irish Setters (CLAD)
to reduce NBT (Renshaw and Davis,1979). Some
Neutrophil defects in Dobermann Pinschers
years later,anIrishSetterwith severcbacterial inf-
Canine cyclic haematopoiesis
tions andlack of tissuepus formation in the face of
Pelger-Huet anomaly
peripheral blood neutrophilia was reported by Gigeret
Chediak-Higashi syndrome
al. (1987).The dog had inherited a deficieney in the
X-linked combincd immunodeficiency
expression of surface integrin molecules (CDilh and
Immunodeficiency syndrome of Irish Wolfhounds
CD18),whichmanifested asaninability of neutrophils
Lethal acrodermatitis of Bull Terriers
to adhere tovarious surfaces invitro and,by extrapo-
Figure 7.8:Congenital defects of leucocytefunction.
lation, to vascular endothelium in vivo.Ncutrophil
Disorders of Leucocyte Function  111
chemotaxis and aggregalion were also irnpaired The
X-linked combined immunodeficiency
defect was thought to be inherited in an autosomal
 Severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) is recog-
recessive manner but a relationship to the canine
nized as an inherited, X-linked recessive trait in Basset
granulocytopathy syndromc was notdefinitively estab-
Hounds and Corgis, which succumb Ao scverc baclcrial
lished. A deficiency in leucocyte adhesion molecules,
and viral infections after loss of maternally derived
now known as canine leucocyte adhesion deficiency
immunity by 8- 16 weeks ofage. The dogshavethymic
(CLAD), is also recognized in Irish Setters in Sweden
hypoplasia and lymphopenia. Isolated lymphocytes
(Trowalrl-Wigh el al., 1992, 2000) anl the United
fail to rcspond to the milogens phytohacmagglutinin
Kingdom. A molecular diagnostic test for this disorder
 q t u  o y uo 
has recently been reported by the Swedish group (Kijas
synthesis can be detected after exposure to PWM.
(6661*70 13
Recenl studies havc shown that thcse findings arc
secondary to mutations in the common y chain of the
Neutrophil defects in Dobermann
receptors for IL-2, IL-4, IL-7, IL9 and IL-15 and that
Pinschers
the mutations in Bassets and Corgis are different
 In 1987 a series of related Dobermarnn Pinschers with
(Somberg et al., 1994, 1995; Felsburg et al., 1999).
 chronic rhinitis and pneumonia was reported. These
dlogs showed defective killing by ncuurophils of phago-
Immunodeficiency syndrome of Irish
cytoscrl Staphylococcus and harl a reduccrd ability to
Wolfhounds
reduce NBT and produce superoxide after stimulation
Chronic recurrent respiratory disease has been recog-
nized in related Irish Wolfhounds in several geographi-
by opsonized zymosan (Breitschwerdt er al., 1987). The
relationship of this syndrome tothc granulocylopathy of
cal areas, and an underlying immunodeficiency has
 Irish Setters has not been determined.
been proposed. One reported study of three cases has
Canine cyclic haematopoiesis
liferation in affected dogs, which might be interpreted as
Canine cyclic haematopoiesis (also called cyclic neu-
an underlying defect ofcell-medliated immunity (Leiswitz
tropenia or Grey Collie syndrome) is characterized by
et al., 1997). By contrast, other research has identified
serun IgA deficiency in affected pedigrees (Day, 1998)
cyclic ncutropcnia (evcry 12 days) in addition 10
myeloperoxidase deficiency of neutrophils (Chusid et
 and these investigations are ongoing.
al., 1975). The dogs have diluted coat colour and
Lethal acrodermatitis of Bull Terriers
display a range of clinical signs during the neutropenic
Lethal acrodermatitis is an inherited syndrome of Bull
episorles. Cycling of 1nonocytes, reticulocyles and
TerTiers characterized by retarded growth, cutaneous
platelets also occurs (Trail er al., 1984). There is no
hyperkeratosis and infections of the skin and respira
genetic mutation of haenopoietic stem cell factor
(Dale et al., 1995). The disease is inherited in an
tory tract (Jezyk et al., 1986). These dogs have subnor-
 mal plasma zinc concentrations antl show depletion of
autosomal recessive manner.
 T lymphocytes from tissue and depressed lymphocyte
proliferative responses to mitogens, in the face of
Pelgcr-Huct anomaly
normal phagocytosis and killing by neutrophils.
The Pelger-Huet anomaly has been documented in
several dog breeds including the American Foxhound
and Basenji. There is decreased segmentation of
DIAGNOSTIC APPROACH TO
granulocyte nuclei, and defective neutrophil chemo-
SUSPECTED DISORDERS OF
taxis in affected dogs has been described (Bowles er
LEUCOCYTE FUNCTION
al., 1979) but not confirmed by later studies (Latimer
et al., 1989). These functional defects appear not tu
Animals with suspected disorders of leucocyte funetion
predispose to infection (Hoskins and Taboada, 1992).
are likely to fall into rwo major groups as defined by an
Thc anomaly also occurs in thc cat where there is
 acquired or congenital pathogenesis. Acquired defects
additional abnormality of monocytes ant
uf leucocyte function oecur as sccondary phenomena in
megakaryocytes (Weiss, 1991).
adult animals,and the diagnostic approach should focus
On characterization of the underlying disease state.
Chediak-Higashi syndrome
Inlhcrited defecis of leucocytc function should be con-
The Chediak-Higashi syndrome is recognized in the
sidered when young littermates present with chronic
Pcrsian and is characicrizcd by abnormal lysosomes
recurrent infections (often involving the skin cr respira-
altl graules within the cyloplasm of granulocytes.
tory tract) that do not respond to standard antimicrobial
aap  posse aq  e s
therapy orrecur after cessation of therapy. The differen-
neutrophil chemotaxis, degranulation and bactericidal
tial diagnoses include other primary immunodeficiency
activity (Weiss, 1991). It is accompanied by abnor-
disorders such as immunoglobulin or complement defi-
malities of coat and ocular fundic pigmentation and
ciency, or aplasia of lymphoid tissue with leucopenia. A.
increased susceptibility to infection (Guilford, 1987).
diagnostic approach to such disease should include:
112 Manual of Canine and Feline Haematology and Transfusion Medicinc
 A haernatology profile, specifically a differential
Bone marrow transplantation and
leucocyte count and morphology
recombinant cytokines
Serum protein analysis, specificaily thc
 Cytokines have profound influences on the develop-
determination of globulin concentrations
cnt and fimction of leucocyics, and there is potential
 Characlcrizatiou of any infectious agent by culture
for therapeutic exploitation of this fact. For cxamplc.
A full postmortem examination of any dead
recombinant canine granulocyte-colony stimulating
littermates, with histological exaimination of
factor and recombianl canine stem cell factor have
lyimphoid anri haemopoietic organs.
 eo    s s n
haematopoiesis (Mishu ctal., 1992; Dale er al., 1995).
Where available, appropriate inmunodiagnostic
Bone marrow transplantation lhas also been success-
tests would include:
fully aftempted in dogs witli cyclic haematopoiesis
(Dale and Graw, 1974; Dale et al., 1995)
Quantification of serum imumunoglobulins and
Genetic approaches
complement
Thc ability of peripheral blood lymphocytes to
When defects of leucocyte function are atributed 1o
respond to mitogens
 specifie genetic abnormalities, the therapeutic use of
 Neutrophil and macrophage function.
 genc replacenent therapy may in future be possible.
Irish Seftters with genetie deficicncy of lcucocyte ad-
Such tests are nol widely available to veterinary
hesion molecules (CLAD) may be a candidate group
surgeons in the United Kingdom, although quantifica-
for such an approach (Giger er al., 1987), and experi-
tion of serum immunoglobulins (IgG, IgM, IgA for
mertal gene transfer has already been undertaken in
clogs: IgG for cats) is performed by the Clinical Immu-
haemopoietic progenitor cellsof normal dogs and dogs
 nology Diagnostic Laboratory al. the University of
with cyclic haematopoiesis (Karlsson, 1991).
Bristol.
REFERENCES
THERAPY FOR DISORDERS OF
Abcles V, Harrus S, Angles JM, Shalev G, Aizenberg I, Peres Y und
LEUCOCYTE FUNCTION
xisonsoi 
puppies associaled with systenic signs.Veterinary Record 145,
Appropriatc antimicrobial therapy for many of the
130-131
Angus K and Yang TJ (1978) Lyimphocyte responsc to
diseases described will result in clinical improvemcnt
phytohemagglutinin:temporalvariationinnornaldog.Jonrnto
but in the case of the primary congenital leucocyte
Immmologica! Methocis 21, 261-269
Baret RE, Hoffer RE and Schultz RD (1977) Treatumenl and
defects this will only be a temporary effect as such.
innunologicalevuluationof tlree cases of cnieaspergillosis.
diseases are often lethal. Although a varicty of thera-
JowrnaoftheAmericanAnimalHuspiiAssocittion13328334
 peutic approaches has been used in primary and sec-
Barta O und Oyekan P (1981) Lynphocyte transformation tes1 in
veterinary clinical icnunology. Compararive lmurnoiogy.
 ondary leucocyte disorders, the cffects have been poorly
Mierobiology and Infections Disease 4, 209-221
characterized, and many such treatments arc still con-
Banla O, Breitschwerdlr FB, Shaffer LM anad Pourciau SS (1983)
Lynphocyteransformationandhumoralimtmunefactorsinbasenji
sidered experimental. Genetic counselling should be
dogs withinmunoproliferaive small incstinal diseasc.American
givcn to breeders when inherited defects of leucocyte
Jowrnat of Vereriuury Research 44, E954-1959
Barta O and Tumwald GH (1983)Denodicosis,pyodermaand oler
function are diagnosed.
skinliscasesofyougogs,andtheiassociaionswithinmmoiogie
dyslunctious.Conpenius of Contining Fdncation for rhe
Immunomodulatory agents
Praeticing Veterinarian 5,995-1002
Becker AM, Janik TA, Smith EK, Sousa CA and Peters BA (1989)
A range ofimmunomodulatory agcnts has been used in
Propionibacferium actes inumunorherapy in chronic rccurtent
therapeutic trials in the dog, but their inmunological
pyodema.Jornai of Vererinary inernatMedicine3,26-30
cffecis are poorly defined. These include products
Bishop S (1995) Functional abnormalitics in the immunc systen of
FIV-infectedcas.In:Felinewuuology and Immodeficiency.
 such as staphage lysate (DeBoer et al., 1990), staphoid
ed.BJ Willctt and OJarrc,pp. 150-169. Oxford ScienceOxford
A-B (Pukay, 1985), killed Propionibacteriuin (Beckcr
Botha WS and van Rensburg IBj (1979) Pacumoeystusis: a chrouic
 etal., 1989) and levamisole (Degenand Breitschwerlt,
respiratory distress syndrome in the dog. Journal of mhe Sorth
AfricanVeterinaryAssocition 5D,173-179
1986h; Guilford, 1987). The potentialfor development
Bowles CA, Alasker RD anrl Wolfte TL (1979) Srudies of the Pelger-
of side effects after administration of levamisole is
Huet anomaly in foxhounds. Americaur Journal of Pathofogy 96,
237-248
considered to outweigh the usefulness of this agent.
Brcitschwerdt EB, Brown TT, DcBuysscher EV, Audersen BR, Tlral!
DE, Hager E, Ananaba G, Degcn MA antl Ward MDW (1987)
Hormones
Rhinitis.eumonia,and deletive netroi funetion in 
Doberuran Pinscher.AmericumJournalofVeterinary Research 48.
 Some ofthe Weimaraner puppies with immunodeficient
1054-1062
dwarfism reported by Roth et al. (1984) were treated
Brown WC, Collisson EW andi Song W (1995) Cytotoxie T lynplhocyte
responsestofelinciuneficiencyviru.In:Feltemnology
with growth hornone and fractions of the thymic
d unodefciency, ed.BJ Willett and OJarett, pp.306-317.
hormone thyrnosin. Although there was clinical in-
Oxford Scientific,Oxford
Caldvell KC, Taddeiui L, Wooxdbunt RL, Anderson GL and Lobell A
provement, the defective proliferative response of the
(1979) Intluetiun of inyelaperoxidase defieieney in granulocytes in
lymphocytes in these dogs was not normalized.
lcad-intoxicated dogs. Bluur 46, 921-930
Disorders of Leucocyte Function   113
Callanman I (1995) Feline inmmunodeficiency virus infecrion: a clinical
Helfand SC, Modiano JF and Nowell PC (1992) lmmunophysiological
and pathological perspective. In: Fetine Immanology qnd
studies of interleukin-2 and canine lyuphoeytes. Vererurary
Imnodejiciency, ed. BJ Wilictt and O Jarrctt, pp. lll-130.
Initnologyandfnmunopathology331-j6
Oxford Seicntifie, Oxford
Hirsch DC, Baker BB, Wiger N, Yaskulski SG and Oshurn BI (1975)
Chabanne L, Murchal T, Denerolle P, Magnol JP, Fuurncl C, MonierJC
Suppression of in vitro lymphocyte transformation by scrum fron
and Rigal D (1995) Lyuplhoeyte subset abnormalities in Genuu
dogs witgeneraliseddemodicosis.AmericamJourmatofVererinry
siepherd dog pyotenna (GSP). Veterinary Immrotogy nd
Research36,1591-1595
Imrepathotogy 49.189-198
Hoskins JD and Tabouda J (1992) Congenial dlefects of the dog.
Compendiun of Continuing Edncation for the Practicing
leukocyie metaloism and hanction in canine cyclic neunropenia.
Veteritarin 14,873
Bloor/46,921-930
Jezyk PF, Haskins ME, MacKay-Snith WE and Pauterson DF (1986)
 Cobbokl S and Mctcalfe S (1994) Monoclonal antibodies that dcfinc
Lethal aerodermatinis in bull terricrs. Joumal of the Anerican
canine homologues of human CD antigens: sununary of the firsl
Veterinavy Medicat Associetion 188, 833-839
inermalional canine lcukoeyte untigen workshop (CLAW). Tissre
Karlssm S (199l) Treatmen of geuctie defects in lemopoietic cell
rmigens 43, 137-154
function by gene Iransfer. Blood 7s, 2481-249?
Cotn LA (1991) The inluenee of eariensteroids on lhost defense
Kijas JMH, Baucr TR, Gafvert S, Marklund S, Trowald-Wigh G.
mechanisms. Journal of Vererinary fmrernal Medicine 5, 95-104
Johannisson A, Hedhammar A,Binms M,Juneja RK, Hickstein DD
CoplandJw (1974)Canine pneumonia causedby Pneumocysriscarinii.
(aju z-d aui mt noeineu asuassni  (agai) T uossapy p
Arstralian Veterinary Jonrnul50,515-518
gene (ITGB2) causes caninc lenkacyte arlhesion deficieney.
Couo CG, Krakowka S, Johnson G, Cickot P, Hil R, Lafrado L and
Gertowies 61, 10f-107
Jauna jo samtay oisoounuui oma t (sel) 5 nqooy
Killingsworth CR, Walshaw R, Reimann KA and Rosscr EJ (1988)
dogs wifh ncutrophil abnornalities aud recurent infections.
Tiyroid and immunologic status of dogs with pcrianal fisnula.
Veeri0
Anerican Jorrnat of Veierinary Researeht 49, 1742-1745
Dale DC and Graw RG (i974) Transplantation of allogeaeic bane
Krakuwka S. Cockerell G und Koeslner A (1975) Effects of canie
marrow in canine cyclic neuropenia. Science 183,83
istemper vis infection onlymhoid functionn viro and  vvo.
Dale DC, Rodger E, Cebon I, Ramesh N, Hatmmond WP and Zseho KM
fectndfy11,1069-1078
(1995) Long-term treatment of canine cyclic hematopoiesis with
reconbinant caninc stemcell factor.lood5,7479
stinulationtestinveterinary inmunology.Vereritaryumwnofogy
Day MI (1987) A study of the imnune respousc in canine disseminaicd
cnd mmwnopathotogy 3, 203-277
aspcrgillosis. PhD Thesis, Murdoch Univcrsity, Wcstcrn Australa
Lalimer KS, Kircler IM, Lendi PA, Dawe DI. and Brown I (1989)
I.eukacyte fmction in Pelger-Huet anomaly of dogs. Jornni of
dog. Resecrch int Veterinary Science 56, 18-23
Lenkocyte Riology 45, 301-310
eus un sastasp parepaut-aununmt jo suisuaaw (s66) y Xnc
Latimer KS and Mahaffey EA (1984) Neutrophil adherence and
amismals. fa Preriee 20, 75--86
movcment in poorly and well-eonirolled diabetic dogs. America
Day MIPenhale WI,Eger CE,Shaw SE,Kahay MJRobinson WF
Jowmal ofVeieriuary Research45,1498-1500)
Latiner KS, Prasse KW and Dawe DL (1982) A irausient deficit in
Huxtahle CRR, Milts JN and Wyburn RS (1986) Disseninated
aspergillosis in dogs. Austraian Veterinary Jownal 63, 55-59
nentrophilic chemotaxis in a dog with recuren staphylococcal
pyodermaVeternqryParolog19,22322
Day MJ, Power C, Oleshko J and Rose M (1997) Low serum
Lalimer KS, Prassc KW, Mahaffey EA, Dawe DL, Lorenz MD and
immunoglohulin concentralionsinrclatcd wcinaranerdogs.Journa
Duncan JR (1983) Neuroplil movement in seiccted caninc skin
ofSmal Anmaat Pracrice 38, 311-315
DeBoerDJ(1994） lmmunomocalatoryeffectsofstaplylococcalantigcn
discuses. Americ Jornal of Veteriuary Resegreh44, 601-605
Lawrenee CE, Calanan J, WiHett BJ and Jarrct O (1995) Cytokine
and antigen-anilbody complexes on canine mononuclear andi
productionby cats infceted with feline inmuuodeficiency virus: a
palymorphonuclear leukocytes. American Jorrtat of Vererinary
longitudimal study.togy85,568.574
Research 55, 1690-1696
Leiswitz AL, Spencer JA, Jacobson LS and Schroeder H (1997)
DeBoerDI, Moriello KA, Thomas CB andSchuhtz KT(1990) Evaluatton
Suspecleu primary immunocdeficiency syndrore in luee related
 of a commercial staphylococal bacterin for thc management of
Iish wolfhpmdls. Journal of Suall Ariuat Pracrice 38, 209-212
idiopathicrecurrentsuperficialpyodermaindogs.AmericanJouna!
L.enarie SL, Foil CS andllorohov DW (1994) Evaluarion ofinterleukin-
af veterinary Research 51, 636-639
DeBuwes LI and Anderson NV (1991) Plhagocytusis and erythroeyle
 2 production and interlcukin-2 receptor expression in dogs with
antibody-roscte formation by three populationsofmonoueear
generaliseddemodicosis.Proceedings oftheAmericunAeudenyf
Veterinury Dermutotogy p.26
phagncytes obtained fron dogs lreated with glueocortieoids.
Masan DW, Pealale WJ and Seigwick JD (1987) Prepararion of
Anerican Jowrnai of Veteriary Research 52, 869..872
lymphcytesubpaltions.LyphocytesaPretiaApproa;
Degcn MA and Breischwerdt EB (1986a) Caninc and feline
ed GGB Klaus, Pp. 35-54. IRL Prcss, Oxforl
immunodeticiency. part I. Comendium of Coninning Education
McCully RM, Lloyd J, Kuys D and Schueider DJ (1979) Canine
for rhe Practicing Vererinarian 8, 313-323
pncumocystis pncumoniaJonrnalefthe Somth Afrieu Veterinry
Degcn MA and Breitschwerdt EB (19B6b) Caninc and felinc
Association50,207-213
immunoxdeficicncy. part H. Compendium ofCoruiing Educanion
Miller WH (1991) Deep pyocdema in two Geman shepherl dogs
for the Pracricing Veterinarian 8, 379-386
ssociated with a cell-mediated immunodeticieacyJorrnat ofthe
Furow BRH, Watson ADJ, Hartlcy WJ and Huxtable CRR (1972)
American Animal Hfospial Associarion 27,513-517
Pueumocystispncumonia in the log.Journt of Conparative
Mishu L,Callahan G,AlcbbanZ,Madux M,Bonc TC,Souza LM
Pathoiogy 82,447-453
and Lothrop CD (1092) Effectsof recombinant canine granuloeyie
Felsburg PL, Hartaeu BJ, Hemhorn PS, Meore PF, Krakowka S and
culony-stinefating factoron whitehloodell productioninclintclly
Ochs IID (i999) Canine X-linked severe comhined
narmal anti nentropenic dogs.Journai ofthe Anerican Vetertary
inamunodcficiency.Veterinaryfmruologyandhmmopathology
Medica! Association 200, 1957-1964
69, 127-135
Gerher Jand Brown AL (1974） Eifect ol developme au ageing on
iterleukin-2 acivity.Joural ofVeierinary MedicaiScience 55,
therespanseofcuinelyuphocytestophytohemagglutinin.fection
925-930
and hmamy 10, 695-699
Nagahata H, Kocilba GJ,Reiter JA au Couto CG (1991) Analysis o
Giger U, Boxer LA, Simpson PJ, Lucchesi BR and Todd RF (1987)
selected variables in lhe under-agarose assay for chemotactic
Deficieney of leukocyte surface glycoprotcins Mol, LFA-1, and
responses pf canine neuraphits. American Journnt of Vererinary
Leu MS in a dog witli reeuren bacterial infections: an aninal
Research52,965-969
nodel. 8lond 69, 1622-1630
Nakada Y, Tokumiu K, Kosaka'T, Kuwubura M. Tanaka S and Koile
GilgerBC, Andtews J, WilleDA,Wyman Mand LainureMD (1995)
F(109s) Correkation between canineNK cell mediatedeylotoxicity.
and radical praduction. Veterinary finmunology and
and aftcr treatnaent with topical 2% cyclosporine. Fererintary
Immwnoparhotogy 45, 285-295
lmmnetogy aad lamunoparotogy 49, 199-208
Pinelli E, Killick-Kendrick R, Wagcnaar J, Bermadina W, Del Real G
Guilford WG (i987) Primary immunoicficicney diseases of dogs and
and Ruiteiberg J (l994) Cellular and humorat inugue response in
dogs experinentally anti naturally infected with Leishmania
Veterinarian 9,641-650
ufantm.nfectionand Immunity 62,229-235
Hansen P, Clercx C. Henroteaux M, Rutten VPMG and Bermadina WE
Pukay BP (1985) Treatment of canine bacterial hypersensitivity by
(1995) Neutrophil phngocyte dysfunction in a weimaraner wils
hyposcnsitization with Sraphyiocoerns alrrens bacterin-tuxoid.
rceurentinconsJouralfSaAnimPracice36,231
JournalftheAnericanAnmalHospitaAssociaton21,479-483
114 Manual of Canine and Feline Haematology and Trausfusion Medicine
Reuslaw HW, Cha(burn C, Bryan GM, Bartsch RC anci Davis WC
Samherg RL., Pullen RP, Casad ML, Paerson DF, Fetslurg PI and
(1975)Canine gramulocytopathy syndrome neutrophil dysfunctinn
Henthom PS (1995) A single nueleotide insertion in the canine
ina dogwithrecnrrentinfections.JonrratoftheAmerieatVeterinary
interleukin-2 recepfor gamma chain results in X-linked severc
Medical Associarion 166, 443-447
cotmbinedimmunodeficiency discase. Veterinary hmmmologyand
Renshaw HW, Davis WC and Renshaw SJ (1977) Canine
lopahology47,203-213
gratulocytopathy syndrone: dcfective bactericidal capacity of
Somberg RL, Robinson IP and relsburg PJ (1994) T lymphocytc
tevclopment and function in dogs with X-Hinkcd severe conbinedl
Immunotogy and frmaropathology 8, 385-395
inmnodefcieney.Journt af haolgy153,4006-4015
Renshaw HW and Davis WC(1979) Canine granlocytopahy syndirome:
Studder VF, Plhillips WA, Shulert MIand Hosking CS (1984) Recurent
an inheritex lisorder of leukoeyte funcrion. Awerican Journal of
and persistent infections jn related weinaraner rlogs. Australimt
Pathology 95, 731-744
Veterinary Journal 61, 261-263
Rivas AL, Kimball ES, Quimby FW and Gebhard D (1995) Functional
Thomsen MK, Larsen CG,Thomsen HK, Kirstcin D, Skak-Nielscn T,
and phcnotypic analysis of in vitro stimulated canine peripheral
Almfelt-Ronne 1 and Thcstrup-Pederscn K (1991) Recombinant
blood nuononuelear celis.
.Vererinury lnmunology and
leman iuterleukin-8 is a potent activator of canine neurophi!
Inmuoputhology45.55-71
aggregation, migntion aud leukotrienne B,biosynthesis. Journa!
RothIA, Kaeherle ML, Grier RL, Hopper JG, Spicgel HEand MuAllister
of Investigarive Dermaielogy 96, 260-266
HA (1984) Improvenent in clinical condition and thymus
Trail PA, Yang TJand Caneran JA (1934) Increase in the haemolytic
morpholngical featnresassociater with growthhormone treatmen
cotuplement activity of tiags affected with cyelic laenatopoiesis.
of immunorieficient dwarf dogs. Americent Journai of Veterinery
Veterinary lnmmtoloey and Imrunopathoiogy 7, 359-36S
Research45,1151-1155
Trowald-Wigh G, Ekman S, lIansson K, Hedhammer A and Hard af
Rotin JA, Lomax LG, Altszuler N, Harnpshire J, Kaeberle ML, Shelton 
Scgerstad C (2000) Chinical, adiological and pathological features
M, Draper DD and Ledet AE (1980) Thymic abnormalities and
of 12 Irish setters with canine lcucocyte adhcsion deficicncy.
growthormonedeicieneyindogs.AtericanJournalofVererinary
JornatofSmalAnimalPractice41,211-217
Research 41, 1256-1262
Trowald-Wigh G, Hakansson L, Johannisson A, Norgren L and Hardl
Rotman JB, Freeman EB, Tonkonogy S and Tonpkins MB (1995) A
af Segersiad C (1992) Leucocyte adlhesion protein deficiency in
reverse transcription-polymerase chain rcaction techniqueto detcct
Irishseter dogs.Veterinary manologyatdImmrmopatofogy
feline cytokine gencs.
Veterinary Immunology and
32,261-280
opathology45,118
Weiss DJ (199l) White cells.Advances in Vererinary Science and
Seott DW, Farrow BRH and Shultz RD (1974) Studies on the tierapcutic
Comparartve Medicine 36, 57-86
and inmmunologic aspects of gcneraliscd demoutectic munge in thc dog.
Winkelstcin JA, Johnson IP, Svilt AJ, Ferry F, Yolken R and Cork LC
Journal of the American Animal Hospial Association 10, 233-243
(1982) Genelically deteruined deficieney of the third compuncnt 
Sheurer DH and Day MI (1p97) An investigation of phugocytosis and
of conplement in the dog: in vitro stulies on the complenent.
inlracellular kiling of Stphylococers interuredius by canine
system and cumplenent-nediated seruu aclivities. Jorna! oy
neurophisivira.Veerinryhnologyampahoiogy
hmnofogy 129, 2598-2602
58, 219-230
Yamahita K, Fujinaga T. Hagio M, Miyamoto T, Izumisawa Y and
Kotant T (i994) Btoassay for interlerkin-1, interleukin-6, am!
variation in cell mediated inmunity of climically normal dogs.
Autnour necrosis faetor-like activities in canine sera. Jortai of
Experimenat Haemarology 8, 318-326
Veterinary Medicai Seience 56, 103-107
CHAPTER EIGHT
Leucocyte Disorders: Selected Topics
CHAPTEREIGHT
i) Neutro
Anthony Abrams-Ogg
INTRODUCTION
increasein susceptibility toinfection.Sccondary
scpsis occurs, which in turn exacerbates
Neutropenia may be an incidental laboratory finding,
neutropenia. Impairment of granulopoiesis is
but more commonly it is discovered in thework-up of
usuallyafacet of acquiredgeneralized
a sickanimal.Whena septicneutropenicanimalis
impairmcnt ofhaematopoiesis,but neutropenia is
presented,there arc thrcepossible scenarios:
the first peripheral blood abnormality to appear
because of the neutrophil's short life span
Primary bacterial sepsis,where tissue demands
Concurrcnt tissue injury promoting sepsis and
overwhelm marrow granulocyte rescrve and
production, as in bacterial peritonitis.Prior to
impaired granulopoiesis,as in parvoviral
infections and cytotoxic chemotherapy.
illness the marrowwasnormal
Primary impairment of granulopoiesis,as in
Specific causes of ncutropenia in the dog and cat
felineleukaemiavirus infection,and therefore an
are listed in Figure 8.1
Inherited
Cyclie haematopoicsis in grey Collics
Chediak-Higashi syndrome (cats)
Infectious
Canine parvovirus-2
Feline parvovirus
Feline leukaemia virus
Feline immunodeficiency virus (IIV)
Ehrlichiosis
Overwhelming sepsis
Systemic mycosis
Toxoplasmosis (cats)
Neoplastic
Lymphocytic leukaemia, leukaemic lymphoma
Multiple myeloma
Myelogenous leukaemia, myelodysplasia
Metastatic cancer (myelophthisis)
Oestrogen-secreting (Sertoli cell) tumour (dog)
Therapeutics
Anticancer and immunosuppressive therapy causing predictable myelosuppression
Cytotoxic chemotherapeutic agents
Large field radiation therapy
Drugs with known risk for causing myelosuppression
Dog: ocstrogens, phenylbutazone
Cat:
chlorarmphenicol, griseofulvin (especially in FIV infected cats),
propylthiouracil, methimazole, carbimazole
Drugs with reported idiosyncratic reactions causing neutropenia (any drug has potcntial to
Dog: cephalosporins, sulphonamides, metronidazole, angiotensin-converting
Cat:
cephalosporins, amitriptyline
Miscellaneous
Idiopathic (may be inherited)
Granuloeyte colony-stimulating factor deficieney
Immune-mediated neutropenia
Myelofibrosis
Disseminated intravascular coagulation (dog)
Hypoadrenocorticism (neutropeniaismild and isnot associatedwith secondary infection)
Normal
Mild ncutropenia may be a normal finding in some breeds,e.g.Belgian Tervuren, Greyhound
Figure8.1:Aetiologyofneutropenia inthe dog and cat.
118Manual of Canine and Feline Haematology and TransfusionMedicine
DIAGNOSISOFNEUTROPENIA
Severity and duration of neutropenia
Severity of neutropenia is the most important risk
Neutropenia is diagnosedwith routinehaematology.
factor for developing an infection.The risk increases
If the hacmogram is obtained byuseof an automated
cxponentiallywithinereasingseverity of neutropenia
haematologyanalyseritisrecommendedthatablood
(Figure 8.2).As the neutrophil count dccrcases.dura-
smearbeexamined tocompletethehaematological
tionofneutropeniabecomes anincreasinglyimportant
cvaluation.Whethermanual orautomatedmethods
factor as well.
are used,clotsin the sample mayresult in artificial
neutropenia.Haemodilution from aggressive fluid
therapy may result in mild depression of leucocyte
Neutrophil
Definition and risk of
count
infection
counts.
There are no clinical signs associated withneutro-
Less than lower
Marginal neutropenia with
penia in itself.Signs are due to the underlying disease
limit of normal
minimal risk of infection
and infection.Whensecondaryinfectionoccurs,most
range
neutropenic animals will develop a fever. Occasion-
<2.0x10/1
Mild neutropeniawith mild
allyonlylethargy,nappetence and tachycardiaoccr.
risk of infection
This ismost likely in elderly animals and in animals
<1.0 x10/1
Moderate neutropenia with
treatedwithanti-inflammatory drugs,whichmayhave
moderate riskof infection
blunted febrile responses. Septic animals may also
<0.5x10/1
Severe neutropenia with high
presentwithvomiting and/or diarrhoea ormay be in
risk of infection
shock.f ranlopoicsisismpairedthsignsoflocal
<0.2 x10%/1
Severe neutropenia with very
inflammationare subtleand thesiteofinfectionmay
high risk of infection
be difficult to identify
Figure8.2:Riskof secondary infectionduringneuiropenia.
Diagnosis of the specific cause of neutropenia is
Foragivendegreeofeutopenia,ahigherriskofinfectin
often possibleonthe hasisofhistory,physicalexami
isassociated witha deereasing,rather thana stable
nation and routine laboratory and serological tesis. On
neutrophil count.
a haemogram, a minimal left shift and pancytopenia
suggest that granulopoictic failure is contributing to
neutropenia.However,many pathophysiological pro-
Duration of neutropenia is the most important
cessesaffectamatologyresultsndwiththxc
riskfactorin determining outcome of aninfection.
tion of the prescncc ofneoplastic cells or certain
When neutropenia is of short duration (<7 days),
infectious organisms,there are no pathognomonic
most infections can be controlled with appropriate
patterns for any given cause of neutropenia.Serial
antimicrobial therapy.Infections complicating
evaluationof haemogramsmaybenecessaryinsome
ncutropenia of moderate duration (7-14 days) are
cases to explain abnormalitics.Bone marrow biopsy
more difficult to treat.Infcctions in patients with
should be considered if thereis evidence of impaired
prolonged neutropenia (>14 days)are even more
granulopoiesis.
difficult to treat,especiallyif theneutrophil count s
lessthan0.2x10/1.Thelikclihoodofclearing
anestablished infection with antimicrobial therapy
decrcases in neutropenia because antimicrobial
INFECTIOUSCOMPLICATIONSOF
agents act in synergy with host defcnccs to kill invad-
NEUTROPENIA
ing organisms.
Catsseemtotoleratebetterlowerneutrophilcounts
Risk factors
and ncutropenia of longer duration than do dogs.They
Several different factorsin humans determine therisk,
are at less risk of developing infections,and thcir
severity and outcome of secondary infcction during
infections are more easily treated.
neutropenia (Feld,1989).These factors include:
Disruption of natural barriers and
Severity and duration ofneutropenia
immunosuppression
Disruption of natural barriers and
Disruption of natural physical barriers and suppres-
immunosuppression
sionofhumoralandcell-mediatedimmunityincreascs
Tumour type and biological stagein patients
the risk of infection during neutropenia.Natural
with cancer
barricrs are disrupted,with gastrointestinal damage
Microbial organismsinvolved andsite of
during parvoviral infections and anticancer chemo-
infection.
therapy, facilitating invasion by enteric bacteria.
Intravenous catheterization increases the risk of
Thesefactorsseemtobeapplicable todogsandcats
infection with cutaneous organisms.Immuno-
and will bc discussed in turn.
suppression may be present concurrently with
Neutropenia
119
PATIENT MANAGEMENT
ease (e.g. multiple myeloma), as a result of therapy
(c.g. cyclophosphamide), or because of malnutrition
In small animal medicine, neutropenia is most
secondary to inappetence. The risk of infection in
commonly of short duralion (<7 days) and/or of
- januoa qm aaa si sny sdonna
mild to norlerate severity. Animals with neutropenia
 phopenia and monocytopenia.
depressed neutrophil counts. This is in part duc lo
Tumour type and biological stage in patients with
use of only moderately aggressive anticancer chemo-
[hcrapy and to euthanasia of severely neutropenic
canccr
 Infections secondary to neutropenia are likely to be
animals with a poor prognosis for prompt recovcry.
The discussion that follows concems the manage-
more severe in humans with acute compared with
mcnt of infection. Underlying diseases should be
chronic haematological malignancies, haematological
 malignancies in relapse compared with malignancies
treated in accordance with standard reconmenda-
 in remission and haematological malignancics com-
tions, and any drugs that arc suspected of causing
pared with solid tumours.
neutropcnia should be withdrawn. Treatment options
to control infections are:
Microbiology
 Isolation (reduce risk of increased neutrophil
 Infections in neutropenic animals may occur with
demand)
environmcntal and hospital-acquired organisms
Antlinicrobial therapy: prophylactic therapy
or be acquired from other animals. However, the
 greatest source of infection is the aninal's own flora.
(reduce risk of increased neutrophil demand) and
empirical treatment of fcbrilc neutropenic
especially of the intestinal tract, which translocate to
palicnts ani therapy of documented infections
other sites. The most frequently isolated organisins
(assist existing neutrophils)
are Gram-negative enteric bacilli (Escherichia coli,
Granulocyte transfusions (rcplacc
Klebsiella spp, Enterobacter spp.), followed by
nculrophils)
Gram-positive cocci (Staphylococcus spp., Strepto-
 Haematopoietic cytokine therapy (stimulate
coccus spp.) (Kowall, 1974; Dow el al., 1989; Couto,
1990; Turk et al., 1990). Pseudomonas spp. are
neutrophil production and funclion)
Removal of the focus of infection (reduce
less frequently isolated but are feared because of
cxisting increased neutrophil demand).
 antimicrobial resistance. Despite being present in
 large numbers in the intestinal tract, anaerobic bac-
lcria are not commonly the first invaders in opportun--
Isolation
istic infection during neutropenia. It is possiblc,
Isolation reduces the risk of acquiring infections fron
however, that anaerobic bactcria contribute to sepsis
 thc cnvironment and other animals. Neutropenic ani-
during parvoviral infections since intestinal prolif-
mals that do not require critical care should hc main-
eration of Clostridium perfringens in caninc
tainedat home and confined to the house and garden or
yardl. In the veterinary hospital, contact with the gen-
 parvovirus-2 infection has bcen ducumented (Turk
el al., 1992).
eral patient population should beavoided. Hands should
 be washed thoroughly andl laboratory coats changed
The most common sites of infection are the blood-
 before handling nentropenic animals. The use of gloves
stream (bacteraenia) and the lung. Infections al thcsc
and isolation gowns should be considered for severely
sites are more difficult 1o treat than infections at other
sites (Feld, 1989). Pneumonia may occur as an oppor-
neutropenic cases. Body temperaturc shouldl be
tunistic infection by upper respiratory flora or morc
 measured with a thcrmometer restricted to use in a
 particular patient. Table scraps should be avoided
commonly from translocafion of intestinal bacteria.
 Local celulitis may occur, manifested as oedena of
and only canned foods offered to dogs and cals with
one or more limbs. Other possible sites of infectian
severe neutropenia.
include the oral cavity, gastrointestinal tract, urinary
Antimicrobial therapy
tract, heart and central nervous systen.
Invasive fungal infections with Candida spp.
Antimicrobial therapy is the cornerstonc of mamage-
and Aspergillusspp. have been reported as complica-
Hent of neutropenia. Il may be divided into three
tions of cytotoxic therapy and parvoviral infections,
calegories:
but prevalence seems to be low (Kowall, 1974;
Anderson and Pidgeon, 1987; Rosenthal, 1988).
 Prophylactic therapy
Thc risk of fungal infection increases with the dura-
 Empirical treatment during fcbrilc episodes
 tion of neutropenia, duration of antibacterial therapy
Treatmcnl. of documented infections (where the
and concurent immunosupprcssivc thcrapy (c.g-
sites of infection and/or infecting organisms are
with cyclosporin).
known).
120  Manual uf Caniue and Feline Hacmatology and Transfusion Medicine
Prophylactic therapy
is not given, and antimicrobial therapy is continued
Antinicrobial prophylaxis in the asymptomatic patient
until the animal is returned for its next chemotherapy
should be consirlcred whenevcr a neulrophil counl of
treatment 4-7 days laler, by which time thc neulrophil
less than 0.5 x 10°9/l is present or anticipated. Antimi-
coumt has usually recovered. In the event that chemo-
crobial therapy is directed at intestinal flora, with the
therapy is delayed again because the neutrophil count
 principal objeclive of reducing the Gran-ncgativc and
has not sufficiently recovercd, anlimicrobial prophy-
Gran-positive organisms most often responsible for
laxis is rliscontinued if the neutrophil count is above
infections. This objective is known as *selective intes-
1.0-2.0 x 10/l.
tinal decoufamination.' The intestinal anaerobic popu-
The author does not routincly use antimicrobial
lation is left relatively undisturbed since it contributes
prophylaxis with protucols involving single agents (e.g.
to resistance to fungal overgrowth and colonization by
doxorubicin or carboplatin) being given every 3 weeks.
comlagious organisms. A second objective of prophy-
However, ifthere has been a previousepisode of chemo-
lactic therapy is to provide sufficient tissue drug levels
therapy-inducerl sepsis and/or neutropenia, then ani-
to contain an incipient bacterial infection. Drug choices
microbial prophylaxis is given after the next treatnent
for prophylactic therapy are presented in Figure 8.3.
witli the cffending drug (the dose of which may also be
Antimicrobial prophylaxis is controvcrsial, The ben-
rcduccd), bul prophylaxis nay be restricted to 5-10
efits are not clear with respect to reducing infection and
days after treatment, which is the period during which
mortality. Prophylactic therapy in humans seems to be
more bencficia! in reducing infcction ralcs dhuring sevcre
 and prolonged neutropenia than during mild to moder-
Empirical treatment of febrile neutropenic patients
ate neutropenia (Wade, 1994). In one study of veterinary
Asymptomatic animals with neutropenia and animals at
cancer patiens recciving vineristine-doxonbicin-
risk of devcloping neutropenia should havc hody tc-
cyciophosphamide chemotherapy, which resulted in
 perature monitored. Depending on anticipated risk, this
neutropenic episodes of short duration with a median
may vary fronm measuring temperature when there are
ncutrophil couml of0.8 x 10/1, trimethoprim-sulphona-
signs of lethargy or inappelence to routine monitoring
mide prophylaxis reduced the number of antibiotic-
 2~4 times a ciay. Axilary temperature measurements
responsive febrile episodes from 40% to 20% (Couto,
facilitate home monitoring and are 0.5-1°C lower than
1990) The polcntial adlvantages of prophylacticthcrapy
reclal tenpcraturc measurements. A reclal temperature
inclrde reductions in infection rate, time to onsct of
abovc 39.0°C in dogs and above 39.2°C in cats should
infection and speed at which an incipient infecticn
be regarded with suspicion. A temperature above 39.5°C
develops into overwhelming sepsis. These benefits fa--
in most cases represents a true fever.
cilitate home managcmcnt of neutropcnie animals and
 Fcver and/or uncxplaincd tlepression and inappe-
improve quality of life. Potential disadvantages of pro-
tence in a neutropenic animal should be considered
phylactic therapy include drug-induced inappetence
infectious in origin until proven otherwise, and anti-
and voiniting and devclopmcnt of rcsistant organisms 
micrabial therapy shoul bc initiated promptly. In
(Wade, 1994). Antimicrobial prophylaxis may also be
most cases of infection secondary to transient
an umnecessary expense, However, in most cases treat-
myelosuppression, early therapy with familiar anti-
ing sepsis is rore expcnsive than prcventing it.
biolics an good supportive care willresult in asuccess-
Antimicrobial prophylaxis isrecommended ifsevere
ful outcome. The animal should be closely examined for
and prolonged neutropenia is anticipated, such as with
any subtle signs of inflammation and an appropriate
pancytopenia caused by oeslrogen loxicosis in dlogs.
culure obtained. If thcre is un obvious site of infection,
Routine prophylactic therapy during anticancer chemo-
blood cultures should be considered before beginning
therapy is not recommended if the owner can closely
therapy. The author currently obtains two simultaneous
observe the animal for signs of infection and if the
blood cnliarcs of 5-10 ml cach fron lifferent veins
anticipated neutropenia is of short duration, such as
(Reller, I994). Blood cultures are, however, expensive.
occurs withi many commonly used chemotherapeutic
Furthermore, results take 2-7 days to become available
pratocols. Prophylactic therapy is discauiraged in cats,
and often are eithicr negative or do not alter initial
which are at less risk of infection secondary to neutro-
therapy. For these reasons, the author does not always
penia than are dogs but are at more risk of antibiotic-
obtain blood cultures during anticancer chenotherapy
jnducedl gastrointestinal disorders (Kunkleetal., 1995).
The author currently uses prophylactic therapy in dogs
and does not routinely obtain them for animals with
during thc more aggressive chemotherapy protocols
parvoviral infections. Urine culture should also be con-
involving weekly treaimments with doxorubicin, cyclo.-
sidercd, espccially ife animalis polyuric, has signs of
phosphamide and vincristine. Furthermore, for ani-
lower urinary tract inflammation or has faecal soiling of
：
mals not receiving prophylaxis, antimicrobial therapy
external genitalia. However, therapy should not bc
is hegun in the asymptomatic animal when a ncutrophil!
delaycd whilc awailing adequate urine prorlucticn for
count below 0.5-1.0 x 10/l is noted on, or anticipated
collection. Cystocentesis should not be performed if the
from, a pretreatment haemogram. The chemotherapy
platelet count is less than 50 x 10°/l; a free catch sample
Ncutropenia
121
Antimicrobial agent
Doses
Comment
Sulphonamides
Trimethoprim-
15 mg/kg (combincd dosc) every 12 hours
Inexpensive
sulphamethoxazole
30 mg/kg(combined dose)every 12-24 hours
No prophylaxis against Pseudomonas spp.
Risk of keratoconjunctivitis sicca with
prolonged use
myelosuppression
Trimethoprim-
15 mg/kg(combined dose)cvery 12hours
As for trimethoprin-sulphamethoxazole but
sulphadiazine
30 mg/kg (combined dose) every 12-24 hours
more expensive
Ormetoprim-
55 mg/kg on first day,then 27.5 mg/kg every
As for trimethoprim-sulphamethoxazole but
sulphadimethoxine
24hours
more expensive
Fluoroquinolones
Enrofloxacin
5-10 mg/kg every 12 hours (dog)
Expensive
10-20 mg/kg every 24 hours (dog)
Lower doses effective for 'selective
2.5 mg/kg every 12 hours (cat)
intestinal decontamination'
5 mg/kg every 24 hours (cat)
Doses>10 mg/kg needed to achieve tissue
levels effective against Pseudomonas spp.
Increased inappetence and vomiting at higher
Risk of blindness in cats (uncommon)
Ciprofloxacin
5-15 mg/kg every 12 hours
As for enrofloxacin
10-30 mg/kg every 24 hours
Smaller tablets with higher strength than
enrofloxacin;tablet strength restrictsuse to
dogs
Orbifloxacin
5 mg/kg every 12-24 hours
Expensive
Less well evaluated than enrofloxacin or
ciprofloxacin
Marbofloxacin
2-4 mg/kg every 12-24 hours
As for orbifloxacin
Difloxacin
5-10 mg/kg every 24 hours (dog)
As for orbifloxacin
p-lactamantibiotics
Cephalexin
30 mg/kg every 12 hours
Expensive
No prophylaxis against Pseudomonas spp.
?Better bioavailability of capsule
formulation compared with tablets
Amoxicillin
10-20 mg/kg every 12 hours
Inexpensive
No prophylaxis against Pseudomonas spp.
Not first choice,but acceptable for cats not
tolerating other choices
Ampicillin causes diarrhoea more often than
does amoxicillin
Amoxicillin-
12.5-25 mg/kg every 12 hours
As for amoxicillin
clavulanate
Increased activity against
Staphylococcus spp., Klebsiella spp..
Escherichia coli and Bacteroides spp.
compared with amoxicillin
Combinations
Fluroquinolone +
As above
Reservedfor animalswithsevereprolonged
β-lactam antibiotic
neutropenia
Figure8.3:Drugchoicesforprophylacticoralantimicrobial therapyfortheneutropenic dogandcat.ModifiedfromAbrams-
Ogg and Kruth (2000).Doses adapted fromAllen(1998）and Greene and Watson(1998).Drugs and dosages presented in bold
usage.Flexibiedoselabellingspecifiesoncetotwicedailyuseofmostfluoroquinolonesindogsandcatsdependingonthe
clinicalsituation.Oncedailyuseoffluoroquinolones inthelower doserangeprobablyresutsinselectiveintestinal
decontamination,althoughthishasnotbeenestablishedforall drugs.Flexibledosingspecifiestwicedaityuseofmost
fluoroquinolonesfor treatingsystemicinfections and ismore appropriate thanoncedailyuseif the goal of antimicrohial
prophylaxisisalsotoprovideadequatetissuedruglevelstotreatincipientacterialinfections.Antifungalprophylaxiswith
itraconazoleforexample,isusedinhmansbutdoesnorseemtobenecessaryfordogsandcats.
122Manual of Canine andFelineHaematology andTransfusion Medicine
may be substituled and submitted for quantitative
neutropenic animals have died of sepsis despite
culture.Urethral catheterization should be avoided
ncgative antcmortem culture resuls.therecommenda-
because of the risk ofintroducinginfection.Faecal
tion is toinitiate empirical antibiotic therapywhile
culture shouldbeconsiderediftheanimalhasdiarrhoea.
awaitingcultureresults,andinmostcases,tocontnue
Thoracicradiographsshouldbeobtainedif there areany
therapy in spite of negative culture results (Hughes et
respiratory signs andmay be considered aspart of the
al.,1
1997).Previous cullure rcsuls, localizing signs,
minimumdatabase.Anormalthoracicradiograph,how-
Gram-stainof bodyfluidand theantimicrobial suscep-
ever,does notruleout pneumonia.Culture oftrachealor
tibilitypatternof a suspectednosocomialpathogenmay
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid should be performed if
assist in antimicrobial selection.If there is a history of
there are clinical or radiographic signs of pneumonia.A
prophylactic therapy with a fluoroquinolone,a febrile
serumbiochemicalprofileandabdominalimagingshould
episode is most likely due toaGram-positive organism.
beobtainedifthereisvomiting,abdominaldistensionor
In most cases the choice of antimicrobial therapy
abdominal pain.All the above tests should be consid
must be empirical.The antibiotics chosen should be
eredforanyfebrile animal presentingwithneutropenia
bactericidal,have limitedmarrow toxicity and be
ofundetermined causewithnoobvioussiteofinfection
active against Gram-negative entericbacilli,Pseudo
and for any neutropenic animal that is severely ill.
monas spp.and Gram-positive cocci.Standardrecom-
It is likely that pyrexia or unexplained depression in
mended drug doses are employed.A representative
a neutropenic animal is due to infection.Because
selection of antibiotics and doses are presented in
untreated infectionmay be rapidly fatal and bccause
Figures 8.4 and 8.5.
Drug
Comment
Combination therapy
Aminoglycoside + first-generation
Commonly used in veterinary medicine
cephalosporin
Relatively incxpensive
s sns r o r ns
?Cephalosporin increases risk of aminoglycoside nephrotoxicity
Aminoglycoside +aminopenicillin
Commonly used for treatment of parvoviral infections
Relatively inexpensive
Aminopenicillin ismore likely to disturbgastrointestinal flora than
first-generation cephalosporin
Can prevent β-lactamase activity by using ampicillin-sulbactam
(parenteral substitute for amoxicillin-clavulanate),but it is cxpcnsivc
Aminoglycoside +
Not as commonly used in veterinary medicine
antipseudomonal penicillin
Expensive
or ceftazidime
Synergy against P'seudomonas spp. and Enterobacteriaceae
Less activity against Gram-positive organisms
Can prevent β-lactamase activityby using ticarcillin-clavulanate or
piperacillin-tazobactam
Fluoroquinolone substituted for
May be more expensive than aminoglycoside
aminoglycoside in above
combinations
Avoids aminoglycoside nephrotoxicity
Combination of two
?Resistance more likely to develop
β-lactam antibiotics*
Potential for antagonism
Avoids aminoglycoside nephrotoxicity
?Prolongation of neutropenia
Monotherapy
Cephalosporins
Cefoxitin (second generation
Substitute for aminoglycoside + aminopenicillin
[cefamycin])
Not effective against Pseudomonas spp.
Effective against anacrobes
More likcly to disturb gastrointestinal flora
Ceftazidime (third generation)
Expensive
Less activity against Gram-positive organisms than combinations
Carbapenems
Imipencm-cilastatin
Expensive
Active against completemicrobial spectrum
Figure8.4:Drugchoicesforempiricalparenteralantimicrobialtherapyforthefebrileneutropenicdogandcat.
Modifiedfrom Abrams-Ogg andKruth(2000).
*Forcxample:first-generationcephalosporinplusantipseudomonalpenicillin,first-generationcephalosporinplusthird
Neutropenia 123
Antimicrobial agent
Dose
Aminoglycosides
Netilmycin
2-3 mg/kg i.v. tid
or 6 mg/kg i.v. once daily
Amikacin
5-10 mg/kg i.v., i.m., s.c. tid
or 15-20 mg/kg i.v.,i.m.,s.c.once daily
Tobramycin
2 mg/kg i.v., i.m., s.c. tid
or 6 mg/kg i.v., i.m., s.c. once daily
Gentamicin
2-3 mg/kg i.v.,i.m., s.c. tid
or 6-10 mg/kg i.v., i.m., s.c. once daily
Comment: these drugs are listed in order of increasing nephrotoxicity. To reducc the risks of nephrotoxicity
due to aminoglycoside antibiotics:use doses at the lower end of the dose range,use once daily
administration, avoid their use in dehydrated animals and avoid their use in animnals rceciving fruscmidc
Cephalosporins
Cephazolin
20-30 mg/kg i.v.,i.m., tid-qid
Cephalothin
25-40 mg/kg i.v., i.m., tid-qid
Cefoxitin
20-30 mg/kg i.v., i.m., s.c. tid-qid
Ceftazidime
25-30 mg/kg i.v., i.m., s.c. tid-qid or
4.4 mg/kg i.v. loading dose, followed by 4.1 mg/kg/h i.v. (constant
rate infusion) (Moore et al.,1999)
Comment: the author initially uses these cephalosporins at 30 mg/kg i.v. tid
Fluoroquinolones
Ciprofloxacin
5-10 mg/kg i.v.(1-hour infusion) once to twice daily
Enrofloxacin
5-10 mg/kg i.v., i.m. once to twice daily
Comment: the author initially uses enrofloxacin at 5 mg/kg i.v. twice daily in dogs and once daily in cats.
The 10 mg/kg bid dose is only used if Pseudomonas spp. are isolated or suspected. Enrofloxacin is approved
for i.m. use only, but the solution is irritating to tissues and the author prefers i.v. administration. For i.v.
injection, the solution should be injected over 20-60 mins; it may be dilutcd (1 part parenteral solution with
9 parts sterile water for injection) if desired. The parenteral solution should not be given s.c. It may be
necessary to reduce the dose and/or dosing interval in animals at risk for seizurcs.
The author has given enrofloxacin intravenously to cats without adverse effects. Howevcr, the injectable
solution is not approved for use in cats, and there are anecdotal reports of acute loss of vision following s.c.
injection and acute death following i.v.injection in cats.
Aminopenicillins
Ampicillin
20-40 mg/kg i.v.,i.m., s.c. tid-qid
Ampicillin-sulbactam
20-50 mg/kg i.v., i.m.tid-qid
Antipseudomonalpenicillins
Piperacillin
25-50 mg/kg i.v.,i.m. tid-qid
Piperacillin-tazobactam
25-50 mg/kg i.v., i.m.tid-qid
Ticarcillin
40-75 mg/kg i.v., i.m. tid-qid
Ticarcillin-clavulanate
30-50 mg/kg i.v., i.m.tid-qid
Carbapenems
Imipenem-cilastatin
2-10 mg/kg i.v. (1-hour infusion), i.m. (reconstitute with 1%
lignocaine without adrenaline) tid-qid
Comment: the author initially uses 5 mg/kg i.v.tid
Figure8.5:Drugdosesforempiricalparenteralantimicrobialtherapyforthefebrileneutropenicdogandcat.Modifiedfrom
Abrams-Oggand Kruth(2000)Doses adapted fromAllen(1998)andGreene andWatson(1998).Optimaldoses in
recommendeddoserangesrenotknwnInravenousroutesofadministratonarepreferred.llinravenousinctionsare
givenover15-20 minutesunlessotherwise indicated.
124  Manual of Canine and Feline Haematology and Transfusion Medicine
Combination therapy has historically been pre-
 after the animal's neutrophil count increases to more
ferred over monotherapy to increasc the antibacterial
than 1.0-2.0 x 10/1 and fever resolvcs. If the fever has
spectrum, take advantage of additive and synergistic
 resolved but prolonged neutropenia is anticipated,
effects while ninimizing toxicity and to reduce the
then consideration may be given to changing to oral
dlevelopnent of resistancc. Most approachcs have
therapy with the sarmc agents as used for antimicrobial
combined an aminoglycoside antibiotic with a
prophylaxis (sec Figure 8.3).
β-lactam antibiotic, although other approaches
Pyrexia may not resolve promptly if:
have also been developed to avoid aminoglycoside
nephrotoxicity and to improve cfficacy. Whcn
 It is not bacterial in origin (and this should be
reconsidered)
seem to have a limited activity against Gram-positive
 The organisn is not sensitive to the antimicrobial
organisms in nculropcnic patienis. For infections
agents
complicating the episodes of neutropenia most com-
Drug doses are too low (uncommon)
monly encountered by veterinarians, the various
 Host defences are so severely compromised that
... ….
prolocols are probably of equivalent efficacy. The
 the infection and associated fever will not
 author currently uses enrofloxacin plus cephazolin in
resolve with any antimicrobial agent unti!
cancer patients, ampicillinplus gentamicin or cefoxitin
defences are repaired.
alone in animals with parvoviral diseases and
 imipencm-cilastatin for initial therapy in animals
 Initial culture results may assist therapeutic deci-
with overwhelming sepsis associated with severe
sion making with unresponsive fever, If a resistant
neutropenia of undetermined cause.
organism is documented, antimicrobial therapy may
 Thc intravcnous route of antibiotic administration
 be changed on the basis of susceptibility testing. How-
is preferred. Intravenous catheterization is preferable
ever,the urganism involved may be reported as sensi-
to repetitive venepuncture for drug injection and is
tive to the current medication, or an infectious cause of
oftcn neccssary for fluid therapy. However, there must
the fever may not be documented, in which case
another empirical judgement will be necessary. If the
ment and use (Figure 8.6). Although a conventional
animal is clinically stable the current rmedication may
recommcndation is that intravenous catlieters should
be continued until the fever resolves and the neutrophil
be changed every 2-3 days, longer dwell times are
count inproves as previously discussed. This situation
possible with proper catheter care (Mathews et al.,
is encountered occasionally in treating parvoviral in-
1996). The catheter should definitely be changed if
fections. If the animal's clinical status is deteriorating.
thcrc arc signs of phlcbitis or infection of the insertion
however, new antimicrobial agents should be em-
site. If duration of catheterization is anticipated to be
 ployetl. In most cases it is preferable to use new drugs
more than a few days or if frequent blood sampling is
 in addition to, rather than as a substitute for, existing
ncccssary, a jugular cathetcr is preferred.
 therapy. The choice of additional drugs depends on
Drug toxiciry should be considered. Animals
which antibiotics were used for initial therapy. Failure
receiving aminoglycosides should be monitored for
of response to empirical therapy with cefoxitin or an
cvidcncc of nephrotoxicily such as casts in the urine,
aminoglycoside plus a first-generation cephalosporin
 glucosuria and azotaemia, especially when the duration
would prompt additional therapy against Pseudomonas
of therapy is longer than 5 days. Fluoroquinolones
spp. with ticarcilin, piperacillin, ceftazidime or
should be avoided in inmature animals because of
imipenem--cilastatin. If a resistant Gram-negative
the possibility of inducing cartilage lefccis. Fluoro-
cnteric organism is suspccted (c.g. with signs ofintes-
quinolones may cause seizures and other neurological
tinal injury or pneumonia), choices for additional
signs in geriatric animals, animals with hypo-
therapy include an aminoglycoside, fluoroquinolone,
albuminaemia and animals with a history of
sccond- or third-gcncralion ccphalosporin and
seizures. Numerous antibiotics inhibit platelet function
imipenem-cilastatin. If a resistant Gram-positive
(Catalfamo and Dodds, 1988). This effect is most im-
cutaneous organism is suspected (e.g. with catheter-
portant with penicillins, andl an animal so trcatcd should
associated phlcbitis or pncumonia), thc animal should
be observed for haemorrhage if there is concurrent 
 be treated with clindamycin 10 mg/kg i.y., i.m. or s.c.
thronabocytopenia, especially if the platelet count is less
bid. Vancomycin and teicoplanin are the drugs of
 han 20 x 10/n. Fluoroquinolones have minimal effect
choicc for resistant Gram-positive infcctions in
On platelet function, and cephazolin does not alter plate-
humans, but there is limited veterinary experience with
1
let function in normal dogs (Wilkens et al., 1995).
 these drugs. The recommended dose for vancomycin
After starting antibiotic therapy, reduction of fever
 in the dog and cat is 15 mg/kg i.v. tid. A non-respond-
1
is expected wihin 72 hours and the animal should
 ing fever may also be rlue to infection with an anaero-
appear more alert. Increased depression accompany-
 bic organism. Additional therapy could include
.·..
ing a decreasing temperature may be a sign of impend-
 1netronidazole (10-15 mg/kg i.v., 1-hour infusion,
ing septic shock. Thcrapy should contiuue for I-7 days
tid), clinlamycin, cefoxitin or imipenem-cilastatin.
Neutropenia
125
The hair over and surrounding the venepuncture site is liberally
clipped, including the clipping of long hairs in the vicinity of the
site that could contaminate the catheter.
2.
The operator's hands are thoroughly washed.
3.
 The skin over and surrounding the venepuncture site is surgically
prepared.
+
A sterile gauze square,or alternatively a gauze square soaked in the
solution used for final skin preparation with the excess solution
(a)
This gauze square protects the needle and catheter from skin contamination during venepuncture (a).
If it is necessary to palpate the vencpuncture site, the operator's fingers are cleansed with the final skin
preparation solution before palpation and the venepuncture site is similarly cleansed after palpation.
6.
After catheter insertion, an injection cap is locked on to the catheter hub.
7.
The catheter is secured by placing the end of a strip of half-inch
wide tape, adhesive side up, under the wings of the catheter,
and then folding the tape over the catheter and wrapping it
around the leg.
8.
The catheter is flushed with 3 ml heparinized saline (1 IU
heparin/ml saline).
9.
 Povidone-iodine ointment is applied to the catheter insertion site,
which is then covered with a sterile plaster or similar adhesive
bandage as illustrated (b).
(b)
10. Thc centrc of a sccond strip of half-inch wide tape, adhesive side down, is placed under the hub of
the catheter.
11. The ends of the tape are wrapped around the leg while applying traction in a proximal direction,
criss-crossing under the leg and coming up over the plaster and/or cathcter hub - this prcvents distal
migration of the catheter.
12. A strip of one-inch tape is wrapped around the leg, covering the plaster and catheter hub.
13. A second strip of one-inch tape is placed under the hub of the catheter and wrapped around the leg in a
similar fashion to the second strip of half-inch tape, covering the plaster. Additional strips of one-inch
tape may be wrapped around the catheter and leg to provide extra security.
14. The leg is bandaged from the toes to a level above the catheter insertion site, with gauze wrap and
self-adherent wrap. The wraps are passed underneath and over the catheter hub to expose the hub and
provide additional security.
15. Thc leg is palpated two to three times a day over, above and below the insertion site. The bandage
should be changed a minimum of every 4 days,or sooner ifit iswet,soiled or displaced distally,if there
is pain or swelling on palpation of the leg, if there is pain on injection through the catheter, or if the
animal is more depressed or has a worsening fever.
16. When the bandage is changed the insertion site and leg should be examined for signs of inflammation.
The catheter should be removed if such signs are present. If there is no indication for catheter removal
and the catheter is left in place, the insertion site should be gently cleansed with 3% hydrogen peroxide
and then 10% povidone-iodine solution, and a fresh plaster with povidone-iodine ointment applied.
17. If the animal is not receiving intravcnous fluid therapy, the cathctcr should be flushed with heparinized
saline cvery 4 hours.
18. For intravenous fluid therapy, an extension set with a luer-lock is
attached to the catheter hub as illustrated (c), and the intravenous
delivery set is attached to the extension set and secured to the
outside of the bandage. This technique minimizes disconnection of
the intravenous fluid line from the catheter, facilitates recognition
that disconnection has occurred and permits changing of the
intravenous fluid line without changing the bandage.
19. Injection ports should be cleaned with alcohol and allowed to dry
(c)
before injection, as illustrated.
20. The intravenous fluid line should be changed a minimum of every 3 days because damaged injection ports
are a potential portal of entry for bacteria, or whenever blood has permanently backed-up into the line.
Figure8.6:Asepticplacementand useofanover-the-needle catheterin thecephalicvein(Mathewset al,1996).Apolyurethane
catheter is recommended.
126 Manual of Canine and Feline Haematology and Transfusion Medicine
Although imipeneim-cilastatin is expensive, it is less
typically treated for at least 6 weeks. The infection may
expensive than triple covcragc with enrofloxacin,
transiently seem to become worse as the neutrophil
cephazolin and metronidazole and may therefore hc
count increases, but fevcr should be decreasing if
 substituted for the latter. If initial therapy is with
 antimicrobial therapy is appropriate.
cnrofloxacin plus cephazolin, the author currently in-
Amphotericin B is the drug of choice for aspergil-
tensifies therapy with ceflazidime or metronidazole or
losis. Amphotericin B can also be used to treat sys-
changes to imipenem-cilastatin.
lcmic candidiasis, but treatiment with ketoconazole or
The preceding recommendations are appropriate
itraconazole therapy may be sufficient (Webcr et al.,
for most cascs bul may liot be feasible due to cost
1985). Intestinal candidiasis can be treated with nysta-
restrictions or inability of the owner to retum tlie
tin, ketoconazole or itraconazole, whereas fluconazole
animal to the hospital. In such cases, initial therapy
is the drug of choice for urinary candidiasis.
with oral antimicrobial therapy may be warranted. lun
 addition, oral antinicrobial agents may be sufficicnt
for initial treatment of neutropenic animals that have
GRANULOCYTE TRANSFUSIONS
bccn febrile and clinically stable for several days. A
Neutrophils normally have short circulating and tissue
 Or aminopenicilin will provide broad-spectrum
residence tincs. Thcse tiimcs are furthcr reduced in
 antibacterial activity sinmilar to the injectable combi-
sepsis, and auy transfused neutrophils arc rapidly
nations discussed previously and is recommended
 cousumed. However, even a transient increase in total
for oral therapy in animals with moderatc lo scvcrc
body neutrophil nunbers above a critical level may
 neutropenia. For clinically stable animals with mild
perinit survival in soine cases of scvcrc sepsis.
ncutropenia and mild pyrexia, treatment as described
 Neutrophils are usually transfused in humans by using
in Figure 8.3 may suffice. Treatmen1. for Ehrlichia
granulocyte concentrates. Donors are treated with
canis infection with oral tetracyclines may also
granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (scc Hacmato-
confrol infection secondary to neutropenia. Doxycy-
 poietic cytokine therapy) with orwithout corticosteroids
cline is preferred when a dog with chrlichiosis is
to increase blood neutrophil levels, and then neutrophils
 neutropenic as it causes less disturbance of intestinal
 are colected by leucapheresis. Neutrophils may also
colonizalion resistance than do tetracycline and
be transfused via exchange transfusion.
oxytetracycline. In all cases thc animal should be
Neutrophil transfusion in humans is most benefi-
closely observed for deterioration, aul arrangemcnis
cial in the treatment of severe prolonged neutropenia
made to initiate parenteral therapy. Oral antimicro.
and in neonatal sepsis. Granulocyte transfusion has
bial thcrapy is not appropriate when tle aninal is
been largely unexplored in small animal medicine
 dehydrated or vomiting. or wlen there is rlisruption
because of the expense of treating such cases and
of the intestinal nucosa.
technical difficulties, although dogs havc hccn
 Empirical antifungal therapy is used in humans but
transfused in research facilities (Christensen et al.,
is not recommended in the dog or cat unless a fiungal
1982; Weiss, 1991). Large volumes of blood must
infection is documented. If neutropenia and antibacte-
be processed to procure sufficient ueutrophils to
rial thcrapy persist heyond 10 days, then faeces should
treat a mature animal. Furthermore, granulocyte
 ddis nppuny ioy ainns 1o Asopoifo Aq paiouou aq
crossmatching is necessary to minimize loss of effec-
overgrowth,especially if antibacterialagents are being
tiveness from alloimmunization during long-lcrm
used that disturb intestinal flora (e.g. amoxicillin.
 transfusion support, and irradiation of granulocyte
cefoxitin, metronidazole).
concentrate is recommended to minimize transfusion-
associalcd graft-vcrsus-host disease in patients with
Trcatmcnt of documented infections
 severe immunosuppression. However, preparation of
Treatment of documentcd bacterial infections should
 granulocyte concentrates for short-term transfusion
support of scplic puppics and kitens is feasible in
 combination, with the choices based uponsusceptibil-
 some veterinary clinics. For dogs, 6% hetastarch. is
ity testing. Initial therapy shouldl bc parenteral in most
added in a 1:8 ratio to a unit of fresh whole blood to
 cases, and a change to oral therapy may be considered
promotc real cell sedimcntation. The bag is stored
if the animal is stable and the infection is responding.
 pe  i  n n  
Treatmcnt of bacteraeinia withoul cvidence of other
point the plasima and buffy coat are expressed into a
organ involvement should continue for I to 7 days
satellite bag. which is then ccnirifuged at 5000 g for
after the animal's neutrophil count increases above
5 ininutes af roorn lemperature (scc Chapter 15).
1.0-2.0 x 10°/l and fever resolves. Treatiment of pneu-
The supernatant plasma is expressed, leaving the
monia and urinary tract and soft tissue infcclions
granulocytes in 20 ml of plasma. For cats, the
should continue for at least 7 days after the animal's
collecting syringe containing a unit of fresh blood is
nentrophil count increases above 1.0-2.0 x 10°/1 and
stored vertically at room temperature for I hour. The
clinical and radiographic signs rcsolve. Pncumonia is
plasma is expressed into a storage bag followed by
Neutropenia 127
expression of the buffy coat into a sccondi storage
 depending on circumstances, Prophylactic therapy and
bag or syringe. Thc resulting granulocyte concen-
 therapy of established neonatal sepsis are also being
trates may be stored at room ternperature for 8 hours.
investigated. Side cffects of rHuG-CSF and rHuGM-
The dose is 1 x 10? granulocytes/kg in a volume of
ai in ue ud   s yi 
15 ml/kg i.v. once to twicc rlaily. The volume of fresh 
effects from overproductionof neutroplils. Side cffects
whole blood ncclel to provide the neutrophils may
of rHuGM-CSFalso include influenza-likc syudromes
be calculated by using the formula:
and capillary lcak syndrone.
Recombinant canine G-CSF and GM-CSF have
Volume of donor bloorl (l) =
been produced but are not commercially available.
 However, rHuG-CSF bas been given to dogs and
Recipient weight (kg) x gramlocyte dose (1 x 10²granulocyes/kg)
 cats. The drug is a potent stinulator of granulopoi-
Donor meutrophil coumt (x 10 gramulocytes/l) x 0.75
esis, but the effect is transient in normal aniinals
because of neutralizing antibody formation. Increased
In this formula 0.75 represents the proportion of
ncutrophil counts beginto decline after 17-23 days of
granulocytes in the unit of fresh whole blood that will
rHuG-CSF treatment, and neutropenia will occur if
be extracted. The transfusion1 is given through a stand-
treatment is continucd (Fulton et al., I99 1; Hammond
 is su  z nI a a u i pn
et al., 1991). Veterinarians have successfully used
transfusion reaction is a fever.
 rHuG-CSF to ameliorate myelosuppression in dogs
If granulocyte concentrate transfusion for a septic
and cats receiving anticancer chemothcrapy. Typi-
neonate is not feasiblc, frcsh whole blood transfusion
cally the drug is given at a dose of 5 μg/kg s.c.
(22 ml/kg) should be considered, as this is anecdotally
once daily to febrile neutropenic animals of
beneficial in treating severe parvovirus infeclion in
 prophylactically when the neutrophil count dlccrcases
kittens (Kowall, 1974). This benefit may be in part
below 0.5-1.0 x 10°/l, and is continued until the
uwing to transfused neutrophils.
neutrophil count increases above 1.0-2.0 x 10°/1.
(Neupogen is supplied as a 300 μg/ml prcscrvalive-
free solution in a singlc-use vial. Because of the cost
HAEMATOPOIETIC CYTOKINE
of the protluct, veterinarians typically use the vial for
THERAPY
multiple doses. It is essential that the vial bc pen
 etrated aseptically and stored under rcfrigcration.
 Recombinant human granulocyte colony-stimulating
To facilitatc small rlose ineasurements, it has been
factor (rHuG-CSF) or filgrastim (Neupogen, Amgen)
 recommended to dilute rHuG-CSF to a concentration 
 and recombinant human granulocyte-macrophage
of 100 μg/ml in a 5% dextrose solution thal conmlains
colony-stimulating factor (rHuGM-CSF)
or
-eey uoaq sey en unias juoged snosojone % 1
sargramostim (Leukine, Immunex) stimulatc
inactivated in a 56°C water bath for 30 minutes. The
granulocyte progcnilor cells and mature neutrophils,
diluted rHuG-CSF is stored under refrigcration for
thereby enhancing neutrophil production, differentia-
four weeks (Hcnry el ul, 1998).) The short courses of
tion, marrow release and function. The rHuGM-CSF
therapy and possibly concurrent immunosuppression
also has sevcral cffects on macrophages and other
from cytotoxic chemotherapy reduce the antibody
haematopoietic cells. The drugs are rnost useful in
effect and pcrmit rcpeated use (Henry et al., 1995).
 Prophylactic use of rHuG-CSF beginning 5 days
chemotherapy and large field irradiation lo reduce the
after a chermotherapy treatment has also been used
 duration and severity of neutropenia. They are less
(Henry et al., 1998). This is lalcr than is typically
useful in established neutropenia due to cytotoxic
uscrl in humans, where rHuG-CSF is given 1 to 2 days
 therapy with or without secondary infcelion, because
 after chemotherapy. The drug should not be given
progcnilor cells may be exhausted and/or endogenous
within 24 hours before or after chemotlerapy as this
cytokine levels are already increased. They are of
will increase cytotoxic progenitor cell injury. When
limited utility in aplastic anacmia (inmune-mediated
 rHuG-CSF is used, stimulation of granulopoiesis
 pancylopenia) as endogenous cytokine levels are often
can result in a left shift and toxic changes in the
nentrophils thal. nay be confused with a response
neutropenia due to a drug rcaction varies with the
to infection. Side effects other than antibody forma-
mcchanisin of toxicosis. Cytokine therapy reduces
 tion are minimal. The use of rHuG-CSF is expensive
severity of cyclic neutropenia and certain other idi-
and the cost beuefit coinpared with the risk of devel-
opathic neutropenic conditions and may be beneficial
 oping and cost of treating sepsis in dogs and cats is not
in humans with acquired iminunudeficiency syndrome.
known. Similarly, although the use of rHuG-CSF
Prophylactic cytokine therapy is beneficial in experi-
prevents dose reduction and may permit dose escala-
mental models of overwhelming sepsis, but the role of
tion of anticancer drugs in dogs and cats, the benefits
cytokine therapy in cstablished sepsis is not clear - it
on improved tumour control and patient survival
is potentially beneficial, of no benefit or detrimental
are not kown.
128  Manual of Canine and Feline Haematology and Transfusion Medicine
The use of rHuG-CSF for treating parvoviral infec-
CouoCG(1990) Managerment of complicatiusof cancerchenohempy.
Veteriaery Clinies of Narh Anerica: Soait Animal Pracrice 20.
tions in rlogs and cats has also becn recomincnded. In
1037-1053
one study, treatment of dogs with 5 μg/kg bid-tid
Dow SW, Curtis CR, Jones RL anrd Wingfield WE (1989) Bacterial
increased neutrophil counts (Kraft and Kuffer, 1995),
cuiture of blood from cnitically ill dogs and cats.Joura! ofthe
Anerican Veterinary Medical Associanion 195, 113-117
whereas in anothcr study treatunent of dogs with
Fcldi R(I989) The compronisedhost. EuropeanJournat ofConeer md
5 μg/kg once daily did not, nor did it affect survival or 
Clinical Oucotogy 25(Suppl 2), S1-S7
Fulton R, Gusper PW,Ogilvic GK,Boone TC, and Domsife RE(1991)
duration of hospitalization (Rewerts er al., 1998). In
the forrmer study there was no apparent benefit to cats.
n henatopoiesis in normal eats. Experimeual Hermuology 19.
The usc of rHuG-CSF may be of linmited utility in
759-767
Greene CEand Watson AD) (1998) Aninicrobial drug fonuulary. 1n:
 parvoviralinfections because of increased endogenous
cytokine levels, viral replication in stimulated pro-
790-919.WB Sauners,Phiadelphia
 genitor cells or exhaustion of progenitor cells and
HammondWP,CsibaECaniA,Hockn H,Souza LMLaytou E
and DC Dale (1991) Chronic neutroperia: a new canine model
matire neutrophils at the time of treatment (Cohn et
induced by hieman granuloeyte calony-stinulating factor. Journe!
αl., 1999; London, 2000). Therapy with rHuG-CSF
of Clinical Imvestigation 87, 704-710
HIardic EM (2000) Therapeutic management of sepsis. In: Kirk's
 has been reportedly or anecdotally beneficial with
Crrrent Veterinary Therapy Xif Suall Aminat Praciice. cd. JD
 myclosuppression (lue to oestrogen and phenobarbital
Bonagura, pp. 272-275. WB Saunders, Philadclphia
Henry CJ, Buss MS and Lothrop CD (1998) Veterinary uses of
toxicosis in dogs and griseofulvin toxicosis in cats. The
reconbinaat funan granuloeyte colony-stinulating factor. Part 1.
 role of rHuG-CSF therapy for neutropenia due to
Cncalogy.ConpenumonCotintingEducationforiePrctising
FeLV and FIV infections has yet to be dlcfined.
Veteririm 20,728-734
Henry CJ, Lollrop CD und Gwoduan S (l995) Dogs rccciving
 Dogs have also been treated with rHuGM-CSF.
mitoxantrone und cyeluplusphamide do not proxure clinicaly
Stimulation of granulopoiesis is less conpared with
significant autilouy tiers to zhG-CSF. Proceediungs of the 13"
rHuG-CSF. Given the lower efficacy and greater po-
Annal Veterivary Medicai Forun of the American College of
Veterinary internet Medicine p. 1020
lential for side effects, the use of rHuGM-CSF is in
Hughes WT, Armstrong D, Borey GP, BruwuAE, Edwards FE, Feld R.
general not recommended for the treatment of neutro-
Pizzo P, Ralston KV, Shenep JL and Young LS (1997) 1997
guidclines for lhe use of antimicrobial agents in neuuropenic
 penia in dogs and cats.
patiens with wcxplaincd fever. Clinical Inferious Diseases 25,
551-573
Kowall NL(I1974)Feline pantcukapcnia.In: Currenr VererinaryTherapy
VSmeil Arjmai Praerice,ed. RW Kirk,pp.957-959. WB Saunders,
Philacelplia
REMOVAL OF THE FOCUS OF
Kraft W and Kuffer M (1995) Belandlung schvcrer neutropenicn
INFECTION
bei hund und kutze nit filgrastin. Tierarzaliche Praxis 23,
609-613
Kunkle GA,SundlofS and Keisling K (1995)Adverse effcts of oral
Excision or debridement of the site of infection
antibacterial therapyndogsandcats anepieniologicstuyofpet
should be considered in. animals with neutropenia
owners’ ohservations. Journa! of the American Animai Hospital
Associarion 31, 46-55
 due to overwhelming sepsis or in animals with pri-
London C (2000) Hematopotetie cytokines: the nyelopoietic factors.
mary neutropenia where a secondary infection has
Hnr: Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy Xlll Small Aninal Practice.
cd. JD Bonagura, p 403-408. WB Saunders, Philadelphia
localized in soft [issue and is nol responding to
Mathcws KA, Brnoks Ml and Valliant AE (1996) A prospcctive sturly
antimicrobial therapy alone. Other therapeutic strat-
of intravenous catheter contamination. Jornal of Vererinary
Emergernrey Medicine atd Criticat Care 6, 33-43
egies in the imanagement of sepsis have recently been
Moore K, Lautzenhiser S, Fialkowski J'and Rosin E (1999)
revicwed (Hardie, 2000).
Coutinuous infusion versus subcutancous administration
infection in dogs. Jorrnal of Vererinary Interna! Medicine
13, 237
Ogilvie GK and Moorc AS (1995) Managing the Veterinary Cancer
REFERENCES AND FURTHER
Patienp149-155rnaryLaingymsTren
READING
Reller LB [1994) What tlac practicing physician should know abou
blooc cultrcs.n:Blood Culure Conroversies -Revisiteucd.F
Koonz, pp. I -8. ASM Audicconference, Iowa City
RewertsMCaDLCoAWaMCanHrn
neutropenia in tle dog and cat. In: Anrimicrobiai Therapy i
D (1998) Recombinant human gratulocyte colony-stimulating
Vererinary Medicine, 3t edn, cd. J Prcscott and D Baggot. lowa
factor for treatmenr of puppies with neatropenia secondary to
State Lniversity Press, Ames
parvovirus infection..lournal of the American Vererinary Medica!
Allen DG (1998) Hanibook of Veteriry Drugs, 2rd cdn. Lippineott-
Associmion 213, 991-992
Raven, Philadelplia
Roscnthal RC (1988) Antologous bonc marrow lransplantation for
Anderson PGandPidgeon G (1987) Candiciasisinadog will parvgvinal
lynaphoma. Proceedings of the 6" Amual Vererinary Medical
enleritis. Journa! of the Aneriean Aninal Hospitul Association
Foruu oftie Americant Coltege ofVererinary Inrernai Medicine
23, 27-30
pp.397-399
Catalfamo JL and Dodds WJ (198s) Heredlitary and acquired
Rubin RH aud Young LS (1994) Clinicel Approach to Infecrion in the
thronbopathias. VeterinaryCliniesofVorth America:SaallAnina!
Cowpromised Hos, 3 ed,ed.RH Rulin and LS Young.Plemum,
Practice 18,185-194
New York
Christensen RD, Anstall HB and Roihstein G (l982) Use of whole blcod
Turk J, Fales W, Miller M, Pace 1., Fischer J, Johnson G, Kreeger J,
cxelhange ransfusion to supply neurophils t septie, neutrupenie
Turnquist S, Pitman L., Rottinghans A and GosserH(1992) Entcri
neonales. Tromsfusion 22, 504-506
Closridiefngesinfectinassxitedwiprvovralentertis
Cohn LA, Rewerts JM, McCaw DL, Boon GD, Wagner-Mann C and
indogs:74ses1987-1990JorufArVer
Mecdical Assoctarion 200, 991-994
Turk J, Miller M, Brown T, Fales W, Fiscler J, Gosser H, Nelson S,
Journal of Vererinary Jnrerval Mericine 13, 581-586
ShawDandSolorzanoR(190)Coliformsepticemiaandpulmumary
Neutropenia 129
rliscase associated with canine parvoviral enteritis: 8 cascs(1987-
Weiss D) (1991) Wlite cells. lr: Advunces in Veteruury Seieace and
[98S), Journal of the American Veterinary Medica! Associanion
Coaparative Metieie, Vol 36: Compartive Trusftsian Medicine.
196. 771-773
ed.SMColt576caeicressSani
a ng toau ymud pun sua(rr o
Weiss DJ (1995) 1enkocyte disorders and their treatmem. In: Kirk's
comnpromsed laost.Iu:CliriceApproeh onfeetiou in the
Churrent Veteritary 7herapy Xlr Small Aninal Pracrice, ed. JD
Conparomised Host, 3" ein,ed. RH Rubin and LSYoung Dp. 5-
Botagura,p.452-457.WB Saunders,Philadelphia
31. Plenun, New York
Wilkens B, Sullivan P, McDonald TP and Krahwinkel DJ (1995)
Wehcr M1,KeppenM,Gawith KEandEpstcin RB (1985) Trcatmcnt of
Effectsofcephalothin cefazolin,andcefnetazolcon heemostatc
systemic candidiasis in ncutropenie dogs with kctoconazole.
Experimenat Henaofogy 13,791-795
Veterinary Suargery 24, 25
CHAPTER EIGHT
11
Krystyna Grodecki
INTRODUCTION
tose foreign particles such as bacteria, yeasts,
protozoans, 1mycoplasmata, masl cell gramules, im-
In normal dogs and cats, only a small percentage of
mune complcxes, antibody-coated red blood cells and
the white bloorl cell differential is comprised of
inert particles, although the phagocytic as well as
eosinophils. The bone marrow is the site of eosino-
 bactericidal capabilities of eosinophils are far less
phil prorduction, maturation and storage. Activated
effectivc han ihose of neutrophils (McEwen, 1992;
T lymphocyics and 1macrophages produce various
Jain, 1993). Eosinophils are potent inflammatory cells,
cytokines (e.g. interleukin-5), which control the
 jo   i d   
procuction of eosinophils (McEwen, 1992; Jain,
processcs and may indluce tissue damage. The role of
1993). The lotal bone marrow transil time fur
 eosinophils as regulators of allergic and inflammatory
eosinophils is about 3 days in humans (Latimer,
responses has not beenn proved (MeEwen, 1992), al-
1995) and 5.5 days in rats (McEwcn, 1992), although
though cvidence exists to suggest this function
eosinophil produclion and release has been shown to
(McEwen, 1992; Jain, 1993). Eosinophils also take
be faster in parasitized rats (McEwen, 1992). The
 part in coagulation and fibrinolysis (Jain, 1993).
bone marrow transit times in tlie dog and cat are not
known. The half-life of cosinophils in the circulationl
in huunans ranges from 2 to 12 hours (Latiner, 1995)
EOSINOPHILIA
and is presumed to be similar in dogs and cats (Latimer
and Rakich, 1989). A marginal pool of cosinophils is
 Latimer (1995) has lefined eosinophilia as an absolule
also present. Eosinophils enter tissues rantlomly and
eosinophil count of greater than 0.75 x 10°/1 in the cat
may function there for several days, after which they
and greater tlhan 1.3 x 10%/l in thc dog. Veterinary
are removcd by the mononuclear phagocytic system,
clinical pathology laboratorics often providc
degenerate within tissues or are lost via epithelial
haematological reference ranges derived from local
transmigration (McEwen, 1992). They do not usually
animal populations, so thesereferenceranges are likely
re-cnlcr the blood (Jain, 1993). Eosinophils are
to vary regionally.
essentially tissue cells and are found in high numbers
The fact that eosinophils in the circulation are
(relative to numbers in the circulation) in subepithe.
simply 'in transit' between their site of production and
lial sites in the skin and respiratory, gastrointestinal
site of function suggests that the nunber of blood
 and urogenital tracts. Diseases of these tissues are
eosinophils is only a crude indicator of the dynamic
more likely to be associated with tissue eosinophilia
state of eosinophils (McEwen, 1992). Eosinophilia,
with ar without blood cosinophilia thau are diseases.
thercfore, should be considerer siguificant only if
of other tissues. The fact that these tissues interact
persistent and reproducible (McBwen, 1992). It is
with an environment with constant antigenic expo-
important to note that localized lesions that contain
sure and that they contain large numbers of mast cells,
large numbers of eosinophils (tissue eosinophilia) fre-
Inay offer a partial cxplanation for this obscrvalion
quently may not be accompanied by bloodcosinophilia
(McEwen, 1992).
(Duncan er al., 1994). Also, animals with eosinophilic
Eosinoplils are widely known for their parasiti-
disorders may have a blood response thiat is diminished
cidal abilities; howcver, they also possess phagocytic
by a concurrent stressc ffect rmedliatecl by corticosteroidls
and bactericidal capabilities, are mediators of tissue
(eosinopenic effect) (Dumcan et al., 1994).
injury and have been incriminated as regulators of
Mechanistically, blood eosinophilia may be the
allergic (hypcrscnsitivity) and inflammatory responses.
resultaf increased proxluction ofeosinophils, increased
Parasiticidal activity occurs via interaction of
 release from the bone marrow storage compartment,
 eosinoplils with T and B lymphocytes and mast cells
redistribution from the marginal pool or increased
lopue apoqun jo aauasand au u paomqa si prn
inlravascular survival (Jain, 1993). Mos1 cosinophilias
complement (Jain, 1993). Eosinophils can plhagocy-
are due to the first two mechanisms (Jain, 1993).
132Manual of Canine andFelineHacmatology and TransfusionMedicine
Eosinophiliaisknownforits association withpara-
the femalegenital tract,7%had bone andjoint disease,
sitism and hypersensitivity, although it has also been
7% hadneurologicalconditions,6% had gastrointestinal
associatedwithmanyotherdiverscconditions(Tvedien,
discase,4%had urinary tract involvement.4% had
1994). Only a few surveys determining the frequency
neoplasia.2% had ocular involvement,2%had
of conditions associated with eosinophilia in the dog
suppurative disease and 2% had cardiac disease.These
and cat have been conducted.Onelarge retrospective
findings were broadly corroborated in a study of 105
study （Center et al.,1990)of 312 cats (which consti-
dogs with cosinophilia (Lilliehook et al,2000) where
tuted about 5%of cats having a complete blood count
inflammatory diseases of the gut, skin or lungs com-
(CBC) performed in this hospital setting)with eosi-
prised 36% of the test population.
nophilia (defined as an absolute cosinophil count of
greater than 1.5 x 10°/1) found that eosinophilia was
Parasitism
indeed associated with a variety of diagnoses (see
Parasitism isthe most frequent cause of eosinophilia in
Figures 8.7 to 8.9). However, the most common diag-
the dog and cat (Latimcr andRakich,1989),although
noses(over half of the reported cases) consisted of flea
parasitism doesnotconsistentlyresultin eosinophilia
allergy dermatitis(FAD). eosinophilic granuloma com-
(Bush,1991).Figure8.7lists some ofthe parasites that
plex,asthma,chronicupper respiratory tract inflam
may be associatedwith eosinophilia in dogs and cats.
mation and gastrointcstinal disease associatcd with
The discovery ofectoparasites orendoparasites should
diarrhoea and endoparasites. One flaw in these data
not necessarily mark the end of an investigation of
was thefactthat some of thecatswith these different
eosinophilia,as their presence does not necessarily
diagnoscs had concomitantfleainfestationorendopara-
implya causativerole (Tvedten,1994).Eosinophiliais
sitism and thatnot all catshadfaecal examinations or
more likely to develop when parasitesmigrate through
heartworm testsperformed.
body tissues,providing prolonged contact between the
Jain (1993) conducted a survey of 72 cats with
parasite and host tissue (migrating stages of ascarids,
eosinophiliabut didnot providespecific diagnoses or
hookwormsorheartworms,orexample),or attachto
information regarding association with parasitism. In
or disrupt mucosal surfaces (Center, 1985). whereas
this study,15%ofcatswitheosinophiliahadrespiratory
parasites livingfreeinthe gastrointestinal tract are less
iscasc,32%had skin discase,18%had gastrointestinal
likelytostimulateaneosinophilia(Center,1985;Bush,
disease,17%had suppurative disease and 18%had
1991;Duncan et al., 1994).In the case of migrating
miscellaneous conditions.T'wo surveys of eosinophilia
larvae,eosinophilia maydevelopbefore detection of
in thedog havebeenreported.Inthestudy describedby
ova in the faeces, and migrating larvae cannot there-
Jain (1993),of a total of 337 dogs with eosinophilia,
fore be completely ruled out as a cause for eosi-
43%had respiratory disease,8%had skin disease,8%
nophilia. Some parasites may not stimulate an
had misccllaneous conditions,7%had involvement of
eosinophilia until they die and expose previously
Dog
Cat
Angiostrongylus vasorum (Prestwood et al.,1981;
Aelurostrongylus abstrusus (Ccntcr et al.,1990;
Patteson et al.,1993)
Hawkins,1995)
Crenosoma vulpis (Cobb and Fisher, 1992;Peterson
Coccidiosis (Center et al., 1990)
et al., 1993; Shaw et al., 1996)
Fleas (Prasse et al., 1987; Center and Randolph,
Filaroides hirthi (Hirth and Hottendorf,1973;
1991)
Torgerson et al., 1997)
Giardiasis (Center et al., 1990)
Fleas (Latimer, 1995)
Ollulanus tricuspis (Latimer,1995)
Oslerus (Filaroides) osleri (Barsanti and Prestwood,
Toxocara cati (Parsons, 1987; Center et al., 1990)
1983; Levitan et al., 1996)
Toxocara canis (Parsons et al., 1989)
Pneumocystis carinii (Greene and Chandler, 1984;
Toxoplasmosis (Center et al., 1990)
Ramsay et al., 1997)
Trombiculid mites (Latimer, 1995)
Strongyloides spp. (Gibbons et al., 1988; Duncan et
al.,1994)
Toxocara canis (Parsons,1987)
Trichuris vulpis (Hendrix et al.,1987;Leib and
Matz,1995)
Uncinaria stenocephala(Bowman,1992)
Figure8.7:Parasitesthatmay beassociatedwitheosinophiliainthedogandcatintheUnitedKingdom.Parasites associated
witheosinophilia butnot indigenous to theUnitedKingdominclude:in the dog,Ancylostoma spp.(Burrows et al.,1995),
Dipetalonemareconditum(Rawlings and Ca/vert,1995),Dirofilariaimmitis（RawlingsandCalvert,1995),Hepatozoon canis
(Craig,1984),Hetcrobilharzia americana (Slaughter et al,1988),Paragonimuskellicoti (Hawkins,1995),Spirocerca lupi
(Latimer,1995）,Trichinella spiralis(Campbel1991）:inthecat,Ancylostoma spp.(Bush,991),Dirofilariaimmitis（Rawlings
and Calvert,1995),Paragoninus kcllicotti(Hawkins,1995）,Platynosomum concinnum(Hitt,1997）,Strongyloides spp.(Duncan
ct al.,1994）,Trichinella spiralis(Burrows ct al.,1995）.
Eosinophilia 133
unexposedantigens(Tvedten,1994).Ectoparasitessuch
10°/1).Cats witheitherFADoreosinophilic granuloma
as fleas and ticks may promote eosinophilia(Latimer
complex (range 1.5-46.2x 10°/l) had the highest
and Rakich,1989).Center and Randolph (1991) ob-
medianeosinophilcounts(3.3x10°/lforboth).Eosino-
served thal catswith agcnerous'flea infestation,in thc
philicplaque was most commonly associated with
absence ofobvious dermal hypersensitivity,developed
eosinophiliaand was associated withthehighesteosino-
eosinophilia of up to7.0 x 10°/1.The same authors also
phil counts ofall catswiththe eosinophilicgranuloma
observcd carmiteinfestations associatedwitheosino-
complex.Eosinophiliahas been associated with atopy
philia,which resolved with miticidal treatment.
and food hypcrsensitivity in the cat (Ccnter et al.,
1990;Roudebush,1995;Scottetal.,1995a) whereasin
Hypersensitivity and inflammation
dogs with these conditions,eosinophilia is rare
Figure 8.8 lists hypersensitivity and inflammatory
(Willcmse,1984)
conditions that maybe associatedwith eosinophilia in
Of respiratory disorders noted in the study by
the dog and cat. As with parasitic infections these
Center etal.(1990),thehighest eosinophilcounts
conditions do not invariably result in eosinophilia.
were associatedwith feline asthma/allergicbronchi-
In the study by Center et al.(1990),cats with flea
tis (range 1.6-20.7 x 10/1) and septie pneumonia
allergy dermatitis comprised the largest proportion
(range 1.6-11.7x 10°/1),although cats with pneumo-
(20.5%) of cals with eosinophilia （range 1.5-23.5x
nia were believed to have had underlying allergic
Dog
Cat
Alimentary tract
Oral eosinophilic granuloma (Madewell et al., 1980)
Eosinophilie enteritis (Leib and Matz, 1995;
Eosinophilic gastritis/enteritis/colitis (Johnson, 1992;
Guilford, 1996)
Burrows et al., 1995; Leib and Matz, 1995)
Lymphoplasmacytic gastroenteritis (Dennis et al.,
Gastrointcstinal eosinophilic granuloma (Burrows et
1992; Hart et al., 1994)
al,. 1995; Leib and Matz, 1995)
Genitourinary tract
Pyometra (Lalimer, 1995)
Pyometra (Prasse et al.,1987;Center et al.,1990)
Lower urinary tract disease (Center et al., 1990)
Musculoskeletal system
Eosinophilic myositis/atrophic myositis/masticatory
muscle myositis (Smith, 1989; Gilmour et al., 1992)
Panosteitis/endostosis (Johnson et al., 1995)
Respiratory tract
Pulmonary infiltrates with eosinophils (Calvert, 1987;
Allergic bronchitis/asthma (Center et al., 1990;
Taboada,1991)
Hawkins, 1995)
Pulmonary eosinophilic granuloma (Taboada, 1991)
 Chronic upper respiratory tract inflammation
(Center et al., 1990)
Skin
Eosinophilic granuloma (Scott et al., 1995b)
Eosinophilic granuloma complex (Center et al.,
Flea allergy dermatitis (Scott et al., 1995a)
1990; Scott et al., 1995b)
Sterile eosinophilic pustulosis (Scoft et al., 1995b)
Flea allergy dermatitis (Center et al., 1990; Scott et
al.,1995a)
Atopy (Center et al.,1990; Scott et al.,1995a)
Food hypersensitivity (Center et al., 1990;
Roudebush, 1995)
Other
Eosinophilic keratitis (Glaze, 1982; Collins et al.,
1986: Carrington et al., 1992)
Chronic focal infection or inflammation, e.g.
abscess, gingivitis/stomatitis, soft tissue trauma
(Center et al., 1990)
Steatitis ( O'Donnell and Hayes, 1987)
(Modified from Latimer(1995)with permission).
134Manual of Canine andFeline Haematology and TransfusionMedicine
bronchitis.Prcvious studies(reviewed by Taboada,
endemic areas (Calvert,1987;Taboada,1991).Pul-
1991) documented eosinophilia in 50-75% of cats
monary eosinophilicgranulomatosis,a PIEsyndrome.
with asthma, although one study (Corcoron et al.
is a rare condition ofunknown actiology,although it
1995)reported eosinophilia in only 5 of 23 cats with
has bccn reporicd in dogs with hcartworm disease
asthma.Mild to moderate eosinophilia associated
(Confer et al.,1983;Calvert,1987).
withchronicinflammation of theupperrespiratory
Center et al.(1990) found that chronic soft tissue
tractwas an unexpected finding by Center et al.
inflammationinvolvinga varictyoftissuesalsoseemed
(199o).The authors speculated that the presence of
to cause a mild tomoderate eosinophilia incats,and
eosinophilia may have bccn a reflection of localiza
that cats with lower urinary tract inflammation un-
tion of inflammation to mucous membranes exposed
cxpectedly had eosinophilia of similarmagnitude.
to the environment.
Pyometra in both dogs and cats has becn cited as a
Pulmonary infiltratcs with eosinophils (PIE),more
cause of eosinophilia by many authors (Prasse et al.,
commonly seen in dogs than cats,is an all inclusivc
1987;Bush,1991;Young,1997),although eosino-
phrase for any disease process with radiographic evi
philia isnotexpected tobetheprimary or only change
dence of infiltrative lung disease and bloodeosino-
in the leucogram.
philia andl/or eosinophilic inflammation found on
cytological assessment of a transtracheal wash or
Miscellaneous conditions
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid.Blood eosinophilia is
Figure 8.9 lists neoplasia-related and miscellaneous
not always present in PIE.Underlying causes include
conditions associated with eosinophilia.Eosinophilia
environmental allergens, drugs,parasites,bactrial
associatedwithtumours,hypereosinophilicsyndrome
and fungalinfections,neoplasia andidiopathic causes.
and eosinophilicleukacmiaisrarcly secn,howeverthe
Heartworm infection is the most common cause in
magnitude of the eosinophilia may be striking.
Dog
Cat
One case: fibrosarcoma (Couto, 1984)
One case each: basal cell tumour, gastric carcinoma,
myxosarcoma,osteosarcoma,pilomatrixoma,renal
carcinoma, salivary carcinoma, two poorly defined
tumours (Center et al.,1990)
One case: mammary carcinoma (Losco, 1986)
One case each: squamous cell carcinoma, sweat gland
adenocarcinoma (Couto,1985)
One case: transitional cell carcinoma (Sellon et al.,
1992)
Disseminated mast cell neoplasia (Klausner and
Mast cell neoplasia; disscminatcd and visceral (Center et
Perman, 1981; O'Keefe et al., 1987; Pollack et
al.,1990; Bortnowski and Rosenthal, 1992; Peaston
al.,1991)
and Griffey, 1994)
Lymphoma (Prasse et al., 1987; Center et al., 1990)
Mycloid lcukaemia (Latimer,1995)
Two cases: myeloproliferative disease (Center et al.
1990)
Suspected eosinophilic leukacmia (Moulton and
Eosinophilic leukaemia (Swenson et al., 1993;
Harvey, 1990; Ndikuwera et al., 1992; Jensen
Huibregste and Turner, 1994)
and Nielsen,1992)
Suspected hypereosinophilic syndrome (Goto et
Hypereosinophilic syndrome (Hendrick, 1981;
al., 1983; Balmer-Rusca and Hauser, 1993)
Huibregste and Turner, 1994; Plotnick, 1994;
Wilson et al., 1996)
Lymphomatoid granulomatosis (Lucke et al.,
Experimental felineleukaemia virus associated-
1979; Postorino et al., 1989; Berry et al., 1990)
leukaemoidreaction/leukaemia(Lewis etal.,1985)
?Hyperthyroidism (Center et al., 1990; Thoday and
Mooney, 1992)
Hypoadrenocorticism (Hardy,1995;Peterson e
Hypoadrenocorticism (Peterson et al., 1989;Hardy,
al.,1996)
1995)
Experimental rhlL-2 administration (Latimer,
ExperimentalrhIL-2 administration(Latimer,1995)
(1995)
?Oestrus (Schalm et al.,1975)
Pemphigus foliaceus, cutaneous lupus erythematosus,
German Shepherd Dog (Bush, 1991; Lilliehook,
chronic renal failure, cardiac disorders, panleucopenia,
1997)
feline infectious peritonitis, immune haemolytic
anaemia (Center et al., 1990)
Methimazole (and potentially carbimazole) therapy
(Peterson et al,1988;Feldman and Nelson,1996)
Figure8.9:Neoplasticandmiscellaneousconditionsthathavebeenassociatedwitheosinophiliainthedogand cat.
(Modifiedfrom Latimer(1995) with permission).
Eosinophilia
135
A. retrospective study of 16 dogs with systemic
 Eosinophilia has been reported in 4-30% of dogs
(disseminated) inastocytosis documented only two
with hypoadrenocorticism (Hardy. 1995). Stressed
dogs with eosinophilia (O'Keefe et al., 1987). Dis-
dogs with adequate adrenocortical function usually
scminated masl cell ncoplasia was associated with
exlibit a strcss leucograrm (mature ncutrophilia, lym-
mild to moderate eosinophilia in the study by Center et
phopenia and eosincpenia) as a result of glucocorti-
al. (1990). Cutaneous mast cell tumours were not
coid action. Eosinophilia or normal numbers of
associatcd with eosinophilia in this study of cals and
eosinophils in a stresscd palient (a revcrsc 'stress
have not previously been reported to be associated
leucogram') suggests the possibility of hypoadreno-
with eosinophilia (Buerger and Scott, 1987). Profound
corticism. Peterson et al. (1996) reported that 56.5% of
cosinophilia was present in two cats (11.5 aud 88.3 x
225 dogs with hypoadrenocorticism had cosinophil
o s s m sd e io
counts within the reference range. Only 1 of 10 cats
tumours (Bortnowski and Rosenthal, 1992). Another
with primary hypoadrenocorticism exhibited an eosino-
case report (Peaston and Griffey, 1994) reported pro-
philia in one study (Peterson et al., 1989).
found cosinophilia (45.6 x 10/1) in a cat with a visceral
Many authors have suggcstcrf that oestras is a cause
 mast cell tumour. Six cats with eosinophilia (range
of eosinophilia in the dog (Schalm et al., 1975; Jain,
1.6-3.2 x 107/) in thie study by Center et al. (1990) had
1993; Bush, 1991; Young, 1997) but the evidence for
lymphoma, aurl two cats with alimentary lyinphoma in
his asscciation scems to be purcly anecdotal. In thc rat,
 another report had profound eosinophilia (>60 x 10%/1)
uterine (but not blood) eosinophilia may be induced by
(Prasse et al., 1987). In all of these cases (as well as the
oestrogen (Bustos et al., 1995). Oestrogen also causes
misccllancous tumours from the study by Center et al.
accumulation of cosinophils in thc uterus of other
listcd in Figure Bi.3) it is possilble that the cbservcd
species (micc, cows, hamshcrs, humans) (Tchernitchin
cosinophilia represented a paraneoplastic syndrome,
et al., 1989), although to the author's knowledge no
but there was no conclusive proof of this hypothesis.
similar investigations have been conducted in the dog.
Hypereosinophilic syiriroue (HES) in cats and
A few aulors, including Bush (1991), havc noted
humans is characterized by a persistent and profound
that some large breed dogs (especially German Shep-
eosinophilia of prolonged duration and unkiown aetiol.
herd Dogs) exhibit eosinophilia, a finding which has
ogy, bone marrow hypcrplasia of cosinophil precursors
hcen regarded as a normal brccd characteristic. Bash
(1991) suggests that there may be a breed predisposi-
(Huibregste and Turner, 1994). Some authors speculate
tion to eosinophilic disorders in the Gerrman Shepherd
that eosinophilic enteritis, HES and eosinophilic leuk-
Dog given the higher incidence of eosinophilic enter-
aemuia inthe cat arc parts of aspectrum ufthe same discasc
itis, myosit is and panoslcilis, alnl has proposed that the
(Hendrick, 1981). HES is a diaguosis of exclusion, and
finding of eosinophilia in apparently normal dogs
differentiation from eosinophilic leukaenmia is controver-
could reflect subclinical disease. Lilliehook (1997)
sial. HES has not been adequately ckcumented inthe dog
documenlcdl significant differences in the numbers of
(Goto et al., 1983; Balmer-Rusca and Hauser, 1993).
eosinophils in the blood of normal German Shepherd
 In the few reports of eosinophilic leulmaemia in tlie
Dogs (mean of 0.85 x 10"/l) versus nornal Beagles
cat, one cat was naturally infected with feline leukae-
(0.36 x 10/l). Although this finding may be associated
mia virus (FeLV) (Swenson et al.. 1993) and the
with breed, in an individual animal othcr causes of
renmainder were negative for FeLV or had not been
eosinophilia should be considered.
tested. Only rare cases of suspected cosinophilic leu-
kaermia in the dog have been reported (Moulton and
APPROACH TO THE INVESTIGATION
Harvey, 1990; Ndikuwera et al., 1992). Jensen and
OF EOSINOPHILIA
Neilsen (1992) reporled an *cosinophilic lcukaemoid
reaction' of umknown aetiology in a dog, Although
Eosinophilia may be cletected either on profiles per-
eosinophilic leukaemia was suspected, the lack of
formed on sick animals as part ofa diagnostic investiga-
diagnostic criteria for cosinophilic leukacmia in the
tion or on apparently healthy animals undergoing routine
dog precluded a definitive dliagnosis in this case.
 hcalih screening. Eosinophiia may or may not be the
The study by Center et al. (1990) included three
main or most significant change present. It is assunecl
 hyperthyroid cats with mild eosinophilia. Tlhis was an
that before taking a blood sample, the clinician has
unexpected finding, particularly as prcvious reporis
alrcady obtained a history and conducted a thorough
have stated that 15% of cats with hyperthyroidism
physical examination. Information derived from the
 exhibiteosinopenia (Feldman and Nelson, 1996). How-
history and physicalexamination may provide evidence
cver, a report describing features of 126 hyperthyroid
for the causc of the eosinophilia or may dircct the
cats in the United Kingdom found that 12 of 57
 clinician along a specific path of further investigation.
(21.1%) cats in which a CBC was performed exhibited
 If, however, no obvious abnormalities that might ex-
eosinophilia (Thoday and Mooncy, 1992). The authors
 plain the eosinophilia are detected, an organized search1
did not, however, indicate whether other causcs of
for the most common disordlers associatcd with eosino-
eosinophilia had been ruled out.
philia is warranted.
136Manual of Caninc and Feline Haematology and TransfusionMedicine
As diseases of the skin orgastrointestinal orrespira-
Suspected hypoadrenocorticism maybe confirmncd by
tory tracts aremost commonly associatedwith eosino-
performing an adrenocorticotrophin stimulation test.If
philiaitseemslogicaltoinitiallyinvcstigatethesebody
these procedures do not provefruitful, a search for the
systems and torule outcommonparasitic and allcrgic
lesscommonneoplastic,inflammatory andinfectious
processes.The skin is easily evaluated for the presence
diseases is in order(Center et al.,1990;Tvcdlen,1994).
of ectoparasites (fleas),signs of hypersensitivity (FAD,
There are no well established‘rules’to indicate
atopy,foodallergy,osinophilic granuloma complex)
when it is necessary to assess abone marrow aspirate
and masses.Fine needle aspirates of skin masses should
or core biopsy in the investigation of cosinophilia.
be examined cytologically.Histopathological assess-
Common sense,however, would suggest that the as-
ment of biopsies of skin lesions may alsoberequired
sessment ofbone marrow is most useful as part of a
(Figure 8.10).The gastrointestinal tract may be evalu-
complete diagnostic investigation of a persistent un-
ated initially by repeated faecal examinations. If
explained eosinophilia,in helping to distinguish be-
cndoparasitcs or cctoparasites are present, the
tween rare causes of eosinophilia(HES,eosinophilic
haemogramshouldbcrcpcatedafterappropriatetherapy
leukaemia,eosinophilia associated with neoplasia),
to assess for the persistence of eosinophilia.As stated
and in further assessing a profound cosinophilia.As
parasitism may not necessarily be the cause of the
stated, the diagnoses of both HES and eosinophilic
cosinophilia.Biopsicsof thegastrointestinal tractmay
leukaemia are diagnoses ofexclusion.Differentiation
be necessary toconfirm orexclude eosinophilic inflam-
ofthe two conditions is controvcrsial inhumans,as it
matory diseases of the gastrointestinal tract. The re-
is in cats.A review by Huibregste and Turner (1994)
spiratory tract may be assessedradiographically,via
suggestsseveraldifferentiatingcriterianthecat.Diff-
cytological assessment of a transtracheal wash Figure
cntiation,however,may be an academic pursuit as
8.11) or bronchoalveolar lavage fluid as well as a
both diseases hold a grave prognosis.
Bacrimann faecal examination.Testingfor heartworm
The clinician must always take into consideration
should bc pcrformcd in areas endemie for this parasite.
the effect of corticosteroid therapy on eosinophil num-
bers.A single dose ofcorticostcroid in an animal with
an eosinophil count within the reference range pro-
duces aneosinopenia within1 to6hours,depending on
dose and route of administration (Latimcr,1995).
Eosinophil concentrations return to normal within 24
hours of a single treatment withmostcorticosteroid
preparations (Duncan et al.,1994: Tvedien, 1994;
Latimer,1995)and 2 to3 days after endinglong term
(10 days or more) corticosteroid therapy(Duncan et
al.,1994).An animal with a condition associatcd with
eosinophilia that is concurrently stressed or bcing
treatedwithcorticosteroidsexhibitsaneosinophilcount
which is a reflection of the process that has thegreater
effect at the time.
Figure 8.10:Histological section of a cutaneous lesion ina
catwitheosinophilic plaque(eosinophiliccollagenolytic
granuloma).Largenumbers of eosinophils are present in
REFERENCES
the dermis.Haematoxylinandeosin.(Courtesy ofDrM.Gains.)
Balmer-Rusca Fand HauserB(1993)Casereport:persistenteosinophilia
ina dog.Hypereosinophilic syndrome?Kleintierpraxis 38,137-
138
BarsantiJRandPrcstwoodAK(1983)Parasiticdiscascoftherespiratory
tract.In:CurrentVeterinaryIherapyVill,SmaltAnimalPractice,
ed.RWKirk,pp.241-246.WBSaunders,Pliladelphia
Berry CR,Moore PF,Thomas WP, Sisson D and Koblik PD (1990)
Lymphomatoidgranulomatosisinsevendogs(1976-1987）.Journal
ofVeterinaryInternalMedicine4,157-16
Bortnowski HB and Rosenthal RC (1992) Gastrointestinal mast cell
tumours and eosinophilia intwo cats.Journal of the American
Animal Hospital Association28,271-275
Compendium of Contimuing Education for the Practicing
Veterinarian14,585-596
Buerger RG and Seott Dw(1987) Cutaneousmastcell neoplasia ineats:
14cases(1975-1985).JournaloftheAmericanVeterinaryMedical
Association190,1440-1444
Burrows CF,Batt RMand Sherding RG(1995)Diseases of the small
Figure8.11:Cytological preparationofa transtracheal
intestine.In:TextbookofVeterinary InrnalMedicine,4"edn,d.
washshowing increased numbers of eosinophils.
SJ Etinger and EC Feldman, pp. 1169-1231.WB Saunders,
Wright-Giemsa.(Courtesy of Dr C.Belford.)
Philadclphia
Eosinophilia 
137
Bush BM (1991) Wnite bloud cells. Ir: thuerprerrion of Laborarory
Rests forSmallAai Clinsed.BMBush,pp.132-195.
exemplified by six cats with cosinophilic cmeritis.Vererhay
Blackwell Scientific, Oxforl
Pathology 18, 188-200
Bustos S, Soto J, Buzzane N. Vasquez V and Tehenichin AN
Hendrix CM, Blagburn BL and Lindsay DS (1987) Whipwomns und
(1995) Effect of p,p-DDT and estrogen on the presence in the
intestinal threadwomns. Veterinary Climics of Norrh America 17,
circulation and degranulation of blood cosinoplil leukocytes.
1355-1375
Butierin of Environnenat Conuaminarion and Toxicoiogy 55,
Hinth RS and Hottcndotr GH (1973) Lcsions produced by a new
309-315
langworm in beugle dogs. Veteriry Putrotogy 10, 385-407
Calvert CA (1987) Seleeted complications and scquelae of canine
Hit ME( 1997) Flukes, liveraud pancreaic.Ir: The S Miure Veterinary
lealwomdiseseeurVeeruaryMediemdSrgery
CosCaiandFelie,dsPTillyandFWKSt,p.604.
(Small Animal) 2, S6-63
Wilhiams and Wilkins, Baltinore.
Camphell BG (1991) Tricheris and other trichelinoid neuatodes of
Huibregste BA and Tumer IL (1994) Hypereosinophilie synclrome and
dlogs and cats in the United States.Conpendi f Continring
cosinoplilicleukemia:acomparisonof22hypereosinophiliccas.
Educarion for rhe Practicing Vererinterian 13, 769..778
Jowrngt ofthe American Animat Hospiral Associarion 3n, 591-599
 (  s  s   
JaiuNC(1993)ThecosinoplilsIn:EssenialsofVeerinaryllemaology.
cOnditions of the feline cornea.Vererinary Aua32,83-96
edl. NC Jtin, pp. 247-257. Lca and Fcbiger, Pliladelphia
Center SA (198s) Feline dliseases, purt Il. Proceedings of the 52
Jensen ALanNielsen OL(1992) Eosinophiic lenkenoid rcaction 
AnatMetingtheAmerinArimlHospiAssocitionp.
a dog.fournnf of Small Aniwal Practice 33, 337-340
199-207
Center SA and Randolpl JF (1991) Eosinoplhitia. In: Cousufafions iat
in Veterinary Medicine and Surgery (Smalt Animal) 7, 145-152
Feline lternat Medicine, ed.R August,Pp. 319-358. WBSamers,
Jotnson KA, Watson ADI and Page RC (1995) Skeletal diseases. In:
Philadelphia
TexbookfVereriryeraMedie edJEtng
Center SA, Randolph JF, Erb IN and Reiter S (1990) Fosinophilia in
and EC Feldman, pp. 2077-2103. WB Saunders, Philadelphin
thc cat:aretrospective study of312cascs(1975-1986）.Journa/Qf
Klausner JS and Peman V (198 1) Non-cutancoussystemic mastocytosi3
the Americen Anima! Hospitat Associarion 26, 349-358
and nast cellleukeniaiadog-cuse report udliterature revicw.
Cobl MA and Fisher MA (19y2) Crenosoma valpis infection in a dog.
Jourmai ofte Anerieat Animal Hospitat Associanion 17, 361-368
Veterirory Reeord 130, 452
Latimer Ks (I995) Leukocytes in health and disease. In: Texrouk o
Collins BK, Swausou JF aad MacWilliarus PS (1986) Eosinoplilie
Veterhary fnterrei Medicine, 4h ed, ed. SI Elinger and EC
keratitis and keratoconjunctivitis in a cat. Modern Veterinary
Feldman, pp.1892-1929.WB Saunders,Philadelpha
Practice 67, 32-35
Latimcr KS and Rakich PM (1989) Clinical interpretation of leukocyte
ConferAW,QualtsCW Ir,MacWiliams PS ani Root CR(1983)Four
responses. Vererinary Clinics of North America (Suall Auma!
Pracricey 19, 637-668
Cornell Vererinarian 73, 41-51
Leib MS und Matz ME (1995) Discascs of thc large intestine. In:
Corcoran BM, Foster DJ and Luis Fuentes V (1995) Feline astiuma
Tetok fVereriry ernMeei, e,d.SEtinger
and EC Feldaran, Pp. 1232-1260. WB Saunders, Philadelplia
culs. Jourut of Snait Animat Praerice 36, 481-488
LevitanDMMatxME,FindlenCSandFisterRD(196)Treatment f
Couto CG (1984) Tumour associatedeosinoplilia inadog.Jounat of
Oserrtsosleri infestatianina dog-caserepart and literulure review.
the Anerican Veteriry Medieat Association 184, 837
JorrnalofteAmericanAnmalHospitaiAssocieton32435-438
Cotn CG (1985) Hematologic abnormalities in snall aninal cuncer
Lewis MG, Kocila GJ, Rojko JL, StiffM, Habernan AB, Velicer
patients, parl H. White blood cell, platelel audl coubined
LV andOlscn RG(1985) Retroviral-associatcdcosinophilic leukemia
abnormalities. Compendin of Coutiaing Educaion for the
in thc cat, American Joumal of Veterinary Researcht 46, 1066-
Practicing Vererimarian 7,21-27
1070
Craig TM (1984) Hepatozconosis. In: Clinicai Microbiology_and
Lilliehook. (1997) iural variations of caninebloori lcukocyte counts.
TafectionsDiseases of theDog anCat cd.CE Greene,pp.771-
Vererinary Clitical Pathoiogy 26, I13-1 17
780.WBSauners,Philudepha
Lilliehook I,Gunnarsson L,ZakrissonGandvedtenH(2000 Diseases
Dennis JS, K1uger IM and Mullaney TP (1992) Lymphioplasnaeytic
associatedwithpronouneedeosinophiiaasyOdogn
gastrcenteris in cats: 14 cases (1985~1990).Jora! of the
Sweden. Journal ofSmall Atima!Pracrice 41, 248-253
Americanr Veterinary Medical Association 200, 1712- 1718
Losco PE (I986) Local and pcriplcral cosinophilia in a dog with
Duncan JR, Prasse KW and Malhaffey FA (1994) Leukocytes. In:
anaplastic manmary carcinoma. Veterinary Parhiology 23,536-538
Veterinary Lahoratory Medicine, 3 edn, eds. JIR Duncan, KW
Lucke VM, Kelly DF, Harrington GA, Gilbbs C and Gaskell CJ (1979)
Prasse und EA Mahaffcy, pp. 37-62. Iowa State University Press,
Lyuploumatoid grunulomatosis of the lngs in young dogs.
Ames, Iuwl
Veteriury Puhofogy 16, 405
Feldman EC and Nelson RW (1996) Feline hyperthyroidism
Madewell BR, Staanard AH,Pulley LT aud Nelson VG (1980) Oral
(thyrotoxicosis).In: Canine and Feline Endocrinoiogy and
cosinophilic granulona in Sihenian Husky dngs. Jourrat of dhre
Reproducrion, 2d edn, ed.EC Feldman and RWNelson,pp.118-
American Veterinery AMedical Associarion 177, 701-703
166. WB Saumters, Philudelphia
McEwen BI (1992) Eosinophils: a review. Vererinary Research
Gibbons LM, Jacubs DE and Pikingtun JG (1938) Strongyloides inl
Coruumicarions 16, 11-44
British greyhounds. Veterinry Record 122, 114
Moulton JE and Harvey JW (1990) Tumors of the lynphoid and
GilnourMA,MorganRVandMooreFM(1992)Masticalorynyopathy
hematopoicticissucs. In: Tiuors of Domestic Antmais, 3* edn, ed.
in tlc dog: a retrospective study of 18 cases. Jorna? of ie
JE Moulton and JW Harvey, Pp.231-307. University of Califomia
Americm Arimal Hospitat Associarion 28, 300-306
Pruss, Berkeley
Glaze MB (1982) Feline cosinophilic keratitis. Southvestern
Ndlikuwer l, SunitliDA, Obwelo MI an Masvingwe C [ 1992) Chronie
Vererinarian 35, 35-37
granulocytic leukemia/eosinophilic leukemia in u dog? Jourutl of
Goto N, Kawamura M, Inoue M and Sato A (1983) Pathology of two
Small Animal Prnctice 33,553-557
casesofcanincdisscninatcd hypercosinoplilicdiseaseJapanesc
O'Donnell JA II and Hayes KC (1987) Nutrition and muritional
Journat of Veerinary Science45,305312
disorders. In: Diseases of the Cat. Medicine and Surgery, ed. J
Grcene CE and Chandler FW (1984) Pneunocystosis. lr: Clinica!
Holzworth, pp 15-39. wB Saundcrs, Philadelphia
Microbiology and Infecrions Diseases ofthe Dog aud Cat, ed. CE
O'Keefe DA, Couto CG, Binlke-Schiwark C und Jacobs RM (1987)
Greene,p.859.WB Sauders,Philadelpa
Systenie mmstocylosis in 16 dogs. Journal of Veterinary fmterna!
Guilford WG (1996) Idiopathic inflammatory bowel (iseases. In:
Medieine 1, 75--30
Stranbeck's Small Animal Gasroenteroiogy,3edn,ed.DR
Parsons JC (1987) Ascarid infectious of cats and dogs. Veterinery
Clnics of North America 17, 1307-1399
Philadelphia
 Parsons JC, Bowman DP and Grieve RB (I989) Fathological and
IIardyRM(1995)Hypoadrenal gland disease.In:TexrbookofVeerinry
InteraiMedicine,4ed,ed.SJ Etinger and ECFeldman,Pp
Taxocara canis larvac. Imernanionat Jouratfor Parasitoiogy 19,
1579- 1502. WB Saunders, Philadelphria
479-488
Harl JR,Shaker E,Patnaik AK and Garvey MS (1994)Lynphocytic-
PallesonMW,GibbsC,WottonPRandDayMJ(1993)Angiostrongyls
plas1macytic cntcrocolitis incats:60cascs (1988-1990).Journa1of
yasorww infection in seven dogs. Veterimary Recored 133, 565-
teAnericarAninalHospitaiAssocicton30505-514
570
IawkinsE(1995)Diseases of1helowerrespiratorysysten.In:Texrbook
 Peaston AE and Griffey SM (1994) Visceral mast cell tumour with
fVererryMedine4ddSIEinger an E
cosinophilia and eosinophilic peritoncal and plcural effusion in a
Fclduan,pp767-811.WB Saunder,Philadelphia
cut.Arsrratian Veteritary Jorrat71,215-217
 138  Manual of Canine and Feline Haematology and Transfusion Mcdicine
Pelerson EW, Bar SC, Gould WJ 11, Beck KA and Bowman DD (1993)
Scoft DW, Miller WH and Griffin CE (1995a) Lanuuuologie skin
Useoffenbendazole for lreutment of Crenosona veipis infcction
discase, In: Snalt Arima! Dermarology 5* edn, exl. Dw Scon, WH
ina dog.Journt of the Amerieun Veierinery Medicut Asseciarion
202, 1483-1484
Seott DW, Miler WH and Grilfin CE (1995b) Miscellaneous skin
Petcrson ME (1995) Hyperhyroid diseascs.1n: Texrbook of Veterinary
Miller and GE Griffin, pp. 902-955. WB Sauders, Philadelphia
1466-1486. WB Saunders, Philudelphia
Selln RK,Rotan,Joran HL,WelsMRSisu PM,n
Peterson ME, Greeo DS and Ortlh DN (I989) Primary
P and Kcene BW (1992) Hypereosinophilia associted with
bypoadrenncaticisn in ten cats. Jourut ofVeterinary Interngl
ransitional cell careinoma in a cat.Joral of he Amerie
Medicine 3, 55-58
Vererinary Medical Axsociation 201, 591-593
Peterson ME, Kintzer PP and Hurviiz AI (1988) Mcthinmazole Ireatment
Shaw DH, Conley GA, Hogan DM and Hermey BS (t996) Eosinwhilic
0f 262 cuts with hyperthyroitism. Journai of Vererinary fmerma!
bronchitiscausedby Crenosomg vipis infection in dogs. Camacdian
Medicine2,150-157
Vereringry Jonrnal 37, 361-363
Peterson ME, KurtzerPPand Kass PH(1996)Pre-treatmentclinical und
Slaughter JB, Billups LHand AcorGK (1988) Canine heterobillarziasis.
Compendiumi for Contirnting Educarion for the Practicitg
(1979-1993). Journal of the American Veterinary Medicol
Veterinarian 10, 606-612
Associarion 208, 85-91
SmithMO (1089)1diopathicnyositidcsindogs.Sentinars in Veterinary
Platnick A (1904) A easc rcpurt: hypereosinophilic syndromc in a cat.
FelinePraeriee22,28-31
Meelieine end Srrgery (Sumatl Animat) 4, 156-160
PollackMI, FlandersJAandJohnson RC(1991) Disseminated maliguant
Swenson CL, Carothers MA, Wellman ML and Kociba GJ (1993)
mastocytoma ina dog.Jorai of the American Animal Hospitt
Eosinophilic leukemia in t cat witt naturaly acquired feline
Jeukeniu virusinfection,Joumal ofheAmericanAnimalHospia
Associarion27,435-440
Poslorinu NC, Whcclcr SL, Park RD, Powers BE and Withrow SJ
Associciont 29, 497-501
[1989) Asyutrorue resermbling lynphomatoid granulomatosis in
SevninarsinVeterinary Melicine und Surgery (SmallAnimal)6,
the dog.Journal of Veterinary fteraal Medicine 3, 15-19
      a  
278-285
Hematologyof normal cats andcharacteristicresponsestoisease.
Tchermitchin AN, Mena MA, Soto J andl Undn C (1989) The role of
In:DiseasesoftheCat:MediineandsurgeryedJHolzworhp
ensinophilsintheactionofestrogesandotherhormones.Medical
739-807. wB Saunders, Plhiladciphia
Science Research I7, S-10
Thoday KLandMooney CD (1992)Historicalluicaland aboratry
Prestwood AK, Greene CE, Mahaffey EH und Burgess DE (1981)
Experimental canine angiostrangylosis I. Patlologie
fcatures of 126hyperthyroid cats. Veierinary Record131,257-264
manifestations. Journai af the American Aninal Hospiut
Torgerson PR,McCanhy Gand Donnely WIC(1997) Filaroides hirthi
Associario 17, 491-497
yerminous pneumonia in a West Highland White tertier bred in
Ransuy IK, Fostcr A, McKay J and Herrtage MC (1997) Pneuumocysris
[reland.JournalofSmall AnimalPractice38,217-219
carii peuanonia intwoCavalierKing Charlesspanicls.Veterinary
Record 140, 372-373
Diaguosis by Laboratory Methods, 2 etn, ed. MD Wiltard,
Rawlings CA and Calveri CA (1995) Hearlworm diseuse. In: Tertbook
H Tvedten and GH Turnwall, pp. 53-70. WB Saunders.
Of Veterinary fnternat Medicie, 4* edu, ed. SI Eltinger and EC
Philadelphia
Fcldman,pp.1046-I067WBSaunders,Philadepia
Willemse A (1984) Canine atopic disease-investigation oeosinoplhilia
Roudebush P(1995) Adverse rcactions to fcods: allergics. In: Texrbook
and the nasal mucosa.Anmerican Journal ofVeterinary Research
of Veterinary Interat Mediene, h edn, cd. SJ Ertingcr and EC
45,1867-1869
Wilscn SC, Thomson-KerrKand Houston DM (1996) Hypereosinophilic
Schalm OW,Jain NC and CarrolI EJ (1975) The leukocytes: structure,
syndrume ina cat. Canadiar Veterinary Jornai 37, 679~680
kinetics, function and clinical interpretation. In: Vererinary
Young KM (1997) Eosinophila and basophilia. In: The 5 Miute
Henalogy ed.OwSehal,NCJanandEJ Carrlp.
Veterinary Consut-Canine ad Fetine, ed. LP Tilley and FWK
471-536. Lea anc Febiger, Philacelplkia
Smilh,pp. 222-223. Williams and Wikins,Baltimore
：
..
CHAPTER EIGHT
(ili) Leukaemia
Joanna Morris and Jane Dobson
INTRODUCTION
extramedullary haematopoiesis in the adult in
times of excessive demand. An understanding of
This chapter is concerned with the diagnosis and
leukacmia rcquires an appreciation of the structure
management of neoplastic conditions of the haemato-
and function of bone marrow (Figures 8.12 and
poietic system (leukaemia). Leukaemia is not a
8.13).
common diagnosis in small animal practice, how-
 It is generally accepted that all haematopoietic
ever, increasing use of haematological evaluation.
cell lincages arc rlerived from pluripotent stem
of the sick patient has led to an appreciation that
cells sited in the bone marrow. Thiese give rise to
leukaemia is a significanl causc of inorbidity and
differentiating progenitor cells, which divide and
mortality in cats and dogs. Leukaemia encompasses
rliffcrentiatc into functional mature blood cells. In
 a complex group of diseases, some of which are not
the early stages of haeinatopoiesis the stem and
well characterized or understoorl in vctcrinary medi-
progenitor cells remain relatively undifferentiated
cine. This chapter addresses principally those
antl retain thc capacily for cell division and multipli-
neoplastic conditions of white blood cells,since those
cation. As the cells become more differentiated
of red blood cells (e.g. polycythacmia vera) are
and committed to a certain cell lineage, the capacity
covered elsewhere,
for replication is progrcssively diminished and
ultimately is lost in the malure ccll lines seen in
Leukaemia
the peripheral blood. Hence for each cell lineage
 Leukaemia is a progressive malignant dliscase
there is a pyramidal arrangement of cells within
of the bone marrow, characterized by abnormal
the bone marrow with divirling undifferentiated cells
 proliferation and development of haematopoietic
at the apex and non-dividing mature cells at the
cells and their precursors. In most inslanccs,
base (Figure 8.14). It is not fully understood whether
excessive numbers of abnormal neoplastic cells
the pluripotent haematopoictie slcm cclls give rise
to lymphoid precursors or whether lymphoid cells
bone marrow. This may be accompanied by a
have a separate stem cell to the granulocyte/mono-
reduction in the number of normal blood cells
cyte lines. Lymphocytes releascd from thc bonc
(cylopenia), as the bone marrow becomes over-
marrow may require processing by other lymphoid
whelinerd by thc ncoplastic cclls.
tissues before they are capable of assuming the
functions of mature T and B cells.
Aleukaemic leukaenia (smouldering
The proliferation and differeutiation of haeimato-
leukaemia)
poietic cells is controlled by mumerous growth factors
 On occasion, the neoplastic process is containedi
(Figure 8.15). The erythroid compartment is control
within the bone marrow and is not accompanied by
led by the circulating glycoprotein hormone, erythro-
excessive numbers of abnormal circulating cells.
poietin, which is produced in the kidney in response
The haemograin will reflect the ongoing disease
 i  siu   xo ui sao o
process in the marrow in the form of non-regenera-
in the bone inarrow. The myeloid compartment is
tive cytopenias.
controlled by locally produced regulatory molecules
called colony-stimulating factors (CSFs), which are
produced by a variety of cell types including
THE HAEMATOPOIETIC SYSTEM
lyrphocytes, monocytes, macrophages, fibroblasts
and endothelial cells. These act at the level of the
The principal organ that forms blood in the adult
commiltcd progenitor cells but. can also affect the
animal is the red bone marrow. Liver, spleen and
function and survival of mature cells. Iiterleukin-3
peripheral lymphoid tissues play a rolc in haemato-
(IL-3) and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulat-
 poiesis in fetal development and act as sites of
ing factor (GM-CSF) have a broad spectrum of
140Manual of Canine andFelineHaematology and TransfusionMedicine
Figure 8.12:
Schematicdiagram
depicting the
structure of bone
Bcells
Plasma cells
marrowand
Pre-Bcell
haematopoiesis.
The different cell
lineagesrecognized
Lymphopoietic
are progeny of
pturipotent stem
cells.
Pre-Tcell
Pluripotent
stem cell
Monoblast
Monocyte
Mycloid
stem cell
Colony-/blast-
foming units
Myeloblast
Neutrophil
V
Eosinophil
C
Megakaryoblast
Megakaryoeyte
Platelets
Proerythroblast
Red blood cell
activity,whereasgranulocyte colony-stimulating fac-
tor (G-CSF) and macrophage colony-stimulating
factor (M-CSF) are lineage restricted.Megakaryocyte
differentiation and platelet production are controlled
by thrombopoietin,alsoknown as megakaryocyte
growth and development factor (MGDF).
Neoplastic transformation may occur at several
levels of this proliferative/maturation process.Trans-
formation of stem cells or earlyprecursors causes a
massive proliferation of undifferentiated cells that are
incapableofmaturation,rcsultingin acute leukaemia.
Figure8.13:Photomicrographof normal canine bone
Transformation of lateprecursor cells causes an over-
marrow showing differentcellinesat various stages
production ofmature differentiated cellsresulting n
ofdifferentiation.A megakaryocyte(arrowed）is
notableinthelowerrightquadrantofthepicture.
chronic leukaemia (Figurc 8.16).
Leukaemia 141
Myeloblast
Promyelocyte
Myelocyte
Metamyelocyte
Band neutrophil
Segmented nculrophil
Figure8.14:Schematicdiagramofnormalmaturationprocessofbonemarrowshowingpvramidalarrangement,withthe
dividing undifferentiated cells at the apex andnon-dividingmature cells atthebase.
Haematopoietic growth factor
Target cells
Interleukin-3
Haematopoietic stem cells
Progenitors of all cell lineages (except lymphoid)
Mature mast cells, megakaryocytes, macrophages,
eosinophils, basophils
Interleukin-5
B and T lymphocytes
Eosinophil progenitors
Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor
Progenitor and mature neutrophils, eosinophils
and macrophages
Erythroid and megakaryocyte progenitors
Antigen-presenting dendritic cells
Granulocytc colony-stimulating factor
Progenitor and mature neutrophils
Macrophage colony-stimulating factor
Progenitor and mature macrophages
Progenitor osteoclasts
Microglial cells
Cells of female reproductive tract
Erythropoietin
Erythroid progenitors and early erythroblasts
Thrombopoietin(megakaryocytegrowth and
Megakaryocyte progenitors
development factor)
Figure8.15:Haematopoieticgrowthfactors.
142Manual of Canine and FelineHaematology andTransfusion Medicine
ACUTELEUKAEMIA
CHRONICLEUKAEMIA
Myeloblast
Promyelocyte
Myelocyte
Metamyelocyte
Band neutrophil
Segmented
neutrophil
Figure8.16:Schematic diagramofbonemarrow depictingthe difference herweenacuteandchronicleukuemiainlevelof
transformationandoutcome.Inacuteleukaemia,transformationofearlyprecursorsresultsinumassiveproliferationof
differentiated cells.
CLASSIFICATIONOFLEUKAEMIA
Acute leukaemias
Acute leukaemias are aggressive,rapidly
Different types of leukaemia are recognized accord-
progressing, conditions characlcrized by exccs-
ing to the cell lineage involved.The mostcommon
sive numbers of abnormal undifferentiated or
types of leukaemia are listed in Figure 8.17. Other
blast’ cells in both the bone marrow and peri-
extremely rare forms of leukaemia include eosino
philic and basophilic lcukaemia (variants of
regenerative cytopenias.
chronic granulocytic leukaemia), megakaryocytic
leukaemia andmast cell leukaemia.Another rare
Chronic leukaemias
Chronic leukaemias tend to be less aggressive than
malignant disease of the monocyte lincage,malig-
nant histiocytosis,is sometimesincluded as a type
acute leukaemias and are slowly progressing condi-
ofleukaemia.
tionscharactcrizedbyexcessivenumbersofmature
differentiated cells in the bone marrow and peri-
Myeloproliferative disease
pheral blood.This may or may not be accompanied
Myeloproliferative disease (MPD) is a general term
by cytopenia in other cell lines.If cytopenia is
used to describe all the non-lymphoid neoplastic and
prescnt it is usually less severe than that seen in
dysplastic conditions of haematopoietic cells.The
acute leukaemia.
termwasintroduced because themyeloid leukaemias
represent a constantly changing spectrum of discases,
It isimportant clinically to distinguish between
which may progress from dysplastic marrow condi-
these two forms of leukaemia as each carries a very
tions to aleukaemicleukaemias and finally to overt
different prognosis.However, the division between
leukaemia.In addition,although one particular cell
acute and chronicleukaemia isnot alwaysabsolute,
lincage may predominate at any time,a second cell
andonoccasioncasesareencountered thatshare some
lineageisoftenaffecteand,asth disease progresses,
features of each.Furthermore,there are recorded in-
transitions to other cell lineages may occur. Thus,
stances of chronic leukaemia progressing to a more
dependingonthetimeofsampling,thediagnosisofthe
acute disease (see below).
specifie cell line involved may differ.
Leukaemia 143
Myeloid
throughout the lifetime of the animal,various envi-
Granulocytic
ronmental agents can contribute toDNA damage and
Acutemyeloid leukaemia
accclerate the neoplastic progression.Experimen
(AML)
Chronic myeloid/granulocytic
tally,exposure to ionizing radiation induccs DNA
damage and causes myeloproliferative discasc in
leukaemia (CML/CGL)
dogs.There is little strong evidence to suggest that
Monocytic
Acute monocytic leukaemia
viruscsplay aroleinthe developmentof leukaemia in
(AMoL)
dogs, despite the demonstration of thc prcsence of
Mixed
Acute myelomonocytic
virus-like particles in a dog with granulocytic leuk-
leukaemia (AMML)
acmia and theisolationof anovelretrovirusfrom a
Lymphoid
dog with lymphoblastic leukaemia (Sykes et al.,
Acute lymphoblastic
1985;Safran et al.,1992).In the cat,however,the
leukaemia (ALL)
oncogenicretrovirus,FeV,is known toplay amajor
Chronic lymphocytic
leukaemia (CLL)
insertion of the provirus into the cat's genomc and
Erythroid
consequent alteration of gene function(see Chapter
Erythroid only
Erythremic myelosis (acute)
8).Bctween60%and90%of catswith LPDor MPD
are reported in the literature to be FeLV positive,
Polycythaemia vera (chronic)
although in recent years the percentage of FeLV.
Mixed
Erythroleukaemia
positive cats with lymphoma has been much lower.
Figure 8.17: Classification of the more conmon types of
Feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV) may also be
leukaemia.
involved in the development of LPD and MPD
Lymphoproliferative disease
(Gardner,1991;Hutson et al.,1991).
Lymphoproliferative disease (LPD)is the term used to
In humans,many leukaemias arisc when the
genome is disrupted by structural rearrangemcnts of
describe all the neoplastic (and dysplastic) conditions
chromosomes, for example, translocations and
arising from lymphoid cells.Because only one cell
lincage is involved there isnot the same spectrum of
insertions.In many cases,a single chromosome re
disease as seen with themyeloid leukacmias,and dys-
arrangement is identified consistently with a particu-
lar type of leukaemia.In chronic myeloid leukaemia
plastic conditions occur rarely,if at all.In addition to
acute lymphoblasticleukaemia(ALL)andchroniclym-
(CML),a translocation between chromosomes 9
phocytic leukaemia (CLL), LPD includcs lymphoma
and22leads to a shortenedchromosomc22,which
is readily identified cytogenetically and called the
andmultiplemyeloma.Inthepast,theveterinarylitera-
turc has applied the terms leukaemia, leukosis and
Philadclphia chromosome.'Many translocations
lynphoma veryloosely,without any distinction be
occurring in lymphoid leukaemias involve thc loci
encoding immunoglobulins and T-cell receplors,
tweenthedifferentdiseases.Strictlyseaking,ncoplastic
transformation of lymphoid cells in the bone marrow
and are thought to originate duringnormalmatura-
results in lymphoidleukaemia,whereas themorefamil
tion of B and T cells,as thevariousreceptorsubunits
on different chromosomes rearrange. Cytogenctic
iar form oflymphoidneoplasia,that is,lymphoma,
studies of leukaemia in the dog and cat are
arisesfrom the solid organs of thelymphoidsystem
(lymph nodes,thymus) and organs through which
limited, and although translocations have been
identified,no consistentchangeshavebeen etectd
lymphocytes normally traffic (gut,skin).Confusion
arises because lymphomamay progress to involve the
as yet (Goh et al., 1981; Grindem and Buoen, 1989;
bone marrow (stage V lymphoma),and these cases
Carter et al.,1990;Nolte et al.,1993).In the cat,
translocations occur in both FeLVpositive and
should be defined as“leukacmic lymphomas.In the
dog,onlyaround 10%of cases of lymphoma will show
FeLV negative cats, suggesting that the virus itself
is notresponsible for the chromosome alterations
boncmarrow abnormalities,but in the cat the associa-
tionbetweenlymphoma andfelincleukaemia virus
(Gulino, 1992).
(FeLV) means that bone marrow abnormalities (espe-
ciallyoftheerythroidseries)arerelativelycommon,and
it canbedifficult todistinguishbetwcenthose thatresult
GENERALAPPROACHTOTHE
LEUKAEMICPATIENT
from lymphoma and those that result from thevirus.
The diagnosis and management of the different types
AETIOLOGY
ofleukaemia areconsideredindetail below.However,
there are several features of these diseases that are
Both genetic and environmental factors are impli-
common to all,and a discussion of clinical presenta
cated in the cause of leukaemia in dogs and cats.
tion,general principles of diagnosis and managcment
Although genetic changcs can occur spontaneously
ispertinent.
144Manual of Canine andFelineHaematology and TransfusionMedicinc
Presenting signs
Underlying cause
Non-specific
Lcthargy
See text
Weakness
See text
Anorexia
See text
Weight loss
See text
Specific
Haemostatic
Swollen joints, gingival or
Thrombocytopenia, bleeding diathesis,
gastrointestinal bleeding.
disseminated intravascular coagulation or
bruising, epistaxis
hyperviscosity syndromc
Metabolic
Polydipsia, polyuria, vomiting
Hypercalcaemia or liver or gastrointestinal
infiltration
Neurological
Disorientation, cerebral
Hyperviscosity syndrome, infiltration of nervous
dysfunction, ataxia
system or intracranial haemorrhage
Ocular
Ocular lesions, sudden blindness
Hyperviscosity syndrome or ocular infiltration
Musculoskeletal
Lameness, paresis
Bone lesions (multiplemyeloma) or infiltration
of nerves
Figure 8.18:Presenting signsofleukaemia.
Clinical presentation
Clinical signs
The clinicalpresentation of leukaemia is variable
Renal
Polydipsia, polyuria
because although the neoplastic cells arise in the
bone marrow, the disease is essentially systemic,
Cardiovascular
Arrhythmias (bradycardia),
withneoplastic cells circulating in the blood and
cardiac arrest
infiltrating other organs such as the lymph nodes,
Gastrointestinal
Vomiting, anorexia,
liver and spleen.Presenting signs result either from
constipation
the effects of the expanding neoplastic cell popula-
Ncuromuscular
Muscle weakness, sluggish
tionwithininfiltrated organs or from tumour-related
reflexes
complications and paraneoplastic syndromes.The
Central nervous
Depression, stupor, coma
majority of cases show non-specific signs such as
lethargy,weakness,anorexia and weight loss,but
system
some may have additional signs relating to the
Figure 8.19:Clinical signs of hypercalcaemia.
following complications (Figure 8.18).
Haematological complications
Hypercalcaemia:Ncoplastic lyinphoid cellsmay pro-
Direct infiltration of the bone marrow by neoplastic
ducehumoralfactors/cytokinesotherthanparathyroid
cells (myelophthisis) suppresses normal haemato-
hormone (PTH)-related protein (e.g.interleukin-1,
poiesis and rcsults in anaemia,thrombocytopcnia and
tumour nccrosis factor and transforming growth fac-
neutropenia,whereas alteration of cell surface ant
tors),whichstimulate osteoclasticresorptionofbone
gens and aberrant production of antibodies from
and result in hypercalcaemia of malignancy Rosol et
neoplastic lymphoid cells canlead to immunc-mcdi-
al.,1992).Hypcrcalcacmia occursinabout 10-20%of
atedhaemolyticanaemiaand/or thrombocytopenia.
cases of lymphoid leukaemiaandmyeloma in thedog
Excessive numbers ofcellsin thecirculationcanresult
but is much less common in the cat.Hypercalcaemia
in hyperviscosity and formation of microthrombi. Dis-
hasserious systemiceffects,byreducing neuromuscu-
scminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) secondary
lar conduction and depressing the excitability of cell
to the above haematological complications is a com-
membranes.Hypercalcaemia also hasa directeffect on
mon terminalevent inleukaemia.
thekidney tubules,initially through inhibition of anti-
diurctichormone,causinginabilitytoconcentraturine.
Metabolic complications
Hypercalcaemia thus causes diuresis leading to hypo-
Infiltration of organs such as theliver may disrupt
sthenuria and severe polyuria.Dehydration rapidly
normal metabolic function and produce various
ensuesif thc animalis notable tocompensatethrough
associated signs such as vomiting,anorexia and
polydipsia.Calcium can also cause direct damage to
clotting defects. In addition, other clinical signs
the renal tubules,and the combined effects of on-
relating to metabolicupsets mayresult from accom-
going tubular damage and decreascd glomerularfil-
panying paraneoplastic syndroncs (Figures 8.19 and
tration rate due to hypovolaemia may cause
8.20).
irreversible renal failure.
Leukaemia 145
Clinical signs
Hyperviscosity
Neurological/ocular
Depression, disorientation, coma, ocular changes, sudden blindness
Cardiac
Congestive heart failure
Haemostatie
Blccding diathesis
Haematological
Epistaxis, gastrointestinal blcding, bruising, haemolyis, petechiation
Renal
Polyuria, polydipsia
Other
Pyrexia
Figure 8.20:Clinical signs of lypergammaglobulinaemia.
Hyperproteinaemia:Hyperproteinaemiaisusuallydue
diagnosis of leukaemia (Figure 8.21).Invariably a
tohypergammaglobulinaemiaresulting from aberrant
series of laboratory-bascd investigations arerequired
production of immunoglobulins by neoplastic lym-
toreach a definitive diagnosis of leukaemia and to
phoidcells,asoccursncasesomulliplemyclomaand
assess the presence and severity of disease-related
chronic lymphocyticleukaemia(CLL).Complications
complications.
associatcdwithexcessplasmaprotein concentrations
are hyperviscosity of the blood,intcrferencewith clot-
Haematology
ting factors leading to a tendency tobleed and renal
Routine haematological assessment of thepatient usu-
damagc caused by breakdown and excretion of
ally provides the first indication of leukaemia.
immunoglobulins.
Haematological abnormalitiesmay include:
Hyperviscosity: Hyperviscosity of the blood causes
sluggish circulation leading to poor oxygen transport
Cytopenia
Anacmia(usually non-regenerative)
Neutropenia
kidney and brain.Hyperviscositymay be exacerbated
Thrombocytopenia
byformalionofaggregatesormicrothrombioftumour
cells incases with extremelyhigh blood ccll counts.
Increased cell numbers
Disproportionate increase of one cellineage
Diagnosis
Abnormal cells
Inmost cases,theclinical findings on physicalexami
Early immature blood cells in the peripheral
nation of the animal will not specifically suggest a
circulation.
Clinical findings
Underlying cause
Weight loss
Cancer cachexia, gastrointestinal upsets
Pyrexia
Neutropenia,hypergammaglobulinaemia,
pyrogen release
Cardiac arrhythmias
Hypercalcaemia
Pale mucous membranes
Anaemia
Petechial haemorrhages
Thrombocytopenia
Ecchymotic haemorrhages, other evidence of bleeding
Bleeding diathesis, disseminated intravascular
coagulation
Ocular lesions (retinal detachment,tortuous retinal
Hyperviscosity syndrome, tumour infiltration
vessels, hypopyon, iris infiltration)
Neurological signs/abnormal cerebral function
Hyperviscosity syndrome, infiltration of
(disorientation, depression, stupor, paresis)
nerves/centralnervous system,intracranial
haemorrhage,hypercalcaemia
Infiltration of lymph nodes
Lymphadenopathy
Hepatosplenomegaly
Infiltration of abdominal organs, extramedullary
haematopoiesis
Lameness, skeletal pain, muscle weakness
Infiltration of joints, multiple myeloma bone
lesions, hypercalcaemia
Figure 8.21:Clinical findings ofleukaemia.
146Manual of Canine and FelineHaematology and Transfusion Medicine
Bone marrow evaluation
Diagnostie imaging
Assessment of bonemarrowisessential toconfirm the
diagnosis of leukaemia and provide information upon
Radiography and/or ulrasonography,to assess
which the prognosis and treatment strategy can be
possible neoplastic infiltration of internal organs
defined,depending on the degree of disruption of
especially the liver, spleen and lung
norimal marrowelements.
Skeletal radiographyif animal presentswith
Bone marrowmay be sampled andevaluatedin one
lameness or if mycloma is suspected.
of two ways (see Chapter 2):
Bone marrow aspirate(examined by cytology)
GENERALPRINCIPLESOF
Bone marrow biopsy (examined by histology).
MANAGEMENT
Biochemistry
Whereas some types of leukacmia prcscnt with acute
and life-thrcatening complications requiring emer-
Electrolytes,especially calcium
gency medical management,others may not require
Urea and crcatinine concentrations for renal
treatment at all.Specific treatments are detailed in the
function, especially if the animal is
following sectionsbut there are somc general princi
hypercalcaemic
ples of managerment that apply to all cases.
Hepatic enzymcs (such as alkaline phosphatase
Treatment of the leukaemic animal usually re-
and alanine aminotransferase)
quires a dual approach:supportive trcatinent of dis-
Protein (both albumin and globulin
casc-rclalcd complications (often necessitating
concentration, in ordcr to dctcet
hypergammaglobulinaemia).
lying disease.
Urinalysis
Supportive treatment
Urinalysis is espccially indicalcd in cases with hyper-
Several supportive measures may be required to cor-
calcaemia or hypergammaglobulinaemia.
rect the haematological and mctabolic conplications
oflcukaemia.
Specific evaluations
Antibiotic therapy
Serumprotein electrophoresis,to determine
Broad spcctrum bactericidal antibiotictreatmentis
nature of hypergammaglobulinacmia(may be
essential in the management of neutropenic patients
monoclonal orpolyclonal gammopathy)
where overwhelming sepsis poscs a scrious life-threat-
Haemostatic profile,including clotting time,
cning risk (Figure 8.22).
coagulation assays (one-stage prothrombin time,
OSPT; activated partial thromboplastin time,
Fluid therapy
APTT) and testsforfibrindegradationproducts
Fluids areindicated for mainicnance of the anorectic
(FDPs) if DIC is suspected.
patient and correction of fluid losses and electrolyte
Management of neutropenia
Specific details
Stop/reduce chemotherapy
If neutropenia <2 x 10°/1, stop treatment
If neutropenia 2-3 x 10/1, reduce trcatnent by at least 50%, or stop
treatment if pyrexic
Set up blood cultures and
Modify antibiotic therapy if antibiotic resistance detected
antibiotic sensitivity tests
Start broad-spectrum
Intravenous route csscntial, and continue for at least 7 days.
bactericidal antibiotics
Can use: cephalosporin or β-lactamase-resistant penicillin in
immediately
combination with gentamycin or amikacin;fluoroquinolone
derivatives such as enrofloxacin;trimethoprim-sulphamethoxazole
Supportive treatment
Intravenous fluid therapy, warmth
Prevent infection with strict asepsis
Use aseptic technique for all interventions such as blood samples
Figure 8.22:Management of neutropenia.
Leukaemia 147
and acidbase disturbances,especiallyinthemanage
Numerousprotocols that combine drugs of lifferent
ment of hypercalcaemia (Figure 8.23).
actions and with different toxicitieshavebeen usedto
treat leukaemiasin thecat and dog,andsome of these
Blood transfusionand/orblood component
are set out in detail in the following sections.For a
therapy
more detailed consideration of the principles and
Bloodandbloodproductsareindicatedinthemanage-
practice of cancer chemotherapy, see the reading list
ment ofpatients that are severely anaemic or actively
at the end of this chapter.
bleeding.
Threephases of treatment areusually defined:
Plasmapheresis
Induction: aggressive and intensive treatment,
This may be indicated in the management of
aimed ateradication of as much tumour as
hyperviscosity (Figure 8.24) and polycythaemia (see
possible in order to achieve clinicalremission
Chapter 4).
(no detectable disease)
Maintenance:less aggressive and less frequent
Specific treatment
treatment,aimed at keeping the tumour in
remission (drug therapy is tapered over a long
Chemotherapy
period but is rarely stopped altogether)
Anticancer cytotoxic drugs are traditionally used to
Rescue: recourse to aggressive treatment in the
treat leukaemia.Because of the diffuse infiltrativc
face of tumour recurrence(relapse of the
nature of the disease, radiation and surgery are rarely
disease).
indicated(althoughbonemarrow irradiation is some
timesusedbeforebone marrow transplantation in
The patient must bemonitored throughout chemo-
human patients).
therapy,notonlytoassessresponse totherapy but tobe
A large array of cytotoxic drugs is availablefrom
sure of detecting any drug-relatedcomplications at an
human medicine,and although none of these agents
early stage and therefore preventing serioussidccffccts.
are licenscd for veterinary use,thcre is considerablc
Although each drug has its own specific toxicities,
experience of the effects and actions of these agents
in the cat and dog.Most forms of leukaemia are at
and frequent haematological evaluation is vital to
lcast potcntially susceptible to sevcral cytotoxic
chcck that serious cytopenias do not develop. Many
drugs, especially the alkylating agents,
the
leukaemic patients have severe haematological abnor
antimetabolites and the anti-tumour antibiotics.
malities before commencing therapy. and the risk of
Cytoloxic drugs are given usually in combinations
drug-induced complications is therefore increased. In
rather than as single agents in order to achieve an
some cases,speciallyforacuteleukaemias,itmaye
additive tumouricidal effect and minimize toxicity.
advisable not to start chemotherapy at all.
Management of hypercalcaemia
Specific details
Restore circulating volume
Intravenous fluid therapy with normal saline (0.9%) to replace fluid
losses
Aid calciuresis
Intravenous fluid therapy with normal (0.9%) saline at 2-3 times
maintenance
Administration of frusemide at 2 mg/kg bid or tid (only after
circulating volume restored)
Administration of prednisolone at 2 mg/kg daily (only after a
diagnosis has been obtained as steroid therapy will lyse lymphoid
cells and may prevent the correct diagnosis being made)
Treat underlying disease
Specific chemotherapy
Figure8.23:Management of hypercalcaemia.
Management of hyperviscosity
Specific details
Plasmapheresis (if hyperviscosity
Remove 20 ml/kg body weight of whole bicod and replace with
severe)
either centrifuged blood cells from the patient, which have been
resuspended in crystalloid fluid or cellsfrom a suitable donor
Treat underlying diseasc
Specific chemotherapy
Figure 8.24:Management of hyperviscosity
148Manual of Canine and Feline Haematology andTransfusionMedicine
Neutropenia(neutrophil count less than3x 10/1)
ventional staining,theuseofcytochemical stains(Fig
is themost serious haematological concern because
ure 8.25),immunocytochemical stains and flow
of the risk of sepsis.Gram-negative bacteria that
cytometrynowindicate thatmyeloid leukaemiasmay
enter the circulation from the gastrointestinal tract
account forupto75%of acuteleukaemiasinboth the
are themost common source ofinfcction,although
dog and the cat (Couto, 1992; Vernau and Moore,
intravenous catheters,urinarycathetersorskinwounds
1999).Affectedanimalsareyoungtomiddle agedbut
may also introduce bacteria.Without neutrophils no
the affected age range is broad (1-12 years).There
pusisproduced toindicate infeetion,and sopyrexia
maybeaslight sexpredisposition toacuteleukaemia
remains the only consistent indicator of infection.
in the dog(male:female ratioof 3:2) but there is no
Anyanimal thatbecomespyrexicwhilereceiving
breed predisposition in dogs or cats.
chemotherapyshouldbeadmittedmmediatelyhave
ahacmatological evaluation and be treated accord-
Clinicalfeatures
ingly (see Figure 8.22).
Acute leukaemias are characterized by aggressive
Haematopoieticgrowth factors are potentially usc-
behaviour and rapid progression.Affected animals
ful topromotenormal marrowfunction in animals at
often present with non-specific vague signs,but signs
risk of neutropenia while receiving chemotherapy.
specific for leukaemia-associated complications are
Thistype of treatment(biological therapy)iscurrently
also common.Pallor,pyrexia,mild lymphadeno-
undergoing veterinary trials in the Unitcd States
pathy and pronounced hepatosplenomegaly arefre
(Ogilvie,1993a).Thehuman recombinantmolecules
quent clinical findings. Although lymphoid and
G-CSFand GM-CSF are commercially available but
myeloid leukaemias cannotbercliably distinguished
their use in normal dogs stimulates neutralizing anti-
on the basis of physicalexamination,subtle differ
bodyproductionagainst theforeignrotenresulting
ences doexist.Forexample,pyrexiashiftinglm-
in leucopenia.In dogsreceiving chemotherapy,how
ness (due tobone pain),ocular lesions and DIC are
ever,antibodies do not develop and the human
more common in acute myeloid leukaemia(AML)
recombinant growth factors are beneficial (Henry et
whereas neurological signs and mild lymphadeno-
al, 1998). The canine recombinant equivalents, al-
pathies are more commonwith acutelymphoblastic
though effective in increasing the numbers of
leukaemia (ALL).
granulocytes and monocytes in dogsand cals (Nash et
al.,1991;Obradovichetal.,1991,1993;Ogilvieetal.,
Diagnostic investigations
1992),are not yet commercially available.
Haematology
Haematology usually shows noticeable abnormalities
ACUTELELKAEMIA
in acute leukaemias.Ncoplastic blast cells are ob-
served in the circulation for both myeloid and lym
Epidemiology
phoidleukaemias(althoughblastcellsareoccasionally
Acute leukaemias account for less than10%of all
absent in AML) and often result in leucocytosis (Fig-
haematopoieticneoplasms in the dogand15-35%in
ures 8.26 and 8.27). White blood cell counts are
the cat,although it is difficult to obtain an accurate
usually highest in ALL (100-600 x 10°/1). Cytopenias
cstimate because of the failure to distinguish lym-
(non-regenerativeanaemia,thrombocytopenia andncu-
phoma from leukaemia inmany cases.Similarly,the
tropenia ) are prescnt in all cases, although anaemia
true proportion of myeloid and lymphoid leukaemias
and thrombocytopenia may beless severe in acute
is unclear.Although themajority of acute leukaemias
monocytic leukaemia (AMoL).Evaluation of coagu-
arelymphoidwhenclassifiedmorphologicallyby con-
lation profiles and FDPs may indicate DIC.
Type of leukaemia
Marker
Monocyte
Granulocyte
α-naphthyl
Chloroacetate
Myeloperoxidase
Lipase
Alkaline
butyrate
esterase
phosphatase
esterase
Acute myeloid leukaemia
+
X
Acute monocytic leukaemia
+
+
Acute myelomonocytic
士
±
土
leukacmia
Acutelymphoblastic leukaemia
（+)
(+）
Figure8.25:Cytochemicalstainingreactionsfor acuteleukaemias.
Leukaemia
149
Figure 8.26:
Haematocritof
dogwith
leucocytosis
showing thick
huffycoat
(arrowed).
Figure 8.29.Photomicrograph ofbonemarrow from dog
with acute lymphoblasticleukaemia.Thebonemarrow is
dominatedby largeandintermediatelymphoidceils(arrowed).
Specific diagnosis
The specific diagnosis of acute leukaemia is based on
the predominance(40-50%)of blast cells in the bone
marrow,usually accompanied by similar cellsinperi-
pheral blood.ALLis best differentiatedfrom AML
and AMoL by cytochemical staining (Jainet al.,1981;
Couto,1985;Facklam and Kociba,1985,1986;
Grindem et al.,1985a and b,1986),immunocyto-
chemicallabellingorflowcytometricanalysis(Vernau
and Moore,1999),asmorphologicalappearancealone
may not be diagnostic (Figure 8.30). However, com-
mercialveterinary diagnostic laboratories in the United
Kingdom do not often use such stains,and ALL is
therefore overdiagnosed.
Figure 8.27:Photomicrograph of blood film from dogwith
acutemyeloidleukaemiacontainingabnormalimmature
myeloid cells(arrowed).
Biochemistry
Biochemistrymayindicate hypercalcaemia,orhepatic
or renal dysfunction.
Bone marrow
Bone marrow usually appears hypercellular,with a
predominance of blast cells and a consequent reduc-
tion in other cell lineages (Figures 8.28 and 8.29).
Figure 8.30:Photomicrograph of bone marrow from dog,
stainedwithchloroacetate esterase.Thestainistaken upby
normal neutrophils andby theirprecursors.(Picture
courtesy of John Dunn.)
In some cases the distinction of ALL from lym
phoma is difficult because animalswith either disease
may havelymphadenopathy,haematological abnor-
malities and lymphoblasts in the bone marrow. In
general,cases ofALLhavcamilderlymphadcnopathy
but more severe bone marrowchanges andcytopenias,
and thereforeappearsystemicallyill (LeiferandMatus,
1985;Morris etal.,1993),whereas cases oflymphoma
aregenerallynol systeinically unwcll andhavc less
Figure8.28:Photomicrograph of bonemarrow froindog
severely affected bone marrow but present with a
with acutemyeloid leukaemia showing a predominance of
early myeloid cells(arrowed).
massive lymphadenopathy.
150Manualof Canine andFelineHaematology andTransfusionMedicine
Management
Inductionprotocolsforacuteleukaemia are useduntil
the whitebloodcellcount returns tothenormalrangeand
Supportive treatment
blast cells are no longer seen in peripheral blood. In
Supportivemeasuresforacuteleukaemiaincludefluid
therapy for dehydration,anorexia orhypercalcaemia,
theory, drug doses and frequencies canthen bereduced to
blood transfusion for severeloss ofred cells or platc-
maintcnancelevels,butin practice thisisrarely achieved.
In veterinary medicine,the use of chemotherapy
lets and antibiotic therapy forsecondary infections.
for the treatment of acule leukaemia is severely re-
Specifictreatment
stricted by the degree of myelosuppression caused by
The aim of specific therapy for acute leukacmia is to
the disease.The inability to preserve sufficient levels
destroy thc leukaemic cells by using chemotherapy,
ofnormal blood cells during trcatmentisa constant
and thereby allow resumption of normal haematopoi-
problem.Furthcrmore,thetoxicityofcytotoxic agents
esis (Figure 8.31). These aims are, however, rarely
may beexacerbated by compromised hepatic and renal
achievedinvctcrinarymedicine(seebelow),and treat
function.Mostanimalpatients succuimbtoeitherover-
nent ofacute leukaemia indogsis notusually success
whelming sepsissecondary oncutropeniaorganfail
ful.Euthanasia is an option that should be considered
ure secondary to infiltraticnwithneoplasticcells or
at the time of diagnosis.
DIC. Intensive medical care, bone marrow transplants
Schedulcs for chermotherapy have been described:
andextracorporeal treatment ofbone marrow are used
in humanmedicincbut are notroutinely availablefor
Drugsrecommendedfor the treatment ofALL
aresimilartothoserecommcndcdforlymphoma,
veterinary use.The developmentof caninerecombinant
G-CSFand GM-CSFmay lead to significant improve-
that is,vincristine and prednisolone plus an
ments in the treatmcnt of acuteleukaemias.
alkylating agent
Drugs recommended for the trcatincnt of AML
Prognosis
includc prednisolone,mercaptopurine or
The prognosis is poor for all acute leukaemias owing
thioguaninein combination withcytosine
to failure to induce and maintain remission, organ
arabinoside; the last agent is used because it may
failure(whichenhancesthecytotoxiceffects of chemo
encourage differentiation of blast cells
therapeutic drugs)andsepticaemiasecondarytocithcr
(Castaigne et al., 1983).
the disease or the treatmcnt
Acute lymphoblastic leukaemia
Induction
Vincristine
0.5 mg/m² i.v. every 7 days
and prednisolone
40 mg/m² by mouth daily for 7 days then 20 mg/m² every 48 hours
Additional agents (if not neutropenic)
Cyclophosphamide
50 mg/m² by mouth every 48 hours
or Cyclophosphamide
50 mg/m² by mouth every 48 hours
and cytosine arabinoside
or L-asparaginase
10,000-20.000 IU/m²i.m.evcry 2-3 weeks
Acute myeloid leukaemia
Induction
Cytosine arabinoside
2-3wecks,then on altermate weeks
Additional agents (to increase response)
Prednisolone
40mg/m²by mouth daily for 7 days then 20 mg/m² evcry 48hours
or 6-Thioguanine
 50 mg/m² by mouth daily or evcry 48 hours
or 6-Thioguanine
50 mg/m? by mouth daily or every 48 hours
and doxorubicin
10 mg/m² i.v. every 7 days
or Mercaptopurine
50 mg/m² bymouth daily or every 48 hours
Maintenance
Reduce any of the above drug combinations to a dose and frequency which maintain white blood cell counts
within the normal range
Try alternate week therapy first, that is, a week of chemotherapy, a week without treatment, a week of
chemotherapy, and so on
Figure8.31:Chemotherapy protocoisfor the treatment of acute leukaemia.
Leukaemia 151
The prognosis for ALL is slightly better than for
Biochemistry
AML in both the dog and cat.Survival times of 1-3
Biochemistry often shows hyperproteinaemia,and
months in dogs and 1-7 months in cats have been
serum electrophoresis may show a monoclonal
rcportedforALL(Couto,1992)although otherauthors
gammopathy (usually owingtoincreased IgMconcen-
claim better success (MacEwen et al.,1977;Matus et
tration).Hypercalcaemia may be present.
al.,1983; Gorman and White,1987).Survival times
for AML rarcly cxceed 2-3 months for both dogs and
Bonemarrow
cats (Couto,1985;Grindem et al,1985b).
Bone marrow analysisshows a hypercellularmarrow
with a predominance of mature forms of the lymphoid
or myeloid series (Figures 8.32 and 8.33).
CHRONICLEUKAEMIAS
Epidemiology
Chroniclcukacmia is less common than acuteleukae-
mia especially in the cat where chronic lymphocytic
leukaemia (CLL) is a rare disease and CML is cvcn
rarer. Most cascs of CLL in the cat are FeLV negative
(MacEwen,1996).In the dog,CLL ismore common
than CML and most cases of CLLare derived from T
lymphocytcs (Vcrnau and Moore,1999).CLLoccurs
in middle-aged to old dogs (mean 9.4years) whereas
CMLoccurs at any age.The male to female ratio for
dogs with CLL is 2:1, but no breed predispositions
havc bccn reported.
Clinical features
Figure 8.32:Photomicrograph of bone marrowfrom dog
Chronic leukaemia is a slowly progressive disease
with chronic lymphocytic leukaemia.The bone marrowis
dominated bysmall maturelymphocytes(arrowed).
characterized by mild clinical signs.About 50%of
cases of CLLmay be asymptomatic and only detcclcd
on hacmatological examination.Most cases of CML
and the remainderof cases ofCLL present withclinical
signs such as lethargy,anorexia,vomiting,pyrcxia,
polyuria, polydipsia and weight loss. Clinical exami-
nationmayrevealpallor,mildlymphadenopathy(more
common in CLL),splenomegaly,hepatomegaly or
skin infiltration.Monoclonal gammopathy is associ-
ated with 25% of cases of CLL （although 10% may
have reduced immunoglobulin concentrations),and
hyperviscosity syndromc may therefore be present.
Infection and pyrexia secondary to reduced humoral
and cellular immunity are common.
JO
A change from thc prolifcration ofmature cells to
Figure8.33:Photomicrographofbone marrowfrom dog
blast cells(a blast cell crisis)often occurs as a terminal
withchronicmyeloid leukaemia.Thebonemarrowcontains
event with CML (but not CLL),months to years after
increasednumbers ofbands andneutrophils.Itcanbe
diagnosis,and at thispoint the clinical signs become
difficulttodistinguishchronicmyeloid leukaemiafrom
granulocytic hyperplasia as theappearance ofthe bone
much more scvcre.
marrow is similar.(Picture courtesyof JohnDunn.)
Diagnostic investigations
Specific diagnosis
Haematology
The specific diagnosis of chronic leukaemia isbased
Haematology usually shows a noticeable lyinpho-
on bone marrowfindings and the natureof the accom-
cytosis in CLL (from 5to more than 100 x10/1) and
panying leucocytosis.A noticeable lymphocytosis
leucocytosis with a left shift in CML.Circulating
(greater than 20 x 10°/1) is alrmost pathognomonic for
lymphocytes in patients with CLL are often normal
CLL,althouhonoccasion thismayneed tobediffer-
in appearance,although slightly less mature forms
entiated from lymphoma of a lymphocytic cell type.
can sometimes be seen.Mild anaemia and thrombo-
The diagnosis of CMLis oftenmore difficult than that
cytopenia are usually present in patients with CLL
of CLL bccause of a lack of specific clinical and
and CML.
laboratory abnormalitiescharacteristic of the disease.
152Manual of Canine and Feline Haematology and TransfusionMedicine
It is often difficult to distinguish CML from leu-
In either CLL or CML,the aim of treatment is to
kaemoidreactions andpreleukaemicsyndromeson
restore theperipheral blood counts towithin thenor-
clinical findings,and careful examination ofbone
malrange,andresponse to treatment ismonitored by
marrowmaybe ncccssary to reach a correct diagnosis.
haematological findings.Once remission is achieved
In patientswith splenomegaly,histological examina-
maintenance therapyiscontinued at reduceddoscsand
tion of the spleen may be helpful.
frequencies of the appropriate drugs in order tokeep
the whiteblood cell countswithin the normalrange.
Management
Prognosis
Supportive trcatment
The prognosis for chronic leukaemia is much more
Paraneoplastiecomplicationssuch ashypcrcalcacmia
favourablethanforacutc lcukacmia.Mcanandmedian
survival times for CLLinthe dog may exceed one year
dressed in patients with chronic leukaemia.
(LeiferandMatus,1985,1986）butareusuallyshrtr
for CML,which has a greater risk of blast cell crisis.
Specifie treatment
For asymptomatic cases of CLL, there may be no need
for treatment,although frequent monitoring and
OTHER LEUKAEMIAS
haematological screens are advised.Forsymptomatic
cases ofCLLand forallcases ofCMLchemotherapy
Eosinophilic and basophilic leukaemia
is the treatment of choice （Figure 8.34).In CLL,the
Eosinophilic and basophilic leukaemias arerarely
alkylating agent chlorambueil is uscd in combination
reported in the dog and are usually considered as
with prednisolone.More potent alkylating agentssuch
variants of CML. The diagnosis of eosinophilic
as cyclophosphamide may be used in refractory cases
leukaemia can only be made after careful exclusion
of CLL, where they may also be combined with vin-
ofother causes of eosinophilia,and there is some
cristineCMLisusuallyreatedwithcithcrthcalkylatng
doubt as to whcther the condition truly cxists in
agent busulphan or hydroxyurea,usuallyin combina-
dogs and cats. Basophilic leukaemia must be distin-
tion with prednisolone.
guished from mast cell leukaemia becausecell types
Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia
Induction
Chlorambucil
2-5 mg/m² by mouth daily for 7-14 days, then 2 mg/m² every 48 hours or
 20 mg/m² by mouth as a single dose every 14 days
±Prednisolone
40 mg/m² by mouth daily for 7 days, then 20 mg/m² every 48 hours
Additional agent (for increased response)
Vincristine
0.5 mg/m² i.v. every 7 days
Alternative protocol (for increased response)
Vincristine
0.5 mg/m² i.v. every 7 days
and Cyclophosphamide
 50 mg/m? by mouth every 48 hours
and Prednisolone
40 mg/m²by mouth daily for 7 days, then 20 mg/m² every 48 hours
Chronic myeloid leukaemia
Induction
Hydroxyurea
50mg/kg by mouth daily for 1-2 weeks then every 48 hours or 80mg/kg
until rcmission achieved
or Busulphan
2-6 mg/m² by mouth daily until remission achieved
Maintenance
Reduce any of the above combinations of drugs to a dose and frequency which maintain white blood cell
counts within the normal range
Try alternate week therapy first, that is, a week of chemotherapy, a week without treatment, a week of
 chemotherapy, and so on
After a fewmonths try one week of treatment in three,then oneweek infour
Figure8.34:Chemotherapy protocolsforthetreatment ofchronicleukaemia.
Leukaemia
153
can be easily confused. Trcalenl of both cosino-
REFERENCES AND FURTHER
philic and basophilic leukaemia is with corticosteroids
READING
and/or hydroxyurea.
Carter RF. Kruta SA, Valli VEOaudDube ID (1990) Long-ern cuture
of canie narraw: cytogenetic evaluation of purging of lymphonn
Leukaemia of platelets and platelet
antl leukaemia. Exyeriaental Iaemrology 18,995-1001
Casiaigne S, Danicl MT, Tilly II, Herait P and Degos L (1983) Does
precursors
trcatment with Ara-Cinlow doses causc differentialionof Icukacmic
 Megakaryocytic leukaemia is another form of acute
cells? Blood 62, S5-86
lcukaemia rarely reportced in the dog and cal, and is
Couto CG (198s) Clinicopathologic aspeets of acue leukeuras in the
ogJoroftheAmericVeteriuryMedicatAssociation186,
681-685
megakaryocytes) and megakaryoblasts in the bone
Cuuo CG (1992) Leukemias. In: Essenrinis of Smail Aninal hnternal
Inarrow. The corresponding chronic Icukacmia, pri-
Medicne, ed. RW Nelson and CG Couto, Pp. 871-878. Moshy
Year Book, St Louis
mary or essential thrombocythaemia, is even more rare
Dabson IM and Gorman NT (1993) Caacer Chemorherapy in Smaff
and is diagnosed on the basis of persistently high
Antntai Practice, ed. CJ Price, PGC Bedfordi and JB Sutton.
Blackwcll Scientific, Oxford
platelet counts and mcgakaryocyte hypcrplasia of the
Facklam NR and Kociba Gl (1985) Cytochemical charucterizat ion of
bone maITOw.
leukemic cells Fron 20 dogs. Veterinary Purha/ogy 22, 363-369
Facklam NR anl Kociba GI ( 1986) Cytochemical characterization of
feline lcukenic cells. Verterinary Pathalogy 23, 155-161
Erythroid leukaenias
Gariner SA (1991) Current concepts of feline inumunodeficiency virus
 Erythremic rmyelosis is a myeloproliferativc disor-
infcction.Vererinary Medicine 86,300-307
Goh K, Smith RA and Proper JS (19s1) Chromosomal aberations in
der, which is relatively common in cats but rare in
lcukcinie cats. Corneff Vererinarian 71, 43-46
dogs. Excessive proliferation of early erythroid pre-
Gorman NT (1991) Clemotherupy. In: Maraat of Saxi! Arinai
Oncology, &xl. RAS Wlite, p. 127.-I50. BSAVA Publications,
cursors andl nucleaterl erylhrocytes is sccn in the bone
Cheltenham
inarrow, with severe anaemia, increased numbers of
Gorman NT and Wite RAS (1987) Clinical management of catine
lymphoproliferative diseases.Veteriary Anma/27,227-242
nucleated circulating red blood cells, moderate to
Grindem CB and Buoen LC (1989) Cytogeneric analysis in nine
severe anisocytosis aud increased meall corpuscular
leukacinic cats. Jounat of ConpararivePethoiogy 101, 21-30
volume. The cquivalent chronie lcukaemia, primary
Grindcn CB, Perman V and Stevens JB (1985a) Morplolugical
erythrocytosis (polycythaemia vera), is rare in both
classifiention and clinieal and pathological churucteristics of
cats and dogs and is characterized by a persistently
Huspital Association 21, 227-236
increased PCV, with low or normal erythropoietin
Grinlemi CB, Stevens JB and Perman V (1985b) Morphological
classification and clinical and pathological characieristies nf
 activity (see Chapter4). Erythroleukaemia is an acute
spontaneousleukemiain17dogsJourtofhe AmericanAnima!
leukaemia that can arise by blast transformation of
Hlospitai Associatio 21, 219-226
Grinden CB, Stcvens JB and Penman V (1986) Cytochemical rcactions
erythremic myelosis. Primitive crylhruid prccursors
in cells from leukemic dogs. Vererinary Pahology 23, 103-109
predominate but myeloblasts are often present in low
Gulino SE (1992) Chromosomc abnormualiics and oncogenesis in cat
leuknenius.Cancer Geneties und Cytogenetics 64,149-157
numbers. Erythroleukaemia occurs relatively com-
Hatn KA. aud Richardson RC (1995) Carerr Chenorherapy. /
 only in cats but rarely in dogs.
Veteriaury handbook, ed. KA Hahn and RC Richardson. Willtains
anel Wilkins, Batimore
Henry CJ, Buss MS and Lothrop CD (1998) Veterinary uscs of
rcconbimn luman granulocyte colony-stinulating factor, Part I
MYELODYSPLASTIC SYNDROMES
Oncology.CompenditemofContiuingEdrcationfortePractising
Veteririn20,728-734
(PRELEUKAEMIA)
Hutso CA,Rideout BA ane Pelerson NC (1991) Neoplusia asseciated
with felineimmunodefeieney virus infectionin cats of soutlem
Califoma.ornloftheAereaVeterinuryMedieaiAssociatin
Some animals may prcscnt with the same vague clini-
199, 1357-1362
cal signs as seen with leukaemia, similar physical
 Jaitn NC Madewell BR, Weller RE antt Geisster MC (I9R1) Clmicaf-
findings and haematological abnormalities such as
pathological findings and cytochcnical characterization nf
myelormonocytic leukaemia in 5 dogs. Journal of Comparotive
cytopenias or abnorinal circulating cells, but examina-
Partotogy 91, 17-31
 tion of the bone marrow fails to confirm the presencc
Leifer CE and Maus RE (1985) Lymphoid leukaemia in thc dog.
of neoplasia. The marrow is normocellular ur
Veterinary Cliniey of North Ameriea: Smait Aaima! Prrctiee 1S(4).
723-739
hypercellular, with maturation arrest of the granulocytic
Leifer CE and Matus RE (198G) Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia in tlhe
series, erythroid abnormalitics and abncrmal dwarf
dog:22 cases (1974-1984). Jowrmal of the American Veterinary
Medicai Associarion 189, 214-217
 megakaryocytes. The clinical signs and bone marow
MacEwen EG (1996) Feline lymphoma and leukemias. In: Smal!
 changes may wax and wane without ever progressing.
Aninal Climnical Oncology. 2m edn, ed. SJ Withrow and EG
MucEwen, Pp. 479-495. WB Saunders, Philadelphia
A proportion of cases, howcvcr, will devclop overt
MacEven EG and Helfand SC (1993) Recent advanccs in the biologic
myeloid leukaemia, hence the term *preleukaemia.
therapy of cancer. Compenedium of Coniuing Edneurion for he
Trcatnent of such conditious with chemotherapy is
Practisng Veteriuriarr 15. 909-922
MacEven EG, Patmaik AK aud Wilkins RJ (1977) Diagnosis and
controversial hecause not all will progress to full
treatmcnt of canine hematopaietic neuplasms. Vereruary Clinies
leukaemia, but regular monitoring and supportive
of Norh Ameriea 7(1), 105-118
Matus RE, Leifer CE and MacEwcn EG (1983) Acute lymphoblastic
 therapy with fluids and antibiotics are needed. Differ-
leukuemia mthe dog:a rcvicw of30euses.JournatofheAmerican
entiating agents (cylosine arabinoside), haematopoi-
Veterinary Medical Associatton 183, 859-862
 etic growth factors or anabolie steroids may also be
Muris JS, Dunn JK and Dobson IM(1993) Caninc lymphoidl leukaemia
ad lymphoma with bone marow involvement: u review of 24
considered.
cases. Jonrua! of Small Animn! Prachiee 34, 72-79
154 Manual of Canine and Feline Haematology and Transfusion Mcdicine
Nash RA,Schnening F,Appelbaum F,ammond WP,Doone T,Morris
Ogilvie GK, Ohradovich JE, Cooper MF, Walters I M, Satlman MD am
CF,Sliclter SJ and Stotb R (1991) Molceular cloning and in vivo
Boone TC (1992) Use af recombimant canine granulocyte colony-
evaluationofcauine granuhxye-macroplgecolonyfuetors,Blood!
stiutatingfactortdecreasenyelosppresionastaw
78,930-937
teadministrationofmitoxanroncinthedog.JounalfVererinary
NolteM, WererM, Notte Iand Georgi A (1993)Different cytogenetic
uternat Medieie 6, 44-47
findings in two clinicaily similar leukaenric dogs.Journal of
Rosol TI, Nagode LA, Couto CG, Hurmmcr AS, Chew DJ, Peterson JL,
Couparative Pathology 108, 337-342
AylRDSineyerCLndCapeCC（992）Parayoidhnc
ObradovichJE, Ogilvie GK, Powers BE and Boonc T(I991) Evaluation 
(PTH)-latd ptiTH -ilyrxyitnDog
of rccombinant canine granulocyte colony-stinulating factor as an
with cancer-associatert hypercalcaemia. Eadocritology 131, 1157-
indueerofgranulopoiesis.JourualofVererinaryeratMedicine
1164
5, 75-79
Safran N, Perk K and Eyal O (992) Isolaion and prelininary
Ouradovich JE, Ogilvie GK, Stadler-Murris S, Suhnitit BR, Cooper MF
claractcrisationofa novel rctrovirus froma leukaenic dng. Reseurcl
and Boone TC (1993) Effecl of recunbinant canine granuloeyte
n Veterinary Science 52,250-255
colony-stinulating factoronperipheralbloodneutrphil counsin
 Sykes GP, King JM and Cooper BC (1985) Rerovirus-like paricles
normal cats. Journal of Veterinary Yntermal Medieie 7, 65-67
associaedwithnyeloproliferaive discase in the dogJoumalof
Ogilvie GK(1993a) Hacmatepnietic growth factors:1onls forarevohution
Comparative Pathology 95, 559-564
inveterinaryoncologyandhematology.CompentiunofConinning
VetmauWandMoorer(i99o) Anitnmumophenotyicstudyof caninte
EdueationforhPraetisingVererinariar15,851-854
leukemias and preliminary assessment nf clonality by polymerase
Ogilvie GK(1993b) Receatadvancesincaneer, chemwtherapy undmcxical
nanagement of the geratrie cat. Veterinary Fternationut 5, 3-12
145-164
1
1
1
CHAPTEREIGHT
(iv) Feline Retrovirus Infections
AndrewSparkesandKostasPapasouliotis
INTRODUCTION
type).In colonies of cats where FeLV is endemic,
Three exogenous contagious retroviruses are transmit
entlyviraemic),40%willhavehadself-limitinginfec
tcd between cats (Figurc 8.35):felinc syncytium-
tionsandbeimmuneand30%willhavehadinsufficient
formingvirus(FeSFV),felineleukaemia virus(FeLV)
exposure toestablishinfection.Of those cats withself-
and feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV).Of these
limiting infections,a proportion will experience tran-
viruses,FeSFV is generally considered to bc non-
sientviracmiabefore theimmunercsponse limitsthe
pathogenic,whereas FeLVand FIV are important and
infection, and a proportion will be latently infected
common causes of disease.Infection witheitherFeLV
(have proviral FeLV DNA integrated into certain host
orFIVcanhaveaprofound effect on hacmatological
cells) for a period of timc.Clinically and
variables,some ofwhich may be diagnosticallyhelp
epidemiologically it is the persistently viraemic cats
ful in alerting the clinician to the possibility of these
that aremost important,althougha small proportionof
viruses as an underlying cause of disease.Although
latently orpreviouslyinfectedcatsmay alsodevelop
there aremanysinilaritiesin the diseases producedby
FeLV-relatcd disease.
these twoviruses,there are alsoimportant differences
Worldwideitisestimated that 1-3%of thegeneral
cat population is persistently infected with FeLV.
diagnosis and control, and these aspects will therefore
However,thcprevalence ofinfectionvariesaccording
be brieflyconsidered separatelyfor eachvirus.
to the population of cats studied (their lifestyle and
potential for exposure toFeLV).and there is also
cvidenceofgcographicalandregional variationsin the
FELINELEUKAEMIA VIRUS (FELV)
prevalence of FeLV.FeLVinfection is most common
in catsupto5yearsofage,withadecliningprevalence
Epidemiology of FeLV
thereafter (Hosie et al.,1989).
quantities oflabile virus in their saliva and nasal
PathogenesisofFeLVinfection
secretions.Transmission ofinfcction is mainlyhori-
Ifa cat infected with FeLV fails to eliminate the
zontal and occurs primarily during prolonged direct
infection within the first 4-6 weeks,haenolymphatic
social interaction between infected and susceptible
infection is established,which almost invariably
results in persistent viraemia. FeLV replicates
(e.g.mutual grooming,sharing of food/food bowls).
most effectively in rapidly dividing cells, having a
Vertical transmission is also possible, but persistent
particular tropism for the haemopoietic stem cells
FeLVnfectionusuallyresultsininfertility,abortion
in the bone marrow,the intestinal crypt epithelial
or resorption of fetuses in a pregnant qucen.
cells and the germinal centres of lymphoid follicles.
The outcome after exposure to FeLV depends on
Infection of bone marrow stcm cells generally leads
many factors, including the dose of virus, the viral
to large quantities of virus being produced, which
strain and host resistance (related to the age of the cat,
overwhelms the host's immune response,leading to
its immunocompetence and probably also its geno-
persistent viracmia.Within the bone marrow, those
Family
Subfamily
Virus
Retroviridae
Spumavirinae
Feline syncytium-forming virus
Oncornavirinae
Feline leukaemia virus
Lentivirinae
Feline immunodeficicncy virus
Figure 8.35:Felineretroviruses.
156  Manual of Caninc and Felinc Haenmatology and Transfusion Medicine
cells of the nyelomonocyte lineage develop an in-
Rarely, FeLV DNA may recombine with certain
creasing virus burden as they mature, whercas in the
Crythrocytc precursors there is a greater viral burden
forming feline sarcoma virus (FeSV). These viruses
in the early undifferentiated cells. The persistent
are defective, requiring FeLV to sustain their replica-
viraemia of bone marrow origin is partly cell associ-
tion, but they result i rapid neoplastic transformation
ated, with circulation of infected neutrophils,
Of cells, with the induction of multiple malignant
lyinphocyics, monocyles and platelets, in addition to
sarcomas.
free virus being present in plasma.
Infection with FeLV can result in either
Diseases associated with FeLV infection
cylopraliferative (neoplastic) discases, such as lyin-
 Uncommonly, but particuiarly if infected at a young
 phoma, sarcoma and myeloproliferativedisorders, and/
age, cats may develop FeLV-related disease and die
or cytosuppressive (degenerative) diseases such as
within a few weeks of the onset of viracrnia. More
immunorleficiency, anacrnia and nyelosuppressive
usually, however, FeL V-related rlisease occurs after a
 disorders. The outcome of infection in any individual
 prolonged period (months to years) of asymptomatic
is partly determined by the subgroups or strains of
viraemia. FeL V is a conimon cause of chronic disease
FeLV infecting that cat.
in cats,the prevalence of viraemia insick cats typically
Indivicdual cels are infeclcd witl FeLV when the
being 10-20% (Hosie etal., 1989). Furthernore, FeLV-
major viral envelope glycoprotein (gp70) binds to
related disease commonly results in death of the in-
specific celfular receptors, resulting in release of the
fected cat; about 50% of infected cats die within 6
viral RNA gcnome into ihe ccll cytoplasm. Undler the
months of the rliagnosis being rmade, and more than
influence of the viral reverse transcriptase and the host
80% die within 3.5 years.
cell's DNA polymerase, a double-stranded DNA copy
Although FeLV is an oncogcnic virus, the devclop-
(provirus) of he single-strandcrl RNA viral genone is
ment of neoplasia accounts for only around 10-25 % of
produced. The provirus is integrated into the host cell
 FeLV-related deaths. Solid lymphomas are the most
genome during cellular division and can then lead to
common tumours caused by FeLV infection, with
：
d p  siss   
thymic, alimentary, multicentric and atypical (miscel-
teins, which are assembletl into viral particles that bud
laneuus) forms also being described. Most FeLV-
from the cell surface). The pathogenesis of IeLV-
related lymphomas are T-cell malignancies and most
related disease at a cellular level is not fully under-
are subleukaemic, although a proportion will be ac-
stood, but whereas infccted cells are often able fo
companied by lymphocytic leukaemia. In addition to
function normally, in other cases the accumulation of
lynphomas, FeL V infection may result in the develop-
certain viral proteins (e.g. p15E, gp70) within the
ment of a variety of leukaemias (predominantly of
cytoplasm may disrupt celular function. In adlition.
 erythroid or myelomonocytic origin) or myeloprolif-
the insertion of the proviral DNA into the host cell
erative disorders.
genlome can disrupt or activate certain cellular proto-
 Cytosuppressive (degenerative) diseases accountfor
oncogenes leading to insertional mutagencsis and
75% or more of FeL V-rclated deatls, and of the differ-
neoplastic transfornation of the cell. Another adverse
ent syndromes recognized, FeLV-associated
effect seen with some FeLV strains is failure to inte-
immunosuppression is the most inportant. probably
grate the proviral DNA into lhe gcrnome, leading to an
accounting for arommdl 50% of all FeLV-related dis-
accumulation of cytoplasmic viral DNA that can again
 eases. The pathogenesis of the inmunosuppression
disrupt cellufar function and cause cytotoxicity.
includes defective neutrophil fuction, dysfunction and
According to the antigenic strueturc of the gp70
dcpletion of T lymphocytes, immune complex forma-
cnvclope glycoprotein, FeLV isolates are divided
tion and complement depletion. The resulting immuno-
into three major subgroups: A, B and C. Subgroup A
suppression leavesthe infected catsusceptible io a wide
is the major naturally acquired transmissible form
variety of secondary and opportunistic infeclions.
of FeLV, whercas subgroups B anl C generally arise
Other manifestations of FeLV infection include
tle novo in infected cats as a result of mutation of the
proviral DNA and/or recombination of this DNA
cats), myelosuppression, cnteropathy, reproductive
with endogenous FeLV-related DNA sequcuces
failurc, neurological disorders, fading kiftens (thymic
prescnt in the cat's genome. FeLV A is invariably
 atrophy) and immune complex-related diseases (poly-
found in all FeLV-infected cats, whereas subgroup B
arthritis, glomeruloncphropathies).
is found in around 50% of infected cats and subgroup
C in just I-2% of infected cats. Mixed infections
Specific haematological changes associated
with subgroups A and B are generally considered
with FeLV infection
more pathogenic than infection with FeLV A alouc,
and infections with subgroup C lead to the rapid
Primary infection
devclupment of erythroid aplasia, thymic atrophy
 Most FeLV stains will cause a lymphopenia during
and lymphoid depletion.
the first 2 months after infection, with a variable effect
Feline RetrovirusInfections
157
onlymphocyte subsets.Conversely,lymphocytosisis
sometimes seen,butin most cases these leucocyte
changesresolve,and thesevariablesremain normal or
nearnormal throughout theprolonged asymptomatic
period.Occasionally,with infection by more virulent
FeLV strains,a persistent decrease in lymphocyte
numbcrs (including CD4and CD8T cells) is seen,
whichcontributestotheearly development ofimmuno-
suppression in these cats.
Anaemia
The development of anaemia is a common conse-
qucnce of FeLV infection and may account for up to
25%of FeLV-related deaths.FeLV infection isrecog-
Figure8.36:Megaloblasticanaemia ina catwithfeline
leukaemiavirus.
nized as thesingle most common cause ofanacmia in
the cat.As the haematopoietic stem cells are a major
target for FeLV replication,the anaemia can be a
aplasiaisthemostcommoncause,althoughinpractice
manifestation of FeLV-induced myelocdysplasia or
itmay not be easy to distinguish red cell aplasia
erythroid aplasia.In other situations,the anaemia is
from certain mycloprolifcrative diseases and
hacmolytic in origin.
dyserythropoiesis,and these may occur concurrently
Between 10% and 20% of FeL.V-relatcd anacmias
in an infected cat.
areregenerative.These anaemias are characterizedby
Red cell aplasia is charactcrized by normocytic
anisocytosis,polychromasiaretculocytosis,macro
normochromic anaemia orsometimesmacrocytic nor-
cytosis and the appearance of nucleated red blood
mochromic anaemia with reticulocytopenia of both
cells,which can be associatedwith extramedullary
aggregate and punctate forms.Bonemarrow aspirates
(splenic and hepatic)erythropoiesis.Most commonly,
show a noticeableincreaseinthcmycloid:erythroid
these anacmias are eitherimmune-mediated or due to
ratio dueto depletionof erythroid precursors.Thereis
concurrentinfectionwithHaemobartonellafelis(scc
a strongassociationbetween the developmentofred
Chapter 5).Because of the established relationship
cell aplasia and infection with FeLV subgroup C,and
bctwecn FeLV infection and haemobartonellosis
inexperimentalinfections theappearance ofsubgroup
(Bobade et al.,1988),evaluation of fresh (not ethyl-
Cin plasmaimmediately precedesthedevelopment of
enediamine tetra-aceticacid-preserved)blood smears
progressive anacmia.It sccms that FeLV C infects
for H.felisis advisable inall cases of FeLV-associated
earlyerythroid precursors (burst-formingunits-eryth-
anaemia.The prognosis for anaemic FeLV-infected
roid, and colony-forming units -erythroid) in the bone
cats is poor.Somecatsmayshowtemporaryresolution
marrow,causingbothdepletionofthesecellsandalso
of the anaemia-eitherspontaneously orinresponseto
a decreased responsiveness tonorimalgrowthfactors,
appropriate therapy - but rccurrence of anaemia is
thustheanaemia progressesdespitemarkedlyincreased
common andmanywilleventuallyprogresstodevelop
serum erythropoietin concentrations.There is evi-
lymphoma,myeloproliferative disease,leukaemia or
dence thatmuch of theredcell aplasia altributcd to
erythroid aplasia.
infectionwithFeLV Cismediatedbythecytotoxicand
Most FeLV-induced anaemiasarenon-regenerative
cytosuppressive effects of the gp70 envelope glyco-
and maybe associatedwithmyeloproliferative disor-
protein of this subgroup.Coinfection with H.felis may
ders,myelofibrosisandstosclrosis,dyserythropoiesis
also contribute to these non-regenerative anaemias.
or erythroid aplasia(which can sometimcs bc apart of
a pancytopenia).Myeloproliferativediseases willsome-
Lymphopenia and neutropenia
timcsIcad to the appearance of leukaemiccellsinblood
Although infection with FeLV can induce immuno-
smears,but more commonly the specific diagnosis of
suppression through functional disturbances of both
these cases requires examination of bone marrow aspi-
lymphocytesandneutrophils,manycatswillalsohave
ratcs.Some cases of dyserythropoietic anaemia exhibit
depletionofthese celllines.Upto70%ofinfected cats
high numbers of circulatingnucleated red blood cells
willhave lymphopeniaandup to 35%may have
withoutconcomitant reticulocytosis and others showa
absolute leucopenia.The lymphopenia seems to in-
noticeablcmegaloblasticanaemia,whichisunrelatedo
volveboth B and Tcells.
vitaminB12 deficiency (Figure 8.36).Although gener-
In addition to lymphopenia,neutropenia has also
ally classified as non-regenerative, some of these
been reported frequentlyinFeLV-infected cats,and
anaemiasmayin fact show evidence ofpartial(but
FeLV infection should bc regarded as an important
inadequate) red cell rcgeneration.
differential diagnosis for any neutropenic cat. Cyclic
In the cat,70% or more of non-rcgenerative
fluctuations in the numbers of neutrophils (cyclic
anaemias are due toFeLV infection,and red cell
neutropenia),lymphocytes and other circulatingcells
158Manual of Canine and Feline Haematology and TransfusionMedicine
(cyclichaematopoiesis)have been reported in some
FeLV-infected cats (Swenson et al.,1987).Neutro-
penia is an important finding as it frcquently leads to
secondary infections that may overwhelm the cat.
Althoughneutropenia and/or leucopenia may be a
manifestation of the cytopathic effect ofFeLVinfec-
tion,theymay alsorcflectunderlyingmyeloprolifera
tive diseases orpreleukaemic syndromes.
FeLVmyeloblastopenia
FeLV-associated myeloblastopenia is clinically indis-
tinguishable from feline panleucopenia virusinfection
andis reported to occur relatively frequentlyinFeLV-
Figure8.37:Lymphoblastic leukaemia ina catwithfeline
infected cats.The syndromc is charactcrized by pro-
leukaemiavirus.
found anaemia (frequently aplastic) in combination
with severe leucopenia (i.e. pancytopenia),which is
accompanied by dysentery, vomiting, anorexia and
ofunderlyingFeLVasacauseof disease by the clinical
depression.Affected cats invariably die.The combina-
history (c.g. recurrcnt episodes of diseasc suggesting
tion of signs in these cats presumably reflects the
immunosuppression),clinical findings and clinico-
replication of FeLVin targetcellsof the intestinal
pathological changes.Asmost cases of FeLV-related
epitheliumand bonemarrow,althoughthe picture may
diseasc occurinpersistentlyviracinic cats,detectionof
be complicated bysecondarybacterialinfection.
infection isreadily achieved by assayingblood sam-
ples for the presenceof p27-one of the core proteins
'Normal'leucocyteresponses
ofFeLV,which is alinost invariably prcsent in thc
Although many,if not all,FeLV-viraemic cats are
plasima of persistcntly infectcd cats.Figure 8.38 lists
immunosuppressed tosome degree,this doesnotnece-
the testscurrently availablein theUnited Kingdom for
ssarily prevcnt themmounting aresponse tosecondary
detection of this antigen and some of these are shown
or opportunistic infections. Many infected cats will
in Figure 8.39. Newer kits designed for ‘in-house
therefore exhibit neutrophilic leucocytosis,perhaps
diagnostic testing, such as the ELISA Snap’ test
with a left shift as an apropriate response to concur-
(Idexx) and witnessimmunogold migration test
rent bacterial (or viral) infections.
(Merial) virtually clininatethe possibility of operator
error and are thus highly reliable.As with any test,on
Platelet abnormalitics
rare occasionsfalsepositives and falsenegativescan
Both megakaryocytes and platelets harbour FeLV.
occur.If thereis anyreason to doubt thcvalidity of a
Macrothrombocytes withimpaired function and de-
positive test result, repeating the test at a refercnce
creased longevity are common in infected cats,and
laboratory by using the technique ofvirus isolation is
although thiscould potcntiallylead tobleedingdisor-
recommended as this is currently considered thegold
ders, such disorders have rarely been described in
standard by which other tcsts are mcasured.Although
FeLV-infectedcats.Inarecent study,FeLVinfection
false negative testresults are considered extremely
wasidentifiedin27%(11of 41)of thrombocytopenic
uncommon,fFeVis still considereda strong oss
cats, two of which had bleeding disorders (Jordan et
bility despite anegative in-house test result, confir-
al.,1993).
mation may again be sought through virus isolation. It
should be remembered however,that not all catswith
FeLV-induced leukaemias
FeLV-related lisease will be persistently viraemic,
Leukaemias are characterized by neoplastic cells
andit is estimated that2-6%of cats that recover from
present in the peripheral circulation,and FeLVis the
FeLV infections (i.e.do not develop persistent virae-
agentrcsponsible formost (70-90%)feline leukacmias.
mia)will go onto devclopFeLV-related discase.
Lymphoblastic (Figure 8.37) or lymphocytic leukae-
mia may ocur alone or in combination with solid
Treatment ol FeLV-infected cats
lymphomas, and other FeLV-associated lcukaemias
The decision onwhether to treat anFeLV-infected cat
include acuteandchronicmyelogenousleukaemia and
must be made on an individual basis but will be influ-
morerarely,monocytic,myelomonocytic,erythrocytic,
enced by the clinicalcondition of the cat,the shortand
megakaryocytic,eosinophilic and undiffcrentiated
long-term prognosis, the risk thc infected individual
leukaemias.
poses to other cats, and the owner's wishes. Sympto-
matic and supportivetherapy ismost often provided for
Diagnosis of FeLV infection
concurrent, secondary or opportunistic infections (e.g.
The diagnosis of FeLV infection is usually straight-
H.felisanditisimportant hat these infectionsar
forward.The clinician will be alerted to thepossibility
correctly identified to allow specific therapy.
Feline RetrovirusInfections 159
thebone marrowpool ofneutrophils).However,it is
Detection of antigenaemia
important that covering antibiotics are used at the same
Plate ELISA
time because of therisk of severe immunosuppression.
 Petchek FeLV (Idexx)
FeLV-associated lymphoma andlymphoid leukac-
Membrane ELISA
mia may respond to appropriate chemotherapy but the
Snap FeLV/FIV Combo (Idexx)
'risks versus benefits’need to be carefully assessed
Rapid immunogold migration
before commencingsuch therapyin a viraemiccat.
Witness FeLV (Merial)
SpeedCat Duo (Vetlab Supplies)
Control of FeLV
Traditionally,FeLV has bcen controlled in colonies
Immunofluorescence
Some commercial laboratories (e.g. VetLab
of cats by the‘test and removalpolicy,which has
been shown to work well (Jarrett,1994).More re-
Services)
cently,the introduction of FeLV vaccination has
Detection of antigen in saliva
meant that the general cat population can also bc
Notrecommendedforroutinetestingdueto
afforded some protection against this disease.
decreasedreliability
Althoughvaccination is avaluable tool tohelppre-
Detection of virus
ventinfectionin catsthat could potentially encounter
thevirus,itisimportant toappreciate thatnoneoft
Virus isolation
Feline Diagnostic Service (University of Bristol)
FeLVvaccinesavailable havebeenshowntoprovide
Felinc Virus Unit (University of Glasgow)
100% protection against infection. Vaccination may
clearlybe desirableincats that are considered tobc
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to detect
at risk'of acquiring FeLV(e.g.cats thatare allowed
proviral DNA
free access outdoors),but because vaccine efficacy is
Some commercial laboratories (e.g. Axiom
known to be less than100%,it is important that a
Laboratories)
vaccinatedcatisnotdeliberatelyexposed tothevirus.
Figure8.38:Some diagnostictestsforfelineleukaemiavirus
Furthermore,acurrent vaccinationcertificate should
(FeLV) in the UnitedKingdom.
not be taken in lieu of a negativc FeLV blood test
ELISAenyme-inkedimmunosorhentassay:FIVfeline
when screening cats before admission to a cattery.
immunodeficiencyvirus.
The use ofvaccines does notinterfere with theroutine
diagnostic tests for FeLV.
FELINEIMMUNODEFICIENCYVIRUS
(FIV)
Epidemiology of FIV
As with FeLV infection, the sourcc of FIV is a cat
persistentlyinfectedwith thisvirus.LikeFeLV,FIVis
a labilcvirus.whichissecreted inthesalivaofinfected
cats.In contrast to FeLV,however,the normal mu-
cosalbarrierprovidesarelativelystrong defence against
penetrationbyFIV,thusdirectinoculationoftheviru
Figure8.39:Variouscommercially availabletestkitsfor the
by biting isthemajorroute of transmission.The risk of
diagnosisoffelineleukaemiavirusandfeline
immunodeficiency virus infections.
transmissionbysocialcontactismuchlowerthanwith
FeLV,and although vertical transmission and trans-
mission via milk has bcen shown with FIV,this is
Awide variety ofanti-viral drugs and/orthosc that
probably not epidemiologicallyimporlant.
modify biological responses have been used in an
The fact thatbiting is themajor route of transmis-
attempt toreverse theviraemia inFcLV-infected cats
sion explains whyFIVinfection is much more com-
(reviewed byRojkoand Hardy,1994).Although some
mon in male cats,free-roaming cats and non-pedigrce
of these agents havc apparently been of benefit in
cats.The age distribution of FIV infection also differs
individual cases, overall the response is poor, and
fromFeLV,infcction beinguncommoninyoung cats
currenlly no specific agent or combination of agents
(less than one year old),but the prevalence incrcases
can be recommended.
withagetoreachapeakinthe6-10-year-old agegroup
Theuse ofcorticostcroidsmayhave somerationale
(Hosie et al.,1989). Importantly,once a cat has been
in cases of immune-mediated hacmolytic anaemia,
infectedwithFIVit will remain infccted permanently.
andcorticostcroidsmay also have a beneficialeffect in
Thenormal immuneresponseis unable to eliminatc
cases of cyclicneutropenia (perhaps throughrelease of
the virus from the body.
 i  o r e  ro p 
FIV is endemic in cat populations throughout the
characterized by pyrexia of several days to weeks
world. Typically, in the gelieral cat population the
duration, neutropenia and gcncralized lymphadeno-
prevalence of FIV in the United Kingdom and North
pathy (lasting up to 9 months). The neutropenia 1may
America is I-6% (Hopper er al., 1994), but the overall
lead to the development of secondary infections, but
prevalence of infection depends on many factors, in-
fatalities in this stage are rare.
cluding the lifestyle of the cats studied and their
After acute infection, cais cnlcr an asymptomatic
population density.
stage which, as alrcady noted, is of variable duration
but generally lasts several years. Although asyinpto-
Pathogenesis of FIV infection
matic, the cat has a progressively impaired immune
Aftcr infection, FIV has been shown to have a tropisin
systen, wlich ultimatcly teads ou to symptomalic
for both CD4t and CD8+ T lymphocytes as well as
FIV infection.
macrophages and astrocytes, with cellular infection
 Many cats are presented for treatment or investiga-
and integration of proviral DNA occurring in a similar
tion during the feline equivalent cf the HIV-associated
way lo FcL.V infcction. Noticeable viracinia is prcsen
persistcnl generalized lymphadenopathy (PGL) OI
during the first 2-4 weeks after infection, but coinci-
AIDS-related complex (ARC) stages of the disease.
dental with the development of an antibody response,
The signs that develop have frequently been likencd to
the viracnmia declines to low levels for many months to
the non-ncoplastic (immunosuppressi ve) findings thal
years until the terminal stages of disease.
occur in association with FeLV infection. The most
After initial exposure to the virus, most FIV.
common presenting signs are persistent or recurrent
infected cats exhibit a prolonged asyrnptomatic
diseascs of the oral cavity, respiralory tract and
period, typically lasting 2-5 years, hut during this tiue
gaslrointestinal traci. Non-specific sigus such as leth-
there is progressive inpairment of the immune system.
argy, malaise, weight loss, lymphadenopathy and
 Although replication of the virus occurs at only a low
pyrexia are also common. Oral cavity discascs are
level during most stages of infection, FIV can ncvcr-
encoumlered particularly frequently aul include chronic
theless be recovered from many sources, including
 gingivitis and stomatitis and periodontitis of varying
circulating lymphocytes, lymph nodes, spleen, bone
severity. Some cats develop neurological signs or
marrow, saliva, brain and cerebrospinal flaid, A dcple-
neoplasia as a consequence of their FIV infection, and
tion of CD4+ T lymphocytes and an inverted CD4*
as the disease progresses it is common to find multiple
CD8+ T-cell ratio are characteristic early findings in
clinical signs in an infected individual.
 FIV-infected cats, and these changes continue to
In the terminal stages of FIV, an AIDS-like syll-
progress with time (Novotney et al., 1990; Barlough e!
droinc may be identified, but its classification lacks the
l., 1991). As early as 6 months after infection, im-
clarity of that in FIIV infection, Features consistent
paired T-cellresponses can be detected, and eventually
with this stage of the disease would include profound
the immunodeficicncy caused by FIV leads lo the
 development of clinical signs, often related to recur-
infections (e.g. cryptococcosis, toxoplasmosis, pox-
 rent secondary or opportunistic infections.
virus and mycobacteriosis), anacmia and leacopcnia.
It is clear that there are many different strains of
FIV, and this is one factor that may determine the
Specific haematological changes associated
clinical effect of infection, the rapidity with which
with FIV infection
lynphocyte subset changes occur and duration of the
asymptomatic period. Other factors may also be im-
Primary infection
portant to the development of disease, such as the age
Neutropenia with or without concomitant leucopenia
 of the cat at the time of infection, exposure dose, route
is a common fcature of thc primary slage of FIV
 of inFection and potential exposure to other pathogens.
 infection. Although many cats may pass through this
stage with little or no overt clinical signs, a small
Diseases associated with FIV infection
proportion may develop significant discase, including
Infecticon with FIV is a significant cause of disease inl
secondary infections dluc lo the neutropenia. As with
cats, and it has been show that the prevalence cf
FeLV, testing for FIV is advisable in any cat that
infection anong cats showing clinical signs compat-
presents with neutropenia.
ible with an immunodeficicncy syndromc (i.e. cats
with chronic or recurrent disease) is typically 15-20%
associationl with the later stages of FIV infection and
(Hopper et al., 1994).
these are comparable to the changes encountercd in
Based on the staging system used to classify
HIV-infcctcd hunans.
humans infected with human immunodeficiency vinus
(HIV), a five-point clinical staging of FIV-infected
Anaemia
cats has been proposed, although the validity of this
Anaemia is frequently found in the later (symplomatic)
 needs to be established. Experimentally, a distincl
stages of FTV infection, and studies of naturally occur-
 acute phase is sccn around 4 weeks after infection,
ring disease suggesta prevalence of anaeinia of between
Feline Retrovirus Infections 161
15% and 40% in these infected cats.As with FcLV
important to interpret these findingsin light of the
infection,FIV-induced immunosuppressionwillpre-
clinical picture.
dispose cats to secondaryH.felis infection,and its
important toconsiderthis organismasapotential under-
Lymphoproliferative andmyeloproliferative
lyingcauseoforcontribuoryfctortoanacmiao
disorders
regenerative and non-regenerative anaemias are en-
Thereisclearevidence that FIV infection predisposes
countcred in FIV-infected cats and,with the latter,
cats to the development of lymphoproliferative and
bonemarrow aspirates are indicatcd torule outmyelo
myeloproliferative disorders, although it is not yet
proliferative disorders or myelodysplasia.Thrombo-
certainwlietherFIVisdirectlyoncogenicor actsas a
cytopenia is occasionally seen in FIV-infected cats.
facilitator through disruption ofthenormalimmune
surveillance that wouldeliminate neoplasticcells.AI-
Lymphopenia and neutropenia
though much lcss common than FeLV as a cause of
Lymphopenia has been reported in 30-55% of FIV
these disorders,a similar range of haematological
infectedcats,andneutropenia in5-35%.Bothof thesc
changes can occur.
maycontribute to aleucopeniathat hasbecnreported
in 5-30% of infected cats.Along with FeLV,FIV
Diagnosis of FIV infection
shouldbeconsideredaprimarycauseofneutropeniain
Unlike the diagnosis of FeLV, there is too little FIV-
the cat,although the pathogenesis of this and other
derived antigen present in plasma tobe detectedusing
cytopenias inFIV is poorly understood.Areversible
currentlyavailabletechnologics.AsFIVinfectionsare
neutropenia has bcen reported in six of seven FIV-
persistent,routine diagnosiscanbebasedondetection
infected cats thatwere treatedwith griscofulvin,and
ofcirculating antibodies to thevirus,which isgener-
thisbears similarity to the observation of antibiotic
ally reliable.Figure 8.40lists the tests currently avail-
associated neutropenias in HIV-infected humans,
able in the UnitedKingdom,and some of these are
although again the precise pathogencsis of these
shown in Figure 8.39.
changes is unclear.
The lymphopenia inFIVinfection is frequently
Serology (detection of FiV antibodies)
profound,andalthoughthestressof concurrent disease
may be partlyresponsible forthis change,theselective
Plate ELISA
depletionof CD4Tcellswillalsocontribute tothis
Petchek FIV (Idexx)
finding.From studics of FIV-infected cats,and by
Membrane ELISA
analogywithHVinfectionotherfactorslikelyob
Snap FeLV/FIV (Idexx)
involvedin thepathogenesisof thevariouscytopenias
Rapid immunogold migration
includeFIVinfection ofbonemarrowstemcellsand
Witness FIV(Merial)
accessory cells,viraemia and/orviralprotcins inhibit-
SpeedCat Duo (Vetlab Supplies)
inghaematopoiesis,an imbalance of bone marrow T
Immunofluorescence
cclls,an alteration in T-cell cytokine profiles,which
Feline Virus Unit (University of Glasgow)
affect haematopoiesis and triggering of immune-
Western immunoblotting
mediated mechanisms.
Limited to research institutes
'Normal'leucocyteresponses
Detection of virus
As with FeLV-induced immunosuppression, depend-
Virus isolation
ingonthetageofdisease,manyV-infectecatsthat
Limited to rcsearch institutes
haveconcurrent orsecondary infectionswill stillelicit
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to identify
an overtlyappropriatehaematologicalresponse.Thus
studies have shown leucocytosis,neutrophilia and a
proviral DNA
 Currently mainly limited to research institutes
left shift as comnon findings in FIv-infected indi
Some commcrcial laboratories,e.g. Axiom
viduals,oftenin associationwith an obviouspurulent
Laboratories
or inflammatory disease process.
Figure8.40:Diagnostictestsforfeline immunodeficiency
Haematological changes in terminal disease
virus (FIV) inthe United Kingdom.
ELISA,enyme-linkedimmunosorbentassay.
Although it can be difficult to accurately clinically
stageanF-infectdcatthereisvidence thatthose
catswithmore advanced diseasc and those that are
As with FeLV diagnosis,severalin-house'diag
enteringthe terminal stages of disease aremuchmore
nostickits are availablefor the rapid dctection of FIV
likely to have severe and multiple cytopeniaspresent
antibodies, and the newer ‘Snap’(Idcxx) and ‘Wit-
onhaematological examination(Sparkes er al.,1993).
ness(Merial) kits have done much to minimize the
Results of routine haematology may therefore havc
danger of tcchnical error when performing these tests.
someprognosticvaluefortheindividualalthoughitis
Evenwhentechnicalerroriselininated,falsepositive
 162 Manual of Canine and Feline Haematology and Transfusion Medicine
and false negative results are more of a conccrn with
Control of FIV
 FIV than FeLV testing. In a cat showing clinical signs
As no vaccine is available for FIV, control of this
compatible with FIV infection, and perhaps with
disease relies on detection of infected cats and then
clinicopathological changes consistent with FIV, a
e Aou rn Aea n yons u peeuu sie fon lunsu
positive result from a correclly pcrforincrl test is highly
unlikely to transmit infection. This may involve the
likely to hc reliable. However, an as yet undetermined
neutering of entire cats, and confining cats to prevent
 proportion of FIV-infected cats (possibly as high as
then wandering. Specific aspects of the control of FIV
10-15%) are seronegative on convenlional testing.
have been outlined by Hopper et al. (1994).
The reasons for this are unclcar, but may include
intdividual variation in the response to FIV infection. A
terminal decline in antibody concentrations is seen in
REFERENCES AND FURTHER
HIV infection, but there is little evidence that this is an
READING
ienportant factor in FIV-infecled cats that are sero-
negative. There is currently no easy solution to the
Barlough JE, Ackley CD, Gcorge JW, Levy N, Acevedo R, Moore PF,
concein of cats suspected of having FIV infection that
Ridcout BA, Cooper MD and Pedersen NC (1991) Acquired
fcst seronegalivc. One approach is 1o repeat the sero-
inmunodeficieneyvins infection comparison of shor-tern and
logical test at 2-61monthly intervals and, as many of the
longte infectons. Jowrnlof Acqirec mmne Deficiency
rapid inmunodiagnostic kits rely on detection of anti-
Syrdromes 4,219--227
Bohade PA,Nash ASand RagersanP(1988)Felinehaemobartoncllosis:
bodies toa singlc viral protein, tlic usc ofa clifferent test
clinical, haematological andpatholngicalstuicsin matural infections
and he relationship to infection with feline lcukaetmia vinus.
methodology looking for antibodies to alternative or
Vererinary; Record 122, 32-36
nultiple antigens (e.g. western blotting or immuno-
Honvcr EA and Mullins J] (1991) Feline leukaemia virus infection and
fluorcscence) may have some mcril in these cases.
discascs, Journai ofthe Anerican Vererinary Medicat Associarion
199, 1287.-1297
Detection of integrated proviral DNA by the
Hopper CD, Sparkes AH and Harbour DA (1994) Feline
 polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is now available as a
inmnnndeficieney vitus. In: Felire Medicie we! Therapenties
commercial diagnostic assay for FlV infectian. This is
2*" edn, cd. EA Clhandler, CJ Gaskell and RM Gaskell.,pp. 48a-505.
Blackwell Scientific, Oxford
Hosic MJ, Robertson C and Jarrett O (1989) Prevalence of feline
 particularly useful in cases ofsuspected FIV infections
leukacimia virus and antibodics to feline inmunodeficiency virusin
cuts in the United Kingdom. Vererinary Record 128,293-297
that are seronegative by conventional tests. Howevcr,
Jarrell O (l994) Felinc leulaeuia virus. lu: Feline Medicine ard
Theruperties, 2nd galt, ed. EA Clancler, CJ Gaskell and RM
gent quality control to ensure reliability of test results,
Gaskell, pp.473 -487. Blackwell Scienifie, Oxford
Jordan HL., Grindem CB and Brietschwerlt EB (1993)
thus making it unsuitable for routine diagnostic use al.
Thrombncytopenia in cats: a retnospective study of 41 cases.
this time. Additionally, to date there have been no
Jorrnal ofVeterianary Internet Medicine 7, 261-265
Macy DW (1994) Feline immnodeficieacy virus. In: The car, diseases
published studies critically assessing the reliability of
ad cliicai management, 2 ednt, ed. RG Sherding, Pp. 433-448.
PCR for diagnosis of clinical FIV infection.
Churchill Livingstone, New York
Nuvotey C,English RV,Housman J, Davidson MG,Naissc MP,Jeng
C-R,Davis wCundTompkinsMB(199U) Lynphocytepopulation
Treatment of FIV infection
changes in cats naturally infected with feline inmunodeficieney
As with FeLV, treatment of FIV-infected cats is largely
virus. AIDS 4, 1213-1218
Pedersen NC and Barlongh IE (1991) Chintical overview of feline
symptomatic and supportive, although again efforis
inmunodeficiency virus. Journal of the American Veterinary
should bc made to identify specific seconlary or opor-
MedicalAssociation199,1298-1305
Rojko JL and Hardy WD (1994) Feline leukaemia virus and other
tunistic infections that can be appropriately treated.
retroviruscs. In: The cat, diseases aned clinical maragemen, 2d
 Specific treatment for haematclogical abnormalitics is
edn, ed. RG Sherding. Pp. 263-432. Churchill Livingstonc, Ncw
not feasiblc,butconsiderationofconcunrent drug therapy
Shelton GH, Linenberger ML and Abkowitz JL (1991) Haemalotogie
andthe possibility of drug-associated sideeffectsshould
abnormalitiesincats seropositive for felieiunanodefcieny
be considered when faced with an FIV-infected cal thal.
virus. lowrnal of the Americon Vererrmary Medicai Association
199, 1353-1357
is neutropcnic. The reverse transcriptase inhibitor
Sparkes AH, HapnerCD, Millard WG, Gruffyld-Jones TI and Harhur
zidovudine (AZT) at a dose of 5 mg/kg twice daily has
clinicopathological findingsin90naturallyoccurring cases.Joma!
shown some efficacy in thc clinical managemenl of
of Vererinary Internai Medicine 7, 85-90
FIV-infcete(d cats, altlhough its myelosuppressive activ--
Swenson CL, Kocilba GJ, O'Keefc DA, Crisp MS,Jacobs RM and
ity. and in particular the induction of anaemia, may
Rojko Ji (1987) Cyclie luaenatopoicsis associated with rchinc
leukaemia virus infection in two cats.Joraat of the Awericat
preclide its long-tern continual use.
Veterianary Medfical Associafion 191, 93-96
PART TWO
Haemostasis
CHAPTER NINE
Overview of Haemostasis
Mary F McConnell
INTRODUCTION
are sequestered within the subenlothelium. Intact
endothelial cells secrete antithrombotic substances such
Bloorl is csscntial Ror the transporl of oxygcn and
as prostacyclin, which is a vasodilator ad platelet
nutrients to the tissues and the return of carbon dioxide
 inhibitor. Platelets are also repelleal by the negatively
and waste products from the tissues. Haemostasis is the
charged surface of the intact endothelial cell barrier.
maintenance of vascular integrity and blood fluidity
that is necessary for thc normal fumction of blood.
von Willebrand factor
When a blood vessel is injured, blood loss must be
von Willebrand factor (vWf) is a large protein synthe-
minimized by the rapid formation of a clot at the site of
sized by endothelial cells, whichi has two major func-
injury. Tlis is achicved by the forination of a plalclc.
lions (Ruggeri and Ware, 1992). It is necessary for
plug over the injury site (primary haemostasis) and the
platelet adhesion at sites of vascular dlamage, and it
stabilization of this plug by a mesh of fibrin formed in
functions as a carrier molecule for factor VIll in the
the coagulalion cascadc (sccondary hacmostasis). It is
circulation. It consists of multiple subunits, with both
equally important that the clot dissolves once the blood
smaller and larger multiple-subuit forms being syn-
vessel is repaired, re-establishing normal blood flow.
thesized. The larger molecules are the most effective at
There is a conslan delicatc balancc bctwcen clot
binding to platelets and are preferentially stored within
formation and clot dlissolution (fibrinolysis), which
the cndothclial cells until released in response to a
may be disturbed in either direction in a range of
variety of stimuli, including thrombin and fibrin. Some
 pathological conditions.
vWf is also constantly released into the plasma and the
subcndothclial tissucs. A small amount of vWf is
synthesized by megakaryocytes and stored within plate-
PRIMARY HAEMOSTASIS
let granules.
Primary haemostasis is the interaction between plate-
Platelets
lets and damaged vascular endothelium to form a
Mammalian platelets are small anucleate cells 2-4 μm
platelet plug at the site of injury (Hawiger, 1990). In
in dlianeter derived from rmegakaryocytes in the bone
capillaries and venules, this initial platelet plug com-
 marrow. They have a plasma mermbrane that contains
bined with vasoconstriction may provide adequate
 numerous types of receptors, a cytoskeleton and con-
hacmoslasis. In vcsscls whcrc flow and pressure are
 tractile proteins that allow them to change shape and
 greater, it is essential to stabilize this plug with an
various types of granules, some of which can rclcasc
overlying mesh of insoluble fibrin formed by the
their contents when platelets are activated. The dense
process of scconrlary haemostasis.
 granules contain cations, nucleotides and amines,
whereas the o-granulcs comtain numerous protcins,
Components required for primary
including fibrinogen, vWf and factors that promote
hacmostasis
vascular repair.
Endothelium
Mechanism and control of primary
The vascular systen is lined by endothclial ccls, which
haemostasis
sif on a basement membrane that separates the endothe-
When a blood vessel is damaged, the enrlothelial cell
lial cells from the subendothelial tissues. The subendo-
barrier is broken and the subendothelial tissue is
thelial tissues contain a variety of components including
exposed (Figure 9.1). Thisresults ina localized decrease
collagen, fibroblasts, elastic fibres and simooth muscle.
in the factors that normally prevent platelet adhesion,
Platelets do not adhere to intact healthy endothelium
 as well as exposure of the platelets to subenclothclial
Ligands such as collagen and von Willebrand factor,
substances such as collagen, which promote platelet
which are involved in platelet ardhesiou to cndothelium,
adhesion. Simultancously, lhere is localized vasocon-
166Manualof Canine andFelineHaematology andTransfusionMedicinc
Fibrinogcn
Platelet (inactive)
vWf
Endothelial cell
Bascment membrane
(a)
vWf
Subendothclial collagenfibrils
Activated platelets undergoing shape change,releasing the contents of
theirgranules and formingfibrinogen-mediatedplatclct-lo-platcletbridges
Platelets adhering tovWf and exposed
(b)
subendothelial collagen fibrils
Primaryplatelet plug formed by platelets adhered tovWf and subendothelial
collagen plus fibrinogen-mediated platelet-to-platelet bridging
(2)
(d)
Platelet plugstabilized bythefibrinmeshformed insccondary haemostasis
Figure9.1:(a) Intact endotheliumand components of primaryhaemostasis.(b)Initialresponse ofplateletstovascular damage
andexposureto subendothelialcollagenfibresandvonWillbrandfactor(vWf.(c)Recruitmentofplateletsto the growing
platelet piuginresponse to agonistsreleusedfromtheplateletgranulesandthegenerationofthrombininsecondary
haemostasis.(d)Stabilizationof the platelet plug by thefibrinmeshformedinsecondary haemostasis.
Overvicw of Hacmostasis 167
striction, which reduces the rate of blood flow. Platelets
two major enzyine-cofactor complexes (tenase and
adhere to the subendotheliai colagen via a specific
prothrombinase) formed during coagulation (Zwaal
plasma membranc receptor, and the binding of collagcn
and Schroit, 1997). In resting platclcis, the negatively
e sieed n on aes e suis adaai s o
charged meinbrane phospholipids are located on the
results in a series of events called platelet activation.
inner leaflet of the lipid bilayer of the plasma men-
Activaterl plateleis change shapc frorn smooih and
branc. When plateleis arc activated in primary hac-
discoigito roud with nunerous projecting pseudopods,
mostasis, these negatively charged phospholipids
which greatly increase platelet surface area. Activation
translocate to the outer surface of the platelet men-
exposes fibrinogen receptors on the platelet membrane
 brane where they are exposed to the circulating coagu-
 and allows fihrinogen-mediated platclet-to-platclet
lation factors. The anchoring of the tenase and
 aggregation. The contents of the dense and α-granules
prothrombinase complexes to the platelets in the plate-
let plug also serves to localize the coagulation cascade
lo the site of injury, where they bind to thc platelets
and thrombin generation fo thc site of injury.
already bound to the subendothelium. The exposure of
the subendothelial tissues also results in a conforma-
Ionized calcium (Ca*t)
tional changc in vWf that allows plalclcts io recognize
Lonized caleium (Ca' ) is csscntial for the formalion and
and bind vWf, resulting in further adherence of platelets
function of the tenase and prothrombinase complexes.
to the subendothelium as well as pronoting further
platelet activation. The primary hacmostatic platelet
Tissue factor
plug uver the site of vessel injury is formed by the
Tissue factor is a glycoprotein that is part of the plasma
combination of platelets adhered to the subendothelium
membrane of a variety of cells, including subendothe.
 and platclcts aggregated to each othcr.
lial fibroblasts. Tissuc factor is not normally prcsent in
thc circulation or expressed on ccll surfaces, bul whcn
subendothelial cells are damaged or activated, tissue
SECONDARY HAEMOSTASIS
factor is expressed and exposed to the circulating
Secondary haemostasis is the process of blood coagula-
coagulation factors.
tion (Mann, 1999). Central to coagulation is the genera-
tion of thrornbin, which converts soluble fibrinogen to
Contact activation factors
Traditionally, the conlact aclivation factors (F XIL,
 insoluble fibrin. The fibrin is then crosslinked and forms
 prekallikrein and high molecular weight kininogen)
a mesh, which stabilizes the platelet plug formed in
primary haemostasis. Thrombin formation is the prod-
were thought to initiate the intrinsic branch of the
lict of a cascade of enzymatic reactions initiated by
coagulation pathiway, but alhongh the contact factors
are important in in vitro clotting tests theirsignificance
tissue trauna and release oftissue factor. In this cascade,
in in vivo coagulation is doubtful, as deficiencies in 
cach coagulation faclor is converled to its active form,
which is then able to catalyse the next step in the cascade.
clinical hleeding disorders. They are included here
Traditionally, the coagulation cascade has been
 divided into the extrinsic, intrinsic and common path-
because of their role in in vitro tests of coagulation. In
the activated partial tlromboplastin time (APTT), a
surfacc activator is used to aclivatc these contact
activation and the extrinsic system initiated by the inter-
factors, resulting in sequential activation of factors X1,
action of tissue factor and activated factor (F) VI. These
IX, X and Il (prothrombin) and fibrinogen.
Iwo paths converge into thecommon pathway attle point
Thesc thrcc plasma proteins may bind to nega-
where F X is activated. The lines between the extrinsic
tively charged surfaces or molecular complexes where
and intrinsic pathways have blurred as knowledge has
they interact to initiate a range of responses (Kaplan
increascd, but the terms are uscd widely and are useful in
 the interpretation of in vitro coagulation tests in which the
ct al., 1997). Ccntral to contacl acfivalion is the
reactions may differ slightly from the coagulation
conversion of F XII to its active form, F XIIa. F XII
cascarle in vivo because of thc couditions under which 1hc
is synthesized in the liver and circulates in the blood
untilitbinds toan initiatingsurface and auloactivates
assays are run. It is now known that the extrinsic tissue.
to F Xlla. Thc initiating surface seems to be a nega-
factor pathway is the primary pathway in the initiation of
the blood coagulation cascade in vivo and that intrinsic
 basement membrane exposed during vascular injury.
activation is more important in sustaining the process.
F XIla is able to initiate the intrinsic coagulation
Components required for secondary
pathway by converting F XI to F XIa. F XIla also
converts prekallikrein to kallikrein, which then con
haemlostasis
verts high molecular weight kininogen to the inflam-
Negatively charged phospholipid surface
Matory mediator bradykinin, In vivo the contact factors
Activated platelcts provide the negatively charged
 are more important in the initiation of inflammation
phospholipid surface that is essential for anchoring the 
and fibrinolysis than in coagulation.
168 Manual of Canine and Feline Haeinatology and Transfusion Medicine
F XI
 Mechanism of secondary haemostasis
F XI is synthesized by the liver and may be considered
Secondary haemostasis is initiated by the same cir-
one of the cointact factors. Unlike the other contact
cumstances that initiate primary haemostasis
factors (FXlI, prekallikrein aurlhigh molecular wcighit
(Figurc 9.2). Tissue Iraurma resulis in exposure of the
kininogen), its deficiency leads to a bleeding disorder.
subendothelial tissues, with the primary initiating
..
Although F XI can be activated by F XIla, it is activated
factor in secondary haemostasis being the exposure
 much more efficiently by thrombin in a positive feed-
of tissue factor to the proteins of the blood coagula-
back systerm and is 1more iuporlan1 in sustaining than
tion system. Tissuc factor initially combines with
initiating the coagulation cascade.
the small amount of pre-existing circulating F VIla
to form F Vlla-tissue factor complex that directly
The vitamin K-dependent coagulation factors
activates F X. The process is amplified as more
The vitamin K-dependent clotting factors (factors II
F VII is activated by F Xa and by autoactivation,
pazisqus szue are (x pu xi ta (qood)
allowing the formation of more F Vlla-tissue factor
by ihe liver as inaclive precursors (proenzymes), whiclh
complex. The function of tissue factor is to act
 are activated in the process of coagulation. They are
as a regulatory protein, which greatly increases
often referred to as serine proteases because thiey belong
(greater than 10” times) the rate at which F VIIa
to a group of enzymes that has a reactive serine at the
autoactivates and activates factors IX and X.
aclive sic. During synthcsis, lhcy uudergo a vitamin
 Although the F VIa-tissue factor complex activates
K-dependent modification in whichy-carboxyglutamate
both factors IX and X, this does not mean that the
is added to the protein. The y-carboxyglutamate is
activation of F X via F IXa and the tenase enzyime
ncgatively clharged and able to bind strongly to Ca'+,
complex is redundant. Once a small amount of
resulting in the formation of Cat*-coagulation factor
F Xa has been generated by dlirect activation of
complexes that bind to the negatively charged phos-
F X by the F VIla-tissue factor complex, the F Xa
pholipid surface of aclivated platelets. F VII is different
mclecule cooperates with the F Vlla-tissue factor
to the other clotting factors in that it is poorly inhibited
cornplex resuilting in preferred formation of F Xa
by the major natural anticoagulant, antithrombin I
via F IXa and the tenase complex.
(ATII) and 1-2% of the total F VII circulates as F VIIa
The tenase complex consists of F Vllla interact-
(Morrisey er al., 1993). This F VIa is available to
ing with Ca++ and F IXa on the negatively chargedl.
1
 initiate coagulation in response to endothelial damage
surface provided by activated platelets. This anchors
and release of tissue factor
 and localizes the tenase complex to the site of damage
and allows tenase to activate F X to F Xa. F VIII is
Cofactors F VIHI and F V
aaisod p u uquon Ao pue ex e Aq paaoe
Factors V and Vlll are synthesized by the liver and
feedback loop.
function as non-cnzymatic protein cofactors in coagu-
The prothrombinase conplex is formed by
：
lation. Once activated by thrormbin or F Xa, they
F Xa with Ca* and activated F V. This is bound on
：
greatly increase the reaction rates of the tenase (F
the negatively charged platelet membrane in a
VIHa) and prothrombinasc (F Va) complexes.
similar fashion to the tenase complex. F V is
activated by thrombin and F Xa and is then able to
Fibrinogen
bind and localize prothrombin (F I) to the site, as
Fibrinogcn is a large plasma proteinsynthesized by the
wcll as greaily increase thie rate at which F Xa
liver. It consists of two identical halves, cach of which
converts prothrombin Io thrombin (F Ila). The gen-
has three polypeptide chains (Aα, Bβ and y) wound
eration of thrombin is central to normal haemostasis,
around each other to form a linear molecule. The
 san   so  ae p
ainino ends of the Ao and Bp chains are callerl
massive amplification of the coagulation cascade
fibrinopeptides A and B respectively. These
via the thrombin-mediated feedback activation of
fibrinopeptides are highly negatively charged and this
factors V, Vl and Xl. Thrombin is a potent platelet
keeps the fibrinogen moleculesaparl,preventing spon-
agonist anel is inportant in the continued forrmation
 taneous aggregation within the circulation. Thromabin
 ofthe platelet plug in primary haemostasis. Thrombin
produced in the coagulation cascade cleaves 
the
rapidly converts fibrinogen into fibrin monomers
negatively charged fibrinopepticles A and B from thc
and activalcs F Xill, which ihcn crosslinks thc
fibrinogen molecule to form fibrin monomers, which
fibrin monomers such that both end-to-end and
then spontaneously aggregate to form fibrin.
side-to-side crosslinks are formed. All of the events
 of secondary haemostasis take place on the surface
F XIII
of the prinary platelet plug. and the crosslinked
F XIll is synthesized by the liver as an inactive precur-
fibrin mesh results in a firm fibrin plug that is
sor, which is activated by thrombin to F XIa at thesite
 much stronger than the primary platelet plug and
of clot formation. F Xllla catalyses the formation of
stable crosslinks between fibrin monomers.
enzyme, plasmin.
Overview of Haemostasis169
Vascular damage and exposure of the subendothelial tissues
Tissue
Factor
Contact activation byfactorsXlla,
kallikrein and bradykinin
(of doubtful significance in in vivo
Pre-cxisting
secondary haemostasis)
VII
VIIa
VIla-TissueFactor
VIla
Xla
XI
IX
VIIL
VIII
TENASE
COMPLEX
PROTHROMBINASE
COMPLEX
Ca
Prothrombin
Thrombin
Fibrinogen
Solublefibrin
monomers
Platelet activation
XIII
and aggrcgation
Cross-linked
fibrin clot
Pathway ofmajorimportanceinsecondaryhaemostasis
Positive feedback pathway
Link with primary haemostasis
Significantininvitrointrinsicsystemclottingtests
Figure9.2:Outlineofthe events insecondaryhaemostasis.F,factor;Ca,calcium.
170Manual of Canine and Feline Haematology and TransfusionMedicine
INHIBITORSOFCOAGULATION
Proteins C and S
Proteins C and S are vitaminK-dependent anticoagu-
Blood clotting is terminated by twotypesofreactions.
lantplasma proteins that circulatein theplasma as
Constitutive inhibition is the constantbaseline inhi-
inactive precursors.Endothelial cells have surface
bition of coagulation that controls inappropriate acti-
receptorscalledthrombomodulin,whichbindthrombin.
vation of the clotting cascade.The second group of
When thrombin generated in the coagulation cascade
reactionsare the terminationreactionsinitiated bythe
binds to thrombomodulin on the surrounding intact
clottingprocess.Inadditionto thebiochemical control
endothelial cells,the bound thrombin loses its
of coagulation,active clotting factors arc rapidly di-
procoagulant activity. Instead, it becomes a potent
luted as the blood flows away from the site of injury,
activator of the anticoagulant protein C.The complex
helping to limit thereaction to thelocal area.
ofactivatedprotein Cwith proteinSas a cofactor,Ca
AntithrombinIlI (ATII)
potent inactivator of factors Va and Vllla, therefore
Antithrombin III (ATIll) is the most important consti-
inhibiting the tenase and prothrombinase complexes.
tutive inhibitor of coagulation.This glycoprotein is a
ActivationofproteinCbythrombin-thrombomodulin
potent inhibitor of thrombin and factors IXa,Xa and
is proportional to the amount of thrombin present and
Xla but isa poorinhibitorof F VIIa.The anticoagulant
the extent of the coagulation response.The activated
activity of circulatingATIll is greatly enhancedby
protein C-proteinScomplexalso initiatesfibrinolysis.
binding to the hcparan sulphate polymcrs that arc
located on cell surfaces.Innormal haemostasis,the
FIBRINOLYSIS
ATIllboundtoendothelial cellheparansulphatepar
ticipatcs in controlling the coagulation proccss at the
The final stage in hacinostasis is the repair of the
periphery of the site of vascular injury.
vascular damage and lysis of the fibrin clot to re-
establish vascular patency and normalblood flow
Tissue factorpathway inbibitor
(Narayanan,1998) (Figure 9.3). Fibrinolysis is medi-
Tissue factor pathway inhibitor (TFPI, extrinsic path-
ated by the proteolytic enzymc, plasmin. This is syn-
wayinhibitor)is boundtoendothelialcellsurfacesand
thesized by the liver and circulates an as inactive
is alsoreleased insmall amountsfrom activatedplate-
precursor,plasminogen.Once plasminogen is acti-
lets. It inhibits both the F VIla-tissue factor complex
vated toplasmin,it degrades crosslinked fibrinwithin
and FXaby forming a Ca-stabilized complex be-
a clot torelease crosslinkedfibrin degradationprod-
tween tissue factor,FVlIla andFXa.
ucts,including the crosslinked fragment D-dimer.
Figure 9.3:
Thrombin
Fibrinogcn-
Soluble fibrin
Outlineof the
monomers
eventsin
fibrinolysis.F,
factor;tPA,tissue-
XIIL
XIII
type plasminogen
activator,uPA,
urokinase-type
Cross-linked
plasminogen
fibrin clot
Plasminogen
activator.
uPA
TPA
Protein C-protein S
activationof tPA
Cross-linked
Fragment D
fragments
Factor XIla
Fragment E
DE (D dimer)
Factor XIIa-mediated
activation of factor XI,
prekallikrein and high
molecular weight kininogcn
PLASMIN
Fibrinolysis
"Positive feedback pathway
Secondaryhaemostasis
Overview of Hacmustasis  171
The most potent aetivators of plasminogen
CONCLUSION
arc tisue-type plasminogen activator (tpA) and
urokinase-type plasminogen activator (uPA). Vascu-
Haeimostasis is a delicate balance between formalion
lar endothelial cells synthesizc and relcase tPA in
ofa primary platelet plug at the sile of vascular injury,.
respunse to a widle range of stimuli, including brady-
stahilization of tlic platelet plug by the formation of a
kinin from contact activation and catecholamines.
fibrin mesh, repair of the injury and re-establislment
Released tPA initially binds fibrin, which localizes
 of normal vascular patency by fibrinolysis. There are
the tPA to the site of thromhus fornation. Only then
numcrous points at which both primary and secondary
is tPA able to bind plasminogen and activate it
haemostasis are amplified to generate a rapid response.
to plasmin. The half-life of iPA is short (about 5
 The process is localized to the site of injury, and
miuies), anl fPA is rapirlly removed by the liver.
control mechanisms ensure that thie process does not
The uPA is secreted primarily by the kidneys as
 extend beyond this area.
an inactive precursor. It is activated by the contact
factors kallikrcin, high nolccular weight kininogen
and F Xll as well as by plasmin, and seems to function
REFERENCES
primarily within urine and tissues. F Xlla also acti-
Hawiger J (1990) Platelet-vessel wall interaetions. Plalclet adhesion
vatcs plasininogen, either directly or via activation
and aggregation. Atheroselerosis Revievs 21, 165-186
of F XI and prekallikrein. The kallikrein then acti-
Kaplahay
Silverlherg M (1997) The iriusic coagulation/kiuin-forming
vates high molecular weight kininogen, which also
cascade: asscmbly in plasma and cell sufaces in inflamuation.
converts plasminogen to plasmin.
Atvances 7 Immmology 66, 225-272
 Fibrinolysis is controlled by specific inhibitors
Mann KG (1999) Blood coagulation. Alcoholism: Clinical and
Erperimenat Research 23, 1111-1113
present in the plasma that inactivate plasmin and
Moriscy JH, Macik BG, Ncucnschwander PF and Comp PC (1993)
the plasminogen activators. Plasmin is inhibited by
Qurunitationt of aelivation factor Vll lcvcls in plasuna using atissue
C, antiplasmin and α, macroglobulin. Plasminogen-
B/oue/ 81, 734-744
Narayanan S (199s) Currnt concepts of coagulation and filbrinolysis.
 cells, bepatocytes and platclcts, is the most important
Atvaaces n Cihtical Chemistry 33,133-1G8
Ruggeri ZM and Ware J (1092) The structue and function of von
inhibitor of tPA and uPA. Almost allcirculating tPA is
Willcbrand factor. Throutbosis and Haemostasis 67, 594-599
 bound to PAI-1, and only the tPA captured by fibrin is
membrane phospholipid asymutmetry in blood cclls. Blood 89,
able to activale plasminogcn.
1121-1132
CHAPTER TEN
Haemostatic Diagnostic Techniques
Mary F McConnell
INTRODUCTION
ful results are to be obtained. A clean venepuncture is
essential to minimize the introduetion of tissuc factor
Adequate haemostasis depends on:
into the sample as this may result in misleading results
 Normal structure and function of the blood
due to activation of clotting factors and/or platelets
vascular system!
Excessive turbulence during collectioil and handling.
 Adequate platelet numbers and normal platelet
Or prolonged exposure to extreme temperatures, will
funetion
cause haenolysis and may affect the results, although
 All adequate coagulation system
this effect may ot bc clinically rclevant (Moreno and
. Stability of the resultant clot.
Ginel, 1999). In general, samples that are clottedl,
collected in the incorrect anticoagulant or filled to less
The first and last of these are rarcly recognized as
than 90% of the correcl capacity of the collection tube
significant causes of haemorrhage in veterinary medi-
are unsuitable for haemostatic screening tests. The
cine. However, haemorrhage secondary to either quan-
exact requirements may differ between laboratories,
titative and qualitative plalclet defccts, or defects in the
and it is advisable lo discuss thcse with the relevant
coagulation systen, are relatively commcn problems.
laboratory beforehand. This chapter discusses thie spe-
Aithough the importance of a detailed history and a
cific requirements for sample collection for each test.
thorough clinical examination cannot be Gverempha-
sized, laboratory screening lests are ncccssary lo csta-
blish the presence or absence of most haemostatic
TESTS OF PRIMARY HAEMOSTASIS
disorders. Screening tests are used to evaluate the
overall activity of the haeinostatic mechanism, whcrcas
In primary haeinostasis, interactions between the vas-
identifying problems with coagulation factors such as
cular endothelium and platelets result in the formation
of a primary haemostatic plug, which provides a tem-
use of specific tcsts. Laboralory screening tests are
porary scal over the injured sitc in the blood vessel.
invaluable in the investigation of suspected haemo-
Platelets adhere to subendothelial collagen at the site
static clisorders, but their limitations must be under-
of vascular injury via von Willebrand factor (vWf).
stood. Whereas some screening tests can bc perforncd
This process activates platelets, resulting in the release
in the practice laboratory, many must be sent to a
of platelet granule contents, aggregation of phatelets 
specialist veterinary diagnostic laboratory. Simple
and the provision of a procoagulant surface on the
screening tests may not be sensitive enough to identify
platclets for thc activation of coagulation factors. Vas-
mild haemostatic disorders and, conversely, deficiency
cular defects, von Willebrand's disease (vWD) and
of some cloting factors (e.g. prckallikrein, factor Xll)
either quantitative or qualitative platelet defects result
may produce abnormal screening test results although
in defective prinary hacmostasis.
the animal is clinically normal. However, screening
Icsts performed on samples that have been appropri-
In-practice tests of primary haemostasis
ately collected and processed will provide 1nuch useful
information if interpreted in conjunction with the his-
Buccal mucosal bleeding time
tory and results of lhe clinical cxamination.
The bleeding time is the time it takes for bleeding from
a standardized superficial incision to cease. In animals,
the buccal mucosal bleeding time (BMBT) is the most
SUBMISSION OF SAMPLES TO THE
reliable method for measuring bleeding time. This is a
LABORATORY
useful presurgical scrcening test for ruling oul defec-
tive prirmary haemostasis in an animal with no curren
Thc correcl collection, storage and processing of blood
clinical evidence of bleeding. If the animal has either
samples for haemostatic testing is critical if meaning
thrombocytopenia or clinical evidcnce of defective
174Manual of Canine andFeline Haematology and TransfusionMerdicine
primary haemostasis such as petechiation, caution
with suspected bleeding disorders.Prolonged bleed
must be exercised as it can be difficult lo stop the
ing times are seen with vWD,thrombocytopenia and
bleedingin this location.Some experience with the
qualitative platelet defects.
technique in healthy animals is essentialif meaningful
and reproducibleblceding times are tobeobtained.A
Estimationof plateletnumberand platelet
technique formeasuring the cuticleblecding time has
morphology
been described(Gileset al.,1982).This is sensitive to
Platelet numbers can be semiquantitativcly cstinated
both coagulation defects as well as primary haemo-
onexaminationofstainedbloodsmears.Normalplate-
static defectsbut anacsthcsiaisrecommended and the
lets appear as small (2-4 um diameter, quarter to half
endpointmaybemore difficult todetermine thanwith
the diameterofanerythrocyte)anucleateroundtooval
theBMBT
cells that stain faintly basophilic.Small reddish gran-
ulesmaybevisibleinthecentre,especiallyinplatelets
Method:TheBMBT testisdonewiththe animal held
from cats,which arc usually largcr and more visible
in lateral recumbency,withminimal physical restraint
than those from dogs.
or light sedation.The upperlipis folded back andheld
in place by a gauzebandage;this must be tied tightly
Method:Ablood smear from a samplecollectedin
enough to impede the venousreturn from thelip and
ethylenediaminc tctra-acetic acid (EDTA)is stained
cause congestion (Figure 10.1).An incision is made in
with a Romanowsky stain such as Wright, Giemsa,
a non-vasculararea ofthemucosawithaspring-loaded
Diff-Quik?orRapiDiff?and scannedunder low
cutting device (e.g. Simplate I, Organon Teknika,
power to determinc the prescnecof any platelet
Cambridge,UK;Surgicutt, Ortho Diagnostic Sys-
clumps. If present, these are usually found in the
tems,High Wycombe,UK).The edge of filter,or
feathered edge and along the sides of the smear and
blotting,paper is used to absorb the blood (the paer
will result in falscly decreased platelet counis.The
must be held awayfrom the edgesof the incisionso as
presence ofplateletclumps does notnecessarily
not to disturb the developing clot).The time from
mean that the platelet count is adequate(Grindem et
making the incision to thc cessation of blecding is
al.,1991).Between the feathered edge and the base
recorded.
of the smear is the monolaycr area where the cells
are evenly distributed. This area is examined and
Interpretation:Thebleeding time rangesfrom 1.7 to
the number of platelets in several oil immersion
4.2minutes for healthy dogs (Jergens et al.,1987) and
fields counted.
from 1.0 to 2.4minutes for healthy cats (Parker et al.,
1988). These values may differ slightly depending on
Interpretation:Each platelet in an oil immersion lens
technique,andeachclinicianshouldtestthemethodon
field (1000 x total magnification)represents approxi-
healthy animals before using theBMBT on animals
mately15x10platelets/l
The upper lip is tied back tightly enough to
Oulyblot a small anout of blood
beforerotating the filter paper so that
blotting efficiency is not reduced
Shallow incisionmade with a commercial spring-loaded
cutting device in a nonvascular area of the mucosa
Filter paper is used to absorb he blood dripping from
the wound without disturbing the developing clot
Figure10.1:Techniquefor the measuremen of buccalmucosalbleeding tine inthedog
Haemostatic Diagnostic Techniques  175
 Normal: 1 1--25 platclcis/oil immersion field is
equivalent to an approximate platelet count of
unly available in specialized veferinary laboratories.
≥165 x 10°/1
Mild thrombocyiopenia: 6-10 platelets/oil
Method: A blood sample is collected in EDTA (so-
immersion field is equivalent tu an approximate
lium citrate can be userl, bul hcparin causes platcict
platelet count of 90-150 x 10°/l. This number of
clumping). A platelet counting diluent system contain-
platelets providcs adequate haemostasis
ing ammonium oxalate (Unopette Microcollection
Moderate thrombocytopenia: 4-5 platelets/oil
Systcm for WBC/Plaiclcl Determination, Bccton-
immersion field is equivalent to an approximate
Dickinson, Oxford, UK) is filled according to the
platelet count of 50-90 x 10°/1. This number of
manufacturer's instructions; this dilutes the blood and
platelets provides adequate hacimoslasis,
lyses tlie erythrocylcs. After complete hacmolysis
although bleeding can be expected with platelet
(about 10 ninutes), a clcancd Ncubauer haemocyl0-
counts of ≤50 x 10°%/1
meter is loaded by capillary action, taking care not to
Severe thronbocytopenia: ≤ 3 plateleis/oil
overfill the counting chamber. The haemocytometer is
imnersion field is equal to an approximate
placcd in a moisture chamber (a small containcr with
platelet count of <50 x 10'/1. Platelet counts of
a lid, such as a petri dish, and a layer of wet filter paper)
≤10 x 10"/1 arc considered to be dangerously low.
for 5 to 10 minutes while the platelets settle. The
platelets in the 25 sinall squares within the largc central
Large platelets (shift platelets or megathrombocytes)
square are then counted on each side of the haemo-
may be seen in any condition in which there is exces-
cytometer by using the high dry lens and a lowered
sive platelet destruction and a regenerative platelet
condenser (Figure 10.2). The averagc of these 1wo
response. Shift platelets may also be seen in infiltrative
counts is the platelet count (x Io/litre). All platelet
diseases of thc bone marrow. Small platelets
counts must be confirmed by examining a stained
(microthrombocytosis) may be seen in iron deficiency
blood smear.
anaemia.
Interpretation: Healthy dogs have platelet counts of
Manual platelet count
200-700 x 102/l and healthy cats 300-800 x 10°/1.
Manual platelet counts are simple to perform but have
an inlerent coefficient of variation of 20-25%, even
Clot retraction
when perforrnerd by cxperienced personncl. Platelet
Clot retraction is a crude test of platelet function
coumts performed with electronic cell counters vali-
thal. can be done on non-thrombocytopenic samples
(a)
(b)
Figare 10.2: Couuting plateiets.(a)Each side of the haenocytomerer is marked with mine major squareswhich are suhdivided
into snallersquares.(b)Platelets arecounted onty in the centrat ajrsquare(5) vhich issuhdivided iuo 25minor squares,
microscope condenser lowered. Leucocyres are larger rhan platelets and are readily distinguished fron piatelers.
176Manual of Canine andFelineHaematology and TransfusionMedicine
5-10minutes
2hours
Room temperature
Room tenperature
Glass tube containing
Retracted clot
1 ml of 0.9%w/v saline
Clottcd blood-
and I ml ofwholeblood
saline mixture
Some erythroeytes
may scttle to the
bottom ofthetuhe
Figure10.3:Clotretraction.Bloodisaddedtoaglassubecontaininganequalvolumeoformalsaline,andthemixtureis
allowedtoclotheubeisexaminedourlyandtheseparationoftheretractedclotfromtheserumsvauatedCiotretractin
shouldbecomplete in 2 hours,but may takelonger in the saline-blood mixture.
(Figure 10.3).A blood sample collected without anti-
Laboratory tests of primaryhaemostasis
coagulantfrom a normalanimalwill clot in the tube
Automatedplateletcount
within minutes.The contractile proteinsin platelets
Automatedplateletcounts aremore accurateandpre-
then contract,squeezing the serum out of the clot,
cise than manual counts because many thousands of
resulting in separation of the clot from the serum.
cells are evaluated in each sample.Platelets from cats
There are several variants of this test.
tend to clump,which often causes inaccurate platelet
counts because they are excluded. Unusually large
Method:A sample ofwhole blood is placed into a
platelets may also be excluded from a count.This is
glasstube and allowcd to clot atroom temperature.
Alternatively,the blood may be added to a tube
more commonincatsthan dogs,althoughit does occur
as abreedvariant in CavalicrKing CharlesSpaniels.
containinganequalvolumeofnormalsaline(O.9%
w/v),and the salinc-blood mixture is allowed to clot.
Platelet function tests
Clotting should occur within 5minutes but may take
Platelet function testing is indicated when there is
a little longer when a saline-blood mixture is used.
clinical cvidcncc suggestive of defective primary hae-
The tube is examincd hourly forevidence of separa-
mostasis and/ora prolonged BMBT,but thrombocyto-
tion of the clot from the serum.This saline-blood
penia andvWD have been ruled out.It isessential to
method is more sensitive than whole blood and is
obtain an accurate history of all drugs the animal has
easier toevaluatebecauseof therelativelysmaller
rcccived in the past 10 days to rule out their effects,
volume of the clot.
especially aspirin andnon-steroidal anti-inflamma-
tory agents,which inhibit platclet function.Platelet
Interpretation:Clotretractionusuallyoccurswithin2
aggrcgation testsmust be completedwithin4 hoursof
hoursbutmay takelongerinasaline-bloodmixture.
collectionandrequire specializedandexpensive equip-
Theclotshouldreduce to about50%of itsoriginal
ment.For these reasons,spccific testing of platelet
volume,and the expectedvolumeof serumshould be
function isusually only available atveterinary teach
at lcast90%of theplasmavolume thatwould be inthe
ing hospitals associatedwithuniversities.The ability
sanple.Failure of clot retraction to occur indicates a
of theplatelets tosticktogether(aggregate)and rclcasc
severe plateletfunction disorder.Even though thistest
the contents of their granules is tested in a platelet
is subjectiveandnot very sensitive,withcxperienceit
aggregometer by adding reagents that induce these
is useful.
responses in healthy platelets.
Hacmostatic Diagnostie Techmiques 177
yWf antigen
calcium and platelets as a source of negatively charged
The conccntralion of vWf antigenn (vWf:Ag) in plasma
phospliolipid surface are all essential cofactors in the
o essuno ie Aq pp q ru
coagulation process in vivo.
cnzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Blood should be
collectedl in trisodiun citrate and, if possible, the plasma
In-practice tests of secondary haemostasis
separated imrmediately. It has been shown that vWf:Ag
in plasma stored at either 4°C or 22°C is stable for up to
Activated clotting time
48 hours (Johnstone et al., 1991). In whole blood,
The activated clotting time (ACT) is a simple and
vWf:Ag is stable for 48 hours at 22*C but decreases
useful screcniog test that measures the time it takes for
significantly within 24 hours if stored at 49C. It is
fresh whole blood to clot in the presence of a substance
advisable to discuss sample and shipping requirements 
that initiates the contact activation of coagulation. It is
with the laboratory before collecting the sanple. vWf
a mcasurc of the intrinsic and common coagulation
concentrations in dogs are increased by strenuous exer-
 pathways. It is inmportant to avoid contaminating the
cisc, age, azotaemia, liver disease, parturition and the
 blood sample with tissue factor at the time of collection
vasopressin analogue, 1-desarnino-8-D-arginine vaso-
as this will activate the cxtrinsic pathway. The combi-
 pressin (DDAVP). Blood for vWf:Ag assays should be
nation of ACT and estimated platelet count from a
collecied from animals atrest but shouldnot be collected
 blood smear is the most accurate means of diagnosing
within 2 wecks of any syslemic slress or illness or from
disseminated intravascular coagulationl (DlC) at the
females during oestrus or pregnancy.
point of care (Bateman el al., 1999).
yWf functinn assays
Method: An ACT tube containing diatomaceous earth
 The assays measure the functional ability of vWf in
(Beclon-Dickinson, Oxford, UK) is prcwarmed to
plasma to agglutinate platelets by forming a bridge
37°C and venepuncture perforned. To minimize con-
betwecn arijacent platelels. Washed or formalin-fixed
tammination from tissue factor, 0.25 to 0.5 ml of blood
platelets suspended in the plasma to be tested are
is drawn up into the syringe and discarded, and then 2
exposed to an agglutinating agent such as botrocetin,
ml of blood is drawn up and added to the ACT tube.
which alters the surface charge of the platelets allow.
Alternatively, if collecting directly into a vacutainer
ing vWf to attach. The resulting agglutinatiou can be
tubc, the first 0.25 to 0.5 ml can be collecicd inlo one
measured by visual assessment, but determining the
tube, which is discarded, and then the ACT tube is
endi point is difficult and the assay is best done in a
attached and filled. The timer is started as soon as the
 platelet aggregometer. This test is largely resiricted t
blood enlcrs thc ACT tube. The sample is gcntly mixed
teaching hospitals associated with universities.
by inversion then placed in a 37*C heating block or
water bath (60 seconds for dogs and 45 seconds for
cals). It is then lilted al 10 second intcrvals until thc first
TESTS OF SECONDARY
clot is observed; this may precede coagulation of tlhe
HAEMOSTASIS
entire sample.
ln secondary haemostasis the primary haermostatic
Interpretation: The ACT ranges from 60 to 1l0 sec-
plug is stabilizedl by thc formation of cross-linked
onds in normal dogs and from 50 to 75 seconds in
fibrin. Prinary and secondary laemostasis nust occu
 normal cais. Prolongation of thc ACT indicates a
simultaneously for effective haemostasis to take place.
severe ahnormality of the intrinsic and/or common
The conversion of soluble fibrinogen to insoluble
 pathways. The ACT will also be prolonged in severe
fibrin by thromhin. is the final sicp in a cascade of
tlirombocytopenia (<10 x 10* platelets/l) and
 enzymatic reactions in which the inactive coagulation
hypofibrinogenacmia.
factors are converted to active forms. This cascade is
iniliatedby release of lissue factor from damagedcells,
Whole biood clotting tinc
which combines with factor Vll to form activated
Whole blood cotting limc (WBCT) is a less seusitive
factor Vll (the extrinsic pathway) which initiates the
version of ACT but can be performed with the minimum
aclivation of factor X (the common pathway). Thc
of equipment. Reference ranges using a standardized
proccdure shouki bc established by cach practice.
response, whereas tlhe intrinsic system is responsible
for sustained generation of fibrin. Although the intri-
Method: To minimize contamination with tissue fac
sic pathway of coagulation is triggered by activation of
tor, 0.25 to 0.5 ml ofbloudisdrawn intothesyringeand
factor Xll by exposure to subendothelial collagen and
discarded, and then about 4 ml of blood is drawn and
kallikrein, sustained generation of fibrin in vivo seems
1 ml is added to each of two glass tubes and a timer
started. The lubes are tipped gently to 90 degrces cvery
steps of thc cascade by thrombin generated in the initial
30 seconds until the blood has coagnlated and the.
activation of the extrinsic systen. Factors V and VIL,
average time is used.
178  Manual of Canine and Feline Haenmatology and Transfusion Medicine
 Interpretarion: The WBCT varies a little lepending
 instrunentation and reagents. The use of a diluted
on the size of tubes used (the saine size tubes should
sample may inprove the sensitivity of the PT as a
always be used) and the temperature, but normal dog
screening test in dogs (Mischke and Nolte, 1997).
anrf cat blood will clot within 6 to 7 minutes. Sinmilar to
the ACT, the WBCT will be prolonged in severe
Interpretation: The PT is sensitive to defects in the
thrombocytopenia and hypofibrinogenaeniia.
extrinsic pathway (factor VII) and/or factors in the
common pathway (fibrinogen, I, V and X). Prolonga-
Laboratory tests of secondary haemostasis
tion of the PT relative to the laboratory's reference
These coagulation tests measure the time taken for
range indicates a significant deficiency in clolting
citrated platelet-poor plasma to clot whcn coagulatiou
factor as factors must be decreased to less than 30% of
is initiated by the addition of calcium and activating
agents. Laboratories use either fibrometers, which
longed in acquired vitamin K deficiency, liver disease,
detect when fibrin strands form and span the gap
specific factor deficiencies andl DIC. Factor VII rlefi-
hetwecn
two electrodcs, or photo-oplical
ciency causes prolongation of the PT with no change in
x...
coagulometers, which detect a change in the intensity
other clotting tests. Factor VH has a relatively short
of filtered light when clot formation occurs. Fibrin
half-life, and the PT may therefore be the only cloing
formation can also be detecterl by visual observalion,
test to be prolonged in the early stages of acquired
but this techinique requires considerable practice to
vitanin K deficiency.
obtain consistent results. These tests form the basis of
thc specialized clot-based coagulation assays used 10
Activated partial thromboplastin time
detect specific factor deficiencies. A test kit for meas-
The activated partial thromboplaslin time (APTT)
uring prothrombin time (PT) designed for the human
identifies coagulation abnormalities of the intrinsic
market has heen evaluated in cnc study and found to bc
and common pathrways. Clotting is initiated by adding
snitable for use with sampies from dogs and cats
phuspholipid (which substitules for the negatively
(Monce er al., 1995).
charged phospholipid surface provided by platelets in
vivo), a suuface activator such as ellagic acid, silica OF
Saple requirements for clotting tests
kaolin and excess calcium. Thc reagens used in the
Blood is collected into a plastic syringe, then the
APTT vary greatly in composition and therefore in
necdle is reinoved and the samplc added to a commer-
cial sodium citralc tube and mixed gently by invcr-
laboratory establish their own reference ranges for
sion. It is essential that the tube is filled exactly to the
niark on the tube as an incorrect ratio of blood to
 reagents. Dilution of the plasma does not increase the
sodium citrate causcs misleading resulis. Resulis of
sensitivity of this test when using electro-optical de-
these tests using blood collected from indwelling
tection of fibrin forrmation (Johnstonc, 1984).
jugular catheters are not significantiy different from
those using blood collected by venepuncture. Thc
 plasma should be separated from the sample and
Interpretation: The APTT issensitive to deficiencies
of the intrinsic pathway factors (high-molecular
frozen if the test is not to be run immediately. It has
weight kininogen, prekallekrein, XI, XI, IX and
 bcen shown, howevc, that bloorl samples from dogs
VIIl) and the conmon patlhway factors (fibrinogen,
collected into sodium citrate and stored at 20?C are
I1, V and X). Prolongation of the APTT relative to the
adequate for up to 48 hours after collection, but
laboratory's rcference range indicates a significanl
slorage of blood al 4°C resulis in a significant dlc-
 deficiency, as factors must be decreased to less tlhan
crease in coagulant activity within 24 hours (Mansell
 30% of normal to cause a prolongation in the APTT.
and Parry, 1989). It is advisable to discuss sample and
The APTT cannot be used to deicct hacmophiliac
    
carriers with 40-60% or higher levels of normal
collecting the sample.
factor VIl or IX activity. Clinical bleeding may
occur without prolongation of the APTT or PT in mild
Prothrombin tine
cases of acquired vitarnin K deficiency. Altlhough
The PT (one-stage PT, OSPT) identifies coagulation
factor VILI activity in animals with vWD is some-
abnormalities of the extrinsic and common pathways.
Cloting is initiated by adding calcium and tissuc
times decreased, it is usuafly sufficient to give an
APTT within the refcrence range,
thromboplasti1 (preferably synthetic or derived from
rabbit brain), which provides tissue factor and substi-
tutes for the negatively charged phospholipid surfacc
provided by platelets in vivo. Although there is little
TESTS OF FIBRINOLYSIS
manufacturers, each laboratory must establish their
Thc cnd product of coagulation is the formation of
own reference ranges for each species using their own
insoluble fibrin. The next step in the process is the
Haemostatic Diagnostic Techniques  179
rcpairofthe damaged blood vessel, lysis of the clol and
clof when exogcnous thrombin anl calciun are
restoration of blood flow. This is achieved through1
added to plasina. This test only assesses the ability of
dissolution of the clot by the fibrinolytic systein. Both
exogenous thrombin to convert the fibrinogen in
fibrinogen and fibrin are digesied by thc cnzyme
thc plasma sample io fibrin and bypasses all other
plasmin, which is derived froun an inactive precursor
steps in the coagulation pathway. Each laboratory
(plasiminogen) and activated by several different mol-
establishes its own protocol, but usually sufficient
ecules, of which the most important is tissue plasmino.
thrombin is added to give a TCT of 8 to 10 seconds in
 gen activator (tPA). If plasmin is produced on fibrin
healthy animals.
surfaces, fibrin is digested (fibrinolysis), and when
plasmin is produced in the circulation, fibrinogen is
Interpretation: The TCT is prolunged if there is either
digcsted (fibrinogenolysis). Fibrinolysis and
hypofibrinogenaemia (less than 1.0 g/l) or
fibrinogenolysis release fibrin(ogen) degradation prod-
dysfibrinogenaemia, or if there is inhibition of thrombin
ucts (FDPs). The FDPs have anticoagulant effects
by substanccs in the sample such as heparin, FDPs or
whereas plasmin also inhibits activated factors V and
abnormal serum proteins.
VHI. Except for conditions such as DIC,it is unusual
for fibrinogenolysis to occur in vivo.
Fibrinogen
The simple heat precipitation inethod uscd to meas-
In-practice tests of fibrinolysis
ure increased concentrations of fibrinogen is not
sensitive enough for the accurate measurement of
FDPs (fibrin degradation products, fibrin split
 decreased fibrinogen concentrations, but fibrinogcn 
products)
 assays based on clotting times are not cominonly used
Test kits that use latex particles coated with antibodies
in veterinary laboratories. When high concentrations
to fibrinogen fragments are rapid, accurate, sensitive
of thrombin are added to diluted citrated plasma, thc
and valid for use in animal spccies. Blood samples
rate of clot formation is proportional to the fibrinogen
must be collected in the special tubes supplied with thc
concentration.
test kit. These tubes contain thrombin to initiate clot-
ting and reimove fibrinogen, as well as prolcase inhibi-
Interpretarion: The fibrinogen concentration rangcs
cnly measures FDPs from the circulation.
from 1.5 to 3.0 g/l in normal dogs and cats.
Hypofibrinogenaemia occurs primarily because of
Method: Tes1 kits for deteclion of FDPs (e.g.
increased consuniption in DIC, but decreased pro-
ThromboWellco Test, Wellcome Diagnostics,
dluction of fibrinogen may oceur in advanced liver
disease.
Dartford, Kent, UK) provide clear instructions and all
the naterials neccssary 1o perfon the test. A positive
test result is visualized as agglutination of the latex
Antithrombin IHI
Antithroimbin IHl is a circulating natural anticoagu-
beads.
lant, which is the main physiological inhibitor of
Interpretation: Healthy dogs have FDP concentrations
thrombin. Heparin functions by enhancing the inhibi-
of less than 10 μg/ml. Increased FDP concentra-
tion of thronmbin by ATlll. The concentration of
tions (greater than 40 μg/ml) indicate thal there is
 ATII dcereases in hypcrcoagulative disorders such
increased ffbrinolysis. DIC is the most common condi-
as DIC in sinall animals. Common assays for ATIHI
tion in cats and dogs in which the FDP test result is
activity are based on the use of a synthetic substrate
positive, but conccntrations of FDPs may also be
altached to a chemical group that is colourless until
released by proteolysis by ATII. A chromogenic
increased in cther disorders of fibrinolysis. DIC is a
ATIII assay has been validated for sanples from dogs
pathophysiological process that underlies many disor-
ders ranging from sepsis to malignancy, characterized
(Mandell et al., 1991). Assessment of AT1lI aclivity
is useful in animals suspected of having a
by simultaneous activation of the coagulation and fibri-
 nolytic systems with degradation of fibrin, coagulation
hypercoagulable state.
factors and fibrinogcn by plasmin. Other conditions in
which concentrations of FDPs may be increasedl inclundc
Interpretatiou: In DIC, ATIII concentrations de-
coagulopathy secondary to vitamin K antagonist
crease in comparison to that of norrmal pooled
poisoning, lnepatic discase and thrombotic conditions.
citrated plasma from dogs. In one study, 85% of
dogs (35 of 41) with confirmed DIC had decreascd
Laboratory tests of fihrinolysis
ATIlI concentrations (Feldman et al., 1981). ATHI
also decreascs in hepatic discase owing to lecreased
Thrombin clot tine
synthesis. A'rill is similar in size to albumin and
Thrombin clot tine (TCT) is a useful screening test
is Iost in protcin-losing nephropathies and protein-
that measures the time taken for citrated plasma to
losing enteropathies.
BLEEDING
DIATHESIS
vWf:Antigen
Buccalmucosal
Normal
bleedingtime
Prolonged
Canine
Platelet Count/Estimation
Plateletfunction tcsts
ClotRetraction
(primaryhaemostasis
and
screening test)
Feline
Invcstigaton of
NormalACT/WBCT,PT,APTT
immune-mcdiated
4
thrombocytopenia
Decreased-
ACT/WBCT,PT,APTT
(secondary haemostasis
screening tests)
ACT/WBCT,↑PT,↑APTT
FDPs,TCT forDIC
and
Dccrcased
↑ACT/WBCT,
NormalACT/wBCT,
NormalACT/WBCT,
plateletcount
fACT/WBCT,
↑APTT,normal PT
APTT,↑PT
PT,APTT
↑PT,↑APTT
Intrinsic pathway
Factor VII deficiency
Normalplatelet
Commonpathway
defect
or early acquircd
nos
vitamin K deficiency
ormultiple defects
Specific factor testing
Specific factor
Liver function
(e.g.haemophiliaAorB)
Specific factor
tcsting
tests
testing
Figure10.4:Flowcharsummarizingtheuseofscreening testsofprimaryand secondaryhaemostasisintheinvestigationofableedingdiathesisTestsinblueitaliescanreaditybedone
inveterinaryratice.WfvonWilrandfactor;ACT,ativatedclotingtime;WBCT,wholebloodcoingtmPTrotrombintne;APTT,activatedpartiatromboplastni
FDPs,fibrinogen degradation products:TCT,thrombinclottime;DIC,disseminated intravascutarcoagulation.
Haemostatic Diagnostic Techniques  181
REFERENCES AND FURTHER
Canadian Journai of Conparanive Medicine 43, 198-201
Johnstone 1B, Kcen J, Halbert A and Cranc S (1991) Stability of facuor
READING
V and yon Wilebrand fuctor in carine blood sanaples during
storage. Cenudien Veterinary Jornr 32, 173-175
Baternun SW, Mathews KA, Abrans-Ogg ACG, Lunsdem 3H,
Lialevood JD (1992) Differentaldiagnosis of haemonhagic disorders
Johuslone 1B at Hilers TK (1999) Evaluation ul point-of-care
in riogs. ft Practice 14, 172-180
tests for diagnosis of dlisseminated iutravascular coagulation in
Mandell CP. O'Neill SL an Feldnan BF (1991) Antithrombin II1
dogs adminted toan intcnsive care unitlonraal ofthe Amerco
concentrations associated wilh L-asparagimase administration.
Veterinary Medical Association 215, 805-810
Vererinary Clinica! Parhotogy 21, 68~70
Feldman BF, Madcwell BR and O'Neill S (1981) Disseminated 
Mansell PD adl Parry Bw (1989) Stability of canine faetor VIII:
intravascular coagulation: antithrombin, plasminogen, and
coagulation abnormalitics in 41 dogs, Journt of rhe American
Veterimary Medieal Associanion 179, 151-154
Mischke R and Nole I (I997) Opinization of prothronbin lime
Giles AR, Tiunlin S un Grenwood R (1982) A caning model ol
measuremens in canie plasma. Auerican Joarnal of Veterinary
hemophilie(faetor V1:Cdeeieney) lleeding. Bloog/60,727-730
Reseorch 58, 236-24!
Grindeni CB, Breilschwerdl EB, Corbell WT and Jauns HE (1991)
Monce KA, Atkins CE and Loughman CM (199S) Eyaluation af a
Epidemiologic survey of thromhocytopenia in dags: a report on
987 cases. Veterinary Cliaricat Parhotogy 20, 38-43
and cats. Journal ofthe American Veterinry Medica! Associarion
···.
Hacker SG (1995) Approach to the diagnosis of blecding disorders.
207, 581-584
Compendium of Conring Vererinary Edarcaton 17,33t-349
Moreno P and Ginct PI (1999) Effects of hernolysis, lipaenna and
Jcrgens AE, Turrentinc MA. Kraus KH and Johnson GS (1987) Buccal
bilirubimemin on proUrombintiune,activated partial thromboplasti
mucosal blceding tine of healtlty dlogs annl of dogs in vuious
te anl thrombin tie in plasma sauples frou leally dogs.
pathological states, ineluding taronboeytopenia, urenia ul vou
Research in Veterinary Seience 67, 273-276
......
Willebrand's disase. Americun Jorrnl of Veterinary Research
Parker MT, Collier I L., Kier AB andl Jnhnson GS (1988) Oral tmucosal
48, 1337-1342
bleeding times of normal cats and cats with Chedfiak-Higashti
syndroneorHageman trai(factor XlI deficiency).Veerinary
diltedl plasma: variability due io method of fihrin detcction.
Clinical Parhology 17, 9-12
CHAPTERELEVEN
Disorders of Platelet Number
DavidC.Lewis
INTRODUCTION
Platelets are small (2-4um) anucleate fragments of
cytoplasin that are progeny of bone marrow
pluripotentialstem cellsofthemegakaryocyte lineagc.
Plateletproduction from megakaryocytes is termed
thrombopoiesis.Megakaryocytes are easilyrecogniz
able in bone marrow aspiratesbecauseof their largc
size(20-160μm),lobulatednucleiand abundant pale
staining cytoplasm (Jain, 1993) (Figure 11.1). A vari-
ety of cytokines play important roles in thrombo-
poiesisincludinginterleukin-3(IL-3)andinterleukin-6
Figure 11.2:Cutancous petechiae on the concave surface of
(IL-6), granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating
factor and thrombopoietin Jain,1993).The average
thepinna ofadogwiththrombocytopeniacaused byheat
stroke-induceddisseminated inravascularcoagulation.
circulatinglife span of canine plateletsis about 5 days
(Slichteretal.,1987)andof felineplateletsisabout30
andismaintained forminutes tohoursbyrelease of
hours (Jacobs et al.,1986). Senescent platelets are
vasoactive substancesfrom platelets andsurrounding
removedbyfixed tissuemacrophagesprcdominantly
tissues.During this time,platelcts form an occlusive
in the spleen and liver(Jain,1993).
plug,which stops haemorrhage.Platelets initially ad-
here to adhesive tissueproteins exposed as aresult of
vessel damage,via von Willebrand factor(Figure 11.3).
After adhesion,platelets contact collagen andother
activator proteins,change shape,become stimulated,
adhere to one another andreleascbiochemical sub-
stances (e.g. serotonin,adenosine diphosphate,
thromboxane A)that maintainvasoconstriction,am
plifyplatclet activation andrecruit additionalplatclets
to the growing haemostatic plug (Figure 11.4).This
process is termed platelet aggregation.In addition to
forming theinitial occlusive plug to effect rapid cessa-
tion of hacmorrhage (Figure 11.5), platelets play a
Figure 11.1:Bone marrowaspirate(10Xobjective)with two
criticalprocoagulantrole bysecretingcoagulationpro-
maturemegakaryocytesrecognizablehecauseoftheir large
teins (fibrinogen, factor V) and Ca+and providing a
sizeand lobulatednucleiNormalcellular bonemarrow
phospholipid surfacc (platelet factor 3)upon which
aspiratesfromdogscontain1-3megakaryocytesperlow
power(10xobjective)field.
coagulation reactions are accelerated.Theintrinsic and
extrinsiccoagulation cascadesleadto formation of
Plateletshaveimportantrolesinthrombosis,inflam-
fibrin,which stabilizes the initial platclet plug Figurc
mationand tissuerepair;butthey arebestrecognized for
11.6).Adhesion and aggregation of platelets is usually
their rolc in haemostasis and in maintaining the struc-
tural integrity of the endothelium.In the presence of
vesselsbutstabilizationof theplateletlugbyfibrinis
thrombocytopeniabloodleaksthroughstructurallyn
rcquiredforpcrinanent haemostasis.Fibrinstabilization
tactbloodvcssels,givingrisetospontaneouspetechiae,
ofthelaletlugsotowever,rquiredfrffct
purpura and mucosal bleeding (Figure 11.2). After
cessation of haemorrhagefromvery smallvessel wall
bloodvessel damage,localvasoconstriction rcsulting
defects. Clot retraction and tissue repair are additional
fromnervousreflexesandlocalmusclespasmoccurs
functions of platelets (Jain,1993;Hackner,1995).
184Manual of Caninc and Feline Hacmatology and TransfusionMedicine
THROMBOCYTOPENIA
RcdBlood Ccll
Platelet
Thrombocytopenia is themost common acquired hae
mostatic disorder in dogs,with areportedprevalence
rate in canine admissions toone hospital of about 5%
(Grindem et al.,1991).For dogs, a reference range of
plateletcoumtof200to500x101,ashistorically
reported in the literature,is used bymany laboratories.
However,some morcreccntly establishedreference
rangesuse approximately150x10°/lasthe lowerlimit
ofnormal(Sullivanetal.,1995).Hence dogswith mild
Figure1l.3:Subsequent robloodvessei damage,platelets
thrombocytopenia asreportcd bysomelaboratories
adheretosubendothelialproteinsviavonWiliebrandfactor,
may benormal.Greyhounds,CavalierKing Charles
become activatedand changeshape.
Spaniels and Shiba Inus have been reported to have
lower platelet counts than otherbreeds of dog(Eksell
Figure 11.4:Afiter being
etal.,1994;Sullivanet al.,1994;Smedile etal.,1997;
activated,plateletsrelease
biochemicalsubstances
Gookin et al., 1998).
(suchas thromboxane A
Thrombocytopenia is much less common in cats
adenosine diphosphate and
than in dogs,with a reported prevalence in cats exam-
serotonin)that amplify
inedat oneveterinaryhospitalof about1%(Jordanet
vasoconstriction and
al.,1993).In cats,areferencerangeof plateletcountof
plateler activation and
recruitadditionalplatelets
approximately 250 to 800x 10/1 is rcported (Jain,
to the haemostatic plug.
1993). Automated haematology analysers frequently
result in artefactual thrombocytopenia in cats owing to
Platelet agonists
the similarsizeof feline platelets andred cells and the
induce platelet -
tendency of feline platelcts to clump (Hackner,1995)
platelet adherence
(Figure 11.7).Platelet counts derived from a haemo-
cytometer aremorereliablethan automatedplatelet
countsincats,althoughtheywillalsobeinfluencedby
platelet clumping. Clumping can also occasionally
causeproblemswith canine platelet counts.
RBC
Figure11.5:Theinitial plateletplugrapidly stops
haemorrhage.RBC= red blood cell.
Fibrin formation proceeds and platelets contract,
Figure 11.7:Platelet clumping incat blood.Felineplatelets
haveagreater tendency toclump thancanineplatelets.
forming a stable haemostatie plug
Additionaily,thesimilar sizeof felineplateletsandredcells
resutsinautomatedplateletcountsbeingunreliableincats.
Causesof thrombocytopenia
The majorpathophysiological causes of thrombocyto-
penia are:
Decreased platclct production(due tobone
marrow disease)
Acceleratedplateletdestruction orutilization
Figure1l.6:Althoughadhesion and aggregation of platelets
Platelet sequestration.
are usualysufficienttostopinitiat haemorrhagefrom
damagedvesselsstabilizationof theplateletplugbyfibrin
Decreased platelet production(bone marrowdisease)
isusuallyrequiredexceptforsmallvesseldfectsfor
Thrombocytopenia duetobone marrowdisease(Figure
completehaemostasis.
11.8) is characterized invariably by pancytopenia,
Disorders ofPlatelet Number 185
be confused withacceleratedplateletdestructionfroma
Drug-induced
varietyof causesnwhich thrombocytopeniamay be
Cytotoxic drugs: cyclophosphamicde,
the only abnormality,or may be accompanied by neu-
azathioprine, doxorubicin
trophilia. A review of the patient's history (mismating
Antibiotics:chloramphcnicol,sulphonamide/
injections and history of castration)and thorough physi-
trimethoprim
calexamination（testicularpalpation)isthebestway to
Oestrogen
distinguishbetweenthese possibilities.Abonemarrow
Phenylbutazone
aspiratecanbe used toconfirmthediagnosisofoestro-
Phenobarbitone
gen toxicity(few orno megakaryocytes)if necessary
Albendazole
(Jain,1993）.Identification of thc source of oestrogen
Thiazide diuretics
Phenytoin
would alsobeconfirmatory.Cats aremuchmoreresist
Griseofulvin (especially in cats infected with
ant to the toxic effecis of oestrogens than are dogs.
feline immunodeficiency virus)
Propylthiouracil,methimazole
Acceleratedplateletdestruction orutilization
Ribavarin (cats)
Thrombocytopenia dueto accelerated platelet destruc
tion or utilization (Figure 11.9) can be considered by
Neoplasia (myelophthisis)
dividing the aetiologies into inmune and non-immune
Originating in bone marrow: myeloproliferative
categorics.Haemorrhage doesnot causethrombocyto-
or lymphoproliferative disease
penia in humans,and thrombocytopenia in people
Metastatic neoplasia
Infection
Immune-mediated platelet destruction
Canine parvovirus, distemper
Primary immune-mediated thrombocytopenia
Feline infectious enteritis
(also called idiopathic thrombocytopenic
Feline leukaemia virus
purpura;ITP)
Feline immunodeficiency virus
Systemic lupus crythematosus (SLE)
Sepsis, endotoxaemia
Feline leukaemia virus,feline immunodeficiency
Ehrlichiosis
virus
Systemic mycoses: histoplasmosis,
Dirofilariasis
blastomycosis, coccidioidomycosis,
Ehrlichiosis(Ehrlichia canis)
cryptococcosis
Neoplasia: particularly lymphoproliferative
Cytauxoonosis
disease but also a variety of solid tumours
2Canine retroviral infection
Drug-induced: especially potentiated
Other
sulphonamides but also a variety of other drugs
Myelofibrosis: secondary to neoplasiasepsisor
Rheumatoid arthritis
bone marrow necrosis
Babesiacanis
?Neonatal alloimmune thrombocytopenia
Haemophagocytic syndrome
?Propylthiouracil, methimazole
Figure11.8:Causes of decreased platelet production(bone
?Viral infections (distemper) or modified live
marrow disease).
virus vaccines
Non-immune platelet utilization
bicytopenia(thrombocytopeniainassociation with non-
Disseminated intravascular coagulation
regenerative anaemia or neutropenia) or presencc of
Vasculitis: SLE, septicaemia immune complex
abnormal bloodcells orabnormal cell morphology,as
disease, E. canis, E. platys, granulocytic
detectedby cvaluationofaperipheral bloodsmear(Jain,
ehrlichiosis,Rickettsia rickettsii,ine
1993).A diagnostic guideline is to consider that the
infectious peritonitis, polyarteritis nodosa,
absence of thesechanges ina patient with thrombocyto-
canine adenovirus-1, canine herpesvirus
penia issuggestive that the thrombocytopenia is due to
Haemorrhage due to anticoagulant rodenticide
acceleratedplatclet destructionorutilization.Oestrogen
toxicity
toxicity is an important cxception to this guideline. In
Haemolytic uraemic syndrome (also called
early ocstrogen toxicity from exogenous oestrogens
cutaneous and renal vasculopathy of
(mismating injcctions, treatment of prostatic hyper-
Greyhounds)
plasia or perianal gland adenomas)orendogenousocs-
Hepatozooncanis
trogens(Sertolicelltumour),thrombocytopenia maybe
Tularaemia
theonlyhaematologicalabnormalityfoundandis often
Leishmaniasis
accompanied by neutrophilic leucocytosis (Sherding et
Snake envenomation
al.,1981;Weiss and Klausncr,1990;Jain,1993).De-
Septicaemia
pending on the severity of the insult,this may be
?Viral infection
followed, after 24weeksby non-regenerative anae-
Figure11.9:Causes ofaccelerated plateietdestructionor
miaandneutropenia.Thisearlybloodpicturecaneasily
utilization.
186Manual of Canine and Feline Haematology andTransfusion Medicine
subsequent to haemorrhage occurs only after trans-
in casesof symmetrical splenomegaly,due toconges-
fusion withmultipleunits ofplatelet-poor bloodpro-
tion (portal hypertension, splenic torsion) or hyper-
lucts.Transientmild tomoderate thrombocytopenia
plasia(chronicnfectiousdisease)thaninasymmctrical
has,however,been reported in dogs subsequent to
splenomegaly due to haematomas,nodular hyper-
haemorrhage due to congenital and acquired bleeding
plasia or non-haematopoietic neoplasia.Thrombocy-
disorders,and profound thrombocytopenia is occa-
topenia is common,however,in dogs with splenic
sionally observed in dogs subsequent to haemorrhage
haemangiosarcoma (Grindem et al.,1994).Platelet
from anticoagulantrodenticide toxicity (Lewis et al.,
poolingmaybe absent in splenomegaly that is due to
1995a).The mechanismfor the thrombocytopenia in
diffuse cellularinfiltration(haematopoieticneoplasia),
thcse cases isunknown.Practitioners shouldbe aware
because of destructionof thevascular compartmcnt by
of thispossibility,because the presenceof thrombo-
neoplastic cells.
cytopenia and prolonged coagulation tinncsisoften
Othercausesofplateletsequestrationinclude sep-
thought tobediagnosticof disseminatedintravascular
sis and hypothermia. Platelet sequestration within
coagulation (DIC).
pulmonaryvasculaturcmay contribute to thrombo-
cytopeniain paticnts with sepsis.Platelet sequestra-
Platelet sequestration
tionwithinhepaticvasculatureisreported to cause
About onc thirdof circulatingplatelets are sequestered
thrombocytopenia in dogs with hypothermia (Rcagan
in the spleen at any one time (Jain, 1993）. More
and Rebar,1995).
platelets are sequestered assplenic sizeincrcases,and
splenomcgaly may cause thrombocytopenia owing to
Clinical presentation of dogs and cats with
platelet sequestration (Figure 11.10). Thrombocyto-
thrombocytopenia
penia due to splenomegaly in dogs is not wcll docu-
Clinical presentation of thrombocytopeniavaries with
mented but is usually mild (not less than 100 x 10°/1)
the severity and duration of thrombocytopenia and
and of no clinical importance.The presence of more
with the underlying discasc.Signs of bleeding in
severe thrombocytopenia in apatientwith spleno-
patients with thromboeytopeniaarevariable.Bleeding
megalyshould stimulate a searchfor anothcr mecha
due to thrombocytopenia isnotfound unlessplatelet
nism for thc observed thrombocytopenia.Not every
counts areless than50x 10/l,and usuallyless than
caseofsplenomegalywill have an associatedthrombo-
30 x 10°/1.Thc degree of haemorrhage for any given
cytopenia.The degree of decrease in platclct nubers
platelet count is unpredictable;it is not unusual
in dogs with splenomegaly depends on the original
for dogs and cats to haveplatelet counts of less than
platelet count and themagnitude and cause of the
10 x 10°/1 and to have no evidence of haemorrhage
splenomegaly.Thrombocytopenia maybc morc likely
(Jordan et al.,1993:Hackner,1995)
History
Neoplasia
Historical complaints in patients with thrombocyto-
Myeloproliferative and lymphoproliferative
penia can be non-specific (e.g.anorexia and lethargy),
 disease, haemangiosarcoma, haemangioma, mast
may relate to the underlying discasc causing the
cell tumour,metastaticneoplasia
thrombocytopenia (e.g.fever,coughing,lymphaden-
opathy) or may be due to thrombocytopenia.Clients
Congestion
mayrortpistaxishamatocheziaclana,ama
Splenic torsion (primary or associated with
turiahacmafemesisorcutaneoushamorrhages.lnd
gastric dilation-volvulus), portal hypertension
ness orneurological signsmay be reported owing to
(hepatic cirrhosis, portosystemic vascular
haemorrhage into these organs.A history of exposure
anomaly)
to anticoagulantrodenticides or drugs (such as oestro-
Haematoma
gn,phnobarbital,phenybutazone,otentiated sul
phonamides, cytotoxic drugs, griseofulvin or
Lymphoid/macrophage hyperplasia
methimazole)shouldbe sought.Prcventative healthcare
Systemic lupus erythematosus,immune-mediated
history.including heartworm prevention and recent
haemolytic anacrmia, chronic bacterial, fungal or
vaccinations,mayyield helpfulinformation.Ahistory
rickettsial infections
of travel may also provide important diagnostic clues,
Splenitis
because infectious causes of thrombocytopenia can
Hypothermia
have variablegeographical prevalence.
Scquestration in multiple vessels
Physical examination findings
Sepsis
Mucosal and cutaneous petechiae,purpura and ecchy-
 Sequestration in pulmonary and/or hepatic
moses are characteristicof a disorder of primaryhae-
vasculature
mostasis (Hackncr,1995).Petechiae are pinpoint
Figure11.10:Causesof plateiet sequestration.
extravasations ofblood from intact bloodvessels
Disorders of Platelet Numbcr 187
(Figure 11.11).Purpura are confluent petechiae,up to
seen in dogswith thrombocytopeniabut arerare in
about 1 cm in diamcter.Ecchymoses are small
cats with thrombocytopenia (Jordan et al,1993).
haemorrhagic spots,largerthan petcchiae,often asso-
Disorders of secondaryhacmostasis,such as haemo-
ciatedwith trauma(Figure 11.12).The terms purpura
philiaAoranticoagulantrodenticide toxicity,donot
and ccchymoses can be used interchangcably.Al-
cause petechiae,purpura or ecchymoses but rather
though thromhocytopeniaisthemostcommoncause
larger arcas of haemorrhage,such as haematomas,
of such clinical signs, altered platelet function
body cavity haemorrhages (haemothorax,haemoperi-
(thrombocytopathia) andvascular disorrders(vascul-
toneum) and haemarthroses.Bleeding from mucosal
itis,hypertcnsion) may cause similarbleeding mani-
surfaces,such as pistaxis,oral cavityhacmorrhage,
festations (Figure 1l.13).Petechiae are commonly
haematemesis,haematuria,haematochezia or
melaena,although not specific,are also commonly
seen in patients with thrombocytopenia (Figure
11.14).Bleeding from mucosal surfaces can be due
to a disorder of primary or secondary haemostasis
(Figure 11.15).Mucosal surface bleeding can also be
due tolocalized diseasc,for example,nasal tumours
causing epistaxis or gastric ulcers causing melaena
(Figure 11.16).Bleeding at multiple sites would en-
ablc the presence of a haemostatic disorder to be
confirmed (Hackner,1995).
Figure11.1l:Oralmucosal petechiae(pinpoint
extravasationsof bloodfrom intactbloodvessels)ina dog
withprimaryimmune-mediatedthrombocytopenia.
ReproducedfromFeldman,ZinklandJain(2000)Schalms
VeterinaryHematology,thcdition,withpermissionof
Lippincott,Williams andwikins.
Figure11.14:Epistaxis ina dogwith anticoagulant
rodenticidetoxicity.Epistaxiscan he dueto local disease,a
primary haemostaticdisordersuch asthrombocytopenia or a
secondary haemostatic disordersuch ashaemophilia A.
Disorders of primary haemostasis
(platelet or vascular abnormalities)
Figure 11.12:Cutaneous purpura andecchrymoses ina dog
Petcchiae and ecchymoses common
withimmune-mediated thrombocytopenia.Purpura are
Haematomas rare
confluent petechiaeuptoabout1cmdiameter.Ecchymoses
Bleeding from mucous membranes
aresmalorhagicpotslargerhanetechiaefn
associatedwithtrauma.Thetermspurpura andecchymoses
Blccding disproportionate to degrcc of trauma
can beused interchangeably.
Bleeding from multiple sites
Figure11.13:
Disorders of secondary haemostasis
Retinal
(coagulation factor abnormalities; except von
haemorrhage
Willebrand factor)
inacat with
Petechiae and ecchymoses rare
systemic
hypertension.
Haematomas common
Bleeding from mucous membranes
Bleeding into muscles, joints and body cavities
Bleeding disproportionate to degree of trauma
Bleeding from multiple sites
Rebleeding common
Figure11.15:Diagnosticcluesfrombleding
manifestations.
188Manual of Canine andFelineHaematology andTransfusionMedicine
evaluationof peripheral blood smears(Figure11.19).
The subjective impression of leucopenia or presence
of abnormalcells,such asblast cells,onevaluation
of a peripheral blood smear is suggestive of bone
marrow disease.The presence of many fragmented
red cells(schistocytes or schizocytes) would support
DIC.haemangiosarcoma or heartworm disease as
likely causes for thrombocytopenia.
Figure 11.16:Haematemesis('coffeegrounds'vomitus）ina
patientwiththrombocytopenia.Mucosalsurfacebleeding.
suchashaematenesis,canbeduetoprimaryhaemostatic
disorders,secondary haemostatic disorders or local disease.
Other physical examination findings associated
withspecificcausesofthrombocytopeniamayinclude
lymphadenopathy,hepatosplenomegaly and fever.
Laboratoryevaluation ofpatientswith
Figure11.17:Plateletclumping,evidentinthisbloodsmear
thrombocytopenia
fromcaninebloodanticoagulatedwithheparin,invalidatea
plateletestimateorcount.Ethylenediaminetetra-aceticacid
isthepreferredanticoagulantforplateletenumeration.
Peripheral blood smearevaluation
Substantial information in patients with thrombo-
cytopenia canbegleanedfrom evaluation of a pcri-
pheral blood smear.This is a rapid andreliable
method to assess adequacy of platelet numbers and
to assess the presence of platelet clumping. Each
platelct in the peripheral blood smear is equivalent
to about15x10plateletsperlitre,andless than three
to four platelets per oil immersion ficld (without
platelet clumping at thefeathcr cdge or alongthe
sidcs of the blood smear) indicates significant
thrombocytopenia (Jain,1993).Platelet clumping
is a common cause of spurious thrombocytopenia,
cspccially in cats.Platelet clumping can be mini-
Figure11.18:Peripheral bloodsmearfromadog
hours)analysis.Ethylenediaminc lctra-acetic acid
with thrombocytopeniashowinglargeplatelets
(megathrombocyles).Megathrombocytesareindicative
(EDTA)is the preferred anticoagulant for platelet
ofacceleratedplateletproduction(thrombopoiesis)in
enumeration (Jain,1993),although EDTA-induced
responsetoacceleratedplateleldestructionorutitization.
platelet clumping causing spurious thrombocytope-
nia has been obscrved in dogs. In the presence of
platelet clumping, neither manual nor automated
platelet counts will be accurate (Figure 11.17). In the
presence of platclct clumping,the likelihood of
thrombocytopenia needs to be subjectively assessed
onthebasisof theplateletcount orestimate and the
degree of clumping. Large densely stained platelets
on a hloodsmear (megathrombocytes) suggest active
thrombopoiesis in response to accelerated platelet
destruction or utilization (Sullivan et al.,1995) （Fig-
ure 11.18).Infectious organisms, such as Ehrlichia
canis morulae in leucocytes,E.platys morulae in
platelets or cytoplasmic distemperinclusion bodies
Figure 11.19:Ehrlichia morula inaneutrophil of a dogwith
in leucocytes orred cells,may rarely be seen on
thrombocytopenia.
Disorders of Platelet Number   189
Platelet count
Mean platelet volume
Despite the valuc of evaluation of peripheral blood
Mcan platelei volume (MPV) is measured by auto-
smears, a platelet count is still important to quantify
mated haematology analysers and may be reported
thrombocytopenia precisely. Spurious thrombocyto-
together with the results of complete blood counts
penia owing to platelet clumping (sec Peripheral blood
(CBCs), MPV in dogs is reported to range between 7.5
smear evaluationj can be minimized by careful
fl and 10 fl (Waner er al., 1989; Northern and Tvedten,
venepuncture and prompt (within 6 hours) analysis.
1992; Sullivan et al,. 1995) and in cats between 12.1 fl
 Spurious thrormbocytopcnia can also occur in platelet
and 15.1 fl (Boyce et al., 1986; Jain, 1993). An in-
 counts from autonated haematology analysers owing
creased MPV (macrotlhrombocytosis) suggests active
to exclusion of simall or large platelets because of
thronmbopoiesis in response to thrombocytopenia due
inappropriate machinc settings or calilbration. In addi-
lo acceleralcd platelcl destruction or utilizalion
tion, automated cell counfers often do not provide
(Sullivan er al., 1995). Macrothrombocytosis associ-
accurate platelet counts in cats because of the similar
ated with decreased automated platelet counts (but not
size of felinc plateleis and red cells. Spurious thrombo-
 manual counts) has bcen reported in Cavalier King
cytopenia has been reported in Cavalier King Charles
Charles Spaniels (Brown et al., 1994). Thrombocyto-
 Spaniels owing to the presence of 1many large platelets
 penia in cats with FeLV infection may also be associ.
(Brow el al., 1994). For these rcasous thromhocyto-
ated with an increascd MPV (Boyce et al., 1986). A
penia should be verified by examination of a peripheral
low MPV (Inicrothrombocytosis), due to platelet frag-
blood smear to assess platelet mumbers and to check for
 mentation or preferential destruction of larger more
heavily antibody-sensilized platelcts, may be found in
 cal signs of bleeding.
 some dogs in the early stages of IMT (Northern and
I'vedten, 1992).
Complele blood count
Thrombocytopenia due to bone marrow disease is
Bone marrow evaluation (aspiration and biopsy)
typically characterized by leucopenia and non-regen-
Bone marrow evaluation is not routinely necessary in
crative anacmia accompanying the thrombocylopenia
patients with thrombocytopenia. Indieations for bone
(pancytopenia). Decreases in two cells lines (so called
 marrow evaluation inclnde pancytopenia or abnormal
bicytopenia; thronbocytopenia and neutropenia or
peripheral blood cell morphology. Bicytopenia (two
thrombocytopenia and non-regcnerative anacmia) of
cell lincs decreased; thrombocylopenia with non-
abaormalitics in peripheral blooxl cell morphology is
also suggestive of bone marrow disease. An important
be indicative of bone marrow disease. Bone marrow
exception to these guidelines is in the early stages (first
evaluation can be used to determine whethier thrombo-
2-3 weeks) of ocstrogen toxicity, in which thrombo-
 cylopenia is chue to impaired platelet production (de-
cytopenia due to decreased platelet prodluction is often
creased numbers of megakaryocytes in bone marrow)
accompanied by leucocytosis and a normal haema-
or accelerated platelet destruction or utilization (in-
tocril. In dogs with oestrogcn toxicity, pancytopcnia
crcased mumbers of mcgakaryocytes in bone narrow)
may or may not develop after 3-4 weeks, depending on
(Jain, 1993). Normal bone marrow contains around
the magnitude of the toxic insult (Weiss and Klausner,
three megakaryocytes per low power (10 x objective)
1990; Jain, 1993). Neutrophilia with or without a left
ficld (Joshi and Jain, 1976). Large numbers of
shift is often seen in animals with thrombocytopenia
 megakaryocytes in bone marrow indicate that platelet
due to accelerated platelet destruction1 or utilization,
production is adequate, and therefore thrombocyto-
and a stress haemogram uay be evilent in some cascs.
penia is duc to acceleralcd platelel destruction or
Leucopenia in affected cats is suggestive of a viral
decreased numbers of megakaryocytes in bone marrow
(FeLV), feline inmunodeficiency virus (FIV), felinc
must beinterprcted in lightofthe qualiy and cellularity
infectious peritonitis (FIP), panleucopenia) (Jordan er
of the bone marrow aspirate. This may need to be
al, 1993).
confirmed by repeating the aspirate (Figure 11.21) or
Anaemia in dogs and cats with tlhrombocytopenia
by procuring a bone marrow core biopsy. Evidence of
 could be due to bone marrow disease, haenmorrhage
phagocytosis of platelets by bone marrow macrophages
as a resull of thrombocytopenia, immune-mediated
would be supportive of IMT or haemophagocytic
haemolytic anaemia (IMHA) accompanying
syndroinc, which has becn associated with infectiuus
inmue-mediated thrombocytopenia (IMT)
O1
and neoplastic diseases in dogs and cats (Walton cr al.
microangiopathic haemolytic anaemia accompany-
1996). Major haemorrhage is unusual subsequent to
ing DIC, heartworm disease or haemangiosarcoma.
bone marrow aspiration or core biopsy, even in dogs
Anaemia due to haemorrhage or IMHA may be re-
with profound thrormbocytopenia, and can be readily
gcncrative or non-rcgenerative depending on the time
controlled with local pressure. Hence, thrombocyto-
course of events and the prcsence of imumunological
 penia is not a contraindication to bone marrow aspira-
targeting of red cell precursors.
tion or core biopsy.
190Manual of Canine andFeline Haematology andTransfusion Medicine
can be a useful adjunct in investigating possible DIC
(Feldman et al.,1981;Bateman et al.,1999).
Mucosalbleeding time orcuticle bleeding time will
be prolonged in the presence of major thrombocyto-
penia and will notadd more information.Thebleeding
function defects andvon Willebrand’s disease.
Detection of antiplatelet antibodies
Avariety of tests have been used to detect serum
antibodies(usuallyIgG) with the capabilityofbinding
toplatelets (platelet bindableIgG) and more recently
Figure11.20:Bonemarrow aspiratefrom a dogwith
todetect IgGbound tothe dog's ownmegakaryocytes
thrombocytopenia showinghypercelularbonemarrowand
or platelets(platelet-bound IgG).No such tests havc
increasednumbers ofmegakaryocytes,indicatingthat
yetbeen developed foruse in cats.Itisimportant lo
thrombocytopeniaisduetoaeceleratedperipheralplatelet
destruclion or utilization.Nornalcanine bonemarrow
recognize that none of these tests are specific for
contains1-3megakaryoeytes per lowpower(10x
primaryIMTanddonotenabledogswithprimaryIMT
objective)field
（nounderlying cause)to be differentiated from dogs
withsecondaryIMT(Lewisetal.,1995c).ThePF3test
isbased on the principle that normal canineplatelets
willbedamagedbyplatelet-bindableIgGinthcplasma
samplebeing evaluated andwill releasePF3,causing
an acceleration of the APTT (Jain and Kono,1970).
Unfortunately,thePF3 test haspoor sensitivity and
specificity forIMT and is oflitile diagnostie use in
evaluatingpatientswith thrombocytopenia(Jain and
Kono,1970;Williams and Maggio-Price,1984).The
directmegakaryocyte immunofluorcsccnce test de-
fectsIgGboundtobonemarrowmegakaryocytesfrom
affected dogs (Joshi and Jain,1976).The sensitivityof
the direct megakaryocyte immunofluoresccnce test in
Figure11.21:Bonemarrow aspiratefroma dogwith
dogs with IMTis variable;sensitivitiesof30%to80%
thromboeytopenia showingdecreasednumbersof
arereported(JoshiandJain,1976).Amajor disadvan-
megakaryoeytes.This couid be indicativeof
thrombocytopeniadueto mpairedplatetetprocductionor
tage is that a bone marrow aspiratc,which is not
couldbeduetoanon-representativesampleofbonemarrow
routinely needed in patients with thrombocytopenia.is
Thisbonemarrowsamplewasdilutedwithperipheralblood
needed to perform the test.
andmay notbe representative of bone marrow as a whole.
Flowcytometry testsfordetectionofserum platelet-
bindableIgG andplatclct-bound IgG havebeen devel-
Coagulation profile
oped for use in dogs and are presently available to
Althoughnotroutinelyecessary,testsofcoagulatn
practitionersin theUnitedStates to assist inevaluating
maybeindicatedtoinvestigatethepossibilityofthrom-
patients with thrombocytopenia (Lewis et al,1995b).
bocytopenia related to DIC or anticoagulant rodenti-
Detection ofplatelet-boundIgGis themost sensitive
cide toxicity.A prolonged activated clotting time
test for IMT (sensitivity around 90%) and can be per-
(ACT),whichcanreadilybedonein-house,nadogr
formed in dogswith cvcn profound thrombocytopenia
cat with thrombocytopenia is suggestive of DIC or
(51o10x10/1),butstilldoesnotenableprimary causes
anticoagulantrodenticidetoxicity.Severethrombocy-
ofIMT to be differentiated from secondary causes.
topenia itself（<10x10°/1),however,will cause slight
Detectionof platelet-bindable IgG inserum ismuch less
prolongation of the ACT.In addition to the platelet
sensitivethandetectionof IgGalready bound toadog's
count,amorccompletecoagulationprofilecaninclude
platelets,but may be helpful in those cases in which
prothrombin time(PT),activated partialthromboplas
sufficientnumbers ofpatient platelets are unable tobe
tin time(APTT),thrombinclottingtime,measurement
isolatcd fortesting Lewis etal,1995c).
of fibrin or fibrinogen degradation products (FDPs)
and evaluation of ablood smear for schistocytes (frag-
Serology
mented red cells).Fibrinogen concentrations may be
included ina CBC (heat precipitationmcthod) or can
Cats:FeLV and FIV testing are indicated in cats
bemorcaccurately dcterminedbyamodifiedthrombin
with confirmed thrombocytopenia.A syndromeof
clotting time.Measurement of antithrombinIll con-
lethargy, anorexia,weight loss,lymphadenopathy,
centrationsmaybeoffered by somelaboratoricsand
polyarthritis,anaemia,thrombocytopenia and hyper
Disordcrs of Platelet Number   191
globulinaemia has been reporicd in cats in North
4. Further diagnostics:
America. These cats have had positive titres toelhrlichial
 Bone marrow aspirate if indicated by CBC,
 Organisms and respondto doxycycline therapy (Bouloy
history (drug exposurc) or physical
er al, 1994; Pcavcy el al., 1997). Py0granulomatous
examination findings (e.g. testicular
vasculitis in cats with FIP can resnlt i1 thromhocyto-
abnormality suggesting the possibility of a
penia due to accelerated platelet consumption, how-
Sertoli cell tumour). If there is evidence of
cver the utility of FIP titres in reaching a diagnosis of
impaired platelet production (dccrcased
FIP is controvcrsial.
 numbers of megakaryocytes) without
evidenl aetiology from bone marrow
 Dogs: Depending on geographical location and travel
aspirates, then a bone rnarrow core biopsy
history, physicalexamination findings and initial labo-
and serology for E. canis (dogs) and FeLV
ratory data, tesling for Ehrlichia canis, E. plarys,
and FIV (cats) is indicated
E. equi, Rickerrsia rickettsi, leptospirosis and Diro-
ii. If there is no evidence of impaired platelet
filaria inmitis nay be indicated in dogs with thrombo-
production from initial CBC, then a
cylopcnia. An antinuclear antibody titre is indicated in
coagulation profile to test for DIC, tests for
dogs with physical examination findings and screen.
 platelet-bound or serum platelet-bindable IgG
ing laboratory testing supportive of systemic lupus
and serology for E. canis, E. plalys, E. equi,
erythcmatosus (SLE).
R. rickettsii, leptospirosis and D. inmmitis in
dogs and FIV, FeLV, E. risticii and E. equi in 
Other tests
cats may be indicaterl
ii. Response to treatment (e.g. glucocorticoids,
 Biochemical profile: A biochemical profile is indicated
tetracyclines) caur be used as a diagnostic test
to look for evidcnce of systemic disease. Examples
 antl while awaiting thc results of cther
include evidence of kidney and liver disease in rdogs
diagnostic tests.
with leptospirosis or rickettsial infections, hypercalcac-
Inia in dogs with lymphoma, hypoalbuminaemia, hyper-
Treatment of thrombocytopenia
cholesterolaemia anl/or azotaemia in dogs with
In addition to specific therapy, which is dictatcd by the
glomerulonephritis, which may be associated with SLE.
cause of thronnbocytopenia, supportive care to mini-
mizc haemorrhage and its consequences is important.
Urinalysis: Proteinuria may be indicative of immune
 Supportive care includes cage rest and prcvention of
complex dliscase such as SLE, dirofilariasis,
Hauma, minimization of injections, use of the oral or
ehrlichiosis, lymphoma, chronic bacterial infections
intra vcnous roule in preference to the subcutaneous or
(c.g endocarditis, discospondylitis, prostatitis) or sys-
intramuscular routes for drug aclninistration and trans-
temic fungal infectious.
fusion therapy for provision of platelets and/or red
Radiology: Rarliography and ultrasonography may be
blood cells,
indicated to investigate the possibility of splenorncgaly.
Platelet transfusions
Ineoplasia or infectious disease.
Platelet transfusions are rarely necessary in dogs and
Diagnostic approach to the patient with a
cats with thrombocytopenia (Williams and Maggio-
disorder of prinary haemostasis
Price, 1984). Platelet transfusions are inrlicalcd for
In palicnts that present with signs consistent with
 patients with profound thrombocytopenia that develop
 a primary haemostatic disorder (petcclhiae, purpura,
ncnrological signs anrdl are suspccted to liave central
 ecchymoses or mucosal haemorrhages), the following
nervous system (CNS) haernorrhage, andl hefore
 diagnostic approach is suggested:
surgery in patients with platelet counts of less than
50 x 109/1. Patients with severe bleeding manifesta-
1. Evaluatc a peripheral blood snear for platelet
tions rlue to profoumd thromboeytopcnia are also can-
numbers, platelet clumping and platclet size
didates for platelet transfusions.
 2. Confirm the magnitude of thrombocytopenia by
 Fresh whole blood or platelet components (plate-
 performing a platclet count (a manual platelet
let-rich plasrna. plalclcl concentrate) can be used as
count can be used to rechcck electronic counts,
sources of platelets for transfiusion. Administration of
especially in cats)
 a single unit of fresh whole blood, platelet-rich plasma
3. For an initial data base include a careful review
or platelet concentratc has thc potential lo increase ihic
 of the patient's history, including cxposure to
platelet count of a 20 kg dog by as much as 30 to
dngs or toxins (oestrogens, phenylbutazonc,
40 x 10/1.
phenobarbital, other drugs, anticoagulant 
 lIn patients with thrombocylopenia due to acceler-
rodenticidcs); hcartworm status and travel
alcd platelet destruction cr utilization (e.g. IMT, DIC).
 history; CBC and platelet count; biochemical
 platelets have dramatically reduced circulating life
 profile and urinalysis
 spans (minutes to hours) and transfused platelets are
192  Manual of Canine and Feline Haematology and Transfusion Medicinc
destroycrl rapidly (Carr et al., 1986). In these cases,
and Meyers, 1996). In cats, IMT may occur secondlary
multiple units of platelet-rich plasma or platelet con-
to FeLV or FIV infection (Shelton et al., 1990).
centrate (prepared from fresh whole blood by ccnirifu-
Although any drug can potentially provoke sec-
gation) are rcquircrl to maintain platelet counts greater
ondary IMT, potentiaied sulphonamides, thc gold salt
than 10 x 10/ and to stop ongoing haemorrhage. This
 auranofin and cephalosporins have been documented
is impractical and cost prohibitive in most situations.
to cause IMT in dogs. Drug-induced IMT usually
The adininistration of a single unit of fresh whole
rlevelops after weeks to months of trcalmcnl, resolves
blood, platelet-rich plasma or platelet concentrate to
within 2 weeks of cessation of the drug and does not
these patients is ineffective.
recur in the absence of the drug. IMT is a common
feature of SLE. Other clinical and laboratory manifes-
Red cell transfusions
tations of SLE, such as polyarthritis, dermatitis, muco-
Red cell transfusions are indicated in patients with
cutaneous ulceration, peripheral neuropathy,
throinbocytopenia in which anaemia is scverc.
polymyositis, glomerulonepliritis, IMHA, neutropenia
and antinuclcar antibodies usually cnable SLE to be
Connonest causes of thronbocytopenia
distinguished from primary IMT. IMT is well docul-
Thrombocytopenia in dogs
u u ardo m so  p
Thrombocytopenia is about five times more commou
haematopoictic neoplasia. Immune-mcdiated platelet
destruction may contribute to thrombocytopenia in
in dogs than it is in cats (Grindem et al., 1991). The
dogs infected witlhn E. canis, Babesia canis, D. inumitis
and distempcr virus (Lewis et ual, 1995; Mackin.
North America (Cockburn and Troy, 1986; Grindem et
al., 1991, 1994) are reported to be:
1995b: Waner et al., 1995).
IMT (either primary or secondary)
Neoplasia
 Infectious diseases, including rickettsial diseases
Thromboeytopenia is frcquentily associated with nco-
(E. canis and Rocky Mountain spatlcd fever).
 plasia in dogs, particularly lymphoproliferative
heartworm disease and systemic mycoses
neoplasia and haemangiosarcoma (Grindemet a., 1994).
(cryptococcosis, coccidioidomycosis,
Mcchanisns for thrombocylopenia associatcd with
blastomycosis, histuplasmosis)
neoplasia are multiple and include disseminated or local
 Neoplasia (especially lyrmphoma and
platelet consumption, splenic sequestration, myeloph-
haemangiosarcoma).
thisis, bone marrow supprcssion by chemothcrapy.
radiation therapy or tumour elaborated oestrogens
Thrombocytopenia in cats
and immune-mediated platelet destruction. IMT is well
Thrcmhocylopenia in cats is uncormnan (Jordan et al.,
documented in dogs with lyuphoproliferative and
1993). The commonest reported causes of confirmed
non-haematopoietic neoplasms (Helfand et al., 1985)
thromnbocytopenia in cats (Shefton et al., 1990; Hart
and may precede the discovery of neoplasia, leading to
and Nol1c, 1994; Peterson et al., 1995) include:
al erroneous diagnosis of primary IMT.
Hnfectious discascs, including FeLV, FIV, FIP,
Disseminated intravascular coagulation
Toxoplasma gondii and Haenobartonelia felis
Thronbocytopcnia is a common finding in dogs and
 Neoplasia, especially lymphoproliferative and
cats with DIC (Feldman et al., 198l; Grindein et af.,
myeloproliferativc discases
1991; Jordan et al., 1993; Batenau et al., 1999). DIC
Thromboembolism related to cardiac disease.
in dogs is most frequently associatcd withsepticacmia,
disseminated malignancy, inassive trauma, heat stroke
DIC has been identified as the pathophysiological
and vasculitis (e.g. leptospirosis, Rocky Mountain
cause for thrombocytopenia in about 10% of cases of
spotted fever, inmmune-medialed vasculitis). In cals,
feline thrombocytopenia (Jordan el al, 1993). The
liver disease, FIP, malignancy and thromboembolism
aetiology for thrombocytopenia in cats is frequently
related to cardiac disease are the most commonly
undetermined, for exanple, 20% of cases in one study
reported causes of DIC (Jordan et cal., 1993; Pctcrson
were idiopathie (Jordan et al., 1993).
et al., 1995). Assessment of a coagulation profile,
Specific causes of thrombocytopenia
including PT, APTT, FDPs, fibrinogen concentration
and antithrombin IlI concentrations, and cvaluation of
Prinary immune-mediated thrombocytopenia
a blood smear for schistucytes will enable most cases
Primary IMT is discussed fully in Chapter I4(i).
of DIC to be diagnosed.
Secondary immmune-mediated thrombocytopenia
Infectious disease
 Secondary IMT has been described in dogs with SLE.
Viral, bacterial, protozoal, fungal and parasitic diseases
neoplasia and certain infectious diseases, and subsc-
may cause thrombocytopenia in dogs and cats.
quent to drug administration (Mackin, 1995b; Lewis
In North America, infectious diseases are reported to
Disorders ofPlatelet Number 193
account for20%to60%of dogswith thrombocyto-
Thrombocytosis due to splenic contraction
penia.Ecanis,Rocky Moutain spotted fever,l-
(physiological)
spirosis and dirofilariasis are frequently dliagnosed
Excitement
infectious causes of thrombocytopenia indogs inNorth
Exercise
America (Breitschwerdt,1988;Grindem et al.,1991).
Acute blood loss
Thrombocytopenia isacommonhaematologicalabnor-
Trauma
mality associatedwithbacteraemiainhumansbutis less
commonly reported inbacteraemic dogs.Mild throm-
Rebound thrombocytosis
bocytopenia is a frequcnt occurrence subsequent to
Response toprior thrombocytopenia
modified-live distempervaccination andisless com-
Post-splenectomy thrombocytosis
monly observedinnaturally occurringcasesof distem-
Reactive thrombocytosis
per. Immune-mediated platclet destruction may
contribute tothrombocytopenia indogsinfected withE.
Inflammatory conditions
canis,B.canis,D.immitisand distempervirus(Lewist
Infection
al,1995c;Mackin,1995b;Waner et al.,1995).
Neoplasia:haematopoietic and solid tumours
Chronic blood loss
Haemolyticuraemic syndrome
Hyperadrenocorticismor administrationof
Hacmolytic uraemic syndrome (HUS),a disorder of
glucocorticoids
platelet hyperaggregabilitywithintravascular platelet
Primary thrombocytosis
thrombi andwidespread tissue ischaemia,has been
Platelet lcukaemias
reported in dogs,especially greyhounds.Clinical and
Essential thrombocythaemia
laboratory findings in HUS,including neurological
Megakaryoblastic leukaemia
signs,renalfailure,microangiopathichaemolyticanae-
Polycythacmia vera,other myeloproliferative and
mia(schistocytosis),thrombocytopenia andfever,make
lymphoproliferative diseases
it distinguishable from primary IMT Holloway and
Myelodysplasia and myelofibrosis
Senior,1993;Hertzke et al,1995).
Figure 11.22: Causes of thrombocytosis.
Breed-related thrombocytopenia
Greyhounds,CavalierKingCharlesSpanielsand Shiba
Rebound thrombocytosis
Inus can have platelet counts that are lower than in
Subsequent to resolution of thrombocytopenia from
other breedsof dog (Eksellelal.,1994;Sullivan etal.,
any cause,rebound thrombocytosismayoccur owing
1994; Smedile et al,1997; Gookin et al.,1998).
to theresidualeffectofincreasedconcentrationsof
thrombopoietin and other cytokines stimulating
thrombopoiesis.
THROMBOCYTOSIS
Reactive thrombocytosis
Thrombocytosisdefinedas aplateletcountabove the
Although thrombopoietin provides the major physio-
reference range,is a much ess common abnormality
than thrombocytopenia.Thrombocytosis,other than
logical stimulus,thrombopoiesis can alsobe stimu-
lated by a variety of cytokines, such as IL-3 and
primary thrombocytosis,isusuallyofno clinical sig-
IL-6,granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating
nificance.The causes of thronbocytosis are summa
factor anderythropoietin.Reactive thrombocytosis
rized in Figure 11.22.
mayoccurcluetonon-specificstimulationofthrombo-
Mechanisms and causes of thrombocytosis
poiesis associatedwith increased concentrations of
these cytokincs in a variety of inflammatory condi-
Thrombocytosis due to splenic contraction
tions,infections,solid tumours,chronicblood loss
The splcennormally contains about 30% of the
and hyperadrenocorticism Jain,1993;Rcagan and
circulating plateletpool,whichisrccognized by th
Rebar,1995).
body as being a constituent of total plateletnumbers
(Jain,1993).Any cause of splenic contraction,for
Primary thrombocytosis
example,excitement,exercise or acute blood loss,
Platelet leukaemia or essential thrombocythaemia(a
willresultinatransientincreaseinplateletnumbers
inyeloproliferativc disease affectingmature platelet
in thecirculatingbloodwhichmayormaynotcause
precursors) and megakaryoblastic leukaemia(which
mild thrombocytosis.
affectsamoreimmaturecelloftheplatelet lineage)are
rare diseases but cause profound thrombocytosis
Post-splenectomy thrombocytosis
(platelet counts often greater than 1000 x 10°/1).
Splenectomywill result in a more permanent increase
Megakaryoblastic leukaemia can also cause thrombo-
inplatletnumberswhichmayrayotcauseil
cytopenia. Essential thrombocythaemia is character-
thrombocytosis (Jain,1993).
ized by largenumbersof circulating platclets(including
194  Manual of Canine and Feline Haematology and Transfusion Medicine
bizarre forms), increased numbers of megakaryocytes
Brown SJ, Sinpson KW, Buker S, Spagnoletti MA aul Elwouxl CM
in bone marrow and no itlentifiable cause for reactive
(1994) Maerothronbocylosis in Cavalier King Charles Spaniels.
Veterinary Recorad 135,281-283
thrombocytosis (Hopper et al., 1989). Circulating
Canfield PI, Church DB and Russ IG (1993) Myeloproliferative dlisorders
.
 megakaryoblasts and bizarre platelet forms, which
involvingthemegakaryocyticline.JorratofSmailAnimat Practice
 may infiltrate other lissues, are typically seen in
34,296-301
Carr JM,Kruskall MS, Kaye JA and Robinson SH (1986) Eficacy of
megakaryoblastic leukaemia (Canfield er al., 1993). In
platclct uansfusious in inaune thromboeytopenia. Anerican
cats, platelet or megakaryoblastic leukaemias rmay he
Journat ofMedicine80,1051-.1054
Cuekbun C and Troy (C (1986) A relruspective study ul 62 cuses gf
due to FeLV infection. Platclcts, red cells and white
tlarwnocytopeia inthedog. Southves/Veteritrit37, 133- t41
1:
cells originate from common bone marrow precursor
EksellP.HaggsrmJ,KvanCandKarlssonA(1994)Tomhocytpenia
in the Cavalicr King Charlcs Spanicl. Jourha! of Sraf! Aniua!
cells (pluripotential and multipotential bone marrow
Praetiee 35, 153-155
stem cells) and thrombocytosis imay occur in associa-
Feldina BF. Madlewell BR and O'Neill S (I98l) Disseminated
intravaseular coagatlation: anlihrcubin, plasninogen, and
tion with polycythaemia vcra, lymphopreliferative or
coagulation abnornalities in 4] dogs. Jouraut of the American
myeloproliferative disease or myelodysplasia if au1l
Veterinary Medicat Associrion 179, 151-154
early stein cell is affected.
Gookin JL, Bunch SE, Rush LJ and Gritrlen CB (1998) Evaluation of
microcyiosis in 18 Shibas.Journal ofthe American Veterinary
Medicat Association Z12, 1258-1259
Clinical prescntation
Grindcm CB, Brcitschwerdt EB, Corbett WT and Jans HE (1991)
The clinical presentation of animals with thrombo-
Epidemiologic survey of thronbocytopenia in dogs: a rcport on
987 cases. Veterinary Clinieal Pathotogy 20, 38-43
cytosis varies primarily with the underlying diseasc.
Grindem CB, Brcitschwerdl EB, Curbett W'T, Page RL adl Jais HE
Pllysiological and reactive thrombocytosis is usually
(1994)Tbocisnd
of Veterinary buernai Medicine 8, 400-405
transient and without clinical consequence. Although
Hackier SG (1995) Approach to the dingnosis of bleeding disorders.
both thrombotic and liaenmorrhagic tendencies may
Compendiun of Contiauing Edueution for the Praerising
occur in paticnts with. primary throinbocytosis, bleed-
Vererinarian 17,331-349
Hart SW and Nolte I (1994) Hemostatic disorders in feliuc
ing is morc coinmonly seen. Splenomegaly is common
iumunodeficicney virus-seropositive cas.Journal ofVererinary
in animals with primary thrombocytosis (Jain, 1993).
Internrl Medicine 8, 355-362
Helfand SC. Coulu CG and Madewell BR (198S) lnmune mediated
 Thronbosis may occur owing to the incrcasc in
thrombocytopenia assnciated with solid 1unors in dags. Jourael of
platelct numbers, in addition to enhanced platelet func-
the Americgn Animat Hospiai Association 21, 787-794
tion. Clinical signs depend on the thrombosed organ.
Hertzke DM, Cowan LA, Schoning P and Fenwick Bw (1995)
Glonerular tltrastructural lesions of iliopathic cutaneous and
Pulmonary thrombosis frequently causes tachypnoca
renalglomerularvasculopathyofgreyhounds.VererinaryPatotogy
and dyspnoca. Pulmonary thrombosis can also cause
32,451-459
Holloway SA and Senior DF (1993) Hemolytic-uremic syndrome in
right-sided congestive heart failure secondary to pul-
dogs. Journat of Velerinary hernat Medicine 7, 220-227
monary hypertension, with ascites, jugular distension
Honeckunn AL, Knupp DW and Reagun WJ (1996) Diagnsis of
and periphcral oedema; aunrd hacinoptysis may also be
canine inmune-nnediated hematologie disease. Compendinm on
Contiauing Eteationfor the Practising Veterirarianr 18.113-125
seen. Mesenteric thrombosis can result in abdominal
Hopper PE, Mandell CP, Turrel IM, Jain NC, Tablia F and Zinkl JG
pain, vomiting and diarrhoea. Portal vein thrombosis
(1989) Prohahle esscntial thromhocythenia in a dog. .Jourma! of
VeterinarInternal Melicine3,79-85
Imay lcad to ascites. CNS thrombosis leatds to sudden
Jacobs RM, Boycc JT, and Kociba GJ (1986) Flow cytomeuic and
onset of neurological signs, such as seizures, altered
mental state and paresis, whicli depends on the location
cars and feline leukemia virus-infected cats. Cyromeiry 7, 64-69
Jain NC(1993) Esseniis ofVeteriry Henatoiogy. Lea and Febiger,
of tle thrombus in the CNS.
Plitadelplhia
 Bleeding in patients with primary thrombocytosis
Jain NC and Kono CS (1970) The platelet factor-3 test for rletection
of canine antiplatelet antihory. Veterinary Clinieal Pathology 9,
 is due to defective platelet function. Haemorrhagic
10-14
sigus reflect a disarder of primary hacmostasis and
Jordan IIL,Grindem CB and Breitschwerlt EB (1993)
Thrombocytopenia in cats: a retrospective study of 41 cases.
 may include bleeding from mucosal surfaces, mucosal
Journai of Vereringry internal Medicite 7, 261-265
 and cutaneous petechiae, purpura and ecchymoses
Joshi BCandJainNC(1976)Detcelionofantiplatcletantibodyinscrum
(Jain, 1993).
and on mcgakaryoeytes of dogs with uutoimnune
lrunbocytopenia. Amerieu Jonrnal of Veterinary Resecrch 37,
681--685
Lewis DCand Meyers KM ( 1996) Canine idiopathie thromboeylopenic
REFERENCES AND FURTHER
purpura.Jouraat of Veterinary Interuel Medicire 10, 207-218
Lewis DC,Bruyeite DS and Kellerman DL(1995a)Thronibocytopena
READING
subscquen to anticoagulant rodenticide-induced hemorrhage in
dogs. (Abstract.) Jonrnai of Veteringry Internal Medicine 9, 188
Baleman SW, Mathews KA, Abrams-Ogg ACG、Lumisden JH.
 Johnstone IB, Hillers TK and Fester RA (1999) Diagnosis of
Development and chatacterizalion of a low eylormetric assay for
disseuinated intavascular coagulation in dogs admitted to an
detcction of platclct-bound immunoglohlin G in rlogs. Anerican
intensivc carc unit. Journal of the American Vererinary Medicaf
Jowrnal of Veterinary Research 56, 1555-1558
Assocition 215, 798-804
Lewis DC, Meyers,KM,Callu MB,Buchcler J and Giger L (I995c)
Bouloy RP, Lappin MR, Holland CH, Thrall MA, Bakcr D and O'Neil
Detection o platelet-bound and serun platelet-bindable anibodies
S (1994) Clinical chrliehiosis in a cat. Journul of rhe American
fordiagnosisofidiopathictlronbocytopeiepupuraindogs.err
Veterinary Medicat Association 204, 1475-1478
ofthe American Veterinary Medicat Association 206, 47-52
Boyce IT, Knciba G1,Jacobs RM and Weiser MG(1986) Feline leukeuia
MackinA(1995a) Canine immune-mediatedthromhocytopenia.Patt I.
vins-inuced thrombocytopenia antl macrathonbocylosis it cals.
Compendiun of Continuing Educarion for the Practising
Veterirary Parhology 23, 16-20
Veterinarian 17, 353-364
Brcitschwerit EB (1988) 1nfectious rarombocytopenia in dogs.
Mackin A(199sb)Canine inume-nelialed thronbocytopenia.Part
Compenuium of Continxing Education for rhe Practising
ILConpendiemof Contiaing Edacation for hePraetising
Vererinarian 10, I177-1190
Vererinarin 17, 513-535
Disorciers of Plalclet. Numbcr  195
Northern J aul Tvedten NW (1992) Dinguusis of nierothromlocylosis
Charles Spaniels: 1 1 cases (1983-1993). Jorrnai ofhe Americon
und inumune-tmediated thranhocytopenin in dogs with
Animal Hospitat Associerion 33, 411-415
luumbocytopenia:68cases(1987-1989).JogmaioftheAuerican
Sullivan PS, Evans IL and McDonall TP (1994) Platelet conccntration
Veterinary Medical Ass0ciation 200,368-372
and hemoglobin fumetionin Greyhounds. Jowat of the Americcn
Peavey GM,Hland CJDua K,mithG,MoorcA,Ri LI,Lain
Vererinary Mediea! Assocition 205, 838-841
MR and Richter K(1997) Suspeeted ehrliclhialinfectiont in tive cats
Sullivun PS, Manning Kl. and McDonald TP (i995) Association of
trom a houseloid. Journat of the Ameriean Veterianury Medieut
mean platelet volume and bone narrow megakaryocytopoicses in
Associion210,231-234
thrombncytopenic dogs: 60 cnses (1984-1993). Journal af the
Peterson JL, Couto CGand Welman ML (1995) Hemostatic disorters
in cats: a relrosective stucly and review of the literafure. Jorrnel
Walton RM, Modiano JF, Thrall MA and Whceler SL (1996) Bone
ofVetermary fautewg! Medieine 9, 298-303
marrow cytological findings in 4 dogs anda cat wiulh hemuophagoeytic
Reagan WI and Rehar AH (1995) Platelet disorders. In: Texrbook of
syndromc. Journai of Veterinary nternei Medicine 10, 7-14
Veterintary Interai Medicine, 4" edt, ed. SJ Euingcr and EC
Waner T, Harrus S. Weiss DJ, Bark H aad Keysary A (1995)
1
Feldman, p. 1964-1976. WB Saunders, Philadciphin
Demonstration f serun antipalelel antilxoties in experimcntal
Shelton GH Linenberger ML, Grant CK and Abkowiz JL (1990)
aeute canine ehrliehiosis. Veterinary fumrnology and
Henatologic manifcstations of feline irmuunodeficiency virus
mmunopatofogy48,177.182
infeetion.Blood 76, 1104-1109
Waner T, Yuval D and Nyska A (1989) Electronic neasurement of
Sherding RG, WilsonGPand Kaciha Gl (1981) Bone marrow hypoplasia
canine mean platelet volume. Vererinary Clinica! Pathoiogy I8,
in cight dogs with Seroli cell rumor. /ournal of the American
84-86
Veteritary MedicalAssociarion178,497-501
Weiss DJ and Klausner JS (199o) Drug-assouiated aplastie unemia in
dogs:cightcases(1984-1988).JournulaftheAmerican Veterinary
alloinmmunization in dogs with systemic cyclosporine and by Ly-
Medical 4ssocietion 196, 472-475
irradiation or cyclosporiuc-loading of donor platelets.Bioord 69
Willians DA and Maggio-Price L (l984) Canine idiopathic
Smedile LE, Houston DM, Fuylor SM, Post K and Searcy GP (1997)
Fullow upin 54 cases.Jourualofthe Ameriean Veterinary Medica!
Idiopathie asynpoualic thrombocytupenia in Cavalier King
Associnfio 185, 660-663
:1
准
1
..、.、.
CHAPTERTWELVE
Disorders ofPlatelet Function
Tracy Stokol
INTRODUCTION
vasculature.While circulating thcy have acharacteris-
tic discoid shape.Despite itssmall size,theplatclctis
The most commonly encountered platelet disorders in
a complex cell,composed of an outer membrane en-
veterinarypractice are quantitative abnormalities,par
closing a cytoplasm rich in organelles andmembra
ticularlythrombocytopenia.Defects in platelet function,
nous structures (Figurc 12.1).The platelet can be
i.e.thrombopathias(thrombocytopathies),aremuch less
divided into several compartments or zones,each
common and difficulttodiagnose astheyrequirespecial-
having a distinctive role inplatelet function.These
ized tests,ostofwhicharenotreadily availabletoihc
compariments are fhe outer membrane,the sol-gcl
general practitioner. Abnormalities in platelet function
zone,the organelle zone and the membrane systems.
have,however,been documented in domestic animals
and result in abnormal blecding in affected individuals.
The outer mcmbrane
Thrombopathiasshouldalwaysbesuspectedifananimal
The outer membrane is a biphospholipid membrane,
is bleedingexcessively but hasanormal plateletcount and
throughout which cholesterolisuniformly dispersed.
coagulation profile.Knowledgcof normal platelet physi
Phospholipids within the membrane arc distributed
ology andfunctionishelpfulinunderstanding the differ-
asymmetrically; this asymmetryis maintained by spe-
ent forms of disturbed plateletfunction.
cific proteins in the membrane.In the resting platelet,
the outer laycr is rich in phosphatidylcholine and
sphingomyelin,whereas the inner layer is rich in
PLATELET'STRUCTURE
phosphatidylserine andphosphatidylethonalamine.
This asymmetry is essential for proper platclct func-
Platelets are small anucleate cells produced by
tion,as alterations in the distribution of the
megakaryocytes in the bonemarrow and pulmonary
phospholipids(specifically,thepreferentialmovement
Platelet
membrane
Open canalicular
system
Glycogen
Dense tubular
system
Lysosome
 Densc body
Membrane
α-Granule
glycoproteins
Microfilaments
and microtubules
Figure12.1:Schematic illustrationof plateletultrastructure.
198Manual of Canine and Feline Haematology and TransfusionMedicine
ofphosphatidylserinetotheouter layer of themem
catalytic activity (Figure 12.3).This is essential for
brane)that occur onplatelet activation converts the
propagation of the coagulation cascade. The expo-
platelet into a procoagulant molecule. Numerous
sureofphosphatidylserine is also termed‘platelet
glycoprotcins (GP) arc cmbeddcd within the lipid
procoagulant activity,and used to be calledplatelet
membrane.These act as receptor molecules,allowing
factor 3 (PF3).Arachidonic acid isproduced by the
the platelet to interact with other cells and the sub
action of phospholipase Aon membrane
endothelialmatrix.Theglycoproteins arelabelledcon
phospholipids (particularly phosphatidylcholine).
secutivelywith roman numerals andbelong to several
Arachidonie acid is the initial substrate in a series of
different gene families,including integrins,leucine-
reactions that result in eicosanoid (prostaglandin)
rich glycoproteins,selectins,the immunoglobulin
synthesis (Figure 12.4).The most important platelet
superfamilyand quadraspanins.Figure 12.2lists the
eicosanoid is thromboxaneA,a potent mediator of
glycoproteinfamilies withknownrolesinplatelet
platelet aggregation and recruitment.The surface
function.
glycoproteins,especially the complexes of GPIb-IX
The different outermembrane componentshave
and GPIIb-IIla,act as receptorsforboth soluble e.g.
specific roles in platelet function.The translocation
fibrinogen) and insoluble (e.g.collagen) ligands and
ofphosphatidylserine to the outer membrane pro-
are essential for platelet aggregation and platelet
vides a binding surface for activated coagulation
adhesion to the vascular subendothelium.A qualita-
factors (especially those associated with the activa-
tive or quantitative defect in these receptors results in
tion of factorX andprothrombin) and promotes their
abnormal platelet function.
Platelet glycoprotein
Ligand
Role in platelet function
Integrins
GPIIb-IIla(α)
 Fibrinogen, von Willebrand factor
Aggregation and spreading
(vWf), fibronectin, vitronectin
Vitronectin receptor(aβ)
Vitronectin,fibrinogen,fibronectin,
Adhesion (low shear)
thrombospondin
GPIa-IIa(αβ)
Collagen
Adhesion (low shear)
GPIc-Ila (αsβ)
Fibronectin
Adhesion (low shear)
GPIc-Ila region (oβ)
Laminin
Adhesion (low shear)
Leucine-rich glycoproteins
GPIb-IX
vWf
Adhesion (high shear) and shape change
GPV
Forms a complex with GPIb-IX
Binding site for α-thrombin
Interacts with vWf
Selectins
P-selectin (α-granule)
Lectins
Leucocyte-platelet interactions
Figure12.2:Glycoproteinreceptorsontheplateletmembraneand theirroleinplateletfunction.
Figure12.3:Schematic illustrationof
Tenase complex
Prothrombinase complex
assembly ofthetenase and
prothrombinasecomplexes onthe
Prothrombin
Thrombin
platelet surface.During platelet
activation,phosphatidyiserineis
enrichedintheouterleafletofthe
plateletmembrane.Thetenase
complex consistsof the platelet
membrane-associaled assemblyof
aclivated factor IX (FIXa),aetivated
factorVIll(faciorVIIla),
phosphatidylserineand ionized
calcium(calcium)andisresponsible
Calcium
for the activation of factor X.
Caleium
FXa
Similarly,theprothrombinase complex
FIXa
Factor VIlla
consists of a composite ofactivated
FactorVa
factorX(FXa),activatedfactorV
(factor Va),phosphatidylserine and
ionizedcalciumandisresponsihlefor
theactivationofprothromhinto
thrombin.
Disorders ofPlatcletFunction199
Agonist
Receptor
Platclet membrane
Inhibition of
adenylatecyclasc
GProtein
Decrcased cAMP
G Protein activation
Phospholipid
Eicosanoid
pathway
pathway
Phospholipase C
Phospholipase A
activation
activation
Membranephospholipid
Membranephospholipid
hydrolysis
hydrolysis
Arachidonic acid
Diacyglycerol
Cyclo-oxygenase
Inositol
triphosphate
Prostaglandin G2
Prostaglandin H
Activation of
Increased
'Thromboxane
protein kinase C
cytosolic calcium
synthetase
Thromboxane A2
Shape change
Release reaction
GPIIb-Illaexposure
Fibrinogen
Platelet aggregation
Figure12.4:Basicplateletreaction.Thisisthe sequenceof signalling events that occur during platelet activation.Thereaction
isinitiatedwhenanagonistbindstoitsspecificreceptorontheplateletmembrane.ThroughmessengerscalledGproteinsthis
binding activates the enzymes phospholipaseC(phospholipidpathway)and phospholipaseA(arachidonate oreicosanoid
pathwayyandcausesarapid influxofextracellularcalcium.Inthephospholipidpathway,phospholipaseChydrolyses
Inositoltriphosphateincreasescytosoliccalciumconcentrationsbypromotingcalciumreleasefromthedensetubularsystem.
TheincreasedintraceltularcalciumhasseveraleffectsincludingshapechangegranulesecretionandactivationofGllblla.
Intheeicosanoidpathway,phospholipaseAcatalysesthereleaseofarachidonicacid fromphospholipids(especially
phosphatidylcholineyintheplateletmembrane,leadingto thesynthesisofprostaglandinendoperoxidesandthromhoxaneA
ThromboxaneAplaysacriticalroleinplateletrecruitmentandgranulesecretion.Althoughthesetwopathwaysofplatelet
activatinareillutratedasrelativelystinctfroneanothertheydointractwith,andamplfyeachother.Theinosito
triphosphatemediatedincreaseinintracellularcalciumconcentrationalsoactivatesphospholipuseAAlipaseconverts
diacyiglycerol ino arachidonic acid.oth arachidonic acid and thromboxane A, can also activate phospholipase C. A separate
effectofagonist-receptorbindingistheinhibitionofadenylateyciase,thusdecreasingcyclicadenosinemonophosphate
(cAMP)concentrations and promoting calcium release from thedense rubular system.
202Manual of Canine andFelineHaematologyandTransfusionMedicine
through theinteraction ofglycoproteinreceptorsin
receptors in the platelet membrane.Figure 12.7
theunstimulated plateletmembranewithligandsin
lists the various types of platelet agonists.Strong
the vascular subendothelial matrix. The type of
agonists,like collagen and thrombin,induce aggrega
receptors and ligands differ depending on the site of
tion through both the phospholipase C (hydrolysis of
vessel damage and,more specifically.on the shear
phospholipid) andeicosanoid pathways(generation of
rate of blood flowin that area.Studies performed in
thromboxane A).They can trigger granule secretion
vitroindicate that under conditions of lowshear,as
even when aggregation is inhibited. Weak agonists,
foundin thevenous circulationor areas ofblood
likeADP,activate theeicosanoid pathway andrely on
stasis,platelets adhere to collagen,laminin and
thromboxane A,for aggregation.They cannot cause
fibronectin through integrin receptors.Under condi-
phospholipid hydrolysis and require aggregation for
tions of high shear,as found in the arterioles and
secretion to occur.The aggregation initiated by thesc
microcirculation,adhesion is accomplished byvWf
weak agonistsisinhibited by drugsthat interferewith
and GPIb-IX(Figure 12.2).Humans with abnormali-
eicosanoid synthesis,such as aspirin.
tics in either vWf （von Willebrand’s disease)or
GPIb-IX (Bernard-Soulier syndrome) exhibit defec-
tiveplatelet adhesion underconditions of high shear.
Agonist
Aggregation
inhibited by aspirin
illustrating the importance of this interaction and
providing a physiological basis for the haemorrhage
Weak agonists
observed in these two conditions.vonWillebrand’s
Adenosine diphosphate
Yes
disease hasbeen diagnosed in several breeds of dogs,
Epinephrine (adrenaline)
Yes
however an animal model of Bernard-Soulier syn-
Platelet-activatingfactor
Partial
drome hasnotbeenidentified.Theinteractionof vWf
with GPIb-IX triggersplatelet activation and subse-
Arachidonic acid
Yes
quent aggregation through a complex series of intra-
Vasopressin (antidiuretic
Partial
cellular signal transduction events termed the basic
hormone)
plateletreaction (Figure 12.4).This reaction involves
Thromboxane A
No
Strong agonists
phospholipid hydrolysis (phospholipase C pathway)
Collagen
At low concentrations
and the other,arachidonic acid metabolism
(arachidonate or eicosanoid pathway).An important
of agonist
consequence of triggering both pathways is the acti-
Thrombin
At low concentrations
vation(by conformational change) of the fibrinogen
of agonist
receptor, GPIIb-IIIa,which culminates in platelet
Calcium ionophores
No
aggregation.
Figure 12.7:Platelet agonists.
Aggregation
Under physiological conditions,platclet aggregation
Relcase reaction
occurs afterplateletshave attached and spread along
The release reaction involves the secretion of the
the subendothelium or have interacted with certain
α-granule and dense body constituents into the open
agonistuchasthrombinrDPhesnteration
canalicularsystem.The released constituents can then
initiate thebasicplateletreaction,resulting in activa-
tion of GPIIb-Hla.Platelet aggregation is mediated by
tion.Thereleasereactioncanbemeasured by detecting
the binding of soluble plasma proteins, particularly
the amount of C-serotonin or ATP released during
fibrinogen,to GPIIb-IIla in the presence of divalent
aggregation.
cations)on the same or adjacent platelets,thus effec
tively crosslinking the platelets.Plasma and platelet
Procoagulantactivity
vWf (released from α-granules)may contribute to this
The generation of platelet procoagulant activity re-
aggregation in healthy humans. Aggregation is
quires aninflux of calcium andis associatedwith the
potentiated by other mediators,including thrombin,
redistributionofphosphatidylscrinctothcoutcrplalc-
ADP(released from dense bodies, damaged endothe-
letmembraneleaflet and the shedding ofmembrane
lialcerrytrocyt),rotoninlatltactivatg
yesiclesfrom theplatelet surface.The translocation
factor and thromboxane A.Thcrefore,unlikc ad-
of phosphatidylscrine provides a binding sitc for
hesion,aggregationisanactiveprocess,rquiringoth
activated coagulation factors and is essential for the
plateletmetabolismand stimulationby one ormore
generationofactivated factorXand thrombin.Plate-
specific agonists.
lets also secrete enzymes and cofactors during the
Platelet aggregation can be mcasured in vitro by
release reaction,all of which participate in thrombin
platelet ggregometers. In these devices, aggregation
generation.Similarly,factorXIll isreleasedfrom the
is initiatedwhen oneormore agonistsbind tospecific
platelet cytoplasm and crosslinks fibrin.
Disordcrs of Platclet Function 
203
DIAGNOSIS OF THROMBOPATHAS
mucosa made with a special disposable device (Simplate
H, Organon Teknika, Jessup, MD, USA or SurgicuttTM,
Thrombopathias should be suspected in aun animal with
Intermational Technidyne Corporation, Edison, NJ,
excessive haermorrhage typical of primary haemostatic
USA). The technique has been well described in the
rlisorders (Figure 12.8) and a normal platelet count and
veterinary literature (Pa1ker et al., 1988; Stokol and
coagulation profile. In many throinbcpathias, sponta-
Parry, 1993).
 neous bleeding is uncommon, haeinorrhage typically
 being induced by trauma or surgery.
von Wilebrand factor
Evaluation of von Willcbrand factor (vWf) is dlis-
Pctechiac and purpura
cussed in Chapter 14.
Mild to moderate bleeding from mucosal surfaces
Gastrointeslinal
Ciot retraction
Genitourinary
Clot retraction is a crude and subjective test of platelet
Nasal
number and function. Abnormal retraction may be due
Gingival
tu hypofibrinogenaemia, thrombocylopenia and
History of easy bruising and haematoina
thrombopathia.
formation
 Excessive blceding afier trauma, surgery and
Glass bead retention
venepuncture
 In the glass bead retention test, platelet numbers are
Figure I2.8: Cliuical fndings in rhrombopathias.
determined before and after a standard volume of ve.
Hous blood is passed at a standard rate ihrough a plastic
The minimal data base in patients with excessivc
 column packed with glass beadis. Retention is dependent
haemorrhage includes a complete history (including
on vWf, ADP release from haenolysed erythrocytes,
sex, agc and breed of dog, family history, details of
normal platelet function and coagulation. Platelet rclen-
previous bouts of haemorrhage, possible access (o
tion is decreased in thrombopathias and vWD (Brassard
anticoagulant rodenticides or drugs), a thorough physi-
and Meyers, 1991). This test is, however, difficult to
cal examination (noling the typc and distribution of
standardize and is not recomncnded as there are rmore
haemorrhage and the presence of underlying disease),
specific tests for the diagnosis of these disorders.
a platelet count, a blood smear examination for plateler
morphology and a coagulation profile (i.e. activated
Platelet aggregation
partial thromboplastin lime, prothrombin. timc and
Platelet aggregation is induced in vitro in response to
fibrinogen concentration). If all these tests are within
agonists. This process occurs in a machine known as a
reference limits, the animal should be evaluated for a
thrombopathia (Figure 12.9). Unfortunaicly, many of
 optical and impedance. The optical aggregometer is
the tests for thrombopathias are only perforrned at
sensitive to changes in light transmission, whereas the
referral institutions and are not readily available to the
impedance rncthod is scnsitive to changes in elccfrical
 general practitioner. Some of these tesis will be ncn-
resistance across two electrodes produced by platelet
tioned briefly here (see also Chapter 10).
lumiaggregoumcicrs, Imeasurc ATP relcasc simultanc-
 ously with aggregation. Theimpedance method, which
 Buccal mucosal blecding timc*
also nmeasures whole blood platelet aggregation, is
Clot retraction*
thouglt to be a more accuratc indicator of the physio-
von Willebrantl factor testing
logical processes occurring in vivo than the optical
Glass bead retention test
Platelet aggregation
 ethiod, which uses platelet-rich plasma.
Platelet release ('C-serotonin and ATP)
 Platelet procoagulant activity
Platelet release and ATP:ADP ratio
Platelet function analysers
 Therelease reaction can be assessed by determmination of
Platelet ATP:ADP ratio.
total platelet ATP anrd ADP content and by fhe release of
 Platelet glycoproteins (gel filtration, imnunoblot,
ATP or it4C-serotonin from dense bodies during aggre-
.flow cytometry)
gation. In storage pool defects, dense bodies and their
Figure 12.9: Tests for diagnosis of thronbopathias.
associated nurcleotides are reduced or absent; therefore
*Canr be perfornrel in privute practice.
the ATP:ADP ratio of the storage pool increases.
 Buccal mucosal bleeding time
Analysers of platelet functionl
 The buccal mucosal bleeding time (BMBT) is a rela-
New instruments have been developed that assess
tively simple in vivo test of primary haemoslasis. The
 platelet function by simlation of in vivo vessel injury.
BMBT is the length of time needed for haemorrhage to
A.nticoagulated blood is passed through an aperture cut
cease froml a small standardized cut in the buccal
 in a collagen-coated membrane impregnated with ADP
204Manual of Canine and FelineHaematologyand TransfusionMedicine
or adrenaline.These instruments measure the time
aswellastheir stateofactivation,canbeassessedwith
taken (closure time) for platelets to adhere to the
monoclonal antibodics in procedures such as flow
membrane,activate and produce a platclct plug,thus
cytometry and immunoblotting(Welles et al.1994;
closing the aperture.In human patients this process
Boudreaux et al.,1996).
dependsonvWfandnormalplateletfunction.Prelimi-
nary testing in dogs has shown that,with the ADP
channel,the closure time is abnormally long in dogs
DEFECTSINPLATELETFUNCTION
withvWD,Glanzmann’s thrombasthenia andBasset
Hound thrombopathia(MBBrooks,personal commu-
Thrombopathiascan beinheritcdor acquired.Acquired
nication).
lisorders are far more common, especially those in
duced by drug treatment or disease.Thrombopathias
Platelet procoagulant activity
typically are associatedwithhaemorrhage and a de-
In the past, procoagulant activity of platclets was
crease inplatelet functionHowever,there are many
measuredby thcPF3 test,an obsolete assay thatwas
disorders(such as diabetesmellitus,immune-mediated
used primarilyfor detection of antiplatelet antibodies.
haemolyticanaemia,pancreatitis,nephroticsyndrome
Currently,procoagulant activity of platelets can be
andhyperadrenocorticism)that arc associated with
determined in human patients using a prothrombinasc
thrombosis.Although thrombosis is usually due to
assay or flow cytornetry.These procedures have not
endothelial injury,deficient or abnormal coagulation
been evaluated in companion animals.
inhibitors and abnormaliticsoffibrinolysis,thereisno
doubtthat platelet hyperaggregabilityisacontributing
Platelet glycoproteins
factor in thrombus formation. Thrombotic disorders
Platelet glycoproteinscanbe separated by gel filtration
will notbe discussed furthcr bccausc hyperfunctional
and labelled.With advances inimmunological tech-
platelets have been implicated in thrombosis in only a
niques,the prcscncc orabsence of theseglycoproteins,
few animal diseases (Figure 12.10).
Disease
Proposed mechanism of platelet dysfunction
Decreased platelet function
Neoplasia
Acute megakaryoblasticleukaemia
Defective adhesion and aggregation
Essential thrombocythaemia
Defective adhesion and aggregation
Polycythaemia vera
Defective adhesion and aggregation
Dysproteinaemias (lymphoma, multiple
Paraprotein (IgG, IgM, IgA) coats platelets causing
myeloma)
defective adhesion, aggregation and procoagulant activity
Infectious agents
Ehrlichia canis
Decreased adhesion, procoagulant activity,
?antibody-mediated dysfunction
Ehrlichia platys
 Decreased aggregation (secondary to platelet activation
with subsequent exhaustion)
Hepatic disease
Decrcased aggregation atributed to a variety of causes
Renal disease
Decreased adhesion
Pancreatitis
Decreased aggregation (secondary to platelet exhaustion
after initial hyperresponsiveness and DIC)
Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC)
Fibrinogen degradation products coat platelets interfering
with function
Immune-mediated thrombocytopenia
Decreased aggregation
Increased platelet function
Nephrotic syndrome
Enhanced arachidonic acid availability
Neoplasia
Feline hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
Infectious agents
Rickettsia rickettsi
?Due to larger more functional platelets
Diroflaria immitis
?Parasite liberates biogenic armines, which interact with
platelet surface
Feline infectious peritonitis virus
Unknown: ?Direct viral interaction with platelets, and DIC
Figure12.10:Animal diseasesassociatedwithacquiredthrombopathias
Disorders of Platelet Function 205
Disorder
Defect
Glanzmann's thrombasthenia
Decreased GPIIb-Ila expression due to defects in GPIlb gene
Basset Hound thrombopathia
Increased cyclic adenosine monophosphate (?abnormal
phosphodiesterase), ?variant of Glanzmann's thrombasthenia
Spitz dog thrombopathia
?Variant of Glanzmann's thrombasthenia
Storage pool deficiency (American
?Defective adenosine diphosphate transport in dense body
Cocker Spaniel)
von Willebrand's disease
Deficiency or abnormality in von Willebrand factor
Chediak-Higashi syndrome (cats)
Storage pool deficiency (absent dense bodies), phospholipase C
signalling defect
Canine cyclic haematopoiesis (grey
Defective uptake and storage of serotonin, and signal
Collies)
transduction defect
Figure12.11:Inherited thrombopathias inanimals.
Thrombopathias are more readily recognized in
retraction is abnormal,which helps differentiate this
dogs than in cats.In general,cats do not often exhibit
lisordcrfromBasset Hound thrombopathia.Flow
excessive haemorrhagc,which may be attributed to
cytometric studies have shown anoticeable reduction
theirsmallsizeandlifestyle.Inherited disordersshould
in GPllb-lllaontheplateletsurfaceinbothOtterhounds
bc suspected in a young animal, especially if family
and GrcatPyrenees.Inthe Otterhound,thereisasingle
members displaysinilarblceding tendencies andthere
nucleotidechangeinexon12oftheGPIIbgene,which
is no history of drug treatment.Thrombopathias can
disrupts a calcium-binding domain and forms an
affcct any component of platelet function from ad-
unstablc GPIIb-IIla complex,preventing its expres
hesion to aggregation.Defects can involve quantita-
sion on the platclct surface Boudreaux and Catalfmo,
tive or qualitative abnormalities in mcmbrane proteins
1999).AnmRNA splicing defect in cxon 13of the
neededforplateletadhesion andinterplateletinter-
GPIIbgenehasbeenidentified in the GreatPyrenees.
actions,aberrantcAMPmetabolism,mpairedsynthe
This defect also disrupts a calcium-binding domain
sis of proaggregatory prostaglandin metabolites,
and results in a truncated protein, which destabilizes
decreased or absent granule pools,and low concentra-
the GPIIb-IIla complex(Lipscomb et al.,1999)
tionsor abnormal functionofessential cofactors such
as vWf and fibrinogen.
Inherited thrombopathias
Many inherited thrombopathias havebeen character-
izedinhumanmedicine,howeveronlyafewhaveheen
diagnosedincompanion animals(Figure 12.11).Some
of these will be discussed in detail.
vonWillebrand's disease
AlthoughvWDdoesnot affectlateletsdirectly,f
isessentialforplatelet adhesiontothesubendothelium
and,toalesserextent,lateletaggregation.heclini
calsignsin this disorder arc therefore similar to
thrombopathias(see Chapter 14).
Figure12.12:Spontaneous epistaxis ina GreatPyrenees
with Glanzmam's thrombasthenia.(Photograph courtesy of
Glanzmann's thrombasthenia
DrM.Boudreaux,AuburnUniversity.)
Glanzmann's thrombasthenia has been diagnosed in
Otterhounds and a GreatPyrenees (Boudreaux et al.
Bassct Hound thrombopathia
1996).The defect sccms to be autosomal recessive,
Basset Hound thrombopathia is unique to this breed
and affected dogs have excessivemucosal haemor-
and doesnot have a human counterpart.Clinical signs
rhage (Figure 12.12).Haemostatic testing shows a
in affected dogs consist of petechiae,aural haema-
normal tomildlydecrcascdplateletcount,normal to
tomas and prolonged haemorrhagewithsheddingof
increasedmeanplateletvolume andprolongedBMBT.
deciduous teeth.These signsare generally observcdat
Characteristic features include decreascd plateletre
oestrus and after trauma or surgery.An autosonal
tention,absent latelet aggregation tocollagen,DP
recessive condition,Basset Hound thrombopathia is
platelet activating factorand thrombin,anddecreased
characterized by decreased platclet retention and ab-
sent platelet aggregation in response to all agonists,
206Manual of Canine and Feline Haematology and TransfusionMcdicine
exceptthrombin,towhichthereis adelayedonset and
Inhibitors of prostaglandin synthesis
reduced rate of aggregation. Platclct -C-serotonin
Cyclo-oxygenase inhibitors
releaseis decreasedinresponsetocollagen,but normal
Aspirin
to ADPandthrombin.Change inshape does occur and
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
clot retraction is normal.The precise aetiology of the
(phenylbutazone,indomcthacin,ibuprofen)
defectisunknown,although abnormal calciummeta-
Thromboxane synthetase inhibitors (diazoxiben)
bolism or a variantof Glanzmann’s thrombasthenia
are possible causes.Plateletsfrom affected dogs have
Drugs that increase concentrations of cyclic
increased basal cAMP concentrations,which have
adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) or cyclic
been attributed to impairedphosphodiesterase activ-
guanosine monophosphate (cGMP)
ity.Increased cAMP inhibits intracellular calcium
Adenylate cyclase or guanylate cyclase activators
releasc,agonist-receptor binding and agonist-induced
Prostaglandin I,Eand D(cAMP)
phospholipid hydrolysis (Boudreaux et al., 1986).
Nitric oxide,nitroglycerin,nitroprusside
(CGMP)
Spitz dog thrombopathia
Phosphodiesterase inhibitors
Thrombopathiahas bcen described byBoudreaux et
Dipyridamole
al.(1994) in young Spitz dogs with chronie intermit-
Methylxanthines (caffeine, theophylline,
tent mucosal bleeding.The disorderclosely resembles
aminophylline)
BassetHound thrombopathia,except thatplatelet 
Calcium antagonists
cretion in response to ADP is absent in the Spitz.
Diltiazem, nifepidine, verapamil
Storage pool deficiency in American Cocker
Barbiturates (?interfere with agonist-receptor
Spaniels
binding and prevent increase in cytosolic
American Cocker Spaniel dogs with storage pool defi-
calcium concentration)
ciencyhave moderate to severe haemorrhage after
Membrane-active drugs (interfere with platelet
trauma,venepuncture or surgery.They havenormal
receptors)
plateletcounts,a prolongedBMBT,decreasedplatlt
Antibiotics (penicillin, ampicillin, ticarcillin,
aggregation and iC-serotonin release in response to
gentamicin, sulphonamides, cephalothrin,
collagen, and an increased platelet ATP:ADP ratio.
Dense bodies are visible on electron microscopy. Thc
cefmetazole,moxalactam)
Antihistamincs (phenothiazines)
disorder hasbeen attributed toa selective defect in
Plasma expanders (dextran,hetastarch,
ADP transport in dense granules.Haemorrhage is
pentastarch)
often severe enough to require fresh platelet trans-
Propanolol, isoproterenol
fusions (Callan et al., 1995).
Anaesthetic agents (procaine, lignocaine,
Acquired thrombopathias
halothane,glycerol guiacolate)
Acquired thrombopathias should be suspected in ani-
Unknown
malswithspecificdiseasesknowntobe associatedwith
Heparin
platclct dysfunction (see Figure 12.10) and in animals
Ticlopidine (?interfere with fibrinogen-receptor
that have been treated with certain drugs (Figure 12.13).
exposure)
Therisk of bleedingis unpredictable and typicallyless
Oestrogens, chondroitin sulphate, carbenicillin
scvcrc and consistent than in animals with inherited
Figure 12.13:Drugs that can interfere with platelet
disorders.Although abnormal platelet function occurs
function.Mostof thesehavebeenreportedinhumans and
in these diseases,there may be other causes for the
not in animais.
excessive haemorrhageseeninthese conditions (throm
bocytopenia, for example). Howevcr, it should be rec-
generation of thromboxane A,which isneeded for
ognized thatplatelets arepotentially not functioning
secretion and aggregation. Othcr non-stcroidal anti-
normallyinthese situations,and drugsthatmayexacer
inflammatory agents(e.gphenylbutazone)reversibly
inhibit cyclo-oxygenase activity. Aspirin is unique,
bateplatelet dysfunctionshould thercforebc avoided.
however, as its effect lasts for the life span of thc
Drugs
platelet (7-10 days in the dog).Therefore when using
An enormousvaricty ofdrugscaninterferewithplate-
aspirin,plateletfunctionisinhibitedforatleast7days
let function (George and Shattil, 1991). The most
after drug treatment ceases.Aspirin should bc avoidcd
commonly used of these is aspirin,which in some
as an analgesic in dogs with inherited haemostatic
situations is prescribed preciscly for its antiplatelet
disorders such as vWD andhaemophilia A.
effects,suchasinthe preventionofthrombocmbolism
in feline cardiomyopathy and canine heartworm dis-
Disseminated intravascular coagulation
ease.Aspirin inhibits platelet function byirreversibly
Disseminatedintravascularcoagulation(DIC)iscaused
acetylating platelet cyclo-oxygenase,thus preventing
by the systemic activation of thrombin resulting in
Disorders of Platelet lunction  207
wiclespread coagulation, with resultant microcircula-
Hepatic disease
tory thromboembolism and multiorgan failure. DIC is
Hepatic disease is often associated with prulongcd
not a primary disorder; it is initiated by an underlying
haemorrhage, attributable to a combination of reduced
dlisease process, typically septicaemia, pancreatitis,
synthesis of coagulation factors, DIC and platelet
heat stroke, surgery, viral infections, neoplasia, trans-
dysfunction. Dogs with various types of hepatic dlis-
fusion reactions or tissuc nccrosis. DIC is initiated by
ease have defective plateletaggregation in whole bluod,
 increased tissue factor expression by monocytes and
and display excessive haemorrhage related to platelet
cndothelial cells, mediated by cytokines or endothelial
dysfunction (Willis et al., 1989). This dysfunction is
cell injury. Some iumours (e.g. mncinous adeno-
 thought to be due to circulating FDPs, increasedl bilc
carcinoma) and snake venoms can initiate DIC by
acids, altered platelet phospholipids, enhanced nitric
 directly activating coagulation factors such as factor
 oxide production (from hyperammonaemia) and in-
X. As a result, there is widespread activation of coagu-
creased proportions ofolderless active platelets(Bowcn
lation, with fibrin deposition and thrombus foralion.
et al., 1988; Willis et al., 1989).
Consequently, there is consumption of platelets,
fibrinogen antl coagulation factors with secondary
fibrinolysis and generation of fibrin (fibrinogen) dcg-
MANAGEMENT
radaticn products (FDPs). Erythrocytes shear as they
lravcrsc damaged blood vessels, producing a
Assessment of the risk of hlccding in thrombopathias
microangiopathic haeinolylic anacmia. Clinical signs
is difficult, as none of the platelet function tests
may be related totissue hypoxia, infarction or haeor-
accurately predicts the likelihood of haemorrhage.
rhage. Typically, haemorrhage is attributed to deple-
The BMBT is considercd by sonmc to be the best
<
tion of platelets and coagulaticon factors and abnormal
indicator of ‘in vivo' haemostatic competence in
fibrin polymerization, but there is often concuren
palicnts with throinbopathias. The BMBT can be
plalclct dysfunction. Platelet dysfunction is mediated
 used as a screening test in animals considered at risk
by FDPs (especially fraguments D and E), which have
of bleeding owing to platelet dysfunction (e.g. dogs
a high affinity for platelet membranes and compete
hcing freated with aspirin) before invasive surgery.
withi fibrinogcn for platelet receptors, thus impairing
 Those patients with a prolunged BMBT are consid-
aggregation.
 ered to be niore likely to bleed during surgery than
thiosc with a BMBT within reference intervals. How-
Immune-mediated thrombocytopenia
ever, therc have been no studies to determine if a
Some dlugs with immune-mediated thrombocytopenia
(IMT) have abnormal platelet aggregatiom, which is
 cal haemorrhage in animals. In a patient with clinical
mediated by IgG antibodies (Kristensen et al., 1994).
signs referable 1o platelet dysfunction, suitable pre.-
In chronic IMT in humans, most antibodies are di-
 cautions should be taken before invasive surgical
rected against GPHb-Ila and GPIb-IX (McMillan et
procedures. These include treatment of the under-
al., 1987), and studies in dogs by Lewis and Meyers
lying diseasc in acquired thrombopathias, cessation
(1996) indicate that, in some dogs with IMT, there is an
 Of drug treatment, attention to strict surgical lhacmo-
autoantibody against GPIIb-IIla. As flhis glycoproicin
stasis and platelet transfusions. Ideally, platelet-rich
has an essential role in platelet aggregation, it is not
 plasma or plalelc. concentrates should be infused,
surprising that dogs with IMThave concurrent platelet
however fresh whole blood is the only form of trans-
dysfunction. For unknown reasons, in IMT the clinical
fusion therapy readily available to the general practi-
signs of haemorrhage do not always correlate with the
tioncr. This should be used judiciously, and ideally
platelel count. It may be that the clinical signs of IMT
all animals should be typed or crossmaiched to mini-
depend on the extent of platelet dysfumction as well as
mize transfusion reactions. Infusion therapy in inher-
 the severity of the thrombocytopenia. Further studies
ited thrombopathias is only palliative, and if
need to be performcd in this area.
 haemorrhage is severe, euthanasia Imay he warranted.
Rcnal disease
 Mucosal bleerling, reduced platelet retention and a
REFERENCES AND FURTHER
 prolonged BMBT are features of natural and cxperi-
READING
Imental uraemia in dogs. These abnormalities correlate
with the extent of azolacmia. Platelet aggregation is
Colnau RW, Hirsh J, Marder VJ and Salznun EW (1994) Hemostasis 
rsi:asprpsncicaracti,dJ
either normal or millly dccrcased, implicating defec-
Lippincott, Philadelphia
tive adhesion as the main haemostatic abnormality
Boudreaux MK, Dodds W1, Slauson DO and Catalfmo JL (1986)
Evidcncc for thc rcgulatory control af canine platelel
(Brassard et al., 1994). The amount and multimeric
phosphodicstcrasc.
Biochenicai und Biophysicul Resrarei
 composition of vWf arc normal, indicating that the
Comications 140, 589-594
BoudireauxMK,CragerC,DioRStanzKand TaivioKinnucanM
adhesion defects are not due to vWr abnormalities
(1994) Ilentificalioof an intrinsic platelet function defect in Spitz
(Brassard and Meyers, 1994).
Dogs.Jornal ofVeterinary hnterial Medicite &,93-98
Boudreaux MK, Kvam K, Dillon AR, Boume C, Seut M, Schwartz KA
Krislensen AT, Weiss DJ and Klausner JS (1994) Platelet dlysfunction
ad Toivio-Kinnuean M(1996) TypeIGlanznan'sthrombasthenia
associated with immune-mediated thrombncytopenia in togs.
int a Great Pyrenees dog.VeierinaryPathology33,503-511
Journali
Boudlreaux MK and Catafino JL (1999) Evaluation of the genes
Lewis DC and Meyers KM (1996) Srudies of piatelet-bound ane serum
encoding for GP complex IIB-IIIA in Otterhounds with
platelet-bindable immunoglobulins in dogs with idiopathic
tlrombasthenic thrombopatlia (abstraet). Vererinary Pathology
thronbucyiopenie purpura. Experimental Haemaology 24, 696-
36,483
701
Bowen DJ, Clemmons RM, Meyer DJ and Dorsey-Lee MR (1988)
Lipscomb D, Bougireaux M and Bourne C (1999) Conparisot of ihe
Platelet functinnal changes sccondary to hepatocholestasis and
αIh mucleotide sequence from platelet cDNA of thrombasthenic
elevatin f senm bile acids.7lobsis Resear 52,649-654
and normal dogs (ahstraci). Veterinary Pathoiogy 36, 482
Brassarel IA and Meyers KM (1991) Evaluation of the huccal bleding
McMillan R, Tani P, Miltard I, Berchtold F, Renshaw L and Woords VL
time and platelet glass head retention as assays of hemostasisin the
(1987) Platelet-associated and plasma anti-glycoprotein
dog: theeffecis of acerylsallcylic acid, warfarin andvon Willcbrand
autoantibodies in chronic ITP. Blood 70, 1040-1045
Factor deficieney. Throubosis Haenostasis 65, 191-195
Parker MT, Colier LL, Kicr AB aud Johnson GS (1988) Oral mucosa
BrassardJA und Meyers KM (I994) von Willebrand factor isnot altered
blcediug tincs of normul cats and cas with Chediak-Higashi
in uzotenic dogs with profonged bleeding tine. Jourrud of
Luboraiory and Clinieal Medicine124,55-62
Clinical Paihotogy 17, 9-12
BrassardJA,Meyers KM, PersonMand Dhein CR (1994) Experimentally
Roth GJ (1992) Platelets and blood vessels: the adhesion event.
incluced renal failure in the dog as an animal modei for uremic
fntmanology Today 13, 100-105
bleeding.JournetofLaboraroryand Clinical Medicine 124,48-54
Stokol T and Pany BW (1993) Canine von Wilicbrand Disease: a
Callan MB, BcnncttIS, Philips DK,Haskins ME, HaydenJE, Andcron
review. Ansiralian Veterinary Praerinioner 23, 94-103
JG and Giger U (1995) Inhcrited platelet -storage pool diseuse in
Thc British Society for Haematology Hacmostasis and Tlhrombosis
deficieney. Tirombosis ame Hurwestusis 74, 949-953
uf Clinical Puhology 41, 1322-1330
De Gopegui RR and Felduan BF(2000) Platelets and von Willebrand's
Welles EG, Bourne C, Tyler IW at Boutreaux MK (1994) Delection
11
Disease. In: Texthook of Veterinary hterna! Medicine, 5" edn, ed.
of activated feline plateles in platelet-rich plasma by use of
SF Eatinger and EC Feldman, pp. 1817-1828. WB Saunders,
ftuorescein-labeled antibodies and flow cyiomctry. Veterinary
11
Philadelphia
Pathology 31, 553-560
George JN and Shauil SJ (199l) The clinical importance of acquired
Wilis SE,Jackson ML,Meric SMand Rousseaux CG (1989) Whole
abnormalities of platelet function.Nev EnglandJournalofMecficine
blood platelet aggregation in dogs with liver discasc. American
321, 27-36
Journal ofVererinary Rescarch 50,1893-1897
1
CHAPTERTHIRTEEN
Disorders of Secondary Haemostasis
Janet D.Littlewood
INTRODLCTION
The extrinsic pathway comprises the activation
offactorVII(FVII),principally bytissue factor(TF),
Secondary hacmostasisistheprocessbywhichsoluble
a lipoprotein that is derived fromvarious cell and
fibrinogen is converted into insoluble fibrin. This
tissue types. Activated F VI and TF with calcium
process occurs on the phospholipid surface of acti-
ions (Ca) comprise the *tissue factor’complex,
vated platelets at the site ofvascular injury and stabi-
which activates factor X (F X).The intrinsic pathway
lizes the primary haemostatic platelet plug in a
is triggered by negatively charged surfaces, the
meshworkoffibrin strands.Theconversionof fibrino
subendothelium invivo,glass or added activators
gen to fibrin is achievcd by the proteolytic action of
(c.g.kaolin) invitro,followed by sequential protease
thrombin,which is formed from prothrombin by the
activation,culminating in the production of the
sequential activation of proteases in conjunction with
‘tenasecomplex,which consists of activated factor
essential cofactors,which together areknown as co-
IX(F IXa),activated cofactor VIlI (F VIlla),phos-
agulation, or clolting,factors.The tcrm coagulation
pholipid and Ca*+.The activation of prothrombin
cascade'is used to describe this sequential activation,
byF Xa.FVa,phospholipid and Ca++ and the subse-
with thrombinitselffurtheractivatinginactivefactors
quent conversion of fibrinogen tofibrin isknown as
and thus amplifying the process (Figure 13.1).The
the common pathway.
coagulation cascadecan be conveniently considered to
Inherited disorders of coagulation are usually
consist of an extrinsic pathway,an intrinsic pathway
deficiencies of single clotting factors due togenetic
and a final common pathway,although in vivo the
mutations,although multiple factor defccts may
occur.Acquired disorders of coagulation are generally
interactive.However,as the in vitro tests described
multiple factor deficiencies and may occur in
earlier (see Chapter 10)measure distinct components
conjunction with platelet disorders in the consumptive
of the clotting process, this concept of two pathways is
coagulopathies.
helpful in the classification and investigation of clot
ting disorders.
CLINICALFINDINGSIN
COAGLLOPATHIES
The manifestation of abnornal bleeding in coagula-
tion defects is generally similar, irrespective of the
XIl
spccific factor defects,but distinct fron the clinical
signs resulting from platclet abnormalities (Figure
pathwa
13.2). Animals with coagulopathies often bleed at a
single siterather than showingwidespread haemor-
Vlla
VI
rhage. Deep blecds into soft tissues. joints and body
cavities are seen,as opposed to mucosalor surface
bleeding.Soft tissue swelling may indicate the pres-
Common pathway
ence of haematomata,with lameness and joint swell-
ing beingfeatures of haemarthroses.Haemothorax and
haemomediastinum result in dyspnoea and dullness on
ibrin
chest prcussionand occasionallysevererespiratory
compromise may result from submucosal haemor
Figure13.1:A simplifiedscheme ofthecoagulation cascade
rhage affecting the trachea and retropharyngeal re
HMWK,highmolecularweighkininogen,NCS,negatively
charged surface;Ca,calcium;PL,phospholipid;TF,tissue
gion.Abdominal pain and malaise arc the cardinal
factor.
signs of intraperitoneal or visceral haemorrhage.
210Manual of Canine and Feline Hacmatology andTransfusion Medicine
the coagulation defect can be achieved by the per-
Haematomata common
formance of APTT correction assays,whereby nor-
Often single site of haemorrhage
malplasma,aluminiumhydroxide-adsorbedplasma
Bleeds into body cavities
and normal scrum arc added to thepatient's plasma
Mucosal or surface bleeds rare
and APTT assays performed (Figure 13.4). Assays of
specificfactors are required to quantify the exact
Delayed bleeding or rebleeding
nature of the defect.
Venepuncture often uncomplicated
Figure13.2:Typical clinical features ofcoagulopathies.
MANAGEMENTOF
The history of the patient maybe helpful in dis-
COAGULOPATHIES
criminatingbetween inherited and acquired disorders
(Figure13.3).Bothinheritcdandacquireddisordersof
Ideally,patients with defects of coagulation factors
coagulation maybe exacerbated by concurrcnt illncss.
should be treated by replacement of the missing
Other historical features of importance include recent
clottingfactors.Inpractice,treatment usually cntails
drug therapy and potential exposure to toxins; these
giving fresh plasma or thawed fresh frozen plasma
havebeenreviewedby Littlewood (1989,1992) and
taken from donor dogs or cats.Although there
Couto (1999)
are several animal blood banking facilitics in
North America,there is no commercial source of
Inherited coagulation
Acquired coagulation
blood products in the United Kingdom.However,
defects
defects
several referral institutions and practiccs maintain
donor animals.
Onsct at young age
Onset at any age
Whole blood transfusions limit the amount of
History of previous
 Often no previous
clotting factors that can be given and carry the
bleeding episodes
 problems, uneventful
accompanying risk of reactions of red cell incompat-
operations
ibility either afterfirst or,significantly,subsequent
Relatives may show
Usually no affected
Iransfusions (see Chapters 15 and 16). As a guide,
bleeding abnormality
relatives
the aim is to increase the concentration of clotting
factorsin thecirculation toat least25%ofnormal
Figure13.3:Differentiationofinherited and acquired
coagulopathies.
lo achicve haemostasis.This can be accomplished
by infusion of 10-15 ml/kg of normal plasma,
Further investigations
although significant blood loss may increase the
Primary haemostatic function is normal in uncormpli-
requirement for plasma replacement. Infusions
cated coagulation defects, and the buccal mucosal
should be repeated twice daily until haemorrhage is
bleeding time in patients is usuallywithin thenormal
controlled andresolving.Broad-spectrumantibiosis
range (less than 5 minutes).During bleeding episodes.
is indicated as extravasated bloodprovides an ideal
however,itisnotuncommonfortheplatelet count to
medium for bacterial growth.
decrease due to consumption at the site ofvessel
Where specific contributory factors orunderlying
injury,and in cases of disscminated intravascular
diseases are identified,then these must be addressed
coagulation(DIC),defects of primary and secondary
and treated appropriately. In thc case of some of the
haemostasis coexist.
inherited coagulopathies, the use of inhibitors of
Laboratory investigation should include the
fibrinolysistostabilizefibrin clots atthe site ofvessel
screening assays of coagulation:prothrombin time
injury hasbeenfound tobeof great bencfit(AR Gilcs,
(PT),activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT)
personal communication;JD Littlewood,unpublished
and thrombin clotting time(TCT).Further details of
observations).The authorhas used tranexamic acid
these andother testsofhaemostasis are covcred in
(Cyclokapron,Kabi) at a dose rate of 15-20 mg/kg
Chapter10.Furtherelucidation of the exact nature of
orally 2-4 times daily.This drug is used to control
APTT clotting times
Test plasma +normal plasma
Corrected
Corrected
Corrected
Uncorrected
Test plasma + adsorbed plasma
Corrected
Corrccted
Uncorrected
Uncorrected
Test plasma+normal serum
Corrected
Uncorrected
Corrected
Uncorrected
Possible factor deficiency
XI, XII, PK,
1,II, V,VIII
II,VI, IX,X
Circulating
HMWK
inhibitor
Figure 13.4:Correction assays for activated partial thromboplastin time(APTT).
PKprekalikrein;HMWK,highmolecuarweightkininogen.
Disordcrs of SecondaryHaemostasis
211
external haemorrhage （e.g. dental, prostatic) in
Haemophilia B
human haemophilic patients and,owing to the
HaemophiliaBis alsoknown asChristmas disease.The
risk of thromboembolic complications,would
condition is due to a deficiency in clotting factor IX
not be used in the management of internal bleeds.
(FIX).Like F VIII deficiency,this is a scx-linked
Thisrisk,owevcr,eemstobeminimalinveterinary
condition,with affected animalsbeingmale and the
patients,probably owing to their enhanced fibrino-
offspring of carrier females.The size of the gene on the
lytic system compared with that of humans.It
Xchromosomeisconsiderablysmallerthanthegenefor
shouldbenotedthat thisproduct isnot licensed for
FVIll,and the frequency ofoccurrence of genc muta-
veterinaryuse.
tions in populations is proportionately less.Haemo-
philia Bis therefore less common than haemophilia A.
FIX acts at the same point in the coagulation
INHERITEDCOAGULOPATHIES
cascadeasFVlI(seeFigure 13.1),the activated forms
of both protcinscontributing to the‘tenase’complex,
Themajor fcaturcs of thcmost common inherited
which activates F X.The clinical manifestations of F
coagulopathies of the dog and cat are summarized in
VIlI and FIX deficiency areidentical.The inheritance
Figure 13.5.
paltcrn is similarly identical.All the daughters of an
affected malewill be obligatecarricrs of the disease,
HaemophiliaA
but his sonswilI be normal.There is a50%probability
Haemophilia A,alsoknown asclassic’haemophilia
ofthc offspring ofa carrier female inheriting the
isduetoadeficiencyinclottingfactorVIll(FVIII)and
defectivechromosome,andonaveragchalfofhersons
is the commonest ofthe inheritcd coagulopathies.This
will be affected and half ofher daughters will be
condition is covered in detail in Chapter 14.
carricrs of the disease.
Factor
Breeds affected
Inheritance
Prothrombin
Activated partial
Thrombin
deficiency
time
thromboplastin
clotting time
time
Various dogs
Autosomal
Prolonged
Prolonged
Prolonged
dominant and
recessive
VII
Beagles
Autosomal
Prolonged
Normal
Normal
Alaskan Malamute
dominant
Crossbreed
VIII
Many pure- and
Sex-linked
Normal
Prolonged
Normal
crossbred dogs
recessive
Various cat breeds
IX
Several breeds and
Sex-linked
Normal
Prolonged
Normal
crossbred dogs
recessive
British Shorthair,
Siamese and
DSH-cross cats
X
Aimerican Cocker
?Autosomal
Prolonged
Prolonged
Normal
Spaniel
recessive
Jack Russell Terrier
DSHcat
IX
Pyrenean Mountain
Autosomal
Normal
Prolonged
Normal
Dog
dominant; only
Kerry Blue Terrier
homozygotes
bleed
XII
Various cat breeds
Autosomal
Normal
Prolonged
Normal
dominant;no
bleeding
tendeney
Vitamin K-
Devon Rex cat
?Autosomal
Prolonged
Prolonged
Normal
dependent
recessive
Figure13.5:Summaryof featuresofcommoninherited coagulopathies.
212  Manual of Canine and Feline Haematology and Transfusion Medici1ic
Bccausc F IX deficiency is a defect of the intrinsic
of FX, is prolonged, and the diagnosis is confirmed by
 pathway, the APTT is prolonged but the PT and TCT
 specific F X assay.
are normal. The APTT is not corrected by addition of
The patlern of inheritance in humans is auosomal
adsorbed plasma, and an assay of specific factors
recessive, with either gender being affected with thie
shows F IX deficicncy, which may bc scvcre (less than
disease. The severity of bleeding episodes in dogs with
1 % of pooled normal plasma) or moderate (2- 10% of
F X deficicncy is variable, and severely affcclcd ani-
pooled normal plasma). Mild forms of the disease have
mals tend to die young. although moderately affected
not been reported in dogs or cats.
dogs may survive to adulthood.
810
Haemophilia B lhas bcen reported in 11 breeds of
dog in the United States (Verlander er al., 1984) and
Factor XI deficiency
more recently the disease has also been described in a
Factor Xl (plasina thromboplastin antecedent) defi-
family of Gcrman Shepherd Dogs (Feldman et al.,
ciency presents as a severe and often lethal bleeding
1995). In the United Kingdom a moderately severe
disordler, Thc condlitiou has becn reported in Springer
fornn of the disease was identified in a spaniel-cross
Spaniels and Pyrenean Moumtain Dogs (Dodds and
dog (Lilewoodl el al., 1986). The dam of this dog was
Kull, 1971; Dodds, 1977) and in Kerry Blue Terriers
confirmed as a carrier, with only half of the norumal
(Knowlcr et al., 1994). Thc inheritancc palltcrn is
plasma activity of F1X, and a malesibling that had died
autosomal, with F XI activity in homozygotes of less
at a few wccks of age was assumcd to have been
than 10%,and of the order of25-50% in heterozygotes,
affected also. The dog was successfully maintainedl as
the latterbcing asymptomalic. An acquired form of the
 a family pet and had only occasional bleeding episodes
condition has been reported in a cat (Feldman et al.,
 as a resull of trauma and subscqucnt to dental extrac-
1983). The APIT is prolonged as this is a defect of the
tions. These episodcs wcre managed by plasma traus-
intrinsic pathway. but the PT and TCT are normal. The
fusion, and the dog survived to old age.
diagnosis is confirmed by specific F XI assay.
At a molecular level the defect has been shown as
a post-transcriptiomal dcfect (High et al., 1987),a poin!
Factor VII deficiency
mutation (Evans et al., I989) and, in other cases,
Deficiency of F Vll is well rccognized in certain
deletion mutations (Mauser et al., 1996; Brooks et al.,
families of laboratory Beagles and has also been de-
110
1997; Gu er al., 1999), cne of which was associated
scribed in the Alaskan Malanmute (Spurling, 1980) and
with the production of inhibitors against transfused
a crossbred dog (Macpherson et al., 1999). The blccd-
canine F IX. Dogs with haemophilia B have been used
ing tendency is usually mild. The paftern of inheritance
 in sturlies of gcne rcplacement thcrapy (reviewed by
is autosomal dominant, but heterozygotes are asymp-
Dodds and Womack, 1997), with a recent repurt of
tomatic. The cxtrinsic pathway-scrcening tes, thc PT,
long-fernn F IX expression (more than 17 umonths) after
is prolonged in cases ofF VII deficiency, but the APTT
adeno-associated viral vector genc transfer in dogs
and TCT are normal.
with haemophilia B (Herzog et al., 1999).
Haemophilia B has been reported in British
Hypofibrinogenaemia (F I) deficiency
shorthaired cats (Dodds, 1984) and Siamese cats (W J
Deficiencies of fibrinogen are reported occasionally
Dodds, personal communication). A cornbined defect 
 and have been identified in several dogs by the coagu-
of F IX and F XII was described in a litter of Siamese-
lation laboratory at thie Aninal Health Trust, Newmar-
cross domestic shorthaired kittens (Dillon and
ket, UK (unpublished observations). One such case
Boudreaux, 1988).
was a I-year-old malc Cocker Spaniel that presented
with a history of recurrent episodes of joint stiffness
Factor X deficiency
and epistaxis. The dog was referred for investigation of
Factor X (Stuart-Power factor) deficiency has becn
respiratory distress. Tachypnoea and pallor were evi-
reported in a family of American Cocker Spaniels
dent on clinical examination, together with scleral and
(Dodds, 1973) and in a Jack Russell Terrier (Cook et
retinal haemorrhages. Radiographs revealed alveolar
al., 1993). The condition has been idlentificd in a
dlensiticsdue to pulinonary haemorrhage (Figure 13.6).
domestic shorthaired cat that presented with seizures,
The fibrinogen concentration in this dog was 0.4 g/l
bleeding associated with jugular venepuncture and a
(normal range 2-4 g/l). The dog subsequently had
history of prolonged bleeding afterdeclawing (Gookin
seizures, and lesions consistcnt with infarcts due to
et al., 1997). Although not confirmerl by imaging
cerebrovascular accidents were identified on magnetic
techniques, the neurological abnormalities were as-
resonance imaging (MRI) scans.
sumecd to have bcen the result of intracranial haemor-
The PT, APTT and TCT assays were all prolonged
rhage, which is reported in some human infants with.
and plasma fibrinogen concentration was low. The
F X deficiency.
acute episode of haemorrhage was managed by plasma
As F X is a common pathway defect, both PT and
transfusion, and low doses of tranexamic acid (an inhibi-
APTT are prolonged bul the TCT is normal. The
lor of fibrinolysis) on a prophylactic basis were success-
Russell's viper venom test (RVVT), a direct activator
ful in minimizing the occurence of blccding episodes.
Disorders of Secondary Haemostasis 213
VitaminK-dependent coagulopathy
AmultifactorialvitaminK-dependentcoagulopathy
has been described in the Devon Rex cat. Although
a complex coagulopathy has bcen recognized in
the breed for some time (Evans,1985),the true nature
of the conditionwas elucidatedbyMaddisonet al.
（1990) in related Devon Rex cats inAustralia.The
condition has also been confirmed in a Devon Rex
cat (Figure 13.7) in the United Kingdom(Littlewood
et al.,1995).
Figure 13.6:FactorI
deficiency
(hypofibrinogenaemia):
lateraland
radiographs showing
an alveoiar pattern
with air bronchograms
duero intraputmonary
haemorrhage.
Figure13.7:VitaminK-dependent coagulopathy of Devon
Rex cats:perineal bruising and scrotal haematoma in an
affectedmale cat aftersurgery.(Photographcourtesy of
Steve Shaw.)
Clinical signs of this coagulopathy include pro-
longed haemorrhage aftcr surgery and trauma,al-
Bothautosomalrecessiveand autosomaldominant
though the risk of bleeding in an individual cat seems
pattcrns of inheritance of hypofibrinogcnaemia have
to be variable.Cats of both genders are affected.Two-
beendocumentcd,but therecessivcconditionmay bc
to three-fold prolongation of the PTandAPTT occurs,
a variant of congenitalafibrinogenaemia andthedomi-
withredueed activityof all thevitaminK-dependent
nant disease may actually be heterozygous afibrino
clottingfactors.Factors II,IXandXarereducedtoless
genaemia (Fogh and Fogh, 1988).
than20%ofpoolednormalplasma inthecat,and FV1l
toless than50%of normal.Subsequent biochemical
FactorXII deficiency
investigations have shown a defectin hepaticvitamin
Kmetabolism in affected animals.An autosomal re-
ported in cats on several occasions (Kier et al.,1980;
Peterson et al.,1995),and a combined deficiency of
Giving vitamin K1 (phytomenadione,Konakion,
F VIlI and F XIIwas encountered in a family of
Roche; not licensed for veterinary use) orally at a dose
cats (Littlewood and Evans,1990) in addition to the
rateof 5mg daily successfullycorrects the abnormali-
combined FIX and FXII deficiencies described
ties in clotting factors and controls the bleeding ten-
above (Dillon and Boudreaux,1988).Although a
dency, and can be given long term.
deficiency of FXllresultsindramaticprolongation of
Thc prevalcnce of the condition in the breed is not
the APTT, it is not associated with a symptomatic
known,although thePT assay would provide a simple
bleeding tendency and is,ineffct, a laboratory abnor-
screening test to identify affected animals.These cats
mality.Theimportanceof thiswasshowninthefamily
couldthenbercmovedfrom breedingprogrammes,
of hacmophilic cats where the presence of F Xil
but treated prophylacticallywithvitaminK1 to pre-
deficiency complicated the identification of kittcns
vent the risk of haemorrhage.
affectedwith haemophilia A (Littlewoodand Evans,
1990). The pattern of inheritance is autosomal, with
Other inherited coagulopathies
homozygotes having a severe deficiency of F Xll
Otherrare inherited disorders of clotting factors are
activity and heterozygotes having about 50% of nor-
occasionallyreported (Fogh and Fogh,1988;Peterson
mal plasma F XII activity.
et al.,1995;Br0oks,1999)
 214  Manal of Caninc and Feline Haenatology and Transfusion Medicinc
ACQUIRED COAGULOPATHIES
consumption of both platelets and clotting factors,
together with the activation of fibrinolysis, depletion
Vitamin K-dependent coagulopathics
of natural inhibitors of coagulationsuch as antithrombin
III (ATIH) and release of substances that interfere with
Vitamin K antagonism
fibrin polymerization. Affected animals thus present
The conmonest acquired disorder of coagulation is due
with a blecding tendency dhue to defects in prinary.
to thc clepletion of vitanin K~clepculeni clotting factors
secondary and tertiary haemostasis. The condition,
resulting from the ingestion of counarin rodenticides,
predisposing factors, diagnosis and management are
which are vitamin K antagonists (see Chapter 14).
covered fully in Chapter 14.
Vitamin K deficiency
Circulating inhibitors of clotting factors
Vitamin K is a fat-soluble vitamin and deficiencies result-
01 Xrupuooas sea ul paliodai an Ayedolnseoo e u Su
Hcparin
maldigestion anrl malahsorption conditions stch as cxo-
Canine mast cellscontain significant amounts ofheparin,
crine pancreatic deficiency (Perry et al., 1991), severe
the physiological inhibitor of coagulation. Some ani-
infiltrative enteritis (Edwards and Russell, 1987) and
bile duct obstruction (Pcdcrson and Holzworth, 1987).
mals with mast cell tumours may releasc heparin into the
circulation resulting iu a haemorrhagic tendency.
Hepatic disease
Heparin, in conjunction with ATill, primarily
The liver is the sile of synthesis of many of thc plasima
inhibits activated F X but also other plasma proteases.
cloling factors, as well as inhibitors of coagulation,
Prolongation of both PT ankl APTT is seen, and adkli-
 and is the site of conversion of the vitamin K-depend-
tion of normal plasma to patient plasma fails to correct
ent factors into their active forms. Widesprcad damage
the clotting times. The bleeding tendency can be man-
lo he livcr parenchyma may thus result in deficiencies
agerl by plasma transfusion, but thc prognosis relates to
that of the undcrlying malignancy.
of many clotting factors. In addition, the liver is re-
sponsible for the removal and inactivation of any
activatcd clotting factors that may escape from the site
Antibodies to clotting factors
of vascular injury into the circulation. Both qualitative
alid quantitative alterations in platelets may occur in
Lupus anticoagulant
liverdiseasc. Clinically significant haemostalic alnor-
A lupus-typc anticoagulant, wlhich in humans is due to
the prcscncc of circulating autoantibodies directed
malities tend to be associated with acute insults to the
liver, although it is considered prudent to check clot-
against phospholipids, has been reported in one dog
ting variables beforc embarking on surgical intcrven-
with thromboembolic disease (Stonc et al., 1994).
tion in patients with chronic hepatic disease (Bradylak.
Although coagulalion lests show a defect in the intrin-
1988). Defects of coagulation factors lhave been de-
sic pathway, with prolongation of the APTT, patients
scribed in dogs with cirrhosis, similar to tlosc occur-
are at risk of thrombotic disease rather than abnormal
ring in human hepatic cirrhosis (Mischke er al., 1998).
 bleeding. The dog described with this conlition had
Clinical signs of liver disease such as hepato-
 pulmonary thromboembolism and immune-mediated
haemolytic anaemia.
megaly and anlerior abdominal discomfort accom-
pany the haemorrhagic tendency. Since multiple
clotting factors are depleted, prolongation of both the
Factor VII inhibitors
PT and APTT is secn. If activaled clotting faclors arc
Acquired inlhibitors to F VIll are present in 6% of human
nol clcared from the circulation, intravascular coagu-
 patients with haermophilia A in the United Kinglom,
lation and a consumptive coagulopathy nay result (see
with 12% of severely affected haeinophiliacs having
Chapter I4: Dissciminatcd intravascular coagulation).
inhibitors (Rizza, 1984). Similar spontaneous inhibitor
 Thc presence of liver damage and liver dysfunction is
(antibody) formation has bcen docurnented in haemo-
confirmed by increased concentrations of liver en-
philic dogs transfused with dog F VIl (Giles et al.,
zyines (alanine aminotransferase, ganma glutamyl
1984; Pijnappels et αal., 1986). In addition, antibodies to
transferase, alkaline phosphatase)and bile acids. Jaum-
hctcrologous F VII, whiclhi cross rcact with canine
F VI, have been described in haemophilic dogs that
dice (lyperbilirubinaemia) may be evident.
Treatment is primarily supportive, and the progno-
have received human and/or pig F Vlll concentrates
sis depenrds on the nature and revcrsibility of the
(Littlewood and Barowcliffe, 1987; Litlcwood, 1988).
hepatic disease.
Autoantibodies to F VIll may dlevelop in hunan
patients, resulting in acquired haemophilia A.
Disseminated intravascular coagulation
A circalating inhibitor to F Vml, prcsumcd lo bc an
Thc diagnostically and therapeutically challenging
 antibody, has been identified in the plasma from a dog
 condition of disseminated intravascular coagulation is
with a laemorrhagic diathesis at the Animal Health
characterizcd by widespread intravascular coagula-
Trust, Newmarkel, United Kingdom (unpublished ob-
lion and ongoing fibrinolysis. This results in the
servations).
1
Disordcrs of Secondary Hacmostasis  215
Factor XI inhibitor
Herzug RW, Yang FY, Coo 1LB, Hagsron JN,Elvell D, Fielis PA,
Buton M, Bellingcr DA, Read MS, Brinkhous KM, Podsakoff
An acquired coagulopathy has been described in a cat
GM, Nichois TC, Kurtzman GJ and High KA (1999) Long-tcrn
 due to the development of inhibitors against F XI
correctionof canine henophiia Bbygene trasler ofblood!
(Feldman et al., 1983).
coagulation lactor IX nediatcd by adcno-ussuciated viral verur.
：
Narionai Medicine 5, S6-63
High KA, Evans JP, Ware JL,Stafford DW and Robens HR (t987)
Hemoplilia in camincs is due to a post-transcriptioual rlefect.
Trowbosis nd Hamosiasis58337,218[Ahstra
REFERENCES
Kier AB,BresnahamJF,WhitFand WagnerJE(I98oTheinheritance
palternaffactorXlIdeficiency indomesticcas.CanadianJourna!
of Comparaive Medicite 44, 309-314
BradylakSF(1988)Coagulaliondisordersandliverdiscasc.Vererinury
Knowler C, Giger U, Dodds WJ and Brxks M (1994) Fuctor XI
Clinics of North America: Small Atimat Praetice 18, 87-93
defieieney nKery blue terricrs.Jourrf ofthe Auerican Veteriory
Brooks M (i999) Hereditary bleeding tlisoriers in dogs and cats.
Medieal Associeion 205, 1557..1561
Vererinary Medicine 94, 555-564
Littlewoud JD (1983) Factor VHI - phospholipid mixtures and factor
Brooks MB,GuWand RayK (1997) Corplete delelionof factor IX
VII mhibitors: stdies in laemophilic dogs. PhD thesis, University
geneundinhibitionoffactorIXactivityinaLabradorRetricver
of Cainbridge
withbemopiJoof thAerieVeterioryMec!
Lillewood ID (19s9) Iaheriterl lhleeding disorders of dogs and cats,
Assoriafioa 211, 1418-1421
lonraai of Small Animal Pracrice 30, 140-143
CookAK,Werer LL,ONeilSL,Bcoks Mand Fean BF(1993)
[Littlewnod JD (1992) Dirferential diagnosis of haemunlagie disorders
辅
Factot X deficiency in a Jack Russell terrter. Veerinary Cltnicu?
in dogs. Int Pracrice 14, 172-180
Pathology 22, 68-71
ContoCG(1999) Clinicalapproach to the bleding dog orcat. Vererinury
characteristiou of atibodiestoluman factorVHI in haemophilic
Medicine 94,450-459
dogs. Thrombosis und Haemostasis 57, 314-321
Dillon AR and Boudreaux MK (1988) Combined Faelors IX and XII
Litlewood JD and Evans RJ (199o) A comhined deliciency of factor
dcfieiencies in a familyofeats, Jurrtl of the Ameriren Veterinary
VIll and conact aetivation defect in a family of cats. British
MedticalAssociation193,83-834
VelerinaryJourna!146,30-35
Dodds WJ (1973) Canine factor X (Stuarl-Power faclor) deficiency.
Litlewood JD, Matic SE and Smith N (1986) Factor IX deficiency
JournaiofLabortory andCinicaiMedicie82,560-566
(haenophilia B, Christmas disease) macross-bred dog. Veterinary
..
Dodds WJ (1977)Inherited hemothagicdefects. In: Cnrreur Vererinary
Record118,400-401
7herapy V7, cd. RW Kirk, pp.438-445. WB Saunders, Philaulelphia
LittlewoodJD,ShawSCandCounlesLM(1995)VitaminK-depenlent
Dodds WJ (1984) Hemophilia in cats. Car Wortd (UsA) November, p.
coagulopatly ina British Devon Rex cat. Journlof Soai Anm!
EE13
Practice36,115-118
DaddsWJand Kull JE(1971)Canne factor XI(plasnatiromboplastin
Maepherson R,Scherer J,Ross Ml.and Genry PA(1999) Factor VII
anteedentdticiency.JourutfLaeratoryudCliuicaMedicie
defictency ina mixed hreed tog, Canadian Vererinary Joxrl 40,
78,746-752
503-505
Dolds WJ und Womaek JE (1997) Molecalar genetics, gene transfer
Maddison JIE, Watson ADI, Eadc IG and Exncr T (19yo) Vitanin K-
and thenpy. Adveces in Veterinary Merdieine No 40
dependlent multifacior cnagulopathy in Devon Rex cuts. Journal of
：
Edwards DF and Russell RG (1987) Probable vitamin K-deficicnt
bleeding in two cas with malabsorption syndrome sccondary tu
Mauser AE,Whitlark J, Wsitmey KM and Lotlrop CD (1996) A
lymphocytic-plasmacyticenteritis.JornaofVererinary Interd
dlelction mutation causes hemuphila B in Lhaso Apso logs Blood
Medicinc 1, 97-101
88, 3451-3455
EvansJPBrinkhausKMBraycrGD,ReisncrHMandHighKA(1989)
Mischke R, Pohle D,Schoon HA, Felhr M and Nolte I (1998) Changes
CaninchemophiliaBresultingfronapointmttionwituusual
in bloud coagulation in dogs with hepanic cirrhosis. Dersche
consequenecs.Proceedingsofthe Nariontl ArudenyofSeiences of
TierurztticheWochenvchrif105, 43-47
rhe USA 86, 10095-10099
Peulerson NC and Hoizwoth I (1987) Diseases of the Cat, ed. NC
Evuns RJ (1985) Feline Medieine, ed.FA Chandler anl CJ GaskeH.
Pexlersonand Halzworh, pp.146-181. WBSaunders,Philadciplia
Blackwell, Oxlord
Perry LA, Williams DA, Pidgeon GL et at. (19y1) Exoerine punereatic
Feldman BF, Soares CJ, Kitchell BE, ef al. (t983) Hcmorrhage in a cat
insufficicney with associated congulopay ina cat.Jourualof the
caused by iahibition of factor Xl (plasma thromboplastin
AmericanAnimalHospialAsocition27,10g-11
antecedent). Journat of rhe Americn Vererinary Metical
Peterson JL,Conto CGandWellman ML(1995) Hemostatic disorders
Associarion 182, 589-591
in cats: a rctrospctive study and revicw of thc literature. Jourta!
Feliman DG, Brooks MB and Docds WJ (1995) Hemophilia B
of Vererinary Internaf Medicine 9, 298-303
(factor IX) Gcficicney in a family of Germau shepherd dlogs.
Pijnappels MIM, Briet E, van der Zweet GTl, Huisden R, van Tilburg
Journa!of theAnericanVeierinaryMedicatAssociation206.
NH and Eulderink F (1986} Evaluation of |e cuticle hleeding time
1901-1905
iewnine haenophilia A.Throbosis ad Haemosasis 55,70-73
FoghJMandFogI(1988)rerteaguationdisorers.Veterity
Rizzu CR (1984) Themaagement ofhaemophiliacs whohave anibodies
Clries of North Americg: Small Anima! Pracrice 18, 231-244
to factorVIll.Scandinavian Journat of Haenatoiogy 33 (Suppl
Giles AR,Tintiu S,Hoogenloom H, Greenwood Pand Grccnwocd R
40),187-193
(1984) Development of factor VII:C antilbodies in dogs wih
Spurling Nw (1980) Hereditary disorders of laenostasis ian dugs: a
criticalreviewofhelitraure.Veeriarylletn50，151173
GookinJL,Braoks MB,Catalfamo JL,Bunch SE nd Muam KR
SoneMSsoneIBrosMBollingerTKanCottSM(19)
(1997) Factor X deficicncy in u ca. Journai of the Aoneriean
Lupus-lype"anticoagulant' inadog with hemolysis and thrombosis.
Veterinary Medicai Associanion 211, 576-579
JornalofVeterinary aternalMedicine8,57-6
Gu W, Brooks M, Catalfano J,RayJand Ruy K (1999) Two distinct
Verlander JW, Gornan NT and Dedds WJ (1984) Fuctor IX deficieney
nutalions cause severe hemophilin Bin two unrelated caninc
(hemophilia B) in a litter of Labrador retrievers, Juurnt of dhre
peligres.7hrorosis and Hemosusis 82,1270-1275
Anerican Veterinary MedicatAssociation185,83-84
CHAPTER FOURTEEN
Disorders of Haemostasis:
Selected Topics
1
CHAPTERFOURTEEN
(i) Immune-Mediated Thrombocytopenia
David C.Lewis
INTRODUCTION
Immune-mediated
Immune-mediated thrombocytopenia(IMT)is a dis-
thrombocytopenia
ease in which antibodies bound to the surface of
platclets result in premature platclct destruction by
macrophages (Mackin 1995a;Lewis and Meyers,
1996a).IMT may occur alone or in association with
systermiclupus crythemalosus (SLE);rheurmatoid ar-
thritis;neoplasia;viral,bacterial,rickettsial or para
sitic infections;or drug administration (Helfand et al.,
1985;Axtheln and Krakowka,1987;Chong,1991;
Kristensen et al.,1994;Lewis et al.1995b).In cats,
IMTcan occur in association with felineleukaemia
virus (FcLV) or feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV)
Figure 14.1:Pathogenesis ofimmune-mediated
thrombocytopenia.Antibodies(primarilyIgG)bound to the
infection (Shelton et al., 1990). IMT in the absencc of
surfaceofplateletsresultinacceleratedplateletdestruction
otheridentifiable diseaseisreferredtoasprimaryIMT
by macrophagesinthespleen and liver.Reproducedfrom
or idiopathic thronbocytopenic purpura (also called
Feldman,Zinkl andJain(200o) Schalm'sVeterinary
ITP).Primary IMT is an autoimmune disease and thc
Hematolgtdinwithmsnft
term autoimmune thrombocytopenia (AITP) is also
Williams andWilkins.
used to describe this disease (Lewis and Meyers,
1996b).Primary IMT may occur alone or in conjune-
Genetic predisposition to primary IMT in dogs is
tion with immune-mediated haemolytic anaemia
suggested by a high prevalence of the disease in
(IMHA;Evans’syndrome).
Cocker Spaniels,miniature and toyPoodles and Old
Primary IMT is commonin dogs and the preva-
English Sheepdogs, and rcports of primary IMT in
lence may approach as high as 1% of hospitalized
familiesof CockerSpaniels,HungarianVizslas,Scot-
patients (Cockburn and Troy,1986; Jans et al.,1990;
tish Terriers and longhaired Dachshunds (Dodds,1983;
Grindemet al.1991).Primary IMT has heen reported
Grindemetal.,1991;Day andPenhale,1992;Lewise
in cats,but is rare (Jordan et al.,1993).
al.,1995d).
Gender(female)predilectiontomany autoimmune
diseases is recognized, and primary IMT occurs in
PATHOGENESIS
females around twiceasfrequentlyasinmales(Wilkins
etal.,1973;WilliamsandMaggio-Price,1984;Jackson
Platelet destruction in dogs with IMT is mediated
andKruth,1985;Lewisetal.,1995d).Causcandeffect
by antibodies(primarily IgG) bound to theplatelet
associations-between environmental factorsandpri-
surface (Figure 14.1) (Lewis et al.,1995d);in
mary IMT in dogs have not been defined.
primaryIMT these antibodiesarcthought tobe
IMT is primarilya disorder of accelerated platelet
directed against normal host antigens on the surface
destruction.Average platelet life spanin dogs is about
of theplatelet(antiplatelet autoantibodies)(Lewis
5days:inprimaryIMTplatelet life span isreduced to
and Meyers,1996b).Thcpathogenesis of most sec-
hours orminutes(Shulman and Jordan,1987).Platclet
ondary causes of IMT is unknown.It is not known
production (thrombopoiesis)is usually appropriately
why the humoralimmunesystem targetshost platelet
accelerated(asmuchasfivetimesnormal)although,in
antigens in dogs with primary IMT,but genetic
some cases,thrombopoiesis may be impaired (Joshi
predisposition, gender and environmental factors
and Jain,1977;Ballem etal.,1987).After Fc receptor
(including infectious agents, pollutants and stress)
interaction,plateletsaredestroyedbymacrophagesn
may all play a part.
the spleen and liver (Figure 14.2).In addition tobeing
220Manual of Canine and FelincHaematology andTransfusion Medicine
cyesis,parturition)and surgery(Dodds,1983;Jackson
and Kruth,1985).Ascasonal distribution hasnot been
reported.
90
Physical examination
Frequent findings in IMT are mucosal and cutaneous
petechiae,pupura,cchymoseshhama,renal
haemorrhages,melaena,haematemesis,epistaxis and
pallorof the mucous membranes(Wilkins et al.,1973;
Williams and Maggio-Price,1984;Fcldman et al.,
1985;Jackson andKruth,1985)(Figures 14.3to 14.6).
Central nervous system orintraocular haemorrhage
can lead to neurological signs or blindness,respec-
Figure14.2:Splenic aspirate froma dogwith prinary
tively.The degree of haemorrhage for any given plate-
immune-mediated thrombocytopeniaandimmune-mediated
Iet countis unpredictable.Dogs with primary IMT may
haemolyticanaemia,showingamacrophagephagocytosing
two platelets anda redcell.Theothernucleated cells present
have a platelet count of less than10x10°/1without
areredcellprecursors.ReproducedfromFeldman,Zinkl
evidenceofhaemorrhage.Fever,splnomegaly,hepat
andJain(2000)Schalm'sVeterinary Hematology,5th
megaly and lymphadenopathy are uncommon in dogs
editionwithermissionofLipincotWilliamsandwilkins.
with primaryIMT(Wilkins etal.,1973;Williams and
Maggio-Price, 1984; Feldman et al., 1985; Jackson
and Kruth,1985).
a majorsiteofplateletdestructioninprimaryIMT,the
spleen is an important source ofantiplatelet
autoantibodies (McMillan et al.,1974).
Platelet function in primary IMT is usually en-
hanced (Harkerand Slichter,1972）,owing toacceler
ated thrombopoiesis producing a largerandmore
haemostatically competent platelet population,al-
though platelet function may be impaired in some
cases (Kristensen et al.,1994).
CLINICALFEATURES
Signalment
PrimaryIMT can occurindogsofallages(thereported
agerangeis8monthsto15years)butismostcommon
Figure14.3:Petechialhaemorrhages in the skinover the
in middlc-aged dogs (Wilkins et al.,1973；Williams
carpus ofaWestHighlandWhiteTerrier with primary
and Maggio-Price, 1984; Lewis et al.,1995d). Fe-
inmune-mediatedthromboeytopenia.
males, spayed or intact, are affected twice as fre-
quently as males (Wilkins et al.,1973;Williams and
Maggio-Price, 1984;Jackson and Kruth,1985;Lewis
et al.,1995d).A high prevalence of primary IMT is
reported in Cocker Spaniels; German Shepherd Dogs;
miniature,toy,and standardPoodles;and Old English
Sheepdogs,althoughanybreedofdog,includlingcross-
breeds,can be affected(Dodds,1983;Grindem et al,
1991;Day and Penhale,1992;Lewis et al.,1995d).
Primary IMT has been reported in cats,but is rare
(Jordan et al.,1993).
History
The most frequentlyreported complaints withIMT are
anorexia,thargy,weakssistaxis,hamatochia
Figure14.4:Hyphaema inaRottweilerwith primary
andmucosal haemorrhage(Jackson andKruth,1985).
immune-mediated thrombocytopenia.Blindnesscanbethe
presentingcomplaintindogswithintraocularhaemorrhage
Episodes of primary IMT have been preceded by
duetothrombocytopenia.ReproducedfromFeldman,Zinkl
stressorssuchaskennelling,extremes ofenvironmen-
and Jain (2000) Schalm’s Veterinary Hematology,5th
tal temperaturc,hormonal changes（oestrus,pseudo-
editionwithpermissionofLippincotWilliamsandWikins.
Immune-MediatedThrombocytopenia221
regenerative depending on the timecourse of redcell
loss and the presence ofimmunological targeting of
red cell precursors.Immune-mediated haemolyticanae-
miaisreported in about 20% of dogs with primary IMT
(Wilkins et al., 1973; Williams and Maggio-Price,
1984;Jackson and Kruth,1985).
Avarictyof critcria havebeen used toconfirm a
diagnosis of primary IMT in dogs,including:
Severityof thrombocytopenia
Presence of microthrormbocytosis
Normal toincreased numbers of megakaryocytes
inboncmarrow
Figure14.5:Irispetechiae ina dogwith primary immune
Detection of antiplatelet autoantibodies
mediatedthrombocytopenia.ReproducedfromFeldman,
Zinkd andJain(2000)Schalm'sVeterinary Hematology，5th
Increased platelet counts subsequent to
editionwithpermissionofLippincotWiliamsandWikins.
administrationofimmunosuppressivedosesof
glucocorticoids
Exclusion of other causes of thrombocytopenia.
Severity of thrombocytopenia
Althoughthrombocytopeniaindogswith primaryIMT
is typically severe,thrombocytopenia associated with
other diseases (e.g. disscminated intravascular coagu-
lation,rickettsial infection) canalsoemarked(Wad
dle and Littman,1988;Harvey,1990).The degree of
thrombocytopenia cannot alone be considered a de-
pendable diagnostic indicator of primary IMT.
Microthrombocytosis
Microthrombocytosis,the presencc of a prcdominant
Figure14.6:Retinal petechiaeina dogwithprimary
population of small platelets,isreported tobeae
inmune-mediatedthrombocytopenia.
cific indicator of primary IMT in dogs (specificity
95%)but is detected in less than 50%of cases (North-
ern and Tvedten,1992)
DIAGNOSIS
Microthrombocytosis may result from preferential
destructionoflargermore heavilyIgG-scnsitizedplate-
Completeblood countandplatelet count
letsby macrophages orcomplement,or plateletfrag-
Dogs with primary IMT usually have marked throm
bocytopenia (<30x10/1)on presentation(Wilkinset
microthrombocytosismay increase diagnostic suspi-
al.,1973;Williams and Maggio-Price,1984;Grindem
cion for IMT in dogs,it is unlikely to be helpful in
et al.,1991;Northern and Tvedten,1992).Examina-
differentiating primary fromsecondary causes of IMT.
tionof aperipheralbloodsmear is areliableway to
asscss the prescnce of thrombocytopenia,although a
Bone marrow evaluation
platelet count is necessary toquantifyitsscverity (Jain,
Thevalue ofbonemarrowevaluation indogswith
1993).Megathrombocytes(large densely stained platc-
primary IMT is cquivocal. Bone marrow disease is
Iets suggestive of active thrombopoiesis) and
unlikelyin theabsenceofleucopenianon-regenra
microthrombocytcs may be seen on peripheral blood
tive anaemia orabnormalblood cellmorphology,and
smears from dogs with IMT (Sullivan et al, 1995).
bonemarrowevaluationis thereforcnotroutinely
Totalanddifferential leucocyte counts arevariable
indicated in dogs with thrombocytopenia (Jones and
in dogs with ITP.Ncutrophilia with a left shift may be
Boyko,1985;Jain,1993).Thepresence of normal to
present owing to non-specific bone marrow responsc
increascd numbers ofbone marrowmcgakaryocytes
to thrombocytopenia or anaemia or owing to chemo-
may suggest that thrombocytopenia is due to acceler-
lactic activity ofplatclet-aclivatingfactor orleuko
atedplatelet destructionor utilization,but thisfind
trienes (Joshi and Jain,1976; Williams and
ing is not specific for primary IMT (Jain,1993)
Maggio-Price,1984).Astress leucogrammay bevi
（Figure 14.7）.Furthermore,somc dogs with primary
dent (Wilkins et al., 1973; Joshi and Jain, 1976).
IMTmay have decreased numbers of bone marrow
Anaemia,due to hacmorrhage orconcurentIMHA,
megakaryocytes owing to failure ofbone marrow
may be present and may be regenerative or non-
samples toprovide arepresentative sanple ofbone
222Manual of Canine andFelineHacmatology and TransfusionMedicine
Megakaryocyte direct immunofluorescence test
The megakaryoctye direct immunofluorescence test
detects IgG bound tomegakaryocytes and has variable
sensitivity（from30%to80%)in dogs with primary
IMT (Joshiand Jain,1976;Jackson and Kruth,1985;
Kristensen et al.,1994).A major disadvantage is that
a bonemarrowaspirateisrequiredandthisisotherwise
not routincly nccessary in patients with thrombocyto-
penia.
Detection of platelet-bound IgG
Detectionofincreasedconcentrationsof platclct-bound
IgG is extremely sensitive(about 90%)for primary
Figure14.7:Bonemarrow aspiratefroma dogwith
IMT (Lewis et al., 1995d) (Figure 14.8). Because of
primaryIMT.Bonemarrow ishypercellularwith
thehigh sensitivity of tests forplatelet-bound IgG,a
increasednumbersofmegakaryocytesanappropriate
thrombopoietieresponsetoacceleratedperipheral
diagnosis of primary IMTis unlikely if the test rcsull
platelet destruction orutilization.
is negative.A positive test result for platelet-bound
IgG in dogs with thrombocytopenia implicates an
immune pathogenesis for thrombocytopenia but is not
marroworowingtoinmunologicaltargetingof
specific for primary IMT. Positive test results for
megakaryocytes (Joshi and Jain, 1976;Williams
platelet-bound IgGhavebeen reportedin dogswith
and Maggio-Price,1984).One study reported that
thrombocytopeniaassociatedwithSLE,Ehrlichiacanis
dogswith primary IMT and decrcased numbers of
infection, dirofilariasis, sulphadiazine/trimethoprim
bonemarrowmegakaryocyteshadapoorerprognosis
administration and cancer (lymphoproliferative dis-
(Williams and Maggio-Price,1984).Thrombocyto-
ease and haemangiosarcoma) (Lewis et al.,1995c,d).
pcnia is not a contraindication for bone marrow
aspiration or core biopsy,as severe haemorrhage is
Flow-Cytometric Detection of
unusualandcanbereadilycontrolledwith local
Platelet-Bound IgG
pressure.
Measurement of mean platelet volume (MPV) can
Patlent's platelets
Mouse anti-dog
alsobe used togauge the adequacy ofplateletproduc-
(washed)
IgG-fluorescein
tion.Increased MPVis a sensitive and specific indica
tor of the adequacy of bone marrow responsc in dogs
with thrombocytopenia(Sullivan et al.,1995).
Detcctionof antiplatelet autoantibodies
A variety of tests havebeen used to detect serum
antiplatelet antibodies in dogs with thrombocyto-
penia. These antibodics are usually of the IgG class
Figure14.8:Detection ofplatelet-boundIgGbyflow
and may be referred to as“platelet-bindableIgG.
cylometry.Plateletsfromaffected dogs arewashed,
Testsforthedetectionof IgG bound to the dog'sown
incubatedwithfurescnconjugatedantidoggGwahed
megakaryocytes or platelcts ('platelet-bound IgG')
again,and analysedforfluorescencebyflowcytometry
have alsobeenreported.Itisimportanttorealize that
none of these tests enable dogs withprimary IMT to
Detection ofplatelet-bindableIgGin serum
be distinguished from dogs with secondary IMT.
Tests for platelet-bindableIgG are less sensitivc (ap-
proximate sensitivity 60%)than tests for platelet-
Plateletfactor3test
boundIgG,probablybecausemostplatelet-bindable
Thc platclet factor3(PF3)testisbased ontheprinciple
IgG is already bound toplatelets and little remainsfrec
that normal canine plateletswill be damagedl by plate-
in the circulation.However,these testsmaybehelpful
let-bindable IgGinthe plasma samplebeing tested and
in thosc cases in which sufficient numbers of platelets
relcasc PF3,causing acceleration of the partial throm
cannot be isolated for testing.A positive test resul for
boplastin time (Jain and Kono,1970).Unfortunatcly,
platelet-bindable IgG is not specific for primary IMT
thePF3test hasvariablesensitivity(from28%to80%)
(Kristenscn et al.,1994;Lewis et al.1995c).
in dogswith primary IMT,lacks specificity and is of
Flowcytometry assaysfordetecting platelet-bound
little diagnostic usein evaluatingpatientswith throm-
IgG and platelet-bindable IgG in serum are presently
bocytopenia (Jain and Kono,1970:Wilkins et al.,
availabletopractitionersinthe UnitedStatesto assist
1973;Joshi and Jain,1976;Williams and Maggio-
in evaluating dogs with thrombocytopenia (Lewis et
Price,1984).
al.,1995c).
Immune-Mediated Thrombocytopenia 223
Response to glucocorticoid therapy
Neoplasia
Most (about 70%) of dogs with ITP will have platelet
Thrombocytopenia is frequently associated with neo-
counts greater than 100 x 109/1 within 7 days of initiat-
 plasia in dogs, particularly lymphoproliferative neo-
ing inmunosuppressive glucocorticoid treatment
plasia and haemangiosarcoma (Hclfand et al. 1985;
(Williamsand Maggio-Price, 1984; Jackson and Kruth,
Grindem et al., 1994), but can occur with a variety 0f
1985; Jans et al., 1990). Howcvcr, because the princi-
solid neoplasms. Mechanisms for thrombocytopenia
pal action of glucocorticoids is to impair macrophage
associated witl neoplasia include DIC; splenic seques-
 phagocytosis of antibody-sensitized platelets, primary
 tration; myelophthisis; IMT; and bone marrow sup-
and secondary IMTs may respond similarly.
pression by chemotherapy, radiation therapy OT
lurmour-elaborated oestrogens. IMT is well documented
Exclusion of other causes of 
in dogs with lynphoproliferativc and solid neoplasia
thrombocytopenia
and may precede the discovery of neoplasia (Helfand
Although patient signalment, history, clinical findings
el al., 1985)
and laboratory tests are helpful in inereasing diagnostic
suspicion, none is specific for primary IMT. Ultimately
 Systemic lupus erythematosus
 a diagnosis of ITP is 1made by excluding other causes of
 IMT may be a component of SLE in dogs. Other
thrombocytopenia, allhough absolute certainty of a di-
clinical and laboratory mamifestalions of SLE, such as
agnosis of ITP is unattainable. Otcrcauscs of tlrombo-
polyarthritis, dermatitis, polymyositis, gloncrulone-
cytopenia need to be excluded to reduce diagnostic
 phritis, neutropenia, IMHA, lupus erythematosus cells
unccrtainty enough to enable the clinician to make opti-
and antinuclcar antibodies would enable a diagnosis of
mal and timely decisions about trealnem. Thc degreeto
ITP to be excluded (Scott et al., 1983).
which other causes of thrombocytopenia must, or can,
be cxcluded varies witli each patient and each client.
Drug-associated IMT
The gold salt auranofin, cephalosporins, and
Splenomegaly
trimethoprim/sulphonamide have been associated with
Thrombocytopenia due to splenomegaly is mild (not
IMT in dogs (Bloom et al., 1985, 1988; Lewis et al.,
less than 100 x 10°/l), which enables it to be easily
1995d). Any drug can potentially provoke IMT. Drug-
distinguished from primary IMT (Jain, 1993). Splen0-
induced IMT usually develops after weeks to months
 megaly is unusual in dogs with primary IMT.
of therapy, resolvcs within 2 weeks of cessation of
 administration of the drug and docs not recur, hence it
Disseminated intravascular coagulation
should be readily distinguishable from primary IMT
 Thrombocytopenia is a frequent finding in dlogs witl.
(Chong, 1991). Any unnecessary medications should 
 disseninated intravascular coagulation (DIC) (TFeldman 
：
be discontinuedl in dogs witlh IMT.
et al., 1981). The abscnce of overt signs of illness in
 dogs with thrombocytopenia makes DIC unlikely.
Infectious discase
.
Evaluation of a coagulation profile, including pro-
In North America, infectious rdiscascs are reported to
thrombin time, partial thromboplastin time, fibrin deg-
account for 20-60% of dogs with thrombocytopenia
radation products, antithrombin II concentrations and
(Cockburn and Troy, 1986; Grindem et al., 1991).
 cvaluation of a peripheral blood smear for schistocytes
 enable most cases of DIC 1o be diagnosed.
Ehrlichiosis, Rocky Mountain spollcd fcver and
dirofilariasis are frequently diagnosed infectious causes
Haemolytie uraemic syndromc (HUS)
of thrombocytopenia in dogs (Cockburn and Troy,
Haemolytic uraemic syndrome (HUS), a lisorder of
1986; Grindem et al., 1991). Mild thrombocytopenia is
想
 platelet hyperaggregability with intravascular platelet
 a frequent occurrence subsequent to modified live
thrombi and widespread tissue ischaemia, has been
 distemper vaccination (McAnulty and Rudd, 1985).
Immune-mediated platclcl destruction may contribute
reported in dogs (Holloway and Senior, 1993; Hertzkc
et al., 1995). Clinical and laboratory findings in HUS.
 to throimbocytopenia in dogs infected with Ehrlichia
including ncurological signs, renal failure,
canis,Babesia canis,Dirofilaria inmitis or distemper
microangiopathic haemolytic anaemia (schistocyto-
virus (Axtheln anl Krakowka, 1987; Lewis et a.,
sis), thrombocytopenia and fever, make it distinguish-
1995d; Waner er al., 1995).
 able from primary IMT.
Spurious thrombocytopenia
Anticoagulant rodenticide toxicity
 Spurious thrombocytopenia is a consideration in dogs
Moderate to severe throimbocylopcnia has been described
with asymptomatic thrombocytopenia. Causes of spu-
:.
in some dogs with haemorrhage subsequent to ingeslionl
rious thrombocytopenia include platelet clumping
：
ofanticoagulant rodenticide toxins (Lewis er al., 1995a).
owing to poor sampling technique, eythelenediaminc
 tetra-acetic acid (EDTA)-induced platelet clumping
static disorders and abnormal coagulation profilcs cnable
and cxclusion of large or snall platelets owing to
difcrcntiation from dogs with prinary IMT.
inappropriate machine settings or calibration (Jain.
224Manual of Canine andFeline Haematology andTransfusionMedicine
1993).MacrothrombocytosisinCavalierKingCharles
Glucocorticoids
Spaniels can result in spurious thrombocytopenia
Glucocorticoids are the initial therapy of choice for
(Brown et al.,1994).Abnormal platelet counts should
dogs with ITP. Thc initial beneficial effect of
always be verified by examination of a peripheral
glucocorticoids in dogswith IMT is primarilyinhibi-
blood smear.
tion of macrophage destruction of antibody-sensitized
platelets(Branehogand Weinfeld,1974).Autoantibody
Breed-related thromboeytopenia
productionmay alsobeimpaired.Glucocorticoids also
Greyhounds,CavalierKingCharlesSpanielsandShiba
increase capillary resistance to haemorrhage,often
Inusmay normallyhave lower platelet counts than
reducing the severity of haemorrhagebefore platelet
dogs of otherbreeds (Eksell etal., 1994; Sullivanetal.,
counts increase（Freundet al.,1983).Glucocorticoids
1994; Smedile et al.,1997; Gookin et al.,1998).
may alsostimulate plateletproductioninsome patients
with IMT (Gernsheimer et al.,1989).
Prednisolone or prednisone (2mg/kg orally every
TREATMENT
12 hours) is the most frequently used immunosuppres-
sive agent for the treatment of IMT (wilkins et al.
Supportivecare
1973;Williams and Maggio-Price,1984;Feldman et
Cage rest and minimization of trauma are important.
al.,1985;Jackson andKruth,1985;Jans et al.,1990),
Drugs and fluids should be givenenterally if feasible;
although some cliniciansfavour dexamcthasone(O.1-
the intravcnous route is otherwise preferred.
0.6mg/kgevery24hours)(Dodds,1983;Williams and
Maggio-Price,1984).Most dogs with primary IMT
Transfusion therapy
attaina platelet count greaterthan100x109/1 within7
Life-thrcatening hacmorrhage is uncommon in dogs
days of commencing glucocorticoid therapy(Williams
with primary MT (Wilkins et al.,1973;Williams and
and Maggio-Price,1984;Jackson and Kruth,1985;
Maggio-Price,1984).Hypovolaemiaoranaemia should
Jans etal.,1990).Initialglucocorticoid therapy should
be treated by administration ofcrystalloidorcolloid
ideallybe continued until theplatelet count normal-
solutions,packed rcd cells or whole blood.Platelet
izes,althoughthismaynotbe achievableinsomedogs,
transfusions in dogs with IMT are rarely necessary but
followed by tapering of the dosc overweeks tomonths
tofindtheminimaleffective maintenance dose.Taper-
haemorrhage (dogs withsevere thrombocytopenia and
ing too rapidly may cause disease exacerbation.Giv-
suddenonsetofneurologicalsigns)tocontrolbleerling
ing prednisone onalternate days during dose tapering
until platelet numbers are abletobe increased by other
may cause less hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis
therapics (Figure 14.9).In this circumstance, trans-
suppression than giving dexamethasone on alternate
fusion of multiple units ofplatelets is necessary bc-
days.Platclet counts should bc monitored frequently
cause transfused platelets are destroyed rapidly(Carr
whilc taperingglucocorticoid therapy,and glucocorti-
et al,1986).The inaccessibility of platelet compo
coid tapering should continue as long as the platelet
nents makes this thcrapy inpractical for most
count does not decline below the reference range.In
veterinarians.
manycases,glucocorticoidscanbe discontinuedonce
the disease is in remission.
Adjunctivc treatments
Avariety of additional treatments,including cyclo-
phosphamide,azathioprine,vincristine,danazol,
cyclosporin,humaninmunoglobulinandsplencctomy,
havebeenusedinconjunctionwithglucocorticoidsto
treat dogs with primary IMT.These treatments are
generally reserved for dogs failing to respond to
glucocorticoids,thosewithrecurrent discase or those
experiencingunacceptableglucocorticoid-inducedad-
verse effects.
Vincristine
Vincristincgiventodogswith primaryIMTresults in
Figure14.9:Intracranialhaemorrhage,whichcausedrapid
prompt(within Iweek)increases in plateletnumbers
onset ofalteredmentationandseizuresinthisdogwith
(Greene etal.,1982;Helfandetal.,1984).Onemecha-
inmune-mediatedthrombocytopeniamayoccurwithsevere
nism of action ofvincristineis to diminish phagocyto-
thronbocytopeniaandisfrequentlyfatal.Reproducedfrom
sis of platclcts by macrophages by impairing
Feldman,Zinkl and Jain(2000) Schalm’sVeterinary
HematologythdiionwithmissionfLip
macrophage microtubule assembly.To accentuate tar
Williams and Wilkins.
geting of macrophages,vincristine can beincubated
Immune-Mediated Thrombocytopenia  225
with homologous platelets in vitro (vincristine-loaded
Cyclosporin
platelets) or infused intravenously over 6~8 lours to
Cyclosporin inhibits T lymphocytes by inhibiting cal-
achieve in vivo platelet uptake (Ahn et al., 1984;
Helfand et al., 1984). Vincristine may also increase
Experience withi cyclosporin is limited; there is one
platelet counts by stimulating thrombopoiesis (Mackin
prelininary report of cyclosporin lreatment of dogs
et al., 1995). Vincristine can have inhibitory effects on
 y o- s ' d 
 platelet function via disruption of platelet microtubules,
 to maintain trough blood concentrations of 400-600
    q    
ng/ml), in addition lo other inmumosuppressive thera-
important (Mackin et al., 1995).
pies, was givenl to four dogs with ITP refractory to
glucocorticoids. Three dogs achieved normal platelet
Cyclophosphamide
coums afler 3-5 wccks; one of thcse dogs died from
Although the role of cyclophosphamide as an in--
systermic aspergillosis (Cook et al., 1994).
munosuppressive agent has been questioned, based on
jts inability to impair lymphocyle mitogcncsis in mor-
Human immunoglobulin
mal dogs (Ogilvie et al., 1988), it is frequently used for
Platelet count increases in humans with primary IMT
treating dogs with primary IMT. Cyclophosphamide is
subsequent to intravenous administration of luman
given orally or intravenously, in conjunction with
immunoglobulin (IVIG) are morc rapid than platelet 
glucocorticoids, at a dose of 200 mg/m? each week
responses to oral prednisone therapy, and IVIG is
until an adequate response is attained. In humans with
 frequently used as emergency therapy in humans with
 prinary IMT, an adequate rcsponse may take 1 to 16
primary IMT (Blanchette et al., 1992). Hunan IVIG
weeks (Reiner etal., 1995). Theefficacy of cyclophos-
binds to dog mononuclear cells and can modulate
 phamide in dogs with primary IMT is not documented.
immune responses in dogs (Scott-Moncrieff et al.,
1995). One dog with IMHA and IMT had resolution of
Azathioprine
thrombocytopenia subsequent to IVIG therapy (Scott-
Azathioprine is given (2 mg/kg orally) once daily
Mcncrieff et al., 1995). Human IVIG is presently
initially and, oncc the desircd clinical response is
undergoing irials in rlogs with. ITP and/or IMHA.
obtained, tapered in tandem with glucocorticoids to a
Although the rationale for the use of vincristine,
maintenance dose of 0.5 to 1 mg/kg every 48 hours
cyclophosphamide,azathioprine, danazol, cyclosporin,
(Ogilvic et al., 1988). An adequale responsc may take
IVIG and splenectomy in the trealincnl of dogs with
as long as 6 to 16 weeks in human patients (Quiquandon.
 primary IMT may be valid, the proclaimed efficacy of
et al., 1990). The efficacy of azathioprine in dogs with
these treatments is based largely on subjective clinical
prirmary IMT is not documentcd.
impressions. Until appropriately controlled clinical
trials test the efficacy and place of these treatments in
Splenectomy
the management of dogs with primary IMT, clinicians
：
In hurans with prinary MT, splenectony rcsults in a
should usc thc therapics with which thcy have most
0
higher cure rate than any medical regimen and is per-
experience.
formed early in the course of diseasc if glucocorticoids
do not result in long-term renmission. In dogs with.
Goals of treatment
a1
 primary IMT, splenectomy is reserved for those dogs
The goal of treatment in dogs with prirnary IMT is to
that fail to rcspond to, or relapse aftcr medical therapy.
withdraw all therapy while maintaining disease remis-
Rates of reinission of clinical disease in dugs with
sion. This may not be attainable in all cases, and some
 dogs require long-term immunosuppressive therapy to
(0/4) to 80% (4/5), wifh a mean responsc rate of about
 maintain remission. Maintenance of a normal platelet
25% (Williams and Maggio-Price, 1984; Feldman etal.,
count in the absence of therapy is the status most likely
：
1985; Jackson and Kruth, 1985; Jans et al., 1990).
to be associated with immunological absolution. Dogs
with lower platelel counts (partial remission) are more
Danazol
likely to be in a compensated thrombocytolytic state,
Danazol, a synthetic androgen witlh low capacity for
maintaining platelet numbers in the face of accelerated
IHasculinization, rcduces the number of Fc rcceptors on 
plalclet destruclion.
macrophages and may act synergistically with
glucocorticoids by displacing then from glucocorti-
coirl-binding globulin. Docucmtation of danazol treat-
PROGNOSIS
ment of dogs with primary IMT is limited. Two dogs
with prinary IMT refractory to prednisone (1 mg/kg
Most (over 70%) of dogs with primary IMT, with or
 r s nd p ( hi Aso 
without concurren IMHA, will have platelel count
100 x 10/1 within 1 to 2 weeks of starting danazol (5
01 juanbasqns l/o1 x 0o1 ueql loieaia ol seseaiou!
 mg/kg orally every 12 hours) in comjunction with pred-
 initial therapy (glucocorticoids alone or in conjunction
nisonc (Bloom et al., 1989; Roscler and Mason, 1994).
with vincristine, cyclophosphanide, azathioprine or
226  Manual of Canine and Feline Haematology and Transfusion Medicine
fresh whole bloodi or platelct transfusions) (Williams
Feldnan BF, Handagama P and Lahherink AA (1985) Splenectomy as
and Maggio-Price, 1984; Jackson and Kruth, 1985;
anjunctive therapy for immune-mediated thronbocytopenia and
henolyticanemiainthedog.JournalofteAmericanVeerinary
Jans et al., 1990). Based on reported cases from refer-
MedicalAssociunion187,617-619
ral hospitals, which may not be representative of cases
pssa ( s o p aa  a 
iniravascular coagulation: anttlhrombin, plasminogen, and
seen by practitioners in the field, about 30% of dogs
coagulation abnornalities in 4l dogs.Journ ofthe America
with ITP die or are euthanased during the initial epi-
Veterinary Medicai Associanton 179, 151-154
Freund LA, Berild D and Hainau B (1983) Haemostatic cffeet of
sode of thrombocytopenia or during disease recur-
prcdnisolone in thrombocytopenia. Seanaitavian Journal of
rence (Wilkins etal., 1973; Williams and Maggio-Price,
Hacmaroiogy 31, 485-487
1984; Jackson and Kruth, 1985; Jans et al., 1990).
Gernsheimer T, Statton.I, Ballem PJ and SlichterS (1989) Mechanisms
of response to treatmentin autoimmunc tlhrombocytopcnie purpura.
About 40% of dogs have recurrent clinical signs of
New Engtanet Journal of Medicine 320, 974-980
primary IMT. Thc remaining dogs are either cured,
Goakin JL, Bunch SE, Rush LJ and Grindem CB (1998) Evaluation of
tmicracytosis in 18 Shibas.Joural of he Americn Veterinary
have subclinical discasc or are lost. to follow-up. The
Medieal Associarion 212, 1258-1259
 prognosis for dogs with primary IMT and IMHA may
Grcene CE, Scoggin J, Thomas JE and Barsami JA (19S2) Vincrisine
be considerably worse than for dogs with primary IMT
in the treatment of thrombocytopenia in five dogs. Journai of thie
11
Anerican Veterinary Medicai Associeuion 180, 140-143
only (Jackson and Kruth, 1985).
Grindem CB, Bretischrwerdr EB, Corlbetr WT and Jans HE (1991)
1
Epidemiologic survey of thrombocytopcnia in dogs: a report on
987 cases. Vererinary Clirical Pathology 20, 38-43
Gridem CB, Breitschwerdt EB, Corlhett WT, Page RL and Jans HE
REFERENCES AND FURTHER
(1994) Thrombocytopenia associated witlh neoplasia in dogs.Jorna!
ofVererinary lnterhal Medicine8,400-405
READING
Harker LA and SlicherSJ (1972) The bleeding tine as a sereening test
for evaluationof platelet fumction. New EnglandJournalofMedicine
Ahn YS,Harrington WJ,Mylvaganam R. AHen LM and PalI LM (1984)
287, 155-159
 Slov infusion of vinca alkalnicis in the treamment of idiopahic
Havey JW (1990) Elrlichia platys infection (infectious cyclic
thromhacytopenic pupura. Auals of hnerwa! Medicine 100, 192-
thrombncytopenia of dogs). In: lnfecrious Diseases ofthe Dog and
196
Cat, ed. CE Greene, pp. 415-418. WB Saunders, Pliladclphia
A xthelm MK and Krakowka S (1987) Canine distemper vins-induced
Helfand SC. Couto CG anl Madewell BR (1985) Inumune-mediated
thrambocytopenia. American Jornal of Vererinary Research 48,
tluombecytopenia associated with solid tumars in tlogs. Journat of
1269-1275
the Anerican Animad Hospital Associarion 21, 787-794
Ballern PJ, Scgal AM, Stratton JR, Gernshcimer T, Atanson JW and
Helfand SC, Jain NC andi Paul M (1984) Vineristine koaded platelet
Slichter SI (1987) Mechanisus 0f thronbocytopenia in chronie
Lherapy for idiopathie thrombocytopenia ina clogfoural aftie
autoimunethromboeytopenie purpura.Evidence of bothinpaired
AnericanVeterinaryMedicalAssnciation185,224-226
platelet produetion and incrcased platelet clearance. Journa! of
Hertzkc DM, Cowan LA, Sehoung P and Fenwick BWw (1995)
Clinical vesrigation 80,33-40
Glonerular ulrastructural lesions of idiopathic cutaneous andl
Blanchete VS, Kirby MA and Tumcr C (1992) Rolc of intravenous
renalglamerularvasculopathyofgreyhounds. Veterinary Parhology
inamunoglobulinGinauoimnunchematologicdisorders.Semminars
32, 451-459
1
ht Hematotogy 29,72-82
Holloway SA and Senior DF (1993) Hemolytic-uremic syndrome in
Bloom JC, Blackmcr SA, Bugeiski PJ, ct al. (1085) Gold-inueed
dogs.Journa of Veterinary Internal Medicine7,220-227
inmune thuumbocytopenia in tie dog. Vererinary Parhoiogy 22,
Jackson ML und Kruh SA (1985) iumune-mexliauted henolytic anenia
492-499
and throuboeylopeniu in the dog: aretrospeclive study of 55 cases
Blcom JC, Meunier LD, Thiem PA and Sellers TS [1989) Use of
dliaguosed from 1969 Llrough 1983 at the Western Collge of
danazol fortrealment of corticostemid-resistant inmune-nediated
Velernary Medicine.Coadi VererinaryJom26,245-250
thromhocytopenia in a dog, Jorrral of rhe American Veterinary
Jain NC (1993) Esseniais of Vererinary Henatoiogy. Lea and Febiger,
Medical Association 194, 76-77
Blom IC, Thieni PA, Sellers TS, Deldar A and Levis HB (1988)
Philadelphia
Jain NC and Kono CS (I970) The platcict facror-3 test for deteetion
Cephalosporin-inducedlimmunc cytopenia inthe dog: denonsiration
ofcanineuntiplatelet antiboly.Veterinary ClinicalPathology9
of erytlroeyte-, neutroplil-, and platclel-nssociated IgG folowing
reatinent with eefuzedene. AnrericaJourul of Henofogy 28,
10-14
Jans IIE, Arnstrong PJ and Pricc GS (1990) Thcrapy of iuunune-
71-78
Brarehog I and Weinfeld A (1974) Platelet survival and platelet
JournalofVererinaryinernaiMeclicine4,4-7
production iu idiopathic thrombacytopenic pupura (fTP) before
and curing treatment with corticosteroids. Scandiaviar.Jourtatof
 Jones EC and Boyko WJ (1985) Diagnostic value of bonc rmarrow.
Haemarology 12, 69-79
exaninarion in isolared thrombocytopcnia. American Journal of
Clinical Paritology 84, 665-667
Brown S, Simpson KW, Baker S, Spagnoleti MA and Elwood CM
Iordan HL, Grindem CB and Breitschwerd1 ED (1993)
(1994) Macroalrombocytosis in Cavalier King Charlcs Spaniels.
Vererinary Record 135,281-283
Thrombocyopenia in cats: a retrospective study of 4l cases.
Carr JM, Kruskall MS, Kaye JA and Robinson SH (1986) Efficaey of
Jonrnal of Veterinary Imrernal Medicite 7, 261-265
platelet transfusions in innune thromoeytopenia.Amerier
Joshi BCandl Jain NC (1976) Detection of antiplatelet antibody in serum
Jaltrrtet of Medieine 80, 1051-1054
and on megakaryocytcs of dogs with autoimmune
Chong BH (1991) Drg-inrluced immune thrommbocytopenia. Plarelers
thrambocytopenia. American Jonrnat of Vererinary Researcht 37,
2,173-181
681-685
Cockhurm C and Tray GC (1986) A relrospective study of 62 cases
 Joshi BC and Jain NC (1977) Experimental immunologic
of thrombocytopenia in the dog. Sorhwest Vererinariant 37,
thramhocytopenia in dogs: a sludy of thromhocytopenia and
133-141
megakaryocytopoiesis.Research inVererinary Science22,I17
Cook AK,Bertoy EH,Grcgory CRand StcwartAF(1994)Effectoforal
Kristeusen AT, Klausner JS, Weiss DJ, Labet J an Clristie DJ (1994a)
cyelospurine (CS) in dogs witrefractory immue-eliatetl anenia
(IMA)orthomboeytopenia (ITP). (Abstract).JornalafVeterinary
assay.lournalfVetrinery ernaMedicine36-39
Interaef Mecdicine 8, 170
Kristensert AT, Weiss DJ and Klausner JS (1y94b) Plalelel dysfuneicu!
Day MJ and Penlale WJ (1992) Inmune -rnediated risease in the oldl
associated witheanineimrune-mediated thronbocylopenia (ITP).
Englis sheepdog.Research i Veterinary Science 53,87-92
JourrulofVeterinary IneratMedicine8,323-32？
Dodds WI (1983) Immune-mediatcd diseases of the blcod. Advances i
Kristcnsen AT, Weiss DI, Klausner JS, LaberJ and Christie D) (1994c)
Veterinary Science and Conparative Medictne 27, 163-196
Comparison of mieruscopic andi flow cytometric detectin of
Ekscll P, HaggstromJ,K van Cani KarlsonA (1994) Turoubocytopenia
platelet autilborly in dogs suspected of having immne-mediatecl
in the Cavalier King Charles Spaniel. Jowrnet of Smatl Animar
thronbncytopenia. American Journa! of Veterinary Research 55,
Pructire 35, 153--155
1111-1114
Immune-Mediated Thrombocytopenia  227
.
1.ewisDCand Meyers KM(1996a) Canine idiopalhiethromhocytopenic
Quiguandon I, Femaus P, Caulier MT, Pagniez D, Hnan JJ and Bauters
F(1990) Re-evaluation of the role of azathiaprine in the treatment
Lewis DC and Meyers KM ( 1996b) Studies ofplatelet-boundand serunl
of adult chrenic idiopathic thombocytopenicpupura: areport on
platelet-bindable inamunoglobulins in dogs with idiopathic
53 cases. Briish Journal of Haenmaology 74, 223-228
thromboypnipururaxperneaHeogy2496-
Reiner A,Gernshcimer T and SlichterSJ(1995) Pulsccyclophosphamide
701
therapy for rcfiactory autoitmmunc thrombocytopenic purpura.
Lewis DC, Bruyette DS und Kelleriman DL (I995a) Throntxocytopenia
Blood2,351-358
subscquent 1o anlicoagulant rodentieide-iuced lenorrlage in
RoselerBJand Mason KV(1094) Useof lanazoland cotiosteruidsTor
商
dogs. (AbstracL.) Jonrual of Veteriury faternal Medieine 9, 188
8
LewisDCMeVey DSand Callan MB(I995b)Flow-cytomctricdetection
AustraliqVeeriaryPreitioner24,126-130
 s  ad s pe d 
Scott DW, Walton DK, Maming TO, Smith CA and Lewis RM (1983)
inmmune-mediatcd thrombocytopenia. (Abstract.) Journa! of
Canine lupus crythcnarosus. I. Systemic lupus crytheinatosus.
Veteriary Hnuernat Medieine 9, 189
JournalofiheAnericanAninat HospitatAssociatio19,461-479
Lewis DC, MeVey DS, Shuman WS and Muller WB (1995e)
Seot-Monerierf JC, Regan WJ, Gliekman LT, UeNicola DB and
：
Developent and clracterzationofaflow-cytonetic assay r
Huringlon D (1995) Treatmeut of nouregeneralive anemia witli
detection of platelet-bond inmunoglobulin Gin dugs. Anerie
ian yglobulin in dogs.Jornul offheAnerican Veierinary
Jowral of Veterinary Research 12, 1555-1558
Merlicri Association 206, 1895-1900
Lewis DC, Meyers KM, Callan MB, Bucheler J and Giger UU (1995d)
Shulman NR anri Iordan JV (1987) Platclet kineties. In: Hewostasisand
Thrombosis, Basic Principies rmd Clinical Practice, edl. RW
in the diagnasisof canineITP.Journalefrhe American Vererinary
Colman, J Hirsh, VJ Marder and EW Salzman, pp. 452-529. IB
Medical Association 206, 47-52
Lippincott, Philadclphia
Mackin A (1995a) Canine inrmune-mcdiated thrombecytopenia. Part I,
Smedile LE, Houston DM, Taylor SM, Post K and Scarcy GP (1997)
Conpendium of Contining Education for the Practicing
ldiopathic, asymptomatic thrombocytopcnia in Cavalier King
：
Veterinarian 17, 353-364
Mackin A (1995b) Cauine imrune-1meliatet ahromloeytopenia. Parl
Aairei Hospiia! Asvociation 33, 411-415
IL. Compendiam uf Cotiring Edueetion for the Preetieing
Veterinerian 17. 515-535
and henoglobifuncionin greyhoundsJotreifheAmeric!
Mackin AI, Allen DG and Jolnstone IB (1995) Effects of vincrisine
Veterinary Medica! Assoriafion 205, 838-841
sulfate and prednisone on platelet munbers and functionjnelinically
Sullivan PS, Manning K and McDonall TP(1995) Assnciaion of mean
138
normaldogs.AnericanfornalofVeternayReserh S6, IO0-108
plateler volume and bone marrow megakaryocytopaiesis in
McAnulty IF and Rudd RG (1985) Thrombocytopenia associated withl
thrombocytopenic dogs: 60 cases (1984-1993). Journal of rhe
vuccination of a dog with a muodilied-live paranyxovirus vuecine.
Americar Veterinury Medicat Association 206, 332-334
JoratfteAnerie Verinury MedielAsocitinS6,
Waddl JR and Litmau MP (1988) A retrospeetive study of27 cuses of
1217-1219
turally occuringcanie chrliclhosisJournu!ftheAmeric
MeMilan R, Longmire RL, Yelenosky R, Buuell RL ad Amstrong
Animai Hospitat Assocition 24, 615620
S(1974)Quantitationof platlet-bindingIgGproduced invitroby
Waner T, Harrus S, Weiss DJ, Bark H and Keysary A (1995)
splcens from patients with idiapathic thromhoeytopenic purputa.
New Englaned Journal ofMedicine291,812-817
acue canine chrlichiosis. Veteriaary Immnnology and
Northern J and Tvedten HW (1992) Diagnasis of microthrombocytosis
uwnopathology 48, 177-182
Wilkins RJ, Ilurvitz ALand Dodds WJ (1973) Immunologically mediated
throntbocytopenia: 68 cascs (1987-1989).Jourmal of1he American
thrombocyopenainedogJouaiofheAmericVetrinary
：
Veterinary Medicat Associarion 200, 368-372
Medical Associarion 163,277-282
Ogilvie GC, Felsbug PJ uul Haris CW (1988) Short-tenu effect of
Williams DA and Maggio-Priee L (1984) Canine idiopathie
Cyclophospharnideunl azathioprineon sclecled aspects of the
thronboeyuwpenie pupura: elinical cbservalion and long-tern
canine blaslogenie respolise.
:Vererinury Immuuoiogy and
Follow-in54 cases.JornutfiheAmerieut Veterinary Mediel
opathetogy18119-127
Associafian 185, 60-663
：
CHAPTERFOURTEEN
(ii) von Willebrand's Disease
Tracy Stokol
INTRODUCTION
Inplasma,vWf circulates in a non-covalentlybound
complex with coagulation factorVIII(FVII).As these
vonWillebrand’s disease(vWD) is caused by a defi-
twoproteinsarefoundasacomplex,vWfwasformerly
ciencyoforabnormalityn,alargelasma lycoo-
calledFVIII-rclatedantigen,but this termismisleading
tein calledvon Willebrand factor(vWf).It is the most
andnowobsolete.Indogs,vWfisproducedbyendothe-
common inherited disorderof haemostasis in dogs and
lialcells,withanegligibleamountdetectableinplatelets
has been diagnosed in one cat (French et al.1987). In
(in contrast tohuman platclets).Production ofvWf by
the United States,vWD hasbeen detectedin over50
megakaryocytes has not been proven in dogs.
breeds of dog,with ahighprevalenceinDobermanns,
vWf is composed of a series of protein polymers
Pembroke Welsh Corgis,Scottish Terriers and Shct-
called multimcrs,which consist ofrepeating subunits
land Sheepdogs (Brooks, 1992). In the United King-
linked by disulphide bonds.Each subunit contains
dom, vWD has been diagnosed in 16 breeds of dog,
binding sites forplatelet glycoproteinreceptors (GPIb-
particularly DobermannsIrishWolfhounds and Ger-
IX and GPIIb-Ila) and components of the subendo
man Shepherd Dogs (Littlewood, 1991),of which
thelial matrix (e.g. collagen）.The nunber of subunits
severalhaveexhibitedclinicalsignsofbleeding.Know-
in eachmultimervaries,imparting arangeofmolecu-
Icdge of the pathogencsis,diagnosis and treatment of
lar weights（from 0.5to 20 million daltons) to the
vWD is therefore essential for practitioners.
multimers.The multimerie structure is important
because themultimerswith higher molecularweight,
owingto theirlargesize andmultiplebindingsites,are
STRUCTUREANDFUNCTIONOFVWF
the most effective in haemostasis.
yWf is essential inprimary haemostasis where it
Inhumans,vWf is produced by endothelial cells and
functions primarily as an adhesion molecule between
megakaryoeytes. These cells store vWf in spccific
platclctsandthcsubendothelialmatrix,betweenplate
organelles known as Weibel-Palade bodies (endothe-
lets andfibrinproducedinthe coagulationcascade and
lial cells) or α-granules (megakaryocytes). These
betweenindividual plateletsthat arepart of a platelet
organelles release vWf in response to endothelial cell
aggrcgalc (Figure 14.10).Thc association of vWf with
damageandvarious agonists,includingthrombin.Main-
FVIII serves to protect FVIII from proteolytic degra-
tenanceof plasma concentrations ofvWfis achievedby
dation,totransportFllltositesofvascularinjury and
a constantbasalsecretionofvWffromendothelialcells.
topromote the secrction ofFVIll.Anyquantitative or
These cells alsosecretevWf directly into the subendo
qualitative abnormalityinvWf thereforeresultsin an
thclialmatrix,whereitbindstomatrixcomponentssuch
inadequate plateletplug,permitting continued haem
as typeVI collagcn and clastin-associated microfibrils.
orrhage from an injured blood vessel.
Figure 14.10:The role
non-activated
erythrocyte
platelet
(vWf) in haemostasis.
GPIb-IX
(a)Endothelial cells
secretevWfintoplasma,
thesubendothelial
matrix andWeibel-
Weibel-Palade
Paladebodies.
endothclialcell
Wf
body
(continuedoverleaf)
subendothelialmatrix
(2)
230Manual of Canine and Feline Haematology andTransfusionMedicine
Figure14.10(continued):
(b）Vuscular trauma disrupts
the endotheliumand,under
conditions ofhighshear,
plasmavwf bindstothe
subendothelial matrix,
which,withthe original
subendothelialvWf,mediates
platelet adhesion by
interactingwith GPIb-IXon
thenon-activated platelet
membrane.Stimulated
endothelialcellsrelease
(b)
nacmorrhage
Weibel-PaladevWf.which
increases the local
activated platelet
concentration of vWf at the
release reaction
rauma site.(c)Adhesion
ibr
GPIIb-lla
activatesplatelets,exposing
theplateletreceptorGPIlb-
fibrinogen
Illa,whichbindsto both
fibrinogen andvWf,thus
crosslinking platelets,
forming aggregates called
?
the primaryplatelet piug.
(d)The coagulation cascade
is activatedsimultaneously,
(C)
culminatingintheformation
offibrin,which,withheaid
ofvWf,isincorporatednto
thegrowing platelet plugto
forma stable thrombus.
stablethombus
CLINICALSIGNSOFVWD
Figure 14.11:
Spontaneous
Clinically,vWD manifests as excessivc bleeding
epistaxis ina
Dobermann
from mucosal surfaces (haematuria,epistaxis,
Pinscher with
mclaena,utcrine or gingival haemorrhage;Figure
14.11) or excessive blccding affcr surgery or trauma
Willebrand's
(includingclippingofclaws).These signscan be seen
disease.
inany disorderofprimary haemostasis(Figure 14.12),
although for unknown reasons petechial haemor-
rhages(whichusuallytypifythese diseases)arerarely
seen in vWD.This may be a useful clue when trying
to differentiate these disorders.Othersignsthat have
been attributedtovWDincludelameness,intracranial
haemorrhage and poor wound healing.The disease
can be diagnoscd at any agebut typicallyisdetected
inyoung dogs,cspecially in countrics where carly
neutering is practised and in breeds subjected to
cosmetic surgery ata young age. vWD is inherited as
an autosomal trait,so there isno sexpredisposition
for the disease.
vonWillebrand’sDisease 231
Quantitative platelet abnormalities
35canine unitsperdecilitre.InAustralia,thisconcentra-
Thrombocytopenia
tion is used as an arbitrary cut-offpointbelowwhich
dogs are regarded as being at risk of haemorrhage. A
Qualitative platelet abnormalities
similar cut-off point of 40% is used in the United King-
Inherited or acquired thrombopathias
dom(Littlewoodetal.,1987;Holmesetal.,1996).These
Vessel wall defects (e.g. Ehlers-Danlos syndrome)
cut-off values should only be used as guidelines,as
some dogs will haemorrhage despite having higher
von Willebrand's disease
concentrations ofWf.Conversely,notall dogsatrisk
Figure 14.12:Disorders of prinary haemostasis.
will haemorrhage.The severest haemorrhage occurs in
Dobermanns withlowconcentrationsofvWf:Ag(<20%).
These findings cannot be extrapolated to other brecds.
The clinical expression ofvWD is variable and
For unknown reasons,Airedale Terriers do not show
depends onseveral factorsthat decreasevWf concentra-
clinical signs ofvWD,despite some dogs havinglow
tions and/or impair vWf or platelet function (Figure
concentrations of vWf:Ag.
14.13). The extent of vWf deficiency and the type of
Expression of disease is most severe in type
vWD are the most importantvariablesgoverningthe
IIIvWD,in which there is an absolute deficiency
likclihood and severity of haemorrhage (Figure 14.14).
ofvWf.Dogs with type IIvWDlack thehigher
Generally, the lower the vWf concentration the greater
molecular weight multimers of vWf and conse-
thelikelihoodofhaemorrhage.An absolute deficiency
quently haemorrhage severely,although their total
ofvWf (type MI vWD) results in severe haemorrhage,
concentrations of vWf:Ag are normalor mildly
often requiring vWf replacement therapy.Less dramatic
decreased.
reductions occur in type IvWD and consequently the
Underlying diseases or drugs that impair platelet
clinical cxpression is milder.Studies by Johnson et al.
function (see Chapter 12) can precipitate or worsen
(1985), Brooks et al. (1992) and Stokol et al. (1995)
haemorrhage in dogs with vWD.Much has been
showed that most bleedingDobermanns have vWf
made of an association betweenvWD and hypothy-
antigen (vWf:Ag)concentrations of less than 35%,or
roidism in dogs (Avgeris et al.,1990; Dodds,1991).
Definitive proof that hypothyroidism produces an
acquired form of vWD is,however, lacking, and
recent studies do not support this contention
Extent of deficiency invonWillebrand factor
(Johnstonc etal.,1993;Lumsdenetal.,1993;Pancicra
Type of vWD
and Johnson, 1994, 1996).Anecdotally, hypothy-
Concurrent disease
roidism does seem to influence the frequency and
Hepatic disease
scvcrityof hacmorrhage in dogswithWD,bccausc
Renal disease
previously asymptomatic animals maybleedif they
Hypothyroidism
develop concurrent hypothyroidism.Thyroid supple
Drug treatment
mentation should not be used for treatment or prophy-
laxis invWD,unless dogs prove to be hypothyroid by
Figure14.13:Factors affecting theclinical expression of
vonWillebrand's disease(vWD).
thyroid function testing.
Type
Breed
Characteristics
Type I
Most breeds,including Dobermann
Quantitativereduction in vonWillebrand factor(vWf)
Pinschers, Manchester Terriers,
All multimers present but reduced in amount.
Pembroke Wclsh Corgis, Poodles
?Autosomal recessive
and Airedale Terriers
Clinical expression depends on breed
Individual patients responsive to DDAVP (desmopressin)
Type II
German Shorthair Pointers and
Variable quantitative reduction in vWf
German Wirehair Pointers
Abnormal multimers: reduced proportion of large multimers
?Autosomal recessive
Severc clinical expression
No response to DDAVP
Type III
Scottish Terriers, Chesapeake Bay
Absolute deficiency ofvWf in plasma and endothelial cells
Retrievers, Shetland Sheepdogs
Total or near total lack of multimcrs
and Dutch Kooiker dogs
Autosomalrecessive,except ShetlandSheepdog(?2mutations)
Most severe clinical expression
No response to DDAVP
Figure14.14:Types ofvonWillebrand's disease inthedog.
232Manual of Canine and Feline Haematology andTransfusionMedicine
DIAGNOSISOFVWD
vWf to participate in platelet aggregationin response
to specific agonists in vitro.vWD is classified into
vWD can onlybe diagnosed by usinglaboratory tests
different types depending on the multimeric composi-
for direct evaluation ofvWforbytestingformutations
tion of Wf,principally using the technique of
in thevWf genc.Routine coagulationprofiles(platelet
multimcric analysis (which involves separation of
counts, activated partial thromboplastin and pro-
vWfinto its constituent multimers in a gel;Figure
thrombin times)inanimalswithvWDarewithin
14.16). In veterinary medicine, vWD is usually diag-
reference linits.Any dog (especially of a breed with a
nosedby quantifying plasma vWf (termed vWf:Ag)in
high prevalence of vWD) with a history of haemor-
immunoassays with anti-vWf antibodies. In certain
rhage and a normal coagulation profile and platclct
dog breeds, the mutation in the vWf gcne can be
count should be tested for vWD.There are several
detccted by using new moleculartechniques (Riegeret
diagnostic tests for vWD (Figure 14.15), including
al.,1998;Venta et al.,2000).
genetic tests,quantitative testsbased onimmunologi-
cal assays and qualitative tests based on the ability of
Measurement ofvWf:Ag
The Laurcll rocket electroimmunoassay is the most
Quantitative assays to measure the amount of
ableintheUnitedKingdomthroughtheAnimal Health
von Willebrand factor antigen*
Trust, Newmarket),although enzyme-linked
Laurell electroimmunoassay
immunosorbent assays (ELISAs) are replacing this
Enzyme-linked imnunosorbent assay
older assay.The results obtained by eithcr immuno-
Qualitative assays to measure the functional
assay are used to define the patient'svWD status
activity of von Willebrand factor
(Tigure 14.17); however, neither assay measures the
functionalactivityofvWf.Thiscanonlybe assessed in
Platelet adhesion
vivo by using the buccal mucosal bleeding time
Buccal mucosal bleeding time*
(BMBT). or in vitro by platelet aggregation.
Glass bead retention test
Toobtain valid results forvWf:Ag,strict attention
PFA-100 platelet function analyser
should bepaid tothe collection and handling of sam-
Platelet aggregation in rcsponse to agonists
ples.vWfisanacutephasereactantprotein,andvalues
Botrocetin
therefore increasein responscto stress,excitement or
Polybrene
disease.Incorrect collection and handling can initiate
Further characterization of vWD
coagulation invitro and artifactually increase or de-
Multimeric analysis
crease vWf:Ag values.Valucs alsochange whenblood
Crossed immunoelectrophoresis
samples are either refrigerated or stored at room lcm-
Genetic analysis*
perature.Itis therefore essential that bloodiscollected
via cleanvcncpuncturefroma healthy unstressed dog
Figure 14.15:Diagnostic tests forvonWilebrand’s disease
(vWD).*Generally available toveterinary surgeons in
and placed into a tube containing citrate anticoagulant
practice.
（the tubemustbefilledto theappropriatelevel sothat
High molccular
weight multimers
Intermediatemolecular
weight multimers
Lowmolecular
weight multimers
Normal
TypeI disease
Type I disease
Type IMI disease
Figure14.16:TheclassificutionofvonWilebrand’sdisease is based onthemultimeric analysisofvonWillebrandfactor(vWf).
Anormalmultimericdistributionshowsamixtureof low,intermediateandhighmolecularweighmulimers.IntypeIdisease,
thereisaquunlitaivedecreaseinmultimerbiosynthesis,thusallmultimersarepresentbut theconcentrationsaredecreased.
TypeIIdiseaseischaracterized byanabsenceofhighandintermediatemolecularweightmulimers.ItypeIldiseasethereisa
totalor near total absenceofvWf.
von Willebrand’sDisease233
yWf:Ag concentration
Category of von
insensitivetestforroutine diagnosisofvWD,bccause
Willebrand's disease
dogs with mild decreases in vWf:Ag concentrations
may have a normal BMBT (Stokol and Parry,1993).
Dobermann Pinscher
The BMBT will, however. be prolongcd in many
60-150%
Normal
Dobermanns with moderate or sevcrc dccreases in
50-60%
Equivocal
vWf:Ag concentrations.Most Dobermanns with
%0S>
Likely carrier of vWf
vWf:Ag concentrations of less than 20% will have
gene defect
prolonged BMBTs,indicating a compromised pri-
<30%
Carrier ‘at risk' of
mary haemostatic system.The BMBTmay be used as
haemorrhage
a presurgicalassessimcnt of the competence of primary
Scottish Terrier
haemostasis inDobermannsof unknownvWDstatus
(Figure 14.18). A prolonged BMBT warrants prophy-
60-150%
Normal
Equivocal
lactic treatment.Normal surgical haemostasis should
50-60%
<50%
Likely carrier ofvWf
not be taken for granted in a dog with a normal BMBT,
as phenothiazines and anaesthetic agents may impair
gene defect
Homozygous affected
platcletfunctionand precipitate surgical bleeding ina
Undetectable
dogwith a mild decreasc invWf:Ag concentrations.
Figure14.17:Interpretation ofresultsforvonWillebrand
Therefore,theBMBT shouldnotreplacetesting for
factor antigen(vWf:Ag)in Dobermann Pinschers and
ScotishTerriersintheUnitedKingdom,basedn
vWf:Ag,andknowledge of the patient’s vWf:Agcon-
informationfromtheAnimal HealthTrust,Newmarket
centration (aswell asa known history of haemorrhagic
（ranges differinthe United States(Brooks,1992）and
tendencies) is the most reliable guide to the nced for
Australia(Stokol and Parry,1993).*vWD status
prophylactic treatment before elective surgery.
questionahle,i.e.the dogcould beacarrier orcould be
normat (genetic testing is advised in these dogs and in dogs
with lownormalvWf:Agconcentrations thatare to be used
Genetic testing
for breeding)vWf:Ag concentration below assay sensitivity.
With the advent of molecular technology,precisc
defecis in the gene encoding vWf have been identified
a blood:citrate ratio of 9:1 is achieved).The sample
invarious dog breeds,includingtheDoberman Pinscher,
shouldbeimmediatelycentrifugedandthcsupernatant
ManchesterTerrier,Pembroke Welsh Corgi,Poodle,
plasma harvested and transported,onice,tothe lab
Shetland Shccpdog,Dutch Kooiker and ScottishTer-
ratory within 24hours of collection.If despatch is
rier. In the dog breeds with type I vWD. there is a
delayed, the plasma sample should be frozcn and
similar splicing defect in an intron in the vWf gene. In
transported on dry ice.
the Dobermann, this defect results in decreased syn-
thesis of vWf by endothelial cells (Meinkoth and
Buccal mucosal bleeding time
Meyers,1995).In Scottish Terriers,a single base
TheBMBT is a useful invivo test ofprimary hacmo
deletion causes a frameshift mutation with generation
stasis as a whole and is not specific forvWD.It is an
ofanewstopcodonand a severelytruncated protein,
Normal
Proceedwithplasma orcryoprecipitatc cnhand
BMBT
Prolonged
Pretreat with DDAVP
30 minutes later
Repeat BMBT
Normal
Treat with plasma
Prolonged
or cryoprccipitate
DobermannsofunknownstatusforvonWillebrand'sdisease and thoseatrisk'ofhaenorrhageduetothedisease
(concentrations ofvonWillebrand factorantigen<30or35%).
234Manual of Canine andFelineHacmatology and TransfusionMedicine
resulting insevere type IIvWD(Venta et al.,2000).
equipmcnt,iscasytoprepare.Topreventsensitization
In Dutch Kooikers with type III vWD, there is a
of the recipient to donor antigcns and tominimize the
splicing defect inintron 16,which gencrates a prema
riskof transfusionreactions,freshwholebloodshould
ture stop codon in the vWf gene (Ricgcr et al.,1998).
beavoidedinvWD,especiallyasthese dogsfrequently
Currently,testsforidentification ofvWf gene muta-
havc repeated bouts of haemorrhage andrequire re-
lions are being offered for certain dog breeds in the
peated treatment.Fresh whole blood,typed or
United States (VetGen LLC,Ann Arhor,MI).The
crossmatched,canbeusedtotreatWDbutwhenev
principal use of these tests isfor the accurate identifi-
possible should be reserved for those cases with a
cation of carriersfor the selectionofbreeding stock,
specific need for red blood cells(e.g.severe anaemia).
especially those dogs with ‘cquivocal’results for
vWf:Ag concentrations.Genetic testing should not be
Desmopressin
used as the sole diagnostic test for vWD,because
Desmopressin (1-dcamino-8-arginine vasopressin;
genetic status cannot be used to predict vWf:Ag con-
DDAVP) isa synthetic analogue of arginine vaso-
centrations,and thcrc is no evidence linking
pressin(antidiuretichormone).Desmopressin increases
genetic status to clinical signs of haemorrhage.
.In
plasma vWf:Ag and FVIlI values byinducing the
contrast,there is awell documented association be-
releaseofvWffrornWeibcl-Paladebodiesinendothe-
tweenvWf:Ag conccntrations and tendeney tobleed.
lial cells. This drug will only work in dogs with
cndothelial stores ofvWf (i.e.typeIvWD)and is
ineffective indogswith typeIIvWD,wholackvWf
TREATMENTOFVWD
stores.Repeat injections produce a diminishing rc-
sponseowingtodepletionofstores,hereforethedug
TreatmentforvWDispalliative,with thegoalbeing
haslimiteduseinthetrcatment of thehaemorrhagic
short-term prevcntion or control of haemorrhage.The
episodes of vWD. Desmopressin is recommended as
objectiveistoincreascplasmavWf:Agconcentrations
presurgical prophylaxis in Dobermanns at risk,and
toa level thatwilleitherprevent orstophaemorrhage.
in Dobermanns of unknown vWD status with a pro-
This is usually accomplished byinfusion ofplasma
longed BMBT.It can also be used to increase vWf:Ag
productsthatcontainWf,althoughdesmopressin,a
concentrations in donor dogs before obtaining blood
drug thatincreases plasmavWf:Ag concentrations,
fortransfusionpurposes.Synthetic vasopressinisavail-
can also be used.
able in tabletform or as an aqueous solution for
injection.Intranasal preparations are also available as
Infusion therapy
solutionsorsprays,which aremore costeffective than
Cryoprecipitate,aconcentratedformofvWfandFVII,
the aqueous solution forinjection.The intranasal prepa-
is the treatment of choice for vWD. Cryoprecipitate
rations areinjected subcutaneously30minutes before
providesthegreatest amount of vWf in a small plasma
surgery,at a doseof 1 μg/kg diluted toa 1 mlvolume
volume,isassociatedwithfewsideeffectsandismore
with stcrilesaline.This dose may shortentheBMBTin
cfficacious in increasingplasma vWf:Ag concentra-
Dobermanns with vWD for up to 4 hours.However,
tions andshortening theBMBTthanany othcrform of
responsetothedrugisunpredictableindogswithvWD
infusiontherapy.The preparation of cryoprecipitate is
(some dogs may not respond at all) and DDAVP
dcseribed in Chapter 15.Figure 14.19 providesguide-
should not bereliedupon to achieve surgical haemo-
lines for infusion therapy.Fresh frozen plasma is the
stasis.Plasma orcryoprecipitateshould be available in
best alternative tocryoprecipitate and,with theright
the event of cxcessive surgical haemorrhage.
Product
Dose
Prophylaxis
Treatment
Cryoprecipitate
1 unit/10-15 kg
Give immediately before surgery.
Twice daily (minimum)
bodyweight*
If surgery is prolonged (more than
until haemorrhage
2 hours), give additional units
ceases
during surgery
Fresh frozen plasma
6-10 ml/kg
Give one doseimmediatelybefore
Twice daily(minimum)
bodyweight
surgery and a second dose if
until haemorrhage
surgery is prolonged (more than
ceases
2hours)
Whole blood
13-22ml/kg
Give one dose before, and a second
As needed until
bodyweight
dose during,surgery
haemorrhage ceases
Figure14.19:Guidelinesforinfusiontherapy indogswithvonWillbrand’s disease.*Dosingis empiricalasthe amountofvon
Willebrandfactorantigen(vWf:Ag）ineachunitof cryoprecipitatevaries,dependingonthevWfAgconcentrationinthedonor
and theefficiencyof thepreparationtechnique.Pretreatmentof donorswithdesmopressinoptimizestheyield ofvWf:Agfromthe
cryoprecipitate(Sato and Parry,1998).
von Willebrand's Disease z2
235
REFERENCES AND FURTHER
LmsdenJHOGralyMRJostoneBanHameR(993）Prevalenc
of hypothyroidism aad von Wilebrand's disease in Doberman
READING
Pinschers and the observed relationship belwcen lhyroid, von
Willcbrand and cardiac status (abstruet).Journal ofVererinary
Avgeris S, Lothrop CD and MeDonuld TP( I990) Plasmu von Willcbrandl
Taternal Medieine 7, 115
faclur concenration aund thyroid funetion in dogs. Jornuni of the
Meinkoth JHand Meyers KM (1995) Measurementof von: Willebrand
AeriaVyMdiAssi1969294
faelor specifie mRNA and release and storage of von witlebrand
Brooks M (1l992) Managenent of canine von Wilelrand's dliseasc.
factorfrom enlathelial cellsofdogs wiltype-I von Willelraned's
Probtens in Veterinery Medicine 4, G36-GA6
disease. American Jonrna! of Vererinary Research S6, 1577-
Brooks M, Dodds WI and Raymond SL (1992) Epidemiologic feahures
1585
of von Willebrand's disease in Daberman Pinschers, Scotish
Meyers KM, Wardrop KI and Meinkoth J (1992) Caninc von
Terriers,and ShetlandShccpdogs:260 cases (1984-1988).Journal
Willcbrand’s discasc:pathobiology, diagnosis, and short-tcrm
ofeAmericaVeeinaryMdicatAssociation200,1231127
treatment.ConpendiurofConiing EducarionfortePracticing
 s  ( a     
Veterinarian 14. 13-22
Conparutive Haematology Internerionat 7. 187-196
Moungomery RR and Coiler BS (i994) von Willebrad disease. In:
Dotds WJ (199l) Blcul sulstiutes. Adaces in Velerimary Seience
HenustsisudTrombosis Ravie ProcplesauClintealPractice,
nndConparariveMedicine36,257-290
3 e,dWCon,Hsh,VIMadrESa
French TW, Fox LE, Randolph JF and Dadlds WJ (1987) A hleeding
134- 168. JB Lippincout, Philadelphia
disorder (von Willebrand's disease) in a Himalayan cat. Journat of
 Panciera DL and Johnson GS (1994) Plastma von Willebrand factor
the Anerican Veterintary Medicat Associarion 190, 437-439
anligen conccntration in dogs with hypothyroidism. Journaf of rhe
Holmcs NG,Shaw SC, Dickcns HF,Coombes LM, RuderEl,Litlewood
American Veterinary Medicat Association 205, 1550-1553
JD and Biuus MM (1996) vorn Wilebrand's disease in UK
Pancicra DL und Folmson GS (1996) Plasma von Willebrane factor
Dobermanns: possible corelalion of n polymorplic DNA murker
antigen concenrations and buccal nucosal bleeding tine in dogs
withdiseasestalus.ourt oSmalniralPruclic37307-308
with experimental iypoyroidisn.Jourt of VeteruraryAterna!
JohosonGS,Schlink GT,Fallon RK and MooreCP (1985)Hemorrhage
Medicine 10, G0-64
from the cosmctic otoplasty of Doberman Pinschers with von
Rieger M, Schwarz. HP, Turecek Pl., Dorner F, Van Mourik JA anl
Witlcbrand’s disease.American Journa! ofVererinary Research
Mannhalter C (1998) Irdentification of mulations in the canine von
46,1335-1340
Willehrand factor gene associated with type Hlf von Willebrand
 Johnson GS, Turrentinc MA and Kraus KH (1988) Caninc von
discasc. Thrombosis and Haennostasis S0. 332-337
Willebrand’s disease. Vereriry Clinies of North Ameriea: Smaf!
AnimalPrectice18,195-229
Vi and von Willebrand factor concenirations in Greyhounds.
Jolnstone IB, OGraly MR, Lumsden JH aud Hone RH (1993)
Ausraliant Verternary Journa! 76, 809-812
Thyroid supplenentation effect on plasma von Willebrand factory
factor VTInDobermanPinschers (abstract）.Jourma!ofVeterinory
review, Ausrgliaut Veternary Practitioter 23. 94-103
Interneal Medicine 7, 130
Stokol T, Parry BW and Mansell PD (1995) von Willehrand's disease
Littlewoad JD (1991)Von Willebrand's tlisease in the dog. Vererinary
in Dohermann dogsin Ausiralia.Australint Vereriary Jourma!72,
Amal31,163-172
257-262
Littlewood JD, Herrtage ME, Gorman NT and McGlennon MJ (1987)
(  m   s    
Mutation causing von Willebrand's diseasc in Seottish Terriers.
Record 121, 463-468
Journal of Vererinary fnternat Medicine 14, 10-19
CHAPTER FOURTEEN
(ii) Haemophilia A
Janet D. Littlewood
INTRODUCTION
an abnormal F VILI moleciule with reduced function,
whereas most of the severely affected patients have no
Haemophilia A, or classie bacnophilia, resulis from
F VIII:Ag measurable because of complete absence of
the deficiency cr absence of factor VIII (F VIII), an
F VIlI synlhesis.
essential cofactor in the activation of F X by F IXa.
PREVALENCE AND INHERITANCE
FUNCTION OF FACTOR VIHI
Haemophilia A was recognized in lumans by the
Human F V1HI has a molecular weight of about 330 kD
ancient Egyptians and is clcarly docunenlcd in the
and an approximate plasma concentration of 200 ng/ml.
Talmud. The disease is inherited in a sex-linked man--
Thc spcciffc activity of canine F VHI is about four
ler, with affected males and female carriers. It is the
times greater than that of human F VII (Littlewood,
commonest of the sevcre inherifcd bleeding disorders,
1988a). The protein circulates inplasma, non-covalently
with a UK prevalence in the order of 16 per I00,000 of
bound to von Willehrand factor (vWf), which confers
the male population. About 30% of patients have n0
stabiliry on the F VIl molecule, This association has
family history and represent new imutations. The nature
given rise to confusion in the early literature about the
 of the genetic defect has been elucidated in nany
separale identity and functions of these two plasma
human families with haemophilia. Gene deletions and
 proteins. F VII is activated by the action of thrombin,
various point mulalions have been identified.
and further thrombin cleavage, together with activated
q 'io nou si seo pue sop ur souaieaid su
：
protein C (cenhanced by protein S) results in inactiva-
haemophilia A is the commonest of the inherited
生
tion by proicolysis. F VII is synthesizcdl largely in the
coagulopathies. It has been reported in many breeds of
liver but is also produced by cther cell types. F VHI
dogs, including crossbreeds. Iis likely that most of the
activity is assessed by biologicalassays. The one-stage
cases identified represent new rmutations, since in the
 assay utilizes F VIH-deficicml plasma as a substrate
severe forim the condition is self-limiting, with af-
and cormpares the activity of dilutions of patient plasma
fccted males rarely surviving lo adulthood and repro-
::
with that of a standard of kiown F VIl activity by a
ductive capability. In the German Shepherd Dog,
modified activalcd partiaf thromhoplastin fime (APTT)
however, a modcrately severe form of the disease
test. Two-stage clotting methods and chromogenic
occurs, and affected males may survive to aclullhood
assays canl also be nsed to assess F Vll potency.
and be used at stud. This has led to dissemination of the
International standards for animal plasmas do not
disease in this brced across thc world (Fogh et cl.,
exist, and patient plasma is usually compared with a
1984; Johnstone and Norris, 1984; Fogh, 1988;
 pool of normal plasma collected from at least 10
Littlewood, 1988b; Parry et al., 1988). It should be
healihy animals of mixcd age, sex and breed. Many
noted that severe forms of the disease have aiso beell
laboratories calibrate each new poolof plasma with the
identified in this brecd, but not iu the saine families; all 
 previous pool to standardize results from that labora-
of the 1moderately affected animals are descendants of
tory, anrd will cross calibralc with othcr laboratories
a single dog, Canto von der Wienerau. Screening
with recognized expertise and experience in coagula-
 programmes are in place in scveral coumlrics and have
tion assays.
been succcssful in eliminating the problem in Aus-
 Antigcn detection assays using polyclonal and
tralia (Mansell, 1991). Cytogenetic analysis in these
 monoclonal antisera exist for hman F VIll, aul somc
German Shepherd Dogs lias shown that thc defect is
 of these reagents cross react with F VIlI from aninal
ael o eonqe euosono ssit t oi ap nou
 sources (Rotblat et al., 1983). Human patients with
 moderate and umild disease usually bave identifiable
expect when there is not complcte absence of func-
 F VIII antigen (F VI:Ag), indicating the presence of
tional protein.
238Manual of Canine andFelineHacmatologyand TransfusionMedicine
The disease is also reported in cats (Cotter et
Severe disease
al.,1978;Littlew0od,1986).Moderate haemophilia
In thc sevcre form of the disease it is often possible to
has also been recognized in a cat that survived
identify affected puppies in a litter at birth due to
castration.The cat,however,bled excessively after
persistent naval bleeding (Figure 14.21).Hacmatomata
surgical removal of a lump. which proved to be a
are common in young puppics once they begin to
resolving haematoma on histological examination
interact with littermates. Gingival haemorrhage is of-
(Littlewood,1999).
ten seen when deciduous teeth are shed (Figure 14.22).
Shifting and recurrent lameness arc common inboth
modcrale and severe forms,with degenerative
CLINICALSIGNS
osteoarthrosis developing as a sequel to these haem-
arthroses. Muscle haematomata are also common.
In humans, severe,moderate and mild forms of
Subcutancous bleedscanbe extensivedue tothe loose
haemophilia Aare recognized(Figurc14.20).Severe
nature of the subcutis in the dog(Figure 14.23).Medi-
and moderatc forms are recognized in dogs and
astinal haemorrhage(Figure14.24),hacmothorax and
cats,and ii is likely that mild forms also occur but
retroperitoneal bleeding are common causes of death
gounrecognized.
in affected animals.
Plasma factor VIII
Bleeding manifestation
(%of normal)
Severe
<2
Prolonged severe bleeding after injury, spontaneous haemarthroses
and muscle haemorrhages, life-threatening cavitybleeds
Moderate
2-15
Severebleeding after surgery ormajor injury, some bleeding after
minor trauma,occasional haemarthroses and spontaneousbleeding
Mild
15-25
Bleeding only after major trauma and surgery
Figure14.20:Classification ofhaemophilia(afier Rizza,1977).
Figure 14.21:
Persistent
haemorrhuagein
a haemophilic
puppy.
Figure 14.22:
Gingival
haemorrhage
due to shedding
ofdeciduous
teeth.
Figure 14.23:
Extensive
subcutaneous
haematoma
affecting theleft
thoracicand
abdominalwall
Figure14.24:Mediastinal haemorrhage causinglef-sided
ofadog,
Hornerssyndrome,dysphagia,dyspnoea andcoughingina
hangingbelow
dog.Thelateral thoracieradiograph shows the anterior
thenormal
mediastinalhaematomacausingnoticeabledepressionand
outine of the
compressionofthetracheaandcaudal displacement of
ventrum.
cranial lung lobes.
Haemrophilia A 239
:
Moderate disease
Tranexamic acid
In moderately affected animals there is often some
 Inhibitors of fibrinolysis can be useful in thc manage-
episode of trauma that resuls in the bleedling tendency
me of bleeding cpisndes in haemophilic dogs (AR
being recognized, although there is often a history
Giles, unpublished observations; Littlewood, 1988a).
of recurrent lameness or other suspicious signs if
The authior has used tranexaimic acid (Cyclokapron,
owncrs are qucstioned carcfully. Abnornal bleeding
Kabi) at a dose ralc of 15-20 mg/kg orally 2-4 tincs
has also been enccuntered during ovariohysterec-
dlaily. This drug is used to control external haemor-
tomy of carrier bitches, as it is possible for carrier
 rhage (e.g. dental, prostatic) in human haemophilic
females to have F Vfl concentrations as low as
paticnts and, owing to the risk of thrombocmbolic
25-30% of normal, due to random suppression of
complications, would not be used in the management 
 X chromosomes. This would be a manifestation of
of internal bleeds. This risk, however, seens to be
mild haemophilia in a hictcrozygote. Affected haemo-
minimal in veterinary patients, probably owing to iheir
philic female dogs that are homozygotic can be
bred, when an affected male is mated with a carrier
 It should be noted that this product is not licensed for 
fcmale. An acute blccding disordcr due to low
velcrinary use.
F VHHI-coagulant activity was described in a female
dog of mixed breed as a spontaneous occurrence
Gene therapy
(Murtaugh and Dodds, 1988), but it is not known if
Gene therapy has been used successfully in F VIII-
this was a heterozygotic or homozygotic defect.
deficient dogs (Connelly et al., 1996). The gene for
The bleeding tendency in haemophilic cats is much
human F VIHI in an adenoviral vector corrected the
less severc than in dogs. probably rlue to the smaller
hacmophilic phenotype as assessed by clotting times
size of cats and differences in behaviour between the
and the cuticle hleeding time. Expression of the gene
two species (Cotter et al., 1978: Littlewood, 1986)
 product was only short term, lasting 1-2 weeks, owing
to the development of an antibody response ad a
 human F VMI-specific inhibitor.
TREATMENT
Cryoprecipitates
CARRIER DETECTION
 Managenent of bleeding episodes is difficult in
scverely affccted aninals, and owners often request
Asymptomatic lheterozygotes provide a genetic reser-
euthanasia once the disease is diagnosed. The aim
voir for the disease. In human medicine, DNA analysis
should be to increase plasma F VIII concentrations to
by the use of probes that detect diagnostically useful
al least 25-30% of normal to achicve haemoslasis
restriction fragment length polymorphisms, enables
(Giles et al., 1982; Pijnappels er al., 1986). Trans-
the identification of carrier females in. many familics
1
fusions of normal plasma from dogs at a rate of 15
with haemophilia A. However, studies using these
ml/kg should achieve this, but grealcr volumes may
probes in Geriman Shepherd Dogs with moderate hae-
be required, and over-transfusion can become a
mophilia showed no differences in the restriction pat-
problem. Plasma cryoprecipitate contains a higher
terns between nornial and affected males for any of the
concentration of F VIll, and some centrcs make thcir
probc combinations, although all probes used hybrid-
 own cryoprecipitate from fresh frozen plasima. A
ized to the dogs' genomic DNA (Clark et al., 1997).
comparison between fresh frozen plasma and cryo-
Whether the probes would be useful in other haemo-
precipitate showed similar increases in F VIII clot-
philic dog fanilics is unknown.
ting activity with both products, but the incidence
of side effects (mild pruritus, pallor, weakness) was
Carrier slatus
 less with cryoprccipitate (Stokol and Parry, 1998).
Carricr status is ascribed by taking into account pedi-
Adverse reactions usually are a feature of animals
gree evidence of haemophilic antecedents, plasna
tliat have received multiple transfusions, and can be
 F VIll concentration and the production of affected
avoided by pretrcatment with an antihisiamine such
 progcny. According to these criteria a bitch can be
as chlorpheniramine (Littlewood, 1988a). Commer-
classified as a suspectedl, probable or obligate hetero-
cial F VIll concentrates fron humans and pigs are
zygote (Figure 14.25). Whereas coagulation assays
haemostatically effcctive in animals (Litilcwood,
will accurately distinguish bctween normal and af-
1988a; Lutze et al., 1999), but the administration of
fected males, the same is not true of females. This is
heterologous proteins induces the formation of anti-
 because of the wide variability of F VIll expression in
bodies and the risk of anaphylaxis al. subsequent
fermale heterozygotes due to thc random suppression
infusion (Littlewood and Barrowcliffe, 1987;
(f X chromosames in somatic cells. Measurement of
Littlewood, 1988a). [nfusions should be given twice
plasma F VllI activity in females can only provide a
daily until bleeding has slopped and the haematoma
statistical probability for the slatus of thal animal.
is resolving. Antibiotic cover is indicated.
Although some studies have found that carrier bitches
240Manual of Canine andFeline Haematology andTransfusion Medicine
Pedigree evidence
FactorVIlI
Number of haemophilic
Diagnosis
pups born
Father is haemophilic
Obligate heterozygote
2
Obligate heterozygote
Suggestive
Low
1
Obligate heterozygote
Suggestive
Low
Probable heterozygote
Suggestive
1
Probable heterozygote
Low
1
Probable heterozygote
Suggestive
Suspected heterozygote
Low
Suspected heterozygote
1
Suspected heterozygote
Figure14.25:Identification ofheterozygoticcarrierbitches.
Probability
cxpress only half the plasmaFVIlI activity of normal
ofnon-carrier
bitches （Fogh,1988;Littlewood,1988b),others have
status
found functional assays of less use in the differentia-
50%
tionbetwecn normal and carrier animals (Iittlewood,
Immediate probability
1988a;Mansell and Parry,1992).Figure 14.26 shows
Plasma F VIII activity 15-60%
11%
theinference ofcarrierstatusfromFVIlI assaysinthe
One plasma F VIII test >60%
82%
daughters of obligate hcterozygotes,and Figure 14.27
Two plasma F VIll tests >60%
98%
shows the influence on the probability figures of pro-
One plasma F VIII test >60%,
64%
duction ofnormal male offspring.
one test<60%
If a bitch has a high probability ofnon-carrier
Two plasma F VIII tests >60%,
93%
status,owncrsshould beadvisedthatifsheistobeused
one test<60%
forbreeding then all the male pups in thefirst litter
Figure14.26:FactorVIll (TVIll) concentrations in
shouldbe tested forAPTTand/orFVIII activity.A
daughters of obtigate carriers.
bitch with a F VIII concentration greater than60%who
produces four normal male offspring has a 99% prob
Probability of
ability of non-carrier status.Blood testing of males
non-carrier status
hcfore thcir usc at stud is an effective way of identify-
Immediateprobability
50%
ingaffectedanimals and preventing further dissemina
1 unaffected son
%99
tion of thegeneticdefectinto subsequent generations
2unaffected sons
80%
inbrccds withmild to moderate manifestations of
3unaffected sons
89%
dlisease.
4 unaffected sons
%6
5 unaffected sons
97%
6unaffected sons
REFERENCES
98%
If daughter has F VIII
82%
ClarkP,BowdenDKandParyBW(1997）Studiesto detectcarrirsf
>60%and:
haemophilia A in German shepherd dogs using diagnostie DNA
polynorphismsinthe humanfactorVIll gene.VeterinaryJourna!
1 unaffected son
90%
153,71-74
2unaffected sons
95%
Clark P and Parry BW (1997) Cytogenetic analysis of German
ShepherdDogswithhaemophiliaA.Australian Veterinary.Journa!
3unaffected sons
97%
75,521-522
Connelly ,MoutJ,ausrA,GardJM,KalckoMMClllan
4 unaffected sons
98%
andLothrop CD (1996)Complete short-term corrcction of caninc
If daughter has F VIII
11%
hemophilia A by in vivo gene therapy.Blood 8,3846-3853
15-60%and:
Cotter SMBrenerRMandDoddsWJ(i978）HeophiliaA in hree
unrelated cats.Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
1 unaffected son
20%
Association172,166-168
Fogh JM(1988)A study of hemophiliaAinGerman shepherd dogsin
2unaffected sons
34%
Denmark.Veterinary Clinics of North America: Snal Animal
3unaffected sons
50%
Practice18,245-254
FoghJM,NygaardL,AndresonEetal.(1984)Hemophiliain dogs,with
4 unaffected sons
67%
specialrefcrcnectohcmophiliaAamong Germanshepherddogs in
5unaffected sons
Dennark.I.Pathophysiology,laboratorytstsandgnctis.Nrdisk
80%
VeterinGernediein36,235-240
6unaffected sons
89%
Giles AR,TinlinSand Greenwood R（1982)A camine mudel of
hemophilic(factor VIIl:Cdeficiency)bleeding.Blood60,727730
7unaffected sons
94%
Johnstone IBand Norris AM(1984)Amoderately severe expression of
Figure14.27:Identificationof carrier status indaughitersof
classicalhemophiliainafamilyofGermanshepherddogs.Canadian
VeterinaryJournal25,191-194
carriers by production ofunaffected sons.
Littlewood JD (1986)Haemophilia A （factorVIlI deficiency)inthe cat.
FVIll,factorF VIll.
Journal ofSmailAnimal Practice27,541-546
Hacmophilia A2
241
Litlewood JD (198sa) FactorVIl - pospholipidnixtures and factor
Mudaugh RJ and Dudds WJ (19s8) Hemophilia A in a female dog.
VIInhbstudisinhahiogs.PhsisUivsi
Juurnel ef the Anerican Veterinvry Medicat Association 193,
of Cambridge
351--352
LittewoodJD (19ssh)HaemnphiA (faclarViH deficiency) inGerman
Parry BW, Howard MA, Manseil PD aul Holloway SA (1088)
shepherd dogs. Jonrnal of Small Animal Practice 29, 117-128
Haenphili AinGen sheperd dagsAstrian Veteriry
Littewoed JD (1999) Diseases of tlhe blood and blnod-fonning prgans.
Jourmal 65, 276-279
I:TexhookoSlAtiaMediine,d.KDu,p.765-819.
Pijuappels MIM, Briet E, van der Zweet GTh, Huisden R, van Tilhrg
Bhackwgll Scienlilic, Oxford
NH and Eullerink F (1986) Evaluation of the cutiele blceding
Litlewood JD and Barroweliffe TW (19s7) Tle dlevelupment and
lhe in canne aemopila A.Fromosis and Haemostasi 55,
churacterisation of antibodies to buman Faclor VIlI n lxremophite
70--73
dlogs. Thrombasis aurd Haemostasis 57, 314-321
Rizza CR (977) Clinicalmanagenem of haemoplila Brish Medica
Lautze G, Katschtmann K, Thomae K, Lantze G andl Franke D (l999)
Brtllethm 33, 225-230
Successful treatmen of canine haemophilia A with porcine factor
Rotblat F, Goodhall AH, O'Drien DP, Rawlings E, Midiletcon S and
VI1.Praktische Tiera280,664-670
MansellPD (1991)Diagnosis of hacmophiliaAindogs,vithparticular
procoagulant factor VIll.Joumnal of Laborarory Clinical Medicine
refereneeto the disease in Genman shepherd dogs in Australia. PhD
101,736-746
thesis,Universityof Melboume
Mansell PD audParry BW(1992) Carrierteectioniahunuad eanine
cryoprecipitateindogs withvon Willebrundl'sdiseseorhemophiia
hemophilia A. Vereriiary Rirllerin 62, 999. 1007
A. Jourxat af Veteriaary Inerrat Meuieie 12, 84-92
:
CHAPTER FOURTEEN
(iv) Anticoagulant Rodenticides
Andrew Mackin
INTRODUCTION
must contain the amino acid glutamic acid in its car-
boxylated form (y-carboxyglutamic acid). Carboxyla-
Poisoning with anticoagulant rodenticides is onc of the
lion of glutainic acid in the proteins of the prothrombin
 most comnon toxicities encountered by veterinary
complex requires the presence of vitamin K. In the
practitioners and is also one of the most common
 absence of vitamin K, these proteins are only present in
acquired causes of haemostatic disorders in small
non-functional forms (Mount and Feldman, 1982).
animal praclicc. Potential or actual poisonings with
Vitamin K-lependent clotting factors are impor-
anticoagulant rodenticide currently account for almost
tant components of the clotting cascade: factor IX in
10% of the enquiries received by the Veterinary Poi-
the intrinsic pathway, factor VII in the extrinsic path-
sons Information Servicc (VPIS) in London, which
way anrl factors II and X in the common pathway of
handles the bulk of such enquiries in the United King-
secondary haemostasis (Figure 14.28). Functional
dom (A Campbell, personal communication). Anti-
deficiency of any one of these clotting factors leads to
coagulant toxicity often presents as a life-threatening
significant impairment of secondary haemostasis.
emergency, with published mortality rates of between
whereas deficiency of allfour factors, witha combined
 10% and 20% despite there being a readily available
effect on all of the major coagulation pathways, is
and highly cffcctivc antidote, vitamin K (Green and
likely to be clinically catastrophic.
Thomas, 1995; Robben et aul., 1998; Sheafor and
 In the normal animal, vitamin K (a fat-soluble
Couto, 1999). Based on practitioner feedback, the
vitamin) is obtained from both dietary sources and
VPIS estimates that in the United Kingdon current
bacterial syntlesis within the gut lumen, typically ina
mortality rates fron poisoning with anticoagulant are
 quinone form, and is absorbed in the small intestine
at least 5% (A Campbell, personal communication).
together with ingested fatty acids (Mount and Feldman,
1982; Green and Thomas, 1995). The vitamin is then
because it can be difficult to obtain a prompt diagnosis
stored in various forms within hepatocytes. Only one
and because treatment with vitamin K is often of
form, the hydroquinone form of vitamin K, is involved
inadequate dosage and duration (Mount, 1988). Tlhis
in the carboxylation of the non-functional precursors
chapter describes the relevant pathophysiological fea-
of factors H, VIl, IX and X into their active forms. As
tures of poisoning with anticoagulant todenticide and
part of this carboxylation process, the active
presents a logical diagnostic and therapeutic approach
hrydroquinone form of the vitamin is converted into an
for practitioncrs.
inactivc cpoxide forn (Figurc 14.29). Sincc the 10r-
mal intestinal uptake of vitamin K is insufficient to
 meet the ongoing demand generated by activation of
ROLE OF VITAMIN K IN
clotling factors, the animal must continuously
HAEMOSTASIS
enzymatically regenerate the active hydroquinone form
of vitamin K from its various inactive forms to main-
Four of (he major coagulation proteius, factors II
tain adcqualc conccntrations of thc functional vitanin.
(prothrombin), VII, IX and X, depend on vitamin K for
 The inactive epoxide form of vitamin K is converted
functional clotting activity (Mount et al., 1986), as do
via an epoxide reductase reaction into a quinone form,
several proteins with anticoagulant activity, namely
and a subsequent reduclasc reaction converts the vari-
proteins C and S (Green and Thomas, 1995). This
ous inactive quinone forms of the vitamin (those de-
group of vitamin K-dependent coagulant and anti-
rived from both reduction cf epoxides and dietary and
coagulant proteins are known as the prothrombin com-
 bacterial origins) into the active lhydroquinone form. A
plex. Like most other clotting factors, the proteins in
brcakdown in auy of the above enzymatic reactions
the prothrombin complex are manufactured by the
 (collectively known as the vitamin K-enzyme com-
liver. The proteins are manufactured by hepatocytes in
 plex) rapidly leads to a deficiency in the functional
an inactive precursor form anrl to become functional
hydraquinone form of vitamin K, which in turn leads
244Manual of Canine and FelineHaematology andTransfusion Medicine
Figure14.28:ThevitaminK-
Intrinsic pathway
Extrinsic pathway
dependent ctottingfactors
（prothrombin）,Vll,IX andX,
Negalively chared
are involved inallthemajor
pathways ofsecondary
XII
XIla
haemostasis:the intrinsic
pathway (IX),theexirinsic
pathway (VIl).and the
XI
XIa
VIla
VII
common pathway (II and X).
Cui
IX
IXa
Teor
a²+
VIII-
VIla
PF3
Thiromhin
Xa
Common pathway
BA
PF3
Prothron
Ca
Fibrinogen
Fibrin
XII
XIlla
Thronbin
Crosslinked fibrin
Figure 14.29:The active
hydroquinoneformofvitamin
Vitamin K
Clotting factors
K is required for the
carboxylationandepoxidation
II, VII, IX, X
processthatformsfunctional
factorsVIIXandXfom
Hydroquinone
Inactive
theirinactive precursor
precursors
proteins.As part of this
process for activationof
Diet
clottingfuctors,the
Reductase
CO2
hydroquinoneisconverted
reaction
into theinactiveepoxideform
ofvitaminK,andtheactive
Quinone
formmust thenberegenerated
Carboxylation
bya complex series of
and
enzymaticreductions.
Gut
Epoxide
epoxidation
Anticoagulant rodenticides act
reductase
predominantly by inhibiting
bacteria
reaction
theepoxidereductase
Activated
reaction.
Epoxide
proteins
to a deficiency in the active forms of thevitamin K
INHIBITIONOFTHEVITAMIN
dependent clotingfactors (MountandFeldman,1982).
K-ENZYMECOMPLEX
By contrast,if the vitamin K-enzyme complex is
intact,reduced dietaryintake ofvitaminKisunlikely
Anticoagulant rodenticidesinhibit the enzymaticpro
tolead to impairedhaemostasis in the normalanimal
cess that regenerates the active hycdroquinonc form of
sinceintestinalbacterial synthesis of the vitamin is
vitaminK,predominantlyviainhibitionoftheepoxide
sufficient to replenishbody stores.
reductase reaction (Mount and Feldman,1982).
Anticoagulant Rodenticides 245
Severeand complete cnzyme inhibition can lead to
marizes therodenticides that belong to each of these
a deficiency in active vitamin K in less than 24
major groups (Beasley and Buck, 1983;Mount et al.,
hours,after which the inactive precursors ofvitamin
1986;Mount,1988;Dorman,1990).Experimental
K-dependent clotting factors are unablc to be con-
studiesandextensiveclinicalexperiencehaveshown
verted into theirfunctional forms.Defective second-
that anticoagulant rodenticides are highly poisonous
ary haemostasis and susceptibility to bleeding occur
and frequentlyfatal when ingestedby dogs andcats at
as soon as pre-existing circulating amounts of these
doses that can be easily allaincd at home(Forbes et al.,
factors are consumcd(Schulman et al.,1986).Since
1973;Schulmanetal.,1986;Woodyetal.,1992;Berry
the circulatinghalf-livesoffactorsVIIIX,XandHn
etal.,1993;Lewisetal.,1997).Manymorepoisonings
the dog areabout 6,14,16and40hoursrespectively,
havebeenreportedindogsthanincats,andrecentdata
impaired secondary hacmostasis can potentially occur
from theLondon VPISshowabout 10veterinary
as soon as one day after ingestion of ananticoagulant
enquiresregardingpotentialanticoagulantrodenticide
rodenticide,pendingon the teand potency f th
toxicities in dogs for cvery one enquiry in cats (A
ingested toxin(Forbes etal.,1973;Mount etal.,1986;
Campbell,personal communication).
Schulman et al.,1986).
Inhibition of the vitaminK-enzyme complex is not
Figure 14.30:
thconlymeansbywhichvitaminKdeficiencycanlead
Brodifacoum
tobleeding disorders.Since vitamin K is fat soluble
rodenticidebait
trays are torn open
and taken upby the small intestine concurrentlywith
andplacedin
fatty acids,conditions that causemaldigestion and/or
locations accessible
malabsorption of dictary fat can also cause vitamin K
torodents.Almost
deficiency.Potential causes of poorintestinal absorp-
half of the contents
tionofvitaminKinclude severeinfiltrativebowel
ofthisbait tray(far
disease,lmphangicctasiaxocrineanreatiinu
inexcess ofa lethal
dose)was ingested
ficiencyand biliary obstruction (sincebileacids arean
by a young
essential component ofmicelle formation,which
Pomeranian.
facilitates intestinal absorption of lipid) (Mount and
Feldman,1982;Mount,1986;Hammer and Couto,
1991;Green and Thomas,1995).Prolongedantibiotic
therapy.particularlywithsecond and third generation
cephalosporinshasalsobeenreportcd tolead tomild
vitamin K deficiency secondary to reduced synthesis
ofthc vitamin by intestinal bacteria (Mount and
Feldman,1982;Hammerand Couto,1991;Green and
First generation hydroxycoumarins
Thomas,1995).Unlike inhibition of the vitamin K-
Warfarin*
cnzyme complex,decreased bacterial synthesis or
Dicoumarin*
impaired intestinal absorption of vitamin K is unlikely
Coumafuryl (Fumarin)
toleadto acute haemostaticdefectssince hcpatocytes
Coumatetralyl*
have some stores ofvitaminKin itsinactive forms.
First generation indanediones
Diphacinone*(Diphenacin)
ANTICOAGULANTRODENTICIDES
Chlorphacinone*
Pindone
The original anticoagulant rodenticides,which wcre
Valone
first commercially developedin the1940s,areknow
Second generation hydroxycoumarins
as first gcneration rodenticides.First generation
Brodifacoum*
rodenticides are further divided into the
Bromadiolone*
hydroxycoumarin group,of which warfarin is the best
Difenacoum*
known cxample,and the indandione group,which
Miscellaneous
includes diphacinone.Over the ycars,as the rodent
population developed resistance to the original
Sulphaquinoxaline
rodenticides,newer forms of thehydroxycoumarins
Figure14.3l:Common anticoagulantrodenticides.
were created,which bypassed thc rodentsmecha
*Enquiries for dog and catexposuresmade to theVeterinary
nisms of resistance.These newer anticoagulants arc
PoisonsInformationService(London)between 1994and
known as second generation rodenticides and includc
1996(A Campbell,personal communication).Themost
commonly encounteredrodenticideswere bromadioioneand
products such as brodifacoum (Figure 14.30),
difenacoumfollowedby,indescendingorderoffrequency
difenacoum and bromadiolone Mount andFeldman,
coumaterralyl,chiorphacinone,warfarin,brodifacoum
1982:Green and Thomas,1995).Figure 14.31 su-
diphacinone anddicoumarin.
246 Manual of Canine and Feline Haeimatology and Transfusion Medicine
 First generation rodenticides, particularly those in
CLINICAL SIGNS OF
the hydroxycoumarin group, are generally less potent
ANTICOAGULANT RODENTICIDE
than seconrl gcncration rodenticides. Multiple inges-
TOXICITY
 tions of first generation rodenticides over a period of
time are usually considered necessary to cause a
 The clinical signs of poisoning with anticoagulant
coagulopathy, although a single exposure to a massive
rodenticides are typical ofthose associated with defec-
rlosc (c.g. ingcstion of the contents of a full contaier of
tive secondary haemostasis (see Chapter 13). Poisoned
toxin) may be enough to cause bleeding, especially ifthc
toxin is an indandione. Clinical signs of toxicity are
haemorrhage into body cavilics (Mount et al., 1986).
unlikcly to develop until at least 4-5 days after ingestion
Commonly reported sites of major haemorrhage in-
of a fist generation hydruxycoumarin (Forhcs et al.,
clude the pleural cavity (Figure 14.32), the media-
Xep suo se a se anooo Aeu speag yonoe "(ei61
stinum, the pericardium, thc ahdominal cavity (Figure
aflcr massive exposure to some members of the
14.33) and the joints (Forbes et al., 1973; Schulman et
 -od Aepuosos (9861 ^m 1 unow dno13 suopuepu
al., 1986; Berry et al., 1993; Lewis et al., 1997; Petrus
 soning from ingestion of poisoned rodents is unlikely to
and Henik, 1999). Palicnis are often in hypovolaenic
：
occur with the less potent first generation rodenticides.
shock secondary to acute blood loss and, if they sur-
Warfarin, the prototype fist gcncration hydroxycou-
vive the initial episode of haerorrhage, will develop a
marin, has a half-life of a little over 12 hours and, oncc
typical blood loss anaemia (Sheafor and Couto, 1999;
exposure is discontinued, toxicity is unlikely to persist
see Chapter 3). Aculc severe dyspnoea secondary to
for more than a week (Mount et al., 1986). By contrast,
haemothorax, haemomediastinum and pulimonary
the indanediones generally have a half-lifc of 4-5 days.
parenchymal haemorrhage is conumon (Mount et al.,
 and toxicity may therefore potentially persist for over a
1986; Berry et al., 1993; Lcwis et al., 1997; Sheafor
month after ingestion of the poison (Mount etal., 1986;
and Couto, 1999). The development of large subcuta-
Schulman et al., 1986; Mount and Kass, 1989).
 lleous or intramuscular haematomas is often reported,
Second generation hydroxycoumarins such as
either spontancously or sccondary lo such simple pro-
brodifacoum are, in contrast to their first generation
cedures as the collection of blood samples antd intra-
cousins, highly potent. A single rlosc of brorlifacoum 
 muscular injections (Mount et al., 1986; Schulman et
can cause bleeding within a day of ingestion, and the
αal., 1986; Woody et al., 1992; Pctcrson and Streeter,
 toxin can persist in an animal's system for up to a month
1996; Sheafor and Couto, 1999). Frequently, there
(Mounl el al., 1986; Woody et al., 1992). Secondary
 o  j sis   o 
 poisoning is feasible (Mount, 1988). Over the pasl 10
 gastrointestinal, respiratory and genitourinary tracts,
years the use of second generation rodenticides has grown
including oral bleeding, haematcmcsis, melaena,
noliccably, and rcported poisonings of dogs and cats have
haemoptysis, epistaxis, haematuria and vaginal of
correspondingly increased (Wooly et al., 1992; Berry et
preputial bleeding (Berry et al., 1993; Padgett et al.,
al., 1993; Peterson and Streeter, 1996; Lewis etal., 1997).
1998; Sheafor and Couto, 1999). Culancous braising
Churrcnlly, most of the calls received by the London VPIS
and ocular haemorrhage (conjunctivaland scleral bruis-
 are enquiries about poisoning with second generation
ing, hyphaerma) may be observed. Clinical signs can
rodenticides (A Campbell, personal communication).
frequently be diagnostically challenging. Paticnts
Sulphaquinoxalinc, a coccidiostatie sulphonamide
often present either with no external signs of haermor-
used in the poultry industry, caused a serious
rhage despite having eithier acute life-threatening dys-
coagulopathy in several dogs that ingested treated
drinking water (Neer and Savant, 1992). Like the anti-
coagulant rotlenticides, sulphaquinoxaline is a potent
inhibitor of the vitamin K epoxide reductase enzyme.
The toxic effects of sulphaquinoxaline persist for less
than a week after ingestion. Bccausc of isanticoagulant
 properties, sulphaquinoxaline has been incorporated
into several rodenticides (Mount et al., 1986).
The potent anticoagulant propcrics of the inhibi-
tors of the vitamin K-enzyme complex are not neces-
sarily undesirable in some clinical circumstances.
Numerous hydroxycoumarins and indancdioncs are
used as anticoagulants in humau. medicine, and in
veterinary medicine the carefully controlled and moni-
tored use of warfarin in cats and dogs has been recom-
mended forthc prcvcntion anel lrcatment of thronbotic
conditions such as aortic or pulmonary thromboembo-
Figure 14.32: Severe haemothorax in a Germun Shepherd
lism (Beasley and Buck, 1983).
Dog that ingested brodifacoun several days earlier.
Anticoagulant Rodenticides  247
 pnoea or lypovolaemic shock, or with unexpected
manifestations lhal reflect a hidden site of haemor-
rhage, such as coughing (pulmonary, mediastinal,
tracheal or laryngeal haemorrhage), lamcness (blced-
ing into joints or musclcs) or neurological abnormali-
ties (haemorrhagc in the central nervous systen)
(Peterson and Streeter, 1996).
 An understanding ofthe pathophysiological mecha-
nisms underlying poisoning with anticoagulant
 Todenticides would suggest that primary haemostasis
·
 should be intact, and therefore that petechial (pin
point) mucosal and culancous hacimorrhages should be
：
uncxpected findings. Indeed, although several review
 papers have stated that rodenticide poisoning could
cause petechial haemorrhagcs (Mount et al., 1986),
his lype of bleeding was not reported in several
clinical papers (Schulman er al., 1986; Berry et al.,
1993; Lewis et al., 1997: Sheafor and Couto, 1999).
 Interestingly, howevcr, several recent clinical papers 
have reported that a majority of dogs who presented
with poisoning with anticoagulant rodenticides had
 transient mild to marked thrormbocytopenia of un-
 dlctcrnined aeticlogy, although no patients exhibited
petechial haemorrhages (Berry et al., 1993; Lewis et
al., 1997; Sheafor annd Coulo, 1999).
Clinicians should always remember that, even in
：
b
ary to rodenticide poisoning, spontaneous bleeding
may 1ot as yet have occurred (Mount et al., 1986).
Toxicological trials have observed that despite having
 noticeably prolonged clotting times, some experimen-
 tal dogs displaycd minimal bleeding, probably be-
cause they had been cage rested (Mount and Kass,
1989; Woody et at., 1992). Even tlhe first blceeding
episode in a paticnt with defective secondary haemos-
tasis can be severe, acute and potentially fatal, there-
fore apparently healthy animals with suspecicd or
proved ingcstion of anticoagulants should always be
regarded at risk util diagnostic testing determines the
status of their coagulation cascade (Mounl, 1988:
Hammer and Couto, 1991).
:
DIAGNOSIS
(c)
 In those patients that have known access to anticoagu-
Figure I4.33: Diagnostic images fron a crossbred dog rhat
lant rodenticides and that present with thc clinical
 fo paydaus u a oi aasnoy v snn
signs classically associated with advanced
huemothorax shown in Figure 14.32. The crosshreed had aiso
coagulopathies (e.g. haematoma formation, haemo-
hud uccess to brodifacoum and presented withacute
thorax, haemoperitoneum), establishing a dliagmosis is
Irypovotaenic shock severat days after the German Shepherd
Dog wasliagnosed and treated.(a) Abdominatradiograps
usually siraightforward. Poisoned animals that do not
immediately succumb to hypovolaenmic shock develop
showed noticeabte abdominat futid distension wirht a loss of
normalradiographicdetait.(b)Abdominululrasonography
typical acute blood loss anaemia and hypoprotein-
confirmed thattheorgans were surrounded bya large anount
aenmia within a day of cominencing bleeding. The
offree abxdoninal fluid, whici was presumed to be biood.
 anacmia becomes regenerative (characterized by ani-
(c) Thoracic radiographs showed onty mitd pleural and
socytosis, polychromasia and reticulocytosis) about 5
puimonary parenchynal haemorrhage. Final diagnosis was
profoudaemopertnendmidpleuratandpnonary
days later (Mountet αl., 1986; Berry et al., 1993). Even
haemorrhage secondary to hrodifacou poisoning.
if cxtcrmal haemorrhage is not evident, careful history
 248  Manual of Canine antl Feline Hacmatology and Transfusion Medicine
taking and physical examinationusually enables locali-
zation of sitcs of internal bleeding. Dyspnoea due to
nent of the extrinsic pathway, the OsPT may become
bleeding into the spaces and structurcs within tle
 prolonged before the ACT and APTT in early or mild
thoracic cavity is particularly common. Thoracic ra-
cases of toxicity (Mount et ail., 1986; Mount and Kass,
diographs frequently show abnormalities such as pleu-
1989; Woody et al., 1992). In most patients witlh.
ral effusion due to haemothorax, an increase in
obvious toxicity, however, all three tests of coagula-
mediastinal soft tissue opacity tlue to haemomedia-
tion will be noticeably prolonged.
 stinum, patchy generalized mixed alveolar/interstitial
 Combined prolongalion of the OSPT, ACT and
cpacities caused by pulmonary parenchymal haemor-
APTT is not unique to poisoning with anticoagulant
rhage and narowing of the trachcal juncn dac to
rodenticides. It can occur in other conditions that cause
1
extratracheal and intratracheal bleeding (Berry et al..
vitamin K tlefieicncy (e.g. biliary obstruction, severe
1993; Sheafor and Couto, 1999). Abdominal radio.
intestinal malabsorption) and ini processes that lead to
graphs may show abdorninal listension and loss ofsoff
either a failure of production of multiple clotting
tissue detail due to haemoperitoneum (Sheafor and
factors (scverc livcr failure) or a generalized acceler-
Couto, 1999). Additional diagnostic tests that may be
ated consumption of factors (disseminated intravascu-
Beeded tu confirm and localizc internal blceding in-
lar coagulation). Far less frequently, a combined
clude abdominal,thoracicand cardiac ultrasonography
prolongalio1 of thc coagulation tests occurs due to
and aspiration of fluid from suspected haematomas,
congenital leficienciesof citherasingle clotting factor
swollen joints and the pleural, pericardial and/or
within the common pathway or multiple factors within
abdominal spaces. Clinicians should, however, be
both the intrinsic and extrinsic pathways, or due to the
aware that the aspiration of blood from a body cavity
presence of a circulaling inhibior of coagalation such
that fails to clot should never be considered proof of a
as heparin. Isolated prolongation of the OSPT alone is
coagulopathy. In paticnts with normal hacnostasis
highly suggestive of early or mild poisoning with
with an episode of internal haemorrhage (post trau-
anticoagulan rodenticides, althongha congenital defi-
 atic, for example), blood that has remained within a
ciency of factor VlI (a condition that is rare and often
bocy cavity for a significannl lime will havc clotted and
subclinical) could cause the same haemostatic abnor-
the resultant clot will have been dissolved by thie
mality. Most. of the conditions thal can mimic the
fibrinolytic systen. Since most of the platelets and
haemostatic abnormalities caused by the anticoagulant
clotting factors within the cavity will have been con-
rodenticides can be excluded by thorough history
sumed by this process, bluod collecled by paracentesis
laking. physical exammination and simple diagnostic
will fail to clot.
tests including haematology, scrun biochemistry.
Animals that have ingested toxic amounts of anti-
thoracic and abdominal radiography and, if indicated,
coagulant rodenticide can often scen lo be clinically
liver function tests. A more complete haenatological
normal for several days before bleeding commences.
and haemostatic profileshould enableidentificalion of
 Prompt and specific diagnostic evaluation of the clot-
disserminated intravascular coagulation (see Chapter
ting cascade is always indicated in any clog or cat. thaf
14v). which often causes 1microangiopathic haemo-
may have ingested an anticoagulant, including the
lytic anaemia (recoguized as schistocytes on a blood
apparently healthy companions of animals tlhat are
 smear), thrombocytopenia, hypofibrinogenaemia and
already showing clinical signs uf toxicity. Evaluation
incrcased concentrations of fibri1 degradation prod-
of haemostasis is similarly indicated in those animals
ucts.
Clinicians should reinember, however, thal
that present with clinical signs consistent with roden-
 rodenticides can themselves cause thrombocytopenia,
ticide poisoning, even if the owners cannot readily
due to unknown causes.
identify a source of the toxin.
Responsc to trcatment with vitamin K should dif.
Standard screening tests of secondary haemostasis
ferentiate coagulopathies due to a deficiency of func-
(sec Chaplcr 10) thal should be performed in all
tional vitamin K fron other disorders of haemostasis
(Forhes et cal., 1973; Mount et al., 1986). Poisoning
rodenticides include the activated clotting time (ACT),
with anticoagulant rodenticides responds to the appro-
which can be pcrformed simply and rapidly in house,
priate oral or parenteral doses of vitamin K, whereas
the activated partial thromboplastin tine (APTT) and
vitamin K deficicncy caused by poor intestinal absorp-
the one-stage prothrombin time (OsPT). Since the
tion of the vitamin may only respond well to drugs
vilainin K-rlependenl clotting factors are involved in
given parenterally. Samples for evaluation of haemo-
all of the major coagulation pathways, severe rodenti-
stasis should always bc colleclcd before commence-
cide poisoning usually causes prolongation of the
ment of treatment, ankd treatmenl can thcn bc slarlcdl
OSPT (which tests the extrinsic and common path-
before the results are obtained. An ACT, which is
ways) and thc ACT and APTT (which icst thc intrinsic
almost invariably prolonged in animals actively bleed-
and common pathways) (Schulman et al., 1986; Berry
ing from rodenticile poisoning, can always bc per-
et al., 1993; Lewis cr al., 1997). Factor V11l is the
formed rapidly in practice and treatment commenced
viftamin K-dependent clotting factor with thc shoriesl
before laboratory evaluation of OSPT and APTT.
Anticoagulant Rodenticides  249
More spccialized tesis can establish a specifie rliag-
Vitamin K, (phytonadlione, phylloyuinone or
nosis of poisoning with anticoagulant rodenticide even
phytomenacdione) is the formulation of choice for
if a source of the toxin can not be identified. ln
treating anticoagulant poisoning (Beasley and Buck,
silualions of vitamin K deficiency of any causc, the
1983; Mount et al., 1986; Hammer and Couto, 1991).
non-functional vitamin K-dependent clotting factors
Vitamin K; (menadione or menophthone), although
build up in hepatocytes and 'spill over' into the circu-
much cheaper than vitamin K, is also much less effec-
lation. These non-functional factors are known as
 tive and should therefore never be used as a substitute
PIVKA or proteins induced by vitamin K absence, and
for vitamin K, (Beasley and Buck, I983; Mount and
are only detectable in thie serum of patients with
Feldman, 1982; Schulman et al., 1986; Hammer and
vitamin K deficiency. Measurenient of PiVKA may be
Couto, 1991). Treatiment of severely affected patients
available in some specialist centres, and the assay is
usually commences with the parenteral (subcutane-
considered to be even more sensitive than the OSPT for
ous) arlininistratiou of vitamin Kq, whicl is then
detecting ea1ly poisonings (Mount, 1986). Alterna-
tively, researchers have shown that once vitamin K is
Feldman, 1982). Vitamin K, should never be given
given to an animal with anticoagulant todenticike
intravenously as this route can causc an anaphylactic
toxicity, large amounts of the epoxide form of vitamin
reaction (Mount and Feldman, 1982; Schulman et al.
K are produced in the hepatocytes as the active
1986). Even in life-tlhreatening emergencies, intra-
hydroquinone form of the vitamin is used to regenerate
venous administration of the vitamin does not signifi-
essential functional clotting factors. The epoxide then
cantly hasten recovery as the aniunal still mecds time to
'spills over' into the circulation as the ongoing inhibi-
regenerate functional clotting factors. Although intra-
lion of the vitamin K epoxide reductase enzyme by the
muscular administration of vitamin K is recommended
toxin prevents metabolism of this inactive forn of
by somne clinicians, it is associatcdl with an increaserl
vitamin K (Mount and Kass, 1989). A surge in serum
risk of haematoma formation (Hammer and Couto,
conccntraticns of vitamin K epoxide 4 to 8 hours after
1991). Altlhough most clinicians switch to oral vitamin
the administration of vitamin K therefore specifically
K, within a dlay or two of commcncing trcalincn,
confirms a diagnosis of poisoning withi anticoagulant
 subcutaneous therapy can be continued if the oralform
Iodenlicide. To date, however, measurement of vita-
of the vitamin is not readily available or if there are
min K epoxide has only been available as a research
concerns regarding the efficacy of imtcstinal absorp-
tool. Finally, specialist toxicology laboratories may on
tion of vitamin K (infiltrative bowel disease or biliary
request assay to detect the presence of specific anti-
obstruction, for example) (Mount, 1988; Hammer
coagulants in stomach contcnts, unclotted blood, urine
and Couto, 1991). Oral vitamin K is best given with
or tissues such as the liver or kidney (Beasley and
a fatty meal to facilitate intestinal uptake (Hanuer
Buck, 1983; Mount etal., 1986; Mount, 1988; Dorman,
and Couto, 1991).
1990; Poppenga and Brascllon, 1990; Woody et al.,
The standard vitamin K, dosage recommended fof
1992; Green and Thomas, 1995; Peterson and Streeter,
the treatment of poisoning with first generation
1996; Robben et al., 1998).
hydroxycoumarin rodenticides is a loading dose of 5
mg/kg s.c. (often given at multiple sites) followed 12
hours later by an ongoing maintenance reginen of 2.5
TREATMENT
mg/kg s.c. ororally given as a twice daily divided dose
for one week (Mount et al., 1986; Hammer and Couto,
Vitamin K
199 1). The same dosing regimen is recommended for
Since vitamin K is a specific and highly effective
animals exposed to the indanediones or second genera-
antidote for inhibitors of the vitamin K-enzyne con-
tion hydroxycoumarins, but the maintenance regimen
plex, administration of vitanin K is the mainstay of
is continucd for 2 to 3 weeks and an OSPT is re-
treatment of poisoning with anticoagulant rodenticides.
evaluated 2 days after therapy is discontinued (Mount
Coagulation parameters return to normal within one or 
et al., 1986; Hammer and Couto, 1991). Maintenance
at most two days of the commencement uf appropriale
hcrapy is continued for two further weeks if thie OSPT
doses of vitamin K (Hammer and Couto, 1991; Woody
is still prolonged (Hammer and Couto, 1991). Moni-
et αal., 1992) and remain within normal limits provided
toring of therapeutic response by measurement of an
that the vitamin is given for as long as the toxin is
ACT, which can be cheaply performcd in house, is less
within the patient's system. Since the first generation
desirable because the test is less sensitive than thie
hydroxycoumarins such as warfarin have a half-life of
less than a day and arc thcreforc rapidly clcared from
(Mount er al., 1986). The ACT must therefore be
the body, treatinent for more than a week is rarely
pcrformcd at lcasl 4 days after disconinuing vitamin K
necessary. By contrast, animals poisoned with the
(Mount, 1988).
more potent and longcr-acting indanediones and sec-
Vitamin K therapy of too inadequate a dosage or
ond generation hydroxycoumarins may require treat-
dluration to trcat the more potent forms of anticoagu-
ment for many weeks.
lant rodenticide effectively is a major cause of unex-
250Manual of Canine and FelineHaematology and TransfusionMedicine
pected morbidities and mortalities.For this reason,
In patients with confirmed anticoagulant toxicity,
some cliniciansrecommend that,if costisnotamajor
issue and owner compliance cannot be absolutely
and avoidance of unnecessary venepuncture,cath
guaranteed, adouble dose’maintenance regimen of
ctcrization,surgcry and other potentially traumatic
vitaminK,(5mg/kgsplit twice daily) should begiven
proccdurcs until vitamin K (with or without trans-
to those patients poisoned by the more potent
fusion) corrects haemostatic defects.Patients with
rodenticides (Mount and Feldman,1982;Robben et
acute hypovolaemic shockmay require intravenous
al.,1998).Onccxpcrimcntalstuy,howcver,hasshown
isotonic crystalloids,hypertonic salinebovine oly-
that although this higher dose is well tolerated in most
merized haemoglobin or whole blood,whereas dys-
dogs,individual animalsmay develop a Heinzbody
pnoeic animals may need oxygen supplementation
haemolytic anaemia(Fernandez et al.,1984).When-
(Mount et al.,1986;Green andThomas1995）.Thra
everowners donotwishtorepeattesthaemostasisto
peutic thoracocentesisisindicated inanimalswithsevere
monitor response to therapy,vitamin K,should be
dyspnoea dueto haemothorax,and pericardiocentesisis
given for atleast3weeks,and the animalshould then
indicatedinpatientswith cardiac tamponade due to
be strictlyrcsted for a further weck aficr trcatinent is
hacmopericardium(Mountetal.,1986;Schulmanet al.,
discontinued (Mount et al.,1986).Patients should be
1986;Hammer and Couto, 1991;Petrus and Henik
treatedforsuspectedpoisoningwithapotent anticoagu-
1999).Aspiration ofbloodfrom bodycavitiesshould,
lant if the sourceof the toxincannot be identified.
however, be avoided unless absolutely necessary,
because of the associated risk of traumatically precipi-
Transfusion
tatingfurtherhaemorrhage(Mountetal.,1986;Schulman
However promptly vitamin K therapy is commeneed
etal.,1986;Green and Thomas,1995).Aspirated blood
in a patient poisoned with anticoagulant rodenticide,
can be used for emergency autotransfusion in animals
functional clotting factors may notbe generated for
with acute severe blood loss (Figure 14.34).It should be
one oreven two days(Schulmanet al.,1986;Hammer
remembered,however,that the autotransfused blood
and Couto,1991;Peterson and Strcclcr,1996).
willnot providefunctionalvitaminK-dcpendent clot-
Severely affected patients can therefore rapidly suc-
ting factors.Autotransfusions should always be pro-
cumbtolife-threateninghaemorrhage despitereceiv
vided through anin-linefilter to removemicrothrombi
ing vitamin K. In these paticnts, functional clotting
(Green and Thomas,1995).
factors must be provided by transfusion to ensure
survival overthefirst day of treatment withvitaminK.
Comparedwithmany of theotherclotting factors,thc
vitaminK-dependent factors arerelatively stablewith
storage.They are still viablein plasma extractedfrom
refrigeratedwholeblood stored understandard condi-
tions for at lcast a month (Stone and Cottcr,1992;see
Chapter 15).Missing clotting factors and red blood
cellsmay therefore be provided by either fresh or
storcdwhole blood if paticnts prcscnt with hypovol-
aemic shockoracuteblood loss anaemia,andvitamin
K-dependent factors alone may be provided by any of
thc standard plasma proructs (fresh,stored, frozen or
fresh frozen plasma)if the patient does notrequire
concurrent red cells (Mount and Feldman,1982;
Figure14.34:Autotransfusion ina dogwith severe
Schulman et al.,1986;Hammcr and Couto,1991).
haemothorax secondary to poisoningwithanticoagulant
rodenticide.Bloodisbeingaspiraledfromthethoracic
cavity and colleted into muliple large syringes.The
Other
contenis ofthesyringes are thengivenintravenouslyinto
Induction ofemesis or gastric lavage toremove gastric
the samepatient throughanin-linefilter.Noanticoagulant
contents may prevent toxicity in animals with recent
is needed for this process.
suspected or confirmed ingestion of rodenticides
(Mount et al.,1986;Schulman et al.,1986；Hammer
PROGNOSIS
and Couto,1991).These are,however,oflittleuseand
mayin fact precipitate gastrointestinal bleeding once
Provided that patientsdonot present inextremisorthat
the toxin has caused impairment of haemostasis.
bleedinghas not occurred ina location that could cause
Haemostatic function in animals with possible expo-
irreversible damage （the central nervous system,for
sure to toxinshould beregularly monitored,eitherby
example),poisoning with anticoagulant rodenticides
measurementof anACTor,preferably,anOPT,for
should be a readily treatablecondition.The unaccept
at leastone weekaftersuspectedexposure,andvilamin
ablyhighmortalityratesassociatcdwiththispoisoning
K therapy commenced if defects are detected.
probablyreflect delays in obtaining acorrect diagnosis
Anticoagulant Rodenticides  251
 and failure to treat the condition aggressively enough.
Mount ME (1988) Diagnsis and herapy u anticoagulant 1oxenticide
Practitioners should therefore be aware of the typical
inluxication. Vererinary Clinics ofNorth Awerica: Small Aninai
Practice 18, 115-130
clinical signs of defcctive sccondary hacmoslasis and
Mount ME and Fcldman BF (1982) Vitamin K and its therapeutic
 the diagnostic tests that are indicated in affected patients.
itnportance.JorrratoftheAnlericanVererinary MedicalAssociation
They should also be prepared to treat acute emergencies
180,1354-1356
Mount ME and Kass PH (1989) Diaguostie iwuuporlauce of vitamin K,
with blood products as well as vitamin K, and, in
and its epoxide measured in serum of dogs exposed to an
 animals exposed to sccond gcncration rodenticides, to
Anticcagulant odcnticide.AmericanJournatofVererinary Research
50, 1704-1709
 provide the vitamin for extended periods.
Momnt ME, Woody BF and Murphy MI (1986) Thc anticoagulan1
todenticides. In: Curren Vererinary Therapy IX: Smali Anined
Pracrice, ed. RW Kirk, pp. 156- 165. WB Saunnlers, Pliladelphia
Ncer TM and Savant RL (1992) Hypoproturoubinenia secondary to
adtministration of sulfaquinoxaiine to dogs inl a kennel seting.
REFERENCES
Jownei of the Americn Veterinary MedicaiAssociation 200,
1344-1345
Beasley VR and Buck WB (1983) Warfarin and other antieoagukant
Padgel SL StokesJE, Tucker Rl. and Wheaton LG(1998)Hematomeira
poisonings. In: Currenr Veterinary Therapy Vill: Smait Anina!
seconclary to anticoagulant rorlenticide toxicity. Jormat of the
PradK010
AnericanAninai HospitalAssociation34,437-439
Berry CR, Galaway A. Thrall DE und Carlisle C (1993) Thoracic
Peterson I and Sirecter V (1996) Laryngeal obstruction sccondary to
radiographic lealures ofaaticoagulantrodcnticide foxicity in
brodifacoumtoxicosisinadog.JournaloftheAmericunVeterinury
fourieendogs.VeteruryRatiotogyandUrasod34391396
MedicalAssociation 208,352-355
Doruam DC (1990) Anticoagulant, cholecalciferol and bromethalin-
hased rodenticides. Vererinary Clinics of North America: Smeit
tampumde secondarylobrodifacnum toxicosisinadog.Jouraalof
Antmal Pracrice 20, 339-352
the Arerican Veterinary Medical Association 215,647-648
Fernandez FR, Davics AP, Tcachout DI, Kakc A, Christopher MM and
PenmanV(1984)VitaminK-inducedHeinzboxlyfoationindogs.
lahoratorics for the diagnosis of toxicologicul problems in small
Jourat of the Aerieu ArimalHospitalAssociatio 20,711-720
animalpactice.VeterinaryClinicsofNorthAnerie: Small Anima!
Forbes CD,Thunsou CPrentice CRM,MeNiol GPandMcEwaAD
Practice 20,293-306
(1973) Experimental warfarin poisoning in the clog. Journal of
Robben JH, Kuijpers EAPand Mout HCA (1998) Plasn superwarfarin
Conpararive Pathology 83, 173-180
lcvcls and vitamin K, trealueut in dogs with anticoagulant
GreenRAand ThomasJS(1995)Hemostaticdisorders:coagulopathics
rodenticide poisoning.VeterinuryQuarterly20,24-27
anel threnbasisIn:Texbook ofVererinary nternaiMedicine,
edngranECFem9461963Sa
inacelcoaglopahyinthedog.JournioftheAmericanVererinary
Philadelphia
Medica! Association 188, 402-405
HanmerASandCoutoCG(1991)Disorlersofheuostasisandprinciples
Sheafar SE anti Coumo GC (1999) Anticoagulant rodenticide toxicity in
of transfusion therapy. In: Sma Anima Mexlicine, ed.DG Allen,
21 dogs..Jorrnai ofthe American Animat Hospirat Associarior35,
pp.173-194.JBLippincut, Pliladelpia
38-46
Lewis DC, Bruyele DS, Kelterman DL and Sinith SA (1997)
Thranhocytopeniainclogswitianticoagulantrodenticide-induccd
therapy.In: Currenr Vererinary Therapy Xi: Snalt Aninei Practice.
hemorhage: cight cases (1990-1995). Journa! of the American
ed. RW Kirk and JD Bonaguna, Dp. 475-479. WB Saunders,
Antimat ffospital Associariort 33, 417-422
Philadelphia
Mount ME (19B6) Proteins induccd by vinamin K abscnce orantagonists
Woody BI, Murphy MJ, Ray AC and Grcen RA (1992) Coagulopathic
(PIVKA'). In: Curren Veteringry Therapy IX: Snalt Antrd
effects and jherapy of brocdifacoum toxicosis in dogs. Journat of
Pracrice, cd. RW Kirk, pp. 513-515. WB Saulers, Philadelphia
Veterinary Yternal Medicine 6, 23-28
CHAPTER FOURTEEN
V
Disseminated Intravascular
Coagulation
Steven A. Holloway
INTRODUCTION
meshwork of fibrin strands develops, enmeshing
red cells and adherent platelets and forming a stable
Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) is a
clot. The clotting mechanism is triggcred by injury
serious complicating event in the pathophysiology of
to blood vessels and involves the coordinated inter-
nany diseases. Reported death rates in fulminant
action of over 20 different proteins in the clotting
DIC arc high, and the diagnosis of DIC has oftenl
cascade. The end result of this process is the genera-
been regarded as forecasting the death of the patient.
tion of active thrombin and the formation of fibrin.
So nuch has the catastrophic nature of DIC been
 Injury to the vessel wall causes platelet aggregation
cmphasized that DIC is often regarded as an indi-
and provides a specialized surface that initiates and
vidual disease, without proper consideration of the
localizes the clotting mechanism. Although the
initiating illness. DlC should be regarded as a
arrest of bleeding after injury is initiated within a
mcchanism of diseasc secondary to other severe
few seconds, it is not complete for several hours and
clinical disorders.
is limited to the site of injury by the anticoagulation
For many clinicians, DIC is a confusing disorder.
system. In the context of preventing DIC, the limita-
Much of the confusion stems from the fact that many
tionn of thie clotting mechhanism to the active site of
of the diseases causing DIC vary in severity and
injury is important. Once generated, thrombin has
prognosis, the clinical signs are variable, there isa lack
powerful prcteolytic properties, accelerating the
of consensus regarding the appropriate laboratory tests
formation of activated clotting factors including
lo confirn a diagnosis and thcrc is varicd opinion
thrombin from prothrombin and causing the aggrega-
tion of platelets. Once a critical amount of thrombin
ter explains the pathogenesis of DIC and discusses the
is formed, a cycle develops that causes more clotting
clinical signs rclatcd 1o thc condition and iis laboratory
to occur and amplification of the coagulation
diagnosis and treatment.
cascade. This process would ultimately lead to DIC if
it were not for the presence of intravascular anti-
coagulants in the normal animal.
DISSEMINATED INTRAVASCULAR
COAGULATON
The anticoagulation system
The anticoagulation system represents the mechanism
Definition
whereby thc blood coagulation pathways are
Bick (1994) defined DIC as a systemic
downregulated. Once activated, the extent and control
thrombohaemerrhagic disorder found in association
of the clotting nechanism is limited by the relative
with well defined clinical sifuations and laboratury
local concentrations of activated coagulant and antico-
evidence of procoagulant activation, fibrinolytic acti-
 agulant proteins. Anticoagulant proteins include anti-
tlhrombin IHI (ATIH) and proteins C and S. ATIII is an
evidence of end-stage organ damage.
Q globulin that binds and inactivates serine proteases,
including thrombin (Figure 14.35). Complexes of A TIII
Pathophysiology of DIC: blood clotting
and protease are then removed by the mononuclear
mechanism
phagocyte systein (MPS). The antiprotcasc activily of
The homeostatic mechanisms that control bleeding
ATIH is enhanced by heparin and heparin-like sub-
after blood vessel injury involve the complex interac-
stances, and these are normally produced by perivas-
cular mast cells. About 80% of the total anticoagulant
It is convenient to view the process of blood clotting
cffcct of plasma comes from ATH, Additional plasma
as the generation of the powerful serine protease,
proteins, including α, antitrypsin and α, macroglobu-
thrombin (Figure 14.35). Thrombin cleaves the solu-
lin, also remove activated serine proteases from the
 ble plasma protein, fibrinogen, so that an insolublc
circulalion.
254Manual of Canine andFelineHaematology and TransfusionMedicine
Antigen-antibody
complexes may cause
XII
Endothelial
Exposed
damage
collagen
activate
Prekallikrcin
XIa
erts
KININS
Shock
Tissue damage
Kallikrein
converts-
Kininogens
BIX
XI
Endotoxins increase
activation
production of
X
Thromboplastin
ncreases
ATII
increases
Phospholipids
Red blood cell
Prothrombin
THROMBIN
orplatelet lysis
converts
Fibrinogen
Fibrin
monomer
Plasminogen
(FDPS
Fibrin
Antiplasmin
PLASMIN
ipolymer
Complement
inhibit
Platelet
inhibition&
consumption
Microthronbosis
End-stage
Haemorrhage
Organ failure
Figure14.35:Pathogenesis of disseminated intravascular coagulation.
ATIantithrombinII:DPsfbrinogendegradationproducts:XllaactivatedfactorXIl.
Oncethrombinisformedfromprothrombin,alarge
acts as an anticoagulant byinactivating the activated
amount of it is adsorbed to the newly generated fibrin
factorsV andVIIl.Another plasma protein,protein S.
strands and prevents dissemination of the clotting pro-
acts as a cofactorfor protein C.Finally,a major limita-
cess.Thrombomodulin,a proteinbound totheendothc-
tiontotheproccssofclottingistheremovaland dilution
lium,binds thrombin.The binding of thrombomodulin
of activated clotting factors by themicrocirculatory
with thrombin not only removes thrombin but the com-
flowof blood.The constant flow of blood past the site
plex so formed activates plasma protein C,which then
of activation of clotting removes activated clotting
Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation 255
factorsandfacilitatestheremovalofinhibitorprotease
by allowing the accumulation of activated clotting pro
complexesfrom the circulationby the MPS
teins and preventing the removal of activated clotting
factors by the MPS (Slappendel, 1988;Bick,1994).
Fibrinolysis
The final stage of the coagulation process is fibrino-
Aetiology
lysis.which is initiated by the action of thrombin
DIC occurs in association with a wide variety of
during clotting,together with therelease ofplasmino-
clinical entities.Figure 14.36 summarizes those
gen activators from the damaged blood vessel wall.
disordersmost commonly associated withDICin
These plasminogen activators convert plasminogen
small animals.
to the active forn,plasmin,which thcn digests the
fibrin clot. Plasmin protease inhibitors include
Neoplasia
αantitrypsin, tissue plasmin inhibitor (TPl) and
Thyroid carcinoma
0 macroglobulin.These rapidly inactivate any circu-
Mammary carcinoma
lating active serine protcases including thrombin
Haemangiosarcoma (see Figure 14.37)
and plasmin (Figure 14.35).
Lymphoma
Myeloproliferative discases
Activation of thecoagulationsystem
The pathophysiology of DIC is shown in Figure
Inflammatory
14.35.Essentially there are three processes that
Pancreatitis
can initiate activation of the coagulation system:
Chronic active hepatitis
endothelial injury exposing subendothelial collagen,
Haemorrhagic gastroenteritis
which then activates factor Xll (Hageman factor)
Severe burns
and subsequently activatcs the intrinsic clotting sys-
Infectious
tem: rclease of tissuc thromboplastin from damaged
Bacterial sepsis
tissue,which activates the extrinsic clotting system;
Aflatoxicosis
and mechanisms involving the direct release of
Canine infectious hepatitis (canine adenovirus 1
procoagulants into thc cireulation causing activation
infection)
of the clotting cascade. This includes substances
Leptospirosis
suchassnakevenoms andphospholipidsfromdam-
Canine parvovirus infection
aged red cells.
 Feline infectious peritonitis
DiCoccurs when theclotting mechanism becomes
Canine babesiosis (Babesia canis)
activated widely throughout the circulation.This
Canine ehrlichiosis (Ehrlichia canis)
widespread activalion of the coagulation systcm
 Rocky Mountain spotied fever (Rickettsia spp.)
consumes the essential protease inhibitors,allowing
Canine angiostrongylosis
thrombin and plasmin to circulate systemically.
Canine heartworm disease
Circulating thrombin may then generate fibrin
monomers from fibrinogen and these are polymer-
Immune mediated
ized toformfibrinin the circulation.The deposition
Immune-mediated hacmolytic anaemia
offibrin in the microcirculation in turn entraps
Glomerulonephritis
platelets and leads tovascularthrombosis,ischaemia
Systemic lupus erythematosus
and end-stage organ failure.
Other
The systcmic circulation of plasmin causes cleav-
Heat stroke
age of fibrin into fibrinogen degradation products
Tumour lysis syndrome
(FDPs).Circulating FDPs may then interfere with
Vcnommous snakc bite
fibrin monomer polymerization. FDPs may also bind
Shock
toplateletmembrancs and inducc aplateletfunction
Cardiac failure
defect that further contributes to haemorrhage (Bick,
Severe trauma
1994).Additionally,circulating plasmin activates the
Figure14.36:Common clinical disorders associatedwith
complement cascadc,causingredcellandplateletlysis
disseminatedintravascularcoagulationinsmall animals.
and the release of additionalprocoagulant substances.
Furthcrmore,activation of the complement system
increasesvascular permeability,contributing tohyo-
Clinical signs
tension and shock and further activation of factor XIl.
DICoccurs with a variety of discases,and depending
Activated factor Xll contributes to the generation of
on the interplay of the processes of coagulation and
circulating kinins (including bradykinin) and subse-
fibrinolysis,clinical signs are related to haemorrhage
quently increasedvascular permeability,hypotension
orthrombosis（Grecn,1981;Grcene,1983;Bick,1994).
and shock.Shock promotes microcirculatory or ve-
Depending on the extent,severity and speed
nous stasis,which further promotes microthrombosis
ofonset of the initiating disease,DICmay have vari
256Manual of Canine and FelineHaematology andTransfusion Medicine
able clinical signs ranging from an acute fulminant
Diagnosis
process to a chronic low grade process.Severe fulmi-
A presumptive diagnosis of DIC should be considered
nantDICis characterized by generalized bleeding
when:
frombodyorifices,mucosal petechiaeorecchymoses
andhaematuriaAdlitionallyorganfailurefrcqunly
Clinical signs of a bleeding disorder are
occurs after obstruction of themicrocirculation by
apparent
fibrin thrombi.In particular,acute oliguric renal fail
Clinical signs relating tomultiple organ failure
ure,dynoea,bloodyvomiusdiarrhoea and coma
developafteraninitialproblempredisposingtoDIC,
are frequent clinical signs in DIC.It is important for
forexamplc,gastricdilation-volvulus,heatstroke,
the clinician torealize thathaemorrhage occurs as a
sepsis,pancreatitis,chemotherapy forneoplasia
late event in the pathogenesis of DIC. Severe DIC
An initial problem predisposing toDIC exists
maymanifest as organfailure before serious haemor-
and laboratory evidence of coagulation
rhage develops. For example,a patient with heat
abnormalities are present,for example,
strokemay develop oliguricrenal failure andrespira-
thrombocytopenia or prolonged coagulation
tory distressresultingfrommicrothrombosisin these
tests.A useful in-house screening test for
organs before the onset of haemorrhage.Laboratory
detecting abnormalitics in the intrinsic and
testsmay confirm the presence ofDiCbefore the
common clotting pathway factors is the
onset of haemorrhagc.
activated clotting time (ACT) (Figure 14.38).
In contrast,chronic DICmay be associated with
minimalclinical signs,orsignsrelatedtomicrocircu
Figure 14.38:
latory thrormbosis may occur and an increasing
Activated clottingtest
bleeding tendency may be seen. As would be
(ACT).Measurement
expected,chronic DIC is often noted in diseases
of clotting by the ACT
characterized by a protracted course of tissue or
provides a useful in-
endothelial damage, such as malignant mctastatic
house screening test
for the presumptive
or autoimmune disease (Figure 14.37).In these
diagnosis of
cases abnormal coagulation may be detected,but
disseminated
clinical signsmay be mild or inapparent because
intravascular
of a compensatory increase in the production of
coagulation(DIC).
platelets and clotting factors.In such instances low
Wholebloodis added
toatubeand thetubeinvertedandplacedinawaterbath
grade consumption of platelets and clotting factors
at37℃.Every15secondsthetubeisinvertedandinspected
may occur,predisposing to potentially disastrous
for the presence of a clot.The time takento clotisthe ACT.
bleeding complications aftersurgery.Similarly,after
Prolongation of the ACT(>120 seconds in dogs and >90
the treatment of largcvolume tumourswith chemo-
secondsincats)shouldalerttheclinicianto thepassibiliry
therapeutic agents,the destruction of large amounts
ofDIC.
of tumour and release of procoagulants may contrib-
ute to the progression from chronic DiC to acute
The definitive diagnosis of DIC should include at
fulminant DIC.
least three of the following:
Moderate to severe thrombocytopenia (<100.000
x 10°platelets/1)
Prolongation of the activated partial
thromboplastin time (APTT) and prothrombin
time(PT) togreater than 25%of control pooled
normalplasma
ReductionofATIIIby60%orless
Inerease inFDPs togreater than 1:10 dilution
(Figure 14.39)
Detectionofincreased concentrations offibrin
monomers.
Other supportive evidence mayinclude:
Hypofibrinogenaemia
The presence of fragmented red blood cells,such
Figure14.37:Disseminatedmetastatichaemangiosarcoma
as schistocytcs, in blood smcars (Figure 14.40)
inthethoraxofadogwithdisseminatedintravascular
The presence histologically of fibrin
coagulation(DIC).Many animals with disseminated
malignancies havelaboratory evidenceof subacute or
microthrombi,particularlyinvolvingthe
chronicDiC,whichmayormaynotbeclinicallymanifested.
capillary and venous circulations.
DisseminatedIntravascular Coagulation257
Theabovecriteriahavebeen adaptedfromFeldman
et al.(1981),Green (1981),Greene (1983) and Bick
(1994).
Increases in conccntrations of circulating fibrin
monomers orFDPs should notby themselves be
considered diagnostic of DIC.Increased concentra-
tions of FDPs orfibrinmonomers occur in avariety
ofotherclinicalsituationsinhumanmedicineinclud-
ing pulmonary thromboembolism,haemolyticurae-
mic syndrome (HUS) and myocardial infarction.
Similarincreasesin concentrations of FDPs hasbeen
seen in caninepulmonary thromboembolismandin
Figure14.39:Thefibrindegradationproducts(FDPs or
renal diseaseresembling HUS in the dog(Holloway
FSPs) test isa semiquantitative slide agglutination test that
etal.1993).
usesrabbit anti-humanFDPantiserum.The testcan he used
Localizedintravascularcoagulation with platelet
indogs becauserabbit antiserum cross reacts with canine
and fibrinthrombusformation,thrombocytopenia and
FDPsbuthetestivesvariableresuttsicats.Theresuls
are scored (-4to +4) by comparing the extent of
coagulation factor deficiencies has been recognized in
agglutinationinthepatient'sbloodwithpositivecontrol
humans with giant cavcrnous haemangiomas,hae-
standards.Thepresence ofincreasedconcentrations ofFDPs
mangiosarcomas or disseminatedvascular malignan-
suggeststhepossibilityofDICbutshouldbeperfornedin
cies(Kasabach-Merritsyndrome)(Bick,1992).Similar
conjunctionwiththemeasurement ofcoagulationtimes anda
localizedconsumptivccoagulopathieshavebeendocu-
platelet count fora definitive diagnosis ofDIC.
mented in the dog and such animals may develop a
clinical pathology profile consistent with a diagnosis
of DIC (Rishniw and Lewis,1994).It is important to
realize that some dogs with skin tumours or vascular
tumours of internal organs may develop a severe
localized consumptive coagulopathy.Insuchcasesthe
differentiationofalocalizcdconsumptivecoagulopathy
from DICmust be based on clinical examination and
diagnosticimaging techniques.
It isimportant forthc clinician to maintain ahigh
index ofclinical suspicion that DICmay develop
secondarily in many severe medicalillnesses.In many
cases a presumptive diagnosis of DIC is often required
for effective treatment of DIC to be instituted.This
mayprecede all laboratory criteriabeingfulfilled that
Figure14.40:Schistocytes intheblood smear of a dogwith
wouldallowadefinitivediagnosisof DIC.Onthebasis
disseminatedintravascular coagulation.Fragmentationof
redcellmembranesbyfibrinstrandsinthemicrocirculation
ofthese aforementioned critcria,DICmaybedivided
occursfrequently inDiC.
into several categories (Figure 14.41).
Clinical signs
Laboratory findings
Acute fulminant DIC
Unexplained haemorrhage from three unrelated
Noticeably prolonged ACT, PT and PTT
body sites
Increased concentration of FDPs or fibrin monomers
Severe bleeding and end-stage organ failure
Noticeably decreased ATIlI concentration
Severe thrombocytopenia
Schistocytes present on blood smears
Acute DICwithout evidence of haemorrhage
Clinical signs related to end-stage organ failure
Noticeably prolonged ACT, PT and PTT
apparent, ineluding oliguria, dyspnoea, jaundice
Increased concentration of FDPs or fibrin monomers
Noticeably decreased ATIlI concentration
Severe thrombocytopenia
Schistocytes present on blood smcars
FigureI4.41:Clinicalstagingofdisseminatedintravascular coagulation(DIC).(continuedoverleaf)
ACT,activatedclottingtimePprothrombintime;PTT,partial thomboplastintimeATIlntithrombinI
Adapted fromBick(1994),Feldmanet al.(1981)andGreene(1983).
258Manual of Canine and FelineHaematology and TransfusionMedicine
Clinical signs
Laboratory findings
Subacute DIC
No clinical signs of severe haemorrhage or
Moderate to severe thrombocylopenia usually present
overt end-stage organ failure but petechial
Coagulation times (ACT, PT, PTT) may be normal,
haemorrhages may be evident on mucous
shortened or mildly prolonged
membranes
FDPs or fibrin monomers may be present
May be an increased tendency towards
ATIlI concentration may be normal or decreased
haemorrhage aftervenepuncture or trauma
Serial evaluation of coagulation profiles is strongly
recommended
Chronic DIC
Minimal clinical signs
Coagulation times (ACT, PT, PTT) may be normal,
mildly prolonged or shortened
Concentration of FDPs may be mildly increased
Platelet count may be normal or incrcascd
Figure14.41continued:Clinical staging of disseminated intravascular coagulation(DIC).
ACTatvatnTpminTTtbotlnomb.
Adapted from Bick(1994),Feldmanet al.(1981)and Greene(1983).
Treatment
andimproves the chancesof controllinglife
Aggressive and prompt treatment is always required
threatening thrombosis or haemorrhage. Factors
in the management of DIC. The most important
such ashypovolaemia,hypoxaemia,endotoxaemia
principle is toremove or inhibit the initiating disease
and acidaemia contribute to the development of
proccss. Removal of procoagulant stimuli signifi-
DIC,and these should be treated appropriately (Fig-
cantly reduces the intravascular clotting process
ure 14.42).
Principle of treatment
Action
Aetiology specific
Diagnose initiating disease and establish prognosis
Improvement ofmicrocirculatory flow
Volume expansion
Intravenous fluid replacement as required
Correct anaemia and hypoalbuminaemia with whole blood or plasma
transfusion
Colloidal volume expansion using Pentastarch (20 ml/kg/day)
Cardiac support
Dobutamine (5-10 μg/kg/min i.v. infusion)
Monitor electrocardiogram for arrhythmia
Rcnal support (if oliguric)
Dopamine (2-5 μg/kg/min i.v. infusion) and furosemide 2-5 mg /kg i.v.
Monitor fluid therapy, central venous pressure and urine output
Treatment of metabolic acidosis
Sodium bicarbonate as required
Treatment of hypoxia
Supplemental oxygen
Treatment of coagulopathy
Fulminant and acute DIC
Whole blood or fresh frozen plasma transfusions (Inay need to repeat
fresh frozen plasma several times to restore ATIlI concentration)
Heparin 50-100 IU/kg in first bag (incubate 30 minutes before
transfusion)
Heparin 250-500 IU/kg tid s.c.
Heparin 250-500 IU/kg tid s.c.
Monitor ATIL, PT, PTT if possible
SubacuteDIC
Heparin 75-150 IU/kg tid s.c.
Chronic DIC
Heparin 25-150 IU/kg tid s.c.
Figure14.42:Treatment of disseminated intravascular coagulation(DiC).
ATIlantithrombinIlPT,prothrombinime;PTT,partial thromboplastin time.
Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation  259
The second principle of trcating DIC is to linit
rapirl legradlation of coagulation factors, particularly
the intravascular clotting process. Again, failure to
fibrinogen, by plasmin. The subsequent generation of
remove or lessen the initiating disease will almost
FDPs may further exacerbate hacmorrhage, and the
 always be associated with the evcntual failure of
formation of fibrin thrombi further compromises the
factor replaccment or anticoagulant therapy
to
microvascular circulation. In humans with DlC the
alleviate DIC. A logical approach to the treatment
administration of ATIl concentrates has proved an
 of DIC is to individualize treatment options after
effective method of restoring ATIll concentrations i
assessment of the severity of clinical signs and
 patients with fulminant DIC, without adding compo-
laboratory abnormalities in the patient (Figure
nents that may potentially worsen the condition. Un-
14.42). Foremost, the primary disease must be diag-
fortunately, ATIH concentrates for animals are not
nosed and treated promptly. If treatmcnt for the
currently available to veterinarians. Although no stud-
initiating dliscase is likely to be protracted or if
ies have been performed, the use of cryosupernatant
the intravascular clotting process cannot be stopped
may be superior in fulminant DIC at restoring ATIH
by treatment of the primary disease, then the intravas-
without providing fibrinogen. If the patient continues
to haemorrhage, repeated plasma or possibly
 should bear in mind that thrombosis, and not haemor-
cryosupermatant infusions shhould be given. Usually if
rhage, is more often the process that lias a major effect
oln mortality in DIC. Thromboses develop in small
ucd hacmorrhage, lespite therapy for the underlying
vessels and usually manifest as progressive end-stage
disease and rational therapy for DIC, is likely to be
organ failure. In this context the use of heparin to
associated with a poor prognosis and reflects failure to
 reduce the process of intravascular coagulation is
control the unrlerlying rlisease process.
 logical. Subcutaneous heparin is given to most patients
with DIC, the dosage based on an assessment of the
severity of the condition (Figures 14.41 and 14.42).
REFERENCES AND FURTHER
The use of subcutaneous low dose heparin provides
READING
the advantage of ease of administration and avoids
the potential complications associated with rapid
Aronsohn M (1985) Cardiae hemangiosarcona in the dog: a review of
increases and decreases in blood heparin concentra-
38 cascs.Journal ofthe American Vererinary Medicat Associariont
 tions associated with intravenous heparin therapy.
187,922-926
Bick RL (1992) Coagulation abnonnalities in maligmaney a review.
Furthermore, clinical data from hunans with DIC
Seninars in Thramhosis and Henostasis 18,353-372
Bick RL (1994) Disseminaterd intravascnlar coagulation. Ohjective 
suggest that low dose sulcutancous heparin is more
criteria for diagnosis and managetment. Medical Clinics of Norrh
effective than larger doses of intravenous heparin
America 78, 511-543
Brooks MB, Matus RE, Lcifer CE and Paimaik AK (1987) Use of
(Bick, 1994).
splcncctomy in thc managcmcnt of lymphoina in dogs: I6 cascs
Much of the controversy surrounding thc trcat-
(1976-1985). Journai of the American Vererinary Medical
ment of DIC concerns the use of factor replacement
Associion 191, 1008-1010
Burrows CF (1977) Canine henorthgic gastroeutenitis. Journui ofthe
and heparin anticoagulant therapy. To summarize
Amreriean Aniomt Hospiia! Association 13, 451-458
 the controversy, lneparin may make blecding worse
Felkdman BF, Madewell BR and O'Neill S (198l) Disseminated
intravascular coagulation: antithrombin, plasminogen, and
 and factor replaceiment may potentiate organ throm-
coagulation abnormalities in 4l dogs. Journal of the American
 bosis and the generation of FDPs. The author believes
Vererinary Medica! Associarion 179, 151-154
that if fuluninam DIC is prcsent, the patient should
Green RA (1981) HIemostasis and disorders of coagulation. Veterinary
Clinies of Norh Anerica: Smait Animai Practice 11, 289~319
be givcn factor replacement in the form of a whole
Greene CE (i975) Disseninated intravascutar coagulation in tle log:
blood or plasma transfusion. The use of heparin
a revicw.Jorrnat ofthe American Antnal Hospitet Associtior I L,
674-687
alone is likely to be minimally effective when ATIII
Greene CE (1983) Management of DIC and thromhosis. In: Curren
concentrations are severely reduced. The develop-
Veterinary Tierapy VI,ed. RWKirk, pp.401-405. WB Saunders.
 ment of haemorrhage in DIC suggests exhaustive
Philadelphia
Greene CE, Barsanli JA and JonesBD(1977) Disseminated intravascular
consumption of platelets, clotting factors and the
coagulationcomplicatingaflatoxicosisindogs. Cornell Veterinarian
Datural anticoagulants, particularly ATIII. In this
67,29-49
Humner AS, Couto CG, Swardson C and Gctzy D (1y91) Hcmostatic
:
situation transfusion of fresh frozen plasma or fresh
alnormalitiesindugswilheangisurwoa.JournalofVeterinary
blood is required to replace clotting factors and
fnterna! Medicine 5, 11--14
 ATII. Heparin may then be given to prevent the
Hargis AM and Feldman BF (199l) Fvaluation of henostatic tefects
sccondarytovaseulartumrsindogs: 1lcases(1983-t988).Jorrt
：
consumption of the administered coagulation factors
of the American Veterinary Medical Aesociation 198, 891-894
and potentiate the effect of infuscd ATIII. Whole
Hollway SA (1992) IIeatstroke in dogs. Compendim of Conriming
:
 blood has the advantage of providing platelets,
Educarion 14, 1598-1604
Holloway SA, Senior DF, Roth L and Tisher CC (1993) Hemolytic
althcugh the platelet count is unlikely to be increased
uremie syndrome in dogs. Journul of Veterinary Interrat Medieine
7,220-227
by more than 10 to 30 x 10°/1for each 500 ml of blood
Kangsirom LE (1989) Snake bite (Vipera berus) in dogs and cats.
transfused in an average sized dog.
SvenskVeterinartidning 41,8-9
A potential problem associated with the use of
Millis DL, Hauptman JG and Fulron RI (1993) Ahnomal hemostatic
profiles and gastric necrosis in canine gastric dilatation-volvulus.
whole blood or plasma for factor replacement is the
Veterinary Surgery 22, 93~97
 260  Mamual of Canine and Feline Haematology and Transfusion Medicinc
Moorc DJ and Wiliatms MC (1979) Disseminated intravascular
Susaneck SJ, Allen TA, Ioopcs J, Withrow SJ aud Macy Dw (1983)
cougulation: acomplicatiouofBabesia canisinfetionin the dog.
lnflammatory mammary carcinoma in the dog, Jorrat of rhe
Anerican Animai Hospital Association 19,971-976
Rislmiw M and Lewis DC(1994) L.ocalizerl consumptive coagulopathy
Wcller RE, Theilen GH and Mudeweil BR (1982) Chemotherapeutic
associaled with cutaneons hemangiosarcoma in a dog. Jonrnai of
Tesponsesindogswithlymphosareomaandhypercalcemia.fowra!
rheAmericanAnimalHospitaiAssociation30,261-264
oflhe Americat Vererirary Medical Associotion 181, 891-B93
Slappendel RJ (1988) Disseiminatcd jntravascular cougulation.
Zenoble RID aned Galhlbert NH (1977) A possible case of dissciminatcd
Veterinary Clinics of North America: Snall Aninal Practice I,
intravascular coagulation and splenie lenungiosareorna. Canine
t81-691
Pracrice 4,52-55
1
PART THREE
Transfusion Medicine
.
:
CHAPTER FIFTEEN
Practical Blood Transfusion
Anthony Abrams-Ogg
INTRODUCTION
 Blooti derivatives are blood protein products pre-
pared by using biochenical methods (e.g. ethanol
Transfusion is defined as intravenous therapy with
extraction) to proccss large pools of clonor plasima.
whole blood or blood products. Whole blood rcfcrs to
Bloodl derivatives, which include albumin solutions.
blood that has not been separated inlo various protl-
intravenous immunoglobulins and specific factor con-
ucts. Historically, transfusion thierapy has relied on the
centrates, have had relatively limited use in veterinary
use of whole blood, and such use reniains the most
medicine comparcd with blood conponents, and most
practical means of giving a transfusion in many vcler
products used have been of human origin.
nary clinics.
 Transfusion may be more broadly defined to in-
 Blood products include blood coniponents and
 clude therapy with blood substitutes, which are pro-
blood derivatives. Blood components arc bloorl prorl-
duced by using biotechnological methods. Blood
 ss o uongs Aq rqa padrd sian
 substitutes include artificial colloids, oxygen trans-
monly, by apheresis. The most frequently used
porters, platelet substitutcs and human coagulation
components are packed red blood cclls (RBCs) and
 proteins produced by recombinant DNA technology.
 plasma. In many clinica! situations a patient in need of
 The first two have been used in veterinary medicine.
a transfusion requires only a specific component of
This chapter revicews the practical aspects of trans-
blood. The use of blood components allows several
fusion therapy in the dog andl cat. It is organized in a
patients to benefit from onc blood dunation and re-
temporal fashion, beginning with the blood donor and
duces the risks of transfusion reactions to unnecessary
 blood douation followed by blood processing and
components. During the past decade there has been
banking, transfusion anci transfusion reactions. Lastly,
increasing interest in vctcrinary transfusion medlicine,
autotransfusion is discussed. Many ofthe recommenda-
spurred on by advances in veterinary oncology and
tions are based on current human blood banking and
critical care, such that blood components are routinely
transfusion slanrlards. It may not be possible for some
 prepared by certain instiulions anl commercial enter-
veterinary clinics to meet these standards, especially in
prises in some countries.
emergency situations. As with all therapy, the risks
Both whole blood and blood conponents may be
associaicd with a transfusion must be weighed against
used shorlly affer colection (fresh' products) or after
the potential benefits. Meeting less than ideal standards
storagc ('stored’ or *banked products). Before World
increases risks, but in the author's opinion a potentially
War I, blood banking was not extensively practised in
life-saving transfusion should not be withheldl lccausc
human medicine. Donors were called in as nccded and
idcal transfusion practices cannot be followed.
blood collectcrl and immediately transfused. This re-
- n u sod uo is ai su
cine, although, as with blood componcnt prcparalion, an
THE BLOOD DONOR
inlcrest in blood banking has flourished in the recent
past. Blood banking allows immiediate access to whole
Source
blood and blood components. Blood colleclion andl
 Blood rlonors may be obtained from several sources.
 component preparation can be labourintensive and time
Each clinic must decide on the optimal source for its
consuming. It may not be feasible or optimal to obtain
needs, and local regulations regarding animal use
and process blood on dermand. For clinics that only
 should be reviewed. In the United Kingdom, practi-
occasionally need to pcrform a transfusion, blood bank-
[ioners are advised to ensure that theirsource of donors
ing is probably neithercost nortime effective as a certain
is compatible with Hone Office guidelines.
carded because of limited shclf life. However, for cmer-
Clinic owned
gency clinics and clinics with a large caseload requiring
The simplest approach for ensuring access to blood
transfusion therapy, blood banking is essential.
donors is to kccp such animals in the clinic. The
 264  Manual of Canine and Felinc Hacimatology and Transfusion Medicine
number of animals depends on anticipated needs. For
The canine donor
 most general practices one to two dogs and cats will
The ideal canine blood donor is a friendly, clinically
suffice. Some ethical concerns have been cxprcsscd
normal, nulliparous, large breed dog with normal body
about donor annimal lifestyles, but these are casily
weight, and has easily acccssible vcins and a universal
addressed. The donors at the Ontario Veterinary Col.
donor blood type (see Canine blood groups). Grey-
lege (OvC), for example, are animals that were des-
hounds are often used for these reasons and because of
tined for euthanasia. The animals arc used as donors
availability when retired from the track. (The life span
for 2 years and then adopted into the comrmumity. The
of Greyhound RBCs is shortcrthan thal of other breeds 
dogs are exercised regularly outside, and the cats are
(Novinger er al., 1996). It is not kmown if the survival
free to roan in an environmentally cnrichcd room. In
 of Greyhound RBCs after transfusion is lower than in
determining the costs of this approach, the cost of focd,
other brceds. If it is, it is unlikely that this has any
use of space in the clinic and staff time should be taken
detrimental effect on the immediate benefits of a
into accounl.
transfusion.) Donors should be young to middle aged;
rkogs up to 8 ycars of age are used at the OVC.
Donor progranme
A donor should weigh 28 kg or more so that a
Anl allcrnativc lo clinic-owned animals is the use of
standard blood donation can be given without exces-
pets owned by the clinic's staff. An extension of this
sivc volume depletion (see Blood donation). Smaller
 approach is a donor programme, where client-owned
 tlogs can clonate when a smaller transfnsion volume is
animals donate blood in exchange for benefits such as
being considered (e.g. paediatric transfusion). A high
frcc annual cxaminalions, vaccinations and pet food.
 donor packed cell volume (PCV) is desirable when
ai si poq ysa y r-uo, aq o smo a
RBC transfusion is planned, whereas a lower PCV is
and/or their animals can donate blood regularly if the
desirable when plasma and platelet products are being
clinic praclises blood banking. Such programmes can
 made. Greyhounds normally have high PCVs and low
be excellent practice builders, although a slight risk is
to low-normal platelet counts.
a uonup jo ssunbaso osipe ue ioi uasaid
risk is more so with cats, wlich need to be sedated or
Temperanent
anaesthetized for donation. Given thie ease of keeping
Blood can bc collected from an uncooperative dog by
donor cats in the clinic, using clinic-owned cats may be
using sedation or general anaesthesia, but regular bluod
 prcfcrablc to using client-owned cats. It must be made
donors should be sufficiently tractable to permit dona-
clear to owners to what cxicnt costs of dealing with
tion with either manual restraint or light sedation,
related medical problems willbesubsidized, ifat all.
 especially if tlhey arc client-owncd. Many dogs habitu-
The cost of such a programme, including lost revenue,
ate to the procedure, and sedation can be discontinued.
must be caleulated against the costs of keeping donors
in the hospital.
Clinical evaluation
Donors are considered to be clinically normal on the
Animal control facilities
An animal shelter or pound may allow blood donation
findings. These should bc revicwcrl hcfore cach dona-
from stray or surrendered animals awaiting adoption.
tion and the donation cancelled if there is any suspicion
There are two principal disadvantagcs with the use
of a relevant disorder. Typical reasons for cancelling a
 of such donors. Firstly, because of unknown history,
donation include bite wounds or acute vomiting and
time constraints and expense, there is usually inad-
diarrhoea. Similarly, blood should be discarded from a
equate screening for infectious and metabolic dis-
dog that develops a fever or other signs of potentially
eases. Secondly, there are ethical and public relations
infcctious disorders within a week of blood donation.
concems.
In a client-owned cdonor programne, owmers are arl-
vised to report such events. Annual laboratory evalu-
Terminal donors
alion consisting of a complete blood count, serun
These are animals that are being euthanased, either at
biochemistry profile, urinalysis and faecal exarnina-
animal control or research facilities or at clinics for
tion for parasites is often recommended, but the value
behaviour problems or medlical dlisorders that do not.
of such screening is not known. Certainly the donor's
affect the quality of donated blood. The same concerns
PCV and total solidls protein should be measured
exist as for non-terminal donations from pound-source
before each donation.
11
animals. The main advantage of terminal donors is that
large volumes of blood (up to 50% estimated blood
Preguazcy: Prcgnant bitches should not be used as
volume) can be collected.
donors, as donation poses an undesirable stres on the
donor and fetuses. Furthermore, bitches that have had
Commercial blood bank
previous prcgnancies should not be used. Tle concern
Conimercial small animal blood banks exist in soine
is that there is a risk that a DEA (dog erythrocyte
countries, which supply selected blood products.
antigen) 1.1 negative bitch (see Cainine blood groups)
Practical Blood Transfusion 265
bred to a DEA I. 1 positive dog may develop anti-DEA
donors will aggravate anaemia due to blood loss, but
1.1 antibodies. This increases the risk of a minor
mild infeslations do nol secm to pose heaith risks to
incompatibility reaction.
 either donor or recipient. This applies as well to mild
 chronic Ancylostoma caninum infections
Vaccination status: Blood donors should be current
 On vaccinations, but these should not be given within
used as donors. Thcsc include dogs with wounds,
10-14 days of a planned donation because of the
 abscesses, surgical implants, extensive skin lesions,
potential for moxlified live vaccines to alicr platelet
advanced periodontal disease and diarrhoea. In addi-
number and function.
tiun, blood should nol bc collected from dogs with
：
pyoderma affecting the collection sites.
Infecrious and parasites: Donors should be free of
parasites and infectious diseases, especially those
thal are blood borne. Depending on risk of infection
 ders, cancer, organ failure and other systemic rlisor-
based upon geographical location and othcr factors,
ders should not donate blood because of the potential
dogs may be tested for infection with Brucella
 for undesirablc stress on the donor and negative effects
canis, Borrelia burgdorferi, Ehrlichia spp., Rickett-
on blood quality.
sia rickettsii, Barionella vinsonit, Babesia spp.,
Trypanosoma cruzi, Leishmania spp.and Dirofilaria
Drug therapy
immitis. Periodical retesting may be required based
Donors shouldl uot. bc recciving any drug therapy
 on risk of exposure.
 because of the potential for undesirable effects in.
Haemobartonella canis infection poscs a unique
 thie recipient and on blood quality, especially if blood
concern as the organism is usually carried
is being stored. Donor dogs living in heartworm
asymplomatically and only causes haemolysis in
 endemic areas must receive prophylaxis, but heart-
splenectomized dogs. In the carrier state it. is rarely
worm prophylaxis drugs should arguably not be
seen on the RBC, and no other test is available to detect
given immedliately preccrling a dlonation. Donor dogs
infection. Nonetheless it can be transmitted by a blood
 s      n
transfusion from a carrier dog. For this rcason il is
such treatment inmmediately preceding donation is
sometimes recommended that canine blood donors be
also discouraged.
splencctomized to reveal infection, and to remove
infected animals from a donor programme. Although
Previous transfusions
 there are cases reported of canine haeinobartonellosis
Dounrs should not have received any transfusions
 after transfusion, the prevalence of this occurrence is
because of the risks of developing antibodics lhal may
not known. Splencclomy rcduces RBC mass and low-
cause minor incompatibility reactions (see Canine
ers the adoptability of a clinic-owned donor, and
blood groups).
ectomized. Furthermore, fransfusion of H. canis in-
The feline donor
fected blood is only likely to be a concerm to dogs being
The ideal feline blood donor is a friendly clinically
Ircated by splenectony, and the infection, if it occurs.
is in most cases easily treatcxdl. As wih all blood
Males are preferred because of their larger size. At the
transfusion decisions, each clinic must make its own
OVC cais imay donatc blood up to 8 years of age.
risk-benefit assessment. Clinic-owned dogs, includ-
 Becanse most feline transfusions are given to correct
ing Greyhounds with extensive travel history, are not
anaemia, a high donor PCV is preferred (≥35% at
splenectomized at the OvC.
lower altitudes and ≥40% at higheraltitudes). Pregnant
Splenectomy has also been recoimmended to reveal
queens should not be uscrl for rcasons given above.
calriers of Babesia spp. However, serological tests and
 Previous pregnancy does not exclude a queen from
donating bleod.
be used to help identify carrier animals. Another ap-
Clinical evaluation
dipropionate (7.5 mg/kg i.m.). It should be notedl than
Thc same principles concerning exclusion of canine
in areas with a high prevalence of babesiosis, there is
donors on the basis of systeinic discases apply to
a reasonable chancc that thc rccipicnl is already in-
feline donors. Donor cats should be housed indoors to
fected, and one of the more common indications for
 miniumize fight wounds and infections. With respect
RBC transfusion is acute anaemia due to this disease,
10 specific infcctious discases, feline donors should
whcrc transmission of Babesia spp. from a carrier
test negatively for feline leinkaemia virus and feline
animal is not important.
immunodeficiency virus infections. Status of donor
Ideally blood donors should not be infested with
cais with respect to felinc infectious peritonitis (FIP)
cndo- or cctoparasites, but this may not be achievable
virus titre is controversial. It is well recognized thal
in some geographical arcas. Severe fea infestations in
 many clinically normal cats with positive FIP titres
 266  Mauual of Canine and Feline Haematology and Transfusion Medicine
have had enteric coronavirus infections and never
Antigcns
develop clinical FIP. Noncthcless, lo iminimize the
 DEA 1.1 and 1.2 are alleles. A dog may be negative for
chance of a donor transmitting FIP virus, cats with
both antigens or positive for only one of them. At the
negative FIP titres are preferred.
OVC, Golden Retrievers, Labrador Retrievers and
The carrier state of Haenobartonella felis poscs
Rotwcilcrs tend to have DEA 1.1 or 1.2 bloud type,
the same problems in thc catas docs H. canisin the log.
whereas Greyhounds and German Shepherd Dogs tend
althoughi recipient cats more readily develop clinical
to be DEA 1.1 and 1.2 negative.
 disease without splenectomy. The recent availability
There are no naturally occurring alloantibodies
 Of a polymerase chain reaction test for dctcction of H.
lo DEA 1.1 or 1.2, so these antigens will mot cause an.
felis shoulkl facilitate the removal of carriers from a
acute reaction during a recipient's first transfusion.
 donor population. Donor cats are not splenectomized
 If, however, a DEA 1.1 negative dog receives a
at the Ovc.
transfusion from a DEA 1.1 positive dog, anti-DEA
Cats shouli also be testet for Bartonella henselae
1.1 antibody formation (sensitization) will cause
and Bartonella clarridgeiae infection by serological
delayed haemolysis within 1-2 weeks. More impor-
and culture techniques. Although bartonellosis is sub-
[antly, on subscquent cxposurc lo DEA I.l positive
 clinical or causes only mild clinical disease in cats,
blood, an acute haemolytic transfusion reaction wil!
removing infected blood donors is recommended be-
occur, with destruction of all transfused RBCs within
cause of the organism's zoonotic potential.
12 hours. The reaction may be clinically moderate to
Dirofilaria inmiris and Babesia spp. infccions
scverc, but is unlikely to be fatal (Giger er al., 1995).
shoukl be ruled out in endemic areas.
The situation is similar for sensitization to DEA 1.2,
 Cats at the OVC are not routinely tested serologi-
except that the reaction is less severe, with destruc-
cally for Toxoplasna gondi infection. Cats raiscd
lion of transfuscd RBCs within 24 hours. A DEA
 indoors and fed a commercial diet will have negative
1. 1/l.2 negative dog sensitized to 1.1 RBCs may also
tires, whereas cats previously outdoors are likely to
have a delayed haemolytic reaction when transfused
have been exposed. If a titre (IgG) is obtaincd and is
witl 1.2 positive RBCs.
positivc, 1hen either an IgM titre shouid be obtained or
Neonatal isoerythrolysis occurs when a sensitized
the IgG titre repeated in 2-4 weeks to rule out active
 DEA 1.1 negative female is bred to a DEA 1.1 positive
infection. As with all cats, donor cats should not be fcd
malc. Inheritancc is aulosoumal dominant,therefore the
uncooked meats.
likelihood is that some pups will be DEA 1.1 positive
and have haemolytic disease.
A third allele in the DEA 1 group, DEA 1.3, has also
BLOOD GROUPS
been rlcscribed (Syimons and Bell, 1991). DEA 1.3
positive dogs are negative for DEA 1.I and 1.2. Trans-
Blood groups are defined by inherited antigens on the
fusing DEA 1.3 positive blood to a DEA 1.1, 1.2 and
suface of RBCs. They are important in transfusion
1.3 negative dog will result in production of antibodies
Medlicine because of the risk of haemolytic reactions.
that will react with the 1.l, 1.2 and 1.3 antigens.
Such reactions occur when there is antibody directed
However, dogs positive for DEA 1.3 may typc as DEA
againsta blood group antigcn. Thc scverity ofa haemo-
1.1 and 1.2 negative with conventional antisera. Thus
lytic reaction depends on several factors. Two key
it is possible for a transfusion of DEA 1.1 and 1.2
 negative blood to sensitize a DEA 1.1 and 1.2 ncgalive
the higher the litre the worse the reaction; secondly,
recipient. This is one reason why crossmatching is
IgM-mcdiaed rcactions fend to be more severe than
 always recommended when a recipient has been previ-
IgG-mediated reactions because of superior comple-
ously transfused.
 ment fixation by IgM. A haemolytic transfusion reac-
 Dogs may also bc sensilizcdl to DEA 3, 5 andl 7 by
transfusion. In addition, naturally occurring
dependent on complement activation by IgM or high.
alloantibodies, similar to the situation with the ABO
titre IgG, or as a delayed extravascular haemolytic
blood groups in humans, arc present in low prevalence
evcnt, dependent on IgG binding to RBCs (see Ad-
to DEA 3 and 5. The prevalence of naturally occurring
verse Consequences of Transfusion).
antibodies to DEA 7 is controversial but has been
reported to bc 15-50%. Anliboxlies to DEA 3, 5 and 7
Canine blood groups
usually result in delayed haemolysis. The prevalence
 Canine blood groups are classified by the DEA (Dog
 of such transfusion reactions is not known, but it is
Erythrocyte Antigen) system. There aresix DEAs (1.1.
probably fairly low.
1.2, 3, 4, 5 and 7) defincd by currcntly available
Because 1nost dlogs are positive for DEA 4 and anti-
 intcratiomatly standardized antisera, but 20 or more
DEA 4 antibodies do not cause haemolysis, this blood
specificities have been described. DEAs have not been
 group has minimal transfusion significancc.
extensively characterized for composition and struc-
An acute haemolytic reacticn has also been de-
lure (Coralo et al., 1997).
 scribed in a dog sensitized to an RBC antigen present
Practical Blood Transfusion 267
in most dogs but distinct from the know DEAs (Callan
question. Antiserum produced by alloimmunizing a
et al., 1995). If such a patient requires transfusion, a
 DEA 1.1/1.2 negative dog with 1.1 positivc blood will
 closely related dog should be sought, which may also
react slrongly with 1.I positive RBCs and cross-react
 be negative for that antigcn.
weakly with 1.2 positive RBCs.
To facilitate detection of DEA 1.2, DEA 1.2 RBCs
Feline hlood groups
are injccicd along with DEA 1. 1 RBCs to produce non-
The feline A, B and AB blood group system is
specific anti-DEA 1. 1/1.2 antiserum. Laboratories pro-
discussed in more detail in Chaptcr 16. Other blooxl
viding limited blood-typing services typically usc such
groups have not been dcscribed. There is no universal 
antiserum. A dog with a negative reaction is classified
donor because, unlike dogs, cats have naturally
as DEA 1.1/1.2 negative. A dog with a positive reac-
occurring alloantibodies and no null typc: ihereforc,
tion is classified as DEA 1.1/1.2 positive, but il is not
RBC incompatibility reactions will occur in naive
 known which antigen is prcsent. (DEA 1.1/1.2 nega-
rccipieulls.
tive dogs havc also been referred to as ^A-negative',
 The reaction is typically peracute and sometimes
and DEA 1.1/1.2 positive dogs as *A-positive*, based 
fatal atthe begiming of a transfusion of type A or AB
 on the older terminology for dog blood group antigcns.
 RBCs to a type B recipient. An acute reaction more
These lerms are confusing and their continued use is
 sinnilar to the acute reaction seen in dogs followed
not recommended.)
 conipletion of a transfusion of type A blood to a typc
Further characterization of a positive DEA 1. 1/1.2
B cat, wih fever, icterus and destruction of trans-
reaction imay be achieved by using antiserum specific
fused RBCs in 24 hours (Giger and Akol, 1990).
for DEA l.l. This antiserum is produced by
 This reaction may have becn due to IgG rather than
alloimmunizing a DEA 1.2 positivc dog with
 IgM. Delayed haemolysis occurs in type A recipients
DEA 1.1 positive blood. A dog with positive DEA
receiving type B or AB RBCs, and acute reactions
1.1/1.2 and positive DEA 1.1 reactions has a DEA
1.1 blood type. A dog with positivc DEA l.i/1.2
 may occur due to anti-A antibedies in Llypc B donor
plasma.
and ncgalivc DEA 1.1 reactions has a DEA 1.2
Type AB cats are universal RBC recipients but
blood type. Specific anti-DEA 1.2 antiserun may
are also at risk of inconpatibility rcacfions from
 also be produced from anti-DEA 1.1/1.2 antiserum
lonor plasma antibolies (so-called minor incompat-
using DEA 1.l red cell absorption techniques to
 ibility reactions). Type AB cats are best transfused
remove anti-DEA 1.1 antibodies.
withi type AB blood, but, given the low prevalcncc of
 Some laboratories provide mnore complete charac-
this blood typc, the likelihood of finding another AB
terization of blood type by using antisera for DEA
 dlonor is low. Type AB cats can be acceptably trans-
3,4, 5 and 7. A typing card using a murine monoclonal
fused with type A blood becausc the low litre of
antibody has recently become available for in-clinic
anti-B antiborlics is unlikely to be harmful (RBC
use to determine DEA 1.1 status (RapidVet-H Canine
washing can be considered if large volurne trans-
I. 1, DMS Laboratories). The experience at the OVC
fusions are needed). Type AB cats should not reccivc
 and elsewhere is that false-positive reactions 'may
type B hlood produets hecause of the frequently high.
 occur with the typing cards resulting in a positive
anti-A antibody titre.
predictive value of about 75% (Moritz et al., 1998).
 False-negative reactions may occur if the haerma-
tocrit is <10%.
RBC transfusions are commonly given to emer-
BLOOD TYPING
gency or urgent cases, and historically blood typing
has only hcen performcd at reference laboratories.
Donor and recipient RBC compatibility should be
 For these reasons blood typing has traditionally been
 considered when selecting a donor.
used only to select clinic-owed and client-uwcd
 oi iapio ui sjuidiooi adki oi nou pue siouop
Blood typing in dogs
donors and rccipients.
The best way to prevent DEA incormpatibility
reactions is by determining blood type using antisera.
Donor blood type
Blood typing is commercially available in some
 A universal komior is negative for DEA 1.1, 1.2, 3, 5 and
countries. Polyclonal antiserum is produced by
 7. The minimal requirement to prevent an acute DEA-
alloimmumizing a dog negative for a given DEA by
mediated laemolytic rcaction is that a donor be nega-
injecting it with small quantities of blood positive for
fivc for DEA 1.1 and 1.2. The minimal requirement to
that DEA. The RBCsto be typed are incubated with the
prevent a moderate to severe DEA haenolytic rcaclion
antiserum in. the presence of complement, with and
 is that a donor be ncgative for DEA 1.1. The clinical
without antiglobulin, in a similar fashion to that
ulility of more complete typing versus typing for DEA
 described for crossmatching below. Hacmolysis or
1.1 alone is not known, At the OvC, clinic-owned
agglutination indicates presence of the antigen in
donors are typed as universal rlonors by an outside
268  Manual of Canine and Feline Haematology and Transfusion Medicine
 specialist laboratory, and client-owned donorsare lypcd
CROSSMATCHING
as DEA 1. 1/1.2 negative by usingantisera produced in-
house. The falsc-positive rate of the typing cards does
Crossmatching tests for anti-RBC antibodies by
 not preclude their use for tonor selection, but some
examining for agglutination and haemolysis. The
 [otcntial DEA 1.l negative donors will be excluded.
technique is similar to blood typing, but in the latter
a known antibody is used in the test lo identify a
Recipient blood type
specific RBC antigen. Crossmatching is an adjunct
 Thcrc is no universal recipient canine blood type.
to, mot a substitutc for, blond typing, but it may be the
 Determining the blood type of the recipient would be
only incompatibility test available. The major
 beneficial in that it would allow the use of DEA 1.1
crossmnatch detects recipient antibodies against
 positivc and other non-universal donors. Although the
donor RBCs. Tlic minor crossmatch detects donor
 availability oftyping cards now permits rapid DEA I. 1
antiboxlics againsl rccipien RBCs. A complete
 blood type determination, the cards should not be used
crossmatch is conducted at 37*C, rooun temperalurc
 to type recipients, because dogs falsely identified as
(technically 25*C) and 4°C and includes an anti-
 DEA 1.1 positive will become sensitized after trans-
globulin rcagcnt (indirect Coombs' test).
fusion with DEA 1.1 positive blood.
 Complete recipient blood type is occasionally de-
Procedures
terninedi for cases at the OVC where multiple trans-
 Numerous crossmatching proccdures have been
fusions are anticipated, in the event that non-universal
reported. Two methods are discussed, adapicd to
donors can be used anl thus prevent cxhaustion of the
general practice from the methods used at the OvC.
rcgular hlcod supply. Merely typing recipients as DEA
The rapid slide mcthod (Figures 15.1 and 15.2) is
1.1/1.2 positive and transfusing them with DEA 1.1/
roughly equivalent to phase I of the tubc inethod. Thc
1.2 positive donor blood is not sufficient because it is
tube method (Figures 15.3 and 15.4) is more cumber-
 possible that a DEA 1.2 positive recipient would
some but superior as:
become sensitized to DEA 1.1 and vice versa.
It is often stated that becausc a first. lrasfusion can
 Longer incubation is feasible with less rouleaux
 be given to any non-breeding dog without risk of acute
fornation (pseuloagglutinatiun), which
hacmolysis, it is umnecessary to type all donor blood
facilitates detection of weak agglutinins
and that it is acceptable to transfuse DEA 1.l/1.2
It facilitates grading of agglutination
positive blood once. These practices are discouraged
 I1 facilitates detection of haemolysis
because it is possible that the recipient may require
 It can incorporate an antiglobulin test.
future transfusions. Certainly only universal donor,
The author prefers the rapid slide test for cats and
should be transfused to:
-ai si isan aqm a4i Xouosioa un  ssop 101
 Imended for dogs if time allows.
A dog transfused more than 4 days prcviously
In both methiods either serum or plasma can be
(anti-RBC antibodies develop within 4-14 days)
used. The use of plasima is mure convenient. Tlhe use
 A dog with a history of a transfusion reaction
 of serum is preferred in dogs as the presence of
 A dog whose transfusion history is niot known
fibrinogen and other proteins in plasma increases
 A prcviously pregnant dog.
rouleaux formation. In cats, rouleaux formation
is nearly as strong in serum as it is in plasma. In
The availability of typing cards greatly facilitates
both species, rouleaux formation is increased in both
propcr dlonor selection. Even if donor selection is
serum and plasma in the presence of increased
limited, the typing cards can be usedl to determine if the
levels of immunoglobulins and fibrinogen and in
recipient was transfused with DEA. 1.1 positive blool
the presence of synthetic colloids. In any case the
and thus if the dog is at increased risk of future
use of donor and recipient controls is important
haemolytic transfusion reactions.
to observe for rouleaux. The usc of 4,4-
disothiocyanatostilbene-2,2-disulphonic acid has
Blood typing in cats
been invcstigated to block roulcaux formation in
 Feline bloor iyping is discusscd in Chapter 16. A
human compatibility testing.
typing card is available for in-house determiuation of
Agglutination must be distinguished from rouleaux
A, B, and AB blood types (RapidVet-H Feline, DMS
forimaticn. This is easy to do with strong agglutination
Laboratorics). Blood typing both donor and recipient
but may be difficult with weak agglulination whcn
in all cases is ideal. A crossmatch (see below) may
using the rapid slide method. The rouleaux formation
identify blood type, especially if the blood type of
may be strong. cspecially in cats and when using
 either the donor or recipient is known. In the latter case
undiluted RBCs, and is macroscopically inrlislinguish-
the procedure is referred to as 'back typing'.
able from agglutination.
Practical Blood Transfusion 269
Collect O.5-1 ml blood in an EDTA tube ± 1-2 mlin a clot tube from recipient and donor. Clearly label tubes.
2
Centrifuge tubes at standard speed for the centrifuge in use (usually about 1000-1500 g for 5-10
minutes) to separate RBCs from plasma and serum. If a centrifuge is not available, allow EDTA
specimens to sit atroom temperaturefor one to several hours until RBCs have scdimented.Using
separate pipettes (or syringes and 18 G needles) for cach sample, transfer serum and/or plasma to
separate tubes. Clearly label tubes.
and 4.8 ml saline. Use a separatc pipette for each mixture and clearly label. This step is optional for the
slide method. This dilution of RBCs in saline retards rouleauxformation and facilitatesmicroscopic
observationbutresults in less dramaticmacroscopic agglutination.Further dilutionmay dilute
alloantibodies to the point of non-reactivity and may still not completely eliminate rouleaux.
4.Label four glass slides as:
donor control (donorRBCs and donor serum or plasma)
major X-match (donor RBCs and recipient serum or plasma)
minor X-match (recipient RBCs and donor serum or plasma)
recipient control (recipient RBCs and recipient serum or plasma).
On to cach slide place either one dropof serum (or plasma) and one dropof RBC suspension or two drops
of serum (or plasma) and one drop of undiluted RBCs. Rapidly mix togcther with an applicator stick.
5.
Gently rock slides back and forth and observe formacroscopic agglutination within 2minutes(see
Figure 15.2). Place on a coverslip and observe the wet mounts with a 40 x objective lens ± a 100 x oil-
immersionlensformicroscopicagglutinationwithin5minutes.
Figure15.1:Rapidslidemethodforcrossmatching.TheauthorpreferstouseundilutedRBCs.fresultsareequivocalthetestis
repeatedwithdilutedRBCs.Repeatingthetestispreferredtoaddingseveraldropsofsalinetotheslide.If salineisaddedtothe
repeated as described in phase I of the tube method.
(a)
(d)
(b)
(e)
Figure 15.2:Macroscopicagglutinationand
pseudoagglutination ina feline crossmatch.(a)Negative
resultat2minutes withundilutedtypeBredcelsandtype A
plasma.(h)Positiveresult at 2minuteswithundilutedtypeA
red cells and typeBplasma.(c)Pseudoagglutination(strong
rouleauxformation)at10minuteswithundiluted typeAred
cells andtype Aplasma.(d)Positive result at 2minutes with
4%suspension typeA redcells and typeBplasma.
(e)Pseudoagglutinationat10minutes with4%suspension
iype Ared cells and type Aplasma.
C
270Manual of Canine and Feline Haematology and TransfusionMedicine
PhaseI
1-3.As Figure 15.1 for rapid slide method. Typically 12 x 75 mm glass tubes are used, but any small
glass tube will suffiece. An optional recommended step with dogs is to wash the RBCs three timcs
in saline before making the final 4% suspension.To perform this wash, add 0.5-1 ml of blood to
the tube and fill the remainder of the tube with saline. Mix by invcrting the tube and centrifuge at
high speed for 1 minute (or longer if required to sediment the RBCs). Remove supernatant. Repeat
twice more.
4.
Label glass tubes as described for slides, and into each tube place two drops of RBC suspension and
two drops of serum or plasma, and mix by flicking the bottom of the tube. In addition, two drops of
guinea-pig complement may be added.* A complete set of major and minor crossmatch and control
tubes is required for each temperature at which the test is conclucted.**
Centrifuge at a low speed for 1530 seconds,just enough tobring the cells together but not to pack
tightly.
Gently shake tubes(wiggle and tip')toresuspcnd the cells.Hold up to light (a radiographviewing box
works well) to observe for macroscopic agglutination and/or hacmolysis (see Figure 15.4). Confirm
agglutination microscopically.
If strong rouleaux formation is present, rcccntrifuge the serum/plasma-RBC mixture. Carefully remove
supernatant with a pipette,replace with an equal volume of saline,and gently mix.Centrifuge th
mixture once more,and thenrepeat step6
PhaseI
8.
If no agglutination is noted in step 6, incubate tubes for 30 minutes at test tempcrature(s).*
9.
Repeat steps 5 and 6.
Phase Ill (dogs)
10.Antiglobulin test. Canine polyvalent antiglobulin (containing anti-IgG, anti-IgM and anti-C3) is added
toeach tube,incubatedfor30minutes andsamples are centrifuged as above and observedfor
agglutination and/or haemolysis.This phase of the test is usuallyperformed in reference laboratories.
Figure15.3:Tube method for crossmatching.
Referencelaboratoriesperformingacompietecrossmatchincludinganantiglobulintestwillconductthetestat37Candroom
temperarureandoptionally at4℃.Anti-DEA1.1and anti-DEA1.2antibodieshavemaximumreactivity at37C,butclinically
relevant tiresshoutdreactatroomtemperature.Manyotheranti-DEAantibodieshavemaximalreactivityatroomtemperature
which isin partwhy they areof less clinical significance.Bloodfor transfusion ideally shouidbe compatibleat37Candroom
*Addingcomplemenwillpromotedetectionofhaemolysis.Thissmost likelytooccurinthepresenceofanti-DEA1.
anibodiessgnfcanttirewillweverresultntctablaggtnatonntheaencefcomemen.Comlemen
untikelytobeusedoutsideareferencelaboratory,astheoptimumstoragetemperatureis-70°℃.
Microscopically,in aggregates of agglutinated
RBCs,the cells are raficd together,randomly ori-
ented and superimposed on each other(Figure
?
15.5).A three-dimensional structure is apparent,
as RBCs of different layers of thc aggrcgate come
inandout of focuswhen thefine focus ofthemicro-
scope is adjusted.The size and density of aggregates
vary with the alloantibody titrc,RBC density and
location on the slide.Comparedwithhigher density
aggrcgatcs, individual RBCs can be discerned
Figure15.4:Gradingofaggfutination reactions ina canine
more easilyinlower density aggregatcs,whichmay
crossmatch.Fromlefttoright:4+,onesolidaggregateofred
resemble bunches of grapes.Aggregate clumps
cells:3+,several large aggregares;2+,medium aggregates,
may be connected by linear aggregate formations.
clearbackground:1+smallaggregates,turbidreddish
background;+w,tiny ormicroscopic aggregates,turbid
One-dimensionallinearformationsresemble'strings
reddishbackground;negative.
ofbeads.'
PracticalBloodTransfusion271
objective lens unless otherwiseindicated.(a)Canine singlerouleaux formation.(b)Tiny canineaggregate.(c)Smallcanine
(g)Small felinerouleaux nerwork.(h)Small high-density feline aggregate.(continuesoverleaf)
272Manual of Canine andFelineHaematology and Transfusion Medicine
COOO
Figure15.5continued:Microscopicagglutinationand pseudoagglutination.All micrographswere obtainedusinga 100x oil
immersionobjectivelensunlessotherwiseindicated.(i)Caninesinglerouleauxformationwiththeappearanceofafallenover
stackofcoins.Suchfornutions forminthinlayerwetmounts.(j）Low density feline aggregateresultinginastringof beads
(l)Large feline aggregate pulling apartforming several‘chains of lemons(m) Large canine rouleaux networks bridged by a
of large,high-densityformations aidsin distinguishingberweenrouleauxformations and aggregates.
Microscopically,n rouleaux the RBCsarealigned
proteincontntBCensityocationonthlidand
face to face and thus appcar as *stacks of coins’ (see
time. Under 5 minutes using the rapid slide method
Figure 15.5).In some cases the stacks may seem to
mostrouleauxwillbesingleformations.Singlerouleaux
have fallen over, appearing as chains of overlapping
are predominantly one-dimensional in structure,and
RBCs. Canine rouleaux may not be quite as‘tidyas
rouleauxnetworksarepredominantlytwo-dimensional.
feline rouleaux.Strong rouleaux clump togcther and
Small aggregates and singlerouleaux and medium
form rouleaux networks,which may be connected by
size and/or density aggregates and rouleaux networks,
single rouleaux formations.The size and density of
can usuallybe distinguished.However,thelarge high
rouleauxnclworks vary with the scrum or plasma
density aggregates and rouleauxnetworks thatmay
Practical Blood Transfusion 273
form when using undiluted RBCs in the rapid slide
on the slideresults in rouleaux formation,beginning
method may be difficult to distinguish. Examining
at theedgesofthesampl.However,rouleauxorma
other areas of the slidewhere smaller clumpsmay be
tion of equivalent intensity to strong agglutination
presentandcloseinspectionof the edgesof the clumps
requires 5-10 minutes to form.Microscopically large
helps in making the distinction.Note,however,that
aggregates and rouleaux can be identified, but
rouleaux can form concurrently with aggregates and
small aggregates cannot be identified because of the
may stick to them.Alsonote thatmoving the slide on
high dcnsity of RBCs.
the microscope stage and using the oil immersion lens
Arapid slidetest using dilutedRBCsissupcriorfor
maymechanically break upboth largerouleaux net-
distinguishingagglutination androuleauxmicroscopi-
works andaggregates,whichcan both be observed to
cally and for detecting weak agglutination.In canine
be'sticky'as they pull apartand form transient‘lemon
preparations,rouleaux will form in 3-4minutes in
chains.Ifclumps ofRBCs cannot be determined tobe
plasmabutwill notforminserumwithnormalprotein
aggregates orrouleaux networks,the test should be
levcls.However,as the slides are rocked the RBCs
repeated with diluted RBCs.
swirland become unevenly distributcd,mimicking
Arapidslidetestusingundiluted RBCsis superior
macroscopic rouleaux.This effectmay be more pro-
for comparing strong macroscopic agglutination to
nounced in serum than in plasma.In feline prepara
rouleaux. Strong agglutination is usually evident
tions,macroscopicrouleaux formationbeginswithin
within1minute andreaches a maximumreaction
2-3minutes.
within 3minutes.Aficr 1-2minutes in the cat and
Figures 15.6 and 15.7 show the interpretation of
2-3minutes in the dog, desiccation of the sample
crossmatchingin dogs and cats.
 Any agglutination and/or haemolysis at 37°C and/or room temperature is a positive test.
Rapid slide or phaseI-II of tube test:
A positive major crossmatch indicates a significant antibody titre in the recipient against donor RBCs and
 precludes the use of that donor for RBC transfusion. Strong reactions are usually duc to anti-DEA 1.1
antibodies. Weak reactions are usually due to anti-DEA 1.1 or 1.2, and perhaps anti-DEA 7, antibodies.
The stronger the crossmatch reaction, the more severe will be the clinical reaction after transfusion.
A positive minor crossmatch indicates the presence of antibodies in the donor against recipient RBCs,
with the stronger reactions usually being due to anti-DEA 1.1 antibodies as in the major crossmatch. The
significance of thc antibodics depends on the titre in the donor and the volume of plasma transfused. If
the minor crossmatch reaction is strong, even small volumes of donor plasma may cause a significant
 transfusion reaction and precludes the use of the donor unless the donor RBCs are washed. With weaker
reactions, packed RBCs from the donor may be transfused. With very weak reactions, transfusion of
large volumes of plasma should be avoided.
A positive recipient control indicates that the patient is autoagglutinating. If the major crossmatch is
positive with a similar strength of rcaction, agglutination is probably due to non-specific anti-RBC
antibodies and not a specific anti-DEA antibody.
A positive donor control usually indicates a procedural error. It is also possible that the donor has
subclinical immune-mediated haemolytic anaemia and should not be used.
PhaseIIl of tube test:
A positive major crossmatch indicates the prescnce of subagglutinating antibodies. These antibodies are
most likely to be anti-DEA 1.2, 3, 5 or 7. Thcse will not result in an acute transfusion reaction but may
result in delayed haemolysis. The donor should not be used if a more compatible donor is available,
especially if the reaction is strong. If a compatible donor is not available, the incompatible donor may be
used to provide temporary RBC replacement, especially if there is life-threatening anaemia.
plasma are to be transfused.
A positive recipient or donor control is a positive direct antiglobulin (Coombs) test, and should be
interpreted as above.
The nature of the incompatibility may be further characterized by incubating recipient serum with RBCs of
known antigenic composition.In humans this procedure isreferred toas antibody screening.Antibodyscreening
is performed before crossmatching and its use has reduced the value of the latter.
When transfusing multiple units of a blood product, incompatibility between donor units is of minimal
concern, as long as all units are compatible with the recipient.
Figure15.6:Interpretationof crossmatchresults inthe dog
274 Mannal of Canine and Feline Haematology antl Transfusion Mcdicine
 Type B serum mixed with type A or AB RBCs results in typically stlrong macroscopic agglutination (see
Figure 15.2)
 Type A serum mixed with type B or AB RBCs results in weak macroscopic, only microscopic or no
undilutcd or diluted RBCs, because the possibility of rouleaux formation precludes positive
RBCs, because the high RBC density and roulcaux formation preclude identification of small
aggregates.
 Type AB serum (uncommon blood type) mixed with type A or type B RBCs does not result in any
agglutination.
p a u ssd si a u no v ya t i alaisod ose si l osn q u rp au a
 Or recipient. Some type B cats with weak anti-A titres have now been reported (Knottenbelt et al., 1999).
 If the recipient has a weak anti-A or anti-B titre, use of an incompatible donor may cause a mild acute
Iransfusion rcaction, and delayed haemolysis will occur.
 Positive major crossmatch: strong macroscopic agglutination denotes type B recipient and type A or AB
 donor. Minor crossmatch will be negative or weakly positivc witlh a type A donor and negative with a
Iypc AB clonor. Usc of this donor is likely to result in a severe transfusion reaction.
 Positive minor crossmatch: strong macroscopic agglutination denotes type A or type AB recipient and
with a type AB recipient. In the likely event thal thc recipient is type A, use of this donor may cause a
mild to modcrale acute transfusion reaction, and delayed haemolysis will occur. If the recipient is type
 AB, use of this donor may cause a mild to moderate acute transfusicn reaction.
 Positive donor or recipient control: This usually indicates a procedural crror. It is also possiblc that the
 donor or recipient is autoagglutinating. ln addlition, some type B and AB cats have been reported to have
weak anti-B antibodies (Knottenbelt er al., 1999).
Figure I5.7: hterpretation of crossnatch resutts in the ca!.
Crossmatching in dogs
the antibodies may be stronger haemolysins than
Few studies have examined the utility of the complete
agglutinins, agglutination will bc detected in the
crossmatch for dogs in the veterinary clinical setting.
crossmatch. Complement can be added to improve
A complete crossmatch will detect all clinically impor-
 detection of haemolysis. The abbreviated crossmatch
tant anti-RBC antibodies.
is unlikely to deteci.antibodies thal will cause delayed
Spccifically, a complete crossmatch is usually
or mild acute reactions.
needed to detect anti-DEA 3, 5 and 7 antibodies and
When should crossmatching be performed? A
low titres of anti-DEA 1.1, 1.2 and 1.3 antibodies. A
complete crossmatch can bc juslificd scicntifically
complcte crossinatch is usually performed at refer-
in all cases, even where blood type of donor and
ence laboratories as few clinics can justify purchas-
recipient are known, since canine blood groups are
ing the reagents. This is again a problein because
Iot fully characterized. However, this is economi-
cally and practically not feasible for most clinics.
situations. Even for clinics affiliatcrl to a refercnce
Routine complete crossmatching is not performed at
laboratory,there is insufficient tine in an emergency
tlhic OVC. An abbreviated crossmatch is recommended
to perform a complete crossmatch. Furthermore, a
d a  asa   s sis e 
complete crossmatch aduls a substanlial cxpcnse to
dure. A crossinatch (complete preferred) should al-
the transfusion.
ways be pcrformcd when:
The abbreviated crossinatch is performed at room
temperature and omits an antiglobulin test. It tmay bc
 The recipient has been previously transfused
performed by either the rapid slide or tube method. It
more than 4 days bcfore the planned transfusion
is quick and inexpensive and can be done in any
There is a history of a transfusion reaction
clinic. As with the complete crossmatch it is subject
 The recipient's transfusion history is unknowll
to false-positive and false-negative findlings when
 The recipient has previously been pregnant.
conducted by inexperienced staff. The abbreviated
crossmatch will detect anti-RBC antibodies that are
In addition, complete crossmatching is recom-
present in high enough titres to cause a clinically
mended when a dog is likely to receive mutiple
moderate to severe haemolytic reaction. Although
transfusions or wherc any immunological stimulation
Practical Blood Transfusion  275
is likely to be detrimental, even where donor blood is
rare, the use of fresh frozen plasma and plasma from
of universal typc or known to be compatible with the
I'I a uoy paedard eused uzo qsy pridxa
.
recipient's blood type. The latter situation includes
or 1.1/1.2 positive donors is acceptable. This practice
immune-mediated haemolytic anaemia (IMHA), but
substantially increases the donor pool, which is in-
in many cascs RBC auloanlibody will result in all
porlanl beca usc patienis rcquiring plasma transfusious
apparent incompalibility with all donors. The
oflen rcquire multiple units. After blood collection
：
crossmatch rmay assist in selecting the ^imost compat-
from a DEA. 1.1 or 1.1/1.2 positive donor, the plasma
ible' donor.
is harvested and the RBCs are returned to the donor.
The minor crossmatch is less important than
the major because of dilution of the donor antibodies
Crossmatching in cats
in the recipient. Indeed, some authors have recom-
A crossmatch using the rapid slide metlhod or phase I
mended elirnination of thc minor crassinatch. The
of the tube method at roon temperal ure will detect
only important minor incompatibility involves anti-
 RBC incompatibility in most cases. Crossmatching is
DEA 1.1 antibodies reacting in phases I-II of the
recommended in all cases where donor and/or recipi-
crossinatch, uulcss largc volumes of plasma are
ent blood type is not known,especially if a transfusion
to be transfused. However, even small amounts of
donor plasma with a high titre of anti-DEA
1.1
of B blood type. The utility of crossmatching in
antibodies can cause a significant transfusion reac-
addition to blood typing donor and recipient is not
tion in a DEA. 1.l positive dog. Such a titre can
known. Potential benefits include verification of
 only develop in a previously pregnant or transfused
blood-typing results and detection of non-AB anti-
DEA 1.1 negative dog. As noted previously, such
RBC antibodies.
dogs should not be accepted as blood donors. Thus
Crossmatching in addition to blood typing is rec-
clinics with properly selected blood donors can
ommended if a cat has been previously transfused or
eliminate a routine minor crossmatch. If a donor of
is infected with feline leukaemia virus, because there
uncertain background is being used, the minor
are auecdotal reports of non-AB incompatibilities in
crossmatch should be performed unless the recipient
these situations. Currently at the OVC donors are
is known to be DEA 1.l negative or the donor DEA
blood typed and are then crossmatched against naive
1.l positive. The minor crossmatch is also recom-
domestic shorthaired and domestic longhaired recipi-
 mended if large-volume plasma trausfusions are
ents by using a rapid slide method. This policy is
followed to reduce costs because B and AB blood
considered delclerious.
lypes are rare in the region's non-purcbredl cat popu-
lation. Recipient blood type is, however, determined
DEA. coinpatibility and plasma products
in purebred cat breeds with a reported prevalence of
Bccausc of the cmphasis on having DEA 1.1/1.2
typc B blood.
negative RBC donors, veterinarians commonly insist
on plasima products from DEA 1.1/1.2 negative do-
nors, Therc is no increascd risk of an acute trans-
ANTICOAGULANT-PRESERVATIVE
fusion reaction with plasma from a DEA 1.l/1.2
SOLUTIONS
positive dog. Indeed, such plasma is less likely to
The solutions into which blood is collected contain
1.1/1.2 positive dogs are less likely to be sensitized.
 either heparin or citrate, which function as anticoagu-
However, there is the potential for DEA
lants by binding Catt. The use of heparin shouid be
alloimmunization owing to contaminating RBCs in
restricted to blood collected for inmediate transfusion.
 plasma products, as only small volumes of incompat-
The citrate solutions may also contain agents that act as
ible RBCs are needed to stiulate antibody produc-
RBC preservatives. The purpose of these preservatives
tion. In humans, fresh frozcn plasina contains only
is to suppor thc glycolylic cncrgy metahbolisn (adeno-
traces of RBC stroma and rarely causes sensitization.
sine triphosphate production) of RBCs to maintain
 Plasma prepared from stored whole blood and plate-
their viability during storage. Historically, dextrose
Icl-rich plasima conlains highcr lcvcls of comainina-
was the first prescrvativc arlded io cilralc solution,
tion and occasionally causes sensitization, It is
followed by phosphate and then adenine. The additive
 therefore recommended that DEA 1.1 or 1.1/1.2 nega-
nutrient solutions Adsol, Nutricel and Optisol were
Xq euseid sindaad oy posn Ajounnoi oq poolq sa
then devcloped. Cormposiion antl use of anticoagu-.
centrifugalion of storcrl whole blood or by sedlimenl.
lant-prcscrvative solutions in the dog and cat have
tation of whole blood and to prepare platelet pro-
been reviewed (Wardrop, 1995) and are summarized
ducts. This is consistent with the recommendation
in Figure 15.8.
that caninc RBC donors should routinely be DEA 1. 1
Phosphalc
is also a substrate for 2.3-
or 1. 1/1.2 negative. However, since the occurrence of
diphosphioglycerate (2,3-DPG) production. 2,3-DPG
sensitization with fresh frozen plasma is probably
decreases the affinity of haemoglobin for oxygen,
276Manual of Canine andFeline Haematology andTransfusionMedicine
Solution
Components
Supplied* and use
Maximum
Maxinum
Comment
whole blood
packed red cels
storage time**
storage time**
Heparin
Heparin1000IL/ml
Supplied:10ml bctles
2days (dog,cat)
Storage not
Used most forcat donatins
Lse:5-12.5IU/m1of blood
recommended
No red cell preservative
Foracat daon daw300750TU
Readily availabenmost clinics
(0.3-0.75ml ino60mlsyringe
Cation:donotconasewih 100IUml
sclution
May cause heparinization of smallerecipients
(seeTrasfusionreactins）
Sodium citrate
Sodium citrate
Suplied:.%son00lba
5days (dog)
Storage not
No red cell preservative
or prepared by a pharmey
Not known (cat)
recommended
Osoetmalaedie
Use:1ml3.8% solution9ml blood
usedextivelyforlasmhareg
Foracatdonatirdraw6mlintoa60
wilareass
mlsyringe
donor)
Forstnfnh.%
use0.5gsodiir100bld
Acid citratedextrose
Soluticn A (ACD-A):
Suplied:500mlr1000mlg
Not known
Storage not
Stadardsltonrmaye
Dextrose (ACD)
Citricacid
humancolletingbagcontaining67.5ml
recommended
Criadaued
Sodium citrate
Lse: 1ml ACD-A:7-9 ml blood
ecll prescrvation
Dextrose
Foracatdntdw60
Usedstfrcadatnsfh
ml syinge
transfusion
Preferabletohepnd sodiuitratefo
fresh trarsfusion
Solution B(ACD-B)
Supplied:500ml bas**
3 weeks(dog)
Storage not
Superseded hy CPD-hased solutions fcr blood
Citrie acid
Use:1m ACD-B:4ml blood
4 weeks (ce)
recommended
banking
Sodium citrate
Fora cat denaton draw15mlintoa60
ACD-Ahas higher eoneenlraions cf citi acid
Dextrose
mlsyringe
sodiumcitrateexosethanCD-B
ACD-A prfe fesh rasrsiswig
largervolueof cllctedlod
Citrate pnosplate
Cirnic acid
Suppliedholeng bag*
4weks dog
Storage not
63m hag isfercolleting450ml ofblod,
dextrose（CPD)
Sodium citrate
cortaning63mlor70ml
cEt)
recommended
70ml lag isfr 500 ml
Phosphate
Use:0.14ml/mlb.ood
Dextrose
Forcat dnationdraw75minta60
ml syringe
Citrate plhosphate
Citic acid
Supliefgha
5weeks (dog,
3weeks (dog,cat)
63mbagisforcofing450mfl
dextrose adenine
Sodium citrate
containng63ml70ml50mlboes
cat)
70 ml hag isfer 500 ml
(CPDA,)
Phosphate
Use:0.14ml/ml Elood
Dextrose
Fora car donatien draw7.5ml inta60
Adenine
mlsyinge
AS-1 (Adsol)
Dextrose
Suplieltpack
Not appliahble
5-6 weeks (dog)
Adslshdeadedtoredeelswith72
Acenine
collecting bugcontains63mlCPD
6 weeks (cat)
hours of collection
Marnitol
100mlAdsoladdedt1cnieit
FoatdmfAi
Sodim chlorde
to1 felineunit
AS-3(Nutricel)
Dextrose
Supliedalectnpack*
Notappliable
5-6 weeks(deg)
Nutricel should be addedto red cells within72
Adenine
collectingbgnis 63mCPD2,
6 weeks (cat)
hours of collection
Phosphate
100mlNurildddtanineunit
Sofium chloride
Frcatfia
Sodiumcitrate
to1feline unit
Citric acid
AS-5(Optisol)
Dextrose
Suplie
Notapplicable
5-6 weeks(dog)
Optiscl sheule be adced t red el within 72
Adenine
collecting bag contins63ml CPD.
6 wecks (ce)
huus of collecticn
Manritol
100mlOptisoladked1cairei
Sodium chloride
Focatod0fpisliae
tcIfeline unit
Figure15.8:Anticoagudant-preservativesolutionsforbloodcollectionandbloodhankinginthedogandcat.
*Supplymayvary withcountry.xThis shouldbedetermined basedon75%invivoredbloodcellRBC)viability at the end of
thestorageperiodasdeterminedby24hourpost-transfusionsurvivalinautologousrecipientsbyusingradiolabellingor
biotinylationtchniquesRecommendationsherearebasedoninvivoviabilitystudiesnvitrostudiesndclnicalexperience.
Thebloodproductmaybeused uptomidnightontheexpiry date.Refrigerated humanRBCsmay berejuvenated byusinga
hoursof rejuvenationForcollctingcatbloodintoa syringebyusingsotutionssuppliedinhumancollectingbagsorbags
usedforhaemapheresisandrelatedproceduressamplingsitecoupler(Figure15.16）isusedandthedesiredvolumef
solutionisaseptically withdrawn.*#*Thenutrientadditivesotutions(AS)are provided in specialcollectionpacksconsistingof
a bagconainingthenutrient solutionsateltitebagsforplasmaorplateletstorageandacolectingbagcontainingCPDirat
phosphate dextrose）solution(withAdsolandOptisoi)orCPD2solution(withNutricel）.CPD2differsfromCPDinhavingtwice
the amountofdextrose.TheprocessingofthesebagsisdescribedinBlood productpreparationandstorage.Thecollection
packsroutinelyusedwithdogscontain63mlCPD/CPD2and100ml ofnutrientASandaredesignedforcollectingand
processing450mtofblood.Collectionpacksarealsoavailablewith70miCPD/CPD2and110-111mlofnutrientASthatare
designed forcollectingandprocessingof500mlofblood.
Practical Blood Trasfusion  277
thereby promoting oxygen release to needy tissues.
count and indices have normalized. Client-owned dogs
The concentration of 2,3-DPG gradually decrcascs
usually donate blood every 2-3 months, and nutri-
during storage in ACD, so that blood at the end of the
tional supplementation is not requircd. Guidelines
storage period is not as effective as fresh blood in
have not been established for how frequently dogs can
delivcring oxygen to needy tissues. Upon ransfusion,
donate blood for plasma and/or platelet harvesting if
up to 50% of normal 2,3-DPG levels are synthesized
he RBCs are rclumed to the donor. I issuggested tha
within 3-8 hours, and most within 24 hours, but this
whole blood donation guidelines be followed.
11
Miay not be sufficient in critical cases. CPD was devel-
 oped in part to maintain better 2,3-DPG levcls, How-
Collection system
....
ever, 2,3-DPG levels still decline somewhat during
Human blood collection packs: Modern human blood
storagc in phosphate-containing solutions. In a dog
banking standards stipulate the use of closed blood
with severe acute anacinia, blool with a sufficient
collection systems. A closed syslcin is one that has nO
level of 2,3-DPG for immediate tissue oxygenation is
 desirable. For such a case, packed RBCs stored less
potential for environmental contact of the blood as it
flows from the vein to the collecting container. Any
than 2 wccks and whole blood storcd less than 4 weeks
system involving the operator having tu conucct picces
are preferred, assuming storage in CPD, CPDA, Adsol,
together is an open system, which increases the risk of
Nutricel or Optisol. This is not as important in cats
microbial contamination. Closed systems are ideal,
since this species normally has low lcvels of 2,3-DPG.
especially when bloor prudlucts are io be storcd, since
 Dog and cat blood is most often collected into CPD,
such products are excellent microbiological growth
CPD2 or CPDA, For syringe collection in cats, the
solutions supplied in boffles are less cxpensive fo use
media. However, open systems have been used for
Imany years and are acceptable as long as strict atten-
than those supplied in collecting bags where the col-
tion is given to avoiding contamination of connecting
lecting systenm is wasted. Wlienever a solution is being
drawn into a syringc, the rubhcr dliaphragem of fhe
surfaces. Also, closed systems do not guarantee steril-
n suso s ug u se 
container should be wiped with alcohol and allowed to
dry before needle puncture.
 Human blood collection packs are currently the
most suitable closed collection systems for use in dogs
BLOOD DONATION
(Figure 15.9). Such a pack is a self-contained unit
consisting of a 16 G thin-walled needle, tubing and
Dogs
plastic collecting bag containing an anticoagulanl-
Volume and frequency
preservative solution. Packs are also available with
Fifteen to 20% of cstimated bloud volure can be
'satellite bags' for preparation of blood components.
During the donation.the blood flows intothe collecting
safely donated.
bag by gravity or vacuum assistance (Figure 15.10).
Estimated blood
= 0.08-0.09 x Bodyweight (kg)
High-rate infusion pumps have been used for blood
volume (lires)
collection in large animals but this mcthol bas not becn
reported in the dog.
Using the above formula, the maximum accept-
able donalion volunc is aboul 16-18 ml/kg. By
Vucuum botlles: Vacuum botles with amlicoagulanl,
convention and for convenience, a standard blood
or to which anticoagulant may be added, are still
donation in the dog is 450 ± 45 ml, which is referred
available although obsolete. Wlien a vacuum bottle
to as *one canine uuit.'
is usedit is an open collclion system. A special tahing
Dogs can donate every 3 weeks as long as they
set is required that has an attached needle at one end (to
receive good nutrition. The need for iron supplementa-
pierce the diaphragm of the collecting bottle) and can
tion in the dliet should be determined by mcasuring
accommorlale a needlc for venepunclure at the ohcr
serun iron levels at least once a year. Microcytosis
end. As the blood enters the bottle it should be directed
is a late change in iron deficiency and should not
against the side, not the bottom, to minimize haemo-
be used to monitor iron status. Serun total iron binding
lysis. Alternatively the boutle may be held upside dowu
capacity is typically increased in dogs that frequently
so that the blood flows through thie anticoagulant.
donalc blood, reflecting increascd erythropciesis, and
Blood collected in this manner is not suitable for
should not be interpreted as a sign of iron deficiency. At
 storage, and contact with glass deactivates platelets
the OvC, clinic-owned donors may be given 100 mg of
 and factors VIII (FVII) and XILI (FXII).
ferric pyrophosphate as partofa liquid vitamin-mineral
supplement added to the ration every I-2 months.
Syringes: In an cmergcncy situation, if a regular collec-
 Repeat donor stress is preferable to patient death,
tion system is not available, multiple aliquots of blood
and in emergencies a dog can donate again after 1
 can be collected by using GO ml syringes and a winged-
week. If a progressive (lecrease in a donor's PCV is
infusion set as dlescribed for cats below. Care must be
moted, then the donor should be rested until the RBC
taken to avoid contamination when attaching and
278Manual of Canine and Feline Haematology and TransfusionMedicine
(a)
(b)
Figure 15.9:Human blood collection packs.(a)Whole blood
BK
collection pack designed for collecting and processing450
ml of blood.Packs designedfor collecting and processing
500mlofbloodareaisoavailabtehutarenotroutinely used
withdogs.(h)Collectionpackwithsatellitebagsuitablefor
preparing plasma andpiatelet products.This setalso
Figure15.10:Plexiglasvacuum chamberaltached to
incorporates a bagcontainingAdsol(seeFigure 15.8)
surgicalsuctionunit.The collectingbagisplaced into the
Collectionpacksmaybe suppliedinpackages containing
vacuum chambertoshortenthedonarion time.Such
more than onepack.Manufacturersinstructionsshould be
chamberswere once commercially manufacturedforhuman
followedforlengthoftimeunusedbagsmaybestoredinopened
useandmaybeavailablefromhospital surplussuppiiers.
Chambersforveterinary use are availablefrom the Animal
removingapacktopreventdesiccationoftheremainingpacks
Blood Bank(Dixon,California,USA).A vacuum pressure
especiailyifthe packsare nottobe usedwithin1-2months.
of125-175mmHg(5-7inchesHg,170-238cmH,O)
Handsshouldbethoroughlywashedbeforerenovingapack
should be used.Vacuum pressures above thismayresult in
from thepackage tominimize contaminationofthepouch,which
collapse of thevein.Ifa collectionset containingsatellite
bags isused,thebags arerolledupandplacedbeneathor
forfungaigrowthwhenevera packisrenoved,and
behind the collecting bag,to ensure that they do not
contaminatedpackages shouldbediscarded.
occludethevacuum port.
detaching the collecting syringesfrom theinfusionset.
technicallymore difficult,there is anincreased chance
Alternatively,a newintravenous saline bag can be emp
ofhaematomaformationandrepeatcollectioncanlead
tied,anticoagulant added anda 16-18Gneedle and fluid
to scarring of the vessel. Femoral artcry puncture or
administration set used tofashion a collection system.In
cardiocentesis are thepreferred methodsof collection
the author's opinion,it is preferable to use anirregular
from terminal donors as these methodsincrease vol-
blood collection system than to withhold a potentially
umeyicld.Carotid-jugular fistulacmaybccrcaled to
life-saving transfusion.Bloodshouldnotbestoredow
facilitatehaemoaccess,but arenotrecommended.
ever, after having been collected by such methods.
Procedure:Twopcople,arestraincrandaphlcbotomist,
Venepuncture and blood collection
are required for a blood donation. A third person is
Fasting:A12-hourfastbeforedonationisrecommended
helpful toprovide additional restraint and handle the
in the event thatsedation oranaesthesia isrequired or that
collecting bag.Most dogs are restrained in lateral re-
hypotensioncausesnausea andvomiting.Ifthe donor has
not beenfasted,forexample,with an emergency dona
more comfortablein sternal recumbency.Habituated
donors can be manually restrained in a quiet location.If
tion,postprandial lpamia doesnot seem to affect t
sedation is required,narcoties such as oxymorphone
qualityoffreshorstoredbloodproductsortoincreasethe
risk of transfusion reactions.Lipaemia may increase
(0.05-0.2 mg/kg i.v.or i.m.,maximum dose 4.5 mg) or
rouleauxformation,which complicates crossmatching.
butorphanol(0.05-0.4mg/kg i.v.or i.m.,maximum
Lipaemiamayalsocausesomelatletactivationbu 
dose6mg) are often sufficient,but diazepam(0.250.5
clinical importance of this is not known.
mg/kg i.v.) or a low dose of acepromazine (0.01-0.025
mg/kgi.v.ori.m.)maybe givenas well.Intractable dogs
Blood vessels: Blood is usually collected by jugular
may haveblood collected under anaesthesiawith bar-
venepuncture.The cephalic vein may beusedinalarge
biturates,propofoland/orinhalation agents.Trace drug
dog.The femoral artery may also be used,but this is
levels in the collected blood are of minimal concern,
Practical BloodTransfusion279
exccpt accpromazine which impairs plateletfunction
and shouldbe avoidedwhereblood isintended tobc
used in the treatment of thrombocytopenic dogs.
A 19 G winged infusion set or 20 G catheter placed
asepticallyintothe cephalic or lateralsaphenous veinis
optional.The catheter facilitates proinptintravenous
administration of sedative drugs andintravcnousfluids
should these bc rcquired.
A blood donation is illustrated in Figures 15.11-
15.15.Duringcollectionthere mustbe strict adherencc
to asepsis,especiallyifbloodis obestorcd.Venepunc-
ture shouldbeminimallytraumatic tominimizeplate
let clumping and coagulation. The injection of local
Figure 15.12:Canine blood donation.During collectionthe
anaesthesia atthevenepuncturesiteisnotrecom-
ncedleshould beatleast1.5cmwithintheveintoguard
mended bccause it interferes with visualization and
againstdislodgement.Thetubingisscuredmanuallyeither
againstthe tableorattheneedie hubagainst theskin.Inthe
palpation of the vein.If local anaesthesia is desired,a
author'sexperiencetheformerispreferablewhenthedonor
topical preparationcontainingprilocaine and/orligno-
isin lateralrecubency,thelatterresulting inmore
caineiscffective.A'mini cul-downcanbe performed
dislodgementduring donation.If the donorisinsternal
but is not usually necessary.
recumbency,theeedlhubmust emanually secued.
The bugiscloselyobservedforcontinuous expansion
duringcollection.If cessationofflow issuspectedthesiteof
entryofthetubeintothebagshouldbedigitallycompressed
towipe awayresidual bloodandobservedforflow.Iblood
flowstopsthevenepuncturesiteshouldbeexaminedfor
haematoma formation.If none isnoted,theneedle should be
gentlyrotated.Ifbloodflowdoesnotresume,theneedle
shouldbeslowlyadvancedin linewiththevein.If this does
notresultinresumptionofbloodflow,theneedleshouidbe
slowly withdrawn until blood flow resumes.
Figures 15.1l:Canine blood donation.The skin over the
venepuncture siteis clipped and surgically prepared.
Inexperiencedphlebotomistsshouldwearsterilegloves.The
jugularveinisraisedwithgentlepressure placedover the
jugulargrooveat thethoracicinletbyeither theassistant
(in this case theowner),the phlebotomist or by useofa
skin is taut over the vein.
Beforeremoving theneedlecover,thetuhingiskinkedor
clamped toprevent theanticoagulunt-preservativesolution
fromemptyingoutofthetubingintothebag.Topreventdamage
to thecollection tubingwhenclanpingcleun bamagetape
shouldbewrappedaroundthegroovesofahaemostatora
plastic intravenous tubing clamp shouid be used.
Ifthe dogisinlateralrecumbency,directing theneedle
Figure15.13:Canineblooddonation.(a）Thecollectingbag
towardstheheart facilitatesvenepuncture.Ifthedogisin
isgentlyrockedasblood flowsin,to ensureadequatemixing
sernalrecumhencydirectingtheneedleowardsthehead
with theanticoagulant-preservative solution.Anassistant
facilitatesvenepuncture.
mosteasilyaccomplishesthisbutanexperiencedphlebotomist
Theneedleshouldheheldat 10-20degrees to theskin.
can stabilizethe tubingwithonehandandrockthecollecting
Alternatively,theskinmaybepenetratedat45degreesand
bagwiththeother.An alternative torockingthechamher
theneedlereorientedinlinewiththeveinat10-20degrees.
duringvacuumcollectionisto hang thebag upsidedownin
Asharperangleisliketytoresultinpiercingofthe opposite
thechamberThisensuresthatthebloodflowsthroughthe
vesselwall.
anticoagulant-preservative solution.A laboratoryblood tube
Ineithercasequicksharphrustislesspainfltohe
rockermaybeusedwith gravity collection.
donor andless apt to pushaway thevesselwall thana
A scaleistared to thecombinedweightofthecollecting
gradual thrust.Apoppingsensationmaybefeltwhenthe
bag,anticoagulant-preservativesolutionandvacuumchamber
needle enters the vein.
ifusedandtheveightischeckedperiodicallyduring the
Successfulvenepunctureis usuallyindicated byaflashof
donarionThetubeisclampedneartheneedlewhenthe desired
bloodinto thetubing.Ifthephlebotomistbelievestheneedle
weightof477±48gofbloodisreached beforeremovingthe
iscorrectlylacedbuoflashcurhntheg
needle,tomininizeairentryntothecollectingbag.
clampshouid hereleased.Ifblood doesnotflowintothe
（b）A blood shakercanbe used,whichrocks theblood
ubing,thetubingshouldbeclampedtheneedlewithrawn
during gravitycollectionandclampsthetubingwhen thebag
andvenepuncture attempted again.
reaches a desiredweight.
280Manual of Canine andFeline Haematologyand Transfusion Medicine
Volume:The standard collection volume is 450±45
ml.This volume is estimated by weight.Assuming 1.0
ml of bloodweighs about 1.06g,thestandard collec-
tion weight is about477±48g.The minimum accept-
able'underdraw'forbloodcollectedintoCPD（citrate
phosphate dextrose)orCPDA,(citrate phosphate dex-
trose adenine)tobetransfused as whole blood is405
ml(429g).Theminimum acceptable underdrawfor
blood tobe used to prepare packedRBCs is 300 ml
(318g),in which case the plasma is discarded.Under-
drawing the bag below these values dccreases RBC
Figure15.14:Canine blood donation.Once the donationis
compleedhebloodremaininginhtubingismechaniay
survival during storage andincreases therisk ofcitrate
intoxication (see Transfusion reactions). The maxi-
gentyrockedbackandforthtoensureadequatemixing,and
mum acceptableoverdraw'is 495 ml (525 g).Over-
thenthebagsgentlymanualcompressedtreflthetubing.
drawing thebagbeyond thesevaluesinercasestherisk
of coagulation during collectionandrupture of thebag
during centrifugation and decreases RBC survival
during storage.
04217607X
n4217602X
Time:The entire donation process,if problem free,
typically takes 20-30 minutes. Blood collection is
(@)
completedwithin5-15minuteswithgravitycollection
and 3-10minutcswithvacuum collection.A brief
stoppage of flow during collection (c.g.<2 minutes)
usually doesnotresult incoagulationbutmayresult in
some platelet clumping. Collections of longer than 15
minutes donotresultin coagulation if blood flowis
continuous but may alsoresult in platelet clurnping.
Problems:Ifa haemaloma develops or the needle
becomes dislodged,bloodcollectionmustusually be
discontinued and a new venepuncture site selected.If
this occurs early in the proccdure, it is best to begin
again witha newcollectionset.Ifthisoccurswell into
the procedure,it is unlikely that a new unit can bc
collectedwithout excessive donor blood loss.Based
on human standards,abloodbagshouldbediscarded
if donationiscompletelynterrupted.However,f th
veterinaryclinic cannot afford towaste the donation,
then as long as contamination of thc ncedle did not
occur,it is the author's opinion that completing the
donation from a newvenepuncture site is acceptable,
especially if the blood is to be given as a fresh trans-
fusion.Ifbothjugularveins develophaematomata and
completing the donation is essential,then anaesthesia
of the donor and surgical exposure of thevein can be
(C)
performed. The vein is always located in thc middle of
Figure 15.15:Canine blood donation.(a)The tubing is
the hacmatoma.
sealedattheX'toprovidealiquotsofabout 0.5ml,which
canbeusedtomeasurepackedcellvolumetotalsolidsand
Aftercareof thedonor
othervariablesonthehloodandtoperformcompatibility
Modcrate pressure is placed overthe venepuncture site
testingwithouivadingthebag.Theubingilefattached
totebagfodaselnginsndeuedt
for 2-5 minutes.A neck bandage is optional.The dog
witharubberband.(b)Aluminium sealing clips aremost
is observed for 15-30 minutes for weakness,pale
cost-efficientforthequantityofblood bagsprocessed by
mucous membranes,weak pulses and other signs of
veterinary clinics.(c)Thermalsealers aremore time efficient
hypotension.
when large quantities of blood are being processed.
Volumereplacementwithsaline orsimilarcrystal
Ifasealingsystemisnotavailahtefirmknotsmaybe
tiedbutthese donotprovideassecurea barrieragainst
loidsolutionshasbeenrecommended afterdonation.
leakage andcontamination.
This is no longer routinely practised at the OvC.
Practical Blood Transfusion281
Volumereplacement attwo to threetimestheblood
loss (i.e. about 1000-1500 ml) is givcn at 90 ml/kg/h
i.v.,if there are clinical signs of hypotension.
The dog may be fed after thepost-donation obser-
vation period.Theownerisadvisedtoavoidexercising
the dogexcessively for scvcral days
Cats
The principles describcd above for the dog apply to
the cat.Differences in feline blood donation are
described below.
Figure 15.16:Feline blood donation.A sampting site
coupler(e.g.Baxter4C2405),thatprovides an injection port
Volume and frequency
forbloodproductbagsisattachedtoahumancoliecting
Fifteen to 20% of estimatedbloodvolume can be
hagsothatasmallvolumeofanticoagulant-preservative
solutionmay bewithdrawn.
safcly donated.
Estimated blood
x
volume (litres)
Using the above formula themaximum accept-
abledonationvolumeis approximately11-13ml/kg,
referred to asone feline unit.A standard donation
in the cat at theOvCresults in 60ml of anticoagu-
lated blood.Cats can donate once every3-4weeks
and again in 2 weeks in times of emergencies. Cats
that donate blood on a monthly basis,or morc frc-
quently,should e given regulariron supplementa
tion in thcir diet (e.g. 10 mg/kg ferrous sulphate
Figure15.17:Feline blood donation.A19 Gwinged
twice a week,5 mg/cat ferrous fumarate daily).Iron
infusionset(butterfly’)isattachedtoa60ml syringeinto
supplementation in the form of daily vitamin-
whichiheanticoagulant-preservative solutionhasbeen
drawn.Thesameprinciples concerningvenepuncturein the
dog applyto thecat.The syringeis gentlyrocked during
supplementsmaybeunpalatable.The levelofsupplc-
bloodcollection.Thecollectiontubingmay begently
mentation should be adjusted based on laboratory
manually securedagainst thedonor'sheadwheninlateral
assessment of iron deficiency.
recumbency. Care is taken to avoid excessive negative
pressure,whichmaycausehaemolysis.Two35ml syringes
Collection system
may be used to increase donationvolumefroma largedonor.
Infusionset:Bloodiscommonly collcctcdfrom cats
with a 19 Gwinged infusionset attached to a 60ml
syringeinto which the anticoagulant-preservative
solution has been （lrawn (Figurcs 15.16-15.18).
For blood banking purposes,the blood is then trans-
ferrcdtoa100-150ml storagebag.Altermatively,the
anticoagulant-preservative solution may bc added
to the storage bag, the storage bag tubing attached
to an 18 G needle for venepuncture and the blood
collectcdby gravity orwith vacuumassistance.These
are open systems.
Figure15.18:Feline blood donation.For blood banking
purposesathree-way stopcockisplacedhetweenthe
Closed systems:Closed systems with small bags and
buterflyand thesyringeanda100mlcapacity storagebag
(Animal BloodBank,Dixon,California,USA)isattached.
needles are currently not available.There are two
Aftercollecting thebloodintothesyringe,thestopcocks
optionsifaclosedcollectionsystem is desired.Firstly,
turned,and thebtoodisslowlyinjectedinto thestoragebag.
aclosedsystcmcanbe fabricatedbyusingasteriletube
Any ar thathasenteredthebag iswithdrawn,atongwith
welding instrument designed forpreparationofuniquc
sufficientblood iofill thetubetothedesiredamount;the
human paediatric blood collctionsets(Springeretal.,
tube is then sealed as deseribed above.
1998). Secondly, standard double bag human blood
Analternativestoragebagisa150mlcapacitypaediatric
transfer pack（e.g.Baxter 4R2001）.Inthiscase a sampling site
collection packs can beused to collect feline blood
coupler(seeFigure15.16)isattachedtothebag,and the
(Price,1991).
blood isslowty injectedintothebag throughan18Gneedle.
282  Manual of Canine and Feline Haemalology and Transfusion Medicine
The feline jugular vein is as large as the human
boluses of propofol 1.0 mg/kg i.v., are given to
antccubital vcin (the slandard hurnan venepuncture
prolong anacsthesia
site) and can accommodate the 16 G needle. The length
Ketamine-diazepam, as previously described,
of the needle makes venepuncture more difficult than
0.5-0.l ml/kg i.v. Additional boluses of one-
with shorter nccdles when thc donor is in lateral
quartcr to one-half the initial dose may be given
recumbency, so sternal recumbency is recommended.
to prolong anacsthcsia. Sedation with
If this system is used, the collecting bag is rolled up to
 intranuscular butorphanol-acepromazine
express cxcess anticoagulant-preservative solution into
followed by intravenous ketamine-diazepam is
the satellite bag. lcaving 8 ml in the collecting bag
the protocol widely uscd at the OVC.
(which may be verified by measuring bag weights).
Blood is collected by gravity.
An oxygen mask may be placed over the cat's face
during the donation, and an cndotracheal tube should
 Sedation and anacsthesia
be available should ventilatory suppor. be required.
 Almost all catsrequire sedation oranaesthcsia. A 21-23
Endotracheal intubation is recommended if the cat has
G winged infusion1 set or 20-22 G catheter aseptically
not been fasted before donation, altlhiough this does not
placcd into the cephalic or merlial saphenous vein is
eliminate the possibility of aspiration because of the
recommended. Recommended sedation aud anaesthe-
need to extubate cats before developing a swalluwing
sia protocols include:
reflex. Inhalation anaesthesia with isoflurane can also
be used for bloorI rlonation. The use of vascular access
Kclamine 100 mg/ml mixed 1:1 or 1:2 with
devices to facilitate feline blood donalion without
diazepam 5 mg/ml. Give 0.1 ml/kg i.v.
anaesthesia is being investigated.
Additional boluses of one-quarter to one-half the
initial dose may be given to prolong anaestlhiesia
Venepuncture and blood collection
Ketamine 10 mg/kg and midazolam 0.2 mg/kg.
Blood is collected by jugular venepuncture, with the
mixed together, i.m. Additional boluses of
cat restrained in cither lateral or sternal recumbency
ketarmine 1.0 1mg/kg i.v., may bc given to prolong
(see Figure 15.17). Cardiocentesis may be used in
anaesthesia
terminal donors. Vasoconstriction is more pronounced
Ketamine 2 mg/kg and midazolam 0. I mg/kg,
in. the cat than dog after venepuncture, making
imixcd together, i.v. Additional holuses of one-
venepuncture more difficult if repeal allempts arc
quarter to one-half the initial dose may bc given.
necessary. Assuming the volume of anticoagulant-
 to prolong anaesthesia.
 preservative solutiou was meant for a 60 ml donation,
the minimum acceptable uderdraw for blood col-
The principal disadvantages of ketamine-based
lected into ACD-A (acid citrate dextrose-A), CPD, or
protocols are the prolonged post-anaesthesia cffect
 CPDA, (see Figure 15.8) to be given as whole blood is
and the possibility of arrhythmogenesis in cats with
a final volume of 55 ml. The minimumi acceptablc
mndiagnoscd hypertroplic cardiomyopathy. For these
pyoed aredaud on pasn aq on poonq roj xeipiapum
reasons some prefer to use neuroleplanalgesia-based
RBCs is a final volume of 42 ml, in which case the
regirmens:
plasma is discarded. The maximum acceptable over-
Oxymorphone 0.05-0.1 mg/kg and acepromazine
draw is a final volume of 65 inl. Blood collection is
0.04-0.10 mg/kg, mixed together, i.m. or i.v.
typically completed within 3-5 minutes. Rouline post-
Butorphanol 0.2-0.4 mg/kg ± acepromazine
anaesthesia monitoring is performed.
0.04-0.10 mg/kg, mixed togethcr, i.m. or i.v.
 Butorphanol 0. 1-0.2 mg/kg ± diazepam 0.5 mg/kg.
Aftercare of the donor
mixed together, i.v.
Hypotension, characterized variably by pale mucous
membranes, tachycardia and weak pulses, is a com
 mon cornplication of feline lomation, but its signifi-
algesia regimens are potential exacerbation of hypo-
cance to donor health is not known. Rapid volume
tension by acepromazine during blood collection
expansion during donation to correct hypotension is
and insufficient sedation for blood collection.
undesirable becausc of haemodilution. At the OVC, in
Some phlebotomists prefer fo sedatc donors
the past, vofume replacerment after the donation with
with oxymorphone 0.1-0.2 mg/kg i.v., without
crystalloid solutions at three times the blood loss (i.e.
150-180 ml) was given intravenously ovcr 15-20
acepromazine to minimize hypolcnsion. If sedation is
insufficient with acepromazine and/or a narcolic, then
minutes. Such rapid volume replacement occasionally
the following agents may be added:
rcsulicd in bradycardia and rarely pulmonary oedema.
The current fluid thcrapy protocol is to givc 90 ml of
 Propofol, calculated induction dose of 4 mg/kg
saline subcutaneously immediately before the dona-
i.v, with onc-half the dose given as a rapid bolus
lion, and then to infuse 60 ml of saline over 15-20
and the remainder given to effect. Additional
minutes starting half-way through the donation,
Practical Blood Transfiusion Z
283
BLOOD PRODUCT PREPARATION
 obtained have been stored successfully without micro-
AND STORAGE
 bial growth, but blood banking is practised at the OVC
 by experienced stalff. For gcncral practices that do not
Editor's Note: In the UK,the storage of blood and
intend to develop a special interest in transfusion
 the preparation of blood products for storagc is not
mcdicine, it is recommended that only fresh blood
encouraged by the Royal College of Veterinary
products be used for the cal or thal a closed human
Surgcons. The 1996 RCVS Guide to Professional
collection system be used for storage.
Conduct states that the taking of blood from healthy
 The most inportant blood products in veterinary
animals for the purposes of blood transfusion is
medicine arc whole blood, packed RBCs, frozen plasma
 only recognized in veterinary practice whcrc lhcrc
 and frcsh frozen plasma. Component therapy is morc
 is an immcrliate or anticipaled clinical indication 
important in dogs than in cats, and feline components
for the transfusion. Blood storage and preparation
are more difficult to prepare because of the smaller
of blood products is covered uder the Animals
volumes involved. Any compouent prepared from onc
(Scienlific Procedures) Acl 1986 andl would re-
unit of whole blood is referred to as one unit of that
 quire a specific Home Office Licence. Moreover,
component. The various components may be washed,
blood products would need to be licensed under thc
depleted of lcucocytes and irradiated in an efforl lo 
Medicincs Act 1968.
reduce inmunogenicity, but these techniques are rarely
 used in veterinary medicine.
Collected blood may be givcn as a fresh transfusionl,
A flow chart for the preparation of blood compo-
 stored and transfused at a later rlate or separated into
 nents is given in Figure 15.19. The collectedt blood
various components for fresh transfusion or storage.
should be held at room temperature while awaiting
Moderm blood banking practice standards stipulatc
separation into frcsh components. Tlic blood producl
that only blood products prcpared from blood col-
should be clcarly labelled as lo the type of producl,
lected in closed collectionsystems should be stored, to
collection date, expiry date, donor, blood type (if
minimize risk of microbial growth. The open collec-
known), PCV (for whole blood and packed RBCs) and
fion system illustrated in Figure 15.17 is uscd at the
total solids prolein (for wholc blood, packed RBCs and
OVC for cat donations, and the blood products
plasma products).
Centrifugation
Fresh
Refrigeration
Wlole Blood
Whole Blood
十
Freeing.
Platelet-Ricl
Fresh
Fresh Plasna
Liquid
Plasna
Packed Rerl Cells
Plaana
Packed Redl Cels
 Fresh Frozen
One Yenr
Plasma
Plasma
Hard Spiut
Thawel
Plasna
Platelet
Frozen
Ciyoprecipitate
Ciyap oor Plasma
Cryopoor
Coucentrate
Plasina
Figure 15.19: Flowcharr for the preparation of blood components by centrifugalion.
 284  Manual of Canine and Ieline Haematology and Transfusion Medicine
RBC products
Fresh blood use: The use of fresh whole blood
has largely been abaudoncd in human medicine,
leading some veterinarians to make sinilar recom-
Whole blood
mendalions. Howcver, one of the inain reasons for
discouraging the usc of frcsh blood products in
 Storage: Whole blood is stored under refrigeratiou
 general in human imedicine is thal screcning for
at 1-6°C (see Figure 15.20). Ideally a dedicated
infectious diseases and compatibility testing often
refrigerator should be used. If a gcncral-purpose
take up to 24 hours to complete. In addition, the
refrigerator is used, a designated area shoull be
wide availability of component products pcrmits
sel aside for blood products (not in the door), and
the replacement of lost blood components to be
 the refrigerator door should bc opened and closed
tailored to indivilual patient needs. Blood compo-
as quickly as possible. A thermomcicr should be
nents have more restricted availability in veterinary
kept inside the refrigerator and examined a mininmum
 medicine. Proper donor selection anl rapid compat-
of two times a day to cnsurc proper refrigeration.
ibility testing (see Transfusion reactions) allow for
 Continuous temperature recordlcrs are available. If
safe transfusion of fresh wholc blood (and other
refrigeration is interrupted for more than 30 mimutes,
fresh blood products), which is likcly to rcimai1 a
necessity in animals.
Maximum storage times reportcd with various
anticoagulant-preservative solutions are prescnicd
in Figure 15.8. The bag should not be *invaded, i.e.
Transfusion: The principal indication for transfusion
of fresh or stored whole blood is substantial acute
no blood should be withdrawn or adlditive injected,
haemorrlhagc, since replacement of RBCs, plasma
during the storage period. The practice of storing
colloid and volume deficits is rcquired. A guideline
feline wliote blood in the collecting syringe is not
is to consider transfusion if volume replacement
recommended.
with crystalloids results in a PCV <20% or total
protein <25 g/ (Wagner and Dunlop, 1993). Fresh 
Haemostatic properties: Stored whole blood differs
whole blood may be preferred if baemurthage is
from fresh whole blood prirnarily with respect to
 owing to disorders of haemostasis, unless other
haemostatic properies. Platelets refrigeratcrl for up
blood products and/or lrcatmenis can be given conn-
to 24 hours lhave normal to increased immediate
currently to address thc haemastatice defects. It
function, but post-transfusion circulation time
should also be noted that RBC transfusion in itself
declines substantially after 6 to 8 hours of refrigera.
has soune hacmostatic benefit and may reduce bleed-
tion, and is only 10% after 24 hours. After 72 hours
ing time and activated partial thromboplastin time
of refrigcration, platelet haemostatic ability in vivo
(Ho, 1998).
is lost, although platelets will retain some ability to
Thie voluunc of whole blood to transfuse is based on
aggregate in vitro.
 previous, ongoing antlestimatedl future losses. Usually
Sinmilarly, activity levels of the labile coagulation
the volume will be between 10 and 22 ml/kg, and thc
factors, i.e. FV (potentially useful in the treatment
volume transfused per day should not exceed this
of disseminated intravascular coagulation) and
upper value unless there are severe ongoing losscs.
 FVIII (csscntial in the treatnent of haemophilia A),
 Reinfusion of shed blood may be useful under these
and von Willebrand factor (vWf; important to the
circumstances (see Autotransfusion). Hypertonic
therapy of von Willebrand's disease) progressivcly
(7.5%) saline, 4-5 ml/kg i.v. over 10 minutcs, should
declinc in refrigerated whole blood due to proteolytic
also be considered if there is haemorrhagic shock. Its
degradation. Human FVIHIactivity decreases by 50%
beneficial effects last about an hour. Once bteeding has
after 24 hours, but effective haemostatic activity
been controlled, the remaining RBC dcficif can be
remains for 2 weeks. Canine FVlll is more stable
replaced as described below.
than human FVIIl, with about 85% of activily of tlie
Whole blood is also frequcntly given to correct
former present after 24 hours of refrigcralion. Activ-
anaemia from causes other than acute haemorrhage,
ity of vWf also decreases rapidly. In human blood,
although packed RBCs are preferredl. Guidelines for
about 75% activily is prcsent after 24 hours, 33%
when to consider transfusion are discussed elsewhere
after 1 week, 22% after 2 wceks aud 13% after
in this manual. Simple rulcs of thumb to determine the
 3 weeks of storage. This loss in activity is mostly
volume to give are:
 owing to breakdlown of large multimers into smaller
multimers, and is not reflected in vWf antigen, wlhich
1.0 ml (transfused whole blood)/lb (recipient
retains most of iis activily in refrigerated whole
weight) raises the recipient PCV by 1%
blood for about I week, and >50% activity has been
found after 21 days. There is only mild loss of other
2.0 ml (transfused whole blood)/kg (recipient
 coagulation factors and antithrombin II (ATIII).
weight) raises the rccipicn1 PCV by 1%
Practical BloodTransfusion
285
Thevolume totransfuse ismoreprecisely calcu-
1-6°Cfor aminimum of 12hours.Sedimentation
latedbythe followingformula:
from3 days to2weeks,ot additionof synthetic
colloid,maximizcs RBC and plasma separation and
Recipient desired PCV
Volume cf donor
Recipient
85(dog)
shouldbe considered if aprimarygoal is toproduce
-Current PCV
blood tobe
=weight
Xor
PCV ofanticagulated
plasma with minimal RBCcontent.If a plasma
transfused (ml)
(kg)
60(cat)
cxtractor is not available, the blood bag can bc
donorblcod
suspended upside down forRBCsedimentation.The
Thisformula assumes that60and 85represent ml/kg
packedRBCs can then betransfused ortransferredto
averagebloodvolume forcat and dog,respectively.
a 300ml transfer packby gravity.For felinc blood the
60 ml collecting syringe can be stored vertically or
Packed RBCs
upside down and theplasma orpacked RBCs trans-
fusedor transferred to a 150 ml transferpack by
Preparation and storage:Fresh wholeblood is sepa-
injcetion.Feline RBCs sediment more rapidly and
rated into packed RBCs and plasma by centrifugation
efficiently than do canine RBCs.
(preferably)orsedimentation.Packed RBCs are stored
under refrigeration at 1-6°C(Figure 15.20).Maxi-
mum storage timesfor packed RBCsreportedwith
various anticoagulant-preservativesolutions aregiven
in Figur 5.8.Canine,but not eline,RBCshave al
been stored by cryopreservation.
Figure 15.21:
Centrifugation of blood.
(a) Large capaeity
swing-bucketfloor
modelrefrigerated
Figure 15.20:Refrigerated storage ofred blood cell(RBC)
centrifuge suitable for
products.WholebloodandpackedRBCbagsshouldbestored
thepreparationofblood
verticallyorsidewaysinplasticholdersorboxestoreducethe
components.Tabletop
riskofdamagetothebloodbagsandtofacilitateorganization
fixedbucket centrifuges
andretrieval.Such storage alsomaximizes oxygen diffusionin
may also be used but
to,andcarbondioxidediffsionutofhebaguttheeff
are not ideal.Styrofoam
of this onRBCviabiliry of dogandcatblood isnotknown.
and cork moulds can be
RBCproducts attheOntarioVeterinary Coilegearegentty
made forthe bucketsto
mixeddaily.buttheimportanceofthispracticeisnotknown.
accommodatethe
ThebagholdersshownhereareavaiiabiefromtheAnimal
smaller cat bloodbags.
Blood Bank,Dixon,California,USA.
Alternatively,the
smaller bagcanbe
placedintotwo
Centrifugation:Centrifugation requires a centrifuge
thicknesses of standard
that is cost prohibitive to most veterinary clinics
bags with the tops cut
(Figure15.21).Centrifugationat5000gfor5minutes
offandsecuredwithrubberbandsfoabagofsalinefor
at4°Cisrccommended.Forslowercentrifuges,2000
supportdurincentrifugationeider1995）(bood
g for 10 minutes has been found to be satisfactory at
bagsshouldbeplacedperpendicular totherotationaxisto
the OvC.Centrifugation timesinclude time required
reducethe chance ofrupture.Satellitebags should be
tucked inalongside theblood bags (they may berolledup)
foraccclcration butnot for decelcration.Rapid decel-
and loosetubingoccludedandsecuredtothebagswitha
eration can result in resuspension of RBCs. Once
rubberband.Thecentrifugeisbestbalancedwith dry
RBCs arepacked,the plasma is removed with a
rubbermaterial.Ifwaterisusedtheblood bagshould be
plasma cxtractor (Figure 15.22).Adsol,Nutricel or
placedina plasticcentrifuge bag andthecentrifuge
Optisol may then be added to the packed RBCs
bucketsthoroughlydriedafter eachused tominimize
npaqfippufoos
(Figure 15.23).
centrifugation,heneitherthecenrifugationrateshould
decreased andcentrifugationtimeincreasedorwater
Sedimentation:For sedimentation of dogblood,the
shouldbepouredaround thebloodbagstosupport them
blood bag is suspended vertically in a refrigerator at
during centrifugation.
286Manual of Canine and Feline Haematology and TransfusionMedicine
RBC transfusion:The principal indication for
packed RBC transfusionis anaemia without hypovol-
aemia or deficits in other blood componcnts.Packed
RBCs are particularly useful with patients at an
increasedrisk ofvolume overload(see Transfusion
reactions).The transfusionvolume is calculatedwith
thc formula given above.Thc rules of thumb for
transfusion volume are:
Figure 15.22:Expressing canine plasma.The primary
1.0mI (transfused packed RBCs)/ib (recipient
(blood) bag is gently transferred to(a)a homemade
wcight)raiscs the recipicnt PCV by2%
extractor or.preferably,(b)a commercial spring-driven
plasma extractor.
Ifa collectionpackwithasatellitebagwasusedthe
2.0 ml (transfused packed RBCs)/kg (recipicnt
plastic seal at thetopof the primaryhag isbroken.
weight) raises thc recipient PCV by2%
Otherwisea3o0mltransferpark isasepricaily attachedto
themiddleentry port of theprimarybag.Theplasma is then
expressedintothe secondary(plasma)bag,Pressure on the
Packed RBCs may also be used to trcat acute
primarybagshouldbeinitiallymanuallyreducedtoprevent
haemorrhagic anaemia,with concurrent administra-
rupture.Plasmaexpressionisterminatedbymanually
tion of plasma products,synthetic colloid solutions
clamping the tubing.
Plasma exiractorswithelectroniecontrolofplasma
and crystalloid solutions.
expression are also available.Ifthepackedredbloodcells
(RBCs)intheprimary bag areio be stored in citrate
phosphate dextroseadeninethefinalpackedcellvolume
RBCsubstitutes:VariousRBC substitutes areunder
shouldbe<80%.Thisrequires leavingat least50mlof
development,includingperfluorochemicals,liposomc-
plasma inthe primary bagwhichisaccomplished by
encapsulated haemoglobin and haemoglobin-based
terminatingplasma expressionwhentheRBC-plasma
oxygen carriers (Wohl and Cotter,1995).
interface isabou2cmfrom thetop.Theresulringvolume of
Oxyglobin(Biopure,Cambridge,Massachusetts,
packedRBCs is usually 250-300ml.ForpackedRBCs to be
USA), a polymerized bovine haemoglobin solution,
storedinAdsolNutricelorOptisoinoresiduaiplasmais
requiredintheprinary bag,andplasma expressionis
is an example of the latter (Rentko,2000).It is
terminated beforeRBCs begintoenter the secondary bag.
available for use in dogs in some countries and
The tubingissealed as described above and cut.One
has also been given successfully to cats. The dose
mililitre of plasmaweighs1.03g,thereforethevolumein the
is10-30 ml/kg,given ata maximum rate of 10
plasma bag is:
ml/kg/h.Haemoglobin concentration,not haema-
Plasma unit
Weight of unit(g)-Weight of bag(g)
tocrit,should be used to monitor anaemia after
volume(ml)
1.03
transfusion.Theprincipal advantagesof Oxyglobin
One unit of canine plasma usually contains 150-250ml.
are thatitisconvenienttouse,avoidsincompatibility
Withfelinebloodlasmaexpressionistminatedwn
reactions and is superior to RBCs in delivering
the RBC-plasmainterfacereachesthe topof thebag.
Alternativelytheplasmamaybedrawnoffwithasyringe
oxygen to tissues. The principal disadvantage is
and18Gneedle.One unit of feline plasma usually contains
its short duration of effect (11-82 hours,half-life
25-35ml.
of18-26hours) compared with RBCs (a typical
transfusionlasts 4-6 weeks unless there is acceler-
Figure 15.23:The sealon the
ated RBC destruction).Other disadvantages include
AdsolNutricel or Optisol bag
interferencewithvariousserumchemistry analyscs
is broken and the solution is
and developmentofhaemoglobinaemia,haemoglob-
transferredbygravityintothe
inuria and icterus. The last may interfere with
primary bagcontaining the
packedred hloodcells
monitoring of patients with haemolytic anaemia.
(RBCs）.The additive solution
Oxyglobin acts as a plasma volume expander and
bagisthenrolled up to
causes vasoconstriction -this increases systemic
maximizetransferof the
solution.TheRBCs and
and pulmonary arterial blood pressure,which may
additivesolution are gently
be beneficial or detrimental depending upon the
mixed together by rocking.
clinical situation.
One halfof thepackedRBCs
maythenbetransferredwith
the piasma extractor backinto
Plasma products
the additive solution bag to
After RBCs are separated from plasma as described
create two haif units.For
above(or by automated plasmapheresis),the plasma
feline packedRBCs,the
mutrientsolutionisinjected
may beprocessed intovarious products.All of these
into the storage bagvia the
plasma products are poorinplatelets,whichremainin
injection port.
the packed RBC fraction.
Practical BloodTransfusion287
Freshplasma and freshfrozen plasma
Fresh plasma is plasma that hasbeen separated
from RBCs within 8 hours of collection and
immediatcly transfused
Fresh frozen plasma is plasma that has been
separated andplaced at-18°Corcolderwithin
8hours of collection.
These time restrictions are based on the deteriora-
lionofhumanFVIlIactivity andreflecttheimportance
of haemophilia A in human medicine.Fresh and fresh
frozenplasmahavemaximalactivityofallcoagulation
factors, also making them suitable for treating
coagulopathies due to hepatice failure and DIC as well
as othercauses.Treshand freshfrozen plasma likewise
have maximum levels of vWf,as well as containing
normal levels of albumin (see Liquid plasma and
frozen plasma).Although not of proven benefit,fresh
frozen plasma hasbeenrecommended for the treat-
(b)
ment of acute pancreatitis toreplace albumin and treat
Figure 15.24:Frozen storage ofplasma products.At the
DIC,but more specifically to replenish α
OntarioVeterinary Collegefreshfrozenplasma is stored at
macroglobulins.The macroglobulins are plasma
-70°℃and frozen plasma is storedat-18C.(a)Plasma
protease inhibitors that bind to activatcd pancreatic
products are properly frozen in hags(e.g.freezer bags)
withinacardboardstoragecontainertopreven breakage.
proteases,which are thencleared from the circulation
(b)Thebags areinitiallyfrozenlyingflatinthefreezer.After
by macrophages.Theoriginalstudies in rats and humans
completefreezingthebagsarestoredverticalyresultingin
used freshfrozenplasma,butinfact macroglobulins
the appearanceofthebagontheright.Shouldinadvertent
seem to be stable in plasma under refrigeration.
thawingandrefreezingoccur,thebagwillchangeshapeund
any airbubblesill shiftothetop(middleugindicating
storageproblem.Inadditiona rubber band canbeplaced
Storage:Because of the time restriction,fresh and
around thebag duringfreezing and thenreoved (left bag).
fresh frozen plasma are normally preparedby centrifu-
Aninadvertent thawandrefreezeresultsinlossof therubber
gation.However,dog plasma separated after 12-48
bandmark(middle bag).
hours of sedimentation still contains clinically useful
levcls of the labilc protcins. Such plasma is best used
as fresh plasma.
Transfusion:Theinitial dose of fresh or freshfrozen
It is not known how long plasma prepared by
plasma is 10-30ml/kg,but larger volume transfusion
scdimcntation and thcn placcd at -18°C canbe stored
may be required if haemorrhage or acquired coagula-
while maintaining clinically useful levels oflabile
tion defects persist. Transfusion of fresh and fresh
proteins,buta3-month expiry date is suggested.Fresh
frozen plasma should ideallybe completed within 4
frozen plasma is ideallystored at -30°Cor colder
hours of separation or thawing,respectively.
(based on FVIII stability),but storage at -18C is
satisfactory (Figure 15.24).This is the intended tem-
Thawed plasma
perature of a regular household refrigerator freezer,
If fresh frozen plasma is thawed but not immediately
but it shouldbeverifiedwitha thermometerthat the
transfused,itshouldberefrigerated(1-6°C).Ifitisnot
freezeris maintaining this temperature.Freezers with
transfusedwithin24hours,theproductisrelabelledas
automatic defrost cyeles should be avoided. If such a
thawcdplasma andmaybe transfuscd forupto5 days
freezeristheonlyone available,theplasma bagshould
after thawing.It has somewhat decreased FVIII and
be stored between two artificial ice bags in an effort to
vWfactivitisutsothrwisequivalentcompared
minimize thawing during defrosting. A dedicated
tofreshfrozen plasma.
freezerisideal,and thefreezerdoorshould be opened
and closed as quickly as possible.
Liquid plasma and frozenplasma
After a 1-ycar storagc pcriod, the product is
relabelled as frozen plasma,which may be stored as
Storage: Liquid plasma is plasma storedunderrefrig-
such for an additional4years at-18C or colder.The
eration at 1-6°C formore than 8 hours after blood
1-yearexpiry dateforfreshfrozen plasma is alsobased
collection.The maximum storage time is 6 weeks,at
on the detcrioration ofFVII activity.If the freezer
which pointthc plasma should beplacedat-18Cand
does not maintain -18°C,the expiry date should be at
labelled as frozen plasma. (It may, of course,be
most 3months.
frozen sooner.)
 288  Manual of Canine and Feline Haematology and Transfusion Medicine
The only reasons to keep refrigerated hiquid plasma
binding, Transfusion has becn recommended in criti-
are if a freezeris not available or if there is an upcoming
cal care patients as hypoalbuminaemia has a negative
plasma transfusion, to eliminate thawing time.
correlation with survival in some studies of humans.
 Plasma is also prcpared by centifuging stored
However, this is controversial, and other studies have
whole blood at any time during the storage period, and
suggesicd that although lransfusion corrects hypo-
up to 5 days after the RBCs are outdated. The later in
albuminaemia it may actually worsen clinical out-
the storage period, the higher will be the plasma
come. It is controversial how much low albumin levels
 haemoglobin, potassiun and ammonia levels. Thc
rclate lo surgical healing. When poor surgical healing
RBCs are discarded. The plasma imay be kept as liquid
occurs in such palients it is a result of a gcncral
1
plasma for up to 5 days beyond the expiry dare of tlhe
catabolic state but may also be due to tissue oedema.
RBCs, at which time it should be frozcn.
 In all the above indications there is usually no
Fresh frozen plasma should also be rclabclledl as
need to normalize plasma albumin levels. Plasma
frozen plasima after l year of storage. The maximum
transfusion to inaintain plasma albumin levels at
 storage time of frozen plasma at -18°C is 5 years.
15-20 g/l will address physiological concerns while
helping to contain costs. About 22.5 ml/kg plasma is
Coagulation factors: Liquid and frozen plasma typi-
required to raise the recipient's albumin level by 5 g/l.
cally do not contain clinically adequate levels of FVIII
 The volume to transfuse is more precisely calculated
or vWf, espccially if prepared from outatcd whalc
 by using the following formula:
blood. Human FVIlI activity declines at the same rate
in refrigerated plasua as in whole blood, although the
Voleme of donor
Recipient
[Desired - curent recipient 
decline in vWf activity is slower. The vitamin
plastna to be
=
XSX
piasma albumin level (g/1)]
K-dependent coagulation factors (II, VII, IX and X)
Iransfused (uml)
(kg)
are stable in liquid and frozen plasma, so these pro-
ducts may be uscrd to treat bleeding due to anticoagu-
 This formula assumes that normal canine plasma
lant rodenticidle poisoning, vitamin K deficicncy and
      t s 
haemophilia B. The initial dose for this purpose is
 donor plasma bags averages 25 g/l and the distribution
10--20 ml/kg. Fibrinogen, FV, ATlI and α, macroglobu-
of albumin is 40% in the plasma. The plasma trans-
lin levels are also stable in liquid and frozeu plasma.
fusion volume (in millilitres) may be rlivided by 200 ml 
(average volume of onc unit of caninc plasima) to
Transfusion: Liquid and frozen plasma have histori-
estimate the number of units required.
cally been used most often to trcat hypoalbuminaemia
in dogs. Normally only 40% of total body albumin is in
A lbuwin-rich products: The albumin-rich blood prod-
plasma. The remainder is in the interstitium, which
ucts of choice in humans are purified albumin (5% and
acts as a reservoit. Plasma and interstitial albumin are
 25% solutions) and plasma protein fraction, which are
in equilibrium, so hypoalbuminaemia owing to im-
preparedl by cthanol extraction. Equivalcnl canine prod-
paired production (from chronic liver failure or severe
ucts do not exist, but the human products have been
malnurition) or extcrnal loss (via the intestinal tract,
used in dogs to correct hypoalbuminaemia and for
kidney or skin) is accoumpanied by a shift of albumin
volumc resuscitation. At the OVC, 25% albumin is
from the interstitium into the plasma. There is there-
used at an initial maximum dose of about 2 inl/kg/day.
fore a total body albumin deficit that is much greater
The rate of admministration depends on the clinical
than the plasma deficit. When plasma is transfuscd.
situalion:
about 60% of the transfused albumin shifts back into
the interstitium. Thus large volumes of plasma are
 For the treatment of hypoproteinaemia, albumin
required to raise plasma albumin levels and to maintain
 is lypically given as a constant rate infusion of
them in the presence of ongoing losses. This is expenl-
 0.1 ml/kg/h for up to 3 days
 sive, especially in big dogs, and increases the risk of
 For urgent correction of hypotension, the dose is
lransfusion reaclions. Large plasma volumes are also
 given over 4 hours or faster
required when hypoalbuninaemia is due tu vasculitis,
 For voluime resuscifafion in severc hypotension,
where the cause of hypoalbuminaemia is a shift in the
it has been given over I0-15 ininutes.
cquilibrium towards the interstitium.
Neither hypoalbuminaemia nor oedema is, in itself,
A 25% albumin solution has an osimolality of 1500
an indication for transfusion. Transfusion is required
mOsm/l and will cause an intravascular volume in-
whcn there are life-threatening complications of re-
crease of five tines the volume of transfused solution
duced plasma oncotic pressure such as severe pleural
within 30-60 minutes. Rapid infusion must he avoided 
effusion or pulmonary oedema.
in conditions with increased risk of pulmonary cedema
Transfusion is also reconnended for the patient
from volume overload (e.g. heart failure). Angioedema
lrdcrgoing anacsthesia, where therc are incrcascd
may occur during administration, and anaphylaxis is a
 concerns with hypotension and altered protein drug
 potential conccrn on repeat acministration.
Praclical Blood Transfusion  289
Syuthetic plasma expanders: The usc of synthetic
solution for intranasal use 0.6-1.0 μg/kg s.c.
colloids instead of, or in adlition to, plasma can also
30-120 minutes before donation is recommended.
reduce the number of plasma transfusions and reduce
This increases the donor's vWf levels (see Chaptel
costs. These include 6% dextran-70, 10% pentastarch
14). A unit of cryoprecipitate contains on avcragc
and 6% hetastarch, given intravenously al a losc of
40-60% of the FVIII and vWf in the original fresh
10-20 ml/kg/d in dogs and 5-10 ml/kg/d in cats For up
frozcn plasma from which it was made, and the most
to 3 days. The daily dose may be infused over 15
   i e   
miuutes to 24 hours depending on the need to maintain
enriched. Cryoprecipitate also contains some of thc
blood pressure and voluneexpausiou. Pentastarch and
fibrinogen, FXII, fibronectin and α, macroglobulins
hetastarch may have thle additional benefit in vasculitis
of the original plasma.
of helping lo 'plug* the leaky vessels. Synthetic col-
The initial dose of cryoprecipitate is I unit/ 10 kg.
loids and alburmin solutions may aggravate hacmo-
which may be repeated every 4 12 hours as needed.
static defects,requiring the transfusion of platelet-rich,
The dlose of cryoprccipilalc (and other plasma prod-
frcsh or fresh frozen plasna.
ucts) required to treat a coagulopathy can be morc
Colloidal volume expanlers shoul be considered
specifically calculated if the concentration of the defi-
 in the management of shock if crystalloid fluid infu-
cient factor in the rccipient and plasma product can be
sion is inadequate or cedema develops. Liquid and
rapidly determined (Wardrop. 1996).
frozen plasima may be used for this purpose at a dose of
10-20 ml/kg, but synthetic colloids or couccntraled
Recipient
(85 gog]
Plama
Desired - curent
albumin solutions are preferred. It should also be
weiglr
x[-Haenxcri(] x
remembcred ihat RBCs act as colloidal volume ex-
prodluct
 factor level(Uml)]
(kg)
60[catl)
panders, and that one volume of RBCs has two to thrce
(ml)
Factor level in plasma arocaet (L/aml)
 times thie volume expansion effect as an equivalent
volume of plasma.
This formula assumes that 60 and 85 represent
ml/kg average blood volurne as a proportion of
Cryoprecipitate
 borlyweight for cat and dog, respectively.
A principal aclvantage of cryoprccipitate is that
Prepuralion and storage: Cryoprecipitate is a pre-
 it allows repetitive transfusions of concentrateri
cipitate of fresh frozen plasma. It is also known
coagulation factors without large volume transfusions,
as cryoprecipitated antihaemophilie factor and
thereby rcducing the risk of transfusion reactions.
CRYO. Canine cryoprecipitate is prepared by thaw-
The argument has been male thal, because only
ing a unit of frcsh frozen plasma at4°C until a slushy
about half of the FVill and vWf in fresh frozen
I "(s t-e Aeoda) paaeoe si uisiso
plasma is cryoprecipitated, maximum haemostatic
that point the bag is centrifuged at 4°C, and the
utility of available blood units is achicvcd by trans-
superuatant is cxpressed, decanted or siphoned into
fusing either fresh whole blood or fresh or fresh
a satellite bag, leaving a small residual volume
frozcn plasma. However, for equivalent amounts
behind with the cryoprecipitate. Various centrifuga-
of FVIII or vWf activities in the blood products,
 tion times andl residual volumes have been reported,
transfusion of cryoprecipitate will result in higher
 including 5000 g for 5 minutes with a residual volune
activities in the recipient than wil transfusion of
of 10-15 ml (Schneider, 1995), 3500 gfor 10 minutes
fresh frozen plasma, at least when the products lave
with a residual volume of 30-40 ml (Stokol and
 been prepared from donors treated with DDAVP
Parry, 1998) and 4050 g for 15 minutes with the
(Stokol and Parry, 1998). This improved efficacy
 cryoprecipitate resuspended in 20 ml of 0.15M saline
in haemostatic activilics coinpensates or overcon-
(Ching et al., 1994).
pensates for the poor yield of these factors during
Canine cryoprecipitate can also he prepared witlh-
cryoprecipitation.
out centrifugation by expressing 90 % of the supernatant
Cryoprecipitatc is, however, unavailable to
when lhc frcsh frozen plasma has thawed about 90%
 many practitioners. The recommended initial rlosc
(Schneider, 1995). The bags are sealcd as deseribed
of freshi or fresh frozen plasma to treat haemophilia
 previously and refrozen.
A ur vWD is typically 10 ml/kg, but doses up to
 Cryoprccipitate may be stored at -18°C or colder
30 ml/kg may be required. The formula above
for up to I year from the unit's collection date.
can also be used to determine the required volume.
If the factor level in the plasma product is not
 Transfusion: Cryoprecipitate is enrichcd in FVHI
knowu, the following formula may be used as a rule
 and vWf and is the veterinary product of choice for
of thumb:
 treating hacmorrhage due to haeimophilia A (uncom-
imon) and vWD (more common). Treating the donor
1ml plasma contains about 1 unit of coagulation
bcfore blood collection with adesmopressin (DDA VP)
factor activity (Wardrop, 1996).
290Manual of Canine and Feline Haematology andTransfusion Medicine
In a bleeding diathesis the likelihood is also high
Feline platelet-rich plasma has been prepared by
that the patient will require RBCreplacement, there-
using a 30minute sedimentation period,followed by
fore fresh whole blood is in many situations themost
centrifugation at 150 g for 10 minutes (Cowlcs et al.,
practical therapcutic option.An initial dose of 20ml/kg
1992).Anecdotally,platelet-rich plasma may also be
is recommended.If this degree of RBC transfusion is
prepared bysedimentationalone,althoughresults have
toohigh,the dosemay beloweredtoaminimumof 10
not becn reported.A 1 hour sedimentation time is
ml/kg.Aswithcryoprecipitate transfusion,freshwhole
suggestedforfelineblood and8hoursforcanineblood.
blood transfusionsmayhave tobercpeated to control
haemorrhage.Repeating fresh or fresh frozen plasma
Platelet concentrate
transfusions every 12hours and fresh whole blood
Preparation:Canineplateletconcentrate is prepared by
transfusions every 24 hours is rccommended in an
apheresis or by centrifugation of platelet-rich plasma.
effort toobtain acceptable haemostasis while minimiz-
Centrifugationresults insedimentation of nearly all the
ing transfusionreactions.With transfusion therapy of
platelets.If platelet-rich plasmaismadebyusing 2000-
vWD,regardless of the blood product to be used,
2500g for 2.5-3minutes,it is typically centrifuged at
trcating the donorwithDDAVPisrecommended.
4000-5000 g tomake platelet concentrate.If platclct-
FVIl and vWf concentrates may be prepared by
richplasma ismadeby using1000gfor4-6minutes,it
further purification of pooled units of cryoprecipitate or
is typically then centrifugcd at 2000 g.At the OVC the
by reconbinant DNA tcchnology. These have been
centrifugation protocolis 2000g for10 minutes at room
giventodogs inresearchfacilities.Cryoprecipitateisalso
temperature,withan accelerationtimeof 1minut and
used to prepare a surgical sealant known as fibrin glue
braking timeof2.5minutes.Theplatelet-poorplasmais
expressed, leaving 40-70 ml of plasma and thc
Cryosupernatant
seclimented plateletsbehindTheresultingplateletcon-
The supernatant expressed when making cryoprecipi-
centrate is left undisturhcd for 60minutes topromote
tate is known as cryosupernatant or cryopoor plasma.
disaggregation, and the platelets are thcn rcsuspended
It contains the vitainin K-dependent clotting factors,
by gentle manual agitation and kneading. Large leuco-
albumin and ATll from the original plasma andmay
cytplatlet aggregatesmaybepresent,whichrequre
be used to treat vitamin K antagonist poisoning or
digital compression to aid in resuspension.
deficiency,haemophilia B and hypoalbuminaemia, as
previously discussed.Cryosupernatant is particularly
pooling threeunits oflatelet-rich lasma,centrifu
useful for the treatment of hypoalbuminaemia due to
ing them at 1100 g for 10 minutes, and resuspending
nephrotie syndromc,whcre dogs are at risk of throm-
theplatelets in5mlof platelet-poorplasma(Cowleset
bosis because of reduced ATIlI levels and increased
al.,1992).Canine and feline platelet-poor plasma may
fibrinogen andFVIlllevels.Cryosupernatant may also
be used for frcsh or fresh frozen plasma.
be preferred to frcshfrozenplasma in some cases of
DIC,wherefibrinogentransfusionmayincreasethrom-
Storage:Ifplateletproducts aretobestored,collection
bosis andproduction of fibrin degradation products.
scts with the appropriate plastic platelet satelitebag
Cryosupernatant may be stored at -18°C or colder for
should be used.Platelet products should be storcd at
up to 5 years from the unit's collection date.
room temperature under constant agitation （Figure
15.25).Plalclet storage bags of different composition
Platelet products
are designed for 3-and 5-day storagc. For canine
platelet products,amaximumstorageperiod of3days
Platelet-rich plasina
in a‘5-day'bag is ideal. Cryopreserved and lyophi-
Canine platclct-rich plasma is prepared by the centrifu-
lized canine platelet concentrates havebccn prepared
gation of fresh whole blood (collected in CPD. CPD2or
but are not routinely available.
CPDA,) at a lighter gravitational force than normally
usedtoseparate packed RBCs and plasma.This concen-
Figure15.25:
tratcs the platelets in the plasma.The plasma is ex
Canineplatelet
pressedintoasatellitcbaguntiltheRBC-plasmainterface
productsstored
is 1.0 cm from the top of the bag.Most of the platelets
under continuous
are thereby expressed with the plasma.Preparation of
reciprocal agitation.
End-over-end
platelet-rich plasma can be difficult.Results depend on
tumblers,elliptical
the donor,thetechnician,thecentrifugeand the centrifu-
rotators andblood
gationprotocol.Various centrifugationrates and times
sample rockers may
have been recommended.Most protocols use about
also be used.If
1000 g for 4-6minutes or 2000-2500g for 2.5-3
continuous agitation
isnot possible,then
minutes.AttheOVCtheprotocolis1000gfor4minutes
intermitent gentle
at room temperature,with an acceleration timeof30
manual agitationis
seconds and braking time of 2.5 minutes.
recommended.
Practical Blood Transfusion291
Transfusion: Platelet products are used in the treat-
If no platelet product is available, transfusion with
ment of haenorrhagc dluc lo thrombocytopcnia and
10 ml/kg fresh frozen plasma should be used becausc
thronbocytopathy. Platelet transfusion is most benefi-
il contains functional platelet microparticles. Various
 cial for thrombocytopenia caused by decreased plate-
 platelet substitutcs arc unrler development.
 let production (e.g. leukaeinia, aplastic anacmia). It is
less beneficial with increased platelet consumplion
Vinca-loaded platelets: A unique treatnent for IMT is
(DIC) and sequestration (splenomegaly). Platelet trans-
the use of *vinca-loaded platelets,' which are prepared
fusion is least beneficial, hul not useless, with in-
by adding supralherapeutic doses of vincristine or
creased platelet destruction (immune-mediatcd
vinblastine to platelet concentrates, and, aftcr incuha-
thrombocytopenia; IMT).
tion, discarding the supernatant plasma. The vinca
As IMT is the most common cause of thrombocy-
alkaloids bind to plalelet microtubules. On transfusion 
:  :
 topenia in general practice, and dogs with other throm-
to patients with IMT, the vinca-loaded platclcls arc
bocylopenic disorders are often euthanazed because of
 phagocytosed by splenic macrophages, which then
 poor progmusis or cost of thcrapy, platelet transfusion
 u r s sd    s
is not frequently performed. Hlowever, with an in-
jau horses, permitting higher tha usual doscsof vinca
crcased willingness on the part of veterinarians and
alkaloids to be delivered to the macrophages while
 owners to treat complex lhacnmalological problems,
sparing the bone marrow.
 platelet transfusion may become nore frequent.
Vincristine-loaded platelets have had limited usc
 T'he initial dose for platelet transfusion is one unit
 in veterinary medicine. Anecdotally, veterinarians
of platelet-rich plasima or platclet concentrate/10 kg.
have injected a therapeutic dose of vincristine into
 Assuming an average unit contains 60 x 10' platclcls,
 platelet-rich plasma or fresh whole blood, and, aftcr
the recipient's platelet count I hour after transfusion
an hour's incubation period, performed the trans-
should be increased by 35 x 10°/l if there is no
fusion. This rmcthorl of vinca-loading platelets is
accelerated platelet destruction, consumption Of
incorrect. A reported protocol based on correcl
sequestration. The expected platelet count 1 hour
principles consists of incubating 100 ml of platelet-
after transfusion in the dog is more precisely calcu-
rich plasma (containing about 250 x 10^ platelets/)
lated with the formula:
Oole ie inou I io adis ausa Su e m
Uurit platelet coumt (x 10)
with constant agitation (Helfand ct al., 1984). The
Expected theur Platele count before
X unit volunie () x 0.51
 platelet-rich plasma is then centrifuged to prepare
platelet count 
transhusion (x 10/l) +
a platelet pellet, and all the supematant plasma
Recipieant veight (kg)x 0.085 1/kg
is discarded. The platelets are resuspended into a
total of 35 ml saline antl transfuscd over 30-60
 
In the above formula 0.085 x weight is the avcragc
minutes.
 blood volume for the dog, and 0.5 1 corrects forsplenic
Vincristinc-loaded platelet therapy seems to have
sequestration of transfuscd platelets. If there is mini-
induced remission of diseasc in scvcral dogs with
 mal platelet production but no accelerated platclcl.
IMT, but interpretation is obscured by concurrent
dlestruction, consumption or sequestration, the recipi-
therapy. Thc dogs so treated have ranged in weight
e ep yeo ee qdop pus u naaed s,a
from 9-30 kg, and thus rcccived quite different
transfusion, When interpreting the success ofa platclet
vincristine-loaded platelet doses. There is no infor-
 transfusion, it should be remeimbered that platelet
 mation on the pharmacokinetics of vincristine given
 counts at low values are imprecise. Crilical haemor-
to dogs in this manner or on thie optimal platelet and
rhage can usually be prevented by repeat transfusiun to
vincristine doses.
maintain the platclet count above 10-15 x 10°/1.
 The necessity for a centrifuge and the short shelf
Leucocyte products
life nake platelet products largely unavailable to most
Blood mononuclear cells may be collected by
clinics. Cascs requiring extensive platelet support are
 leucapheresis and modified for progenitor cel trans-
best referred to a facility that can provide the trans-
 plantation, adoptive immunothcrapy anrl gene therapy.
fusions and other aspects of critical care that are
Neutrophils may be collected to prepare grauulocyte
needed. If platelet products arc not available, fresh
concentralcs (see Chapter 8).
whole blood should be used. As a rule of thumb:
10 ml/kg of fresh whole blood will raise the
 Serum products
recipicnt's platelet count by about 10 x 10°/1.
Pooled adult serum may be given to neonates as a
colostrum substitute when there is failure of passive
If this is continued for more than a few days,
transfer. The dose reported in pups is 20 mlkg orally
polycythaemia will resull. Hyperprotcinaeinia may
or 20-40 ml/kg s.c. at birth (Bouchard et al., 1992).
also result from transfusion of large volumes of plate-
Subculancous administration at the highest dose is
let-rich plasma (see Transfusion reactions).
 pog m aa nou soop p aaoa so
292 Manual of Canine and Feline Haematology and Transfusion Metlicinc
The injection should be given slowly to minimize
stration. The products gradually warm to room ten-
pain. The dose reported in kittens is 150 ml/kg i.p.
perature during adininistration, and excessive warm-
 or s.c. divided into three treatments over 24 hours
ing may decrease RBC viability and increase the
(Levy and Crawford, 2000). The treatment protocol
risk of microbial growth. Refrigerated products
in killcns was rnore cffectivc and should be consid-
should, however, be warmed to room or body tem-
ered for pups. Serum treatment should also be
perature for recipients at risk of hypothermia and
considered in the treatment of a fading neonate
when large-volume and/or rapid transfusions are
 because immunoglobulin therapy (see Intravenous
planned, because the rapid infusion of cold fluids
inmunoglobulin) is beneficial in thc treatment of
is arrhythmogenic.
 human neonatal sepsis. The preparation of pooled
To warin 1o roon temperature, the blood
Krn l e u jd aq n r 
product may be allowed tosit at room tenperature for
 clinic, and the use of scrum from a single donor is
 30-60 minutes before beginning the transfusion.
likely to be beneficial.
To warrn to body lcinperature, the intravenous line
Other serum preparations used in dogs and cats
 may be passed through a bowl of waterorsantlwiched
include antitoxins and antivenins, immune serum for
between oat bags warmed to 37-38°C. Electrical
parvoviral infections and antithymocyte serum for
iufusion wariners are also available. The blood
imnunosuppression,
37-38*C water bath, although this increases the
Blood derivatives and blood substitutes
risks of contamination and decreased RBC viability
comparerl witlh warming the infusion line. Micro-
Intravenous immunoglobulin
wave warming is not recommended because of tlhe
Concentraled preparations of human immunoglobu-
risks of haemolysis.
lins were initially developed for the treatment of
Storcdl wholc blood should be mixed by gentle
human immunodeficiency states. lntramuscular
inversion (at least 60 times) before transfusion.
With canine packed RBCs stored in CPDA, the PCV
immunoglobulin (IVIG), which is purified nonomeric
is often 70-80% and the product may be too viscous
IgG. Human IVIG may also be used to treat IMT
to transfuse easily, and RBC clunps may be present.
pim ssop an ol posn aoq seu pue suenq !
This problen may be corrected by adding 100 ml
immune-mediated haemolytic anaemia (IMHA) at a
of 37°C salinc to the unit and resuspending tle
dose of 0.5-1.5 g/kg as a 12-hour infusion (Scott-
 RBCs by geutle manual agitation and kncading. Add-
Moncrieff and Reagan, 1997). The mechanisms of
 ing more than 100 ml unnecessarily increases trans-
fusion volume. Although feline packed RBCs have
a lower PCV, dilution with 20-30 ml of saline
of immunoglobulin receptors. Human IVIG therapy
facilitates passage through the smaller filters recom-
has corrected anaemia in some dogs with chronic
imended for use in cats. Canine and feline packed
 non-regenerative IMHA. It has not had a major
RBCs stored in Arlsol, Nutriccl or Optisol do not
impact on survival in severe acute IMHA and is often
usually require further dilution before transfusion.
cost prohibitive. Human IVIG has also becn used to
Calcium-containing fluids such as lactated Ringer's
treat canine IMT in a limited number of cases, with
should not be used for rlilution bccause lhe calcium
variable results. Anaphylaxis is a potential concern,
may initiate coagulation.
 especially with repeated administration, but lhas not
Frozen plasma products should be thawed in a
been reported.
37-38°C water bath or incubator. Thawing time is
Lyophilized canine IgG has been prepared and
30 minutes or more for a unit of canine plasma.
used in the management of parvovirus infection
Agitation and manually kneading the bag to break up
(Macintire et al., 1999). Digoxin immune Fab frag"
ice crystals spced ups thawing. Higher temperatures
ments may be used to treat digoxin toxicosis.
may result in denaturing of proteins. The plasma unit
should be left in the freezer bag and box during thawing
Other products
lo prevent confamination of the entry ports, although
Other blood derivatives and blood substitutes have
this slows down thawing time.
becn rliscusscrl prcviously in thc appropriate sections.
Apidei aio aq Xe sonpoid cmsejd uazoig
thawed in a microwave oven. A reported protocol for
microwave thawing of canine plasma resulted in
thawing times of less than I0 rminutes (Hurst et al..
BLOOD AND BLOOD COMPONENTS
1987). The bag was placed in 37°C water for 1 minute
and then. microwaved al the highcsl sclting in a
Warming and mixing
700W oven for 14-17 cycles of 10-second cooking
 Reffrigcraicd wholc hlood and blood components
intervals and 5-second intervals of manual agitation.
do not need to be routinely warmed before adimini-
When ice particles less than 1.0 cim long remained.
1
Practical BloodTransfusion
293
the bagwasinvertedscvcral times for30 seconds
In some cases this may not be possible, and in
to complete the thaw.Thawing at the defrost setting
the author's opinionit is acceptable for a transfusion
has also been recommended (Kristensen and Feldman,
to extend over a longer period so long as strict
1995a).Cautionisadvisedwhen microwavingplasma
attention is given topreventingcontaminationwhen
because ofvariations betwccn microwave ovens.
the transfusion is set up.Alternatively,some blood
Short cooking times and intermittent agitation are
productsmay be divided into subunits and the
recommended to minimize non-uniform heating
subunits refrigerated until uransfuscd.This practice,
and protein denaturation.Bagswith aluminun clips
however,involves additional manipulation of the
should not be microwaved.
blood product,increasing therisks of contamination
Frozen plasma products should not be thawed ina
and in vitro haemolysis.
refrigeratoras thisresultsinformationofcryoprecipi-
tate.Units of cryoprecipitate may be thawed as de
Filter
scribed above or by adding 10 ml of 37°C saline per
Special administrationsetsforblood transfusion arc
unit andgentlykneading thebagfor3minutes.Multi-
commercially available,which containin-line filters
ple units should be pooled in one bag for transfusion
toremove clots,platelet aggregates and some fat
(Kristensen and Feldman,1995a).
(Figures 15.26 and 15.27).However,if an animal is
in need of anemergency transfusion and a filter set is
Venous access
not available,then an unfiltered transfusion of fresh
A transfusionmay be given via any vein.Viscosity of
whole blood or plasma can be given so long as the
transfusedwhole bloodmay slow orstop transfusions
collectionissmoothandrapid andtherc arc no grossly
with smallr cathctcrs. In the dog, a 16-19 G jugular
visible clots. Filters should always be used with
catheteror18-20Gperipheralveincatheterissatisfac-
storedwholebloodandbloodcomponents.Filters are
tory,with the larger gauge catheters preferred for
recommended for plasma products as they may con-
packcd RBC transfusions. In cats,a 22 G peripheral
tain particulate matter.
veincatheteralso worksbecause of the lowerPCV and
smaller RBC size.
If venous access is not possible, the infraosseous
（intramedullary)route isbest,with an18-20Gneedle
or bone marrow aspiration needleplaced into the
trochanteric fossa(Otto and Crowe,1992).The trans-
fusion will be rapidly absorbed into the systemic
circulation.Intraosseous transfusion is particularly
usefulinneonatal transfusion,where a 22 Gnecdlle can
also be placed into the tibial crest.
Neonates can alsobetransfused byintraperitoneal
injection.About 50% of transfused RBCs will be
absorbedintothccireulationfrontheperitonealspace
in24hours,and70%within48-72hours,but they will
have a shorter life span.
Transfusion rate
Asageneralrule,wholebloodand itscomponents may
bc transfusedat arate of 5-10 ml/kg/h.Theinitialrate
should be 0.25ml/kg/h for thefirst 15-30 minutes to
allowfor early detection of potentially severe trans-
fusion reactions.This stepmay havc to be omited if
emergency transfusion is required.
The maximum rate of transfusion is 22ml/kg/h,
which is usually only used in an cmcrgcncy situation.
Electrocardiographic monitoring is recommended dur-
ing higher transfusion rates (especially with large
volumes) since arrhythmias may occur fromvarious
(b)
mechanisms,
Figure 15.26:Standard transfusionsets containinga170μim
Transfusion ratesmustbe slowed down in the
filierforuseinbloodtransfusiorstomiddleand largebreed
presence of increased risks of volume overload.To
dogs.Sets come as(a)‘straight'(single line) and (b)Y
whichallowsforconcurrenfuidtherapywihalineWn
minimizc the risk of bacterial proliferation in RBC
bloodproductsarebeinggiventodeliverplateletsorcloting
and plasma productshuman standards stipulate that
factorstransfusionsetswithoutlatexbulbsshouldbeused
a transfusion should be completed within 4hours.
as latex may bind thesecomponents.
294Manual of Canine andFelineHacmatology andTransfusionMedicine
ADVERSECONSEQLENCESOF
TRANSFUSION(TRANSFUSION
REACTIONS)
Transfusion reactions are categorized as immunologi-
cal andnon-immunological and as acute and delayed.
The major transfusion reactions are listed in Figure
15.28.ImmunologicalreactionsareduetoRBC,plasma
(c)
protein,white ccll and platelet antigens.The non-spe
cific signs thatmay occurwith an acutcimmunological
reaction to any blood product are shown in Figures
15.29 and 15.30.More specific clinical signs are dis-
cussedwitheachtype ofreaction.Somcoftheinforma
tionconcerningcausesandmanifestationsoftransfusion
reactions is based on experimental evidence and ex-
trapolated fronhumanmedicine.Thereportedratesof
acute transfusionreactionsin dogs and catsrange from
3 to 8%. These rates are expected to decline with
improved compatibility testing and increasing experi-
ence inveterinary transfusion medicinc.
(b)
Figure15.27:Thestandard transfusionsetsaretoolargeto
usewithcatsoyrdsandediaripatientsamhf
Immunological transfusion reactions
thetransfisionremainsinthesetandmustbeflushedthrough
withsaline,thusincreasingtherisk ofvolume overload
RBCincompatibility reactions
Humanpaediatricfiltersandsmallinfusionsetsaresuitable
Reactions to plasma proteins
forsmallvolume transfusions.(a)Blood componentinfusion
Reactions to white blood cells and platelets
set（Baxter 4C2223)containing an 80μmfilter.(b)Hemo-
Other immunological reactions
Nate(Gesco）containinga20pmfiltrer.The smallerpore
filters are designedtoremovemicroaggregates of
Non-immunological transfusion reactions
degranwil
Anaphylactoid reactions
throughstandard170μmfilters.Microaggregatefilirationis
Volume (circulatory) overload
ofmostbenefitincardiopulmonarybypass andblood
scavenging(seeAutotransfusion).Microaggregatefiliration
Hypothermia
may aisoamelioratethethrombocytopeniathatmay occur
Citrate intoxication (hypocalcaemia)
afertransfusionowingtosplenicsequestrationof
Heparinization
microaggregatesThemiroaggregatfitersrusedherefor
Coagulopathy and thrombosis
theadvantage ofthesmallvolume infusion sets.
Microbial contamination
Hyperammonaemia
Delivery
Hypophosphataemia
In most veterinary clinics canine transfusions aredeliv
Hyperkalaemia
ered by gravity. Newer infusion pumps can be used.
Acidosis
Some oldermodelscausehaemolysisandthemanufac
Pretransfusion (in vitro) haemolysis
turer should be consulted.For feline andpaediatric
Hacmosiderosis
transfusions,a 60ml syringe can be used to slowly
Figure 15.28:Transfusionreactions in the dog and cat.
deliverthetransfusionbyintermittentinjcction.Syringe
infusion pumps are also availableIf the small volume
blood product isinabag,a smallrvolume transfusion
Weakness,depression,recumbeny
set should be used (Figurc 15.27a).Alternatively the
Tremors,agitation,vocalization
blood productmaybegently drawn out of thcbagwith
Polypnoea, dyspnoca
an 18Gneedle and 60ml syringe and then injected.Ifa
Tachycardia, bradycardia (cats),arrhythmias, pale
standard canine unit isbcing used to transfuse a small
mucous membranes, weak pulses (hypotension)
patient,abiuret can be placed between thebag and the
Cardiopulmonary arrest (may be the only sign
filter settoregulatethe deliveredvolume.
present during anaesthesia)
Salivation (and other signs of nausea),vomiting,
Record keeping
diarrhoea
A transfusion log should be kept noting the informa-
Urination
tion from the blood product label,recipient,trans
Seizures,coma
fusiondate,and transfusionreactions.Ahighlyvisible
Angiocdema and urticaria (see Figure 15.30)
notationshouldbe added tothemedicalrecordtoshow
Figure15.29:Non-specificclinical signs thatmay occurwith
the patient has received a transfusion.
anacuteimmunologicalreactiontoatransfusedbloodproduct.
Practical Blood Transfusion 295
Figure 15.30:
Reactions to plasma proteins
Angioedema ina
Immunologicalreactions to plasma proteins (usually
dogoccurring
gamma globulins) are allergic in nature (i.e. IgE
within minutes of
giving a test dose
mediated),resuling in urticaria and angioedema or,
rarcly,anaphylaxis.Pruritus,salivation,vomiting
ofwholebloodat
0.25ml/kg/h.
anddiarrhoea,anddyspnoeafrombronchoconstriction
may occur,but fever is not typical. The hallmark of
anaphylaxis is hypotension, characterized by weak-
ness,weak pulses and pale mucous membranes. In
allergicreactions thereisloss offluid andalbumin
from thc circulation,which partly abrogates any
benefit from the transfusioninthisregard.Withsevere
reactions,ascites,pleural effusion and pulmonary
oedema may occur.Allergic reactions to plasma
protcinstypically occurwithin 1-15minutesbut may
occur at any time during a transfusion,even if there
has been no reaction to a test dose.The riskof such
rcactions inereases with the rate of transfusion,os-
Immunological transfusion reactions
siblybecause some are anaphylactoid.
In humans,anaphylaxis occurs when a sensitized
RBC incompatibility reactions (haemolysis)
IgA dcficicnt individual with anti-IgA antibodies
The pathogenesis of haemolytic reactions has been
receives a transfusion containingIgA (i.e.most donor
discussed above (see Canine blood groups and Feline
blood).Theauthorhas seen one anaphylactic reaction
blood groups).The clinical signs of an acute haemo-
in a dog that was IgA deficient, but circulating anti-
lytic crisis in dogs include one or more of the signs
IgA antibodies could not be demonstrated.Allergic
listed inFigure15.29plus haemoglobinuria and hae-
reactions donot seem to occur frequently in dogs
moglobinaemia.Fever is common buturticaria and
and cats,butthey canoccurinanaiverecipicnt.Therc
angioedema are not.Acute renal failure and DIC are
is some evidence that the risk of allergic reactions
uncommon sequelae. The severity of thereaction is
increases with multiple transfusions in dogs and
directly correlated withthe numberof RBCs destroyed.
cats, and that an animal that has had a prcvious
The reaction is predominantly IgGmediated.
allergic reaction is at increased risk of a subsequent
ThesevereacutehaemolyticreactionofcatsisIgM
one.An urticarial reaction in humans is not typically
mediated and resembles anaphylaxis more than thc
repeated onsubsequent transfusion,whcrcas anaphy-
reaction in dogs.Itisdivided intotwo phases (Auerand
laxis becomes more severe.Dogs and cats,unlike
Bell, 1986; Griot-Wenk and Giger, 1995).Recum-
humans.may be transfused more than once from a
bency,stretching of lmbs,hyotension,bradycadia
certain donor, and this may increase the risk of
and apnoca arc thc nost common signs in phase I,
allergic rcactions.
occurringwithin2minutes of starting the transfusion
For animalsreceiving multiple transfusions,use of
and lasting upto5 minutes.Otheracute signs may also
a new donor for each transfusion(donorrotation)and
occur.Less severereactions are associated with milder
pretreatment with antihistamines with or without
hypotension,tachycardia andpolypnoea.Haemoglob
corticosteroidscanbeconsideredespeciallyifthere
inuria and haemoglobinaemia may beundetectable
a history of allergic reactions.Pretreatment with anti-
since small volumes ofblood,aslittle as 1ml,can
histamines and corticosteroidsshould beusedifarapid
initiate a severe reaction.Phase ll (the recovery
transfusion rate is necessary.However,suchpretreat
phase)is characterized by tachyeardia and polypnoea,
ment does not guarantee that an allergicreaction will
whichmaylastfor several hours.Hypcrlcnsion and
notoccur.Foranantihistaminc,cithcrdiphenhydramine
ventricular arrhythmias followa severereaction for
or tripelennamine 1.0mg/kg i.m.30 minutes before
about 30 minutes.Pulmonary oedema may develop
transfusion can be used.These drugs can be given
within several hours.
intravenously if necessary,but in some cases admini-
Ina delayed haemolyticreaction there are no acute
strationby thisrouteresultsin transient hypotension
clinical signs,but the post-transfusionPCV declines
and agitation.For a corticosteroid,dexamethasone
rapidlyover 35 days.In dogs andcatsa transfusionis
sodium phosphate 0.5-1.0 mg/kg i.v.5-15 minutes
before transfusion is recommended.
transfused compatibleRBCs is about 21 daysin the
If a recipient requiring a RBC transfusion has a
dog and35days in thecat
history of severe allergicreactions oris known to havc
Pretransfusion trcatment with antihistamines and
aplasmaprotcinincompatibilitywiththe onlyavailable
corticosteroids will not prevent an acute or delayed
donor,RBCs should be washed with saline before
RBCincompatibility reaction in either dogs or cats.
transfusion.Washingmaybeperformedeither with
296  Mamual of Canine and Feline Hacmatology and Transfusion Medicine
apheresis erquipment or by centrifugation. With the
A scverc acute respiralory distress syndronme may
latter technique, packed RBCs are prepared as previ-
 also occur in humans after transfusion. This is charac-
ously dcscrilbed, except that as much plasma as possible
terized by non-cardiogenic pulmonary coedema and is
is expresscd. A volume of saline equivalent lo the
believed to be due lo donor antibodies reacting with
volume of plasma expressed is added to the RBCs,
recipicnt leucocylcs. This specific reaction in dogs and
which are resuspended by gentle manual agitation. The
cats has not been reported, although pulmonary ocdema
saline-RBC suspension is then centifuged as before to
 may occur in phase II of the reaction of a type B cat
花
 produce packed RBCs,and thesaline-plasma supemalant
recciving typc A blood.
is expressed. The procedure is repeated two more times.
Reactions to platelets
Reactions to white blood cells
Platelet alloimmunization may occur with repetitive
In humans, reactions to leucocytes occur owing to
transfusions and results in platelet Iransfusions becom-
incompatibilities of major histocompatibility comiplex
ing ineffective (Slichter, 2000). The onset of platelet
(MHC) antigens. Platclets also express these antigens.
alloimmunization may be delayed by using a new
 Reactions between recipient antibodies andl donor
umrelated donor for each transfusion and may be pre-
leucocytes are characterized primarily by fever, chills
vented by treating the recipient with cyclosporin, bu.
 and vomiting. Such rcactions are not usually clinically
not with prednisone or cyclophosphamide. Leucocyte
dangerous but interfere with patient welbeing andl with
rcduction combined with ultraviolet irradiation may
monitoring for sepsis in critically ill patients. In addi-
 also prevent alloimmunizaltion, but it is unavailable t0
lion, when fever occurs haemolysis must be ruled out.
most veterinary clinics.
Non-haemolytic febrile reactions may also occur in
Post-transfusion thrombocytopenia may rarely 0c-
 response to cytokines and other bioactive substances
cur in hurmans and dogs within 1-2 wecks after trans-
that accumulate in the stored blood. With either cause,
fusion and last up to 2 months (Wardrop er al., 1997).
the rate of transfusicn does nol sccm to be imporiant.
Antibody response to transfused platelets is general-
 Non-haemolytic febrile reactions in dogs and cais
izcd to an aliack on the recipient's own platelets.
after whole blood and platelet transfusions are pre-
Immunosuppressive therapy with prednisonc may
sutned tobe due to rccipient immune responses to donor
hasten recovery.
leucocyte antigens anid bioactive substances. In the
Other immunological reaclions
by lrcmors and voiniting) may occur during or within
 Immunosuppression resulting from blood transfusion
several hours of transfusion, range from mill to grcalcr
is ost imporlant in crgan transplantation, enhancing
than 41.0°C and may take up to 12 hours to fully resolve.
allograft survival except with marrow allografts.
Animals typically do nolseem to be as clinically illas do
It is controversial whether of not transfusion-
animals with an equivalent fever due to a bacterial
 associated immunosuppression increases the risk of
infection. In humans, the risk of subsequent reactious is
infection and ncoplasia. The effcct of transfusion on
12.5-50%. The risk in dogs and cats is not known, but
the coursc of canine and feline immune-mediated
it is presumably high if fhe same donor is used.
diseases is not known.
 Pretreatment with antilhistamines will not prevcmt
Transfusion-relatcd graft-versus-host diseasc re-
febrile reactions. Pretreatment with dexamethasone so-
fers to pancytopenia caused by an immunological
dium plosphatc0.5-1.0mg/kg i.v. 5-15 minutes before
attack on the recipient's bone marrow by lymphocytes
transfusion, or non-steroidal anti-inflammatory dugs al
 in the transfusert blood. In dogs and cats it is a problcm
 standard doses or paracetamol (dogs only) 10-15 ng/kg
B aq Ae jnq uondsun mou suq a nso
 orally I hour bcfore transfusion may help to prevent a
febrile reaction. Pretreatment is only recommended if
 If available, irradiation of blood products with 25 -50
the recipient has a history of deleterious febrile re-
Gy shonld be considered for such patienls.
actions. Donor rotation may also reduce the risk of
A transfusion may have an antineoplastic effect.
febrile reactions. Leucocyte-absorption filtcrs for vari-
This has been reported with lymphoid leukaenia in a
ous blood productsare available butexpensive (Brownlee
clog (MacEwen et al., 1981).
Et al.,2000). Leucocytecontentof packed RBCs may be
reduced less expcnsively although less efficicntly by
 Non-immunological transfusion reactions
Thcse reactions occur from cxcessive volumcs or rates
lion, where the whole blood bag is centrifuged upside
of transfusion or from changes during storage.
 down when preparing packed RBCs and 70-80% of the
a  paai e (a  p) so
Anaphylactoid reactions
Platelet concentrates may be depleted of leucocytes by
Anaphylactoidl reactions usually occur from too rapid
 using a special centrifugation system (Leukotrap Plate-
 a transfusion rate and resemble allergic reactions to
let Pooling System, Cutter). All methods of white blood
plasma proteins. Non-lgE-medialcd mast cell degranu-
cell removal result in some loss of RBCs or platelets.
Practical Blood Transfusion   297
Volume (circulatory) overload
Citrate intoxication (hypocalcaemia)
Transfusion often involves the adminisiration of
When large volumes of cilraied blood procducts are
relatively high fluid rates and/or volumes. Volume
given rapiily, the citrate anticoagulant (which is present
overload is most often a problem in cats, animals
in excess) can chelate calcium in the patient resulting
with concurrent cardiac or renal failure and animals
 in signs of hypocalcaemia, including rmuscle Iremors,
with chronic anaemia, The resulting polypnoea and
twitching of ears, tctanic scizurcs, vomniting and
dyspnoea - and occasionally ascites - may be
arrhythmias. The problem is only likely to occur if
confused with a RBC incompatibility reaction or
more than one recipient blood volume is transfused.
anaphylactic/anaphylactoid reaction to plasma
Lesser volumes can causc citratc inloxicalion if blood
proteins. The radiographic changcs associated wifl
collection bags have been underfilled or if there is liver
volune overload and anaphylaxis/anaphylactoid
failure, severe hypotension or hypothermia, impairing
reactions may also be similar, in that the latter may
the metabolism of citrate lo bicarbonafc. Trenmrors dlue
result in pulnonary ocdema or pleural effusion
to hypocalcaeinia can be confused with those due to
secondary to increased vascular permeability.
 hypothermia, which may also result from rapid large
In addition to history, cardiovascular findings are
volume transfusion.
helpful in distinguishing volumc overloadl from
Cunfirmation of citrate-induced hypocalcaemia re-
anaphylactic/anaphylactoid reactions. With volume
quires measurement of ionized calcium, because the
overload, the heart rate tends to be norimal to low
citrate-bound calcium will be measured if total serum
(unless tachycardia is present due to heart disease or
caleium is measured. Unforlunatcly, jonizedl caleium
another disorder), arterial prcssure 1ends to be normal
levels are not available as a 'stat' value in most veteri
to high and central venous pressure is high (e.g.
 u s ooa o r
 jugular distension may be evident). If pulmonary
supportive. The most common change is prolongation
oedema is due to volumc ovcrloal, pulinonary ve-
 of the Q-T interval; other changes include depression
nous distension will be present on radiographs, and
 of P and T waves and ventricular arrhythmias. Treat-
cardiomegaly may be evident. In contrast, anaphy-
 ment is 10% calciun gluconatc 0.5-1.5 ml/kg i.v. over
lactic/anaphylactoid rcaclions causc rlistributive shock
5-10 minutes, to effect. The injection of calcium
 and are characterized by tachycardia, arterial hypo-
gluconate should be interrupted if vomiting or
tension (weak pulses) and poor central venous pres-
arrhythmias occur.
sure. Pulmonary veins arc Hormal to small on
Citrate intoxication may also cause hypomagnes-
radiograpls, and microcardia may be present (unless
 aemia. With the recent interests in the role of inag-
there is cardiomegaly due to heart disease).
nesium in critical care, this effect imay reccivc imnorc
allcution in the future.
Polycythaemia and hyperproteinaemia
Polycythaemia may occur when repetitive transfusions
Heparinization
of fresh whole blood are used to treat a hacimostalic
An animal is considered to be heparinized when it
disorcler. The increased blood viscosity and altered
 has received a heparin dose greater than 100 1U/kg.
rheology may be detrimental in animals that are
but marked haemorrhagic tcndencies arc not likcly
septic (ideal PCV=30%) or prone to thromlosis
(0 occur until doses greater than 300 IU/kg have
anl ischaeinia. Phlebotomy (20 ml/kg) may be neces-
been given. Heparin is rapidly metabolized (plasma
sary, and the plasma and platelets may be returned to
lhalf-life is 1.5 hours) so bleeding is rarcly a problem.
the donor to minimize loss of haemostatic function.
In the event of an inadvcricnl massive overdose
Hyperproteinaeimia may also occur with repetitive
 of heparin, protamine sulphate may be given at a
transfusions of plasma products. In the event that
miaximu dose of I.0 mg/100 IU of heparin intrave-
 .
hyperproteinaemia causes an unacceptable increase
nously, although few vclerinary clinicsroutinely carry
in blood viscosily, phlchotony and reinfusion of
ps au uo ia oi uiodu st i 'ionpoid s
1:
RBCs should be used before transfusion to renmove
 of underdosing protamine, since protamine itself is
 a volume of recipient plasma equal to the volume
all anlicoagulant. witl no antilote,
to be transfuscd.
Coagulopathy and thrombosis
Hypothermia
-sn piden uoy inosn Aau Aqedonseos peuogn
Administratiou of coldi blood products may result in
fusion of large volumes (usually greaterthan one blood
hypothermia. This occurs most often with rapid large-
volume) of stored whole blood or liquidl/frozcn plasma.
volume transfusions, transfusions to paediatric and
which are deficient in platelets and havc rerluccd levels
small patients and transfusions during anacsthicsia.
of coagulation proteins. This is most likely to occur in
Transfusion-inlaced hypothermia inay aggravate
 catastrophic trauma patients,and the situation isaggra
hypothermia due to shock, cause tremors and result in
vated by aggressive flnid thcrapy. Transfusiou with
arrhythmias, which imay in lurn cause acntc cardio-
 platclct-richi blood products ad fresh frozen plasma
pulmonary arresl.
may be required.
298  Manual of Canine and Feline Haenmatology and Transfusion Medicine
Blood transfusion may increase thc risk of pul-
Hyperammonacmia
monary thromboembolism in dogs with IMHA
Ammonia builds up during RBC sloragc, and only
(Klein et al., 1989). Transfusions of fresh or fresh
RBC products stored for less ihan 2 weeks should bc
frozcn plasma imay increase the risk of thrombosis
given to animals with liver failure.
in some situations (see Cryoprecipitate and
Cryosupernatant).
Hypophosphataemia
Phosphate levels decrease progressively during RBC
Microbial contamination (transfusion-associated
 storage, and RBC fragility increases. This is not nor-
sepsis)
mally a problem. However, ransfusion of whole blood
Transfusion of blood products contaminated with
or packed RBCs nearing the end of their storage
bacteria or fungi can result in acuie vomiting.
periods may aggravate hypophosphataemia. Trans-
diarrhoea, dyspnoea, collapse, carliopalmonary
fusion of RBC products stored for less than 2 weeks is
arrest and haemolysis, thus mimicking inmunologi-
recommended in hypophosphataemic animals, espe-
cal reactions. Fever may occur, but its absence
cially if the transfusion is being given because of
does not rulc out blood product coutainination. Thc
haemolysis secondary to hypophosphataemia.
peracute signs result from transfused endotoxins
rather than bacterial proliferation in the recipient.
Hyperkalaemia
Howevcr, lhc transfuscd bacteria nay also cause laler
RBCs leak potassium during storage, and transfusions
signs of systemic or localized infections. Contami-
greater than cnc recipien blood volumc may causc
 nated blood may appear darker than usual or brown
hyperkalaenia in humans with renal faiure or
and/or contain air bubbles or clots, and such blood
pretransfusion hyperkalaemia. This is not as likely to
 should not bc used
be a problem in dogs and cats, which have lower RBC
Sources of microorganisms include donors (bacter-
pulassium levcls. Purebrcd andl crossbred Akitas arean
aemia and skin flora) and contaminated blood collec-
exception and should therefore not be used as donors.
tion, bankiug and transfusion supplies. Infeclions
 Shiba Inus also have increased RBC potassium levels
resulting from a fresh transfusion are unlikely to occur
but are not usually used for blood donation bccause of
unless there is gross contanination during collection.
their small size.
The problens occur most offcn when microorganisms
 proliferate in stored blood products. The risk of trans-
Acidosis
fusion-associated sepsis with modern human blood
There is a progressive decrease in the pH of stored
约
banking is low. The risk is higher with leucocyte-
 RBC and platelet products. Large-volume transfusion
depleted products, since leucocytes phagocytosc
 coulrl, thcrcfore, potentially aggravate metabolic acid-
microorganisms during storage, and with platelet pro-
osis. This rarely occurs, especially since tTansfused
ducis stored at roon temperaturc.
lactate and citrate are usually rapidly metabolized to
 The organisms implicaled most often in humans
bicarbomalc.
are psychrophilic environmental contaminants and
faccal flora, wlrich can typically use citrate as a carbo-
Pretransfusion (in vitro) haemolysis
hydrale source. The most common RBC contaiminants
In vitro liaemolysis may occur from microbial con-
are Yersinia enterocolitica and Pseudomonus spp.:
tanination, poor RBC viahiliy during storage, rough.
whereas platelet products are most commonly con-
handling, freezing, overheating of blood or mixing
taninatcd with Staphylococcus spp., Streptococcas
with hypotonic solutions. RBC-rich blood products
 spp. and various Gram-negative organisms.
should not bc dliluled in a 5% dextrose solalion. A 5%
The prevalence of microbial contamination and
dextrose solution is isotonic, but when mixed with
 organisims involvedl in velcrinary transfusion mcdi-
whole blood or packed RBCs, the red cells will meta-
cine are poorly documented. Sepsis after transfusion
bolize the dexlrosc, and thc resulting hypotonic solu-
 of Klebsiella spp. contaminated blood occurred in
tion will cause haemolysis. Signs of pretransfusion
one dog at thc OVC. Contamination of cat blood
haemolysis are identical to IgG-mediated haemolysis.
with Serratia marcescens has been reported
At thic OvC two transfusion reactions to canine packed
(Hohenhaus etal., 1997). In this report sepsis resulted 
RBCs stored in CPDA, were aliributedl to poor in vitro
from nse of a contaminated intravenous solution
viability and rough handling; no such problems have
 and not from use of an open collection syslcm. Whcn
occurrcd with transfusions of packed RBCs stored in
a practice is first developing blood banking.
Adsol, Nutricel or Optisol.
 blood producis should be routinely cultured using
 Even under ideal storage conditions, some haeino-
blood-culture media befure and afler storage.
lysis occurs. In MHA transfused RBCs are likely to
 Routine culturing was discontinued at the OvC in
umdergo immediate immunological attack. RBCs with
1991 since there had not been a positive isolate in 5
increased fragility are likely to be more susceptible to
years, and no infections owing to transfusions have
immunological injury, so transfusions of RBCs less
been documented since that lime.
than 2 weeks old are prcferred.
Practical Blood Transfusion   299
Haemosiderosis
Address angioedeina and anaphylactic/
Liver damage may rarely occur as a complication of
anaphylactoid shock
 iron overload from numerous transfusions. I has been
reported as a complieation of transfusion therapy with
5. If urticaria, angioedema or pruritus is present,
some congenital haemolytic anaemias.
rule out haemolysis and examine for signs of
shock (e.g. recumbency, tachycardia, weak pulses,
 pale mucous membranes). Give an antihistamine
MANAGEMENT OF ACUTE
(e.g. liphenhydramine 0.5-2.0 mg/kg i.n.,
TRANSFUSION REACTIONS
tripelennamine 1.0 mg/kg i.m.) and
 The nanagement of acue transfusions reactions has
dexamethasone sodium phosphate 0.5-1.0 mg/kg
been reviewed by Auer and Bell (1986), Harrell and
i.v. over 20 minutes. The antihistamine and
Kristensen (1995) and Mathews (1996).
corticosteroid should not be given as rapid
intravenous boluses as botli such treatments can
General measures
 promote hypotension. If a reaction to plasma
proteins is stable or subsiding. the transfusion can
1. Monitor the patient closely during transfusion to
be started again at 25-50% of the previous rate.
facilitate early detection. The patient should be
6.
If anaphylactic or anaphylactoid shock has occurred:
 observed 'at the bedside^ for the first 15 minutes 
 Ensure an open airway and administer oxygen
and then ^at a distance' throughout the transfusion
If peracute give 1: 10 000 adrenaline 0.1
for any signs of a possiblc rcaclion. Tenpxerature,
ml/kg i.v.
heart rate and respiratory rate should be obtained
 1: 10 000 adrenaline is prepared by taking
every 5-10 mimutes for the first 15-30 minutes
I ml adrenaline 1: 1000 (1 mg/ml) and
antl cvery 15-30 minulcs tlhercafier.
diluting in 9 ml salinc
2. Stop the transfusion at the first sign of a possible
If severe give 1:100 000 adrenaline 0. 1 ml/kg i.v.
reaction. This may be the only specific measure
1: 100 000 adrenaline is prepared by taking
required with mild rcactions. With a scvcre
0.1 ml adrcnaline 1: 10o0 (1 mg/ml) anrl
peracute reaction (e.g. anaphylaxis, type B cat
diluting in 9 ml saline
receiving type A blood), aspirate any blood
If mild to moderate give 1:100 000 adrenaline
product renaining in the cathetcr before infusing
0.05 ml/kg i.an. and 0.05 ml/kg s.c. Acdrenaline
fluids or drugs. Verify that the correct blood
may be repeated every 2~30 minutes as required
product was given to the intended recipient.
Begin saline or similar fluid at 90 ml/kg/h
Identify the volume that has been transfused and
(1.5 ml/kg/min) in dogs and 60 ml/kg/h (1.0
the rate at which. that volune has been
ml/kg/min) in cats. This high fluid rate shouled
transfused. Do not discard the blood product - it
be discontinued as soon as possible to avoid
may be needed for full investigation or it may be
exacerbation of pulmonary cedema
 possible to resume the transfusion. During
Give an antihistamine as in (5)
 interruption of a transfusion, platelet-poor blood
Give aln H, blocker, for example, cimetidine
products should be refrigerated. Interruption of a
5 mg/kg i.v. or ranitidine 0.5-2.0 mg/kg i.v.
transfusion may violate the *complete transfusion
(dog), 2.5 mg/kg i.v. (cat)
within 4 hours rule'. ln the author's opinion, this
 Once hypotension has been reversed, give
is acceptable as long as care was taken not to
prednisolone sodium succinate 5-30 mg/kg
contaminale the transfusion duing set up, anl it
i.v. or rlexamethasone sodium phusphate
is preferable to wasting a blood product.
0.5-4.0 mg/kg i.v. over 20 minutes. More rapid
 3. If a reaction is suspected, assess the recipient's
adrninistration may exacerbate hypotension
temperalure, pulse rate and quality, respiration
If there are signs of increased vascular
rate and character, mucous membrane colour
permeability (e.g. increasing PCV with
and capillary refill time and alertness. Monitor
decreasing total solids, ascites, pulmonary
these variables closely. If hypotension is
oedema, pleural effusion) or hypotension is
suspected, measure blood pressure if possible.
persisting, give pentastarch or hetastarch at a
If arrhythmias are present or there is a high risk
S/u 01-S pue (ssop) sy/u 0z-01 Jo asop
of occurrence, establish continuous
(cats) 0ver 15-30 minutes
electrocardiographic monitoring if possible
 If hypotension is persisting, give adrenaline or
 4. Begin artificial respiration if respiratory arrest
dopanmine by constant rate infusion (CRl). For
has occurred and cardiopulnonary resuscitation
adrenaline CRI, add 5 mg adrcnaline 1o 1.0
if cardiopulmonary arrest has occurred.
litre saline (final concentration = 5 μg/ml);
Resuscitation should be attempted as the
start at 0.1 μg/kg/min (0.02 ml/kg/min, 1.2
siluation is not hopeless. Resuscitation may
iml/kg/h) and titralc up or down to effect.
result in recovery without drug therapy.
For dopamine CRl, add 200 mg dopamine to
300Manual of Canine and Feline Hacmatology and Transfusion Medicine
500 ml 5% dextrose solution (final
(0. 1 mg/iml) adrenaline 0.1-0.3 ml/kg i.v., and
concentration = 400 μg/ml) and give at 2-10
repeat in 2-3 mimules if necessary. Persistent
μg/kg/nin (0.005-0.025 ml/kg/min, 0.3-1.5
 phase I hypotension should be Ircated with
iml/kg/h) and titrate up or down to effect
synthetic colloids (preferably) or crystalloids and
If dyspnoea is prcscnt (from pulnonary oedena
drugs if ncccssary, as described in (6). Persistent
 or bronclhocoustriction). give aminophylline
 phase I braclycardia may be treated with atropine
5 mg/kg i.v. over 20 mimutes. The dose may
0.04 mg/kg i.v., or 0.08 mg/kg intratracheally. The
be repeated in 6 hours if necessary. Do not
latter route reduces the risk of ventricular
use aminophyllinc with cinetidine
fibrillation. Treatment for hypotension must be
 Once an anaphylactoid reaction has subsided,
discontinued when phase I hlypcriension develops.
the transfusion may be resumed at 10-25% of
10. Management of pretransfusion haemolysis in
the previous ratc. If a transfusion has resulted
both dogs and cats is similar to the management
in anaphylaxis, the recipient should never be
of haemolysis in dogs describcd in (8). The dose
 transfused from that donor again and must be
of frusenmide in the cat is I-2 mg/kg. Poleutial
transfused fron a new donor with extreme
 causes should be investigated.
caution in the future.
Rule put microbial contamination of blood produet
Rule out haemolysis
 11.lf signs are compatible with trausfusion-associated
7. If RBCs are being Irauisfused, collect a
scpsis, microbial contamination should be ruledl
microhaematocrit tube of bloodl fronm the recipient
out by testing the blood remaining in the bag.
and from the blood bag. Examine plasma from eacli
Gran-stained or Wright's-stained blood smears
for evidence of hacimolysis. Check the recipient's
should be examined for microorganisrs, and the
urine for haemoglobinaemia. Remcmbcr that cats
blood shoulci hc culured at 1-6°C, 25--30°℃
in particular can lave a haeinolytic reaction
and 37°C. Two simultaneous samplcs for blood
without evilenec of hacrmoglobinaemia and
culture from different veins should also be
haemoglobinuria. If a haemolytic rcaclion has
obtained fron thc rccipient, who should then be
occurred, blood typing of donor and recipient and 
 treated with enrofloxacin 5 mg/kg i.v. and either
crossmatching shuuld be performed to elucidate
ccfazolin 30 mg/kg i.v. or clindamycin 10 mng/kg
the incornpatibility or repeated to rulc out
i.v., all given over 20 minutes. This approach is
pretransfusion laboratory error.
not necessary with simple uticarial reactions.
8.
Canine haemolytic reaction: If haemolysis is
present in a dog, rcgardless of cause, obtain 
Address dyspnoea
baseline serum urea and/or creatinine level and
12. Rule oul haemolysis, sepsis and allergic reactions
activated clotting time. Begin intravenous fluid
and treat these as lescribed above. If dyspnoea is
therapy with a replacement fluid to maintain
 due to volume overload, give frusemide 2-4
adequate hydration and treat hypotension. In
mg/kg (dog) or 1-2 mg/kg (cat) i.v. Oxygen
modcrate to severe cases give frusemide 2-4
therapy is usually beneficial rcgardiless of the
mg/kg i.y. to help uaimain urine production. If the
cause of dyspnoea. Aminophylline (see 6) may
dog has severe haemolysis and is aciclaemic, it may
also be bcncficial. Mechanical ventilation may be
also be beneficial to treat with intravenous sodium
bicarbomatc; this may facilitate excretion of RBC
required in severe cases of non-cardiogenic
 pulmonary oedema, such as may occur in phase II
stroma, although it is not of proven benefit.
 of an acute feline haemolytic reaction.
 Monitor urine production. In the unlikely even
that acule rcnal failure develops, give dopamine at
Address fever
5 μg/kg/min i.v. as in (6), and institute standard
tlherapy. If massive haemolysis or overwhelming
13.If fever is the only sign, rule out haemolysis and
sepsis has occurred, consider giving heparin
bactcrial containination as previously discussed.
70-200 IU/kg s.c. tid as proplhylaxis for DIC.
If the transfusion is nol completed and the fever
 9. Feline haemolytic reaction (type B cat receiving
is believed to be due to leucocyte antigens, thc
type A bloorl): Trcatment of short-term (phase I)
fransfusion may be resumed. lf the temperature
hypotension is the comerstone for managing this
is higher than 41.0°C, consider giving an
reaction. Giving crystalloids as described in (6)
antipyretic drug if not contraindicated by
 and 'waiting out' the reaction may be al that is
 concurrent disorders. Drugs inchude dipyrone
necessary. Antilhistarmincs and corticosteroids are
 25 1ug/kg (dogs) or 10 mg/kg (cats) by slow
not routinely given. If cardicpulmonary arrest
intravenous bolus, intrainuscularly o!'
occurs, the most inmportant treatment is
subcutaneously; aspirin 10 mg/kg orally (dog
cardiopulimonary rcsuscitation. If cardiac function
only) and other non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
has not returned within 90 secondls, give 1:10 000
drugs at standard doses; paracctamol 10-15
Practical Blood Transfusion 301
mg/kg orally (dog only);and dexamethasone
volume.Ifvolumereplacement occursconcurrcntly
sodium phosphate 0.5-1.0 mg/kg i.v.
withblood withdrawal,the target haematocrit is
20-28%in an othcrwise healthy animal.Thevolume
Address otherproblems
to remove is calculated as:
14.Arrhythmias shouldbe treatedby standard
Estimated
Phlebotomy
Initial PCV -Final PCV
therapy.Note that the most common arrhythmia
volume
Average of initial and final PCV
in phase I ofan acute felinehaemolyticreaction
volume
is ventricularbigeminy,which doesnotnornally
require treatment.
Thebloodisstoredatroomtemperature andreinfused
15.Seizuresare usuallyself-limiting.Frequentseizures
within8hours topreservehaemostatic properties.
or status epilepticus shouldbe treatedbystandard
Haemodilution is more complicated than
therapy withdiazepam withorwithout phenobarbital.
preoperative donation.The main advantage of haemo-
16.Gastrointestinal signs are usually self-limiting
dilution over preoperative donation is that theblood
and donot require specifictreatment.An
contains normal levels of platelets and coagulation
exceptioniswithallergicreactions,whre
factors.Haemodilution is also useful where blood
trcatment with an H,blocker as listed in (6)
banking is not possiblc.
shouldbe consideredifmoderatetosevere
Although immunological transfusionrcactions are
vomiting and diarrhoea are present.
avoided,anaphylactoidreactions,non-haemolyticfe
brilereactionstobioactivecompounds andnon-immu
nological reactionsmay still occur.
AUTOTRANSFUSION
Salvage (scavenging)
In autotransfusionthe paticnt'sownbloodiscollected
This refers to collecting intrathoracic orintra-abdomi-
andreinfusedThisapproach,whichsunderutilizedin
nal bloodandreinfusingit.Itisusuallyperformed with
veterinarymedicine,avoidsisease transfer,he
lraumaandsurgerypatients,andisaparticularlyuseful
fora lonor and incompatibility.There are threetypes
procedurein veterinaryemergeney clinics whereblood
of autotransfusion:preoperative donation,hacmodilu-
supply caneasilybeexhausted and thereisinsufficient
tion and scavenging.
time for a fresh donation (Purvis,1995).
Commercial scavenging systems,and in-line col-
Preoperative donation and haemodilution
lecting bags for use with commercial suction chest
These proceduresrefer to elective donationofblood
lrainage systems,areavailable.Scavenging systems
from a paticnt before a procedure where there is a high
using readily available cquipment have been
likelihood of transfusion requirement.Thcsc proce-
described (Crowe, 1980). Large volumes of shed
dures are particularly useful with dogs that havc a
bloodmay be suctioned through aPoole suction tip.
history of transfusion reactions and with type B cats
peritoneal dialysis catheter or large-bore tube into a
where donoravailability may belimited.A caseseries
sterilecollecting bottle.Another method is toattach
of preoperative donation hasbeenrecentlyreporicd in
an injection cap(INTS',PRN adapter）to a collec-
cats (Fusco et al., 2000).
tion catheter.The ncedle of a blood collection set is
Preoperative donationmaybe performed at any
pierced through the injection cap,and blood iscol-
time within themaximum RBC storage periodbut is
lected byvacuum asdescribedpreviouslyforjugular
idcally performed about 2-3 weeks in advance of
collection.The salvaged blood maybe reinfused as
surgery.This allowstime for hemarrow toregenerate
rapidlyaspossible.Forsmall dogs and catsaspira
the lost RBCswhileminimizing the decrease instored
tion of blood with a 60ml syringe and sterile intra-
RBCviability.Ironsupplementationisrecommended
venous tubing will suffice.Three-way stopcocks
inhumans.If sufficient regeneration has occurred,
and intravenous tubing maybe attached to allow
predonationmaybecombinedwith hacmodilution.
direct reinfusion and anticoagulation.Because it
With haemodilution the donation isperformed
takes 1 hour ormore of serosal contact for blood
immediately before surgery. The withdrawn blood
tobecome fully defibrinated,anticoagulation isrec-
volume isreplaced by three timesthatvolumewith
ommended atarate of0.05ml CPD(orCPDA)）/ml
crystalloid solutions. Colloid solutions may also be
salvaged blood.
used,with thereplaccmcnt volume equal to thewith
Salvaged blood is more prone lo hacmolysis and
drawal volume.In acute blood loss,the hacmo-
must be handledgently.Vacuum pressuresshould be
dynamic problem is one of volume depletion and not
40-60mmHg（1.6-2.4inchesHg,54-82cmH,O)for
RBC loss.With this procedure volume depletion is
intraopcrative collcction and 10-15 mmHg (0.4-0.6
correctedandintraoperativeRBC lossisminimized.If
inchesHg,14-20 cmH,O) for collction fron closcd
the donation precedes volume replacement,the maxi-
body cavities.Aspirationofairshouldbeminimizedas
mum donationvolume is25%of estimatedblood
this can worscn hacmolysis.Autotransfusion should
 302Manual of Canine and Feline Haematology and Transfusion Medicine
 not be performed if haemorrlhage occurred more than
Callan MB, Jones LT and Giger U (l995) Hemolytic transfision
6 hours previously, bccause contact of blood with
reaction in a lug will at alloasilxody tu a corumon untigen.
JoornaofVeteriery ter!Medicne9277-280
traumatized serosa increases haernolysis. Excessive
pressure must be avoided when reinfusing by injec-
of cryoprecipitate and plasma on plasma von wilelwand faclor
nultimers and bleering time in Dalxerman Pinschers with type-T
tion. Infusion pumps should not be usecd.
vonWillcbrand'sdiscasc.AmericanJorrttofVeteruaryResearch
Coagulation anrdl fibrinolysis are activatedl un con-
55, 102-110
tact of blood with serosal surfaces, and platelets are
Corato A, Mazza G, Hale AS, BarkerRN and Day MI ( 1997) Biochennical
charaeterization of canine blood group antigens:
reduced inl number and function. This has several
innmneprecipitatiou of DEA 1.2, 4 ud 7 and icentifieation of a
implications. Firstly, salvagcd blood cannot be cx-
log erythrucyte menbrane amligen hwuologous tw hunun Rhesus.
Veterinary 1manology nd fmmoputhulogy59,213-223
[ected to correct hypocoagulable states. Indeed, large-
Coller SM(1991) Conparative Trwyfsia Meieine,d. SM Cotter.
volume autotransfusion may result in a hypocoagulable
Academic Press, New York
State. This is most likely to occur with volmmes grcater
Cowles BE, Meyers KM, Wardrop K], Menard M and Sylvester D
than 50% of patient blood volume, and haemostasis
platelet transfnsion, Thramhosis crd Haemostasis 67, 708-.712
usually normalizes within 3 days. Secondly, salvaged
Crowe DT (1930) Autotransfusion in the trauenu patiest. Vererinary
blood contains microlhromhi (as wcll as other
Clinics nf North Anerica: Smoll Aimal Practiee 10, 581 -597
Feldman BF, Zinkt JG and Jain NC (2000) Sehaim's Veterincry
microemboli) and should be given thrcugh a filter.
Hewarofogy. 5* edin, ed. BF Feldnan, JG Zinkl and NC Jain.
Idleally a 40 μm filter should be used.
Lippineot Willians and Wilkins, Hagerstown
Fusco JV, Hohenhaus AE, Aiken SW, Ioseph RI and Beg IM (2000)
 The risk of sepsis resulting from an autotransfusion
Antotogous blood collecion and transfusion in cats unergoing
 of salvaged blood is potenmtially greater thau that
partial cranicctomy. Jorrat of rhe American Veterinary Medice!
Associkrion 216, 1584-1588
fron a regular transfusion. Microbial contamination
Giger U and Akol KG (1990) Aente henolytie transfusion rcaction in 
of salvaged blood may occur as open collection
 systems are used and slcrility nay be broken in the
Medteme 4,315-316
Gigcr U, Gctcus CJ, Callan MB and Oaklcy DA (1995) An acute
rush of emergency patient care. Intestinal rupture
laenolytie 1ransfusion reaction caused by dog erythrocyte antigen
may result in contanination of intra-abdominal
1.1 incumpatibility in a previously sensifized dog. Jorri of the
blood. Autotransfuscd palients are frequently
Anerien Veterinury Merlicel Associarou 201, 1358-1362
Grot-Wenk ME ud Giger U (1995) Feline transfusion medicine: blood
immunocompromised because of shock or under-
types al their cliuical inpurlanee. Vererinary Ctinies of North
lying disorders. For these reasons empirical therapy
Anterree: Small Antaat Praetice 25, 130S-1322
Harell KAand Krisleusen AT(199S) Cuninetransfusion rcactins and
with broad-spectrum antibioties (see Chapter8) should
their management. Veterinry Ctinics of North Armeriea: Smalf
be consitlered.
Animn/ Procnice 25,1323-1361
Dissemination of neoplasia is a theoretical con-
Helfand SC, Jain NC and Paul M (1984) Vincristine-loaded platclel 
therapy for idiopathic lronalxocyiapenia in a rlng. forrna! af fhe
cern with salvage after rupture of a haemangiosar-
AmericaVeierinary Medicat Association I85, 224-226
coma. Dissemination of ncoplasia does Hut seem to
Ho C-I (199s) The hemostatic elfect of packed rxl eell ransfusion in
patients with anemia. Transfrsion 38, 1011-1014
be a major concern with scavenging in human medi-
Hohenhaus AE(1992) Tramsfusion medicine.Prohtems in Vereriary
cine, but haemangiosarcoma is an uncommon tu-
Medicine 4, 555-670
mour. Notall cells shed from a famour have imetastatic
Hohenhaus AE, Drusin LM anel Garvey MS (i997) Serrotia marcesces
contamination of feline whole blood in a hospital hlond bank.
 potential, and the likelihood is that a ruptured haem-
Journatofthe Anericau Veteriary MedicalAssociarion210,794-
angiosarcoma has already metastasized. so
86
Hurst TS, Turrenmine MA and Johmson GS (1987) Evalualion of
autotransfusion should be consideredl if no other
nticrovave-thawed caninc plasna for transfusion. Journa! of rhe
transfusion is available. Perhaps a more important
Anerican Veterinary Medicat Associarion 190, 863-865
Klein MK,Dow SW and Rosychuk RAW (i989) Pulmonary
concern withi salvage of blood shied from a haem-
thiromboembolisn associatcd wil inme-nediated hemolytic
angiosarcoma is that the blood may have bcen pool-
anenia in dog: 10 cases (1982-1987）. Journal ofrhe Americ!
 ing in hody cavities for more than 6 hours. However,
Veterinery Meedica! Assoriarior 195, 246-250
KnollenbelCM,DayMJCppsPJandMackinAJ(1999)Measurment
the serosal surfaces would not be traumatized, al1d
of titresof naallyocung alaniudies ugainst felineblod
autotransfusion should be performcrd if ihe clog rc-
quircs transfusicn and no othier blood is available.
365-370
KristensenATandFeldnanBF(1995a) Blool bankiung andiransfusion
medicine. In: Texhook of Veterinry Inerui Metieine, 4 edn,ed.
SJ Etinger anrd EC Feldman, Pp. 347-360. WB Saunders.
Philadclphia
REFERENCES AND FURTHER
Kristensen AT and Felcduan BF (1995b) Canine nnd feline translusion
READING
medicinc. Veteritary Clinies of North Aumerica: Soait Aninef
Pracnice 25, 1231-1490
Levy JK and Crawford PC (2000) Failune of passivetransferin meoatal
Aucr LK and Bell K (1986) Felinc blood transfusion reactians. l:
kittens correctionbyadminstrationofalle cat serum.Jouraf
Curreur Vererinary Therapy IX Snall Aninrai Pracrice, cd. RW
Veierinary fnernat Medicine 14, 362
Kirk,p.515-521.WBSaundrsPhiladlhia
MacEwen EG, Patnaik AK, Hayes AA, Wilkins RJ, Hardy WD, Kassel
Bouchad G,Plata-Madrid H, Youngquist RS, Buenug GM, Gunjun
RL and Old EJ (1981) Temporary plasma-indrced remission of
VK, Krase GF, Allen GK and Paine AL (1992) Absurpion ol au
lynploblsticteukemiainalog.American JowatofVererinry
altemate souree of inunoglohulininpups.AmerirJorrat
Researeh 42, 1450-1452
Veterinary Research 53, 230-233
Macintire DK, Smith-Carr S, Jones R aud Swango L (199y) Treatucnt
Brownlee L, Wardrop KJ, Sellon RK & Mcyers KM (2000) Use nf
of dogs naturally infected with camine parvovirus withlyoplilized
prcstoragc lcukorcduction filter effeclfvely rcmoves letikocytcs
canine IgG. Jorrnn of Veterinary fnerrl Meefieite 13,255
ron canine wlolc blaod while prescrving red blood cell vialbility.
Mathews KA (1996) Emergency aunef Critical Care Prorarols, ed. KA
Journai of Veterinary 1nrernai Medicine 14, 412-4 17
 Mathews. Lifelearn V, Guclph, Canada
Practical Blood Transfusiou303
Mallisan Pl., Contreras M and Engelfield CP (1997) Blood Trans/fusion
SliclterSI (2000)Platelet ransfusionsan platelet aloimmunization.
jn Chinieat Medicine, JO" edn. Blackwell Seience, Oxlord
Proceediugs of the IB Amanat Vererinary Medical Foru, pp.
MoritzA,WidmanTandHaleAS(I98)Comparisonfcurcnt tping
477-478. American College of Veterinary Internal Medicinc,
teclniques For cvaluaon of dog erytleytenntigen I.1.Jowrne
Seantle
of Veterinary tuernut Medicite 12,226
Springer T, Iatchet WL, Oakley DA, Niggemeir A and Giger U
NovingerMS, Sullivan PS and McDonaldl TP (t96) Delernination nf
(1998) Feline blood storagc and couponent tlerapy using a
thelifesa of etythtocytes Fron greyhouads using an in vitro
closedcolletionsystem.JournalafVeterinaryInterneMedieine
biuinylatinlechnique.AmericanJonmal ofVeterinary Research
12,248
57,739-742
Oto CM and Crowe DT (1992) lngraosscous resuscitation teehiques
cryoprccipitatein dogs wihhvon Wilebrand’s disease orbemoplilia
and applications,In: Curren ererinary Therapy Xi Smt! Animal
A.lornat ofVeeriary fuernatMedicie32,84-92
Synons M and BellK (i9gi) Expansion of the canine A bloud group
Saunders, Pliladelphia
system.AnnalGenetics 22,227-235
Pe1z LD, Swisler SN, Kleinnan S, Spenee RK and Sarauss RG (1996)
Vengelen-Tylcr V (1999) Techieat Marut, I3* ea, ed. V Vengclen-
CliePrfTfnMeeddD
Tyler. Aneriean Association of Bluod Banks, Bethesda
Swisher, S Kleinman, RK Spcnce and RG Strauss Churchill
Livingstone, New York
of aeute lenorrhage during surgery. fonrna! of the Americw
Price LR (i991) A method for collecing and sioring felinc wlhole blood.
Veieriuury Medieal Assncintion 203,40-45
Veterinary Techmician 7, 561-563
Wardrop J (199G Medical indications for plasma therapy. Proceedingy
Purvis D (1995) Autotranstusion in the cmergeney patiem. Veterinary
ofthe 14*Armnal Verermary MedicalFor pp.31-33.Ameriean
Cinics of NorthAmerica: Small AnimalPractice25,12911304
College of Veterinary Intermal Medicinc, Lakewaod
Rentko V (200) Practical usu of a blood substitie. In: Cirrear
Wardrop KJ (1995) Selcctionofanticoagulant-prescrvaives forranine
Veterinary Therapy Xi Srit Animl Practice, cd ID Bonagura,
and feline blood storagc. Veterinary Clionies of North Ameritc:
Dp424-427.WB SaunlersPhiladelplia
Snail Animal Practice2s,1263-1276
Storage.VererinaryCiunicsofNorhAmerica:SmatfAnimat Praeiee
pupurinaog wihhemaphilia AfotrnaiofVererinary mrer
25, 1245-1261
Medicne 11, 261-263
Scolt-Moncriefr JCR and Rengan WJ (1997) Human intravenuus
Woll JS antd Coltcr SM (199s) Blood sabstitutes: oxygcn-carrying
inmuoglobulin Aherapy. Serniaars in Veteriarry Medieine and
acellulartluids. Veterinary Cinies ofNorrh America: Snail Anima!
Surgery (Small Animal)12,178.185
Pracrice 25, I417-1440
?..*
.......
'...
CHAPTERSIXTEEN
Blood Groups in 
cats
AndrewSparkesandTimGruffydd-Jones
INTRODUCTION
much smaller proportion (about 25%) of group A cats
have corresponding alloantibodies against the B group
Blood groups are established by identifying major
antigcn,and when they are found these areofvery low
antigenic differences between erythrocyics from dif-
titre.Therare ABgroupcatscontainneitheralloantibody.
ferent individuals.In catsa well established A-B
These alloantibodiesare ofparticular significance in
blood group system bascd on naturally occurring
two situations,firstly,blood transfusionswhercthere
alloantibodies hasbeen described that hasimportant
areimplications for immediate transfusionreactions
clinical inplications.Recent work suggests that the
and alsofor the survivalof transfusederythrocytesand,
antigenic differences bctwcen erythrocytes in cats
sccondly,thephenomenonofneonatalisoerythrolysis.
forming this grouping system relates to the form of
neuraminic acid present on the glycolipids of the
Major transfusionreactions
erythrocyte cell membrane (Andrews et al.,1992).
The highlevels of anti-A alloantibodies in most group
Bcatsmeans that these individuals carry a highrisk of
THEA-BBLOODGROUPSYSTEMIN
amajortransfusionrcactionif theyreceivebloodfrom
CATS
a group A donor.Fortunately thisis not common,as
there is a low prevalence of group B cats in the gencral
Thc A-Bblood group system in the cat seems tobe
population.Neverthclsscertainbreeds haveamuch
inheritedinasimplc cominantformviatwoalllesatthe
higher prevalence of group B cats (Figure 16.1) and
samegenelocus.ThealleleforgroupAisdominantover
consequentlytheriskofmajorreactionsinthesebrecds
that for group B,and thus cats expressing the groupA
is much higher.
phenotype have a homozygous (A/A) or heterozygous
(A/B) genotype,whcreas cats expressing the group B
phenotype are invariably homozygousfor theB allele
Pedigree breed
GroupA
Group B
(B/B).In adition to the A and B phenotype,a small
(%)
(%)
proportion of cats (gencrally less than 1%)havebeen
British Shorthair
41
59
identified that express both A and B antigcns on the
Devon Rex
57
43
erythrocytc mcmbrane (ie. are of AB phenotype),al-
Persian
76
24
thougharecent studyfroin theUnitedKingdomidenti-
fiedahigherproportionof ABcats(5%)inthcpopulation
Somali
78
22
studied Knotcnbelt et al.,1999).These AB cats are
Abyssinian
80
20
assumedtohaveanA/Bgenotypebutwitha thirdallele
Himalayan
80
20
that prevents thenormalAdominanccbeingexpressed,
(Colourpoint)
the gcncs therefore acting as a co-dominant pair.
Birman
82
18
Scottish Fold
85
15
CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE OF BLOOD
Siamese
100
0
GROUPSINCATS
Tonkinese
100
0
The clinicalsignificanceofblood groupsincatsrelates
Oriental Shorthair
100
0
mainly to the high levels of naturally occurring
American Shorthair
100
0
alloantibodicsfoundinmanycats against the hetero-
logousblood group(a situation that does not occurin
Burmese
100
0
dogs).Most cats of blood group B (more than 95%)
Norwcgian Forest
100
0
contain moderate to high titres of both haemagglutinat-
Figure 16.1:Frequency oftypes Aand Bhlood groups in
ing (mainly IgM) and haemolytic (IgM and IgG)
pedigree catsfrom theUnited States.(Gigeret al,1991a;
alloantibodies against group A antigens,whereas a
BichelerandCotter,1993)
306Manual of Canine and Fcline Hacmatology and TransfusionMedicine
If a groupBcatreceives typeA blood,the donated
groupA phenotypekittenswithin thcfirst 2 to3 days
erythrocytes are destroyedwithin minutes tohours
aficr birth.Although relatively fewcasesofneonatal
depending on the antibody titre,and clinical signs of
isoerythrolysishavebeenreported,the trueicidne
transfusionreaction may develop.The initial clinical
is difficult to defineasmanyaffected kittensmay die
signs of a severe reaction (seen within seconds of
without a specific diagnosis bcing madle (dcath being
receiving even 1-2 ml of type A blood) are typical of
attributed to thefading kitten syndrome）.Affected
acute anaphylaxis, with restlessness, vocalization,
cats typically show haemoglobinuria,bilirubinuria
urination,vomiting,salivation,collapse,mydriasis,
and jaundiceandshouldbeseparatedfrom thcqucen
apnoea/hypopnoea,bradycardia (sometimes with
and artificiallyrcaredor fostered until they are48-72
atrioventricular block),dysrrhythimia,andprofound
hours old.
hypotension.Thesesignstypicallylastfor1-5minutes
and arefollowedbytachycardia,dysrrhythmiahyer
tensionandtachypnoeawithgradualrcturntonormal-
PREVALENCEOFBLOODGROUPSIN
ity in about an hour.In addition,haemoglobinaemia
CATS
and hacmoglobinuria occurowingtoacuteintravascu-
lar haemolysis.Although such transfusion reactions
Relativcly little information is available on thepreva-
arepotentiallyfatal,theseverityofthereactionwill be
lence of the different blood groups in cat populations,
related to the titre of anti-A alloantibodies,and some
but what there is suggests there may be noticcable
cats will therefore experience less severe subacute
geographical variations and certainlyprofound differ-
reactions.
ences between pedigreebreeds.
Major transfusion reactions have not been reported
AsthealleleforgroupAis dominant,thereshould
ingroup A catsreceiving type B blood,but the short
be a low prcvalcncc of type B cats among large
half-life of the transfused erythrocytesinthissituation
relatively free-breeding cat populations.Indeed, in
is an important concern.
most countries where studies havebeen made of do-
mestic (both shorthair and longhair) cats,thc preva-
Survival of transfused erythrocytes
lencc ofgroup Acats is between 94%and 100%
The half-life of transfused erythrocyics in cats given
(Figure 16.2).
autogcnousblood is typically 30-38days.A similar
half-life is also seen in group A and B cats given
Country
Group A domestic cats (%)
matched allogeneic transfusions,indicating the effec-
tivencssofthese transfusionsinclinicalpractice.Eryth-
Australia
73
rocytes from mismatched transfusions have a much
Austria
96
shorter half-life.Depending on thc anti-A titre, as
England
87-97
alrcadynoted type A erythrocytes transfused toa
Finland
100
groupBcat might have an extremely short half-life
France
85
(minutes to hours),whereas type Berythrocytes trans-
fused to a group A cat typically have a half-life of 2
Germany
94
days(Giger,1992).The survivalofthe transfused cells
Holland
96
is an importantreason why matchedtransfusionsshould
Italy
87
be given, in addition to the need to avoid major
Japan
90
transfusionreactions.
Scotland
97
Neonatal isoerythrolysis
Switzerland
>99
Nconatal isoerythrolysis is an immune-mediated
United States
>99
haemolytic disease of nconatcs thatcan occur when a
Figure16.2:Frequency of rypeA blood group in domestic
kitten of blood group A (or AB) is born to a quecn of
cats in various countries.(Gigeret al,1989;Lubas and
blood group B.Thc potentialforthisto occuris present
Continanza,1995;Knottenbelt et al,1999)
inany matingofa groupAtom toa groupBqueen,and
the chances of such a mating occurring are much
At present the only substantial published informa-
higherin the brccdswitha higher prevalence of group
tion on the prevalence of blood groups in different
B cats (Figure 16.1).
pedigree breeds comcs from the United States (Giger
The group B queen secretes anti-A alloantibodies
et al.,1991a),with some additional data from Italy
in her colostrum andmilk and,afer sucking,theIg
(Lubas and Continanza,1995) and thc United King-
antibodiescan be absorbed from the intestine of the
dom (Knottenhell et al.,1999).As the production of
neonate during the first 24 hours of life.Depending
pcdigrec breeds involves selective breeding (some
therefore on the antibody titrein the blood and colos-
times from a limited starting gene pool) it is not
trum of thc qucen and the amount absorbedby the
surprisingtofind thatmany brccdshave a much higher
kitten,haemolytic anaemia and death can occur in
proportion of group B cats than the domestic (non-
Blood Groups in Cats  307
 pedigree) cat populalion. It is, however, umwise to
 high prevalence of B group in the breed may facilitate
assume that the distribution of blood groups in cats
 planed breeding prograrmmes to avoid the possibiliy
from the United States will be similar in all countries.
of neonatal isoerythrolysis (i.e. avcid mating a type B
For cxample, in Italy (Lubas and Continanza, 1995)
queen to a type A tom).
the prcvalence of group A cats ainung Siamcse was
The recent introduction of a simple rapid card-
found to be 96% and anong Persians was 97%, corn-
agglutination test for lyping cat blood makes thcsc
pared with 100% and 76% respectively in the United
procedures much simpler, alid is available to all prac-
Stalcs. Even within countries, regional variations are
titioners (Rapid Vet-H Feline, DMS Laboratories). It
likely to exist in the prevalence of blood groups in both
should bc nuted, howcver, ha1 major and minor
 pedigree and non-pedigree cats (Giger et al., 1991b).
crossmatching of blood may still have to be performed
The general picture for the distribution of blood
in cats receiving more than one transfusion, as the first
 groups in pedigree breels in the United Kingriom
(ransfusion (even witln matehed blood) may inclucc
seems to be similar to that described in the United
 production of antibodies against red cellantigens other
 Stalcs. Most brecds identified as having a high preva-
than those involved in the A-B blood group system
lencc of type B cais in the United Stalcs also have a
(Giger, 1992; Lubas and Continanza, 1995).
high prevalence in the United Kingdom (e.g. Devon
Rex, British Shorthairs). The major difference is that
group B cats are rare in UK Abyssinians (TI Gruffydd-
REFERENCES
Jones, unpublished cbservations). In the study of UK
cats by Knottenbelt et al. (1999), information was
Andrews GA, Chavcy PS, Simith JE and Rich L (1992) N-
available from 121 British Shorthairs (59% were type
glyeolylneuraninic acid and acctylncuraminic acid dctine feline
B), 24 Birmans (29% were type B) and 17 Persians
blood group A and B antigcns. Biood 79,2485-2491
Bilchclcr J and CotierS(1993)Sctingupa felincblood doncr program.
(12% were type B). Other breeds were tested but the
Vererinary Medicine 88, 838-845
Giger U(1992) The feline AB bloud group-systen and iueomputibiity
Humbcrs were small (≤10).
reaclions. 1n: Current Vererinery Theropy XI, eals. RW Kirk arm JD
Bonagura,Dp.470-474.WBSauniers,Philadelphia
Gigcr U, Bucheler J and Patterson DF(1 991a) Frequency and inheritance
BLOOD TYPING
ofA and B blood types in feline brecds ofthe Unitcd Statcs.Jourua!
of Hereditary 82, 15-20
Giger U, Griot-Wenk M, Buchcler J, Simith S and Discrens D (19910)
Although naturally occurring blood transfusion reac-
Geogaphical variation of the felinc blood type frexquencics in the
tions are unconmon in cats, it is clear certain brccds
United States. Feline Practiee 19, 21-27
run a much higher risk of a major reaction. Knowledge
Giger U, Kilain CG, Filippich LJ and Bell K (1989) Frequeneies f
feline bloed groups in the United States. Jarrrol of the Americ!
of the overall prevalence of group B cats within a breed
Veterinary Meeieal Associarion 195,1230-1232
helps to quantify the risks involved but may be inaccn-
Knotenhelt CM, Addie DD, Day MJ and Mackin AJ (1999)
Determination of the ptevalencc of feline blood types in the UK.
 rate owing to geographical and local regional varia-
Jorrnal ofSuall AnimalPracrice 40,I15-118
lions. Blood typing before transfusion is therefore
LulasG and Continanza R(1995)Recentadvances inour understanding
routinely recomumended as the safesl approach. In
of the inipunolhacmatologieal charactcristies of cats and their
clinicatapplieaion.uromJor ofCompnionAiml
addition, blood typing of pedigree cats with a knowul
Prcrice 6,47-54
APPENDIXONE
Reference Values forHaematol
and Haemostasis
Thereference valuesin thefollowing table have been
It should always beremembered that any table of
taken from the BSAVA Small Animal Formulary, 2
referencc valucs of this kind is for guidance only.
edition(1997;edited byBrynTennant).Thesevalues
Whenever a sample is sent to a laboratory for analysis,
reflect those commonly used by small animalvcteri-
the laboratory shouldbe asked toprovide areference
nary surgeons. The ranges given in individual chapters
value forthespccificlaboratory,the specific test and
may vary bccause of the geographical spread of the
the specificpatient type so that interpretation ofthc
authors.
results can be done fairly.
HAEMATOLOGY
Value
Dog
Cat
PCV (1/)
0.35-0.55
0.26-0.46
Hb (g/l)
120-180
80-150
RBC (x10²/1)
5.4-8
5-11
MCV (fl)
65-75
37-49
MCH(pg)
22-25
12-17
MCHC (g/l)
340-370
320-350
Reticulocytes (%)
T-0
0-1
Reticulocytes (x 10°/l)
20-80
20-60
RBC life (days)
100-120
66-78
ESR (mm/h)
0-2
0-10
M:Eratio
0.75-2.5:1
0.6-3.9:1
Platelets (x10/1)
150-400
150-400
WBC(x10/1)
6-18
5.5-19.5
Neutrophils:bands
0-0.3
0-0.3
Neutrophils: mature
3-12
2.5-12.5
Lymphocytes
0.8-3.8
1.5-7
In young dogs upto 6months old lymphocyte number
may beincreased by as much as50%.
Monocytes
0.1-1.8
0-0.85
Eosinophils
0.1-1.9
0.1-1.5
Basophils
0-0.2
0-0.2
MCV (fl)= (PCV x 1000) ÷RBC
MCHC (g/l) = (Hb concentration) ÷ PCV
HAEMOSTASIS
Value
Dog
Cat
One stage prothrombin time (OSPT) (scconds)
7-12
7-12
Activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) (seconds)
12-15
12-22
Bleeding time (ear) (min)
1-2
1-5
Wholebloodcoagulation time
Glass (min)
6-7.5
8
Silicone (min)
2-15
Capillary tube (min)
3-4
5-5.4
Activated coagulation time (seconds)
60-129
Fibrinogen (g/l)
2-4.5
1-4
Fibrin degradation products (ug/ml)
<10
<10
1.
APPENDIX TWO
...
List of Abbreviations
....
ACD
acid citrate dextrose
DIC
dlisseminaled intravascular
ACT
activated clotting time
coagulation
ADP
adenosine diphosphate
2,3-DPG
 2,3-diphosphoglycerate
AIHA
 autoimmune haemolytic anaemia
DSH
domcstic shorthaired (cat)
AITP
autoinmune thrombocytopenia
ALL
acute lymphoblastic leukaemia
ECF-A
eosinophil chemotactic factor of
AML
acute myeloid leukaemia
anaphylaxis
AMoL
acute monocytic leukaemia
EDTA
ethylenerliaminc tctra-acetic acid
ANA
antinuclear antibody
ELISA
 enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
APTT
activated partial thromboplastin timc
EPO
erythropoietin
ARC
AIDS-related complex
ARDS
acule respiralory distress syndrome
FAD
flea allergy dermatitis
ARF
acute renal failure
Fc
inmunoglobulin heavy chain
ATII
antithrombin II
(fragment crystallizable)
ATP
adcnosine triphosphate
FDPs
fibrinogen degradation products
AZT
zidovudine
FeLV
 feline inmunodeficiency virus
FcSFV
 feline syncytium-forming virus
BFU-E
 burst-forming unit - erythroid
FeSV
feline sarcoma virus
BMBT
 buccal mucosal blceding time
FIA
feline infectious anaemia
BUN
blood urea nitrogen
FIP
feline infectious peritonitis
FIV
feline immunotleficiency virus
third componcnt of complement
FVIlI:Ag
 factor VII antigen
C3
CAMP
cyclic adenosine monophosphate
CBC
complete blood count
G-CSF
granulocyte colony stimulating factor
CFL-Bas
colony-foruming unit - basophil
GM-CSF
granulocyte-macrophage colony
CFU-E
 colony-forming unit - erythroid
 stimulating factor
CFU-Eos
 colony-forming unit - eosinophil
GP
glycoprotein
CFU-G
colony-forming unit 
- granulocyte
CFU-GM
colony-forming unit - granulocyic-
HES
hypereosinophilic syndrome
macrophage
HIV
human iunmunodeficiency virus
CFU-M
colony-fornming unit -
- macrophage
HUS
 haeimolytic uraemic syndrome
CLAD
canine leucocyte adhesion deficiency
CLL
chronic lymphocytic leukaemia
IFN-Y
interferon gamma
CML
chronic mycloid leukaemia
1g
immunoglobulin (IgG, IgM, IgA)
CNS
central nervous systen
IL
interleukin (e.g. IL-1 to IL-18)
CPD
citrate phosphate dextrose
IL-2R
interleukin 2 reccptor
CPDA.
cilralc phosplale dextrose adenine,
LMHA
immune-mediated haemolytic
CRI
constant rate infusion
anaenia
CRD
chronic renal disease
IMT
immane-mediated thrormbocytopenia
CRF
chronic renal failure
LI
idiopathic thrambocytopenic purpura
CSF
colony stimmlating factor
IVIG
 intravenous immunoglobulin
(therapy)
DAT
direct antiglobulin test 
DDAVP
1-leamino-8-D-arginine vasopressin
LGL
 large granular lymphocyte
DEA
Dog Erythrocyte Antigen
LPD
lymphoproliferative disease
 312 Mauual of Caninc and Feline Haemalology and Transfusion Medlicine
MCHC
 mean corpuscular haemoglobin
rHuEPO
 recombinant human erythropoietin
concentration
rHuG-CSF
recombinant hunan granulocyte
M-CSF
macrophage colony stimulating factor
colony stimulating factor
MCV
mean corpuscular volume
rHuGM-CSF rccombinant hmman granulocyte-
M/E
mycloid:crythroid
macrophage colony stimulating
MGDF
lcgakarocyte growtlh and
factor
development factor
RVVT
 Russell's viper venom tcs1
MODS
multiple organ dysfunction syudronc
MPD
1nycloprolifcrative disease
SCID
 severe combined inmmunodeficiency
MPS
mononuclear pliagocytic system
SID
strong ion dlifference
MPV
 mean platelet volume
SIRS
 systeimic inflammatory rcsponse
 syndrome
NBT
nitroblue tetrazolium (test)
SLE
systcmic lupus eryhenatosus
NK
natural killer (cell)
T4
thyroxine
OSPT
 one-stage prothrombin time
TCT
thrombin clot time
OVC
Ontario Veterinary College
TF
tissue factor
TFPI
tissue factor pathway iahibitor
PAI-1
 plasminogcn-activator inhibitor 1
TIBC
total iron binding capacity
PCR
 polymerase chain reaction
TNF
tunour necrosis factor
PCV
packed cell volume
tPA
tissue-lype plasminogen activator
PF3
plalclcl faclor 3 (test)
TP1
tissue plasimin inhibitor
PFK
phosphofructokinase
PGL
persistent generalized
uPA
urokinase-type plasminogen activator
lymphadcuopathy
PIE
pulmonary infiltrates with eosinophils
PIVKA
 proteins induced by vitamin K
VPIS
Veterinary Poisos Information
abscnce
Service
PRCA
pure red cell aplasia
vWD
von Willebrand's diseasc
 prothrombin time
vWf
PT
von Willebrand factor
PTH
parathyroid hormone
vWf:Ag
von Willebrand factor antigen
RBC
red blood cell
WBC
white blood cell (count)
RDW
red cell distribution width
WBCT
whole blood clotting time
：
Abyssinian cals
Angiosirongytus vasorum, 132
blood groups, 305
Anisocylosis, 8
pyruvate kinase deficieney, 36
Antibiotics, 82-3
Acanthocyles, 9, 31
in leukaenia, 146
Acitl citrate dextrose,276
in neutropenia, 119. 121-6
Acidosis, 298
 Antibody-mediated haenolysis、 80 
Activated clolting time, 177
Anticoagulant-preservative solutions, 275-7
Activatedl partial thromboplastin tine, 178
Anticoagnlant rodenticile toxicity, 223
Acante leukaemia, 148-51
clinical signs, 246-7
clinical features, 148
diagnosis, 247--9
diagnosis, 148-9
prognosis, 250~1
epidemiology, 148
trcatmcnt, 249-50
managcnient, 150
Anticoagulant roxlcnticidcs, 243-5 1
prognosis, 150-1
inhibition of vitamin K-enzyinc complcx, 244-5
Acute phase proteins, 56
role of vita1nin K in haenmostasis, 243-4
Aeute respiratory distress syndrone, 87, 90
Anticougulauls, 3-4
Adliesion of platelets, 201-2
Anticoagulation systen, 253-5
Aelurostrorgyius abstrusus, 132
Antimicrobial therapy see Antibioties
Aggluination, 69,71,269, 271,272
Anti-platelet antibodies, 190, 222
grading of, 270
Antithironbin IIl, 170, 179
Aggregation of platelets,183,202,203
Aplastic anaemia、 25
Airedale Teniers, von Willebrand's dlisease, 231
AS-1, 276
Alaskan Malamrtes
AS-3, 276
coagulopatlies, 211
AS-5, 276
...
hereditary stomalocytosis, 36
L-Asparaginmase, 150
Albumin-rich products, 288
Australia, frequency of type A blood group in cats, 306
Aleukaemic leukaemia, 139
Austria, frequency of type A blood group in cats, 306"
Amcrican Cocker Spanicls
Autonated blooxd count, 5-6
coagulopathics, 211
Autotransfusion, 301-2
slorage pool deficienicy, 205,206
preoperative donation and laemotilution, 301
American Foxloumds, Pelger-Hucl auoualy in, 109
salvage (scavenging), 301-2
American Slorthair cats, blood groups in, 305
Azathioprine, in imue-mediated Hronboeylopeniat, 224-5
Anaemia, 29-41
bone marrow sampling, 39
calses, 41
Babesia,266
characterization of, 30-1
Babesia cnis, 10, 37, 85, 185, 192,223
 of chronic renal disease, 59-65
Babesia canis canis, 85
clinical evaluation, 60- [
Babesia canis rossi, 85
pathophysiology.59-60
Bahesia canis vogeli, 85
treatment. 61-5
Babesia gibsoni, 85
classificarian of, 32-9
Band cells, 88
definition of, 30
Baronella clarridgeiae, 266
erythron disorders without, 31-2
Barronella henseiae, 266
 in FIV infection, 160-1
Bascnjis
：
1
 in FeLV infection, 157
 inmunoproliferativc small intcstinal diseasc, 109
haematopoictic ncoplasia, 39-41
Pelger-Huel unomaly, 111
Haenobartoneita felis see Haemobartonetta felis
pyruvale kinase deficieney, 36
immune-mediated haenolytic see Immune-miediated
Basophilia, 98
baemolytic anaemia
Basophilic leukaemia, 152-3
iron deficiency see Iron deficiency anaemia
Basophilic stippling, 10
red cell production, 29-30
Basophils, 12-13, 14, 98
Anaermic stress, 83
Basset Hounrls
Anaphylactoil reaction, 296
tlhromboparhia, 205-6
Angioedema, 295
Xlinked comhined immumodeficiency in, II 1
314 Manual of Canine and Feline Haematology and Transfusion Medicine
Beagles
sample collection, 20-1
cougulopathnics, 211
in anaemia, 39
 non-spheroeytie hacinolytic anaemia, 36
biopsy needles, 20
pyravate kinase defieicney, 36
biopsy rechniques, 20-1
Bilirubinuria, 36
core biopsy. 22~3
Biopsy. 20-1
snicar preparation, 21-2
Biopsy needlles, 20
sample interpretation, 23-7
 Birman cats, hlood groups in, 305
erythrenic myelosis and polyeythaenia, 25-6
Blast cells, 188
high rmagnification, 23-5
Blastic crisis, 41
low nagnification, 23
Blood antigens, 266-7
 neoplasms of haematopoietic cels, 25
Blood derivatives, 292
 non-haematopoietic neoplasms, 26-7
Bloud donors, 263-6
 Bone marrow evaluation
cats, 265-6
immune-mediated thrombocytopenia, 221-2
dogs, 264-5
thrombocytopenia, 189-90
source, 263-4
 Bonc marrow transplantation, I 12
 animal control facilities, 264
Border Collics, vitainin B, malabsorption in, 37
clinic-0wned, 263-4
Brcedl-relaled lrombocylopenia, 193
coinmercial blood donor, 264
Britisht Shorlhair cats, blxd groups in, 305
donor programme, 264
Brodifacowm, 245
terminal rionors, 264
Brouadiolone, 245
Blocxl films, 6-7
Buccal mucosal bleeding time, 173-4, 203, 233
Blood groups, 266-7
Bull Terriers, lethal acroderrmatitis of, 111
inn cats, 267, 305-7
Burmese cats, blood groups in, 305
in dogs, 266-7
Burr cells see Echinocytes
Blood loss, 61-2
Burst-forming units, 29
Blood procducis, 283-92
Busulphan, 152
blood derivatives and bloou substilutes, 292
leucocyte, 291
plasima, 286-90
Cain Terriers, pyruvatc kinasc deficiency in, 36
 platelet, 290-1
Caleiu, ionized, 167
red blood cell, 284-6
Candida albicans, phagoeylosis, 107
serm, 291-2
Canine babesiosis, 85-91
Blood sampling. 3-4
clinical manifestations, 86-8
Blood substiutes, 292
clinical pathology. 88
Blood transfusion, 62, 263-303
dliagnosis, 89
adverse rcactions, 294-301
epidemiology, 85
anticoagulant-prescrvative solutions, 275-7
life cycle, 85
antolransfusion, 301-2
pathogenesis, 85-6
blood donation, 277-82
prevention, 91
blood donors, 263-6
therapy, 89-91
blood groups, 266-7
Caninc blood donors,264-5
blood product preparation and storage, 283-92
clinical cvaluation, 264-5
canine babesiosis, 89.-91
drug tlerapy, 265
chronic renal disease, G2
previous transfusions, 265
 compatibility testing, 267-8
temperaucn, 264
crossmmatching, 268-75
Canine cyclic haematopoiesis, 111
H. felis, 83
Cats
immue-inediared baemolytic anaemia, 74-5
blood donation, 281-2
in leukacmia, 147
aftercare, 282
whole blood and blood components, 292~4
collection system, 281-2
Blood typing
 sedation and anaesthesia, 282
in cals, 268, 307
venepuncture ancd blood collection, 282
iel logs, 267-8
volume and frequency, 28 1
Bone marow, 19-27, 142
blood groups, 305-7
acute leukaemia, 149
A-B system, 305
aspirate, 20
blood typing, 307
polycythaemia,47
clinical significance of, 305-6
smear preparation,21-2
prcvalcncc of, 306-7
chronic leukaemia, 151
blood typing, 268
core biopsy, 20, 22-3
coagulopatlhies, 211
cytology
crossmalching,275
in inimune-mediated haemolytic anaemia, 73
thrombocytopenia, 184, 190-1, 192
in polycythaemmia, 47
see niso Feline
dysfunction, anaemias of, 32-4
Cavalier King Charles Spaniels, thrombocytopenia in, 5, 184,
examination,19
193,224
iron concenralions in, 56
CD4+ T lymphocyte balance, 108-9
leukaemia, 146
Cerehral bahesiosis, 86, 90
production, 29
Chediak-Higashi syndrome, I 11, 205 
Index 315
Chemotherapy. 147-8
Dermacentor reticlatus, 85
Chesapeake Bay Retrievers, von Willebrand's disease in, 231
Desmopressin, in von Willebrand's disease, 234--5
Chlorambucil, 152
Devon Rex cats
Chlorphacinone, 245
 blood groups, 305
Christmas risease, 211- 12
coagulopatlhies, 211, 213
Chronie leukaemia, 15 1-2
Dexanethasone, 83
Cireulalory overlond, 297
Diagnostic tcchniqucs, 3-17
Citrale intoxieation, 297
Dicounarin, 245
Citrate phosphate dextrose, 276
Difenacoum, 245
Citrate phosphate dextrose adenine, 276
Diff-Quik stain, 7
Clostridiun: haenolyticun, 37
Difloxaein, 121
Clot retraction, 175-6. 203
Diminazene, 89
Clotting factors
Diphacinone, 245
antibodies t0., 214-15
Dirofilaria immiis, 191, 192, 223, 266
脯
circulating inhibitors of, 214
Disseminated intravascular coagulation, 186, 192, 206-7,
Coagulation
214, 223,253-60
mechanism of, 253
aetiology, 255
in tlronbacyopenia, 190
clinical signs, 255-6
Coagulation factors, 288
detinition,253
 Coagulation inhibitors, 170
diagnosis, 256-8
Coagulalion syslem, aclivation of, 255
pathoplysiology, 253-5
Coagulopathies, 86, 87, 90
trealuc, 258-9
clinical findings, 209- 10
Dobenmann Pinschers
inherited, 211-13
 neulrophil defects, 111
management of, 210-11
von Willebrand's disease, 230, 231, 233
transfusion-related, 297-8
Doehle bodies, 96
Coccidiosis, 132
Dogs
Cocker Spaniels, imnume-mediated thrombocytopenia in,
blood donation, 277-81
219
aftercare, 280-1
Cocdocytes, 8-9
collection systenm, 277-8
Colony-forming units, 29, 93
venepuncture and blood collection, 278-80
Commercial blood donars, 264
volume and frequency, 277
Complete blood count, 19
blood typing. 267-8
innnune-mediated thrombocytopenia, 221
crossmatching, 274-5
thrombocytopenia, 189
thuromboeytopenia, 191, 192
Contact activation factors, 167
see ailso Canine
Copper deficiency,35
Doxorubicin, 150
Corgis, X-linked combined immunodeficiency in, 111
Drug-incluced leucocyle dlisorders, I08
Corticosteroids, 83
Drug-incluced tlrombopathias, 206
Coulter counter, 6
Dutch Kooikers, von Willebrand's disease in, 231
Counafuryl, 245
Coumatetralyl, 245
Crenosoua vuipis, 132
Eccentrocytes, 9
Crossmatching, 268-75
Ecchymoses, 187
in cars, 275
Echinocytes, 9, 31
in dogs, 274-5
Ehrlichia,14
procedures, 268-74
Ehrlichia camis, 32, 96, 185, 188, 191, 192, 204, 223
rapid slide method, 269
Ehrtichia egui, 191
tube methoxd, 270
Ehrlichia platys, 188, 191, 204
Cryoprecipitate, 239, 289-90
Elliptoeylosis, hereditary,36
Cryosupernatant, 290
Englaund, frequeney uf type A blood group in cats, 306
Cryptococcus neoformans, 44
Englisli Spauiels, polysyslcnic disorder in, 36
Cutaneous purpura, 187
Eosinopenia, 98
Cyclic haenatopoiesis, 205
Eosinophilia, 97-8, 131-8
Cyclophosphamide, 150, 152
hypersensitivity and inflammation, 133-4
 in immane-mediated thrombocytopenia, 2245
investigation of, 1334
Cyclosporin, 76
parasitism, 132-3
 in immune-medliated thrornbocytopenia, 224-5
Eosinophilic leukaemia, 152-3
Cytokines, 112
Eosinophils, 12, 14, 53. 88, 97-8
therapy,127-8
function, 97
Cytapenias, 16
production, 97
Cytosine arahinoside, 150
Epistaxis, 187,230
Erythreinic myclosis, 25-6
Erythrocylc inclusions, 9-10 
Dachshunds, imnune-1nediated tlroulxoeytopenuia in, 183
Eryuhuroeyte protoporphyrin, 56
Dacryocyles, 31, 35
Erythrocytes see Red blood cells
Danazol, 76
Erythroid leukaemia, 153
 in inmune-nediated thrombocytopenia, 224-5
Erythrophagia, 80-1
Denodicosis, 109
Erythropoiesis, 43
 316 Manual of Canine and Feline Haenatology and Transfusion Medicinc
Erythropoietin, 43, 141
Germany, frequency of typxe A blood group in cais, 306
deficicncy, 59-60
Giant Sehmauzers, vitamin B ualubsorption in, 37
recombinant human, 62-5
Giardiasis, 132
lenefits, 62
Gingival haenorrhage, 238
contraindications, 62
Glanzmann's thromnasthenia, 205
indieations, 62
Glass beadl retentiou test, 203
injeclion, 62
Gilucocorticoids, in immune-meliated tlirombocytopenia, 224
 preparations of, 62
Golclen Retrievers, blood antigens in, 266
resistance to 1reatinent, 65
Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor, 141
safety and side effects, 64-5
Grnulocyte-macrophage colony-stinulating factor, 141
serum concentrations, 46-7
Granulocyles, 93-9
transfiusions of, 126-7
Granulocytopatlhy of Irish Setters, 110-11
Factor V, 168
Granulopoiesis, 93
Factor VII deficicncy, 212
Grey Collies, cyclic haematopoiesis in, 205
Factor VIIl, 168, 237
Grey Collie syndrome, 111
 in laemophilia A carricrs, 240
Greyhomds
inhibitors, 214
blood antigens, 266
Factor X deficiency, 212
thrombocytopenia, 184, 193, 224
Factor XI, 168
deficiency, 212
inbibitor, 215
Haenartlroscs, 187
Factor XII deficiency, 213
Haenalemrcsis, 187, 188
Factor XIH, 168
Haema1ochezit, 187
Feline blooxl rlonors, 265-6
Haemaloerit see Packed cell volume
 clinical evaluation, 265-6
Haematology
Feline inunodcficicncy vins, 159-62, 189 
acute leukaemia,148
conlrol of, 162
chronic leukaemia, 151
diag1nosis, 161-2
H. felis, 82
diseases associateti with, 160
iron deficiency anaeimia, 55
epideniology, 159--60
lenkaemia, I45
haematological changes, 160-1
Hacinatopoiesis, 29
 pathogenesis, 160
Hacuatopoictic cells, neoplasms of, 25
treatment, 162
Hacmatopoictic systcu, 139-42
Feline infectious peritonitis, 189
Haemaluria, 187
Feline leukaemia virus, 155-9, 189
Haemobertonetle canis, 37
control of, 159
Haemobartonelle felis, 10, 37, 67, 79-84, 192, 266
diagnosis, 158
claracteristics, 79
diseases associated with, 156
clinical signs, 81
epidemiology, 155
diagnosis, 81-2
hacmatological changes, l56-7
epidemiology, 79-80
palliogcncsis, 155-6
pathogenesis. 80-1
treatncnt, 158-9
prognosis. 83
Ferritin, serum concentrations, 56
treatnient, 82-3
Fibrian degradation products, 179
Hacmoconcentration, 87-8, 90
Fibrinogen, 168, 179
Hacmoglobin, 5
deficieney, 212-13
Imlcasurement of, S
Fibrinolysis, 170-1, 255
synthesis, defects in, 35
tesis of, 178-80
Haerogiobin conccntration, 14
Fibrin split preducts, 179
Haenograu, 19
Fitaroides hirrhi, 132
Haemolysis
 Finland, frequency of type A blood group in cats, 306
antibody-mediated, 80
Fleas
non-agglatinating, 69
and eosinophilia, 132
in vitro,298
and spread of Haemobartosteila felis, 80
Haemolytic uraenic syndrome, 193, 223
Filnid therapy, in leukaenia, 146-7
Haemoperitoneum, 187
France, frequency of type A blood group in cats, 306
Haemophagocytic syndrorne, 27
Haemophilia A, 21i, 237-41
carrier detection, 239-40
Gammaglabulin, intravenous hauman, 756
clinical signs, 238-9
Gastrointestinal haeuorrhage, 60
function of factor VIl, 237
treatment, G1-2
prcvalence andl inlhcritance, 2378
Gene therapy, 239
trealnet, 239
German Shepherd Dogs
Hacmoplilia B, 211-12
aspergillosis, 109
Haemophysalis ieachi, 85
blood antigens, 266
Haemorrlhage
eosinophil counts, 16
gastrointeslial, 60
German Shorthair Pointers, von Willebrand's disease in, 231
treainen, 61-2
German Wirehair Pointers, von Willebrand's disease in, 231
Haemosiderosis,299
Index 317
Haemostasis, 165-71
Interlenkin-5, 141 
coagulation inhibitors, 170
Intravascular haemolysis, 69
diagnostic techniques, 17381
In vitro haeinolysis, 298
fibrinolysis, 170 I 
Ionized calcium, 167
primary, 165-7
Irish Seliers, granulocytopathy of, 110-1 1
tesis of, 173-7
secondary see Secondary hiaemostasis
Iron
22
 submission of samples ro laboratory, 173
metabolism, 55-6
Hacnrothorax, 187, 246
serum concentrations, 55-6
Heinz bodics, 10, 31
Iron deficiency anaemia, 35, 53
Heparin, 214, 276
calrses of, 55
Heparinization,297
jn chronic renal dlisease, 60
Hepatic disease, 214
haematology, 53
 platelet disorders in, 207
pathophysiology, 54-5
Hepatopathy, 87, 90
tcsts of iron metabolism, 55-6
+1 *dds to02odo
trcatncnt, 56-7
Hinalayan cats, blood groups in, 305
Italy, frequeney of typc A blood group in cars, 306
Histiocytosis, 27
Holland, frequency of type A blood group in cats, 30
Howell-Iolly bodies、10
Jack Russell Terriers, coagulopaulhies in, 211
 Hungarian Vizslas, immune-nediated thrombocytopenia in,
Japan, frequency of type A blood group in cals, 306
Japanese Akitas, macrocytosis in, 37
Hydroxyurca, 48, 152
Hyperamnonaemia, 298
Hypercaleacmia, 144
Kasabach-Merrit syndrome, 257
management, 147
Keratocytes, 31
Hyperganmaglobulinaemia, 145
Kerry Blne Terriers, coaguopathies in, 211.
Hyperkalaeimia, 298
Hyperparathyroidism, 60
Hyperproteimaemia, 145.297
Labrador Retricvcrs, blood antigens in, 266
Hypertension, 61
Laser cell counters, 6
Hyperviscosity, 145
Left shift, 11
management,147
degenerative, 102
Hypoalbuminaemia, 61
regemerative, 102
Hypocalcaenia, 297
Leisimmania spp., 14
Hypofibrinogenacmia, 212--13
 in bone marrow aspirate, 20
Hypophosphatacinia, 298
Leishman's stain, 7
Hypotcnsion, 88, 90
Leprospira icrerofaemorrhagica, 37
Hypotermia, 297
Lethal acrodermatitis of Bull Terriers, 111
Lencine-rich glycoproteins, 198
Lencncyte count, 5. 88
Icterus, 87, 90
age-relared changes, 101
Inidocarb, 89
differential, 16
Immue-mediated haemolysis, 37-8
disorders of, 93-104
Inmue-mediated haenolytic amaemia, 67-77, 87, 90, 189
total, 16, 93
categories of, 69
Lcucocytc products, 291
clinical signs, 69.70
Lcucocytc rcactions, 296
diagnosis, 70-3
Leucocytes
management, 73-7
functional disorders of, 105-14
mechanism of rerdi cell destruction, 68-9
acquired, 108-10
prognosis, 77
congenital, 110.11
Inmune-mediated thrombocytopenia, 207, 219-27
diagnosis, 111-12
clinical features, 220- 1
therapy, 112
diag11osis, 221-4
 infectious inclusions, 14
pathogencsis, 219-20
inflammatory responses, 102-3
prognosis, 225-6
marphology, 10-14
treatment, 224-5
patterns of, 16-17
Immunocytes, 100
responses, I01-3
Imnunodeficiency disorder of Wcimarancrs, 110
lests of function, I05-8
Inamunodeficieney syudroue of Irish Wolflounds, 111
Leucocytosis, adrenaline-intltuced, 101-2
lmunoglobulin, 292
Leucoerythroblastic reaction, 103 
Immunologieal testing, 71-2
Leucopenia, plhysiological, 102
Irmmunomodulatory agents, 112
Leukaenia, 16-17, 103-4, 139-54
Immnnosuppression, 83
acute,142,148-51
Immunosuppressive therapy, 73-4
aetiology, 143
Infusion therapy, 234
approach to patient, 143-6
Integrins, 198
chronic, [42, 151-2
Interleuki-1, 30
classification, 142-3
Interleukin-3, 141
cosinophilic andl basophilic, 152-3
318 Manual of Canine and Feline Haeinatology and Transfusion Medicine
crythroid, 153
Natural killer cells, 108
haematopoietic system, 139-42
Ncoplasia
mamagement, 146--8
anid cosinophilia, 134-5
myelodysplastic syndromes, 153
haenatopoietic, 25, 39-41
oflatelers and platelet precusors53
and immune-mnediatcd thrombocytopenia, 223
Leulaemcid response, 103
non-haematopoictic, 26-7
Lupus anticoagulant, 214
and thronbocylopenia, 192
Lymplocytes, 13-14, 53, 88, 99-101
Netilmycin, 123
cytokine/innnunoglobulin release from, 108
Neutropenia, 95-6, 117-29
function, f00-1
diagnosis, 118
isolatiou fron peripheral blood, 107
in feline immunodeficiency virus, 159
production, 100
in feline leukaemia virus, 157-9
proliferation assays, 107
infectious complications, 118-19
tests of function, I07-8
managcment, 119-26
Lymphocytosis, 101
prophylaxis, 120
Lymphoma, 26
Neutrophilia, 95
Lymphopenia, 101
Neutrophits, 11-12, 88, 93-7
 in feline immunoreficiency virus, 161
band, 14, 53
in fclinc leukaemia vinis, 157-8
chemotaxis, 10G
L.ymploprolifcrative disease, 143, 161
function, 95
 jsolation from peripheral blood, 105
morphological abnomalities, 96-7
Macrocyles. 7-8
plagacytosis and killing assays, 106
Macrocytosis, 37
production of, 93-4
Macrophage colony-stilating factor, 141
respiratory burst, 107
Macrophages, tests of fumctiou, 107
scgnntented, 14, 53
Macrothrombocytosis, 189
tests of function, 105-7
Manchester Terriers, von Willebrand's disease in, 23 1
Nou-agglutinating haemolysis, 69
Maual cell counts, 5
Norwcgian Forcst cats, blood groups in, 305
Mast cells, 98
Nucleotide syuthesis, defccts in, 34
Mast cell tumours, 26
MCH see Mean corpuscular haemoglobin
MCHC see Mean corpuscular haemoglohin concentration 
Obesity, polycythaemia in, 44
MCV see Mean carpuscular volume
 Old English Sheepdogs, inmune-mediated thrombocytopenia
Mean corpuscular concentration, 53
in, 183
Mean corpuscular laemoglobin conccnlratiou (MCHC), 5,
Olttans ricuspis,132
14, 15
Oral cavity haemorrhage, 187
Mean corpuscular haemoglobin (MCH), 5, 14
Oriental Shorthair cats, blood groups in, 305
Mean corpuscular volume (MCV), 5, 14, 15, 53, 55
Oslerus (Fitaroides) osteri, 132
Megakaryocyte direct ianmtunofluorescence test, 222
Megakaryocyte growth and developunent factor. 141
Megakaryocytes, 183, 190
Packed ce11 volume (PCV), 4, 5, 6, 43, 53, 60, 61, 88
Megathrombocytes, 188
Packed red cells, 285-6
Melaena, 187
Panleucopenia, 189
Mercaptaurine, 150
Parasites, ad eosinophilia, 132-3
Metastatic carcinomas, of bone marrow, 27
Parathyroid honmone, plasina concentration, G1
Methaemoglobin reductase deficiency. 37
PCV see Packed cell volune
Microcytes, 8
Pelger-Huet anomaly, 97, 111
Microhaematocrit, 4
 Penmbroke Welsh Corgis, von Willebrand's disease i1, 231
Micrathrombocyiosis, 221
Persian Cats
Miniature Dachshunds,Pnenmocystis carinit infection in,
blaod groups, 305
110
Chediak-Higashi syndrome, 111
Miniature Poodles
Petechiae, 183, 187,220,221
Imethaeruoglobin rcductase deficiency, 37
Phlebotomy. in polycythaemia, 48
non-splerocylic hacmolytic anaemia, 36
Phasphorus, radioactive, 48-9
Monocytes, 13, 14, 88, 99
lindonc, 245
tests of function, 107
Plasma products, 286-90
Monocytopenia, 99
cryoprecipitate, 289-90
Monocytosis, 99
cryosupematant, 290
Multiple myeloma, 26
fresh/fresh frozen plasna, 287
Myelohlastopenia, 158
liquid plasma and frozen plasma, 287-9
Myelodysplastic syndromes, 35-6, 153
thawed plasma, 287
Myelofibrosis, 24, 36, 60
Plasma protein reactions, 295-6
Myeloidl cells, 24
Plasmapheresis, 76、 147
Myeloid hyperplasia, 24
Platelet aggregometer, 203
Myeloid unetaplasia, 36
Platelet-bound immunoglobulin G, 222
Myeloproliferative discase, 142, I60
Platelet concenrate, 290-1
Plarelet count, 14, 174-5
automated, 15-16, 176
Index 319
immune-mecliated thrombocytopenia,221
Red blood cell products,284-6
manual,175
packedredcells,285-6
thrombocytopenia,189
whole blood,284-5
Platelct factor3test,222
Red blood cell substiutes,286
Platelet plug, 184
Red blood cells
Platelet products,2901
acquired defects,37-8
Platelet reactions,296
genetic defects,36-7
Platelet-rich plasma,290
increased destruetion,36-8,689
Platelet transfusions,1912
increased loss.389
Platelets,53,88,165,197-208
increased osmotic fragility,60
accelerated destruction,185-6
indices of,30-1
adhesion,184,201-2
morphology,7-10,31,53
aggregation,183,202,203
see also individualredcellforms
clumping,184,188
nucleated,10,14
dccrcased production,184-5
production of,29-30
disorders of function,203-4,204-7
reduction,32,34
disorders of nunber,183-95
sequestration of,80
in feline leukaemia virus,158
variables,15
function,200-2
Red cell count,5,14
function tests, 175-7
Red cell distribution width,55
leukaemia of,153
Red cell transfusions, 192
morphology,14.174 5
Regenerative response, 30
procoagulant activity,202,204
Releasereaction of platelets,202,203
releasereaction,202,203
Renal disease
sequestration,186
acute,in canine babesiosis,86,90
structure,197-200
chronic,anaemia of,59-65
membrane systems,200
platelet disorders in, 207
organelle zone,200
Renal neoplasia, polyeythaemia in, 44,46
outer menbrane,197-9
Reticuloeyte count,60,88
sol-gel zone,200
Reticulocyte proxduction index (RP1).15
volume,189
Reticulocytes,10,53
Pneumocystis carini,110,132
Retinal haemorrhage,187
Poikilocytosis,34
Rhipicephalus sanguineous,10,85
Polycythaemia.25 6,43-50.297
Rickettsia rickettsii,191
consequences of,45
RockyMountain spotted fever,192
laboratory findings and diagnosis,457
Romanowsky stains.7
primary,44
Rottweilers,immunemediated thrombocytopenia in,220
relative,43
Rubriblasts,24
secondary,43-4
treatment,47-9
Polyeythacmia vera,32,44
Sehistocyts,9,31
Poodles
ScotlandfrquncyoftyeAbloodgroupincats06
immune-mediated thrombocytopenia.219
ScotishFold cats,blood groups in,05
von willebrand’s discase,231
ScottishTerriers
Porphyria,hereditary,35
immune-mcdiated thrombocytopenia,183
Post splenectomy thrombocytosis,193
vonWillebrand’s discase,231,233
Prednisolone,83,150,152
Secondary haemostasis,167-9
Preleukaemia seeMyelodysplastic syndromes
components of,167-8
Primary immune-mediated rombocytopenia,192
disordersof,209-15
Primary thrombocytosis,193
acquired coagulopathics,214-15
Procoagulant activityof platelets202,204
clinical findings in coagulopathics,209-10
Protein C,170
inherited coagulopathies,211-13
Protein S,170
management of coagulopathies,210-11
Protcinuria,191
mcchanism of,168-9
Protlrombin time,178
tests of,177-8
Pseudoagglutination,269,271,272
Secondary immune-mediated thrombocytopenia,192
Pure red cell aplasia,24,34
Selectins,198
Pyrenean Mountain Dogs,coagulopathies in,211
Sertoli cell tumour,185
Pyruvate kinase deficicncy.36
Serun produets,291-2
Shetland Sheepdogs,von Willebrand’s disease in231
Shiba Inus
Quantitative buffy coat analysis,6
macrocytosis,37
thrombocytopenia,184,193,224
Siamese cats
Reactive thrombocytosis,193
blood groups,305
Rcbound thrombocytosis,193
coagulopathies,211
Rccombinanthuman erythropoietin seeErythropoietin,
SilkyTerriers,hcreditary ellprocytosis in,36
recombinant human
Smouldering leukacmia,139
SID
Red blood cellincompatibility,295
Sodium citrate,276
U.
E
BIBLIOTECA
320Manual of Canine andFelineHaematology and Transfusion Medicine
Preco
Somali cats,blood groups in,305
hypophosphataemia,298
Spherocytes, 8,31,70
hypothermia,297
Sphcrocytosis,70
microbial contamination,298
Spitz dog thronbopathia,205,206
polyeythaemia and hyperproteinacmia,297
Splenectomy.76,225
pretransfusion haenolysis,298
Splenomegaly,223
volume（circulatory)overload,297
SpringerSpaniels,bilirubinuria in.36
Trichuris vulpis,132
Spurious thrombocytopenia,223-4
Trombiculid mites,132
Staining of blood films,7
Trypan blue,89
Staphylococcus intermediusphagocytosis106
Trypanosoma congolense,34
Stomatocytosis,hereditary,36
Tumour necrosis factor(TNF),30
Storagepool deficiency,205,206
Stress leucogram,16,102
Strongyloides spp.,132
Umbilical haemorrhage,238
Sulphaquinoxalinc,245
Uncinaria stenocephala,132
Switzerland,frequency of type A blood group in cats,306
United States,frequency of type A blood group in cats.306
Synthetic plasma expanders,289
'Target cells see Codocytes
Valone,245
Tetracyclines,83
Venepuncture,3-4
Thiacctarsemide sodium,83
Vinca-loaded platelets291
6-Thioguaninc,150
Vincristine.150,152
Thronbin clot tine,179
in immunemediated thrombocytopenia,224-5
Thromboeytopenia,184-93
Vitamin B, deficiency,35
breed-associated, 5
Vitamin Bmalabsorption,37
causes of,184-6
VitaminK
clinical presentation,1860
antagonism,214
immunemediated seeImmune-mediated
deficiency.214
thrombocytopenia
rolc in hacmostasis,243-4
laboratory evaluation,188-91
trcatincnt of anticoagulantrodenticide toxicity,249-50
specific causes,192-3
VitainK-dependent coagulation factors,168
treatment,191-2
VitaminK-dependent coagulopathies213,214
Thrombocytosis,193-4
VitaminK-enzymecomplex,inhibition of,244-5
Thrombopathias,203-4
von Willebrandfactor,165,183.184,203
Thrombopoictin, 141
antigen,177
Thrombosis,297-8
function tests,177
Tissue faetor,167
measurement of,232-3
Tissuefactor pathway inhibitor,170
structure and function,193-4
Tonkinese catsblood groups n,5
vonWillebrands disease,205,229-35
Total iron binding capacity,56
clinical signs,230-1
Total nucleated cell count,53
diagnosis,232-4
Total protein,53
trcatment,234
Toxocara canis,132
Toxocara cati,132
Toxoplasma gondi,192,266
Warfarin,245
Toxoplasmosis,132
Weimaraners,immunodeficiencyof110
ToyAlaskan Eskimos,methaemoglobinreductase deficiency
West Highland White Terriers
in,37
immune-mediated thrombocytopenia,220
Transcxamic acid,239
pyruvate kinase deficiency,36
Transferrin saturation,56
White cells seeLeucocytes
Transfusion-associated scpsis298
Whole blood,284-5
Transfusion reactions2949
administration,292-4
immunological, 2956
delivcry,294
plasma protein reactions.295-6
filter,293-4
platelet reactions,296
record keeping,294
red blood cellincompatibility,295
transfusionrate,293
white cell reactions,296
venous access,293
management of,299-301
warming and mixing,292-3
non-immunological,296-9
haemostatic properties,284
acidosis.298
storage,284
anaphylactoid reactions,296
transfusion,284-5
citrate intoxication (hypocalcaemia),297
use,284
coagulopathy and thrombosis,297-8
Whole blood clotting time,177-8
hacmosiderosis,299
Wright's/Giemsa stain,7
heparinization,297
hyperammonaemia,298
hyperkalaemia,298
X-linked combined immunodeficiency,111