CE Article #4
Diagnosing Acute
Pancreatitis in Dogs
Kirstin Mix, DVM
Christopher Jones, DVM, DACVIM
Gulf Coast Veterinary Specialists
Houston, Texas
ABSTRACT: Canine acute pancreatitis is challenging to diagnose and treat. Because this disease has
the potential for severe morbidity and mortality, accurate and timely diagnosis is important. The
ideal diagnostic test would be highly sensitive and specific, practical, affordable, and readily available.
Because no one diagnostic test fits these criteria, the diagnosis of acute pancreatitis must be made
based on evidence from a variety of diagnostic tests and clinical judgment.This article reviews some
of the tests available to diagnose pancreatitis.
ancreatitis is the most common disease of
for degradation of ingested proteins, fats, and
the canine exocrine pancreas, but accurate
polysaccharides. These digestive enzymes are
diagnosis and reliable treatment of this
produced by the pancreatic acinar cells, where
disease remain challenging. Based on a necropsy
they are stored until the pancreas is stimulated
study' evaluating the prevalence of inflamma-
to secrete them into the duodenum. Most dogs
tory lesions within the pancreas, 64.4% of dogs
have two pancreatic ducts: the pancreatic duct
 have histologic evidence of pancreatic inflam-
and the accessory pancreatic duct (Figure 1).
mation, although the clinical significance of
 Most pancreatic cells are pancreatic acinar cells.
these lesions is not clear. In humans, it is sus
Approximately 1% to 2% of pancreatic cll are
seioued jo saseo jo 906 0n dn 1eun paioad
endocrine cells.
remain unrecognized and undiagnosed.? This
damage normal tissues within the body (includ-
Timely and accurate diagnosis of pancreatitis is
the
, the pancreas has several
essential because pancreatitis can be associated
defense
with significant morbidity and mortality. This
autodigestion or damage from these digestive
article reviews the sensitivity, specificity, and
enzymes.
The first defense mechanism of the
 practicality of the different diagnostic modalities
 pancreas against autodigestion or damage from
 available to diagnose pancreatitis.
 pancreatic enzymes is production, storage, and
secretion of pancreatic digestive enzymes in
Send comments/questions via email
PANCREAS
their inactive forms, called zymogens. Within
editor@CompendiumVet.com
PHYSIOLOGY
the pancreatic acinar cells, the zymogens are
or fax 800-556-3288.
The major function of the
segregated into zymogen granules, thus protect-
exocrine pancreas is produc-
ing other cellular contents from contact with
Visit Compendium Vet.com for
full-text articles, CE testing and CE
tion, storage, and secretion of
the zymogens. In healthy animals, zymogens
test answers.
digestive enzymes important
 are activated after they are secreted into the
COMPENDIUM
226
March 2006
Diagnosing Acute Pancreatitis in Dogs CE
227
Table 1. Prevalence of Clinical Signs in
Dogs with Pancreatitis'
Clinical Sign
Prevalence
Pancreatic duct
 Dehydration
97%
Accessory pancreatic duct
Anorexia
91%
Stomach
Vomiting
90%
Weakness
79%
 Abdominal pain
58%
Diarrhea
33%
Icterus
32%
by Felecia Paras
active forms within the pancreas, thereby resulting in
autodigestion of pancreatic tissue.? Following activation
of pancreatic enzymes, pancreatic inflammation and
Acinus
necrosis may occur, resulting in activation of inflamma-
ration
tory mediators and free radicals. Depending on the
Zymogen granules
severity of inflammation, pancreatic edema may occur,
nl
Figure 1. Most dogs have both a pancreatic duct and an
accessory pancreatic duct. The exocrine pancreas comprises
 o ap ap  jsn iod on ae A 
most of the pancreatic tissue. Pancreatic islets of Langerhans'
presence of pancreatic enzymes in the intravascular and
comprise less than 5% of the pancreatic tissue.
peritoneal spaces. c-Macroglobulins and other protease
inhibitors exist in systemic circulation and can bind to
the pancreatic digestive enzymes, thereby inactivating
duodenum with exposure to the duodenal enzyme
them and expediting their removal from the body. There
is a finite supply of α-macroglobulins and protease
activated to its active form, trypsin, releasing the protein 
 inhibitors in circulation. Once this supply is exhausted,
trypsin activation peptide. Trypsin then activates the
the circulating digestive enzymes result in widespread
inflammation and activation of the coagulation, fibri-
Another defense mechanism of the pancreas against
 nolytic, and complement cascades. Affected individuals
Neither serum amylase nor serum lipase testing is a
sensitive or specific diagnostic test for pancreatitis in dogs.
autodigestion is trypsin inhibitor, which inhibits trypsin
may develop disseminated intravascular coagulation,
activity in the event that this enzyme is inappropriately
 shock, and multiorgan failure.4
activated within the pancreatic acinar cells. Trypsin
The clinical course of pancreatitis is highly variable,
inhibitor is produced and stored along with the pancre-
ranging from subclinical to life-threatening disease.
atic zymogens.4
 Because of the potential for life-threatening complica
 Both acute and chronic forms of pancreatitis occur in
tions, timely and accurate diagnosis of pancreatitis is
dogs, with the acute form being more clinically recog
essential. The ideal diagnostic test for pancreatitis would
nized. Acute pancreatitis is thought to occur primarily
be highly sensitive and specific, practical, noninvasive,
March 2006
COMPENDIUM
228
CE Diagnosing Acute Pancreatitis in Dogs
Figure 2. Ultrasonography of pancreatitis. (Courtesy of Gulf Coast Veterinary Diagnostic Imaging)
SMABD
LR SINGLE
STOMA
PANCRE
VER
BODY
Ultrasonogram of a patient with pancreatitis. Note that the body
of the pancreas appears large and the surrounding mesentery is
 Ultrasonogram of a patient with severe pancreatitis that 
hyperechoic.
developed a pancreatic abscess.
  n  i n   s
the history and clinical signs associated with pancreatitis
   sa  ar aq s i
se a A   aids rod 2
 patients. This article reviews the clinical history and
with numerous other diseases.
physical examination findings, imaging techniques,
hematologic and biochemical findings, serologic testing,
RadIoGRaPHY, UlTraSonoGRAPhy,
and biopsy techniques involved in diagnosing acute pan-
AND COMPUTEDTOMOGRAPHY
creatitis in dogs.
The most commonly used imaging techniques for
 assessing the pancreas in veterinary patients are abdomi-
HISTORY AND PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
 nal radiography and ultrasonography In human medi-
 The clinical presentation of acute pancreatitis is
cine, computed tomography (CT) is routinely used to
highly variable. Many affected dogs have a mild, self-
assess patients suspected of having pancreatitis.8 The
limited course of disease, and some of these patients
value of this imaging modality has not been widely eval-
remain subclinical. It is suspected that most dogs with
 pancreatitis remain undiagnosed.2 Middle-aged, female
 Abdominal radiography should be performed in every
dogs are more likely to develop acute pancreatitis than
 patient suspected of having pancreatitis. Radiographic
 are other patient populations.4s There is a clinical
changes and specificity associated with pancreatitis are
impression that this disease is more common in minia-
variable but may include loss of detail in the cranial
ture schnauzers and anecdotal evidence that pancreatitis
abdomen, displacement of the stomach to the left, and
is more likely to occur after consumption of a fatty
displacement of the duodenum to the right or ventrally.
meal.4 Other historical factors, such as abdominal
trauma or exposure to certain drugs (e.g., azathioprine,
tients.279,10 In a retrospective study' of fatal cases of
L-asparaginase, corticosteroids), may also raise clinical
canine pancreatitis, only 24% of dogs had radiographic
suspicion of pancreatitis.4-6
abnormalities attributable to pancreatitis. Therefore,
In a study? of dogs with fatal, acute pancreatitis, the
abdominal radiography has a low sensitivity in diagnos-
most common clinical signs were dehydration, anorexia,
vomiting, weakness, abdominal pain, diarrhea, and
 radiography in patients suspected of having pancreatitis
icterus (Table 1). Fever, renal failure, respiratory com-
is that it allows assessment of other organs in the
 promise, cardiovascular shock, and multiorgan failure
 abdominal cavity. As previously discussed, clinical signs
have also been recognized in patients with severe forms
of pancreatitis are nonspecific and could be related to
of acute pancreatitis.24 It is important to recognize that
 many other diseases of the abdomen, such as gastroin-
COMPENDIUM
March 2006
Diagnosing Acute Pancreatitis in Dogs CE
229
Biochemical Abnormalities in Patients
with Pancreatitis
 Increased total protein level
STOMACH
Azotemia
 Increased alanine aminotransferase level
Increased alkaline phosphatase level
Increased bilirubin level
RIGHT
Increased cholesterol level
PANCREAS
Hypocalcemia
Hyperglycemia
EFTPANCREAS
be obtained immediately, and other abdominal organs
can be evaluated simultaneously. Abdominal ultrasonog
Figure 3. CT scan of a normal feline pancreas.
Visualization of the entire pancreas may be improved with
reconstructed images, which cause blurriness. (Courtesy of Gulf
patients.
CoastVeterinary Diagnostic Imaging)
CT is the most widely used diagnostic test in assess-
ing pancreatitis in humans and is considered the most
effective method of detecting inflammatory disease of
testinal disease, liver disease, or neoplasia. Abdominal 
the pancreas.13 However, limited information is available
radiography is widely available, safe, noninvasive, and 
regarding the value of CT in veterinary patients. Almost
 aa a    
 all humans with pancreatitis have some abnormalities
diately, which is important in critically ill patients.
that can be identified via CT, such as local or diffuse
Abdominal ultrasonography is useful in assessing
 pancreatic enlargement, edema, pancreatic pseudocysts,
patients suspected of having pancreatitis. Ultrasono-
graphic findings consistent with acute pancreatitis
 presence of peripancreatic fluid and thickening of tissue
include an enlarged pancreas, a hypoechoic mass in the
in the pancreatic regions, may also be noted (Figure 3).
region of the pancreas, a hyperechoic region within the
 Intravenous and oral contrast enhancement improve the
 pancreas, generalized or localized free abdominal fluid,
accuracy of CT in humans. There also appears to be a
and thickening of the stomach or duodenal wallsz,.12
 correlation between the severity of changes identified
(Figure 2). Because of regional pain, the patient may
via CT and the severity of the patient's disease.8141s In
 resent examination of the pancreas. Ultrasonographic
 sm   go as a g s  a
abnormalities are due to pancreatic edema, necrosis, or
 pared with serologic testing and abdominal ultrasonog-
 hemorrhage secondary to pancreatitis.12 Complications
raphy in diagnosing pancreatitis in cats. In this study,16
of pancreatitis, such as pancreatic abscesses or pseudo-
CT was found to be less sensitive and less specific than
abdominal ultrasonography in diagnosing pancreatitis.
Ultrasonographic evaluation of the pancreas is more
To our knowledge, a similar study has not been con-
sensitive in diagnosing pancreatitis than is radiographic
ducted in dogs. A major concern with the use of CT in
evaluation.7 One study? identified ultrasonographic
diagnosing pancreatitis in dogs is the requirement of
changes consistent with pancreatitis in 68% of cases.
anesthesia to obtain images. Even in sedated or mori-
Ultrasonographic evaluation of the pancreas is tech-
bund patients, motion artifact interferes with accurate
nically challenging, and the diagnostic value of this
CT of the pancreas.17 The suitability of an individual
imaging modality depends on the expertise of the ultra-
 patient for anesthesia must be assessed before pursuing
sonographer. Because pancreatic lesions may be detected
abdominal CT. The availability of CT is limited and
but not clinically significant, the significance of pancre-
may be financially prohibitive for some owners.
atic abnormalities identified via ultrasonography must
be interpreted in light of a patient's clinical signs. Major
HEMATOLOGY AND BIOCHEMISTrY
advantages of abdominal ultrasonography are that it is
A complete blood cell count should be conducted on
 noninvasive, it is relatively inexpensive, information can
all patients clinically suspected of having pancreatitis.
March 2006
COMPENDIUM
230
CB Diagnosing Acute Pancreatitis in Dogs
Neutrophilia with a left shift is commonly recognized
azotemia may occur secondary to hypovolemia or shock
and was identified in 55% of cases in one study.7 Ane-
 or may be associated with multiorgan dysfunction.?
mia and thrombocytopenia may be recognized and may
Azotemic patients must be monitored carefully. If
be early indications of disseminated intravascular coagu-
 azotemia does not resolve with fluid therapy, the possi-
lation.? Conversely, an elevated packed cell volume may
bility of renal failure must be considered.
be observed secondary to hemoconcentration resulting
Hyperglycemia is commonly identified in dogs with
from dehydration.27
 pancreatitis. Possible causes of hyperglycemia include
 Evaluation of a serum biochemistry panel is indicated
stress hyperglycemia or diabetes mellitus. Stress hyper-
in patients suspected of having pancreatitis (see box on
 u so u aras ssir ue ooo sit si ei
 page 229). Elevated amylase and lipase levels have long
y ym sop 1o %/'67 /Xpn4s 2aoadsona1 e uI es5
been associated with a diagnosis of pancreatitis.18 How-
 pancreatitis were hyperglycemic at initial presentation
ever, studies² have failed to demonstrate a reliable pre
Of these dogs, 63% were persistently hyperglycemic and
dictive value for these enzymes. Hyperamylasemia and
were diagnosed as diabetic.
hyperlipasemia have poor specificity for pancreatitis.
Hypoglycemia may be recognized in dogs with severe
Approximately 50% of dogs with elevated amylase and
pancreatitis and may occur as a result of septic compli-
lipase levels have pancreatitis. Reported sensitivities of
cations of pancreatitis or concurrent liver disease.?
these enzymes for a diagnosis of pancreatitis are 50% to
Hypercholesterolemia and hyperlipidemia are com-
 monly identified in dogs with pancreatitis. These find-
because both enzymes are produced in sites other than
ings may be evident via gross examination, even if the
Abdominal ultrasonography is the most sensitive
imaging modality in diagnosing canine acute pancreatitis.
the pancreas, such as the gastrointestinal tract and the
patient has not recently eaten.? Mild to moderate
liver. Furthermore, both enzymes are excreted via the
-d  sp u pnoa ueq ose s ee
kidneys, and decreased kidney function has been shown
 creatitis. Hypocalcemia is thought to occur as a result of
to result in hyperamylasemia and hyperlipasemia.19
deposition of calcium salts within the pancreas, which
Hypolipasemia or low-normal serum levels of lipase
 occurs secondary to pancreatic inflammation. Hypocal-
should decrease clinical suspicion of pancreatitis in
cemia is rarely severe enough to result in clinical signs
dogs, although this finding does not exclude the possi-
related to low serum calcium.4 However, a study20 in cats
bility of pancreatitis.1' It is important to remember that
with pancreatitis revealed that patients with low ionized
the presence of normal serum amylase and lipase values
calcium had a worse prognosis compared with patients
does not exclude the possibility of a diagnosis of pancre
with normal ionized calcium. ?
To our knowledge, no
atitis. Furthermore, elevations in these enzymes are not,
 such study has been reported in dogs.
by themselves, diagnostic of pancreatitis.
 Several biochemical abnormalities are commonly iden
MARKERS OF PANCrEATIC ENZYME
tified in patients with pancreatitis. Many patients with
ACTIVATION
 pancreatitis have elevated total protein levels, likely sec-
Trypsin activation peptide (TAP) may be measured in
ondary to dehydration. Elevated liver enzyme levels are
the serum or urine of patients clinically suspected of hav-
common and may reflect hepatocellular injury due to
ing pancreatitis. Inappropriate activation of trypsinogen
local inflammatory mediators originating from the pan-
to its active form, trypsin, within the pancreas is impor-
creas. Multiorgan dysfunction may also result in liver
tant in the pathogenesis of acute pancreatitis. During
damage. Hyperbilirubinemia may occur secondary to bile
 activation of trypsinogen to trypsin, TAP is released into
duct obstruction. Azotemia is common in this patient
the pancreas, where it may diffuse into the intravascular
 population and may be prerenal or renal in origin. Prere-
 Or peritoneal space. Studies' in rodents have demon-
 nal azotemia develops as a result of dehydration. Renal
 strated a rise in TAP shortly after induction of pancreati-
COMPENDIUM
March2006
Diagnosing Acute Pancreatitis in Dogs CE
231
Figure 4. Laparoscopy of the pancreas.
07720/05
Edematous
10:23:31
pancreas
SCU-
Normal pancreas
Hemorrhage
Laparoscopic image of a healthy canine pancreas and healthy
Laparoscopic image of an inflamed pancreas showing an
surrounding tissue. Note the light pink appearance of the
edematous and erythematous pancreas. The surrounding
pancreas. The organ does not appear hemorrhagic or edematous.
mesentery is hemorrhagic. Biopsy of the pancreas proved that
the patient had pancreatitis.
tis in experimental models. The specificity of serum TAP
study22 demonstrated higher CRP levels in dogs with
levels is questionable—one study21 found elevations in
 acute pancreatitis compared with levels in healthy dogs.
TAP in dogs with pancreatitis, dogs with renal disease,
Because CRP may be elevated with any inflammatory
and healthy dogs. However, this study also found higher
disease or subsequent to trauma, the specificity of CRP
serum levels of TAP in dogs with more severe cases of
is questionable. A more practical application of this test,
 pancreatitis compared with dogs with milder disease.21
rather than the diagnosis of pancreatitis, may be as a
Therefore, although the value of serum and urinary TAP
tool to monitor the progression or resolution of pancre-
measurement is not thoroughly understood to date,
atitis or as a prognostic indicator.
because the test is not widely available and the signifi-
cance of results is difficult to interpret, the clinical value
SErOLOGIC MArKERS OF
of this test is unclear. In the future, measurement of
PANCREATITIS
 serum TAP levels may prove useful as a prognostic indi-
Two major serologic markers have been used to diag-
 cator or as a tool to monitor resolution of disease.
 nose pancreatitis: trypsin-like immunoreactivity (TLI)
and pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity (PLI). Both of
MARKERS OF PANCREATIC
these are used as pancreas-specific tests. TLI testing,
INFLAMMATION
which is serologic, detects serum trypsinogen, trypsin,
C-reactive protein (CRP) is an acute-phase reactant
 and trypsin molecules bound to protease inhibitors. TLI
produced by the liver in response to inflammation,
testing is well known to be highly sensitive and specific
infection, or trauma.22 CRP has been used in humans as
for the diagnosis of exocrine pancreatic insufficiency. In
a predictor of the severity of inflammation in patients 
experimentally induced pancreatitis, serum levels of TLI
with acute pancreatitis.22 In humans, measurement of
   a    
 CRP has shown value in assessing the severity of acute
pancreatitis seem to produce a rapid rise of TLI follow-
 pancreatitis, with more severe cases demonstrating
ing induction of pancreatitis.1 One study2 showed a
higher levels of CRP22 A study23 in dogs with pancreati-
m sop 1oy 959 jo Ays e ue 9e go Aasus
tis has shown elevated levels of CRP in dogs with pan-
naturally occurring pancreatitis. Results of TLI testing
creatic necrosis compared with dogs with edematous
are not immediately available, and the sensitivity of this
 pancreatitis. Therefore, CRP may have value as a prog-
test for the diagnosis of pancreatitis is poor. Therefore,
nostic indicator in dogs with pancreatitis. Another
 measurement of TLI is not considered useful in diag-
March 2006
COMPENDIUM
232
CE Diagnosing Acute Pancreatitis in Dogs
 nosing pancreatitis.
aspiration is best performed by an experienced ultra-
Development of a PLI assay has occurred fairly
 sonographer because the pancreas can be difficult to
fecently, and this test shows promise as a sensitive and
identify and assess via ultrasonography, as previously
discussed. Because of the regional nature of pancreatitis,
normal results of fine-needle aspiration cannot exclude
fore, lipase originating from other sources in the body,
a diagnosis of pancreatitis. Therefore, fine-needle aspi-
such as the stomach and salivary glands, cannot be
ration of the pancreas is a relatively specific, but not
sensitive, diagnostic test for pancreatitis.
unique compared with lipase produced in other parts of
the body. Reported sensitivity of PLI testing to diagnose 
CONCLUSION
pancreatitis is greater than 80%. Serum PLI levels
Definitive diagnosis of acute pancreatitis in dogs
appear to be highly sensitive in diagnosing pancreati-
remains challenging. The clinical diagnosis of acute
tis.26 The presence of renal failure does not appear to
pancreatitis can be made based on the collective inter-
result in elevated PLI levels.27 To date, serum PLI is
pretation of history, clinical signs, biochemical abnor-
considered the single best blood test for diagnosing pan-
malities, serologic testing, imaging studies, and cytology
creatitis in dogs.23 The major drawback of this test is
 or histopathology. The ideal diagnostic test for pancre-
that results are generally not available for several days
 atitis would be highly sensitive and specific, readily
because of the limited availability of the test. This delay
available, affordable, and noninvasive. Unfortunately, the
in results is problematic, particularly in critically ill
ideal diagnostic test for pancreatitis does not exist. The
patients.
clinical presentation of patients with pancreatitis is
highly variable, and this disease can result in severe
PANCREATIC BIOPSY AND FINE-NEEDLE
morbidity or death in some patients. Pancreatitis
ASPIRATION
 remains a uniquely challenging disease to diagnose and
 Biopsy of the pancreas remains the gold standard in
manage. The possibility of this disease must be consid-
diagnosing canine acute pancreatitis.? Pancreatic biopsy
ered in critically ill patients or patients with appropriate
 de no Aoede ea pd aq ae
clinical signs.
inspection of the pancreas may confirm suspected pan-
creatitis. However, a normal gross appearance of the
REFERENCES
pancreas does not exclude the possibility of microscopic
1. Newman S, Steiner J, Woosley K, et al: Localization of pancreatic inflamma-
tion and necrosis in dogs. J Vet Interm Med 18:488-493, 2004.
2. SteinerJ: Diagnosisof pancreatitis. Ve Clin SmallAn 3:1181195,2003.
Creatitis.2 Laparoscopic evaluation of the pancreas is less
3.
Willams D: Exocrine pancreatic disease, in Ettinger S,Feldman E (eds):
invasive than laparotomy. The right limb and central
Textbk gf Veterinary Internal Medicine. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 2000,
body of the pancreas can be visually inspected via
pp 1345-1367.
laparoscopy. The surrounding mesentery can also be
4. Williams D: The pancreas, in Guilford WG, Center SA, Strombeck DR, et
al (eds): Small Anmal Gastroenterology, ed 3. Philadelphia, WB Saunders,
assessed. The left limb of the pancreas is challenging to
1996, pp 381-410.
visualize laparoscopically2s (Figure 4). The benefit of
5. Cook AK, Breitschwerdt EB, Levine JF, et al: Risk factors associated with
 pancreatic visualization and biopsy must be weighed
acute pancreatitis in dogs: 101 cases (1985-1990) JAVMA 203:673-679,
1993.
against the potential risks of anesthesia to the individual
6.MorilloKA,BowenD,MeyerDJ,et al Acute pancreatitis in two gs
patient.2 If the decision to pursue laparotomy or
given azathioprine and prednisone. JA VMA 191:695-696, 1987.
laparoscopy is made, the abdomen should be thoroughly
7.Hess RS,SaersHM, Va Winkle TJ, et al: Clinical, lnicpathlogi,
explored, if possible. Biopsy of the pancreas is highly
radiographic, and ultrasonographic abnormalities in dogs with fatal acute
specific, but the sensitivity of pancreatic biopsy is poor
pancreatitis: 70 cases (1986-1995). J4VMA 213:665-670, 1998.
because pancreatitis may be localized to small regions
8. Kemppainen P, Puolakkainen A, Leppaniemi A, et al: Diagnosis of acute
pancreatitis. Ann Chir Gynaecol 87:191-194, 1998.
within the pancreas.
9.Mahaffey M, Barber D: The peritoneal space, in Thrall D (ed): Textbook of
Ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration of the pan-
Diagnostic Veterinary Radiology, ed 3. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1998, pp
creas may be performed to obtain a diagnosis of pancre-
441-457.
atitis. This procedure can generally be performed
10. Holm J, Chan D, Rozanski E: Acute pancreatitis in dogs. J Vet Emerg Crit
Care 13:201-213, 2003.
without anesthesia and may reveal inflammation, necro-
11.Raux C: Diagnostic approaches to acute pancreatitis. Clin Tech SmallAnim
sis, or sepsis of the pancreas." Pancreatic fine-needle
Prace 18(4):245-249, 2003.
COMPENDIUM
March 2006
Diagnosing Acute Pancreatitis in Dogs CE 2
233
12.
Nyand T, Matton J: The pancreas, in Nyland T, Mattoon J (eds): SmllAnma?
plasma ionized calcium concentration in cats with acute pancreatitis: 46 cases
Diagnostic Utrasound, ed 2. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 2002, pp 144157.
(1996-1998). J4VMA 219:1105-1109, 2001.
13.F
Haaga JR, Alfidi RJ, Havrilla TR, et al: Definitive role of CT scanning of the
apdad ugeane uaounsdan Aeun pue euseld ag sauo 's Pysu 17
pancreas.Radiology124:723730,1977.
in healthy dogs, dogs with pancreatitis, and dogs with other systemic dis-
14.F
Fawcitt RA, Forbes WS, Isherwood I, et al: Computed tomography in pan-
eases. Aust VeeJ 78:416-422, 2000.
creatic disease. Br J Radio/ 51:1-4, 1978.
 22. Holm J, Rozanski E, Freeman L, et al: C-reactive protein concentrations in 
Partain CL, Stab EV, McCartney WH, et al: Multiple imaging modalities
canine acute pancreatitis. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 14:183-186, 2004.
15.
for the study of pancreatic disease. Semin Vucl Med 9:36-42, 1979.
23. Spillman T, KorrellJ, Wittker A, et al: Serum canine pancreatic elastase and
16.Forman MA, Marks SL, De Cock HE, et al: Evaluation of serum feline pan-
canineC-rectiveprtinforheiagnsisandpronsisfacutepancre
tis in dogs. Proc 12* ECVIM-CA/ESVIM Congress, 2002.
ventional testing for thediagnis of feline pancreatitisVe Intern Med
24. Mansfield C: New insights into pancreatitis in dogs. Proc 12 ECVIM-
18:807-815, 2004.
CA/ESVIM Congress, 2002.
17. Mix K, Fabiani M: Unpublished data, Evaluation of the normal feline pan-
 25. Steiner J: Pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity Proc ACVIM, 2003.
creas withmutd tgraphHustonTXGulCastVetnay
 26. Steiner J: Serum canine pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity (cPLI) concentra-
cialists, 2005.
tions in dogs with spontaneous pancreatitis. J Vet Interm Med 18:274, 2004.
18. Mia AS, Koger HD, Tierney MM, et al: Serum values of amylase and pan
 27. Steiner J, Willams D: Diagnosis of canine and feline pancreatitis. Prorc
Am J Vet Rer 39:965-969, 1978.
ACVIM, 2004
28. Tams T: Laparoscopy for hepatic, pancreatic, and kidney biopsy. Proc West Vt
19.
Willard M, Twedt D: Gastrointestinal, pancreatic, and hepatic disorders, in
Willard MD,Tvedten H,Turnwald GH (eds): Small Anmal CliniralDiago-
Conf, 2004.
sisbyabratryMhdsd3.Philadlphia,WBaers199
29. Mansfield C: New directions in diagnosis and treating canine pancreatitis.
172-207.
Proc ACVIM, 2004.
20. Kimmel S, Washabau RJ, Drobatz KJ: Incidence and prognostic value of low
30.Center S: Feline pancreatitis. Proc West Vet Conf Proc, 2004.
ARTICLE #4 CETEST
This orticle qualifies for 2 contact hours of continuing education credit from the Auburn University College of Veterinary
Medicine. Paid subscribers moy purchase individual CE tests or sign up for our annuol CE program. Those who wish to opply
this credit to fulfll state relicensure requirements shouid consult their respective state Quthorities regording the opplicobility
of this program. To participate, fll out the test form inserted at the end of this issue or toke CE tests online ond get real-time
scores ot CompendiumVet.com.
I. Which is a defense mechanism of the pancreas
 b. diarrhea, weakness, anorexia
 to prevent autodigestion from pancreatic diges-
c. dehydration, anorexia, vomiting
tive enzymes?
d. hypothermia, vomiting, diarrhea
a. production, storage, and secretion of pancreatic
 enzymes as zymogens
 4. Which diagnostic imaging modality has the high-
 b. segregation of zymogens into granules within the
est reported sensitivity in diagnosing pancreatitis
pancreatic cells
in dogs?
 C. production and storage of trypsin inhibitor to inacti-
a. ultrasonography
vate trypsin within the pancreatic cells
b. radiography
d. all of the above
c.CT
d. MRI
2. Inappropriate activation of
within the
pancreatic acinar cells is important in the patho-
 5. Which ultrasonographic findings are not consis-
physiology of pancreatitis.
tent with acute pancreatitis?
a enteropeptidase
a. a hypoechoic mass lesion within the pancreas
b. trypsin
 b. peripancreatic free fluid 
c. elastase
C.
"sludge”" within the gallbladder
d. lipase
d. generalized pancreatic enlargement
3. Which are the most common clinical signs of
6. Which statement regarding serum amylase and
acute pancreatitis in dogs?
lipase is incorrect?
a. demonstration of the "praying position" vomiting
 a. Elevations in serum amylase and lipase are neither
fever
sensitive nor specific for pancreatitis.
March 2006
Test answers available to paid subscribers at Compendium Vet.com
COMPENDIUM
234(
CE Diagnosing Acute Pancreatitis in Dogs
b. Normal serum amylase and lipase levels eliminate the
 genically unique from lipase produced in other sites
possibility of a diagnosis of pancreatitis.
of the body.
c. Low or low-normal serum lipase decreases the clini-
b. Extrapancreatic disease such as renal failure can
cal suggestion of pancreatitis.
result in elevated serum lipase levels but does not
d. Both ammylase and lipase are produced in extrapancre-
appear to affect PLI levels.
atic sites within the body.
c. A drawback of PLl measurement is that test results
are not readily available.
7. Which hematologic or biochemical abnormality
d. all of the above
is diagnostic of acute pancreatitis?
a. hyperbilirubinemia
I0. Which test is the gold standard in diagnosing
b. neutrophilia with a left shift
 canine pancreatitis?
c. hypercholesterolemia 
a. pancreatic biopsy
c. abdominal ultrasonography
d. none of the above
b. TLI
d. abdominal CT
8. Which statement regarding CRP is correct?
 a. An elevated CRP level is diagnostic of pancreatitis.
b. CRP appears to have high specificity but poor sensi-
tivity in diagnosing pancreatitis.
c. CRP appears to have high sensitivity but poor speci
ficity in diagnosing pancreatitis.
d. CRP is produced within the pancreas and leaks from
edermatous pancreatic tissue during pancreatitis.
9. Which statement regarding PLl and serum
lipase is correct?
a. PLl measures pancreas-specific lipase, which is anti-
COMPENDIUM
March 2006