Ear Diseases of the
Dog and Cat
Richard G.Harvey
Joseph Harari
Agnes J. Delauche
MANSON
PUBLISHING
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.com
Ear Diseases of the
Dog and Cat
Richard G. Harvey
BVSc, PhD, CBiol, FIBiol, DVD, DipECVD, MRCVS
Coventry, UK
Joseph Harari
DVM, MS, DipACVS
Spokane, Washington State, USA
Agnes J. Delauche
DVM, DipACVIM (Neurology), DipECVN, MRCVS
Newmarket, UK
Manson Publishing/The Veterinary Press
Copyright @ 2001 Manson Publishing Ltd
ISBN 1-84076-003-6
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a
retrieval system or transmitted in any form or by any means without the written
permission of the copyright holder or in accordance with the provisions of the
Copyright Act 1956 (as amended), or under the terms of any licence permitting
London WC1E 7D, UK.
be liable to criminal prosecution and civil claims for damages.
A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
For full details of all Manson Publishing Ltd titles please write to:
Manson Publishing Ltd
73 Corringham Road
London NW11 7DL, UK
Tel: +44(0)20 8905 5150
Fax: +44(0)20 8201 9233
Email : manson@man-pub.demon.co.uk
Website: www.manson-publishing.co.uk
Commissioning editor:
 Jill Northcott
Project management:
Paul Bennett
Text editor:
Peter Beynon
Layout:
Initial Typesetting Services
Cover design:
Patrick Daly
Colour reproduction:
Tenon & Polert Colour Scanning Ltd, Hong Kong
Printed by:
Grafos SA, Barcelona, Spain
onten
Preface
10
 Chapter 4: Diseases of the Pinna
123
Introduction
124
Adknowledgements
6
 Pinnal trauma
124
 Dermatoses characterized by crust and scale
124
Abbreviations
7
 Focal lesions principally affecting the dorsal
137
pinna
Chapter I: The Normal Ear
6
 Dermatoses causing papules and nodules
138
Gross and microscopic anatomy of the ear:
10
 Dermatoses principally affecting the concave
141
structure and function
 aspect of the pinna
Microscopic structure of the external ear
21
Dermatoses principally causing symmetrical
143
canal
pinnal alopecia
 Microscopic structure of the tympanum and
28
References
145
middle ear
Microclimate of the external ear canal
32
Chapter 5: Otitis Media, Otitis Interna
147
 Microbiology of the canine external ear canal
35
Otitis media
148
References
39
Otitis interna
153
References
155
 Chapter 2: Diagnostic Procedures
43
 Otoscopic appearance of the external ear
44
Chapter 6: Para-Aural Abscess
157
canal and tympanum
 Para-aural abscessation
158
Cytologic characteristics of normal and
50
References
160
abnormal ears
 Neurologic examination of the ear 
58
Chapter 7: Medical Management of
161
Radiographic features of the normal and
61
Ear Disease
abnormal ear
Approach to the diagnosis of otitis externa
162
 Imaging the middle and inner ears
70
Acute otitis externa
166
 Electrophysiologic procedures
72
Gram-negative otitis externa
171
 Other investigatory procedures
76
Chronic, or recurrent, otitis externa in dogs
174
References
78
Chronic, or recurrent, otitis externa in cats 
182
Neurologic signs related to middle ear disease
184
Chapter 3: Etiopathogenesis and
81
 Neurologic signs related to inner ear disease
196
 Classification of Otitis Externa
References
208
 Effects of breed and progressive pathology
82
Ectoparasitic causes of otitis externa, and
86
Chapter 8: Ototoxicity and Other
213
 antiparasitic agents
Side-Effects of Otic Medication
 Foreign bodies
94
 Introduction
214
Nasopharyngeal and middle ear polyps
96
Meatal and tympanic inflammation
214
Otic neoplasia
100
Effects within the middle ear
215
Underlying disease
111
Ototoxicity
215
The effects of weather on the incidence of
118
Allergic contact dermatitis and irritant
217
otitis externa
contact dermatitis
References
119
Systemic effects of otic medication
217
Strategies to minimize ototoxicity
217
References
218
Chapter 9: Qeaning the Extermal
219
Chapter Il: Surgical Resection, Aural
233
Ear Canal
 Ablation, and Bulla Osteotomy
Introduction
220
Introduction
234
Assessing the integrity of the tympanum
220
 Presurgical investigations
234
 Products advocated for cleaning ears
221
Resection and ablation of the external ear
235
Cleaning process
222
canal
Irrigating solutions
222
 Bulla osteotomy
253
Drying agents
223
Special problems relating to surgery of the
255
Home cleaning
224
middle ear in cats
References
224
References
255
Chapter I0: Aural Hematoma, and
225
Chapter I2: Perioperative Analgesia
257
Other Pinnal Surgery
 and Management
Introduction
226
Introduction
258
Aural hematoma
226
 Peri- and postoperative analgesia
258
 Traumatic injury to the pinna
231
Perioperative systemic antibacterial therapy
259
References
232
 Postoperative dressings and wound
260
management
261
Postoperative nutritional management
References
261
Index
264
5
Preface
Studies of disease prevalence in dogs and cats,
hanced by providing information on structure and
particularly those based on hospital admission data,
function, and on the response to insult, without going
suggest that ear diseases are common. Estimates of
 into needless detail. Detailed notes on surgical tech-
the frequency of presentation range from 7.5-16.5%
niques, coupled with clear photographic illustrations
for dogs and 2-6.2% for cats1-4. However, although
of the surgical procedures, will assist clinicians in en-
Grono noted a presenting frequency of 4.8% for
suring that pitfalls are avoided. Neurologic investiga-
dogs, in line with other estimates, he also noted that
tions of the manifestations of vestibular disease, facial
the incidence of otitis externa detected during clinical
 nerve paralysis, and deafness are described and the
examination of these dogs rose to between l6% and
relevant differential diagnoses discussed. Extensive
25%. T'hus, the ability of an owner to detect otitis
 cross-referencing between chapters will help readers
externa does not appear to be very good. This has
to find additional information under different head-
implications for treatment since chronic otitis results
ings, and the comprehensive reference lists will be of
in permanent stenosis of the lumen and this is an
benefit to those who seek further information on this
indication for surgery.
important subject.
The majority of the dogs and cats presented to
We hope that veterinary students and clinicians will
veterinarians for ear disease will have otitis externa,
find this book a valuable source of reference and will
 often as a consequence of an underlying disease6.
give it the ultimate accolade - that it will become
While early reports suggested that there was no sex
stained and tattered through frequent use.
predlisposition for otitis externa, statistical analysis of
a very large study? detected a significant predisposi-
1 Baxter M and Lawler DC (l972) The incidence
tion in male dogs, although this was unexplained.
and microbiology of otitis externa of dogs and cats
Peak incidence in dogs occurs between one and four
in New Zealand. New Zealand Veterinary Journal
years of age 6. Male dogs of this age group are likely
20,29-32.
to be very active and may be at increased risk as a
2 Fraser G (1965) Aetiology of otitis externa in the
consequence of swimming and from otic foreign
dog. Journal ofSmall Animal Practice 6, 445-452.
bodies. T'he clinical signs of atopy, a major underlying
3 Baba E, Fukata T and Saito M (l98l) Incidence of
cause of otitis externa, also exhibit peak incidence in
 otitis externa in dogs and cats in Japan. Veterinary
this age group.
Record 108,393-395.
It is readily apparent that the investigation and
4 McKeever PJ and Globus H (l995) Canine otitis
management of ear disease, in its broadest sense, will
externa. In: Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy X11
occupy a significant proportion of a veterinary
(ed JD Bonagura). WB Saunders, Philadelphia, pp.
clinician's time. The concept behind this book is to
647-655.
provide a comprehensive source of information on the
5 Grono LR (1969) Studies of the ear mite, Otodectes
structure, function, medicine, and surgery of the ear,
cynotis.Veterinary Record 85,6-8.
from Otodectes cynotis infection to acquired conductive
6 August JR (1988) Otitis externa: a disease of
deafness.
multifactorial etiology. Veterinary Clinics of North
 In order to assist clinicians in the diagnosis and
America 18,731-741.
 management of ear disease, much of the book is prob-
7 Hayes HM, Pickle LW and Wilson GP (1987)
lem oriented in approach. In addition there are clear
Effects of ear type and weather on the prevalence
guides to the use, and limitations, of various diagnos
of canine otitis externa. Research in Veterinary
tic aids. T'he practicality of the book has been en-
Science42,294-298
Acknowledgements
This book could not have been written without the
The otoscopic pictures in Chapter 2 (Otoscopic
understanding and support of our friends and families.
 appearance of the external ear canal and tympanum)
 Colleagues who provided clinica ilustrations include
were taken using a Storz 4 mm rigid endoscope, a
Jaques Penderis, Masahiko Nagata, Jane Sansom, and
Ricoh XR-X 3000 camera, and a Storz blitzgenerator
Janet Steiss. Simon Orr and Duncan Lascelles
600. The endoscope, camera, and flash generator
provided valuable criticism of the radiology and
were generously loaned by Karl Storz Endoscopy UK
analgesia sections, respectively. We are indebted to all
Ltd.
these colleagues.
Fujichrome Sensai II ISO 400 film was used
The photomicrographs in Chapter 1 (Microscopic
throughout.
 structure of the external ear canal) were taken using a
Nikon Eclipse E600 microscope, a Nikon Model H3
automatic light meter, and a Nikon FDX 35 camera.
Richard Harvey
The microscope and photographic equipment were
Joseph Harari
generously loaned by Nikon UK Ltd.
Agnes Delauche
Abbreviations
AT'P
adenosine triphosphate
BAEP
brainstem auditory evoked potential
BAER
 brainstem auditory evoked response
BAHA
bone-anchored hearing aid
CN
cranial nerve
CSF
cerebrospinal fluid
CT
computed tomography
FeLV
feline leukemia virus
FIP
feline infectious peritonitis
FIV
 feline immunodeficiency virus
HCI
hydrochloride
IgE
immunoglobulin E
K+
potassium ion
MIC
 minimal inhibitory concentration
MRI
magnetic resonance imaging
Na+
sodium ion
p/o
per os (by mouth, orally)
q6h
 quaque 6 hora (every 6 hours, four times daily)
q8h
quaque 8 hora (every 8 hours, three times daily)
ql2h
quaque 12 hora (every 12 hours, twice daily)
q24h
quaque 24 hora (once daily)
RTA
road traffic accident
SLE
systemic lupus erythematosus
SPL
sound pressure level
T4
thyroxine
TSH
thyroid stimulating hormone
This page intentionally left blank
Chapter One
The Normal Ear
· Gross and microscopic anatomy of the ear: structure and function
· Microscopic structure of the external ear canal
· Microscopic structure of the tympanum and middle ear
· Microclimate of the external ear canal
· Microbiology of the canine external ear canal
· References
10
EAr DISEASES Of tHe DOG AND CAT
GrOSS AND MICrOSCOPIC ANaTOMY Of The EAr:
STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION
KEY POINts
INTRODUCTION
· The external ear comprises the pinna and the
T'he ear of the dog and cat is composed of three parts:
external acoustic meatus. It serves to collect and
the external ear, the middle ear, and the inner earl-3.
locate the origin of sound waves.
Together these components allow the animal to locate
· T'he middle ear comprises the tympanic membrane,
a sound and the direction from which it emanates, to
the ossicles, the auditory tube, and the tympanic
orientate the head in relation to gravity, and to
cavity. It serves to transduce incoming airborne
measure acceleration and rotation of the head.
sound waves into waves in a liquid medium.
Selective breeding, of dogs in particular, has resulted
· The inner ear comprises the cochlea, the vestibule,
in a wide variation in relative size and shape of the
and the semicircular canals. It interprets sound and
components of the external ear. Compare, for example,
serves to relate the head to gravity, allowing the
the French Bulldog, the Cocker Spaniel, the German
visual system to compensate for movement and to
Shepherd Dog, the St. Bernard, and the Persian cat.
perceive both linear and rotational acceleration.
The pinnal shape and carriage, the diameter of the
external ear canal, the degree of hair and amount of
soft tissue within the external ear canal, and the shape
of the skull within which the middle and inner ear lie
vary from one breed to another. Despite this anatomic
variation the essential relationship between the various
components of the external, middle, and inner ear is
preserved (1).
7
I Ear canal
 2 Tympanic membrane 
3 Malleus 
4 Incus 
5 Stapes
6 Semicincular canals
7 Cochlea
 8 Cochlear nerve
9Vestibularnerve
The anatomic relationship of the components of the external, middle, and inner ear remains constant in relation to each other
and the skull.
THE NORMAL EAR
PINNA
T'he evolutionary role of the pinna has been as an
resulted in pinnae which often appear to have been
aid to sound collection and point-of-origin location
designed more as lids to prevent access by foreign
(2, 3). However, selective breeding of dogs has
bodies (4, 5) or as vehicles to carry ornate displays
2 3  Archetypal pinna, in this case a German Shepherd Dog. Note the even distribution of short hairs on the convex aspect (2)
of the external ear canal.
4, 5  Examples of the various pinnae which have resulted from selective breeding. Labrador Retriever (4), Cocker Spaniel (5)
12
EaR DISEASES Of tHE DOG AND CAT
of exuberant growths of hair (6, 7). Despite these
ridge with the prominent tubercle that is situated on
changes the functionality of the ear appears to have
the medial aspect of the entrance to the vertical ear
been maintained. In most breeds of cats the pinna
canal (8). Opposite the anthelix (9) is an irregularly
is held erect, with the exception of the Scottish Fold
 shaped, dense plate of cartilage, called the tragus1, 3.
Cat where the distal portion of the scapha is folded
This is extended caudally and medially to the
rostroventrally4.
antitragus and thus creates the caudal boundary of the
The pinna is composed of a sheet of cartilage
opening into the external acoustic meatus. T'he rostral
covered on both sides by skin (2, 3), which is more
border of the opening is demarcated by the medial
frmly adherent on the concave aspect than on the
 and lateral crus of the helix'. The tragus is an essential
 surgical landmark in aural surgery, because its rostral
the pinna is a flared extension of the auricular
 and caudal incisures mark the incision points for
cartilage. Proximally this becomes rolled to form the  lateral wall resection.
vertical ear canal and part of the horizontal ear canal.
 The auricular cartilage becomes rolled proximal to
The major part of the external auditory meatus is
the scapha and is termed the concha3. T'he scutiform
 contained within the auricular cartilage.
cartilage is rostromedial to the horizontal canal,
The portion of the flared auricular cartilage which
 closely associated with muscular tissue?, and it forms
forms the body of the pinna is called the scapha,  1
 no part of the external ear, although the associated
although the free edges of the pinna are termed the 1
 pad of fat, the corpus adiposum auricula, may help to
rostral border of the helix and the caudal border of  provide support to the horizontal portions of the
the helix, respectivelyl, 3. The anthelix is the medial
external ear canal'.
6, 7 Examples of the various pinnae which have resulted
from selective breeding. Papillon (6), Yorkshire Terrier (7)
THE NORMAL EAR  13
Generally the pinna is haired on the convex surface
canal6. Avascular necrosis of the pinna may follow
and in some breeds, such as the Cocker Spaniel and
damage to this blood vessel during resection of the
Papillon, for example, markedly so. T'he concave
 sa    a e a 
aspect may be lightly haired on the free edges and
the base of the convex aspect of the pinna. Its branches
towards the tip, but towards the base it becomes
ascend the convex aspect of the pinna (10), wrapping
essentially glabrous and is tightly adherent to the
 around the helicine margins and penetrating the plate
underlying cartilage. A few fine hairs are usually
of the scapha to supply the concave surface5. T'he
present around the entrance to the external auditory
 majority of the foramina through which the vessels pass
meatus. In breeds with hirsute ear canals, such as
to the concave aspect of the pinna are located about
Cocker Spaniels, there may be profuse hair growth
one third of the way along the longitudinal aspect of
along the whole length of the ear canal.
the scapha'. T'he auricular veins drain via the internal
T'he blood supply to the pinna arises from the great
maxillary vein into the jugular vein.
auricular artery, a branch of the maxillary artery6. T'he
The sensory and motor innervation of the pinna is
great auricular artery ascends dorsally towards the pinna
extremely complex and is discussed in detail later
just deep to the caudomedial aspect of the vertical ear
(Chapter 2: Neurologic examination of the ear).
8
The prominent tubercle of the anthelix (arrow) is clearly
9The tragus (arrow) is clearly visible on the lateral aspect of
visible on the medial aspect of the entrance to the external
the entrance to the external ear canal of this cat.
 ear canal of this dog.
I0 The convex surface of the pinna of
10
 an elderly dog with an endocrinopathy.
Note the prominent blood vessels
following the long axis of the pinna.
14
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
EXTERNAL AUDITORY MEATUS
and the distal end of the external acoustic meatus'.
T'he external auditory meatus serves to conduct sound
The average length of canal within the annular carti-
waves to the tympanum. It is contained within the
lage is 1.2 cm (0.5 in) (0.8-1.9 cm [0.3-0.7 in])7.
vertical and horizontal portions of the external ear
T'he ligamentous unions between these cartilaginous
canal.
and bony tubes allow great freedom of motion to the
 Proximally the external auditory meatus abuts the
pinna.
tympanum and distally it is defined within, and
The epithelium and dermal tissues which line the
bounded by, the medial faces of the various cartila-
bony and cartilaginous components of the external ear
ginous components at the base of the pinna. The
canal result in a smooth inner surface to the canal (1l).
vertical ear canal and the distal part of the horizontal
 T'he epithelium is sparsely haired in most, but not all,
canal are contained within the rolled plate (the concha)
 breeds and it is rich in adnexal glands (see Microscopic
of the auricular cartilage. The free edges of the rolled
 structure of the external ear canal).
auricular cartilage overlap on the medial aspect of the
Medial to the vertical portion of the external ear
vertical canal and the lumen contained within becomes
canal are branches of the auricular and superficial tem-
progressively narrower proximally. The size of the
 poral arteries. T'he parotid salivary gland overlies the
vertical canal (length and volume) correlates with body
 lateral and proximal portions of the vertical ear canal6.
weight7,8. T'he average length of the external ear canal
 Deep to the parotid gland are the facial nerve, the in-
within the auricular cartilage is 4.l cm (l.6 in)
) ternal maxillary vein, and branches of the external
(2.2-5.7 cm [0.8-2.2 in]) and its average diameter, at (
 carotid artery6. T'he facial nerve emerges from the
the level of the tragus, is 5.8 cm (2.3 in) (2.1-7.9 cm
skull (via the stylomastoid foramen) and passes be-
[0.8-3.1 in])7.
neath the rostroventral aspect of the horizontal canal
T'he vertical canal deviates medially, just dorsal to
(12). Branches of the facial nerve and the auricu-
the level of the tympanum, towards the external
 lotemporal branch of the mandibular portion of the
acoustic process. The annular cartilage is interposed
 trigeminal nerve pass rostral to the vertical ear canal6.
between the proximal end of the auricular cartilage
12
I2   The caudolateral aspect of a canine skull.The external
acoustic meatus {arrow) and stylomastoid foramen (arrow
 Otoscopic picture of a normal canine external ear canal
head) are adjacent.
demonstrating the smooth mural lining. Note the occasional
accumulations of cerumen.
THE NORMAL EAR
15
MIDDLE EAR
13
The middle ear and auditory (eustachian) tube com-
prise a functional physiologic unit with protective,
drainage, and ventilatory capabilities9, 10. The middle
ear is composed of the tympanum, the ossicles, the au-
ditory tube, and the tympanic cavities (13)i, 3. The
middle ear cavities are lined with secretory epithelium
(14). Epithelia such as this not only secrete liquid, they
also absorb gas?. This tends to result in a slight nega-
 tive pressure within the normal middle ear cavity 9. The
 composition of the gas in the normal middle ear cavity
of both dogs and cats has been describedll. It appears
to correlate closely to the composition of the capillary
I3  The caudoventral aspect of a canine skull.The paired
blood, rather than reflecting gaseous exchange along
bullae are clearly visible{arrows)
the auditory tube.
The three ossicles transmit sound waves impacting
upon the tympanic membrane to the oval window. At
this point the mechanical energy of the ossicles is
transduced to pressure waves within the inner ear, to
be interpreted subsequently as sound. Pressure and
internal homeostasis within the inner ear is
equilibrated across the round window membrane.
wnuedwA
The gross appearance of the canine and feline tympanic
 membrane is similar3, 4, 12. The canine tympanum is a
thin, semitransparent membrane with a rounded,
elliptical outline; its mean size is 15 × 10 mm (0.6 x
0.4 in). The shorter dimension is nearly vertical, the
long axis is directed ventral, medial, and cranial, and it
14
 Photomicrograph of a section of normal bulla. Note the
has an area of approximately 63.3 sq mm (0.1 sq in)1, 2,
 thin bone and the secretory epithelil lining (Sample prepared 
by Finn Pathology Diss, Norfolk, UK.)
X 6 mm [0.3 × 0.2 in]) and has an area of approximately
external aspect of the tympanum is thin, tough, and
15
glistening (the pars tensa) with the outline of the
manubrium of the malleus being clearly visible (l5).
The manubrium inserts under the epithelium on the
medial aspect of the tympanum and exerts tension onto
it, resulting in a concave shape to the intact membrane,
rather similar to the speaker cone in a loudspeaker3, 15.
The pars flacida is more opaque, pink, or white in color.
 It is confined to the upper quadrant of the tympanic
membrane and bound ventrally by the lateral process of
the malleus 3, 13.
I5  Otoscopic picture of a normal tympanic membrane.The
manubrium of the malleus is clearly visible
16
Ear DISEASES Of tHE DOG AND CAT
Tympanic cavities
Damage to these nerves leads to ipsilateral pupillary
The tympanic cavity proper, at least in anatomic terms,
dilation and retraction of the third eyelid4. Sectioning of
is one of three intercommunicating, air-flled cavities
the nerves results in Horner's syndrome4.
which lie directly behind the tympanum. T'he smallest
cavity, the epitympanic cavity, lies dorsal to the
Ossicles
 tympanum and is almost entirely occupied by the head
 The ossicular chain comprises three bones: the malleus,
of the malleus and its articulation with the incusl, 3. T'he
 the incus, and the stapesl, 3. The manubrium of the
tympanic cavity proper is bounded laterally by the
malleus is embedded in the central fibrous portion of the
tympanic membrane (l6). Its greatest dimension is less
 tympanum and is visible via otoscopy as a pale line across
than 1 cm (0.4 in). Opposite the tympanum is a bony
the tympanic membrane. In the dog it is about l cm
protuberance, the promontory, within which lies the
(0.4 in) in length'. The malleus articulates with the incus,
cochlea. T'he mean volume of the canine middle ear
about 4 mm (0.2 in) in length, in the epitympanic cavity
cavity is about 2.5 cubic cm (0.15 cubic in) and this
dorsal to the tympanum?. The incus subsequently
increases with body weight&. T'he volume of the feline
articulates with the head of the stapes, the shortest bone
middle ear cavity is about 0.9 cubic cm (0.05 cubic in)16.
 in the body at about 2 mm (0.1 in) in length1, 3. The
The largest of the three tympanic cavities is the
 ossicular chain does not cross the epitympanic and
ventral (or fundic) cavity'. Getty et all compared the
 tympanic cavities unsupported; ligaments attach to the
canine tympanic bulla to the shell of an egg, the long
bony walls of the cavities. In addition to the various
axis of which is some 15 mm (0.6 in) in length, set at
ligaments there are two muscles attaching to the ossicles:
an angle of 45% to a sagittal plane. The width and
the tensor tympani and the stapedius. Contraction of
depth of the chamber are 8-10 mm (0.3-0.4 in)3.
these muscles moves the relevant ossicle in relation to the
There is an elliptical opening in the dorsal wall which
membrane with which it is associated, significantly
 communicates with the tympanic cavity properl.
reducing the efficiency of sound transmission. These
There are four ports of communication into the
actions may serve a protective function, particularly from
middle ear, all of which enter the tympanic cavity
the harmful effect of low frequency sound vibrationst.
proper (17). Three of the ports, the tympanum, the
The ratio of the length of the manubrium of the
round window, and the vestibular window into which
 malleus to the length of the long process of the incus
the stapes connects, have membranes across their
is known as the malleus:incus ratio. In the dog it is 2.7
lumen. The auditory tube does not have such a
± 0.75:1 and in the cat it is 3.1 ± 0.6:14,22. These
membrane. The tympanum, as outlined above, is
ratios are almost two to three times that ofhumans
located on the lateral aspect of the tympanic cavity. T'he
(ratio of 1:3) and probably explains why dogs and cats
vestibular window is on the dorsolateral aspect of the
are able to hear very faint sounds which are inaudible
promontory, on the caudomedial wall of the tympanic
to humans22. Furthermore, the ratio of the weight of
 cavity. T'he round windlow, across whose membrane the
the stapes to the sum of the weights of the malleus and
cochlea communicates with the middle ear17, is located
incus is constant, as is the ratio of the cross-sectional
in the caudal portion of the tympanic cavity proper. The
areas of the malleus and incus to the area of the
ostium of the auditory tube is at the rostral extremity
tympanum?2.
 of the tympanic cavityl, 18.
The ventral chamber of the feline tympanic cavity (18)
Auditory tube
T'he auditory tube arises in the dorsolateral wall of the
 It is this septum which is visible upon opening the ventral
nasopharynx and passes dlorsocaudolaterally to enter the
wall of the tympanic bulla, and it divides the ventral cavity
 rostral aspect of the tympanic cavity proper (19)1, 3. In 
into two. T'he larger, ventromedial chamber is entered
both the dog and cat it is in the order of 1.5-2 cm
via a bulla osteotomy surgical approach and the smaller,
(0.6-0.8 in) long3,4, 18. The entrance to the auditory
dorsolateral chamber, in effect the tympanic cavity
tubes is obscured behind the soft palate, roughly
proper, lies beyond the septum. The two chambers
midline, midway between the posterior nares and the
communicate via the space between the septum and the
round window of the cochlea, the promontory, and the
 postganglionic fibers of the cervical sympathetic trunk
It is opened by contraction of two muscles: the levator
(to the eye and orbit) are in this region of the
 dorsomedial wall and are thus vulnerable to damage,
epithelial lining of the auditory tube is continuous with
 particularly if the septum is removed during surgery4.
that of the pharynx and it is mucociliary in nature4, 24.
THE NORMAL EAR
The patency of the auditory tube is ensured by the
infection. Malfunction of the normal homeostatic
presence of a phospholipid-based surfactant, which
 controls will also follow edematous swelling of the
helps to prevent closely-apposed, protein-rich mucus 
 epithelial lining of the auditory tubel0. Auditory tube
layers from 'sticking together'25.
dysfunction is currently not considered a major
Otitis media may reflect abnormal function of the
etiological factor in the development of otitis media
auditory tubel0, 12. For example, reflux or aspiration
in dogs, in contrast to the situation in man10, 12.
of pharyngeal organisms may result in middle ear
6
I6Silicone rubber cast of the tympanic cavities of a normal
I7  The caudoventral aspect of a canine skull with the bulla
dog. This is viewed from the lateral aspect The opening of the
removed.Three of the four ports of communication are visible:
extermal acoustic meatus (l) is visible, as is the tympanic cavity (2).
the external acoustic meatus (arrow), the round window on
the promontory (3), the distal part of the auditory tube (4), and
the promontory (arrow head), and the auditory tube
the ventral cavity, which is situated within the bulla.
(delineated with a piece of nylon).
18
19
I8 The caudoventral aspect of a feline skull. The left bulla has
I9 The ventral aspect of a canine skull.The stilette of the
been opened and the septum is clearly visible. The promontory
spinal needle enters the right bulla via the entrance taken by
can be seen medial and deep to the septum (arrow)
the auditory tube.
18
Ear DISEASES Of tHE DOG AND CAT
INNER EAR
wall of the cochlea. A thin layer of tissue, the
The various tubular and spiral cavities within the
vestibular membrane, forms the dorsal border of the
petrous temporal bone that contain the components
cochlear duct and this borders the scala vestibuli. T'he
of the inner ear are called the labyrinthl,3,4. The three
basilar membrane separates the endolymph of this
 organs contained within the bony labyrinth are the
duct from the perilymph of the scala tympani. Within
cochlea, the semicircular canals, and the vestibule
the cochlear duct lies the organ of Corti (spiral
(20). Each labyrinthine tube and dilation contains a
organ), which is a sensory epithelium, composed of
membranous sleeve supported and anchored by
several types of supporting cells and hair cells, resting
connective tissue trabeculae. T'he space between bone
 On a basement membrane, the basilar membrane (21).
and membrane contains perilymph, whereas the
The hair cells have modified microvilli on their
membranous sleeve contains endolymph and the
 luminal surface. T'he tips of these hairs are embedded
specialized sensory cells'. T'he membranous sleeves of
in a proteinaceous membrane, the tectorial mem-
the cochlea and the semicircular canals simulate the
brane, which covers the hair cells and is attached
shape of their bony counterparts, whereas that of the
medially along the cochlear duct. T'hese structures are
vestibule is composed of the sac-like utricle and
involved in the transduction and transmission of
saccule which communicate with each other, the
 sound impulses, via the cochlear portion of the eighth
cochlea, and the semicircular canals1,4.
cranial nerve, to the brain?.
Sound waves are transmitted from the air medium
Vestibule
of the external ear to the solid medium of the
 The vestibule is an irregularly shaped cavity, roughly
tympanum and, via a chain of three ear ossicles which
extend to the vestibular window, to the fluid medium
communicates with the scala vestibuli, caudally with
 of the perilymph in the scala vestibuli. Wave flow
the semicircular canals?. The medial wall contains two
through the perilymph in the scala vestibuli is
depressions: the elliptical recess of the utricle caudo-
 reflected through the basilar membrane by way of the
dorsally and the spherical recess of the saccule
 movement triggered in the endolymph of the cochlear
rostroventrally. T'he lateral wall contains two fenestra-
 duct. Movement of the highly organized basilar
tions: the oval window closed by the base of the stapes 1
 membrane causes the hair cells of the overlying organ
 dorsally and the membrane-covered round window
 of Corti to move and their stereocilia, which are
ventrally. The semicircular canals open into the
embedded in the tectorial membrane, to bend. T'his
vestibule caudally. The smallest foramen on the
action causes an impulse to be generated in the
vestibular wall is that of the minute vestibular aque-
cochlear neurons which synapse with the base of the
duct which transports endolymph to the endolym-
hair cells. Low frequencies cause maximal vibration of
phatic sac adjacent to the dura.
the basilar membrane at the apex of the cochlear duct,
whereas high frequencies affect the proximal portion
Cochlea
of the basilar membrane maximally2.
The spiral of the canine cochlea takes 3.25 turns
around a central bony core'; that of the feline cochlea
Peripheral vestibular system
takes 2.75 turns4. T'he basal turn is about 4 mm
T'he vestibular system is the primary sensory system that
(0.2 in) in diameter and the height of the bony spiral
maintains an animal's balance or normal orientation
in the dog is about 7 mm (0.3 in)'. The whole is
relative to the gravitational field of the Earth. It
contained within the petrous temporal bone, although
comprises the peripheral vestibular system, located in
it bulges laterally into the tympanic cavity, the
the inner ear, and the central vestibular system, located
 promontory. The cochlea contains the cochlear duct
in the brainstem. Details of the central vestibular system
between two perilymph-filled chambers: the scala
are beyond the scope of this book. The vestibular
vestibuli dorsally and the scala tympani ventrally.
system is responsible for maintaining the position of the
These two chambers communicate at the apex of the
eyes, trunk, and limbs in reference to the position or
 cochlear duct25. T'he scala vestibuli communicates
movement of the head at any time. This orientation is
proximally with the vestibule, whereas the scala
maintained in the face of linear or rotatory acceleration
tympani terminates proximally at the level of the
cochlear (round) window, which is covered by a
of proprioception develops in conjunction with the
membrane separating it from the middle ear.
receptor for the auditory system, the membranous
T'he cochlear duct is triangular in shape with its
labyrinth2.
base, the stria vascularis, situated at the outer lateral
The bony labyrinth in the petrosal part of the
THE NORMAL EAR
19
temporal bone consists of three communicating,
membrane covering the vestibular window2.
 perilymph-filled portions: the large vestibule, the three
The membranous labyrinth consists of four
semicircular canals, and the cochlea. T'here are two
 compartments: the saccule and utriculus within the
openings in the bony labyrinth, the vestibular and
bony vestibule; three semicircular ducts within the
cochlear (round) windows, which are named
 bony semicircular canals; and a cochlear duct within
according to the component of the bony labyrinth in
the bony cochlea (22, 23). The three semicircular
which they are located. Each is covered by a
ducts are the anterior (vertical) duct, the posterior
membrane and the stapes ossicle is inserted in the
(vertical) duct, and the lateral (horizontal) duct. Each
20
21
Semi-circular
Scala vestibuli
canals 
Cochlearduct
Vestibular
membrane
Tectorial
membrane
Stria vasculari
Ampulla 
Vestibular
Vestibulo-V
Cochlear duct
 nerve
cochlearnerve
Basilarmembrane
Scala tympani
between the various components of the middle and inner ear.
21S
 Sectional view of one turn of the cochlear duct.
(Adapted from Morell R), Kim H), Hood LJ et ol. (1998)
Mutations in the connexin 26 gene (GJB2) among Ashkenazi
Jews with nonsyndromic recessive deafness. New Engiand
Journol of Medicine 339, 1500-1505, with permission.)
23
 22, 23 Magnetic resonance images depicting the components of the membranous labyrinth (arrow = semicircular canal; arrow
head = cochlea). (Courtesy B Dayrell-Hart.)
20
Ear DISEASES Of tHE DOG AND CAT
semicircular duct is oriented at right angles to the
into the otolithic membrane. Movement of the
others; thus rotation of the head around any plane
otoliths away from these cell processes initiates an
causes endolymph to flow within one or more of the
impulse in the vestibular neuron. T'he macula sacculi
ducts. Each of the semicircular ducts connects at both
is oriented in a vertical direction (sagittal plane), while
ends with the utriculus, which in turn connects to the
the macula utriculi is oriented in a horizontal direction
saccule by way of the intervening endolymphatic duct
(dorsal plane). Thus, gravitational forces continually
and sac. The saccule communicates with the cochlear
affect the position of the otoliths in relationship to the
duct by the small ductus reuniens2.
hair cells. T'hese are responsible for the sensation of
Each 0.5 mm (0.02 in) diameter semicircular
the static position of the head and linear acceleration
canal describes approximately two thirds of a circle
or deceleration. They function in static equilibrium.
and is between 3.5 mm (0.1 in) and 6 mm (0.2 in)
T'he macula utriculi might be more important as a
across, roughly at 90 degrees to each other. They lie
receptor for sensing changes in posture of the head
caudal and slightly dorsal to the vestibulel,3,4. At
whilst the macula sacculi might be more sensitive to
one end of each membranous semicircular duct is a
vibrations and loud sounds2.
dilatation called the ampulla. On one side of the
membranous ampulla a proliferation of connective
tissue forms a transverse ridge called the crista
ampullaris. This is lined on its medial surface by
columnar epithelial cells, the neuroepithelium. On
the surface of the crest is a gelatinous structure
composed of a protein-saccharide material called the
cupula, which extends across the lumen of the
ampulla. T'he neuroepithelium is composed of two
basic cell types: supporting cells and hair cells. The
latter are in synaptic relationship to the dendritic
zone
JO
the
vestibularportion
of
the
vestibulocochlear nerve. T'he hair cells have 40-80
stereocilia and a single kinocilium on their luminar
surface. T'hese project into the overlying cupula.
Movement of fluid in the semicircular duct causes
deflection of the cupula which is oriented
transversely to the direction of flow of endolymph.
This bends the stereocilia and is the source of
stimulus by way of the hair cell to the dendritic zone
of the vestibular neuron. Each semicircular duct on
one side can be paired to a semicircular duct on the
 opposite side by their common position in a parallel
plane. Deviation of the stereocilia towards the
kinocilium increases vestibular neuronal activity.
T'hese receptors function in dynamic equilibrium.
T'hey are not affected by a constant velocity of
movement but respond to acceleration or decelera
tion, especially when there is rotation of the head25.
Receptors (maculae) are present in the utriculus
and saccule. They comprise thickened connective
tissue on the surface of the membranous labyrinth,
which is covered by a neuroepithelium composed of
hair cells and supporting cells. T'he neuroepithelium
is covered by the otolithic membrane, a gelatinous
 material on the surface of which are found calcareous
crystalline bodies known as statoconia (otoliths). The
hair cells are similar to those found in the crista
ampullaris and their stereocilia and kinocilia project
THE NORMAl EAR
21
MICROSCOPIC STRUCTURE OF THE EXTERNAL EAR CANAL
KEY POINTS
skin, i.e. a statified cornifying epithelium with adnexal
· The normal ear canal contains a stratified squamous
organs such as hair follicles and their associated
epidermis, hair follicles, and associated sebaceous
sebaceous and ceruminous (apocrine) glands (24,
and ceruminous (apocrine) glands.
25)1-4. The underlying dermis is heavily invested with
● Breeds of dog predisposed to otitis externa, such as
elastic and collagenous fibers (26, 27). Beneath the
Cocker Spaniels, have increased amounts
dermis and subcutis lie the rolled cartilaginous sheets
glandular tissue compared to normal dogs.
of the auricular and annular cartilages which contain
· Otitis externa results in increased production of
 and support the external ear canal. The syndesmoses
cerumen with a lower lipid content than normal,
 between these cartilage tubes, and between the annular
associated with increased ceruminous gland activity.
cartilage and the osseous external acoustic process,
· Chronic otitis externa results in permanent changes.
allow great freedom of movement for the pinna?. T'he
elastic and collagen fibers of the dermis allow a degree
NORMAL EXTERNAL EAR CANAL
of freedom of movement for the external ear canal as
T'he epidermis lining the external ear canal is similar in
well, and this can be exploited during otoscopic
structure to that of the interfollicular epidermis of the
examination.
24Photomicrograph of a section of normal canine extermal ear
25  Photomicrograph of a section of normal feline extermal ear
canal. Note the thin epidermis, the sparse hair follices, sebaceous
canal. Note the thin epidermis, the sparse hair folicles, sebaceous 
gands and ceruminous glands, and the underlying auricular
 gands and ceruminous glands, and the underlying auricular
cartilage.
cartilage.
26
77
26  Photomicrograph of a section of normal canine extermal ear
27  Photomicrograph of a section of normal canine extemal
canal stained with Gomorri's stain to highlight collagen and fibrous
ear canal stained with Masson's stain to highlight collagen and
tissue in the dermis.
fibrous tissue in the dermis.
22
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
Epidermis
Hair follicles
The epidermis is stratified and rather thin3-5, being
All breeds of dog have hair follicles throughout the
only a few layers thick (28). T'he superficial topo-
length of the external ear canal, although in most breeds
graphy is smooth and, on a microscopic level,
 these follicles are simple and sparsely distributed (30)3.
composed of layers of flattened squames closely
 It has been suggestedl, 2 that the density of hair follicles
apposed and overlapping at the edges (29). Although 
 decreases as one progresses toward the external acoustic
no laboratory data are available, there is no reason to
meatus, but recent studies3, 4 did not describe such a
believe that the epidermis of the external ear canal
distribution. The mean proportion of integument
turns over or reacts to insult any differently to the
Occupied by hair follicles was found to be 1.5-3.6%, with
epidermis of the skin. The epidermis is punctuated by
 no significant spatial distribution along the canal. T'here
the hair follicles. In man, and presumably also in the
was a large interdog variation4. However, some breeds
dog and cat, the superficial epidermis and keratinized
which are predisposed to otitis externa dliffer from the
stratum corneum migrate, en masss, laterally from the
 basic pattern?. Thus, Cocker Spaniels exhibit a much
tympanum?. This process is an extension of the
 higher concentration of hair follicles than other breeds
epidermal migration on the surface of the tympanic
 and, furthermore, the follicles are typically compound in
membrane and serves to keep the proximal ear canal
pattern (3l)3. There is no correlation between the
and tympanum free from cerumen and debris.
percentage of hair follicles within the otic integument
 and predisposition to otitis externa4.
Hair is sparse or absent in the feline external ear
canal7.
28
29
28
Photomicrograph of a section of normal canine external
29
Scanning electron micrograph of the epithelial surface of
ear canal illustrating the thin epidermis, which is only a few
the external ear canal. (llustration produced by the
cells thick
Department of Anatomy Royal Veterinary College, London.)
30
30 Photomicrograph of a section of normal canine external
ear canal showing simple hair follicles
THE NORMAL EAR  23
Adnexal glands
maintain normal keratinization of the epidermis, aids
Sebaceous glands are present in the upper dermisl-5, 7.
in the capture and excretion of debris which is
They are numerous and prominent (32) and have a
produced within, and enters the external ear canal and
similar structure to the sebaceous glands of the skin.
results in a relatively low humidity within the lumen of
The mean proportion of integument occupied by
the ear canal. In the cat the sebaceous glands become
sebaceous glands is 4.1-10.5%, gradually increasing
more prevalent and crowded proximally5.
from proximal to distal and peaking at the level of the
Ceruminous (apocrine) glands are located in the
anthelix4. There is a large interdog variation4. The
deeper dermis (33)1-5. They are characterized by a
sebaceous glands secrete principally neutral lipids4. In
simple tubular pattern and a lumen lined by a simple
the normal dog this lipid accounts for the majority of
 cuboidal-pattern epithelium. In the normal dog and
the cerumen, along with sloughed epidermal debris&.
cat the ducts of the apocrine glands are virtually non-
This high lipid content of normal cerumen helps 
 apparent. The mean proportion of integument
3
32
 32  Photomicrograph of a section of normal canine external ear canal
showing a higher power view of a sebaceous gland.
3
31Photomicrograph of a section of normal
canine external ear canal from a Cocker Spaniel.
 Note the density of the hair follicles compared to
30, and that they are compound
33   Photomicrograph of a section of normal canine external ear canal
showing a higher power view of an apocrine gland.
24
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
occupied by apocrine glands is 1.4-4.5%, gradually
dogs3. Specifically, they exhibit an increase in the
decreasing from proximal to distal and peaking at the
overall amount of soft tissue within the confines of the
level of the tympanic membrane4. T'here is a large
auricular cartilage, an increase in the area occupied by
interdog variation4. The apocrine glands contain acid
the apocrine glands, and an increase in the apocrine
mucopolysaccharides and phospholipids5.
gland area compared to that of the sebaceous glands
Overall, these data4 suggest that the ratio of
(34). Overall, the breeds of dog predisposed to otitis
apocrine to sebaceous gland decreases from proximal
externa have increased apocrine tissue. If this increased
uanas snosnbe aiou e sonpod oi supuan 'jes o
volume of apocrine tissue is actively secreting, the
in the deeper ear canal, possibly more conducive to
concentration of lipid within the cerumen will fall4,
epidermal migration. The more lipid nature of 
humidity within the ear canal will rise, and maceration,
cerumen at the distal end may facilitate water
followed by infection and otitis externa, will follow.
repulsion.
 Increased moisture and surface maceration creates an
environment particularly favorable to gram-negative
Breed variations
bacteria. Theoretically, the increased apocrine secre-
Fernando5 observed that the external ear canals of
tions in the ear canals of these dogs should result in a
longhaired breeds of dogs and those with fine hair
cerumen with a lower pH than normal and an environ-
contained more sebaceous and apocrine glandular
ment not conducive to gram-negative colonization. It
tissue, which was also better developed, than dogs
may be that the acidifying effect of increased ceru-
with short hair.
minous gland secretion is not sufficient to overcome
Breeds predisposed to otitis externa also have
the effects of humidity, inflammation, and surface
abnormal morphometric ratios compared to normal
maceration.
34
34  Photomicrograph of a section of normal canine external
ear canal from a Cocker Spaniel. Note the much more closely
packed dermis than that in 30. There is more hair follicle and
more glandular tissue.
THE NORMAL EAR
25
 Response to insult and injury
becomes infiltrated with inflammatory cells (36) and
The epidermis of the external ear canal reacts to
fbrosis will follow (37, 38). The mean proportion of
inflammation by increasing its rate of turnover and
integument occupied by connective tissue falls from
increasing in thickness; it becomes hyperplastic (35)9,
85.9-91.5% to a mean of 66.5-75.2% in cases of
10. There may be surface erosions and ulceration,
chronic otitis, a reflection of the relative and absolute
particularly with gram-negative infections. T'he dermis
increase in glandular tissue4
36
36 Photomicrograph of a section of canine external ear
canal exhibiting epidermal hyperplasia, a thickened stratum
corneum, and a moderate dermal inflammatory infltrate.
35
Photomicrograph of a section of feline external ear canal
demonstrating epidermal hyperplasia.
37
38
37 Photomicrograph of a section from a chronically
38 Photomicrograph of a section from a chronically inflamed
inflamed canine external ear canal which has been stained with
canine external ear canal which has been stained with
Gomorri's stain to highlight fibrosis. Compare the amount of
Masson's trichrome. Compare the amount of epidermal and
fibrous tissue and the thickness of the dermis with 26.
dermal tissue with 27.
26
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
In the early stages of otitis externa there is
hyperplasia of the sebaceous glands, and their ducts
Even very early changes in the lining of the extermal
may become dilatedio. If chronic otitis persists, the
ear canal have the potential to become permanent,
apocrine glands become hyperplastic with cystic
and it is for this reason that the most common
dilatation of the glands and ducts (39, 40). Thus, in
surgical procedure practiced upon the extermal ear,
ears from dogs with chronic otitis the proportion of
 the Zepp resection, fails so often. Once any degree
integument occupied by sebaceous glands increases
of luminal stenosis has occumred, lateral wall
from a mean of 5.2% to a mean of 19.2%, significantly
resection is not indicated. Vertical ablation is
more than in normal ears4. The proportion occupied
necessary.
by apocrine glands increases from a mean of 10.1% to
17.1%, significantly more than in normal ears4.
Papillary proliferation of ceruminous glands and
ducts may obliterate the lumen of the external ear
Similar changes take place in the feline ear canal,
canal in some cases (41-45)10. In very chronic cases
although the papillary changes in the ceruminous glands
ossification of the tissues may take place.
 may be sufficiently florid that discrete polyps occurl0.
6
 Photomicrograph of a section from a chronically inflamed 
canine external ear canal which has moderate dilation of the
apocrine glands.
40 Photomicrograph of a section from a chronically inflamed
feline external ear canal. Note the massively dilated apocrine
gands which are distorting the epithelium into the lumen.
THE NORMAl EAR
27
41
42
 41 Cross-section of hyperplastic external ear
43
canal demonstrating almost complete obstruction
of the lumen.
42  Photomicrograph of a cross-section of an
 inflamed external ear canal.There is thickening of 
 the soft tissue within the confines of the cartilage.
resulting in reduced luminal cross-section.
 43   Photomicrograph ilustrating folds of
section.
44
45
44, 45 Photomicrographs of two chronically inflamed canine external
ear canals. Note the almost complete loss of lumen.
28  EAR DISEASES OF THE D0G AND CAT
KEY POINTS
Reaction to insult and puncture
· The tympanum, middle ear cavities, and auditory
Reaction to irritants
tube all possess epithelia which react to injury in a
Experimental studies have demonstrated that the
similar fashion to epithelial surfaces elsewhere in
epithelium of the tympanum responds similarly to that
the body.
 of the external ear canal and other squamous epithelia
· Epithelial migration occurs on the tympanum as a
when exposed to irritants. T'here is thickening of the
 mechanism to maintain auditory function.
tympanic epithelium, particularly of the stratum
· Auditory tube dysfunction may be more important
corneum, and an increase in epithelial turnover time,
than is currently recognized.
 as measured by an increased rare of basal cell mitoses!l.
The tympanic epithelium also responds to chronic
TYMPANUM
inflammation (48, 49) within the middle ear, even if
Microscopic structure
there is no tympanic rupture. There is hyperplasia of
The components of the tympanic membrane are t
 the epithelium on the lateral side and loss of the
arranged in three layers (46, 47): an outer keratiniz-1
 mucosa on the medial sidel2. If the otitis media
ing epithelium, a central lamina propria, and an inner  continues, the hyperplastic epithelium migrates
mucosa of pharyngeal originl, 2. T'here are no hair  through the lamina propria into the middle ear where
follicles, or sebaceous or apocrine glands, on the i
 it keratinizes, leading to cholesteatoma12.
tympanum'
T'he pars flaccida tends to be thicker than the pars
 Puncture of the tympanum
tensa and it contains irregular, loosely packed collagen
 Puncture of the tympanum most commonly arises as
bundles3 4, 5, whereas the pars tensa is more dense and
 a result of infection or traumal3. The well-docu-
contains tightly packed collagen fibers6, 7. The outer
 mented sequence of hemostasis, inflammation, fibro-
collagen bundles are radial in arrangement, whereas the 1
 blastic and collagenous proliferation, and epithelial-
inner bundles are arranged in a circular pattern, helping  i
 ization, which characterizes healing of skin wounds14,
to maintain the acoustic properties of the membrane
 is not followed in the tympanuml5. In particular, the
under varying conditions' . Elastin fibers are found in 
 epithelium migrates over and bridges the defect
both the pars tensa and the pars flaccida of the dog and
 before a granulation bed is established beneath10, 13,
in neither area of the cat°. T'he reason for this disparity
 15. This adaptation presumably results in a more rapid
is not known. The lamina propria of both dogs and cats
restoration of tympanic function than might be
contains abundant mast cells, although their function
achieved if the cutaneous pattern was followed. T'hus,
is unclearr.
simple, elective myringotomy wounds heal rapidly
and even excision myringectomy wounds heal within
Epithelial migration
3-8 weeks16, 17.
Superficial epithelial cells on the human tympanum
migrate centripetally from the umbo, and it appears
that this is a mechanism for clearing epithelial and
ceruminous debris from the tympanum which, if it
accumulated, would impair hearing&. The epithelial
migration may also have a role in repair of tympanic
 perforation?. The cleavage line between stationary and
migrating cells is at the level of the nucleated squames,
rather than the stratum corneum, although the
 mechanism of the migration is not clearl0. In some
experimental animals, such as the guinea pig, the
 movement is not centripetal but rather follows the line
of the underlying collagen fibers'. T'he mechanics of
tympanic epithelial migration in the dog and cat have
yet to be established.
THE NORMAL EAR
29
46, 47 Photomicrographs of normal tympanic membrane.
46
Note the insertion of the malleus in 47.The three layers are
 o    a i s
UK)
47
 48, 49 Photomicrographs of inflamed tympanic membrane.
48
Note the overall increase in thickness (compare with 46), the
 increased cellularity of the central lamina propria, and the
hyperkeratosis of the outer epithelial layer (Sample courtesy
 D Heripret, Clinique Frgis Paris, France; sample prepared by 
Fnn Pathology Norfolk UK)
49
30
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
MidDle EAR
AUDITORY TUBE
The epithelial lining of the normal middle ear is a
T'he canine auditory tube is lined with pseudostratifed
modified respiratory pattern with a squamous or
ciliated and non-ciliated columnar epithelium
cuboidal appearance (50)18. A few ciliated and
interspersed with goblet cells22. Cilia predominate at
secretory cells are scattered among the epithelial cells.
the proximal end of the auditory tube. This is
T'here is a thin lamina propria between the epithelium
presumably an adaptation to facilitate mucus clearance
and the periosteum overlying the bone of the
into the nasopharynx, while at the same time providing
tympanic bullal8.
a mechanism to limit bacteria ascending from the
When exposed to irritant chemicals, which may
enter via a punctured tympanum for example, the
the distal, tympanic end. The goblet cells may be the
epithelium responds with a range of inflammatory
source of the surface tension-lowering substance
reactions proportional to the toxicity of the chemical
detected in the canine auditory tube24, 25. This
and, presumably, its concentration and the period of 
 surfactant is a complex mixture of lecithin, lipids, and
exposure. There may be a mild and potentially
 polysaccharides, which helps to keep the auclitory tube
reversible perivascular dermatitis with hypersecretion
 patent. Infection or allergic reactions, for example, may
of mucus into the middle ear cavity12, i8, 19. If the
 compromise epithelial function, resulting in decreased
irritation continues, the low cuboidal or squamous
clearance of middle ear secretions and decreased
epithelium becomes columnar with a papillary
 patency of the auditory tube. T'hese changes have been
 postulated as possible causes of otitis media in man26.
 of the columnar epithelial cells. Glandular or even
Whether auditory tube dysfunction is a factor in the
cystic structures may be found within the granulation
etiology of canine otitis media is not known.
tissue; they may become so large that they fill the
middle ear (51, 52). The lamina propria underlying
ROUND WINDOW MEMBRANE
the epidermis thickens and may take on the
T'he round window membrane is located in the medial
appearance of loose, edematous granulation tissuel8,
wall of the middle ear. It separates the scala tympani
19,20 with collagen, and even bone, being laid down
of the cochlea from the cavity of the middle ear and
as chronic changes take place. New bone deposition
provides a means of communication between the
 occurs on both the luminal and extraluminal bone of
 two27. T'he structure of the round window membrane
the tympanic bulla. At worst, a necrotizing
is essentially similar to that of the tympanum. There
inflammation may occur, with a thick, cellular
are three layers, the middle layer being composed of
neutrophil-rich exudate filling the middle ear cavity
connective tissue27. However, unlike the tympanum
 and an underlying osteomyelitis12, 18, 19, 20.
both outer layers are thin epithelium. Morphologic
Chronic inflammation within the middle ear cavity
evidence suggests that the round window membrane
 may lead to loss of the mucosal surface of the tympa-
 has an important role in the movement of substances
 num' and, ultimately, to cholesteatoma formation12,
 between the inner and middle ear and, as such, it plays
 20. Cholesteatomas are slowly enlarging, cystic lesions
a role in both homeostasis and ototoxicity27.
within the middle ear cavity. They are lined by stratified
them20, 21. Cholesteatomas are thought to arise when
a pocket of the tympanic membrane comes into con-
tact with, and adheres to, inflamed mucosa within the
middle ear12, 20, 21.
The NorMAl EaR
31
50  Photomicrograph of a section of normal
50
canine bulla from a dog. Note the thin 
mucosa overlying the bone. (Sample prepared
by Finn Pathology Norfolk UK.)
51, 52 Photomicrographs of inflammatory
51
tissue taken from the middle ear of a dog 
with otitis media. Note the increase in
thickness of the epithelium, associated with a 
 chronic inflammatory reaction. Cystic changes 
are beginning.
52
32  EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
MiCROClIMaTe Of The eXTerNal eAr CANaL
KEY POINtS
canal is a mean of 0.6°C (33.1°F) lower than rectal
· T'he principal factor affecting the microflora within
temperature.
the external ear canal is the microenvironment.
One study? was performed in Australia where the
· Temperature and relative humidity within the
environmental temperature tends to be high.
external ear canal are very stable.
 Nevertheless, as the day grew progressively hotter the
· T'he mean temperature within the external ear canal
temperature within the external ear canal only rose
is between 38.2°C (100.7°F) and 38.4°C
0.3°C (32.5°F) compared to a rise of 6.4°C (43.5°F)
(101.1°F), some 0.6°C (33.1°F) lower than the
in the environment. This illustrates very well how the
rectal temperature.
environment within the ear canal is effectively
· The mean relative humidity in the external ear
buffered from the external environment.
canal is 88.5%.
· The mean pH of the normal external ear canal is
RELATIVE HUMIDITY
6.1 in males and 6.2 in females.
In one study the mean relative humidity within the
· Otitis externa is associated with a rise in relative
external ear canal of 19 dogs was 80.4%6. This was
humidity and a rise in pH within the external ear
remarkably stable throughout the day", with a
canal.
recorded rise within the ear of only 2.3% compared
· Cerumen is composed principally of lipid and
 to 24% in the external environment, again illustrating
sloughed epithelial cells
the buffering effect of the tissues surrounding the
· In cases of chronic otitis externa the lipid
external ear canal. Grono° suggested that the high
component of cerumen decreases.
relative humidity in the external ear canal was such
· Lateral wall resection results in a fall in both
that the meatal epithelium would readily become
temperature and relative humidity within the
hydrated and macerated, an ideal environment for
external ear canal.
bacterial proliferation. In cases of otitis externa the
relative humidity was somewhat higher (mean 89%)
EPITHELIAL LINING
than normal, but not significantly so. T'he influence
The external ear canals are lined such that the
of a pendulous pinna was not reported.
underlying cartilaginous architecture and  the
intercartilaginous joints are covered by a smooth,
pH
clean epithelial surface (53). The epithelial surface is
The range of pH in normal dogs is 4.6-7.26. The
 am sbs pasode soi go sos
 mean pH is slightly lower in males than in females
covered by a variable, but usually thin, layer of
(6.1 compared to 6.2). The pH rises in otitis externa.
cerumen and adherent debris (54, 55). There is a
Grono? measured the pH in cases of otitis externa and
constant, outward movement of cerumen', 2. Squames
found the mean to be 5.9 (range 5.9-7.2) in acute
detach (56, 57) and move distally in the cerumen,
cases and 6.8 (range 6.0-7.4) in chronic cases. Grono
thus keeping the tympanum clear of debris and
also measured the pH of the external ear canals of
providing a mechanism for removing sloughed
dogs and recorded the bacteria which were isolated
epithelial and glandular secretions from the external
from some of these cases. Non-parametric (Mann
ear canal.
Whitney) analysis of Grono's data by the authors
showed that in cases of otitis externa associated with
TEMPERATURE
Pseudomonas spp. the pH is significantly higher (mean
In a series of studies the temperature within the
6.85, p>0.05) than in cases of otitis externa in which
external ear canal of dogs was 38.2-38.4°C
no Pseudomonas spp. are isolated (mean 5.7).
(100.7-101.1°F)3,4, 5. These studies were performed
 Over 25 years apart with very different technologies,
and for such close results to be achieved is remarkable.
T'here was no significant dlifference between breeds of
 dog or whether there was a pendulous pinna or not3,
4. T'he temperature within the external ear canal rises
significantly if otitis externa is present: mean 38.9°C
(102°F)5. The temperature within the external ear
THE NORMAL EAR
33
53Otoscopic view of the normal external ear
53
 canal. Note the clean, smooth epithelial surface.
54
55
54,55
Scanning electron micrographs of the
epithelial surface of the external ear canal of a dog
(54) and a cat (55). Note the cerumen coating the
hair shafts and squames such that individual 
squame borders cannot clearly be seen. (Electron 
micrographs produced by the Department of
Anatomy Royal Veterinary College, London, UK)
56
5/
56,57
 Scanning electron micrographs ilustrating squames in the
process of detaching in a canine ear canal (56) and a feline ear canal (57)
Veterinary College, London, UK.)
34
Ear dISeASES of the dOG ANd CAT
CERUMEN IN NORMAL AND OTITIC EARS
compared to a mean of 49.7% from normal ears?. This
Cerumen coats the lining of the external ear canal (58,
fall in lipid content may reflect the hypertrophy of
59). It is composed of lipid secretions from the
apocrine glands which accompanies chronic otitis
sebaceous glands, ceruminous gland secretion?, and
 external4. The decreased lipid component of cerumen
sloughed epithelial cells. T'he lipid component of dogs'
may account for the increase in relative humidity
cerumen can vary widely, as does the type of lipid
reported in the external ear canals of dogs with otitis
within the cerumen, although margaric (17:0), stearic
externa6. This, plus the decrease in antibacterial
(18:0), oleic (18:1), and linoleic (18:2) fatty acids are
activity, may allow increased bacterial multiplication.
the most common9, 10. A range of 18.2-92.6% (by
weight) of lipid content was found in the external ear
EFFECT OF SURGERY ON THE ENVIRONMENT
canals of normal dogs and in some cases there was
OF THE EXTERNAL EAR CANAL
wide disparity between the left and right ears. This
 Lateral wall resection results in a fall in both
variation presumably reflects individual variation in 
 temperature and humidity within the external ear
concentration and activity of ceruminous glands. In (
 canal, as might be expected. In one study of 12 dogs
man, cerumen type (wet’ or ‘dry") is a simple t
 the temperature in the resected ears was reduced by
mendelian traitll. Whether there is a simple genetic
   1) 9   
control of canine or feline cerumen type is not known.
 contralateral, normal ears?. Furthermore, the relative
 Oleic and linoleic acid have antibacterial activity12, 13,
 humidity in resected ear canals falls by a mean of
although the effects of these fatty acids, and others,
10%6. Whether this change in temperature and
against bacteria and Malassezia pachydermatis within
humidity is sufficient to explain the clinical
the ear canal is less clear10.
improvement which follows lateral wall resection is
In cases of otitis externa the lipid content of the
 debatable. Certainly it increases local drainage and
cerumen falls significantly to a mean of 24.4%, 1
this may be all that is necessary.
58
58 Photomicrograph of normal cerumen. Note the
high proportion of amorphous lipid material to
squame.
59
 59  Scanning electron micrograph illustrating cerumen
on the epithelial surface of a cat's external ear canal
(Electron micrograph produced by the Department of
Anatomy, Royal Veterinary College, London, UK.)
THE NORMAl EAR
35
MICRObIOLOGY OF The CANINe EXTErNaL Ear CANAL
KEY POiNtS
ear canal, collect a sample, and then inoculate the
· The bacterial flora of the canine external ear canal
 material onto appropriate culture plates. Collation
is principally a gram-positive flora, similar to that
of the interfollicular epidermis.
 difficult because of the methods and classifications
· T'he vertical portion of the external
ear canal
of results employed in each study. Furthermore, the
 contains more bacteria than the horizontal portion.
· Not all external ear canals contain significant
numbers of bacteria or yeast.
carry no viable bacteria within their
increasein
the number
of bacteria and a shift
externalear
ococci
increased numbe
recovered from a large percentage of normal ear
Maiassezia
1S
as
canals (Table I)
Consideration of Table I reveals a disparity in the
Otitis media may be present in over 80% of cases of
reported recovery of bacteria between Grono and
otitis externa.
 Frost? and the other studies. Grono and Frost reported
· T'he bacterial flora in the inner ear may be different
a lower incidence of ears yielding no bacterial growth
from that of the external ear.
 and a higher incidence of gram-negative bacteria, par-
ticularly coliforms, compared to the other studlies. This
NORMAL FLORA OF THE CANINE
 might relate to the location of the institution in which
EXTERNAL EAR CANAL
the studies were performed. Grono and Frost carried
Bacteria
 out their work in a subtropical region (Queensland,
 The approach to investigating the bacterial flora of
 Australia) whereas the other studies were performed
the normal ear canal has usually been to insert a
in temperate climates. Humidity and temperature
sterile swab an unspecified distance into the vertical
within the external ear canal increases (albeit within
Table I: A summary of the microbial flora (% incidence) of the external ear canal of normal dogs. Note the incidence of ears from
aeau-weue jo anuapiou yauaiy ynw e pamous gisouy pue ouous wouy shnsau aun moy osie aon papuoau sem ymoua ou yum
 carriage than the other studies.
Reference
Number
No
Mala.
CPS
CNS
Strp
Crn
Psd
Prt
Col
number
of ears
growth
156
40.0
ND:
42.9
combined
0
0
0
<0.5
70
ND:
ND:
54.3
combined
32.9
15.7
0
0
5.7
3
124 
1.6
35.9
47.6
74.2
15.3
25.8
2.4
1.6
42.7
4
279
ND:
15.8
9.6
13.6
3.6
1.8
0
0
0.4
600
22.7
20.7
28.7
73.7
14.3
11.0
0
1.6
6
42
26.2
14.3
19.0
ND:
ND:
ND:
ND:
ND
ND:
60
ND:
28.3
1.6
3.2
0
5
0
7
0
Mean
22.7
23.0
17.5
41.2
10.2
11.9
0.4
E'0
7.27
Mala = Malassezia pochydermatis ; CP5 = coagulase-positive Staphyiococus spp.: CN5 = coagulase-negative Stophylococcus spp. and 
Micrococcus spp.: Strp = Streptococcus spp.: Crn = Corynebacteria spp.: Psd = Pseudomonas spp.: Prt = Proteus spp.: Col = coliforms:
combined = coagulase-positive and coagulase-negative staphylococci counts combined; ND = not done
36
Ear DISEASES Of tHE DOG AND CAT
narrow limits) as environmental temperature and
organisms found on cultures are part of the normal
humidity increases8, 9. Furthermore, the incidence of
flora.
 canine otitis externa increased with seasonal increases
T'he bacterial flora of the normal feline external ear
in rainfall and humidlity 10. It is possible that the higher
canal has not been reportedl5, although it may be
humidity and higher environmental temperatures in
envisaged that it is broadly similar to that of the dog.
tropical and subtropical regions result in a degree of
maceration within the external ear canal and an in-
Fungi
creased carriage of gram-negative organisms.
Malassezia pachydermatis
 Only one study specifically investigated the bacterial
Malasezia pachydermatisis a yeast-like fungus commonly
flora of the horizontal ear canall1. Fourteen of the 51
 isolated from both normal and diseased external ear
ears sampled yielded no growth, and when bacteria
canals of dogs and cats. The number of organisms
were recovered they were reported to be in very low
recovered varies, as does the rate of recovery of the yeast
numbers. Thus, although
1someof the
from ear canals. T'hus recovery rates of between 14.3%
organisms
involved in otitis externa can
.from a
 and 37% have been reported for healthy dogs3-7, 16.
recovered
normal external ear canal, they are 
carce
T'here appears to be the same environmental effect on
or absent from the horizontal
portion ofthe
the carriage of M. pachydermatis in normal ears as there
is on gram-negative bacteria, with a higher rate of
 recovery in tropical and subtropical regions compared to
temperate areas (Table I). Currently, the organism is
 positive staphylococci were recovered from the vertical
regarded as an opportunist pathogen, capable of causing
and horizontal ear canals, although
1 not from all the
inflammatory changes in the ear canal, at least in the
canals. T'he number of staphylococci was very similar to
that obtained from normal interfollicular epidermis. A
importance as a potentiator of chronic, or acute, otic
detailed, albeit qualitative, study of the staphylococcal
inflammation, but it serves to suggest to the clinician that
flora in normal earsl3 revealed several (five) species of
a search for underlying causes of the inflammation should
 coagulase-negative staphylococci in the canine ear canal
be made.
and four in the feline ear canal.
Consideration of the above suggests that the rela-
Other yeast-like fungi
tionship between normal flora and disease is not
 Malassezia sympodialis was reported to be present in
straightforward. Potential pathogens such as coagulase-
 the external ear canals of both normal cats and those
positive staphylococci can be recovered from ear canals
with mild otic pruritus18. The pathogenic status of 
in the absence of evidence of disease, just as they can be
this organism is not known. A small study from
found on the normal interfollicular epidermis of the
Spain19 reported that M. pachydermatis represented
skin12. It seems reasonable to consider that these or-
only 3% of the yeast isolates from cases of otitis
 ganisms cannot proliferate unless inflammation or mac-
externa and that Candida spp. and Cryptococcus spp.
eration occurs within the ear canal, and it was for this
were more prevalent. It may be that the local
environment (hot and（
dry climate) 2
and the
petuating causes rather than primary or predisposing
microbiologic methods used influenced this result.
causes of otitis externa. T'his theory also highlights the
Candida albicans has been recovered from normal
value of otic cytology as an adjunctive aid in assessing
ear canals of dogs and cats2,4. However, the organism
the relevance of bacteriologic results. Failure to detect
is only rarely implicated in otitis externa. In one
changes consistent with otitis externa suggests that any
incident, C. albicans was implicated as the prime agent
in an outbreak of apparently contagious otitis externa
in 76 foxhounds20.
Other fungi
Given that most cases of infectious otitis externa
Fraser21 reported on the fungal flora of 35 healthy
originate in the horizontal canal',the clinician
dogs and 277 dogs with otitis externa. In addition to
should ensure that both bacteriologic and cytologic
yeast he recovered six species of fungi from 1l% of the
samples are taken from this area and that
normal ear canals. Aspergillus spp., Penicillum spp.,
precautions are taken to prevent contamination by
and Rhizopus spp. accounted for 70% of the strains
microorganisms within the vertical ear canal.
from normal ears and were presumably contaminants
rather than members of the normal otic flora.
The NorMal ear
37
MICROBIAL CHANGES ASSOCIATED
canals and to defects in keratinization. Both of these
WITH OTITIS EXTeRNA
factors are likely to predispose to chronic otitis externa
The overall changes in bacterial flora associated with
and gram-negative bacterial infection, particularly if
otitis externa are qualitative and quantitative ( Table 2);
the humidity within the external ear canal is elevated
the number of bacteria increases and the proportion of 
 because of a pendulous pinna. Miniature Poodles, on 
various species changes (compare Tables I and 2). The
the other hand, might well have hirsute canals but
incidence of recovery of staphylococci in general, and
they are often affected by atopy. Atopy is associated
 of coagulase-positive staphylococci in particular,
with an inflamed, erythematous otitis, at least at first,
which is not exudative. Such changes mimic those on
1Proteus spp.
the skin and might be sufficiently aberrant to favor
increases1-5,20-30.
colonization by
Staphylococcus
sintermedius andM.
Early studies²
 reported that Proteus spp. and
Pseudomonas spp. were commonly isolated from
certain breeds of dog, particularly the Cocker Spaniel,
externaincats'
but not recovered from others such as the Miniature
lococci(
(54.8%).
Gram-negative bacteria such as
Poodle.
 The authors postulated that Miniature
Pseudomonas spp. and Proteus spp. were only rarely
 Poodles presented with acute, painful ear disease with
a short time course, whereas Cocker Spaniels were
The fungal flora of the ear canal also changes in
notorious for exhibiting chronic 
otitis
externa,
otitis externa (
(Tables I and 2) and almost all of the
permitting
contamination
with
gram-negative
increase results from an increased incidence of M.
organisms. A more rational explanation is that Cocker
pachydermatis.
T'hus,
recovered
M.
Spaniels are anatomically prone to narrow, hirsute ear
pachydermatis from 36% of normal ear canals and
Table 2: A summary of the microbial flora (% incidence) from the external ear canal of dogs with otitis externa. Note the number
' aai on paedwos uaum eo aneau-wee jo auen aun puemot yuys aun ose anon paonau sem ymaa ou yum way shea jo
 Reference
 Number
No
Mala
CPS
CNS
Strp
Crn
Psd
Prt
Col
number
of ears
growth
ND:
79.3
combined
56.0
ND:
3.4
3.4
3.4
62
ND:
ND:
80.6
ND:
6.5
19.4
12.9
12.9
7.7
3
716
9.9
35.9
30.9
8.0
12.6
3.1
34.6
20.8
7.3
4
115
18.3
54.2
32
ND
1.0
1.0
9.0
9.0
4.0
69
ND
34.8
22.6
1.9
4.2
1.8
18.1
3.9
5.6
160
26.2
14.3
19.0
ND
ND
ND:
ND:
ND
ND:
r-.
116
ND:
82.8
37.9
20.7
8.6
6.0
16.4
3.4
2.5
20
60
ND
63
51.8
combined
29.6
ND:
3.7
14.8
25.9
22
371
ND
51.5
66.6
combined
25.8
ND:
11.3
14.8
22
87
ND:
56
32
ND:
1
9
9
ND
24
669
22.3
19.3
16.3
combined 
ND:
ND:
ND:
ND:
ND:
26
389
ND
2.1
32.1
0.5
9.0
0.5
20.1
13.4
ND:
27
59
ND:
ND:
47.5
3.4
25.4
1.7
5. 1
13.6
ND:
29
293
ND:
35.8
33.8
combined
6.5
ND
3.8
3.1
ND
30
96
ND:
50
41.6 
combined
25
ND:
25
19.4
13.8
Mean
24.8
41.6
44.7
6.9
15.1
4.1
13.5
10.9
8.8
Mala = Maiassezia pochydermatis; CPS = coagulase-positive Stophyiococcus spp.: CN5 = coagulase-negative Stophyiocorcus spp. and
suuos = io 'dds snaod = iud rdds sououopnasd = psd idds duaogauio = u 'dds snrosodaas = duas 1dds snroo.di
 Combined = coagulase-positive and coagulase-negative staphylococci counts combined; ND = not done 
38
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
from 44% of cases of otitis externa. However, the
EFFECTS OF TREATMENT ON THE
incidence of fungi was unchanged; indeed the number 
OTIC MICROFLORA
of isolations of Aspergillus spp., Penicillium spp., and
Only a few published studies (summarized in Table 3)
 Rhizopus spp. was reduced in otitic ear canals.
have investigated the otic microflora before and after
OTItIS MeDIA AND OtItIS EXTerNA
ductions in the numbers of organisms recovered after
Otitis media is thought to be an important cause of
treatment, with a marked increase in the number of ears
recurrent otitis externa, as the presence of bacteria in
from which no
0 growth was recorded (86% compared
the middle ear may act as a focus for reinfection. T'he
media since it can repair in the presence
of otitis media.
treatment, and were pronounced cured, the original or-
ganisms could still be recovered.
in microbial isolates f
from either side
of
an intact
Therefore, clinical cure does not always necessitate
tympanum31,
microbial elimination. It may well be that in a number
medications fail to cross the tympanum, resulting in
of cases the
agents within polypharmaceutical
 different populations of bacteria. T'he implication of this
is that separate samples from both the middle and
in particular,
,affect inflammation,
 epidermal prolifer-
external ear must be taken for bacterial culture and sen-
ation, and bacterial adhesion to such an extent that
sitivity testing if otitis media and otitis externa are
microbial 1
multiplication is not possible. T'herefore,
present.
although viable bacteria can be recovered from ear
canals post treatment, they are unable to adhere,
multiply, or cause infection.
Table 3: The microbial flora (% of incidence) of canine external canals before treatment and after appropriate treatment had resulted in resolution
 of the condition. Note that after treatment had resulted in resolution it was still possible to recover microflora from the extemal ear canals.
Source
No
Mala.
CPS
CNS
Strp
Psd
Prt
Col
growth
Before (a)
ND:
63.0
51.8
combined
29.6
ND:
3.7
14.8
25.9
After (a)
ND
11.1
ND
11.1
ND:
0
7.4
18.5
Before (b)
ND:
53.3
46.7
combined 
33.3
ND:
6.7
13.3
43.3
After (b)
ND:
0
10.0
ND
10.0
ND:
0
10.0
3.3
Before (c)
50
52.3
51.5
combined
0.4
2.1
6.0
3.4
2.1
After (c)
203
8.9
4.3
combined
0
0
3.4
0.9
0.9
Before (d)
ND
45
17
15
5.2
ND:
8.2
2.3
3.0
After (d)
ND:
9.1
7.5
6.4
2.2
ND:
3.8
2.3
 Before (a) = before treatment with miconazole, prednisolone, and polymixin20 
 After (a) = after resolution of the otitis externa20
 Before (b) = before treatment with diethanolamine fusid ate,framycetin, nystatin, and prednisolone24
 After (b) = after resolution of the otitis externa24
oauoiosupaud pue ueisu 'unauey'uiiny yrm suauean aoyag = () aoag 
 After (c) = after resolution of the otitis externa20
 After (d) = after resolution of the otitis external7
Mala = Maiassezia pochydermatis; CPS = coagulase-positive Stophylococcus spp.: CN5 = coagulase-negative Staphyiococcus spp. and Micrococcus
Spp.: Strp = Streptococcus spp: Crn = Corynebacteria spp.: Psd = Pseudomonas spp: Prt = Proteus spp.: Col = coliforms; combined = coagulase-
 positive and coagulase-negative staphylococci counts combined; ND = not done or not recorded
THE NORMAL EAR
¥39
REFERENCES
GROSS AND MICROSCOPIC ANATOMY OF THE
treatment of middle-ear disease in cats: 19 cases {1984-1991).
EAR: STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION
Journal of the Americon Veterinory Medical Associotion 202,
Getty R, Foust HL, Presley ET and Miller ME {1956)
123-128.
Macroscopic anatomy of the ear of the dog. Americon journal 
22 El-Mofty A and El-Serafy S {1967) The ossicular chain in
ofVeterinory Reseorch 17,364-375.
2
 Fraser G, Gregor WV, Mackenzie CP Spreull JSA and Withers
903-909.
AR {1970) Canine ear disease.jourmal of Small Anirmal Proctice
ui jo uoenuue (osel)  laualleg pue dd poomdo t
10, 725-754.
canine auditory tube. Reseorch in Veterinory Scierce 28, 382-383.
 Evans HE (1993) Miller's Anotomy of the Dog. 3rd edn. (ed HE
24 Sucheston ME and Cannon MS (1971) Eustachian tube of
Evans) WB Saunders, Philadelphia, pp. 988-1 008.
several mammalian species. Archives of Otolaryngology 93, 58-65.
Hudson LC and Hamilton WP (1993) Atlas of Feline Anatomy
 25 Hills BA (1984) Analysis of eustachian surfactant and its function
for Veterinarians.WB Saunders, Philadelphia, Pp. 228-239.
as a release agent Archives of Otoloryngology Ilo, 3-9
Henderson RA and Horne RD (1993) The pinna. In Textbook
of Small Anirmai Surgery. 2nd edn. (ed D Slatter) WB Saunders.
MICROSCOPIC STRUCTURE OF THE EXTERNAL
Philadelphia, pp. 1545-1559.
EAR CANAL
6 Smeak DD (i998) Total ear canal ablation and lateral bulla
Fraser G (1961) The histopathology of the external auditory
Osteotomy. In Current Techniques in Small Anirmal Surgery.4th edn.
meatus of the dog Journol of Comporative Pathology 71,
(ed MJ Bojrab) Williams and Wilkins, Baltimone, pp. 102-109.
253-258.
7Huang H-P (1993) Studies of the Microenvironment ond
2
Getty R, Foust HL, Presley ET and Miller ME (1956)
Microfloro of the Conine Extemal Eor Conal. PhD Thesis, Glasgow
 Macroscopic anatomy of the ear of the dog Americon Jouma
University.
ofVeterinory Reseorch 17, 364-375
8Forsythe WB (1985) Tympanographic volume measurements
Stout-Graham M, Kainer RA, Whalen LR and Macy DW (1990)
of the canine ear American Journal of Veterinory Reseorch 46.
Morphologic measurements of the extermal ear canal of dogs.
13511353.
American Jourmol of Veterinory Reseorch 51, 990-994.
9Bluestone CD and Doyle W) (1988) Anatomy and physiology
Huang H-P (1993) Studies of the Microenvironment and
of the eustachian tube and middle ear related to otitis media.
/Microforo of the Canine Extermal Ear Canal. PhD Thesis, Glasgow
Jourmal ofAllergy and Cinical lImmunology 81, 997-1003.
University.
I0 Bluestone CD (1983) Eustachian tube function: physiology
5
 Fernando SDA {1 966) A histological and histochemical study
of the glands of the extermal auditory canal of the dog Reseorch
media. joumal ofAllergy and Clinical lmunology 72, 242-251
in Veterinory Science 7, 116—119.
II Ostfield E, Blonder J, Crispin M and Szeinberg A {1980) The
6
Johnson A, Hawke M and Berger G {1984) Surface wrinkes,
middle ear gas composition in air-ventilated dogs. Acto
cell ridges and desquamation in the extermal auditory canal. jour-
Otolaryngology 89, 105-108.
nal of Otoloryngology I3, 345-354.
12 Chole RA and Kodama K {1989) Comparative histology of the 
7
Scott DW (1980) Feline dermatology: a monograph.Joumal of
tympanic membrane and its relationship to cholesteatoma.
the Americon Animal Hospital Associotion I6, 426433.
Annais of Rhinalogy and Laryngology 98, 761-766.
8
Huang HP Fixter LM and Little CJL {1994) Lipid content of
I3 Neer TM (1982) Otitis media. Compendium on Continuing
cerumen from normal dogs and otitic canine ears. Veterinory
Educotion 4, 410-416.
Record 134, 380-381
[4 Nummela S {1995) Scaling of the mammalian middle ear
9
 Fermando SDA {1 966) Certain histopathologic features of the
Hearing Research 85, 18-30.
extermal auditory meatus of the cat and dog with otitis exterma.
I5 Secondi U {1951) Structure and function of the lamina propria
Americon Jourmol of Veterinory Research 28, 278-282.
of the tympanic membrane in various mammals. Archives of
10 Van der Gaagl {1986) The pathology of the extermal ear canal
Otolaryngaiogy 53, 170-181.
in dogs and cats. Veterinory Quortenly 8, 307-317.
I6 Huang GT, RosowskiJ, Flandermeyer DT, Lynch TJ and Peak
WT (1997) The middle ear of a lion: comparison of structure
MICROSCOPIC STRUCTUre OF tHE
and function to domestic cat Jjourmal of the Acoustic Society I01,
TYMPANUM AND MIDDLe EAR
1532-1549
ILim D) {1995) Structure and function of the tympanic
mopum punoy (66l) 7 uewpun pue  ealoooko l
membrane: a review.Acta Oto-hinc-Haryngolico belg. 49, 101-115.
membrane. Structure, function, and permeability: a review.
2
Evans HE {1993) Miller's Anotomy of the Dog. 3rd edn. (ed HE
Microscopy Research and Technique 36, 201-211
Evans) WB Saunders, Philadelphia, pp. 988-1008.
I8 Rose WR (1978) The eustachian tube.
3
I:General
 Secondi U (1951) Structure and function of the lamina propria
 considerations. Veterinory Medicine/Smoll Animol Clinician 73,
of the tympanic membrane in various mammals. Archives of Oto-
882-887
loryngology 53, 170-181.
I9 Boothe HW (1998) Ventral bulla osteotomy: dog and cat. In
Filogamo G {1949) Recherches sur la structure de la
Current Techniques in Smoll Animal Surgery. 4th edn. (ed M)
membrane du tympan chez les differents vertebres. Acto
Bojrab). Williams and Vilkins, Baltimore, pp. I 09- I 1 2.
Anotomico 7, 248-272
20 Seim HB Ill (1993) Middle ear In Textbook of Smoll Animal
5
Lim D) (1968) Tympanic membrane. Electron microscopic
 Surgery. 2nd edn. (ed D Slatter) WB Saunders, Philadelphia, PP.
observations. Part II: Pars flaccida. Acta Otoloryngologica 66,
1568-1576
5 15-532.
21Trevor PB and Martin RA (1993) Tympanic bulla osteotomy for
6
Chole RA and Kodama K {1989) Comparative histology of the
40
Ear DISEASES Of tHe DOG AND CAT
 tympanic membrane and its relationship to cholesteatoma.
MICROCLIMATe OF THE EXTERNAL
Annais of Rhinology and Loryngology 98, 761-766.
EAR CANAL
Lim D) {1968) Tympanic membrane. Electron microscopic
observations. Part I: Pars tensa. Acta Otolaryngologica 66,
extermal canal. Archives of Otolaryngology 77, 254-257.
181-198
2B
Broekaert D {1990) The migratory capacity of the external
8
pue wnuedu au hano uoneiw elauida (el) M uo
auditory canal epithelium: a critical mini neview. Acto Oto-rhino-
extermal canal. Archives of Otoloryngology 77, 254-257.
loryngologico belg. 44, 385-392.
9Reeve DR {1977) Some observations on the diurmal variation
3
Grono LR {1970) Studies of the microclimate of the extermal
of mitosis in the stratified squamous epithelium of wounded
auditory canal in the dog I: Aural temperature. Reseorch in
tympanum. Cell,Trssue Reseorch 9, 253-263.
Veterinory Science Il, 307-311.
I0 Broekaert D (1990) The migratory capacity of the external
4
Huang H-P Shih H-M and Chen K-Y (1998) The application of
auditory canal epithelium: a critical mini review. Acto Oto-rhino-
an infrared tympanic membrane thermometer in comparing
loryngologico belg. 44, 385-392.
the extermal ear canal temperature between erect and pendu-
lous ears in dogs. In Advonces in Veterinory Dermatology. Volume
histological effect on the guinea pig external ear of several
3. (eds KW Kwochka, T Willemse and C von Tscharner) But-
constituents of commonly used aural preparations. Cinical
terworth Heinemann, Oxford, pp. 57-63.
Otolaryngology 13, 121-131
5
paueuu! jo asn (8661) ys law-inH pue BuenH ld-inH
12 Sennaroglu L, Ozkul A, Gedikoglu G and Turan E {1998) Effect
thermometry and effect of otitis exterma on extermal ear canal
of intratympanic steroid application on the development of
temperature in dogs.Jourmal of the AmericonVeterinary Medical
experimental cholesteatoma. Laryngoscope I08, 543-547
Associotion 213, 7679.
13 Boedts D (1995) Tympanic membrane perforations. Acta Oto-
6
Grono LR {1970) Studies of the microclimate of the extermal
rhinc-loryngolico beig. 49, 149-158.
auditory canal in the dog. ll: Relative humidity within the
14 Dyson M (1997) Advances in wound healing physiology:the
external auditory meatus. Research in Veterinory Science I1,
comparative perspective. Veterinary Dermatology 8, 227-233.
316-319.
15 Makino K, Amatsu M, Kinishi M and Mohri M (i990) Epithelial
Grono LR {1970) Studies of the microclimate of the extermal
migration in the healing process of tympanic membrane
auditory canal in the dog. ll: Hydrogen ion concentration of the
perforations. Archives of Otorhinoloryngology 247, 352-355.
I6 Truy E, Disant F and Morgon A (1995) Chronic tympanic
Scierce I1, 31231 5
membrane perforation: an animal model. Americon Journol of
8
Fernando SDA (1 966) A histological and histochemical study
Otology 16, 222-225.
of the glands of the extermal auditory canal of the dog Reseorch
17 Steiss JE, BoosingerTR, Wright JC and Pillai SR {1982) Healing
in Veterinory Science 7, 116-119.
experimentally   perforated    tympanic  membranes
6
Huang HP and Little CJL (1994) Lipid content of cerumen from 
normal dogs and otitic canine ears. Veterinory Record 134,
Jourmaol of the American Anirmal Hospital Association 28, 307-310.
380-381.
I8 Little CJL and Lane JG {1991) Inflammatory middle ear disease
I0 Huang HP Little CJL and Fixter LM (1993) Effects of fatty acids
of the dog: the pathology of otitis media. Veterinory Record 128,
293-296.
and their relevance to canine otitis externa. Reseorch in
I9 Mansfield PD, Steiss JE, BoosingerTR and Marshall AE (1997)
Veterinory Science 55, 1I1 9I 23.
The effects of four commercial ceruminolytic agents on the
II Roeser RJ (1997) Physiology pathophysiology and anthropolo-
middle ear. journal of the American Animol Hospitol Associotion
gy/epidemiology of human ear canal secretions.Journal of the
35, 479-486.
Armerican Academy of Audioclogy 8, 39 I-400.
20 Little CJL. Lane JG, Gibbs C and Pearson GR (1991)
12
 Gutteridge JMC, Lamport P and DormandyTL {1974) Autox-
Inflammatory middle ear disease in the dog: the clinical and
idation as a cause of antibacterial activity in unsaturated fatty
pathological features of cholesteatoma, a complication of otitis
acids.Joumol of Medical Microbiology 7, 387-389
media. Veterinary Record 128, 319-322.
13 Knapp HR and Melly MA {1986) Bactericidal effects of
21 Ruedi L {1959) Cholesteatoma formation in the middle ear in
polyunsaturated fatty acids. journol of Infectious Diseoses I54,
animal experiments. Acta Otolaryngologico 50, 233-242.
84-94.
22 HaradaY (1977) Scanning electron microscopic study on the
I4 Stout-Graham M, Kainer RA, Whalen LR and Macy DW (1990)
distribution of epithelial cells in the eustachian tube. Acto
 Morphologic measurements of the extermal ear horizontal canal 
Otolaryngolica 83, 284-290.
of dogs. American Joummal of Veterinary Research 51,990-994.
23 Sucheston ME and Cannon MS (1971) Eustachian tube of
several mammalian species.Archives of Otolaryngoiogy 93, 5864.
MICROBIOLOGY OF THE CANINE EXTERNAL
EAR CANAL
substance of the canine eustachian tube. Annois of Otology 81,
Gustafson B (l954) Otitis externa hos hund. Nordic
268-271.
Veterinaermedicin 6. 434-442
 25 Mendenhall RM, Mendenhall AL and Tucker JH {1966) A study
2
 Fraser G {1961) Factors predisposing to canine extermal otitis
of some biological surfactants. Arnais of the NewYork Acodemy
Veterinory Record 73, 55-58.
of Sciences 130, 902-919.
Grono LR and Frost A) (1969) Otitis externa in the dog
26 Bluestone CD (1983) Eustachian tube function: physiology
Austrolion Veterinory Journal 45, 420-422
pathophysiology and role of allergy in pathogenesis of otitis
A
Sharma VD and Rhodes HE {1975) The occurrence and
medial Joumal ofAllergy and Clinical lmmunology 72, 242-245.
microbiology of otitis exterma in the dog Jourmal of Small Anirmol
27 Goycoolea MV and Lundman L {1997) Round window
Proctice 16, 241247.
membrane. Structure, function, and permeability: a review.
5
McCarthy G and Kelly WR (1 982) Microbial species associat-
/Microscopy Research and Technique 36, 201211.
ed with the canine ear and their antibacterial sensitivity patterms.
THE NORMAL EAR   41
Irish Veterinary Jourmal 36, 53-56.
18 Bond R,Anthony RM, Dodd M and Loyd DH (1996) Isolation
Chengappa MM. Maddux R and Greer S (1983) A
microbiologic survey of clinically normal and otitic ear canals.
Veterinary Mycology 34, 1 45-147.
Pet Proctice 78, 343-344.
I9 Blanco JL Guedeja-Marron J. Hontecilas R, Suarez G and Garcia
7  Marshall MJ, Harris AM and Home JE {1974) The bacteriological
M-E {1996) Microbiological diagnosis of chronic otitis externa
and clinical assessment of a new preparation for the treatment
 in the dog. Jourmol ofVeterinary Medicine 43, 475-482.
of otitis exterma in dogs and cats. jourmol of Small Animol Proctice
20 McKellar QA, Rycroft, A, Anderson L and Love J (1990) Otitis
15. 401-410.
externa in a foxhound pack associated with Candida oibicons.
8
Grono LR {1970) Studies of the microclimate of the extermal
Veterinory Record 127, 15-16.
auditory canal of the dog I: Aural temperature. Reseorch in
2
Fraser G {196l) The fungal flora of the canine ear journol of
Veterinory Science II, 307-311
Comporotive Pathology 71, 1-5.
6
Grono LR {1970) Studies of the microclimate of the extermal
 22 Fraser G, Withers AR and SpreullJSA (1961) Otitis extema in 
auditory canal of the dog. Ill: Relative humidity within the
the dog. Joummol of Small Animal Proctice 2, 32-47.
external auditory meatus. Reseorch in Veterinory Science II,
23 Baxter M and Lawler DC {1972) The incidence and
316-319.
microbiology of otitis exterma of dogs and cats in New Zealand.
I0 Hayes HM, Williams Pickle L and VVilson GP (1987) Effects of
New Zealond Veterinory Journal 20, 29-32.
ear type and weather on the hospital prevalence of canine otitis
i axa so (el) d uasny pue  lau h yo 
exterma. Reseorch in Veterinory Scienrce 42, 294-298.
the dog:  a clinical and microbiological  study.  Nordic 
II Dickson DB and Love DN (1983) Bacteriology of the
Veterinaermedicin 27, 285-295
horizontal ear canal of dogs. Joumol of Small Anirmal Proctice 24.
25 Baba E, Fukata T and Saito M (1981) Incidence of otitis extema
413-421
in dogs and cats in Japan. Veterinory Record 108, 393-395
12 Harvey RG and Lloyd DH (1995) The distribution of
26 Blue JL and Wooley RE {1977) Antibacterial sensitivity pattems
Stophylococcus intermedius and coagulase-negative staphylococci
of bacteria isolated from dogs with otitis exterma.jourmol of the
on the hair skin surface, within the hair follicles and on the
Armericon Veterinory Medicol Associotion 171, 362-363.
27 Nesbitt GH and Schmitz JA {1977) Chronic bacterial dermatitis
75-81.
and otitis: a review of I95 cases. Joumol of the AmericonAnirmol
13 Uchida
KitazawaK(1990)
Hospitol Associotion I3, 442-450.
Clinicomicrobiological study of the normal and otitis externa
28 Webster FL, Whyard BH, Brandt RW and Jones WG {1974)
a uaao po asause pue sop u sue e
Treatment of otitis externa in the dog with Gentocin Otic.
52, 415-417.
Canadian Veterinory Joumal I5, 1 76—177.
14 August JR {1988) Otitis externa: a disease of multifactorial
29 Rycroft AK and Saban HS {1977) A clinical study of otitis
etiology Veterinory Clinics of NorthAmmerico I8, 731-742
exterma in the dog. Conodion Veterinory Jourmol I8, 64-70.
 I5 Scott DW (1980) Feline dermatology:a monograph. journal of
30 Hallu RE, Gentilini E, Rebuelto M, Albarellos GA and Otero PE
the Armericon Anirmal Hospital Associotion I6, 426-433.
{1996) The combination of norfloxacin and ketoconazole in the
I6 Fraser G (1 96l) The fungal flora of the canine ear. Journal of
treatment of canine otitis. Conine Proctice 21, 26-28.
Comparotive Pathology 71. 1-5.
31 Cole LK, Kwochka KW Kowalski J) and Hillier A (1998)
I7 Mansfield PD, Boosinger TR and Attleburger MH (1990)
Microbial flora and antimicrobial susceptibility patterns of
Infectivity of Malossezio pochydermotis in the extermal ear canal
isolated pathogens from the horizontal ear canal and middle
of dogs. Jourmol of the American Animal Hospital Associotion 26,
ear in dogs with otitis media. Jourmal of the American Veterinory
97-100.
Medicol Associotion 212, 534538.
This page intentionally left blank
43
Chapter Two
Diagnostic Procedures
· otoscopic appearance of the external ear canal and tympanum
· Cytologic characteristics of normal and abnormal ears
· Neurologic examination of the ear
· Radiographic features of the normal and abnormal ear
· Imaging the middle and inner ears
· Electrophysiologic procedures
· Other investigatory procedures
· References
44
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
OTOSCOPIC APPEARANCE OF THE EXTErNAL EAr
CANal ANd TYMPanUM
KEY POINtS
potentiated sulphonamides are administered at the
· Do not examine the ear in isolation. Obtain a
same time.
history and examine the animal first.
· Ear canals may require cleaning before a proper
NORMAL APPEaRaNCE Of THe EXTERNAL
examination is possible.
EaR CANAL AND TYMPANUM
· Always examine both ears, even if a unilateral
T'he normal external ear canal is smooth, pale in color,
problem is suspected.
and contains minimal discharge (60, 6l). A small
· Adequate restraint is essential. Use a sedative or
amount of pale yellow or brown cerumen (62, 63)
neuroleptanalgesia if necessary.
may be seen in some cases and this is normal3.
· Cats require general anesthesia before they are
Occasionally, there may be a hair shaft in the
subjected to otoscopic examination.
horizontal canal (64, 65). In some breeds, such as
· Remember that the presence of hair in the external
Cocker Spaniels, Miniature and Giant Schnauzers,
ear canal is normal in some dogs.
Airedales, and other terriers, for example, there are
· Do not expect to visualize Otodectes cynotis unfail-
hair follicles the whole length of the external ear
ingly. Use a microscope as well as an otoscope.
canall,3. The diameter of the vertical portion of the
external canal varies from breed to breed but at its
SEDATION FOR OTOSCOPY AND AURAL
base, where it apposes the horizontal portion, it is
EXAMINATION
5-10 mm (0.2-0.4 in) in diameter2. The horizontal
In order properly to examine the entire length of the
 canal is approximately 2 cm (0.8 in) in length2.
ear canal, adequate restraint is necessary as the
 T'he normal tympanum is thin, pale gray in color
s        
(described as rice paper-like), and translucent (66). It
a line as possible. This is achieved by gently grasping
is visible via otoscopy in about 75% of normal ears4.
the pinna and pulling it, and the attached auricular
Cerumen, debris, or hair prevents a clear view of the
cartilage, up and away from the sagittal plane.
 tympanum in the other ears4. T'he shape of the tym-
Otoscopic cannulae are hard, often cold, and have
panum is elliptical, mean 15 × 10 mm (0.6 x 0.4 in),
sharp ends; it hurts when a cannula is thrust into an
with the short axis nearly vertical?. The initial
inflamed ear canal. In small dogs and cats, and animals
 otoscopic view is restricted to the posterior quadrant
with painful or tender ear canals, this process is resented
 of the pars tensa and the pars flaccida5, 6. Manipulation
and the clinician will require chemical restraint or
general anesthesia. McKeever and Richardson
minutes sedation, sufficient to allow thorough examin-
ation and cleaning of both ears:
60
● Ketamine (1.36-2.2 mg/kg)
●Midazolam (0.023 mg/kg)
●Acepromazine (0.023 mg/kg)
● All mixed in the same syringe and injected slowly
intravenously.
One alternative would be xylazine injection
(1-2 mg/10 kg i/v), which should provide about 20
minutes reasonable sedation. Another alternative is
detomidine (20-40 mcg/kg i/v), which will produce
moderate sedation and has the great advantage that it
can be reversed by intramuscular injection of its
antagonist atipamezole. However, there are two
disadvantages with this regime: it is very expensive
(mitigated by giving buprenorphine at the same time),
and there is a risk of inducing a cardiac arrhythmia if
60 The upper portion of the feline external ear canal.
DIAGNOSTIC PROCEDURES
45
61
62
6l A normal horizontal external ear canal of a dog. There is
62 Patchy brown cerumen adhering to the walls of a normal
an even, pale color with a smooth contour. A few fine hairs
external ear canal
may be seen
63
64
63
Yellowish cerumen near the tympanum.
64 Tufts of hair emerging from the horizontal ear canal.
65
66
65
Hair and adhering cerumen emerging from the
66
A normal, translucent tympanic membrane, in this
horizontal ear canal.
instance partially hidden by hair and cerumen.
46
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
of both the external ear canal and the otoscope will
 be considered in the differential diagnosis.
usually bring the majority of the manubrium (67) and
Inflammation also results in increased secretion
 2u 'g'smsia oui esui sied su jo uonod aoarel au
from the glands within the epithelial lining of the
external aspect of the tympanum, as viewed with an
otoscope, is divided into two unequal parts by the
 constitution7,8. Continued inflammation results in
manubrium of the malleus. This is attached along the
maceration of the stratum corneum, loss of barrier
medial aspect of the tympanum and exerts tension
function,and
the
 outward
movement
of
onto it, resulting in a concave shape to the intact
transepidermal fluid. Discharge accumulates within
membrane.
the external ear canal (7l-73) and microbial
proliferation occurs. T'he color of the dlischarge may
ABNORMAL APPEARANCE OF THE
vary from light yellow to dark brown and it may be
EXTERNAL EAR CANAL
aqueous, thin, or pus-like in nature. Animals with
Inflammation results in edema, erythema, and warmth
severe or generalized defects in keratinization may
(68). Given that the glandular tissues of the external
exhibit a greasy yellow discharge that has a purulent
appearance but which may be sterile and non-
swelling will result in a reduction in the diameter of the
inflammatory in nature. Medications may result in a
lumen. In many cases the concave aspect of the pinna
thin, shiny covering over the mural epithelium
will also be affected (69). In most cases the inflam-
mation affects the entire ear canal but in some instances
it will be localized to either the horizontal or, more
usually, the vertical canal. Bilateral inflammation
confined to the concave aspect of the pinna and the
The color and nature of the otic discharge may give
vertical canal, particularly if there is little discharge, is
some clues to the microbial population within the
very suggestive of atopy (70). Indeed, erythema of the
extermal ear canal, but prescribing treatment solely
entire canal in the absence of significant discharge or
on the basis of the nature of this discharge is
other pathology is highly suggestive of allergy. Atopy,
inadvisable.
dietary intolerance, and neomycin sensitivity should all
67
68
67 The tympanic membrane with the manubrium of the
malleus clearly visible.
and some degree of swelling resulting in loss of luminal cross-
section.
DIAGNOSTIC PROCEDURES
47
69
70
69External ear canal of an atopic dog. There is erythema,
70  Erythema, hyperplasia, moderate fissure formation, and a
hyperplasia, and lichenification.
tendency to ulcerate and bleed very easily even after otoscopy
 are commonly seen in ear canals of atopic dogs.
71
72
 71-73 Erythema, hyperplasia, loss of luminal cross-section,
73
and partial obstruction of the lumen by cerumen.
48
EAR DISEASES OF tHE DOG AND CAT
Ihe presence of erosions and ulcers in the external
ear canal should be noted (74). Frank ulceration is
Otoscopic examination of the tympanum in dogs
-au-ua ym peiosse Aensn si pue uouon
with otitis extema is difficult.
ative bacterial infection. Rare causes of otic ulceration
are autoimmune diseases and otic neoplasms. The
finding of ulcers within the external ear canal man-
The tympanum should be examined for color,
dates samples for both cytologic evaluation and bac-
texture, and integrity; it is usually dark gray or brown in
terial culture and sensitivity testing.
cases of otitis external. In contrast to normal dogs it is
 Otoscopic examination may reveal the presence of
only possible adequately to visualize the tympanum in
ectoparasites, such as Otodetes cynotis or Otobius
28% of ears affected with otitis externa*. If tears or holes
megnini. Otodectic mites are often accompanied by
in the tympanum (78, 79) indicate that otitis media is
the presence of a crumbly brown discharge (75). Not
present (although an intact tympanum does not rule out
all infestations are inflammatory. Failure to detect
otitis media), then failure adequately to visualize the
otodectic mites during otoscopic examination does
 tympanum, let alone a tear, suggests that diagnosis of
not preclude infestation, and microscopic examination
otitis media, exclusively via otoscopy, is not reliable.
of cytologic samples is necessary.
Bulging of the tympanum may indicate an accumulation
Epidermal hyperplasia, nodules, tumors, polyps,
of exudate within the middle ear, whereas retraction
and foreign bodies within the external ear canal are
(and a concave appearance) suggests a partially filled
easily visualized during otoscopy (76), although
 middle ear with obstruction of the auditory tube5.
cleaning of the external ear canal may be necessary.
Tympanic defects may heal in the presence of
This is particularly the case for cats where the whole
 infection in the middle ear. T'hus, diagnosing otitis
canal may fill with purulent discharge if an otic tumor
 media on the sole basis of a ruptured tympanum is
or polyp is present (77).
unreliable.
74
75
74  Hemorrhagic foci associated with focal ulceration in a case
75   Crumbly, dry blackish brown cerumen associated with
of gram-negative bacterial infection.
Otodectes cynotis infestation.
DIAGNOSTIC PROCEDUReS
49
76
77
76 Grass awn, cerumen, and associated erythema in the
77  Polyp in the external ear canal of a cat.
external ear canal of a dog.
8L
79
78
Acute tear in the tympanic membrane of a dog
79
Chronic otitis media and otitis externa have resulted in a
associated with grass awn penetration.
thickened, opaque, ruptured tympanic membrane.
50
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
CYTOLOGIC ChArACTErISTICS OF NOrMAL AND
AbNORMAL EARS
KEY POINtS
· Cytologic samples should be taken before ear
Cytologic examination of otic discharges should
cleaning is undertaken.
become part of the routine work up in all but the
· Both external ear canals should be sampled,
most obvious cases of otitis externa, such as those
preferably from the horizontal canal.
caused by foreign bodies.
· There is no reliable correlation between the
physical nature of the discharge and a particular
microbe.
· Examination of unstained, oil-mixed cerumen is a
reliable method of determining infestation with
therapeutically useful information2-5. In many cases,
Otodectes cynotis.
information from cytologic examination of cerumen is
· Information on the organisms within the canal and
more accurate than that from samples submitted for
the type and nature of the inflammatory response
microbiologic culture and sensitivity testing ( Table 4).
 may be obtained from microscopic examination of
Furthermore, the clinician can assess the significance of
stained smears.
any microorganisms in the light of other ceruminal
· Modified Wright's stains such as Diff-Quik are ideal
characteristics, such as the presence of nucleated
stains for in-house use.
squames, proteinaceous debris, and inflammatory cells.
This is particularly exemplified in the case illustrated
INTRODUCTION
(82) of a Cocker Spaniel with chronic, bilateral otitis
Otodectic otitis (80) is often associated with
a
associated with a thick, greasy exudate. Gross
crumbly, rather dryish discharge (81), similar to coffee
examination of the discharge (83, 84) might suggest 
grounds'. However, there is no clear-cut relationship
that a malassezial, or even a gram-negative, infection
between the gross characteristics of any otic discharge
was responsible but cytologic examination (85) does
and the species of microorganism with which it is
not support this. Although there are increased numbers
associated, e.g. staphylococcal, gram-negative, or
of squames and microbes visible, the lack of any
malassezial2,3
inflammatory cells suggests a ceruminous otitis externa,
Cytologic examination of otic exudate is a rapid, in-
probably associated with a more generalized defect in
house test which provides diagnostically
and
keratinization, rather than infection.
Table 4: Sensitivity and specificity of cytologic examination versus culture and sensitivity of selected Classes of microbes
recovered from the external ear canals of dogs?.
Class of microbe
Cytology
 Culture and sensitivity
 Gramm-positive cocci
 Sensitivity
84%
59%
 Specifity
100%
100%
 Gram-negative rods
 Sensitivity
100%
%69
 Specifity
100%
100%
Yeast
 Sensitivity
100%
50%
Specificity
100%
100%
DIAGNOSTIC PROCEDURES
51
80
81
81
The dry crumbly nature of the cerumen can be
 appreciated when it is rolled onto a glass slide.
80Typical appearance of cerumen associated with Otodectes
cynotis - dark, dry and crumbly. As in this case, it is not always
associated with inflammation in the ear canal.
82
83
82
8
 Gross appearance of an unstained cytologic sample -
externa.
thick and white.
84
85
84  Gross appearance of a Diff-Quik-stained sample - thick
85 High-power photomicrograph from the Cocker Spaniel
and blue, suggestive of a high cell content.
 in 82. Note the yeast and cocci on and around the squames,
and the absence of inflammatory cells.
52
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
SAMPLES AND STAINS
The most useful sample for otic cytology is a swab
Cytologic examination of gram-stained smears of
taken from the ear canal which is then rolled onto a
cerumen has proved to be more sensitive in
clean glass slide. If feasible, samples should be taken
detecting microorganisms within the extemal canal
from the horizontal portion of the external ear canal
than culture23.47.
of both ears4, 5. In large dogs it is usually possible to
collect a shielded sample using, for example, an
alcohol-sprayed otoscope cone. In small dogs and cats
collecting a shielded sample is difficult and vertical
canal samples will have to suffice5. If otitis media is
to allowing visualization of the microbial populations
suspected, a shielded sample should be taken from the
of the external ear canal, cytology also allows the
middle ear in addition to that from the external ear
 physical nature of the cerumen to be assessed, in terms
canal.
of keratinaceous debris and the lipid content of the
Most clinicians advocate using modified Wright's
cerumen?8.
stains such as Diff-Quik1,4. Alcohol-based stains are
 Stained samples should be air-dried and examined
more useful than aqueous preparations (e.g. new
for evenness of stain and for depth of stain, which is
methylene blue) because of the lipid nature of the otic
usually deeper in intensity as the cell count increases. A
dlischarge4. Griffnl advocated heat fixing of obviously
coverslip should be applied prior to microscopic
waxy preparations in order to prevent solvent-assoc-
examination?. Initial low-power examination is followed
iated leaching of lipid. Since all cerumen contains lipid
by high power examination, and this is usually sufficient
it would seem appropriate to heat fix all samples, but
for accurate classification of any microorganisms and
opinion is divided on this issue4-6. Subtle information
identification of any cells present5. 6.
may be lost if heat fixing is not performed, but
generally it is not necessary unless samples are to be
GROSS EXAMINATION OF CYTOLOGIC
kept for future examination. Commercial laboratories
PREPARATIONS
usually perform a Gram's stain because although more
Gross examination of fresh and stained smears reflects
time consuming, it does allow assessment of the
 the lipid and cellular content of cerumen. Normal
classification of organisms by both morphology
cerumen has a high lipid content and a low
(coccus, rod, diphtheroid) and Gram's stain status.
concentration of intact cells, usually squames.
Generally, Gram staining is too cumbersome and time
Unstained preparations are all but invisible in direct
consuming for practitioners to consider it as a rapid,
light (86) reflecting the low cell content of cerumen.
in-house stain6.
Increasing cell content, particularly if it is
Knowledge of morphology and Gram's stain status
inflammatory in nature, is reflected in the increased
allows a recommendation for treatmentl, 4. In addition
 opacity of the cerumen.
86
87
86 Unstained smears from normal ear canals are all but
87 Photomicrograph of a cytologic sample from a norma
invisible.
ear: Note the low cell content in the cerumen.
DIAGnOStic PrOCedUreS
53
NORMAL CYTOLOGIC CHARACTERISTICS
external ear canal the rate of cellular turnover increases
Cerumen does not take up stain because of its high
and nucleated squames may be seen in the cerumen
lipid content (87), although ghost outlines of lipid
(90). Low numbers of Malassezia pachydermatis and
droplets may be seen occasionally (88). Low numbers
staphylococci may be identified adhering to shed
of anucleate, epithelial cells may be detected, although 
 squames (91, 92). Leucocytes are usually absent from
in normal ears they are not excessive (89). When
normal cerumen4
there is inflammation of the epithelial lining of the
88
89
88  Outlines of lipid are visible, even after fixing and staining
06
with Diff-Quik
89 Photomicrograph of a cytologic sample from a normal
ear, with a few squames apparent.
90 Photomicrograph demonstrating increased numbers of
squames, some of which are nucleated.
91
92
 9l Photomicrograph demonstrating a few anucleate
92 Photomicrograph demonstrating a few anucleate
squames with a few staphylococci apparent.
squames with low numbers of yeast apparent.
54
EAR DISEASES OF THe DOG AND CAT
ABNORMAL CYTOLOGIC CHARACTERISTICS
Abnormal cytologic samples from ear canals
Cerumen
The lipid content of cerumen from inflamed external
may reflect aberrations in lipid content, squame
characteristics, and the inflammatory cell
ear canals is lower and the cell count is usually higher
than that in normal ear canals&. T'his is reflected in the
population, and in changes in the microflora.
 gross appearance of the stained smear, which appears
bluer in a sample from an otitic ear (93) than in that
from a normal ear (94).
external ear canal should be flushed before treatment
Keratinocytes
is initiated'.
In acute cases of otitis externa, or cases of very short
duration, there will be very little change in the
Neoplastic cells
epithelial shedding of squames. In chronic cases, such
Intraluminal neoplasms may shed cells into the
as those associated with defects in keratinization or
 cerumen but it is unusual to find diagnostically useful
atopy, the epithelial lining of the external ear canal
material
in
this
 discharge?.
Cells from
reacts to the inflammation and the hyperplasia may
adenocarcinomas tend to exfoliate in sheets or
result in the appearance of both anucleate and
 clusters, whereas squamous cel carcinomas shed large,
nucleated squames and debris (95).
densely-staining individual cells with prominent
Autoimmune disorders, in particular pemphigus
nucleolis.
foliaceus, may result in acantholysis. Single, nucleated,
well-defined acanthocytes may be shed from erosions
Bacteria
in the ear canal, often surrounded by adherent
The normal microbial population of the ear canal is
neutrophils (96), i.e. a positive Tzank test.
dominated by staphylococci. In the early stages of otic
inflammation the numbers of staphylococci increase,
Inflammatory cells
particularly the numbers of Staphylococcus intermedius
In samples taken from dogs and cats with acute otitis
(99).
externa there may be little change in the cellular
Care should be taken when pronouncing that
population, but in most cases there will be
staphylococci are present in cerumen or on the
neutrophils and proteinaceous debris (97). More
squames, as cocci may be confused with:
chronic otitis results in the appearance of 
· Debris in poorly-maintained Diff-Quik (filter the
macrophages as well as neutrophils within the
stain regularly).
exudate. In cases of bacterial otitis the increasing
· Or with pigment granules within the squames
concentration of toxins may result in the appearance
(melanin granules are usually brown in color rather
of toxic neutrophils (98) and indicate that the
than the blue-black color of staphylococci).
93
93, 94 Gross cytologic samples from an otitic and a normal ear canal.The otitic ear (93) contains a higher cell content and
appears much bluer, when stained, than the smear from the normal ear (94)
DIAGNOSTIC PROCEDURES
55
95
%
 95Photomicrograph from an acute case of otitis externa.
96Photomicrograph of a stained smear from a pustule in a
There are anucleate and nucleated squames present.
case of pemphigus foliaceus. Compare the 'clean' neutrophils
and rounded-up, nucleated squames in this Tzank test-positive
smear with the cells and neutrophils in 97 and 98.
97
28
 97 Photomicrograph of a small group of squames with 
98 Photomicrograph illustrating squames, proteinaceous 
surrounding neutrophils.
debris, and dark, pyknotic neutrophils.
99Photomicrograph of a dense group of cells with large
numbers of staphylococci apparent.
56
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
Occasionally the otic flora remains staphylococcal
M. pachydermatis and M. sympodialisll. The presence
in nature but most commonly it becomes dominated
of yeast (l0l) must, therefore, be interpreted with
by gram-negative bacilli, in particular Escherichia coli,
caution. Evidence of increased numbers of yeast
 Proteus spp., and Pseudomonas spp. These changes in
(arbitrarily more than 5 to 10 per high-power field
bacterial shape (i.e. coccoid to rod) are easily
[102]1,4,5) and an associated inflammatory reaction
detected by microscopic examination of cytologic
(l03) should be sought before disease status is
decided. Malassezial yeast are flask or peanut-shaped
as either staphylococci or streptococci on the basis
whereas candidial yeast are round in appearance,
of clumping or chain formation, respectively, since
although this distinction is not easily made.
this is not usually observed4. With experience,
The importance of cytologic evaluation was
clinicians may be able to detect that staphylococci
exemplified in two studies which reported that
are larger than streptococci4.
demonstration of malassezial infection by cultural
Generally, even in first opinion cases, the
methods achieved a sensitivity of 82% and 50%
observation of bacilli should prompt sampling for
bacterial culture and sensitivity testing4. T'his is
 malassezial culture is expensive and time consuming,
particularly important if Gram's staining is not
 resulting in unnecessary cost and delay in treatment
performed, since clinicians cannot differentiate
compared to cytologic assessment?.
Pseudomonas spp. from Clostridium spp. or Bacillus
spp.4. Unless a recurrent case is involved it is not
Ectoparasites
usually necessary to submit samples from otitis
 It is often easy to visualize Otodectes cymotis within the
externa associated with cocci for bacterial culture and
external ear canal simply by using an otoscope.
sensitivity testing. Indeed, in one study7 testing
However, since very low numbers of mites have been
achieved a sensitivity of 59% for gram-positive cocci
 associated with otitis external2 it is not surprising that
and 69% for gram-negative rods, compared with
they will be missed in some cases, particularly if there
100% sensitivity with cytologic examination (Table 4).
is an accumulation of debris or discharge within the
canal. Therefore, microscopic examination of
Yeast
cytologic preparations is indicated if otodectic mange
Malassezia pachydermatis is a member of the normal
 is suspected. Cerumen is deposited on a glass slide and
canine otic microfloral0, although it has the potential 
mixed with mineral oil p
prior to microscopic
for opportunistic pathogenicity. At least two species of 
 examination2. Otodectic mites have a characteristic
malassezial yeast can be isolated from feline ear canals,
appearance (104, 105).
100
I00 Photomicrograph illustrating squames and vast numbers of bacilli.
DIAGNOSTIC PROCEDURES
57
101
IPhotomicrograph ilustrating yeast.
101
102
103
102
 Photomicrograph illustrating yeast in sufficient numbers 
01
 Photomicrograph illustrating yeast and inflammatory
to be associated with disease.
cells.
104
105
I04 Photomicrograph of an adult otodectic mite.
105
5 Photomicrograph of an ovum recovered from the
cerumen of an ear infected with Otodectes cynotis.
58
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
NEUROLOGIC EXAMINATION OF THE EAr
KEY POINTS
106
· The neurologic examination of the ear is
complicated by the multiplicity of sensory and
motor innervation.
· Meaningful assessment of the sense of hearing is
extremely difficult without the use of complex
equipment.
SENSORY AND MOTOR FUNCTION OF THE
PINNA AND THE EXTERNAL EAR CANAL
Sensory function
The sensory innervation of the external ear canal is
extremely complex and involves multiple nerves.
Evaluation of the sensory innervation of the pinna and
external ear canal is dependent on a knowledge of the
extensive overlap in sensory field that exists between
various cutaneous nerves as well as the role these
cutaneous afferents play in eliciting the pinna reflex
(106-111).
107
T'he convex surface of the pinna is innervated by:
· Branches of the second cervical nerve (107):
- The dorsal cutaneous branch of the second
cervical nerve;
 The great auricular nerve (a branch of the
ventral cutaneous branch of C2).
· Branches of the trigeminal nerves (l06):
The third cervical nerve;
 T'he mandibular branch of the trigeminal nerve
(111).
T'he concave surface of the pinna is innervated by:
· Branches of the facial nerve:
- Middle internal auricular branch of the facial nerve
(108);
- Lateral internal auricular branch of the facial
nerve;
106,107
Lateral and dorsal views of a German Shepherd
 Caudal internal auricular branch of the facial nerve
Dog marked up to illustrate the principal areas of innervation
(109).
of the convex aspect of the pinna. Note that the central
· T'he second cervical nerve'.
portion is innervated by branches of the cervical nerve
Overlap zones occur at the free edges. I06 Mandibular
T'he horizontal canal is innervated by:
branch of the trigeminal nerve. Io7 Greater auricular nerve
·A branch of the facial nerve (lateral internal
(caudal part of the pinna) and greater occipital nerve (both
auricular branch)2.
from the second cervical nerve) innervating the rostral part
of the pinna.
T'he proximal part of the external acoustic meatus
and the tympanum is innervated by:
· The auriculotemporal nerve (from the mandibular
branch of the trigeminal nerve)3.
DIAGNOSTIC PROCEDURES
59
108
109
110
I08-III  Areas of the concave aspect of the pinna innervated: Io8 by the caudal, Io9 by the middle, Il0 by the lateral
internal auricular branches of the facial nerve, IlI by the mandibular branch of the trigeminal nerve. Note that the central
portion is innervated by other branches of the facial nerve. Overlap zones occur at the free edges.
60  EAR DISEASES OF THe DOG AND CAT
Motor function
locked with the stimulus. T'he test is called brainstem
The facial nerve provides motor innervation for all of
auditory evoked responses (BAER) or potentials
the muscles of the external ear? and represents the
(BAEP). BAER not only detects auditory deficits but
efferent limb of the pinnal reflex.
it may also indicate the location of the lesion+ (see
A branch of the mandibular branch of the
Electrophysiologic procedures).
trigeminal nerve innervates the tensor tympani
muscle. It is this muscle which is responsible for
Assessing the sense of balance
maintaining the tension of the tympanic membrane as
Evaluation of the vestibular division of the
it vibrates in response to sound waves.
vestibulocochlear nerve is based on a number of tests
T'he stapedial branch of the facial nerve innervates
such as examination of the posture, gait, and head
the stapedius muscle, which is responsible for
 position, and precise observation of the position and
 reducing movement of the stapes ossicle3.
movements of the eyes (physiologic nystagmus) in
relation to the position of the head. The animal
Assessing the sensory and motor innervation
should be left to ambulate freely in the examination
of the pinna and the external ear canal
room during initial discussion with the owner; then it
The pinnal reflex
should be walked and trotted in straight lines on a
Gentle pinpoint stimulation of the convex or concave 
lead. The position of the head should be observed
surface of the pinna with a blunt instrument (such as
 carefully at rest and in motion. Physiologic nystagmus
an artery forceps) elicits a twitch of the pinna - a test
 should be elicited by gentle oscillation of the head in
 of sensory innervation. Stimulation of the central
 the horizontal plane in both directions, and the
portion of the pinna on the convex surface tests the
e presence of positional strabismus should be evaluated
2nd cervical nerve reflex while stimulation on the
 during dorsal extension or ventral flexion of the head
concave surface tests the facial nerve. Attempting to
(compare with Table 15 [Comparative neurologic
interpret this reflex by stimulating the cranial or the
signs of vestibular disease] in Chapter 7: Neurologic
caudal margin of the pinna is inadvisable because of 
 signs related to inner ear disease ). A complete neuro-
the overlap of different cutaneous nerves'.
logic examination, including evaluation of proprio-
T'he motor function of the ear is evaluated by the
 ception and cranial and spinal segmental reflexes,
pinnal reflex. It can also be evaluated by the Preyer's :
 should be performed in order to establish the
reflex which is manifested by a twitch of both pinnae  presence of vestibular disease and to localize it to
in response to any auditory stimuli. However, care 
 either side, and to differentiate peripheral versus
must be taken to interpret the absence of reflex due
 central vestibular syndrome (compare with Chapter 7:
 to bilateral deafness as a bilateral paralysis of the facial
 Neurologic signs related to inner ear disease).
nerve.
NB: The pinnal scratch reflex is a pathologic sign
which must not be confused with the pinnal reflex.
Rubbing the tip of the pinna between finger and
thumb elicits a vigorous scratch reflex in the ipsilateral
hindlimb, particularly in dogs with scabies or
pediculosis. T'his reflex is not pathognomonic but it is
highly reliable.
 Assessing the sense of hearing 
Evaluation of the sense of hearing during a physical
to sound and it is therefore subject to misinterpre-
tation. Crude assessment involves startling the animal
with a loud noise such as a clap or a whistle4. T'he only
objective means of evaluating the hearing ability in
animals is based on electrophysiologic assessment of
electric potentials triggered along the auditory
pathway by an audible stimulus such as a click. T'he
equipment used consists of a signal-averaging com-
puter recording the response of the brainstem time,
DIAGnOStic ProCEdUreS
61
RADIOGRAPHIC FEATURES OF THE NORMAL AND AbNORMAL EAR
KEY POINtS
ear, is complex and subject both to breed and indi-
· Careful positioning is the key to radiographic
interpretation of the tympanic bullae.
quently, a thorough knowledge of the spatial rela-
· T'he most useful views are the dorsoventral,
tionships between the skull and the ear is essential if
rostrocaudal (open mouth), and lateral oblique
the radiographs are to be interpreted correctly3. How-
views.
ever, pathologic changes to the region are unlikely to
· Given the individual variation between animals,
be symmetrical. T'hus, provided a good quality, sym-
comparison of one side with the other is often the
metrical radiographic image is obtained, useful infor-
only way of making a diagnosis. Therefore, perfect
mation may be acquired by comparing one side with
positioning is essential.
radiographic changes seen with external and middle
INTRODUCTION
ear disease.
Radiographic examination is a useful tool in the
investigation of ear disease in both the dog and the
cat. Principally, it is utilized for the diagnosis of disease
affecting the middle ear, although there are some
The key to successful radiological diagnosis of
indications for radiographic examination of the
 ear disease is the positioning of the animal for
external ear canal.
radiography3.
The radiological anatomy of the petrous temporal
bones, and the associated components of the middle
'l's's'sea alppiu pue (eualxa aut u (sojouned esiuo 4rw patelose sasueys sude.aoipe. aut yo Auewuns s elgel
Condition
Increased 
Sclerosis and
Lysis of
Sclerosis,
Calcification
soft tissue
thidkening
the bulla.
thickening,
of the external
opacity
of the bulia.
wall
or lysis of
ear canals
wall*
the petrous
temporal bone
Otitis externa 
++
Otitis media 
++
+1-
Otitis media
associated
with
 osteomyelitis
 Neoplasia of
the middle or
external ear
+1-
+++
 Inflammatory
polyp
++
* Bilateral sclerosis and thickening of the bulla wall is normal in elderly cats
62
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
NORMAL RADIOGRAPHIC FEATURES
crisply outlined bone structures with a smooth
NB:
external border (114, 115)7. Air shadow should be
· Dolichocephalic (or oligocephalic) heads are long
visible in the external ear canal7. Predominantly lytic
and narrow, e.g. as in the Rough Collie or Saluki.
changes on the rostroventral wall of the bulla are
· Mesaticephalic heads are more rounded, e.g. as in
usually associated with chronic inflammation7. Lytic
the Doberman Pinscher or Labrador Retriever.
changes within the petrous temporal bone may reflect
● Brachycephalic heads are short and wide, e.g. as in
either inflammation or neoplasia7, 8.
the English Bulldog and the Pekingese.
Rostrocaudal (open mouth) view (116, 117)
Any one of several radiographic views will provide
Advantages. Good visualization of both tympanic
information on the middle ear but no one view can
bullae. Good view for diagnosing otitis media4, 9.
provide a complete picture. T'herefore, at least two dif-
Disadvantages. General anesthesia is necessary and
ferent radiograph views must be included in any radi-
the endotracheal tube must be removed. Can be
Ographic investigation. T'he three most frequently used
 difficult to obtain perfect pictures without fine-tuning,
radliographic views are the lateral oblique, the dorsoven
especially with brachycephalic breeds.
tral, and the rostrocaudal (open mouth) views. Lateral
Positioning. The animal must be in dorsal
and ventrodorsal views may occasionally be required.
recumbency. The head is positioned with the sagittal
 plane and hard palate vertical to the film. The tongue
Lateral oblique view (112, 113)
must be brought as far forward as possible and tied to
Advantages. Good visualization of the tympanic bulla
 the mandible with tape?. T'he interpupillary line must be
and petrous temporal bone.
parallel to the film. In dolichocephalic breeds the
Disadvantages. General anesthesia is necessary.
primary beam is centered through the open mouth
Only one bulla can be visualized at a time. Not easily
 parallel to the hard palate. In mesaticephalic breeds it
repeatable, even in the same animal, so side-to-side
 may be necessary to angle the hard palate slightly away
comparison is difficult6.
from the vertical (perhaps 10° or so+). In brachycephalic
Positioning. The animal is placed in lateral
 breeds the hard palate may need to be angled up to 209
recumbency with the head parallel to the film and the
 away from the vertical in order to avoid superimposing
bulla of interest nearest the to film. T'he jaw should
 the bullae on the wings of the atlass. Alternatively, the
be closed. Either the head is rotated around this long
 center of the beam can be angled rostrocaudally, at up
axis until the sagittal plane lies at about 20° to the
 to 30° angling towards the hard palate. T'he beam can
horizontal, the bulla to be radiographed remaining
be centered on the base of the tonguel0.
ventral, or the nose is elevated some 15-20% to
Interpretation. The bullae appear as thin-walled,
achieve separation of the bullae on the plate6. T'he
symmetrical bone opacities at the base of the skull
beam should be centered to the base of the ear to
(118)7. Overlying soft tissues may produce the
project the bulla clear of other structures.
appearance of middle ear pathology. This must be
Interpretation. The bullae appear as thin-walled,
interpreted with care.
112
113
I12, I13 Lateral oblique radiographs of the head of a dog (l12) and a cat (li3) demonstrating optimal positioning for
Misualizing the tympanic bullae, which are clearly visible
DIAGNOSTIC PROCEDURES
63
115
I14, I15 Close ups of the normal tympanic bullae of a dog (Il4) and a cat (ll5) in the lateral oblique view.
116, 117 Rostrocaudal (open mouth)
116
117
radiographs of the head of a dog (l16)
and a cat (I17) demonstrating how the
tympanic bullae are skylined.
Il8 Cose-up rostrocaudal (open
118
mouth) view of the tympanic bullae of a
cat. Near perfect positioning is important
for this view as one is looking for subtle
changes that may only be apparent by
comparing one side with the other
64
EAR DISEASES OF THe DOG AND CAT
Dorsoventral view (119, 120)
are superimposed if a true lateral position is achieved.
Advantages. Anesthesia may not be necessary, although
 Positioning. Place the animal in lateral recumbency
in most cases it will allow better positioning. In some
and adjust the head to true lateral with the sagittal plane
patients sedation may suffice. It is easier to achieve good
 parallel to the film and the interpupillary line vertical6.
bilateral symmetry with this view than with the ventro-
T'his may require foam padding to achieve a true lateral.
dorsal view, as the mandibles provide stability against
The calvarium, nasal pharynx, and larynx should be
lateral rotatione. Good view for diagnosing otitis media4.
included in the view. The beam should be centered
Disadvantages. Because the calvarium is further from
 between the ear and the eye.
the plate it is magnified and this can induce some arte-
Interpretation. The bullae appear as thin-walled,
factual distortion°. However, this is more than outweighed
crisply outlined bony structures with a smooth external
by the adlvantage of having the bullae close to the plate.
border (123, 124), but in a true lateral view they will
Positioning. T'he animal is placed in ventral recum-
be superimposed, making for difficult interpretationé.
bency, under general anesthesia or heavy sedation. Care
Air shadow and, if present, the thickened walls of the
must be taken to ensure that the animal is aligned
 horizontal ear canal may be visible6.
symmetrically with the interpupillary line parallel to the
film°. T'he hard palate must be parallel to the table and
Ventrodorsal view (125, 126)
the animal adjusted so that the base of the skull is as
 Advantages. Standard view; lots of reference material.
 close to the film as possible. This may require support 
 Good view for diagnosing otitis media4.
with radiolucent blocks of foam under the rostral
 Disadvantages. Requires general anesthesia. This
mandible or sandbags over the cervical spine, or both.  position is not suitable for brachycephalic breeds5. T'he
The beam should be centered at the intersection of two S
 sagittal crest tends to make the skull fall laterally, making
imaginary lines: a sagittal line, and a lateral line, at right
 exact positioning difficult6.
angles to the sagittal line, drawn through the estimated
Positioning. The animal is placed in dorsal
position of the tympanic membranes.
recumbency, under general anesthesia. Care must be
Interpretation. The bullae should exhibit bilateral
 taken to ensure that the animal is aligned symmetrically.
symmetry and appear as fine, crisp, distinct, linear bony
 T'he hard palate must be parallel to the table. T'his may
opacities7. Some distortion and masking may occur due
 require support under the rostral mandible or under the
to superimposition of the petrous temporal bones°. Air
cervical spine, or both. Intraoral tape, positioned
shadow should be visible in the external ear canals.
immediately caudal to the canine teeth and then tied to
the table, may help in positioning the mandible. The
Lateral view (121, 122)
beam should be centered at the intersection of two
Advantages. Standard view; lots of reference material.
imaginary lines: a sagittal line, and a lateral line, at right
Disadvantages. General anesthesia is necessary. Not
 angles to the sagittal line, drawn through the estimated
ideal for visualizing individual tympanic bullae as they
 position of the tympanic membranes.
119
120
119, 120 Dorsoventral
radiographs of the head 
of a dog (l19) and a cat
(120) Note the
appearance of the bullae
and the difficulty in
visualizing them using this
 position compared with
the lateral oblique and
rostrocaudal (open
mouth) views.
DIAGNOSTIC PROCEDURES
65
Interpretation. The superimposition of the
changes more difficult. The bulla of the cat contains
petrous temporal bones makes the bullae walls appear 
 an additional inner bony wall which appears in this
thicker, and this can make evaluation of subtle
view (126)6
121
122
121, 122
Lateral radiographs of the head of a dog (12l) and a cat (122).The bullae are visible but both left and right bullae are
superimposed, making interpretation difficult.
123
124
123, 124 Cose ups of the
25
26
tympanic bullae of a dog (123)
and a cat (124) demonstrating
the air shadow of the horizontal
ear canal.
125, 126 Ventrodorsal
radiographs of a dog (125) and a
cat {126). Note the appearance
of the bullae and the difficulty in
visualizing them using this position 
compared with the lateral oblique 
and rostrocaudal (open mouth)
vews.
66
EAR DISEASES OF tHE DOG AND CAT
VISUALIZING THE EXTERNAL EAR CANAL
medium may be diluted 50:50 with saline, prior to
AND ASSESSING THe TYMPaNIC MEMbRaNE
instilling it into the external ear canal1. Care must be
Radiography is not commonly employed as a means
taken to ensure that the contrast medium is distributed
of assessing pathologic changes in the external ear
evenly along the external ear canal and that none
canal. It may be possible to see air shadows (127,
contaminates the hair on the surrounding aspects of the
128) delineating the external ear canal in some of
head3, I1 Gentle massage of the ear canal will ensure an
the standard radiographic views of the
ear,
even distribution. Taking care to deliver all the contrast
particularly the ventrodorsal and rostrocaudal (open
 medium into the ear canal, and subsequently plugging
mouth) views. In addition, in cases of chronic otitis
the orifice with cotton wool, should prevent soiling of
externa there may be calcification of the cartilages of
 the area around the external ear3, 11.
the external canal (129-131). However, it is not
Ventrodorsal or, preferably, rostrocaudal (open
possible to assess the integrity of the tympanic
mouth) radiography will allow evaluation of the lumen
membrane or visualize the position of an obstructing
of the external ear canal and permit some deductions
luminal neoplasm without using contrast techniques.
on the state of the tympanic membrane (132)12. If
Otoscopic and plain radiographic examinations
contrast medium enters the middle ear (l33) it is
must be performed prior to contrast studies. Signifi-
usually visualized as an opacification of the inner wall
cant epidermal hyperplasia or neoplastic proliferation
of the bullal1, best seen on rostrocaudal (open mouth)
may occlude the lumen to such an extent that
views. Failure to detect contrast medium in the bulla
adequate distribution of contrast medium is impos-
should not be interpreted as indicating an intact
sible. In addition, the presence of an exudate or mass
tympanum.
within the bulla may prevent contrast medium from
entering the middle ear. False-negative interpretation
may occur if these changes are not identified prior to
contrast studies!1.
It is important to examine the ears otoscopically
A standard radiographic contrast medium is used,
preferably a non-ionic, water-soluble iodine-based
performed.
medium rather than an oily mediumll. T'he contrast
127
128
I27 Dorsoventral radiograph of a Cairn Terrier with a
128  Dorsoventral radiograph of a West Highland White
normal ear: The air shadow within the external ear canal
Terrier with chronic otitis externa. In this close up of the right
is visible (arrowed).
side of the skull the narrow ear canal is visible between the
thickened walls of the horizontal ear canal (arrowed).
DIAGNOSTIC PrOCEDURES
67
129
Dorsoventral
129
radiograph of an Airedale
Terrier showing early signs
of calcification of the 
external ear canal
cartilages (arrowed).
130, 13l Dorsoventral
30
3
 and rostrocaudal open 
mouth radiographs of a 
Cocker Spaniel with chronic
otitis externa and otitis
media. Note the extensive
calcification of the ear canal
cartilages (arrowheads) and 
the changes around the left
bulla (arrow).
Ventrodorsal 
133
radiographs demonstrating
tympanography In I32 the 
tympanum is intact and the
 concavity is apparent. In 
133 the tympanum has
been breached and 
 contrast fls the tympanic 
bulla.
68
EAR DISEASES OF tHE DOG AND CAT
DIAGNOSING OtitiS MedIA
Sclerosis and thickening of the wall of the tympanic
Although radiography has been shown to be less sen-
bulla. Unilateral sclerosis may reflect chronic
sitive than surgery? or computed tomography4 for the
inflammation or an inflammatory polyp (135,
diagnosis of otitis media, its importance should not
136). Bilateral sclerosis is not uncommon in elderly
 be underestimated. It remains an essential first step in
cats, in bilateral otitis media, in bilateral inflam-
the investigation of ear disease, particularly if surgery
matory polyps, and in craniomandibular osteo-
is contemplated. Radliography usually underestimates
arthropathy.
pathologic changes in the middle ear?, a consequence 
· Increased soft tissue density within the bulla
of the difficulty in interpreting radiographs where su-
(137-140). This may reflect chronic inflammation,
perimposition of surrounding tissues takes place and
cholesteatoma, or middle ear neoplasia.
of the minimal radiographic changes associated with
· Sclerosis and thickening of the petrous temporal
early to moderate middle ear pathology.
bone.
Radiographs of the normal tympanic bulla show
· Lysis of the wall of the tympanic bulla and petrous
that it has crisp clean lines with no evidence of soff
 temporal bone. This usually reflects inflammation,
fissue within the bony confines, although air shadow
 particularly if predominantly on the ventrocranial
of the external ear canal may be visible in lateral
 aspects of the bulla. Neoplasia must also be a
projections (134). The radiographic findings asso-
consideration, although it is much less common.
diated with otitis media ( Table 5, see page 61) include?:
134
135
136
134Lateral radiograph demonstrating a
normal tympanic bulla with air shadow of the
external ear canal arrowed.
I35Ten percent ventrodorsal view of a
young Himalayan cat with unilateral (left) otitis
media. The wall of the affected bulla is
thickened (arrow).
136 Rostrocaudal (open mouth) radiograph
of a young Hungarian Viszla with unilateral
(eft) otitis media. Note the increase in
 thickness in the bony wall of the affected
bulla (arrow).
DIAGNOSTIC PROCEDURES
69
I37Lateral oblique view of the head of a cat with
Lel
unilateral otitis media secondary to polyp formation.
Note the uniform increase in soft tissue density within
the bulla.
138
139
138, I39 Close ups of lateral oblique views of both bullae of the cat radiographed in I37. Note the clear difference in the
density within the bullae.
140
140
Lateral oblique views of the bullae of a Cocker Spaniel with unilateral otitis media. The difference in soft tissue density
within the bullae is apparent (arrows)
70
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
IMAGING The MIDDle AND INNER EARS
KEY POINTS
COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
· Computed tomography (CT) gives better resolu-
Computed tomography has a resolution somewhat
tion of bony lesions than magnetic resonance
less than conventional radiography and it takes much
imaging (MRI).
longer to perform, in the order of 20-30 minutes2,3.
● MRI gives better resolution of soft tissue lesions
However, by taking repeated, sequential views in the
than CT.
same plane, and then using computed processing, it 
·Neither CT nor MRI is likely to replace
is possible, digitally, to remove extraneous super-
plain radiography in the diagnosis of ex-
imposed structures, permitting visualization of the
ternal and middle ear disease in clinical practice.
middle and inner ear? (141, 142).
 Precise positioning and an absolute minimum of
INTRODUCTION
movement are prerequisites for CT3. Animals are
Radiographic examination of the middle ear cannot
placed in ventral recumbency and they must be under
always demonstrate changes consistent with otitis 
 general anesthesia to minimize movement?. In one
media, giving false-negative findings compared to  study, which compared CT with radiography in the
surgery in 25-30% of cases, 2. False-positive radio-  diagnosis of otitis media2, CT gave 11% false positives
graphic findings generally do not occur when com-  and 17% false negatives (compared to surgical
imize false-negative results, clinicians and imagers have  somewhat less specific than radiography'. Neither
investigated other techniques, in particular CT' and 
 radiography nor CT' was able to detect early changes
MRI.
of otitis media where there was no osseous change.
The authors of one study, which compared
radiography with CT' in the diagnosis of otitis media,
concluded that CT gave too little additional
information to justify the additional logistical and
financial costs incurred2.
141
142
I4I  CT scan of a cat with otitis media. There is an effusion
I42 CT scan of a dog with a soft tissue mass within the
within the left bulla (arrow).
horizontal ear canal. Note that the mass (a neoplasm) has
clearly breached the tympanic membrane on the right (arrow)
DIAGNOSTIC PROCEDURES
71
MaGNEtic rESONaNCe IMaGING
about five minutes). In addition, using a contrast
Magnetic resonance imaging uses a completely
agent (gadolinium-diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid)
different principle to radiography and CT4, and the
it was possible to visualize inflamed, swollen middle
images which result are best regarded as comple-
earmucosa
mentary to, rather than replacements for, CT. T'hus,
 In humans, comparative studies in malignant otitis
CT gives better definition of osseous changes than
(a particularly severe Pseudomonas spp. infection of the
MRI, whereas the latter gives better definition of soft
external ear canal) and the fine structure of the tem-
tissue lesions than CT6 (143).
poromandibular joint6,9 found that CT was superior
MRI has been used in the diagnosis of otitis media
for documenting subtle osseous changes whereas MRI
 in dogs, although only one case report exists to date?.
was superior in detecting sof tissue aberrations. Fur-
 One experimental study investigated the potential of
thermore, in a study comparing CT with MRI in de-
MRI to assess otitis media in chinchillas and cats?. T'he
 tecting osteoid sarcoma it was recommended that MR
authors reported superior results using T2-weighted
images should not be interpreted without reference
images (requiring a 20 minute scanning/measure-
 to plain radiographs and CT if serious errors in diag-
ment cycle) compared to T'l-weighted images (taking
nosis were to be avoidedl0.
143
I43MR images of a cat with left-sided otitis media (arrows)
Note that the image at the lower right position is much
clearer; this is the T2-weighted image.
72
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGIC PROCEDURES
KEY POINTS
cochlear nerve in the segment closest to the cochlea.
·Electrophysiologic testing is the only objective means
· Wave II originates from the extramedullary
 of testing the sense of hearing in veterinary species.
intracranial segment of cranial nerve VIIl, with
· Brainstem auditory evoked response records the
possibly some contribution of the ipsilateral
neurologic response to sound.
cochlear nucleus.
· Tympanometry measures the changes in com-
· Wave III is generated by the dorsal nucleus of the
pliance of the tympanic membrane.
trapezoid body.
· Wave IV originates from the rostral pons by
INTRODUCTION
structures of the lateral lemniscus.
 Deafness in a veterinary patient can be frustrating for
· Wave V comes from the caudal colliculus.
the clinician because subjective evaluation can be
 The close approximation of these latter generators
equivocal, particularly when the hearing loss is partial
 may explain the overlap between wave IV and wave
or unilateral. Even bilaterally deaf animals can respond
V2. Cochlear microphonics are observed just prior to
to visual or odoriferous cues, or even vibrations,
wave I of the BAER. They are the electrical respons-
unbeknown to the person conducting behavioral
es occurring in different parts of the cochlea and are
assessment of the auditory function. For this reason,
thought to arise from the cuticular surface of the hair
electrophysiologic testing is the only objective means
 cells. T'hey are best seen when the stimulus is a pure
of testing the sense of hearing in veterinary species.
 tone, and they are affected by the stimulus polarity3.
 Both the peripheral and part of the central auditory
 A number of non-pathologic factors influence the
components can be tested by means of electro-
shape of the potentials obtained. These include mainly
physiologic procedures, including tympanometry,
the position of the electrodes, the stimulus intensity and
acoustic reflex testing, and auditory evoked responses.
its presentation rate and initial phase (rarefaction versus
 T'hese tests are non-invasive and evaluate components
condensation), as well as the subject's body tem-
of the external ear canal, the middle and inner ear
 perature4. Body weight and cranium size do not affect
cavities, cranial nerve VIII, and selected areas of the
wave I but can affect the latency of wave V and the
brainstem and cortex. T'he complete sequence of these 
 inter-peak latency between waves I and V. It follows
procedures  will  allow  differentiation
between
 that variation in the external auditory canal, middle ear,
 conductive and sensorineural hearing loss. The great
and inner ear does not significantly contribute to the
advantage of electrodiagnostic procedures is that they
BAER variability5. BAER thresholds are mature by day
 do not require consciousness and they can therefore be
 20 in both the dog and cat°. Other than this, age
 performed even in uncooperative animalst.
related changes affecting the BAER are poorly
documented.
BRAINSTEM AUDITORY EVOKED RESPONSE
The amplitude of the waves, measured in V,
NB: The physiology of hearing is reviewed in Chapter
increases with the stimulus intensity and it is highly
8 (Neurologic signs related to inner ear disease).
variable. The latency of each wave decreases linearly
as the acoustic stimulus intensity increases, and
Theory and technique
decreases in rectal temperature cause a lengthening of
Theory
the waves' latency4. Inter-peak latencies are indicative
Acoustic stimulation of an ear with a short pulse
of conduction time within the brainstem between
(click) results in a series of electrical waveforms ema-
generator sites and they do not change with the
nating from structures in the auditory pathways. The
 stimulus intensity. T'hey can help to localize the site of
wave forms occurring within the first ten minutes after
deafness along the auditory pathways2, 7-10. Normal
the stimulus are identified as the brainstem auditory
values for latencies of the peaks and the threshold
evoked response (BAER) or brainstem auditory
response have been established for a population of
 evoked potential (BAEP), or as short (early) latency
healthy dogsl1.
auditory potential. This activity can be recorded reli-
Whilst the BAER test is non-invasive and painless,
ably, with the use of signal-averaging methods, from 
some animals are more difficult to restrain than others
electrodes attached to various sites on the head. Four 
 and chemical restraint may be indicated. However, se-
or five waves are readily recognized (144, 145):
dation does not affect any of the BAER parameters and
· Wave I reflects activity triggered in the vestibulo-
the lack of struggling allows a more precise measure-
DIAGNOSTIC PrOCEDURES
73
mentl1. Although most anesthetic agents do not affect
the best response is a ^click' with a broad-frequency
the characteristic of the BAER components, thiamylal
spectrum in the region of 2-3 kHz. The intensity of
sodium and methoxyflurane have been shown to alter
the click is most commonly calibrated in decibels (dB)
waveform12 and latencies13 respectively. Therefore, se-
and referred to as the normal hearing level (dB nHL),
dation is preferable to general anesthesia.
where O dB nHL is the human behavioral hearing
 threshold in a normal adult population14.
Technique
In animals suspected of suffering from conductive
To record the BAER, three small needle electrodes are
 hearing loss, evaluation of the hearing status can be
inserted subcutaneously on the animal's head (l46,
performed with bone-conducted signals. In these cases
147). A recording electrode, a reference, and a
the BAER is generated with a bone vibrator instead of
ground electrode are connected to an amplifying and
 headphones, in order to bypass the conductive hearing
signal-averaging recording system, ideally coupled
apparatus. However, this technique has limitations. For
with an artefact rejection device. Head phones or ear
instance, with bone-conducted BAER the latency of
inserts can be used to produce clicks at various rates
wave V is about 0.5 milliseconds longer at intensities
of delivery (clicks/second), intensities (dB), and fre-
similar to air-conducted BAER, and the maximum
quencies (Hz)2,4. The acoustic signal which results in 
acoustic output from a bone vibrator is less than that
145
Auditory
Left ear
radiations
8P 08
 Right ear
Click
8P 08_
5
10
rms
144[
 Diagram of BAER generators. (Adapted from Mayhew IG
145
Normal BAER in both ears; the wave forms from each
and Washboume JR (1990) A method of assessing auditory
ear are similar and both are clearly similar to the stylized
function in horses. British Veterinary Joural I46, 509-518, with
diagram in 144.
perrmission.)
146
147
心
DO
I46 BAER generating and recording equipment is complex 
I47Pacement of BAER electrodes on a Border Collie pup.
and bulky.
74
EAR DISEASES OF THe DOG AND CAT
of a click or a tonel5. In a study by Wolschrijn et al.16
externa with total ear canal ablation (T'ECA), with or
the mean threshold for bone-conducted stimulus was
without ventral or lateral bulla osteotomy (V/LBO).
found to vary between 50 and 60 dB whilst the air
 Krahwinkel et al.19 reported that although dogs with
conducted threshold in the same population of healthy
severe otitis externa already have greatly compromised
dogs was 0-10 dB6. Bone-conduction thresholds do
auditory function (as reflected by prolonged BAER
not just measure inner ear function; sound applied to
latencies and low amplitudes), T'ECA and V/LBO can
the skull is transmitted to the cochlea via bone but also
further decrease auditory function as assessed by BAER.
via the external auditory canal and the ossiclesl6.
Nevertheless, wave forms and inter-peak latencies of
Presbycusis
the BAER elicited by bone-conducted stimuli and air-
 In a group of aged cats, peripheral auditory dysfunction
conducted stimuli are similar, indicating that the
was evidenced by consistent elevation in the BAER
 signals have the same origin16.
thresholds to click stimuli. T'he BAER waveforms were
essentially normal, suggesting that the stimulus was
Pathologic findings
effectively transmitted to the appropriate BAER genera-
Reduced hearing/otitis externa and otitis media
tors. A decreasing trend in the BAER amplitude was
 In a group of dogs with clinically reduced hearing, no 
observed but was not found to be statisticallysignifcant?0.
changes in the wave latencies were observed. However,
the most striking feature was a decrement in the
Deafness
amplitudes of waves I and I17. Following simulation of
 Deafness due to ageing or to a congenital abnormality
damage to the external ear canal and tympanic mem-
of the cochlea and/or cranial nerve VIHI results in
brane associated with otitis externa, Steiss et al15
 total absence of recognizable recordings (isoelectric
reported that moderate changes, such as stenosis of the
tracing)17 (148, 149).
ear canal and single puncture of the tympanic membrane,
did not alter the BAER thresholds or latencies in a signi-
Ototoxicity
ficant manner, nor did more significant damage to the 
Cochlear nerve destruction and aminoglycoside
tympanic membrane. Other authors have reported that
intoxication have been reported to abolish all neural
severe otitis externa and/or otitis media rarely causes
 components of the BAER&, 17. In the case of neomycin
complete deafness, but often results in severe conductive
sulphate intoxication, waveform loss is reported to
hearing loss. This hearing loss can be improved measur-
        
ably by cleaning the affected ear canal, indicating the
 treatment and it is permanent?1.
profound effect of debris present in the external acoustic
meatusl8. However, if the ossicular chain is interrupted,
Brainstem lesions
 a more severe loss of 30-40 dB can be expected15.
T'he predominant effect of brainstem lesions on the
BAERs are also used to assess auditory function
BAER is an attenuation of the amplitudes of the com-
before and after surgical correction of chronic otitis
 ponents and only an occasional increase in their latency&.
148
149
Left ear
Right ear
80 dB
80 dB
100 dB 
100 dB
Right ear
80 dB
Right ear (left
ear masked)
100dB
Left ear.
100 dB
100 dB
ms
7
8
910
148 BAER trace of a dog with bilateral deafness
[49 BAER trace from a dog with unilateral (right ear)
deafness.
DIAGNOSTIC PROCEDURES
75
TYMPANOMeTry
some technical problems facing the operator (Dr J
Tympanometry is the study of changes in compliance
Steiss, personal communication):
of the tympanic membrane which occur as pressure
T'he angle between the vertical ear canal and the
within the external ear canal is changed22. Impedance
horizontal ear canal makes aligning the equipment
audiometry is based on the principle that the intensi-
difficult. It is also difficult to achieve a good seal
ty of a sound wave is dependent upon the size of the
between the cuff and the wall of the vertical canal.
cavity within which it is generated, and on the com-
pliance or stiffness of the containing walls. Tympa.
tympanic membrane. Again, the angle between the
nometry, using impedance audiometry, is a non-inva-
vertical and the horizontal canal makes this difficult
sive, objective, reliable method of assessing the in-
to achieve.
of impedance audiometry can also be used to gain
These logistical and technical problems make
other information; for example, to assess the presence
tympanometry primarily a research tool which is
or absence of effusion within the middle ear.
unlikely to be of value to practitioners.
pedance audiometry and the clinician must adapt those
ACOUSTIC (STAPEDIAL) REFLEX TEST AND
is to be practised.
ACOUSTIC DECAY TEST
Essentially, the external
1 is blocked with an in-
When a sufficiently large sound is detected by the ear
fatable cuff through which passe
soundprobe,apres
the stapedius muscle contracts, purportedlly to protect
sure probe, and a microphone.
Tympanometrymea-
the delicate inner ear from the damaging effects of
sures the change in compliance of the tympanum as
ransmitting sound waves of very high amplitude.
pressure within the occluded external ear canal changes
Using impedance audiometry it is possible to detect
when a sound tone is generated. In a normal ear the
this reflex via the sudden contraction of the stapedius
rigid sheet of the tympanum behaves differently com-
muscle, which affects the tension within the tympan-
pared to when there is a ruptured tympanic membrane,
 um24. This information can help to indicate whether
and this difference is detected and displayed (l50a-c).
 one, or both, middle ears are functioning normally.
Tympanometry can be performed in conscious 
 If the threshold for the acoustic reflex is identified,
dogs²2 and can provide useful information in terms of a signal some 10 dB above the threshold is given for
indicating whether investigation for otitis media is 
 a period of ten seconds?4. In normal animals, and in
warranted. Also, tympanometry may impact on the 
 animals with cochlear lesions, the reflex should be
selection of otic medication, since some medications
maintained for the entire test period. In some
are contraindicated in the presence of a ruptured
conditions affecting the function of cranial VIHI there
tympanic membrane23
is a characteristic decay of the reflex, within the ten-
In addition to the logistical problems of sourcing
second test period. Reference values for the dog have
and adapting equipment for canine use, there are
been published recently.
150
(a)
(q)
(9)
1.5
1.5
1.5
1.0
1.5
1.5
ml 0.5
ml 0.5
ml0.5
0
400
200
0
+200
-400
-200
0
+200
-400
-200
0
+200
daPa
daPa
I50a-c  Two normal tympanograms (150a, b). In both cases the tympanic membrane is intact. Abnormal tympanogram (150c)
associated with a ruptured tympanic membrane. {llustrations courtesy Dr J Steiss, Scott Ritchey Research Center, Auburn
University Alabama, USA.)
76
EAR DISEASES OF THe DOG AND CAT
OTHER INVESTIGATORY PROCEDURES
KEY POINTS
Incisional myringotomy
● Myringotomy is the deliberate incision of an intact,
Greater access may be required for drainage or
though not necessarily healthy, tympanic membrane.
instillation of medication. T'wo types of incision are
· T'he process of myringotomy allows assessment of
recommended: curvilinear or radial3. Both are made
the contents of the tympanic bulla when the
into the inferior, caudal quadrant of the tympanum
tympanum is intact.
using a Gerzog and Sexton or Buck myringotomy
· Biopsy of the tissues of the external ear canal is
knife. Prior to myringotomy, radiographs of the middlle
occasionally indicated, particularly if radical excision
ears should be taken to assess the degree of effusion.
of neoplasms is contemplated. It may also permit
Tympanometry may also be helpful as abnormal
assessment of the degree of fibrosis within mural
thickening of the tympanum may be detected and this
 tissues, helping to elucidate decision making.
may have implications in that myringotomy may be
more difficult and healing may be compromised. Care
MYrINGOtOMY
must be taken not to incise the tympanum too deeply
Surgical incision of the intact 
tympanum
as structures of the middle and inner ear may be
(myringotomy) is indicated in a number of instances:(
 damaged. Similarly, too forceful flushing should be
· To obtain samples of the effusion within the avoided. Postmyringotomy antibacterial cover is
middle ear cavity for microbial culture and  indicated until the tympanic defect has healed. Surgical
sensitivity testing, if otitis media is present.
 dlefects in the tympanum of experimental dogs showed
· To provide a route of access to, or drainage of,
 evidence of healing by ten days but this was not
accumulated middle ear effusion.
 complete until 21-35 days post surgery4.
· To provide a means of access to the middle ear
 Curvilinear incision provides better drainage than
cavity to permit flushing, or to facilitate instillation
a radial incision3. Using a myringotomy knife, a
 of medication or insertion of a transtympanic
 curved incision is made parallel to, but away from, the
ventilation tube.
periphery of the tympanum (151).
· Myringotomy must be carried out under direct
visual observation.
· T'he external ear canal must be carefully cleaned
and dried before myringotomy is performed.
151
Needle aspiration
Given that different organisms with different
antibacterial sensitivity patterns may exist either side
of an intact tympanic membrane', it may be necessary
to obtain samples from the middle ear by puncturing
the intact tympanum and aspirating its contents.
A 22 gauge spinal needle or a pediatric scalp vein
catheter are suitable since both are of an appropriate
length to be passed through an otoscope. T'he catheter
must be carried to the tympanum by fine-nosed
crocodile forceps; this has the advantage of providing a
more flexible connection to the 5 ml or 10 ml syringe
which is required to aspirate the middle ear contentst, 2.
There are two disadvantage of simple paracentesis3.
Firstly, the effusion within the middle ear is often
purulent or particulate and narrow needles may
become blocked; subsequently, trying to pass even a
small swab through the first hole is nigh on
impossible. Secondly, the puncture is too small and it
I51I  Myringotomy. Note the controlled incision avoids both
heals too quickly to permit adequate drainage of any
the periphery and the manubrium. (llustration courtesy Dr
effusion.
LN Gottelf, with permission of Walthom Focus.)
DIAGNOSTIC PROCEDURES
77
Radial incision allows poorer examination of the
BIOPSY
middle ear than curvilinear incision and makes
Taking 4 mm (0.2 in) punch biopsy samples, under
 removal of inspissated material, in particular, difficult?.
general anesthesia, of the vertical ear canal or of
Wire-mounted, small pharyngeal swabs provide
lesions and masses within the external ear canal is an
an ideal method of collecting samples for micro-
important method of obtaining useful information on
biology as they are flexible, do not break, and are
the processes underway. Biopsy of the external ear
small enough to permit direct visual manipulation
canal has three main indications:
through the otoscope. Once the laboratory sample
· As a means of providing information on the degree
is collected the effusion may be drained with a blunt
of permanence of epithelial changes. For example,
needle or washed out with repeated cycles of
some apparently permanently thickened epithelia
flushing with a warmed, aqueous solution of an
will regress dramatically when treated with topical
antibacterial agent.
glucocorticoids to suppress the inflammatory
reaction. However, fibrosis, in general, will not
Placement of a transtympanic ventilation tube
regress. Biopsy of the luminal wall can yield
Otitis media in the absence of otitis externa and
information on the degree of fibrosis present (see
infection is very rare in dogs. In man, particularly in
Chapter l: Microscopic structure of the external
children, otitis media with effusion (^glue ear') is not
ear canal). This information can help decide
uncommon. A single case has been reported of
whether to opt for a surgical or medical approach.
apparently ^primary’ otitis media with effusion in a
·As a means of providing information on the
young Cocker Spaniel4. No bacteriological culture
 etiology of ulcerated lesions in the ear canal. Ulcers
and sensitivity testing was performed on middle ear
 of the luminal wall may reflect gram-negative
samples so the true diagnosis in this case must remain
bacterial infection particularly, but also auto-
unproven. Nonetheless, the dog was successfully
immune disease and neoplasia. Biopsy of these
treated by placing a flanged transtympanic ventilation
 lesions can yield information which will influence
tube (a grommet) in the ventral aspect of the 
management.
tympanic membrane4.
· As an adjunct to surgery. Neoplastic changes within
the ear canal may be fibrogranulomatous, benign,
or malignant. Knowing the type of neoplasm and
being able to predict its behavior can help the
surgeon plan the degree of resection necessary to
remove the risk of recurrence.
78
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
REFERENCES
OTOSCOPIC APPEARANCE OF THE EXTERNAL
NEUROLOGIC EXAMINATION OF THE EAR
EAR CANAL AND TYMPANUM
I Whalen L and Kitchell R {1983) Electrophysiologic studies of 
IMcKeever P) and Richardson HW (1988) Otitis externa. Part
the cutaneous nerves of the head of the dog Americon Joumol
2: Clinical appearance and diagnostic methods. Componion
of Veterinary Reseorch 44, 615-627.
Animol Proctice 2, 25-31
2 Whalen L and Kitchell R {1983) Electrophysiologic and be-
2 Getty R, Foust HL, Presley ET and Miller ME {I956)
havioral studies of the cutaneous nerves of the concave sur-
Macroscopic anatomy of the ear of the dog Americon journal
-y op aun jo eu ye euaxa aun pue euuid at jo a
of Veterinory Reseorch 17, 364-375.
ion Journol of Veterinory Reseorch 44, 628-634.
3 Stout-Graham M, Kainer RA, Whalen LR and Macy DW
3B
Evans HE (1993) Miers Anatomy of the Dog. 3rd edn. (ed HE
(1990) Morphologic measurements of the external ear canal
Evans) WB Saunders, Philadelphia, pp. 988- 1008.
of dogs. Americon Journal of Veterinary Reseorch 51, 990-994.
 4 Oliver JE, Lorenz MD and Kornegay IN (1997) Confirming a
Xnawoueduk jo uonenea u (686l) Df auel pue 7 am t
diagnosis.In Handbook ofVeterinory Neurology. 3rd edn. WB
Duedwk auuen au jo juawssasse ao uogedied pue <donsono
Saunders, Philadelphia, pp 89-108.
membrane. Veterinory Record 124, 5-8.
5 Fraser G, Gregor WW Mackenzie CP Spreull JSA and Withers
RADIOGRAPHIC FEATURES OF THE NORMAL
AR (1970) Canine ear disease. Journol of Smoll Anirmol Proctice
AND ABNORMAL EAR
10, 725-754.
IHare WCD {1958) Radiographic anatomy of the canine skull
6 NeerTM (1982) Otitis media. Compendium on Continuing
Journal of the Americon Veterinory Medical Association I33,
Educotion 4, 41 0-416.
149-157.
7Fraser G {1 965) Aetiology of otitis externa in the dog. Journol
2 Gilbbs C (1978) Radiological refresher Part Il. The head.Joumol
of Smoll Animol Proctice 6, 445-452.
of Smoll Anirmol Proctice I9, 539-545.
8 Huang HP, Fixter LM and Little CJL {1994) Lipid content of
3 Rose WR (1977) Small animal clinical otology:radiology.
cerumen from normal dogs and otitic canine ears. Veterinory
Veterinory Medicine/Smoll Animol Clinicion 72, 1508-15 17.
Record 134, 380-381.
4 Love NE, Kramer RW, Spodnick GJ and Thrall DE {1995)
Radiographic and computed tomographic evaluation of otitis 
CYTOLOGIC CHARACTERISTICS OF NORMAL
media. Veterinory Radiology and Ultrasound 36, 375-379.
AND ABNORMAL EARS
5[
 Douglas SW, Herrtage ME and Williamson HD (1987) Canine
I Griffin CE {1993) Otitis externa and otitis media. In Current
radiography: skull. n Principes ofVeterinary Radiography Bailiene
Veterinary Dermatology (eds CE Grifn, KW Kwochka and JM
Tindall, London, Pp. 177-1 92.
MacDonald) Mosby St Louis, pp. 245-262.
6
 Sullivan M (1995) The head and neck In BSAVA Monuol of
2 Rosser EJ {1 988) Evaluation of the patient with otitis externa.
Small Animol Diognostic Imoging. (ed R Lee) British Small
Veterinary Clinics of North America I8, 765-772
Animal Veterinary Association, Cheltenham, pp. I 6-22.
3 Huang H-P {1993) Studies of the Microenvironment ond
7 Hoskinson J (1993) Imaging techniques in the diagnosis of
Microfloro of the Conine Externol Eor Conol. PhD Thesis.
middle ear disease. Seminors in Veterinory Medicine 8, 10-16.
Glasgow University.
8
 Smeak DD and Kerpsack S) {1993) Total ear canal ablation
4  Kowalski J) (1988) The microbial environment of the ear canal
and lateral bulla osteotomy for management of end-stage
in health and disease. Veterinory Clinics of North Americo I8.
otitis. Seminars in Veterinary Medicine 8, 30-41
743-754.
9 Remedios AM, Fowler JD and Pharr JW (1991) A comparison
5 Chickering WR {1988) Cytologic evaluation of otic exudates.
of radiographic versus surgical diagnosis of otitis mediaJoumal
Veterinory Clinics of North Americo I8, 773-782
of the American Animol Hospital Associotion 27, 1 83- 188.
6 Rosychuck RWA (l994) Management of otitis externa.
10 Kealy JK {1987) The skull and vertebral column. In Diognostic
Veterinory Clinics of North Americo 24, 921-952.
Rodioiogy of the Dog and Cat. 2nd edn. (ed JK Kealy) WB
 7 Huang H-P (1995) Canine cerumen cytology. Chinese Society
Saunders, Philadelphia, p. 439-441.
of Veterinary Science 21, 18-23.
II Trower ND, Gregory SP Renfrew H and Lamb CR (1998)
8 Huang H P and Little CJL {1994) Lipid content of cerumen
 Evaluation of canine tympanic membrane by positive contrast
from normal dogs and otitic canine ears. Veterinary Record
ear canalography. Veterinory Record 142, 78-81.
134,380-381
I2 Eom K-D, Lee H-C and Yoon Y-H (2000) Canalographic
9 Rogers KS {1988) Tumors of the ear canal. Veterinory Clinics of
evaluation of the external ear canal in dogs. Veterinory
North Americo 4, 859-868.
Rodiology ond Ultrosound 41, 231 -234.
(066l) H daaungan pue 1 daBuisoog d Playsu 01
Infectivity of Malossezio pochydermotis in the external ear
IMAGING THE MIDDLE AND INNER EARS
canal of dogs. Journol of the Americon Animal Hospitol
IRemedios AM, Fowler JD and Pharr JW {1991) A comparison
Associotion 26, 97-1 00.
of radiographic versus surgical diagnosis of otitis media. joumol
11 Bond R,Anthony RM, Dodd M and Lloyd DH {1 996) Isolation
of the Americon Animol Hospitol Associotion 27, 1 83- 188
of Malassezia sympodialis from feline skin. journal of Medicol
2 Love NE, Kramer RW, Spodnick GJ and Thrall DE {1995)
and Veterinory Mycology 34, 145- 147.
Radiographic and computed tomographic evaluation of otitis
12 Frost CR (1961) Canine otocariasis. Journol of Smoll Animal
media. Veterinory Radiology and Ultrasound 36, 375-379.
Proctice 2, 253-256.
3 Hoskinson J (1993) Imaging techniques in the diagnosis of
middle ear disease. Semirnors in Veterinory Medicine 8, 10-16.
DIAGNOSTIC PrOCEDUReS
 79
4 Hendee WR and Morgan CJ (1984) Magnetic resonance
I4 Shiu J, Munro K and Cox C {1997) Normative auditory brain-
imaging Part I: Physical principles (medical progress). Western
 stem response data for hearing threshold and neuro-otolog
Journol of Medicine 141, 491-500.
ical diagnosis in the dog.Journal of Small Animol Proctice 38,
103-107.
magnetic resonance imaging: an update. Western Journol of
I5 Steiss JE, Wright JC and Storrs JP {1990) Alteration in the
Medicine 143, 782-792
-uae pue piysu asuodsau paoa uone wasuie
6 Westersson P-L, Katzberg RW, Tallents RH, Sanchez-
 intensity curve associated with conductive hearing loss in
Woodworth RE and Svensson SA (1987) CT and MRl of the
dogs. Progressin Veterinory Neurology I, 205-211.
temporomandibular joint: comparison  with  autopsy
I6 Wolschrijin CF,Venker-vanHaagen AJ and Van-den-Brom WE
specimens.American Journal of Rodiology I48, 1165-1171
(1997) Comparison of air- and bone-conducted brainstem
 7 Dvir E, Kirberger RM and Terblanche AG (2000) Magnetic
auditory evoked responses in young dogs and dogs with bi-
resonance imaging of otitis media in a dog. Veterinary Radiology
lateral ear canal obstruction. Veterinory Quorterly 19, 158-162.
ond Ultrosound 41, 46-49
 I7 Knowles K, Cash W and Blauch B (1988) Auditory-evoked re-
8 Chan KH, Swarts D, Doyle WJ and Wolf GL {1991)
sponses of dogs with different hearing abilities. Conadion Jour-
Assessment of middle ear status during experimental otitis
nol of Veterinory Reseorch 52, 394-397
media using magnetic resonance imaging. Archives of
I8 Eger C and Lindsay P (1997) Effects of otitis on hearing in
Otoloryngology. Heod ond Neck Surgery I17, 91-95
9 Grandis JR, Curtin HD and Yu VL (1995) Necrotizing
testing Journal of Small Anirmal Practice 38, 380-386.
(malignant) external otitis: prospective comparison of CT and
I9 Krahwinkel D), Pardo AD, Sims MH and Bubb W) (1993) Ef-
MR imaging in diagnosis and follow-up. Rodiology 196, 499-504.
fect of total ablation of the external acoustic meatus and bulla
[0 Assoun J, Richardi G, Railhac J-J] et ol. (1994) Ostoid osteoma:
osteotomy on auditory function in dogs. Journal of the Ameri-
MR imaging versus CT Radioiogy I91, 217-223.
con Veterinory Medical Associotion 202, 949-952.
20 Harrison J and Buchwald J (1982) Auditory brainstem re-
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGIC PROCEDURES
sponse in the aged cat. Neurobiology ofAging 3, 163-171.
ISims MH {1988) Electrodiagnostic evaluation of auditory func-
21 Morgan JL, Coulter DB, Marshall AE and Goetsch DD (1980)
tion. Veterinory Clinics of North Armerico I8, 913-944.
Effects of neomycin on the wave form of auditory evoked
 2 MarshallA (1985) Brainstem auditory-evoked response of the
brainstem potential in dogs. Americon Journal of Veterinary Re-
nonanesthetized dog Americon Journol of Veterinory Reseorch
seorch 41, 1077-1081
46.966-973
22 Penrod JP and Coulter DB {1980) The diagnostic uses of
3 Cuddon PA {1988) Electrodiagnostics. In First Bosic Science
impedance audiometry in the dog Journal of the Americon
Course in Veterinory ond Comporotve Neurology ond Neuro-
Animol Hospitol Associotion I6, 94 1-948
Surgery. (ed PA Cuddon) University of WWisconsin, Madison.
23 Merchant SR {1994) Ototoxicity In Veterinory Clinics of North
4 Bodenhamer R, Hunter J and Luttgen P {1985) Brainstem au-
Americo (eds RAW Rosychuck and SR Merchant) 24,
ditory-evoked response in the dog. Americon Journol of Veteri
086-146
 24 Steiss JE, BoosingerTR, Wright JC and Pillai SR (1982) Healing
nory Reseorch 46, 1787-1792.
of experimentally  perforated tympanic membranes
5 Pook H and Steiss J (1990) Correlation of brainstem auditory-
evoked response with cranium size and body weight. Ameri-
con Journol of Veterinory Reseorch 51, 1779-1783.
6 Strain G,Tedford B and Jackson R (1991) Postnatal develop-
307-310.
ment of the brainstem auditory-evoked potential in dogs.
 25 Cole LK, Podell M and Kwochka KW (2000) Impedance
Americon Journol ofVeterinory Research 52, 410-414.
audiometric measurements in clinically normal dogs. Americon 
 7 Achor LJ and Starr A (1980) Auditory brainstem response in 
Journol of Veterinory Reoseorch 61, 442-445.
the cat. I: Intracranial and extracranial responses. Electroen-
cephalogrophy ond Clinicol Neurophysiology 48, 155- 173
OTHERINVESTIGATORYPROCEDURES
8 Achor L and Starr A (1980) Auditory brainstem response in
I Cole LK, Kwochka KW, Kowalski Jl and Hillier A {1998)
the cat. ll: Effects of lesions. Electroencephalogrophy ond Clini-
Microbial flora and antimicrobial susceptibility patterns of
col Neurophysioiogy 48, 1 74-190
isolated pathogens from the horizontal ear canal and middle
9 Jewett DL {1970) Volume conducted potentials in response
ear in dogs with otitis media.journal of the American Veterinary
to auditory stimuli as detected by averaging in the cat. Elec-
Medicol Associotion 212, 534-538.
troencephaiogrophy and Clinical Neurophysiology 28, 609-6 18.
2  Bruyette DS and Lorenz MD {1 993) Otitis externa and otitis
10 Buchwald JS and Huang CM {1975) Far-field acoustic re-
media: diagnostic and medical aspects. Seminors in Veterinory
sponse: origins in the cat. Science 189, 382-384.
Medicine ond Surgery (Smoll Animol) 8, 3-9.
3 Rose WR (1977) Surgery. 1: Myringotomy Veterinary
II Venker-vanHaagen AJ, Siemelink RJG and Smoorenburg GF
Medicine/Smoll Animol Clinicion 72, 1 646-1 650.
(1989) Auditory brainstem responses in the normal beagle.
Veterinory Quorterly I1, 129-137
4
4Cox CL, Slack RWT and Cox GR {1989) Insertion of a
12 Sims MH and Moore RE {1984) Auditory evoked response
transtympanic ventilation tube for the treatment of otitis
 in the clinically normal dog: early latency components. Ameri-
media with effusion. journal of Small Animol Proctice 30,
 517-519.
con Journol ofVeterinory Reseorch 45, 2019-2017.
I3 Myers LF, Redding RW and WWilson S {1 985) Reference val-
 ues of the brainstem auditory evoked response of methoxy-
flurane anesthetized and nonanesthetized dogs. Veterinory Re-
seorch Communicotions 9, 289-294.
This page intentionally left blank
81
Chapter Three
Etiopathogenesis and
Classification of otitis
Externa
 Effects of breed and progressive pathology
 Ectoparasitic causes of otitis externa, and antiparasitic agents
· Foreign bodies
· Nasopharyngeal and middle ear polyps
· Otic neoplasia
· Underlying disease
· The effects of weather on the incidence of otitis externa
· References
82
 EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
EFFECTS OF bREED AND PROGRESSIVE PATHOLOGY
KEY POINtS
RESPONSE tO INSULT AND INJURY
· Breeds of dog predisposed to otitis externa, such as
Reactions to inflammation within the
Cocker Spaniels, have increased amounts of
external ear canal
glandular tissue compared to normal dogs.
The epidermis of the external ear canal reacts to
· Otitis externa results in increased production of
inflammation by increasing its rate of turnover and
cerumen with a lower lipid content than normal,
increasing in thickness, i.e.it becomes hyperplastic4, 5.
associated with increased ceruminous gland activity.
T'here may be surface erosions and ulceration,
· Dogs with pendulous ears are predisposed to otitis
particularly with gram-negative infections. The dermis
externa.
becomes infltrated with inflammatory cells and fibrosis
· Pathologic changes within the external ear canal are
will follow. In the early stages of otitis externa there is
progressive.
hyperplasia of the sebaceous glands, and their ducts
· Changes in structure engender changes in the local
may become dilated5,6. If chronic otitis persists, the
microenvironment.
apocrine glands become hyperplastic with cystic
· Surgery is the inevitable consequence of chronic
dilatation of the glands and ducts. Although this may
otitis externa.
be of such magnitucde that the sebaceous glands appear
displaced, with very little secretory potential4, 5,
BREED VARIATION
 morphometric analysis reveals no significant changes
Fernandol observed that the external ear canals of
 in sebaceous gland size or activity2. Papillary pro-
longhaired breeds of dogs and those with fine hair
liferation of ceruminous glands and ducts may
contained more sebaceous and apocrine glandular
 obliterate the lumen of the external ear canal in some
tissue, which was also better developed, than dogs 
 cases'. In very chronic cases, ossification of the tissues
with short hair. Breeds predisposed to otitis externa
may take place.
also have abnormal morphometric ratios compared to
 Similar changes take place in the feline ear canal,
normal dogs2. Specifically, they exhibit an increase in
although the papillary changes in the ceruminous
the overall amount of soft tissue within the confines
 glands may be sufficiently florid that discrete polyps
of the auricular cartilage, an increase in the area
occur5.
occupied by the apocrine glands, and an increase in
T'he consequence of these changes is a reduction
the apocrine gland area compared to that of the
in luminal cross-section, a result of increasing soft
sebaceous glands.
tissue within the bounds of the containing cartilage2.
 Overall, the breeds of dog predisposed to otitis
The change in nature of the cerumen, the reduction
externa have increased apocrine tissue?. If this
in luminal diameter, and the moisture and warmth
increased volume of apocrine tissue is actively
which accompany active inflammation contribute to
secreting, the concentration of lipid within the
 an increase in local humidity3. These changes in the
 cerumen willfall3, humidity within the ear canal will
otic environment result in surface maceration and the
rise, and maceration, followed by infection and otitis
creation of a milieu favorable to microbial multi-
externa, will result. Increased moisture and surface
plication, itself a potent inducer of inflammation (see
maceration creates an environment particularly
flow chart right).
favorable to gram-negative bacteria. T'heoretically, the
increased apocrine secretions in the ear canals of these
dogs should result in cerumen with a lower pH than
normal and an environment not conducive to gram-
 negative colonization. It may be that the acidifying
Even very early changes in the lining of the extemal
effect of increased ceruminous gland secretion is not
sufficient to overcome the effects of humidity,
 This is the reason why the most common surgical
inflammation, and surface maceration.
procedure practised upon the extermal ear, the
Zepp resection, fails so often. Once any degree of
luminal stenosis has occurred, lateral wall resection
is not indicated. Vertical ablation is necessary.
ETIOPATHOGENESIS AND CLASSIFICATION OF OTITIS EXTERNA
83
It is not clear at which stage these changes become
tion at work. T'he presence of hair, per se, within the
irreversible. Certainly, aggressive medical therapy,
ear canal does not correlate with otitis externall.
initially with antimicrobial agents and then with
However, Cocker Spaniels have many compound hair
topical glucocorticoids, can result in significant
follicles throughout the length of the external ear canal
reduction in soft tissue occlusion of the lumen.
whereas non-predisposed breeds typically have fewer,
However, the structural changes in apocrine ducts and
predominantly simple follicles in their ear canals12.
glands are probably irreversible; certainly t
the
Certain breeds, such as Cocker Spaniels and Miniature
 progressive changes in glandular architecture correlate
Poodles, appear on every list of affected breeds10, 12-14.
with the progression of the otitis externa2.
However, it is now recognized that one of the
 Once these permanent changes occur, simple Zepp
principal causes of otitis externa is the presence of
resection of the lateral wall of the vertical canal is
hypersensitivities, such as atopy, and generalized skin
unlikely to be successfu17-9. Ablation of the canal is
disease, such as defects in keratinization, which
indicated.
predispose to otitis externa. It is the predisposition to
these diseases which accounts for the increased relative
Influence of breed on otitis externa
risk of ear disease rather than the anatomy per se.
Dogs with pendulous ears are predisposed to otitis
 Only one study15 has recorded the incidence of
externa10, 11 but the low incidence in some breeds with
otitis externa in cats. In this series of 36 cats,
pendulous ears, such as Beagles and Irish Setters, in
Himalayans and Persian breeds were most commonly
most studies12 suggests factors other than conforma-
affected.
Flow chart summarizing the progression of otitis externa
Hyperkeratosis
Fbroplasia
Apocrine hyperplasia
Increase in soft tissue volume
Reduced lumen
Increased humidity
Microbial proliferation
Inflammation
Chronic otitis exterma
84
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
Influence of progressive pathology
Fibroplasia of the underlying dermis follows
T'he soft tissues surrounding the lumen of the external
chronic inflammatory challenge within the lumen
ear canal react in a predictable sequence to the
and the epithelium. In long-standing cases the
 inflammation associated with chronic otitis externa2 4-6.
fibrosis may be extensive (154) and this contributes
· Epidermal hyperplasia (acanthosis and hyper-
considerably to the loss of luminal cross-section.
keratinization) is an early consequence of otic
 Early sebaceous gland hyperplasia is followed by
irritation (152). The basal cells of the epidermis
massive ceruminous gland hyperplasia, both of the
respond to inflammation by increasing their rate of
duct and the glandular portion (155). The changes
division and increasing the transit time of cells
in the ceruminous glands result in gross thickening
moving through the epidermis. In addition, kera-
of the epidermis, particularly in cats.
tinization is affected and a thickened stratum
· Papillary proliferation of the epithelia lining occurs
corneum is apparent. This reaction is reversible,
to such an extent that the lumen becomes occluded
provided the initiating cause is alleviated.
(156, 157). In the external ear canals of cats this
● Subepithelial infiltration with inflammatory cells,
 papillary proliferation may result in polyp formation
such as lymphocytes, neutrophils, macrophages,
with trapping of exudate between the polyp and
and plasma cells, occurs in response to inflam-
the tympanum.
mation. Chronic cellular infiltration results in local
· Ossification of the dermis, sometime extending to
release of inflammatory mediators, cutaneous
the auricular cartilage, occurs as a final stage.
erythema, and edema (153). Early cellular infiltra-
tion is reversible but the effects of chronic mediator
release may engender permanent changes.
152
153
I52 Photomicrograph of a section of canine external
I53 Photomicrograph of a section of canine external
ear canal demonstrating epidermal hyperplasia.
ear canal demonstrating epidermal hyperplasia, an
inflammatory infltrate, and dermal edema.
ETIOPATHOGENESIS AND CLASSIFICATION OF OTITIS EXTERNA
85
I54Photomicrograph of a section of canine external ear
154
canal stained to demonstrate dermal fibrosis, which in this case
is extensive.
I55  Photomicrograph of a section of canine external ear
155
canal demonstrating massive apocrine gland hyperplasia.
I56Photomicrograph of a section of hyperplastic external
56
ear canal with papillary fronds almost occluding the lumen.
I57 Photograph of a section of a chronically hyperplastic
157
external ear canal with almost no lumen.
86 EAR DISEASES OF THe DOG AND CAT
EctoparaSItic CauSes of otItis externa, And
ANTIPARASITIC AGENTS
KEY POINtS
periods3. Nevertheless, contact with an infected host
· Otodectes cynotis is the most common ectoparasite
is still believed to be the main route of transmissionl.
involved in otitis externa.
The prevalence of O. cynotis in dogs’ ears was
· As few as three otodectic mites have been reported
to cause otitis externa.
significant predisposition in dogs with pendulous and
· Asymptomatic carriage of O. cynotis is common in
1 to erect pinnae7. T'his
the cat and may occur, though rarely, in the dog.
study also r
was a highly significant
·(
Otodectes cynotis may, rarely, be zoonotic.
· Other ectoparasitic causes of otitis externa include
externa. In 1l4 (out of 700 ears) ears, mites were
Demodex spp.,Neotrombicula autumnalis and
found in the absence of any indication of otitis
other harvest mites, and ticks such as Otobius
externa, suggesting that in dogs,
, asymptomatic
megnini.
carriage is possible. Fewer cases were reported in the
summer months.One study
suggested a seasonal
OTODECTES CYNOTIS
incidence for the disease; however, a very large study9
Introduction
could find no evidence ofa seasonal incidence.
Otodectes cynotis is a large (0.3 x 0.4 mm [0.0l x
0.02 in]) mite (158) which lives predlominantly in the
Clinical features
external ear canal of dogs and cats, and perhaps
 Young dogs appear to be more commonly infected
Occasionally on the adjacent skin of the head'. The
than older animals?. This probably reflects the fact
mite does not burrow but lives on the skin surface
that infected dogs are easily diagnosed, effectively
where it feeds on tissue fluid and debris?. It has been
 treated, and not reinfected. The average number of
 Suggested that otodectic mites can survive within the
mites per dogs was only 5.69.
household, off the host, for weeks if not months3.
Otodectes cynotis is typically associated with a
T'he physical presence of the mite induces a I
 pruritic otitis externa7, 8. However, Scott& considered
 mechanical irritation which accounts for some of the
 that in the cat, three syndromes (otitis externa, ectopic
 pruritus experienced by infected animals. However, the
infection, and asymptomatic carriage) might be
saliva is both irritant and immunogenic and in the cat the  
 associated with infection with the mite.
mite stimulates an IgE-like antibody2, suggesting that
Very low numbers of mites, even as low as three?,
hypersensitivity contributes to the pruritus. The mite
 may be sufficient to induce clinical signs. This,
 produces an antibody which cross-reacts with the house
together with the mite's ability to inhabit the entire
dust mite Dermatophagoides farinae and may thus play
external ear canal, can make definitive diagnosis
jed e Aeid Aeu usue su eg Adoie unq u ied e
difficult and might make a rule-out of otodectic
in inducing aural hematoma in both the dog and cat and
acariasis, other than by trial therapy, problematic.
 this might have an autoimmune etiology4, 5.
Zoonotic lesions may occur on in-contact human
Otitis externa
members of the householdl.
Vesicles, wheals,
T'he classic feature of otitis externa due to ear mite
 erythematous papules, and excoriations on the arms
infection is moderate to severe otic pruritus. In
 and torso have been reported.
addition, the external ear canal becomes filled with a
crumbly black/brown discharge (161-163). Most
Lifecycle, transmission, and prevalence
affected dogs exhibit chronic otic pruritus but Frost?
Females lay eggs (159) and cement them to the
reported four dogs out of 200 which had asympto-
epidermal surface. T'hey hatch to yield six-legged
matic infection. Puppies are most likely to be infected
larvae which undergo two moults through eight-
from dams, but in adult dogs the cat is a common
legged
1protonymphs and
1  deutonymphs.
T'he
 cause of contagion', particularly since the cat may well
emerging deutonymph is approached by, and attached
 be asymptomatic8, i0.
to, an adult male mite (l60) and, if it is female,
copulation occurs. Although the life cycle of three
weeks is confined to the host, it has been suggested
that the mite can survive in the environment for long
ETIOPATHOGENESIS AND CLASSIFICATION OF OTITIS EXTERNA
87
158
159
I58 Photomicrograph of an adult Otodectes cynotis mite.
I59  Photomicrograph of Otodectes ova collected in cerumen.
160
161
I60Photomicrograph of a deutonymph attached to an
I6lAdult cat with Otodectes cynotis infestation. Note the
adult otodectic mite.
typical dark brown color and the dry nature of the cerumen.
Note also the lack of self-trauma in this asymptomatic case.
162
163
I62  Otodectic mange in a pup. Note the presence of the
163
 Cerumen from an ear infested with Otodectes cynotis.
 dryish cerumen and evidence of some self-trauma.
 Note the crumbly nature of the cerumen and the dark brown
color.
88 EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
In cats the pruritus associated with infection may be
 Treatment
associated with moderate to severe self-trauma to the
Topical otic acaricidal preparations are usually
head (164, 165). Scott& suggested an age predilection
sufficient, although ivermectin is also effective.
in young cats. In cases of chronic infection there may
Suitable otic and systemic acaricides include:
be hyperplastic changes in the lining of the external ear
+ Topical monosulfiram.
canal and a predisposition to secondary infection.
· Topical thiabendazolell, 12.
+ Topical rotenonell, 13.
Ectopic infection
●Systemic ivermectin (0.2-0.3 mg/kg s/c)14, 15 or
In some cases, perhaps in cats more than in dogs, the
topical ivermectin in mineral oil.
mite causes clinical signs distant from the ear. Scott?
· Topical application of an unidentified component
considered that this might be a consequence of cats
found in a commercial otic preparation (Canaural,
 sleeping in a curled position so that the ear is apposed
Leo Laboratories Limited)16, 17.
to the tail-base. T'wo syndromes may be associated with
· Topical application (administered via a weight-
ectopic infection:
banded individual dispenser) of a single dose of
· Crusted papules, i.e. miliary dermatitis.
selamectin at a minimum dose rate of 6mg/kg18.
· Patchy alopecia.
· Topical application of fipronil into the ear canal.
Asymptomatic infection
Prior cleaning of the ear with ceruminolytics may
This may be a feature of older cats where very high
be beneficial in cases where there is a heavy discharge.
numbers of mites may be found with apparently no 
 In view of the possibility of an ectopic infection with
associated clinical signsio. The presence of asymptomatic the mite, the body surface of affected animals should
carriage in dogs has not been considered a major 
r  also be treated with an appropriate antiparasitic agent
problem in veterinary dermatologic texts, but in light of
 such as a carbamate, pyrethrin, dichlorvos/fenitro-
the discussion above it should be borne in mind,
thion aerosol, pipronyl, or selamectin. In view of the
 particularly when treatment protocols are discussed.
possibility of the mite surviving off the host, within
the home, a thorough house clean followed by appli-
Diagnosis
cation of a suitable environmental agent may be
 The mite is relatively large and may be easily seen in
indicated in apparently intractable cases.
the external ear canal with the aid of an auroscope
(166). Direct observation may not always result in a
diagnosis:
· The degree of discharge may make direct
observation difficult.
· T'here may be so few mites that direct observation
is not possible.
In these situations, microscopic examination of dis-
charge may be necessary. Gentle maceration of col-
lected samples in mineral oil will aid diagnosis, and
microscopic examination under low power should
show evidence of infestation.
ETIOPATHOGENESIS AND CLASSIFICATION OF OTITIS EXTERNA
89
I64Small area of crust and self-trauma in
164
the entrance to the external ear canal of a cat
with otodectic otitis.
I65  Area of erythema and self-trauma
165
associated with otodectic otitis on thelateral
aspect of the head of a cat.
166
Otoscopic view of ceruminous debris and
166
otodectic mites in a feline external ear canal. The mites
 appear small in this unmagnified view.
90
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
OThEr ECTOPaRASItIC CAUSES OF
examples which are safe in cats and dogs.
OTITIS EXTERNA
Control of reinfection is much more difficult since
Demodex canis, D. felis and D. gatoi
the animal must be prevented from traversing infected
Demodex canis has been reported as a rare cause of
ground. This is not very practical in most cases. How-
otitis externa in dogs. It may occur as part of a
ever, dips, sprays, or spot-on formulations of amitraz or
 generalized condition, in isolation, or as a long-term 
fipronil may have a protective effect, and both will aid
complication of juvenile onset generalized demodicosis
in removal of larvae from infected hosts22, 23. Any
which has apparently responded to treatmentl9. A
resicdual pruritus may be suppressed with a short course
history of demodicosis should alert the clinician to the
of prednisolone (0.5-1.1 mg/kg p/o q12h).
possibility of otodemodicosis but cases arising de novo
should not be discounted. Typically, otodemodicosis
Ticks
is associated with a ceruminous otitis externa (l67).
The spinous ear tick, Otobius megnini, is most frequently
In cats, demodicosis is more usually associated with
found in the southern and south-western regions of the
erythema (l68) and crusting on the pinnae and head,
USA. However, the increased mobility of owners and
rather than otitis externa. However, D. gato may be
their pets means that the tick may be found in almost
associated with a ceruminous otitis externa in cats.
any region of the USA24, 25. T'he larvae (six legs, yellow-
Diagnosis is based on recovery of demodecid mites
pink color) and adults (eight legs, blue-gray color) are
(l69-l7l) in skin scrapes and on cotton swabs from
parasitic and infest the external ear canal of both dogs
the external ear canal. Punch biopsy samples would
and cats to the extent that in some cases the external ear
also give appropriate material for a diagnosis.
canal is entirely filled with the parasites. Acute otitis
Treatment with demodecicidal agents is indicated. The
externa results. Ixodic, and other hard ticks such as
choice of agent will depend on whether the otodemo-
 Demacentor spp., are usually are found on the pinnae
clicosis is in isolation or part of the generalized disease:
and head, rather than within the external ear canal.
· Feline otodemodicosis has been reported to
The tficks may be removed with forceps and otic flush-
ing, although this may require sedation or anesthesia. A
· One ml of 19.9% amitraz solution in 30 ml mineral
topical otic preparation containing thiabendazole,
oil12 or 2 ml of 5% solution in 20 ml mineral oil19
 neomycin and dexamethasone has also been reported to
has been recommended for treatment of both
 be curative25. Any postinfestation inflammation may be
canine and feline otodemodicosis.
 treated with a topical glucocorticoid and antibacterial otic
● Ivermectin given orally (0.6 mg/kg q24h) might also
 preparation. Reinfestation is a problem as animals will
be successful in canine demodecosis, although clini-
often regularly revisit tick-infested areas. If these are lo-
cians should ensure that the drug is not used in Collie
 cated, the ground can be cleared and, if necessary, treat-
breeds, Collie-crosses, and certain herding breeds.
ed with an organophosphate such as malathion, chlor-
 pyriphos, or other approved environmental agents24.
Harvest mites
Some protection from reinfestation by ticks may be
Harvest mites such as Neotrombicula autumnalis(172)
afforded by amitraz dips and collars or by fipronil
and Euotrombicula alfredugesi are occasional causes of
preparations, both of which may have some tick-
otitis externa in both dogs and cats. T'he larvae are
repellent properties:
parasitic and require a mammalian host; they are not
· Although fipronil is presented in both spray and
species specific. Larvae hatch in rapid succession and
spot-on formulations, the spray formulation is
usually tens or hundreds are involved in the parasitic
preferred for the treatment of ticks (and harvest
aftack. Typically, they cause a pruritic crusting dermatitis
mites) since effective local concentrations on both
on the ventrum and face and in the interdigital areas.
hair and skin surface may be achieved rapidly.
Occasional animals exhibit larval clustering and crusting
Fipronil has been demonstrated under field condi-
 at the base of the pinnae20 or within the confines of the
 tions to prevent infestation with ticks23, 26.
proximal external ear canal. Close examination usually
● Amitraz dips are useful as a tick repellent?2 and in
reveals tiny orange, or orange-red, clusters of larvae.
some countries the chemical is marketed as an
T'he parasite is a seasonal threat to the hunting or
amitraz-impregnated collar for tick repellent pur-
punoue uo uowuo sou si ni pue jeo pue sop sueou
 poses. Accidental ingestion of amitraz-impregnated
composed of well drained, chalky soil. Treatment of the
collars may prove fatal to the dog and prompt
larval infection is relatively easy since simple ectoparasitic
treatment is necessary. Atipamezole (50 mcg/kg
treatment is effctive21. Lime sulfur (2% dip),pyrethrin
i/m) should be followed by oral yohimbine
powder, and dichlorvos/fenitrothion aerosols are good
(0.1 mg/kg) every six hours as needed27.
ETIOPATHOGENESIS AND CLASSIFICATION OF OTITIS EXTERNA
91
167
168
I68 Feline demodicosis causing erythematous dermatitis
adjacent to the entrance to the external ear canal.
I67Erythematous, ceruminous otitis externa in a Cavalier
King Charles Spaniel with otodemodicosis.
169
170
I69, I70 Photomicrographs of a juvenile demodectic mite (I69) and an egg (170) in cerumen from the ear of a dog with 
otodemodecticmange.
171
172
I7l Photomicrograph of an adult Demodex conis mite in 
I72Larva of Neotrombiculo outumnolis. Note the red color
cerumen from the external ear canal of a dog with
and sixlegs.
otodemodectic mange.
92 EAR DISEASES OF THe DOG AND CAT
ECTOPaRASITIC AGENTS USED AGaINST
intervals for scabies, and once daily until remission is
OTIC ECTOPARASIteS
achieved for demodicosis33. Ivermectin has been
Monosulfiram (tetraethylthiuran
advocated for otodectic mange in cats35 at a dose of
monosulphide)
0.2-0.3 mg/kg. T'wo injections at 10-14 day intervals
Indication: Otodectes cynotis.
are curative. Although ivermectin may be admini-
Sulfur has been used for centuries as a scabicide and
stered topically, orally, or by injection, the topical
monosulfiram emulsion has a long history as a topical
 route is least effective36. Subcutaneous injections must
acaricide28. However, it is rarely used in human
only be given using the propylene glycol-based
dermatology as it cross-reacts with alcohol abuse
 presentation37. For oral dosing, particularly long-term
 treatments29. Monosulfiram also has a fungicidal effect
treatment, it may be more appropriate to use the
and a 5mg/ml solution is active against malassezial
water-based presentation marketed for oral adminis-
yeast30.
tration to the horse, although it may prove difficult to
measure the exact dose. This will obviate any risk of
Thiabendazole (2-(thiazol-4-yl)benzimidazole)
propylene-glycol toxicity which, although rare, may
Indications: Malassezia pachydermatis, Aspergilfus spp.,
be noted occasionally (bradycardia and central
Otodectes cynotis, ticks, feline otodemodicosis.
nervous system and respiratory depression).
Thiabendazole is an antifungal agent with acaricidal
Ivermectin should be highly effective against other
properties31. Thiabendazole kills all stages of the mite
 mites affecting cats and dogs35. It has some activity
life cyclell and is thus preferred to pyrethrins and
against the sucking louse of dogs (Lanognathus setosus)
 rotenone, for example, which have no activity against
 and some activity against ticks; it inhibits feeding and
eggs. Thiabendazole is useful against malassezial yeast
the ticks fall off only partially engorged35.
Certain breeds of dog are susceptible to side-effects
 dard doses, has made it a popular ingredient in otic
when given ivermectin, and great care is warranted
polypharmaceutical preparations. A topical otic prepa-
when considering its use. Informed, preferably signed,
ration containing thiabendazole, neomycin, and dex-
consent may be necessary in some circumstances.
amethasone has also been reported to be curative against
 Ivermectin toxicity is related to central nervous system
Otobius megnini ticks25. T'hiabendazole is also effective
effects caused by ivermectin-enhanced gamma-amino
 in the treatment of feline otodemodicosis!l.
 butyric acid (GABA) activity37. In most canine breeds
acute toxicity is seen when a dose in excess of 2.5
Pyrethrin, pyrethroids, carbamates,
mg/kg is given. In cats the maximum dose above
and rotenone
which signs of acute toxicity are seen is 0.75 mg/kg
Indications:
Otodectes
Cynotis,
Neotrombicula
orally. Chronic toxicity begins to be noted with doses
autumnalis, Eurotromicula affredurgesi, tick infestation.
in excess of 1 mg/kg in dogs and 0.5 mg/kg in cats37.
These are relatively broad-spectrum insecticides and
 T'here appears to be minimal risk of teratogenic effects
acaricides.Pyrethrins (natural derivatives of Chrysan
following administration of ivermectin to pregnant
themum cinerariaefolium), pyrethroids (synthetic ana-
bitches37. Signs of ivermectin toxicity include mydriasis,
logues), and rotenone are characterized by quick
depression, tremors, ataxia, stupor, emesis, coma, and
knock-down and poor persistence. T'hey are thus com-
death37,3839However certainbreeds ofdogs exhiitn
 monly used in over-the-counter antiparasitic prepara-
idiosyncratic sensitivity toivermectin,developing side
tions for puppies and kittens. T'hese agents all have sim-
effects at doses as low as 0.1 mg/kg.Collies,OldEnglish
ilar spectra of activity and a low toxicity potential, al-
Sheepdogs_andShetland Sheepdogs areparticularly
though if cats are treated with products marketed for
susceptible37
dogs, toxic side-effects may be seen32, 33. None of these
Ivermectin dosages over 0.05 mg/kg will kill
 agents kill the eggs of ear mites and thus repeated treat-
Dirofilaria immitis larvae. Therefore, in heartworm-
ment is necessary.
endemic areas dogs should be tested for heartworm
 before receiving ivermectin in acaricidal dosages37.
vermectin
Many dogs with ivermectin toxicity will recover,
Indications: Demodex spp.. Otodectes cynotis,
particularly if recognized early and treated adequately.
Sarcoptes scabiei, Notoedres cati, Neotrombicula
T'he provision of adequate nursing care is criticai39 and
autumnalis, ticks, Linognathus setosus.
treatment is based on antishock doses of gluco-
Ivermectin is effective against demodectic and
sarcoptic mange in dogs, at doses of0.3 mg/kg body
that may antagonize ivermectin include picrotoxin and
weight34. It is given on four occasions at seven-day
physostigmine. Clinicians are unlikely to be able to
ETIOPATHOGENESIS AND CLASSIFICATION OF OTITIS EXTERNA
93
necessary. Atipamezole (50 mcg/kg i/m) should be
NB: All use of ivermectin in dogs and cats is off-
followed by oral yohimbine (0.1 mg/kg) every six
label. Collies, Collie-crosses, and some herding
hours as needed27.
breeds are very susceptible to central nervous
 system side-effects when given ivermectin. They
Fpronil
ja!p keu
Indications: Spilopsyffus cuniculi, Otodectes cynotis
Sarcoptes scabies, Neotrombicula autumnalis, ticks, lice.
Fipronil is primarily marketed as a flea control product
and as such it will be effective against S. cuniculi (see
Chapter 4: Dermatoses characterized by crust and
obtain these agents easily or quickly.
scale). Although presented in both spray and spot-on
The inability to predict with any confidence if an 
formulations, the spray formulation is preferred for
individual dog will exhibit ivermectin toxicity is one of
the treatment of otic parasites since effective local
the main problems facing clinicians38. A modified
 concentrations on both hair and skin surfaces may be
dosing schedule has been proposed which provides for
 achieved rapidly. Fipronil is also effective against lice42.
a gradually increasing dose, allowing the opportunity
Fipronil has been demonstrated under field
to observe the dogs closely for toxic signs34. Prompt 
 conditions to prevent infestation with trombiculid
intervention (and at the subcritical dose stage) increases
mites and ticks23 26. The spray formulation of fpronil
the chances of recovery from ivermectin toxicity. T'he
is preferred for this indication.
modified dosing scheme is as followsalter 34.
Fipronil spray has also proven effective against
Day 1 0.05 mg/kg
 isn d q ae  pe etsis
Day 20.1 mg/kg
clinicians are faced with scabies in very young puppies,
Day 30.15 mg/kg
where other topical treatments are inadvisable.
Day 4 0.2 mg/ kg
Day 50.3 mg/kg
Selamectin
Indications: Sarcoptes scabiei, Otodectes cynotis,
Amitraz
possibly Spifopsyffus cunicufi, lice.
Indications: Demodex spp., Sarcoptes scabiei, ticks.
Selamectin is a novel avermectin with considerable
Amitraz is a monoamine oxidase inhibitor presented
 advantages over ivermectin:
in an organic vehicle. Although serious side-effects are
+ It is safe in ivermectin-sensitive Collies44.
rare, owners may report transient lethargy and hypo-
· It is effective against against fleas, roundworms,
O. cynotis and S. scabiei.
40. Problems are most serious in very small dogs
· It is applied topically.
where the hypothermia may be severe. The drug is
contraindicated in Chihuahuas, for example. Pre-
Selamectin must not be given to animals of less
than six weeks of age and it must be applied topically
and the dipping should be performed in a well-
to the back of the neck, even for the treatment of O.
ventilated room. T'he person carrying out the dipping
cynotis.
should wear gloves and waterproof protective
clothing.
 One ml of 19.9% amitraz solution in 30 ml mineral
oil, or 2 ml 5% solution in 20 ml mineral oil, has been
recommended for the
treatment
of canine
Otodemodicosis1l, 12, 19.
Amitraz is also licensed (in the UK) against scabies,
at a dilution of 0.025% (25 ml 5% solution in 5 liters
water).
Amitraz dips are useful as a tick repellent?2 and in
some countries the chemical is marketed as an
amitraz-impregnated collar for  this
purpose.
Accidental ingestion of amitraz-impregnated collars
may prove fatal to dogs and prompt treatment is
94 EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
FOREIGN BODIES
KEY POINTS
movement; once in the ear canal they can only move
● Younger dogs from hunting and working breeds
forward (174).
are predisposed.
Hair shafts, particularly if they contact the tympanum,
· Otic foreign bodies usually, but not always, cause
may also act as foreign bodies (175). In one series of
acute clinical signs of otitis.
120 cases of otitis externa, 12.6% of the cases were con-
· Grass awns are the most common foreign body
sidered to result from matted hair in the external ear
entering the external ear canal.
canal3. Other foreign bodies that may enter, or be put
· Always examine both ears as foreign bodies may be
into, the external ear canal include other pieces of veg-
bilateral.
etation and children's toys. Aggregations of otic, usual-
· Rupture of the tympanum is a common compli-
ly proprietary, non-veterinary powders and ointments
cation of otic foreign body penetration.
with cerumen may also induce foreign body reactions.
· Otic foreign bodies are most commonly seen in the
Foreign body penetration into the ear canal is usually
summer, reflecting the importance of grass awns in
accompanied by acute pain. The dog or cat shakes its
the etiology.
head and may attempt to remove the object with a foot.
As the object moves down it may induce hyperemia and
There is no sex predisposition to otic foreign body
ulceration followed by the generation of an otic
penetration but young dogs are predisposed to grass
 dlischarge and secondary bacterial proliferation (l76)
awn penetration', 2. In general , all breeds of Spaniels  If the foreign body penetrates the epithelia lining of the
and Golden Retrievers are most commonly affected,
external ear canal, it may become embedded in a
while German Shepherd Dogs, Miniature Poodles,
pyogranuloma4. In one study2 nearly 20% of cases of
and Dachshunds are underrepresented?.
otic grass awn penetration were associated with rupture
The most common foreign body found in the
of the tympanum (177), suggesting that otitis media
external ear canal of dogs and cats is the grass awn'.
should be considlered in long-standing cases, even where
In the USA the most common species of plant awn is
the tympanum is intact.
Hordeum jubatum, although other members of the
 The most common bacteria associated with grass
genus, such as H. murinum, H. silvestre, and genera 
 awns are streptococci, although Staphylococcus spp,
such as Stipa, Setaria, Bromus, and Avena, may be
Pasteurella spp., and Actinomycetes spp. may also be
involved in other areas of the world2. All have a similar
cultured'.
shape (173) with wiry barbs which prevent retrograde
173
I73  Typical shape of a grass awn; this was removed from the
external ear canal of a dog.
ETIOPATHOGENESIS AND CLASSIFICATION OF OTITIS EXTERNA
174
175
I74  Otoscopic picture of grass awn lying adjacent to the
175
 Accumulation of hair and cerumen obstructing the
tympanic membrane. In this case the grass awn had not
horizontal ear canal at the level of the tympanum.
and erosion on the tympanic membrane.
176
177
I76 Acute, erythematous, ulcerated otitis externa associated
I77 Grass awn penetration of the tympanum. Note the
with the penetration of a grass awn into the external ear
 small piece of vegetation still visible on the left, adjacent to the
canal.
area of hemorrhage.
96 EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
NASOPHARYNGEAL AND MIDDLE EAr POLYPS
KEY POINTS
proximally along the auditory tube may provoke signs
· Nasopharyngeal polyps are benign growths which
of respiratory disease without signs of otitis media.
usually arise from the middle ear or distal auditory
 provided middle ear drainage is unimpeded and the
tube.
tympanum is not breached. Alternatively, Horner's
· Polyps are extremely rare in the dog and
syndrome, in association with gagging, may well result
uncommon in the cat.
from a polyp arising in the middle ear which grows
· Presenting signs may relate to oropharyngeal
proximally along the auditory tube to protrude into
obstruction, otitis media, or otitis externa.
the nasopharynx?. Finally, otitis media and chronic
· Diagnosis is based on clinical signs, radiography,
otorrhea may result from a polyp arising in the
and visual examination at surgery.
auditory tube, growing distally onto the bulla,
· Removing the polyps by traction alone is not
 provoking otitis media, breaching the tympanum, and
advocated as recurrence usually occurs.
resulting in the otic discharge.
· Ventral bulla osteotomy is indicated in most cases.
DIAGNOSIS
INTRODUCTION
Nasopharyngeal polyps are usually unilateral but
Inflammatory polyps are non-neoplastic masses arising
 typically cause bilateral nasal discharge. T'here may be
from the epithelial mucosa of the nasopharynx,
local lymphadenopathy. T'he differential diagnosis of
auditory tube, or middle ear'. The most common
 nasopharyngeal polyps includes upper respiratory
sites of origin are within the tympanic bulla or at the infection, nasopharyngeal foreign bodies, fungal
distal (tympanic) end of the auditory tube. Polyps are  sinusitis, and neoplasia. In particular, young cats with
the most common masses arising within the ear
system and they are benign in naturel, 2, 3. The
pinoqs susean aedoidde on puodsu on aadod
etiology of these growths is unknown. Polyps are very
be screened for nasopharyngeal polyps?. Examination
rare in the dog4, although they have been reported5.
of the pharynx typically reveals a ventrally displaced
soft palate (178).
CLINICAL FEATURES
Chronic otitis
s externa mandates otoscopic
There is no breed or age predisposition but most
examination. Bilateral otitis externa in young cats
usually reflects Otodectes cynotis infestation. Unilateral
unilateral in presentation'. Clinical signs relate to the
 otitis externa, particularly if chronic in nature, is very
presence of a mass within the nasopharynx, the middlle 
suspicious of an otic mass since extraneous otic
ear, or the external ear canal:
foreign bodies are rare in cats (179). Since most
· Nasopharyngeal polyps protrude from, or through,
 polyps will have passed through, or originated within,
the proximal oriface of the auditory tube and
the middle ear the tympanum will be ruptured and
provoke various signs such as voice change,
there may be a detectable mass within the external ear
 gagging, a chronic nasal discharge, dysphagia,
canal (180).
chronic cough, or severe respiratory embarrassment
with cyanosis2, 3, 6. Local lymphadenopathy is 
common2,3.
· Polyps confined to the middle ear may produce
neurologic signs associated with otitis media such
as nystagmus, Horner's syndrome, head tilt, or
circling2,3,6.
· Polyps breaching the tympanic membrane may be
associated with signs of otitis media but cases may
also exhibit a chronic, often malodorous, purulent,
Occasionally hemorrhagic discharge2, 3.
Do not forget to examine the ear canals in cases
of nasopharyngeal polyps and the nasopharynx in
In some cases cats may exhibit signs reflecting
cases of polyps in the extermal ear canal.
lesions in one, two, or all three of the areas above.
Thus, polyps arising in the middle ear and growing
ETIOPATHOGENESIS AND CLASSIFICATION OF OTITIS EXTERNA
97
178
 TWo nasopharyngeal polyps identified
178
intraorally after reflecting the soft palate.
I79An aural polyp at the entrance to the
179
extemal ear canal.
I80Otoscopic view of a polyp within the external ear canal.
180
98 EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
All cats with suspected polyps should be subjected
Ifneurologic andradiographic examination
to radiographic examination of the bullae, not only cats
determines that the tympanic bulla is the site of
with signs referable to the middle ear disease. Signs of
origin, or that there is bulla pathology, ventral bulla
Otitis media such as thickened walls, soft tissue densities,
osteotomy is indicatedl, 6. This allows removal of the
and fluid lines (181, 182) may well indicate that the
mucosa from which the polyp arises and permits
polyp arises within the middle ear or that there is
drainage from the bulla, which alleviates the otitis
middle ear pathology. Ventral bull osteotomy and
media. Bacterial infection frequently accompanies
extirpation of the site of origin of the polyp should be
polyps which arise from the middlle ear, and swabbing
performed on these cats.
for bacterial culture and sensitivity testing is
recommendedl, 7.
PATHOLOGIC FEATURES
 Polyps are variable in appearance. They may be
POSTOPERATIVE COMPLICATIONS
smooth (183), granular, or friable in nature and they
 Recurrence will occur if the origin of the polyp is not
often have a pale pinkish-gray coloration?. On section
 r    a  
they tend to have a pale, rather uniformly dense
associated with a recurrence rate of 30%l,2. In
appearance. Histopathologically the polyps are  contrast, extirpating the mucosal lining of the bulla
essentially connective tissue, often containing an 1
 when polyps originated in the middle ear resulted in
infammatory infltrate4, with an epithelial covering.
no recurrencel,6.
T'he epithelium is usually thin, one to two layers thick,
and it may be ciliated or non-ciliated, columnar or
stratified, and squamous non-keratinizing in nature2,
3, 6. Some polyps exhibit very ulcerated surfaces.
Occasionally, mucus-secreting glands are found
beneath the surface3. Lymphoid follicles may be
found within the stroma3*4.
MANAGEMENT
Nasopharyngeal polyps may cause respiratory embar-
rassment to such an extent that anesthetic induction
is potentially complicated'. Preanaesthetic oxygena-
tion may allow for an increased safety margin if intu-
bation is difficult because the soft palate is pushed
ventrallyl, 3.
Lesions that mimic the appearance of polyps are
so rare that presurgical biopsy is not justifiedl and
immediate excision should be undertaken. Naso-
pharyngeal polyps may be removed by transecting
the pedicle as close to the opening of the auditory
tube as possible. It is usually possible to achieve this
without transecting the soft palate; simply maneuver
the soft palate rostrally and dorsally to allow the
transection of the pedicle is minimall,3.
Clinicians should note, however, that simply
removing the polyp by traction or pedicle section,
whether the polyp is pharyngeal or otic, results in
recurence rates of approximately 30%1, 2,3 Therefore,
consideration should be given to bulla osteotomy, even
in cases where signs of otitis media are not present.
This is justified on the basis that the middle ear, or
distal auditory tube immediately adjacent to the
middle ear, is the most likely site of origin of the
polyp'.
ETIOPATHOGENESIS AND CLASSIFICATION OF OTITIS EXTERNA
66
I8l, I82 Lateral (18l) and rostrocaudal (open mouth)
181
(182) radiographs of a cat's skull. Note the increased tissue
density within the right bulla and external ear canal (arrows)
182
I83  A resected nasopharyngeal polyp removed from a cat's 
18.3
bulla via ventral bulla osteotomy. The stump of stalk, which
originated within the auditory tube, is visible on the right.
100
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
OTIC NEOPLASIA
KEY POINTS
PINNAL NEOPLASIA
· Otic neoplasia is uncommon.
Pinnal neoplasia in dogs tends to be benign, with the
· Not all growths within the external ear canal are
exception of mast cell tumors (Table 6). Pinnal
neoplastic; polyps and inflammatory granulomas
neoplasia in cats tends to be malignant. Numerous
can occur.
 tumor types are reported, as might be expected from
· In the dog most conchal neoplasia is benign,
an organ composed of skin, connective tissue, and
whereas in the cat it is malignant.
cartilage, but only the most frequently recognized
· The most common sign of conchal neoplasia is
types will be dliscussed here.
chronic otitis externa, often associated with
malodour.
Papilloma
·Radical excision is indicated, usually associated with
Cutaneous papillomas (l84) are almost exclusively
lateral wall resection or ablation of the external ear
confined to dogs10,1l1. Cocker Spaniels, Kerry Blue
canal.
Terriers, and male dogs in general are predisposedl0,
12. T'he lesions are usually well-demarcated, superficial,
INTRODUCTION
occasionally pedunculated papules (i.e. <l cm
Neoplasia of the external ear canal is generally agreed
[<0.4 in] diameter) which tend to bleed if trauma-
to be uncommon in dogs and catsl-4. Pinnal
tizedl3. Many papillomas exhibit a frond-like
neoplasms are somewhat more common. Thus, in a 
study of 340 cats with skin neoplasia, 8.7% of basal
 of, the papovavirus which causes canine oral papillo-
cell tumors, 8% of fibrosarcomas, 13.8% of mast cell
 matosis14. Cutaneous papillomas are not considered
tumors, and 40% of squamous cell carcinomas
 transmissible in the clinical settingl5. Papillomas
occurred on the pinna. The pinna is the most
 sometimes occur in the external ear canal3.
common site for canine cutaneous histiocytoma, the
 Diagnosis is generally made on clinical grounds,
most common canine tumore. Pinnal neoplasia is 
although sebaceous adenomas may have a similar
more commonly encountered in dogs and cats in
 clinical appearance. Diagnosis may be confirmed by
tropical and subtropical areas, a consequence of 
histopathologic examination of excised tissue.
 prolonged exposure to actinic radiation inducing
Cutaneous papillomas rarely undergo spontaneous
 regression. Since they are benign they generally do
ear is rare?.
not warrant surgical excision, unless the papilloma
becomes traumatized. However, many owners find
them esthetically displeasing and request excision.
After excision a good prognosis may be givenl3.
Table 6: Most common pinnal neoplasms of dogs and cats2.6.
Dogs
Cats
Benign
Benign
 Pinnal histiocytoma
Basal cell tumor
Papilloma 
Malignant
Malignant
Rare
Mast cell neoplasia
Sqaumous cell carcinoma
Fibrosarcoma
ETI0PATH0GENESIS AND CLASSIFICATION 0F 0TITIS EXTERNA 101
Canine cutaneous histiocytoma
A tentative diagnosis is generally made on clinical
Canine cutaneous histiocytomas (l85) are most like-
 grounds but because of the difficulty in ruling out
ly of Langerhans cell originl6. These are the most  mast cell tumor, in particular, further work up is
common neoplasms of the dog and 50% of cases  indicated. A granulomatous lesion would be the other
Occur in dogs under two years of agel7. Pedigree dogs  I
 most likely differential. Microscopic examination of
are predisposed, particularly Boxers, English Bulldogs, 
 aspirated cytologic samples will usually allow differen-
Greyhounds, and Scottish Terriers6, i7. The most t
tiation of histiocytoma (186) from mast cell tumor2,
common site for the tumor is the dorsal pinna, often
 18, 19, but histopathologic examination of excised
toward the base2, 6, 17. These are solitary, elevated,
 tissue is necessary to rule out granuloma and to obtain
domed, erythematous, well-demarcated, minimally
a definitive diagnosis. Canine cutaneous histiocytomas
 pruritic lesions which are often reported to show rapid
 are benign lesions and the response to surgery is close
growth. Occasionally they are ulcerated and very
to 100%17. A good prognosis may be given.
 rarely they have been reported to be multiple17.
184
185
I84Flesh-colored papilloma on the pinna of a Cocker
185
Discrete, erythematous histiocytoma on the rostral
Spaniel.
edge of the pinna.
I86  Photomicrograph of a needle cytologic
186
sample from the lesion in I85. Note the
discrete, large, round cells with an absence
of granules in the cytoplasm.
102
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
Squamous cell carcinoma
Squamous cell carcinoma of the feline pinna has low
Squamous cell carcinoma is the most common
metastatic potential2l and it may remain in situ for
malignant neoplasm of the cat and the pinna is a
some considerable time23. Local invasion and spread
predilection site 2,5,20,21. Squamous cell carcinoma
to the regional lymph nodes and, ultimately, the lung
rarely affects the canine pinnal3. In one study the mean
felds may be seen2. Surgical excision of the pinnal
 age of affected cats was 12 yearss. Early lesions of
margin is curative in most cases (190, 191); a 5 mm
actinic dermatitis may precede neoplastic transform-
ation; this is related to long-term exposure to actinic
white pinnae the tips of the pinnae may be excised as
radiation22. Consequently the dlisease is more common
a prophylactic measure at the earliest sign of actinic
in tropical regions. Squamous cell carcinoma may also
 damage. Cryotherapy achieves good cosmetic results20
be seen in temperate regions, particularly on the tips
but local recurrence is quite common24, perhaps
of the pinnae of white ears20. White cats with blue eyes
because the margin of affected tissue is not well
are generally predlisposed?1. The earliest clinical sign is
delineated25. In a study comparing surgical excision,
hyperemia (187), which may wax and wane for a
 cryotherapy, and radiotherapy26, it was found that
number of years in temperate climates. Malignant
although all modalities were effective, surgical excision
transformation is characterized by a thickened, folded
 achieved the longest disease-free interval ( Table 7).
pinnal margin, ulceration, and crust (188, 189).
Table 7: A comparison of the disease-free intervals and survival times for various treatments of feline squamous cell carcinoma of
the nasal planum and pinna27
Treatment modality
Disease-free interval (me dian)
Survival time (median)
 Surgical excision (n = 39)
5/ep t65
673 days
Cryosurgery (n = I 1)
254 days
682 days
Radiotherapy (n = I1)
361 days
383 days
187
I87 White haired cat with erythematous lesions of early squamous cell
carcinoma on the right pinna. More advanced disease is apparent on the
left pinna.
ETIOPATHOGENESIS AND CLASSIFICATION OF OTITIS EXTERNA
103
188
189
I88  Crusted and early erosive lesions of squamous cell
I89  Advanced stage of squamous cell carcinoma of the
carcinoma on the distal pinna of a cat.
 pinna of a cat. The ulceration is well advanced.
I90 This cat has had the distal pinna
061
amputated to well below the hair line.
I91  This cat has had bilateral pinnal ablation
161
to remove active lesions.
104
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
Canine mast cell tumor
Basal cell tumor
Canine basal cell tumors tend to be solitary, slow
Although mast cell tumors may occur in young dogs
growing, well-defined, occasionally ulcerated nodules,
(hence the inclusion of canine cutaneous histiocytoma
1-5 cm (0.4-2.0 in) in diameter, which are benign in
as a differential diagnosis), the incidence increases
behaviorl3, 31. Feline basal cell tumors are much more
with age, peaking at eight or nine years of agel8, 19.
variable at presentation; they may be rounded or
Boxers, and other breeds with Bulldog ancestry, are
intradermal and they may be cystic5, 31. Although
 predisposed but mast cell tumors may occur in any
feline basal cell tumors are benign, with an excellent
dog18,19. The predilection site for mast cell neoplasia
they may undergo malignant
varies from breed to breedl9. Thus in the Boxer it is
transformation to basal cell carcinoma. These
the hindlimb which is predisposed, whereas in the
malignant tumors may be multicentric, tend to occur
 Rhodesian Ridgeback it is the tail19.
on the rostral end of the body, are intradermal, and
T'he clinical appearance of the tumor is very variable
 often ulcerates, 31. Given that clinically it is not possi-
but single cutaneous lesions less than 3 cm (l.2 in) in
ble to differentiate a benign neoplasm from a
diameter (l92) are the most common presentation.
 malignant one, wide surgical margin is advocated31
The diagnosis of mast cell tumor is made by a
 Basal cell tumors may sometimes occur in the external
combination  of  cytologic  and  histopathologic
ear canal3.
examination of aspirated or excised material.
However, clinical management of all but single
Fbrosarcoma
nodules (treated by wide surgical excision) will
Fibrosarcomas are more common in the cat than in
mandate clinical staging prior to initiation of
the dog32. The most common presentation is of a
 treatment ( Table 8). Note, however, that with regard 
solitary, domed, rarely ulcerated, well-demarcated
to the pinna, the advised 3 cm (1.2 in) margin rule is
 neoplasm5, 32. Solitary fibrosarcomas usually occur in
clearly impractical18. Given that most mast cells extend
older cats and it is this type (rather than the viral-
laterally rather than deeper, it may be best to amputate
associated multiple presentation sometimes seen in
the pinna at the first presentation18.
 younger cats) which is usually found on the pinna5, 32
T'he selection of various treatment modalities for
extensive or recurrent canine mast cell tumors is
 and a wide margin is advised. Again, in practice this
beyond the scope of this book, and readers are
implies a degree of pinnal amputation. Postsurgical
 referred to specialist texts. Clinicians may well have to
 consider referral to institutions offering radliotherapy
 rarely found on the canine pinna2, 32.
and chemotherapy.
Feline mast cell tumor
 T'he skin of the convex surface of the feline pinna has a
higher concentration of mast cells than skin in other
 areas27, although whether this relates to the relatively
high incidence of feline mast cell tumors which occur
 on the pinna and head3, 25 is not known. There is no
sex predisposition but Siamese cats appear to be at risk3.
 19. Mast cell tumors of the pinna tend to occur toward
the base5. Feline mast cell tumors present and behave
in a dlifferent way to canine mast cell tumors. T'hey may
appear as slow or rapidly growing intracutaneous
 papules or nodules, which may have a pink coloration
and may ulcerate. Some animals present with multiple
 celltumors tend to behave in a benign manners, 19,with
a low rate of visceral metastasis compared to the canine
form of the disease28,29, 30. They tend to recur locally
and the relatively benign nature should not preclude
 aggressive management. Furthermore, mast cell tumors
may arise, de novo, at distant sites19.
ETIOPATHOGENESIS AND CLASSIFICATION OF OTITIS EXTERNA
105
Table 8: Summary of the diagnosis, staging and management of canine mast cell neoplasia (based on Goldschmidt and Shofer'9).
Clinical work up of canine mast cell neoplasia
· Cytologic examination of aspirates or touch impressions of lesion and regional lymph node.
+
Histopathologic examination of excised material
· Full hematology and biochemistry.
·Buffy coat examination.
Bone marrow biopsy.
Consider results and stage tumor
· One tumor confined to the dermis, no lymph node involvement (Stage I):
(a) without systemic signs;
(b) with clinical signs.
· One tumor confined to the dermis, regional lymph nodes involved (Stage 2):
(a) without systemic signs;
(b) with clinical signs.
· Multiple dermal tumors, or large infitrating tumors with or without lymph node involvement (Stage 3):
(a) without systemic signs:
(b) with clinical signs.
· Any tumor or recurrence, with metastasis (Stage 4).
Treatment plans
 Stage I (a and b): local excision with 3 cm (I.2 in) margins on all ides.
 Stage 2 (a and b): local excision of tumor radiotherapy of surgical site and regional lymph node. In addition, Stage 2b receives systemic
prednisolone. NB: No radiotherapy of perineal or genital lesions.
 Stages 3 and 4: Local debulking if possible, chemotherapy consider radiotherapy.
192
I92 Mast cell tumor. Solitary well-demarcated, rapidly growing ulcerated
nodule at the base of the pinna of a dog.
106
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
CONCHAL NEOPLASIA
Neoplasia of the external ear canal is rare?. In general,
Malignant conchal neoplasia must be identified
otic neoplasia in cats tends to be malignantl, 3 and is
and treated radically. Lateral wall resection is not
likely to be found in either the vertical or the
adequate; total ablation of the ear canal and lateral
 horizontal canal with equal frequency3. Otic discharge,
bulla osteotomy is indicated.
pruritus, and pain are common, whereas neurologic
signs are rare3. Canine conchal neoplasia is more likely
to be benign than feline conchal neoplasia, but
distribution and clinical signs are similarl, 3. Most
in both dogs and cats. T'he clinical appearance of these
benign tumors do not affect the bullae?. Although the
neoplasms is usually that of a raised, frequently
malignant tumors, particularly in the cat, tend to
ulcerated mass which may occlude the lumen3.
invade locally, it appears that distant metastasis is the
Ceruminous gland adenoma
accompany otic neoplasia, a generally poor prognosis
Benign ceruminous gland neoplasia tends to present
is necessary since this usually indicates middle ear
with signs of obstructive otitis externa (193): pruritus,
involvement and squamous cell carcinoma; altogether
head shaking, malodor, otorrhea, and occasional
a more malignant tumor than ceruminous gland
hemorrhage20,33. Ceruminous gland adenomas are
adenocarcinoma of the external ear canal3. Indeed,
most commonly seen in middle-aged to elderly
when squamous cell carcinoma is found in the external
animals2, 33. These benign tumors tend to be raised
ear canal it usually has its origins in the middle ear.
and occasionally pedunculated (194) and they may
Papillomas, basal cell tumors, and ceruminous
 occlude the external ear canal32. They may have a
gland adenomas are the most commonly found
 melanotic appearance (195) and may be multiple2.
benign tumors in dogs, while in cats ceruminous
Aggressive surgical management is usually curative
gland adenomas are most common (Table 9)3.
and lateral wall resection, vertical wall ablation, or
Carcinomas, adenocarcinomas, and squamous cell
total ablation of the external ear canal is indicated, as
carcinomas are the most common malignant tumors
 dictated by the extent of the tumor.
Table 9: The most common tumors of the external ear canal of dogs and cats5
Dogs
Cats
Benign
Benign
 Papilloma
Ceruminous gland adenoma
 Basal cell tumor
Ceruminous gland adenoma
 Sebaceous gland adenoma
Malignant
Malignant
 Ceruminous gland adenocarcinoma
 Ceruminous gland adenocarcinoma
 Other carcinomas
Squamous cell carcinoma
 Squamous cell carcinoma
Other carcinoma
ETIOPATHOGENESIS AND CLASSIFICATION OF OTITIS EXTERNA
107
193Obstructive otitis secondary to
61
ceruminous gland neoplasia in a cat.
I94 Large, pedunculated ceruminous gland
194
adenoma protruding from the external ear
canal of a dog.
195
Multiple, melanotic ceruminous gland
195
adenomas in the external ear canal of a cat.
108
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
Ceruminous gland adenocarcinoma
longer disease-free interval, a lower recurrence rate, and
Malignant ceruminous gland tumors tend to be
longer postoperative survival time than simple lateral
ulcerative and infiltrating rather than occlusive2, 33
wall resection34, 35. If the tumor has extended through
Most cases tend to occur in old animals - cats: mean
the external ear canal into surrounding soft tissue,
age 12 years; dogs: mean age nine years34, 35.
adjunctive radiotherapy is indicated33, 36.
Otoscopically they are pinkish in color (196), ulcerated,
and friable in nature34, 35. Most dogs and cats exhibit
Squamous cell carcinoma
an otic discharge which is commonly malodorous,
 In cats, squamous cell carcinoma appears to be as
purulent (197),and blood stained34, 35. Otic pruritus
common as ceruminous gland adenocarcinoma?. The
and ipsilateral mandibular lymphadenopathy is also
 tumors are proliferative and ulcerated (200) and they
have a tendency to grow rapidly2. Most conchal
strated in nearly half the cats and dogs in recent
 tumors with otoscopically visible evidence of extensive
studies34,35. This tendency to involve the bulla (198,
spread and histopathologic evidence of local infiltration
199) is reflected in the response to surgery; radical,
are squamous cell carcinomas?. Radical resection is
total ear canal ablation and bulla osteotomy results in a
necessary and presurgical biopsy may be advantageous.
196
I96 Fnkish, nodular appearance of a ceruminous gland
adenocarcinoma in the external ear canal of a cat.
L61
197 Malodorous, hemorrhagic obstructive
otitis secondary to ceruminous gland
adenocarcinoma in a cat.The ulcerated mass
of tumor may be seen protruding into the
lumen at the entrance to the external ear
canal
ETIOPATHOGENESIS AND CLASSIFICATION OF OTITIS EXTERNA
109
I98 CT scan of a I3-year-old cat There is
861
increased soft tissue opacity in the right 
extermal ear canal extending up to, and perhaps 
across, the tympanic membrane. This is a
ceruminous gland adenocarcinoma. Note that
the right bulla appears as normal as the left The
bony septum dividing the feline bulla into lateral 
and medial compartments is clearly visible with
 this imaging modality.
I99CT scan of a ten-year-old Cocker
661
Spaniel. The left-hand side exhibits an irregular 
imprecise outline to the bulla, increased
density within the bulla, loss of air within the
external ear canal, mineralization of soft tissue
in the external ear canal, and a homogenous
soft tissue mass on the ventral aspect of the
 skull.This is a ceruminous gland
adenocarcinoma.
 200 Ulcerated, poorly defined squamous
200
cell carcinoma at the entrance to the external
ear canal of a dog.
110
 EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
Non-neoplastic growths
MiDDLE EAR NEOPLASIA
Pyogenic granulomas
Neoplastic transformation within the middle ear is
T'hese have been reported to occur within the external
rare, accounting for only 2.6% of cases referred to the
 ear canal of cats37. Clinically the granulomas appear as 
authors of a review of ten years of referral surgery?: in
fleshy masses that may be covered in epithelium.
total ll dogs comprising three cases of ceruminous
However, the epithelial surface is usually ulcerated37.
gland adenocarcinoma, two basal cell tumors, two
 The prognosis for pyogenic granuloma is much better
sebaceous adenocarcinomas, two papillary adenomas,
than for overt neoplasia. However, histopathologic
one squamous papilloma, and one anaplastic tumor.
examination of biopsy samples is essential to dlistinguish
(However, one report stated that squamous cell
the two.
carcinoma is the most common tumor of the middle
and inner ear of dogs39.)
Eosinophilic granulomas
Only one of the ll dogs was less than six years old
Eosinophilic granuloma of the external ear canal has
 and there was no sex bias. Persistent otorrhea and
been reported in four dogs38. T'hese dogs presented
otic irritation or pain was the most common clinical
with chronic otitis externa. Otoscopic examination
sign. Rarely, signs referable to a pharyngeal mass or
revealed a solitary, friable mass occluding the vertical
to neurologic lesions occured?. In six dogs there was
canal. Surgical excision was curative.
a visible mass within the external ear canal and in two
there was para-aural abscessation. All the animals
Cryptococcosis
were examined radiographically and in all cases there
Cryptococcosis and other fungal disease may
Of the eleven dogs in this study only five were
external ear canal (20l). Histopathologic examination 
 amenable to surgery, typically total ablation of the
of biopsy samples will identify these lesions.
external ear canal combined with bulla osteotomy. Of
Cryptococcosis has a better prognosis that squamous
the five dogs treated surgically four survived for more
cell carcinoma, thereby justifying biopsy.
than eight months after surgery6.
201
201   Ulcerated granulomatous lesions due to cryptococcosis should be
considered in the differential diagnosis of conchal neoplasia.
ETIOPATHOGENESIS AND CLASSIFICATION OF OTITIS EXTERNA
UNDERLYING DISEASE
KEY POINTS
HYPERSENSITIVITIES
· Underlying disease is an important cause of chronic
Atopy
otitis externa.
Atopy is an inherited predisposition to develop IgE to
· Atopy is by far the most common underlying
environmental allergens resulting in disease2. Affected
disease in chronic otitis externa.
dogs exhibit pruritus and otitis externa2-4. Atopy has
· Unless the underlying disease is recognized and
been stated to be the most common cause of chronic
treated, the otitis will continue.
otitis externa in dogs4.The incidence of otitis externa in
· Corrective surgery, such as Zepp resection, will not
atopic dogs has been estimated at 55% and in 3% of
be successful if the underlying disease is not treated.
atopic dogs otitis externa was the only clinical sign?3.
Although atopy does exist in cats, it is not usually
INTRODUCTION
associated with otitis externa in this species, possibly
Underlying disease as a cause of otitis externa is 1
 reflecting differences in otic microclimate.
important'. Most underlying diseases were classified
Otitis externa in atopic dogs often begins as
as primary causes of otitis externa by August',i.e. they erythema at the base of the concave aspects of the
may directly result in otitis externa without the pinnae and on the vertical portions of the external ear
presence of predisposing factors (such as  canals (202, 203)². The horizontal portion of the
conformation） or perpetuating factors (such as（
external ear canal is minimally affected in early cases.
 microorganisms). Failure to recognize that atopy is  Scott? reported that otitis externa associated with
present, for example, may condemn the dog to a 2
 atopy often flared in association with the skin disease.
lifetime of symptomatic otic therapy and surgery
This is a valuable clue that an alert clinician should
which will fail to elicit a cure.
spot when taking a history.
202
Whenever a case of bilateral otitis exterma is
presented the clinician should consider the
possibility of otodectic mange or underlying disease
before initiating symptomatic therapy.
202, 203 Classic signs of a hypersensitivity affecting the
the upper portions of the external ear canal (203).There is
erythema and hyperplasia in both areas.
203
112
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
Atopy is associated with erythema and edema of
severe that that seen in atopy and it exhibits a rapid
the ear canal but there is usually little exudation?.
progression. Otitis externa is also associated with
Secondary changes and microbial proliferation result
dietary intolerance in cats7,8.
in extension of these early clinical signs to the
horizontal canal and hyperplasia of the epithelial lining
Contact dermatitis
(204). Malassezial proliferation may be particularly
Allergic contact dermatitis is a rare dermatosis in dogs
troublesome (205). Although chronic otitis externa
and almost unknown in cats?. In dogs with very
is commonly due to atopy, it rarely results in gram-
extensive or generalized allergic contact dermatitis the
negative bacterial infection.
concave aspects of the pinnae and upper portion of
Lateral wall resection or vertical canal ablation
the vertical ear canals may exhibit lesions (208)10.
should not be carried out on an atopic ear, in an
More commonly, allergic contact dermatitis or
attempt to alleviate the otitis externa, without an
irritant contact dermatitis may occur due to exposure
appreciation of the underlying
disease.
T'he
 to any of the components of an otic preparation,
inflammation will continue to affect the medial and
provided it is used for long enough. Irritant contact
lateral walls of the residual canal and the proximal
dermatitis within the confines of the external ear canal
aspect of the pinna (206, 207).
may be due to exposure to one of the common
vehicles, propylene glycoll. However, the most
Dietary intolerance
commonly implicated component is neomycin,
Dietary intolerance is a dermatosis which is much less
although documented, published reports are very
common than atopy. However, when it occurs there  rare. Bilateral, erythematous otitis externa would be
may be concurrent otitis externa. Although otitis  anticipated (209). The classic history is a cat or dog
externa may, on rare occasions', be the only sign of with chronic, relapsing otitis externa, which had
dietary intolerance, it is commonly associated with
 previously responded well to a certain medication only
other signs, typically pruritus5, 6, 7. The otitis
 to deteriorate when exposed to the medicant again.
associated with dietary intolerance appears to be more
204
205
atopic dog's external ear canal. There are a few squames, no
inflammatory cells, but many yeast.
204Otoscopic picture of the lower portion of the vertical
ear canal of a dog with atopy. Note the erythema and
hyperplasia.
ETIOPATHOGENESIS AND CLASSIFICATION OF OTITIS EXTERNA
113
206
207
 206Failed lateral wall resection in an atopic West Highland
 207  Only partially successful vertical canal ablation in an
atopic dog. Erythema and hyperplasia stillaffect the pnoximal
 affect the residual medial wall of the external ear canal.
aspect of the pinna and the residual portion of the medial wall 
of the external ear canal.
208
209
 208 Allergic contact dermatitis. Note the hyperpigmentation
affecting the perioral, periocular regions in addition to the
aun jo uood saddn aue pue euuid aue jo padse aouo
vertical ear canal.
209  Allergic contact dermatitis following neomycin therapy.
Erythematous, hyperplastic otitis externa. Note the lack of 
syt oi satuiod e euuid aun jo padse auon aui uo suoisl
 not being atopy even though the changes in the external ear
canal are indistinguishable on clinical grounds.
114 
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
DEFECTS IN KERATINIZATION
dermatosis which used to be classified as idiopathic
 o d     si
seborrhea. Many of these dogs suffer from M.
secondary to another disease. By far the most
 pachydermatis dermatitis and they show a spectacular
common causes of scaling and crusting dermatoses
response to antimalassezial therapyl6. Whatever the
are secondary causes such as ectoparasites, infectious
exact nature of these two disorders, or their
agents, hypersensitivities, and endocrinopathies12.
relationship, they are both associated with severe otitis
Otitis externa may be anticipated with these disorders
external4,16.
only if the underlying disease is itself a cause of ear
The otitis externa associated with primary
disease. Superficial pyoderma, dermatophytosis, or
seborrhea in Cocker Spaniels is initially ceruminous
demodicosis are common causes of crust and scale on
(210), but epidermal hyperplasia (2ll) soon follows.
the trunk or limbs, but they rarely cause otitis
The otic discharge is typically thick and oleaginous
externa. In contrast, the inflammation caused by
(212). Otoscopic examination of early cases reveals
atopy is generalized, as are the aberrations in
 hyperplasia, a moister appearance than in an atopic ear
cutaneous homeostasis which accompany an
canal (compare with 204), and a tendency to bleed
endocrinopathy. T'hus, these diseases are often
easily (2l3). Cytologic examination from many cases
associated with otitis externa.
will reveal plenty of cerumen and cellular debris but
Similarly, some, but not all, of the primary defects
      
in keratinization (idiopathic seborrhea) may be s
 subsequent bacterial culture from these ears may fail
associated with otitis externa. Examples include ↑
 to record any significant bacterial growth at all,
idiopathic seborrhea in Cocker Spanielsl3 and i
 illustrating the value of otic cytology. However, in
epidermal(
 dysplasia  in West Highland  White  contrast to the otitis associated with atopy, the disease
Terriers14. The relationship between epidermal i
 in Cocker Spaniels is often complicated by gram-
dysplasia and theyeast Malassezia pachydermatisin
 negative infection (215), perhaps a reflection of
West Highland White Terriers is complex and poorly
differences in glandular secretion.
understood14, 15. Basset Hounds also suffer from a
210
211
210  Early changes associated with chronic otitis externa in a
2IICocker Spaniel with an almost occluded external ear
Cocker Spaniel. Ceruminous otitis with early hyperplasia.
canal, a consequence of chronic otitis externa.
ETIOPATHOGENESIS AND CLASSIFICATION OF OTITIS EXTERNA
115
212
213
 212 Unstained cytology smear. Note the thick, oleaginous
nature of the cerumen.
213Otoscopic picture of the external ear canal of a Cocker
Spaniel with early changes associated with chronic otitis
externa. There is erythema and the ear canal has a moister
appearance than the atopic ear (compare with 204). Note
 that the ear canal has been plucked to facilitate cleaning.
214Photomicrograph of a stained cytologic smear from
24
a Cocker Spaniel. Note the increased numbers of squames,
the amount of cerumen, the lack of microorganisms, and 
the absence of inflammatory cells.
215 Ulcerated external ear canal due to gram-negative
215
bacterial infection in a Cocker Spaniel.
116
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
M. pachydermatis is a common cause of otitis
216
externa in West Highland White Terriers and Basset
Hounds. In these animals the ears are erythematous,
malodorous, and hyperplastic (216, 217). Cerumen
may be thick and oleaginous and vast numbers of
yeast may be detected when smears are stained and
examined microscopically (218).
Hereditary defects in keratinization have been
reported in cats17. Persian cats are most commonly
affected (219), although the condition may occur in
other breeds. Affected animals show signs from a very
early age and either sex may be affected. The ears
develop a ceruminous otitis externa and greasy scale
may accumulate on the pinnae. T'he entire trunk is
also affected with scale, grease, and malodor. Because
of the severity of the disease, many cases are
216 Hyperplastic otic epithelium occluding the external ear
euthanased at an early age as there is no effective
canal of a West Highland White Terrier
treatment.
ENDOCRINOPATHIES
217
Endocrinopathies are often cited as underlying causes
of chronic ceruminous otitis externa. However, neither
hypothyroidism nor hyperadrenocorticism are com-
monly associated with otitis externa18, 19, 20. Gonadal
hormone changes (e.g. Sertoli cell tumors), in contrast,
may have a profound effect on cutaneous glandular
finction and may therefore be associated with ceru-
 minous otitis (220) in association with other signs21.
AUTOIMMUNE AND IMMUNE-MEDIATED
DISEASES
Pemphigus foliaceus, pemphigus erythematosus,
vasculitis, and systemic lupus erythematosus commonly
affect the pinnae but they very rarely cause otitis
externa22-25. However,if vesicles, blisters, erosions, or
ulcers are found on the concave aspect of the pinna
217
 Greasy erythematous, malodorous, hyperplastic otitis
and in the external ear canal (22l), these diseases
externa in a Bassett Hound. Note the extension of the lesions
should be considered, particularly if bacteriology and
on the pinna.
cytology suggest minimal microbial involvement.
Cytological examination of vesicular contents may
reveal acanthocytes and neutrophils, a combination
218
suggestive of pemphigus foliaceus (see 96).
many yeast.
ETIOPATHOGENESIS AND CLASSIFICATION OF OTITIS EXTERNA
117
219Persian cat with an hereditary defect in
219
keratinization. There is a greasy otitis externa and
greasy tags are apparent on the adjacent skin and
hair of the pinna. (llustration courtesy Dr Manon
Paradis.)
220Otitis externa associated with a Sertoli cell tumor Note
220
the ceruminous discharge adhering to the concave aspect of
the pinna.
 221  Primary lesions of pemphigus foliaceus at the
2
entrance to the external ear canal and on the concave
aspect of the pinna.
118
 EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
THE EFFECTS OF WEATHER ON THE INCIDENCE
OF OTITIS EXTERNA
KEY POINtS
geographic location, affect both the incidence and
·Increases in environmental temperature
and
 type of otitis externa. Thus, although temperature,
humidity are reflected in the external ear canal.
relative humidity, and rainfall all affect the incidence
· The incidence of otitis externa peaks in late
of otitis externa, the local climate also exerts its effect3
summer and early autumn.
(Table 10).
· Gram-negative infections of the external ear canal are
The local climate will also affect the microbial flora
 more common in humid and warm environments.
of the external ear canal. In hot and humid
environments there are fewer ear canals from which
CLIMATE AND WEATHER
no bacterial growth can be cultured4. In man the
The three main components of weather which impact
incidence of gram-negative bacterial complication of
On external ear disease are temperature, humidity, and
 otitis externa increases in hot humid environments5
rainfall. All three factors interact with each other and
and there is evidence that this is also the case in dogs4.
affect theinternal environment of the external ear
Finally, in man it has been demonstrated that the
canal, 2. Thus, increasing environmental temperature
incidence of asthma increases after thunderstorms6.
or relative humidity is reflected in a small but measur-
Thunderstorms are associated with a decrease in
able increase in temperature or relative humidity
 temperature and an increase in humidity and rainfall
within the external ear canall. T'he incidence of otitis
and, more significantly, a significant rise in the
externa increases as environmental temperature,
concentration of pollen allergen in the air, secondary
relative humidity, and rainfall increases, although there
to osmotic rupture of pollen grains7. Given that a
is a lag effect of l-2 months?. This results in a peak
high proportion of cases of otitis externa are a
incidence of otitis externa, in dogs, in late summer
consequence of atopy, it may be that some cases of
and early autumn?.
acute otitis externa may also be related to
Variations in climate, commensurate
upon
thunderstorms.
Table Io: llustration of how the peak incidence of otitis externa in dogs varies with climate, although the effect of one particular
component of the climate may be delayed by up to two months. (After Hayes, Picke, and VWilson3)
Region
Relative humidity
Rainfall
 Missouri
2 month lag
current month
I month lag
Minnesota
2 month lag 
current month
I month lag 
Georgia
 2 month lag 
current month
I month lag
California
2 month lag
I month lag
current month 
I month lag 
2 month lag
 current month 
Illinois
I month lag
2 month lag
current month
 Brisbane
I month lag
2 month lag
data not available
ETIOPATHOGENESIS AND CLASSIFICATION OF OTITIS EXTERNA
119
REFERENCES
EFFECTS OF BREED AND PROGRESSIVE
Anirmol Hospital Associotion 22, 64 1-647.
PATHOLOGY
6Hewitt M, Walton GS and Waterhouse M (1971) Pet animal
I Fernando SDA (1966) A histological and histochemical study
infestations and skin lesions. British Journol of Dermatology 85.
of the glands of the external auditory canal of the dog.
215-255.
Reseorch in Veterinory Science 7, I1 6- I19.
7 Frost CR (196l) Canine otocariasis.Journol of Smoll Animoi
2 Stout-Graham M, Kainer RA, Whalen LR and Macy DW (1990)
Proctice 2, 253-256.
Morphologic measurements of the external ear canal of dogs.
8
Scott DW {1980) Feline dermatology 1900-1978.A
Armerican Joummol of Veterinory Reseorch 51, 990-994.
3 Huang HP Fixter LM and Little CJL (1994) Lipid content of
16, 331-459.
cerumen from normal dogs and otitic canine ears. Veterinory
9 Park G-S, Park J-S, Cho B-K, Lee W-K and Cho J-H {1996)
Record 134, 380-381
Mite infestation rate of pet dogs with ear dermatoses. Korean
4 Fermando SDA {1966) Certain histopathological features of the
Journol of Porositology 34, 1 43-150.
extermal auditory meatus of the cat and dog with otitis exterma.
I0 Grono LR {1 969) Studies of the ear mite, Otodectes cynotis
Americon Jourmal of Veterinory Reseorch 28, 278-282.
Veterinory Record 85, 6-8.
 5 van der Gagg I (1986) The pathology of the external ear canal 
II Chester DK {1 988) Medical management of otitis externa. In
in dogs and cats. Veterinary Quorterly 8, 307-317.
Veterinory Clinics of NorthAmerico (ed JR August) I8, 799-812.
6 Fraser G {196l) The histopathology of the external auditory
I2 White SD {1992) Otitis externa. Walthom Focus 2, 2-9
meatus of the dog. Journal of Comparative Pathology 71,
I3 McKeever P) and Richardson HW (1988) Otitis externa. Part
253-258
3: Ear cleaning and medical treatment. Companion Animal
7 Grono LR {1970) Studies of the microclimate of the external
Proctice 2, 24-29
auditory canal in the dog. Il l: Relative humidity within the
I4 Schneck G {1988) Use of ivermectin against ear mites in cats.
external auditory meatus. Reseorch in Veterinory Science II,
Veterinory Record 123, 599
316-319.
I5 Medleau L {1994) Using ivermectin to treat parasitic
 8 Fraser G, GregorWW, Mackenzie CP Spreull JSA and Withers
dermatoses in small animals. Veterinory Medicine August,
AR {1970) Canine ear disease.Journol of Smoll Anirmol Proctice
770-774.
10, 725-754.
ea eidoi e jo a au1 (eel) ( a pue f nd 91
9 Lane JG and Little CJL (1986) Surgery of the extemal auditory
meatus: a review of failures. Joumol of Smoll Anirmol Proctice 27.,
Veterinory Record I04, 579.
247-254.
I7 Scherk-Nixon M, Baker B, Pauling GE and Hare JE (1997)
I0 Baxter M and Lawler DC {1972) The incidence and
Treatment of feline otoacariasis with two otic preparations not
microbiology of otitis externa of dogs and cats in New
 containing miticidal active ingredients. Canadian Veterinary Joumal
Zealand. New Zeaiond Veterinory Journal 20, 29-32.
38, 229-230.
II Hayes HM, Picke LW and Wilson GP (1987) Effects of ear
I8 Thomas CA, Shanks D], Six RH et ol. (1999) Efficacy of
type and weather on the prevalence of canine otitis externa
selamectin against natural infestations of Sorcoptes scabiei and 
Reseorch in Veterinory Science 42, 294-298.
Otodectes cynotis in dogs and cats. Proceedings of the American
12 Fraser G {1965) Aetiology of otitis externa in the dog Journal
Association ofVeterinory Parositoiogy. New Orleans, p. 58.
of Smoll Anirmal Proctice 6, 445-452.
I9 Knottenbelt MK {1994) Chronic otitis extema due to Demodex
I3 Fraser G, Withers AR and Spreull JSA {I961) Otitis externa in
conis in a Tibetan Spaniel. Veterinory Record I35, 409-41 0.
the dog Journol of Small Anirmal Proctice 2, 32-47.
20 Greene RT, ScheidtV) and Moncol D) (1986) Trombiculiasis in
I4 Rycroft AK and Saban HS {1977) A clinical study of otitis
a cat Joumal of the Americon Veterinary Medical Associotion I88,
externa in the dog. Conodion Veterinary Joumal I8, 64-70.
1054-1055
I5 Baba E, Fukata T and Saito M {198 1) Incidence of otitis extema
 2I ScheidtV] (1987) Common feline ectoparasites. Part 3: Chigger
in dogs and cats in Japan. Veterinory Record 108, 393-395
mites, cat fur mites, ticks, lice, bot fly larvae, and fleas. Componion
Anirmol Proctice I, 5-15.
ECTOPARASITIC CAUSES OF OTITIS EXTERNA,
AND ANTIPARASITIC AGENTS
IScott DW and Hom RT (1987) Zoonotic dermatoses of dogs
Veterinary Pharmocology ond Therapeutics 9, 150- 156.
and cats. Veterinory Clinics of North Americo 17, 117-144.
23 Famose F {1995) Efficacy of fipronil (Frontline) spray in the
2 Powell MB, Weisbroth SH, Roth L and Wilhelmsen C (I 980)
prevention of natural infestation by Trommbicula outumnalis in
Reaginic hypersensitivity in Otodectes cynotis infestation of cats
dogs. Proceedings of The Royal Veterinary College Seminar:
and mode of mite feeding. Americon Journol of Veterinory
Ectoporasites ond Their Control pp. 28-30.
Reseorch 6, 877-881
24 Moriello KA (1987) Common ectoparasites of the dog. Part I:
 3 Larkin AD and Gaillard GE (1981) Mites in cats' ears: a source
Fleas and ticks. Conine Proctice I4, 6—18.
of cross antigenicity with house dust mites. Annais ofAllergy 46,
25 White SD, Scott KV and Cheney JM (1995) Otobius megnini
301-304.
infestation in three dogs. Veterinory Dermotoiogy 6, 33-35.
 4  Kuwahara J (1986) Canine and feline aural hematoma: clinical
26 Hunter JS, Keister DM and Jeannin P {1996) A comparison of
the tick control efficacy of Frontine Spray against the American
Journol of Veterinory Reseorch 47, 2300-2308.
dog tick and brown dog tick Proceedings of the 4 1st Annuol
5 Kuwahara J {1986) Canine and feline aural hematomas: results
Meeting of the American Associotion of Veterinary Porasitoiogists,
of treatment with corticosteroids. journol of the Americon
Louisville, p. 5 I.
120
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
27 Hugnet C, Buronfosse F, Pineau X Cadore J-L, Lorgue G and
FOREIGN BODIES
Bermy P) (1996) Toxicity and kinetics of amitraz. American Joumol
IMcKeever P) and Torres S {1988) Otitis exterma. Part I:The ear
ofVeterinory Reseorch 57, 1506-1510.
and predisposing factors to otitis externa. Companion Animal
28 Clayton TM (1943) Treatment of scabies by TE.TS. British
Proctice 2, 7-14.
Medical Journoi I, 443-445
2 Brennan KE and Ihrke P) (1983) Grass awn migration in dogs
29 Gold S (1966) A skin full of alcohol. Loncet , 141 7.
and cats: a retrospective study of 182 cases. Journol of the
30 Evans JM and Jemmett JE {1978) Otitis externa: the case for
American Veterinory Medicol Asscciotion I82, 1201-1204
polypharmacy New Zealond Veterinary Joumal 26, 280-283.
3 Rycroft AK and Saben HS {1977) A clinical study of otitis exterma
31 Wilcke JB (1988) Otopharmacology. Veterinory Clinics of North
in the dog Conadian Veterinary Joual I8, 64-70.
Americo 18, 783-797.
4  Roth L {1988) Pathologic changes in otitis externa. Veterinory
32 Hansen SR {1995) Management of adverse reactions to
Cinics of North Americo I4, 755-764.
 pyrethrins and pyrethroid insecticides. In Current Veterinary
Theropy Xll.(ed JD Bonagura) WB Saunders, Philadelphia Pp.
NASOPHARYNGEAL AND MIDDLE EAR POLYPS
242-245
I Pope ER {1995) Feline inflammatory polyps. Seminors in
33 Hansen SR (1995) Management of organophosphate and
Veterinory Medicine and Surgery 10. 87-93.
carbamate toxicoses. In Current Veterinory Theropy Xll. (ed JD
2 Harvey CE and Goldschmidt MH (1978) Inflammatory
Bonagura) WB Saunders, Philadelphia, pp. 245-248.
 polypoid growths in the ear canals of cats. joummol of Smoll Aniral
au asod  (6l) As un e  yain 
Proctice 19, 669-677.
therapeutic protocol for the treatment of canine mange with
3 Lane JG, Orr CM, Lucke VM and Gruffydd-Jones TJ (1981)
Nasopharyngeal polyps arising in the middle ear of the cat.
ivermectin. journol of the Arericon Anirmal Hospital Associotion
35,77-80.
Jourmol of Smoll Animol Proctice22, 5 11-522.
 35 Schneck G (1 988) Use of ivermectin against ear mites in cats.
4  van der Gaag l {1986) The pathology of the extemal ear canal
Veterinory Record 123, 599.
in dogs and cats. Veterinory Quorterly 8, 307-317.
 5 Pollock S (1971) Nasopharyngeal polyp in a dog Veterinory
36 Gram D (1991) Treatment of ear mites (Otodectes cynotis) in
Medicine/Small Animal Clinician 66, 705-706.
cats: comparison of subcutaneous and topical ivermectin.
Proceedings 7th Annuol Meeting AAVD/ACVD, Scottsdale, p. 26.
6 Bradley RL, Noone KE, Saunders GK and Patnaik AK {1985)
37 Paradis M (1998) Ivermectin in small animal dermatology. Part
Nasopharyngeal and middle ear poylpoid masses in five cats.
Veterinary Surgery I4, 141-144
7 Kirpenstein J (1993) Aural neoplasms. Seminars in Veterinary
Educotion 20, 193-199.
38 Dorman DC (1995) Neurotoxic drugs in dogs and cats. In
Medicine and Surgery 8, 17-23.
Current Veterinory Theropy Xll.(ed JD Bonagura) WB Saunders,
Philadelphia, pp. 11401145.
OTIC NEOPLASIA
Ivan der Gaag 1 (1986) The pathology of the extermal ear canal
39 Paul AJ, Tranquilli W), Seward RL, Todd KS jnr and DiPietro JA
 in dogs and cats. Veterinary Quarterly 8, 307-317.
{1 987) Clinical observations in Collies given ivermectin orally.
2
Americon Jourmal of Veterinory Reseorch 48, 684-685
uoedde eidot jo soa (86l) aa dayeus pue H nsH 0
Medicine ond Surgery (Small Anial) 8, 17-23
3 London CA, Dubilzieg RR,Vail DM et ol. (1 996) Evaluation of 
of amitraz on plasma glucose and insulin concentrations in dogs.
Americon Jourmal ofVeterinory Reseorch 49, 130-131
dogs and cats with tumors of the ear canal: 145 cases
{1978-1992). Journal of the Americon Veterinory Medicol
o zeue A jo  (6l) 1asal ue  neaia I
Association 208, 1413-1418.
generalised demodicosis in dogs.Jourmal of Small Animal Proctice
4
 Scott DW (1980) Extemal ear disonders. Jourmol of the Americon
36,3-6.
Anirmol Hospital Associotion I6, 426433.
42 Cooper PR and Penaliggon EJ (1996) Use of fipronil to
5 Miller MA, Nelson SL, Turk JR et ol. (1991) Cutaneous
eliminate recurrent infestation by Trichodectes conis in a pack of
neoplasia in 340 cats. Veterinory Pathology 28, 389-395.
Bloodhounds. Veterinory Record 139, 95.
6
Goldschmidt MH and Shofer FS (1992) Canine cutaneous
43 Curtis CF (1996) Use of 0.25% fipronil spray to treat sarcoptic
histiocytoma. In Skin Tumors of the Dog ond Cot. (eds MH
mange in a litter of five-week-old puppies. Veterinory Record
Goldschmidt and FS Shofer) Pergammon Press, New York Pp.
139, 43-44.
222-230.
7 Mueller RA {1996) Tropical and subtropical dermatoses.
of selamectin in dogs. Proceedings of the Arericon Associotion of
Walthom Focus 6, 16-23.
Veterinory Parositoiogy. New Orleans, p. 61
8Kwa RE, Campana K and Moy RL (1992) Biology of cutaneous
45 McTierTL, McCall JW, Jernigan AD et ol. (1998) Efficacy of 
 cell carcinoma. Jourmal of the Americon Acodemy of Dermatology
26, 1-26.
heartworms in dogs and cats. Recent Aovances in Heortworm
9
9Little CJL, Pearson GR and Lane JG {1989) Neoplasia involving
Diseose Symposium. Tampa, pp. 187-1 92.
the middle ear cavity of dogs. Veterinory Record 124, 54-57
 46 Wren JA, McTierTL, Thomas CA, Bowman DD and Jernigan 
I0 Goldschmidt MH and Shofer FS (1992) Cutaneous papilloma.
 AD {1999) Eficacy of selamectin against Toxocaro canis in dogs.
In Skin Turmors of the Dog and Cot.(eds MH Goldschmidt and FS
Proceedings of the Ammericon Associotion ofVeterinory Parasitology.
Shofer) Pergammon Press, New York pp. I I-15.
New Orleans, p. 60.
II Lozano-Alarcon F, Lewis TP Clarke EG, Bradley GA, Shupe MR
47 Six RH, McTierTL and Shanks D) (1999) Eficacy of selamectin
and Hargis AM (1 996) Persistent papilloma infection in a cat.
against induced and natural infections of Toxocoro coti and
Joumol of the Aericon Anirmol Hospitol Associotion 32, 392-396
Ancylostormo tuboeformis in cats. Proceedings of the American
12 Scott DW, Miller WH jnr and Griffen CE {199) Neoplastic and
Association ofVeterinory Porasitology. New Orleans, p. 60.
non-neoplastic tumors. In Mulier ond Kirk's Small Animol
ETIOPATHOGENESIS AND CLASSIFICATION OF OTITIS EXTERNA
121
Dermatoiogy. 5th edn. (eds DW Scott, WH Miller jnr and CE
fbrosarcoma. In Skin Tumors of the Dog ond Cot. (eds MH
Griffin) WB Saunders, Philadelphia, pp. 994-999.
 Goldschmidt and FS Shofer) Pergammon Press, New York pp.
I3 Bevier DE and Goldschmidt MH {198 1) Skin tumors in the
158-167.
dog Part I: Epithelial tumors and tumor-like lesions.
33 Goldschmidt MH and Shofer FS (1992). Ceruminous gland
Compendium on Continuing Educotion 3, 389-400.
tumors. In Skin Tumors of the Dog and Cat. (eds MH
I4 Watrach AM {1969) The ultrastructure of canine cutaneous
Goldschmidt and FS Shofer) Pergammon Press, New York pp.
papilloma. Concer Reseorch 29, 2079-2084.
96-102
I5 Calvert CA {1990) Canine viral papillomatosis. In Infectious
34 Marino DJ, MacDonald JM, Matthiesen DT and Patnaik AK
Diseoses of the Dog ond Cot. 2nd edn. (ed CE Greene) WWB
(1994) Results of surgery in cats with ceruminous gland
Saunders, Philadelphia, pp. 288-290.
adenocarcinoma. Journal of the American Animal Hospitol
I6 Moore PF and Schrenzel MD (1991) Canine cutaneous
Associotion 30, 54-58.
histiocytoma represents a Langerhans cell proliferative disorder
based on an immunophenotypic analysis. Proceedings of the
Patnaik AK (1993). Results of surgery and long-term follow-up
Americon College ofVeterinory Pothology 42, 119.
in dogs with ceruminous gland adenocarcinoma. Joumol of the
I7 Goldschmidt MH and Bevier DE (198 1) Skin tumors in the
Arerican Anirmal Hospitol Associotion 29, 560563.
dog. Part ll: Lymphohystiocytic and melanocytic tumors.
36 Theon AP Barthez PY, Madewell BR and Griffey SM (1994)
Compendiur on Continuing Educotion 3, 588-594.
 Radiation therapy of ceruminous gland carcinomas in dogs and
  i i i   a   8
cats. Journol of the American Veterinory Medical Associotion 205,
behavior diagnosis, and therapy. Seminars in Veterinory /Medicine
566-569
ond Surgery I, 72-83.
37 Howlett CR and Allan GS (1974) Tumours of the feline ear
I9 Goldschmidt MH and Shofer FS (1 992) Mast cell tumors. In
canal. Austrolior Veterinory Proctitioner 4, 56-57
Skin Tumors of the Dog ond Cot. (eds MH Goldschmidt and FS
 i6el) a    a  o 
Shofer) Pergammon Press, New York, pp. 231-251
proliferative eosinophilic dermatitis of the external ear canal
20 Legendre AM and Krahwinkel AJ (1 98 1) Feline ear tumours.
in four dogs. Veterinory Pathology 28, 171-173.
Journal of the  Americon  Animal Hospitol  Associotion I7.
39 Rogers KS {1 988) Tumors of the ear canal. Veterinory Clinics of
1035-1037.
North Americo 18, 859-868.
21 Goldschmidt MH and Shofer FS {1992) Squamous cell
carcinoma. In Skin Tumors of the Dog ond Cot. (eds MH
UNDERLYING DISEASE
 Goldschmidt and FS Shofer) Pergammon Press, New York, pp.
I August JR {1988) Otitis externa. A disease of multifactorial
37-49.
etiology Veterinory Clinics of North Americo I8, 731-742.
22 Kwa RE, Campana K and Moy RL {1992) Biology of cutaneous
2 Halliwell REW and Gorman NT (1989) Atopic disease. In
squamous cell cancinoma. Journal of the Americon Acodemy of
Veterinary Clinical lmmunology. (eds REW Haliwell and NT
Dermatology 26, 1-26.
Gorman) WB Saunders, Philadelphia, pp. 232-252.
(6    Ma   'M  
3Scott DW {1 981) Observations on canine atopy Joumai of the
Multicentric squamous cell carcinomas in situ resembling
Americon Anirmal Hospitol Associotion I7, 91-I 00.
Bowen's disease in five cats. Veterinory Dermotology 3, 177-182.
4
Grifin CE (1993) Canine atopic disease.In Current Veterinory
24 Atwater SV, Powers BE, Straw RC et ol. {199 1) Squamous cell
Dermmotology.(eds CE Grifin, KW Kwochka and JM MacDonald)
carcinoma of the pinna and nasal planum. 54 cats {1980-1991).
Mosby St Louis, pp. 99-120.
Proceedings of the Veterinory Cancer Society II, 35-36.
 5 Harvey RG (1993) Food allergy and dietary intolerance in dogs:
i al (iei) H sioy e a  s
a report of 25 cases. Journal of Smoll Animol Practice 34.
characteristics, and clinical management of skin tumors of cats.
175-179.
Journal of the Americon Animol Hospital AssociotionI7,
6Rosser E) {1993) Diagnosis of food allergy in dogs. Joumal of the
1026-1034
Americar Veterinory Medical Associotion 203, 259-262.
26 Lana Se, Ogilvie GK, Withrow S), Straw RC and Rogers KS
7 Carlotti DN, Remy I and Prost C (1990) Food allergy in dogs
(1997) Feline cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma of the nasal
and cats: a review and report of 43 cases. Veterinary
planum and the pinnae: 6l cases. Journol of the American Anirmal
Dermatology I, 55-62.
Hospitol Associotion 33, 329-332.
8
White SD and Sequoia D {1989) Food hypersensitivity in cats:
27 Foster AP (1994) A study of the number and distribution of
14 cases {1982-1987).Jourmal of the Aericon Veterinary Medical
cutaneous mast cell in cats with disease not affecting the skin.
Associotion 194,692-695
Veterinary Dermatology 5, 17-20.
9
Walder E) and Conroy JD (1994) Contact dermatitis in dogs
and cats: pathogenesis, histopathology experimental induction,
mastocytosis in two litters of Siamese kittens. journol of the
and case reports. Veterinory Dermatology 5, 149-1 62.
American Veterinary Medical Associotion 193, 959-960.
I0 Nesbitt GH and Schmitz JA (1977) Contact dermatitis in the
pue ou au(9al  u pue  a ol 
dog: a neview of 35 cases. Joural of theAmericonAnimal Hospital
behaviour of feline cutaneous mastocytomas. Veterinory
Associotion 13, 155-163
Pothology 23, 320-324.
II Griffin CE (1993) Otitis externa and otitis media. In Current
Veterinory Dermatoiogy. (eds CE Griffin, KW Kwochka and JM 
neoplasia in cats: 14 cases {1975-1985). Journol of theAmericon
MacDonald) Mosby St Louis, pp. 245-262.
Veterinory Medical Asscciotion 190, 1440-1444.
I2 Kwochka KW (1993) Overview of normal keratinization and
31 Goldschmidt MH and Shofer FS (1992) Basal cell tumors. In
cutaneous scaling disorders of dogs. In Current Veterinary
Skin Tumors of the Dog and Cat. (eds MH Goldschmidt and FS
Dermotology. (eds CE Griffin, KW Kwochka and JM MacDonald)
Shofer) Pergammon Press, New York, pp. I 6-28.
Mosby St Louis pp. 167-1 75.
32 Goldschmidt MH and Shofer FS (1992)
Cutaneous
I3 Kwochka KW and Rademakers AM (1 989) Cell proliferation
122 EAR DISEASES OF THE D0G AND CAT
kinetics of epidermis, hair follicles, and sebaceous glands of
THE EFFECTS OF WEATHER ON THE INCIDENCE OF
Cocker Spaniels with idiopathic seborrhea. American Joumol of
OTITIS EXTERNA
Veterinory Research 50, 1918-1922.
IGrono LR {1970) Studies of the microclimate of the external
I4 Scott DW and Miller WH jnr {1989) Epidermal dysplasia and 
auditory canal in the dog I: Aural temperature. Reseorch in
Malassezia pochydermatis infection in West Highland White
Veterinory Science II, 307-311.
Terriers. Veterinary Dermatology I, 25-36.
2 Grono LR {1970) Studies of the microclimate of the external
I5 Maudlin EA, Scott DW, MillerWH jnr and Smith CA (1997)
auditory canal in the dog. ll: Relative humidity within the
Malossezio dermatitis in the dog a retrospective
extermal ear auditory meatus. Research in Veterinory Science II,
316-319.
{1 990-95). Veterinory Dermatology 8, 183-190.
 3 Hayes HM, Pickle LW and Wilson GP (1987) Effects of ear type
I6 Bond R, Rose JF Ellis JW and Lloyd DH (1995) Comparison of
and weather on the prevalence of canine otitis externa.
two shampoos for treatment of Malossezia pochydermotis-
Reseorch in Veterinary Science 42, 294-298.
associated seborrhoeic dermatitis in Basset Hounds. Journol of
4
Grono LR and Frost AJ (1969) Otitis externa in the dog.
Smoll Anirmol Proctice 36, 99-104.
Austrolior Veterinory Jourmal 45, 420-422.
I7 Paradis M and Scott DW (1990) Hereditary primary
5
Wilkinson JD {1992) The external ear In Textbook of
seborrhoea in Persian cats. Feline Proctice I8, 17-20.
Dermatology. 4th edn. (eds RH Champion, JL Burton and FJG
I8 Pancierra DL (1994) Hypothyroidism in dogs: 66 cases
Ebling) Blackwell Scientic Publications, Oxfond, p. 2671-2688.
{1987-1992). Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
Pack GE and Ayres JG (1985) Asthma outbreaks during a
Associotion 204, 761-767.
thunderstorm. Larcet 2, 1 99-203.
 Ha   ao H iaq  n l
Knox RB (1993) Grass pollen, thunderstorms and asthma.
Schechter RD (1979)Canine hyperadrenocorticism:
Clinical ond Experimental Allergy 23, 345-359.
 pretreatment clinical and laboratory evaluation of I17 cases.
Journal of the Americon Veterinory Medicol Associotion I74,
1211-1215.
20 White SD, Ceragioli KL, Bullock LP and Mason GD (1989) Cu-
taneous markers of canine hyperadrenocorticism. Comperdium
on Cortinuing Educotion II, 446 464.
21 Schmeitzel LP and Lothrop CD (1990) Sex hormones and skin
disease Veterinory Medicine Report 2, 28-41
22 Scott DW, MillerWJ jnr, Lewis RM, Manning TO and Smith CA
{1980) Pemphigus erythematosus in the dog and cat.journol of
the Armericon Anirmal Hospital Associotion I6, 815-823.
23 Manning TO; Scott DW, Smith CA and Lewis RM (I1982)
Pemphigus diseases in the feline: seven case reports and
discussion. Jourmal of the Americon Animal Hospital Associotion I8,
433-443.
{1983) Canine lupus erythematosus. I:Systemic lupus
erythematosus. Journal of the American Anirmal Hospitol
Associotion I9, 561 -579.
25 Ihrke P], Stannard AA, Ardans AA and Griffin CE {1985)
Pemphigus foliaceus in dogs: a review of 37 cases. joumal of the
Armerican Veterinary Medical Association 186, 59-66.
123
Chapter Four
Diseases of the Pinna
+ Introduction
· Pinnal trauma
· Dermatoses characterized by crust and scale
· Focal lesions principally affecting the dorsal pinna
· Dermatoses causing papules and nodules
· Dermatoses principally affecting the concave aspect of the pinna
· Dermatoses principally causing symmetrical pinnal alopecia
· References
124
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
INTRODUCTION
KEY POINTS
pinnal surgery). Some diseases, such as scabies and
· Dermatoses other than neoplasia are rarely
dermatophytosis, may initially present with lesions on the
confined to the pinna.
pinna before spreadling elsewhere. Other diseases, such as
· T'he most common dermatoses affecting the pinnae
atopy, initially may affect the pinna and then the external
cause crust and scale, and many are ectoparasitic in
ear canal. Finally, the pinna may be involved as part of a
origin.
 generalized condition; for example, endocrinopathy,
· Pinnal pruritus, other than that associated with
dlefects in keratinization, or pemphigus foliaceus.
otitis externa, is not common and usually
In common with skin elsewhere on the body, the
represents scabies or pediculosis.
pinnal skin responds with a range of primary and
· Papules and nodules are quite common presenting
secondary lesions. However, primary lesions, other
signs.
than nodules, are rare. Papules and pustules are most
· Histopathologic examination of biopsy samples
commonly associated with pemphigus foliaceus, itself
may be needed to define a diagnosis before surgery
 a rare condition. Scale, crust, self-excoriation, and
is attempted, since achieving adequate margins is 
alopecia are the most common secondary lesions. It
not easy.
is rare to see lichenification, for example.
In combination with the history and a physical
Dermatoses other than neoplasia are rarely confined to
examination of the pinna, and with the results of
the pinna, an exception being aural hematoma, which is
 appropriate laboratory tests, a differential diagnosis
discussed in Chapter 10 (Aural hematoma, and other 
 and ultimately a definitive diagnosis will follow.
PINNAl TRAUMA
Trauma to the pinna, particularly in cats, is relatively
and facial pruritus may all result in damage to the
common. Fight wounds result in torn pinnae (222)
 pinna, typically trauma to the periphery (223).
and, often, prolific bleeding. Surprisingly, postbite 
Many texts ascribe aural hematoma (224) to trauma.
infection is uncommon. In dogs, pinnal trauma more 
 However, the relationship is unclear and currently the
often results from head shaking than fighting.
 etiology of aural hematoma is unknown (see Chapter
Otodectic mange, otic foreign bodies, otitis media, 
10: Aural hematoma, and other pinnal surgery).
DERMATOSES CHARACTERIZED bY CRUST AND SCALe
ECTOPARASITES
pinnal lesions are typically crust and scale (225).
 Sarcoptes scabiei and Notoedres cati
With time these lesions spread along the periphery of
Scabies is an intensely pruritic disease of dogs which
the pinna, but accompanying pruritus may result in
results from infestation with the mite Sarcoptes
crust, scale, alopecia, and self-excoriation on the
scabiei. The mite exhibits a typical distribution
dorsum of the pinna (226). Rubbing the tip of the
    s   
pinna between finger tip and thumbnail usually
distal pinna, the elbows, and the hocks - ^launch
evokes an intense scratching action from the
points'l. An erythematous papular dermatitis is
 ipsilateral hindlimb - a pinnal scratch reflex.
usually present on the elbows and hocks, whereas the
DISEASES OF THE PINNA
125
222
223
222 Lacerations to the periphery of the pinna of a cat due
224
to fight wounds.
223
3Traumatic lesions on the tip of the pinna of a Hungarian
Viszla with otitis media. Head shaking had resulted in repeated
damage.
224 Aural hematoma on the pinna of a dog Although
 commonly assumed to be associated with trauma, it has so far
proved impossible to demonstrate a relationship between
 trauma and hematoma.
225
5 Classic lesions of scabies. Peripheral pinnal alopecia in
226 Severe self-trauma has resulted in alopecia, scale, and self-
association with fine crust and scale.
eXcoriation in this Beagle with scabies.
126
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
Scabies is one of the few dermatoses which can
induce steroid-resistant pruritus ( Table Il).
Table Il: Causes of steroid resistant pruritus in dogs.
Microscopic examination of multiple skin scrapes
may reveal the typical shape of a sarcoptic mite (227).
Scabies.
care to collect skin scrapes from lesions which are not
Dietary intolerance and food allergy.
 heavily traumatized, or from the periphery of the pinna.
Allergic contact dermatitis.
Feline scabies is caused by Notoedres cati. This mite
Mycosis fungoides.
also exhibits a preference for the pinnae, although in
Metabolic epidermal necrosis.
contrast to S. scabie infestation, the early lesions are
Calcinosis cutis
typically on the anterior periphery of the pinna, rather
Maiassezia pochydermatis dermatitis 
than the tip. Notoedric mange is often restricted to the
pinnae and head (228) and generalized infections are
277
227
7 Photomicrograph of an adult Sarcoptes scobiei mite.
228
228 Notoedres coti infestation causing spectacular crust on the pinna and
adjacent areas of the head of a cat.
DISEASES OF THE PINNA
127
unusual2. Mites are usually plentiful and easily found
naked eye. Egg cases on the hair shafts (nits) may also
On microscopic examination of skin scrapes.
be seen on gross examination or microscopic examin-
T'he treatment of scabies and other ectoparasitic
 ation of hair. However, diagnosis of pediculosis may
diseases is discussed in Chapter 3 (Ectoparasitic causes
be difficult as Trichodectes canis (the biting louse of
 of otitis externa, and antiparasitic agents).
dogs) can move surprisingly quickly. Furthermore,
because of the supposition that the parasite is easily
Pediculosis
killed, a diagnosis of pediculosis is often not con-
Pediculosis in dogs and cats causes variable pruritus
sidered. Treatment of pediculosis is not difficult in
and variable secondary lesions such as scale, knotted
individual animals, since the insect is confined to the
hair, alopecia, and serohemorrhagic crust, particularly
 host and is easily killed by most insecticides. Infection
on the pinnae (229) but also on the trunk. The lice
in groups of animals may be more dlifficult to
are quite large (230) and they may be seen with the
control?.
229
229 Pediculosis resulting in traumatic alopecia to the pinna.
230
230  Photomicrograph of Trichodectes conis.
128
 EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
Demodicosis
maximum activity to coincide with the rabbit's
 Demodicosis is an uncommon cause of pinnal alopecia
 parturition, thus the seasonality can be predlicted. Small
in dogs. It is usually seen in association with more
dark brown fleas may be seen attached to the tips of the
extensive lesions of generalized demodicosis (231)
pinnae. Focal alopecia (234) may be associated with
rather than with the localized form. Demodicosis is1
 these fleas. In some cases there is marked alopecia and
rare in cats, although the pinnae and head are sites of
crusting (235).
predisposition4, 5. Diagnosis of demodicosis is made
Stable flies (Stomoxys calcitrans) may cause a
by microscopic examination of skin scrapings (232).
serosanguinous, crusted dermatitis which may progress 
 t0 a granulomatous dermatitis. Lesions are principally
Harvest mite infestation
confined to the tips of the pinnae (236) and they are
Trombiculidiasis results from infestation with the
usually confined to dogs with erect pinnae and access
parasitic larval stage of free living mites. The most 
to stables?. Black flies ( Simulium spp.) and other small
common infestation results from contact with larvae of 1
biting fies may cause a papular dermatitis on the dorsal.
Neotrombiculaautumnalis and
 Eutrombicula aspect of the pinna which may be accompanied by focal
alfredugesi, typically in the late summer; hence the  alopecia (237). These lesions may look very similar to
name harvest mite. Clusters of mites gather on the tip  those associated with Spilopsyllus cuniculi but no
of the pinna or within the deep folds of skin covering
 parasites will be found.
the cartilage at the entrance to the vertical portion of
 Mosquito bites may cause a seasonal dermatitis in
the external ear canal. Moderate to severe pruritus  catslo. The lesions are a result of hypersensitivityll and
results and this, together with dried serous exudate, they consist of papules, erythematous erosions,
may result in crust formation. Diagnosis is straight- alopecia, and occasionally hypopigmentation on the
forward as the six-legged larva is unmistakable (233).
 dorsum of the face and pinnae. Afected animals may
also exhibit moderate polylymphadenopathy, mild
Insect bite dermatitis
 pyrexia and symmetrical erythema, fissuring, and hyper
T'he rabbit flea, Spilopsyllus cuniculi, is a seasonal cause
keratosis of the footpads. Lesions resolve with the onset
of pinnal dermatitis that has been reported in hunting
 of winter or with effective screening to prevent
cats in the UK and Australia7, 8. The flea times its 
 exposure to mosquitoes
231
232
231  Adult onset generalized demodicosis in a Doberman
232   Photomicrograph of canine demodectic mites
Pinscher resulting in scale, crust, and alopecia
illustrating the unmistakable shape of the mite
DISEASES OF THE PINNA
129
233Photomicrograph of a harvest mite{Neotrombiculo
233
Outumnalis).
234
235
234, 235 Spilopsyllus cuniculi infestation in cats. The tiny fleas can be seen at the tip of the pinna (234). The associated crust and
alopecia which follows prolonged infestation (235).
236
237
236Fly bite dermatitis caused by the stable fly Stomoxys
237
More extensive alopecia with a papulocrustous
dermatitis on the pinna of a cat.
pinna.
130
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
INFECTIOUS DISEASES
dermatitis may also occur in the absence of discernible
Leishmaniasis
underlying disease.
Canine leishmaniasis is a severe, often fatal disease of
The clinical signs consist of erythematous dermatitis,
dogs caused by parasites of the genus Leishmanial2.
Occasionally papular, associated with a variable, typically
Classically, leishmaniasis is characterized by chronic
yellowish gray, greasy scale (239). In some dogs the
wasting and systemic signs such as intermittent pyrexia,
dermatitis may affect the concave aspect of the pinna
anemia, and polylymphadenopathy. Cutaneous lesions
only as an extension of otitis externa, but in some
often accompany the systemic signs; the most common
breeds, notably the Basset Hound and West Highland
sign is alopecia, which is often symmetrical and accom-
White Terrier, both sides of the pinna, as well as
panied by a fine dry scale (238). The diagnosis and
adjacent areas of the head and neck, may be affected.
management of leishmaniasis is beyond the scope of
 Pruritus is often intense and it may be steroid resistant.
this book and readers are referred to current texts for
 Diagnosis is based on demonstrating the yeast in
details of up-to-date treatment recommendations.
tape strips, skin scrapes, or on contact plate cultures13.
The approach to treatment is based on identifying the
Malassezia pachydermatis
underlying disease and removing the yeast with either
Dermatitis caused by the yeast Malassezia pachy-
topical shampoos (miconazole, ketoconazole, chlor-
dermatis is frequently found as a secondary compli-
hexidine) or systemic ketoconazole (5-10 mg/kg
cation in many chronic dermatoses; atopy and idio-
 ql2h). Some animals, particularly Basset Hounds,
pathic defects in keratinization, for example. Malassezzial
 require regular shampoo therapy to maintain remission.
238
239
238 Alopecia and fine scale on the base of the pinna of a
239 Severe Malassezio pochydermatis dermatitis in a
dog with leishmaniasis.
Weimaraner Note the erythema, alopecia, and scale. The dog
exhibited severe steroid-refractory pruritus.
DISEASES OF THE PINNA
131
IMMUNE MEDIATED AND
dematoses in this group which may affect the pinnae
AUTOIMMUNE DISEASE
 include pemphigus erythematosus and systemic lupus
Pemphigus foliaceus
erythematosus (SLE). Both of these conditions are ex-
This is the most common of this rare group of dis-
tremely rare and SLE is notoriously difficult to dliag-
eases14, 15. Lesions in the dog are usually symmetrical
nosel6
and they are often generalizedi5. Pinnal lesions may ap-
Diagnosis is based on cytology and on histo-
pear first and they may be very severe with pruritus,
 pathologic examination of biopsy samples, although
 crusting, and alopecia (240). In the cat the disease is 
other tests will be necessary for the definitive diagnosis
 often confined to the face and pinnael5 and spectacu-
 of SLE. Management is based on immunosuppressive
lar crusting may be seen (241). Pruritus is variable in
doses of systemic glucocorticoids. Details of this is
the cat. Careful examination of these cases may reveal
beyond the scope of this book and clinicians are
primary lesions, tiny papules, and pustules (242). Other
 referred to specialist texts.
 240  Crusting and alopecia on the pinna,
240
periorbital region and face of a dog with
pemphigus foliaceus
241
242
241  Marked crust formation on the pinna of a cat with
242Erythematous papules and pustules on the concave
pemphigus foliaceus
aspect of a pinna. These are primary lesions of pemphigus
foliaceus.
132
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
Vasculitis
Dermatoses associated with cold temperatures
Vasculitis is usually an inflammatory process in which
Frost bite, cold agglutinin disease, and cryoglobu-
cell-mediated (neutrophils, lymphocytes, or macro-
linemia/cryofibrinogenemia may affect the tips of the
phages) damage occurs within the walls of blood
pinnae, in addition to the tip of the tail and the digits.
vessels17. T'he cellular infltrate may occur in response to
antigen-antibody complex deposition in the vascular
 Frost-bitten pinnae
endothelium. T'his immune complex deposition may be
 Frost-bitten pinnae may appear pale or cyanosed and
  s rs siss    o
they are cold to the touch. Lesions of frostbite are
drug eruption. More commonly the underlying cause
 best treated with gentle warming.
remains unidentifiedl8. The damaged endothelium
results in extravasation of erythrocytes and underperfu-
Cold agglutinin disease
sion of the tissue served by the blood vessel. There is
erythema, edema, and sloughing of necrosed tissue 
 disease in which autoagglutination of erythrocytes
producing ‘punched out’ ulcers (243). Initial
 Occurs in distal extremities when the temperature
investigations should try to identify an underlying
within the tissue falls to a critical levell7. Micro-
disease, such as SLE, which may dictate therapy. In
thromboses occur in small end-arterioles and
idiopathic cases immunosuppressive doses of pred-
capillaries, with ischemic necrosis ensuing. Early
nisolone (1.1-2.2 mg/kg q12-24h) may be necessary,
lesions consist of edema and erythema and this may
although pentoxyphylline may also be helpful.
 be followed by the appearance of crust and even
ulceration. Cold agglutinin disease is managed by
ENVIRONMENTAL DERMATOSES
immunosuppressive
doses  of prednisolone
Actinic dermatitis
(1.1-2.2 mg/kg q12-24h).
Actinic dermatitis results from exposure to ultraviolet
B radiation and it is most commonly seen on the tips
 Cryoglobulins and cryofibrinogins
of the pinnae of white haired cats19, 20. Early lesions 
Cryoglobulins and cryofibrinogins are proteins which
consist of erythema, fine scale, and alopecia which
 precipitate out of cold serum, only to redissolve when
may be bilateral. With continued exposure there is 1
 the serum is warmed22. The precipitating proteins
 preneoplastic and finally neoplastic transformation to
 induce microthrombi and vasculitis. The clinical signs
 in one case were limited to well-demarcated areas of
erosive and crusted and may be hemorrhagic (244,
, necrosis at the distal end of the pinnae (246)22. The
245). If exposure cannot be prevented, tattooing may
 only treatment required was to keep the dog indoors
be helpful, although amputation of the pinnal tip to
during the winter months.
below the hair line is the most effective prophylactic,
and the most effective treatment once neoplastic
transformation has occurred19, 20, 21.
243
243 Punched out ulcers on the periphery
of the pinna of a dog with vasculitis
DISEASES OF THE PINNA
133
244, 245
Advanced actinic dermatitis on
244
the pinnae of a cat (244), and advanced
neoplastic transformation on another cat
(245).
245
246 Distal pinnal necrosis due to
246
precipitation of cryoglobulins and 
cryofibrinogins in small blood vessels at the 
tip of the pinna, induced by exposure to cold 
weather. (llustration from Nagata M, Nanko 
H, Hashimoto K, Ogawa M and Sakashita E
(1998) Cryoglobulinaemia and 
cryofibronogenaemia: a comparison of canine
and human cases. Veterinory Dermatology 9,
 277-281, with permission.)
134
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
HYPERKERATOSES
(249). Severe cases may affect the body of the pinna.
Idiopathic defects in keratinization
Treatment consists of keratolytic and keratoplastic
A defect in keratinization may be primary or
shampoos such as tar, sulphur and salicyclic acid,
secondary ( Table 12). Primary defects in keratinization
benzoyl peroxide, or selenium sulphide.
reflect inherent errors in the control of the various
processes associated with epidermal  turnover,
Sebaceous adenitis
sebaceous gland function, and the production of hair.
Sebaceous adenitis is a disease of unknown etiology
The disease is best documented in American Cocker
 characterized by an inflammatory response against the
Spaniels23, 24 but other breeds such as Basset Hounds,
West Highland White Terriers, Labrador Retrievers,
follicular disruption, alopecia, and surface scale (250,
Doberman Pinschers, and Springer Spaniels may also
251). In some breeds, particularly shorthaired breeds,
be affected. An hereditary seborrhea oleosa has been
there may be a granulomatous response. Astute
 described in Persian cats25.
Owners may notice that the crimp and nature of the
Affected animals show varying degrees of papules,
coat changes before alopecia is apparent. Affected
scale, crust, and alopecia (247, 248). The scale may
animals exhibit progressive loss of hair associated with
be very greasy or dry. Affected animals frequently have
prominent follicular casts. T'he pinnae and dorsal
chronic otitis externa and a greasy, ceruminous
trunk are usually the first places to be affected.
exudate often coats the hairs on the concave aspect of
 Diagnosis is based on clinical suspicion but it must be
the pinna (247). Diagnosis is based on ruling out the
confirmed by histopathologic examination of multiple
differential diagnoses and on histopathologic findings.
(>3) biopsy samples. There is no effective treatment
Management is based on the individual and involves
once the sebaceous glands are destroyed. Early
control of  secondary  infection
(Stapbylocccus
 treatment with essential fatty acids, humectants, and
intermedius and Malassezia pachydermatis in parti-
 anti-inflammatory doses of prednisolone may suppress
cular), suppressing exuberant keratinization (retinoids,
the inflammation and help to preserve some function.
Vitamin A, for example) and degreasing the skin with
Retinoids may be useful in the granulomatous
shampoos. Clinicians are referred to specialist texts for
presentation.
detailed discussion of these conditions24, 26.
Idiopathic benign lichenoid keratosis
Peripheral hyperkeratosis
 Idiopathic benign lichenoid keratosis affecting the
Peripheral hyperkeratosis is regarded as a primary
 pinnae has been reported in four dogs?9. Affected
keratinization defect and it affects principally the
 animals present with multiple, wart-like papules, or
Miniature Dachshund26. Mild lesions are confined to
hyperkeratotic plaques. Histologically the lesions are
the pinnal periphery and consist of non-pruritic,
distinct. Complete surgical excision is curative.
 greasy or scaly plugs attached to the pinnal margin
Table I2: Classification of the defects in keratinization which may affect the pinnae
Primary defects
Secondary defects
Ildiopathic seborrhea
Ectoparasite infestation
Follicular dystrophy
Dermatophytosis
Epidermal dysplasia of VWest Highland
Hypersensitivities
White Terriers 
Immune-mediated dermatoses
Icthyosis 
Endocrinopathies 
 Zinc responsive dermatosis
Neoplasia
Sebaceous adenitis
Low humidity
 Ear margin dermatosis 
Lichenoid-psoriasiform dermatosis 
Lupoid dermatosis of Pointers
DISEASES OF THE PINNA
135
247
248
247, 248 Otitis externa (247) and pinnal crust, scale, and alopecia
(248) in a Cocker Spaniel with an idiopathic defect in keratinization.
249
249  Peripheral hyperkeratosis resulting in crust
 and scale in a Miniature Dachshund.
250
251
250 Labrador Retriever with advanced sebaceous adenitis.
251 Standard Poodle with sebaceous adenitis. Note the
Note the surface scale and alopecia.
tightly adherent surface scale and alopecia on this pinna.
136
 EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
Lichenoid psoriasiform dermatosis
NUTRITIONAL DERMATOSES
Lichenoid psoriasiform dermatosis is an extremely rare
Zinc deficiency
dermatosis which has only been reported in young
 Zinc deficiency ocurs as two clinical syndromes in the
Springer Spaniels in the USA30, raising the possibility
dog32 but has not been reported in the cat.
that it is a genodermatosis. Affected animals exhibit
Occasional clusters of cases, affecting any breed of
erythematous papules and lichenoid plaques on the
dog, may occur when a deficient diet is fed. Some
concave aspects of the pinnae, external ear canals, and
breeds, for example Alaskans, may manifest a
other, predominantly ventral, parts of the head and
physiologic inability to absorb zinc. T'he major clinical
trunk. Diagnosis is based on the almost patho-
sign in such cases is crusting of the pinnae and
gnomonic signalment and clinical signs and confirmed
perioral, periorbital, perianal, and perivulval sites, as
by histopathologic examination of biopsy samples.
well as crusting over pressure points 32.
The condition is frustrating to treat, requiring
combinations of topical antimicrobial shampoo and
Food allergy
systemic antibacterial agents, usually with systemic
Dietary intolerance and food allergy are rare
glucocorticoids, to effect even a modicum of control.
conditions which may be associated with any
combination of clinical signs, and therefore they
Lupoid dermatosis
should always be includled in differential diagnoses for
Lupoid dermatosis is a rare heritable disease of
animals with chronic pinnal dermatosis. Approxi-
German Shorthaired Pointers?31. The disease is
 mately half of affected animals will have a history of
characterized by progressive, non-pruritic scale and
steroid-resistant pruritus33,34 (Table 11). Clinical signs
alopecia of the face, pinnae (252), and trunk. There
 will almost always reflect pruritus, although the degree
is no effective treatment.
and duration of the pruritus will dictate the changes:
erythema, alopecia, crust and scale and, ultimately,
hyperpigmentation and lichenification. T'here are no
primary or pathognomic lesions. Diagnosis of dietary
252
intolerance and food allergy depends on eliminating
diagnoses from the working differential and then
instituting dietary testing. T'he formulation of an
exclusion diet and demonstrating that the clinical
signs resolve when it is fed, relapse when the normal
diet or the offending component is subsequently fed,
and resolve upon refeeding the exclusion diet is
 period of six weeks, and in some cases it may need to
be fed for l2 weeks. T'his procedure should not be
undertaken lightly.
252 Shorthaired Pointer with lupoid dermatosis. Not the
surface scale and alopecia.
DISEASES OF THE PINNA
137
FOCaL LeSIONS PrINCIPALlY AFFeCTING The DOrSal PINNA
DERMATOPHYTOSIS
FELINE POXVIRUS
Dermatophytosis is one of the most common conditions
Feline poxvirus infection (synonym: cowpox) is caused
affecting the pinnae of cats but it is much less common
by an Orthopoxvirus, presumably transmitted by bites
in dogs. Dermatophytosis is more common in young cats
from small rodents4. Primary lesions appear as
 than in mature individuals, unless their immune system 
transient erythematous papules or erosions, usually on
is compromised by ill health. T'he most common lesions
the anterior part of the body. Some 10-14 days later
consist of broken, dull-looking hairs and a thin, often
secondary lesions appear as papules, which rapidly
slvery scale (253)1. However, dermatophytosis may also
crust and become alopecic erosions (255). The
cause a papular dermatitis, erythematous dermatitis
disease has zoonotic potential and suitable precautions
(254) and, in some cases, a granulomatous reaction,
against infection should be taken. Supportive
although these are much less common on the pinnae
 treatment with systemic antibacterial agents is usually
than on the trunk or limbs. Diagnosis is by examination
sufficient. Glucocorticoids should be avoided as they
of skin scrapes, examination of the affected area under
may predispose to systemic infection and severe
Wood's light, and ultimately by culture. ‘Spot' treatment,
 complications, even death, may ensue.
even of localized lesions, is not advised and current
treatment recommendations advocate principally systemic
medication (griseofulvin or ketoconazole) and topical
dlips with, for example, enilconazole2 3.
253
254
253
3Dermatophytosis causing patchy alopecia on the head
254B
 Erythematous patch caused by dermatophytosis in a
and pinnae of a cat.
cat.
255  Multiple erythematous erosions on the head and
255
pinnae of a cat with feline poxvirus infection.These are
secondary lesions, a result of viremic spread from the point
of inoculation.
138  EAR DISEASES 0F THE D0G AND CAT
DERMATOSES CAUSING PAPULES AND NODULES
Nodules on the pinnae may reflect many etiologies. It
NEOPLASTIC LESIONS
is almost impossible to distinguish between them with
Papilloma
confidence on the basis of clinical appearance.
Cocker Spaniels, Kerry Blue Terriers, and male dogs
 in general are predisposed6, 7. Papillomas are usually
excision biopsy is indicated in all cases in which the
well-demarcated (258), superficial, occasionally
etiology is unknown.
pedunculated papules (i.e. <1 cm [<0.4 in] diameter)
which tend to bleed if traumatized7. Many papillomas
TICK INFESTATION
exhibit a frond-like appearance6.
Owners often mistakenly identify ticks as tumors. T'he
most common ticks found on the pinnae of dogs are
Canine cutaneous histiocytoma
the American dog tick (Dermacentor variablis), the
Canine cutaneous histiocytomas are most likely of
lone star tick (Amblyomma americanum), the brown
Langerhans cell origin&. These are the most common
dog tick(Rhipicephalus sanguinus),and Ixodes spp.
neoplasms of the dog and 50% of cases occur in dogs
(256). The latter are the species least likely to be
under two years of age?. Pedigree dogs are
found on the pinnae and headl, 2. It has been
predisposed, particularly the Boxer, English Bulldog,
speculated that the prevalence of ticks on the head
and Scottish Terrierl0. The most common site for the
and pinnae simply reflects the inability of the host to
remove them easily from this area of the body2.
elevated, domed, erythematous, well-demarcated,
In addition to causing local irritation and occasion-
 minimally pruritic lesions (259) which are often
ally postbite granulomas (257), ticks are frequently
 reported to show rapid growth. Occasionally they are
associated with vectoring infectious dlisease. Viral (e.g.
 ulcerated and very rarely they have been reported to
louping ill in dogs), bacterial (e.g. tularemia in cats),  be multiple. Canine cutaneous histiocytomas are
rickettsial (e.g. ehrlichiosis) and protozoal (e.g.
benign lesions and response to surgery is close to
 babesiosis) diseases may all be transmitted by various
100%10. The principal differential diagnoses are mast
species of tick.
cell tumors and granulomas.
Ticks may be removed with gentle traction.
Removal is more easily accomplished if the ticks are
killed first, for example by application of vegetable or
mineral oil, or a specific agent such as amitraz or
fipronil3-5 (see Chapter 3: Ectoparasitic causes of otitis
externa, and antiparasitic agents).
256
256xodes ricinus on a cat
DISEASES OF THE PINNA
139
257 Post tick-bite granuloma on the pinna
257
of a dog.
258
258 Well-demarcated, flesh-colored
papilloma on the pinna of a Cocker Spaniel
 259  Erythematous nodule on the pinna of
259
a dog - histiocytoma.
140
 EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
Mast cell tumor
GRANULOMATOUS LESIONS
Mast cell tumors are common in the dogll, 12. Although
Staphylococci, Nocardia spp,Actinomycetes spp.,
 aur sop noa u ao  sio o is
mycobacteria, atypical mycobacteria, dermatophytes,
inclusion of canine cutaneous histiocytoma as a
subcutaneous mycoses, deep mycoses, algae, ticks,
differential diagnosis) the incidence increases with age,
Leishmania spp., and foreign bodies are all potential
 peaking at eight or nine years oldll, 12. Boxers and other 
causes of granulomatous cdermatitisl4. Clinically these
breeds with Bulldog ancestry are predlisposed but mast
 are usually nodular in appearance, slowly growing, and
cell tumors may occur in any dogli. The clinical
domed in appearance (26l). Granulomas may be
appearance of the tumor is very variable but single
solitary or multiple (262), exudative, or ulcerated. T'hey
cutaneous lesions less than 3 cm (1.2 in) in diameter are
are usually non-pruritic. The management of these
the most common presentation (260)12. The diagnosis
 nodules is primarily aimed at defining the etiology so
of mast cell tumor is made by a combination of cytology
that specific treatment may be provided. The clinical
and histopathology. However, clinical management of
 approach may therefore include aspiration cytology,
all but single nodules (treated by simple surgical
serology, histology, microbiology, and fungal culture.
 excision) will mandate clinical staging prior to initiation
of treatmentl2, 13. The selection of various treatment
modalities for extensive canine mast cell neoplasia is
beyond the scope of this book and readers are referred
to references.
260
260
Large, erythematous, eroded mast cell tumor at the
 base of the pinna of a Newfoundland dog.
261
262
261  Small granuloma, probably a consequence of a tick bite,
262
 Eosinophilic furunculosis/granulomas on the pinna of a
 on the pinna of a dog.
Weimaraner recently bitten by a bee.These lesions are
intensely pruritic.
DISEASES OF THE PINNA
141
DeRMATOSES PrINCIPALlY AFFeCTING The CONCAVe
ASPECT OF THE PINNA
ATOPY
ALLERGIC CONTACT DERMATITIS
Atopy is possibly the most common cause of recurrent
 Allergic contact dermatitis is rare. Most commonly it
otitis externa and lesions are often found on the
 affects middle-aged animals since the induction period
concave aspect of the pinnae as well as within the
 is long2, 3. If the allergen is contained within something
external ear canal (263, 264). In early cases of atopy,
on which the animal lies, the pinnae may be involved.
where the otitis externa has not yet become fully
Since the convex aspect of the pinna is haired it is usually
established, astute clinicians may note erythema and
the glabrous concave surfaces which exhibit lesions first.
hyperplasia on the concave aspect of the pinnae and
The glabrous ventral aspect of the pinna may also be
in the upper portions only of the vertical part of the
involved in allergic contact dermatitis to topical otic
external ear canal. With time a chronic, recurrent,
medications such as neomycin and propylene glycol
erythematous, ceruminous otitis externa results.
(265). T'he management of allergic contact dermatitis
Although most dogs with atopy exhibit otitis externa
is based upon identifying the allergen with
in association with other signs, in about 3% of atopic
exclusion/provocative or closed patch testing, neither
dogs otitis externa is the only clinical sign'.
of which is easy. Failure to identify the allergen, and
avoiding contact, condemns the animal to systemic
gucocorticoid therapy, usually in such high dosages that
The importance of recognizing atopy early cannot
side-effects become apparent.
be overemphasized since the association with
recurrent chronic otitis extema is well documented.
263
264
265
263, 264 Hyperplasia and lichenification on the concave
aspect of the pinnae of an atopic dog (263) often
accompanies erythema of the vertical ear canal (264)
265   Erythematous pinna as a result of allergic contact
dermatitis to topical application of Vaseline
142
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
DEFECTS IN KERATINIZATION,
aspect of the pinna (266-268). Diagnosis, in the
HYPOThYROIdISm, ANd SEX
absence of demonstrable gonadal neoplasia, is difficult
HORMONE ABERRATIONS
 and may require ACTH testing combined with pre-
Defects in keratinization, hypothyroidism, and sex
 and postadrenal sex hormone assay. This may be very
hormone aberrations are often associated with
 expensive and difficult to justify in practice. Clinicians
excessive sebaceous gland activity, and a greasy,
 should consult a specialist if sex hormone aberrations
hyperkeratotic dermatosis results on the concave
 are suspected.
266
266-268 Greasy scale on the concave
aspect of the pinna in a Cocker Spaniel with a
defect in keratinization, even after vertical ear
canal ablation has been performed (266); in a
Cocker Spaniel with hypothyroidism (267):
and in a German Shepherd Dog with Sertoli
cell tumor (268)
267
268
DISEASES OF THE PINNA
143
DerMaTOSES PrInCIPALlY CAUSING SYMMETrICAL
PINNaL ALOPECIA
ENDOCRINOPATHY
DRUG ERUPTION
Hypothyroidism, feline hyperthyroidism, and sex
 Drug eruption may result in unpredictable clinical
hormone aberrations are the endocrine diseases most
signs, occasionally even very localized lesions.
likely to be associated with alopecia. Hypothyroidism 
However, in many cases the lesions are symmetrical
is the most common endocrinopathy affecting dogs
and alopecia may be part of the clinical syndrome
but it is extremely rare in cats. Hypothyroidism occurs
displayed (271).
most commonly in middle-aged dogs and is
characterized by an insidious onset and a plethora of
clinical signs. Bilateral symmetrical alopecia of the
trunk is one of the most common cutaneous signs.
269
On rare occasions the pinnae may be affected (269).
Hypothyroidism in the cat may follow
thyroidectomy, and alopecia may be noted. However,
more commonly, alopecia occurs with feline
hyperthyroidism, a consequence of overgrooming
(270). Diagnosis of thyroid disease in the dog is based
on documenting subnormal serum total T4
concentrations, elevated serum T'SH concentrations, or
a blunted response to the T'SH stimulation test'. In the
cat the diagnosis is based on clinical examination and
elevated serum total T'4 concentration.
269Alopecia of the pinna of a hypothyroid Cocker Spaniel.
270
271
270 Symmetrical alopecia at the base of the pinnae in a cat
271Cocker Spaniel with drug eruption. There is marked
with hyperthyroidism. The alopecia is a result of overgrooming 
alopecia, scale, and crust formation.
rather than telogen arrest
144
 EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
FOLLICULAR DYSPLASIA
PATTERN BALDNESS
Follicular dysplasia occurs when the hair follicle
 Pattern baldness is an uncommon dermatosis in which
cannot produce a normal hair shaft2, 3. Color dilute
 animals dlisplay symmetrical alopecia, or hypotrichosis,
alopecia is a type of follicular dysplasia?. T'he result of
 of the pinnae, ventrum, and caudal medial thighs.
the follicular defects in these animals is symmetrical
 Miniature Dachshunds and Staffordshire Bull Terriers
alopecia, typically affecting the dorsal and lateral
 appear to be predisposed. Diagnosis is based on ruling
trunk, although the convex aspects of the pinnae may
out the differential diagnoses and on histopathologic
also become alopecic (272). There are occasional
findings.
 papules or comedones and there may be a variable
epidermal scale. Generally the dermatosis is non-
PINNAL HYPERPIGMENTATION AND
pruritic, unless secondary pyoderma ensues. Dober-
ALOPECIA
man Pinschers and Dachshunds, in particular, are
 Pinnal hyperpigmentation and alopecia has been
affected, although it has been reported in many other
recognized in Yorkshire Terriers (273) and occa-
breeds4. Diagnosis is based on ruling out the dlifferen-
sionally other breeds, such as the Doberman Pinscher.
fial diagnoses (endocrinopathy in particular) and on 
The etiology of the condition is unknown. There is
histopathologic findings. T'reatment is palliative.
no effective treatment.
272
272 Fnnal alopecia in a Doberman Pinscher with a follicular
defect.
273
 273  Pinnal alopecia and hyperpigmentation
in a Yorkshire Terrier.
DISEASES OF THE PINNA
145
REFERENCES
DERMATOSES CHARACTERIZED BY CRUST
 6       
AND SCALE
cell carcinoma of the pinna and nasal planum: 54 cats
I August JR (1986) Taking a dermatologic history. Compendium
on Continuing Education 8, 5 10-518.
35-36.
 2 Scheidt V) (1987) Common feline ectoparasites. Part 2:
22 Nagata M, Nanko H, Hashimoto K, Ogawa M and Sakashita E
Notoedres coti, Demodex coti, Cheyletiello spp. and Otodectes
(1998)  Cryoglobulinemia  and   cryofibronogenemia:
a
cynotis. Feline Proctice 17, 1323.
comparison  of canine  and human cases.  Veterinory
 3 Cooper PR and Penaiggon J (196) Use of fipronil to eliminate
Dermatology 9, 277-28 1
recurrent infestation by Trichodectes conis in a pack of
23 Kwochka KW and Rademakers AM (1989) Cell proliferation
Bloodhounds. Veterinory Record I39, 95.
kinetics of epidermis, hair follicles, and sebaceous glands of
 4  Chesney C) (1989) Demodicosis in the cat. Journol of Small
Cocker Spaniels with idiopathic seborrhea. Americon Journal
Animal Proctice 30, 689-695.
ofVeterinory Reseorch 50, 1918-1922.
5 Wilkinson GT (l983) Demodicosis in a cat due to a new
24 Kwochka KW (1993) Primary keratinization disorders of
mite species. Feline Proctice 13, 32-36
dogs. In Current Veterinary Dermatology (eds CE Grifn, KW
6 Greene RT, Scheidt V] and Moncol D) (1986) Trombiculiasis in
Kwochka and JM MacDonald) WB Saunders, Philadelphia, PP.
a cat.Journal of the Americon Veterinary Medical Association I88,
176-190.
1054-1055.
25 Paradis M and Scott DW (1990) Hereditary primary
 7 StuddertVP and Arundel JH {1988) Dermatitis of the pinnae
seborrhea oleosa in Persian cats. Feline Proctice I8, 17-20.
of cats in Australia associated with the European rabbit flea
26 Kwochka KW (1993) Overview of normal keratinization and
(Spilopsyils cunicul). Veterinory Record 123, 624625.
cutaneous scaling disonders. In Current Veterinary Dermatology
8 Harvey RG {l990) Dermatitis in a cat associated with
(eds CE Griffin, KW Kwochka and JM MacDonald) WB
Spilopsyilus cuniculi. Veterinory Record 126, 89-90.
Saunders, Philadelphia, pp. 167-175.
9
Angarano DW (1988) Diseases of the pinnae. In Veterinary
27 Rosser EJ, Dunstan RW, Breen PT and Johnson GR (1987)
Clinics of North Americo. (ed JR August) 18, 869-884.
Sebaceous adenitis with hyperkeratosis in the standard
I0 Mason KV and Evans AG {199l) Mosquito bite-caused
poodle: a discussion of I0 cases. Journal of the American Animal
eosinophilic dermatitis in cats. Joumol of the Americon Veterinory
Hospitol Associotion 23, 341-345.
Medicol Associotion 198, 2086-2088.
 28 Scott DW (1986) Granulomatous sebaceous adenitisin dogs.
Journal of the American Animol Hospital Association 22.
mosquito bites and its antigens in cats. Veterinory Dermotology
631-634.
8.19-26.
29 Anderson Wl, Scott DW, and Luther PB (1989) Idiopathic
I2 Ferrer L, Rabanal R, Fondevila D, Ramos JA and Domingo M
benign lichenoid keratosis on the pinna of the ear in four
(1988) Skin lesions in canine leishmaniasis. Journal of Small
dogs. Cornell Veterinorion 79, 179-184.
Animol Proctice 29, 381-388.
30 Mason KV Halliwell REW and McDougal BJ {1986)
I3 Bond R, Collin NS and Lloyd DH {1994) Use of contact
Characterization of lichenoid-psoriasiform dermatosis of
plates for the quantitative culture of /Malossezio pochydermotis
from canine skin. Journol of Small Animal Proctice 35, 68-72.
Associotion 189, 897-901
[4 Ihrke PJ, Stannard AA, Ardans AA and Griffin CE {l985)
 31 Theaker A) and Rest JR (1992) Lupoid dermatosis in a German
Pemphigus foliaceus in the dog a review of 37 cases.journol
Shorthaired Pointer Veterinory Record I3 1, 495.
of the American Veterinory Medical Association 186, 59-66
 32 Willemse T (1992) Zinc-related cutaneous disorders of dogs.
I5 Manning TO; Scott DW, Smith CA and Lewis RM (1982)
In Current Veterinory Theropy Xl. {eds RW Kirk and JD
-es dd eudiapellyd suapunes 8 (euneuoe
discussion. journal of the American Anirmal Hospitol Associotion
Jounof saop u ualle poo jo sisousea (6el) dul ( hasso 
18, 433-443.
of the American Veterirnory Medical Association 203, 259-262.
I6 Scott DW, Walton DK, Manning TO, Smith CA and Lewis RM
{1983) Canine lupus erythematosus. I: Systemic lupus
dogs: a report of 25 cases.Journal of Small Animol Proctice 34.
erythematosus. Journol of the Americon Animal Hospital
175-179.
Associotion 19, 461-479.
 35 Wills JM and Harvey RG {1994) Diagnosis and management
17 Halliwell REW and Gorman NT (1989) Autoimmune blood
of food allergy and dietary intolerance in dogs and cats.
diseases. In Veterinory Clinicol Immunology. (eds REV Halliwell
Australian Veterinory Journal 71, 322-326.
and NT Gorman) WB Saunders, Philadelphia, pp. 308-336
I8 Parker WM and Foster RA {1989) Cutaneous vasculitis in five
FOCAL LESIONS PRINCIPALLY AFFECTING THE
Jack Russell Terriers. Veterinory Dermatology 7, I09-I I15.
DORSAL PINNA
I9 Lana Se, Ogilvie GK, Withrow S], Straw RC and Rogers KS
I Wright Al (1989) Ringworm in dogs and cats.Journal of Small
(1997) Feline cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma of the nasal
Animol Proctice 30, 242-249
planum and the pinnae: 6l cases. journol of the Americon Animal
2 Moriello KA {1995) Treatment of feline dermatophytosis:
Hospitol Associotion 33, 329-332
revised recommendations. Feline Proctice 24,32-36
20 Goldschmidt MH and Shofer FS {1992) Squamous cell
3 White-Weithers MS and Medleau L {1995) Evaluation of
carcinoma. In Skin Tumors of the Dog ond Cat. (eds MH
topical therapies for the treatment of dermatophyte-infected
Goldschmidt and FS Shofer) Pergammon Press, New York, PP.
hairs from dogs and cats. journal of the Americon Animal
37-49.
Hospitol Associotion 31, 250-253.
146  EAR DISEASES 0F THE D0G AND CAT
4 Bennett M, Gaskell CJ, Gaskell RM, Baxby D and Gruffyd-Jones
DERMATOSES PRINCIPALLY CAUSING
T) (1986) Poxvirus infection in the domestic cat: some clinical
SYMMETRICAl PINNAL AlOPECIA
and epidemiological investigations. Veterinory Record I18,
I Kemppainen R] and MacDonald JM (1993) Canine
387-390.
hypothyroidism. In Current Veterinory Dermatoiogy (eds CE
Griffin, KW Kwochka and JM MacDonald) WB Saunders,
DERMATOSES CAUSING PAPULES
Philadelphia, pp. 265-272.
AND NODULES
 MillerWH jnr {1990) Follicular dysplasia in adult black and red 
IKoch HG {1982) Seasonal incidence and attachment sites of
Doberman Pinschers. Veterinory Dermatoiogy I, 1 81-187
ticks (Acari: Ixodidae) on domestic dogs in southeastern
3[
Okahoma and northwestern Arkansas, USA. Journol of
Pinschers with blue and fawn coat colors: a study on the
Medical Entomology 19, 293-295.
incidence and histopathology of this disorder Veterinory
 2  Sucharit S and Rongsiyam Y (1990) Rhipicephaius sanguinus
Dermatology I, 11 3-1 22.
Lotrielle, the causative agent of foreign body in the ear:
      s  
distribution on the body of the dog. Journal of the Medicol
aun pue Apnis eniun e spunusyoea uaas ui eioadoe ainp
Associotion ofThoilond 63, 535-536.
3 Searle A. Jensen C) and Atwell RB {1995) Results of a trial of
disease. Veterinory Dermotology 7, 91-97
fipronil as a adulticide on ticks (xodes holocyclus) naturally
attached to animals in the Brisbane area Austrolion Veterinory
Proctice 25, 157-158.
4 Folz SD, Ash KA, Conder GA and Rector DL {1986) Amitraz:
a tick and flea repellent and tick detachment drug. Journal of
Veterinary Phormocology and Theropeutics 9, 1 50- 156.
5 Hunter JS, Keister DM and Jeannin P (1996) A comparison of
the tick control efficacy of Frontline Spray against the
American dog tick and brown dog tick Proceedings of the 4 Ist
Annual Meeting of the American Associotion of Veterinary
Parasitologists, Louisville, I996, p. 51.
6 Goldschmidt MH and Shofer FS (1 992) Cutaneous papilloma.
pue ipuuospio Hw spa) zo puo bog aup jo souni uys ul
 7 Bevier DE and Goldschmidt MH (1981) Skin tumors in the
dog. Part I: Epithelial tumors and tumor-like lesions.
Compendium on Continuing Educotion 3, 389-400.
8 Moore PF and Schrenzel MD (l991) Canine cutaneous
histiocytoma represents a Langerhans cell proliferative
disorder based on an immunophenotypic analysis. Proceedings
of the Armericon College of Veterinory Pothology 42, 119.
9 Goldschmidt MH and Bevier DE (1981) Skin tumors in the
dog. Part Ill: Lymphohystiocytic and melanocytic tumors.
Compendium on Continuing Educotion 3, 588-594.
I0 Goldschmidt MH and Shofer FS {1992) Canine cutaneous
histiocytoma. In Skin Tumors of the Dog ond Cot. {eds MH
Goldschmidt and FS Shofer) Pergammon Press, New York, pp.
222-230.
Skin Tumors of the Dog ond Cot. {eds MH Goldschmidt and FS
Shofer) Pergammon Press, New York pp. 23 I-251.
I2 Tams TR and Macy DW (198l) Canine mast cell tumors.
Compendium on Continuing Educotion 3, 869-878.
I3 Macy DW {1 986) Canine and feline mast cell tumors: biologic
behavior diagnosis, and therapy. Seminars in Veterinory /Medicine
ond Surgery I, 72-83.
 I4 FadokVA (1987) Granulomatous dermatitis in dogs and cats.
Seminors in Veterinory Medicine and Surgery 2, 186-194
DERMATOSES PRINCIPALLY AFFECTING THE
CONCAVEASPECT OF THEPINNA
I Scott DW (198l) Observations on canine atopy Journol of
the Americon Animol Hospitol Associotion I7, 91-100.
2Thomsen MK and Kristensen F {1986) Contact dermatitis in
the dog. Nordsik Veterinaer Medicine 38, 1 29-147.
3 Olivry T, Prélaud P Heripret D and Atlee BA (1990) Allergic
contact dermatitis in the dog. Veterinory Clinics of North
Americo 20, 1443-1456.
147
Chapter Five
Otitis
Media,
Otitis
 Interna
· Otitis media
· Otitis interna
· References
148
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
Otitis MedIA
KEY POINtS
· The term otitis media implies inflammation within
The most common bacteria isolated from
the confines of the middle ear, usually bacterial in
cases of otitis media are those associated
origin.
with otitis exterma.
· Otitis media is common and often unrecognized
· In the vast majority of dogs with otitis media,
 clinical signs relate to the accompanying otitis
externa.
spp.) and yeast were most commonly found in the
· Neurologic signs accompanying otitis media are
external ear canal, whereas bacteria alone were more
unusual.
common in the middle ear. A greater variety of
· Systemic antibacterial therapy, in association with
bacteria, including anaerobes, Group D streptococci,
local drainage, is the medical treatment of choice.
 and E. coli, were found in the middle ear compared to
· Surgical treatment may be necessary if the
the external ear canal2.
condition proves refractory to medical manage-
Other causes, particularly of unilateral otitis media,
ment.
include foreign bodies which have penetrated the
tympanum, inflammatory polyps, and neoplasms such
ETIOLOGY
as fibromas and squamous cell carcinomas'.
Otitis media is common and is almost invariably
The pathologic changes within the infected middle
ear were reported by Little et al7. All the cases in their
the vast majority of cases the infection within the
 study were accompanied by pathologic changes within
 middle ear appears to result from extension of otitis
 the external ear canal, supporting the theory of an
 externa, rather than from ascending infection via the
association between the two conditions. There was
auditory tube or as a result of hematogenous
epidermal hyperplasia with a replacement of the
infection'. However, it may be that the role of the
 normal stratified squamous epithelium by pseudo-
auditory tube in the etiology of canine otitis media
stratified columnar type. T'he underlying dermis was
has not been fully appreciated, since its normal
 infiltrated by a mixed inflammatory cell population
physiologic role is critical to middle ear homeostasis,
 and it took on the appearance of granulation tissue,
both microbiologic and environmental4, 5. Most cases 
 Occasionally with spicules of bone within it. Secretory
of otitis media appear to be missed since in one study
cells and gland-like structures appeared within this
the duration of the condition, before diagnosis, was
inflamed granulation tissue. Most of the tympanic
in excess of two years in over half the cases3.
membranes were thickened.
T'he microorganisms isolated from cases of otitis
media are principally those associated with otitis
Cholesteatomas
externa,i.e.Stapbylococcus intermedius,Pseudomonas
Cholesteatomas are slowly enlarging, cystic lesions
spp., Proteus spp., Escherichia coli, and Malassezia
within the middle ear cavity. T'hey are lined by
pachydermatisl, 2. However, aerobic bacteria were
stratified squamous epithelium and keratin squames
isolated from nearly half the normal middle ears
are shed into them. T'hey are thought to arise when a
 sampled in one study', suggesting a normal flora,
pocket of the tympanic membrane contacts, and
presumably derived from pharyngeal flora ascending
adheres to, inflamed mucosa within the middle ear7.
the auditory tube. T'he bacteria recovered were
Cholesteatomas are associated with chronic otitis
principally E. coli, staphylococci, and Branbamella
externa, particularly if there is marked stenosis, or
spp., together with yeast.
even total occlusion, of the external ear canal. In
Otitis media usually results as an extension of otitis
addition to otitis externa they may be associated with
externa through
the
tympanum,
which
may
local pain, pain when eating, and head tilt7.
subsequently heal, even in the presence of otitis
Radiographically, cholesteatomas are associated with
media. However, the bacteria recovered from behind
increased density within the middle ear cavity and
an intact tympanum in cases of otitis media are not
disruption or a change in shape of the middle ear
always the same species, or with the same antibacterial
cavity. T'here is usually stenosis and calcification of the
sensitivity, as those within the external ear canal2.
external ear canal7.
Bacteria (especially S. intermedius and Pseudomonas
Otitis media, otitis Interna
149
CLINICAL SIGNS
The most common clinical signs associated with otitis
Otitis media is often confused with otitis intema
 medlia are those of otitis externa or, rarely, of otitis in-
and masked by otitis extema.
ternal, 8, 9. Pain may be a feature in some cases and an-
imals may resent patting of the aural region or may ex-
hibit frantic head shaking (274). Otitis externa is often
Horner's syndrome (276), or facial nerve paralysis
 present and animals commonly have a history of chron-
(277, 278)7, 9, 10. Keratoconjunctivitis sicca may, rarely,
ic or recurrent otitis externa8. Neurologic signs are un-
result from otitis media, following damage to the
usual but include head tilt (275), ataxia, nystagmus,
parasympathetic innervation of the lachrymal gland9.
274
275
op suieia so jo aouanbasuon e se enen geuuh tt
275
Dramatic head tilt to the right in a domestic longhaired
displayed incessant head shaking.
cat with peripheral vestibular disease associated with otitis
media.
276 Horner's syndrome on the left-hand side. The markedly
276
prolapsed third eyelid prevents examination of the pupil. This
 cat had a nasopharyngeal polyp which passed through the 
middle ear, then through the tympanic membrane into the
external ear canal where it produced signs of an obstructive
otitis externa.
277, 278 Horner's syndrome and facial nerve paralysis in a
Staffordshire Bull Terrier There is right-sided head tilt, a myotic
right pupil, and facial paralysis resulting in drooping of the lips
on the right-hand side of the face.
277
278
150  EAR DISEASES OF THE D0G AND CAT
Otitis interna may occur following extension of
Tympanometry (impedance audiometry)
infection into the inner ear via the oval window.
Signs of otitis interna includel, &: deafness, head tilt 
specificity and high sensitivity in detecting the
and circling toward the affected side; nystagmus with
 presence of a ruptured tympanum. Unfortunately, in
the fast component away from the affected side; and
order to perform tympanometry in the dog it is
asymmetric ataxia.
necessary to adapt specialized equipment and it is
unlikely to feature in the diagnostic armamentarium
MAJOR DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSES
of any but the most specialized of clinics (see Chapter
 Idiopathic canine and feline vestibular syndromes are
2: Electrophysiologic procedures).
the most common non-middle ear disorders associat-
ed with peripheral vestibular signs10. However, in con-
Culture and sensitivity following myringotomy
trast to otitis media these diseases usually show signs
This technique, if performed carefully, has both good
 of gradual clinical improvement in 1-10 days10.
sensitivity and good specificity. However, it is
necessary to rupture the tympanic membrane
DIAGNOSIS
(myringotomy),ifit is not already ruptured. Myrin-
Otoscopy
gotomy is described in Chapter 2 (Other investigatory
 Otoscopy has good specificity but poor sensitivityll.
procedures).
Otitis media should be suspected in all cases of
chronic otitis externa or in cases with recurrent
episodes of otitis externa. The presence of a ruptured
tympanic membrane is diagnostic (279). However,
the presence of inflammation and exudate within the
external ear canal makes meaningful examination of
the tympanum difficultll (Chapter 2: Otoscopic
 appearance of the external ear canal and tympanum).
Furthermore, the presence of an intact tympanum
does not rule out otitis media since the defect in the
tympanum often heals, even in the presence of
 ongoing otitis media2. These complications make
definitive otoscopic diagnosis difficult.
Radiography and other imaging modalities
Radiographic techniques have good specificity but
poor sensitivity, being able to delineate soft tissue,
fluid, or bony changes within the middle ear in only
about 70% of casesi0. They are particularly useful in
 evaluation of bone involvement (e.g. petrous temporal
bone) and in cases where neoplasia is suspected12. The
 open-mouth views are most useful12, although in a
series of cases in which otitis media persisted after
bulla osteotomy the lateral oblique view was
air density within the tympanic cavity. Otitis media
results in increased soft tissue density within the bullae
(280, 281) and, if present, is a reliable indicator of
disease within the middle earl, 12 (see Chapter 2:
Radiographic features of the normal and abnormal
ear). Positive contrast ear canalography may also be
used to demonstrate otitis medial4.
Both CT and MRI have the potential to aid in the
diagnosis of otitis medial5, although the clinician in
 practice will have difficulty accessing these techniques.
OtitiS MEdIa, OtitiS INteRNA
151
279Otoscopic view of a thickened
279
and ruptured tympanic membrane.
280
281
280, 281  Lateral oblique views of the tympanic bullae of a three-year-old 
 Himalayan cat with left-sided otitis media associated with a nasopharyngeal
) 1t yh (me ais u a uo n   o do
tissue density within bulla on the left side, arrow).
152
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
MANAGEMENT
flushed daily for 7-10 days and appropriate
Given that most cases of otitis media are associated
 antibacterial therapy, based on bacterial culture and
with otitis externa, the treatment of the former cannot
sensitivity, is instituted. The same glucocorticoid
be considered in isolation from the latterl,9, 10. The
regime is used as described above, again designed to
 approach to each case should be structured with this
suppress inflammation within the bulla.
in mind and one authority10 triaged animals into three
groups:
Group 3
Cases which fail to resolve after surgery are radio-
Group 1
graphed again and, if thought necessary (failure to
All new cases that have presented within the previous
demonstrate lesions with radiography), may be
few days are treated with a cephalosporin or a
subjected to CT or MRI if not already performed. T'he
fluoroquinolone antimicrobial agent at maximal doses
bulla is curetted and a drain placed to facilitate daily
for four weeks. Anti-inflammatory doses of pred-
flushing. Systemic antibacterial agents, based on
nisolone are given (l mg/kg once daily for two weeks
 culture and sensitivity testing, are prescribed for two
and then l mg/kg every other day for two weeks). If
months. Prednisolone, starting on the eighth day post-
the tympanum is ruptured, a sample should be
Operatively, is given for one month as dlescribed above.
obtained from the middle ear for bacteriologic culture
and sensitivity testing and treatment adjusted accord-
PROGNOSIS
ingly. Any apparent otitis externa is treated with
 If the inflammatory process is identified early, the
ceruminolytics (if necessary) and dilute chlorhexidine
cause identified, and effective treatment instituted, the
(1:40) once daily, followed by gentle cleaning of the
 prognosis for recovery is good. Minor residual
external ear canal. If indicated, clients can instil, twice
 vestibular deficits, such as head tilt or mild ataxia, may
daily, an appropriate non-oily (water-based) otic
persist but the animal soon adapts to the ^new' head
polypharmaceutic preparation. NB: Ensure that there
position. Neurologic signs associated with otitis
is no aminoglycoside in the preparation if the
 media, such as facial nerve paralysis and Horner's
tympanum is not intact.
syndrome, may persist and complications associated
Generally these animals show gradual improvement
with these deficits can occur (see Chapter 7:
and the ataxia and head tilt resolves over 2-14 days.
 Neurologic signs related to middle ear disease).
 Resolution of nystagmus must not to be associated
 Some cases of otitis media (and, indeed, some cases
with successful  treatment since the brain  will
 of otitis interna) develop osteomyelitis of the osseous
compensate for aberrant input. Conversely, failure of  bulla and petrous temporal bone. Occasionally the
nystagmus to resolve indicates treatment failure.
infection ascends the vestibulocochlear and facial
Animals with otitis externa are subjected to
 nerves to the brainstem, resulting in a brainstem
dermatologic work up to establish whether there is an 2
 abscess or meningitis associated with central vestibular
underlying cause that can be addressed. Careful
signs2. Central vestibular infections can progress
attendance to these principles will minimize the
 rapidly and cause death despite appropriate and
number of animals which go forward to radical
aggressive treatment?.
surgery.
Group 2
Cases which have not resolved within four weeks or
so, or who presented originally having shown
symptoms for a number of weeks, or those cases
presenting with chronic or recurrent otitis externa, are
subject to radiography (if not yet performed) and
worked up for surgery. If available, CT' or MRI would
be indicated prior to surgery. Those with otitis externa
are subject to total ear canal ablation and lateral bulla
Osteotomy. T'hose with no evidence of otitis externa
are subject to ventral bulla osteotomy. The aim of
treatment with these patients is to alleviate the otitis
externa and to establish drainage of, and the
opportunity for flushing of, the bulla. The bulla is
otitis media, otitis Interna
153
OTITIS INTERNA
KEY POINTS
CLiNICAL SIGNS
· T'he true incidence of otitis interna is not known.
The most commonly observed clinical signs of otitis
· There are no data relating to the normal microbial
interna include head tilt towards the affected side.
flora of the inner ear or, indeed, as to whether a
spontaneous horizontal or rotatory nystagmus, and
microbial flora is present or not.
an asymmetric limb ataxia with preservation of
· Most cases of otitis interna are thought to result as
 strength2. In the acute stage the animal may be
 an extension from otitis media.
severely disorientated, circling and falling to the
affected
side.
 Sometimes, coordination and
INTRODUCTION
equilibrium are so affected that the animal may not be
Otitis interna has been reported to account for half of 
able to stand or walk. Vomiting or anorexia is
the cases presenting with acute peripheral vestibular
 commonly reported?. Acquired onset of deafness may
signs, at least in dogs'. F
However, the relative
be noted in some animals.
incidence of otitis interna versus otitis media may be
The clinical signs of otitis interna are very difficult
somewhat less in reality. This may be a reflection of
 to differentiate from those caused by other peripheral
the severity of the clinical signs, which are much more
vestibular diseases such as idiopathic vestibular disease
dramatic in a case of vestibular dysfunction. Otitis
and neoplasia. Readers are referred to Chapter 7:
media may be a chronic disease (possibly masked by
(Neurologic signs related to inner ear disease) for a
chronic otitis externa) with less dramatic neurologic
detailed discussion.
signs, such as facial nerve paralysis.
DIAGNOSIS
ETIOLOGY
A thorough analysis of the case history will help to
 There appears to be a strong association between
establish
the
presence of systemic diseases,
 Otitis interna, otitis externa, and otitis media'. Thus,
 hypersensitivities, defects in keratinization, or localized
the most likely etiology of otitis interna is extension
conditions (such as otodectic mange) which may
of otitis medial, 2, itself usually an extension of otitis
underlie otitis externa and otitis media. A detailed
externa (see Otitis media). Otitis media, and hence an
 description of the animal's behavior and clinical signs
associated otitis interna, may also result from
 observed at home can sometimes provide evidence of
 hematogenous spread and ascending infection along
 middle or inner ear disease that is not always apparent
the auditory tube?. Unfortunately, there are no
on physical examination.
reports describing the normal microbial flora of the
 A careful physical examination should encompass
inner ear, or even if one exists, either in health or in
the entire body in a systematic manner. Swelling,
the presence of otitis interna. It would be reasonable
lumps, or pain may be found on careful palpation of
 to assume that similar pathogens affect the middle and
the temporomandibular joints and around the base of
the inner ear, although similar assumptions about the
the ears. Localized discharge may indicate a para-aural
relationship between the microbial flora of the
sinus. Signs of pruritus (alopecia, excoriation,
external ear and middle ear have been proven to be
hyperemia), a history of recurrent aural hematomata,
incorrect4.
or head shaking should alert the clinician
to
Inflammatory changes in the middle ear may cause
underlying dermatologic disease. The pharyngeal area
a conductive hearing
g impairment, as only the
should be examined for signs of inflammation or
 transmission of sound waves through the tympanic
masses that may have spread to, or originated within,
bulla is affected; the hair cells within the cochlea are
the middle ear via the auditory tube.
unaffected. However, some studies have described
sensorineural deafness associated with otitis media5. If
severe otitis media persists, combined conductive and
sensorineural deafness may occur as fibrotic changes
Given that otitis media may be clinically 'silent', or
may develop in the inner ear.
masked by chronic otitis exterma, it could be
inferred that otitis intema can be present in the
absence of overt signs of otitis media.
154 
EAR DISEASES OF tHE DOG AND CAT
A complete neurologic examination should
MaNAGEMENT
document all parts of the nervous system, without
The goal of treatment is to remove the underlying
bias, in order to distinguish peripheral versus central
cause of otitis interna:
vestibular disease. This should report on mental
Every effort should be made to identify if otitis
status, behavior at home and in the examination
media/externa is present. If otitis media or otitis
room, head position, gait, and muscle strength. All
externa is present, treat accordingly (see Otitis
the cranial nerves should be assessed individually.
media; and Chapter 7: Medical management of ear
Proprioception, motor function, and spinal reflexes
dlisease).
should be tested and evaluated. A more detailed
· Consider referral for CT or MRI to rule out
neurologic examination of the ear is described in
neoplasia.
Chapter 2 (Neurologic examination of the ear).
· In the absence of any obvious pathology observed
Otic examination and visualization of the tympanic
 on advanced imaging, and once endocrine disease
membrane, under sedation or general anesthesia, are
has been ruled out, it is reasonable to assume that
the logical next steps (see Chapter 2: Otoscopic
either an idiopathic or an infectious cause is at the
 appearance of the external ear canal and tympanum).
origin of the clinical signs. Long-term systemic
Myringotomy (see Chapter 2: Other investigatory
antibacterial treatment is recommended, for a
procedures) and the subsequent submission of
period of 6-8 weeks.
samples from the middle ear for bacterial culture and
sensitivity are recommended in all cases of suspected
otitis media/interna.
Imaging of the middle ear is best performed in a
general practice setting by means of radiography (see
Chapter 2: Radiographic features of the normal and
abnormal ear), although recent studies have shown
radiographs to be a poorly sensitive means of
documentation of otitis media compared to CT or
 MRI6, 7. The inner ear is still poorly documented
using the current means of imaging. MRI is the only
means reported of imaging the peripheral vestibular
system?.
Otitis MedIa, otitis InternA
155
REFERENCES
OTITIS MEDIA
OTITIS INTERNA
INeer TM (1982) Otitis media. Compendium on Continuing
I Schunk KL and Averill DR {l983) Peripheral vestibular
Educotion 4, 41 0-4 17.
syndrome in the dog: a review of 83 cases. journol of the
2 Cole LK, Kwochka KW, Kowalski J) and Hillier A {1998)
Americon Veterinory Medicol Associotion I82, 13541357.
Microbial flora and antimicrobial susceptibility patterns of
29
 Shell L {1995) Otitis media and interna. In Krk's Current
isolated pathogens from the horizontal ear canal and middle
Veterinory Theropy Xll. (ed JD Bonagura) Philadelphia, WB
ear in dogs with otitis media. Journal of the Armerican Veterinary
Saunders, pp. I128-1131.
Medicol Associotion 212, 534-538.
3[
 Neer TM (1982) Otitis media. Compendium on Continuing 
3 Little CJL, Lane JG and Pearson GR (1991) Inflammatory
Educotion 4, 4 10-41 7.
middle ear disease of the dog: the pathology of otitis media.
4
Cole LK, Kwochka KW, Kowalski J) and Hillier A {1988)
Veterinory Record 128, 293-296
Microbial flora and antimicrobial susceptibility patterns of
 4 Bluestone CD and Doyle W) (1988) Anatomy and physiology
isolated pathogens from the horizontal ear canal and middle
of the eustachian tube and middle ear related to otitis media.
ear in dogs with otitis media. Journal of the Americon Veterinary
Journal of Allergy ond Clinical Immunology 8l, 997-1003.
Mediciol Associotion 212, 534-538.
 5 Bluestone CD'(1983) Eustachian tube function: physiology
5
Morizono T {1990) Toxicity of ototopical drugs: animal
pathophysiology and role of allergy in pathogenesis of otitis
media. Journal of Allergy ond Clinicol Immunology 72.
99. 42-45.
242-251
6
Love NE, Kramer RW, Spodnick GJ and Thrall DE {1995)
6 Matsuda H,Tojo M, Fukui K, Imori T and Baba E {1984) The
 Radiographic and computed tomographic evaluation of otitis
aerobic bacterial flora of the middle and external ears in
media. Veterinary Radiology ond Ultrosound 36, 375-379
normal dogs. Journal of Small Animal Proctice 25, 269-274.
Dayrell-Hart BL {1997) MR Imaging of the vestibular
7 Little CJL. Lane JG, Gibbs C and Pearson GR {I991)
apparatus of the dog. Proceeding of the 15th Annual Meeting of
Inflammatory middle ear disease in the dog: the clinical and
the Armericon College ofVeterinory Internol Medicine I 997, Lake
pathological features of cholesteatoma, a complication of otitis
Buena Vista, pp. 606-607.
media. Veterinory Record 128, 319-322.
8 Spreull JSA (1964) Treatment of otitis media. Journol of Small
Anirmol Proctice 5, I 07-152.
9 Bruyette DS and Lorenz MD {1993) Otitis externa and otitis
media: diagnostic and medical aspects. Seminors in Veterinory
Medicine ond Surgery (Smoll Animol) 8, 3-9.
I0 Parker AJ and Chrisman CL {l995) How do I treat? Otitis
 media-interna in dogs and cats. Progress in Veterinary Neurology
6.139-141
IILittle CJL and Lane JG (I989) An evaluation of
aun po suawssasse aoy uoedled pue <doosoo Xnawouedus
canine tympanic membrane. Veterinory Record 124, 5-8.
I2 Remedios AM, Fowler JD and Pharr JW (1991) A comparison
of radiographic versus surgical diagnosis of otitis media. journat
of the Arerican Anirmal Hospital Associotion 27, 183-1 88.
13 Smeak DD, Crocker CB and Birchard S] (1996) Treatment of
otitis media that developed after total ear canal ablation and
lateral bulla osteotomy in dogs: nine cases {1986-1994).
Journal of the American Veterinory Medical Associotion 209,
937-942.
I4 Trower ND, Gregory SP Renfrew H and Lamb CR {1998)
Evaluation of the canine tympanic membrane by positive
contrast ear canalography. Veterinory Record 123, 78-81
I5 Dvir E, Kirberger RM and Terblanche AG (2000) Magnetic
resonance imaging of otitis media in the dog Veterinary Rodiology
ond Ultrosound 41, 46-49.
16 Penrod JP and Coulter DB (1980) The diagnostic use of
impedance audiometry in the dog. Journal of the Americon
Animol Hospitol Associotion I6, 941 -948.
This page intentionally left blank
157
Chapter six
Para-Aural Abscess
· Para-aural abscessation
· References
158
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
PARA-AURAL ABSCESSATION
KEY POINtS
DIAGNOSIS
· Para-aural abscessation results in chronic soft tissue
The clinical signs of soft tissue pain, swelling, and sinus
swelling or discharge in the parotid area.
formation in the region of the parotid gland are highly
· T'he clinical signs result from leakage of purulent
suggestive of a para-aural abscess (282, 283). Foreign
Otic discharge into the surrounding tissues.
 body penetration (either pharyngeal or percutaneous)
· Most commonly, para-aural abscessation follows
 and salivary gland pathology (iatrogenic at surgery or,
 otic surgery, particularly total ear canal ablation and
rarely, necrosis or neoplasia) are the most likely
bulla osteotomy.
differential diagnoses and both are rare causes of sinus
●Otitis media is almost always present.
formation on the lateral aspect of the head.
· Most cases require corrective surgery.
Exploration of the sinus with a probe will usually
allow confirmation that the discharge is from the
ETIOLOGY
middle or external ear'. Otic examination (assuming
Para-aural abscessation occurs when purulent 
 that at least part of the external ear canal is present) will
discharge extends from the deeper parts of the
 usually allow recognition of obstruction'. Radiography
external ear canal, or the middle ear cavity, to the 1
may be helpful in making a diagnosis and in allowing
surrounding soft tissues via a fistula or sinus.
 recognition of any associated soft tissue damagef.
Ultimately there is soft tissue swelling and discharge,
 However, the sensitivity of the technique, with regard
usually in the parotid area'. In addition there may be
 to demonstrating increased bulla opacity, is debatable2,
 head tilt toward the affected side, pain on opening the
3. Changes were reported to be most obvious on lateral
mouth, and resentment of palpation in the region of
oblique views3. Contrast radiography (fistulograms)
the inflammation2 3. Para-aural abscessation is more 
 may also be helpful in documenting the association
common in dogs than in cats', which is not surprising
between sinus and bulla2, 3.
when the underlying causes are considered.
In a series of l7 dogs with para-aural abscess
MaNAGEMENT
reported by Lane and Watkins', 50% of the cases had
 Surgical management of this condition is usually
 Ongoing otitis externa, 50% had suffered previous otic1
 necessary. Systemic antibacterial treatment, based on
surgery, and all the cases had otitis media. Between (
 culture and sensitivity, for 3-6 weeks may induce
3% and 5% of dogs undergoing total ear canal ablation
 remission of the clinical signs in dogs which have had
and lateral or ventral bulla osteotomy may develop
 total ear canal ablation and bulla osteotomy, although
postoperative fistulation4-8. Most commonly this
 recurrence after cessation of therapy is common?.
represents failure to remove all remnants of secretory
The objectives of surgery are to relieve or remove
tissue from the external ear canal, auditory meatus, or
the obstruction within the canal and to eliminate any
tympanic cavity. However, osteomyelitis of the
 suppurative foci within the external and middle ears'.
Ossicles, inadequate drainage of the middle ear (via the
 In many cases this will at the least mandate resection
auditory tube), and iatrogenic parotid gland damage
of the vertical canal. However, total ear canal ablation
may also result in the syndrome3, 4, 5, 8. Cocker
with concurrent bulla osteotomy is probably the
Spaniels, in particular, feature
in
reviews
of
treatment of choice in spontaneous cases'. In cases
 postoperative para-aural abscessation2, 3.
resulting from previous bulla surgery, re-exploration
Neoplasia within the external ear canal may result
is mandatory.
in para-aural abscessation', although the neoplasm
When sinus formation occurs as a sequela to total
must occlude the external ear canal completely in
canal ablation and bulla osteotomy, it is essential that
order for this to happen. T'raumatic separation of the
a thorough search is made for epithelial remnants and
auricular and annular cartilages results in blockage of
infected foci. A second, lateral approach to the bulla
the external ear canal and may result in para-aural
is complicated by scar tissue and loss of surgical
abscessation?. Atresia of the external ear canal should
landmarks, and it carries a risk of iatrogenic damage
be considered in the differential diagnosis of para-
to the facial nerve7. Ventral bulla osteotomy avoids
 aural abscessation in young animals'. However, both 
this, allows for a cleaner, more rapid dissection, and
of these conditions should be considered rare causes
has therefore been recommended on this basis3.
of para-aural abscessation.
Furthermore, it allows easier visualization of the
PARA-AURAL ABSCESS
159
tympanic cavityl0, l. The ventral route allows ready
cavity3. However, in another study2, 40% of cases (ten
access to the dorsal areas of the tympanic cavity. The
 dogs in total) had remnants of horizontal ear canal
most common location of the epithelial remnants is
attached to the osseous external acoustic meatus.
the dorsal rim of the osseous portion of the external
 There is little prospect of exposing this area with a
ear canal or the caudolateral aspect of the tympanic
ventral approach.
282Cocker Spaniel with a para-aural
282
abscess. Note the area of matted hair
below the pinna.
283 Close up of area after clipping Note the serosanguinous
28
discharge from the sinus and the tense, swollen areas of
incipient sinus formation.
160  EAR DISEASES OF THE D0G AND CAT
REFERENCES
I Lane JG and Watkins PE {1986) Para-aural abscess in the dog
treated by total ear canal ablation and ventral bulla osteotomy
and cat. Journol of Smoll Animol Proctice 27, 521-531
in thirteen dogs. Veterinory Surgery I9, 162-166.
2 Holt D, Brockman D), Sylvestre AM and Sadanaga KK {1996)
7 Matthiesen DT and Scavelli T {1990) Total ear canal ablation
Lateral exploration of fistulas developing after total ear canal
and lateral bulla osteotomy in 38 dogs. Journal of the American 
ablations: 10 cases (1989-1993).Journal of the Americon Animal
Animol Hospital Associotion 26, 257-267
Hospitol Associotion 32, 527-530.
8B
 Beckman SL, Henry WB and Cechner P {1990) Total ear canal
3 Smeak DD, Crocker CB and Birchard SJ {1 996) Treatment of 
ablation combining bulla osteotomy and curretage in dogs
recurrent otitis media that developed after total ear canal
with chronic otitis externa and media. journol of the Americon
ablation and lateral bulla osteotomy in dogs: nine cases
Veterinory Medicol Associotion I96, 84-90.
{1986-1994). Journal of the American Veterinory Medical
9 McCarthy PE, Hosgood G and Pechman RD {1995) Traumatic
Associotion 209, 937-942.
4 Smeak DD and de Hoff WD (1 986) Total ear canal ablation:
dogs. Journol of the Americon Animol Hospital Associotion 3.
clinical results in the dog and cat. Veterinory Surgery I5.
419-424.
161-170.
I0 Boothe HW (1998) Ventral bulla osteotomy: dog and cat. In
5 Mason LK, Harvey CE and Orsher R) (1988) Total ear canal
Current Techniques in Smoll Animol Surgery. 4th edn. (ed M)
 ablation combined with lateral bulla osteotomy for end-stage
Bojrab) Williams and Wilkins, Baltimore, p. I 09-I 12.
otitis in dogs: results in 30 dogs. Veterinary Surgery 17.
II Seim HB Ill (1993) Middle ear In Textbook of Smoll Animol
263-268.
 Surgery. 2nd edn. (ed D Slatter) WB Saunders, Philadelphia.
6 Sharp NJH (1990) Chronic otitis externa and otitis media
Pp. 1568-1576.
161
Chapter Seven
Medical Management
of Ear Disease
+ Approach to the diagnosis of otitis externa
· Acute otitis externa
· Gram-negative otitis externa
· Chronic, or recurrent, otitis externa in dogs
· Chronic, or recurrent, otitis externa in cats
· Neurologic signs related to middle ear disease
· Neurologic signs related to inner ear disease
· References
162
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
APPROACH TO ThE DIAGNOSIS OF OTITIS EXTERNA
INTRODUCTION
Anatomic factors such as the amount of soft tissue
The approach to a case of otitis externa is no different
within the confines of the auricular cartilage and
to that of any disease. A look at the signalment will
the presence of hair follicles, particularly
allow the clinician to consider breed, age, and sex
compound hair follicles, within the external ear
predisposition to otitis externa. A case history may be
canal, e.g. stenotic ear canals (Shar Peis) or hair
sufficient to allow a working diagnosis of a foreign
within the ear canal (Cocker Spaniels).
body to be made. In other cases it may be apparent
The effects of pathologic changes which occur
that the dog has suffered occasional bouts of bilateral
as a result of previous episodes of otitis externa.
otitis externa before and, in these cases, a more
Underlying disease such as defects in keratiniz-
detailed approach is necessary.
ation, atopy, dietary intolerance, and food allergy.
Consideration of the history and signalment will
Otitis media, an underrecognised factor in
allow the clinician to make a provisional differential
recurrent otitis externa.
diagnosis, which will be further amended once the
Water within the external ear canal, which may
physical examination has been performed. At this
precipitate acute gram-negative infection or
point, pertinent laboratory tests are performed and a
Malassezia pachydermatis otitis externa.
working diagnosis made. Treatment can be supplied
The external environment may also be pertinent
and the response noted.
since humidity and high temperature are known
to be correlated with an increased incidence of
CONCEPT Of PrIMARY CAUSe,
ear disease.
PREDISPOSING FACTORS, AND
· Are there perpetuating factors? Perpetuating factors
PERPETUATING CHANGE
occur as a consequence of otitis externa. T'hey tend
 August' proposed that the approach to otitis externa
to aggravate the otitis and further induce
should be considered in a new light. He proposed a
pathologic changes within the lining of the external
triad of factors: primary, predisposing, and perpetuat-
ear canal. Perpetuating factors include:
ing. Based on this concept it is helpful to approach
Microbial infection with organisms such as
 otitis externa in a similar fashion and each case should
Stapbylococcus ntermedius,M.pacbydermatis,and
be considered in the following, non-exclusive
gram-negative bacili such as Pseudomonas spp.
classification:
Pathologic responses to otitis externa such as
· Is there a primary cause? Primary causes are capable
epidermal hyperplasia, which tends to cause
of causing otitis externa in their own right and
luminal stenosis, and ceruminous gland
include ectoparasites such as Otodectes cynotis and
hyperplasia, which results in a change in cerumen.
Otobius megnini, foreign bodies, otic neoplasia and
Otitis media, which may occur as a consequence
inflammatory polyps, and the immune-mediated
of otitis externa.
disorders such as drug eruption, allergic contact
 Inappropriate medication which may irritate the
dlermatitis, and the pemphigus group diseases.
external and middle ear or increase humidity
· Are there any predisposing factors? Predisposing
within the external ear canal.
factors make otitis externa more likely by changing
the internal environment in such a fashion that
humidity within the ear canal rises, surface
maceration occurs, and microbial proliferation
follows. Predisposing factors include:
Clinicians should attempt to identify and treat the primary causes
of ear disease, diagnose and treat any predisposing factors, and
MEDICAL MANAGEMENT OF EAR DISEASE
 163
SIGNALMENT
The history should encompass all aspects of the
Breed
dog's management and lifestyle in an attempt to
Some breeds, for example Cocker Spaniels and Persian
identify the cause of the otitis externa.
cats, are predisposed to defects in keratinization,
which may be associated with a ceruminous otitis
Management and lifestyle
externa. Breeds of dog recognized as particularly
· Diet: to identify deficiencies such as zinc and
prone to otitis externa include Springer Spaniels,
essential fatty acids.
Miniature Poodles, Shar Peis, and German Shepherd
Dogs. Dogs with pendulous pinnae are not necessarily
·Housing: kenneled or indoors?
predisposed to otitis externa but they may
be
● Exposure to sunlight: actinic radiation damage.
susceptible to a rapidly progressive infection, should
● Exercise: swimming predisposes to ear disease.
otitis externa develop. Breeds with excessive hair
●Work: (working dogs predisposed to foreign bodlies?).
within the external ear canals, such as Poodles, may
· Grooming requirements: clipper burn on the
be predisposed to accumulations of cerumen and
pinnae, failure to pluck the ear canals, irritation
debris, which may provoke otitis externa. Yorkshire
following plucking, contagion at clipping parlor?
Terriers are predisposed to bilateral pinnal alopecia
· Presence of other animals (Otodectes cynotis,
and hyperpigmentation. Longhaired breeds of cats
Sarcoptes scabiei, dermatophytosis).
and show cats are commonly affected by dermato
·Hunting cat (Spilopsyllus cuniculi, feline poxvirus
phytosis. White haired cats and dogs are predisposed
infection, ticks).
to actinic radiation damage to the pinnae.
Evidence of underlying disease
Age
· Recurrent episodes of ear disease should raise the
 Young animals are often affected with O. cynotis, but
suspicion of an underlying disease, particularly if
this may not be associated with pruritus, particularly
bilateral.
in kittens. In cats the peak incidence of otitis externa
● Facial, otic, and pedal pruritus suggest atopy.
is between one and two years of age, presumably
· Erythema in the ear, facial, neck, and truncal folds,
reflecting exposure to, and hypersensitivity to, O.
and perhaps crust, scale, and erythema on the pinnae
cynotis. In older cats bilateral otitis externa is almost
 and trunk, suggest a defect in keratinization.
always associated with O. cynotis infection whereas
· A seasonal pattern is most likely to reflect atopy or
unilateral otitis externa may reflect cat bite abscess or
     
obstructive otitis secondary to polyps or neoplasia.
toes, flies, harvest mites ( Neotrombicula spp.), and
Young animals are predisposed to dermatophytosis.
rabbit fleas (S. cuniculi).
In dogs, young animals (and very old animals) are
· Dietary intolerance is often associated with otitis
underrepresented in studies of the incidence of otitis
externa.
externa. T'he peak incidence of otitis externa occurs in
· Allergic contact dermatitis may affect the concave,
dogs between three and six years of age. Otic foreign
ventral aspect of the pinnae.
bodies are unusual in young animals. Underlying
· Endocrinopathies may be associated with a
disease, such as a defect in keratinization, atopy, or a
ceruminous otitis externa.
dietary intolerance, may cause uni- or bilateral otitis
· Sudden onset of severe, ulcerative bilateral otitis,
externa and may occur in young animals, particularly
perhaps in association with other skin disease, or
in predisposed breeds.
systemic signs should raise the suspicion of drug
eruption or immune-mediated disease.
Sex
 There is no sex predisposition to otitis externa.
HISTORY
The key aims of history taking are:
Failure to consider the possibility of underlying
· To make a definitive diagnosis, thus allowing
disease, and addressing it, may result in permanent
specific treatment.
changes to the extemal ear canal, these changes
· To identify whether or not there is any evidence of
themselves predisposing the dog to recurrent
underlying disease which may be predisposing the
episodes of otitis exterma.
animal to otitis externa.
164
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
Medications
· Curling of the pinnae in the cat is almost patho
Topical application of otic medication may induce an
gmomonic for relapsing polychondritis.
irritant or allergic contact dermatitis. T'he clinical sign
Vesicles, pustules, and crust may be due to super-
which might suggest this is continued otitis in the face
fcial pyoderma, pemphigus foliaceus, or zinc
of repeated application of a medication. Neomycin is
deficiency.
the most often cited agent in this regard, although
● Punched out ulcerations on the convex aspect may
 propylene glycol also may be irritant.
be due to feline cowpox.
● Punched out ulcerations on the concave aspect may
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
reflect vasculitis.
Having established the immedliate and past history, the
 dog should be given a full clinical examination. In par-
Gross examination of the external ear canal
ficular, evidence of internal disease and endocrinopathies
· Calcification of the otic cartilage, which can be
should be sought. T'hus, lymph nodes and testes should
palpated, suggests the presence of chronic otitis
be palpated, the oral cavity examined, the chest auscul-
externa.
tated, the abdomen palpated, and the perineum
● Malodor of the external ear canal may be associated
checked. Only after this general physical examination
with M. pachydermatis infection, gram-negative
should the dlermatologic assessment take place.
bacterial infection, devitalized tissues, or neoplasia.
· The amount of hair around the entrance to and
Pinnal scratch reflex
within the external ear canal should be assessed.
In some pruritic canine dermatoses, rubbing the distal
T'he clinician may need to remove this hair in order
edge of the pinna between finger and thumb nail
to complete an auroscopic examination.
induces a scratch reflex from the ipsilateral hindlimb.
● T'he areas hidden within the cartilage folds at the
This positive scratch reflex is most commonly
entrance to the ear canal should be examined for
associated with scabies, although it is not
ectoparasites, particularly ticks and trombiculid
pathognomonic. Pediculosis, M. pachydermatis
mites.
dermatitis, and atopy also may result in positive
· Erythema is often associated with swelling of the
scratch reflexes.
soft tissues of the external ear canal and stenosis of
the lumen. In some cases the stenosis is so severe
OTIC EXAMINATION
that it is impossible to insert the cone of an
Gross examination of the pinnae
 otoscope into the canal. Erythema of the vertical
· Peripheral crust and scale may suggest scabies,
canal, in combination with a normal, or nearly
pediculosis, a defect in keratinization, zinc
 normal, horizontal canal is very suggestive of atopy.
deficiency, endocrinopathy, or fly bite or mosquito
· Ulceration of the otic epithelium is usually
hypersensitivity.
associated with gram-negative bacterial infection
· Erythema on the convex aspect, particularly distal,
but it may be a sign of immune-mediated disease
suggests actinic radiation damage.
· The nature, color, and odor of any discharge
· Erythema on the concave aspect suggests atopy or
should be noted. However, whether any con-
allergic contact dermatitis.
clusions as to the causal organism, based on the
· Alopecia may be due to pruritus (scabies, pedicu-
physical nature of the discharge, are valid is
losis, hypersensitivity) or dermatophytosis.
debatable. Cytologic examination of the dlischarge
· Alopecia and hyperpigmentation may reflect an
is much more reliable in this regard.
endocrinopathy.
Physical examination. The extermal ear should not be
considered in isolation from either the skin or the internal
mileau.
MEDICAL MANAGEMENT OF EAR DISEASE
165
Otoscopic examination of the external
Other diagnostic aids
ear canal
Bacterial culture and sensitivity testing
Many animals will allow otoscopic examination of the
 In most cases examination of cytologic samples will
 external ear canals with only gentle manual restraint
provide all the information necessary for effective
being necessary. However, in cases of otitis externa the
treatment to be instituted. Microbial culture and
swelling and inflammation of the epithelial tissues
sensitivity testing of samples from the external ear
make the process uncomfortable and usually some
canal is, however, useful in certain cases:
form of chemical restraint is necessary.
· In cases of recurrent, or refractory, otitis externa.
T'he external ear canal should be assessed for
· If ulceration of the epithelial lining of the external
foreign bodies and ectoparasites, hair, accumulations
ear canal is present.
of cerumen, erythema, stenosis, ulceration, and polyps
· If gram-negative infection is suspected.
or neoplasia. T'he tympanum should be examined for
· If otitis media is suspected (when samples from the
color, distension, and integrity.
middle ear will also be necessary).
Cytologic examination of cerumen
Radiography and other imaging modalities 
and otic exudate
Radiography is used to delineate otitis media.
Cytologic and microscopic examination of otic
Radiographic investigation (or CT or MRI) is
 discharge is much more meaningful than attempting
 indicated if the tympanum is abnormal, distended, or
to classify the etiology of the otitis on the basis of the 
 torn, or if the clinical signs suggest the presence of
physical characteristics of any discharge. Samples may
otitis media.
be collected with cotton swabs. One swab should be
applied to, and gently rolled in, a small pool of liquid
Biopsy
 paraffin (or other mineral oil) on a clean glass slide. A
 Otic tumors or polyps are usually subject to excision
cover slip is applied and the slide examined for
biopsy. Punch biopsy and excision biopsy of the
ectoparasites. Another swab is rolled onto a clean glass
epithelial lining of the deeper portions of the external
slide which is then air dried, or briefly heat fixed, and
 ear canal is difficult, although pinch biopsy samples
stained with a modified Wright's stain such as Diff-
 can be obtained using endoscope forceps.
Quik. Further samples may be stained with Gram's
stain if desired.
Microscopic examination of these samples will
allow identification of ectoparasites, inflammatory
cells, nucleated keratinocytes, cocci, bacilli, and yeast.
This information is very useful when the clinician is
formulating a treatment plan.
166
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
ACUTE OTITIS EXTERNA
KEY POINTS
following swimming or grooming, are the most likely
· Pay great attention to the first onset of otitis
causes
in
dogs3.
Malasseziapachydermatis
externa; it may be the best chance to identify the
 Pseudomonas spp. (and other gram-negative bacteria)
cause and treat it before chronic changes ensue.
· Owners usually fail to distinguish between pinnal
bodies are rare in cats and gram-negative infections in
pruritus and otitis externa.
the feline external ear canal are almost unknown4.
+
Bilateral otitis usually reflects an underlying disease.
Most cases of otitis externa which are presented as
 Remember that otitis media is commonly present, or
acute have usually been present for some time before
may be induced by, otitis externa. Check the status
clinical signs are noted by the owner. Although many
 of the tympanum before prescribing treatment.
of these will have some degree of abnormality
· Do not rely on a quick otoscopic examination.
consequent upon the duration of ear disease, it is
usually possible to discern a primary cause of the otitis
cytology are required for a minimum database.
externa. A useful diagnostic clue can be gleaned from
I
 Do not provide broad-spectrum, polypharmaceutical
discovering the temporal relationship between otic
otic medications without a minimum database
discomfort and the presence of a discharge5.
· Make a re-examination appointment; do not allow
Pruritus prior to a discharge is most commonly
the owner to make therapeutic decisions.
seen in acute otitis externa such as that caused by a
foreign body, which is nearly always unilateral,
HISTORY AND CLINICAL SIGNS
although both ear canals should be inspected. In
Most cases of acute otitis externa are presented because
dogs, otodectic mange may be associated with
of pruritus or head shaking. There may be minimal
 pruritus before significant erythema or discharge is
 discharge (284) or, in some cases, profuse exudate and
 apparent, but more usually there is a crumbly, brown
malodor (285). Ulceration of the vertical canal (286)
discharge within the ear canal. Otitis externa due to
and concave aspects of the pinnae (287) may be a
feature, particularly of cases where there is gram-negative
infection. Infection with gram-negative bacteria usually
284
produces a painful ear canal and dogs may be very
subdued in these cases. Pyrexia, lymphadenopathy, and
 signs of systemic illness, however, are rare.
T'he dog's response to otic pruritus may result in
pyotraumatic dermatitis (hot spot', ^wet eczema') on
the lateral aspect of the head (288). Aural hematoma
formation (289) may also be noted in association with
otitis externa, although current thoughts are that there
 may be no direct relationship between these conditions'.
Cats may exhibit very severe self-trauma in the
periaural region in some instances and clinicians
should be careful to rule out ear disease before
considering dietary intolerance (food allergy), which
is a major cause of facial trauma in cats2.
Acute otitis externa is a common complaint and the
first task facing the clinician is to answer two questions:
· Is the condition really acute or has it been slowly
developing?
· Is there a reason to suspect underlying disease?
True acute otitis externa is, in reality, not that
common. In one study of 515 dogs with otitis externa?
284 Acute otitis externa associated with a grass awn foreign
only 17% presented with acute suppurative otitis. Otic
body.There is minimal discharge and only a little erythema. The
foreign bodies and acute gram-negative infection,
 most dramatic clinical sign was peracute otic pruritus
MEDICAL MANAGEMENT OF EAR DISEASE
167
285
286
285 Acute otitis externa in a Cocker Spaniel associated with
286 Discrete ulcerations of the external ear canal and
malodor otic pain, and otic discharge. Acute gram-negative 
immediately adjacent skin of a Labrador Retriever Gram-
bacterial otitis externa associated with a defect in
negative bacterial otitis externa associated with swimming
keratinization.
287
288
289
287Acute otitis externa in a Doberman Pinscher with
ulceration and crusting affecting the concave aspects of the
 pinna. Gram-negative bacterial otitis externa associated with
swimming.
288 Pyotraumatic dermatitis (hot spot) on the lateral
aspect of the head of a dog associated with otic pruritus.
289Aural hematoma associated with otitis externa.
168
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
hypersensitivity is nearly always bilateral. Atopy may
        
cause otic pruritus in the absence of a discharge,
portion of the external ear canal may inhibit
 although there will usually be detectable erythema on
examination but if the hair is gently plucked, a good
the concave aspect of the pinna and in the vertical
view is usually possible. Inflammatory polyps and
canal. Dietary intolerance, although rare, may cause
verrucose thickening of the epithelium may occlude
similar signs.
the external ear canal and the polyps themselves may
 Discharge prior to pruritus is most commonly :
 be obscured by discharge.
seen
 in cases where there is underlying disease, particularly
The color and nature of the otic epithelium should
a defect in keratinization. In many of these cases there
be assessed. The normal epithelium is a smooth, clean
 is a ceruminous discharge apparent even before otic
 pink surface gently undulating over the underlying
inflammation occurs, and in some cases there may be
cartilage. Erythema and lichenification are early signs of
significant otic pathology at the time of presentation.
chronic change. Ulceration is not common, but when
Similarly, ceruminous otitis externa may be seen in cases
  o   si in r s 
 of endocrinopathy, particularly gonadal
endocrine
negative infection than with immune-mediated disease.
disease, which is often associated with seborrhea
The presence of hair within the external ear canal
Otodectes cynotis infection in cats is frequently
is normal, although the density of hair follicles and the
accompanied by significant dark brown, crumbly
ratio of simple follicles to compound follicles varies.
discharge in the absence of pruritus. Cats are frequently
 Most dogs have sparsely distributed, typically simple
presented for an otic dlischarge and associated malodor
hair follicles whereas some breeds, notably Cocker
secondary to an inflammatory polyp or otic neoplasm.
Spaniels, have compound follicles throughout the
Cats may traumatize the area surrounding the ear in
whole length of the external ear canal6. Excessive hair
an attempt to alleviate the irritation, and crusting exco-
will tend to stabilize cerumen and scale and allow local
riations in the immediate surrounding area of the ear
accumulation to occur, thus aggravating any tendency
may be noted.
to ceruminous otitis externa.
T'he vertical portion of the external ear canal can
INVESTIGATIONS
also be palpated as it passes ventrally under the skin to
Once a history has been elicited the clinician is in a
meet the horizontal canal. Any stenosis of the ear
 position to rank the differential diagnoses (Table 13).
 canal, consequent upon hyperplastic changes in the
 The animal must then be given a clinical examination
epithelium, will reduce its pliability and may evoke
to ascertain whether the otitis is part of a more
pain. Calcification of the external ear canal also may
 generalized problem or if it is an isolated event, and
 be detected by palpation.
for the cause to be identified.
Presence and nature of the discharge
Otic examination
Otic discharge may vary from minimal to profuse.
Pinnae
Although there may be some correlation between the
The pinnae should be checked for the presence of a
physical nature of the discharge and the major microbial
pinnal scratch reflex (not pathognomonic for scabies
pathogens, it is unwise to rely on this as a guide to
but very suggestive) and the presence of papules,
treatment. In some animals with a keratinization defect
pustules, crust, scale, or alopecia, which may indicate 
(Cocker Spaniels, for example) there may be a profuse
that the owner has misinterpreted pinnal pruritus as
 discharge which harbors no pathogens and only a scant
ear disease. Erythema and early lichenification of the
growth of commensal organisms. Perhaps the most
proximal, concave aspect of the pinnae is common in
widely accepted relationship is that between O. cynotis
 atopy and may be an early pointer to the presence of
and a dark brown, dryish, crumbly discharge.
the disease.
Vertical ear canal
 The upper aspect of the external ear canal is examined
Vertical ear canal. Gross examination of the
initially with the naked eye. T'he dliameter of the canal
affected ear canal, and the nature of the animal's
is assessed and the color and nature of the epithelium
 noted, as is the presence or absence of hair or dlischarge.
if sedation and cleaning are necessary before
T'he external ear canal should be wide and free
meaningful examination can be achieved.
from obstruction. In medium-sized and large dogs it 
is possible to see a considerable distance into the
MEDICAL MANAGEMENT OF EAR DISEASE
169
visualize mites should not be taken as a reliable
On balance it is best simply to note the physical
finding: cytologic examination of otic discharge is
nature of the discharge and to rely on cytologic
much more reliable.
examination to establish any etiologic relationship
A close examination of the epithelial lining is
 possible and its condition, as well as the presence and
nature of any cerumen or discharge, should be noted.
The location and degree ofluminal stenosis can also
be assessed otoscopically. This may allow a presumptive
Otoscopic examination
 diagnosis of an inflammatory polyp, mural granuloma,
Vertical canal
or neoplasm occluding the lumen. In cases of mural
Otoscopic examination of the vertical canal should not
hyperplasia associated with allergic skin disease,
be neglected on the grounds that a visual examination
particularly atopy, the luminal stenosis may be
is possible without the use of an otoscope. The
 markedly reduced following application of topical
magnification provided by the lens allows for easier 
 glucocorticoids. Serial otoscopic examination will allow
identification of otodectic mites, although failure to
 the clinician to monitor the response to treatment.
Table I3: Important points to establish when taking a history and the type of information which they elicit. Answers to these question
 should allow the clinician to rank a differential diagnosis and prioritie investigatory tests.
Signalment
 Breed. Certain breeds are predisposed to otitis externa, defects in keratinization, atopy and immune-mediated disease. Cats are predisposed
to inflammatory polyps.
 Age. Otodectes cynotis and atopy occurs in young animals.
o on pasodsipaid aq Aew saop saleu buno, aseasip pateipaw-aunwwi ot pasodsipaud aue saleway sauredouuoopua lpuo aleway xas
foreign bodies.
Badkground
Where and when obtained? O. cynotis is more common in rescue cats; scabies is more common in puppies from puppy farms.
Other animals in the household? O.cynotis scabies and dermatophytosis are all contagious and potentialy zoonotic.
Diet and water intake
 restricted diet if the clinician suspects dietary intolerance.
Maragement and lifestyle
 Confined or allowed out? Ectoparasites are usually acquired from other animals or from the envinonment.
auuua shya ui uoon aou ae saipog ulaoy po pue 'si suosaui dds niquonon ou no punae yanou yano sasani
than on parkand, for example.
 Regular contact with other animals? Ectoparasites and dermatophytosis are contagious.
 Regular swimmer? Gram-negative infections.
 Does the cat hunt? Feline cow pox, salmonellosis, and possibly rickettsial diseases may be acquired by contact with, or devouring of, affected prey.
 Recent grooming, ear canals plucked? Traumatic damage to the external ear canal
Previous historyof ear disease
Has the animal had ear disease before? Consider contagious diseases, underlying disease and predisposing causes. Remember that otitis
media may present as recurrent otitis externa. When, which ear and how often? Any evidence of a seasonal patterm? Occasional relapse
might suggest a predisposing cause, whereas frequent relapse might be more typical of an underlying disease.
What was used to treat it Malassezio pochyderatis and Q cynotis will not respond to antibacterial agents; neomycin, in particular is a
sensitizing agent.
What was the response? Good response with relapse suggests predisposing cause or underlying disease. Failure to respond suggests a failure to
 prescribe correct treatment, infection with a resistant microbe, or allergic contact sensitivity to one of the agents in the otic preparation.Also, the
dinician should consider otic disease which might be refractory to topical treatments such as polyps and neoplasia,food allergxor hypersensitivity.
Pointers to other disease
 Seasonality Atopy or seasonal ectoparasites such as Neotrombicuo spp., or Spilopsylilus cuniculi.
immune-mediated or autoimmune disease.
170
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
Horizontal ear canal and tympanum
 In most cases of mild to moderate otitis externa it is
The importance of cytologic evaluation of otic
 possible to visualize the distal portion of the horizontal
discharge cannot be overstated.
ear canal, at least in medium and large sized, tractable
patients. Small dogs, cats, and animals with swollen ears
 may greatly resent the procedure and in these cases
culture are acting as pathogens and are not simply part
sedation will be necessary. T'he otoscopic examination
of the normal otic flora. The presence of an inflam-
should permit the clinician to assess whether epithelial
 matory infiltrate (neutrophils, macrophages, perhaps in
changes, discharge, and luminal stenosis are similar in
 association with cocci and/or gram-negative bacilli) is
both the vertical and horizontal portions of the canal.
a prerequisite.T
The value of otic cytology in this
In addition to examining and noting the physical nature
situation is that it also allows the clinician a more
of the epithelium, the clinician may be able to visualize
extensive database on which to make an empirical
the tympanum. However, since it is not possible ade-
prescription pending culture and sensitivity testing.
quately to assess the patency of the tympanum in most
Culture and sensitivity testing is mandatory in cases
cases, specific tests may be necessary
y to establish the
of otitis media. Furthermore, care must be taken to
presence of a damaged tympanum and otitis media (see
ensure that the microbial sample taken from the
Chapter 5: Otitis media, otitis interna). The simplest 
 middle ear is not contaminated while passing through
test is described by Griffin5. A soft rubber feeding tube
the external ear canal (see Chapter 5: Otitis media,
is gently passed through the cone of the otoscope and
otitis interna). Samples from the external ear canal
pushed toward the tympanum. If the tympanum is
should also be submitted for culture and sensitivity
intact the tip of the tube will remain in sight, via the
 testing since there is every probability that a different
otoscope. If the tip passes out of sight, presumably
spectrum of microbes, with a different antimicrobial
through a ruptured tympanum into the middle ear,
pattern, is present on either side of the tympanum.
otitis media is presumed. Griffin pointed out that this
technique is difficult if there is marked proliferation in
MANAGEMENT
the horizontal canal.
· Identify any primary or underlying causes of ear
disease such as ectoparasites, foreign bodies, or
Cytologic examination
systemic disease. T'hese must be treated, or managed,
 Microscopic examination of cytologic preparations
if the otitis externa is to be cured or controlled.
taken from the external ear canal form a key part of
● Identify any predisposing or perpetuating factors
the diagnostic work up, since it is from examination
which will potentiate the ear disease or induce
of these samples that treatment will be prescribed. T'he
 relapse. T'hese include microbial infections, epithelial
presence, or absence, of otodectic mites may be
and glandular hypertrophy, luminal stenosis, and
 difficult to assess if the clinician relies on otoscopic
 compound hair follicles within the deeper portions
examination alone. Furthermore, the shape, (yeast,
 of the external ear canal. T'hese must be managed if
coccus, bacillus) and gram-staining status of any
 relapsing ear disease is to be prevented
microbes can be assessed.
·
 Identify if otitis media is present. This must receive
The clinician may decide that further diagnostic
 priority in the treatment plan.
information is not needed and prescribe treatment
· Clean and dry the external ear canal.
based on otoscopic and cytologic evaluation alone.
● Instill and dispense an appropriate otic medication.
However, the presence of bacilli, particularly gram-
This will either be an acaricide or a combination of
 negative bacilli, mandates culture and sensitivity testing.
an antimicrobial and glucocorticoid designed to
In the meantime, treatment can be commenced on an
 reduce the infection and inhibit inflammation. Both
empirical basis, pending laboratory results.
of these actions will tend to reduce the onset of
hyperplasia within the glandular and epithelial
Microbial culture and sensitivity
 components of the external ear canal.
Under most circumstances clinicians prescribe otic
 Re-examine the dog. Do not let the owner decide that
 antimicrobials for acute otitis externa on an empirical
the dog is in remission and suspend treatment without
basis, usually as part of a polypharmaceutical product.
a proper
examination. The interval
1 between
Certainly, there is little value in performing culture and
examinations will vary according to the identified
sensitivity testing without first examining an otic
cause. Thus, four or five days is appropriate in the case
cytologic preparation. Evidence is needed that any
of a foreign body, ten days in the case of microbial
organisms recovered from the external ear canal on
infection, and two weeks if O. cymotis is present.
MEDICAL MANAGEMENT OF EAR DISEASE
171
GRAM-NEGATIVE OTITIS EXTERNA
KEY POINTS
 Otic inflammation, an increase in humidity, and a
· Gram-negative otitis externa is usually suppurative
and painful.
necessary for Pseudomonas spp. to establish3;
· Bathing, grooming, and foreign bodies are the
inflammation per se is not sufficient in the normal
most common conditions associated with acute
external ear canal. However, predisposing factors such
gram-negative otitis externa.
as hirsute ear canals, narrow ear canals, and pendulous
· Bacterial culture and sensitivity testing is mandatory
pinnae may make the external ear canal more
as multiple-resistant strains may be recovered.
susceptible to gram-negative infection. Hence, Cocker
· 2% or 2.5% acetic acid may be used for treatment
Spaniels (290) are predisposed4, 5. Gram-negative
on an empirical basis pending laboratory results.
 infections of the external ear canal appear to be more
common in tropical climates", possibly because of
HISTORY AND CLINICAL SIGNS
increased temperature and increased humidity in the
Most cases of gram-negative otitis externa are acute
 environment affecting, or potentiating, alteration in 
in onset, unilateral, painful rather than pruritic,
the otic microclimate.
suppurative, and ulcerated'. The most common causes 
Acute gram-negative suppurative otitis (29l) is
in one survey of 550 dogs with otitis externa were otic
most often associated with Pseudomonas spp.
foreign body, grooming, and bathing, rather than i
 infection, although it may commonly be associated
underlying disease2. This finding was supported in
with other gram-negative bacteria² and Malassezia
another large study (of 752 dogs with otitis externa)
pachydermatis.Staphylococcus intermedius was not
in which underlying disease was not a feature of gram-
 isolated in any of the 65 cases of Pseudomonas spp.
 negative otitis in dogst.
otitis externa in one study2.
290
291
290Cocker Spaniel with chronic otitis externa secondary to
291   Suppurative otitis externa associated with gram-
a defect in keratinization. There is a gram-negative bacterial
negative bacterial infection.
infection.
172
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
Because of the severity of the clinical signs these
The ear canal should be flushed and a careful
cases rarely become chronic before being presented to
examination made for an otic foreign body. The
the veterinarian, therefore ulceration (292, 293)
clinician should bear in mind that these ear canals may
rather than hyperplasia is the most common finding
 be ulcerated and that application of alcohol-containing
on gross and otoscopic examination1,2. However, in
cleansers and drying agents may cause pain. An attempt
some cases there is extension into the middle ear2.
should be made to assess the integrity of the tympanum
since many agents, which might be expected empirically
DIAGNOSTIC APPROACH
to be useful against Pseudomonas spp., are ototoxic if
 Because gram-negative otitis externa is often a very
they reach the middle ear. Examples of potentially
painful condition, affected animals may greatly resent 
ototoxic agents include gentamycin, neomycin,
any attempt at investigation, and sedation, or even 
 propylene glycol, acetic acid, and chlorhexidine6.
general anesthesia, will be necessary. If cytologic
Although underlying disease is not a common
examination (294) suggests that bacilli, particularly
feature of acute gram-negative otitis externa, it should
gram-negative bacilli, are associated with otitis externa,
 be borne in mind in animals which suffer recurrent
samples should be submitted for bacteriological culture
episodes of otitis externa. Hypersensitivity, defects in
and sensitivity testing for two reasons:
keratinization, and endocrinopathy should be ruled out
· Pseudomonas spp. may be resistant to many
before idiopathic disease is diagnosed
antibacterial agents, including gyrase inhibitors.
· Otitis media may be present, necessitating long
 term, systemic antibacterial therapy.
292
293
292  Suppurative, ulcerative otitis externa associated with
293  Acute, erosive gram-negative otitis externa.
 gram-negative bacterial infection.
794
 294Cytologic preparation from a Cocker Spaniel with acute
gram-negative bacterial otitis externa. Note the nucleated
squames and masses of bacilli
MEDICAL MANAGEMENT OF EAR DISEASE
173
MANAGEMENT
before instilling topical enrofloxacin, since it is inactivated
· Ensure adequate restraint.
in an acidic environment?, 16. A dilution of the injectable
· Submit samples for bacteriological culture and
solution (20 mg/ml) at the rate of l:6 in water or
sensitivity.
isotonic saline has been recommended as being effcacious
· Clean and dry the external ear canal.
when instilled directly into the external ear canal9.
· Pending laboratory results, apply a 2-5%
solution of acetic acid to the external ear canal,
Other antibacterial agents
twice daily. If the tympanum is ruptured,
Imipenem and carbenicillin are both active against P
consider enrofloxacin diluted l:6 in saline,
aeruginosa, although imipenem has met with resistance
instilled directly into the external ear canal.
problems because of its widespread use in the human
· When bacteriological results are to hand, institute
field17. Topically applied ticarcillin, in conjunction with
specific treatment.
prednisolone (1-2 mg/kg p/o ql2h) and an acetic acid-
· If concurrent gram-negative otitis media is
based topical otic cleanser, has been reported to be
diagnosed, prescribe a systemic fluoroquinolone
effectivel8. If the tympanum is ruptured, the ticarcillin is
such as enrofloxacin (5-7.5 mg/kg q12h or
acdlministered three times daily intravenously until healing
20 mg/kg q24h) in addition.
is observedl8. The topical solution is made by mixing a
6g vial of ticarcillin powder with 12 ml of sterile water?.
If muliple resistant Pseudomonas sp. is recovered,
This may be divided into 2 ml aliquots and frozen, where
consider one, or several, of the following options:
it will remain stable for up to three months. The vials are
thawed and mixed with 40 ml saline, each again being
Silver sulfadiazine
divided into aliquots, this time of about 10 ml. These are
1% silver sulfadiazine cream applied daily for ten
given to the client to freeze at home. When required they
days is effective but, being rather viscous in nature,
are thawed for use, the surplus being kept in the
it is hard to apply to the depths of the external ear
refrigerator for up to seven days?.
canal7. However, dilutions of the cream with
water, to a concentration as low as l/lo0, will
Potentiating the effect of topical antibacterial
exceed the minimal inhibitory concentration
agents with EDTA-tris
(MIC) of P. aeruginosa and be fluid enough to
Ethylene-dliamine tetra-acetic acid (EDTA) binds divalent
penetrate the depths of the ear canal8. A 0.1%
cations, enhances membrane permeability, and alters
solution may be prepared by mixing 1.5 ml silver
ribosome stability19. P. aeruginosa and S. intermedius,
sulfadiazine cream into 13.5 ml water or saline9.
which are resistant to enrofloxacin and cephalexin
This may be instilled into the ear canal twice daily
(respectively), may be rendered sensitive by pretreatment
of the external ear canal with EDTA-tris20. In vitro stucdies
Acetic acid
with Pseudomonas spp. isolated from cases of canine otitis
Application of aqueous solutions of acetic acid
have also demonstrated the bactericidal potential of
(2-5%) to the external ear canal is effective at
 EDTA-tris?2l. EDTA-ris is prepared in the following ways:
inducing a sufficiently low pH that Pseudomonas spp.
· By adding 6.05 g EDTA (disodium) and 12 g
cannot survivel0. The 5% solution may be iritating
tromethamine (Trizma base) to distilled water,
and should only be used with caution in the presence
sufficient to make 1 liter. T'he pH is adjusted to pH8
of a ruptured tympanum6, l. Anecdotal reports
with HCl and the solution autoclaved for 15
suggest that the 2% or 2.5% solution may be safe to
minutes to ensure sterilityll.
use in the presence of a ruptured tympanumll,12.
·By adding 24.2 g tromethamine and 4.8 g EDTA
(disodium) to 3,900 ml distilled water. Adjust the
Huoroquinolone antibacterial agents
pH to pH8 using white vinegar (5% acetic acid).
Antibacterial agents such as enrofloxacin, marbo-
Autoclave to ensure sterility9.
foxacin, and ciprofloxacin are highly effective against
 gram-negative bacteria such as P aeruginosa and
The ear canal is treated with 2.5 ml of the EDTA-
Proteus spp.13, 14. A recommended oral dose is
tris solution ten minutes prior to application of
 20 mg/kg enrofloxacin once daily, 15. The systemic
 antibacterial solution (such as gentamycin, cephalexin,
activity can be augmented by local administration of
 Or a gyrase inhibitor), twice daily for 7-10 days.
dliluted solutions of these agents into the external ear
In some countries, EDTA-tris is available commer
canal9, 12. Care should be taken to ensure that the
cially in an otic preparation. This has rapidly become
external ear canal is cleaned and thoroughly dried
the treatment of choice for gram-negative otitis.
174
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
Chronic, or recurrent, otitis externa in doGs
KEY POINtS
· Most cases of chronic otitis externa are bilateral.
In a surprising number of cases owners are
· Defects in keratinization, hypersensitivities, and
unaware of the changes taking place within the
otitis media are the most common causes of
ear and they are surprised when the degree of
chronic, or recurrent, otitis externa.
change, and its significance, is pointed out.
· Less common causes include allergic contact
dermatitis and multiresistant microorganisms.
· Chronic otitis externa is usually either ceruminous
or erythematous and hyperplastic.
● Surgery will be necessary unless chronic pathologic
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
change can be prevented or reversed.
Some animals will severely traumatize the area around
the pinnae and erythema, alopecia, and crusting may
HISTORY AND SIGNALMENT
be detected. Similarly, dogs with chronic otitis externa
From a practical point of view, recurrent otitis externa
 will develop hyperpigmentation and lichenification in
and chronic otitis externa present similar problems.
the periaural region (295).
Indeed, given that relapsing otitis externa will
Affected dogs should be given a thorough
eventually result in chronic disease, the former could
 examination in an attempt to identify whether the otitis
be viewed as an early stage of the latter. Both conditions  i
is associated with dermatologic lesions. T'he type of
have the potential for inducing irreversible, pathologic
 change within the external ear canal may give a pointer
changes within the external ear canal, and in both
to the pattern of dermatologic lesion to look for,
instances the clinician is required to institute a
 although clinicians should not be too dogmatic about
 diagnostic work up in order to identify the underlying
this as cross-over occurs.
 or predlisposing cause(s).
In a dog with ceruminous otitis (296-298) the
Many breeds are predisposed to chronic otitis
clinician should search for evidence of defects in
externa and clinicians should ^flag’ even the first
keratinization and endocrinopathies.
 episode as a possible harbinger of future problems.
Thus, Cocker Spaniels are not only predisposed from
an anatomic point of view but also from the frequency
with which defects in keratinization and ceruminous
otitis externa occur. Similarly, atopic West Highland
White Terriers are predisposed. Larger breeds (Basset
Hounds with seborrhea and Labrador Retrievers with
 atopy, for example) appear to have some resistance to
the onset of chronic pathologic changes, perhaps
 because the external ear canals are much wider and
the local microclimate less subject to change. On the
other hand, German Shepherd Dogs are notorious for
developing chronic obstructive otitis externa, even
though they have wide external ear canals and erect
pinnae.
MEDICAL MANAGEMENT OF EAR DISEASE
175
295Hyperpigmentation around the base of
295
the pinna and the opening to the external ear
canal in this terrier with chronic otitis externa.
296
297
 296  Moderate ceruminous otitis externa in a Cavalier King 
298
Charles Spaniel. Note the greasy scale adhering to the 
surrounding hair.
297Moderate ceruminous otitis externa in a German
Shepherd Dog with a Sertoli cell tumor.
298  Severe hyperplasia and chronic ceruminous otitis
externa.
176
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
Accumulations of greasy scale around the nipples
(301), and even alopecia on the dorsal trunk. There
(299), comedones, follicular casts on hair shafts
may be secondary pyoderma and Malassezia pachyde-
(300), and erythema, perhaps with greasy scale, in
rmatis infection.
the ventral neck folds, axillae, and groins suggest a
 In a dog with erythematous hyperplastic changes
defect in keratinization. There may be scale, crust
(302-304) characteristic of hypersensitivity, the
clinician should look for similar changes on the
concave aspect of the pinnae (305), in the dorsal and
plantar interdigitae (306), on the flexor aspect of the
carpus (307), and on the extensor aspect of the tarsus.
667
 In addition, the coat may be rather harsh and dry and
be accompanied by a fine scale. There may be a
infection.
300
667
Greasy scale adhering around the nipples. Note also the
300   Follicular casts adhering to hair shafts. Follicular casts re-
comedones.
 flect abnormal follicular keratinization.
301
302
 301  Erythema alopecia, and patches of crust in a Cocker
302 Erythematous, hyperplastic otitis externa in a
Spaniel with a defect in keratinization.
Rottweiler.
MEDICAL MANAGEMENT OF EAR DISEASE
177
303
304
303 Erythematous, hyperplastic otitis externa.
305
304 Erythematous, hyperplastic otitis has continued in this
German Shepherd Dog with atopy even though the dog has
been subject to lateral wall resection.
 305 Erythematous, hyperplastic changes on the concave
aspect of the pinna in a dog with atopy.
306
307
306Hyperpigmentation following chronic infl ammation in 
the interdigital areas of a Labrador Retriever with atopy.
307Discrete patch of erythema and alopecia immediately
aul jo ioadse deueld aun uo ped peduen Auossanoe aul ot pensip
distal limb of a German Shepherd Dog with atopy.
178
 EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
Otic examination and other investigations
horizontal ear canal and tympanum is completely hid-
 Most cases of chronic or recurrent otitis externa man-
den from view and protected from topical treatment
ifest some degree of hyperplasia of the epithelial lin-
-‘false middle ear'.
ing of the external ear canal (308). Although this may
Attempting to classify the changes within the ear
 be not be readily apparent on gross examination, it
canal, as ceruminous or erythematous hyperplastic, is
will be visible on histopathologic examination of biop-
 helpful from a management point of view. However,
sy samples. The epithelial lining may appear grossly
the basic elements of the otic examination should stil
normal or may have a cobblestone-like pattern (309)
be carried out. Given that many of these animals will
if glandular and epithelial hyperplasia is present. In
have a degree of stenosis within the canal and that all
some cases the canal may be stenosed by proliferative
are at risk for concurrent otitis media, the
epithelial changes (310), which are often localized or
investigation should probably be performed under
polyploid in the cat. Epithelial hyperplasia and accu-
sedation so that radiography of the bullae, assessment
mulation of cerumen may result in complete obstruc-
of the tympanum and, possibly, myringotomy can be
tion of the horizontal canal. T'he deeper portion of the 
 performed.
308
309
310
308Otoscopic picture of the external ear canal of an atopic
dog Note the erythema and early hyperplasia.
 309  Otoscopic picture of more advanced hyperplastic
changes in an external ear canal; the 'cobblestone' pattern is
clearly visible.
310Otoscopic view of an external ear canal almost
completely obstructed by hyperplastic epithelium
MEDICAL MANAGEMENT OF EAR DISEASE
179
 Otoscopic examination may reveal large quantities
of ceruminous discharge in some cases (311, 312); in
other ears there may be minimal discharge. Air-dried
It cannot be stressed too much that the
smears should be examined unstained and after
quantity, physical nature, and color of otic
staining with Diff-Quik (313-315). Yeast and bacteria
exudate cannot be reliably correlated with
may be identified (315), in addition to cellular
 any particular microbial infection.
elements and variably proteinaceous exudate. Air-dried
smears should be examined before and after staining.
312
breadth of appearance of the sample.
314
 313-315  Photomicrographs of cerumen from a
315
hyperplastic-type ear canal. Ceruminous debris and microbes
are clearly apparent and there are no inflammatory cells.
180
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
hypersensitivity and in many cases there is minimal
All cases of chronic otitis externa should have
microbial multiplication, at least in the early stages. As
 ad s  a 
with atopic dermatitis, the microbial proliferation is
samples from both ears, and from both sides of
usually staphylococcal and malassezial in nature, rather
than gram negative:
the tympanic membrane if otitis media is present.
● Identify and institute treatment for the underlying
disease.
· Control
secondary malassezial and bacterial
multiplication.
Not all exudate contains pathogenic micro-
· Assess the status of the tympanum and ascertain
organisms. Microscopic examination of otic exudate
whether otitis media is present. If so, treat it.
only allows identification of the relative number and
Apply topical otic glucocorticoids to suppress
physical classification of organisms; yeast, coccus,
inflammation, reduce epithelial hyperproliferation,
bacillus, gram positive, or gram negative, for example.
and minimize fibrosis.
 The presence of a neutrophilic infiltrate may suggest
· Maintain remission with regular application of otic
an infectious process, or at least that inflammation is
cleansers, antimicrobial ointments, and occasional
present. Absence of such an inflammatory infiltrate
otic glucocorticoid preparations,
 s e  nss s 
· Consider ablation of the external ear canal if these
non-pathogenic and that any discharge relates to
measures fail to prevent progressive pathologic
ceruminous gland hyperactivity (which can be
changes.
prodigious) and epithelial hyperproliferation, rather
than to infection. Histopathologic examination of
Application of topical glucocorticoids to these ear
biopsy samples may be useful in identifying the degree
 canals (and to the concave aspect of the pinnae) can
of fibrosis present (316, 317). Topical glucocorticoids
produce a spectacular reduction in the degree of
may be useful in suppressing mural edema and
inflammation and otic stenosis which is present, often
hyperplasia, provided fibrosis is minimal.
obviating the requirement for surgery. However,
regular use of potent glucocorticoids, even in otic pre-
MANAGEMENT
parations, can induce iatrogenic hyperadreno
Otitis externa associated with hypersensitivity
corticism'. Therefore, although a potent fluorinated
Most commonly the hypersensitivity will be atopy,
 steroid may initially be indicated, the clinician should
although dietary intolerance and food allergy may be 
switch
to a minimally potent agent such
as
associated with chronic otitis externa. Erythematous,
 prednisolone, prednisone, or hydrocortisone for
hyperplastic otitis externa is usually associated with
maintenance.
316
317
316, 3 17 Photomicrographs of histopathologic samples from a case of chronic otitis externa. Epidermal hyperplasia, an
inflammatory infltrate, and dermal edema (316). The same section but stained to highlight fibrosis (317). This degree of fibrosis is
not amenable to topical glucocorticoids; surgery rather than medicine is indicated.
MEDICAL MANAGEMENT OF EAR DISEASE
181
Otitis externa associated with a defect in
·Consider ablation of the external ear canal if these
keratinization
 steps fail to prevent progressive pathologic changes.
Ceruminous otitis externa is not always complicated
by infection, but chronic cases usually are. In
Otitis externa associated with otitis media
particular there is a tendency for gram-negative
 Although otitis media usually results as an extension
bacteria to proliferate early in the course of the disease
of otitis externa through the tympanum4, it may itself
and this must be identified and treated. Furthermore,
be a cause of recurrent otitis externa. Diagnosis may
there may be concurrent otitis media and this must be
be difficult since the tympanic defects may heal, in
ruled in or ruled out before long-term measures are
spite of the presence of infection within the middle
instituted:
ear. Furthermore, bacteria recovered from cases of
· Consider surgical ablation at an earlier rather than
otitis media, behind an intact tympanum, are not
a later stage, and be sure to warn the owner that
always the same species, or with the same antibacterial
surgery may well be necessary at some point.
susceptibility, as those within the external ear canal5.
· Keep the external ear canal and the surrounding
area as clean as possible. Pluck hair regularly out of
Otitis externa associated with allergic
the external ear canal, and keep the concave aspect
contact dermatitis
of the proximal pinna and surrounding area clipped
 Allergic contact dermatitis to environmental allergens
short. Local shampooing may be helpful in keeping
(for example carpet or grass) may affect the medial
greasy scale to a minimum; use a degreasing,
aspect of the pinna but is unlikely to cause otitis
keratolytic, or keratoplastic product such as benzyl
 externa. However, reactions to otic medications have
peroxide or one of the tar/sulfur/salicylic acid
been reported, most commonly to neomycin and
combination products.
 propylene glycol. Whether the reaction to propylene
· Regular use of an acetic acid based aqueous
glycol is a true allergic reaction and not simply an
cleanser (2.5% or 5% concentration) will help to
irritant dermatitis is not clear. However, this is
keep the otic pH acid and suppress gram-negative
 immaterial from a practical point of view. What the
Overgrowth. Commercial products may be used, as
clinician and client will note is that the otitis is
 may equal quantities of white vinegar and water, or 
 aggravated by the treatment.
alcohol2,3.
· Regular use of ear cleansers which loosen cerumen
Otitis externa associated with resistant
and inhibit microbial growth may help to prevent
microorganism
accumulation of such debris and prevent relapse
 In a survey of the bacterial flora associated with otitis
into overt otitis externa.
 externa in dogs and cats, 15% of the staphylococci
· Occasional, sometimes more frequent, use of
were resistant to more than three antibacterial agents.
cleansers such as carbamide peroxide and dioctyl
However, none were resistant to all the commonly
sodium sulfosuccinate will help to flush out
used antibacterial agents. Furthermore, in a review of
accumulations of ceruminous debris, although a
cases in which otic surgery had failed7, resistant
drying agent, such as one based on isopropyl
 bacterial infection was not considered a significant
alcohol, should be used after these products2.
factor. Multiple-resistant, gram-positive otitis externa
· Otic  polypharmaceutical
preparations
with
is, it appears, a recognized problem in veterinary
combinations of glucocorticoids and antimicrobial
medicine.
agents, based on bacterial culture and sensitivity,
 may be indicated if the measures outlined above fail
 to prevent otitis externa developing.
If otitis media is suspected, it must be treated
In practice the most difficult organism to treat
is Pseudomonas ceruginosg, which may only be
aggressively. Management of otitis media is
sensitive to parenteral agents in vivo.Approaches
detailed in Chapter 5 (Otitis media, otitis
intema).
to gram-negative infection are detailed earlier in
this chapter (Gram-negative otitis externa).
182
 EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
Chronic, or recurrent, otItiS eXterna In cats
KEY POINTS
· Recurrent otitis externa is rare in cats.
Microscopic examination of collected cerumen may
· As in dogs, the initial challenge to the clinician is
be a more reliable method of detecting O. cynotis 
to identify whether the otitis is recurring because
than otoscopic examination.
of a disease within the ear or is a manifestation of
systemic disease.
· Systemic causes of otitis externa are unusual in cats
al.4 reported the recovery of M. pachydermatis and M.
and most cases result from Otodectes
 sympodialis from the feline external ear canal and also
tion, yeast infection, or polyps or neop
lasia. Otode
stated that aural yeast infection may be associated with
modicosis may be found.
otic pruritus. Feline malassezial otitis externa may be
· Hypersensitivities such
1 as atopy and dietary
associated with minimal pathologic changes, raising the
intolerance are rare.
suspicion of hypersensitivity rather than infectious disease.
· Indications for surgery, other than for polyps and
Many otic polypharmaceutical preparations contain only
neoplasia, are very rare.
acaricides, antibacterial agents, and topically acting
glucocorticoids, and these will not be effective in
ETIOLOGY
eliminating yeast infection. Non-response to treatment
Otodectes cynotis infection
with such medlications compounds the error of assuming
Many cats dlevelop a local hypersensitivity to O. cynotid
hypersensitivity when in fact there is an infectious disease.
and exhibit otitis externa characterized by variable
 Treatment with an otic preparation containing an
erythema, variable pruritus, and a crumbly black brown
 antifungal is curative, although reinfection may occur.
discharge (318). Some animals may exhibit local self-
 T'his may reflect abnormal otic expression of adhesion
trauma (319) whereas others may harbor huge numbers
molecules, or a systemic aberration that is not
of mites within the external ear canal and show no
clinically expressed and hence difficult to diagnose.
obvious sign of discomfort. T'hese are easily recognized
and treated. Animals exhibiting intense self-trauma with
Polyps and otic neoplasia
little obvious pathology are more diffcult to diagnose,
 Most inflammatory polyps arise from the epithelium
as are those with only one or two mites in the external
 of the middle ear or auditory tubes. Inflammatory
ear canal: the mites are sufficient in number to cause
polyps arising from the epithelium of the auditory
disease but very hard to see. Problems with diagnosis
tube or middle ear may occur in cats as young as three
may also occur in multicat households, where control
 months of age6. If they grow laterally through the
 may be dlifficult and low numbers of mites are endemic.
tympanum and into the external ear canal (320), they
Combined environmental, otic, and topical (or sys-
may be associated with otic discharge, inflammation,
temic) acaricidal treatment should be carried out in
head shaking, and Horner's syndrome.
these cases. Ivermectin is particularly useful as it will
Otic neoplasia in the cat is usually malignant,
eliminate mites within the ear canal and any ectopic
typically_adenocarcinomas or squamous cell car-
mites on the body surface. It is important that all
 cinomas7 8. Animals often present with malodor and
animals in the household are treated, whether dogs or
otic pruritus (321).
cats?. Demodex gatoi has been reported to cause
chronic ceruminous otitis externa in cats.
Hypersensitivity
Atopy
Malassezia pachydermatis or
 Although atopy is a very common cause of oitis externa
M. sympodialis infection
in dogs, it appears to be much less so in cats, perhaps due
The status of yeast within the feline external ear canal is
to dlifferences in anatomy, such as a relatively wide canal
probably analogous to the status of M. pachydermatis in
lack of hair within the canal, and an upright pinna?.
the canine, i.e. it is an opportunist pathogen?. Bond et
T'here may also be differences in the cerumen which
 make microbial overgrowth less likely, even in the face of
chronic inflammation. Intradermal skin testing is more
Microscopic examination of stained cytologic
difficult to perform in the cat compared to dogs and
preparations is mandatory.
 many clinicians will make a provisional cliagnosis of atopy
 on the basis of ruling out all other potential diagnoses.
MEDICAL MANAGEMENT 0F EAR DISEASE  183
Dietary intolerance
clinical signs while an exclusion diet is fed. A period
Dietary intolerance (food allergy) is rare in the cat.
 of 3-16 weeks may elapse before complete recovery
However, pinnal erythema and otitis externa may be
is noted.
Perhaps more commonly there is facial and head
Allergic contact dermatitis
pruritus with the pinnae and periaural areas being
 Allergic contact dermatitis is extraordinarily rare in
affected (322) rather than the external ear canals10,
cats. However, allergic contact dermatitis to topical
11,12. The most common allergens in proven cases
 neomycin is recognized by some clinicians. Certainly,
of feline dietary intolerance are beef, milk, and
the diagnosis should be considered in all cases of
fish13. Diagnosis is based on a resolution of the
 refractory otitis externa.
318
319
318
Otodectes cynotis infestation in a cat. Note the discharge
 3I9Self-excoriation as a consequence of otic pruritus.
within the ear canal.
320
321
 320 Pgmented polyp apparent at the
322
entrance to the external ear canal.
 321  Hemorrhagic tumor in the external
ear canal
322Severe self-trauma to the head and
neck in a case of food allergy.
184
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
NeUrOlOGIC SIGNS reLATeD tO MiDDLe EAr DISeASe
KEY POINTS
and sublingual salivary glands; and the buccal and
· The neurologic structures crossing the middle ear
lingual mucosa. The somatic efferent fibers of the
include the facial nerve and the sympathetic supply
facial nerve have their cell body located in the motor
to the eye and eyelids.
nucleus of the facial nerve in the brainstem. T'he
· Middle ear disease can result in ipsilateral facial
intermediate nerve constitutes the sensory and
nerve dysfunction, Horner's syndrome, and
 preganglionic root of the facial nerve. Its cell bodies
conductive deafness.
are located in the parasympathetic nucleus of the facial
· Causes of middle ear disease principally include
nerve, situated dorsally and cranially to the motor
infection, neoplasia, trauma and, in cats, polyps.
nucleus in the brainstem. T'he sensory nerve fibers
· Conductive deafness associated with middle ear
have their cell bodies in the geniculate ganglion3.
dlisease carries a better prognosis than sensorineural
The central course of CN VII is beyond the scope
deafness.
of this book. However, for an understanding of
neuropathies that can be associated with middle ear
INTrODUCTION AND NEUROANATOMY
disease, a good appreciation of the course of the facial.
T'he middle ear consists of an air-filled tympanic cavity
 nerve in relation to the tympanic bulla is important.
connected to the nasopharynx via the auditory tube,
The intermediate nerve and motor fibers join just
and closed to the outsidle by the tympanic membrane.
distal to their emergence from the brainstem. The
In the dog the tympanic cavity has a small dorsal
facial nerve leaves the cranial cavity via the internal
epitympanic recess and a large ventral tympanic bulla.
 acoustic meatus, together with the vestibular and
The middle portion of the tympanic cavity contains
cochlear nerves. Within the meatus the cochlear nerve
the three auditory ossicles and their two associated
diverges and the vestibular nerve divides into a
muscles' (see Chapter l: Gross and microscopic
anatomy of the ear: structure and function). In the cat
remains in contact with the facial nerve as they
the middle ear cavity is divided into two parts by a
 traverse the dorsal part of the internal acoustic meatus
bony septum, incomplete dorsally. These two
and enter the facial canal together² (323, 324).
compartments lie dorsolaterally and ventromedially,
 After pursuing a sigmoid course throughout the
the latter being larger than, and extending caudally to,
 temporal bone, the facial nerve emerges at the
the former. The larger compartment corresponds to
stylomastoid foramen situated dorsally and laterally to
the fundic portion of the tympanic bulla in the dog.
the tympanic bulla (325).
The tympanic membrane forms the major portion of
The initial 3 mm (0.l in) of the facial canal,
the lateral wall of the smaller compartment, which also
starting at the internal acoustic meatus, is straight.
contains the bony part of the auditory tube2.
T'he canal makes its first turn on arriving at the thin
medial wall of the fossa m. tensor tympani. At this
Facial nerve
turn, or genu, of the facial canal there is an indistinct
The facial nerve (cranial nerve [CN] VII) is a mixed
enlargement of the sensory geniculate ganglion of the
nerve, providing motor innervation for all of the
facial nerve. In the concavity of this bend is the rostral
superficial muscles of the head, face, and external ear
half of the vestibule. As the canal straightens after the
(mimetic muscles) as well as the caudal belly of the
first turn, and before the second turn begins, it opens
digastricus muscle, the stylohyoid muscle, the
into the cavity of the middle ear lateral to the
platysma of the neck, and the stapedius muscle in the
vestibular window. This is where the facial nerve is
middle
ear.It also
contains
preganglionic
exposed to diseases affecting the middle ear. The
parasympathetic fibers, as well as afferent sensory
direction of the second bend of the canal is the reverse
neurons coming from the taste buds of the rostral
of that of the first, so that the whole passage is S-
 two-thirds of the tongue and other visceral receptors 
shaped but does not lie in one plane4. The facial nerve
in the soft palate, nasopharynx, and nasal cavity via the
then exits the skull via the stylomastoid foramen to be
 chorda tympani. The parasympathetic fibers synapse 
 distributed in branches (the auriculopalpebral, dorsal,
in ganglia that send postganglionic fibers to the
 and ventral buccal nerves) to the muscles of the ears,
lacrimal gland; the glands of the nasal mucosa (via the
cheek, lips, and nose5.
major petrosal nerve); the dorsal buccal, mandibular,
MEDICAL MANAGEMENT OF EAR DISEASE
185
323Ventral aspect of the skull of a dog
323
with the bulla removed. The acoustic meatus
(l), the internal aspect of the stylomastoid
foramen (2), the jugular foramen (3), the
promontory (4), and the facial canal (dotted
line) are visible.
 324  Dorsal view of the skull of a dog with
324
the calvarium removed. The internal acoustic
meatus (l) and the jugular foramen (2) are 
visible.
325  Lateral view of the caudal part of the
325
skull of a dog.The stylomastoid foramen (1) is
clearly visible immediately caudal to the
external acoustic meatus (2).
186
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
Sympathetic innervation of the eye
ganglion. At this level the preganglionic axons synapse
 In order to understand the reasons for the occurrence
with the third neuron. The axons for ocular inner-
 of Horner's syndrome with middle ear disease, and its
vation course rostrally through the tympano-occipital
accurate diagnosis, it is important to have a basic
understanding of the anatomy of the autonomic
between the tympanic bulla and the petrosal bone
nervous system. T'his system is concerned with the
into the middle ear cavity, closely associated with the
motor innervation of smooth muscles, cardiac
ventral surface of the petrosal bone (326).
muscles, and glands, as well as fat. It is further
The axons continue rostrally between the petrosal
subdivided into sympathetic and parasympathetic
 bone and the basisphenoid to join the ventral surface
parts, which are ^three-neurons′ systems. Both parts
of the trigeminal ganglion and the ophthalmic branch
of the autonomic nervous system are under the
 of the trigeminal nerve in the cavernous sinus. This
influence of higher centers located in the midbrain,
ophthalmic nerve enters the periorbita through the
pons, medulla and, most importantly,
the hypo-
orbital
fissure.
The postganglionic
Caxonsare
thalamus. T'he first neuron of the chain descends from
distributed by way of the ophthalmic nerve branches
the hypothalamus through the brainstem and the
to the smooth muscles of the periorbita, the eyelids,
spinal cord in the tecto-tegmento-
-spinal tract. It
including the third eyelid, and the iris muscles,
 synapses in the gray matter of the thoracic and lumbar
particularly the dilator of the pupil. T'he normal tone
segments with the second neuron of the chain, the
of the smooth muscles of the periorbita and eyelids
 preganglionic neuron, which has its cell body in the
keeps the eyeball protruded and the eyelids retracted.
 gray matter of the central nervous system (brainstem
The sympathetic tone also keeps the pupil partially
and spinal cord). Its axon leaves the central nervous
 dilated in normal conditions and aids dilation during
 system via a cranial or spinal nerve and synapses in a
periods of stress, fear, pain, and darkness6, 9 (327).
peripheral
ganglion
with
the
third
neuron
Although it is important to remember that the
(postganglionic neuron) which terminates in the
 sympathetic innervation of the eye is counterbalanced
structure to be innervated. In the sympathetic system,
 by parasympathetic innervation, a detailed description
also called the thoracolumbar system, the cell bodies
of the latter system is beyond the scope of this book,
of the preganglionic neuron are located in the
 but it can be found in anatomy and neuroanatomy
intermediate horn of the gray matter in the spinal
texts1, 6, 10 (328).
 cord, from the first thoracic to the fifth lumbar spinal
segments. With a few exceptions, the neurotransmitter
MIDDLE EAR DISEASE: CAUSES AND
released at the presynaptic end of the postganglionic
CONSEQUENCES
axon is norepinephrine6, 7.
The main causes of middle ear disease include
T'he sympathetic innervation of the eye responds to
neoplasia, infection, polyps, and trauma. A detailed
stimulation eliciting excitement, fear, or anger. T'he
discussion of polyps and otitis media can be found in
cell bodies of the preganglionic neurons destined to
Chapter 3 (Nasopharyngeal and middle ear polyps)
innervate the pupil are located in the first three or
and
Chapter 5 (Otitis media, otitis interna),
four thoracic spinal segments. T'he axons pass through
respectively. Neoplasms involving the middle ear
the ventral gray horn and adjacent white matter into
include adenocarcinoma of the tympanic bullal1,
the ventral roots and the proximal portion of the
spinal nerve corresponding to these segments. Before
Chapter 3: Otic neoplasia). Traumatic causes of middle
the spinal nerve branches, these preganglionic axons 
 ear disease are mostly due to road traffc accidents.
leave it via the segmental ramus communicans, which
The main neurologic consequences of middle ear
joins the thoracic sympathetic trunk inside the thorax
disease are conductive deafness, facial nerve paralysis,
ventrolateral to the vertebral column and close to the
and Horner's syndrome.
surface of the cranial lung lobe&. T'he axons usually
progress cranially without synapse in a trunk ganglion.
Conductive deafness
They pass through the cervicothoracic (stellate) and
Conductive deafness occurs when there is a failure of
middle cervical ganglia and course cranially in the
proper transmission of sound vibration to the inner
cervical sympathetic trunk, which is part of the
 ear and auditory nervous systeml3. Therefore, this
vagosympathetic trunk. Medial to the origin of the
type of hearing impairment results from problems in
digastricus muscle and ventromedial to the tympanic
the external or middle ear, such as external ear
 bulla, the cervical sympathetic trunk separates from
occlusion (in extreme cases of chronic otitis externa),
the vagus nerve and terminates in the cranial cervical
rigidity or rupture of the tympanic membrane,
MEDICAL MANAGEMENT OF EAR DISEASE
187
damage to the ossicular chain, and fluid or soft tissue
with cholesteatomal4. However, while severe hearing
accumulation within the tympanic bulla. T'he most
loss can be present in dogs affected by severe otitis,
common cause of conductive deafness is chronic
few become totally deafi5. Cleaning of the external
otitis externa or otitis media, sometimes in association
ear has been reported to be a potential cause of
326Ventral view of the skull of a dog with
326
the tympano-occipito fissures marked
(arrows).
327
328
327Staffordshire Bull Terrier with left-sided facial nerve
328 Cavalier King Charles Spaniel exhibiting asymmetry of
paralysis exhibiting asymmetry of the lip commisures.
the lip commisures as a result of right-sided facial nerve
 paralysis.
188
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
bilateral total ear canal ablation and lateral bulla
It is important that conductive deafness is
osteotomy20. (NB: The inner ear must function
differentiated from sensorineural deafness,
normally, with a hearing threshold below 45 dB [as
particularly when an animal is considered as
assessed by bone-conducted BAER].) The BAHA
a candidate for an auditory prosthesis, as the
implant allows the by-pass of the resected or
 prognosis is rather different.
redundant ear canals and tympanic bullae and permits
stimulation of the cochlea by bone-conducted sound
through the skull. With the BAHA in place, BAER
testing shows a good hearing threshold at 30 dB
deafness. Although damage to bony ossicles is a rare
(sound pressure level [SPL]) while without the BAHA
cause of deafness16, it can occur after overzealous
no BAER line is reproducible even at 70 dB (SPL).
flushing and curettage of the tympanic bulla.
The principal consideration is whether amplifying
Nonetheless, gentle cleaning of the ear canal tends to
devices are indicated in the ageing canine. Indeed,
improve the hearing function of dogs, which
studies suggest that presbycusis is due to a degenera-
indicates the profound effect of physical obstruction
 tion of neurons?l which would not support the use of
 of the external ear canal by debris15.
a sound amplifier if the sound cannot be perceived at
the receiving end. This was the perceived opinion
Treatment
early in human research. However, experience
Ear cleaning. As suggested by Eger and Lindsayl5,
accumulated over 20 years contradicts this early
ear cleaning (see Chapter 9: Cleaning the external ear
impression. Indeed, it is stated that the great majority
canal) can improve the hearing function of dogs, as
of people who wear and benefit from hearing aids
long as it does not cause more damage (rupture of the
 have sensorineural loss. Similar experience is reported
tympanic membrane, disruption of the ossicle chain,
in veterinary patients. Nevertheless, it remains
ototoxicity).
important to understand that amplification cannot
Surgical options. Surgical management of
help totally deaf animals19.
external and middle ear disease is described in
Chapter ll (Surgical resection, aural ablation, and
Prognosis
21'   q ss (is g
 The prognosis associated with conductive deafness is
 demon-strated that ventral tympanic bulla osteotomy
essentially based on the underlying cause. An objective
 does not have any deleterious effect on hearing, as
evaluation of the hearing level with BAEP is indicated
measured by brainstem auditory evoked potential
(see Chapter 2: Electrophysiologic procedures).
(BAEP), in a majority of treated dogs. However, total
Further investigation of the cause of deafness should
ear canal ablation with lateral tympanic bulla
yield a definitive diagnosis and a treatment plan. As
Osteotomy causes irreversible hearing loss unless the
mentioned above, surgical treatment may or may not
tympanic membrane and ossicles are retained, which
help with recovery of the hearing ability. It is also
important to remember that the hearing impairment
Hearing aids. Hearing aids for veterinary patients
can be worsened by inappropriate or aggressive
have been developed. They are similar to a miniature
medical treatment (see Chapter 8: Ototoxicity and
public address system, containing a miniaturized
other side-effects of otic medications).
microphone and a battery-powered amplifier and
speaker housed in a suitable container. T'he amplified
Facial nerve paralysis
sound is introduced into the ear by various means that
 Clinical signs
have evolved with experience of tolerance in dogs.
The cardinal signs of facial nerve paralysis include ear
T'he latest model, described by Marshall9, is mounted
and lip droop, asymmetrical commissures of the lips,
in a case worn on the collar of the dog. T'he amplified
widened palpebral fissure, ipsilateral sialosis, and
sound is fed into the ear via a flexible plastic tube,
collection of food on the paralyzed side of the mouth
which is held in the ear by acoustic foam. Success
(327, 328, see page 187). Cranial nerve reflexes and
depends largely on the training provided by the dog's
responses requiring facial nerve function (palpebral.
owner, as well as the owner's patience in conditioning
and corneal reflexes, menace response) are decreased
the dog to wear the instrument.
or absent22. If the parasympathetic fibers conveyed in
More recently, the surgical placement of a bone-
the facial nerve are affected, this can lead to reduced
anchored hearing aid (BAHA) was described in a dog
tear production and result in keratoconjunctivitis
with bilateral chronic otitis which had been treated by
sicca23 (329).
MEDICAL MANAGEMENT OF EAR DISEASE
189
Hemifacial spasm, which is a constant contraction of
 Neoplastic causes of facial nerve paralysis include
all the facial muscles on one side of the head, has been
pituitary tumor6 and insulinoma, which is often
observed in dogs. On the affected side the nose is pulled
 associated with a subclinical peripheral neuropathy25.
caudally and the lips may feel hypertonic. T'he palpebral
Fibrosarcoma and squamous cell carcinoma of the
fissure is smaller due to partial closure of the eyelids, and
tympanic bulla in cats can cause facial nerve paralysis,
the ear is slightly elevated. In most dogs some slight
 amongst other cranial nerve involvement26.
movement can be elicited in the eyelids and sometimes
in the ear and nose. The facial muscles on the opposite
dogs and cats. In a retrospective study it was judged to
side function normally. This syndrome has been
be the cause of 74.7% of cases in dogs and 25% of cases
attributed mainly to hyperirritability of the facial nerve
in cats. The onset is usually sudden and the course
caused by otitis media, although it can occur spon-
variable6. T'he condition is usually unilateral but can be
taneously or follow total facial nerve paralysise.
bilateral. Idiopathic facial nerve paralysis has been
reported mainly in mature dlogs and cats. Some breeds,
Neuroanatomic localization and associated
such as Cocker Spaniels, Welsh Corgis, Boxers, English
neurologic signs
Setters, and domestic longhaired cats, are more
T'he facial nerve can be affected, like all cranial nerves,
 predisposed5, 27.
 at the level of its nucleus in the brainstem, or anywhere
Inflammatory causes of facial nerve paralysis
along its axon, within the skull, during its exit of the
 include polyradiculoneuritis, such as Coonhound
skull, and outside of the skull. Neurologic signs
 paralysis in the USAl6, and brachial plexus neuritis6.
associated with facial nerve paralysis often allow a more
Granulomatous meningoencephalomyelitis can involve
precise localization of the problem:
the facial nerve nucleus, amongst other structures of the
· If the lesion is located within the brainstem,
 central nervous system28.
neurologic signs affecting adjacent structures will be
 Infectious causes of facial nerve paralysis are
observed simultaneously causing, for instance,  I
 mainly localized to the middle ear and are the most
ipsilateral conscious proprioception deficits with
 common cause for this cranial nerve deficit. In cases of
upper motor neuron (UMN) signs. Other cranial
 otitis medlia, concomitant signs of ipsilateral peripheral
nerves, such as CNs V, VI, and VIII, may be affected
vestibular disease are most common26.
as well.
· If the facial nerve is affected along its passage through
the petrosal bone, the vestibulocochlear nerve is most
likely to be affected and this will cause concomitant
ipsilateral signs of peripheral vestibular disease and
cdeafness.
· If the facial nerve is affected after it emerges from the
329
 stylomastoid foramen, the parasympathetic fibers in
the major perosal nerve will be spared23 and paralysis
of the facial muscles will not be accompanied by the
dry eye and nasal mucosa that are often associated
with total facial neuropathy.
Differential diagnosis
Facial nerve paralysis can occur without any lesion in the
middle ear. T'he clinician presented with a case of facial
nerve paralysis should consider carefully all possible
dlifferential diagnoses and localizations of the problem
 before narrowing investigations to the middle ear.
Metabolic facial nerve paralysis has been reported
to be associated with hypothyroidism, often in
conjunction with neuropathies involving other cranial
nerves or even peripheral appendicular nerves. T'he exact
pathogenesis of hypothyroid neuropathy is still poorly
understood and results of thyroid hormone replacement
Note the ipsilateral (left) neurogenic dry nose and dry eye.
 in affected animals have been variablel6, 24.
(llustration courtesy J Sansom.)
06P
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
Trauma, such as fracture of the petrosal or
T'herefore, dark adaptation accentuates the anisocoria,
basioccipital bone, can also be a cause of facial nerve
with the normal pupil dilating widely and the affected
paralysis. In this case it is mostly associated with signs of
pupil being incompletely dlilated9. T'he size of the pupils
ipsilateral peripheral vestibular disease6. Surgical trauma
in the dark is best evaluated by eliciting a tapetal reflex
subsequent to middle ear surgery is also one of the most
during distant direct ophthalmoscopic examination, the
commonly reported causes of facial nerve paralysis
ophthalmoscope being held at arms length from the
animal (333, 334).
Investigation
Theoretically, ptosis is caused by loss of sympathetic
Aural examination and radiographs of the skull and
innervation of the smooth muscle of the upper eyelid;
tympanic bullae help rule out obvious signs of trauma
however, some experts believe that ptosis may occur
and otitis media. However, radiography is not a very
secondarily to the enophthalmos?.
sensitive means of investigating otitis media and
Narrowing of the palpebral fissure is caused by a
advanced imaging techniques such as CT or MRI
combination of ptosis of the upper eyelid,
should be pursued. Electromyography will confirm the
 enophthalmos, and elevation of the lower eyelid?
presence of denervation if the clinical signs have been
Enophthalmos is the result of lack of sympathetic
present for five days or more. However, this will not
 supply to the musculus orbitalis of the periorbital
identify the cause of the neuropathy. In all cases of
 sheath, which pushes the globe forward. T'he retractor
confirmed facial nerve paralysis, tear production should
 bulbi is left without antagonism, which allows further
be assessed by Schirmer tear testing and fluorescein
 retraction of the globe?.
staining should be performed to rule out exposure
 Protrusion of the third eyelid is not always present
keratitis. Both tests should be monitored on a monthly
in Horner's syndrome but it is the most consistent
or two-monthly basis22.
sign after miosis. Protrusion of the third eyelid is
 i   o   
Treatment
accentuated by the enophthalmos?.
Other changes occasionally reported with long-
underlying cause and aims at avoiding the occurrence of
term Horner's syndrome
include
peripheral
exposure keratitis or keratoconjunctivitis sicca. Artificial
 vasodilation causing locally increased skin temperature
tears should be applied in confirmed dry eyes and
 and hyperemia, best observed in the ipsilateral ear and
animals should be kept out of draughts and dusty
 nasal mucosa6, 28, 32. This phenomenon is reported to
environments. If motor function does not return within
 be the cause of a change in coat color in affected
three months post diagnosis, a temporary or permanent
 Siamese cats?9, 29, 30. It has also been noted that the
tarsorrhaphy can be performed to prevent traumatic
 affected iris of the cat changes color three-and-a-half
keratitis.
 years after cervical ganglionectomy31.
Prognosis
Neuroanatomic localization and associated
Recovery of facial muscle function is guarded. It can
neurologic signs
take weeks or months and, more often than not, the
As with any neurologic disorder, it is important to
paralysis is permanent.
localize the lesion before establishing a list of
differential diagnoses specific to the neuroanatomic
Horner's syndrome
location.
Clinical signs
 Brainstem. Damage to the hypothalamus or tecto-
The classic features of Horner's syndrome are well
tegmental-spinal tract in the brainstem can result in
recognized (330-332):
lst order Horner's syndrome. As these structures are
·Anisocoria with ipsilateral miosis.
placed fairly deeply in the parenchyma, they are
● Ptosis of the upper eyelid.
unlikely to be the only ones affected, and most of the
· Narrowing of the palpebral fissure.
time they are associated with rather severe neurologic
· Enophthalmos.
signs affecting the long tracts and adjacent brainstem
· Protrusion of the third eyelid.
nuclei such as the cranial nerves or the vegetative
respiratory and cardiovascular centers. The deficits
The affected pupil is not pinpoint but is definitely
 observed can include dyspnea, arrhythmia, altered
smaller than the normal pupil. It is best assessed in the
mental status, and proprioceptive deficits affecting the
dark, as the affected pupil cannot dilate beyond the size
ipsilateral thoracic and pelvic limbs, at least in theory.
of the pupil created by the resting iris sphincter muscle.
In practice most cases present with tetraparesis and
MEDICAL MANAGEMENT OF EAR DISEASE
191
tetraplegia. The segmental spinal reflexes are normal
330
to increased in both the thoracic and the pelvic limbs,
indicating an UMN lesion.
Spinal cord. The Ist sympathetic neuron of the
 chain travels in the tecto-tegmento-spinal tract in the
white matter of the spinal cord until it synapses with
the 2nd neuron at the level of spinal segments T'l,
T2, and T3. Lesions affecting the tecto-tegmento-
spinal tract in the spinal cord are unlikely to be
discreet enough to cause a Horner's syndrome as the
 sole clinical sign. Long tracts are likely to be affected
as well, causing proprioceptive deficits in the
ipsilateral thoracic and pelvic limbs.
330Domestic shorthaired cat with right-sided Horner's
 syndrome. There is myosis, a protruded third eyelid, and a
drooped upper eyelid. Compare with the normal left eye.
331
332
331, 332 Domestic shorthaired cat with right-sided Horner's syndrome and right-sided facial nerve paralysis. Note the prolapsed
third eyelid, myotic pupil, and asymmetric eyelid aperture, as well as the absence of a blink reflex in the affected eye in 331
334
In 334 the tapetal reflex is easily seen. Note the anisocoria.
192
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
The segmental spinal reflexes vary with the local-
the chain in the sympathetic trunk before it synapses
ization of the lesion along the cervico-thoracic spine:
with the postganglionic neuron can occur at the level
· Between Cl and C5 spinal segments the reflexes
of the cranial mediastinum, the thoracic inlet, or in
indicate an UMN lesion in both the thoracic and
the neck where it courses with the carotid artery, the
the pelvic limbs.
vagus nerve, and the recurrent laryngeal nerve. Signs
· Between C6 and T3 spinal segments the reflexes
associated with a 2nd order Horner's syndrome at this
are decreased to absent in the thoracic limb,
level include laryngeal and esophageal dysfunction.
indicating a lower motor neuron (LMN) lesion
 Lesions in the mediastinum do not tend to produce
whilst they indicate an UMN lesion in the pelvic
other neurologic deficits but may cause dyspnea.
limb. With a lesion at this level of the spinal cord,
Middle ear. Diseases of the middle ear may be the
it is possible to observe ipsilateral deficits of the
most common cause of Horner's syndrome?. Clinical
cutaneous trunci (panniculus) reflex, as its efferent
signs associated with middlle ear disease can be associated
(motor) arm, the lateral thoracic nerve, emerges
or not with signs of otitis externa and/or otitis interna
from spinal segments C8-T1.
(see Chapter 5: Otitis media, otitis interna). Facial nerve
· A lesion to the tecto-tegmento-spinal tract between
 paralysis is another sign often observed with Horner's
Cl and C8 causes a lst order Horner's syndrome,
syndrome due to a lesion localized to the middle ear, as
whilst lesions located between Tl and T3 spinal
 well as ipsilateral vestibular disease if the problem
segments affect the cell body of the 2nd neuron in
extends to the inner ear (335, 336).
the chain and cause a 2nd order Horner's syndrome.
Cavernous sinus. The cavernous sinus is a paired
venous sinus that lies on each side of the floor in the
Lesions located in the central nervous system
middle cranial fossa and runs from the orbital fissure
causing Horner's syndrome are rarely discreet enough
to the petro-occipital canal. Lesions located at the
 to cause neurologic deficits limited to the ipsilateral
level of the cavernous sinus are rare. They can affect
side, and it is not unusual to observe neurologic
the sympathetic innervation of the pupil and produce
deficits in all four limbs.
a Horner's syndrome as part of a clinical syndrome.
Ventral roots of Tl, T2, T3, and proximal
However, the majority of cases reported presented
spinal nerves. Lesions to the ventral roots cause a
mainly
ywith deficits of the parasympathetic
2nd order Horner's syndrome associated with LMN
 innervation of the eye, as well as involvement of CNs
signs to the ipsilateral thoracic limb and possibly
III, IV, VI, and the ophthalmic and maxillary
cutaneous trunci deficits, but they should not affect
 branches of CN V. The most common signs are
the ipsilateral pelvic limb. LMN injuries are the most
ophthalmoparesis or ophthalmoplegia, mydriasis and
common cause of Horner's syndrome in animals33.
 absent pupillary light reflex, ptosis, decreased corneal
Sympathetic trumk. Damage to the 2nd neuron of
 sensation, and decreased retractor occuli reflex. In one
335
336
335, 336 Siamese cat with retropharyngeal lymphoma extending to the middle ear and causing bilateral Horner's syndrome
and left-sided facial paralysis. Note the absence of a blink reflex in the left eye.
MEDICAL MANAGEMENT OF EAR DISEASE
193
series of l2 cases, only one had signs of partial
0.00l% epinephrine is subject to the same route of
Horner's syndrome33.
inactivation as endogenously released norepinephrine.
Retrobulbar area. Retrobulbar lesions can cause
 If a low concentration is applied exogenously, some
Horner's syndrome. In these cases it is often asso
will diffuse into the circulation and the rest will be
 ciated with other clinical signs due to compression or
taken up into the nerve endings.
damage to the surrounding structures, i.e. exo-
Therefore, in the normal eye there will not be
phthalmos, retrobulbar compression of the optic
sufficient concentration of epinephrine to cause
dilation. However, in the eye with a postganglionic
visual deficits and ophthalmoplegia/ophthalmoparesis.
 Horner's syndrome the sympathetic nerve is no longer
intact.
.Thus,
route of inactivation of the
Pharmacologic localization
Often, the neuroanatomic localization of the cause of
been lost35.Acco
rding to Canon's law of denervation
the Horner's syndrome cannot be determined by
supersensitivity, weak concentrations of epinephrine
physical examination alone. Therefore, attempts to
e rapid dilation of
 determine whether the lesion is pre- or postganglionic
the affected pupil
36. T'he cat and dog have some degree
can be helpful19. Although the classically described
of supersensitivity with a preganglionic lesion, although
cocaine and epinephrine tests are used by some
it is only 1o% of that seen after postganglionic dener-
clinicians, they rarely produce a clear localization of
vation35. However, results of testing with epinephrine
the lesion site34.
have proved to be inaccurate and some authors
Pharmacologic testing theoretically allows the
recommend the use of 10% phenylephrine, which
classification of Horner's syndrome into three
 penetrates the cornea more effectively8, 35.
categories23.
10% phenylephrine. Ten percent phenylephrine is
· A lst order Horner's syndrome where the lst
a direct-acting sympathomimetic drug. It should be
neuron of the chain is affected.
used at least 24 hours after a positive hydroxyam
· A 2nd order Horner's syndrome where the 2nd
phetamine test (i.e. incomplete to no mydriasis)34.
neuron of the chain is affected (preganglionic).
After denervation the iris dilator muscle becomes
· A 3rd order Horner's syndrome where the post-
 hypersensitive to catecholamines. Hypersensitivity is
ganglionic neuron, the 3rd in the chain, is affected.
lionic denervation37. Therefore, if the lesion is post-
During pharmacologic testing, both the normal and
 ganglionic, mydriasis and retraction of the protruded
the abnormal eye should be tested for comparison and
3rd eyelid occur in the affected eye within 5-20
each eye should receive the same amount of drug?. I
Under normal circumstances the following sequence  In the case of a 2nd order Horner's syndrome the
of events accounts for stimulation of the iris dilator:
 abnormal pupil dilates in about 45 minutes, and in the
· Sympathetic nerve impulses are transmitted to the
 normal eye, or lst order Horner's syndrome, mydriasis
ends of postganglionic nerve fibers, at which time
 occurs between 60 and 90 minutes10.
norepinephrine is released.
 1% hydroxyamphetamine. One percent hydroxy-
· Norepinephrine rapidly crosses the neuromucular
amphetamine is an indirect-acting sympathomimetic
junction, and the iris dilates.
which acts by causing endogenous norepinephrine re-
lease from adrenergic nerve endings. Therefore, it can
 In Horner's syndrome, when these nerve fibers are
 help distinguish between pre- and postganglionic le-
non-functional or are destroyed, the iris does not
sions. When the lesion is central or preganglionic, my-
dilate and the unopposed iris sphincter maintains the
driasis results after 1% hydroxyamphetamine is placed
pupil in a contracted miotic status. The released
in a Horner's-affected pupil, just as in the control eye.
norepinephrine can undergo several fates:
In these lesions the nerve endings of the
· It may be removed by capillary circulation.
 postganglionic neurons are unimpaired and therefore
·It can be destroyed enzymatically.
they liberate their endogenous norepinephrine stores.
· It can undergo re-uptake by the nerve from which
 Since this drug is dose dependent, a sufficient quantity
it was released.
needs to be administered equally to each eye to
achieve mydriasis of the control eye to assure valid
0.00l% epinephrine. Diffusion and re-uptake are
testing. A greater number of drops are required in
probably the most significant routes for inactivation
dark irides. The test may require one
ehourto
 of norepinephrine after its release35. Topically applied
 complete and requires multiple instillations. When the
194
 EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
lesion is postganglionic, the norepinephrine stores
ort
thymoma in the anterior mediastinum,thyroid
contained in the adrenergic nerve terminals are
adenocarcinoma40 , salivary gland adenocarcinoma43,
reduced or absent, depending on the duration of the
and metastatic carcinoma involving the maxillary and
lesion and the location of the damage from the nerve
palatine bones or the regional lymph nodes29,41, 44.
endings. This type of Horner's pupil dilates incom-
Other less common neoplastic causes of Horner's
pletely or not at all, depending on the state of the
 syndrome include myelomonocytic neoplasia of peri-
nerve terminals9, 34 ( Table 14).
pheral nerves, especially the trigeminal nerve in dogs45,
 5% or 6% cocaine. Five percent34 or 6%37 cocaine
and retrobulbar squamous cell carcinoma in the cat46.
 potentiates or produces adrenergic effects by blocking
 Iatrogenic causes of Horner's syndrome are mainly
the transport of catecholamines back into the sympa-
 due to trauma during middle ear surgery or cleaning
thetic postganglionic fibres35. While cocaine
is
valuable in confirming Horner's syndrome, it is
common complication of neck surgery for cervical
considered unreliable in predicting the site of a lesion
spinal cord compression38, thyroid47 and parathyroid
in cats and dogs38.
gland excision48, as well as surgical correction of
osteochondritis dissecans in the shoulder49. Horner's
Differential diagnosis
syndrome can occur following placement of intra-
Although all the clinical signs constituting Horner's
thoracic drains50 or aortic catheterization51.
syndrome are rarely present simultaneously for any
Idiopathic Horner's syndrome is diagnosed in over
other reason, the above mentioned clinical signs taken
 50% of canine cases?2 and over 40% of feline cases38,
individually can be caused by a variety of specific
disorders. It is important to keep these options in
the Golden Retriever53.
mind when investigating the origin of Horner's
Infection localized to the middle ear is one of the
syndrome. For instance, the differential diagnosis for
 main causes of Horner's syndrome in cats and dogs52.
miosis includes anterior uveitis, corneal ulceration
Toxoplasma gondii was reported to cause Horner's syn-
with secondary miosis, causes of synechia, and spastic
pupil syndrome in cats8, 9. Anisocoria can also occur
Inflammatory causes of Horner's syndrome are
following cranial trauma.
unusual. In these cases signs of sympathetic involve-
The differential diagnosis for enophthalmos and
ment tend to be associated with other signs of
 protrusion of the third eyelid includes microphthalmia,
neurologic disease. Idiopathic pyogranulomatous
phthysis bulbi, dehydration, chronic orbital inflamma-
meningoencephalomyelitis in Pointers is one of the
tion, or loss of orbital fat due to excessive weight loss39.
 Protrusion of the third eyelid can also be associated
 paralysis of the muscles of mastication and a dropped
with tetanus or Haw's syndrome in the cat40. The main
jaw can also cause Horner's syndrome, presumably
clinical signs of Haw's syndrome are chronic diarrhea
from involvement of the postganglionic sympathetic
and depression and they are usually self-limiting41.
 axons coursing in the ophthalmic branch6.
However, systemic disorders such as dehydration,
Traumatic causes of Horner's syndrome include
 -s si o i  siin p ss i
chronic intervertebral disk protrusion consistent with
metrically. Blepharospasm due to primary ocular disease
lower cervical spondylomyelopathy. This latter
can mimic narrowing of the palpebral fissure.
etiology was reported at the level of C6-C7 in a
T'here are many causes of Horner's syndrome, but
 Doberman Pinscher29. Some authors have reported
it is essential that, as in any other neurologic disease,
that spinal cord lesions cranial to C6 severe enough
the causes are assessed in the context of the likelihood
 to cause Horner's syndrome usually cause respiratory
 of their occurrence at the identified neuroanatomic
failure, leading to death56. Other frequently reported
localization.
traumatic causes include rib fracture, high rise falls,
Congenital Horner's syndrome has been reported
stake and choke chain injuries, bite wounds, and
in a Basset Hound, which showed clinical signs from
 the time its eyes opened42.
are the most common cause of Horner's syndrome.
Neoplastic processes can affect the sympathetic
An RTA resulting in avulsion of the brachial plexus
pathway anywhere along its way from the hypothala-
can include the spinal nerve roots Tl, T2, and T3 and
mus to the muscle dilator of the pupil. Many types of
cause an associated ipsilateral preganglionic Horner's
tumor have been described in cats and dogs. They
syndrome. Postganglionic Horner's syndrome caused
include  intramedullary  or  extradural  lymphoma
by trauma can be brought on by fracture or
compressing the thoracic spinal cord, leiomyosarcoma29
hemorrhage in the middle ear.
MEDICAL MANAGEMENT OF EAR DISEASE
195
Cardiovascular causes of Horner's syndrome are
in cats, and Neospora caninum in dogs. Imaging
 mainly represented by fibrocartilaginous emboli in the
procedures should include radiographs of the thorax,
cervical spinal cord. In these cases the associated
the cervical and thoracic spine, and the tympanic
 neurologic signs are characterized by sudden onset,
bullae, and orbital ultrasonography. More advanced
 imaging of the skull and orbit, or even of the neck and
thorax, can be pursued with MRI or CT, associated
Diagnosis
with CSF sampling and analysis.
Investigation of Horner's syndrome should always
start with a precise localization in mind. However,
Prognosis
 despite the above mentioned theory of pharmacologic
T'he prognosis for recovery from Horner's syndrome is
localization, it is not always possible 
to localize
mainly associated with the underlying disease. If the
Horner's syndrome very precisely. The next step,
cause of the problem is transient, pre- and post-
therefore, involves exploring all localizations and all
 ganglionic innervation willre-establish itself. Pregang-
dlifferential diagnoses in context with the set of clinical
lionic lesions may require as long as six months to re-
signs observed.
 Investigative procedures should commence with
nOsis29,40, 58
. Resolution time is shortest for animals
 routine hematology, a complete serum biochemistry
with traumatic
causes and longest for those with
profile, and serum titers for toxoplasmosis,FeLV/FIV
Table 14: Localization of the lesion in Horner's syndrome using pharmacologic agents. (Modified from Neer 1984,Theisen et ol. 199633 
 and Gum 199 137)
Neuron involved 
Location of lesion
Localization of
Pharmacologic test
clinical signs
Central (Ist order)
Hypothalamus 
Temperament change, polyuria/polydipsia, 
1% hydroxyamphetamine: normal mydriasis 
tecto-tegmento
polyphagia hypersexuality.
in both eyes.
-spinal tract
10% phenylephrine: minimal dilation of
both pupils.
 Brainstem
Ipsilateral UMN hemiparesis/hemiplegia,
 6% cocaine: impaired mydriasis of affected
cranial nerve deficits (CN IV-VI),
pupil full mydriasis of normal pupil.
dyspnea, cardiac arrhythmias.
altered mentation.
 Cervical spinal cord
Ipsilateral UMN hemiparesis/hemiplegia.
 Pre-ganglionic
Thoracic spinal
Ipsilateral UMN deficits 
1% hydroxyamphetamine: normal
(2nd order)
(1-I 1) puo)
to pelvic limb and LMN
myd riasis.
deficit to thoracic limb.
10% phenylephrine: minimal to no dilation 
of both pupils.
Ventral roots
Ipsilateral brachial plexopathy LMN
 6% cocaine: no dilation of affected pupil.
(E1-IL)
deficits to thoracic limb, ipsilateral
 full mydriasis of normal pupil.
cutaneous trunci reflexe deficit.
Cranial thoracic
Possible dyspnea.
 sympathetic trunk
Cervical (vago)
Laceration, sinuses (foreign bodies),
sympathetic trunk 
swelling (abscess, tumor), pain (trauma),.
laryngeal hemiparesis/hemiplegia.
 Post-ganglionic
Middle ear
Ipsilateral peripheral vestibular signs,
1% hydroxyamphetamine:incomplete
(3rd onder)
facial nerve paralysis.
to no mydriasis of affected pupil full 
mydriasis of normal pupil.
Cavernous sinus
Ipsilateral cranial nerve deficits (Ill,IVVl,
10% phenylephrine: mydriasis of affected 
ophthalmic and maxillary branches ofV).
pupil, minimal dilation of normal pupil.
6% cocaine: no dilation of affected pupil
Retrobulbar
Ipsilateral cranial nerve deficits (Illl IVVl).
full mydriasis of normal pupil
UMN = upper motor neuron
LMN = lower motor neuron 
196
 EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
NEUROLOGIC SIGNS rELATED TO INNEr EAR DISEASe
KEY POINTS
The axons course through the internal acoustic
· T'he inner ear consists of one peripheral receptor
meatus into the cranial cavity and enter the rostral
for the sense of hearing and one for the organ of
 medulla at the cerebello-medullary angle. Most of
balance, the peripheral vestibular apparatus.
these axons terminate in the vestibular nuclei in the
·T'he vestibular system is the primary sensory system I
 rostral medulla. A portion of them enter the cere-
responsible for maintaining an animal's balance or l
 bellum to terminate in the fastigial nucleus and the
its normal orientation relative to the gravitational f
flocculonodular lobe?.
field of the Earth.
· Signs of inner ear disease include sensorineural
Vestibular nuclei
deafness and peripheral vestibular disease, ataxia,
 Although a detailed description of the components of
head tilt, nystagmus, positional strabismus and,
the central vestibular system is beyond the scope of
sometimes, nausea
this book, it is important to acquire at least a
· Peripheral vestibular disease must be differentiated
superficial knowledge of its anatomy and connections.
from central vestibular disease.
This will allow a better understanding of the
difference between clinical signs of peripheral disease
INTRODUCTION
 as opposed to central vestibular disease.
The vestibular system has two main functions:
There are four vestibular nuclei on either side of
·T'o maintain the visual image by stabilizing the eyes
the medulla, adjacent to the wall of the fourth
in space during head movements.
ventricle in the brainstem. T'hey are grouped into
· To stabilize the position of the head in space, thus
rostral, medial, lateral, and caudal vestibular nuclei.
ensuring that the position of the body is stablel.
There are numerous projections from the vestibular
nuclei into the spinal cord (descending) and the
Clinically, signs of vestibular disease have been
brainstem (ascending):
classified either as peripheral or central in order to
· Descending pathways remain essentially ipsilateral
help localization of the neurologic lesion and to aid
in the spinal cord. They are responsible for the
in the ranking of a list of differential diagnoses. The
maintenance of posture and locomotion and are
anatomic structures concerned include peripheral
generally responsible for control over the
receptors connected to central receptors.
antigravity muscles of the neck and limbs as well as
the coordination of movements of the limbs and
RECEPTORS OF THE VESTIBULAR SYSTEM
 trunk with movements of the headl, 3.
Peripheral receptors
· Ascending pathways can be ispsilateral or contra-
The peripheral vestibular system consists of the
lateral. One of them, the medial-longitudinal
membranous semicircular canals, the utricle, and the
fasciculus, establishes a connection between the
saccule as well as the vestibular ganglion and the
vestibular nuclei and the nuclei of CNs III, IV, and
vestibular portion of CN VIII. It develops in
VI, which are responsible for movements of the
 conjunction with the receptor for the auditory system.
eyes. This connection provides coordinated, con-
Together they are the components of the inner ear
jugated eye movements associated with changes in
and their anatomic structure has been detailed in
the position of the head. Other ascending pathways
Chapter l (Gross and microscopic anatomy of the ear:
are directed towards the vomiting center in the
structure and function). Receptors located in the
reticular formation, which is the pathway under-
semicircular canals are responsive to angular
lying motion sicknesst, 3.
(rotational) acceleration (or deceleration), while
receptors located in the utricle and the saccule are
Other projections of the vestibular nuclei are
 responsive to linear acceleration (or deceleration) and
directed towards the cerebellum. T'hrough these
gravity!.
pathways the vestibular system functions to coordinate
the eye, trunk, and limbs with movements of the
Vestibulo-cochlear nerve (cN Vlll) -
head. It maintains equilibrium during active and
vestibular branch
 passive movement and when the head is at rest?.
The vestibular nerve is composed of bipolar neurons,
with the cell bodies located in the vestibular ganglion.
MEDICAL MANAGEMENT OF EAR DISEASE
197
SIGNS OF VESTIBULAR DISEASE
If nystagmus occurs when the head is stationary
Ataxia and abnormal posture
and there is no rotation or movement of the
As a general rule, signs of vestibular dysfunction are
 surroundings, it is abnormal and is called spontaneous
those of loss of balance without loss of muscle
strength. As the vestibular system is involved in
therefore observed in the posture assumed by the
coordination of movements of the limbs, neck, and
animal and is due to an abnormal input from the
trunk with those of the head, the gait observed can be
vestibular system to the neurons innervating the
described as ataxic (from the Greek ataxia = disorder:
extraocular muscles. Positional nystagmus
is
Ω = privative; taxis = order). Vision helps to com-
stimulated by changing the orientation of the head.
pensate for the vestibular system deficit. T'herefore,
 Positional nystagmus may be ^direction-fixed’ or
blindfolding an animal with suspected vestibular
'direction-changing', which means that the direction
disease may accentuate the clinical signs. In most cases
of the fast phase can change when the head position
the disturbance is unilateral, although sometimes both
is altered. More importantly, it can show:
sidles may be affected simultaneously3.
● Latency,i.e. take 10-15 seconds to appear once a
new head position is assumed.
Nystagmus
· Adaptation, i.e. persist for only a short period after
Nystagmus is one of the described signs of disturbed
appearing
vestibular function. Physiologic (or vestibular)
·Fatigability,
,i.e. not reappear after repeated
nystagmus is a normal reflex which helps to maintain
stimulation4.
visual fixation on stationary points as the body or
head rotates. It is usually elicited in both eyes
Abnormal nystagmus can be horizontal, vertical, or
simultaneously with any rapid head movements.
rotatory (i.e. around the axis of the eye). Pendular
Nystagmus is defined as an involuntary rhythmic
 nystagmus is usually associated with congenital visual
eyeball oscillation. The movements can occur in any
 deficits and is not of vestibular origin. Both eyeballs
plane, and they can be either equal (pendular) or
 are usually affected simultaneously and in the same
show a quick and slow phase (jerk). Physiologic
direction. It has been described in Siamese cats and
 nystagmus can be observed in the horizontal or in
 Belgian Sheepdogs and is reported to be due to a lack
the vertical plane. Rapid dorsoventral flexion and
 of development of the optic chiasm (optic nerve fibers
extension of the animal's head and neck elicits a (
 continue into the ipsilateral optic tract without
vertical nystagmus. Side-to-side movements of the
 decussation). It has also been attributed to an
head elicit a horizontal nystagmus. T'he quick phase
 abnormal sensory input to the system that controls
of the nystagmus is in the direction of the rotation.
eye movements, or even to an excessive contralateral
 The labyrinth initiates the slow component whereas
 projection of optic nerve axons in albino cats3.
the fast component is a function of a brainstem
It has become customary to describe a nystagmus
center.
by the direction of its fast phase, although the slow
Physiologic nystagmus can also be induced by fast
phase (or drift) is actually the abnormal one when
rotation of the whole animal, and this is called
associated with vestibular diseasel, 3.
postrotational nystagmus. During rotation the quick
phase of the nystagmus is in the direction of the
rotation. However, once the rotation stops,
 nystagmus continues to be elicited by movements of
the viscous endolymph in the membranous labyrinth.
The direction of the endolymph flow is now opposite
to the direction of the rotation and the fast phase of
the nystagmus becomes opposite to the direction of
the rotation.
The individual labyrinths can be tested separately
by the caloric test. Irrigation of the external ear canals
with ice-cold water sets up currents in the endolymph,
stimulating a caloric nystagmus directed to the side
opposite to the one being stimulated. However, this
test is unreliable and rarely used in the daily
neurologic examination of the vestibular system.
198
 EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
Strabismus
toward the side of the lesion, and there may be a
In normal individuals, when the head is extended
curvature of the trunk with the concavity directed
dorsally (tonic neck reaction), the eyeballs should
toward the affected side.
remain in the center of the palpebral fissure. T'his
In cases of unilateral peripheral vestibular disease
often fails to occur on the side of the vestibular
the nystagmus observed is spontaneous, either in a
disturbance and results in a dropped or ventrally
horizontal or a rotary direction. The direction (or fast
deviated eyeball (ventral positional strabismus).
phase) is always away from the affected side and does
Occasionally, in vestibular disease, an eye may be
not tend to change with the head position. The
deviated ventrally or ventrolaterally without extension
direction of rotatory nystagmus is defined by the
of the head, only to be corrected by moving the head
change in the 12 o'clock position of the limbus
or attracting the patient's gaze in a different direction.
during the fast phase. Exceptionally, a direction-
T'his is called vestibular strabismus (337). It is not due
changing positional nystagmus is observed, which also
to a paralysis of a cranial nerve, as eye movements are
shows latency, adaptation, and fatigability4. The
otherwise normal.
postrotational nystagmus is depressed when the
patient is rotated in a direction opposite to the side of
Nausea and vomiting
a peripheral receptor lesion. The caloric nystagmus
These may be associated with any vestibular dlisorder
will not be observed when the affected side is tested3.
but they are more commonly observed in cases of
Ventral positional or vestibular strabismus can be
peripheral vestibular disease2.
observed in the eye on the affected side. Nausea and
yomiting are not infrequent and tend to resolve as the
LOCALIZATION OF VESTIbULAR DISEASE
animal adapts to its new head position.
(SEE TABLE 15)
Unilateral peripheral disease
Bilateral peripheral disease
Animals with unilateral peripheral vestibular
In these cases the ataxia and loss of balance are
dysfunction display a head tilt towards the side of the  S
 symmetrical, often resulting in a complete inability to
 10/pue snusisu snosueiuods ao/pue (sgg) uoal
 stand, at least in the early days of the problem. The
asymmetrical ataxia, with preservation of muscle
 animal is crouched, close to the ground, with its limbs
strength (339).
 spread apart. Affected animals tend to be reluctant to
T'he ataxia is characterized by leaning, drifting,
 move at all and if they walk, they stagger or fall to
rolling, or falling towards the affected side, and the
 either side. Wide head sway is frequently observed.
animal may walk along a wall for additional support. It
is common for an affected animal to fall over when
or strabismus.
shaking its head. The animal may circle in tight circles
337
 337Cavalier King Charles Spaniel exhibiting positional ventral strabismus in the
J Penderis.)
MEDICal MaNAGEMENt OF EAR DISEASE
199
Table I5: Comparative neurologic signs of vestibular disease (after Schunk 19902).
Clinical signs
Peripheral vestibular disease
Central vestibular disease
Head tilt 
Yes, towards the affected side
Yes, towards the affected side
 Nystagmus
- direction 
May vary with head position
May vary with head position
- horizontal
-rotary
Yes
- vertical 
No
5a
 Strabismus
 Ataxia (ipsilateral)
 Proprioceptive defcits 
No
Yes (ipsilateral hemiparesis)
Facial nerve paralysis
Possibly (with otitis media)
Possibly (+/- CNs VVI, IX,X)
Horner's syndrome 
Possibly (with otitis media)
No
Nausea
Yes, often 
Sometimes
 Mental status
Normal 
May be affected
338
339
338Cavalier King Charles Spaniel with right-sided peripheral
vestibular disease. Note the head tilt and facial nerve paralysis.
(llustration courtesy J Penderis.)
and ataxia. The dog is leaning against the wall for support.
(llustration courtesy P Cuddon.)
200
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
Central vestibular disease
CAUSES OF PERIPHERAL
Although detailed knowledge of the clinical signs
VESTIBULAR DISEASE
associated with central vestibular disease are beyond
As in all other aspects of neurologic diseases, it is of
the scope of this book, it is important to be able to
utmost importance to localize the disease and
recognize these signs as they allow differentiation of
establish a list of differential diagnoses before
central versus peripheral disease. T'he neurologic signs
 proceeding to any kind of investigative procedures, as
that the animal will exhibit, in addition to the normal
these can vary dramatically with the localization of the
signs of the vestibular disease, reflect the principal
problem.
 neuroanatomic structures located in the brainstem
 The most common way to avoid forgetting possible
near the vestibular nuclei.
causes of vestibular diseases is to use the colloquial
The most commonly observed signs are due to
acronymic mnemonic ^DAMNIT" (D = degenerative
disruption of long tracts from the
cerebral
cliseases; A = abnormalities; M = metabolic diseases; N =
cortex/brainstem to the spinal cord/peripheral nerves
 neoplasia and nutritional; I = infectious, inflammatory,
and back, passing by the vestibular nuclei. Other
idiopathic; T' = trauma and toxic substances). Cardio-
connections of the vestibular nuclei (e.g. with the
vascular causes should not be forgotten, although they
cerebellum) can also be disturbed.
.Therefore,
 do not tend to play a significant role in dysfunction of
proprioceptive deficits will be reported in the
the peripheral vestibular system in small animals.
ipsilateral limbs with normal to increased spinal
reflexes (UMN paresis), cerebellar ataxia, or even
 Degenerative diseases
other cranial nerve disturbances such as facial nerve
 Degenerative peripheral vestibular diseases are mainly
paralysis. Note that facial nerve paralysis may also be
due to ototoxicity (see Chapter 8: Ototoxity and
associated with peripheral vestibular disease secondary
other side-effects of otic medication).
to otitis media.
Nystagmus is present most of the time. It may be
 Abnormalities (usually congenital diseases)
 positional or spontaneous and it may be horizontal,
Congenital peripheral vestibular disease has been
rotatory, or vertical. T'he fast phase is away from the
 described in several breeds of dogs and cats. It has been
affected side but the direction may change with
 reported in _German Shepherd Dogs, Doberman
changes in the head position. T'he caloric test may
Pinschers6, 7, English Cocker Spaniels8, Tibetan
 Terriers?, Labrador Retrieversl0, and Siamese and
dlissociated (disconjugate) nystagmus, which suggests
 Burmese cats?. A congenital bilateral peripheral vestibu-
a lesion in the vestibular nuclei or the medial
  aag  o  s  
longitudinal fasciculus'.
 puppies. Deafness has been associated only with the syn-
Positional strabismus can be observed in the
drome described in Beagles and Doberman Pinschers?.
ipsilateral eye.
In most cases signs of peripheral vestibular disease
may be noted from birth to four months of age. In
Paradoxical vestibular syndrome
German Shepherd Dogs and Siamese cats, abnormal
With unilateral peripheral vestibular disease, the head
nystagmus was not a common feature, although
tilt is always towards the side of the lesion. The same
physiologic nystagmus could not be elicited. T'he
applies for central vestibular disease except when the
 clinical signs were reported to have regressed by 2-4
lesion is located at the cerebello-pontine angle or
months of age and although normal function may
involves more precisely the caudal cerebellar peduncle.
have occurred, recurrences within a few months of
In these cases the head tilt and vestibular ataxia are
recovery were not infrequent?. Signs of unilateral and
directed towards the side opposite to that of the
bilateral peripheral vestibular disease were reported in
lesion. The nystagmus will be directed toward the
the two litters of Doberman Pinschers reported by
opposite side as well. Cerebellar dysmetria and
Forbes et al.6. T'hey were associated with complete
proprioception deficits will be observed on the
functional deafness and the prognosis was uncertain.
affected side and will allow localization of the
The final histopathologic diagnosis was lymphocytic
problem.
labyrinthitis of unknown origin. The involvement of
the same bitch in both litters suggested a possible
hereditary component°.
Deafness was
salso
component of the syndrome in the
e litter of
Dobermanns described by Wilkes and Palmer?, and in
these cases the prognosis for recovery was good.
MEDICAL MANAGEMENT OF EAR DISEASE
201
 Pedigree analysis showed that the condition was likely
TSH values are 0-6.0 ng/l. Ideally, the premedication
to be transmitted by an autosomal recessive gene7.
T4 level should be in the upper half of the normal
In general, congenital vestibular
rdisease
1S
values. The therapeutic T4 levels 4-6 hours post-
associated with a guarded to good prognosis. There
 medication should be well above the upper normal
is no treatment, and even if return to normal head
limit. If that is not the case, the oral dose of
position and gait is not always the case, affected
levothyroxine should be increased by 5 μg/kg q12h
animals tend to maintain a satisfactory quality of life
and the same monitoring should be repeated six
 as long as they can ambulate and feed adequately. T'he
weeks later.
prognosis for the deafness associated with
the
vestibular syndrome is usually hopeless, as the
Neoplastic disease
degenerative changes observed in the cochlea are
 Primary tumors
irreversible.
Primary tumors such as peripheral nerve sheath
tumors
(Schwannoma,
 neurofbroma,  and
Metabolic diseases
neurofibrosarcoma) originating from the vesti-
Hypothyroidism is reported to cause peripheral
 bulocochlear nerve are rare. If they do occur, they are
vestibular disease in a number of dogs, associated or
 slowly progressive and present with the usual signs of
not associated with other signs of peripheral
peripheral vestibular syndrome. The signs may
 neuropathy or neuromuscular diseasell, 12. In their 
 progress to those of central vestibular disease if the
 neoplasm invades the posterior fossa and compresses
diagnosed with neurologic signs associated with hypo-
the brainstem. T'he prognosis is offten poor as surgical
thyroidism, nine presented for investigation of
resection is difficult in this area. There are no
vestibular syndrome. The signs of vestibular disease
 published reports of cases treated with radiotherapy.
were mostly associated with involvement of other
cranial nerves (such as the facial nerve). T'hey were
Secondary tumors
frst noticed ten days to four weeks
before
Secondary tumors arising from structures adjacent
presentation, with a variable rapidity of onset. T'he
to the labyrinth may destroy or compress the inner
clinical signs of vestibular disease appeared refractory
ear and cause signs of peripheral vestibular disease.
to supplementation with levothyroxine (20 μg/kg
They include fibrosarcoma, chondrosarcoma, osteo-
p/o q12h), despite subsequent improvement of the
sarcoma, ceruminous adenoma, adenosquamous car-
other clinical signs of hypothyroidism within two
cinomai3, adenocarcinomal4, and squamous cell
months of treatment. One dog was followed up at
carcinoma15.
three and four months. Its postmedication serum
levothyroxine levels were found to be low and a
Polyps
month after the oral dose was doubled, all neurologic
 Polyps can be defined as benign tumors', although
they are described as inflammatory in most reportsl6,
the practitioner to investigate thyroid function in all
cases of suspected vestibular disease.
 age. Polyps can arise from the nasopharyngeal area or
Very little is known about the pathophysiology of
 the middle ear. T'hey tend to cause mainly signs of
peripheral neuropathy and hypothyroidism. Thyroxin
middle ear and upper respiratory tract disease.
is involved in cellular metabolism, influencing energy
 Occasionally polyps can extend against the vestibular
production via the activity of the AT'P-dependent
 window and cause disruption of the vestibular system.
Nat/K+ pump. Therefore, a lack of thyroxin could be
The neurologic signs associated with middle
ear
altering the pump-dependent axonal transport,
 disease have been discussed earlier (see Neurologic
leading to axonal (
 degeneration and peripheral
signs related to middle ear disease). The management
neuropathyll.
of polyps in cats is discussed in detail in Chapter 3
Thyroid function is investigated by measuring
(Nasopharyngeal and middle ear polyps).
resting serum total T4 and endogenous canine TSH
concentrations. T'reatment consists of a starting dose
Idiopathic diseases
of levothyroxine of 20ug/kg p/o q24h for one week
Feline idiopathic vestibular syndrome
then ql2h. The treatment is usually monitored 6-8
T'his is a disease of unknown cause. In the USA it tends
weeks later with a premedication and a 4-6 hours
to be seasonal, occurring mostly between early summer
postmedication serum T4 assay. T'he normal resting
and early autumn (June to September). The clinical
T4 values are 16-45 nmol/l, whilst normal canine
signs are those of peripheral vestibular disease. They
202
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
include head tilt, ataxia, rolling, rotatory, or horizontal
encounters with larger animals or because of head
nystagmus, and occasional vomiting. They do not
injury subsequent to a road traffic accident. Fractures
involve any other cranial nerve. The disease has no sex
of the petrous temporal bone or hemorrhage within
predilection and the age varies between one year and
the tympanic bullae are more frequently reported in
ten years, with a median of four yearsl8. T'he signs are
larger dogs22, but they can occur in small animals and
acute to peracute in onset, frequently developing in one
these differentials should be investigated. In these
hour or less, and they are usually unilateral. Affected
 cases the signs of peripheral vestibular disease may be
animals tend to stabilize within 24 hours and the
nystagmus dlisappears over several days. The ataxia
 ment of the central nervous system or musculoskeletal
resolves gradually, but may persist for up to 3-6 weeks.
system, and they can be associated with facial nerve
 Exhaustive diagnostic work up is unremarkable, making
paralysis or Horner's syndrome (see Neurologic signs
idiopathic feline vestibular syndrome a diagnosis of
related to middle ear disease).
exclusion. Except for supportive care in anorexic or
vomiting cases, there is no treatment that will alter the
Toxic diseases
 course of the disease and the prognosis is generally
A large variety of drugs cause ototoxicity, affecting
excellent'9. Most cats experience only one episode of
vestibular function, hearing, or both. Most of these
idiopathic vestibular syndrome18.
agents initially cause damage to the receptors, leading
eventually to degeneration of the nerve. Toxicity can
Canine idiopathic vestibular syndrome
occur from either systemic or topical therapy23.
This disease is recognized in older dogs, and it is also
Causes and clinical signs of ototoxicity are discussed
sometimes called ^old dog vestibular disease'. It is 
 in detail in Chapter 8 (Ototoxicity and other side-
characterized by acute onset of head tilt, asymmetric
effects of otic medication).
ataxia, and nystagmus. The signs are very similar to
those described for the feline idiopathic syndrome.
SENSORINEURAL DEAFNESS
The diagnosis, as in feline idiopathic vestibular
 Physiology of hearing
syndrome, is one of exclusion. The syndrome is
 The pinna and external ear canal act as a collector of
usually self-limiting within 72 hours, although some 
 sound and they are useful in sound localization24.
of the signs can persist for several days to weeks. No
Sound waves in the external ear canal cause vibrations
specific therapy is available20. It is rare for dogs to
of the tympanic membrane. T'hese vibrations are then
suffer more than one episode of this disease.
transmitted through the ossicles, the malleus, the
incus, and the stapes to the oval window of the
Infectious diseases
cochlea (340) (see Chapter 1: Gross and microscopic
Infectious causes of otitis interna usually relate to
anatomy of the ear: structure and function; and
associated otitis media. (See Chapter 5: Otitis media,
Chapter 2: Neurologic examination of the ear).
otitis interna for further details.)
Vibrations of the tympanum may be as small as the
diameter of a hydrogen molecule and they are
Inflammatory diseases
transmitted with negligible distortion but with
increased power by the ossicles. Damage to these
disease have been observed with facial nerve paresis or
structures can result in conductive deafness despite a
paralysis in mature dogs without evidence of otitis
normal cochlea.
media?. A few patients affected by this combination 
 Muscle tension in the tensor tympani muscle and
of neuropathy or neuritis recovered spontaneously.
the stapedius muscle attached to the stapes allows the
However, the author describing these clinical signs3
animal to reduce or enhance sensitivity25. Vibrations
 did not report the investigative procedures that led to
are then further transmitted from the oval window
the exclusion of otitis media. As described in the study
into the perilymph of the scala vestibuli. T'his canal
by Cole et al.21, otitis media can be subclinical and
joins the scala tympani at the apex of the cochlea so
should not be ruled out unless myringotomy is
that the inward deflection of the oval window
performed and followed by culture and sensitivity of
produced by the stapes results in an outward
the local microflora.
deflection of the round window. Within the cochlear
duct, hair cell stereocilia of the organ of Corti are
Traumatic causes
embedded in the tectorial membrane (see Chapter 1:
Trauma to the inner ear and peripheral vestibular
Gross and microscopic anatomy of the ear: structure
system in small dogs and cats can arise as a result of
 and function) so that shearing forces from sound
MeDICal MaNAGEMENt OF eAR DISEASE
203
waves propagated along the scala vestibuli produce
objective electrophysiologic test. T'he technical aspects
bending of the stereocilia, thereby depolarizing their
of this test are discussed in detail in Chapter 2
cells. From there, synaptic connections between hair
(Electrophysiologic procedures). Studies report
cells and spiral ganglion neurons result in transmission
various hearing thresholds in dogs of different sizes
of information through the cochlear branch of the
and in different experimental settings. T'hese
vestibulocochlear nerve26.
thresholds vary between -5 dB nHL (normal hearing
Auditory function is present when the ear canals
S! THu aP 0) 2op su u! ozTHu aP 0f o1 dn z(lA2]
 open at the age of 12-14 days in dogs and five days
the average threshold for disappearance of hearing
 in cats. However, behavioral response to loud noises
 behavior in a normal human population.)
can be detected before the canals open27. Reported
When evaluating hearing it is important to
hearing frequencies range from 45-67 kHz in dogs
remember that vibration through air and surfaces can
and 45-78 kHz in cats28, 29. Electrophysiologic
also be felt via extracochlear mechanoreceptors. An
studies of the sense of hearing suggest that the most
animal may react to the vibrations of a door slammed
sensitive level of hearing is reached by the age of 20
rather than actually hear the sound produced. Vibra
days in dogs30 and 30 days in cats31. The hearing
tions can also be ^heard’ by transmission through the
threshold of veterinary patients who cannot respond
skull to the inner ear and auditory system. T'his is the
reliably to conventional hearing tests can be estimated
 basis for bone-conducted stimulation in audlitory test-
by brainstem auditory evoked response (BAER), an
 ing (see Chapter 2: Electrophysiologic procedures )33.
340
Anterior semi-circular canal
Posterior semi-circular canal
Ampulla
Vestibular nerve
Facial nerve
Cochlearnerve
Lateral
Utriculus
semi-circular
 Stapes
canal
Incus
Cochlea
Malleus
Acoustic canal
204
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
Cassification of deafness
and feline population is unknown but the occurrence
 Peripheral deafness can be characterized by three pairs
of deafness may reach 30% in selected breeds, such as
of descriptors:
the Dalmatian; the incidence reported currently in the
· Inherited versus acquired.
US is 8% bilateral deafness and 22% unilateral
· Congenital versus late-onset.
deafness26.
· Sensorineural versus conductive.
Pathophysiology.  Congenital  deafness  is  a
degenerative process that manifests itself at various
I'his results in eight classifications of deafness, but
ages. However, in an epidemiologic study of canine
: p op ui uss oo ae si a a
congenital deafness, 50% of the deaf animals were
inherited congenital sensorineural; acquired late-onset
diagnosed before six months of age37. Although the
sensorineural; and acquired late-onset conductive.
 degenerative process can start as early as one day after
Inherited congenital sensorineural deafness is usually,
birth, congenitally affected dogs such as Dalmatians
but not always, associated with pigmentation genes
do not become deaf until 3-4 weeks after birth34.
responsible for white in the coat. Acquired late-onset
Inherited hearing dysfunction does not necessarily
sensorineural deafness is most often associated with
 result in total deafness in all breeds affected. Although
ototoxicity or age (presbycusis), but it can also be
 any breed of dog can be affected, a list of predisposed
associated with a breed predisposition or result from
canine breeds has been established (Table l6) and is
otitis interna, noise, and other causes. Acquired late-
constantly growing. Reports of breed-associated
onset conductive deafness is associated with otitis
congenital deafness in cats are not available but blue-
media and is discussed earlier in this chapter
eyed, white cats have a high incidence of deafness.
(Neurologic signs related to middle ear disease).
Genetics. Hereditary deafness associated with
Acquired congenital deafness may result from
pigmentation abnormalities has been reported as a
 malformation, intrauterine infections, or drug toxicity
syndrome with a spectrum of features including
 but these are uncommon34.
piebaldlism or partial albinism, dleafness, heterochromia
iridis (blue iris or irides attributable to absence of
Etiologies of deafness
pigment), absence of retinal pigment, and absence of
Congenital sensorineural deafness
pigment in the cochlear stria vascularis26, 38, 39.
Prevalence. In 1896, Rawitz first described a case of
In cats the syndrome results from a dominant
 canine congenital deafness in a white dog with blue
autosomal gene W that is fully dominant with respect
eyes35, and in 1898, Charles Darwin reported his
to the production of white fur and incompletely
 observation of entirely white cats with blue eyes being
dominant in the production of a blue iris. However,
generally deaf6.
 gene W expresses incomplete penetrance with respect
T'he incidence of congenital deafness in the canine
to deafness40.
Table I6: List of breeds affected by congenitl deafness7.8.2634.374.45.50.52-54
Akita
Dachshund (Dappled)
Ibizan Hound
 Saint Bernard 
American Staffordshire Terrier
Dalmatian 
Jack Russell Terrier
Schnauzer
 Australian Blue Heeler
Doberman Pinscher
Kuvasz
Scottish Terrier
 Australian Shepherd Dog
Dogo Argentino
Labrador Retriever
 Sealyham Terrier
Beagle
English Bulldog
Maltese
Shetland Sheepdog
Bichon Frise
 English Setter
 Miniature Pinscher
 Shropshire Terrier
Border Collie
Foxhound 
 Norwegian Dunkerhound 
Siberian Husky
Boston Terrier
Fox Terrier
Old English Sheepdog
Springer Spaniel
Boxer
French Bulldog
Papillon 
WWalker American Foxhound 
Bulldog
German Shepherd Dog
 Pitbull Terrier
West Highland W/hite Terrier
Bull Terrier 
Great Dane
 Pointer 
White cats
Catahoula Leopard Dog
Great Pyrennees (Pyrenean
Poodle (Toy Miniature)
Cocker Spaniel
Mountain Dog)
 Rhodesian Ridgeback
Collie 
Greyhound 
Rottweiler
MEDICAL MANAGEMENT OF EAR DISEASE
205
Deafness in dogs is frequently associated with the
suppressed, are significantly more likely to be deaf41
 presence of the merle or dlapple (M) gene (e.g. Collie,
Dalmatians that are the offspring of one bilaterally
Shetland Sheepdog, Harlequin Great Dane, Dappled
hearing parent and one unilaterally deaf parent are
Dachshund) and the piebald (Sp) or extreme piebald
twice as likely to be deaf (unilaterally or bilaterally) as
(Sw) gene (e.g. Bull Terrier, Great Pyrennees [Pyrenean
 dogs born from bilaterally normal parents34,42.
Mountain Dog], Dalmatian) where large amounts of
Histopathology. The histopathologic finding
white are present in the fur.
described in most breeds of dogs and cats with
The merle gene is dominant, and heterozygous
congenital sensorineural deafness is known  as
dogs (Mm) show the ‘merle’ pattern (341).
cochleosaccular-type of end organ degeneration. In
Homozygous individuals (MM) have a solid white
 Dalmatians degeneration begins in the middle coil of
coat and blue irises and they are often deaf and/or
the cochlea, followed by the basal and then the apical
blind and sterile. Heterozygous merles can also be
coils43. T'he stria vascularis lining the outer wall of the
deaf, with the likelihood of deafness increasing with
cochlear duct is the major vascular area of the cochlea
the amount of white in the coat.
and this produces endolymph, which is necessary for
Genetic transmission of deafness in dogs with the
the maintenance of cochlear hair cells. Sensorineural
piebald and extreme piebald genes, such as the
deafness may result from direct damage to hair cells
Dalmatian, is less clear. The gene responsible for
by neuroepithelial degeneration or from hair cell loss
deafness is neither dominant nor recessive and there
 secondary to strial degeneration26.
is increasing suspicion that there is more than one
In congenitally deaf animals this degenerative
gene involved in the transmission of this congenital
 process includes collapse of the cochlear duct and the
disease. In the Dalmatian the underlying color of the 
saccule, adhesion of the Reissner membrane to the
coat is black (B) or liver (b, simple recessive). T'he
 basilar membrane, replacement of the hair cells in the
extreme piebald gene (S") covers the color with white,
organ of Corti by an irregular arrangement of cells,
and the dominant ticking gene (T) opens the spots 
 and presence of colloid bodies in the cochlear canal.
through the white. In Dalmatians with a patch the
The tectorial membrane has been reported to be
gene Sw does not completely suppress the underlying
swollen and tucked into the internal spiral sulcus and
coat colour; the Sw gene is only weakly expressed.
connective tissue can accumulate in the cochlear
Patched Dalmatians have been shown to have
 aqueduct4. The stria vascularis is atrophied through-
significantly lower deafness rates but patches are not
 out the cochlea and its blood supply is markedly less
allowed in the breed standard. Conversely, blue-eyed
 than normal. Secondary loss of spiral ganglion cells is
Dalmatians, where the normal brown iris pigment is
 also described at later stages. Melanin pigmentation is
341
341Blue merle Border Collie pup.
206
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
also diminished, which has to be considered in
Presbycusis is common in geriatric dogs59.
relation to the coat color of affected individuals. It is
Although it is a progressive phenomenon, owners
important to note that the temporal bone, middle ear,
often report sudden onset deafness. T'his is most likely
utricle, and semicircular canals were found to be
due to the ability of the animal to compensate for
normal45,46. However, in congenitally deaf Dalma-
hearing loss until nearly complete deafness occurs.
tians, anatomic alterations were observed in the tem-
 Hearing aids have been successfully placed in dogs
poral lobes of the cerebrum, the auditory pathways in
with residual hearing capabilities, but the ear plug is
the brainstem, and even in the acoustic nerve47.
not always well tolerated by veterinary patients,
 Although Ferrara et al.47 suspected that these changes
 particularly cats. T'he success of the hearing aid rests
might be the primary cause of the deafness, they are
on the ability of the owner to train the dog to tolerate
most likely secondary to the lack of sensory input.
the presence of such a foreign body in the ear canal34.
A few exceptions to the Dalmatian model of
Noise. Noise-induced hearing loss or deafness can
 deafness exist. In Shropshire Terriers the deafness is
 due to a degeneration of the scala media48, whereas a
 hearing threshold occur after brief exposure to intense
 cochlear aplasia has been described in a Foxhound49,
sounds (over l00 dB), with gradual recovery of
 50. In Doberman Pinschers the hearing impairment
function occurring over periods ranging from minutes
comes from direct loss of cochlear hair cells without
 to two weeks. Noise-induced hearing loss is thought to
any effects on the stria vascularis51.
 result from either disarrangement or breakage of hair
cilia6l but it can also result from damage to the
Acquired late-onset conductive deafness
tympanum or the ossicles. Continuous or repeated
Conductive deafness is most often secondary to
exposure to noise results in a progressive loss of hair
chronic otitis externa and otitis media, where stenosis
 cells and corresponding hearing threshold. Dogs
and eventual occlusion of the external ear canal or
 regularly used to work with guns may develop noise-
impaction from excess accumulation of cerumen
incuced hearing loss34.
Occurs34.
Breed predisposition. Cavalier King Charles
Spaniels are reported to clevelop an early onset hearing
Acquired late-onset sensorineural deafness
impairment. In one study, nine dogs were evaluated
Ototoxicity. Ototoxic agents may cause hearing loss
between the age of 14 and 93 months and found to
or deafness by direct effects on cochlear or vestibular
have elevated hearing threshold as assessed by BAER62.
hair cells, or they may cause damage to the stria
vascularis with secondary hair cell loss. Over 180
 late-onset conductive deafness'; the suspected genetic
compounds and classes of compounds have been 
 origin has not yet been demonstrated.
identified as ototoxic34. Otoxicity is discussed in
Infectious disease. Infectious otitis interna
Chapter 8 (Ototoxicity and other side-effects of otic
responsible for hearing loss is only
arare
medications).
histopathologic diagnosis as affected animals maintain
 Presbycusis. Presbycusis is the decline in hearing
 a satisfactory quality of life and their clinical signs
associated with various types of auditory system
seldom warrant euthanasia. However, an unusual case
dysfunction that accompany ageing, and that cannot
of sensorineural hearing loss due to Prothoteca zopfi?
be accounted for by traumatic, genetic, or pathologic
is reported in the literature63. In the case described
 conditionsss. Four types of presbycusis are described
the agent was also causing blindness due to intraocular
in man56 and dogs:
disease and postmortem examination revealed a
· Sensory presbycusis, characterized by loss of hair
polysystemic involvement.
cells and degeneration of the organ of Corti2.
Other causes. Hearing loss or deafness may also
· Neural presbycusis, characterized by primary
 result from meningitis, anoxia, anesthesia, and trauma,
degeneration of neural elements, including the cells
 or a combination of these causes64.
of the spiral ganglion and the fibers in the cochlear
nerve3,57
Diagnosis of deafness
· Strial, or metabolic presbycusis, characterized by
The diagnosis of deafness in veterinary patients is
atrophy of the stria vascularis and a flat audiometric
based initially on a high index of suspicion or astute
loss.
observation by the owner or breeder. Indeed, since
· Inner ear conductive or mechanical presbycusis,
the ear canal does not open until a few days after
characterized by changes in the structure and
birth, and deaf puppies and kittens often take cues
 mechanical properties of the basilar membrane58.
from the response of their littermates, it is not
MEDICAL MANAGEMENT OF EAR DISEASE
207
uncommon for deafness to go unrecognized for
years in a very noisy environment causes a gradual
several weeks. Bilaterally deaf puppies may display a
killing of hair cells. However, resting in a quiet
 more aggressive behavior, as they cannot hear the cries
environment (less than 70 dB) for three weeks can
of pain when playing with their littermates. Deaf
reverse impulsive noise-induced hearing loss as is
animals tend to sleep very deeply as they are
observed in the case of dogs working with guns. T'he
 unperturbed by auditory stimuli and do not wake up
result of impulsive noise seems to be mainly a
unless jostled. Bilateral deafness can be observed
dlisarrangement of the cilia, which resolves with time
during a routine physical examination if the animal is
and silence6l.
blindfolded and vibrations are avoided during
Animals bilaterally deaf from both congenital and
auditory stimuli. The minimum response expected is
acquired etiologies rely more on visual and
a Preyer's reflex (twitching of the ears in response to
odoriferous cues as well as on vibrations to cope with
the sound). However, unilateral deafness is rarely
their disability. They can be trained to read their
picked up during routine physical examination as the
owner's body language and interpret cues such a
normal ear compensates quite well for the dysfunc-
flashing porch light or obedience-training shock
tional ear. Extremely observant owners report that
collars set to the lowest shock level as a call back
unilaterally deaf patients have difficulty orienting the
signal34
 origin of sounds, but this is an exception rather than
Despite the worry of their owners and those
the rule.
concerned with animal rights, the quality of life of
T'he only objective means of diagnosing deafness
deaf dogs and cats is not demonstrably diminished.
and establishing the degree of hearing loss is based on
These animals do not have any more diminished
electrophysiologic evaluation of each ear by means of
mental capabilities than their human counterparts. A
BAER. T'his may be one of a series of investigative
 dilemma often occurs when bilaterally deaf puppies
 procedures described in detail in Chapter 2 (Electro-
are identified in a litter. The official position of the
physiologic procedures).
Dalmatian Club of America is that such animals
should be euthanased, but this position is not
Prognosis and management of deafness
universally accepted. T'his recommendation becomes
Despite progress made in the field of human deafness,
even more difficult once the deaf animal has been
very little has been done towards treating or assisting
 placed in a home, as emotional attachment develops
deaf veterinary patients. Canine hearing aids have
 rapidly. Although it may not always be the case,
been developed but their use remains anecdotal. They
 congenitally deaf dogs are prone to untimely death by
have been used mainly in animals which have retained
 road traffic accident and they may develop anxious or
some degree of hearing. They are known to be 
aggressive personalities from continuously being
 expensive and of short benefit to the treated animal.S
 startled. They are undoubtedly more difficult to rear
They work as amplifiers and therefore need the
 and often end up in animal shelters because of their
retained ability of the hearing apparatus to hear
 owner's inability to cope with the hearing impairment.
sounds, even at a very low level. Congenital deafness
When possible, cats should be confined to the house
is an irreversible phenomenon, and as it tends to be
and dogs restricted to a fenced yard or to exercise only
complete in the affected ear in most cases, hearing
on the lead34, 42.
aids would not be helpful.
Genetic counselling for breeders is delicate as the
Dogs and cats with unilateral congenital deafness
exact mode of inheritance is as yet undetermined.
 make excellent pets, with owners often unable to detect
However, common sense dictates the elimination of
any impairment. However, in order to prevent further
affected individuals from breeding and systematically
 spreading of the defect in the breed, owners should be
screening breeding stock and offspring, as the defect
discouraged from breeding from affected animals.
 can be present in the litter from two healthy parents34.
Some animals may show difficulty localizing sounds or
Screening schemes using BAER are currently organ-
may not awaken to sounds if sleeping on the normal
ized at various veterinary centers in the UK and the
ear34
USA in collaboration with the Dalmatian Club and
Animals with late-onset acquired deafness generally
other breed associations. It is important to remember
adapt well, but precautions must be observed to
that electrophysiologic testing (with BAER amongst
 prevent vehicular injury or death and also bite injuries
other procedures) is the only objective means of
to humans, especially to children, when deaf dogs are
evaluating the hearing status of veterinary patients (see
 startled34. Noise-induced hearing loss acquired slowly,
Chapter 2: Electrophysiologic procedures)
over time, is unfortunately irreversible, as living for
208
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
REFERENCES
I2 Griffin CE (1993) Otitis exterma In Current Veterinary Derrmatology.
APPROACH tO THE DIAGNOSIS OF OTITIS
{eds CE Griffin, KW Kwochka and JM Macdonald) Mosby St
EXTERNA
Louis, p. 245-262.
I August JR {1988) Otitis externa: a disease of multifactorial
I3 Litle CJL (1996) Medical treatment of otitis extema in the dog
etiology. Veterinary Cinics of North Armerico I8, 731-742.
and cat In Proctice 18, 66-71.
I4 Waker RD, Stein GE, Hauptman JG and MacDonald KH (1992)
Pharmacokinetic evaluation of enrofloxacin administered orally
ACUTE OTITIS EXTERNA
IJoyce JA and Day M] (1997) Immunopathogenesis of canine aural
2315-2319.
haematoma. Jourmal of Small Anirmol Proctice 38, 1 52-1 58.
I5 Rosin E, Fialkowski J and Kujak J {1996) Enroflaxacin and
2 White SD and Sequoia D (1989) Food hypersensitivity in cats:
qiprofloxacin dosage in Pseudomonas infection in dogs. Veterinary
|4 cases {1982-1987). Jourmal of the Armericon Veterinory Medicol
Surgery 25, 436-437.
Associotior 194, 692-695.
  g   (   
 3Kiss G, Radvanyi Sz and Szigeti G {1997) New combination for
properties of fluonoquinolones. Proceedings of the Znd Intermational
the therapy of canine otitis externa. I: Microbiology of otitis
Veterinory Symposir on Fuoroquinolones, pp. 1 421.
exterma. Jourmal of Small Anirmol Proctice 38, 5156.
I7 Salyer AA and Whitt DD (1994) Pseudomonos oeuroginoso. In
4Scott DW (1980) External ear disease.Joumal of theAmerican
Bocterial Pothogenesis: o MoleculorApprooch. (eds AA Salyers and
Anirmal Hospital Associotion I6. 426-433
DD Whitt) ASM Press, Washington, pp. 260270.
5 Griffin CE (1993) Otitis externa and otitis media. In Current
I8 Nuttall T) (1998) Use of ticarcillin in the management of canine
Veterinory Dermatoiogy. (eds CE Griffin, KW Kwochka and JM
otitisextema complicated by Pseudomonas oeruginoso.joumal of
MacDonald) Mosby, St Louis, pp. 244-262
Small Aniral Proctice 39, 165-168.
6 Stout Graham M, Kainer RA, Whalen LR and Macy DW (1990)
I9 Yuan D and Shen V (1975) Stability of ribosomal and transfer
Morphologic measurements of the external ear canal of dogs.
ribonucleic acid in Escherichio coli B/V after treatment with
Americon Jourmol of Veterinory Reseorch 51, 990-994.
ethylene-diamine tetra-acetic acid and rifampin. Journal of
Bocteriology 122, 425-432
GRAM-NEGATIVE OTITIS EXTERNA
20 Farca AM, Piromalli G, Maffei F and Re G (1997) Potentiating
I Carlotti DN, Guaguere E, Denerolle P Madin F, Collet JP and
effects of EDTA-tris on the activity of antibiotics against resistant
bacteria associated with otitis, dermatitis and cystitis. Journol of
Proceedings of the I I thAnnuol /Meeting of the AAVD/ACVD, Santa
Smoll Anirol Proctice 38, 243245.
Fe, p. 84.
2I Wooley RE and Jones MS {1983) Action of EDTA-tris and 
oy uoeunqwo man (661) 5 haigs pue zs uepey ' ssi 
antimicrobial agent combinations on selected pathogenic bacteria.
the therapy of canine otitis externa. I: Microbiology of otitis
Veterinory Microbiology 8, 271-280.
exterma. Jourmol of Small Anirmol Proctice 38, 5156.
{1995) Development of a canine model for Pseudomonos otitis
ChroNIC, or rECUrrEnt, oTiTis
exterma. Proxceedings ofthe I Ith Anmual /Meeting of the AVD/ACVD,
EXTERNA IN DOGS
Santa Fe, p. 21
 4 Fraser G (196l) Factors predisposing to canine external otitis
IMoriello KA, Fehrer-Swaer SL Meyer D) and Feder B {1988)
Adrenocortical  suppression  associated  with  topical  otic
Veterinory Record 73, 55-58.
5 Grono LR and Frost A] {1969) Otitis externa in the dog.
Veterinory Medical Associotion 193, 329-331
Australion Veterinary lourmal 45, 420-422
2 Grifin CE (1993) Otitis extema In Current Veterinary Dermotoogy.
6 Merchant SR {1994) Ototoxicity. In Veterinary Clinics of North
(eds CE Griffin, KW Kwochka and JM Macdonald) Mosby St
Americo. (eds RAW Rosychuck and SR Merchant) 24, 971-980.
Louis, p. 245-262.
7 Bogaand van den AEJM and Bohm ROB (1986)
 Chester DK (1988) Medical management of otitis externa. In
Silbersulfadiazincreme als therapie bei chronischen Pseudomonas
Veterinory Clinics of North Americo. (ed JR August) 18, 799-812.
 infektionen des ausseren Gehorganges des hundes Prakt Tierarztl
4 Neer TM {1982) Otitis media. Compendium on Continuing
67,963-966.
Educotion 4, 410-417.
8 Noxon JO: Kinyon JM and Murphy DP {1997) Minimum
5
Cole LK, Kwochka KW Kowalski Jl and Hillier A {1998) Microbial
inhibitory concentration of silver sulfadiazine on Pseudormonas
flora and antimicrobial susceptibility patterns of isolated
oeruginosa and Staphylococusintermedius solates from the ears
pathogens from the horizontal ear canal and middle ear in dogs
of dogs with otitis extema. Proceedings of the I 3thAnmual /Meeting
with otitis media. Journal of the Americon Veterinory Medical
of the AAVD/ACVD, Nashville, Pp. I 2-1 3.
Associotion 212, 534-538.
9Foster AP and DeBoer D) {1998) The role of Pseudomonos in
6
Baba E, Fukata T and Saito M (1981) Incidence of otitis exterma
canine ear disease. Compendium on Continuing Education 20.
 in dogs and cats in Japan. Veterinory Record 108, 393-395.
616-606
 7 Lane JG and Little CJL (1986) Surgery of the canine external
I0 McKeever PJ (1996) Otitis externa. Compendium on ContinLuing
auditory meatus: a review of failures. Journal of Small Animal
Educotion 18, 759-772.
Proctice 27, 247-254.
II Rosychuck RAW (1994) Management of otitis externa. In
Veterinory Clinics of North Armerico. (eds RAW Rosychuck and SR
Merchant) 24, 921-952.
MEDICAL MANAGEMENT OF EAR DISEASE
209
Philadelphia, pp. 776-799.
ChroNIC, or rECUrreNt, otItis
8 Scagliotti RH {1980) Current concepts in veterinary neuro-
EXTERNA IN CATS
ophthalmology. Veterinory Clinics of North Armerico: Small Ani-
IPowell MB, Weisbroth SH, Roth L and Wilhelmsen C (1980)
moiProctice 10, 417-436.
Reaginic hypersensitivity in Otodectes cynotis infestation of cats
9 NeerTM (1 984) Horner's syndrome: anatomy diagnosis, and 
and mode of mite feeding. Armerican Jourmal ofVeterinary Reseorch
causes. Compendium on Contirnuing Education 6, 740-746
6.877-881
I0 Petersen-Jones SM (1995) Abnormalities of eyes and vision.
 2 Scott DW and Hom RT (1987) Zoonotic dermatoses of dogs
In Monuol of Small Animol Neurology. (ed S) Wheeler) BSAVA,
and cats. Veterinory Clinics of North Armerico I7, 117-144.
Cheltenham, pp. I 25- 142.
 3 Mansfield PD, BoosingerTR and Atleburger MH (1990) Infectivity
I1 Busch DS, Noxon JO and Miller LD (1992) Laryngeal paral-
of Malossezio pochydermotis in the external ear canal of dogs.
ysis and peripheral vestibular disease in a cat. journol of the
Jourmal of the American Animal Hospital Association 26, 97-1 00.
Americon Animol Hospitol Associotion 28, 82-86.
4 Bond R,Anthony RM, Dodd M and Lloyd DH {1996) Isolation
12 Indrieri R] and Taylor RF {1984) Vestibular dysfunction caused
by squamous cell carcinoma involving the middle ear and
Veterinory /Mycology 34, 145-147.
inner ear in two cats. Journol of the Americon Veterinaory Med-
5 Katapkin AS, Matthieson DT, Noone NE et ol. {1990) Results of
icol Associotion 184, 471-473.
surgery and long-term follow up in 3l cats with nasopharyngeal
[3 Luttgen P) (1994) Deafness in the dog and cat. Veterinary Clin-
polyps.Journal of the American Animal Hospital Associotion 26,
ics of North Americo 24, 98 1-989
387-392.
I4 Little CJL {1991) Inflammatory middle ear disease of the dog:
 6 Brownlie SE and Bedford PGC (1985) Nasopharyngeal polyp in
the clinical and pathological features of cholesteatoma, a com-
a kitten. Veterinory Record I17, 25-26.
plication of otitis media. Veterinory Record 128, 319-322
7  van der Gaag I (1986) The pathology of the extermal ear canal in
I5 Eger C and Lindsay P (1997) Effects of otitis on hearing in
dogs and cats. Veterinary Quorterly 8, 307-317.
dogs characterised by brainstem auditory evoked response
8 London CA, Dubilzeig RR, Vail DM et ol. (1996) Evaluation of
testing. Journal of Small Animal Proctice 38, 380-386.
dogs and cats with tumors of the ear canal: l45 cases
I6 Braund KG (1994) Clinicol Syndromes in Veterinary Neurology.
{19781 992) Jourmal of the Arerican Veterinory /edical Associotion
2nd edn. Mosby St Louis, pp.81-332.
208,1413-1418.
I7 McAnulty JF, Hattel A and Harvey CE (1995) Wound healing
9 Scott DW {1 980) Feline dermatology a monograph. Joumal of
and brainstem auditory evoked potentials after experimental
the American Anirmal Hospital Association I6, 426433.
total ear canal ablation with lateral tympanic bulla osteotomy
jo Apms annoadsoud e e au u alale poo (e6el) 3 asso 01
in dogs. Veterinory Research 24, 1-8.
13 cats. In Advonces in Veterinory Dermatology. Volume 2. (eds P)
18 McAnulty JF, Hattel A and Harvey CE {1 995) Wound healing
Ihrke, IS Mason and SD White) Pergammon Press, Oxfond, PP.
and brainstem auditory evoked potentials after experimental
33-39.
ventral tympanic bulla osteotomy in dogs. Veterinory Surgery
seo ui Ainisuasiadsy pooy (eel) a eionbas pue as ahu 11
24, 9-14.
|4 cases {1982-1987). Jourmol of the Armericon Veterinary Medicol
I9 Marshall AE (1990) Comment on Reduction of spiral gan-
Associotion 194, 692-695.
gion neurons in the ageing canine with hearing loss'. Advarces
12 Stogdale L, Bomzom L and van den Berg PB (1982) Food allergy
in Small Animol Medicine ond Surgery 2, 5-7.
in cats. Journal of the Ammericon Anirmal Hospitol Association I8,
20 Sommerlad S, Mackenzie D, Divitni J, Goldstein L and Filippich
188-194
L {1999) Surgical placement and efficacy of a bone-anchored
I3 Vills JM and Harvey RG {1994) Diagnosis and management of
hearing aid in a dog with conductive deafness. Austrolion Vet-
food allergy and intolerance in dogs and cats. Australian Veterinory
erinary Proctitioner 29, 70-80.
Joumol 71, 322-326.
21 Knowles K, Blauch B, Leipold H, Cash W and Hewett J (1989)
Reduction of spiral ganglion in the ageing canine with hearing
loss. Journal ofVeterinary Medicine 36, 188-199.
NEUROLOGIC SIGNS RELATED tO
22 Luttgen P] (i990) Diseases of the nervous system in older
MidDLe Ear DISEASE
IEvans HE (1993) The ear In Milers Anatomy of the Dog. (ed
tnuing Educotion 12, 1077-1081
HE Evans) WB Saunders, Philadelphia, pp. 988-1 008.
23 Petersen-Jones SM (1989) Neuro-ophthalmology. British Vet-
2 Little CJL and Lane JG {1986) The surgical anatomy of the fe-
erinory Journal 145, 99-120.
line bulla tympanica. journal of Small Animol Proctice 27,
24 Jaggy A, Oliver JE, Ferguson DC, Mahaffey EA and Glaus-T Jnr
371-378.
(1994) Neurological manifestations of hypothyroidism: a ret-
3 Evans HE and Kitchell RL {1993) Cranial nerves and cuta-
rospective study of 29 dogs. Journol of Veterinory lInternal Med-
neous innervation of the head. In Miller's Anatomy of the Dog.
icine 8,328-336
(ed HE Evans) WB Saunders, Philadelphia, pp. 953-987.
25 Braund KG, Steiss JE, Amling KA et ol. (1987) Insulinoma and 
4 Evans HE {1993) The skeleton. In Miler's Anotomy of the Dog.
(ed HE Evans) VB Saunders, Philadelphia, Pp. 122-218.
erinory Internol Medicine I, 8690.
pue sop ui Kyzedounau jeloey (861) 3N s!lloH pue (1 uuay 
26 Rendano VT, DeLahunta A and King JM {1 980) Extracranial 
cats: 95 cases (1975-1985).journal of the Americon Veterinary
neoplasia with facial nerve paralysis in two cats. journol of the
Medicol Associotion 191, 1604-1 609
Arericon Anirmal Hospitol Associotion I6, 92 1-925
6 DeLahunta A {1983) Veterinory Neuroonotomy ond Clinicol
27 Braund KG, Luttgen PG, Sorjonen DC and Redding RW
a o au ui sised aau eiy edi (a)
7 Stromberg MW {1993) The autonomic nervous system. In
Record 105, 297-299.
Miller's Anotomy of the Dog. {ed HE Evans) WB Saunders,
28 Braund KG, Vandevelds M, WalkerTL and Redding RW (1978)
210  EAR DISEASES OF THE D0G AND CAT
Granulomatous meningoencephalomyelitis in six dogs. Journal
Journal of Small Animal Proctice 38, 466-467
ofthe Americon Veterinory Medical Associotion I72, 1195-1 200.
 5I Kneller SK, Lewis RE and Oliver JE {1 972) Horner's syndrome
29 Jones BR and Studdert VP {1975) Horner's syndrome in the
following common carotid artery catheterization in cats. Jour-
dog and cat as an aid to diagnosis. Austrolion Veterinory Journol
nol of Smoll Animol Proctice 13, 595-599.
51, 329-332
52 Kern T), Aromado MC and Erb HN {1989) Horner's syn-
30 Innes DC (1973) How temperature changes hair color in the
drome in dogs and cats: 100 cases {1975-1985). Journol of the
Siamese. Feline Proctice 3, 23-29.
Americon Veterinory Medical Associotion I95, 369-373.
 31l Laties AM (1972) Specific neurohistology comes of age: a look
53 Boydell P (1995) Idiopathic Horner's syndrome in the Gold-
back and a look forward. lnvestigotory Ophthaimoiogy II,
en Retriever. Journol of Small Animol Proctice 36, 382-384.
555-584.
54 Sullivan PS and Pardo AD (1993) Challenging cases in inter-
ui awouurs sauh (ael) Ms ouez pue Ay ueo e
nal medicine: what's your diagnosis (Toxoplosmo gondi). Vet-
dogs and cats: 49 cases (1980-1986).Journal of the American
erinary Medicine 88, 309-320.
Veterinory Medicol Associotion I94, 1096-1099.
55 Greene CE and Braun KG {1989) Diseases of the brain.In
33 Theisen SK Podell M, SchneiderT, Wilkie DA and Fenner WR
Textbook of Veterinory Internal Medicine. (ed S Ettinger) WB
{1996) A retrospective study of cavernous sinus syndrome in
Saunders, Philadelphia, pp. 578-623
four dogs and eight cats.journal ofVeterinory lnternol Medicine
56 LeCouteur RA and Child G {1989) Diseases of the spinal
10, 65-75.
cond. In Textbook ofVeterinary Intemal Medicine. (ed S Ettinger)
WB Saunders, Philadelphia, pp. 684-701.
57 Greene CE and Higgins R) {1976) Fibrocartilaginous emboli
707-743.
as the cause of ischemic myelopathy in a dog. Cornell Veteri-
35 Bistner S, Rubin L, CoxTA and Condon WE {1970) Pharma-
norion 66, 131-142
cologic diagnosis of Horner's syndrome in the dog. Journal of
 58 Rubin LF (1971) Neuro-ophthalmology In Canine Neurology:
the Americon Veterinory Medical Associotion I57, 1 220-1 224.
Diognosis and Treatment 2nd edn. (ed BF Hoerlein) WB Saun-
 36 Kramer SG and Potts M {1 969) Iris uptake of catecholamines
ders, Philadelphia, pp. 502-5 16.
in experimental Horner's syndrome. Americon Journol of Oph-
thalrmology 67, 705-713.
37 Gum GG (1991) Physiology of the eye. In Veterinary Oph-
NEUROLOGIC SIGNS RELATED tO
d eiaed aa pe ean (e  ) lo
INNER EAR DISEASE
1 24-161.
ILeCouteur RA (1994) Vestibular disorders of cats and dogs.
38 Broek AHM van den {1 987) Horner's syndrome in cats and
Proceedings of the XIX Annual Meeting of the Worid Small Ani-
dogs: a review. journol of Smoll Animol Proctice 28, 929-940.
mal Veterinary Association, Durban, pp 41 7- 422.
39 Kern T) (1 99 1) The canine orbit. In Veterinary Ophthaimology
29
 Schunk KL (i 990) Diseases of the vestibular system. Progress
(ed KN Gelatt) Lea and Febiger Philadelphia, pp. 239-255.
in Veterinory Neurology I, 247-254.
 40 Raw ME (1994) Horner's syndrome in the dog and cat. Vet-
3DeLahunta A (1983) Veterinory Neuroonotomy ond Clinical
erinory Anmuol 34, 181-188.
Neurology. 2nd edn. WB Saunders, Philadelphia, pp. 238-254.
 4I Slatter D (1990) Fundomentals ofVeterinary Ophthaimoiogy.
4 Holliday TA (1990) Clinical signs caused by experimental le-
2nd edn. WB Saunders, Philadelphia, Pp. 451-452.
sions in the vestibular system. Proceedings of the 8th Arruol
42 Brightman AH, Helper LC and ParkerAJ (1977) Congenital 
Horner's syndrome. Conine Proctice 4, 19-20.
Washington DC, pp. 1025-1028.
5 Stirling J and Clarke M {1981) Congenital peripheral vestibu-
case report. lowa Stote University Veterinorion 31, 55-57
lar disorder in two German Shepherd Dogs. Australian Veteri-
44 Manning PD {1998) Horner's syndrome secondary to
nory Journol 57, 200.
metastatic squamous cell carcinoma of a retropharyngeal
6 Forbes S and Cook JR {1991) Congenital peripheral vestibu-
ymph node in a cat. Austrolion Veterinary Joummal 76, 322-324.
lar disease attributed to lymphocytic labyrinthitis in two re-
45 Carpenter JL, King NW and Abrams KL (1987) Bilateral
lated litters of Doberman Pinscher pups. Journal of the Ameri-
trigeminal nerve paralysis and Horner's syndrome associated
cor Veterinory Associotion 198, 447-449
with myelomonocytic neoplasia in a dog journal of the Ameri
7 Wilkes M and Palmer A {1986) Congenital deafness in
con Veterinory Medical Associotion I91, 1594-1596.
Dobermanns. Veterinory Record I15 (letter), 218.
8 Bedfond PGC (1979) Congenital vestibular disease in the Eng-
ing T (i989) Squamous cell carcinoma causing blindness and
lish Cocker Spaniel. Veterinory Record 105, 530-531.
ophthalmoplegia in a cat. journol of the Americon Veterinory
9B
 Bower JIM (1 983) Head tilt in Tibetan Terrier puppies. Veteri-
Medical Associotion 195, 965-968.
nory Record I12, 46.
47 Birchard S], Peterson ME and Jacobson A {1984) Surgical
[0 Barker ] and Sansom J (1 983) Head tilt in puppies. Veterinory
treatment of feline hyperthyroidism: results of 85 cases. Jour-
Record 112, 207
nal of the Armericon Hospital Associotion 20, 705-709.
48 Kallet AJ, Richter KP Feldman EC and Brum DE {I 99 1) Pri-
{1994) Neurological manifestations of hypothyroidism: a ret-
mary hyperparathyroidism in cats: seven cases {1984-1 989)
rospective study of 29 dogs. Joumal of Veterinory lnternal Med-
Journal of the American Veterinory Medicol Associotion 199,
icine 8, 328-336.
1767-1771
12 Bichsel P Jacobs G and Oliver JE {1988) Neurologic manifes-
49 Steidl T and Zimmerman M (1989) Operationbedings
tations associated with hypothyroidism in four dogs. Journal of
Horner-Syndrom beim Hund. Kleintierpraxis 34, 363-364.
the Aericon Veterinory Medicol Associotion I92, 1745- 1749.
(el)  u e  aisso  l d lio o
13 Carpenter JL, Andrews LK and Holzworth J {1997) Tumors 
Horner's syndrome following intrathoracic tube placement.
and tumor-like lesions. In Diseases of the Cat. (ed J Holzworth)
MEDICAL MANAGEMENT OF EAR DISEASE
211
WB Saunders, Philadelphia, pp. 565-569
ness in dogs and cats. British Veterinory Journol I52, 17-36.
I4 Lane IF and Hall DG {1992) Adenocarcinoma of the middle
35 Rawitz B {1896) Gehororgan and Gehirn eines weissen Hun-
ear with osteolysis of the tympanic bulla in a cat. journai of the
des mit blauen Augen. Morphol Arbeit 6, 545-554.
Armerican Veterinory Medicai Association 201, 463.
36 Darwin C {1 898) Variation under domestication. In Origin of
I5 Indrieri R) and Taylor RF {1 984) Vestibular dysfunction caused
Species by Means of Noturol Selection.W Clowes and Sons,
by squamous cell carcinoma involving the middle ear and
London, p. 5-30.
inner ear in two cats. journol of the American Veterinory /Med-
37 Hayes H, Wilson GP Fenner WR, and Wyman M {1981) Ca-
icol Associotion 184, 471473.
nine congenital deafness: epidemiologic study of cases.Jjournal
I6 Birchard S) and Bradley RL (1994) Surgery of the respirato-
of the Americor Animal Hospitol Associotion I7, 473-476
 ry tract and thorax.In The Cat Diseases and Clinical Manoge
38 Little CC (1957) The Inheritonce of Coat Color in Dogs. How-
ell Book House, NewYork, pp. 180-188.
1093-1116
 39 Brown KS, Bergma DR and Barrow MV (1971) Animal mod-
I7 Stanton ME, Wheaton LG, Render JA and Blevins WE {1985)
els of pigment and hearing abnormalities in man. In Birth De-
Pharyngeal polyps in two feline siblings. Journal of the Ameri-
fects: Original Article Series. (ed DR Bergma) Williams and
con Veterinory Medical Associotion I86, 1311-1313.
Wilkins, Baltimore, pp. I 02-109
I8 Burke EE, Mosie NS, DeLahunta A and Erb HN (1985) Re-
40 Bergsma DR {1971) White fur blue eye and deafness in the
view of idiopathic feline vestibular syndrome. journol of the
domestic cat.Journol of Heredity 62, 171-185
Americon Veterinory Medicol Associotion 187, 941-943
 4I Strain G, Kearney MT, Gignac I] et ol. (1992) Brainstem audi-
I9 Fenner WR (1 994) Diseases of the brain, spinal cord, and pe-
tory evoked potential assessment of congenital deafness in
ripheral nerves. In The Cot Diseoses ond Clinical Monogement.
Dalmatians: association with phenotypic markers. Journol of
(ed RG Sherding) Churchill Livingstone, New York PP.
Veterinory Internal Medicine 6, 175-182
1507-1568
42 Strain G (1992) Deafness in dogs and cats. Proceedings of the
 20 Schunk KL and Averill DR (1983) Peripheral vestibular syn-
IOth Annuol Congress of the Americon College of Veterinory In-
drome in the dog: a review of 83 cases. journol of the Ameri-
ternal Medicine, San Diego, pp. 275-278.
con Veterinory Medicol Associotiorn 182, 1354-1357.
43 Anderson H, Henricson B, Lundquist PG, Wedenberg E and
21 Cole L, Kwochka KW, Kowalski J), Hillier A et ol. (1998) Mi-
Wersall J (1968) Genetic hearing impairment in the Dalmat-
crobial flora and antimicrobial susceptibility patterns of isolat-
( 
ed pathogens from the horizontal ear canal and middle ear in
dogs with otitis media. Journal of the Armericon Veterinory Med-
the Royol Society of Medicine 17, 29-31
icol Associotion 212, 534-538.
45 Lurie MH (1948) The membranous labyrinth in the congen-
itally deaf Collie and Dalmatian dog. Loryngoscope 58,
Veterinory Clinicions. Lea and Febiger Philadelphia, Pp. 133-146.
279-287.
23 Oliver JE, Lorenz MD, and Kornegay JN (1 989) Handbook of
46 Hudson WR, Durham NC, and Reuben RJ {1962) Hereditary
Veterinory Neurology. 3rd edn. WB Saunders, Philadelphia, PP.
deafnessin the Dalmation dog. Archives of Otolaryngology 75.
208-228.
213-219.
47 Ferrara ML and Halnan CRE {1983) Congenital structural
HE Evans) VB Saunders, Philadelphia, pp. 988-1 008.
 brain defects in the deaf Dalmatian. Veterinory Record I 12,
-I ooolo (oel)  uosho pue assos  sa 
344-346.
agnosis and treatment of deafness. Clinical Symposia 22, 34-69.
48 Igarashi M, Alford BR, Cohn AM, Saito R and Watanabe T
 26 Strain G (1991) Congenital deafness in dogs and cats. Com-
(1972) Inner ear abnormalities in dogs. Annols of Otology. Rhi-
pendium on Continuing Educotion I3, 245-253.
nology ond Loryngology 81, 249-255
27 Foss I and Flottorp G (1974) A comparative study of the de-
49 Alexander G and Tandler J (1905) Untersuchungen an kon-
velopment of hearing and vision in various species common-
genital tauben Hunden, Katzen und an jungen kongenital
ly used in experiments. Acta Otoloryngology 77, 202-214.
tauber Katzen. Archives Ohrenheikd 66, 161-179.
 28 Heffner HE (1983) Hearing in large and small dogs: absolute 
50 Adams E {1956) Hereditary deafness in a family of Fox-
thresholds and size of the tympanic membrane. Behovioral
hounds. Journol of the Americon Veterinory Medicol Association
Neuroscience 97, 310-318.
15, 302-303.
 29 Heffner RS and Heffner HE (1985) Hearing range of the do-
5I Wilkes MK and Palmer AC (1992) Congenital deafness and
mestic cat. Heoring Reseorch 19, 85-88.
vestibular deficit in the Dobermann. Journal of Small Animal
 30 Strain G, Tedford B and Jackson R (1991) Postnatal develop-
Proctice 33, 218-224
ment of the brainstem auditory evoked potential in dogs.
 52 Anniko M, Fabiansson E and Nlilsson O (1977) Deafness in an
Armerican Journal of Veterinary Reseorch 52, 4 10-4|4
Old English Sheepdog Archives of Otology, Rhinology ond Loryn-
31 Buchwald JS and Shipley C {1986) Development of auditory
gology 218, 1-7.
evoked potentials in the kitten. In Advonces in Neurol ond Be
53 Steinberg S, Kelin E, Killens R and Uhde TW (1989) Inherited 
hoviorol Development. (ed RN Aslin) Ablex Publishing Com-
pany Norwood, pp. 95-I18.
Annual Meeting of the Americon College of Veterinary Internal
32 Shiu J, Munro K and Cox C {1997) Normative auditory brain-
Medicine, San Diego, pp. 953-956
 stem response data for hearing threshold and neuro-otolog-
54 Foss I {1981) Development of hearing and vision in deaf
ical diagnosis in the dog. Journal of Small Animal Practice 38.
white Norwegian Dunkerhounds and normal dogs (black and 
103-107.
dappled Norwegian Dunkerhound). MSc Thesis, University of
33 Luttgen P) (1994) Deafness in the dog and cat Veterinory Clin
Cornell.
ics of North Americo 24, 98 1-989.
55 Schucknecht HF {1955) Presbycusis. Loryngoscope 65,
34 Strain GM (1996) Aetiology prevalence and diagnosis of deaf-
402-419.
212 
 EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
 56 Schuknecht HF and Gacek MR (1 993) Cochlear pathology in 
61 Flottorp, G {1990) Treatment of noise-induced hearing loss.
Scandinavion Audiology 34, 1 23- 130.
1-16.
62 Munro K and Cox C {1997) Investigation of hearing impair-
57 Knowles K, Blauch B, Leipold H, Cash H and Hewett J (1989)
ment in Cavalier King Charles Spaniels using auditory brain-
Reduction of spiral ganglion in the ageing canine with hearing
stem response audiometry. Journal of Small Animal Proctice 38,
loss.Journal ofVeterinary Medicine 36, 188-199.
2-5
58 Shimada A, Ebisu M, Morita T, Takeuchi T and Unemara T
{1998) Age-related changes in the cochlea and cochlear nu-
 seminated protothecosis causing acute blindness and deafness
clei of dogs.Journol of Veterinary Medicol Science 60, 4 I-48.
 in a dog. Journal of the Aerican Veterinory Medicol Associotion
 a on( yon pue ys  sou 
184, 1266-1272.
sponses of dogs with different hearing abilities. Canadian Jour-
64 Pickerell JA, Oehme FW and Cash WC {1993) Ototoxicity in
nol ofVeterinory Reseorch 52, 394-397.
dogs and cats. Seminars in Veterinary Medicine and Surgery 8.
60 Peterson APG {1980) Handbook of Noise Meosurement. Gen-
42-49.
Rad, Massachusetts.
213
Chapter Eight
Ototoxicity and Other
Side-Effects of Otic
Medication
+ Introduction
· Meatal and tympanic inflammation
· Effects within the middle ear
· Ototoxicity
· Allergic contact and irritant contact dermatitis
· Systemic effects of otic medication
· Strategies to minimize ototoxicity
· References
214
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
INTRODUCTION
KEY POINtS
the external ear canal for their topical effect and
· Clinical cases of true ototoxicity following medical
absorption is not necessary.
 management of otitis externa are very rare.
Inflammation within, and overt damage to, the
· Almost all the risks associated with otopharmacy
 tympanic and round window membranes may permit
can be obviated provided the clinician can
inflammatory mediators or drugs to enter the middle
document an intact tympanic membrane before
ear or inner ear, respectively. Furthermore, it is not
applying the otopharmaceutical agent.
known to what extent penetration enhancers such as
· Side-effects from otic administration of chemicals
propylene glycol (a common ingredient in otic
include local inflammation, otitis media, vestibular
preparations) may increase the passage of these
or cochlear damage, and systemic absorption
substances across these membranes
· Almost any chemical will cause inflammation within
The unwanted effects of otic medication may be
the middle ear or inner ear if instilled through the
 classified into four groups:
· Direct effects on the meatal and tympanic
· T'he round window is an important portal for the
epithelium and underlying dermis.
passage of drugs, toxins, and inflammatory
· Effects within the middle ear.
mediators from the middle to the inner ear.
· Effects on vestibular and cochlear functions
· T'he non-pharmaceutical component of an otic pre-
(ototoxicity)
paration (penetrance enhancer, detergent) may
● Systemic sequelae of the otic administration of
significantly affect the toxic potential of the product.
medications.
Many types of medlication are applied to the external
One of the greatest difficulties facing clinicians is
ear canal of dogs and cats. In addition to specific medi-
assessing the relevance of experimental studies, particu-
 cations, such as anti-inflammatory agents, acaricides,
 s o i d    
antimicrobial agents, and ceruminolytics, there may be
 experimental research into ototoxicity is performed on
substances included to enhance penetration and to act
 guinea pigs and chinchillas. It could be argued that these
as vehicle components and preservatives.
tests are so artificial, and interspecies anatomic and
The anatomy of the external ear canal is such that
physiologic variation is so great, that the conclusions
liquid medications, in excess, will tend to pool in the 
 drawn from experimental animals cannot be applied to
horizontal canal. High concentrations of medication
1 dogs with clinical ear disease'. Merchant et al.2 demon-
may thus come into contact with inflamed epithelium  strated that chlorhexidine exhibited very little ototoxic
and the potential for intra- and percutaneous (
 effect in dogs, in contrast to experimental stuclies which
absorption is readily apparent. In some circumstances
reported both vestibular and cochlear toxicity to
this is desirable. For example, the anti-inflammatory
chlorhexidine in guinea pigs3,4. However, in a recent
effect of a topical glucocorticoid must be exerted on
experimental study using guinea pigs and dogs there was
dermal tissues. In contrast, an antimicrobial, anti-
a good correlation between the two species$, suggesting
fungal, or acaricidal agent will usually be applied to
that extrapolation might be valid in some instances.
MEATal AND TYMPANIC InFLAMMATION
The effects of various constituents of commercial otic
pathologic evidence of inflammation was noted. Not
pharmaceutical products on the meatal epithelium and
surprisingly, both products also induced a statistically
the tympanic membrane were studied in an experi-
 significant increase in the epidermal mitotic index.
 mental model6. Benzalkonium chloride (a quaternary
Similar effects were exerted on the tympanic
ammonium preservative) produced profound effects
epithelium.
The only noted effect of topical
such as acanthosis and surface ulceration. A mixed
hydrocortisone was a significant reduction in the
inflammatory infiltrate in the dermis was also noted.
epidermal mitotic index. T'he authors made the point
Propylene glycol (a solvent and penetrance enhancer)
that it was the supposedly ‘inactive’ components,
induced acanthosis and hyperkeratosis but no histo-
rather than the pharmacologically active ingredients,
of commercial otopharmaceutical products which
 prolonged application of aqueous or propylene glycol-
induced most change. It may be that these iatrogenic
 based cleansers. T'his might paricularly be the case when
inflammatory effects are, in reality, very mild in nature
 otic preparations are used for the long-term management
and are probably masked by the more marked changes
of ear disease, such as in allergic otitis externa7. Suspicion
consequent upon otitis externa. T'hus, they may be of
should be raised when examination of the external ear
little clinical significance. However, until definitive
 canal reveals moderate infammation accompanied by an
studies are performed this cannot be relied upon.
accumulation of white, moist debris composed of
 Otic maceration may result from overenthusiastic or
sloughed squames, with no inflammatory cells present.
EFFECTS WITHIN THE MIDDLE EAR
Several types of otic medication can induce inflam-
formation10, 1l. Propylene glycol is the main agent
mation within the middle ear, if they reach it via a
used for experimental induction of cholesteatomas!l
ruptured tympanum. Several commercial cerumino-
 and it is a common ingredient in many commercial
 otic pharmaceuticals. Whether this, or other, chemo-
inflammation within the middlle ear. Propylene glycol
 therapeutic agents are involved in the induction of
is well documented as an irritant of middle ear
 cholesteatomas in dogs is not known. However, many
epithelium8. Indeed, almost all antibacterial agents 
 polypharmaceutical otic preparations contain gluco-
(carbenicillin is a notable exception) and most solvents
 corticoids in addition to putative irritants, and intra-
(with the exception of water and saline) cause
 tympanic administration of prednisolone with propy-
inflammation in the middle ear if instilled into it?.
 lene glycol has been shown to inhibit propylene
Chronic inflammation within the middle ear is
Sglycol-induced inflammation and subsequent choles-
thought to be associated with cholesteatoma
 teatoma formation!l.
OTOTOXICITY
An ototoxic agent produces cochlear or vestibular damage
 and drugs from the middle ear to the inner earl6.
by injuring structures within the inner earl, 12. The effects
T'he potential for a drug to cause ototoxicity will vary:
may reflect uni- or bilateral toxicity. Clinical signs of
 the vehicle, chemical composition, and concentration of
vestibular damage may be reflected very early after the
 the agent in question; the route, frequency, and duration
insult has been effected and these include nystagmus,
of administration; the concentrations of other com-
strabismus, ataxia, head tilt, and circling. Clinical signs of
 ponents in the otic preparation used; and, in some cases,
cochlear damage usually go unnoticed until complete
deafnessis recognized'. T'he early signs of cochlear dam-
· Direct instillation of most substances into the inner
age in man include tinnitus and although this would be
ear is likely to induce ototoxicity.
difficult to document in dogs and cats, it may be that an
· Topical administration into the external ear canal
 inappropriate, or unusually strong, response to an audi-
in the presence of a ruptured tympanum and/or
 otitis media increases the risk of ototoxicity.
In order for a drug to exert ototoxicity it must reach
· Certain detergents may increase the ototoxic
the inner ear. T'his may be the result of hematogenous
potential of chlorhexidine.
· Certain agents, such as aminoglycosides, are selectively
more commonly it follows topical application of ototoxic
ototoxic, by whatever route they are administered.
 agents into the external ear canal and their subsequent
· Loop diuretics potentiate aminoglycoside toxicity
 passage into the middle ear via a ruptured tympanum.
by increasing their relative concentration in the
Subsequent diffusion into the middle ear is enhanced by
endolymph.
the presence of otitis media, which induces increased
· Salicylates may potentiate the toxicity of gentamycin.
permeability through the round window membranel4,
· Familial sensitivity to aminoglycoside toxicity has
15, 16. The round window membrane is an important 
been demonstrated in man17 and may be relevant
portal for the passage ofinflammatory mediators, toxins,
in veterinary medicine.
216
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
CERUMINOLYTICS
Mansfield et al.5 recently demonstrated that instilla-
ammonium compounds (cetrimide for example)
tion of some commercial ceruminolytic preparations
appear to potentiate the toxic effects of chlor-
into the middle ear of both guinea pigs and dogs
hexidinel8 and commercial mixtures of the two
resulted in measurable loss of cochlear function,
compounds (Savlon@ for example) should not be
although whether the damage resulted from one or
instilled into the external ear canal.
several of the ingredients was not clear.
Povidone-iodine preparations
PROPYLENE GLYCOL
Aqueous solutions of certain iodine preparations were
Propylene glycol is a solvent and penetrance enhancer
found to be non-ototoxic in guinea pigs22 whereas
um 'ssuogeedaad so Areaidoad Aueu u punoy
alcohol-based preparations of iodine22 and povidone-
instilled into the middle and inner ear in experimental
iodine solutions20 were ototoxic. Both vestibular and
studies it is ototoxic&, 9. In one studys some
 cochlear damage was caused.
commercial ceruminolytic preparations were shown
to induce inflammatory reaction within the middle
Antibacterial agents
ear. Some of the dogs exhibited signs of vestibular
Aminoglycosides are recognized to be selectively
damage and altered brainstem auditory evoked
 ototoxic, by whatever route, although the various
response. T'wo of the three products which were
 agents exhibit differing effects, particularly at low
associated with these changes contained propylene
doses23. Thus, neomycin and dihydrostreptomycin
glycol, although whether this was the sole agent 
affect the cochlea whereas gentamycin and strepto-
responsible for the effects is not clear.
 mycin exert effects primarily on the vestibular organ23,
24. Topical otic administration of gentamycin, even in
ANTIMICROBIAL AGENTS
the presence of a ruptured tympanum, did not
Chlorhexidine
produce a noticeable degree of cochlear or vestibular
Chlorhexidine is ototoxic, affecting
boththe
 toxicity after 21 days therapy25.
vestibular and cochlear systems18. Vestibular effects
Aminoglycosides preferentially, but not exclusively,
 may be noted very rapidly, even on awakening from
 damage the outer hair cells of the cochlea23. T'he exact
 anesthesia?, whereas the signs of cochlear damage are
 mechanism by which aminoglycosides exert their
more subtle and difficult to detect early. Ultimately,
 toxicity is unclear, but early effects probably relate to
the functional disturbances of the vestibular and
 their ability to influence the concentrations of ions,
cochlear systems are accompanied by fibrosis and
particularly calcium, and free radicals in the endo-
 degeneration of the sensory epithelia4.
lymph. This will subsequently impact on both
Although there are no licensed chlorhexidine-based
 electrical activity and neuron function. Other effects
 otic preparations, the chemical is readily available in
relate1
to aminoglycoside-induced inflammatory
 clinical practice and is frequently used for irrigation of
cascades mediated via membrane phospholipids such
the external ear canal. Care must be taken to ensure
 as phosphoinositides23. To a certain extent the oto-
that adequate dilution is achieved. If it is formulated
toxic effects are dose and duration related but,
too weakly, it loses its antimicrobial potency,
ultimately, irreversible fibrodegeneration of the organ
particularly
against
t gram-negative bacteria;
 of Corti and stria vascularis occurs. Thus, in the case
formulated too strongly, it is ototoxicl8. However,
of neomycin sulfate intoxication, BAER waveform loss
used as a 0.05% solution (2% solution diluted 1 in
is reported to occur between 22 and 50 days after
40), chlorhexidine has a broad-spectrum antimicrobial
 initiation of the treatment and it is permanent26.
action and may even have some residual activity. A
Other
antibacterial
substances
must
be
recent study2 investigated the ototoxic potential of
 administered directly into the middle ear for effects to
 0.2% chlorhexidine acetate instilled into canine ears 
be noted9.
before and after experimental myringotomy. No
significant effects were noted, suggesting that at 0.2%
OTHER PHARMACEUTICALS
concentration, or less, chlorhexidine is safe as an
Furosemide, salicylates, and cisplatin have all been
irrigating solution in dogs, even in the presence of a
reported to cause ototoxicity in man and experimental
ruptured tympanum. Chlorhexidine may exert a
animals but only cisplatin has been reported to cause
transient ototoxicity in cats19.
The ototoxicity of chlorhexidine is markedly
situations where it is administered long term.
enhanced in the presence of some, but not all,
OTOtOXICItY AND OTHEr SIDE-EFFeCtS OF OTIC MEDICATION
217
ALLERGIC CONTACT DeRMATITIS AND IrrITANT
CONTACT DERMATITIS
Allergic contact dermatitis and irritant contact
Allergic and irritant contact dermatitis present as
dermatitis can be very difficult to differentiate and,
an erythematous, occasionally erosive or ulcerative,
from a practical point of view, it is not necessary to do
 dermatitis. The principal differential diagnosis is gram-
so: removal of the triggering agent results in
 negative otitis7. Examination of cytologic specimens
resolution of the problem.
will reveal a neutrophilic inflammatory reaction in
T'he external ear canal may be predlisposed to locally
both conditions, but there will be very few micro-
induced topical drug reactions. Firstly, the anatomy
organisms in the case of contact dermatitis and
favors pooling of medication, rather than rapid run off,
multitudes of them in the case of the gram-negative
resulting in prolonged exposure. Secondly, the lipid
infection.
 nature of cerumen may result in high concentrations of
The most common contact allergen in the canine
certain drugs remaining closely apposed to the
ear is neomycin?. In man both neomycin and genta-
epidermis, favoring increased local absorption. Thirdly,
 mycin are commonly implicated in allergic otitis
some products contain solvents and other agents 
 externa27. This suggests that trying to avoid neomycin
designed to aid penetration (propylene glycol, for
example)， and these may
increase the risk of
helpful.
sensitization. Finally, topical sensitizers such as neo-
Problems may occur if the allergen is propylene
mycin, may be incorporated into topical otic products.
glycol. T'his is so widely used that it is dliffcult to avoid.
SYSTEMIC EFFECTS OF OTIC MEDICATION
Topically applied drugs pass easily into and through
Measurable serum concentrations of gentamycin
the epithelial lining of the external ear canal. This may
 Occurred in humans and dogs following otic adminis-
 be enhanced in the presence of propylene glycol and
 tration29, 30. Whether the route of absorption was via
other agents. The facility of systemic absorption
 the epithelium of the external or middle ear, or even if
following topical otic administration, even into normal
 it was via the auditory tube, is not known, although the
ear canals, is demonstrated by the ability of locally
 latter route is unlikely in view of the poor absorption of
applied glucocorticoid to suppress the pituitary
 aminoglycosides via the gut. Given that most topical
adrenococortical axis28.
otic preparations are administered when the otic
Systemic absorption following topical otic adminis-
epithelium is inflamed, it is most probable that
tration may not be limited to glucocorticoids.
absorption was via this route.
STrATeGIeS TO MiNIMIZe OTOTOXICITY
In general, ototoxic effects are dose related, vis  vis
cochlear damage'. Indeed, it may be virtually
the middle and inner ear. The first principle, therefore,
impossible to detect unilateral cochlear damage in the
is to avoid using ototoxic chemicals and, if they must
clinical setting without recourse to sophisticated
be used, reduce the dose and frequency of adminis-
investigatory tools, such as BAER, for example.
tration to an absolute minimum. Careful observation
and regular follow-up examinations of the patient may
allow detection of vestibular signs early enough to
allow the clinician to suspend therapy. In some
Aways suspect a ruptured tympanum unless you
can demonstrate otherwise.
damagel3. Unfortunately, it is diffcult to detect early
218  EAR DISEASES 0F THe D0G AND CAT
T'he use of aminoglycosides such as neomycin and
flushing agents. It is important to remember that
gentamycin, which are concentrated in the endolymph,
certain detergents may potentiate chlorhexidine toxicity
should be avoided in the presence of otitis media since
and concomitant use should be avoided.
inflammation of the round window allows increased
 If the tympanum is proven to be intact, cerumeno-
penetration of drugs into the inner ear. Concomitant
lytics, foamers, and chemical depilatories may be used
use of loop diuretics should be avoidedl2.
provided that the ear canal is thoroughly washed,
With regard to the flushing of the external ear canal,
flushed, and dried at the end of the cleaning
it is best to assume that the tympanum is not intact and
procedure.
to use only saline or 0.2% chlorhexidine solution as
REFERENCES
IMerchant SR (1994) Ototoxicity. Veterinory Clinics of North
modelling Annals of Otolaryngology Rhinology and Laryngology
Aerico 24, 971-980.
99, 42-45.
2 Merchant SR, NeerTM, Tedford BL, Tewdt AC, Cheramie OM
Jo sinadse 2iaua5 (1661) 1o 2 18 nM OM inO 'Na nH Z1
and Strain GM (1995) Ototoxicity of a chlorhexidine otic
antibiotic induced deafness: mitochondrial inheritance. Journal
preparation in dogs. Progress in Veterinory Neurology 4, 72-75.
of Medicol Genetics 28, 79-83.
3 Aursnes J {1981) Vestibular damage from chlorhexidine in
18 Gallé HG and Venker van Haagen A) {1986) Ototoxicity of the
guinea pigs.Acta Otolaryngology 92, 89-100.
antiseptic combination chlorhexidine/cetrimide (Savlon):
 4 Aursnes J (1981) Cochlear damage from chlorhexidine in
effects on equillbrium and hearing. Veterinary Quortenly 8, 56-60.
guinea pigs. Acta Otolaryngology 92, 259-271.
19 lgashi Y and OkaY (1988) Vestibular ototoxicity following
5 Mansfield PD, Steiss JE, BoosingerTR and Marshall AE. {1997)
intratympanic application of chlorhexidine gluconate in the
The effects of four commercial ceruminolytics on the middle
cat. Archives of Otorhinolaryngology 245, 210-217.
ear. Journol of the Americon Animol Hospital Associotion 33,
20 Morizono T and Sikora MA (1982) The ototoxicity of topically
479-486
applied povidone-iodine products. Archives of Otoloryngology
6 Monkhouse WS, Moran P and Freedman A (1988) The
108, 210-213.
2I Morizono T and Sikora MA (1982) Reply to correspondence.
constituents of commonly used aural preparations. Clinical
Archives of Otolaryngology I08, 808.
Otoloryngology 13, 121-131
22 Aursnes J {1982) Ototoxic effect of iodine disinfectants. Acta
7 Rosychuck RAW (1994) Management of otitis externa.
Otolaryngolica 93, 219-226.
Veterinory Clinics of North Aerica 24, 921-951
23 Priuska EM and Schacht J (1997) Mechanism and prevention
 8 Morozono T {1988) Ototopical agents: ototoxicity in animal
of aminoglycoside toxicity: outer hair cells as targets and tools.
studies. Annais of Otorhinoloryngoiogy 97 (supplerment 131).
Eor Nose ond Throot journal 76, 164-172.
28-30.
24 Tran Ba Huy P and Deffrennes D (1988) Aminoglycoside 
9 Parker FL and James GWL {1978) The effect of various topical
ototoxicity. influences of dosage regimen of drug uptake and
antibiotic and antibacterial agents on the middle and inner ear
correlation between membrane binding and some clinical
Of guinea pigs.Journal of Pharmocology ond Pharmoceutics 30,
features. Acta Otolaryngologica I05, 51ll-515.
236-239.
25 Strain GM, Merchant SR, Neer TM and Tedford BL (1995)
I0 Little CJL, Lane JG, Gibbs C and Pearson GR (I99l)
Ototoxicity of a gentamycin sulfate otic preparation in dogs.
 Inflammatory middle ear disease in the dog: the clinical and
American Journal of Veterinary Research 56, 532-538.
 pathological features of cholesteatoma, a complication of otitis
26 Morgan JL Coulter DB, Marshall AE and Gortsch DD (1980)
media. Veterinory Record 128, 319-322.
Effects of neomycin on the wave form of brainstem auditory
II Ozkul A, Gedikogula G and Turan E {l998) Effect of
evoked potentials in dogs. American Journal of Veterinary
intratympanic steroid application on the development of 
Reseorch 41, 1077-1081.
eXperimental cholesteatoma. Laryngoscope I08, 543-547.
 27 Onder M, OnderT, Ozunlui A et ol. (1 994) An investigation of
I2 Mansfield PD {1990) Ototoxicity in dogs and cats.
contact dermatitis in patients with chronic otitis externa.
Compendium on Continuing Education I2, 331-337
Contoct Dermatitis 3I, II6-I17.
I3 Pickrell JA, Oehme FW and Cash WC (1993) Ototoxicity in
dogs and cats. Seminors in Veterinory Medicine ond Surgery
Adrenocortical suppression associated with topical otic
(Smoll Anirmol) 8, 42-48.
administration of glucocorticoids in dogs. Journal of the
[4 Goycoolea MM, Paparella MM, Goldberg B et ol. (1980)
Armerican Veterinary Medical Associotion 193, 329-331
Permeability of the round window membrane in otitis media.
29 Green KM, Lappin DW, Curley JW and de Carpentier JP
Archives of Otoloryngology I06, 430-433.
{1997) Systemic absorption of gentamycin ear drops. Journal
mopuim punoy (6e1) 7 uewpun] pue Aw ealoooko5 sl
of Otolaryngology I11, 960-962.
membrane. Structure function and permeability: a review.
30 Weinstein MJ, Oden EM, Zeman WV and Wagman GH
Microscopy Reseorch and Technique 36, 20 1-211.
(1965) Antibiotic absorption after otic administration in dogs.
16 Morizono T {1990) Toxicity of ototopical drugs: animal
Antimicrobial Agents and Chermotheropy 5, 239-244.
219
Chapter Nine
Cleaning the External
Ear Canal
· Introduction
· Assessing the integrity of the tympanum
· Products advocated for cleaning ears
· Cleaning process
· Irrigating solutions
· Drying agents
· Home cleaning
· References
220
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
INTRODUCTION
KEY POINTS
· T'he integrity of the tympanum must be established
 If the tympanum is ruptured, the clinician must use
before anything other than water or saline is put
the least ototoxic regime available.This means
into the external ear canal.
water or saline only, gentle pressure using a syringe
· Many of the commonly used ceruminolytics exhibit
and catheter system (see below), careful aspiration
ototoxic effects in the middle ear.
of all fluid, gentle manual removal of all debris, and
· Aural lavage and subsequent drying are the key
treatment for otitis media (see Chapter 5: Otitis
steps in cleaning the external ear canal.
media, otitis exterma) in addition to treatment of
· Chemical depilation and ceruminolytics may be an
the otitis externa.
aid to cleaning the ear canal.
Inflamed ear canals contain increased amounts of
moisture, aberrant cerumen, increased numbers of
microorganisms, and increased concentrations of
microbial toxins. Foreign bodies, neoplasms, or
ectoparasites may be present. There may be inflam-
matory cells in the lumen, an inflammatory reaction
The procedure for cleaning the external ear is
within the epithelium, and erosions, or even ulcer-
straightforward and involves a number of distinct
ation, of the epithelium. The animal may well be
steps:
showing signs of pain. The tympanum may be
· Establish the integrity of the tympanum. If this
ruptured.
cannot be assessed, use only saline as a lavage
Aural lavage is beneficial for several reasons (after
agent.
Littlel and McKeever²):
· Pretreat with a ceruminolytic or an oil-based
· It removes exudate, debris, macerated epithelial
lubricant.
components, microorganisms, toxins, and some
· Flush and remove all debris from the external ear
foreign bodies.
canal.
· It improves visualization of the proximal external
· Remove as much free fluid as possible with suction
ear canal and allows otoscopic examination of the
or very gentle swabbing.
deeper regions.
· Apply a drying agent to ensure complete removal
· It may permit visualization of the tympanum.
of moisture.
· It facilitates subsequent therapy.
Consider visual examination in the light of the
● It may provide relief from pain.
cytologic results and provide specific treatment.
ASSESSING THE INTEGRITY OF THE TYMPANUM
T'his step is critical since many cleaning techniques ad-
appearance of the external ear canal and tympanum).
vocate chemicals and some degree of water pressure
However, Griffin4 described a technique which allows
to flush the external ear canal. Any damage to the
indirect assessment of the tympanum. An otoscope is
tympanum puts the middle and inner ear at risk. A re-
used to visualize the distal horizontal canal. A small,
cent study3 demonstrated that glycerine-based ceru-
soft rubber feeding tube is passed through the
minolytics, including carbamide peroxide/dioctyl sul-
otoscope toward the tympanum. If it continues to
fosuccinate and triethanolamine polypeptide oleate-
pass unhindered, the tympanum is ruptured or there
condensate preparations, had pathologic effects when
is false middle ear syndrome. If its progress is blocked
instilled directly into the middle ear.
and the tip remains in view, the tympanum is intact.
Visual assessment of the tympanum is difficult in
Assessing the tympanum with a Spreull needle is not
normal circumstances and often impossible when
advised since such a needle has the potential to
otitis externa is present (see Chapter 2: Otoscopic
rupture the tympanum.
CleANING THE EXTERNAL EAR CANAL
221
PrODUCTS ADVOCATED FOr CleANING eArS
CERUMINOLYTICS
· Firstly, they are less messy’ and are more easily
 Many authors2,4-7 advocate an initial application of 
removed from the ear canal, permitting quicker
ceruminolytic agents prior to lavage in cases of otitis
 cleaning and drying.
externa. T'he justification for this is that the action of
· Secondly, oil-based preparations are occlusive and
the ceruminolytic, and some of the additives which
may, if not thoroughly
potentiate
 may potentiate their effect, softens the ceruminous
bacterial infections?
 debris and cerumenocellular aggregates, permitting
easy removal with subsequent aural lavage. Clinicians
Dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate and calcium
should be aware of the difference between a true
 sulfosuccinate are effective emulsifiersll but they must
 ceruminolytic and a lubricant:
not be used in dogs or cats if there is a ruptured
· A ceruminolytic disrupts the integrity of cerumen
by inducing lysis of the squames&.
agent than the sulfocuccinates+ but is still capable of
· A lubricant merely softens and loosens the
damaging the middle ear3. The foaming effect of
cerumen.
released urea and oxygen may help to loosen adhered
debris. This product is probably most useful in cases
A recent study? demonstrated that some commer-
of purulent otitis externa4.
 cial ceruminolytics were ototoxic (vestibular effects)
Oil-based proprietary lubricants may have a very
and caused inflammatory changes within the middle
 mild clinical ^ceruminolytic' effect. Indeed, they are
 ear. It was not clear which component(s) of the various
probably best confined to cases characterized by a
products was/were responsible for the changes.
mild ceruminous otitis, where they may have a
Ceruminolysis is optimal in hypo-osmolar, alkaline
lubricant, diluting effect, permitting subsequent
solutions8. Proteins on the surface of squames dlissolve
 flushing out. Squalene, triethanolamine polypeptide
into this alkaline solution, binding with free hydroxyl
oleate condensate, and hexamethyltetracosane are
ions. Loss of surface proteins reduces the integrity of 
 more potent than propylene glycol and mineral oil,
the cell membrane and water enters the cell, resulting
but are not as powerful as the aqueous products
in swelling and fragmentation?. Disruption of the
detailed above which have a powerful surfactant
squames results in disintegration of the cerumen,
 activity4. T'hese oil-based products soften the cerumen
allowing it to be flushed from the external ear canal.
 permitting easier removal from the external ear canal.
No in vivo or in vitro studies have been performed
Squalene appears to be well tolerated in the middle
on canine or feline cerumen. However, studies on
ear? and was not associated with otic toxicity in
human cerumen demonstrated that aqueous alkaline
Mansfield's study3.
solutions of sodium hydroxide (0.1 molar), sodium
bicarbonate (0.5% and 1.25%), and sodium dodecyl
CHEMICAL DEPILATORIES
sulfate (0.05% and 0.1%) were superior to organic
Chemical depilatory compounds have occasionally
agents such as glycerine, triethanolamine polypeptide
been advocated as aids in cleaning the external ear
oleate-condensate, and olive oil8. Proprietary oil-based
canal of dogsl2. Given that in some dogs the external
ceruminolytics were found to be no better than glyc-
 ear canal may be so hirsute that cleaning and adequate
erine or olive oil. None of the oil-based products had
visualization is difficult, depilatory compounds would
 any true ceruminolytic effect; all merely lubricated and
appear to be useful. Furthermore, chemical depilatory
 softened the bolus of cerumen&, 9. However, soften-
products, because of their alkalinity, might well be of
ing and lubricating may be just as useful as true ceru-
value in helping to break down some of the aggregates
minolysis since a blind, controlled studyl0 failed to
 of hair and cerumen which occur in some ears.
show significant differences between sterile water,
Most modern chemical depilatories contain
sodium bicarbonate solution, and a lipid-based pro-
thioglycolic acid or glycolate salts, presented as a
prietary ^ceruminolytic'
 cream or foam sprayl3. The depilation is accomplished
Water-based proprietary ceruminolytic preparations
by chemical (
 disruption of disulfide bonds. The
usually possess surfactant and emulsifying properties
chemical effect requires a concentration of at least
which allow aqueous substances to penetrate and
2.5% and most contain thioglycolates in the range of
underrun oily masses. T'hese are preferred to oil-based
2.5-4%13. One drawback of these preparations is that
products for two reasons:
thioglycolates require a very high pH (ideally about
222 EAR DISEASES 0F THE D0G AND CAT
12.5) if the chemical depilation is to occur within a
The depilatory compound is applied via a syringe
few minutes13 and as such they might be expected to
 in sufficient quantity to coat the external ear canal and
it is allowed to remain for 5-10 minutes before being
one studyl2 looked at the postapplication histo-
flushed out. It has been suggested (Fadok, commu-
pathologic features of the external ear canal of dogs,
 nication on VetDerm Listserv) that an initial test dose
and no significant evidence of inflammation was
 should be applied to the concave surface of the pinna
reported. Furthermore, experimental studies compar-
as a few individuals may show extreme sensitivity. It is
ing chemical depilation with shaving found no recommended that chemical depilatory compounds
evidence of either increased bacterial colonization or 
 do not enter the middle ear.
delayed wound healing14, 15.
CLEANING PROCESS
There are three methods, not mutually exclusive, to
 enter the middle ear cavity. However, there is a risk of
accomplish removal of cerumen from the external ear
 the suction tip becoming blocked16 and in animals the
 canall6: mechanical removal; suction; and lavage.
tip is often too large to enter the middle ear4.
Furthermore, the lack of infusion fluid can make
MECHANICAL REMOVAL
effective cleaning difficult. T'he length of time involved
This is the safest method for removing cerumen since
in cleaning the equipment is also a disadvantage4.
it does not involve any risk to the tympanum or middle
ear. Good visualization is imperative and if possible,
IRRIGATION
both eyes should be used as this increases depth
Irrigation is necessary to remove ceruminolytics or
perceptionl6. A wire loop, or blunt curette, is gently
 chemical depilatory compounds and it is very effective
pulled along the lining of the canal, loosening and 
 in cleaning the external ear canal16. Pressure irrigation
rolling cerumen out of the canal as it moves. After 
 is potentially hazardous as a damaged tympanum may
 pretreatment with lubricants or ceruminolytics, there 
 be ruptured by powerful jets of fluid4, 16. Curved
should be no tightly adherent pieces of cerumen, but if heads on the end of the jets may help to prevent 
any are remaining, perhaps bound to hair shafts, they
direct pressure on the tympanum4. The main
should not be subject to undue force as this may result
 dlisadvantage of these irrigating pumps is the lack of
in erosions to the epidermis.
suction, the mess they create, and the time taken to
dry the dog and clean up the equipment?.
SUCTION
Griffin4 described using a soft rubber feeding tube
Suction is particularly useful when cerumen is
attached to a syringe, which may be used alternatively
semiliquid or purulent. It is indicated for draining the
 to flush and aspirate fluid under direct observation
middlle eart and is useful when the tympanum has been
through the otoscope. This method is also ideal for
ruptured since there is no lavage fluid which might
flushing the middle ear cavity.
IRRIGATING SOLUTIONS
Irrigating solutions are used to flush out debris and
in a gentle stream, the overflow being monitored to
any cleaning agents, such as ceruminolytics or
assess when flushed debris ceases to be present.
chemical depilatories. Generally they are administered
Extreme care is needed if the tympanum is ruptured.
Cleaning the extermal ear canal using cotton buds is not advised Impaction of cerumen
eueo aut jo suul leuapida au ot ewne Xe se dnooo Xeu wnueduk au oiuo
CLEANING THE EXTERNAL EAR CANAL
223
Chlorhexidine, povidone-iodine, and acetic acid should be used with care in the
A solution of propylene glycol and malic, benzoic, and
 and wound healing21.
salicylic acids, 2% or 5% acetic acid alone, or 1:3
On the basis of the above research a 0.05%
povidone-iodine (1%) solution have been recom-
concentration of chlorhexidine would appear to be a
mended if the tympanum is not intact2,4, 5.
safe product with which to irrigate the canine external
ear canal, although it might not be an ideal choice for
WATER OR STERILE SALINE
postoperative irrigation following aural surgery. Note
These are the agents of choice when the integrity of
that P aeruginosa may be resistant to chlorhexidline at
the tympanum has not been establishedl, 6. Given that 
a concentration of 0.05% or lower'. Consequently,
the antimicrobial agents listed below have potential
 more potent antimicrobial agents should be used if
ototoxic effects, particularly in the presence of a
 gram-negative bacterial infection is suspected.
ruptured tympanum, the justification for their use is
 debatable; their main indication is a broad-spectrum
POVIDONE-IODINE
antimicrobial activity. However, in most cases the
T'he bactericidal activity of povidone-iodine is related
cleaning and irrigation procedure is a preliminary step
to the concentration of non-complexed iodine in
whose function is to clean the ear canal in preparation
 solution22. Concentrations of povidone-iodine greater
for specific topical medication.
than 0.5% are toxic to fibroblastic cultures19, somewhat
below the 1% minimum concentration required for
CHLORHEXIDINE
reliable
antistaphylococcal activityl9, although
A 0.05% solution (2% solution diluted l:40) of
 comfortably above the 0.001% dilution reported to be
chlorhexidine has a broad-spectrum antimicrobial
staphylococcicidal in another study23. However,
action, may have some residual activity, and is not toxic
 povidone-iodine, particularly when combined with a
in the presence of a ruptured tympanum in dogs,
detergent, is potentially ototoxic24 and it is not
although it may exert a transient ototoxicity in cats17, 18.
 recommended for use as a flushing agent.
An even more dilute preparation (0.0075%: 15 ml 2%
solution in 4.5 liters of water) has been recommended
ACETIC ACID
Dilute solutions of acetic acid (5% diluted 1 in 2 or 1
 resistant to chlorhexidine at this lower concentration'.
in 3) have been reported to be safe for use as a middle
Although concentrations of chlorhexidine diacetate
ear
flushing agent’ and several commercial
over 0.013% were shown to be cytotoxic to fibroblasts
preparations of 2.5% or 5% solutions are available. A
in vitrol9, a concentration of 0.05% was not
2% solution of acetic acid kills pseudomonids and a 5%
 detrimental to wound healing in vivo20. However, a
solution kills staphylococcit, although the higher
0.5% solution of chlorhexidine has been shown
concentration may be irritating.
significantly to impair granulation tissue production
DRYING AGENTS
Once the ear canal has been cleaned it must be dried,
Most products contain isopropyl alcohol, often
as residual moisture may potentiate bacterial infection.
combined with a weak acid such as boric acid, benzoic
Lavage fluid may be removed by suction, or even
acid, salicylic acid, or acetic acidl, 4. 
High
gentle use of swabs, but a final application of an
concentrations of these weak acids may be mildly
alcohol-based product is recommendedl, 2, 5.
irritant, particularly in inflamed ear canals.
224
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
HoMe CleaNiNG
Animals with chronic otitis externa will benefit from reg-
2.5% lactic acid, 0.1 % salicylic acid with sodium
 ular ear cleaning and in many cases owners can perform
docusate,
propylene glycol, and 
parachloro-
this at home, although patient compliance is mandato-
metaxylenol has been shown to be particularly
ry. T'he most usual candlidates are dogs with ceruminous
effective as a rapidly effective, in vitro killer of bacteria
otitis externa, secondary to defects in keratinization or
 and yeast commonly found in canine otitis externa25.
allergy4. In these cases flushing debris and preventing
Furthermore, a controlled in vivo study demonstrated
secondary microbial proliferation is necessary.
effective killing of microorganisms in the external ear
A commercially available ear cleanser containing
 canal of Basset Hounds25.
REFERENCES
ILittle C) (1996) Medical treatment of otitis externa in the dog
prospective study of wound infection rates. Americon Journal
and cat. in Proctice I8, 66-71.
of Surgery 145, 377-378.
2 McKeever P) (1996) Otitis extema. Compendiur or Continuing
I6 Wilson PL and Roeser R) (1997) Cerumen management:
Educotion 18, 759-772.
professional issues and techniques. Journal of the American
3 Mansfield PD, Steiss JE, BoosingerTR and Marshall AE {1997)
Acodermy of Audiology 8, 42 1430.
The effect of four commercialy available ceruminolytic agents
I7 Merchant SR, NeerTM, Tedford BL, Tewdt AC, Cheramie OM
on the middle ear Journol of the Americon Animol Hospitol
and Strain GM {1995) Ototoxicity of a chlorhexidine otic
Associotion 33, 479-486
preparation in dogs.Progress inVeterinary Neurology 4, 7275.
4 Griffin CE (1993) Otitis externa and otitis media. In Current
I8 lgashi Y and OkaY (1l988) Vestibular ototoxicity following
  o    s  
intratympanic application of chlorhexidine gluconate in the
MacDonald) Mosby St Louis, pp. 245-262.
cat. Archives of Otorhinoloryngology 245, 210-2 17.
5 McKeever PJ and Richardson HW (1988) Otitis externa. Part
I9 Sanchez IR, Nusbaum KE, Swaim SF Hale AS, Henderson RA.
3: Ear cleaning and medical treatment. Companion Animal
and McGuire JA {1988) Chlorhexidine diacetate and povidine-
Proctice 2, 24-30.
iodine cytotoxocity to canine embryonic fibroblasts and
6 Rosychuck RAW (1994) Management of otitis externa In
Stophylococcus oureus. Veterinory Surgery I7, 182-185
Veterinary Cinics of North America. (eds RAW Rosychuck and
20 Sanchez IR Swaim SF, Nusbaum KE, Hale AS, Henderson RA
SR Merchant) 24, 921-952
and McGuire JA {1988) Efects of chlorhexidine diacetate and
7 Chester DK {1988) Medical management of otitis externa. In
 povidine-iodine on wound healing in dogs. Veterinory Surgery
Veterinory Clinics of North Americo. (ed JG August) I8.
17, 291-295
799-812.
21 Lee AH, Swaim SF, McGuire JA and Hughes KS (1 988) Effects
8 Robinson AC, Hawke M, Mackay A, Ekem JK and Stratis M
chlorhexidine(
diacetate, povidine iodine and
(1989) The mechanism of ceruminolysis. Journal
polyhydroxydine on wound healing in dogs. Journal of the
Otolaryngology 18, 268-273.
Americon Anirmal Hospital Associotion 24, 77-84.
9 Robinson AC and Hawke M {l989) The efficacy
of
 22 Rackur H (1985) New aspects of mechanism of action of
ceruminolytics: everything old is new again. Journol of
povidine-iodine. Journal of Hospital Infection 6, 13-23.
Otolaryngology 18, 263-267
23 LineaweaverW, McMorris S, Soucy D and Howard R {1985)
I0 Bruyette DS and Lorenz MD {1993) Otitis externa and otitis
Cellular and bacterial toxicities of topical antimicrobials. Plostic
media: diagnostic and medical aspects. Seminors in Veterinory
and Reconstructive Surgery 75, 394-396.
Medicine ond Surgery (Small Animol) 8, 3-9.
24 Morizono T and Sikora MA {1982) The ototoxicity of topically
II Wilcke JR (1988) Otopharmacology. In Veterinory Clinics of
applied
povidone-iodine
preparations.
Archives
North Americo. (ed JG August) I8, 783-798
Otolaryngoiogy 108, 210-213.
12 Hammond DL, Conroy JD and Woody B) (1990) The
25 Loyd DH, Bond R and Lamport I {1998) Antimicrobial activity
histological effects of a chemical depilatory on the auditory
in vitro and in vivo of a canine ear cleanser Veterinory Record
canal of dogs. Journol of the Americon Animal Hospital
143, 111-112
Associotion 26, 551-554.
I3 Wilkinson JB and Moore RJ (1982) Depilatories. In Horry's
Cosmeticology. 7th edn. (eds HB Wilkinson and RJ Moore)
Longman Scientific, Harlow, pp. 142-1 52.
I4 Jaffray B, King PM, Macleod DA and Wiseman R (1990)
Bacterial colonisation of the skin after chemical depilation.
Journal of the Royal College of Surgeons (Edinburgh) 35,
243-244.
I5 De Koos T and McComas B (1983) Shaving versus skin
depilatory cream for preoperative skin preparation: a
225
Chapter Ten
Aural Hematoma, and
Other Pinnal Surgery
· Introduction
· Aural hematoma
· Traumatic injury to the pinna
· References
226
 EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
INTRODUCTION
KEY POINTS
342
· Aural hematoma must be properly drained but
surgical fixation is not always necessary.
· Pinnal lesions tend to bleed profusely and are easily
traumatized, particularly in dogs with pendulous
pinnae.
· Wound healing at the pinnal margins may be slow;
even small lacerations need aggressive treatment.
· Pinnal lacerations require prompt attention if a
 good cosmetic result is to be obtained.
· Pedicle flaps may be indicated if large pinnal defects
are present.
342 Prominent, longitudinal veins are visible on the convex
The pinna is composed of a flared cartilaginous
aspect of the pinna of this dog.
extension of the annular cartilage covered with skin1,2.
T'he relatively hairless skin of the concave side is more
which pass through foramina in the middle third of the
tightly adherent than the haired skin of the convex
 pinna? or which wrap around the pinnal margins. This
sidel. T'he pinna is supplied by branches of the external
 pattern of vascular supply explains the tendency for
carotid artery and the great auricular artery which
 pinnal lacerations to bleed profusely and is the reason
branches and courses up the convex aspect of the pinna
 for placing mattress sutures parallel to the long axis of
(342). The concave aspect is supplied by branches
 the pinna when dealing with aural hematoma.
AURAl HEMATOMA
The underlying cause of aural hematoma is un-
externa in one study5, lending support to the
known?. Various factors have been proposed to
 hypothesis that otitis externa, and the head shaking
account for the pathogenesis of the lesion itself and
 which accompanies it, are involved in the pathogenesis
for the underlying cause which incites the process:
 of aural hematoma4. However, Joyce? found evidence
most of these have been shown subsequently to be
of otitis externa in only 36% of her series, again
inadequate in some degree.
suggesting only a tenuous connection.
UNDERLYING CAUSES
Association with trauma
Association with Otodectes cynotis
Trauma to the pinna is most frequently cited as the
Stephenson+ noted the association with otitis externa
cause of aural hematoma, 9. Traumatic injury to the
and observed that otodectic mange was present in
 pinna can occur from directly inflicted trauma from
most cases. Fify nine percent of dogs and 76% of cats
 the ipsilateral rear foot or from violent head shaking.
with aural hematoma were affected with O. cynotis in
Given that trauma from a dog's foot, for example,
one studys. It has been suggested that antigens
 would most likely affect the convex aspect of the
released from ear mites, in the process of feeding,
pinna, it seems unlikely that direct trauma is the
might be involved in an immune-mediated action
cause'. Furthermore, Kuwahara was unable to
which culminates in aural hematoma5 6. However,
produce aural hematoma by either applying direct
Otodectic mites are not present in all the ears in which
force to the pinna or by injecting sterile saline or
aural hematoma occurs, suggesting that if there is a
 autogenous blood between the skin and the cartilage.
relationship, it is not direct.
Trauma might occur secondary to head shaking
and
underlying otitis externa.
Ectoparasite
Association with otitis externa
infestations, allrgy, and otic foreign bodies have been
Seventy two percent of dogs and 8l% of cats were
proposed as common causes8. However, the author
affected with some macroscopic evidence of otitis
had never seen aural hematoma in cases of scabies,
AURAL HEMATOMA, AND OTHER PINNAL SURGERY  227
possibly the most pruritic dermatosis in dogs,
neither of these sites suffer from hematoma. T'he site
notwithstanding the severe pinnal self-trauma which
 of the fluid accumulation is within the cartilage5, 10,11
occurs. Also, otitis externa is not often associated with
and this led investigators to search for mechanisms of
aural hematoma7.
cartilage damage. Violent head shaking resulting in
Association with autoimmunity
posedll but no experimental evidence has been put
 Kuwahara5, 6 proposed that aural hematoma had an
forward to support this theory. Similarly, Kuwahara5
immune-mediated, possibly autoimmune, cause. This
was unable to reproduce aural hematoma by inflicting
hypothesis was based on positive direct and indirect
cartilage damage with hemostats.
immunofluorescence on pinnal excised tissue,
It has recently been proposed? that the initiating
antinuclear antibody titers, and a response to
event may be an immunologic process which results
glucocorticoidss. This hypothesis has subsequently
in damage to the pinnal cartilage. Joyce and Day?
been challenged by Joyce and Day? who found no
 s a ss  y    
evidence of antinuclear antibody activity and minimal
degeneration with fibrovascular granulation tissue
evidence of tissue immunofluorescence.
flling defects within the cartilage. This finding
suggests that at least some of the cartilage damage
Association with underlying hypersensitivity
 occurs weeks before the aural hematoma develops,
Many cases of aural hematoma appear to be associated
which is at odds with the clinical signs which are
with underlying hypersensitivity? and in atopy, the
 acutely uncomfortable to the dog and usually prompt
most common canine hypersensitivity, lesions are  rapid presentation to the veterinary surgeon.
often present on the concave aspect of the pinnae.
 The fluid within the lesion is more akin to seroma
Certainly, otitis externa is a common manifestation of
 fluid than that found in true hematomas? and this also
atopy, as is pruritus of the head and face. Further-
suggests a more chronic nature to the etiology than
more, Joyce and Day? reported that in two thirds of
 clinical findings would suggest.
their case series there was a significant dermal infiltrate
of eosinophils and mast cells.
CLINICAL FEATURES
Aural hematoma is a relatively common condition in
PATHOGENESIS OF THE LESION
small animal practice and it has a pathognomonic
Quite why aural hematoma occurs on the concave
 appearance (343, 344). The initial lesion usually
aspect of the pinna is not known. That there is some
develops at the base of the concave aspect of the
damage to the pinnal cartilage is unquestionable, but
 pinna, subsequently enlarging towards the apex. The
whether this results from trauma is not known. A dog
lesion is a cause of acute discomfort to the dog and
with acute otitis externa will attempt to scratch the ear
rapid presentation is the norm. This is supported by
but in that case the trauma is more likely to be on the
a study6 in which over 80% cases were in the acute
convex aspect of the pinna, at least in dogs with pen-
stages of the disease. Aural hematomas are warm,
dulous pinnae, or in the external ear canal itself, and
tense, and painful.
343
344
343, 344 Aural hematoma in a cat (343) and a dog (344). Such lesions are tense, rounded, occasionally bluish purple
in color and fluid filled
228
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
In cases where drainage or surgical intervention is
not performed, chronic scarring fibrosis develops which
Client management and an attempt to prevent
distorts the pinna, the so-called ^cauliflower ear' (345).
recurrence are important.
MaNAGEMENT
The lesion must be drained. In addition, recurrence,
both immediate and long term, must be prevented.
There are three techniques described in the literature
·T'he cavity is drained, fibrin is curetted out, and the
which achieve the first aim, but only a carefully taken
cavity flushed with sterile saline.
history and complete physical examination will allow
● Full-thickness sutures are placed in rows parallel
identification of the underlying cause, if indeed there
with the incision (347, 348). The longitudinal
is one. General anesthesia may be necessary to treat the
placing of these sutures is mandatory as it
lesion. None of the three techniques described achieve
minimizes the risk of iatrogenic damage to the
a rapid resolution and all are relatively expensive in fi-
blood vessels of the pinna. T'he major vessels may
nancial terms for what the owner might consider sim-
be visualized on the concave aspect of the pinna
ply a large ^blood blister'. Good communication with
but incorrect placement and blockage of even a
the owner is important.
small vessel can lead to necrosis of an area of the
Aural hematomas that are acute respond to drainage
pinna. The free ends of the sutures, on the convex
and pressure dressings better than those which have
aspect of the pinna, are cut short (349).
been present for more than seven days. T'hese latter cases
● T'he principle role of these sutures is to obliterate
 dead space, rather than to appose tissue, and
Although surgery is more painful, more expensive, and
consequently the number of rows placed will
requires general anesthesia, it does resolve the condition
depend on the size of the cavity. Generally, one to
more rapidly than passive drainage 12.
three rows are required, each some 5-l0 mm
(0.2-0.4 in) from the next.
Surgical incision, drainage, and suture
· Pressure wrapping is necessary (see Chapter 12:
Incisional drainage and suturing is probably the most
Perioperative analgesia and management). An
consistently successful technique for dealing with aural
absorbent pad is placed on the crown, the pinna is
hematomas?. Early and complete drainage ensures
folded back over the head, and the ear is bandaged.
good apposition with minimal fibrin deposits to
The free pinna may poke through a window (350).
curette out. T'he principle disadvantage of this method
In some animals an Elizabethan collar may be
is the necessity for general anesthesia. The technique
necessary.
(after Henderson and Horne&, Cechner?, and Swaim 
· Postoperative pain relief is necessary for the first
and Hendersonl?) is as follows:
24-48 hours (see Chapter 12: Perioperative
· T'he pinna is prepared surgically and the hematoma
analgesia and management).
incised with a single, straight cut along its long axis
· Sutures are removed after a minimum of two
(346). Additional excision is not necessary9.
weeks; more usually three weeks is allowed.
345
346
345 Gnarled and distorted pinna, a consequence of leaving
346 The incision is along the entire length of the hematoma.
an aural hematoma to resolve without treatment.
AURaL HEmATOmA, AND OTHEr PINNAl SURGErY
229
Postsurgical problems
placement will necessitate symptomatic management.
The following may occur:
 Recurrence, and permanent scarring of the pinna
· Some animals may shake their heads so violently
(351, 352), may follow poor drainage, incorrect
that hemorrhage occurs. Sedation may be necessary
suture placement, or, more usually, too few sutures.
in these cases, although good control of pain
Recurrence should prompt a search for an
usually prevents self-trauma.
underlying pruritus if the surgical technique was 
·Localized necrosis as a result of poor suture
good.
347
348
347,348
The sutures are placed longitudinally along the entire length of the incisions.
349
350
349
 The free ends of the sutures ane cut short.
350
 The ear is dressed and bandaged with the normal pinna
allowed to stand free.
351
352
351   Localized scarring and distortion of the pinna
352
 Distortion of the pinna following inadequate surgical
secondary to poor surgical technique.
 management of an aural hematoma.
230
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
Surgical incision, drainage, and taping
a daily basis. The dog is checked weekly and the drain
This technique is reported to have an advantage over
removed when the lesion is quiescent. A similar
that described above in that no sutures are required and
approach was reported using a teat tube rather than a
there is therefore less risk of pinnal distortion13. The
Penrose drain15. In one study7, Penrose drain insertion
major disadvantages of this technique are the necessity
was supplemented by oral prednisolone (l mg/kg
for general anesthesia and the unnatural position of the
ql2h for two weeks followed by a further two weeks
pinna, which may upset some owners. The technique
at l mg/kg q24h). Twenty four of 27 hematomas
(after Bojrab and Constantinescul3) is as follows:
were successfully treated with this technique.
· T'he hematoma is drained as described above but
 no sutures are placed.
Drainage and glucocorticoid instillation
· Dressings are applied as described above and the
The huge advantage of this technique is that general.
wound cleaned daily.
anesthesia is not required. Furthermore, a more rapid
· Dressings are changed as necessary and the taped
resolution of the condition occurs6. The principle
 pinna is freed after three weeks.
disadvantage is that repeated visits to the clinic are
necessary as regular drainage is required. T'his tends to
Drainage with an indwelling Penrose
negate any cost benefit that may be gained by obviating
drain or teat tube
a general anesthetic and it may prove logistically tedious
This procedure may be carried out under heavy
 to the client. In addition, the instillation of gluco-
sedation or ultrashort anesthesia. The hematoma is
 corticoids into the wound may delay healing and the
incised distally and drained via a stab incision or biopsy
technique has been criticized on this basis8. The
punch7, 14. A Penrose drain is inserted through the
 technique (after Kuwahara°) is as follows:
incision to exit proximally via another similar incision
● T'he hematoma is cleaned and sprayed with spirit.
(353). Both ends of the drain are left exposed and stay
● An 18G needle and syringe was described initially
sutures are placed. No dressings are applied, although
to drain the hematoma fluid. However, the authors
the owner is advised to clean the drain holes gently on
found that a butterfly connection (with a length of
soft tubing interposed between needle and syringe)
allowed for some movement by the dog and was a
353
much less painful procedure (354, 355).
·Dexamethasone (0.2% solution) diluted 5-10 times
in sterile saline is instilled into the hematoma cavity,
although not in sufficient quantity to cause
distension of the skin overlying the cavity.
· T'he puncture is sealed with a piece of adhesive tape
to prevent leakage.
 The procedure is repeated daily until no fluid is
aspirated, typically on the third to fifth day6.
Closed-suction drainage
 Closed-suction drainage depends on fluid following a
negative pressure gradient. A technique has been
described which exploits this principle in the
management of aural hematomal6. Although a good
response to treatment has been reported, this
technique appears to hold no advantage over the other,
more straightforward, methods described above. A
19G butterfly adapter with swaged-on tubing is used
in this techniquei6. The length of the hematoma is
measured on the tubing and it is repeatedlly fenestrated
so that the fenestrated length of tube lies completely
within the hematoma. T'he hematoma is drained via a
19G needle and if there are clots of fibrin within, it is
353 A Penrose drain has been inserted through this aural
incised, drained, and sutured as described above. If the
hematoma.
aspirated fluid contains no clots, the closed-suction
AURal HEmATOmA, AND OTHEr PINNAL SUrGErY
231
354
355
354, 355 A loose butterfly connection is preferred to a simple needle and syringe as it allows the dog some degree of movement.
technique is progressed. The technique (after
pressure become negative. The first evacuated tube
Swaim and Bradleyl6) is as follows:
is immediately replaced with another.
· A small incision is made to enlarge the needle
· T'he pinna is reflected back over the head, as
puncture just so that the fenestrated tube can
described above, and the evacuated tube packed
pass into the hematoma. T'he tube is pushed to
between surgical sponge on the dog's head and
the apex of the hematoma cavity so that all the
secured with adhesive tape.
fenestrations are within the cavity. T'he distal
· Periodically the vacuum tube is ^unpacked’ and
end of the tube is fixed with a simple
replaced to ensure a steady draw of fluid. Initially,
interrupted  percutaneous  non-absorbable
this is necessary two or three times daily, falling to
suture. A purse-string suture is passed around
once daily as fluid production within the hematoma
the proximal end to ensure a tight seal.
decreases.
The needle at the end of the tubing is passed
· After seven days the bandages are removed, the stay
through the stopper of a 3 ml or 5 ml eva-
sutures removed, and the tube withdrawn.
 cuated blood collection tube. Proper placement
· T'he bandages are replaced to ensure that the pinna
 of the fenestrated tube is confirmed by noting
is held firm for another ten days to allow complete
that the hematoma ^collapses' onto the tube as
healing.
TRAUMATIC INJURY TO THE PINNA
Traumatic injuries to the pinnae are common. Dogs
circumstances where general anesthesia is not indicated
and cats frequently suffer pinnal laceration and even 
(or cannot be funded) but the end result is not quite as
pinnal defects during fights, and wound infection
good as can be achieved with careful surgical apposition
invariably occurs. The general principles of treatment
 and suturing. The dressng is cut to shape and applied
are cleaning, debridement, tissue apposition, protec-
to the cleaned and dried wound such that there is at
tion, and prevention of secondary infection?. Lacera-
least l cm (0.4 in) margin of overlap. The dressing
tions may be full thickness or partial, in which case 
must be held gently in place for a few minutes until it
pinnal cartilage may or may not be involved. Small
has adhered. Once firmly attached, no further dressing
lacerations may be treated conservatively by clipping
is needed. Hydroactive dressings are light and generally
and cleaning
very well tolerated. T'hey suppress bacterial infection
PINNAL LACERATION
noted under these dressings as they break down; this
Hydroactive dressings
should not be confused with infection. T'he remains of
Adhesive, hydroactive dressings may be useful in the
the hydroactive dressing may be gently peeled off after
management of small lacerations. T'hey are ideal in
two weeks.
232
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
Surgical repair
T'he outline of the pinnal defect is marked on the
Early surgical intervention is recommended8. T'he
donor site, allowing 5 mm (0.2 in) excess in all
pinna must be surgically prepared and carefully
directions. The edges of the pinnal lesion are
debrided. The first sutures are placed at the pinnal
debrided.
 margin to ensure good alignment. If a full-thickness
The pedicle is incised on the two edges which are
laceration has occurred, it must be closed with sutures
to be sutured into the pinna and the graft is
on both the concave and convex aspects, either with
incorporated with simple interrupted sutures.
rows of simple interrupted sutures on both aspects or
· The wound is dressed and bandaged. Regular
with simple interrupted sutures on one face and
redressing is performed for two weeks.
vertical mattress sutures on the other&.
Three options are now available for management
PINNAL DEFECTS
of the defect on the convex side of the pinna:
· T'he base of the pedicle is severed and the concave
flaps8:
side left to granulate. This is usually cosmetically
· The edges of the defect are debrided and
acceptable in dogs with pendulous ears.
straightened, excising as little tissue as possible.
· T'he base of the pedicle is severed and a new pedicle
Topical antibacterial ointment is applied and the
 prepared for the defect on the concave aspect.
dressings changed, as necessary, for seven days,
· T'he base of the original pedicle is used as a base for
when a clean proud epithelial line is visible.
a new pedicle matching the defect on the concave
· A donor site is chosen to close the convex aspect of
aspect. Since the flap has revascularized it is not
the defect first. It is selected on the basis of hair
necessary to create a new pedicle, simply ^flip' the
color, texture, density, and direction of growth,
flap over and suture it into position. T'his technique
usually in the cervicobuccal region, avoiding the
is quick but runs the risk of avascular necrosis
ventral midline of the neck.
following collapse of vessels in the folded flap.
· Both the recipient and donor site are aseptically
 prepared.
REFERENCES
IFraser G, GregorWW, Mackenzie CP Spreull JSA and Withers
hematoma. In Current Techniques in Small Animol Surgery. 4th
AR {1970) Canine ear disease. Journal of Small Animol Proctice
edn. (ed M) Bojrab) Williams and Wilkins, Baltimore, pp. 95-97
10. 725-754.
I0 Larsen S {1968) Intrachondrial rupture and hematoma
2 Getty R, Foust HL, Presley ET and Miller ER {I956)
formation in the external ear of dogs. Pothoiogica Veterinoria
Macroscopic anatomy of the ear of the dog. Americon Journal
5. 442-450.
of Veterinory Reseorch 17, 364-375.
 3 Joyce JA, and Day M) (1997) Immunopathogenesis of canine
of canine aural hematomas. Journal of the Americon Veterinory
aural hematoma. journol of Small Animol Proctice 38, 152-1 58.
Medicol Associotion 185, 873-875.
4 Stephenson HC {194l) Some diseases of the ear of dogs.
12 Swaim SF and Henderson RA (1990) Wounds of the head
Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Associotion 98,
In Small Animol Wound Monogement. (eds SF Swaim and RA
1 38-142.
Henderson) Williams and Wilkins, Baltimore, pp. 19I-233.
5 Kuwahara J (1986) Canine and feline aural hematomas: clinical,
13 Bojrab MJ and Constantinescu GM {1998) Sutureless
experimental, and clinicopathological observations. Americon
technique for repair of aural hematoma. In Current Techniques
Journal of Veterinary Reseorch 47, 2300-2308.
in Smoll Animol Surgery. 4th edn. (ed M) Bojrab) Williams and
6 Kuwahara J (1986) Canine and feline aural hematomas: results
Wikins,Baltimore, pp. 97-98.
of treatment with corticosteroids. journol of the Americon
I4 Kagan KG (1983) Treatment of canine aural hematoma with
Anirmol Hospitol Associotion 22, 64 1-647
an indwelling drain.Journal of the American Veterinary Medicol
7  Joyce JA {1 994) Treatment of canine aural haematoma using
Associotion 182, 972-974
an indwelling drain and corticosteroids. Journal of Small Anirmol
I5 Wilson JW (1983) Treatment of auricular hematoma using a
Proctice 35, 341-344
teat tube. Journol of the Americorn Veterinory Medicol Associotion
8 Henderson RA and Horne RD (1993) The pinna. In Textbook
182, 1081-1083.
of Smoll Animal Surgery. 2nd edn. (ed D Slatter) VB Saunders,
I6 Swaim SF and Bradley DM (1996) Evaluation of closed-suction
Philadelphia, pp. 1 545-1 559.
   su ene   e
9 Cechner PE {1998) Suture technique for repair of aural
Arericon Animol Hospital Associotion 32, 3643.
233
Chapter Eleven
Surgical Resection,
Aural Ablation, and
Bulla Osteotomy
· Introduction
· Presurgical investigations
· Resection and ablation of the external ear canal
· Bulla osteotomy
· Special problems relating to surgery of the middle ear in cats
· References
234
EAR DISEASES OF tHE DOG AND CAT
INTRODUCTION
KEY POINTS
the alleviation of the chronic otitis.For example,
· Surgical resection and ablation of the ear canal is
failure fully to assess the patient and make a definitive
useful in the management of chronic ear disease,
diagnosis of the cause of the otitis externa is the main
 provided a critical assessment of the individual case 
reason why lateral wall resection fails. T'hus, if the
is made on each occasion.
underlying cause is atopy or dietary intolerance, the
· Do not underestimate the medical aspects of
otitis will continue to affect the remaining medial wall
chronic ear disease. In particular, recognize the
of the external ear canal, even after a technically
contribution that dermatologic conditions can
 perfect lateral wall resection.
make to poor surgical outcome.
Surgical management of ear disease cannot be
· Lateral wall resection is most probably over-
divorced from the medical necessity of fully
performed and the technique has very few, if any,
investigating all the components of the otic structure
indications in the Cocker Spaniel.
and recognizing that the epithelial lining of the
· Vertical canal ablation is associated with the fewest
external ear canal is an extension of the skin of the
postoperative complications.
head and neck. Chronic otitis externa, at least in the
· Total ablation and bulla
1osteotomy is best
dog, is usually a manifestation of a more generalized
 performed by an experienced surgeon.
dermatologic process such as a defect in keratiniz-
ation, hypersensitivity, endocrinopathy, or an immune-
T'he various surgical resections of the external ear
mediated disease. Furthermore, many cases are
canal are generally indicated as a means of resolving
associated with otitis media. These diseases and
chronic otitis externa or as aids in the management of
associated problems must all be fully investigated
otitis media. The decision on how much of the
 ae s e si ns a
external ear canal to resect is crucial, since the
 to read the relevant chapters and sections of this book
outcome of the surgical procedure will be assessed by
for further information.
PRESURGICAL INVESTIGATIONS
Presurgical assessment of the entire structure of the
present. The status of the tympanic membrane cannot
always be assessed fully by otoscopy, even in a normal
procedures advocated below will have been performed
 external ear canal6.
by way of routine management and work up of a case
Neurologic examination (see Chapter
2：
of otitis media or externa. A fuller description of these 
Neurologic examination of the ear) of the facial,
 procedures can be found elsewhere in this book.
 oculosympathetic, and vestibular (CN VIII) nerves
Palpation of the external ear canal may reveal
 provicdes a baseline for assessing the significance of any
thickening and ossification of the cartilaginous
postoperative neurologic signs. Similarly, assessing a
components. Local thickening, particularly in the 
dog's auditory ability preoperatively may give a useful
 parotid area, or the presence of a sinus adjacent to the
measure against which to compare postoperative
external ear canal may reflect para-aural abscess4, 5.
deafness.
Changes to the vertical part of the external ear canal
Bacteriological culture and sensitivity testing will
are often accompanied by chronic changes to the
often have been performed before surgery is
concave aspect of the pinna, which may be thickened
considered. However, repeated use of various topical
and lichenified.
antibacterial agents may well influence the bacterial
Otoscopy
population and its antibacterial susceptibility. Preoper-
the external ear canal and tympanum) is essential and
ative sampling to provide an up-to-date antibacterial
a clear view is mandatory if meaningful conclusions
susceptibility is advisable if postoperative infection is
 are to be drawn. Visual examination via an otoscope
to be managed effectively. However, if otitis media is
can provide information on the state of the epithelial
present, intraoperative sampling is essential since it has
lining of the otic canal, the degree of stenosis of the
been shown that in the presence of otitis media there
lumen and, sometimes, an indication that neoplasia is
is little correlation between the flora of the horizontal
SURGICal rESECtIOn, AUraL ABLATIoN, AND bUlLa OSTeotomY
235
ear canal and that of the middle ear?.
Radiographic assessment (see Chapter
2：
Owners should be cautioned that all aural
Radliographic features of the normal and abnormal ear)
of the external ear may reveal ossification of the
of the entire vertical canal, may adversely affect ear
auricular cartilage and absence of the luminal air
carriage in dogs with erect pinnae.
shadow, both findings suggestive of chronic,
inflammatory, proliferative otitis externa?, 9. Positive
contrast ear canalography may be useful in establishing
the status of the tympanum if tympanometry is not
available or is impracticable, for instance if the external.
 matory, with little evidence of fibrosis and glandular
ear canal is stenosed8, 10. Radiographic examination of
hyperplasia, aggressive glucocorticoid therapy may
the middle ear is essential in the work up of otitis
reduce luminal stenosis, thus obviating the need for
 media9, 10, 11, although CT' (see Chapter 2: Imaging of 
surgery. Biopsy of neoplastic lesions may provide
the middle and inner ears) may be more sensitive for
information which influences the type of surgical
resection required, and it is therefore a useful
Biopsy (see Chapter 2: Other investigatory
 presurgical investigation, particularly if the lesion is
procedures) of the epithelial lining of the external
accessible. Cytologic examination of otic cerumen
ear canal is rarely performed but, conceivably, it may
 may help provide information on the tumor type but
help to influence whether surgery takes place. For
itcannot
grade malignancy;
this
requires
example, if the histopathologic pattern is inflam-
histopathologic examination of biopsy samples
ReSeCTION AND AbLATION Of The eXTeRNaL ear CaNaL
INDICATIONS
 Neoplasia of the lateral wall of the vertical ear canal.
Lateral wall resection
· In the management of otitis media to facilitate
Resection of the lateral wall of the external ear canal
flushing and drainage of the bulla, although in
is accompanied by a small, but measurable, reduction
most cases a total ear canal ablation and bulla
in the humidity within the lumen of the canall3.
osteotomy is probably the treatment of choice.
Whether this is clinically relevant is debatable.
However, the provision of good drainage at the
Vertical canal ablation
most ventral part of the external ear canal probably
T'he purpose of vertical canal ablation is to remove the
results in an improved otic microenvironment by
portion of the external ear canal which contains the
reducing humidity and surface maceration. Zepp's
most potential for chronic hyperplastic change. In
 modification14 of an earlier technique15 was the first 
reality, most surgery is performed in patients with
report to describe the crucial step of making a
 irreversible changes already in place, i.e. it is salvage
drainplate (baffle) which provides the mechanism for
surgery rather than pre-emptive surgery. Furthermore,
markedly increased drainage of the ventral parts of
most cases of chronic otitis externa exhibit varying
the external ear canal.
degrees of luminal stenosis within the horizontal
Clinicians should note that lateral wall resection is
 portion of the external ear canal, in addition to changes
probably contraindicated in the Cocker Spaniel for
within the vertical portion, and in theory this should
two reasons. Firstly, the otic disease is almost always
 also be removed. However, the horizontal canal is short
too far advanced and secondly, the breed is very likely
and ablation of the vertical canal (provided a good
to have ear disease severe enough to warrant total ear
 canal ablation2. This is supported by a retrospective
study which demonstrated that Cocker Spaniels, as a
 breed, correlate highly with surgical failurel6.
It is important to stress that lateral wall resection
 Lateral wall resection is indicated in the following
will fail if there are chronic, ireversible, hyperplastic
circumstances3, 17, 18.
· Persistent, or recurrent, otitis externa with mild,
ongoing otic inflammation.If in doubt, ablate the
 potentially reversible, hyperplasia of the epithelium
entire vertical canal.
and adnexae.
236
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
drainplate is fashioned) establishes good drainage,
RESECTION
resulting in an improvement of the microenvironment 
Because of the difficulty of adequately preparing the
within the remaining portions of the canal.
entire surgical field, systemic antibiotics should be
Vertical canal ablation is indicated in the following
circumstances17, 18, 19:
postoperatively. Antibiotic selection should be based
· Chronic, or recurrent, otitis externa associated with
on culture and sensitivity of the ear canal obtained
irreversible, hyperplastic changes in the luminal
prior to intravenous medication. If empirical drug
epithelium.
selection is necessary, first generation cephalosporins3
· Neoplasia of the vertical ear canal.
most often provide an adequate antibacterial
spectrum, although the effect of previous therapy
Total ear canal ablation (and lateral bulla
must be borne in mind.
osteotomy)
Total ear canal ablation is always performed with a
Lateral wall resection
lateral bulla osteotomy. The removal of the entire
The crucial steps in this procedure are:
external ear canal can only be accomplished if the
· Careful delineation of the tissue to be resected; do
external canal is resected to the level of the tympanum,
 not let the incisures wander rostromedially.
which marks the boundary between the external and
· Construction of the drainplate (baffle).
the middle ear. T'his necessitates resection of bone.
Total ear canal ablation and lateral bulla osteotomy
A basic surgery kit supplemented with rongeurs,
is rarely indicated in cats2, 20. Although bulla
Gelpi retractors, periosteal elevators, Steinmann pins
osteotomy alone (usually ventral) may be indicated for
(356), drains, and small-gauge absorbable and non-
the management of polyps, for example, the otitis
absorbable suture materials is necessary. T'he external
externa usually resolves and chronic changes are rarely
ear canal is flushed with 0.05% chlorhexidine solution.
 severe enough to warrant vertical canal ablation.
 Both sides of the pinna are prepared aseptically, as well
Total ear canal ablation and lateral bulla osteotomy
 as the area of head surrounding the external acoustic
 are indicated in the following circumstances2, 3, 18, 21.
 meatus. It is helpful if the patient is positioned in lateral
· Chronic, or recurrent, otitis externa associated with
recumbency with the head supported over a sandbag;
irreversible, hyperplastic changes in the luminal
this helps to keep the tissues around the surgical field
epithelium.
 taut17. The pinna is hung with atraumatic forceps and
· Failure of more conservative surgery to alleviate
a full draping of the field is performed3, 18, 19
otitis externa or media.
The junction of the vertical and horizontal canal is
· Neoplasia of the external ear canal.
determined by palpation or by inserting a curved
· Otitis media.
hemostat, facing laterally, into the vertical canal to the
level of the horizontal ear canal.
The incisions start at the incisures of the tragus (357)
and continue parallel to the vertical canal (358),
terminating below the level of the horizontal canal.
The flap is reflected, using blunt, superficial dissection
Total ear canal ablation and lateral bulla osteotomy
(359), and removed.
renders the ear dysfunctional as a hearing organ.
Careful, blunt dissection is used to expose the
Bilateral surgery may result in deafness21.
cartilage of the canal (360). NB: The parotid salivary
 gland will be found at the base of the vertical canal,
and care must be taken not to disrupt this structure.
 It is not necessary to dissect deeper than the vertical
cartilage and the dissection should not be performed
ventral to the horizontal canal, as damage to the facial
Total ear canal ablation and lateral bulla osteotomy
nerve (CN VII) may occur.
is a technically difficult procedure with potential for
This procedure should not be attempted by
inexperienced surgeons. Referral is indicated.
SUrGICal reSeCtIon, AUral AblAtIon, AND bUlla oSteotomY
237
356
357
356 Basic instruments for otic surgery are supplemented
with rongeurs, Gelpi retractors, and periosteal elevators.
357Ilustration depicting the amount of skin to be removed
during lateral wall resection.
358
359
 358 Lateral wall resection. The incisions are parallel to the
360
vertical canal.
 359  The skin flap is reflected using careful, superficial, blunt
dissection.
360The dissection is carried deeper to expose the
cartilaginous wall of the external ear canal
238
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
Using a tissue forceps at the lateral aspect of the
performed in the same manner (365). Absorbable, or
external acoustic meatus for traction, the vertical canal
 non-absorbable, skin sutures are used if necessary.
is incised from the tragal incisures to the junction of the
vertical and horizontal canals, to permit resection of the
Postoperative care
lateral one third to one half of the vertical canal (36l).
 Postoperative self-trauma may be a problem and ade-
The local anatomy tends to force the incision rostro-
quate analgesia must be ensured; taping the pinnae over
medially. It is critical that this does not occur. Lane?
the head may help to minimize disruption of the suture
advocated preliminary scoring (on the outer surface of
line5, 18 and in some cases an Elizabethan collar may be
the exposed ear canal prior to beginning the incisions)
 necessary until the incision has healed (see Chapter 12:
from the ligament between the conchal and annular
Perioperative analgesia and management). Postoperative
cartilages dorsally to the tragal incisures, i.e. in the oppo-
use of anti-inflammatory doses of prednisolone
site direction to which the actual incisions will subse
(0.5-1.0 mg/kg p/o q24h) may be of use in helping to
quently be performed. This scoring provides a guide for
minimize soft tissue swelling5, although care should be
incision and prevents the line of incision wandering
taken not to use prednisolone in conjunction with non-
rostromedlially. T'his is crucial for surgery success as any
steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). Gentle
tendency for the incision to deviate from the lateral
application of a warm moist towel helps to minimize
aspect of the vertical canal results in a narrowed
 swelling and facilitate cleaning of the surgical site.
exposure and an inadequate drainplate3, 17, 19, 23, 24.
If non-absorbable sutures are used, they should be left
T'he incised section of vertical wall is reflected
 in place for 14 daysl8, although regular postoperative
(362). A section of the lateral cartilage is left attached
checks are important. Caution owners that wound heal-
at the base, 2-3 cm (0.8-1.2 in) above the level of the
ing and complete recovery may take some time. It may
junction between the conchal and annular cartilages
take 10-14 days for obvious improvement to take place
(363). This will allow creation of a drainplatel7,24.
and several weeks for re-epithelialization of any defects
The creation of a functional drainplate is essential for
around the drainplate to be completed. Mild postopera-
the success of this technique.
tive surgical dehiscence is left to heal by second inten-
The drainplate is created by reflecting the residual flap
tion18. Complete dehiscence necessitates surgical revision;
of the lateral wall of the vertical canal ventrally (364),
 postoperative infection should be suspected in these cases
using the ligament between the conchal and annular
 and bacterial culture and sensitivity testing performed.
cartilages as a hinge24. Simple interrupted subcuticular
It may prove necessary to sedate the animal to
monofilament absorbable sutures (3/0) should be used
facilitate suture removal. To avoid this the use of long-
to suture the flap in place. It is easiest to suture the four
life absorbent materials such as PDS should be
corners first to ensure proper positioning. Apposition of
considered. Regular clipping of long hair in the area
the remaining exposed cartilage to the skin is then 
helps ensure cleanliness.
361
362
361 Starting at the tragus, the vertical ear canal is incised to
362 The reflected skin flap has been removed. The excised
the level of the horizontal ear canal.
section of lateral wall is reflected ventrally.
SUrGIcal reSeCtIon, AUral AblATIon, ANd bUlla oSteotomy :
239
Postsurgical problems
disorders and concomitant infections is imperative
Reviews of lateral wall resections cite a 34-47%
if resolution of otitis externa is to be achieved.
failure ratel5,25. There are three common reasons for
 Inflammatory changes will continue in the medial
failure of this procedure, two medical and one
wall irrespective of the surgical technique (366).
surgical23.
· Unrecognized otitis media.
· Failure to appreciate that this procedure should not 
· Failure to provide adequate drainage for the rem-
be relied upon as the sole treatment for otitis
nants of the horizontal canal by way of a functional
externa. Concurrent medical therapy of underlying
drainplate.
363
364
 363The major part of the reflected cartilage is removed,
364 The reflected drainplate is sutured to surrounding skin,
ensuring that a 2-3 cm (0.8-1.2 in) flap is left with which to
starting at the corners.
make the drainplate.
365
366
365
The exposed walls of the vertical canal are then sutured to
366 This English Setter has atopy. The lateral wall
surrounding skin, to close the operation.
resection was technically sound, but it failed in its 
objective because otitis continued.
240
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
Options in the face of postsurgical problems
367
If the results of surgery are disappointing, it is
important to understand why, rather than to persist
with ineffectual topical medications in the face of
ongoing pathologic change and aural discomfort, or
even frank pain. Surgical options include:
· Corrective surgery. In reality this is limited to
 providing a functional drainplate and this should
only be performed in cases where there is no
 ongoing inflammation in the medial wall.
· Converting the lateral wall resection to a vertical
canal ablation. T'his option should only be
considered if there is no evidence of otitis media
and if the horizontal canal is normal and provided
with a fully patent opening and a functional
drainplate.
· Performing a total ablation and bulla osteotomy.
VERTICAL EAR CANAL ABLATION
The crucial steps in this procedure are:
· Construction of an effective drainplate.
·Careful closure of all dead space.
367Vertical canal ablation.A 'T'-shaped incision is made
Preparation of the field is identical to that for a
Over the vertical ear canal.
lateral ear resection.
An initial ^T"-shaped incision is made. The lower
point of the incision, the base of the *T", is just below
the level of the horizontal portion of the external ear
The excised canal is sectioned above the level of the
cana13, 17, 23, 24, 26. The bar of the *T" follows a
horizontal canal to allow creation of a drainplate
circumferential path across the medial wall of the
(369). The ligamentous connection between the
conchal cartilage (367), immediately dorsal to the 
annular and conchal cartilages is used as a hinge to
large antihelicine tuberclel7. In dogs with erect pinnae
allow reflection of the cartilage, as in the lateral wall
a dorsally curved incision may be performed; this
resection described above. At the new acoustic
results in a crescent-shaped base for the pinna and
meatus, exact closure of skin to canal epithelium with
 helps to maintain a normal carriage postoperatively27.
4/0 absorbable monofilament subcuticular sutures is
Incision through the auricular cartilage is made,
attempted so as to minimize stricture at the site
taking care not to penetrate the lateral aspect of the
(370). Skin sutures are placed if necessary.
pinna. The ^trumpet' of conchal cartilage is grasped 
The suture line is closed above the drainplate
with tissue forceps and a combination of blunt and
(37l), incorporating subcutaneous tissues deep to the
sharp dissection is used to isolate the vertical canal,
 excised conchal cartilages with the sutures to eliminate
which can be pulled free from the underlying tissues
 dead space17. Failure to close dead space may result in
(368). It is essential to keep the dissection as close to
 postoperative dehiscence.
the cartilage as possible as this minimizes iatrogenic
damage to blood vessels and nerves.
SUrGICal reSeCtIon, AUral AblAtIon, AND bUlla oSteotomY
241
368
369
368  Circumferential dissection of the soft tissues is
369
The base of the freed vertical ear canal is resected at a
performed keeping as close to the cartilaginous ear canal as
level below the diseased tissue, at the level of the horizontal
possible.
ear canal.
370
370A permanent stroma is constructed by ensuring that
The rest of the incision is closed, ensuring that dead
the cartilaginous portion of the horizontal ear canal remains 
 space is eliminated.
patent when sutured to the skin.
242
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
Pull-through modification28
a pue r q aa o An si 
This modification of vertical canal ablation results in
dissection until the entire ^trumpet’ of the vertical
less incised tissue to suture than with standard
canal is freed from its soft tissue attachments and
techniques, less trauma to subcutaneous tissues, less 
exposed via the dorsal incision (373, 374).
risk of damage to associated structures such as the
 The skin is palpated at the level of the horizontal
salivary glands, less postoperative discomfort, fewer
canal (375) and a circular incision, roughly one and
sutures, more rapid healing, and less dead space.
a half times the diameter of the horizontal canal, is
Although the original authors did not describe the
made (376).
creation of a drainplate, it is generally considered
 The entire, exposed conchal cartilage ^trumpet',
appropriate to do so.
which was previously exposed by blunt dissection, is
The circumferential incision is identical to that
pulled through this ventral incision (377) and cut
described above except that a subsequent vertical
1.5 cm (0.6 in) above the level of the horizontal
incision is not made (372). Instead, the conchal
canal (378).
372
372Tigari modification. A circumferential incision is made at
the entrance to the vertical ear canal
374
373, 374 Using traction and blunt dissection, the vertical ear canal is gradually freed from its surroundings
SUrGICal reSeCtIon, AUral AblAtIon, AND bUlla oSteotomY
243
375
376
375
The level of the horizontal ear canal is palpated.
376
 The skin is incised at the level of the horizontal ear
 canal.
377The entire, already freed, conchal cone is pulled through
the incision.
 The exposed vertical ear canal is excised at the level of
the horizontal ear canal.
244
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
A drainplate is constructed as described above
Dealing with ossification of the
(379) and the distal incision closed (380).
external ear canal
Mineralization of the cartilaginous components of the
 Postoperative care
external ear canal may occur as a consequence of
 Postoperative analgesia is mandatory (see Chapter 12:
chronic inflammations. The initial changes appear to
Perioperative
analgesia
and
management).
Occur in the horizontal canal5, although with time,
Postoperative  antibacterial
therapy
should
be
and in particular in Cocker Spaniels, the vertical canal
continued for at least ten days, or until the sutures are
may also become ossified. Although the ossified
removed. Surgical aftercare is similar to that provided
vertical canal may be removed relatively easily by
for lateral ear resection, although the wound is less
ablation, the surgical resection of ossified horizontal
likely to dehisce18.
canals is more difficult5.
A surgical technique has been described5, 29 for
Postsurgical problems
dissecting out the ossified portions of the horizontal
Postsurgical complications with this technique are
and vertical canals, although if the condition has
much less common than those seen after lateral wall
progressed to this stage, total ablation and bulla
resection17, 18, 26. Furthermore, improper patient 
 osteotomy may be indicated. However, since total
selection occurs less frequently than with lateral wall
 ablation and bulla osteotomy sometimes results in loss
resection17. In one study26, dehiscence of the suture (
 of hearing, owners may want to avoid such a radical
line occurred in l2% of cases, with stenosis of the 
 step, particularly if the contralateral ear has already
external acoustic meatus occurring in 7% of cases.
 been ablated. Although the pain associated with
Damage to the facial nerve is possible, particularly if
 chronic otitis externa was largely controlled in the
deep sectioning of the external acoustic meatus is (
attempted. Stenosis of the external acoustic meatus
 occasional treatment to clean the ear canals.
(38l) is usually a consequence of inadequate
 T'he technique for dissecting out the ossifications is
construction of the drainplate, resulting in a failure to
 as follows (after Hobson and Elkins et al.29 ):
support the canal and impairment of natural
· If the vertical canal is still present (and is to be
drainagel6.
ablated, as described above), it is exposed and the
dissection is continued ventrally to expose the
Options in the face of postsurgical problems
ventral wall of the ossified horizontal canal, taking
· Postoperative, acute, inflammatory stenosis of the
 great care to avoid the facial nerve.
external acoustic meatus may be suppressed if the
· In the presence of an ossified vertical canal,
lumen is packed with glucocorticoid-impregnated
ronguers are used to remove ossified cartilage from
gauze for a few days17.
the lateral surface of that portion of the vertical
· Dehiscence is best treated aggressively with
canal destined to form the drainplate. In effect, the
drainplate is constructed from  the epithelial
Consideration should be given to obtaining a
components of the vertical canal rather than from
culture and sensitivity report if dehiscence occurs
the cartilaginous portion.
in dogs receiving postoperative antibacterial
· An incision is made on the distal aspect of the
therapy. Surgical closure is indicated as soon as
junction of the annular and auricular cartilages. This
infection is under control6.
allows an osteotome (or a small rounded periosteal
· Stenosis of, or impaired drainage from, the external.
elevator) gradually to elevate the softissue lining
acoustic meatus warrants investigation since it
of the horizontal canal. The ossified cartilage can
implies one of two problems, neither mutually
then be gradually removed with ronguers while
antagonistic: inadequate drainplate construction or
leaving the soft tissue lining of the ear canal intact.
ongoing otitis media.
Once the ossified material has been removed a
drainplate is created from the remnants of the
lateral wall of the vertical canal, taking care to
ensure that the horizontal canal is patent.
SUrGICal reSeCtIon, AUral AblAtIon, AND bUlla oSteotomY
245
379
380
 379 The stoma at the horizontal ear canal is closed, taking 
The initial circumferential incision is closed in a routine
care to ensure that the drainplate keeps the opening patent.
manner.
381Stenosis of the horizontal ear canal following
381
inadequate construction of the drainplate. The problem was
exacerbated by a failure to identify underlying atopy which 
resulted in ongoing disease in the remnants of the vertical ear
 canal and concave aspect of the pinna.
246
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
TOTAL EAR CANAL ABLATION AND
surgical area prepared as described above. The pinna
LATERAl bULLA OSTEOTOMY
is hung with atraumatic forceps and a full draping of
The crucial steps in this procedure are:
the field is performed. A small rolled towel placed
· Avoid damage to the round window and the facial
under the neck of the dog, to elevate the head to the
nerve.
level of the chest wall, facilitates exposure2.
· Ensure that all secretory epithelium is removed
A circumferential incision is made around the
from the bulla and from the site of the horizontal
acoustic meatus, severing the auricular cartilage but
ear canal.
not penetrating the lateral skin surface of the pinna.
· Treat tissues gently; ensure good hemostasis and
 The incision is continued to the level of the junction
close all dead space.
of the horizontal and vertical ear canals (382). It may
be necessary to resect large areas of infected, hyper-
It is now generally accepted that it is prudent to
plastic tissue in some cases, with consequent impli-
perform a lateral bulla osteotomy (LBO) with every
 cations for postoperative pinnal carriage.
total ear canal ablation2, 3, 19, 30,31, 32. Given the
Blunt dissection is used to expose the lateral surface
difficulty of definitively documenting otitis media by
of the vertical canal (383). The vertical canal is freed
radiography&, or even by CT33, it is almost impossible
from the surrounding tissue using a combination of
to justify not performing a bulla osteotomy. Any
 blunt and sharp dissection (384, 385). A dry gauze
residual discharge or secretion which might result
sponge can be helpful for bluntly rubbing the
from continuing otitis media, or indeed any portions
connective tissue from the vertical canal. Care should
of epithelial tissue inadvertently left behind, will
be taken to avoid hemorrhage from the rostral
accumulate and may well result in para-aural
auricular artery and vein and from the auriculo-
abscessation3, 31. Most authorities recommend LBO
palpebral (branch of the facial) and auriculotemporal
in association with ablation of the external ear canal,
(branch of the trigeminal) nerves in the cranial aspect
since to perform ventral bulla osteotomy would
of the dissection35. Damage to blood vessels in this
require repositioning of the animal during surgery, an
 area may lead to avascular necrosis of the pinna2.
unnecessary complication since the ventral approach
Hemorrhage may be controlled with electrocautery
 has no advantage over the latera134.
in the area around the vertical canal but not the
Presurgical evaluation of the facial, oculosym-
horizontal canal; the risk to the facial nerve is too
 pathetic, and vestibular (CN VIII) nerves is useful2,
greats.
33, 35 as it provides a baseline for assessing the
Blunt dissection, keeping as close to the peri-
significance of any postoperative neurologic signs.
chondrium as possible, is continued around the angle
Bilateral total ear canal ablation (TECA) performed
 that forms the transition between the vertical and
 simultaneously has been reported to cause pharyngeal
 horizontal canals, which represents the transition from
swelling?, a complication of hypoglossal nerve
auricular cartilage to annular cartilage (386). Care
damage.
This complication may I
necessitate a
should be taken to identify the facial nerve as it exits
tracheostomy to alleviate upper airway obstruction.
from the stylomastoid foramen and curves rostro-
For this reason some surgeons stage the procedure by
ventrally around the horizontal canal. It should be
allowing at least 2-3 weeks to lapse before performing
 carefully retracted ventrally. The advantage of per-
a second TECA on a patient. However, other
forming this dissection after freeing the vertical canal
 surgeons take the view that the advantages of a single
is that there is maximal tissue laxity, which allows the
episode of anesthesia and a single period of post-
fullest retraction2l. In some cases the facial nerve may
be intimately associated with perichondrial connective
problems.
tissue or even buried within the reactive tissue
Total ablation and bulla osteotomy should render
surrounding ossified cartilagel, 31. This will require
the ear cleaf but, somewhat surprisingly, this does not
 careful dissection if significant postoperative morbidity
is to be avoided. Gelpi retractors may be useful at this
dog's
sauditory   ability preoperatively
and
point. If the facial nerve proves hard to find, Smeak21
demonstrate this to the owners? in an attempt to
advocated searching the caudal and more superficial
forestall
unwarranted
 accusations of
surgical
 aspect of the horizontal ear canal for small branches of
ineptitude.
the internal auricular nerve which penetrate the
 Systemic antibacterial therapy is indicated both pre-
cartilage; these may be followed back to the facial
and postoperatively, beginning 7-l4 days pre-
nerve trunk. Gentle traction and tissue manipulation
in this area is mandatory.
SUrGIcal resectIon, AUral AblatIon, And bULla oSteotomy
247
382
383
382 Total ear canal ablation and bulla osteotomy. The initial
383 The vertical ear canal is exposed, using blunt dissection.
incisions are made.
384
385
 384, 385 The external ear canal is gradually freed.
386
386 Bunt dissection and gentle traction is used to enable
 the surgeon progressively to free the external ear canal to the
level of the bony acoustic meatus.
248
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
Blunt dissection is continued along the horizontal
387
canal to the level of the skull. T'he entire horizontal
canal is exposed to the level of the bony acoustic
meatus, and then sharply transected, with scissors, at
this level (387). If chronic disease has caused
Ossification of the horizontal canal, a small osteotome
may be necessary to transect the ear canal. A clamp
across the base of the horizontal canal before
transection minimizes contamination from debris
within the canal.
A bone curette is used to scrape all epithelial tissue
from the osseous external acoustic meatus32, 35, 37. It
is critical that all secretory tissue is removed as failure
 to achieve this will result in postoperative para-aural
abscessation. T'he bony external acoustic meatus is
removed (388) using a sharp, small rongeur (such as
a Lempert rongeur) or an air drill. This will allow
increased visualization of the tympanic cavity. When
enlarging the external auditory meatus it is best to stay
rostral and ventral to avoid the oval and round
windows (on the opposite wall of the bulla to the
tympanum) and the facial nerve37.
T'he ventrolateral portion of the tympanic bulla is
removed (389) with rongeurs or an air-driven bur. It
The external ear canal is excised to expose the
may prove necessary to extend the osteotomy rostrally
tympanic aperture.
and caudally in order adequately to visualize the
caudal aspects of the tympanic cavity. It is imperative
that the shelf of bone ventromedial to the external
acoustic meatus is removed if adequate exposure is to
 be achieved for optimum curettage37.
accomplished than removal of minimally inflamed
The surgeon should avoid advancing onto the
tissue. Extreme care should be taken not to disrupt the
ventral aspect of the bulla. Some ventral retraction of 
epitympanic recess, the round window (mid-dorsal
the soft tissues will have been performed to allow 
 aspect), or the oval window (craniodorsal). Samples
dissection of the annular cartilage, but both the facial 
from the middle ear should be submitted for bacterial
nerve and the external carotid artery are in this area
culture and sensitivity.
and extreme caution is warranted. If hemorrhage is
NB: This part of the procedure is critical, for if
encountered, definitive hemostasis is important; use
infected secretory tissue is left within the bulla,
hemostatic clips37.
postoperative abscessation and fistulation can be
Suction is usually necessary at this point to maintain
expected.
adequate visibility of the surgical field. T'he tympanic
The tympanic cavity is thoroughly flushed with
cavity is curetted or abraded, using a dry gauze sponge
warmed saline solution (390). A drain (latex, active,
wrapped on the end of a hemostat to remove any
or ingress/egress) (391) may be placed, entering via
inspissated contents, secretory epithelium, and
the tympanic orifice and exiting the tympanic cavity
remnants of the tympanic membrane and the malleus,
through the osteotomy and passing through the skin
if not removed earlier. Care should be taken not to
via a stab incision. This is beneficial if clearing of the
evulse the stapes off the oval window; peripheral
 bulla is not complete or if a large amount of dlischarge
vestibular problems may result. Paradoxically, removal
is expected2. Drainage may not be necessary with
of chronically inflamed epithelia is often more easily
 strict adherence to good surgical techniques38?
SUrGIcal reSectIon, AUral AblatIon, And bULla oSteotomy
249
388
389
388
Using rongeurs, the bony external acoustic meatus is
389
 The ventrolateral wall of the tympanic bulla has now
removed to expose further the tympanic cavity.
been breached.
390
39
390  After the tympanic cavity has been curetted it is flushed 
391  A drain tube is placed (through a separate stab incision)
to ensure removal of all debris.
 and closure begun.
250
EAr DISEASES OF tHE DOG AND CAT
Closure is performed using monofilament
postoperative cellulitis. Routine skin closure is
absorbable sutures in the subcutaneous tissue
performed in the shape of a ^T", with care taken to
(392-394). Great care must be taken to close all
effect a cosmetic ear carriage when closing the area of
potential dead space as this will help to minimize
the former tragus and antitragus.
392
393
394
392-394 Routine closure, ensuring elimination of dead space, ends the surgery.
SURGICAL RESECTION, AURAL ABLATION, AND BULLA OSTEOTOMY 251
Postsurgical care
allow local exudate to clear the surgical site rather
Postoperative analgesia is mandatory (see Chapter 12:
than to facilitate flushing35. If a drain is inserted, soft,
Perioperative analgesia and management). Post-
padded dressings should be used to cover the surgical
operative systemic antibacterial therapy is usually
site and the drain egress until the drain is removed,
warranted and must be continued for 10-21 days2, 35.
typically after 2-5 days. Care should be taken that
The choice of antibacterial agent may need to be
these dressings do not constrict the pharynx2l.
reviewed in the light of bacterial culture and sensitivity
Sutures are removed after l0-l4 days.
testing of tissue obtained at surgery. Postoperative
Careful neurologic observations should be made.
glucocorticoids have been recommended5. Used in
 In the immediate postoperative period, hypoglossal
anti-inflammatory doses (0.5-1.0 mg/kg divided
damage may be apparent and although it does not
q12h) prednisolone may help to decrease postoperative
usually require specific treatment, animals should be
swelling. Glucocorticoids should not be used for more
closely observed for the 24 hours immediately post
than three days and care must be taken to ensure that
surgery2. Respiratory function, in particular, should
they are not used concurrently with NSAIDs as there
be monitored postoperatively as significant pharyn-
is an increased risk of gastric ulceration.
 geal swelling may occur following bilateral surgery21.
Generally, it is not necessary
toirrigate
Ocular lubricants may be indicated until normal blink
postoperatively; the drains are placed (395, 396) to  reflex is regained.
395
396
395, 396 Passive and active drains, put in place after surgery ensure that any
exudate is removed.
252
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
Postsurgical problems
managed by application of artificial tears, for
Postsurgical problems are a reflection of two main
factors: the surgical complexity of the procedure and
 pue n u aq A sisied lud no 'sised
the degree of bacterial contamination of the surgical
prognosis is poor if no evidence of improvement is
site2, 21, 35.
apparent four weeks post surgery2l. T'he practical
Discharge from the surgical site is common2, 31,32,
consequences of long-term facial nerve damage are
 33,37. Discharge and postoperative swelling may
be
minimal provided tear production is normal and
treated with hot compresses for five minutes, three
exophthalmia is not present?1.
times daily. Drainage may be facilitated by removing
 Postoperative Horner's syndrome and damage to
 the most ventral sutures. Fistula formation (para-aural
the facial nerve (ptosis, midriasis, nystagmus, head tilt,
sinus) (397) may occur 3-12 months post surgery in
flaccid facial paralysis) is usually confined to the cat
cases in which incomplete removal of infected and
and will resolve within a few weeks, as long as the
secretory tissue was achieved. Para-aural sinuses may
Otitis media has resolved2.
create more clinical problems than the original otitis21
(see Chapter 6: Para-aural abscess).
Options in the face of postsurgical problems
Pinnal necrosis (which is usually limited to the
Short-term complications such as incisional abscess,
caudal aspect of the pinna) is a consequence of
dehiscence, or swelling can be seen with T'ECA-LBO.
compromised blood supply. Management is based on
Most are short lived and resolve with conservative
local cleansing, debridement if necesary, and awaiting
treatment, although extensive complications may
re-epithelialization.
require surgical revision.
Postoperative nerve damage is relatively common,
If damage to the epitympanic recess, oval window,
and in about 10% of cases some degree of permanent
or round window occurs, abnormalities such as
nystagmus, head tilt, and general
vestibular
nerve damage (drooling, dysphagia) is usually short 
 abnormalities can occur. This complication is often
term. Facial nerve damage is the most common
 temporary, and resolves within 7-10 days with only
 supportive care. If a patient displayed a head tilt prior
paresis of the auriculopalpebral nerve is also 
 to surgery, it will often persist in the acute post-
common2l. Ninety percent of these cases resolve 
within a few weeks of surgery and they can be s
 sistently abnormal.
397
397 Para-aural sinus following incomplete removal of all secretory tissues
at surgery.
SUrGIcal reSEctIon, AUral AblatIon, AND bUlla oSteotomy
253
Long-term complications usually involve abscess-
effective in up to 85% of dogs with recurrent post-
ation of the middle ear and/or fistulation of tissues
 operative otitis39, 40.
ventral to the middle ear (see Chapter 6: Para-aural
 Deafness and loss of hearing ability after total
abscess). Most commonly this is due to incomplete
ablation and bulla osteotomy is a common concern of
excision of the membranous lining of the bulla3,38.
owners. Studies vary, but patients with severe
Medical therapy of persistent or recurrent infection is
proliferative canal disease tend to retain the same level
rarely curative. Surgical re-exploration of the bulla to
 of hearing they had prior to surgery, hence the value
remove remaining epithelial tissue, combined with
of preoperative assessment22. T'his also is true in most
debridement of infected tissue and appropriate
cases when comparing preoperative and postoperative
drainage, is used to control infection and this is
BULLA OSTEOTOMY
INDICATIONS
on the caudolateral aspect of the bulla and is
The principle indication for bulla osteotomy is the
 directed from a caudoventral direction so that ifit
treatment of refractory otitis media34, 35, 37. The
impacts on the medial wall it avoids the
procedure is most commonly performed in the dog in
mediodorsal wall.
association with total ablation of the external ear
· T'he osteotomy site is enlarged with rongeurs,
canal, in which case a lateral bulla osteotomy is
 observing the precautions outlined above.
performed. T'he alternative approach to the bulla is a
· Samples for microbiological culture and sensitivity
ventral approach, most often performed in the cat in
 testing are taken and the tympanic cavity is flushed
the management of inflammatory polyps arising from
the middle ear. Other, much less common, indications
of debris.
are the excision of neoplastic masses and the removal
● If purulence is evident in the tympanic cavity, a
 of cholesteatomas2l.
drain tube is sometimes placed. This is sutured to
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
adjacent to the initial skin incision. Twice daily
Lateral bulla osteotomy as a
flushing with an appropriate antibacterial agent is
separate procedure
performed until the drain is removed after seven
Lateral bulla osteotomy is more easily performed after
days. Flushing may not always be effective unless
total ear canal ablation has been carried out,
an ingress (dorsal via the tympanic opening)/egress
principally because of increased visualization4l.
(ventral) drain is used31. Passive ventral drainage
The surgical technique is as follows (after
may suffice in many cases.
Krahwinkel et al.40, Barrett and Rathfon42, and
Booth43):
Ventral bulla osteotomy
· A skin incision is made over the external ear canal
Ventral bulla osteotomy provides less opportunity for
and extended ventrally beyond the level of the
iatrogenic nerve damage, better visualization of the
horizontal ear canal. The subcutaneous tissues are
tympanic cavity, and more consistent ventral drainage
gently dissected to reveal the apposition of the
than the lateral approach44,45. The reason that this
 parotid salivary gland and the horizontal ear canal.
approach is not used more frequently in dogs is that
· Gentle, ventral retraction of the parotid gland
in most cases middle ear infection is associated with
should reveal the facial nerve, which is carefully
chronic external ear disease and both areas are then
retracted caudoventrally to reveal the lateral aspect
addressed in a unified field. Furthermore, in one
of the tympanic bulla.
study34 there was little difference in postoperative
· T'he bulla is further exposed using a periosteal
 complications compared with the lateral approach.
elevator and broached with a Steinmann pin in a
Ventral bulla osteotomy is the most frequently used
hand chuck. Care is needed here because the
approach in the cat, a reflection of otitis media
density of the bulla varies and is unpredictable; to0
 occurring in the absence of chronic otitis externa in
much pressure and the pin may impact on the
this species. Note that the bulla of the cat differs from
 opposite side of the tympanic cavity. T'he pin enters
that of the dog (see page 255).
254
 EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
I'he surgical technique is as follows (after Fossum?
dorsal aspect of the tympanic cavity and damaging
Hararil9, Smeak and de Hoff1, Booth44, Seim45,
the oval or round windows.
Denny46, and McNutt and McCoy47):
· T'he pin is removed and the osteotomy site enlarged
● A sagittal incision is made immediately medial to the
with rongeurs (400, 401).
mandibular salivary gland, at a level midway between
· Samples for microbiological culture and sensitivity
the angle of the mandible and the wings of the atlas
 testing are taken and the tympanic cavity is flushed
(398). The thin myelohyoid muscle is split.
with warm isotonic saline until the run-out is clear of
· The digastricus muscle is separated from the
debris.
hyoglossal and styloglossal muscles by blunt
·● A drain tube is placed if necessary (see above) in the
dissection.
tympanic cavity, sutured to adljacent soft tissues with
· T'he hypoglossal nerve and branches of the internal
4/0 catgut, and exited adjacent to the initial skin
carotid artery are identified on the lateral aspect of
 incision. Twice daily flushing with an appropriate
the hyoglossal muscle and carefully retracted medially.
 antibacterial agent is performed until drain removal
· Further retraction of the digastricus muscle (laterally)
after seven days.
and of the hyoglossal muscle (medially) reveals the
rounded bulge of the bulla between the jugular
Postsurgical problems
processes of the skull (caudal to the bulla) and the
 Possible complications to bulla osteotomy are princi-
angular process of the mandible (rostral).
pally neurologic42. As with those encountered after
· T'he thin muscular covering of the bulla is incised and
total ear canal ablation and bulla osteotomy (described
reflected with a periosteal elevator (398).
above), these relate principally to the hypoglossal nerve
· T'he bulla is broached with a Steinmann pin in a hand
(drooling, dysphagia) and branches of the sympathetic
chuck (399). Care is needed here because sudden  and parasympathetic nerve supply (ipsilateral Horner's
penetration may result in the pin impacting on the  syndrome and keratoconjunctivitis sicca, respectively).
398
66
398The bulla has been exposed
399A Steinmann pin has been used to broach the bulla
400
401
400, 4oI  The osteotomy is progressively enlarged with rongeurs
SURGICAL RESECTION, AURAL ABLATION, AND BULLA OSTEOTOMY
255
SPECIaL PrObLEMS rElATING TO SUrGERY OF The
MiDdle ear In CatS
Middle ear disease in cats usually relates to otitis
21% of cases. Some facial paresis and inner ear disease
media or inflammatory polyps, although neoplasia
(head tilt, ataxia) may also be noted postoperatively
may 0ccur rarely20,47.
T'he tympanic bullae of cats are easily palpable on
the ventral aspect of the feline skull and they are easily
accessible with a straightforward dissection (402), as
402
outlined above. However, the ventral chamber of the
tympanic cavity is characterized by an incomplete
bony septum44. It is this septum which is visible upon
opening the ventral wall of the tympanic bulla and it
Digastric muscle.
divides the ventral cavity into two. The larger
 Hypoglossal 
ventromedial chamber is entered via the bulla
Osteotomy and the smaller dorsolateral chamber, in
nerve
effect the tympanic cavity proper, lies beyond the
Tympanic bulla
septum.
The two chambers communicate via the space
Sublingual gland 
between the septum and the caudomedial wall of the
tympanic cavity44. The round window of the cochlea,
the promontory, and the postganglionic fibers of the
cervical sympathetic trunk are in this region of the
medial wall and are thus vulnerable to damage,
particularly if the septum is removed. Horner's
syndrome will result if the sympathetic fibers are
damaged. It may be necessary to open the septum if
access to inflammatory polyps in the dorsolateral
Soft rubber
chamber is required or to facilitate drainage and, if so,
tubing
care should be taken to avoid the region adjacent to
the promontory20. Postoperative Horner's syndrome
Occurred in 57% of cases in one series48. Although the
 402  Feline ventral bulla osteotomy.The surgical site.
majority of cases resolved within eight days of surgery,
 Illustration reproduced from NVMS Small Animmal Surgery.
the signs persisted, albeit mildly, after four weeks in
1996, courtesy of VWilliams and Wilkins, Media, PA, USA.)
REFERENCES
ILayton CE (l993) The role of lateral wall resection in
Cole LK, Kwochka KW, Kowalski J) and Hillier A {1998)
managing chronic otitis exterma. Serminors in Veterinary Medicine
Microbial flora and antimicrobial susceptibility patterns of
ond Surgery 8, 24-29.
isolated pathogens from the horizontal ear canal and middle
oeiqe eue yea eiol (6el) (s aoesdiay ue a aeas 
ear in dogs with otitis media. Journal of the Americon Veterinory
and lateral bulla osteotomy for management of end-stage
Medicol Associotion 212, 534-538.
otitis. Serminars in Veterinary Medicine and Surgery 8, 30-41.
8 Remedios AM, Fowler JD and Pharr JW (I99l) A
3Fossum TV {1997) Surgery of the ear: In Small Animal Surgery.
comparison of radiographic versus surgical diagnosis of otitis
(ed TW Fossum) Mosby St Louis, pp. 1 53-178
media. Journol of the Americon Animal Hospital Associotion 27,
4 Lane JG and Watkins PE {1986) Para-aural sinus in the dog
183-188.
and cat. Journol of Smoll Animol Proctice 27, 52 1531
9 Trower ND, Gregory SP Renfrew H and Lamb CR (1998)
ea panueape jo uawauew eoiuns (agel) dh uosqoh 
Evaluation of the canine tympanic membrane by positive
disease. Veterinory Clinics of North Armerico 18, 82 1-844
contrast ear canalography Veterinory Record 142, 78-81
6 Little C) and Lane JG (1989) An evaluation of tympanometry
I0 Penrod JP and Coulter DB (1980) The diagnostic use of
otoscopy and palpation for assessment of the canine tympanic
impedance audiometry in the dog. Journol of the American
membrane. Veterinory Record 124, 5-8.
Anirmol Hospitol Associotion 16, 94 1948
256
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
II Neer TM (1982) Otitis media. Compendium on Continuing
32 Mason LK, Harvey CE and Orsher R) {1988) Total ear canal
Educotion 4, 41 0-417.
a a i  e   
I2 Love NE and Kramer RW {1995) Radiographic and
otitis in dogs: results in 30 dogs. Veterinory Surgery I7.
computed tomographic evaluation of otitis media in the dog.
263-268.
Veterinory Rodiogrophy ond Ultrasound 36, 375-379.
33 Love NE, Kramer RW, Spodnick GJ and Thrall DE {1995)
I3 Grono LR {1970) Studies of the microclimate of the external
Radiographic and computed tomographic evaluation of otitis
 auditory canal in the dog. Ill: Relative humidity within the
media in the dog. Veterinory Rodioiogy ond Uitrosound 36.
external auditory meatus. Reseorch in Veterinory Science II.
375-379.
316-319.
 34 Sharp NJH (1990) Chronic otitis externa and otitis media
I4 Zepp CP (1949) Surgical technique to establish drainage of
 treated by total ear canal ablation and ventral bulla osteotomy
the external ear canal and corrections of hematoma of the
in 13 dogs. Veterinory Surgery 19, 162-166.
dog and cat. Journal of the Americon Veterinory Medical
    e 1l    
Associotion I15, 91-92.
and lateral bulla osteotomy in 38 dogs. Journal of the American
 I5 Tufvesson G (1955) Operation for otitis externa in dogs
Animal Hospital Associotion 26, 257-267
according to Zepp's method. Americon Journol ofVeterinory
36 Payne JT, Shell LG, Flora RM, Martin RA and Shires PK (1989)
Reseorch 16, 565-570.
Hearing loss in dogs subjected to total ear canal ablation.
16 Sylvestre AM {1998) Potential factors affecting the outcome
Veterinory Surgery I8, 70.
of dogs with a resection of the lateral wall of the vertical ear
37 Beckman SL Henry WB and Cechner P {1 990) Total ear canal
canal. Canodian Veterinory Journal 39, 157-1 60.
ablation combining bulla osteotomy and curretage in dogs
I7 Lane JG (1979) Canine aural surgery in Proctice I, 5-11.
with chronic otitis externa and media. Journal of the American
[8 Krahwinkle D) {1993) External ear canal. In Textbook of Smoll
Veterinory Medicol Associotion I96, 84-90.
Anirmal Surgery. 2nd edn. (ed D Slatter D) WB Saunders,
Philadelphia pp. 1 561-1 567.
(1997) Passive drainage versus primary closure after total ear
I9 Harari J (1996) Ear In Smoll Animol Surgery. (ed J Harari)
canal ablation/lateral bulla osteotomy in dogs: 59 dogs
Williams and Wilkins, Baltimone, Pp. 193-199.
{1985-1995). Veterinary Surgery 26, 210-216.
       d  
39 Holt D and Brockman D) {1996) Lateral exploration of
for treatment of middle ear disease in cats: l9 cases
fistulas developing after total canal ablations: l0 cases
{1984-1991). Journol of the American Veterinory Medical
{1989-1993). Journol of the Americon Animol Hospital
Association 202, 123-128.
Associotior 32, 527-530.
21 Smeak DD {1998) Total ear canal ablation and lateral bulla
40 Krahwinkel D), Pardo AD, Sims MH and Bubb W) (1993)
Osteotomy. In Current Techniques in Smoll Animol Surgery. 4th
Effect of total ablation of the external acoustic meatus and
edn. (ed MJ Bojrab) Williams and Wilkins, Baltimore, Pp.
 bulla osteotomy on auditory function in dogs. Journal of the
1 02-109.
American Veterinary Medicol Associotion 202, 949-952.
22 Krahwinkel DJ, Pardo AD, Sims MH and Bubb WJ (1989)
41 Smeak DD, Crocker BS and Birchard SJ (1 996) Treatment of
 Effect of ear ablation on auditory function as determined by
recurrent otitis media that developed after total ear canal
brainstem auditory evoked response and subjective
ablation and lateral bulla osteotomy in dogs: nine cases
evaluation. Veterinory Surgery I8, 60.
(1986-1994). Journol of the Americon Veterinory Medicol
 23 Lane JG and Little CJL (1i986) Surgery of the canine external 
Associotion 209, 937-942
auditory meatus: a review of failures. Journol of Small Animal
42 Barrett RE and Rathfon BL {1975) Lateral approach to bulla
Proctice 27, 247-254.
osteotomy. Journol of the Americon Animol Hospitol Associotion
24 Bradley RL (1988) Surgical management of otitis externa.
11, 203-205.
Veterinary Clinics of North America I5, 8 13-844
43 Boothe HW (1988) Surgical management of otitis media and
25 Gregory CR and Vasseur PB (1983) Clinical results of lateral
otitis interna. Veterinary Clinics of North Americo I8, 90 1-9 11.
ear resection in dogs. Joumal of the Armericon Veterinory Medicol
 44 Boothe HW (1998) Ventral bulla osteotomy: dog and cat. In
Associotion 182, 1087-1090.
Current Techniques in Small Animal Surgery. 4th edn. (ed M)
26 McCarthy RJ and Caywood DD {1992) Vertical ear canal
Bojrab) Williams and Wilkins, Baltimore, p. I09-I 12.
resection for end-stage otitis externa in dogs. Journol of the
45 Seim HB Ill (1993) Middle ear In Textbook of Smoll Animol
American Animol Hospital Associotion 28, 546-552.
Surgery. 2nd edn. (ed D Slatter) WB Saunders, Philadelphia,
27 Pohlman DDL (1981) A modified surgical approach to
Pp. 1568-1576
chronic otitis exterma. Veterinary Medicine Small Anirmal Clinician
46 Denny HR {1973) The results of surgical treatment of otitis
76, 334-335.
media and interna in the dog. Journal of Small Animol Proctice
28 Tirgari M and Pinniger RS {1986) Pull-through technique for
14, 585-600.
47 McNutt GW and McCoy JH (1980) Bulla osteotomy in the
and cats. Journol of Smoll Animol Proctice 27, 123-131
dog. Journal of the American Veterinory /Medical Associotion 77,
29 EIkins AD, Hedlund CS and Hobson HP {1981) Surgical
617-628.
management of ossified ear canals in the canine. Veterinory
48 Ader PL and Boothe HW (1979) Ventral bulla osteotomy in
Surgery 10. 163-168.
the cat. Journal of the Armerican Anirmal Hospital Associotion I5,
30 White RAS (1995) Total ear canal ablation in the dog and cat.
757-762.
Waltham Focus 5, 23-28.
e e ea o (e    pe  e 1
clinical results in the dog and cat. Veterinory Surgery I5,
161-170.
257
Chapter Twelve
Perioperative Analgesia
and Management
+ Introduction
· Peri- and postoperative analgesia
· Postoperative systemic antibacterial therapy
· Postoperative dressings and wound management
· Postoperative nutritional management
· References
258
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
INTRODUCTION
KEY POINTS
· Animals will be in considerable pain following ear
Cinicians should consider pre- and postoperative
 surgery and they may have difficulty drinking and
uelnodwi se ag oi susanu pue 'uotunu 'eisageue
eating.
Bugeidwauoo uaum anbiuypal leoans poos se
· Pain causes physiologic changes in the animal. It
aural surgery.
also dlistresses clinicians, nurses, and owners.
· Patient selection, surgical skill, optimal pain relief,
good nursing, and appropriate antibacterial therapy
all contribute to a rapid recovery.
and a shift to a catabolic state. The animal may resent
Surgical intervention results in direct stimulation of
 both movement and handling if pain results3. Appetite
nerve endings and the liberation of inflammatory me-
 is reduced, inefficient metabolic pathways kick in, and
diators from damaged tissue. There are measurable
 a delayed return to good health ensues.
physiologic changes following surgeryl, 2, mediated by
 The consequence of these events is a vicious circle
the neuronal, physiologic, and endocrine changes
of pain, apprehension, and weight loss on the part of
which result in:
the animal and apprehension, concern, and even guilt
· Increased skeletal muscle tone.
on the part of the owner.
· Inhibition of smooth muscle.
There are a number of aims for effective and
· Increased sympathetic tone.
successful postoperative nursing care:
· Minimize pain.
These changes may predispose to metabolic
Prevent postoperative infections and surgical
 acidosis, constipation and urinary retention, increased
complications arising from trauma to the wound.
heart rate, increased blood pressure, increased
Minimize postoperative anorexia and dehydration.
metabolic rate, increased release of catecholamines,
· Ensure a rapid return to the owner.
PeRI- AND POSTOPERaTIVe ANaLGeSIA
Pre-emptive analgesia blocks afferent noxious stimuli
from sensitizing the central nervous system during
OR pethidine (3-5 mg/kg i/m) 10 minutes
surgery and helps to prevent postoperative pain2, 3,4,
preoperatively.
OR methadone (0.1-0.5 mg/kg i/m) 20 minutes
reduces the amount of postoperative analgesic
preoperatively.
required to control pain3. Pre-emptive analgesia even
NB: Butorphanol should be repeated every 60
 negates the benefit of supplementary local anesthetic
minutes during surgery.
application (splash block) around the surgical site?.
 All of these morphine-type agents may be repeated
With these facts in mind, an effective analgesic
postoperatively, if necessary.
protocol for dogs undergoing drainage and suture of
Acepromazine (0.0625-0.125 mg/kg i/m or s/c)
an aural hematoma, lateral wall resection, vertical
 20 minutes preoperatively.
canal ablation, and/or bulla osteotomy would be:
Carprofen (2 mg/kg s/c) postoperatively at 12
·Carprofen (4 mg/kg s/c) 90-120 minutes
hours.
preoperatively.
· Carprofen (2 mg/kg p/o ql2h) for 4-7 days.
· Buprenorphine
(0.01-0.02 mg/kg i/m) 45
minutes preoperatively.
 For feline patients undergoing major otic surgery
OR butorphanol (0.3-0.6 mg/kg i/m) 20 minutes
the same protocol can be used, but generally only two
preoperatively
doses of morphine are required (0.3-0.5 mg/kg), one
OR morphine (0.3-0.6 mg/kg i/m) 20 minutes
dose preoperatively and then one dose either as
preoperatively.
required postoperatively or four hours later.
PERIOPERATIVE ANALGESIA AND MANAGEMENT
259
PERIOPERATIVE SYSTEMIC ANTIbACTERIAL THERAPY
Most otic cases which go forward to surgery will be
 effective against known and potential pathogens.
classified as contaminated or (
dirty8. However,
The most likely pathogens are Stapbylococcus
classifying a procedure as contaminated or dirty is not
intermedius,Escherichia coli,Proteus mirabilis,and
an excuse to forgo normal aseptic surgical procedures,
Pseudomonas aeruginosa. These bacteria are most
i.e. minimizing tissue trauma and eliminating dead
likely to have been exposed to a variety of topical and
space. Nonetheless, some degree 
of
wound
systemic antibacterial agents and they will most
 contamination is likely and this, plus a degree of self-
probably
y express resistance to some of them.
trauma, may result in postoperative problems.
 However, given that most otic surgery is elective there 
Reported studies of postoperative infection rates in
plentyof
opportunity for an up-to-date
dogs following otic surgery cite an incidence of
 bacteriological culture and sensitivity. An appropriate
agent should be chosen and the correct dose
things, on the type of surgery (Table
17.
 administered at least 24 hours before surgery. Deep,
Postoperative infection in cats subjected to aural
shielded samples should be taken during surgery in
 surgery appears much less of a problem18-20.
order to update the bacteriological susceptibility
Rational use of prophylactic antibacterial therapy
 information; if indicated, a different agent can be used
dictates that the antibacterial agent is present in
for postoperative treatment. The antibacterial
appropriate concentrations in the tissues before
 treatment is continued until the wound is healing
Table I 7: Reported rates of postoperative wound dehiscence and postoperative infection in dogs.
Reference
Technique
Number of ears
% postoperative dehiscence
% infection
8
LWR
27
18.5
25.9
VCA
68
19
10
VCA
18
0
0
二
TECA/LBO
6E
7.6
41
12
TECA/LBO
14
0
14.3
13
TECA/LBO
1
0
6.0
14 
TECA/LBO
39
21
88
15
TECA/LBO
46
8.6
23.9
16
TECA/LBO
100
0
LWR = lateral wall resection
VCA = vertical canal ablation 
TECA/LBO = total external canal ablation and lateral bulla osteotomy
260
EAR DISEASES OF THE DOG AND CAT
POSTOPERATIVE DRESSINGSAND WOUND MANAGEMENT
Postoperative wound dehiscence occurs in between
403
1% and 21% of cases subjected to aural surgery
involving the external ear canal ( Table 17). Patient
selection and surgical technique will influence this
figure; however, wound dehiscence is most likely to
reflect postoperative infection and/or self-trauma.
Therefore, nursing as much as surgical skill plays a
part in the degree of complications which may be
experienced.
Animals which have been subjected to bulla
osteotomy should be monitored for respiratory
embarrassment, particularly after bilateral surgery
when pharyngeal swelling may occur23. Postoperative
respiratory distress reflects pharyngeal edema and will
403  A piece of adhesive tape some 48 cm (19 in) long is
require anti-inflammatory medication and, possibly,
affixed to the pinnal margin so that half adheres to the concave
more aggressive intervention.
side and the other half is reflected to adhere to the convex
Dogs which have had major ear surgery should
aspect. The free portion of the tape is folded onto itself.
have their ears dressed after surgery to prevent
inadvertent removal of drains or sutures and trauma
to the wound22. A 2.4-4.8 cm (0.9-1.9 in) piece of
0.8 cm (0.3 in) wide adhesive tape is placed on the
concave surface, such that half the width can be
reflected over onto the convex aspect24. The fold is
 Bandages should be checked twice daily to ensure
continued along the length of the tape, even where it
that they do not become soiled or damp24. Dressings
becomes free of the pinna. T'hese extra lengths are
should be gently freed from wounds on a daily basis
passed over the head to anchor the pinna24.T'he pinna
to allow lavage with 1:40 chlorhexidine2, 23. If
is reflected back over the head, with gauze sponges
postoperative swelling is marked, a hot pack should
between the pinna and the head to prevent
be applied to the area several times daily.
development of moist dermatitis22. A non-adhesive
If a passive or ingress/egress drain is placed, daily
dressing is placed over the incision and the head is 
flushing is necessary until the discharge is minimal14,
bandaged to include the pinna. The free pinna may
poke through a ^window (403-407). This double
effectively, but an ingress/egress drain may be flushed
layer allows the top dressings to be removed to
through with sterile saline, dilute chlorhexidine
facilitate wound cleaning, without having to
(1:40), dilute povidone iodine (1:10), or modified
 rebandage completely on every occasion23.
EDTA-tris21, 23 (Table 18).
Table I8: Formula for EDTA-tris.
I liter distilled water
1.2 g EDTA
6.05 g tris
I ml glacial acetic acid 
adjust pH to 8
PERIOPERATIVE ANALGESIA AND MANAGEMENT
261
404
405
404 The pinna is reflected back over the head. A roll of
406
 bandage or gauze is placed between the pinna and the head.
405
The free ends of the tape are passed around the head,
to secure the pinna.
 406The head is bandaged in such a way that the free pinna
is allowed to 'poke through' The wound remains visible and
this allows dressing changes to be carried out without having
to redress the ear completely.
407
407  A final layer of protective dressing is applied.
262 EAR DISEASES 0F THE D0G AND CAT
POSTOPERATIVE NUTRITIONAL MANAGEMENT
After major surgery, such as total ablation or bulla
attention to intravenous fluid therapy, analgesia, and
osteotomy, the metabolic changes that take place can
 provision of warmth. Preventing postoperative loss of
be summarized as follows:
body heat is important and this becomes more critical
· A relatively short hypometabolic ('shock') phase,
with small dogs and cats as they have minimal
which lasts a few hours to a day or so.
buffering capacity due to a low body mass.
· A hypermetabolic, catabolic phase which can be
Intravenous fluids should be administered until
subdivided into:
normal drinking begins.
A catabolic phase. The hypermetabolism is
T'he subsequent catabolic phase is best met with an
 maximal at around 1l0% of normal following
energy rich, high protein, highly digestible diet.
   g
aweek
Concentrated diets (such as Waltham Veterinary Diet:
postoperatively'. Postoperative inflammation and
 Whiskas or Pedigree Concentrated Instant Diet) are
wound repair is a glucose-dependent, glycolytic
ideal since they provide an essential nutrient source
 process which is relatively inefficient in energy
with minimal volume. An animal which has under-
terms. T'hus, even modest surgery may result in
 gone aural surgery might find eating painful, and thus
a considerable glucose drain'. T'here may also be
the minimal volume of concentrated diets is helpful.
considerable protein catabolism and, if anorexia
 Furthermore, the small volume and high digestibility
is prolonged, there may be postoperative weight
of these diets reduces the risk of vomiting and
loss as skeletal muscle and fat is broken down to
diarrhea.
 provide for increased requirements at the site of
Careful nursing and effective analgesia are usually
surgery.
sufficient to return an animal to good health within a
- An anabolic convalescent phase characterized by
few days of surgery. Chemical stimulation of appetite
a return of metabolism, weight, and lifestyle to
should not be needed in most cases, although some
normal.
cats may prove difficult to tempt back to eating.
Intravenous diazepam (l-2 mg total dose) may be
T'he initial hypometabolic phase is not generally
sufficient to initiate voluntary intake in cats, and this
regarded
1as being
amenable
to
nutritional
is then sustained'.
 management, but its duration may be minimized with
REFERENCES
IButterwick RF and Torrance A(l995) Nutrition and
pethidine in dogs. Veterinory Record 134, 187-191
malnutrition in the hospitalised small animal. Waitham Focus
7Buback JL, Boothe HW, Carroll GL and Green RW (1996)
5, 15-21
Comparison of three methods for relief of pain after ear canal
2  Lascelles BDX Cripps PJ, Jones A and Waterman-Pearson AE
ablation in dogs. Veterinary Surgery 25, 380-385.
(1997) Postoperative central hypersensitivity and pain: the
8 Fossum TW (1997) Surgical infection and antibiotic selection.
pre-emptive value of pethidine for ovariohysterectomy. Pain
In Small Animat Surgery. (ed TW Fossum) Mosby St Louis pp.
73, 461-471
57-63.
3 Brock N {1995) Treating moderate and severe pain in small
9 Gregory CR and Vasseur PB (1983) Clinical results of lateral
animals. Conadion Veterinory Journol 36, 658-660.
ear resection in dogs. Jourmal of the Arerican Veterinary Medicol
 4 Lascelles BDX Crips PJ, Jones A and Waterman-Pearson AE
Associotion 182, 1087-1090.
(1998) Efficacy and kinetics of carprofen, given pre-or
   (6el  o    01
resection for end-stage otitis externa in dogs. journol of the
Ovariohysterectomy. Veterinary Surgery 27, 568-582
Armerican Animol Hospital Associotion 28, 546-552
5 Welsh EM, Nolan AM and Reid J (1997) Beneficial effects of
II Tirgari M and Pinniger RS (1986) Pull-through technique for
administering carprofen before surgery on dogs. Veterinory
vertical canal ablation for treatment of otitis externa in dogs
Record 141, 251-253.
and cats. Journol of Small Animol Proctice 27, 123-1 31
6 Lascelles BDX, Butterworth SJ and Waterman AE (1994)
 Postoperative analgesic and sedative effects of carprofen and
dinical results in the dog and cat Véterinory Surgery I5, 161-170.
PERIOPERATIVE ANALGESIA AND MANAGEMENT
263
I3 Sharp NJH {1990) Chronic otitis externa and otitis media
I9 Trevor PB and Martin RA (1 993) Tympanic bulla osteotomy
 treated by total ear canal ablation and ventral bulla osteotomy
for treatment of middle-ear disease in cats: 19 cases
in thirteen dogs. Veterinary Surgery I9, 162-166.
{1984-1991). Journol of the Americon Veterinory Medicol
I4 Beckman SL, Henry WB and Cechner P {1990) Total ear
Associotion 202, 123-128.
 canal ablation combining bulla osteotomy and curretage in
 20 Pope ER (1995) Feline inflammatory polyps. Seminars in
dogs with chronic otitis externa and media. journal of the
Veterinory Medicine ond Surgery I0, 87-93.
Armerican Veterinory Medical Association I96, 84-90.
 2Il Fossum TV (1997) Surgery of the ear: In Smoll Animol Surgery.
I5 Mason LK, Harvey CE and Orsher RJ (1988) Total ear canal 
8 I-esI dd sino7 is Xqso (unsso M1 pa))
ablation combined with lateral bulla osteotomy for end-stage
otitis in dogs: results in 30 dogs. Veterinory Surgery I7,
ablation with lateral bulla osteotomy for the management of
263-268.
end-stage otitis in dogs. Compendium on Continuing Educotion
I6 Matthiesen DT and Scavelli T (1990) Total ear canal ablation
17, 157-164.
and lateral bulla osteotomy in 38 dogs. Journol of the Americon
23 Smeak DD and Kerpsack S) (1993) Total ear canal ablation
Anial Hospitol Associotion 26, 257-267
and lateral bulla osteotomy for management of end-stage
17 White RAS and Pomeroy C) (1990) Total ear canal ablation
otitis. Seminars in Veterinary Medicine ond Surgery 8, 30-4 1
and lateral bulla osteotomy (TECA/LBO) in the dog:
24 Swaim SF and Henderson RA (1 990) Wounds of the head
indications, complications, and long-term results in 100
In Small Animal Wound Monogement. (eds SF Swaim and RA
 procedures. Veterinary Surgery I9, 81
Henderson) Williams and VWilkins, Baltimore, pp. 19 I-233.
I8 Ader PL and Boothe HW (1 979) Ventral bulla osteotomy in
the cat. Journal of the American Animol Hospitol Associotion I5,
757-762.
264
Index
A
apocrine glands 23-4
acantholysis 54, 55
adenocarcinoma 108
acaricides 88,90,92-3
adenoma 106-7
acepromazine 44,258
in breeds predisposed to otitis externa 82
acetic acid 171,173,181,223,224
hyperplasia 84-5
acoustic decay test 75
Aspergillus spp.36,38,92
acoustic reflex test 75
ataxia 197,198-9
actinic dermatitis 132
atipamezole 90
acute otitis externa l66-70
atopy 37,111-13,141,168, 176-7
 investigations 168-70
and aural hematoma 227
management 170
in cats 182
presentation 166-8
atresia, aural 158
age
auditory tube 16-17, 30
hearing loss 74, 206
aural hematoma 125, 166-7
predisposition to otitis externa 163
clinical features 227-8
Airedale 44
pathogenesis 227
Akita 200
postsurgical problems 229
Alaskan 136
surgical management 228-31
albino cat 197
underlying causes 226-7
allergic contact dermatitis 112-13, 141, 164, 18l,217
aural lavage 181, 220-4
in cats 183
at home 224
aopecia 130,131,137,164
benefits 220
ectoparasitic disease 125-9
ceruminolytics 214-15, 216, 221
symmetrical pinnal 143-4
cleaning process 222
Amblyommnamericanum138
depilatories 221-2
American Cocker Spaniel 134
drying agents 223
American dog tick 138
irrigating solutions 222-3
aminoglycosides
auricular cartilage 12,21
allergic contact dermatitis 112-13, 18l, 217
autoimmune disease 116-17, 131-2,227
ototoxicity 74,216,218
autonomic nervous system 186
 systemic absorption 217
 avascular necrosis, pinna 13
amitraz 90,93
analgesia 258
B
anisocoria 190,194
bacteria
annular cartilage 14, 21
cytologic evaluation 54-6
anthelix 12,13
effects of treatment 38
 antibacterial agents 38, 173
gram-negative 114, 115,166, 167,171-3
ototoxicity 74,216
normal ear flora 35-6
perioperative 259
otitis externa 37-8
resistance to 181
otitis media 148
systemic effects 217
BAER see brainstem auditory evoked response
antimicrobial agents 38,92
BAHA see bone-anchored hearing aid
irnigation 218, 223
balance
toxicity 214,216
assessment 60
antitragus 12
loss of 197
INDEX
265
baldness, pattern 144
cat(continned)
bandaging 260-1
malassezial infection 182
basal cell tumor 104
polyps 96-9, 182-3
basilar membrane 18, 19
scabies 126
Basset Hound 114,130,134,174,194
tympanic cavity 16,17,184
Beagle 200
ventral bulla osteotomy 253, 255
Belgian Sheepdog 197
white haired 102,163,197,204
benzalkonium chloride 214
seenisonamedbreeds
benzoic acid 223
Cavalier King Charles Spaniel 206
 benzyl peroxide 181
central vestibular disease 152, 199, 200
betamethasone 38
 central vestibular system 196
biopsy 77, 165
cephalosporin 152
black fly 128
cerumen24,34
 blepharospasm 194
cytology 50-2,165
bone-anchored hearing aid (BAHA) 188
abnormal 24,34, 54,179-80
bony labyrinth 18-19
normal 34, 53
Boxer 101,104,138,140,189
in otodectic mite infestation 48, 50-1
brachial plexus neuritis 189
ceruminolytic agents 214-15, 216, 221
brainstem auditory evoked response ( BAER) 60,
ceruminous glands see apocrine glands
72-4
cervical spondylomyelopathy 194
brainstem lesions 74, 152, 200
cetrimide 216
Branhamella spp. 148
chemical depilatories 221-2
breeds
chlorhexidine 130,152,218,223
congenital peripheral vestibular disease 200-1
toxicity 214,216
congenital sensorineural deafness 204-6
chlorpyriphos 90
 pinnal shape and hair 10-12
cholesteatoma 28, 30, 148, 215
predisposed to otitis exterma 24, 37, 82-3, 162-3,
chronic otitis externa 26-7
171, 174
history and signalment 174
brown dog tick 138
management 180-1
bulla osteotomy 152
otic examination 178-80
lateral 152,188,236,253
pathologic changes 84-5
postoperative fistulation 158-9
physical examination 174-7
postoperative infection 259
ciprofloxacin 173
ventral 98,152,188,253-5
cisplatin 216
Bulldogs 140
cleansing se aural lavage
 buprenorphine 258
cleansing agents 173, 181,221-2,224
Burmese cat 200
adverse effects 214-16
butorphanol 258
climate 118
closed-suction drainage 230-1
c
Clumber Spaniel 189
calcium sulfosuccinate 221
coat color 190, 204-6
caloric test 197
cochlea
Candida aibicans36
anatomy 18,19
Candida spp.36
damage from medication 214, 215
canine cutaneous histiocytoma 10l,138-9
cochlear duct 18, 19
canine idiopathic vestibular syndrome 202
cochlear nerve 185
carbamates 92
Cocker Spaniel 189, 200
carbamide peroxide 181,221
ear canal anatomy and microstructure 22, 23, 24, 83,
carbenicillin 173
168,174
carpal pad 177
ear canal microflora 37, 171
carprofen 258
keratinization defects 1l4-15, 134
cat
neoplasia 100-1, 138-9
chronic/recurrent otitis externa 182-3
pinna 11,13
dietary intolerance 183
cold agglutinin disease 132
ectoparasites 92-3, 124-7,182-3
coliforms 35,37,38
hypersensitivity 182
Collie breeds 90,92,93,205
longhaired 189
color dilute alopecia 144
266
INDEX
comedones 176
dietary intolerance in cats 183
computed tomography (CT) 70
diethanolamine fusidate 38
concha
DiffQuik stain 51, 179
neoplasia 106-10
dhydrostreptomycin 216
normal anatomy 12
dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate 18l, 221
conductive hearing loss 72-5, 187-8, 206
Dirofilarin immitis92
 congenital sensorineural deafness 204-6
discharge 46-7, 164
congenital vestibular disease 200-1
abnormal 54-7,168, 170, 179-80
Coonhound paralysis 189
cytology 50-2,165
corpus adiposum auricula 12
normal 50-3
Corti, organ of 18, 205
prior to pruritis 168
Corynebacteria spp.35,37,38
Doberman Pinscher 134,144,194, 200,206
cotton buds 222
dorsoventral radiographs 64-5
cranial nerve VII see facial nerve
drug eruptions 143
cranial nerve VIII see vestibulo-cochlear nerve
drying agents 223
 cista ampullaris 20
ductus reuniens 20
cryofibrinogenemia 132-3
cryoglobulinemia 132-3
E
cryptococcosis 110
ectoparasites
Cryptococcus spp. 36
in cats 182-3
CT see computed tomography
cytologic examination 56, 57
cupula 20
external ear canal 86-91
cytologic examination 50-7, 165
pinna 124-9, 138-9
abnormal 54-7, 168, 170, 179-80
ectoparasitic agents 90, 92-3
normal 50-3
 EDTA-tris see ethylene-diamine tetra-acetic acid
sampling/staining 51,52, 165
(EDTA)-tris
Elizabethan collar 238
D
endocrinopathies 13, 116, 143, 168
Dachshund 134-5,144,205
English Bulldog l0l, 138
Dalmatian 204,205,207
English Setter 189
DAMNIT mnemonic 200
enilconazole 137
dapple gene 205
enophthalmos 190,194
Dappled Dachshund 205
enrofloxacin 173
deafness
environmental conditions 118
after total ear ablation 253
environmental dermatoses 132
conductive 187-8
cosinophilic granuloma 110
diagnosis 60,72-5,206-7
epidermal hyperplasia 25-7, 84, 176-80
prognosis and management 207
epidermis 21-2
sensorineural 202-7
epitympanic cavity 16
Demacentor spp. 90
Escherichin coli 148,259
Demodex canis 90
ethylene-diamine tetra-acetic acid (EDTA)-tris 173, 260
Demodex gatoi90
eustachian tube see auditory tube
demodicosis 128
Eutrombicula alfredugesi 90,128
clinical signs 90-1
external ear canal
treatment92-3
anatomy 14
depilatories 221-2
biopsy 77,165
Dermncentor variablis138
changes in chronic otitis externa 84-5
dermal fbrosis 84-5
ectoparasites 56-7, 86-91
Dermatophagoidesfarinae86
gross examination 164, 168
dermatophytosis 137
hair growth in 22-3,24, 83, 168
dermis 21,84-5
inflammation 25-7,46-7,54, 55
detomidine 44
innervation 58
dexamethasone 90, 230
medication side-effects 214-15
diazepam 262
microenvironment 32-3, 118
dichlorvos 90
microflora 35-8
diet, postoperative 262
microstructure 21-7
detary intolerance 112, 136, 168
neoplasia 106-10
INDEX
267
external ear canal ( continned)
gram-negative otitis externa ( continued)
ossification 66-7,164, 244
medical management 173
otoscopic examination 44-9, 165, 169, 178
granulomatous lesions 1l0, 139,140
polyps 48-9,96-9, 182-3,201
 granulomatous meningoencephalomyelitis 189
radiographic examination 66-7
grass awns 49, 94-5
surgery see surgical resection/ablation
great auricular artery 13
eye, sympathetic innervation 186-7
Great Schnauzer 44
Greyhound 101
F
griseofulvin 137
facial canal 184-5
grommet 77
facial nerve 14, 60, 184-6
facial nerve paralysis 149, 152, 188-90
H
clinical signs 187, 188-9, 199
hair
differential diagnosis 189-90
as foreign body 94-5
investigation 190
growth in ear canal 22-3,24,83, 168
neuroanatomic localization 189
on pinna 13
treatment 190
hair cells 18, 20
feline idiopathic vestibular syndrome 201-2
Harlequin Great Dane 205
feline poxvirus 137
harvest mites 90, 91, 128-9
fenitrothion 90
treatment 90, 92-3
fibrosarcoma 104, 189
Haw's syndrome 194
fipronil 90, 93
head bandaging 260-1
fuoroquinolone 152,173
head shaking 149,227
fy bite dermatitis 128-9
head tilt 149, 199
follicular dysplasia 144
hearing
food allergy 136, 183
acuity 16
foreign bodies 48-9, 94-5, 166
assessment 60,72-5
Foxhound 206
physiology of 202-3
framycetin 38
see aiso deafness
frostbite 132
hearing aids 188, 207
ficidin 38
heartworm 92
fundic cavity see ventral cavity
hematoma see aural hematoma
fungi
hemifacial spasm 189
normal external ear 36
hexamethyltetracosane 221
otitis externa 37-8
Himalayan cat 84
seeaiso namedorganisms
histiocytoma, canine cutaneous 10l, 138-9
fungicidal agents 38, 92
horizontal ear canal 14
furosemide 216
bacterial flora 36
innervation 58
G
otoscopy 44-5,170
genetic counselling 207
Horner's syndrome 96, 149, 152, 190-5
gentamycin 216,217
clinical signs 190, 191
German Shepherd Dog 1l, 94, 173, 174, 200
dagnosis 195
German Shorthaired Pointer 136
differential diagnosis 194-5
glucocorticoids 132,137,152
following bulla osteotomy 254, 255
for aural hematoma 230
neuroanatomic localization 190-3
postoperative 238,251
pharmacologic localization 193, 195
side-effects 214, 217
prognosis 195
topical 90,170,180
‘hot spot' 166-7
glycolate salts 221
house mite 86
goblet cells 30
hydroactive dressings 231
Golden Retriever 94, 194
hyperkeratoses 134-6, 142
 gonadal hormone changes 1l6-17
hypermetabolism 262
gram staining 52
hyperpigmentation 144, 174-5, 177
gram-negative otitis externa 114, 115, 166, 167
hyperplasia 25-7,84, 176-80
diagnosis 172
hypersensitivity 111-13,141, 176-7
history and clinical signs 171-2
and aural hematoma 227
268
 INDEX
hypersensitivity (continned)
lateral oblique radiographs 62-3, 69, 151
in cats 182
lateral radiographs 64-5, 68
dietary 112,136,168,183
lateral wall resection
management 180
effect on ear microclimate 34
hyperthyroidism 143
filure 112-13,239
hypometabolism 262
indications 235
hypothyroid neuropathy 189
postoperative care 238-9
hypothyroidism 142,143, 189,201
postoperative infection 259
surgical procedure 236-8
leishmaniasis 130
idiopathic benign lichenoid keratosis 134
levator muscle 16
imipenem 173
levothyroxine 201
immune-mediated disease 116-17, 13l-2,227
lice 93,127,164
impedance audiometry 75, 150
lichenoid keratosis, idiopathic benign 134
incus l6
lichenoid psoriasiform dermatosis 136
infectious diseases 130, 206
lime sulfur 90
inner ear
Linognathus setus,treatment 92-3
imaging 70-1
lone star tick 138
normal anatomy 18-20
longhaired breeds 22-3,24,82,163,189
ototoxicity 215
loop diuretics 215,218
se also vestibular disease
lubricants 221
insect bite dermatitis 128-9
 lupoid dermatosis 136
insulinoma 189
interdigitae 176
M
intervertebral disk protrusion 194
macula sacculi 20
inis color 205
macula utriculi 20
irrigating solutions 218, 222-3
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 71
irrigation 223
Malassezia pachydermatis176
irritant contact dermatitis 112-13, 164, 217
in cats 182
ivermectin 90,92-3
cytologic evaluation 56, 57
Ixodes ricinus138
normal ear 35, 36
ixodic ticks 90, 138
otitis externa 37-8, 116
pinnal dermatitis 130
J
treatment 38,92
 jugular foramen 185
Malassezin sympodialis 36, 182
malathion 90
K
malic acid 223
keratinization defects
malleus 15,16,46
affecting pinna 134-6, 142
malleus:incus ratio 16
otitis externa associated with 46, 114-16, 181
malodor 164
keratoconjunctivitis sicca 149, 188, 254
manubrium of the malleus 15, 16, 46
keratolytic agents 181
marbofloxacin 173
Kerry Blue Terrier 100, 138
mast cell tumor 104-5, 140
ketamine 44
medication
ketoconazole 130, 137
ototoxicity 74,92-3,214-18
kinocilium 20
sensitivity to 164, 181, 214-15
melanin pigmentation 205-6
L
membranous labyrinth 19-20
Labrador Retriever 134-5, 174, 200
 meningoencephalomyelitis 189, 194
lactic acid 224
merle gene 205
lamina propria 28,29
metabolic disease 142, 143, 189, 201
lateral bulla osteotomy 152, 188
methadone 258
indications 236,253
miconazole 38, 130
postoperative infection 259
microbial culture and sensitivity testing 50, 165, 170
 as separate procedure 253
Micrococcus spp.35, 37,38
 surgical technique 253
microorganisms
with total ear canal ablation 246-53
antimicrobial resistance 181
INDEX
269
microorganisms (continned)
nipples, greasy scale 176
effects of antimicrobial agents 38
noise-induced hearing loss 206
normal ear flora 35-6
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) 238,
in otitis externa 37-8
251
midazolam 44
Notoedres cati 126-7
middle ear
treatment 92-3
anatomy 15-17,184-5
NSAIDs see non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
effects of otic medication 215
nutrition, postoperative 262
gas in 15
nutritional dermatoses 136
imaging 61-5,68-9,70-1
nystagmus 197-8, 199, 200
 inflammatory reactions 30, 31
nystatin 38
neoplasia110
neuroanatomy 184-5
middle ear cavity 16, 17, 184
open mouth radiographs 62-3, 68
middle ear disease
ophthalmic nerve 186
in cats 255
organ of Corti 18,205
causes 186
organophosphates 91
conductive deafness 187-8
onientation 18
facial nerve paralysis 187, 188-9
ossicles 15,16
Horner's syndrome 190-5
damage to 188
see aiso otitis media
osteomyelitis 6l, 152
middle ear effusion 76-7
otitis externa
Miniature Dachshund 134-5, 144
and aural hematoma 226
Miniature Poodle 37,94, 163
in cats 84,163,182-3
Miniature Schnauzer 44
diagnostic approach 162-5
niosis 190, 191, 194
ectoparasitic causes 86-91, 162
monosulfiram 38, 92
gram-negative infection 114-15, 166, 167, 171-3
morphine 258
hearing loss 74
mosquito bites 128
history taking 163-4, 169
 MRI see magnetic resonance imaging
nicrobial changes 37-8
myringotomy 76-7
otic examination 164-5
perpetuating factors 162
N
physical examination 164
nausea 198,199
predisposition to 24,37,82,83,162-3,171,174
needle aspiration 76
progression of 82-3
neomycin 38
radiographic changes 61, 66-7
allergic contact dermatitis 112-13, 18l, 217
underlying disease 11l-17, 163
ototoxicity 74,216,218
and weather 118
neoplasia 100-10
see niso acute otitis externa; chronic otitis externa
biopsy 77,165
otitis interna 150, 153-4
in cats 182-3
otitis media 28, 30, 31, 148-52
causing facial nerve paralysis 189
auditory tube dysfunction 17
causing Horner's syndrome 194
clinical signs 149-50
causing para-aural sinus 158
diagnosis 150-1
causing peripheral vestibular disease 201
differential diagnoses 150
concha 106-10
etiology 148
imaging 70
hearing loss 74
middle ear 61, 110
magnetic resonance imaging 71
pinna 100-5,132-3,138-40
management 152, 181
see also polyps
prognosis 152
Neotrombicuiaantumnalis90,9l,128-9
radiographic changes 6l, 68-9
control/treatment 90, 92-3
Otobius megnini 90,162
neuroepithelium 20
Otodectes cynotis 86-9, 162, 163
neurologic examination 58-60
and aural hematoma 226
neuropathy
in cats 163, 168, 182-3
hypothyroid 189
clinical features 48, 86-9
postsurgical 252
diagnosis of infestation 56-7, 88
270
 INDEX
Otodectes cynotis(continned)
pinna (continned)
lifecycle and transmission 86
neoplasia 100-5, 138-40
prevalence 86
snsory and motor function 58-60
treatment 88, 92-3
symmetrical alopecia 143-4
otolithic membrane 20
trauma see pinnal trauma
otoliths 20
pinnal reflex 60
otoscopy 44-9, 165
pinnal scratch reflex 60, 124, 164
abnormal ear 46-9, 169-70, 178-80
pinnal trauma124,125,149,226-7
normal ear 44-6
surgical repair 232,260-1
otitis media 150
wound dressings 231
sedation 44
pituitary tumor 189
ototoxicity 74,202,206,214,215-16
Pointer 194
agents causing 216
polychondritis 164
minimization 217-18
polymixin 38
oval window 18
polypharmaceutical preparations 181, 182, 215
polyps 48,49,96-9,182-3,201
P
clinical features 96
 pain control see analgesia
diagnosis 96-8
palpebral fissure 188, 189, 190, 191
management 98,253-5
papilloma 100-1, 138-9
pathologic features 98, 99
para-aural abscessation 158-9, 252, 253
polyradiculoneuritis 189
 parachlorometaxylenol 224
Poodle 37,94, 163
paradoxical vestibular syndrome 200
 postganglionic neuron 186
 parotid salivary gland 14
posture 197
pars flaccida 15,28
povidone-iodine 216, 223
pars tensa 15,28
prednisolone 38,152,238
pattern baldness 144
oral 132,230
pedicle flap 232
postsurgical 251
pediculosis 93,127,164
 preganglionic neuron 186
 pemphigus erythematosus 131
presbycusis 74, 204, 206
pemphigus foliaceus 54, 55, 116-17, 131
Preyer's reflex 60, 207
pendulous ears 83
promontory 16, 17
Penicillium spp.36, 38
proprioceptive deficits 199,200
Penrose drain 230
propylene glycol 216, 223,224
pentoxyphyline 132
ototoxicity 216
 peripheral hyperkeratosis 134-5
snsitivity to 112,181,214,215
 peripheral nerve sheath tumors 201
Proteus mirabilis 259
 peripheral receptors 196
Proteus spp. 35,37-8, 148, 173,259
 peripheral vestibular disease 149
Prothoteca zopfi 206
causes 200-2
pruritus
localization 198-9
mite infestation 86
peripheral vestibular system 18-20, 196
prior to discharge 166, 168
Persian cat 11, 84, 116-17,134, 163
steroid-resistant 126, 136
pethidine 258
Pseudomonasneruginosn173,223,259
 petrosal temporal bone 68
Psewdomonas spp.35,37-8,148,171-3,223
pH, external ear canal 32, 181
ptosis 190
piebald gene 205
pupil
pinna
in Horner's syndrome 190, 191
anatomy 10-13
innervation 186-7
blood supply 13
 pyogenic granuloma 110
 concave aspect dermatoses 141-2
 pyogranulomatous meningoencephalomyelitis 194
crusting and scaling dermatoses 124-36
pyotraumatic dermatitis 166-7
eCtoparasites 124-9, 138-9
Pyrenean Mountain Dog 205
focal lesions of dorsum 137
pyrethrin 90,92
granulomatous lesions 138, 139, 140
pyrethroids 92
hematoma see aural hematoma
necrosis 13,252
INDEX
271
Q
Shar Pei 162, 163
quaternary ammonium compounds 216
Shetland Sheepdog 205
Shropshire Terrier 206
R
Siamese cat 104, 190, 197,200
rabbit flea 128-9
silver sufadiazine 173
radiography 61-9, 150, 165
Simwlium spp.128
dorsoventral view 64-5
skull 10
external ear canal 66-7
 SLE see systemic lupus erythematosus
lateral oblique views 62-3, 69, 151
sodium docusate 224
lateral views 64-5, 68
Spaniels 94,see aiso individual breeds
normal features 62-5
Spilopsyllus cunicuii93,128-9
otitis externa diagnosis 6l, 66-7
spinal cord lesions 194
otitis media diagnosis 6l, 68-9
spiral ganglion cells 205
rostrocaudal (open mouth) view 62-3, 68
Spreull needle 220
ventrodorsal view 64-5,68
Springer Spaniel 134, 136, 163
rainfall 118
sqalene 221
Reissner membrane 205
 squamous cell carcinoma
relative humidity 32,118
concha 108-9
retinoids 134
pinna 102,132
Rhipicephalussanguinus138
tympanic bulla 189
Rhizopus spp.36,38
stable flies 128-9
Rhodesian Ridgeback 104
Staffordshire Bull Terrier 144
road traffic accidents 194
stains 51,52,165
rostrocaudal (open mouth) radiographs 62-3, 68
stapedial reflex test 75
rotenone 92
stapedius muscle 17
round window 16, 17
stapes 16
 round window membrane 31, 215
staphylococci 36-8,54,55
Stapiylococcus intermedius37,148,259
s
statoconia 20
saccule 19, 20
sterocilia 18,20
salicylates 215, 216
steroid-resistant pruritus 126, 136
salicylic acid 223, 224
Stomoxys calcitrans 128-9
Sarcoptes scabiei 124
strabismus 197-8, 199
scabies
Streptococcus spp. 35, 37-8,148
symptoms 124-7,164
stria vascularis 18,19,205
treatment 92-3
stylomastoid foramen 14, 184-5
scala tympani 18,19
sulfur 92
scala vestibuli 18, 19
surgical resection/ablation
scapha 12
bulla osteotomy 98, 152,158, 188,253-5
Scottish Terrier 10l, 138
indications 235-6
scutiform cartilage 12
lateral wall resection 34,112-13, 235-9
sebaceous adenitis 134-5
perioperative analgesia 258
sebaceous glands 23
 perioperative antibacterial therapy 259
scondary tumors 201
physiologic changes following 258
sdation 44
postoperative nutrition 262
selamectin 93
presurgical assessment 234-5
slective breeding 10-12
total ear canal ablation 158, 246-53
self-trauma 166,168,182-3
vertical canal ablation 240-5
semicircular canals 18-20
wound management 260-1
snsorineural deafness 202-7
swimming 166-7
acquired late onset 206
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) 131-2
congenital 204-6
diagnosis and evaluation 72-5, 203, 206-7
T
 prognosis and management 207
tapetal reflex 190, 191
Sertoli cell tumor 117, 142, 175
tectorial membrane 18, 19, 205
sx hormone aberrations 142
temperature 32,118
shampoos 130,134, 181
tensor palatini muscle 16
272
 INDEX
tensor tympani muscle 16, 60
V
thiabendazole 90, 92
vasculitis 132
thioglycolates 221-2
ventral bulla osteotomy 152, 188
third eyelid,protrusion 190, 191, 194
in cats 255
thunderstorms 118
indications 253
thyroid disease 142, 143, 189,201
for polyps 98
thyroid function tests 143,201
surgical procedure 253-4
thyroxin 201
ventral cavity 16, 17
Tibetan Terrier 200
ventrodorsal radiographs 64-5, 68
ticarcillin 173
vertical ear canal
ticks 90,92-3, 138-9
gross examination 164, 168
total ear canal ablation
normal anatomy 14
indications 236
otoscopic examination 44, 169
postsurgical care 251
vertical ear canal ablation 1l2-13, 240-5
postsurgical problems 158, 252-3, 259
indications 235-6
surgical procedure 246-50
ossification of ear canal 244
Toxopiasma gondii194
postoperative infection 259
tragus 12,13
postsurgical problems 244-5, 259
 transtympanic ventilation tube 77
surgical procedure 240-4, 245
rauma
vestibular aqueduct 18
 causing facial nerve paralysis 190
vestibular disease 196-207
causing Horner's syndrome 194
causes 200-2,214,215
 peripheral vestibular system 202
localization 198-200
pinna 124,226-7,231-2
signs 197-8, 199
see aiso self-trauma
vestibular membrane 18, 19
Trichodectes canis 127
vestibular nuclei 196
tiethanolamine polypeptide oleate condensate 221
vestibular system 18-20, 196
tigeminal nerve 14, 60
vestibular window 16
tigeminal neuritis 194
vestibule 18, 215
trombiculidiasis see harvest mites
vestibulo-cochlear nerve 196
tromethamine 173
vitamin A 134
tympanic bullae
vomiting 198
in cats 255
changes in otitis media 68-9
M
neoplasia 189
weather 118
radiography 62-5
Welsh Corgi 189
tympanic cavity 16, 17,184
West Highland White Terrier 114, 116, 130, 134, 174
98 sanssy doso-oud
wet eczema 166-7
tympanometry 75,150
white haired cats 102, 163, 197,204
tympanum
wound dehiscence 259, 260
assessing integrity of 75, 150, 170, 220
wound dressings 231, 260-1
effects of otic medication 2l4-15
microscopic structure 28-9
X
 normal appearance 15, 44-6
xylazine 44
radiographic examination 66-7
reaction to insult 28, 29
Y
rupture 28,48-9,94-5, 151
yeasts
see also myringotomy
cytologic evaluation 56-7
Tzank test 54, 55
in normal ear 35, 36
treatment 38,92
U
susuobto pauuu ospu ss
ulceration
yohimbine 90
biopsy 77
Yorkshire Terrier 144, 163
external ear canal 48, 166-7
young animals 162
pinna 164, 166-7
ultraviolet radiation 132
z
utriculus 19,20
Zepp resection 26,82,235
zinc deficiency 136, 164