LARRY P.TILLEY
FRANCIS W.K.SMITHJR
MARKA.OYAMA
MEG M.SLEEPER
Manualof
CANINEANDFELINE
CARDIOLOGY
FOURTH EDITION
SALNDERS
小尾巴物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.com
SAUNDERS
FI.SFVIFR
11830 Westline lndustrial Drive
St. Louis, Missouri 63146
MANUAL OF CANINE AND FELINE CARDIOLOGY
ISBN: 978-1-4160-2398-2
FOURTH EDITION
Copyright @ 2008 by Saunders, an imprint of Elsevier Inc.
without permission in writing from the publisher. Permissions may be sought directly from Elsevier's Rights 
Department: phone: (+1) 215 239 3804 (US) or (+44) 1865 843830 (UK); fax: (+44) 1865 853333; e-mail:
http://www.elsevier.com/permissions.
Notice
Knowledge and best practice in this field are constantly changing. As new research and experience broaden
our knowledge, changes in practice, treatment and drug therapy may become necessary or appropriate.
Readers are advised to check the most current information provided (i) on procedures featured or (i) by the 
and duration of administration, and contraindications. It is the responsibility of the practitioner, relying on
their own experience and knowledge of the patient, to make diagnoses, to determine dosages and the best 
treatment for each individual patient, and to take all appropriate safety prec autions. To the fullest extent of
property arising out of or related to any use of the material contained in this book.
The Publisher
Previous editions copyrighted 2001, 1995, 1985.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2007928036
Vice President and Pubtisher: Linda Duncan
Senior Acquisitions Editor: Anthony Winkel
Devetopmentat Editor: Shelly Stringer
Pubtishing Services Manager: Pat Joiner-Myers
Senior Project Manager: Gena Magouirk
Design Direction: Karen O'Keefe Owens
Working together to grow
libraries in developing countries
www.elsevier.com |www.bookaid.org | www.sabre.org
Printed in Canada
ELSLVILR
BOOK AID
Sabre Foundation
Last digit is the print number:987654321
oternatioual
To my wife, Jeri, my son, Kyle, mother, Dorothy
 In honor of that secret correspondence and love within our hearts
Larry P. Tilley
To the ever-popular Ben Smith and his charming sister Jade,
thanks for keeping life fun. You are the best! To my wife May.
who warms my heart every day, thanks for always being there.
Francis W. K. Smith, Jr.
 To my parents, who made this all possible.
To Emi, K.A., Miya, and Audrey, who keep the kid in me alive.
MarkA.Oyama
To Dave, whose support enables my dreams; and my father, who inspired them.
MegM.Sleeper
Contributors
Jonathan A. Abbott, DVM, DACVIM
Kathleen E. Cavanagh, BSc, DVM
(Cardiology)
Haskell Valley Veterinary Hospital
Associate Professor
Orleans, New York;
 Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences
 Niagara Veterinary Emergency Clinic
Virginia-Maryland Regional College of Veterinary
St. Catharines, Ontario, Canada
Medicine
Appendix I: Canine Breed Predilections for Heart
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
Disease
Blacksburg, Virginia
Acquired Valvutar Disease
Steven G. Cole, DVm, DACVECC, DACVIM
(Cardiology)
Janice Mclntosh Bright, BSN, MS, DVM,
Section of Critical Care
DACVIM (Cardiology and Internal
 Department of Clinical Studies - Philadelphia
Medicine)
School of Veterinary Medicine
 Professor of Cardiology
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
 Department of Clinical Sciences
Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation
College of Veterinary Medicine and
Emergency Management and Critical Care
Biomedical Sciences
Colorado State University
Thomas K. Day, DVM, MS, DACVA,
Fort Collins, Colorado
Pacemaker Therapy
DACVECC
 Owner, Emergency and Critical Care Veterinarian,
Scott A. Brown, VMD, PhD, DACVIM
Anesthesiologist
Louisville Veterinary Specialty and Emergency Services
(lnternal Medicine)
Louisville, Kentucky
 Josiah Meigs Distinguished Professor
Anesthesia of the Cardiac Patient
Associate Dean for Academic Affairs
 Department of Physiology and Pharmacology
University of Georgia
Kenneth J. Drobatz, DVM, MSCE, DACVIM
 College of Veterinary Medicine
(lnternal Medicine), DACVECC
Athens, Georgia
 Professor, Section of Critical Care 
Systemic Hypertension
Department of Clinical Studies - Philadelphia
School of Veterinary Medicine
Clay A. Calvert, DVM, DACVIM
University of Pennsyl vania;
(Internal Medicine)
Director, Emergency Service
Professor
Ryan Veterinary Hospital of the University of
 Small Animal Medicine and Surgery
 Pennsylvania
 Philadelphia, Penns ylvania
College of Veterinary Medicine
The University of Georgia
Cardioputmonary Resuscitation
Athens, Georgia
Emergency Management and Critical Care
Heartworm Disease
vii
vili
Contributors
Virginia Luis Fuentes, MA, VETMB, PhD,
Marc S. Kraus, DVM, DACVIM
CertVR, DVC, DACVIM (Cardiology),
(Cardiology and Internal Medicine)
DECVIM-CA (Cardiology), MRCVS
Lecturer
Senior Lecturer in Small Animal Medicine
 Department of Clinical Sciences
Veterinary Clinical Sciences
College of Veterinary Medicine
Royal Veterinary College
Cornell University
Hatfeld, United Kingdom
Ithaca, New York
Echocardiography and Doppler Utrasound
Treatment of Cardiac Arrhythmias and Conduction
Disturbances
Anna R. M. Gelzer, Dr.med.vet., DACVIM
(Cardiology)
Elizabeth A. McNiel, DVM, PhD,
Assistant Professor
DACVIM (Oncology), ACVR
 Department of Clinical Sciences
(Radiation Oncology)
College of Veterinary Medicine
Assistant Professor
Cornell University
 Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences
Ithaca, New York
College of Veterinary Medicine
Treatmentof CardiacArrhythmias and Conduction
 University of Minnesota
Disturbances
St. Paul, Minnesota
Pericardial Disorders and Cardiac Tumors
Rebecca E. Gompf, DVM, MS, DACVIM
(Cardiology)
Sydney Moise, DVM, MS, DACVIM
Associate Professor of Cardiology
(Cardiology and Internal Medicine)
 Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences
Professor of Medicine, Section Chief Cardiology
University of Tennessee
 Department of Clinical Sciences
College of Veterinary Medicine
 College of Veterinary Medicine
Knox ville, Tennessee
Cornell University
The History and Physicat Examination
Ithaca, New York
Treatment of Cardiac Arrhythmias and Conduction
Rosemary A. Henik, DVM, MS, DACVIM
Disturbances
(lnternal Medicine)
Clinical Associate Professor
E. Christopher Orton, DVM, PhD, DACVS
 Department of Medical Sciences
Professor
University of Wisconsin - Madison
Department of Clinical Sciences
Madison, Wisconsin
Veterinary Medical Center
Colorado State University
Systemic Hypertension
Fort Collins, Colorado
Lynelle R. Johnson, DVM, PhD, DACVIM
Cardiac Surgery
(internal Medicine)
Mark A. Oyama, DVM, DACVIM
Assistant Professor
(Cardiology)
 Department of Veterinary Medicine and Epidemiology
College of Veterinary Medicine
Associate ProfessOr
University of California-Davis
Department of Clinical Studies
Davis, California
School of Veterinary Medicine
Cor Puimonale and Putmonary Thromboembolism
University of Pennsylvania
 Philadelphia, Penns ylvania
Richard D. Kienle, DVM, DACVIM
Canine Cardiomyopathy
(Cardiology)
Appendix 2: Common Cardiovascular Drugs
Staff Cardiologist
Bay Area Veterinary Specialists
Brian A. Poteet, MS, DVM, DACVR, ABSVM
San Leandro, California;
Director,
Owner
Gulf Coast Veterinary Diagnostic Imaging
Mission Valley Veterinary Cardiology
Gulf Coast Veterinary Specialists
Gilroy, California
Houston, Texas
Fetine Cardiomyopathy
Radiology of the Heart
Contributors
ix
Carl D. Sammarco, BVSc, DACVIM
Keith N. Strickland, DVM, DACVIM
(Cardiology)
(Cardiology)
Senior Cardiologist
Clinical Associate Professor of Veterinary Cardiology
 Department of Cardiology
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences
Red Bank Veterinary Hospital
School of Veterinary Medicine
Tinton Falls, New Jersey
Louisiana State University
Cardiovascular Effects of Systemic Diseases
Baton Rouge, Louisiana
Congenital Heart Disease
Donald P. Schrope, DVM, DACVIM
Pathophysiology and Therapy of Heart Failure
(Cardiology)
Oradell Animal Hospital
Justin David Thomason, DVM, DACVIM
 Department of Cardiology
(lnternal Medicine)
Paramus, New Jersey
Assistant Professor
Cardiovascular Effects of Systemic Diseases
Department of Veterinary Clinical Science
Center for Veterinary Health Sciences
Meg M. Sleeper, VMD, DACVIM
Oklahoma State University
(Cardiology)
Still water, Oklahoma
 Assistant Professor and Section Chief, Cardiology
Heartworm Disease
 Department of Clinical Studies
School of Veterinary Medicine
Larry P. Tilley, DVM, DAVCIM
University of Pennsylvania
(lnternal Medicine)
 Philadelphia, Pennsyl vania
President, VetMed Consultants, Inc.
Special Diagnostic Techniques for Evatuation of
Consultant, New Mexico
Cardiac Disease
Veterinary Specialty Referral Center
Appendix 2: Common Cardiovascular Drugs
Santa Fe,New Mexico
Electrocardiography
Francis W. K. Smith, Jr., DVM, DACVIM
Appendix 2: Common Cardiovascular Drugs
(Internal Medicine and Cardiology)
Vice President
Anthony H. Tobias, BVSc, PhD, DACVIM
VetMed Consultants, Inc.
(Cardiology)
Lexington, Massachusetts;
Associate Professor
Clinical Assistant Professor
 Department of Clinical Sciences
 Department of Medicine
College of Veterinary Medicine
 Cummings School of Veterinary Medicine
 University of Minnesota
Tufts University
St. Paul, Minnesota
North Grafton, Massachusetts
Pericardial Disorders and Cardiac Tumors
Electrocardiography
Cardiovascular Effects of Systemic Diseases
Appendix I:Canine Breed Predilections for Heart
Disease
Appendix 2: Common Cardiovascular Drugs
Preface
In the last 5 years there have been a number of
field of canine and feline cardiology. The fourth edi-
excellent textbook chapters and jourmal articles
tion has been carefully revised, edited, and updated
describing new findings in the feld of canine and
to refect the latest technologies and approaches to
feline cardiology. However, for the practicing vet-
cardiac care.
erinarian and veterinary student, the amount of
 The methods of diagnosis of heart diseases in the
information is overwhelming. Many veterinarians
dog and the cat are described in Section I The first
and students have stated, in past surveys, the diff-
five chapters follow the sequence that the veterinar-
culty in keeping up with cardiovascular advances in
ian uses in approaching the patient. Chapter 1 cov-
the most time-effective way. The Manual of Canine
ers the history and physical examination; Chapter
and Feline Cardiology, now inits fourth edition, has
2, radiology of the heart; Chapter 3, electrocardi-
been updated to continue to meet the need for a cur-
 ography; Chapter 4, echocardiography and Doppler
rent textbook that can provide useful and practical
ultrasound; and Chapter 5, special diagnostic tech-
 information on cardiac disease in the dog and cat.
niques for evaluation of cardiac disease.
We have worked hard to make this book a most reli-
 Section II presents in a step-by-step fashion a
able source for practicing cardiovascular medicine
description of the various cardiac disorders that oc-
in the dog and cat. For the new edition, we have
cur in the dog and cat, starting in each chapter with
expanded the number of contributors,
.with each
general considerations (e.g., definitions, incidence,
 chapter written by an expert. We have also worked
pathophysiology, etiology), history, physical exam-
to conserve reading time by using an easy-to-use
ination, electrocardiography, thoracic radiography,
format. The Manual of Canine and Feline Cardiol-
special diagnostic techniques, differential diagno-
 ogy, Fourth Edition, is umique as a quick reference
sis, and finally, the therapeutic approach.
with consistency of presentation. The new edition
Section MI includes chapters describing the
now also has generous use of figures and charts,
treatment of cardiac failure, treatment of arrhyth-
with many in color.
 mias and conduction disturbances, and two sepa-
This practical approach to the diagnosis and
rate chapters on cardiopulmonary arrest and resus-
therapy of cardiac disease will be useful to a wide
 [no pue puauaeuu Auaraa uo pue uoga
 audience, from the veterinary student to the fully
care in cardiology. Chapters on anesthesia of the
trained cardiologist. The approach is largely clini-
cardiac patient, cardiac surgery, and pacemaker
cal and includes the practical as well as the most
therapy complete this section.
 sophisticated methods for diagnosis and therapy.
Appendix 1, Canine Breed Predilections for
Cardiovascular disorders in the dog and cat
Heart Disease, represents the most current listing
represent a substantial portion of diseases seen
of breed-associated cardiac disorders.
in the average veterinary practice. It is important
Appendix 2 is a cardiopulmonary drug formu-
for veterinary students and practitioners to under-
 lary that contains extensive cardiopulmonary drug
stand the principles of diagnosis and treatment of
tables with indications, dosages, side effects, con-
the numerous cardiovascular disorders. New chap-
traindications, and drug interactions. An extraordi-
ters that have been added include cardiac surgery,
cor pulmonale, pulmonary thromboembolism, and
available, and both students and veterinarians have
pacemaker therapy. A table of canine breed pre-
difficulty deciding which drugs from various drug
dilections for heart disease has been added to the
classes should be prescribed.
appendixes.
Appendix 3, Echocardiographic Normals, is
Since the third edition of this textbook was pub-
an easy-to-refer-to list of normal values by body
lished, there has been tremendous growth in the
weight and breed.
七i
xii
Preface
The Manual of Canine and Feline Cardiology,
as a reference for the advanced student and the vet-
Fourth Edition, will help to eliminate the aura of
erinarian with expertise in cardiology.
mystery that surrounds the diagnostic and thera-
peutic principles of veterinary cardiology. The
LARRY P. TILLEY
teaching principles that are presented will allow
FRANCIS W. K. SMITH, JR.
even the novice to make an intelligent assessment
MARK A. OYAMA
of a cardiac case. This manual will be useful to a
MEG M. SLEEPER
wide audience, but comprehensive enough to serve
Acknowledgments
The completion of this manual provides a welcome
non qonu moq mouy Aaq lun mouy noA qonu
care." That saying was John's philosophy and one
viduals who have helped along the way. All authors
that all of us should follow.
have board certification and are uniquely qualifed
 Finally, a special thank you goes to Tony Winkel,
to give an update or review of their respective dis-
Editor, Elsevier, whose vision and support were
ciplines.
critical for this fourth edition. The unique format
 In addition to thanking veterinarians who have
and use of numerous images demonstrates the edu-
referred cases to us, we would like to express our 
cational vision he had. For this edition, we would
gratitude to each of the veterinary students, interms,
also like to thank Shelly Stringer, Developmental
and residents whom we have had the pleasure of
Editor and the rest of the Elsevier staff, including
teaching. Their curiosity and intellectual stimula-
everyone in the Production Department. They are
tion have enabled us to grow and prompted us to
all meticulous workers and kind people who made
undertake the task of writing this manual.
the final stages of preparing this book both inspir-
The last edition was co-edited by John Karl
ing and fun.
Goodwin, and since then he has unfortunately
passed away. John's teaching principles in vet-
LARRY P. TILLEY
erinary medicine were clearly drawn from clinical
FRANCIS W. K. SMITH, JR.
experience, and this edition continues to maintain
MARK A. OYAMA
that focus. I will always remember what John had
MEG M. SLEEPER
 s  ,  s e   u 
!!!X
Contents
SectionI
12.Congenital Heart Disease,215
Diagnosis ofHeart Disease
Keith N.Strickland
13.Cardiovascular Effects of SystemicDis
1.The History and Physical Examination,2
eases,240
Rebecca E.Gompf
Francis W.K.Smith.Jr.Donald P.Schrope.
and Carl D.Sammarco
2.Radiology of the Heart,24
Brian A.Poteet
14.SystemicHypertension,277
3.Electrocardiography，49
Rosemary A.Henik and Scolt A.Brown
Larry P.Tilley and Francis W.K.Smith.Jr
SectipnII
4.Echocardiography and Doppler Ultra
Treatmentof Cardiovascular
sound,78
Disease
Virginia Luis Fuentes
5.Special DiagnosticTechniquesfor Evalua-
15.Pathophysiology and Therapyof Heart
tion of Cardiac Disease,99
Failure,288
Keith N.Strickland
Meg M.Sleeper
16.Treatment of CardiacArrhythmias and
SectionII
ConductionDisturbances,315
CardiovascularDisease
Marc S.Kraus,Amna R.M.Gelzer,and
Sydney Moise
6.Acquired ValvularDisease,110
17.Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation,333
Jonathan A.Abbon
Steven G.Cole and Kenneth J.Drobatz
7.Canine Cardiomyopathy,139
18.Emergency Management and Critical
Mark A.Oyama
Care,342
8.Feline Cardiomyopathy,151
Steven G.Cole andKenneth J.Drobarz
Richard D.Kienle
19.Anesthesia of the Cardiac Patient, 356
9.Cor Pulmonale and Pulmonary Thrombo
Thomas K.Day
embolism,176
20.CardiacSurgery,376
Lynelle R.Johnson
E.Christopher Orton
10.Heartworm Disease,183
21.PacemakerTherapy,386
Clay A.Calvert and Justin David Thomason
Janice MclntoshBrigh
11.Pericardial Disorders and CardiacTumors,
200
Anthorw H.Tobias and Elizabeth A.McNiel
xvi
Contents
Appendixes
Appendix2:Common CardiovascularDrugs,
402
Appendix1:CanineBreed Predilectionsfor
Francis W.K.Smith,Jr,Larry P.Tilley
Heart Disease,399
Mark A.Oyama,and Meg M.Sleeper
Kathleen E.Cavanagh andFrancis W.K.
Smith,Jr.
Appendix3:EchocardiographicNormals,415
SECTIONI
Diagnosis of Heart Disease
 1. The History and Physical Examination
 4. Echocardiography and Doppler
Rebecca E. Gompf
Ultrasound
2. Radiology of the Heart
Virginia Luis Fuentes
Brian A. Poteet
5. Special Diagnostic Techniques for
3. Electrocardiography
Evaluation of Cardiac Disease
Meg M. Sleeper
Larry P. Tilfey and Francis W. K. Smith, fr.
MR
0.5
[m/s]
0.5
The History and Physical
Examination
Rebecca E. Gompf
INTRODUCTION
MEDICAL HISTORY
Despite the technical nature of many cardiovascu-
Signalment
lar diagnostics, such as electrocardiography and
echocardiography, the history and physical exami-
Age
nation remain the most crucial steps in establish-
Young animals usually present with congenital
ing the correct diagnosis. Findings from a careful
diseases (e.g., patent ductus arteriosus [PDA]),
- an ndod uoxa isud pu Ars
whereas older animals usually present with ac-
cian to the probability or presence of heart disease.
quired diseases, such as degenerative diseases
 Results of the cardiovascular physical examination
(e.g., mitral and tricuspid regurgitations) or neo-
will usually allow the clinician to make a tentative
plastic diseases (e.g., heart base tumor). Excep-
diagnosis or formulate a specific differential diag-
tions can occur because cardiomyopathies can
nosis. The history and physical examination also
occur in young dogs and cats (aged 6 months
 provide important information regarding the stage
or younger), and older dogs can have congeni-
 of heart disease present, which may significantly
tal heart defects that were not diagnosed when
impact therapy.
they were young (e.g., PDA, atrial septal de-
· A good history and physical exam are invalu-
fect). Also, cardiac disease in older animals can
able in making a diagnosis of heart disease and
 be modified or affected by other concurrent dis-
helping to differentiate heart disease from pul-
ease processes (e.g., collapsing trachea, renal or
monary disease.
liver disease).
· Besides helping to make the diagnosis, a good
history and physical exam help to tellthe extent
Breed
of the problem, how well the animal is respond-
Certain cardiac defects are more common in some
ing to previous therapy, if the owner is able to
breeds of animals; however there can be a regional
medicate the animal consistently, and if other
difference in the rate of occurrence of cardiac prob-
medical problems are present.
lems. See Appendix for a summary of some of the
cardiac defects found in certain breeds of dogs and
cats.
KEY POINT
Clinicians should do a thorough history and
Sex
physical exam in crder to properly diagnose
Males are more susceptible to certain cardiac dis-
and treat an animal with heart disease.
eases (e.g., male cocker spaniels to endocardiosis
of the mitral valve, and large-breed males to dilated
Chapter!
 The History and Physical Examination
cardiomyopathy). However, sick sinus syndrome
· It will also define the animal's attitude and be-
occurs in the female miniature schnauzer and PDA
havior by asking if the animal is listless and
is more common in females than in males.
depressed or alert and playful. Does the animal
tire easily with exercise?
Weight
· It covers the family history of the siblings and
The animal's weight infuences several aspects of
parents, especially if congenital disease is present
treatment including the dose of cardiac medication
in the patient.
 to use, evaluation of the response to diuretic medi-
· It will ask about the health of other pets in the
cation, and the monitoring of cardiac cachexia. A
household.
Pickwickian syndrome (characterized by severe
· It includes the results of previous tests done on
obesity, somnolence, and hypoventilation) can oc-
the patient.
cur in an animal that is so obese that its ability to
· It covers other relevant information that may help
breathe is restricted.
to identify the patient's problem(s), such as what
and how much is being fed and the patient's ap-
Utilization of the A nimal
petite and water consumption. How frequently is
It is important to know how an animal is going to
the animal urinating, and does it have any diar-
be used when giving a long term prognosis for a
rhea? Does the patient have any vomiting or re-
cardiac disease. For example, hunting dogs with
gurgitation? Has the patient had any seizures or
severe heartwonm disease may not be able to hunt
syncopal episodes? What is the patient's repro-
again after treatment. Also, some animals with con-
ductive status? Does the patient have any lame-
genital heart defects may have normal life spans
 ness or paresis? Is the patient coughing, sneezing.
and may make good pets; however, they should not
or having difficulty breathing? Has the patient
 be used for breeding purposes, because the defect
had any previous trauma? Where is the animal
could be perpetuated.
housed (e.g., indoors, outdoors, fenced-in yard)?
· It includes information about other diseases such
as hyperthyroidism, chronic renal disease, respi-
ratory diseases, or other diseases that can also af-
KEY POINT
fect the heart or can affect how the animal's heart
The age, breed, and sex of the animal may
disease is treated.
help the clinician to make an accurate diag-
· Once a problem is identified, more specific ques-
nosis; however, there are always exceptions
tions can be asked such as the character of a
to every rule, so a clinician should not ignore
cough, when the cough occurs, and stimuli evok-
the fact that an animal could have an atypical
ing the cough.
problem for its age, breed, or sex.
· Common presenting complaints for cardiac dis-
ease include dyspnea or tachypnea, coughing.
exercise intolerance, syncope, abdominal swell-
History
ing, cyanosis, anorexia or decreased appetite, and
 poor growth or perfonmance.
· A good history will establish the presence of a
· Other symptoms can be associated with cardio-
cardiac problem, help to differentiate between
vascular disease. Polydipsia and polyuria are
cardiac and respiratory problems, and help to
common in animals on diuretics or that have a
monitor the course of the disease and the re-
concurrent disease (e.g, renal disease), whereas
sponse to therapy. It must be done carefully
 oliguria occurs with severe left-heart failure. He-
to prevent an owner from giving a misleading
moglobinuria is found with the postcaval syn-
history.
drome of heartwonm disease.
· It includes several key questions such as the rea-
· Cardiac drugs such as digitalis, quinidine, and
son the animal is being presented, the problems
procainamide can cause vomiting and diarrhea.
noted by the owner, the onset and duration of the
Regurgitation occurs with congenital vascular
problem(s), the progression of the disease, any
 ring anomalies. Right-heart failure can cause in-
known exposure to infectious diseases, vaccina-
testinal edema and a protein-losing enteropathy
tion history, any current medications the animal
resulting in diarrhea. Cats with cardiomyopathy
is receiving, the animal's response to any medica-
can develop hemorrhagic enteritis secondary to
tions that have been given, and the owner's ability
thromboembolism of the gastric or mesenteric
to give the medication(s).
arteries.
4
SECTIONI[
 Diagnosis of Heart Disease
KEY POINT
· Dogs with chronic heart disease usually have
mild, intermittent coughs. They may also have
 A good history will uncover all of the animal's
nocturmal dyspnea, coughing, and restlessness.
symptoms and problems whether they are
Their coughs tend to be harsh and lower pitched.
due to a cardiac problem or to another con-
· Dogs with fulminant left-heart failure may have
current problem. Also, by the end of a good
history, an astute clinician will have a good 
pink foam in their mouth and nose and be dys-
idea as to the potential causes of the animal's
pneic, but they may or may not be coughing.
problems.
· Dogs with a loud, harsh, dry cough of sudden on-
set followed by a nonproductive gag commonly
have tracheobronchitis.
SPECIFIC SYMPTOMS
· Dogs with a honking, high-pitched cough often have
Coughing
a collapsing trachea and/or collapsed bronchi.
· Small breeds of dogs with large airway disease will
· Coughing is the most common complaint in dogs
have a chronic, paroxysmal cough that is hard, loud,
with significant heart disease, but cats rarely cough
and honking, and usually occurs with excitement.
even when they have an enlarged left atrium.
· Dogs that cough after drinking may have cardiac
·Coughing is a sudden, forced expiration and is a
disease, collapsing trachea, chronic tracheitis,
normal defense mechanism to clear debris from
tracheobronchitis, laryngeal problems, or other
the tracheobronchial tree. It can originate from
causes of dysphagia.
many different areas such as the pharynx, tra-
· Dogthat cough without an inciting factor may have 
chea, bronchi, bronchioli, pleura, pericardium,
cardiac, pulmonary, or extrapulmonary disease.
and diaphragm.
· Dogs that cough after eating have pharyngeal
· A cardiac cough can be difficult to differentiate
 dysphagia, megaesophagus, vascular ring anom-
from arespiratory cough. Table 1-1 lists some of the
alies, esophageal diverticula, esophageal foreign
characteristic coughs and their associated causes.
 bodies, or esophageal tumors.
· Dogs with pulmonary edema often have an acute
· It is unusual for cats to cough with congestive
onset of coughing that progresses rapidly to a severe
heart failure; however, they will cough with
 cough and dyspnea. These coughs are usually soft.
 heartworm disease. If the clinician compresses
Table 1-1
 Characteristics of Coughs and Their Associated Causes in Dogs and Cats
Type of Cough
Causes
Acute cough
Tonsillitis, pharyngitis, tracheobronchitis, acutebronchitis,
pleuritis, acute left heart failure (dogs)
Chronic cough
Right or left heart disease, heartworms, enlarged left
atrium compressing the left mainstem bronchus (dog
only), pulmonary neoplasia, asthma (cat only), chronic
respiratory problem, chronic bronchitis (dog only)
Acute onset, soft that rapidly becomes
 Pulmonary edema
worse in dogs with dyspnea
 Mild, intermittent cough, harsh, low
Chronic heart disease
 pitched in dogs
Loud, harsh, dry, sudden onset followed
Tracheobronchitis
by gag in dogs
 Honking, high-pitched in dogs 
Collapsing trachea or bronchi
 Chronic, paroxysmal, loud, honking
Large airway disease
with excitement in dogs
 Cough after drinking in dogs
Cardiac disease, collapsing trachea, chronic tracheitis,
 tracheobronchitis, laryngeal paral ysis, dysphagia
Cough after eating in dogs
 Pharyngeal dysfunction, megaesophagus, vascular ring
anomalies, esophageal diverticula, esophageal foreign
bodies, esophageal tumors
Cough without an inciting factor
Cardiac, pulmonary, or extrapulmonary disease
Chapter!
The History and Physical Examination
KEY POINT
Box 1-1
Causes of Dyspnea
 It is important to distinguish between a cough
Acidosis
due to cardiac disease versus one due to re-
Anemia
spiratory disease. The history can be the first
Central nervous system disorders
step in differentiating between the two major
Excitement
causes of coughing.
High altitude
Pain
Pericardial effusi ons
the cat's trachea and the cat has a prolonged bout
Pleural effusions
of coughing, then coughing is likely to be part of
Primary cardiac diseases causing pulmonary edema
the cat's problem.
 Or pleural effusion
Pulmonary edema
Secondary cardiac diseases
Dyspnea
Strenuous exercise
Thoracic wall problems (e.g.,fractured ribs)
· Dyspnea is diffcult, labored, or painful breathing.
It is usually preceded by tachypnea (an increased
rate of breathing), which owners may miss. It is a
into heart failure. It can also be associated with
 good idea to have the owner of a cardiac patient
 chronic, obstructive lung disease.
learm to count his or her pet's respiratory rate at
· Expiratory dyspnea is prolonged and labored ex-
rest. The respiratory rate should be less than 30
piration and is due to lower respiratory tract ob-
 per minute in a dog at rest, and if it goes over 50
struction or disease.
 per minute, then the dog has tachypnea.
· Inspiratory dyspnea is prolonged and labored in-
· Dyspnea will occur whenever anything increases the
spiration and is due to upper airway obstruction.
 amount of air that must be breathed by the animal.
· Mixed dyspnea is due to severe pulmonary edema
 Box 1-1 lists the problems that can cause dyspnea.
caused by left-heart failure or severe pneumonia.
· The most common cardiac cause of dyspnea in
· Orthopnea means that the dyspnea occurs when
the dog is left-heart failure causing pulmonary
the animal lies down but not when it is standing.
edema. The most common cardiac cause
of
 It is associated with severe pulmonary edema,
 dyspnea in the cat is right-heart failure causing
pleural effusion, pericardial effusion, pneumo-
 pleural effusion or left-heart failure causing pul-
thorax, diaphragmatic hermia, and severe respira-
monary edema.
tory problems.
· Dyspnea can be accompanied in cardiac patients by
· Paroxysmal dyspnea means that the dyspnea
stridor, which is a harsh, high-pitched respiratory
comes and goes. It can be associated with ar-
sound. Other sounds include rhonchi, which sound
rhythmias
that
cause either bradycardia or
like dry, coarse crackles. Also, dyspnea can be ac-
tac hycardia.
companied by wheezing, which is more typical of 
· Simple dyspnea,
, Or polypnea, is an increased
respiratory problems than cardiac problems.
rate of respiration due to fever, fear, pain, or
· Table 1-2 lists the different types of dyspnea and
excitement.
the problems associated with each type.
· Cats with severe hyperthyroidism can also be
· Acute dyspnea is usually caused by pulmonary
dyspneic.
edema (cardiac and noncardiac), severe pneu-
· Dyspnea that improves when treated with diuret-
monia, airway obstruction, pneumothorax, Or
ics and angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors
 pulmonary embolism.
· Chronic, progressive dyspnea is caused by right-
heart failure with ascites and/or pleural effusion,
KEY POINT
pericardial diseases, bronchial disease, lung
diseases such as emphysema, pleural effusions,
Dyspnea is a sign of significant cardiac, respi-
ratory, or other systemic problems. It requires
progressive anemia, and primary or secondary
 pulmonary neoplasia.
immediate diagnostic tests to identify the
cause of the dyspnea so that specific therapy
· Dyspnea at rest occurs with pneumothorax, pulmo-
can be started. However, all tests should be 
nary embolism, and severe left- or right-heart failure.
done with minimal stress to the animal as
· Exertional dyspnea occurs after or during activity
these patients are very fragile and could die
and can be associated with heart diseases, such
with stress.
as dilated cardiomyopathy, when the animal goes
SECTION I  Diagnosis of Heart Disease
Table 1-2
Types of Dyspnea and Their Associated Diseases or Problems
Type of Dyspnea
Disease or Problem
Acute dyspnea
 Pulmonary edema (cardiogenic and noncardiogenic), severe pneumonia, airway
obstruction, pneumothorax, pulmonary embolis m 
Chronic, progressive
Right heart failure with ascites and/or pleural effusion, pericardial diseases, bronchial
dyspnea
disease, lung diseases (e.g., emphysema), pleural effusions, progressive anemia,
primary and secondary neoplasia
 Dyspnea at rest
Pneumothorax, pulmonary embolism, severe left or right heart failure
Exertional dyspnea
Heart disease (e.g., dilated cardiomyopathy) or chronic obstructive lung disease
Expiratory dyspnea
Lower respiratory tract obstruction or disease
Inspiratory dyspnea
Upper airway obstruction
Mixed dyspnea
Pulmonary edema due to left heart failure or severe pneumonia
Orthopnea
Severe pulmonary edema, pericardial effusion, pleural effusion, diaphragmatic hernia,
pneumothorax, severe pulmonary disease
 Paroxysmal dyspnea
Arrhythmias (e.g., bradycardia or tachycardia)
 Simple dyspnea
 Fever, fear, pain, or excitement
plus or minus digoxin is suggestive of left-heart
failure as the cause of the dyspnea.
Box 1-2
 Causes of Hemoptysis
· Dyspnea that improves when treated with bron-
Acute and chronic bronchitis
chodilators, antibiotics, or steroids is sugges-
Chronic pulmonary granulomas
tive of respiratory disease as the cause of the
Clotting disorders
dy spnea.
Disseminated intravascular coagulopathy
Lung abscesses
Lung lobe torsions
Hemoptysis
Oral or other neoplasia
 Pulmonary embolism
· Hemoptysis is coughing up of blood. It is uncom-
Pulmonary fungal infections
mon in animals, as they usually swallow their
Pulmonary neoplasia
sputum. It is a sign of very severe pulmonary
Respiratory foreign bodies
disease.
Severe heartworm disease with pulmonary embo-
· The causes of hemoptysis are listed in Box 1-2.
lism
Severe pneumonia
· Cardiac causes of hemoptysis include severe pul-
 Severe pulmonary
 edema (e.g., from ruptured chor-
 monary edema (e.g., ruptured chordae tendineae)
dae tendineae)
 and severe heartworm disease, usually with pul-
Trauma with severe pulmonary contusions
monary embolism.
KEY PoINT
back up quickly, and are normal before and after
Hemoptysis is a sign of a very serious underly-
the syncopal episode.
ing abnormality in the lungs, which may be 
· Box 1-3 lists the causes of syncope in dogs and
caused by either a severe cardiac or respira-
tory problem.
cats.
· In a dog with no other cardiac problems, syncope
 may be associated with severe bradycardias (e.g..
third degree heart block or sick sinus syndrome),
Syncope
Or with marked sustained tachycardias (e.g., atrial
· Syncope is a loss of consciousness due to inad-
or ventricular tachycardias), which are usually
equate cerebral blood flow. It can reoccur and is
paroxysmal (i.e., they come and go).
usually brief.
· Small dogs with chronic, severe mitral regurgita-
· Syncope can be hard to differentiate from sei-
tion that cough when they get excited can have
zures. Animals usually fall over suddenly, get
syncopal episodes.
Chapter!
The History and Physical Examination
Box 1-3
 Causes of Syncope in Dogs and
Box 1-4
Causes of Weakness and
Cats
Exercise Intolerance
Disease with very poor cardiac output (e.g., dilated
Cardiac disease with myocardial dysfunction (e.g,
car diomyopathy)
dilated cardiomyopathy)
Severe bradycardia (e.g., complete heart block, sick
Cardiac disease with obstruction to left ventricular
sinus syndrome)
outfow (e.g., subaortic stenosis, hypertrophic
Severe sustained tachycardias (e.g., atrial or ventri
obstructive cardiomyopathy)
cular tachycardia)
Decreased arterial oxygen (e.g., pulmonary edema,
Severe hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in cats
Systemic hypotension including arteriolar dilator
Inadequate ventricular filling (e.g., arrhythmias, peri-
therapy
cardial diseases)
Severe pulmonary hypertension
Drug toxicities
Severe subaortic stenosis
Severe anemia
Severe pulmonic stenosis
Severe metabolic disease
Small dogs with severe mitral regurgitation that
Severe respiratory diseases
cough when excited
Severe systemic diseases
Tetralogy of Fallot
that their animal is slowing down due to old age
· Dogs with severe subaortic stenosis, pulmonic
and not due to heart disease or other problems.
stenosis, pulmonary hypertension, or tetralogy of
· Both complaints can be an early sign of decom-
Fallot can have arrhythmias associated with their
 pensated heart failure, as the heart cannot pump
ventricular hypertrophy and myocardial hypoxia.
enough blood to the muscles due to:
Syncope can also occur in cats with severe hyper-
· Myocardial dysfunction (e.g., dilated cardio-
 trophic cardiomyopathy
· Animals with poor cardiac output due to di-
· Obstruction to left ventricular outfow (e.g..
lated cardiomyopathy can have syncope, espe-
subaortic stenosis or hypertrophic obstructive
cially if they also have arrhythmias such as atrial
cardiomyopathy)
fibrillation or ventricular premature beats that
· Inadequate ventricular f
flling (e.g., arrhyth-
further reduce their cardiac output.
mias,
pericardial
diseases,
hypertrophic
· Vasodilators, especially arterial dilators, can result
 cardiomyopathy)
· Decreased arterial oxygen (e.g., pulmonary
edema or pleural effusion).
KEY POINT
 Syncope must be distinguished from seizures
by careful history and physical examination.
kev point
Having the owner videotape an episode can
It is important to distinguish between exer-
also help the clinician to distinguish between
cise intolerance due to heart disease versus 
the two. Further tests such as Holter or event
other causes.
monitoring may be necessary to determine if
an arrhythmia is causing the syncope.
Ascites
Weakness and Exercise Intolerance
·Ascites is an accumulation of fuid in the
·Weakness and exercise intolerance are nonspe-
abdomen.
cific signs of heart disease. Many diseases such
· Ascites caused by cardiac problems is either
as severe anemia, systemic diseases, metabolic
 due to the right heart being unable to pump the
diseases (e.g., hyperadrenocorticism), drug tox-
blood presented to it or because of pericardial
icities, and severe respiratory diseases can cause
disease, in which the blood cannot get into the
these signs. See Box 1-4 for causes of weakness
right heart. In either case the blood accumulates
and exercise intolerance.
in the liver and spleen and causes congestion
· Because most animals do not exercise very hard,
and increased venous pressure. Eventually fuid
weakness and exercise intolerance are uncom-
leaks out of the capsule of the liver causing the
mon presenting complaints. Some owners think
ascites.
8
SECTION I  Diagnosis of Heart Disease
· Ascites is seen more frequently with right-heart
Box 1-5
Causes of Ascites in the Dog
failure in dogs due to acquired diseases (e.g..
tricuspid regurgitation due to endocardiosis, ad-
Advanced heartworm disease
vanced heartwonm disease, dilated cardiomyopa-
 Dilated cardiomyopathy
Large atrial septal defect
thy, pericardial effusions, restrictive pericarditis)
Large ventricular septal defect
and congenital heart defects (e.g., tricuspid dys-
 Pericardial effusion
plasia, large ventricular septal defect, large atrial
 Restrictive pericarditis
septal defect). See Figure 1-1 for an example of
Tricuspid dysplasia
ascites and Box 1-5 for a list of causes of ascites
Tricuspid regurgitation due to endocar diosis
in the dog.
· Ascites is less common in cats and is usually
due to tricuspid dysplasia but occasionally can
be seen with other problems such as dilated
· Cyanosis is a very insensitive way of detecting
cardiomyopathy.
hypoxemia in dogs and cats because the oxy-
· Large amounts of ascites will put pressure on the
gen saturation has to be very low to cause it and
 diaphragm, resulting in tachypnea or dyspnea.
animals have darker mucous membranes, which
· Ascites associated with right-heart failure is
makes cyanosis harder to detect until it is severe.
usually a modified transudate and accumulates
· Right-to-left shunting cardiac defects such as
slowly.
tetralogy of Fallot result in low oxygen satura-
tion plus high deoxygenated hemoglobin levels,
KEY POINT
which make affected animals cyanotic. These pa-
tients also have polycythemia, and the increased
Decompensated heart diseases that result in
ascites may not have an associated murmur
number of red blood cells has increased amounts
(e.g ., pericardial effusion, some dilated cardio-
 of reduced hemoglobin, which contributes to the
myopathies, heartworm disease). Thus, any
cyanosis.
time ascites occurs, right-heart failure must be
· Cyanosis gets worse with exercise because the
included in the differential diagnosis.
 peripheral vascular resistance will decrease while
the pulmonary vascular pressure is unchanged
so more deoxygenated venous blood will go
Cyanosis
systemically.
· Cyanosis is blue-tinged mucous membranes
of the gums, tongue, eyes, ears, and so on and
key PoinT
is associated most commonly with right-to-left
Cyanosis is a very late finding in severe car-
shunting congenital heart defects. Occasionally it
diac disease, except in right to left shunting
is seen with severe left-heart failure or severe re-
congenital heart defects, and so it is an in-
spiratory disease. It is rarely seen with abnormal
 sensitive indicator of membrane oxygenation
hemoglobin production.
and cardiac function.
Weight Loss
· Weight loss occurs in dogs with chronic, severe
right-heart failure (e.g., severe tricuspid regurgi-
tation, dilated cardiomyopathy, advanced heart-
worm disease).
· Weight loss in cats is usually associated with
 hyperthyroidism or infiltrative bowel disease, al-
though cats with chronic right-heart failure can
also lose weight.
· Cardiac cachexia is the loss of total body fat and
lean body mass, especially skeletal muscle, de-
spite a normal appetite and adequate therapy for
Figure 1-1.
 Notice the severe ascites in this dog with right-
heart failure due to severe pulmonic stenosis and severe tri-
the underlying heart disease. It can be a rapid
 cuspid dysplasia.
Chapter!
The History and Physical Examination
cardiomyopathy (Figure 1-2). See Box 1-6 for a
Box 1-6
Problems Contributing to Cardiac
list of the problems that contribute to cardiac ca-
Cachexia in the Dog
chexia in dogs.
Weight loss is associated with:
Ascites
· Ascites. Dogs with ascites may have mild discom-
Cardiac medications causing anorexia and vomiting
fort from the fuid which makes them reluctant
Electrolyte imbalance causing anorexia
to eat. Also, the ascites and congested liver will
Increased energy use by the body
compress the stomach so that the animal feels
Increased tumor necrosis factor
Mal abs orption
full after eating only a small amount of food. The
Maldigestion
fuid also restricts gastric emptying. Finally, if an
Protein losing enteropathy
unpalatable diet is fed, the animal is even more
reluctant to eat and does not consume enough
calories to keep from losing weight.
· Malabsorption caused by the congestion of the
intestines secondary to the ascites.
· Congestion of the pancreas, which may decrease
 its function of secreting enzymes for digestion,
resulting in maldigestion.
· Systemic venous and lymphatic hypertension
from right-heart failure causing a secondary in-
testinal lymphangiectasia that results in a pro-
tein-losing enteropathy.
· Increased effort to breath and increased myocar-
dial oxygen consumption that result from the de-
creased cardiac output. These two problems result
in an increased use of energy and therefore calories
by the heart and lungs. The activation of the sym-
pathetic nervous system, which also results from
the decreased cardiac output, causes increased en-
ergy use by the rest of the body.
·Use of cardiac medications such as digoxin, mex-
iletine, quinidine, procainamide, diltiazem, and
occasionally other drugs that can cause anorexia
 and/or vomiting. Digoxin also has a direct effect
on the small bowel, where it inhibits sugar and
amino acid transport.
· Electrolytes, especially sodium and potassium,
are adversely affected by diuretics, angiotensin
 converting enzyme inhibitors, and digoxin. When
KEY POINT
Weight loss and cardiac cachexia are due to
multiple factors. It is very important to make 
sure that an animal with ascites is being treat-
ed appropriately for heart failure and that the
animal's digoxin levels, electrolytes, and renal
function are being monitored. It is also impor-
tant to calculate the animal's caloric require-
ment and make sure it is eating enough to
meet its requirements. Special high caloric di-
ets and multiple small meals may be needed to
insure adequate caloric intake. Appetite stimu-
Figure 1-2.
Great Dane with cardiac cachexia secondary to
lants have been tried with varying success.
dilated cardiomyopathy.
10
SECTION IDiagnosis of Heart Disease
 potassium levels are abnormal, they contribute to
dilated left atrium or left ventricle, and pieces
anorexia.
break off and lodge in the distal aorta or other
· Dogs with chronic congestive heart failure have
artery. When the thrombus lodges in the aortic
increased tumor necrosis factor that inhibits the
bifurcation, the cat will exhibit severe pain in
activity of lipoprotein lipase (hydrolyzes chylo-
the first few hours after the embolism and the
microns) and therefore interferes with the con-
distal limbs will be cold and may be slightly
version of triglycerides to free fatty acids
swollen. The pads on the rear feet will be cya-
notic (Figure 1-5). The cat's pulses cannot be
detected, and the nails on the affected legs do
Paresis
not bleed when cut short.
· Cats with acute, posterior paresis (Figure 1-3)
· Acute, posterior paresis is rare in dogs but it has
or paresis of one front leg (Figure 1-4) often
been associated with emboli from severe, vegeta-
have thromboembolism secondary to cardio-
tive endocarditis of the aortic or mitral valve.
myopathy. The thrombi tend to form in the
-s uaq os s so u sn san s a
sociated with bacterial endocarditis.
KEY POINT
Paresis in the rear limbs of the cat is usually
due to emboli that form in the left atrium sec-
ondary to left atrial enlargement secondary
to cardiomyopathies. Shifting leg lameness
or posterior paresis in the dog can be due to
emboli from vegetations on either the mitral 
 or aortic valve.
Figure 1-3.
 Cat with a saddle thrombus secondary to a left
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
atrial thrombus due to hypertrophic cardliomyopathy.
Observation
· The animal's attitude and behavior can give clues
as to the severity and kind of problems that the
animal is having. It is important to note whether
the animal is depressed or alert, and listless or
active.
Figure 1-5.
 Comparison of the front and rear leg footpads
in a cat with a saddle thrombus. Note the purple color of the
rear leg due to the complete occlusion of blood flow to the
Figure 1-4.
4.Cat with a front leg thrombus secondary to a
rear limbs secondary to the saddle thrombus and constriction
left atrial thrombus due to hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
of the collateral circulation.
Chapter!
The History and Physical Examination
11
· An animal that refuses to lie down may have
· Hypertension in cats will cause decreased pu-
severe pulmonary edema, pleural effusion, peri-
pillary responses due to retinal detachment or
cardial effusion, pneumothorax, diaphragmatic
hemorrhage. Also, a fundic exam may reveal pap-
hermia, or respiratory disease (Box 1-7).
illedema (swelling of the optic disc) along with
· An animal that stands with elbows abducted and
 hemorrhage or retinal detachment.
head extended as well as open-mouth breathing
· Retinal hemorhages also can occur with polycy-
with fared nostrils has severe respiratory distress
themia and bacterial endocarditis.
 and needs immediate therapy.
· Central retinal degeneration occurs in about one
· The rate and rhythm of respirations can help de
third of cats with dilated cardiomyopathy caused
termine the underlying problem. Tachypnea and
by taurine deficiency. The areas of degeneration
panting are usually due to excitement; however,
are horizontal, linear, and hyperreflective.
expiratory dyspnea usually indicates lower air-
· The ears have no significant changes associated
way disease, and inspiratory dyspnea usually in-
with the cardiovascular system.
dicates upper airway disease.
· Cyanosis can sometimes be recognized by evalu-
· The nature and type of coughing is helpful if it
ating the color of the pinna.
occurs during the course of the physical exam.
· Examine the nose for signs of disease and for
· The presence of dependent ventral edema can
patency.
give the clinician an idea as to the source
of
· In the mouth, mucous membrane color and perfu-
the animal's problem. If edema is present in
sion should be noted. A perfusion time of greater
the neck, head, and forelimbs only, then it usu-
than 2 seconds suggests decreased cardiac out-
ally indicates an obstruction of the cranial vena
put; however, most animals with congestive heart
cava or a mediastinal mass. If edema is present
failure have normal mucous membrane color un-
in the entire body, then pleural effusion with or
til their heart failure is severe. So, mucous mem-
without ascites is usually present. Other causes
brane color and perfusion are very insensitive
of edema (e.g., hypoproteinemia) should also be
ways to evaluate adequate circulation.
considered.
· Cyanosis is due to hypoventilation or poor dif-
· Elevated temperature may be seen with an infec-
fusion across the alveoli produced by multiple
 tious disease or subacute bacterial endocarditis.
different factors (see history section discussed
previously).
· Hyperemic mucous membranes (dark red to
KEY POINT
muddy) may indicate an increased packed cell
volume (polycythemia), which can be second-
By observing an animal, the presence and se-
ary to a chronic right-to-left vascular shunt
verity of a respiratory problem can be deter-
mined quickly. Animals with severe dyspnea
(Figure 1-6).
should be handled gently to avoid stress and
· Pale mucous membranes indicate anemia or poor
should be treated immediately.
perfusion.
· The mucous membranes of the mouth should
be compared with the posterior membranes
Head
· Check for any asymmetry and swellings.
· The eyes should be examined for changes that
 could indicate systemic diseases.
Box 1-7
 Reasons an Animal Will Not Lie
Down
Diaphragmatic hernia
Pneumothorax
Severe pericar dial effusion
Severe pleural effusion
Severe pulmonary edema
Severe respiratory disease
Figure 1-6.
 Hyperemic mucous membranes in a dog with
polycythemia due to Tetralogy of Fallot.
12
SECTION I  Diagnosis of Heart Disease
(e.g., vagina, prepuce), because differential cya-
· The entire jugular vein can be distended indicat-
nosis can occur in a right-to-left shunting PDA.
ing increased systemic venous pressure caused
· Check the oral cavity for severe dental tartar, gin-
by right-heart failure, pericardial disease, or ob-
givitis, or pyorrhea, which can serve as sources
struction of the cranial vena cava (e.g., heart base
of sepsis leading to bacteremia and possibly
tumor). Only about 70% of dogs with right-heart
endocarditis.
failure have distended jugular veins, and cats
rarely have distended jugular veins with right-
KEY POINT
 heart failure. See Box 1-9 for causes of jugular
distension.
Mucous membrane color and perfusion are
insensitive signs of cardiac function, so when
·Mediastinal masses such as lymphosarcoma can
they are abnormal, the animal's cardiac or re-
 compress the cranial vena cava causing a dis-
spiratory problem is severe.
tended jugular vein; however, they also usually
cause pleural effusion and head and neck edema.
· Arterial pulses can mimic a jugular pulse; how-
Neck
ever, when light pressure is applied to the area of
· The jugular pulse should be evaluated while the
the jugular pulse, the arterial pulse will continue,
 animal is standing with its head in a normal posi-
whereas the jugular pulse will stop.
tion. Any pulse going over one third of the way
· The hepatojugular refex is a distension of the jug-
up the neck is abnonmal and can be due to any of
ular veins that occurs when the abdomen is com-
several factors. See Box 1-8 for causes of abnor-
 pressed for 10 to 30 seconds. It is caused by an
mal jugular pulses.
increased returm of blood to the right heart from the
· Abnormal jugular pulses occur in right-heart fail-
 abdomen. However, the right heart is not normal
ure due to tricuspid regurgitation or dilated car-
 and cannot handle the increased venous returm, so
diomyopathy, when the right ventricle contracts
the blood from the cranial vena cava cannot enter
and the blood fows back into the right atrium and
the heart and the jugular veins become distended.
up the jugular veins due to the insufficient tricus-
This refex is present with both right- and left-heart
pid valve.
failure and indicates increased blood volume in the
· Abnormal jugular pulses occur with pulmonic
 peripheral venous system due to an inability of the
stenosis and pulmonary hypertension, when the
 heart to circulate the blood properly.
right atrium contracts against a hypertrophied,
· Cats with left-heart failure may have distended
 noncompliant right ventricle so that only some of
 jugular veins only when lying down and the jugu-
the blood enters the right ventricle and the rest
lar veins returm to normal when they sit or stand.
 goes back up the jugular veins.
·With heartwonm disease, abnormal jugular pulses
occur because there is both a stiff, hypertrophied
Box 1-9
Causes of Distended Jugular Veins
right ventricle and tricuspid regurgitation which
both contribute to the jugular pulses.
Right-heart failure (e.g., tricuspid regurgitation,
· Arrhythmias such as second or third degree heart
dilated cardiomyopathy)
 block or premature beats cause abnormal jugular
Pericardial diseases
 Heart base tumor
pulses because the sequence of atrial and ven-
tricular activation is disrupted so that the atrium
Mediastinal mass
contracts against a closed tricuspid valve sending
blood back up the jugular veins.
KEY PoINT
Box 1-8
Causes of Abnormal Jugular
Jugular vein distention can be present with
Pulses
both right- and left-heart failure, but may be
present in only 70% of these cases. Abdominal 
Arrhythmias
ultrasound is a sensitive, noninvasive method
Heartworm disease
of determining increased venous pressure by
Pulmonary hypertension
detecting distended hepatic veins; however,
Pulmonic stenosis
the ultrasound only confirms the presence of
Right-heart failure (e.g., tricuspid regurgitation, di-
increased venous pressure and not the cause
lated cardiomyopathy)
of it.
Chapter!
The History and Physical Examination
13
· A central venous pressure can be obtained on
Box 1-10
Causes of Shifting of the
 animals with distended jugular veins. It is most
Palpable Apex Beat or Point
useful in the diagnosis of restrictive pericardial
 of Maximum Intensity
disease where less invasive tests have not con-
frmed the diagnosis.
Cardiac enlargement
· A young dog with regurgitation due to a mega-
 Collapsed lung lobes on the right
esophagus may have a congenital vascular ring
Diaphragmatic hernias
anomaly.
Pectus excavatum
Lying down
Masses displacing the heart
Tracheal Palpation
Pleural effusions
· The trachea should be palpated for abnormali-
ties such as collapsing. masses, or increased
sensitivity.
Box 1-11
 Causes of Changes in Heart
· This step is best postponed until after ausculta-
Sounds
tion of the thorax, because a cough may be elic-
ited that makes auscultation difficult.
Decreased intensity due to:
· Lymph nodes should be palpated to see if they are
Decreased left ventricular contractility
enlarged.
 Diaphragmatic hernias
·The thyroids may be enlarged in cats with hyper-
Emphysema
Obesity
thyroidism (thyroid slip).
 Pleural or pericardial effusions
· An old dog having a mass near the larynx with
Pneumothorax
 an associated thrill usually has thyroid carcinoma
Thoracic masses
with an arteriovenous fistula causing the thrill
Increased intensity due to:
(murmur that can be felt as well as heard).
Hyperdynamic states (e.g., anemia, hyperthyroid-
ism, fever)
KEY POINT
 Increased heart rates
Young, thin animals
 Palpation of the neck can reveal primary or
secondary problems that affect the heart and
can mimic heart disease (collapsing trachea).
with increased heart rates or with hyperdynamic
states such as anemia, hyperthyroidism, or fever.
Thoracic Palpation
· The heart sometimes appears to be beating on the
· The apex beat (sometimes called the point of
chest wall. The heart is not actually hitting the
maximum intensity [PMI]) is where the cardiac
chest wall; the appearance is due to the increased
impulse is felt strongest on the chest wall. It
wall tension of the thoracic wall for an indeter-
should be on the left side of the thorax between
minate reason. It does not mean that the heart is
the fourth and sixth intercostal spaces. Shifting
contracting normally or better than normal.
of the PMI is due to cardiac enlargement, masses
· Loud cardiac murmurs can be palpated as thrills,
displacing the heart, collapsed lung lobes al-
which are due to vibrations caused by blood flow. A
lowing the heart to shift, diaphragmatic hemias,
thrill is always located where a murmur is loudest.
pleural effusions associated with collapsed lung
lobes or fibrin, or lying down in right lateral re-
KEY POINT
cumbency such that the heart falls to the right.
It is important to locate both the PMI
Pectus excavatum, a deformity of the stermum,
of the heartbeat and the presence of thrills
can also shift the heart to the right (Box 1-10).
due to heart murmurs on the thoracic
·A decreased intensity of heartbeat or heart
wall.
sounds may be due to obesity, pleural effusion,
pericardial effusion, thoracic masses, pneumo-
A bdominal Palpation
thorax, emphysema, diaphragmatic hermias, or
decreased left ventricular contractility with de-
· Abdominal palpation is done to check for ascites,
creased cardiac output (Box 1-11).
the presence of fuid in the abdomen. Ascites can
· There can be an increased intensity of the PMI or
be due to right-heart failure but also can be due to
heart sounds in young, thin animals or in animals
multiple other causes.
14
SECTION I  Diagnosis of Heart Disease
· The presence of ascites can be difficult to ascer-
· The femoral pulse rate should be taken. Nor-
tain in obese animals. The clinician should put
mal rates in dogs are 70 to 180 beats per minute
one hand on one side of the abdomen and the
(bpm). Puppies can have a normal rate of 220
other hand on the other side, and then tap the
bpm. Normal rates in cats are 160 to 240 bpm.
abdomen. If a fuid wave is felt by the hand on
· The rhythm of the pulses should be noted. There
the opposite side of the abdomen, then ascites is
should be a pulse for every heartbeat. Pulse defi-
present.
cits usually indicate incomplete ventricular fill-
· Check for signs of hepatomegaly and splenomeg-
img, as seen in arrhythmias.
aly. The presence of ascites, splenomegaly and
· Arterial pulse pressure (femoral pulse quality) is
hepatomegaly, usually indicates right-heart failure
the difference between the arterial systolic pres-
due to dilated cardiomyopathy, tricuspid regurgi-
sure and the diastolic pressure. Pulse quality can
tation, heartworm disease, pericardial disease, or
nonmally vary depending on the animal's confor-
congenital heart disease. Another possibility is an
mation, age, hydration, heart rate, cardiac func-
obstruction of the posterior vena cava.
tion, and level of excitement or activity.
·Palpate for any masses.
· The intensity of the pulse should be palpated.
· Palpate the kidneys as chronic renal failure can
Normal pulses are strong and have a rapid rate of
lead to systemic hypertension that can affect the
rise and fall.
heart.
· Table 1-3 lists the pulse quality and the cause for
· Most ascites due to right-heart failure is a modi-
each type of pulse.
fed transudate on cytology and accumulates
· Hypokinetic (weak) pulses are due to decreased
slowly.
cardiac output (e.g., congestive heart failure, hy-
povolemia), decreased peripheral vascular resis-
KEY POINT
tance, increased arterial compliance, or slower
Ascites can be due to right-heart failure or
rate of rise due to delayed emptying of the left
other heart problems such as pericardial effu-
ventricle (e.g., subaortic stenosis). Dogs will
sion; however, it can also be due to other
have nonmal pulses until the stroke volume is
noncardiac problems. Further tests are indicted
markedly decreased with severe congestive heart
to determine the cause of ascites.
Table 1-3
Skin
Types of Pulses and Their
Associated Causes
· Palpate for evidence of edema due to right-heart
Pulse
Cause
failure or venous obstruction.
Absent pulses
Thromboembolis m
Abrupt pulses
Femoral Pulses
Mitral regurgi tation
Ventricular septal defects
· Both pulses should be felt with the dog or cat
Erratic pulses
Atrial fibrillation
standing. and they should be compared to each
Hypokinetic pul ses
Heart failure
other because one could be obstructed.
Hypotension
· It is difficult to palpate the femoral pulse in a
Hypovolemia
normal cat; therefore, the absence of palpable
Subaortic stenosis
femoral pulses in a cat should not be interpreted
Hyperkinetic pulses
Aortic regurgitation
as definite arterial obstruction.
Fear
· Partial or complete occlusion of the pulses so that
Fever
they cannot be felt is usually due to thrombo-
 Patent ductus arteriosus
embolism. In dogs this can occur with bacterial
Severe anemia
endocarditis of the mitral or aortic valves, hyper-
Severe bradycardia
adrenocorticism, and protein-losing glomerulo-
Thyrotoxicosis
 nephritis (especially amyloidosis). Cavalier King
 Pulse deficits
Arthythmias
Charles Spaniels with mitral regurgitation some-
Pulsus alternans
Severe dilated cardiomy-
times lack a pulse for unknown reasons. In cats,
opathy
absent pulses are associated with cardiomyopa-
 Pulsus bigeminus
Arthythmias
thy but can also occasionally be due to bacterial
 Pulsus paradoxus
Cardiac tamponade
endocarditis or extra cardiac disease.
Chapter1
The History and Physical Examination
15
failure so pulses are an insensitive indicator of
· If an area, especially dorsally, in the thorax sounds
cardiac output.
hyperresonant, then pneumothorax may be present.
· Hyperkinetic (strong) pulses rise and fall quickly
· If an area, especially ventrally, sounds hyporeso-
and are due to large left ventricular stroke vol-
nant, then pleural effusion may be present.
umes with rapid diastolic runoffs (e.g., PDA,
aortic regurgitation). They are called "B-B shot"
KEY PoINT
or "water-hammer" pulses. Fear, fever, severe
 Percussion can be a rapid way of determining
bradycardia, thyrotoxicosis, and anemia can also
the presence or absence of pleural effusion.
produce this type of pulse.
· The pulses can be abrupt or jerky with mitral regur-
Stethoscope
 gitation and ventricular septal defects as a greater
volume of blood is ejected in early systole.
· The main components of the stethoscope are the
· Pulsus altermans occurs whenthe pulseis altermately
bell, diaphragm, tubing, and ear pieces. The bell 
weak and then strong in patients with normal si-
transmits both low-frequency (20 to 300 cycles
nus rhythm. It is frequently associated with severe
per second [cps]) sounds when light pressure is
myocardial failure (e.g., dilated cardiomyopathy).
used and high-frequency (300 to 1000 cps) sounds
· Pulsus bigeminus occurs when weak pulses alter-
when firm pressure is used to apply it to the thorax.
nate with strong pulses. This is associated with
It is best for hearing third and fourth heart sounds.
arrhythmias such as ventricular bigeminy where
The diaphragm attenuates low frequencies and se-
a normal heart beat altermates with a ventricular
 lectively transmits the high frequencies. It is best
premature beat. The weak pulses occur because
for hearing the first and second heart sounds.
the premature beat causes the ventricles to con
· Most stethoscopes combine the bell and dia-
tract before they are adequately filled so a smaller
phragm into a dual-sided, combination-style
than normal volume of bloodis ejected by the left
 chest piece. Some stethoscopes have the bell and
ventricle, causing weak pulses. The difference
 diaphragm as one piece. With these stethoscopes,
between the normal and abnormal pulses may
simple fingertip pressure allows one to switch
be accentuated due to the fact the ventricles have
from low- to high-frequency sounds. There is no
more time to fill on the normal beats so that the
interruption in sound as there is in a traditional
 normal pulses feel even stronger.
two-sided stethoscope, resulting in added conve-
· Pulsus paradoxus is an alteration of the pulse
nience and efficiency in auscultation.
strength during respiration due to changes in
· A practical tubing length on a stethoscope is ap-
ventricular filling. There is an increase in pulse
proximately 14 to 18 inches. If the tubing is too
 strength on expiration and a decrease in strength
long, then it will attenuate all the heart and lung
on inspiration in normal animals; however, this
sounds.
change is exaggerated and easier to feel when
· Ear tubes should angle forward to conform to the
cardiac tamponade is present.
anatomy of the ear canals. A stethoscope with
· Pulses feel erratic when an animal has atrial
variable sizes of ear pieces is ideal because each
fibrillation.
 person can find the correct size earpiece that fits
comfortably in the ear canal and shuts out extra-
KEY POINT
neous sounds.
 The quality of an animal's pulse is not a good
· For dogs and cats less than 15 pounds, a pediatric
indication of the severity of its cardiac prob-
stethoscope that has a smaller headpiece should
lem because only very advanced heart disease
be used.
will cause weak pulses; however, pulse defi-
· Electronic stethoscopes have improved dramati-
dts are very good indicators of the presence
cally in the past 10 years. In addition to electronic
of an arrhythmia.
amplification of heart sounds and murmurs, most
electronic stethoscopes currently allow the user to
Percussion
record and play back sounds at either normal or
half speed. This feature is useful for judging and
· Percussion can be used to determine the presence
timing the shape or quality of murmurs in tachy-
of masses or fuid lines, especially in the thorax.
cardic patients and for judging the timing of tran-
It will elicit a hollow sound (hyperresonance)
sient heart sounds such as clicks or gallops. Some
over the lungs and a dull sound over solid struc-
models also provide the ability to record graphic
tures (hyporesonant).
representations of sounds in a digital file format
16
SECTION IDiagnosis of Heart Disease
(i.e., a phonocardiogram) that can be stored on
crackling due to the rubbing of hair. Extraneous
a computer, possibly even becoming part of the
sounds will occur if auscultation is not performed
patient's medical record. A new electronic stetho-
in a quiet area.
scope (Figure 1-7), the 3M Littman Model 3000,
· Auscult the heart and lungs separately.
features useful ambient noise reduction circuitry
·Auscult the entire thorax on both sides.
that appears to overcome most if not all of the
· The areas of auscultation of the heart are
problems of background noise amplification that
shown in Figure 1-8. Table 1-4 lists the areas of
plagued previous models.
auscultation.
· The pulmonic valve area is on the left side. In
KEY POINT
the dog, it is between the second and the fourth
Not every stethoscope is ideal for everyone.
intercostal spaces just above the stermum. In the
ldeally, a clinician should try various stetho-
scopes to find the one that works best for him
or her.
Auscultation
· This is the most helpful part of the cardiac exami-
nation; it should be done carefully and systemati-
cally. The animal should be standing so that the
heart is in its normal position. This avoids the
 problem of positional murmurs caused by the
heart rubbing against the chest wall when an ani-
mal is lying down.
· Common artifacts heard include respiratory
clicks and murmurs, rumbles due to shivering
Figure 1-7.
 3M Littman electronic stethoscope.
and twitching, and movement sounds such as
(Courtesy 3M Health Care, St. Paul, Minn.)
Figure 1-8.
Areas of auscultation in the dog. M is the mitral vave area, A is the aortic valve area, P is the pulmonic valve area,
and T is the tricuspid valve area. (From Gompf RE: The clinical approach to heart disease: history and physical examination. In Fox
PR, ed: Canine and feline cardiology. New York, 1988, Churchill Livingstone.)
Chapter1
The History and Physical Examination
17
· Altermate areas of auscultation include the tho-
Table 1-4
 Areas of Auscultation in the Dog
and Cat
racic inlets for radiation of the murmur of sub-
aortic stenosis and the left axillary area for the
Structure
Location
murmurs of PDA.
 Mitral valve
Dog—left side, fth intercostal
· Heart rate and rhythm should be identified. The
 space at the costochondral
effects of inspiration and expiration on heart rate,
junction
rhythm, and heart sounds should be noted.
Cat—-left side, fth to sixth inter-
· The presence or absence of heart sounds should
costal space near sternum
 be noted.
Aortic valve
Dog—left side, fourth intercostal
space just above costochondral
KEY PoINT
 junction
 The lungs and heart should be ausculted sep-
Cat—left side, second to third 
 arately to avoid missing or confusing any ab-
intercostal space just dorsal to
pulmonic area
normal sounds. All valve areas should be aus-
culted in all animals. Congenital heart defects
Pulmonic valve
Dog—left side, between second
have been missed when clinicians only listen
and fourth intercostal space just
to the mitral valve area in a young animal.
above the sternum
Cat—left side, second to third
intercostal space one-third way
Normal Heart Sounds
up from sternum
Tricuspid valve
 Dog—-right side, third to fth 
· Heart sounds are due to the abrupt acceleration
intercostal space near costo-
 or deceleration of blood and the vibrations of the
chondral junction
 heart and vessels
Cat—-right side, fourth to fifth
· The first heart sound (S,) (Figure 1-9) is due to
intercostal space near sternum
passive closure of the mitral (left AV) and tricus-
pid (right AV) valves resulting in the sudden ac-
celeration and deceleration of blood. It has four
cat, it is located at the second to the third inter-
parts that can be seen on a phonocardiogram.
costal space one third to one half of the way up
·S， is longer, louder, duller, and lower-pitched
the thorax from the stemum.
than the second heart sound. It is loudest over the
· The aortic valve area is on the left side. In the
mitral and tricuspid areas. It is loudest in young.
dog, it is at the fourth intercostal space just above
thin animals and those with high sympathetic
the costochondral junction. In the cat, it is at the
tone (e.g., fear), tachycardia, systemic hyperten-
second to the third intercostal space just dorsal to
sion, anemia, or mitral regurgitation.
the pulmonic area.
· The intensity of S decreases owing to obesity,
· In cats and small dogs, it may be impossible to
pleural or pericardial effusion, thoracic masses,
distinguish the pulmonic and aortic areas, so
diaphragmatic hermias, bradycardia, emphysema,
these two areas are referred to as the left heart
shock and insufficient filling of the ventricles.
base.
· S varies in intensity with arrhythmias.
· The mitral valve area is on the left side. In the
· Splitting of S (see Figure 1-9) is due to asynchro-
dog, it is at the fifth intercostal space at the cos-
nous closure of the mitral and tricuspid valves. It
tochondral junction. In the cat, it is at the fifth to
can be split normally in large breeds of dogs or
the sixth intercostal space one fourth of the way
abnormally with right bundle branch block, atrial
up the thorax from the stermum. In cats and small
or ventricular premature beats, cardiac pacing, or
dogs, this area may also be referred to as the left
stenosis of the mitral or tricuspid valve.
heart apex.
· Box 1-12 lists the causes of changes in the first
· The tricuspid valve area is on the right side. In the
heart sound.
dog, it is at the third to the fifth intercostal space
· The second heart sound (S2) (see Figure 1-9) is
near the costochondral junction. In the cat, it is
 produced by passive closure of the aortic and pul-
at the fourth or fifth intercostal space, at a level
monic valves. It is short, high pitched, and sharp.
 opposite the mitral area.
It is loudest over the aortic and pulmonic areas.
·The areas in which murmurs are loudest (PMI)
· A split S2 (see Figure 1-9) is due to closure of
and to which they radiate should be noted. This
the pulmonic valve after the aortic valve. This
can help identify the heart problem.
occurs in pulmonary hypertension (e.g., severe
18
SECTION IDiagnosis of Heart Disease
ECG
PHONO.
litS
S2
S3
S1
split S2
diastole-
PHONO
olC
click
Figure 1-9.
Heart sounds and their relationship to the ECG. The first heart sound is S. The second heart sound is S2. The third
examination. In Fox PR, ed: Canine and feline cardiology. New York, 1988, Churchill Livingstone.)
heartworm disease or right-to-left PDA), right
bundle branch block, ventricular premature beats
Abnormal Heart Sounds
 originating in the left ventricle, atrial septal de-
· The third heart sound (S3) (Figure 1-9) is due to
fect, pulmonic stenosis, and mitral stenosis.
rapid ventricular filling and is not heard in normal
· Paradoxical splitting of S2 is due to delayed
dogs or cats. It is lower pitched than the second
closure of the aortic valve. This results from left
heart sound. It is heard best in the mitral valve
bundle branch block, premature beats originating
area and occurs during diastole after the second
from the right ventricle, subaortic stenosis, se-
heart sound (S2).
vere systemic hypertension, and left ventricular
· An S in dogs indicates dilated ventricles, which
failure.
 most commonly occur with dilated cardiomyopa-
· S2 may be absent in arrhythmias where there is
thy, decompensated mitral or tricuspid regurgi-
incomplete filling of the ventricles and insuffi-
tation, large ventricular or atrial septal defects,
cient pressure to open the semilunar valves.
and large PDA. In cats it is associated with di-
· Box 1-13 lists the causes of changes in the second
lated cardiomyopathy, severe anemia, and severe
heart sound.
hyperthyroidism.
· Table 1-5 lists the causes of abnormal heart sounds.
KEY POINT
· The fourth heart sound (S4)(see Figure 1-9) is due
to atrial contraction into an already over-distended
It is critical to identify the first and second
ventricle or into a stiff ventricle in dogs and cats.
heart sounds in all patients in order to use
auscultation as an effective tool in the diag-
It is heard best over the aortic or pulmonic areas
but sometimes can be heard over the mitral valve
nosis of heart disease. If extraneous sounds
are present, then the clinician may need to
 area as well. It occurs in diastole just prior to the
move to another area of the thorax in order
first heart sound.
to identify these sounds properly.
· An S4 is present in dogs or cats when the atria dilate
in response to ventricular diastolic dysfunction,
Chapter !
The History and Physical Examination
19
Box 1-12
Causes of Changes in the First
Box 1-13
Causes of Changes in the Second
(S1) Heart Sound
(S2) Heart Sound
Loud S
Loud S
Anemia
Atrial septal defect
Excitement
Mild valvular pulmonic stenosis
Exercise
 Patent ductus arteriosus
Fear
Pulmonary embolism
Fever
Pulmonary hypertension
Hyperth yroidis m
Systemic hypertension
Mitral regurgitation
Valvular aortic stenosis
Positive inotropic agents
Ventricular septal defect
Pregnancy
Soft S2
 Systemic hypertension
 Dilated car diomy opathy
Tachycardia
Hypothyroidism
 Thin animals
Marked aortic regurgitation
Soft S
Shock
Bradycardias
 Significant pulmonic stenosis
Decreased cardiac output
Valvular aortic stenosis
Diaphragmatic hernias
Split S2
Emphysema
Atrial septal defect
Hypothyroidism
Heartworms
 Left bundle branch block
Mitral stenosis
 Negative inotropic agents
 Pulmonary hypertension—moderate to severe
Obesity
Pulmonic stenosis
Pericardial effusion
Right bundle branch block
Pleural effusion
Right to left patent ductus arteriosus
 Severe aortic or mitral regurgitation
Ventricular premature beat from left ventricle
Severe heart failure
Paradoxical split S2
Shock
Left bundle branch block
Thoracic masses
Left ventricular failure
Variable S,
Severe systemic hypertension
Arrhythmias
Significant aortic regurgitation
Split S
Subaortic stenosis
Atrial or ventricular premature beats
Ventricular premature beats from the right ven-
Cardiac pacing
tricle
Right bundle branch block
Absent S2
 Stenosis of mitral or tricuspid valve
Arrhythmias
such as hypertrophic cardiomyopathy or third
· The precise cause of the click is unknown, but it
degree heart block. It may also be heard in dogs
may be due to the mitral valve buckling into the
with ruptured chordae tendineae.
left atrium (mitral valve prolapse) in dogs with
· A gallop rhythm is an S3, S4, or combination
early mitral regurgitation because many of these
(summation) of the two. Gallops are of a low fre-
animals develop a mitral regurgitation munmur
quency and can be difficult to hear. A gallop can
later in life. This is a benign finding and is not
be a very early sign of heart failure, preceding
usually associated with heart failure.
clinical signs.
 Ejection sounds are high frequency sounds gen-
· Systolic clicks are short, mid- to high-frequency
erated in early systole due to hypertension, dila-
clicking noises that occur in systole between Sf
tion of the great vessels, or opening of abnormal
and S2 (see Figure 1-9). They are usually loud-
semilunar valves such as in valvular pulmonic
est over the mitral and tricuspid areas. A sys-
stenosis.
tolic click may come and go and may change its
position in systole (gets closer to or further away
KEY PoINT
from S2) and may change its intensity.
 The presence of a gallop is an indication of 
· A systolic click can be hard to differentiate from a
cardiac disease in small animals.
 gallop, especially if the animal's heart rate is fast.
20
SECTION I  Diagnosis of Heart Disease
 beats as well as Ss and S4 on physical examina-
Table 1-5
Causes of Abnormal Heart Sounds
tion. An electrocardiogram and phonocardiogram
 Sound
Cause
may be necessary.
· Both atrial and ventricular premature beats inter-
Gallop sounds
S3
Decompensated mitral or
rupt the normal rhythm and are usually followed
tricuspid regurgitation
by a pause. Usually only an S is heard with a
Dilated cardiomyopathy
premature beat and S2 is absent. However, some-
Large atrial septal defect
times S; and S2 can be heard very close together.
Large patent ductus arteriosus
Premature beats can also cause a split S or S2-
Large ventricular septal defect
· Sinus arrhythmia has a cyclical patterm. The heart
Severe anemia in cats
Severe hyperthyroidism in
rate will increase during inspiration and decrease
cats
during expiration owing to changes in vagal tone.
Significant aortic regurgitation
The intensity of the pulse and heart sounds may
Anemia
vary. It is normal in dogs, but in cats it is usually
S4
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
associated with heart disease. Sinus arrhythmia
Dogs with ruptured chordae
occurs at normal heart rates in dogs and cats and
tendineae
tends to disappear as the heart rate increases
 Pulmonary hypertension
·Arrhythmias that decrease the heart rate are
Systemic hypertension
 called bradycardias and examples include both
Third degree heart block
sinus bradycardia and heart blocks.
Thyrotoxicosis
  3s a  s   a
 Systolic click
Mitral val ve prolapse
 heart sounds may vary. The heart rate in dogs is be-
 Ejection sounds
Anemia
tween 50 to 70 bpm, depending on the size of the
Atrial septal defect
dog. The heart rate in cats is less than 120 bpm.
 Dilation of great vessels
· Second and third degree heart blocks result in
Exercise
slow heart rates. The heart sounds will vary in
Heartworms
Hyperthyroidism
sd aq  po au   s
 Pulmonary embolism
in third degree block. The pulses will be slow
Pulmonary hypertension
and hyperkinetic, but there are no pulse deficits.
Systemic hypertension
A jugular pulse is usually present. Extra sounds
Val vular aortic stenosis
may be generated by escape beats.
Val vular pulmonic stenosis
· An electrocardiogram is necessary to diagnose
the type of bradycardia present
· Unexpected pauses can occur with sinoatrial (SA Or
Arrhythmias Heard on Auscultation
sinus) arrest. Sinus arrest occurs when an impulse
· Arrhythmias that increase the heart rate (tachy-
does not leave the SA node. The pause continues
cardias) include both atrial and ventricular
until the next nonmal beat or an escape beat occurs.
arrhythmias.
The heart sound following a pause may be louder
· Animals with atrial fibrillation have a rapid, ir-
than usual as the ventricles have had longer to fill
regular rhythm with heart sounds that vary in
and eject a larger amount of blood. An electrocar-
intensity. Pulse deficits are present. It has been
diogram is necessary to diagnose sinus arrest.
described as being irregularly irregular and rarely
is mistaken for other tachycardias.
· Ventricular tachycardias are usually intermittent
Murmurs
 and tend to be more regular than atrial fibrilla-
· Mummurs are caused by turbulent blood flow through
tion. Pulse deficits are frequently present.
the heart and vessels. The turbulence can be caused
· Sinus and atrial tachycardias are rapid and regu-
by disruptions of blood fow through holes in the
lar. All the heart sounds are of a uniform intensity,
 heart (e.g., ventricular septal or atrial septal defect),
but an atrial tachycardia tends to be intermittent.
a stenotic valve (e.g., aortic, pulmonic, mitral or
· An electrocardiogram is necessary to distinguish
tricuspid stenosis), an insufficient valve (e.g.,
 among sinus, atrial, and ventricular tachycardia
 mitral, tricuspid, aortic, or pulmonic regurgitation),
· Atrial and ventricular premature beats generate
an abnormal arterial venous connection near the
extra sounds that mimic S and S4. It is difficult to
 heart(e.g., PDA), or can be due to altered blood vis-
differentiate between the two types of premature
cosity or changes in blood vessel diameter.
Chapter!
The History and Physical Examination
21
· Functional munmurs are divided into physiologic
· The loudness of a murmur does not indicate the
 and innocent murmurs
severity of the underlying problem.
· Physiologic murmurs have a known cause such as
·A murmur should be described by using the
increased cardiac output or decreased blood vis-
following classification. First, the munmur
cosity and occur with anemia, hypoproteinemia,
should be identifed as to its timing in the car-
fever, increased blood pressure, pregnancy, hyper-
diac cycle (e.g., systolic, diastolic, continuous).
thyroidism, and an athletic heart. These are high
Also, the duration of the murmur (e.g., early
frequency murmurs occurring in the early to mid-
systolic, holosystolic, pansystolic) should be
systolic phase, are loudest over the aortic and pul-
noted (Figures 1-10 and 1-11).
 monic areas and rarely radiate to other areas. Table
· Next the site at which the munmur is loudest
1-6 lists the types of murmurs and their causes.
(PMI) (e.g., valve area) and where it radiates due
· Innocent murmurs have no known cause and are
to blood fow through the defect (e.g., other valve
 not associated with any cardiac problem. These
 areas where it can be heard) should be noted.
murmurs are soft systolic murmurs (no louder than
· The intensity or loudness of the murmur can be
'se suno un nnooo isnf Annsn pue (g ape
evaluated based on the following scale: grade I/
They can be located over any valve area but are
VI can only be heard after listening for several
most frequent over the mitral and aortic areas. Also,
 minutes and sounds like a prolonged first heart
these murmurs should disappear by the time of the
sound; grade II/VI is very soft, but can be heard
animal's last vaccinations (5 months of age).
immediately; grade III/VI is low to moderate in
·Pathologic murmurs are caused by underlying
 intensity; grade IV/VI is very loud, but a thrill
heart or vessel disease such as stenosis of valves
cannot be palpated on the thorax; grade V/VI is
or outfow tract or great vessels, valvular regur-
very loud, and a thrill can be palpated on the tho-
gitation, or abnormal intracardiac or extracardiac
rax; grade VI/VI can be heard without the use of
shunts. Refer to individual defects in the follow-
a stethoscope or with the stethoscope slightly off
ing chapters for a description of the murmurs as-
the thoracic wall.
sociated with each defect.
· The quality or shape of the murmur is subjective,
but can be evaluated according to graphic appear-
ance on phonocardiogram (see Figures 1-10 and
Table 1-6
 Types of Heart Murmurs and Their
1-11). Regurgitant murmurs are plateau shaped
Causes
(e.g., equal loudness throughout). Ejection murmurs
Murmur
Cause
are usually decrescendo, crescendo, or diamond
Physiologic
Anemia
shaped. Machinery or continuous murmurs are
diamond-shaped and peak at S2, continuing
Athletic heart
Fever
through all of systole and most of diastole. Blow-
Hypoproteinemia
ing murmurs are decrescendo murmurs (e.g., de-
Hypertension
crease in intensity).
Hyperthyroidism
· The pitch or frequency of the murmur can also
Pregnancy
be described. Some murmurs are high, medium
Innocent
No known cause
or low pitched, or a mix. Also, they can be harsh,
Pathologic
 Aortic regurgitation
blowing, or musical.
Aorticopulmonary septal defect
Arteriovenous fistula
 Atrial septal defect
Other Sounds Auscultated in the Thorax
 Mitral dysplasia
· Normal respiratory sounds include referred
 Mitral regurgitation
sounds from the trachea that are commonly heard
Mitral stenosis
Patent ductus arteriosus
over the lungs. Vesicular sounds are due to air
Pulmonic regurgitati on
moving through the small bronchi and are louder
Pulmonic stenosis
on inspiration. Bronchial sounds are due to air
Subaortic stenosis
moving through the large bronchi and trachea
Tetralogy of Fallot
and are heard best on expiration. Bronc hovesicu-
Tricuspid Dysplasia
lar sounds are the combination of the above two
Tricuspid regurgitation
and are heard best over the hilar area.
Tricuspid stenosis
Ventricular septal defect
· Abnormal respiratory sounds include attenuated
sounds as well as increased, abnormal sounds.
22
SECTIONIDiagnosis of HeartDisease
Ls
S2
Figure 1-10.  Timing and duration of murmurs. (From Gompf RE: The clinical approach to heart disease: history and physical
examination. In Fox PR, ed: Canine and feline cardiology. New York, 1988, Churchill Livingstone.)
Systolio
examination. In Fox PR, ed: Canine and feline cardiology. New York, 1988, Churchill Livingstone.)
Chapter!
The History and Physical Examination
23
· Attenuated bronchovesicular lung sounds are due
 pericarditis. Wheezes are relatively high pitched,
tothoracic masses, pleural effusion, pneumothorax,
musical sounds and are often a sign of pulmonary
obesity, pneumonia, shallow breathing, or early
pathology.
consolidation of the pulmonary parenchyma.
· Rhonchi are due to air passing through partially
SUGGESTED READINGS
obstructed airways in the bronchial tubes or
smallest airways. Rhonchi from the large bronchi
Buchanan J: Prevalence of cardiovascular disorders. In
are low pitched, sonorous, and almost continu-
Fox PR, Sisson DD, Moise NS, eds: Textbook of ca-
ous. They are heard best on inspiration. Rhonchi
nine and feline cardiology, ed 2, Philadelphia, 1992,
WBSaunders.
from the small bronchi are high pitched, sibilant,
 Or squeaky, and are heard best on expiration.
Gompf RE: The clinical approach to heart disease: his-
· Crackles are interrupted, crepitant, inspiratory
tory and physical examination. In Fox PR, ed: Canine
and feline cardiology. New York, 1988, Churchill
sounds heard in many disease conditions and are
Livingstone.
not pathognomonic for pulmonary edema. They
Kittleson MD: Signalment, history, and physical ex-
are due to opening of alveoli or airways that are
amination. In Kittleson MD, Kienle RD, eds: Small
collapsed or partially filled with fuid or bubbles
animal cardiovascular medicine. St Louis, 1998,
bursting in the airways. They are further defined
Mosby.
as fine or coarse in quality.
Sisson DD, Ettinger SJ: The physical examination. In
· Other sounds which can be ausculted include
Fox PR, Sisson DD, Moise NS, eds: Textbook of ca-
pleural friction rubs. Pleural friction rubs are
nine and feline cardiology, ed 2, Philadelphia, 1999,
grating, rubbing sounds heard during inspira-
WB Saunders.
tion and expiration owing to the moving of two
Smith FWK, Keene B, Tilley LP: Heart sounds. In
Smith FWK, Keene B, Tilley LP, eds: Interpretation
 relatively dry, roughened pleural surfaces against
each other. Pericardial friction rubs are short,
of heart sounds, murmurs, arthythmias, and lung
sounds: a guide to cardiac auscultation in dogs and
cats—CD ROM and manual. Philadelphia, 2006,
heart movement. Pericardial knocks are diastolic
WBSaunders.
sounds that occur in animals with constrictive
Radiology of the Heart
Brian A. Poteet
INTRODUCTION
· Use of a grid is imperative for adequate image
Thoracic radiography is a key component of the car
quality when chest thickness exceeds 10 cm.
diovascular evaluation. Careful attention to proper
Table 2-1 is a representative thoracic technique
positioning is of primary importance to the use of
chart using a 400-speed imaging system and 300
radiographic guidelines for interpretation. Radio-
 mA/125 kVp radiographic equipment.
graphic interpretation relies heavily on possible
Radiographic Projections
disease considerations (i.e., differential diagnosis)
derived from signalment, physical examination,
Lateral Projection
and clinical pathology. Radiographic findings are
 There are subtle differences in cardiac conforma-
not consistently specific enough to lead to the deri-
tion and position when comparing the right ver-
vation of a definitive diagnosis without supportive
sus the left lateral radiographic projection. These
clinical evidence. The radiographic study isolated
differences are not significant enough to warrant
from clinical information will not provide a diagno-
further discussion except to note that the same
sis. The clinician must be aware of certain param-
projection should be used on all serial radio-
eters and guidelines for interpretation in order to
graphic examinations when repeated evaluation
 derive information from the radiographic image
is required.
· Patient positioning and adequate radiographic
exposure are critical to an accurate radiographic
RADIOGRAPHIC TECHNIQUE
interpretation in the lateral projection.
Exposure Technique and Film Quality
KEY POINT
· Ex posure technique will vary depending on equip-
A normal heart can appear diseased and vice
ment and film-screen combinations. The current
versa when positioning is not adequate.
standard for veterinary radiographic equipment is
a 300 mA/125 to 75 kVp machine.
Guidelines for proper exposure and positioning of
· The current standard for economic film-screen
a lateral thoracic radiograph (Figure 2-1) include:
combination imaging systems is the rare earth
· Radiographic exposure should be adequate to
systems. Because of the motion created by res-
define the dorsal spinous process of the cranial
thoracic vertebrae superimposed on the scapula.
combinations that allow shorter exposure times
· To ensure a lateral projection, the dorsal heads of
 are best suited for thoracic radiography.
the ribs should be superimposed.
24
Chapter2
RadiologyoftheHeart
25
TABLE 2-1
Small Animal Thoracic Radiographic Technique Chart Using a 400-Speed Film-Screen
System and Standard Radiographic Equipment*
Thickness (cm)
mA
Time mAs
kVp
Table Top
Thorax
100
1/60
1.7
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 cm
48
50
52
54
56
58
60
62
 In the Table (using Grid)
Thorax
200
1/60
3.3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16 cm
52
54
56
58
60
62
64
66
68
70
72
74
76
1/60
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28 cm
300
5
76
78
80
82
84
86
88
90
92
95
90
101
Technique rules of thumb: Chan ge exposure-
( 1) 10% K Vp: (2) two thirds of mAs.
*Single-phase fully rectified 300mA 125 KVp generator focal-film distance = 38".
Heart
Abdomen
B
Figure 2-1.
A, Guidelines for proper exposure and positioning of a lateral thoracic radiographic projection. (1) Exposure should 
allow delineation of the thoracic vertebral dorsal spinous process superimposed over the scapula. (2) The forelimbs should be pulled
forward to provide an unsuperimposed view of the cranial thorax. (3) The dorsal rib heads should be superimposed (compare with
B). (4) The exposure should be performed during inspiration, which provides maximum separation between caudal cardiac margin
left and right rib heads. (2) The oblique projection markedly distorts cardiac silhouette conformation and intrathoracic position. (3)
 Expiratory phase radiographic exposure with poor lung volume between caudal cardiac margin and cupula of the diaphragm.
26
SECTION I
Diagnosis of Heart Disease
L
L
DV
DV
3
2
2
2
1
A
1
B
E
4
4
V
Figure 2-2.
 A, Guidelines for proper exposure and positioning of a dorsoventral/ventrodorsal thoracic radiographic projection.
L, Lateral; DV, dorsoventral. (1) The radiographic exposure should provide outline definition of thoracic vertebra superimposed 
in thoracic body wall thickness). (3) The thoracic vertebral dorsal spinous processes should be superimposed over the body por-
tions for the entire length of the thoracic spine. (4) Adequate lung volume between caudal cardiac margin and cupula indicates
an inspiratory phase radiographic exposure. B, Improperly positioned dorsoventral radiographic projection. Thoracic vertebral
dorsal spinous processes projected over the left hemithorax (1) and the sternal vertebra projected over the right hemithorax (2),
indicating an oblique thoracic dorsoventral radiographic projection. A lack of lung volume between caudal cardiac margin (3) and
· The forelimbs should be pulled forward so that
· The dorsal lung fields are hyperinflated, and the
they are not superimposed over the cranial thorax
vessels to the caudal lung fields are magnified
Or cranial margin of the heart.
owing to increased object-film distance. This
· The radiographic exposure is taken during full
produces an improved radiographic definition
inspiration, identified as an adequate lung field
of the large pulmonary arteries and veins of
spacing between the caudal margin of the heart
the caudal lung fields. The DV projection also
and the cupula of the diagram. Two primary
allows increased detection of early pulmonary
disease considerations for consistent expiratory
infiltrates (most commonly with cardiac dis-
phase radiographs are:
ease in the hilar and caudodorsal lung fields).
· Obesity and Pickwickian syndrome, where the
However, an improperly positioned DV/VD
Overabundance of abdominal fat prevents ade-
projection is worthless for cardiac radiographic
quate inspiratory distraction of the diaphragm
interpretation.
· Upper airway disease, which most commonly
causes obstruction during the inspiratory phase
of respiration
KEY POINT
Athough the DV projection is preferred, a
Dorsoventral/Ventrodorsal Projection
straight (symmetric) projection is the ultimate
· The dorsoventral (DV) radiographic projection is
goal, with patient compliance determining 
preferred over the ventrodorsal (VD) for cardiac
which projection (DV vs. VD) is attainable.
evaluation for two reasons:
· The anatomic positioning of the heart in the DV
projection is less dependent on thoracic cavity con-
Guidelines for proper exposure and positioning for
formation (deep-chested vs. barrel-chested breeds).
the DV/VD projections (Figure 2-2) include:
Chapter2P
Radiology of the Heart
27
· Radiographic exposure should be sufficient to
formation of early cardiogenic pulmonary edema.
define the outline of the thoracic vertebrae super-
 Adequate exposure is critical to ensure definition
imposed over the cardiac silhouette.
of caudal pulmonary vasculature superimposed
· The kVp should be increased 10% from tech
over the cupula of the diaphragm.
mique-chart values for obese patients. Examina-
· The radiographic detection of caudodorsal pul-
tion of the thoracic body wall thickness on the
monary vasculature is the best objective parame-
VD view should assist in evaluation of obesity.
ter for the detection of pulmonary edema. Vessels
· The dorsal spinous processes of the thoracic
in the normal lung are detected by their soft tissue
vertebrae should be centered over the vertebral
opacity contrasting with the normal radiolucent
 bodies along the full length of the thoracic spine.
gas-filled lung parenchyma surrounding them.
The thoracic stermal vertebrae also should be su-
As pulmonary parenchyma (interstitial spaces as
perimposed over the thoracic spine and be essen-
well as alveoli) become filled with edema fuid,
tially indistinguishable radiographically.
the nonmal radiographic soft tissue-gas contrast
· The radiograph is taken during full inspiration,
is lost, and delineation of the vessels diminishes.
identifed as an adequate lung field spacing be-
In other words, the vessels start to "disappear'"
tween caudal cardiac margin and cupula of the
from radiographic detection with the increased
diaphragm.
opacity of the surrounding edematous lung pa-
renchyma (Figure 2-3).
· The phase of inspiration is critical when using this
PROJECTION SELECTION IN
method for interpretation both in the DV/VD and
CARDIAC-RELATED PATHOLOGY
in the lateral projections. Pulmonary pathology
Pulmonary Edema
can be mimicked when underinflation decreases
the parenchymal gas content per unit volume,
· The DV is preferred over the VD projection for
thus decreasing the radiographic contrast be-
radiographic detection of pulmonary edema. The
tween lung parenchyma and associated vascu-
 DV view accentuates pathology in the dorsal lung
lature. This is especially true in older patients.
field, which is the most common location for the
which already have slightly increased pulmonary
L
DV
DV
Heart
B
LAa
A
LA
PV
PV
Alv
Figure 2-3.
 A, Normal radiographic definition and contrast of pulmonary venous vasculature (Pv) with surrounding normal
radiolucent lung parenchyma. L, Lateral; DV, dorsoventral; LA, left atrium; LAa, left atrial auricular appendage. B, Radiographic
obliteration of pulmonary venous vasculature (PV) by alveolar consolidation (Aiv) of hilar and caudal lung lobes, a characteristic
distribution for cardiogenic pulmonary edema.
28
SECTION IDiagnosis of Heart Disease
degree of respiratory compromise should always
related pulmonary degenerative changes (intersti-
be assessed prior to thoracic imaging.
tial fibrosis, bronchial mineralization, heterotopic
· If significant amounts of pleural effusion are sus-
pulmonary bone formation).
pected, increasing radiographic exposure to ab-
dominal technique-chart levels results in better
intrathoracic radiographic contrast. When pos-
Pleural Effusion
sible, thoracocentesis and fuid drainage prior to
· Pleural effusion is radiographically evident as fo-
radiography is always preferred.
cal areas of increased soft tissue opacity located
within the thoracic cavity. It causes separation of
lung lobes from both the thoracic wall and the ad-
RADIOGRAPHIC ANATOMY
jacent lobes. This is seen on the lateral projection
Lateral Thoracic Radiographic Projection
as an increase in the soft tissue thickness of the
 caudodorsal thoracophrenic angle and diaphragm
Cardiac Parameters
as well as linear soft tissue opacities (pleural fis-
Even though the lateral radiographic projection de-
sures) at anatomic locations comparable with
fines the cranial-caudal and dorsal-ventral dimen-
interlobar fissures (Figure 2-4). Pleural effusion
sions of the thorax, the anatomy of the heart of the
also contributes to loss of definition of the cra-
dog and the cat as it resides in the thorax also al-
nial and caudal margins of the heart, producing a
lows this projection to detail the left and right as-
radiographic positive-silhouette sign.
pects of the heart. This is because in the dog and the
· In cases of pleural effusion, the VD projection is
cat the heart is slightly rotated along its base-apex
much preferred over the DV view for detection
axis, such that the right cardiac chambers are posi-
and delineation of cardiac size and shape. If intra-
tioned more cranially and the left chambers posi-
thoracic fluid volumes are severe enough, the heart
tioned more caudally. Thus, the cardiac silhouette
can effectively disappear on the DV view because
as it appears on the lateral projection defines the
of the relative distribution of the fuid and heart
right side of the heart along the cranial margin and
in the thoracic cavity. The positive-silhouette
 the left side is defined by its caudal margin (Figures
 phenomenon is accentuated in the DV compared
2-6 to 2-8).
with the VD view (Figure 2-5). However, patient
The camine and feline heart shape or radiographic
positioning for the DV projection puts less
silhouette is ovoid, with the apex more pointed in
physiologic demand on the patient compromised
confonmation than the broader base. This base-
by pleural effusion and thus is favored over the VD
 apex difference in conformation is accentuated
 projection. The patient's physiologic stability and
in the cat. The heart axis is defined by drawing a
2
2
1
Trachea
UeaH
Figure 2-4.
Lateral thoracic radiographic projection of pleural efusion. Intrathoracic fluid accumulation causes separation of
adjacent lung lobes by (1) linear interlobar opacities, radiographically defined as pleural fissures, and (2) separation of lung lobes
from the thoracic wall.
Chapter2
Radiology of the Heart
29
L
VD
DV
V
Figure 2-5.
. A, Ventrodorsal (VD) thoracic radiographic projection of pleural effusion consisting of pleural fissure lines (ciosed
arrows) with blunting of the thoracophrenic angles (open arrows). Note that the cardiac silhouette is stil well outlined. B, Dorso-
ventral (Dv) thoracic radiographic projection of pleural effusion. The intrathoracic fluid distribution creates a “"positive silhouette
sign" where a complete loss of the cardiac silhouette has occurred. Thus, the VD projection (A) is preferred for cardiac silhouette
definition in the presence of pleural effusion. L, Lateral.
CrVC
PAS
LP
RP
11
11
11
1
111
CaVC
RA
TV
ra
PV
RV
Figure 2-6.
 Schematic lateral thoracic radiographic projection of the relative position and size of the right-side structures of the
heart. Note the more cranial position of the right chambers of the heart. CrvC, Cranial vena cava; PAS, main pulmonary artery;
pulmonary artery; TV, tricuspid valve; CaVC, caudal vena cava.
30
SECTION I
Diagnosis of Heart Disease
Aa
LA
CVC
MV
LVI
Aor
AV
Aot
LV
Figure 2-7.
.Schematic lateral thoracic radiographic projection of the relative position and size of the left-side structures of the
heart. Note the more caudal position of the left chambers of the heart. Aa, Aortic arch; AOr, aorta; AV, aortic valve; Aot, aortic
outflow tract; IV, left ventricle; IVi, left ventricular inflow tract; LA, left atrium; MV, mitral valve; CVC, caudal vena cava.
Trachea
TB
CVC
RA
LV
RV
Abdomen
Figure 2-8.
 Schematic lateral thoracic radiographic projection outlining the approximate location of the four heart chambers.
TB, Tracheal bifurcation; CVC, caudal vena cava; RA, right atrium; LA, left atrium; RV, right ventricle; LV, left ventricle.
line from the tracheal bifurcation (carina) to the
Apso, Bulldog) tend to have more globular-shaped
hearts, with increased stermal contact of the cra-
stermal vertebrae. This angle can decrease in the cat
nial margin of the heart. The heart chambers can
with age and is often called a "lazy" heart. It has
 be roughly defined by a line connecting the apex
been postulated that this may be related to a loss
to the tracheal bifurcation and a second line per-
of aortic connective tissue elasticity. This is most
pendicular to the base-apex axis and positioned at
often seen in cats older than 7 years. Shallow,
the level of the ventral aspect of the caudal vena
barrel-chested dog breeds (Dachshund, Lhasa
cava (see Figure 2-8).
Chapter2
Radiology of the Heart
31
Trachea
T4
Unit measuring site
CVC
VHS = S + L
Measured in vertebral units beginning at T4.
Figure 2-9.   Schematic representation parameters for the vertebral scale system of cardiac size. The vertebral heart sum (VHS) is
the sum of the long axis cardiac dimension (l) and the maximal perpendicular short axis dimension (S). S and L are measured in 
vertebral units beginning at T4. CVC, Caudal vena cava.
The dorsal cardiac margin includes both atria,
A more objective determination of cardiac size
pulmonary arteries and veins, the cranial and caudal
has been formulated for the dog and uses a verte-
vena cavae, and the aortic arch (see Figures 2-6 to
bral scale system in which cardiac dimensions are
2-8). The cranial border is formed by both the right
scaled against the length of specifc thoracic ver-
ventricle and the right atrial appendage, resulting in
tebrae (Figure 2-9). In lateral radiographs the long
the radiographically defined "cranial waist" (see Fig-
axis of the heart (L) is measured with a caliper
ures 2-6 and 2-8). The caudal margin is formed by the
extending from the ventral aspect of the left main
left atrium and left ventricle, with the atrioventricular
stem bronchus (tracheal bifurcation hilus, carina) to
junction defined as the radiographic "caudal waist.:"
the left ventricular apex. The caliper is repositioned
The base-to-apex cardiac dimension or length
along the vertebral column beginning at the cranial
Occupies approximately 70% of the DV distance of
edge of the fourth thoracic vertebra. The length of
the thoracic cavity at its position within the thorax.
the heart is recorded as the number of vertebrae cau-
 For objective measurements it is important to mea-
dal to that point and estimated to the nearest tenth
sure thoracic cavity distance between the thoracic
of a vertebra. The maximum perpendicular short
spine and the stermum at an axis perpendicular to
 axis (S) is measured in the same manmer beginning
thethoracicspine.
at the fourth thoracic vertebra. If obvious left atrial
The cranial-caudal dimension or width as it ap-
enlargement is present, the short axis measurement
pears on the lateral projection is measured at its
is made at the ventral jumcture of left atrial and cau-
maximum width (which is usually at the level of
dal vena caval silhouettes.
the ventral aspect of the insertion of the caudal vena
The lengths in vertebrae (v) of the long and
cava) and perpendicular to the base-apex axis. This
short axes are then added to obtain a vertebral
classically has been defined as between 2.5 (deep-
heart sum (VHS), which provides a single number
chested confonmation breeds [Setters, Afghans,
representing heart size proportionate to the size
Collies]) and 3.5 (barrel-chested conformation
of the dog. The average VHS in the dog is 9.7 v
breeds [Dachshunds, Bulldogs]) intercostal spaces
(range 8.5 to 10.5 v). Caution must be exercised in
(ICS) in the dog and 2.5 to 3.0 ICS in the cat. The
some breeds that have excessively disproportionate
ICS measurement is made at an axis perpendicular
skeletal-body weight conformations. An example is
to the long axis of the ribs. Thus, the cardiac width
the English Bulldog, which has relatively small tho-
distance determination may have to be shifted in
racic vertebrae and commonly has hemivertebrae
axis angle before comparison to ICS length.
as well; thus, a normal heart may be interpreted
32
SECTION IDiagnosis of Heart Disease
Trachea
BCrL
RPA
TB
LPA
Heart
PA
PV
Figure 2-10.  Pulmonary vascular anatomy in the lateral thoracic projection. Cranial lung lobe branch of the pulmonary artery
(PA), cranial lung lobe branch of the pulmonary vein (pV), end-on view of the right main pulmonary artery (RPA) as it traverses
the thorax from left to right, and left main pulmonary artery (LPA). TB, tracheal bifurcation (carina); BCrl, Bronchus to a cranial
lung lobe.
as large with the VHS method. Although the VHS
The pulmonary arteries and veins should be equal
concept is more precise, clinical judgment is still
in size. The width of the vessels where they cross
necessary to avoid over diagnosing or under diag-
the fourth rib should not exceed the width of the
nosing heart disease.
narrowest portion of that rib at its juncture with the
rib head (the dorsal aspect of the rib near the tho-
Vessel Parameters
racic spine). The dorsal section of the rib is used as
The main pulmonary artery (pulmonary trunk) can-
a reference to adjust for radiographic magnification
not be seen on the lateral projection owing to a pos-
owing to thoracic confonmation.
itive-silhouette sign with the craniodorsal base of
Dorsoventral and Ventrodorsal Projections
the heart. The left pulmonary artery can sometimes
be seen extending dorsal and caudal to the tracheal
Cardiac Parameters
bifurcation (carina). The right pulmonary artery is
The heart is rotated on its long axis such that the
frequently seen end-on as it leaves the main pul-
right chambers are oriented both right and cranially,
monary artery immediately ventral to the carina
and the left chambers reside both left and caudal.
(Figure 2-10). This end-on appearance may be con-
The degree of rotation is less in the cat. The cranial-
fused with a mass lesion on normal radiographs and
caudal rotation is most significant when defining
is accentuated in cases of pulmonary hypertension
the location of the left and right atria, respectively.
such as heartworm disease. The pulmonary veins
 The canine heart appears radiographically as an
are best identified as they enter the left atrium cau-
elliptical opacity with its base-apex axis orientation
dal to the heart base.
approximately 30 degrees to the left of the midline.
Using the larger, more proximal segments of the
The width of the heart across its widest point is usu-
mainstem bronchi as a reference, the pulmonary ar-
ally 60% to 65% of the thoracic width at its loca-
teries are dorsal to the bronchus, and the pulmonary
tion within the thorax. In the cat the cardiac axis
veins are ventral to the bronchus (see Figure 2-10).
is most commonly on or close to midline, and its
The vessels to the cranial lung lobes are usu-
width does not usually exceed 50% of the width
ally seen as two pairs of vessels, each with their
of the thoracic cavity during full inspiration. The
respective bronchi. The more cranial pair of vessels
cardiac silhouette may be artificially increased in
generally corresponds to the side on which the lat-
the obese patient owing to an excessive amount of
eral projection was made. Thus, in the right lateral
pericardial fat. In these cases, the cardiac silhouette
projection, the right cranial lobar vessels are more
margin appears to be less well defined or blurred
cranial than vessels of the left cranial lung lobe.
because the margin of contrast between soft tissue
Chapter2
Radiology of the Heart
33
AA
PAS
AV
Aot
LV
Da
Figure 2-11.
Schematic anatomy of the chambers and vasculature of the left ventricular outflow tractof the heart in the dorso-
ventral radiographic projection. LV, Left ventricle; Aot, aortic outflow tract; AV, aortic valve; AA, aortic arch; PAS, pulmonary artery
segment; Da, descending aorta.
PAS
rpa
Ipa
LA
P
0
Figure 2-12.
Schematic anatomy of the pulmonary vasculature in the dorsoventral projection. PAs, Main pulmonary artery
(radiographic description—-pulmonary artery segment); Ipa, left pulmonary artery; pa, right pulmonary artery; LA, left atrium; Pv,
pulmonary veins.
(heart), fat (pericardial), and air is not as distinct as
vertical in the thorax and thus produces a smaller
that between soft tissue and air.
and more circular cardiac silhouette conformation.
Evaluating the obesity of the patient by evalu-
 The broad, barrel-chested breeds produce a radio-
ating the thickness of the abaxial thoracic wall
 graphic silhouette that appears wider than that of
and width of the mediastinum (as well as exam-
standard breeds.
ining the patient) will assist in the determination
The margins of the heart that create the car-
of pericardial fat contribution to cardiac size. In
diac silhouette contain a number of structures that
deep, narrow-chested breeds, the heart stands more
often overlap. A clock face analogy can be used to
34
SECTION IDiagnosis of Heart Disease
LA
m
auricular appendage (LAu) contributes to the cardiac silhouette at the 2 to 3 o'clock position (1). The body of the left atrium su-
perimposed over the caudal cardiac silhouette produces a radiolucent "mach" line, a radiographic edge effect caused by an acute
change in soft tissue thickness (2).
#
RAa
PAS
RA
PV
RV
CVC
0
m
Figure 2-14.  Schematic anatomy of the chambers and outflow tract of the right side of the heart in the dorsoventral radio-
pulmonary artery segment; CVC, caudal vena cava.
simplify the location of these structures. The aortic
segment (PAS) (Figures 2-12 and 2-13). In the
arch extends from the 11 o'clock to 1 o'clock posi-
cat, the body of the left atrium proper forms the 2
tion (Figure 2-11). The main pulmonary artery is
to 3 o'clock position of the cardiac silhouette. In
located from the 1 to 2 o'clock position, with its
the dog. the left atrium is superimposed over the
radiographic designation as the pulmonary artery
caudal portion of the cardiac silhouette in the DV
Chapter 2
 Radiology of the Heart
35
projection (see Figure 2-12). With severe cases of
substantiated on multiple radiographic views where
left atrial enlargement in the dog, the left auricular
applicable.
appendage contributes to the definition and enlarge-
· Evaluate the radiographs for technical quality.
ment of the cardiac silhouette at the 2 to 3 o'clock
positioning, and proper exposure. If the study is
position (Figure 2-13). The left ventricle forms the
substandard, then stop right here and repeat the
left heart margin from the 2 to 6 o'clock position
radiographic study.
(see Figure 2-11). The right ventricle is located
· Determine the phase of respiration.
from the 7 to 11 o'clock position (the right ven-
·Review the entire thoracic cavity: spine, stermum,
tricle does not extend to the apex of the heart) (Fig-
diaphragm, thoracic wall, ribs, cranial and caudal
ure 2-14). The right atrium is located at the 9 to 11
mediastinum, conformation and position of the
0'clock position (see Figure 2-14). Pericardial fat
diaphragm.
in the dog can asymmetrically contribute to cardiac
· Review the portion of the cranial abdomen in-
silhouette enlargement at the 4 to 5 o'clock and 8 to
cluded in the projection. Thoracic radiographic
11 o'clock positions.
exposure is usually half of that required for ab-
 dominal imaging but a cursory evaluation of ab-
Vessel Parameters
dominal contrast, detail, and hepatic size (using
The pulmonary arteries originate from the main
gastric axis) can be performed.
pulmonary artery or the PAS with the right branch
· Evaluate the position, course, and diameter of the
coursing transversely, superimposed over
the
trac hea and mainstem bifurcations.
cranial portion of the heart silhouette, extending
· Evaluate the position of the cardiac apex and cau-
beyond the right heart margin at approximately the
dal mediastinum.
 8 o'clock position (see Figure 2-12). The left pul-
· Evaluate the size, shape, and course of the main
monary artery branch courses caudally, superim-
- Ad paudnad pu An And
 posed over the caudal left ventricular portion of the
teries and veins.
heart, and extends beyond the left heart margin at
· Evaluate the lung fields for hyperinflation or un-
approximately the 4 o'clock position. The pulmo-
derinflation and for distribution and pattem of
nary veins are best seen as they enter the left atrium
increased or decreased opacity.
along the caudal margin of the cardiac silhouette
· Evaluate the cardiac margin (cranial, caudal, right,
(see Figure 2-12). Compared with the pulmonary
left, "clock position" segmentation) for enlarge-
arteries, they are clustered in a more axial position.
ment, abnormal position, or confonrmation.
Thus, the pulmonary arteries extend to both the cra-
nial and caudal lung felds in a more abaxial posi-
tion relative to the pulmonary veins.
NONCARDLAC-RELATED
The aortic arch is within the cranial mediasti-
VARIABLES THAT CAN MIMIC
num at the cranial heart margin and is normally
RADIOGRAPHIC SIGNS OF
not visible. The descending aorta is superimposed
CARDIAC DISEASE
over the heart and extends caudally, dorsally, and
Cardiac Position
medially. The left lateral margin of the aorta can
be seen to the left of the vertebral column on both
· Pulmonary pathology (such as lung consolida-
DV and VD views (see Figure 2-11). The caudal
tion, atelectasis, or pleural disease) can cause a
vena cava courses cranially from the diaphragm
mediastinal shift and alter the position and axis
to the right of midline and into the right caudal
of the heart in the thoracic cavity.
margin of the heart (see Figure 2-14). This is one
· Mediastinal mass lesions can affect the cardiac
of the most useful landmarks for detenmination
position and axis, as well as obscure the cranial and
of proper orientation of the DV radiograph on a
cardiac margins when in contact with the heart, by
viewbox.
 producing a radiographic positive-silhouette sign.
· Pneumothorax can produce disproportionate
hemithoracic volume changes, altering cardiac
RADIOGRAPHIC
position and axis. Pneumothorax commonly
INTERPRETATION
produces elevation of the cardiac apex from the
A systematic evaluation of the entire thoracic
stermum. This is supported by other radiographic
cavity involves adherence to and inclusion of the
signs of pneumothorax:
following steps with each radiographic interpreta-
· Premature termination of lung vasculature into
tion. Abnormalities supportive of disease should be
the periphery of the thoracic cavity
36
SECTION I  Diagnosis of Heart Disease
· Lung lobe margin detection as it contrasts with
· Uneven lung infation secondary to disease or
nonparenchymal free intrathoracic gas
previous lobectomy can produce a mediastinal
·Stemal conformational abnormalities due to con-
shift and resultant apex shift.
genital defects or previous trauma can alter car-
· If radiographs are taken on diseased, recumbent pa-
diac position and axis.
    d  
 general anesthesia, then hypostatic congestion and
atelectasis of the dependent lung fields can produce
Cardiac Size and Lateral Projection
 a mediastinal shift, altering cardiac position.
· Younger animals appear to have larger hearts
· Pectus excavatum or "funnel chest" stemal con-
relative to their thoracic size than do mature
formation due to congenital deformities
patients.
· The heart appears smaller on inspiration than
 On expiration. During expiration increased ster-
EVALUATION OF HEART
nal contact of the right heart margin and dorsal
CHAMBER ENLARGEMENT
elevation of the trachea occurs, falsely suggesting
Right Atrial Enlargement
right-heart enlargement.
· Anemic or emaciated patients often have small
Radiographie Signs
hearts owing to hypovolemia and are hyperin-
· Lateral projection (Figure 2-15):
fated to compensate for hypoxemia. In deep-
· Elevation of the trachea as it courses dorsally
 chested conformation breeds, the cardiac apex
over the right atrium
can be elevated far enough from the stermum to
· Accentuation of the cranial waist. Preferential
mimic pneumothorax.
enlargement of the more dorsal margin of the
cranial margin of the cardiac silhouette defines
Cardiac Position, Dorsoventral/
 selective enlargement of the right atrial auricu-
Ventrodorsal Projection
 lar appendage.
Malposition of the Cardiac Apex to the Right
· Increased soft tissue opacity of the cranial
or Left
aspect of the cardiac silhouette owing to in-
· Malposition of the heart to the right is normal
creased soft tissue thickness of the right atrium
variant in the cat.
superimposed over the right ventricle
Ao
Pa
RA
LA
CVC
Abdomen
Trachea
RV
Normal cardiac 
LV
silhouette
Figure 2-15.
Cardiac silhouette changes associated with vessel and chamber enlargement in the lateral thoracic radiographic
projection. Ao, Aortic arch; Pa, main pulmonary artery; RA, right atrium; LA, left atrium; RV, right ventricle; LV, left ventricle; CVC,
caudal vena cava. Dotted fine, area of right atrial superimposition over the right ventricle.
Chapter2
Radiology of the Heart
37
Aa
PaS
-LAa
RA
Normal heart
LV
RV
Figure 2-16.
Cardiac silhouette changes associated with vessel and chamber enlargement in the dorsoventral radiographic
projection. Aa, Aortic arch; PaS, main pulmonary artery; LAa, left atrial auricular appendage; LV, left ventricle; RV, right ventricle;
RA, right atrium.
LA
4）
RA
③
LV
RV
2
Abdomen
1
Trachea
CVC
Figure 2-17.
 Schematic representation of radiographic signs associated with right- heart enlargement in the lateral projection.
(1) Dorsal lifting of apex from sternum. (2) Increased sternal contact of cranial cardiac margin. (3) Disproportionate enlargement
of the cranial portion of the cardiac silhouette when empirically divided into its right and left chambers. (4) Elevation of the tra-
chea as it courses dorsally over the right atrium. RA, Right atrium; RV, right ventricle; LA, left atrium; LV, left ventricle; CVC, caudal 
vena cava.
· DV projection (Figure 2-16):
· Cardiomyopathy
· Enlargement of the cardiac margin at 9 to 11
· Right atrial neoplasia (e.g., hemangiosarcoma)
o'clock
· Enlargement can be dramatic in severe cases
Differential Diagnosis
(especially in the cat) and can be easily mis-
· Cranial mediastinal mass
taken for pulmonary hilar mass lesion.
·Heartbase neoplasia(most common inbrachyce-
phalic breeds)
Causes of Right Atrial Enlargement
· Tracheobronchial lymphadenopathy
·Right-heart failure
· Superimposition of the aortic arch or main pul-
· Tricuspid insufficiency
monary artery
38
SECTION I  Diagnosis of Heart Disease
· Right cranial or middle lobar pulmonary alveolar
· Cardiomyopathy
consolidation or mass lesion
· Cor pulmonale
Right Ventricular Enlargement
· Diroflariasis
· Congenital heart disease: pulmonic stenosis,
Radiographie Signs
 patent ductus arteriosus (PDA), ventricular sep-
· Lateral projections (see Figure 2-15)
tal defects, tetralogy of Fallot, tricuspid valve
· Increased stermal contact of cranial cardiac
dysplasia
margin
Left Atrial Enlargement
· Elevation of the cardiac apex from the ster-
num
Radiographie Signs
· Rounding of the conformation of the entire car-
· Lateral projection (see Figure 2-15)
diac silhouette; increased cardiac width
· Dorsal elevation of the caudal portion of tra-
· Disproportionate enlargement of the cranial
chea and carina
portion of the cardiac silhouette when empiri-
· Disproportionate dorsal elevation of the main-
cally divided into its right and left chambers
stem bronchi (the two will no longer be super-
(Figure 2-17)
imposed; the left bronchus will appear more
· Dorsal elevation of the caudal vena cava
dorsal than the right bronchus)
· DV projection (see Figure 2-16)
· Enlargement and straightening of the cau-
· Cardiac silhouette enlargement at the 6 to 11
dodorsal portion of the cardiac silhouette
o'clock position
with almost a right-angle margin confor-
· Given the enlargement and rounded conformation 
mation (Figure 2-18); straightening of the
of the right margin, the left margin in comparison
caudal margin of the heart and loss of the
assumes a more straightened conformation; an
caudal waist (determined by the atrioven-
 Overall "reverse-D" conformational appearance
tricular junction)
 of the cardiac silhouette results
· DV projection (see Figure 2-16)
· Shift of cardiac apex to the left
·The dog
· Enlargement of the atrial auricular append-
Causes of Right Ventricular Enlargement
age, which now produces a noticeable focal
· Secondary to left-heart failure
"bulge” enlargement at the 2 to 3 o'clock po-
·Tricuspid insufficiency
sition (see Figures 2-13 and 2-16)
Trachea
3）
5
④
LA
RA
RV
LV
Figure 2-18.
 Schematic representation of radiographic signs associated with left- heart enlargement in the lateral projection.
(1) Rounding and widening of the cardiac apex conformation. (2) Straightening and increased vertical axis of the caudal cardiac
margin. (3) Left atrial enlargement with characteristic right-angular caudodorsal margin conformation. (4) Dorsal elevation of the
intrathoracic portion of the trachea, carina, and mainstem bronchi. The angle between the thoracic spine axis and the trachea is
diminished to the point of becoming parallel. (5) Separation of normally superimposed caudal mainstem bronchi. Left more dorsal
in position than the right. RA, Right atrium; RV, right ventricle; LA, left atrium; LV, left ventricle.
Chapter2
 Radiology of the Heart
39
·A double opacity of the atrial body
Enlargement of the Aortic Arch and Aorta
over the caudal aspect of the cardiac
silhouette; the body of the left atrium su-
Radiographic Signs
perimposed over the caudal cardiac silhou-
· Lateral projection (see Figure 2-15)
ette produces a radiolucent "mach" line,
· Widening of the dorsal aspect of the cardiac
a radiographic edge effect caused by an
silhouette
acute change in soft tissue thickness (see
· Enlargement of the craniodorsal cardiac
Figure 2-13)
margin
· The cat
· DV projection (see Figure 2-16)
· Enlargement if the cardiac margin at the 2 to
· Widening and increased cranial extensions of the
 3 o'clock position of the silhouette
cardiac margin between the 11 and 1 o'clock
positions.
Causes of Left A trial Enlargement
· Mitral insufficiency
Causes of Aortic Arch Enlargement
·Cardiomyopathy
· PDA; enlargement more abaxial (1 o'clock)
· Congenital heart disease; mitral valve dyspla-
· Aortic stenosis with poststenotic enlargement of
sia, PDA, ventricular septal defects, atrial septal
the aortic arch; enlargement more axial and cra-
defects
nial (11 o'clock)
· Left ventricular failure
● Aortic aneurysm (very rare)
Differential Diagnosis
Differen tial Dia gnosis
· Hilar lymphadenopathy
·Normal variation in some dogs
· Pulmonary mass adjacent to hilus
· Very common variant in older cats with "lazy"
heart conformation; very prominent on the DV
Left Ventricular Enlargement
projection
Radiographic Signs
·Cranial mediastinal mass
· Lateral projection (see Figure 2-15)
· Thymus, or the "sail-sign" in young dogs
· Loss of the caudal waist
· Cranial mediastinal fat in obese brachycephalic
· Caudal cardiac margin straighter and more ver-
dogs
tical than normal
Enlargement of the Pulmonary Artery
· Dorsal elevation of the intrathoracic portion
of the trachea, carina, and mainstem bronchi;
Radiographie Signs
the angle between the thoracic spine axis and
· Lateral projection (see Figure 2-15)
trachea is diminished to the point of becoming
· Protrusion of the craniodorsal heart border
parallel
· DV projection (see Figure 2-16)
· Disproportionate enlargement of the caudal
· Lateral bulge of the cardiac margin at 1 to 2
portion of the cardiac silhouette when em-
 o'clock position
pirically divided into its right and left cardiac
· Radiographically defined as the pulmonary ar-
chambers (see Figure 2-18)
tery segment (PAS)
· DV projection (see Figure 2-16)
· Rounding and enlargement of left ventricular
Causes of Pulmonary Artery Segment
margin
Enlargement
· Rounding and broadening of the cardiac apex
· Dirofilariasis
conformation
· Pulmonary thrombosis and thromboembolism
· Shift of the cardiac apex to the right
· Cor pulmonale
· Congenital disease: pulmonic stenosis, PDA, sep-
Causes of Left Ventricular Enlargement
tal defects both ventricular and atrial with left-to-
· Mitral insufficiency
right shunting
· Cardiomyopathy
· Congenital heart disease: PDA, aortic stenosis,
Differential Diagnosis
ventricular septal defects
· Previous dirofilariasis infection and treatment
· High-output cardiac disease: fuid overload,
· Rotational (oblique) positional artifact (usually
 chronic anemia, peripheral arteriovenous fistula,
on VD projection) most commonly experienced
obesity, chronic renal disease, hyperthyroidism
with deep-chested conformation dogs
40
SECTION IDiagnosis of Heart Disease
RADIOGRAPHIC DIAGNOSIS
EVALUATION OF THE
OF HEART FAILURE
PULMONARY CIRCULATION
Undercirculation
The radiographic diagnosis of heart failure is de-
pendent upon recognition of imbalances in the
Radiographie Signs
blood and fuid distribution within the body. This
· Lung field more radiolucent than normal owing
circulatory imbalance is the result of diminished
to lack of pulmonary vascular volume
cardiac output into the pulmonary or systemic
· Hyperinflation due to hypoxemia or ventilation/
vascular systems or reduced acceptance of blood
perfusion mismatch
by the failing ventricle (hypertrophy), or both. De-
· Pulmonary arteries smaller than normal; may be
pending on which side of the heart is most severely
smaller in size when compared with correspond-
affected, blood is shifted from the systemic to the
ing pulmonary veins
pulmonary circulation (left-heart failure) or from
the pulmonary to the systemic circulation (right-
Causes of Pulmonary Undercirculation
heart failure).
· Congenital disease: pulmonic stenosis, te-
Right-Heart Failure
tralogy of Fallot, reverse PDA (right-to-left
shunting)
Physiologic Phenomenon
· In right-heart failure, an inadequate right ven-
Differential Diagnosis
tricular output into the pulmonary arteries ex-
·Emphysema, chronic obstructive pulmonary
ists concurrently with a reduced acceptance of
disease
blood from the systemic veins. The blood vol-
· Hyperinflation
ume and pressure in the splanchnic and systemic
· Pneumothorax
veins are elevated. The venous congestion causes
· Overexposure
hepatomegaly.
·Pulmonary thromboembolism
· With further progression of right-heart failure,
·Hypovolemia, shock (the heart will also be
a progression of systemic hypertension leads to
smaller than normal)
 increased amounts of fuid, solutes, and protein
· Hypoadrenocorticism (Addison's disease); the
escaping from the capillary beds of the major
 heart may also be smaller than normal
organs. The lymphatic circulation is overtaxed,
 and fuid exudes into the serosal cavities, pro-
Overcirculation
ducing ascites, pleural, and even pericardial
Radiographie Signs
effusions.
· Both the pulmonary arteries and the veins are
· The extracardiac radiographic signs of progres-
enlarged
sively worsening right-heart failure are hepato-
· Arteries are frequently larger than the veins
megaly, ascites, and then pleural effusion.
· Pulmonary thoracic opacity is increased because
of larger vascular volume
Radiographic Signs
· Right-sided cardiomegaly (see Figures 2-15
Causes of Pulmonary Overcirculation
through 2-17). Patients with concentric cardiac
· Dirofilariasis (arteries are larger than correspond-
hypertrophy (e.g., pulmonic stenosis), thin-
ing veins)
walled cardiomyopathy,. or acute arrhythmias
· PDA: both arteries and veins enlarged
often may not have dramatic radiographic cardio-
· Left-to-right shunts (ventricular and atrial septal
megaly. Thus, subtle cardiac silhouette changes
defects): both arteries and veins enlarged
in both the DV and the lateral projections must
· Congestive heart failure: veins may be larger than
be considered significant with supportive clinical
arteries if mainly left sided; both arteries and
evidence of cardiac disease.
veins enlarged with concurrent left- and right-
· Hepatomegaly: rounded liver margin, which ex-
sided failure
tends caudal to last rib; displacement of stomach
· Fluid overload
caudally and to the left
· Ascites: abdominal distention; diffuse loss of
Differential Diagnosis
 intra-abdominal detail
· Underexposure
· Pleural effusion
· Expiratory phase of respiration
· Generalized increase in thoracic opacity
Chapter2P
 Radiology of the Heart
41
· Visualization of interlobar pleural fissures (see
· Engorgement and distention of the pulmonary
Figures 2-4 and 2-5, A)
veins, especially in the hilar area as they enter
· Obliteration of cardiac silhouette definition
the left atrium. On the DV view these are iden-
(best demonstrated on the DV projection) (see
tified as the more axial of the caudal vascula-
Figure 2-5, B)
ture (see Figure 2-12).
· Separation of pulmonary visceral pleural mar-
· The diameter of the pulmonary veins is greater
gin away from thoracic wall (see Figures 2-4
than that of their corresponding pulmonary ar-
and 2-5)
teries (best seen on the lateral projection with
cranial lobar vessels) (see Figure 2-10).
Causes of Pleural Effusion Secondary to Right-
· The radiopacity of the lung parenchyma distal
Heart Failure
and peripheral to the hilus is unchanged.
· Decompensated mitral and tricuspid insufficiency
· Interstitial edema
· Decompensated pulmonic stenosis, tetralogy of
· Diffuse increased radiopacity of the lung fields
Fallot
 owing to a hazy interstitial opacity is apparent.
· Dirofilariasis (caval syndrome)
· The margins of the pulmonary veins and arter-
· Pericardial effusion with tamponade
ies are indistinct owing to perivascular edema.
· Restrictive pericarditis
As the lung parenchyma surrounding the pul-
monary vasculature fills with fuid, the normal
 Differential Diagnosis
 pulmonary radiographic contrast between gas
· Pleuritis
(air-filled lung) and soft tissue (blood-filled
·Chylothorax
vessels) is lost. Thus, the pulmonary vascu-
·Hemothorax
lature becomes indistinct and begins to dis'
· Pyothorax
appear in the surrounding, fuid-filled lung
· Hypoproteinemia
 parenchyma.
· Neoplasia (pleural, mediastinal, cardiac, pulmo-
· In some patients, fuid accumulates around ma-
nary, primary, or metastatic)
jor bronchi, producing prominent peribronc hial
Left-Heart Failure
markings.
· Alveolar edema
Physiologic Phenomenon
· Radiographic signs
· In left-heart failure, inadequate left ven-
· Fluid enters the alveolar air spaces and
tricular output into the aorta occurs, and a
peripheral bronchioles, causing a coales-
diminished acceptance of blood from the pul-
cent fuffy alveolar infiltrate. Air broncho-
monary veins entering the left atrium results.
grams (black tubes in a white radiopaque
This causes pulmonary venous congestion
background) and air alveolograms (lung
and leakage of fluid into the pulmonary in-
parenchyma with the radiopacity of liver
terstitium, with progression to flooding of the
containing no vascular markings) are pres-
alveoli.
ent. In the cat, cardiogenic alveolar consoli-
· Clinically, this evolves as a progression of physi-
'pae lm Aiaa e se eadde uo suonp
ologic events: pulmonary venous congestion, in-
"cloudlike" confonmation area of increased
terstitial pulmonary edema, alveolar edema, and
 pulmonary radiopacity.
lung consolidation.
· The margins of the pulmonary vessels are
usually completely obscured (see Figure 2-3,
Radiographie Signs
 B). The alveolar infiltrate is of greatest opac-
· Left-sided cardiomegaly (see Figure 2-18). Pa-
ity in the perihilar area, fading peripherally.
tients with concentric cardiac hypertrophy (e.g..
 In the dog, alveolar edema can be asymmet-
aortic stenosis), thin-walled cardiomyopathy
rical, with the right lung fields more severely
(large- and giant-breed dogs), or acute arrhyth-
affected than the left (best seen on the DV
mias often may not have dramatic radiographic
projection).
cardiomegaly. Thus, subtle cardiac silhouette
· Differential diagnosis for pulmonary edema
changes in both the DV and lateral projections
· Neurogenic: electrocution, head trauma, post
as well as noncardiac changes (pulmonary vas-
seizure, encephalitis, brain neoplasm
cular changes, pulmonary edema, etc.) must be
· Hyperdynamic (excessive negative intratho-
evaluated.
racic pressures): choking, strangulation, up-
· Pulmonary venous congestion
 per airway obstructions
42
SECTION IDiagnosis of Heart Disease
Trachea
CVC
1
2
4
3
Abdomen
Pericardial
 Normal cardiac
Pericardial
effusion
sihouette
effusion 
Figure 2-19.
intrathoracic portion of the trachea, carina, and mainstem bronchi. The angle between the thoracic spine axis and the trachea is
,ahue-uhu, e inoum ubie reipie jesiopopnes aun jo juaahiea xaauo (z) aeied bujonag jo puiod aun on pausiu
conformation characteristic for left atrial enlargement. (3) Increased sternal contact of cranial margin. (4) Dorsal elevation and
enlargement of the caudal vena cava (Cvc). The cardiac silhouette takes on a smoothly contoured circular conformation with
 obliteration of normal cardiac contour.
· Fluid overload: overhydration
· Dorsal elevation of the trachea (similar to left-
·Toxicity
side enlargement)
· Systemic shock
· Hepatomegaly, ascites, and pleural effusion second-
·Hypersensitization
 ary to cardiac tamponade (see Figures 2-4 and 2-5)
·Drowning
· Increased bronchial markings in some cases
SUMMARY OF RADIOGRAPHIC
· Pleural effusion
SIGNS
· In the dog, this can occur only in very progres-
sive or severe forms of left-heart failure; this
The clinician must be armed with both potential
usually indicates early concurrent left- and
radiographic parameters and a clinically derived
right-heart failure.
differential diagnostic list for cardiac disease
· In the cat, pleural effusion is very common
before the radiographic image can begin to pro-
with only left-heart failure; this can be sepa-
vide useful information. Table 2-2 summarizes the
rated from right-heart failure by the absence of
radiographic signs associated with congenital and
accompanying hepatomegaly and ascites.
acquired heart diseases. Awareness of noncardiac
and artifactual conditions that can present with the
same radiographic signs is also paramount to a cor-
RADIOGRAPHIC DIAGNOSIS OF
PERICARDIAL EFFUSION
rect diagnosis.
· Generalized enlargement of cardiac silhouette in
INTRODUCTION TO DIGITAL
a "basketball conformation, with elimination of
RADIOGRAPHY
all normal cardiac margin contours on all views
· Increased stermal contact of the cranial margin
 Digital radiography is a relatively new technology
and convex bulging of the caudal margin, without
that is becoming common place in veterinary medi-
the angular conformation and straightening char-
cine. It is been used in human medicine for over 20
 acteristic for left atrial and ventricular enlarge-
years and has been thoroughly tested and proven.
ments (Figure 2-19)
There are many advantages to digital radiography
· Elevation and enlargement of the caudal vena
beyond the excellent image quality (Figure 2-20)
cava
which include:
Chapter2
 Radiology of the Heart 
43
Failure/Type
Myocardial
Myocardial
Tamponade
Volume
Pressure
Pressure
Volume
Pressure
Volume
Co ua peo a aa euwmd Ad soq Ae Aomd 'vd uwaas Ae Auownd u 'sdw aua t a7 wnne a 7 aua y Ay wne uly v
Fluid
Failure/Side
Left > Right
Right > Left
Right
Right
Left
Right
Left
Left
Left
VC
#
JI/N
uI/N
Z
UI/N
N/De
N
Z
n
PAb
U/N
uI/N
N/De
ZZZ
De/N/In
MPAs
UI/N
uI/N
三
N
ZZZZ
Z
Z
Aorta
ZZ
艺
N
ZZ
2
NU
Z
28
LA
艺
n
In, enl arged or increased; De, smaller or decreased; N, normal.
AX
UI/N
N
n
RA
uI/N
ＺＺ
UNU
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
Ventricular septal defect
Dilated cardiomyopathy
Tricuspid insufficiency
 Atrial septal defect
Acquired heart disease
Mital insuffciency
Aortic insufficiency
Pericardial effusi on 
Pulmonic stenosis
 Congenital defects
Aortic stenosis
Lesion
44
SECTION IDiagnosis of Heart Disease
Figure 2-20.  Right lateral view of the thorax taken with a flat panel detector system (DR). Note that all structures (bone, lung,
pulmonary vessels, spine, etc) are visible in the same image. There are no areas of overexposure or underexposure.
· Other devices such as film scanners and digital
cameras can be used to digitize conventional
x-ray film that allows the image to be stored on a
computer. Once the image is acquired and stored
it can be manipulated by the user to taste.
· There are financial savings over time including:
· No cost for radiology disposable (film, chemi-
cals)
· No expense for processor maintenance, film
jackets and storage space
· Perhaps the most significant means of recoup-
ing revenue pertains to the fact there will be a
significant reduction in the number of retakes
because there should be little to no need to re-
take images due to under or overexposure.
· Flat panel technology (also known as digital
[DDR] [Figure 2-21 ]) is the most expensive form
Figure 2-21.  Hat panel detector (DR plate) made by Can-
on@ (CXDl-50G). This plate is mounted out of sight under
of digital radiography; however, this technol-
the x-ray table top in the location of the Bucky tray. The plate
ogy results in the highest quality image. These
si iu asind ierala ue ot riiaua uoioud Aei-x sao
systems consist of a DR plate that is physically
then interfaced with an acquisition station computer.
mounted in the area of the Bucky tray under the
x-ray table top. The plate is then electronically
interfaced to both the x-ray machine and a dedi-
· No lost films
cated computer (acquisition station). Of the three
· No film degradation over time
forms of digital radiography, DR systems are ex-
 e u  m   a e
tremely forgiving as far as technique (kVp and
computer at your clinic or home
mAs settings) (Figure 2-22). This in tum simpli-
· The ability to easily send images to specialists
fies a typical technique chart to essentially three
for consultation
or four settings (small, medium, large and extra
large) no matter if you are imaging bone, tho-
tems, including fat panel radiology, computed
rax, or abdomen. Another advantage of DR sys-
radiography, and charge-coupled device systems.
tems include extremely quick image time (3 to 8
Chapter 2
Radiology of the Heart
45
B
C
DIXI Patient 49094
Figure 2-22.
1.8 mAs. B, 2.5 mAs. C, 5.0 mAs. Note that allthree exposures appear similar and are diagnostic. The computer software corrects
for under or overexposure automatically. This decreased the number of retakes and increases productivity. On the other hand, if
image A is magnified, it will appear much grainier than the other images.
46
SECTION IDiagnosis of Heart Disease
seconds before the image is seen on a computer
monitor) which allows the user to either save or
delete the image immediately if it is not satisfac-
tory (rotated, crooked, etc).
· Computed radiography (CR) systems use im-
aging plates that resemble traditional x-ray
cassettes. The major difference is that the in-
tensifying screen and film within the cassette is
replaced by a fexible phosphor plate that has
the ability to store a latent image. These storage
phosphor plates operate similarly to the screen
inside a conventional cassette in that they emit
light (scintillate) in response to incident x-ray en-
ergy. However, unlike an x-ray screen, a storage
phosphor plate retains a portion of the energy as
a latent image, which is extracted (*"read out'") by
a CR reader. In general, the image quality from a
CR system is very high (similar to that of DR);
however, CR is typically less forgiving as far as
technique (compared to DR) which necessitates 
a more complicated technique chart. The image
time for most CR systems range from about 55 to
90 seconds. CR systems are less expensive than
DR systems, however.
· Charge-coupled device systems consist of a phos-
 phor storage plate mounted under the x-ray table
Figure 2-23.
Dedicated x-ray film scanner (Vidar Sierra). An
top that is in tum interfaced with a small light
x-ray film is fed into the machine, and it is converted to a
 sensitive chip (CCD chip) similar to that found in
digital image that can be stored on a computer.
digital cameras and video cameras. These CCD
chips are commonly about 2 cm in size and may
of significant grey scale data. Because of this
have thousands of individual light sensitive ele-
fact, the use of film scanners and digital cameras
ments on them. Because of the small size of the
are not recommended as a means of sending im-
chips, the aerial image (14 x 17, etc.) must be
ages for consultation (teleradiology).
minified down to the size of the CCD chip. This
is usually accomplished using a series of mirrors
and lenses, which unfortunately results in a sig-
nificant loss (90%) of the photon data. This loss
 Of data can often make the resultant image appear'
KEY POINtS
'grainy" or pixilated on the computer monitor
 Digital Radiography (DR) is extremely fast,
which is accentuated if the image is electroni-
 is technique independent, has the highest
cally magnified. On the other hand, CCD systems
image quality but is the most expensive
have fast image time (similar to DR systems) and
method.
are less expensive than DR systems. Because
· Computed Radiography (CR) is slower, is
of the nature of these systems, they are usually
somewhere between conventional film-
sold as a complete system that includes the x-ray
screen technology and DR as far as reliance
machine.
on x-ray technique, has high image quality.
· Dedicated x-ray film scanners (Figure 2-23) and
and is mcderately expensive.
 Charged Coupled Devices (CCD) systems
-o i g sg nu a  p
 are fast, are similar to CR systems as far as
phy. Both of these methods only reproduce the
technical factors, have the poorest image
traditional hard copy radiograph, and in gen-
quality, and are the least expensive.
uaag uonnpaudai ase jo qof ood e op era
 Film scanners and digital cameras are not
    
forms of digital radiography and have a lim-
available do a poor job of converting an analog
ited role.
x-ray image into a digital format without the loss
Chapter 2  Radiology of the Heart
47
INTRODUCTION TO
for free) and they do not need to have specific
TELERADIOLOGY
GE software to view the images. DICOM allows
the practicing veterinarian to send non-lossy,
· Teleradiology (telemedicine) offers the practi-
tioner quick access to board certified special-
ists for case consultation. Once the radiographic
though DICOM "compliance" initially met with
images are in a digital format, they can be sent
resistance (mostly from vendors), it has become
to any specialist for review via the World Wide
common place in veterinary medicine and will
Web. There are several methods of accomplish-
continue to fourish.
 ing this including using dedicated teleradiology
companies, emailing images directly to special-
Frequently Asked Questions
ists, or by using DICOM.
· At this time, there are four or five companies in
A Weimaraner dog is being anesthetized. Because of
 a murmur and mild coughing episodes, the heart and
the United States that cater to veterinary telemed-
especially lung felds are of interest. The DV radio-
icine. In general, these companies provide the
graph is not too light, and not too dark. This judgment
necessary software that allows the veterinarian
is determined by the:
to upload digital images to the company's server
1. Inability to see the bony column details (very
and they in tum send those images to affiliated
white), but a light (white) appearance of the lung
radiologists, intermists, etc. The referring practice
fields to increase detail visualization there.
pays a fee to the teleradiology company which
2.
Ability to see the outline of the heart clearly
in turm pays the specialists to read their images.
agai nst the lungs.
3.
 Ability to see the thoracic vertebrae in the area
The disadvantage of this type of service is that
where they overlap the car diac silhouette.
the refering veterinarian often pays a premium
4.
 The appearance of the lungs as a dark air densi-
as pno a g ed nom a uu a a
ty, and full visualization of the bony structures.
the images directly to the specialist), they may
The most correct answer is #3. This indicates
not have any or little input on exactly which spe-
-pu uogdo isiy oul onbiuyoen aedoidde ou
cialist their images are sent to and they may have
cates that this is too light a technique. This is com-
little ability to directly communicate with that
mon where the technique has not been adjusted in
obese patients. In #2, seeing the outline of the heart
specialist.
clearly against the lungs is not necessarily associ-
· Submission of images via standard email can be
ated with technique, but may be due to pathology in
simple, but it is not recommended. Because of
the area. The #4 answer is burning through the soft
the very large image size of digital radiographs
tissues and is not appropriate for heart and lung stud-
(a 14 x 17 radiograph of the thorax can be 14
ies.
megabytes of information) these images must be
A new digital radiography system has just been in-
s yons) peoy ,Assoi, e ut paaes so passardo
stalled. The practice has opted for the flat panel tech-
nology. It does not appear that the image is different
jpg) before emailing, thus making the transmit-
even when thin, obese or barrel shaped dogs are im-
ted image of poor quality. Also, in the author's
aged using the same settings. This means:
experience, these images are often submitted
1. Further staff training is needed.
with a lack of necessary patient information and
 2. This is normal—only four basic settings will be
history.
needed with digital radiography, and that is why
· DICOM (Digital Image Communication in Med-
we chose the system!
3. The chart needs to be evol ved further, because
icine) is a proven and world wide recognized
something must be wrong if the same setting
method of transmitting high-quality, lossless, dig-
works for a large range of animals.
ital radiographs (and other medical images such
 4. The equipment is working better than prom-
 as ultras ound) from one place to another. DICOM
ised.
images are embedded with very specific informa-
Answer #2 is most correct. Answer #1 is not probably
tion regarding patient data as well as the type
an issue because this is the most forgiving of the im-
of system that the images were acquired on and
aging systems, digital or traditional.
this information cannot be altered. Also, DICOM
Answer #3 is not relevant because only three of
four settings will capture all dog breeds and body
allows transmission of images without the need
condition scores. Answer #4 is normal for this system.
for proprietary software that is vendor specific.
-sAs Ayde io pe1 ena1p stu saisuedxe jsou yanou
For example, if you have a GE brand ultrasound
tem is known to be the most forgiving and is known
machine, the images can be read by any radiolo-
 to produce the highest quality images.
gist with a DICOM viewer (which can be found
48
SECTION IDiagnosis of Heart Disease
SUGGESTED READINGS
The thoracic radiographs for this patient are not
easily interpreted so the plan is to:
Animal Insides. http://www.animalinsides.com (accessed
 1. Take another view and use foam supports to help
October, 2006).
stabilize the body in a fully vertical position, to
Buchanan JW, Bucheler J: Vertebral scale system to mea-
ensure sternum and spine are superimposed
sure canine heart size in radiographs. J Am Vet Med
which gives a better image. This still does not
Assoc 206: 194-199, 1995.
-pug ueoyusis ou, os remsue ilo e apiaoid 
Bushberg JT, Seibert JA, Leidholdt EM, et al: The essen-
ings" is placed on the medical record, assuming 
tial physics of medical imaging, Philadelphia, 2002,
that the standard of care has been met due to
Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins.
acquisition of the best possible radiographs.
Ettinger SJ, Suter PF: Canine cardiology. Philadelphia,
 2. Follow the steps in answer #1 and send a jpg to
1970, WB Saunders.
 the telemedicine group for a radiologist opinion.
Kittleson MD, Kienle RD: Small animal cardiovascular
 3. Follow the steps in answer #1 and send a DI-
medicine. St Louis, 1998, Mosby.
 COM image to the telemedicine group for a
Lord PF, Suter PF: Radiology. In Fox PR, Sisson D, Moi-
radiologist's opinion.
use NS, eds: Textbook of canine and feline cardiol-
Answer #3 is the best option as a lossless format,
 ogy. ed 2, Philadelphia, 1999, WB Saunders.
sonoed isog epiaod lm uoido jedxo ue pue
Matton JS: Digital radiography, Vet Comp Orthop Trau-
here. Answer #2 is going to degrade the image—if
matol, 19:123-132, 2006.
an important detail is lost during image compression,
it could compromise patient care. #1 is a good first
Owens JM: Radiographic interpretation for the small ani-
mal clinician, St Louis, 1982, Ralston Purina Co.
step, but if the attending clinician does not have a
 provide the gold standard for care. Generalist prac-
titioners cannot be the master of all trades, and with
the ability to transmit high-quality images of reas on-
able size, questionable interpretations for radiographs 
should always be referred for a specialist evaluation
via telemedicine.
Electrocardiography
Larry P. Tilley and Francis W. K. Smith, Jr.
status of the patient. An electrocardiogram should
INTRODUCTION
be recorded in animals with significant heart
Electrocardiography  in  clinical practice is  the
disease.
recording at the body surface of electrical fields gen-
· The electrocardiogram is also used to monitor
erated by the heart. Specific waveforms represent
efficacy of antiarrhythmic therapy and to deter-
stages of myocardial depolarization and repolar-
mine whether arrhythmias may have developed
ization. The electrocardiogram is a basic and valu-
secondary to cardiac medications (e.g., digoxin).
able diagnostic test in veterinary medicine and is
· Significant arrhythmias may also occur in ani-
relatively easy to acquire. The electrocardiogram is
mals with systemic disease, including those dis-
the initial test of choice in the diagnosis of cardiac
eases associated with electrolyte abnormalities
arrhythmias and may also yield information regard-
(hyperkalemia, hyponatremia, hypercalcemia, and
 ing chamber dilation and hypertrophy.
hypocalcemia), neoplasia (particularly splenic
neoplasia), gastric dilatation-volvulus, and sepsis.
INDICATIONS AND ROLE OF
THE ELECTROCARDIOGRAM
Assessment of Chamber
Enlargement Patterns
IN CLINICAL PRACTICE
· Changes in waveforms may provide indirect evi-
Documentation of Cardiac Arrhythmias
dence of cardiac chamber enlargement. The electro-
· An electrocardiogram should be recorded when
cardiogram may be normal, however, in cases with
an arrhythmia is detected during physical exami-
chamber enlargement. Right ventricular hypertro-
nation. This may include bradycardia, tachycar
 phy most consistently results in waveform changes.
dia, or irregularity in rhythm that is not secondary
· As heart disease progresses, waveform changes
to respiratory sinus arrhythmia.
may indicate progressive chamber enlargement.
· Animals presenting with a history of syncope or
· Thoracic radiography and, ideally, echocardiog-
episodic weakness may have cardiac arrhythmias,
raphy, should be perfommed for definitive assess-
and an electrocardiogram is indicated in these
ment of chamber enlargement.
cases. Arrhythmias in such cases may be tran-
sient—a normal electrocardiogram does not rule
Miscellaneous Indications
out transient arrhythmias. In some cases, long-
for Electrocardiography
term electrocardiographic monitoring (Holter
monitor or cardiac event recorder) is warranted.
· The electrocardiogram may provide evidence of
· Arrhythmias often accompany significant heart
 pericardial effusion (electrical altermans, low-am-
disease and may significantly affect the clinical
plitude complexes).
49
50
SECTION I  Diagnosis of Heart Disease
· Electrocardiographic abnormalities are often pres-
A positive electrode is placed on the left side of the
ent with hypothyroidism and hyperthyroidism
chest, over the heart, and the negative electrode is
· A pronounced sinus arrhythmia may be present
placed in the area of the right shoulder or neck.
in animals with elevated vagal tone (often seen
· Esophageal ECG electrode lead for surgical mon-
with diseases affecting the respiratory tract, cen-
itoring (Figure 3-3.) This technique is very use-
tral nervous system, and gastrointestinal tract).
ful as complexes recorded are increased in size,
providing an increased accuracy for diagnosing
an arrhythmia during surgery.
PRINCIPLES OF
·Hand-held, wireless ECG and ECG real time
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY
 recording electrocardiograms (Figures 3-4 and
Surface Electrodes are Placed in a
3-5.)
Designated Fashion to Obtain Standard
Electrocardiographic Leads
RECORDING THE
·A lead consists of the electrical activity mea-
ELECTROCARDIOGRAM
sured between a positive electrode and a negative
electrode.
· The electrocardiogram should be recorded in an
· Electrical impulses with a net direction toward
area as quiet and as free of distraction as possible.
the positive electrode will generate a positive
Noises from clinical activity and other animals
waveform or deflection. Electrical impulses with
may significantly affect rate and rhythm. Any
a net direction away from the positive electrode
use of electrically operated equipment, such as
will generate a negative waveform or defection.
clippers, may cause interference and should be
Electrical impulses with a net direction perpen-
 minimized during the electrocardiogram. In some
dicular to the positive electrode will not generate
cases, fuorescent lighting may result in electrical
a wavefonm or deflection (isoelectric).
interference.
· Standard electrocardiographic lead systems are
· The patient should ideally be placed in right lat-
used to create several angles of assessment. A sin-
eral recumbency.
gle lead would provide information on only one
· Electrocardiographic reference values were
dimension of the current (e.g., left vs. right). Two
obtained from animals in right lateral recumbency.
leads would allow two-dimensional information
· Limbs should be held perpendicular to the
(e.g., left vs. right and cranial vs. caudal). As many
body. Each pair of limbs should be held paral-
as 12 leads may be acquired simultaneously.
lel, and limbs should not be allowed to contact
one another.
Standard Lead Systems
· The animal should be held as still as possible
during the electrocardiogram. When possible,
· The standard leads are I, II, III, aVR, aVL, and aVF
panting should be prevented.
(Figure 3-1, Box 3-1). Placement of electrodes to
· When dyspnea or other factors prevent stan-
generate each lead is illustrated in Figure 3-2.
dard positioning, the electrocardiogram may be
· Leads I, II, and IMI are bipolar limb leads. These
recorded while the animal is standing, or, less
 are tenmed bipolar because the electrocardiogram
ideally, sitting.
is recorded from two specific electrodes.
· Electrode placement
· Leads aVR,aVL,andaVF are augmented unipolar
· Alligator clips or adhesive electrodes may be
leads. To generate these, two electrodes are elec-
used. To reduce discomfort, teeth of alligator
trically connected (as a negative electrode) and
clips should be blunted and the spring should
compared with the single electrode (positive).
be relaxed.
· Precordial chest leads are obtained using an explor-
· Limb electrodes are placed either distal or prox-
ing unipolar positive electrode at specific locations
imal to the elbow (caudal surface) and over the
on the chest. These leads may provide additional
stifle. Electrodes placed proximal to the elbow
 information or supportive evidence of cardiac cham-
may increase respiratory artifact.
ber enlargement. They are also useful in evaluating
· Each electrode should be wetted with 70 % is0-
for the P wave when limb leads are equivocal.
 propyl alcohol to ensure electrical contact.
· The base-apex lead is often used in equine
· Recording the electrocardiogram
electrocardiography and may also be used in
· Approximately three to four complete complexes
small-animal practice for rhythm assessment.
should be recorded from each lead at 50mm/s.
Chapter3
Electrocardiography
51
Rights were not granted to include this figure in electronic media.
Pleaserefer to theprintedpublication.
Figure 3-1. The limb leads (l, Il, Il, avR, aVl, avF) surround the heart in the frontal plane as shown in the top part of the
figure (feline). The circled limb lead names indicate the direction of electrical activity if the QRS is positive in that lead. The
mean electrical axis in this canine ECG (bottom part of the figure) is +9o. Lead Iis isoelectric. The lead perpendicular to lead I
is aVF (see axis chart on top). Lead avF is positive, making the axis +9o. If lead aVF had been negative, the axis would have
  t a     a ae    s    a
·A lead II rhythm strip should then be recorded
CARDIAC CONDUCTION AND
at 25 mm/s or 50 mm/s.
GENESIS OF WAVEFORMS
· The function of the cardiac conduction system
KEY POINT
is to coordinate the contraction and relaxation of
The 1 mV standardization marker should be re-
the four cardiac chambers (Figures 3-6 and 3-7).
corded at the onset of the electrocarcdiogram
· For each cardiac cycle, the initial impulse originates
and any time the sensitivity is changed.
in the sinoatrial (SA) node located in the wall of the
right atrium near the entrance of the cranial vena
52
SECTION I  Diagnosis of Heart Disease
Box 3-1
Lead Systems Used in Canine and
prominent QRS complex and causes ventricular
Feline Electrocardiography
contraction.
· The Q wave represents initial depolarization
Bipolar limb leads
of the interventricular septum and is defined
1: Right thoracic limb (-) compared with left tho-
as the first negative defection following the
racic limb (+)
P wave and occurring before the R wave. A
II: Right thoracic limb (-) compared with left pelvic
Q wave may not be identifed in all animals.
limb (+)
· The R wave represents depolarization of the
III: Left thoracic limb (-) compared with left pelvic
limb (+)
ventricular myocardium from the endocardial
surface to the epicardial surface. The R wave is
Augmented unipolar limb leads
the first positive deflection following the P wave
aVR: Right thoracic limb (+) compared with average
and is usually the most prominent waveform.
voltage of left thoracic limb and left pelvic limb (-)
aVL: Left thoracic limb (+) compared with average
· The S wave represents depolarization of the
voltage of right thoracic limb and left pelvic limb (-)
basal sections of the ventricular posterior wall
and interventricular septum. The S wave is
 of right thoracic limb and left thoracic limb (-)
defined as the first negative defection following
Unipolar precordial chest leads plus exploring
the R wave in the QRS complex.
electrode
· Ventricular repolarization quickly follows ven-
CV§RL (rV2): Right fifth intercostal space near the
tricular depolarization and results in the T wave.
sternum
The delay in repolarization results in the ST seg-
CV,LL (V): Left sixth intercostal space near the sternum
ment on the surface electrocardiogram.
CV,LU (V4): Left sixth intercostal space near the
costochondral junction
Vio: Over the dorsal process of the seventh thoracic
EVALUATION OF THE
vertebra
ELECTROCARDIOGRAM
Base-apex bipolar lead
· The electrocardiogram should be evaluated from
Record in lead I position on ECG machine with leads 
left to right.
placed as follows
LA electrode over left sixth intercostal space at
· Areas of artifact should be identified and avoided
costosternal junction
in the evaluation.
RA electrode over spine of right scapula near the
· Calculate the heart rate.
vertebra
· Determine the number of R waves (or R-R inter-
vals) within 3 seconds and multiply by 20to obtain
beats per minute (bpm) (for an electrocardiogram
cava. This impulse is rapidly propagated through
recorded at 50mm/s, vertical timing marks above
the atrial myocardium, resulting in depolarization
the gridlines occur every 1.5 seconds).
of the atria. Depolarization of the atria results in the
· If the rhythm is regular, the heart rate may be
P wave and atrial contraction. The initial SA nodal
derived by determining the number of small boxes
impulse is small and does not produce an electro-
in one R-R interval and dividing 3000 by that
cardiographic change on the body's surface.
number (for paper speed of 25 mm/s, use 1500).
·Immediately after atrial depolarization, the im
The method is also useful for determining the
pulse travels through the atrioventricular (AV)
rate of paroxysmal ventricular tachycardia and
node, located near the base of the right atrium.
other arrhythmias lasting less than 3 seconds.
Conduction is slow here, which allows atrial con-
· Obtain measurements for the wavefonms and
traction to be completed before ventricular depo-
intervals (Figure 3-8).
larization occurs. As the impulse travels through
· P wave height and width
the AV node, there is no electrocardiographic ac-
· Duration of PR interval
tivity on the body's surface—rather the PR inter-
· Duration of QRS complex and height of R wave
val is generated.
· Duration of QT segment
· Upon leaving the AV node, conduction velocity
· Determine the approximate mean electrical axis
imcreases significantly, and the impulse is rapidly
(MEA)
spread through the bundle of His, bundle branches,
·The MEA refers to the direction of the net
and Purkinje system. This results in rapid and nearly
ventricular depolarization  and  refers solely
simultaneous depolarization of the ventricles.
to the QRS complex. If there is significant
Depolarization of the ventricles results in the
right ventricular hypertrophy, then the MEA
Chapter 3
Electrocardiography
53
Rightswerenotgranted to include this figure in electronic media.
Please refer to the printed publication.
A
Rights were not granted to include this figure in electronic media.
Please refer to the printed publication.
B
connected across any pair of several electrodes. Each pair of electrodes is called a lead. The leads illustrated here are identified as
graphy: interpretation and treatment, ed 3, Malvern, Penn, 1992, Lea & Febiger.)
will shift to the right. Because the left ven-
· The MEA may be determined using the six stan-
tricle is normally the dominant ventricle, the
dard leads and the Bailey axis system (see Figure
normal MEA is to the left. A degree system is
3-1). If there is a lead with isoelectric QRS com-
used—if the MEA is directly to the left, then it
plexes, then the MEA equates to the lead on the
is said to be 0 degrees; if the MEA is directly
Bailey axis perpendicular to the isoelectric lead.
downward, then it is 90 degrees, and if it is
· The MEA may also be determined by plotting
directly to the right, then it is 180 degrees. The
the net amplitude of a lead I QRS complex (hori-
MEA of the normal dog is 40 to 100 degrees.
zontal axis) and the net amplitude of a lead aVF
For the cat, the MEA is more variable, ranging
QRS (vertical axis). The intersection will provide
from 0 to 160 degrees.
the vector equal to the MEA (see Figure 3-1).
54
SECTION IDiagnosis of Heart Disease
Figure 3-3.  Esophageal ECG electrode and temperature probe positioned for surgical monitoring. This technique is very useful as
Aahins buunp eiupqe ue buisoubeip jot Aeinsoe paseaiui ue bupiaoid 'azis ui paseaui ane papional saxalduon
EVALUATION OF WAVEFORMS
P Wave
270
· Atrial enlargement pattems (Figure 3-9)
· The P wave is generated by atrial depolarization.
Atrial enlargement may result in an increase in
width or height of the P waves recorded in lead II.
· Enlargement of the right atrium may result in an
increased P wave height. This is referred to as P-
pulmonale. The height of the P wave should not
exceed 0.4 mV (dog) or 0.2 mV (cat). Chronic pul-
monary disease may result in P-pulmonale in the
absence of heart disease.
Figure 3-4.
4.Hand-held, wireless ECG and ECG real time
· Enlargement of the left atrium may result in
computer display. (Courtesy Vmed Technology, Redmond,
an increased P wave width or duration. This
Wash. www.vmedtech.com.)
is referred to as P-mitrale. The duration of the
P wave should not exceed 0.04 second (dog or
cat). Left atrial enlargement may also result in
· The MEA may be approximated by inspecting
notching of the P wave.
leads I and aVF.
· Presence or absence of P waves
· If the net direction of the lead I QRS is posi-
· There is no minimum height or duration for the P
tive, then the MEA is to the left. If the net
wave. In some cases, P waves may be indistinct.
deflection of the lead I QRS is negative, then
In this situation, carefully evaluate all leads for P
the MEA is to the right.
wave activity. If P waves cannot be discermed in
· Ifthe net direction of the lead aVF QRS is pos-
any of the limb leads, evaluation of chest leads is
itive, then the MEA is downward or caudal. If
recommended.
the net deflection of the lead aVF QRS is nega-
· P waves may be absent in several arrhythmias,
tive, then the MEA is upward or cranial.
including atrial fibrillation and atrial standstill.
· The approximate angle can be estimated by
P waves may be superimposed on other wave-
 examining the relative amplitudes of leads I
forms in ventricular tachycardia and supraven-
and aVF.
tricular tachycardia (SVT).
· Determine the rhythm.
· Variation of P wave height is a normal finding
· Compare patient values with reference values
in the dog and a manifestation of alterations in
(Table 3-1).
vagal tone.
Chapter3
Electrocardiography
55
Date
06/17/2004
PatientName:
Heart Rante
Time
14:14:38
Patien ID:
at
Other
ECGGain:
width/Notch:
Owner
Figure 3-5.
Redmond,Wash.www.vmedtech.com.)
· A significantly shortened PR interval may occur
when an accessory pathway allows conduction to
S-A
bypass the AV node.
node
Left
posterior
· Prolongation of the PR interval represents first
A-V
fascicle
degree AV block.
node
· Variation of the PR interval may occur with alter-
ations in vagal tone or secondary to the presence
Left
anterior
of ectopic beats causing dissociation of atrial and
fascicle
Bundle
ventricular activity.
of His
-Left
septal
QRS Complex
fibers
· The QRS complex is generated by ventricu-
Right 
Purkinje
bundle
fibers
lar depolarization (left ventricle, interventri-
branch
cular septum, and right ventricle). Ventricular
enlargement may result in changes in the QRS
Figure 3-6.
Anatomy of the cardiac conduction system. S-A,
complex.
Sinoatrial; A-V, atrioventricular. (Modified from Tilley LP: Es-
sentials of canine and feline electrocardiography: interpretation 
· Left ventricular enlargement pattem
and treatment, ed 2, Philadelphia, 1985, Lea & Febiger.)
· Increased amplitude of the R wave
·Dog
· Amplitude of R wave greater than 3.0 mV
PR Interval
(2.5 mV in small-breed dogs) in leads II,
· The PR interval refects the slowed conduction
 aVF, and the precordial chest leads CV,LU,
through the AV node. The normal PR interval is
CV,LL and CV,RL
0.06 to 0.13 second for dogs and 0.05 to 0.09
· Amplitude of R wave greater than 1.5 mV
second for cats.
in lead I
56
SECTION 1
Diagnosis of HeartDisease
SA
node
A-V
node
RA
A-V
node
LBB
Positive
RBB
electrode
Q
2
Q
Figure 3-7.
 Sequence of electrical impulse conduction and cardiac chamber activation as it relates to the electrocardiogram.
 (Modified from Tilley LP: Essentials of canine and feline electrocardiography: interpretation and treatment, ed 3, Philadelphia, 1992,
Lea & Febiger.)
Rightswerenotgranted toincludethisfigureinelectronicmedia.
Please refer to the printed publication.
Figure 3-8.
Close-up of a normal feline lead Il P-QRs-T complex with labels and intervals. Measurements for amplitude (mil-
livolts) are indicated by positive (+) and negative (-) movement; time intervals (hundredths of a second) are indicated from left
to right. Paper speed, 50 mm/s; sensitivity 1 cm =1 mV. (From Tilley LP: Essentials of canine and feline electrocardiography:
interpretation and treatment, ed 2, Philadelphia, 1985, Lea & Febiger.)
Chapter3
Electrocardiography
57
Table 3-1
 Normal Canine and Feline ECG Values*
Canine
Feline
Heart rate (HR)
Puppy: 70-220 bpm
120-240 bpm
Toy breeds: 70-180 bpm
Standard: 70-160 bpm
 Giant breeds: 60- 140 bpm
Rhythm
Sinus rhythm
Sinus rhythm
Sinus arrhythmia
Wandering pacemaker
P wave
Height
Maximum: 0.4 mV
Maximum: 0.2 mV
Width
Maximum: 0.04 s (Giant breeds 0.05 s)
Maximum: 0.04 s
 PR interval
0.06-0.13 s
0.05-0.09 s
QRS
Height
Large breeds: 3.0 mV maximum
Maximum: 0.9 m V
Small breeds: 2.5 mV maximum
Width
Large breeds: 0.06 s maximum 
Maximum: 0.04 s
Small breeds: 0.05 s maximum
ST segment
 Depression
No more than 0.2 m V
None
 Elevation
No more than 0.15 mV
None
QT interval
 0.15-0.25 s at normal HR
 0.12-0.18 s at normal HR
T waves
May be positive, negative, or biphasic
usually positive and < 0.3 mV
Amplitude range ± 0.05-1.0 mV in
any lead
Not more than 14 of R wave
 amplitude
Electrical axis
+40 to + 100
0±160
Chest leads
CVsRL (rV2)
T positive; R <3.0 mV
CVLL (v2)
S <0.8 mV; R <3.0 mV
R<1.0mV
CV,LU (V4)
S<0.7 mV; R <3.0 mV
R<1.0 mV
V10
QRS negative; T negative except in
T negative. R wave/Q wave < 1
Chihuahua
S, Second.
*Measurements are made in lead l unless otherwise stated.
INot valid for thin, deep-chested dogs under 2 years old.
· Sum of R wave amplitudes in leads I and
· R wave/Q wave > 1.0 in lead V o
aVF greater than 4.0 mV
QRS duration greater than 0.06 second (large
· Cat
dogs), 0.05 second (small dogs), or 0.04 second
·Amplitude of R wave greater than 0.9 mV
(cats)
in lead II
· ST slurring or coving
· Amplitude of R wave greater than 1.0 mV
·Shift in the MEA to the left (less than 40
in CV,LU and CVLL
degrees for dog, less than 0 degrees for cat)
58
SECTION I
 Diagnosis of Heart Disease
· Right ventricular enlargement patterm (Figure
· S wave in lead I > 0.05 mV
3-10)
· S wave in lead II > 0.35 mV
· Increased amplitude of S waves
· S wave in lead CV,LL > 0.8 mV
·Dog
· S wave in lead CV,LU > 0.7 mV
· Presence of S waves in leads I, II, IlI, and
· Cat
aVF
· Presence of S waves in leads I, II, II, and
aVF
· Prominent S waves in CV,LU and CV,LL
·T wave positive in lead Vlo (except
Chihuahua)
· W-shaped QRS complex in Vo (dog)
· R:S ratio<0.87 in CV,LU
· Shift in the MEA to the right (more than
A
100 degrees for the dog or more than 160
degrees for the cat)
· Widening of the QRS complexes may occur with
left ventricular enlargement, right or left bundle
branch block (LBBB), and complexes of ven-
tricular origin (ventricular premature complexes
[VPCs] or ventricular escape complexes).
· Electrical altemans (Figure 3-11,A)
· In electrical altemans, there is a pattem of
regular variation in the amplitude of normal
electrocardiographic complexes (excluding
ventricular ectopy). This is usually mani-
B
fested by an alteration in R wave height,
although variation in other
rwaveforms
may be seen. The amplitude may change
significantly with every complex and alter-
nate short-tall.
· Electrical altermans is most often associated
with pericardial effusion. A severe pleural ef-
Figure 3-9.
A, Biatrial enlargement in a small-breed dog
fusion may cause electrical altermans.
with a collapsed trachea and compensated mitral regurgita-
tion. The P wave is 0.5 mV tall (P pulmonale) and 0.05 sec
· SVT may result in an electrical altemans
wide (P mitrale). B, Left atrial enlargement in a geriatric, small-
pattem.
breed dog with chronic acquired valvular disease (mitral in-
· Low-amplitude QRS complexes
sufficiency). P waves are wide (0.075 second), notched, and
equivocally tall. (From Fox PR, Sisson D, Moise NS, eds: Text-
The minimum height for the normal R wave in
book of Canine and Feline Cardiology. Philadelphia, 1999, WB
the dog is 0.05 mV to 1.0 mV.
Soundes.)
Rights were not granted to include this figure in electronic media.
Pleaserefer to theprinted publication.
Figure 3-10.   Severe right ventricular enlargement in a dog with pulmonic stenosis. There is a right axis deviation of approxi-
mately -110 degrees. Note the deep S waves in leads I,Il I, aVF, and CvsLU. The T wave is positive in V10. (From Tilley LP: Es-
Chapter3
 Electrocardiography
59
50
SECTION I
 Diagnosis of Heart Disease
Chapter3
Electrocardiography
61
工
62
SECTIONI[
 Diagnosis of Heart Disease
· Low-amplitude R waves may occur when
Box 3-2
Classification of Cardiac
transmission of the cardiac electrical impulse
Arrhythmias
to the skin is hindered. This may occur with
pericardial effusion, pleural effusion, obesity,
 Normal sinus impulse formation
or subcutaneous edema. Pneumothorax and
Normal sinus rhythm
pulmonary edema may also decrease R wave
Sinus arthythmia
height.
Wandering sinus pacemaker
· Hypothyroidism may result in low-amplitude R
Disturbances of sinus impulse formation
waves (usually with accompanying slow rate)
Sinus arrest
Sinus bradycardia
Sinus tachycardia
ST Segment
Disturbances of supraventricular impulse formation
· ST segment elevation (Figure 3-11, B)
Atrial premature complexes
· Elevation of the ST segment greater than
Atrial tachycardia
0.15 mV in leads II, IMl, or aVF is abnormal in
Atrial futter
Atrial fibrillation
the dog. Any ST segment elevation in the cat is
Atrioventricular junctional rhythm
abnormal.
· ST segment elevation may be caused by myo-
Disturbances of ventricul ar impulse formation
Ventricular premature complexes
cardial hypoxia, transmural myocardial infarc-
Ventricular tachycardia
tion, pericardial effusion, see pericarditis. In
Ventricular as ystole
cats, digoxin toxicity may cause ST segment
Ventricular fibrillation
elevation.
Disturbances of impulse conduction
· ST segment depression (Figure 3-11, C)
Sinoatrial block
· Depression of the ST segment greater than 0.2
Persistent atrial standstill ("silent'" atrium)
Atrial standstill (hyperkalemia)
mV in leads II, III or aVF is abnormal in the
Ventricular pre-excitation
 dog. Any ST segment depression in the cat is
First-degree AV block
abnormal.
Second-degree AV block
· ST segment depression may be caused by myo-
Complete AV block (third degree)
cardial hypoxia, hyperkalemia, hypokalemia,
Bundle branch blocks
subendocardial myocardial infarction, or di-
Disturbances of both impulse formation and impulse
goxin toxicity.
conduction
Sick sinus syndrome
· Pseudodepression due to prominent T。 waves
Ventricular pre-excitation and the Wolff-Parkin-
(atrial repolarization) caused by atrial disease or
son-White (WPW) syndrome
tachycardia also causes ST segment depression.
Atrial premature complexes with aberrant ventric-
· Miscellaneous ST segment changes
ular conduction
· ST segment changes may occur secondary to
Escape rhythms
bundle branch blocks, myocardial hypertro-
Junctional escape rhythms
phy, or VPCs. The changes in the ST seg-
Ventricular escape rhythms (idioventricular rhythm)
 ment are in the opposite direction from the
main QRS deflection.
different sympathetic neurons that may or may
KEY POINT
not be activated together. Corrections of the QT
Baseline artifact may mimic changes with the
interval (QT) for heart rate appear to be appli-
ST segment.
cable under circumstances, such as exercise.
· Within the past two decades, the overall ven-
tricular repolarization and its relationship to the
QT Interval
QT, interval has led to studies for using the QT.
· The nonmal QT interval is 0.15 to 0.25 second (dog)
interval as a prognostic marker of ventricular
and 0.12 to 0.18 second (cat). The QT interval tends
tachyarrhythmias and death. Class IA or class
to increase with slow heart rates and decrease with
IMI antiarrhythmic drugs, such as quinidine and
rapid rates. In general, the QT interval should be
sotalol, are known to prolong myocardial repolar-
less than half of the preceding R-R interval.
ization. This may either provide a protective effect
·The length ofthe QT intervalis chiefly determined
against arrhythmias or lead to an increased occur-
by an interplay of autonomic infuences. Heart
rence of QT, interval-related arrhythmias, includ-
rate and QT interval are govermed separately by
ing torsade de pointes ventricular tachycardia.
Chapter3
 Electrocardiography
63
· Torsades de pointes (turming about a point) is a
not exceed one-fourth the height of the R wave,
rare arrhythmia in the dog. It is a form of poly.
one-fourth the height of the Q wave (if Q wave is
morphic ventricular tachycardia or futter in
 greater than R wave), or 0.5 mV to 1.0 mV in any
which the amplitude of the complexes increases
lead.
and decreases in size so that they appear to twist
· The T wave should be positive in CVsRL in dogs
around the baseline. Human patients with tors-
 2 months of age and should be negative in Vio.
 ades de pointes are at risk for sudden death
except in the Chihuahua.
· Prominent T waves may occur with myocardial
Possible Formulas for Corrected QT intervals.
hypoxia, interventricular conduction 
distur-
· Many formulas and methods for correctingthe QT
bances, ventricular enlargement, and in some ani-
 interval for the effects of heart rate, including log-
mals with heart disease and bradycardia.
arithmic, hyperbolic, and exponential functions,
· Prominent and peaked T waves are associated
but they also have limitations. These limitations
with hyperkalemia.
result from both physiological and computational
·Small, biphasic T waves may occur with
problems. The Bazett's formula, for example,
hypokalemia.
predicts an ever-increasing increment in the
· Nonspecific T wave changes may occur with
QT interval as the heart rate slows and an ever-
metabolic disturbances (hypoglycemia, anemia,
 decreasing increment as the rate rises, both of which
shock, fever), drug toxicity (digoxin, quinidine,
 are physiologically improbable. In addition, all
 procainamide), and neurologic disease.
these formulas do not account for the effects of
· T wave altermans has been reported second-
autonomic tone on the QT interval independent
ary to hypocalcemia, increased circulating cat-
of the effects on rate. They also do not account for
 echolamines, and sudden increases in sympathetic
the relatively slow adaptation of repolarization to
tone.
 changes in rate. Fridericia's formula (QT divided
by the cube root of the R-R interval) is a modi-
fication of Bazett's formula. This modification is
ARRHYTHMIAS AND
important, because Bazett's formula will over-
CONDUCTION DISTURBANCES
correct for rates higher than 60 bpm. Van de Wa-
·An arrhythmia (or dysrhythmia) refers to an
ter formula (study was done in dogs) involves
irregularity in the cardiac rhythm. In general, an
regression analysis yielding the following equa-
arrhythmia denotes an abnormality of the car-
tion: QT. = Van de Water formula = QT - 87(60/
diac rhythm, although in the dog the term normal
HR - 1). Recent publications have recommended
sinus arrhythmia is used to describe the normal
the use of the log-log formula for correcting the
variation in heart rate associated with respiration
QT interval for heart rate (Linear regression with
(see Box 3-2).
log.HR as the covariate: QT = a + b (logHR);
· Arrhythmias may be classified according to
a & b are constants).
their origin.
· Prolongation of the QT interval may occur with
· Supraventricular arrhythmias arise from the
interventricular  conduction disturbances 
that
atria or AV node.
are associated with prolongation of the QRS
· Ventricular
arrhythmias  arise
from the
complexes, bradycardia, ethylene glycol toxic-
ventricles.
ity, strenuous activity, or CNS disturbances. QT
· Arrhythmias may be classified according to
 prolongation has been reported with many drugs
their rates.
 and electrolyte imbalances. These include hypo-
· Arrhythmias with slow rates are referred to as
kalemia, hypocalcemia, quinidine, proc ainamide
brady arrhythmias.
bretylium, tricyclic antidepressants and many
· Arrhythmias with rapid rates are referred to
anesthetics.
as tachyarrhythmias.
· Shortening of the QT interval may occur with
· Arrhythmias may be classified according to
hypercalcemia, hyperkalemia, or digoxin therapy.
their regularity.
· Fibrillation is an irregular, chaotic rhythm.
· Tachycardia is a regular (non irregular) rhythm.
T Wave
· Examples: Atial fibrillation is an irregular,
· The T wave is quite variable in the dog and cat.
chaotic arrhythmia originating from the atria;
In most leads, the T wave may be positive, nega-
ventricular tachycardia is a regular arrhythmia
tive or biphasic. The height of the T wave should
originating from the ventricles.
64
SECTION I  Diagnosis of Heart Disease
· There are several pathophysiologic causes of
· Check for pauses in the rhythm—periods of
arrhythmias.
inactivity greater than two R-R intervals.
· Abnormal automaticity of normal pacemaker
· Check for P waves occurring prematurely
cells
(occurring earlier than expected)—distinguish
· Shift of the pacemaker from the SA node to
from normal sinus arrhythmia, where P wave
other areas of the heart
rate increases during inspiration. Premature
·Conduction blocks that terminate or slow nor-
P waves will noticeably break the rhythm. Pre-
mal conduction through the heart
 mature P waves indicate the presence of atrial
· Abnormal pathways of impulse conduction
premature complexes (APCs).
through the heart
· Check for QRS complexes occuring prema-
· Spontaneous impulse formation in any area of
turely. These may occur without preceding
the heart
P wave, may be superimposed on P wave,
· Systemic approach to arrhythmia recognition and
or may follow P wave with shortened PR
evaluation
interval. Premature QRS complexes indicate
· Any lead may be used for arrhythmia evalua-
presence of VPCs.
tion—lead II is generally used as waveforms
are usually best defined in this lead. A signif-
cant duration of artifact-free lead II should be
KEY PoINT
carefully evaluated.
· Determine if P waves are present. Examine all
Remember, a ventricular premature complex
is premature. A ventricular complex occurring
leads—P waves may be small or isoelectric in
several leads. You must distinguish baseline
after a pause is not premature-it is a ven-
tricular escape complex.
motion (artifact) from P waves. P waves are
 generally consistent in size and distance from
associated QRS complex. The presence of
 P waves indicates a sinus (originating from SA
node) rhythm.
· Evaluation of PR interval
· Determine if an atrial (P wave) and ven-
· PR interval may vary slightly with changes in
tricular (QRS complex) association exists.
vagal tonethis would also result in a sinus
There should be a P wave for every QRS
arrhythmia.
complex. If there are a greater number of P
· Progressive prolongation of the PR interval
waves or QRS complexes, then an arrhyth-
signals first degree AV block.
mia exists.
· P waves without associated QRS complexes
·P waves
 should slightly precede QRS
are usually indicative of second degree AV
complexes.
block
· If P waves follow the QRS complex, then AV
· Shortened PR interval may be seen with
dissociation exists, and the rhythm is ventric-
increased sympathetic tone and pre-excitation
ular or junctional rather than sinus.
syndromes (presence of accessory pathway
· There should be a QRS complex following
bypassing AV node).
each P wave. If not, then a conduction distur-
· Evaluation of QRS complexes
bance is present.
· Height of R wave and duration of QRS complex
· Determine the regularity of the rhythm.
· Presence of prominent S waves
·Normal sinus rhythm—insignificant (less
· Morphology of QRS complexes should not
than 10%) variation in the P-P or R-R
vary significantly. Variation may be caused by :
intervals
· VPCs or ventricular escape complexes
· Normal sinus arrhythmia—significant (more
· Fusion beats—simultaneous occurrence of
than 10%) variation in the P-P or R-R
VPC and normal QRS
intervals
· Electrical altemans
· A pattem of irregularity is usually noted-
· Intermittent bundle branch block
the heart rate increases during inspiration
·Artifact
and decreases during expiration in a cycli-
· Premature QRS complexes suggest VPCs;
cal patterm.
QRS complexes without P waves and oc-
· This may be referred to as a respiratory
curring after a pause suggest ventricular
sinus arrhythmia.
escape complexes.
Chapter 3
Electrocardiography
65
· Note morphology of any premature com-
KEY PoINT
plexes--APCs have a QRS of normal morphol-
ogy; VPCs have a QRS that is significantly
Sinus arrhythmia is NOT expected in the cat,
but is normal, and the result of variations in
different from the normal QRS.
vagal tone in dogs.
KEY POINT
DISTURBANCES OF SINUS
QRS complexes should not vary in their mor-
IMPULSE FORMATION
phology in a normal animal.
Sinus A rrest
· When the SA node fails to discharge as expected,
NORMAL RHYTHMS
a pause in the rhythm will occur. The duration
of the pause is at least twice the preceding R-R
Normal Sinus Rhythm
interval. When severe, pause duration may be 5
·Normal rhythm in the dog and cat
to 12 seconds (Figure 3-11, E).
· P wave for every QRS complex, regular rhythm
· For survival, the pause is ended by a ventricular
· Rate between 60 bpm and 180 bpm for the dog.
escape complex, junctional escape complex, or
depending on size of dog and degree of anxiousness 
normal complex.
· Rate between 140 bpm and 240 bpm for the cat,
·Causes include fbrosis of the SA nodal tis-
 depending on degree of anxiousness
sue, greatly increased vagal stimulation, drug
· Rate and rhythm dependent on SA nodal dis-
infuences (digoxin, beta blockers), and rarely
charge. This is highly infuenced by changes in
neoplasia.
autonomic tone. An elevated sympathetic tone
· If severe and frequent, intermittent weakness or
will increase rate of SA nodal discharge; an ele-
syncope may occur.
vated parasympathetic (vagal) tone will decrease
rate of SA nodal discharge.
Sinus Bradycardia
· A sinus rhythm with an abnormally slow rate
Normal Sinus Arrhythmia
· May be physiologic—during sleep, the heart rate
· Normal in the dog, generally abnormal in the cat
of many dogs drops to 30 to 40 bpm. Calm ani-
· A pattem of irregularity is present—the heart
mals or athletic animals at rest may have a physi-
rate increases during inspiration and decreases
ologic sinus bradycardia.
during expiration in a cyclical patterm (Figure
· Elevated vagal tone may result in a sinus bradycardia.
3-11, D).
· Drug-induced—anesthetics and sedatives, di-
· Irregularity is secondary to fuctuations in vagal
goxin, calcium channel blockers, beta blockers
tone associated with the respiratory cycle
· Pathologic—hypothermia, hypothyroidism, sick
· When respiratory effort is increased (brachyce-
sinus syndrome (SSS)
phalic breeds, animals with respiratory disease),
· Specific therapy for sinus bradycardia is not
fuctuations in vagal tone may be dramatic, pro-
warranted unless clinical signs (weakness,
ducing a pronounced sinus arrhythmia.
reduced cardiac output) have developed as a
· Normal sinus arrhythmia is a rhythm of high
result of the arrhythmia.
vagal tone and low sympathetic tonethis situ-
ation is rare in dogs with congestive heart failure.
Sinus Tachycardia
 The presence of a sinus arrhythmia in a dog with
· A sinus rhythm with an abnormally rapid rate
-dsa Arud jo aanioddns aou si ynon aaas
· May be physiologic—associated with exercise,
tory disease rather than congestive heart failure.
stress, anxiousness, pain
·Drug-induced—atropine or
glycopyrrolate,
Wandering Sinus Pacemaker
methylxanthines (theophylline), excessive thyroid
· The origin of SA nodal discharge may change as
supplementation, catecholamines (epinephrine,
a consequence of alterations in vagal tone. This
dobutamine)
is noted on the electrocardiogram as a cyclical
· Pathologic—fever, shock, hyperthyroidism, ane-
change in the height of the P wave. At times, the P
mia, hypoxia, and congestive heart failure
wave may become isoelectric and not detectable
· Specific therapy for sinus tachycardia is usually
· Often associated with normal sinus arrhythmia or
indicated for rate control in congestive heart fail-
pronounced sinus arrhythmia.
ure patients.
66
SECTIONI[
 Diagnosis of Heart Disease
KEY POINT
· May be clinically significant depending on rate,
frequency of runs, and length of runs
The underying cause of the sinus tachycardia
should be identified and addressed if necessary.
Atrial Flutter
· An uncommon arrhythmia characterized by
a rapid atrial rate (greater than 250 bpm) and
DISTURBANCES OF
altered atrial depolarization resulting in bidirec-
SUPRAVENTRICULAR
tional saw-toothed atrial complexes (F waves).
Ventricular rate varies depending on refractori-
IMPULSE FORMATION
ness of AV node.
Atrial Premature Complexes
· Usually a result of severe structural heart disease
· An APC is an abnormal beat occurring prema-
· Clinical significance depends on ventricu-
turely and originating in atrial tissue
lar rate. If excessive, then cardiac output is
· Electrocardiographic features Figure 3-11, F
reduced.
· Presence or absence of ectopic P wave-
 P wave is usually of normal morphology
Atrial Fibrillation
· Ectopic P wave may be superimposed on pre-
· A common arrhythmia in the dog characterized
ceding T wave.
by lack of P waves, rapid ventricular rate, and
· Premature QRS with identical or nearly iden
irregularity of ventricular depolarizations. In atrial
tical appearance to normal QRS
fibrillation, there are numerous sites of ectopic
· A compensatory pause may follow the APC.
atrial depolarization and varying AV nodal
· If the APC occurs when the ventricles are
refractoriness (Figure 3-11, H). Atrial fibrillation
refractory, then an isolated ectopic P wave
is uncommon in the cat.
will be noted—it is nonconducted owing to
· Baseline may be fat or may exhibit fine fibrilla-
the refractoriness of the ventricles
tion potentials.
· Causes generally include any disease associ-
· Causes include
ated with atrial enlargement, such as degenera-
· Structural heart disease (advanced degenerative
tive valve disease, congenital heart disease, or
valve disease, dilated cardiomyopathy, atrial
cardiomyopathy. Other causes include hypoxia,
neoplasia, congenital heart disease)
 atrial neoplasia, and chronic obstructive pulmo-
· Lone atrial fibrillation—occurs in large- to
nary disease.
 giant-breed dogs without structural heart disease
· Therapy is not generally warranted for infre-
· May occur as a complication of noncardiac
quent APCs. Antiarrhythmic therapy may be
 disease, such as gastric dilatation-volvulus or
needed if APCs are frequent and thought to
other disorders altering vagal tone
be compromising cardiac output, or if there is
· May be drug-induced, for example, digoxin
a concem of impending atrial tachycardia or
· Clinical significance depends on ventricular rate
atrial fibrillation.
in most cases. With atrial fibrillation there is also
loss of atrial contraction (atrial kick), which may
Atrial Tachycardia
reduce ventricular performance. If the rate is not
· A paroxysmal tachycardia originating from
controlled, then lone atrial fibrillation may cause
atrial tissue ( other than SA node)
myocardial deterioration and secondary dilated
· Electrocardiographic features (Figure 3-11, G)
cardiomyopathy.
· Rapid rate—from 200 to 350 bpm
· Usually a regular rhythm. If originating from
Junctional Premature Complexes
 multiple atrial sites, then an irregular rhythm
· A junctional premature complex is an abnormal
may occur.
beat occuring prematurely and originating in the
·P waves may be difficult to discerm. QRS
AV nodal area.
complexes are generally normal but may
· Electrocardiographic
 characteristics include
widen, or electrical altermans may develop.
abnormal-appearing P wave (often inverted), which
· Sudden onset and sudden termination of
may precede QRS, be superimposed on QRS,
arrhythmia
or follow QRS complexes. The QRS complex is
· May occur as a reentrant arhythmia within
usually unaffected.
the AV node
· Causes are the same as for APCs.
· Causes are the same as for APCs.
· Clinical significance is the same as APCs.
Chapter3
Electrocardiography
67
Atrioventricular Junctional Tachycardia
node reaches the AV node by way of intemodal
· A paroxysmal or sustained rhythm originating
fibers. Hyperkalemia also slows the rate of SA
from AV nodal tissue
nodal discharge and affects ventricular depolar-
·Electrocardiographic features
 ization and repolarization.
· Rate is greater than 60 bpm (inherent rate of
· Electrocardiographic characteristics of persistent
AV nodal tissue is approximately 40 bpm to 60
atrial standstill
bpm)
·Absence of P waves
·A regular rhythm
·Heart rate usually slow (< 60 bpm)
· Abnormal appearing P wave (often inverted in 
· Rhythm regular with supraventricular-appear-
lead II), which may precede QRS, be superim-
ing QRS complexes
 posed on QRS, or follow QRS complexes
· Heart rate does not increase with atropine ad-
· QRS complexes may be normal or may be wid-
ministration
 ened secondary to aberrant conduction.
· Electrocardiographic characteristics of atrial
· Causes include digoxin toxicity and structural
standstill due to hyperkalemia (Figure 3-12, A)
heart disease
· As serum potassium increases, P wave ampli-
· May be clinically significant depending on ven-
tude diminishes. Absence of P waves occurs
tricular rate
when the potassium approaches 8.0 mEq/L.
· Slow ventricular rate—the rhythm is termed
Supraventricular Tachycardia
 sinoventricular, and the rate is approximately
· SVT refers to a rapid arrhythmia originating from
20 to 40 bpm.
supraventricular tissue, but in which the exact
· As serum potassium increases, T wave ampli-
site of origin cannot be determined. Atrial tachy.
tude increases and becomes peaked.
cardia and AV junctional tachycardia are often
· QRS duration progressively increases and R
indistinguishable, so the tenm SVT may be more
wave height decreases as serum potassium lev-
precise in these cases.
els increase.
·Heart rate may increase slightly with atropine
administration
KEY POINT
· Causes of hyperkalemia include hypoadre-
AV junctional tachycardia may be difficult to
nocorticism,
, anuric or oliguric renal failure,
distinguish from atrial tachycardia
uncontrolled diabetic ketoacidosis, metabolic
acidosis, urethral obstruction, rupture of the
urinary bladder.
DISTURBANCES OF IMPULSE
CONDUCTION
KEY POINT
Sinus Block
·The SA node discharges nommally, but the
 Atrial standstill due to hyperkalemia is usually
impulse is blocked by neighboring tissue.
life threatening.
· Produces a pause equal to twice the preceding
R-R interval, with immediate restoration of rhythm
· Causes are the same as for sinus arrest
Ventricular Pre-Excitation Syndrome
· Usually not clinically significant
· In these syndromes, an abnormal accessory path-
way exists, which bypasses the AV node. This
Atrial Standstill
results in a shortening or loss of the PR interval due
· Atrial standstill is characterized by an absence of P
to premature activation of the ventricles. With an
waves and can be temporary in nature or persistent.
accessory pathway, there are two electrical connec-
The most common cause of temporary atrial stand-
tions between the atria and the ventricles, and both
still is hyperkalemia. Persistent atrial standstill is due
may simultaneously be relaying impulses. There
to an atrial muscular dystrophy, most commonly
also exists the potential for reentry as the impulse
occurring in English Springer Spaniels.
may leave the atria through one pathway and
·In atrial standstill due to hyperkalemia,
.SA
immediately reenter through the other. The accessory
nodal discharge occurs, but atrial depolarization
pathway may connect the atria to the distal AV node,
is blocked by the effects of hyperkalemia. As
bundle of His, or directly to ventricular tissue.
there is no atrial depolarization, P waves are
· Electrocardiographic features (Table 3-2 and
absent. The impulse originating from the SA
Figure 3-13)
68
SECTIONI
 Diagnosis of Heart Disease
igure3-12.
Chapter3
Electrocardiography
69
bundle
E
block.
Figure 3-12, cont'd.
omplexe
70
SECTION I
Diagnosis of Heart Disease
Chapter3
Electrocardiography
71
Table 3-2
 Summary of Pre-Excitation Syndrome
Cardiac Sequence
Mechanism
ECG
Sinus impulse
Normal
 Atrial depolarization 
Normal
Normal P wave
AV node accessory pathways
Relatively rapid conduction,
Short PR interval
skirting the A-V nodal system
Early ventricular depolarization
One ventricle activated early
Initial QRS slurred (delta
wave) (. widened QRS)
 Retrograde conduction from
Atrial re-entry impulse
Tendency to supraventricu-
ventricles to atria
lar parox ysmal arrhythmias
 Late ventricular depolarization
Fusion between normal and
Delay, often with altered 
anomalous ventricular activation
direction, of terminal QRS
· Isolated first degree AV block is not clinically
significant but may be an early indicator of pro-
 gressive AV nodal dysfunction.
Second-Degree Atrioventricular Block
· There is intermittent blockage of conduction
through the AV node.
· Following discharge of the SA node and atrial
depolarization, there is no associated ventricular
Figure 3-13.
Ventricular pre-excitation in a dog. A short
 depolarization.
P-R interval and a widened QRS complex with slurring or
notching (arow) of the upstroke ("delta" wave) are present.
· Electrocardiographic features include absence of
(From Fox PR, Sisson D, Moise NS, eds: Textbook of canine
QRS-T complexes following P wave (see Figure
and feline cardiology, St Louis, 1999, Elsevier.)
3-12, C).
· In Mobitz type I (Wenckebach) block, there is
 progressive prolongation of the PR interval, fol-
lowed by occurrence of second degree AV block.
·A shortened PR interval
· In Mobitz type II block, there is second degree
· If the accessory pathway terminates in ven-
AV block without preceding prolongation of
tricular tissue, then initial slurring of the QRS
the PR interval.
complex (delta wave) occurs.
· A patterm of block may exist—a 2:1 AV block
· Paroxysmal reentrant tachycardia in some cases
would refer to the presence of two P waves for
· Causes include congenital anomalies, f
feline
every QRS complex.
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, and other struc-
· Advanced or high-grade AV block consists of
tural heart diseases.
more than two consecutive blocked atrial de-
· Clinical significance depends on the frequency
polarizations.
and severity of secondary tachycardia resulting
· Causes are identical to those of frst-degree AV
from the accessory pathway.
block.
· High-grade AV block may reduce cardiac output
First-Degree Atrioventricular Block
 and result in clinical signs.
· Conduction through the AV node is delayed.
· Produces prolongation of the PR interval (more
than 0.13 second for the dog. more than 0.09 sec-
KEY POINT
ond for the cat) (see Figure 3-12, B).
Second-degree block may progress to com-
· Causes include fibrosis of the AV node, vagal
plete AV block. This is more common with
stimulation, and drug-induced (digoxin) and
Mobitz type ll AV block.
electrolyte imbalance.
72
SECTION I  Diagnosis of Heart Disease
Third-Degree Atrioventricular Block
· The presence of an LBBB does not impair car-
(Complete Heart Block)
diac performance directly, but is a marker of sig-
· All conduction through the AV node is blocked.
nificant heart disease.
Atrial and ventricular depolarizations are no lon-
ger coordinated and occur independently of one
KEY POINT
another. Ventricular depolarization is initiated by
Complete heart block will occur if right bun-
discharge of a ventricular escape focus.
dle branch block (RBBB) develops in an ani-
· Electrocardiographic features (see Figure 3-12, D)
mal with LBBB.
· There is no association between P waves and
QRS-T complexes.
· P waves are of normal morphology and usually
Left Anterior Fascicular Block
occur at a normal rate.
· There is a block in the left anterior fascicle of the
· QRS complexes are of ventricular origin
left bundle branch slowing depolarization of the
morphology.
left ventricle.
· Ventricular rate is typically 30 to 50 bpm.
· Electrocardiographic features
· Causes include fbrosis of the AV node, drug-in-
 QRS duration is within normal limits
duced (digoxin), infiltrative disease, Rickettsial
· Left axis deviation (dog less than 40 degrees,
myocarditis, hyperkalemia.
cat less than 0 degrees)
· Usually associated with clinical signs of weak-
· Small Q wave and tall R wave in leads I and
ness or collapse. Complete AV block warrants
aVL (small Q wave not consistent)
implantation of a penrmanent pacemaker in most
· Deep S waves in leads II, MI, and aVF
cases.
(exceeding R wave)
· Associated with feline hypertrophic cardiomy-
Left Bundle Branch Block
opathy, other diseases associated with left ven-
· A conduction delay or block in both the left pos-
tricular hypertrophy, hyperkalemia, ischemia,
terior and the left anterior fascicles of the left bun-
 and post-cardiac surgery
 dlle. A supraventricular impulse activates the right
ventricle first through the right bundle branch.
KEY POINT
Left ventricular depolarization is delayed.
· Electrocardiographic features (Figure 3-14)
Left anterior fascicular block does not directly
· Prolongation of QRS duration ( > 0.08 second
impair cardiac function, but if present, then
one should look for underlying etiologies.
for the dog; > 0.06 second for the cat)
· QRS wide and positive in leads I, II, III, and aVF
· Unlike VPCs, the QRS complex is associated
with a preceding P wave.
Right Bundle Branch Block
· May be difficult to distinguish from left ven
 There is block of the right bundle branch, delay-
tricular enlargement patterm
ing depolarization of the right ventricle.
· Causes include structural heart disease (car
· Electrocardiographic features (Figure 3-12, E)
diomyopathy, congenital anomalies, neoplasia,
· QRS duration increased
trauma, fbrosis)
· Prominent S waves in leads I, II, III, and aVF
T：
Figure 3-14.
 Intermittent left bundle branch block in a dog. The QRS complexes are wider and taller than normal in the fourth,
fifth, and sixth complexes. (From Fox PR, Sisson D, Moise NS, eds: Textbook of canine and feline cardiology, St Louis, 1999,
Elsevier.)
Chapter3
 Electrocardiography
73
· Right axis shift
· When every other complex is a VPC, ven-
· Associated with structural heart disease, Chagas
tricular bigeminy exists.
disease, heartworm disease, acute pulmonary
· When every third complex is a VPC, ventric-
thromboembolism, hypokalemia.
ular trigeminy exists.
· R-on-T phenomenon occurs when the VPC
occurs immediately following a normal beat
KEY POINT
within the T wave. This may predispose to
As in the case of LAFB, RBBB does not signifi-
the development of ventricular tachycardia.
canty impair cardiac function, but one should
· Causes are numerous and include structural heart
look for underlying etiologies.
disease, familial in young German Shepherds,
 arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy
(boxer cardiomyopathy), hypoxia, anemia, ure-
DISTURBANCES OF VENTRICULAR
mia, gastric dilatation-volvulus, splenic torsion
IMPULSE FORMATION
and splenic neoplasia, pancreatitis, myocarditis,
Ventricular Premature Complexes
and drug induced (digoxin, anesthesia).
· An abnonmal beat originating in the ventricles
· Clinical significance depends on the frequency
and occurring earlier than expected in relation to
of VPCs, pattem of ectopy, and cause of the
the existing rhythm. A compensatory pause often
arrhythmia.
follows a VPC.
·Isolated VPCs usually pose no significant
· Unifocal VPCs occur from one ventricular site
 problems but may signal the presence of pro-
and have identical morphologies (see Figure 3-
 gressive disease and potential for more serious
12, F).
arrh ythmia.
· Multifocal VPCs usually occur from more
· Runs of VPCs do suggest the potential for ven-
than one ventricular site and have differing
tricular tachycardia and possibly ventricular
morphologies.
Electrophysiologic
studies
fibrillation.
have demonstrated that a single ventricular
 site may produce VPCs of differing morphol-
Ogy—this is due to altered conduction of the
KEY PoINT
VPCs rather than multiple ectopic sites. It is
 The finding of isolated VPCs in a young to
more precise, therefore, to use the term mul-
middle-aged Doberman Pinscher or Boxer is
tifonm rather than multifocal (see Figure 3-
highly suggestive of occult dilated cardiomy-
12, G).
opathy or arrhythmogenic right ventricular
· When the VPC does not alter the under-
cardiomyopathy respectively.
lying nonmal
rhythm,
it
is
said
to
be
 interpolated.
·When normal ventricular depolarization is
Ventricular Tachycardia
interrupted by a VPC, a fusion beat occurs—this 
· Runs of VPCs occurring in succession at a rate of
 is essentially the electrocardiographic merging
-    n  r 
of a nonmal QRS and VPC.
charge rate of the ventricle is approximately 40
· Electrocardiographic features 
(Figures 3-12,
to 50 bpm (seen with complete heart block). In
F to H)
normal animals, this is overdriven by the sinus
· As the site of depolarization is ventricular,
rhythm. An accelerated idioventricular rhythm re-
there is no AV association. P waves are not
fers to a ventricular rhythm at a rate of 60 to 100
associated with the QRS complexes of the
bpm. Ventricular tachycardia may be sustained or
VPCs.
parox ysmal.
· QRS complexes wide and bizarre, consistent
· Electrocardiographic features (Figure 3-15, A)
with ventricular origin
· P waves not associated with QRS complexes
· T wave polarity often reversed
· QRS complexes wide and bizarre, consistent
· Compensatory pause following VPC is typical.
with ventricular origin
· Patterms of VPCs
· Regular rhythm, as contrasted with atrial fibril-
· Two consecutive VPCs are referred to as a
lation and RBBB
couplet
· Causes are the same as for VPCs.
· Three or more consecutive VPCs is a salvo or
· Ventricular tachycardia indicates significant
run (see Figure 3-12, H).
heart disease or systemic disease. Cardiac
74
SECTION I   Diagnosis of Heart Disease
output may be significantly
y impaired, and
Atrial Premature Complexes with Aberrant
the arrhythmia predisposes to ventricular
Conduction
fibrillation.
· When the impulse of an APC encounters an area of
refractoriness (AV node, bundle of His, or ventricu-
Ventricular Fibrillation
lar myocardium), it may terminate or continue with
· Completely irregular, chaotic variable fibril-
aberrant conduction. The latter may result in a wide
lation potentials, indicating lack of organized
and bizarre QRS configuration resembling a beat of
ventricular  depolarization  and  impending
ventricular origin.
death
· Most often occurs at slow heart rates
· Electrocardiographic features (Figure 3-15, B)
· QRS may take the form of RBBB.
· There is no evidence of organized cardiac
depolarization (absence of P-QRS-T waves)
· Wavy, undulating baseline
ESCAPE RHYTHMS
· Coarse ventricular fibrillation is character-
Junctional Escape Beat
ized by large wavelets.
·When not activated by atrial depolarization, the
· Fine ventricular fibrillation is characterized
junctional AV nodal area may spontaneously dis-
by small wavelets.
charge. This impulse results in ventricular depo-
larization in a normal fashion. Junctional escape
beats may occur when there is a significant pause
KEY POINT
in the sinus rhythm.
Ventricular  fibrillation   indicates  cardiopul-
· Electrocardiographic features
monary arrest, and immediate restoration of
· Inverted P wave, occurring before, during, or
rhythm is required to preserve life.
just after QRS complex
· Normal or relatively normal QRS complex
Ventricular Asystole
· Occurs after significant pause in sinus rhythm
· Lack of any significant ventricular electrical activity
· Clinical significance—this complex is adaptive
· Electrocardiogram demonstrates fat baseline-
and helps to maintain cardiac output in the face
occasional ventricular escape complexes may
of a slow rate or sinus arrest.
occur
· A terminal rhythm requiring immediate restora-
KEY POINT
tion of rhythm to preserve life
Junctional escape beats should not be sup-
pressed.
DISTURBANCES OF BOTH
IMPULSE FORMATION AND
Junctional Rhythm
IMPULSE CONDUCTION
· Succession of junctional escape beats in absence
Sick Sinus Syndrome
of adequate sinus node function
· SSS is a progressive heart disease charac-
· Rate of junctional escape rhythm is typically
terized by a variety of arrhythmias, including
40 to 60 bpm.
sinus bradycardia, sinus arrest, paroxysmal
· This rhythm is adaptive and should not be sup-
atrial tachycardia (bradycardia-tachycardia
pressed. Correction of the cause of sinus node
syndrome), intermittent AV nodal block, and
dysfunction is warranted.
lack of ventricular escape complexes (Figure
3-15, C).
Ventricular Escape Beat
· Breeds predisposed include Miniature Schnau-
·When not activated by atrial depolarization, a
zers, Cocker Spaniels, Dachshunds, Pugs, West
ventricular focus may spontaneously discharge.
Highland White Terriers. SSS is most common in
This impulse results in an abnormal ventricular
older female dogs.
depolarization, but contraction is not affected.
· The cause is unknown but likely involves idio-
Ventricular escape beats may occur when there is
pathic degeneration of the conduction system.
a significant pause in the sinus rhythm and lack of
· Most cases are presented with a history of inter-
junctional escape complexes.
mittent weakness and collapse.
· Electrocardiographic features
· Medical therapy may be successful in some cases;
·Ventricular escape beat occurs following a
 many require pacemaker implantation.
 pause in the rhythm
Chapter3
Electrocardiography
76
SECTION I  Diagnosis of Heart Disease
· QRS wide and bizarre, consistent with ventric-
· Ventricular parasystole focus is located within
ular origin
ventricular myocardium and produces regularly
· Clinical significance—this complex is adaptive
spaced QRS complexes. When the focus dis-
 and helps to maintain cardiac output in the face
charges during the ventricle's refractory period,
of a slow rate or sinus arrest.
a QRS will not be created.
Ventricular Escape Rhythm
Ashman's Phenomenon
· Succession of ventricular escape beats in absence
· Tendency of premature supraventricular beats
of adequate sinus node function
to have aberrant ventricular conduction when a
short cycle follows a long one.
to 40 bpm.
· This rhythm is adaptive and should not be sup-
 pressed. Correction of the cause of sinus node
dysfunction is warranted.
KEY POINT
 The beats generated by the pacemaker are
KEY POINT
not of normal morphology-this is expected.
These ventricular escape beats should not be
suppressed.
MISCELLANEOUS
Frequently Asked Questions
Artifcial Pacemaker
lfa veterinarian auscuts an abnormality that comes
· A permanent pacemaker is used to control brady-
and goes, and the ECG does not show an arrhythmia,
arrhythmias that caused clinical signs and were
then what should be done?
unresponsive to medical therapy.
Repeat ECGs may be required to pick up changes in
·Transvenous implantation with an endocardial lead
heart activity occurring only in a paroxysmal pattern.
is the preferred means and is much less invasive than
In some cases, a Holter monitor must be used for a
24-hour recording so that the pattern and frequency
abdominal surgery and epicardial lead implantation.
of abnormality can be properly tracked.
· Most pacemakers used in dogs are set at 100 bpm.
· Electrocardiographic features
Interference is occurring on an ECG tracing: it
· If the sinus node is functioning and the heart
appears to be 60 cycle (small waveforms) and is not
improved when the fuorescent bulbs and all electri-
rate is greater than 100 bpm (or discharge rate
cal equipment in the room are turned off. What could
of pacemaker), then there will be no electrocar-
cause this ongoing interference?
diographic changes.
Sometimes, interference may travel through the walls
· Once the heart rate decreases below the pace-
from the adjacent room and close proximity to power
maker's minimum rate, a pacing spike will
supply in the wall could also send off interference.
appear followed by a wide and bizarre QRS
Electrical supply to the facility must be properly
grounded and so if the problem persists when all of
(ventricular origin of impulse).
those factors have been controlled, then an electrician
should examine the electrical system of the building.
KEY POINT
We must do a surgery that requires an unusuat posi
 Ashman's aberrance may mimic a VPC.
tion for the dog. Will abnormal relative and absotute
position of the clips interfere with our routine intra-
operative monitoring?
Position is not critical for routine intra-operative
Parasystole
electrocardiography, as opposed to position required
·In parasystole, there is an independent fo-
for a pri mary ECG with multiple leads for diagnostic
cus discharging spontaneously. There is an
purposes, and so a useful capture can be done in spite
entrance block, so the focus is not overdriven by
of unorthodox limb or animal position. Any position
the normal cardiac impulse. The parasystolic fo-
for the recording will still always give an analysis
of an arrhythmia and/or conduction abnormality.
   a a   as l s
It is important to watch that the extreme position-
complete depolarization of the atria or ventricles
ing required will not lead to the lead wires or clips
· Atrial parasystole focus is located within atrial
touching a metal surgical table since that can cause
myocardium and produces small P waves, usu-
interference.
ally unassociated with QRS complexes.
Chapter3
Electrocardiography
77
SUGGESTED READINGS
Miller MS, Tilley LP, Detweiler DK: Cardiac electro-
physiology. In Duke's physiology of domestic ani-
Davis AS, Middleton, BJ: Relationship between QT
mals, ed 11, Ithaca, NY, 1993, Cornell.
interval and heart rate in Alderley Park beagles,
Redfern WS, Carlsson L, Davis AS, Lynch WG, Mac-
Rec0rd,145:248-250, 1999.
Kenzie I, et al: Relationships between preclinical
Detweiler DK: The dog electrocardiogram: a critical
cardiac electrophysiology, clinical QT interval prolon-
review. In MacFarlane, PW, Lawrie, TDV, eds: Com-
gation and torsade de pointes for a broad range of
prehensive electrocardiography: theory and practice
  s d e 1  s
in health and disease, New York, 1998, Pergamon
drug development. Cardiovasc Res, 58, 32-45, 2003.
Press.
Smith, FWK, Tilley, LP, Miller, MS: Disorders of cardiac
Ettinger SJ Le Bobinnec G, Cote E: Electrocardiography.
rhythm. In Brichard, SJ, Sherding, RG, eds: Manual
In Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC, eds: Textbook of Vet-
of small animal practice, ed 3, St Louis, 2007, WB
erinary internal medicine, ed 5, St Louis, 2000, WB
Saunders.
Saunders.
Smith FWK, Tilley, LP, Miller, MS. Electrocardiography.
Finley MR, Lillich JD, Gilmour RF, Freeman LC:
In
Brichard, SJ, Sherding, RG, eds: Manual
Structural and functional basis for the long QT syndrome:
of small animal practice, ed 3, St Louis, 2007,
relevance to veterinary patients. J Vet Med 17:473-488,
WB Saunders.
2003.
Tilley LP: Essentials of canine and feline electrocardio-
Kittleson MD: Electrocardiography. In Kittleson MD,
graphy, ed 3, Ames, Iowa, 1992, Blackwell.
Kienle RD, eds: Small animal cardiovascular medi-
Tilley LP, Miller MS, Smith FW, Jr: canine and feline
cine, St Louis, 1998, Mosby.
cardiac arrhythmias: self-assessment. Ames, Iowa,
Miller MS, Tilley LP, Smith FWK Jr, Fox PR, Electro-
1993, Blackwell.
cardiography. In Fox PR, Sisson D, Moise NS, eds:
Textbook of canine and feline cardiology, St Louis,
1999,Elsevier.
Echocardiography and Doppler
Ultrasound
Virginia Luis Fuentes
INTRODUCTION
that obtained with 2D, so that the frame is updated
Echocardiography has become the most important
thousands of time per second rather than the 40 to
diagnostic technique for the diagnosis of canine and
200 times per second obtained with 2D.
feline heart disease. The interaction between ultra-
high-frequency sound waves and the heart allows
Applications
 the depiction of cardiac morphology, information on
· Time-dependent measurements (chamber dimen-
the movement of myocardium and valves, and blood
sions, wall motion)
fow within the heart. Echocardiography is comple-
mentary to physical examination, radiography and
Doppler Echocardiography
electrocardiography (ECG) and has replaced invasive
techniques such as cardiac catheterization for all but a
· Doppler echocardiography uses the Doppler princi-
few specific indications.
ple: the frequency of a reflected sound wave depends
 on the direction and velocity of the reflector and the
transmitted frequency (producing a Doppler shiff).
TYPES OF IMAGING
· If the transmitted ultrasound frequency and the
Two-Dimensional Echocardiography
velocity of sound in soft tissue and blood are
known, then the velocity of red blood cells can be
· A sector-shaped beam of ultrasound waves is
calculated.
reflected by the interfaces of cardiac tissue to
KEY POINT
provide a two-dimensional (2D) cross-sectional
(tomographic) image (Figure 4-1).
The angle of the incident ultrasound beam is
critical: the uftrasound beam must be parallel with
Applications
flow (or less than 20° from the cirection of flow)
· Demonstrating cardiac morphology
 or the velocity will be underestimated.
· Increasingly important in quantification of cham-
ber dimensions (as machines become capable of
There are several modes of Doppler echocardiography:
faster frame rates)
· Spectral Doppler, where the velocity of blood
fow is calculated in a region of interest selected
M-Mode Echocardiography
by moving a cursor (Figure 4-3)
· Color Doppler, where the blood flow is coded in
· M-mode uses a single narrow beam of ultrasound,
 red (toward the transducer) or blue (away from
 but displays the resulting echoes as a distance-time
 the transducer) and superimposed on the black-
 graph (Figure 4-2). The time resolution is superior to
and-white 2D image (Figure 4-4)
78
Chapter 4 Echocardiography and Doppler Ultrasound
79
RV
104
RA
Ao
Figure 4-1.  Right parasternal echocardiographic views. A, Long-axis four-chamber view optimized for left ventricular inlet.
B, Long-axis view optimized for left ventricular outflow tract. C, Short-axis view at the papillary muscle level.
ContinDed
80
SECTION I Diagnosis of Heart Disease
LV
RV
Figure 4-1. cont'd. D, Short-axis view at chorclal level. E, Short-axis view at mitral valve level. F, Short-axis view at the heart base,
Optimized for left atrium and aortic valve.
Continued
Chapter 4Echocardiography and Doppler Ultrasound
81
RA
RV
G
品
Figure 4-1. cont'd. G, Short-axis view at the heart base, optimized for pulmonary artery. LA, Left atrium; LV, left ventricle; RA,
right atrium; RV, right ventricle; Ao, aorta; R, right coronary sinus of Valsalva; L, left coronary sinus of Valsalva; NC, noncoronary
sinus of Valsalva; PA, pulmonary artery; rPA, right pulmonary artery.
· Tissue Doppler imaging (TDI), where the velocity
times as a receiver or transmitter of ultrasoumd
of myocardial motion is displayed (Figure 4-5, E)
waves, allowing the interrogation of blood fow
velocities within a specific region of interest.
· This region of interest is represented as a sample
Spectral Doppler Echocardiography
volume on the cursor.
· A graph of blood fow velocity against time
· Pulsed wave Doppler has limitations in the maxi-
is shown, usually with a simultaneous ECG
 mum velocities that it can display without ambigu-
display.
ity : high velocities result in "aliasing,’ where blood
· Blood fow velocities toward the transducer are
fow will be displayed as both positive and negative
displayed as positive (above the baseline), and
velocities (i.e., signal wraps around the baseline).
blood fow velocities away from the transducer
· The velocity at which aliasing will occur depends
are displayed as negative (below the baseline).
on the Nyquist limit (half the pulse repetition
· The Doppler shift can also be represented by an
frequency), with higher velocities without alias-
audible sound, because the shift in frequency is
ing achieved at lower transducer frequencies, and
usually quite small and within the audible range
reduced depth from the transducer.
(around 10 kHz), so that most machines will
show a visual spectral display with a simultane-
Continuous Wave Doppler
ous audible signal.
· In contrast, with continuous wave (Cw) Doppler,
· Spectral Doppler is usually recorded with guid-
ultrasound waves can be transmitted and received
ance from two-dimensional echocardiographic
simultaneously. This allows much higher veloci-
images (2D-Doppler, or Duplex Doppler). This
ties to be displayed, but it is not possible to draw
allows a cursor to be superimposed over a 2D
any conclusions about the depth along the cursor
image, showing the angle of interrogation of the
from where these velocities are originating (i.e.,
 Doppler beam in two dimensions.
there is range ambiguity).
· Spectral Doppler can be further subdivided into
pulsed wave, continuous wave, and high-pulse
High-Pulse Repetition Frequency Doppler
repetition frequency.
· High-Pulse repetition frequency Doppler is a form
of pulsed Doppler that shares some similarities
Pulsed Wave Doppler
with CW Doppler. Frequent pulses of ultrasound
· The ultrasound waves are transmitted as pulses
waves are produced so that a number of sample
of waves, with the transducer acting at different
volumes will be superimposed on the 2D image.
82
SECTIONIDiagnosis of HeartDisease
S50-7.5
64HZ
RW
Figure 4-2. M-mode echocardiograms of the left heart at the mitral valve chordal level (note that the 2D image is moved to the
left of the screen to allow correct placement of the cursor) (A); mitral valve leaflet level (B); aortic valve level.
Continued
Chapter4
 Echocardiography and Doppler Ultrasound
83
S50-7.
67Hz
#127
LAur
LAu
40/1
Figure 4-2. cont'd. (C). IVS, Interventricular septum; LV, left ventricle; LVFW, left ventricular free wall; RV, right ventricle;
Ao, aorta; LA, left atrium; LAur, left auricle.
This not only allows the display of higher veloci-
indices, because they may be less infuenced by
ties without aliasing, but also increases the num-
loading conditions.
ber of possible sites from which the velocities are
 being recorded.
Applications
· Doppler echocardiography is most often used to
Color Flow Doppler
characterize abnormal direction or velocity of
· Color fow Doppler represents the velocity and
blood fow, or to indicate the origin of turbulent
direction of blood fow in color, superimposed
blood fow. This is invaluable in valve disease or
on a black-and-white 2D image. In effect, the
 congenital heart disease, but Doppler echocardiog-
color is displayed within a very large sample vol-
raphy may also be used to estimate fow volumes,
ume superimposed on the 2D image. Blood fow
to assess systolic and diastolic function, and to ob-
away from the transducer is shown in blue, and
tain infonmation about intracardiac pressures.
blood fow toward the transducer is displayed in
·Abnormal blood flow direction may be noted
red ("BART:" blue away, red toward). Disturbed
with conditions such as valvular insufficiency
 Or turbulent fow may be displayed in green Or
· Abnormal blood fow velocity may be a clinically
yellow. Aliasing may also occur in color fow
useful finding, as the velocity of blood fow across
Doppler.
an orifice is chiefy determined by the difference
in pressure. If there is a large difference in the
Tissue Doppler Imaging
 pressures in the chambers on each side of a valve,
· More sophisticated machines may include fa-
then the velocity of fow across the valve will be
cilities for recording the velocity of myocardial
high. For example, during systole the pressure in
motion. The signals refected by the moving
the left ventricle is very high, and the pressure
myocardium are high amplitude, but low veloc-
in the left atrium is very low. If the mitral valve
ity. These myocardial velocities can be displayed
is incompetent and regurgitation occurs, then
in spectral format, as a color display, or as color
M-mode. It is believed that TDI indices may have
the left ventricle to the left atrium will be very
advantages over conventional echocardiographic
high, reflecting the large difference in pressures.
84
SECTION I   Diagnosis of Heart Disease
Chapter4
 Echocardiography and Doppler Ultrasound
85
E
R
D
RA
CdvC
RVOT
AO
PA
Figure 4-3.
Doppler echocardiographic studies. A, Mitral inflow obtained from the
mitral inflow, and a small sample volume placed at the tips of the mitral valve leaflets
when the mitral valve is open. The typical spectral Doppler waveform of mitral inflow
displays an early diastolic (E) wave and an atrial contraction (A) wave of flling. B, Aortic
flow obtained from the left caudal parasternal (apical) "five-chamber" view, showing
left ventricular outflow tract and placement of pulsed wave sample volume in ascend-
ing aorta. The typical spectral Doppler waveform of aortic flow is displayed. C, Aortic
flow obtained from the subcostal view, showing continuous wave cursor positioned
in ascending aorta. The typical spectral Doppler waveform of aortic flow is displayed.
D, Tricuspid valve flow obtained the left cranial parasternal view optimized for right
ventricular inflow. The pulsed wave sample volume is placed at the tricuspid leaflet tips,
with the probe in a cranial position. The spectral waveform is similar to that of mitral
inflow, although sometimes an additional systolic forward flow wave is recorded. E,
Pulmonary artery flow from the right parasternal short-axis view optimized for right
main pulmonary artery, and from the left cranial parasternal view optimized for the
artery flow is displayed. LA, Left atrium; LV, left ventricle; RA, right atrium; RV, right
ventricle; CdCV, caudal vena cava; Ao, aorta; RVOT, right ventricular outflow tract; PA,
pulmonary artery.
86
SECTION IDiagnosis of Heart Disease
A
B
c
D
E
Figure 4-4.
Color flow echocardiographic studies of mitral regurgitation. A, Mild mitral regurgitation. The color jet occu-
pies < 20% of the left atrial area. B, Moderate mitral regurgitation. The color mitral regurgitation jet occupies 20% to 40% of
the left atrial area. C, Severe mitral regurgitation. The color jet occupies > 40% of the left atrial area (the jet is rebounding from
the dorsal LA wall in red), the vena contracta is wide, and a proximal flow convergence region can be seen. D, Right parasternal
long-axis view of a dog with severe mitral regurgitation, showing a large vena contracta width (biack arrow). E, Left apical view of
a dog with severemitral regurgitation, showing a large proximal flow convergenceregion.The white arrows indicate the borders
of the hemisphere where aliasing is occurring. The larger the hemisphere's diameter for a particular aliasing velocity (in this case
69 cm/s), the more severe the mitral insufficiency.
Conversely, for much of diastole, the pressure
fow will be present when a murmur is audible,
in the left atrium is only slightly higher than the
making Doppler echocardiography particularly
pressure in the left ventricle, so the velocity of
useful in conditions where a murmur is present.
the early filling (E) wave is fairly low. This ve-
·Estimation of flow volumes is possible using
locity information can therefore be used to derive
Doppler echocardiography combined with 2D
information about intracardiac pressures.
measurements. Flow is the product of cross-sec-
· Turbulent blood fow is relatively uncommon in
tional area multiplied by the area under the spec-
the nonmal heart, but when present, is most likely
tral Doppler curve (velocity time integral).
to occur where velocity is highest (i.e., within
·Assessment of pressure gradients is possible
the aorta). Even in a nonmal heart, vigorous
using the modified Bermoulli equation, where
ejection into the aorta can sometimes result in
[4x(blood flow velocity)²] gives the difference
signal aliasing on color Doppler. Blood fow will
in pressure across a valve or between chambers.
be turbulent whenever velocity is high, and val-
·Diastolic dysfiunction can also be assessed with Dop-
vular insufficiency or stenosis almost inevitably
pler echocardiography, although many measurements 
results in turbulent blood fow. Turbulent blood
are imfluenced by loading conditions. Evaluation of
flow may be displayed in a different color (green/
-aun u mo snoua nd p qsn
yellow) or color distribution (mosaic patterm);
tion with TDI indices can suggest abnonmal left ven-
this is termed variance. In most cases, turbulent
tricular (LV) relaxation and filling pressures.
Chapter4
Echocardiography and Doppler Ultrasound
87
B
c
D
E
0.15
E
0.10
0.05
m/s
0.05
0.10
0.15
Figure 4-5. Echocardiographic evaluation of ventricular diastolic function. A, Normal transmitral flow pattern demonstrating an
early filling wave (E) with higher velocity than the atrial contraction wave (A). B, Delayed relaxation transmitral flow pattern dem-
onstrating reduced amplitude and prolonged duration of the E wave. C, Pseudonormal transmitral flow pattern demonstrating a
normal E:A velocity ratio, but this is the result of the combined effects of delayed relaxation, increased LA pressures and increased
LV stiffness. D, Restrictive transmitral flow pattern. High LA pressures result in increased E wave amplitude despite delayed relax-
ation. Decreased LV compliance (sometimes with atrial systolic dysfunction) results in a dliminished A wave. E, Pulsed wave tissue
Doppler (TDl) image of mitral annulus velocity, displaying a systolic wave (S), early diastolic wave (E ) and atrial wave (A').
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHIC
although this will also be affected by the choice of
TECHNIQUE
transducer. High-end machines may have additional
options such as TDI or even 3D echocardiography.
Equipment
Echocardiographie Machines
Transducers
· Echo machines are becoming increasingly afford-
· Linear scanners are unsuitable for echocardiog-
able for many practices. Almost all machines have
raphy because of the limited acoustic window
 appropriate software for cardiac measurements and
available between ribs.
will be capable of 2D and M-mode imaging. Many
· Sector probes produce a fan-shaped arc of ultra-
machines will also have Doppler capabilities, with
sound waves, and so they will provide a wide im-
spectral and CW as well as color Doppler. Im-
age of the far field from a small acoustic window.
age quality remains the most important feature,
These are ideal for cardiac applications.
88
SECTION I  Diagnosis of Heart Disease
· Types of sector probes include:
Sedation
· Mechanical transducers, where the crystal is
· The ideal is to echo patients without sedation,
oscillated back and forth to produce the arc-
but a sedated patient may be better than a rest-
shaped ultrasound beam. These are more com-
less one, because it can be impossible to obtain
mon with basic machines.
the necessary images without adequate patient
· Curvilinear probes are similar to linear probes,
cooperation. A reasonable compromise for most
but have a rounded surface. They tend to
canine and feline patients is a combination of
produce good images when the footprint is
low-dose acepromazine and an opiate. This may
placed between ribs, but rib shadows are a
have a mild effect on some blood flow velocities,
problem when they are rotated through 90°.
but is less likely to affect cardiac dimensions
· Phased array transducers are also available and
and will not affect lesions. General anesthesia
 have an array of crystals that are electronically
and alpha-2 agonists will affect systolic func-
fired in sequence to produce the fan-shaped
tion and may affect ventricular dimensions.
wavefront. They are more expensive, but they
have better beam focusing.
Electrocardiography
· Some commercially available transducers have
·An ECG should be obtained simultaneously.
a wide frequency bandwidth that allows a single
 ECGs allow a much longer time period of screen-
probe to operate at more than one frequency, for
ing for arrhythmias than would be normally
example, 2.5 and 3.5 MHz, or 5 and 7.5 MHz.
 practicable with an ECG machine and a paper
· Higher-end machines may have harmonic imag-
trace. An ECG also allows accurate timing of
ing, which results in a better signal to noise
measurements. Adhesive ECG electrodes are
ratio.
 more comfortable than traditional alligator clips
and can be attached with tape or bandage, and
electrical contact can be maintained by using ad-
KEY POINT
ditional alcohol, if necessary.
Low-frequency transducers have high pen-
etrating power but poor resclution. They pro-
duce better Doppler signals
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHICVIEWS
High-frequency
 transducers
haveI
low
penetrating power but high resolution. The
Two-Dimensional Imaging
higher the frequency, the better the imaging
(providing the tissue can be penetrated and
· It is worthwhile to adopt a consistent technique
signal strength is adequate).
so that the same views are obtained in the same
sequence with each study. Some views may be
more difficult to obtain in some patients. The
most commonly used imaging planes are obtained
The Echo Table
with the transducer on the right side of the chest
· The majority of echocardiographers position
(right parasternal views; see Figure 4-1). Views
animals in lateral recumbency and approach
obtained from the left apical windows (caudal
from undemeath, with the probe on the de-
and cranial left parastermal views; see Figure 4-3)
 pendent chest wall. This minimizes air artifact
are mainly used for Doppler echocardiography
in the lung tissue between the probe and the
applications, but as with radiography, it is helpful
heart. The ideal table will have a wedge-shaped
to confirm lesions in more than one view.
cut-out rather than a circular hole, and should
be covered with a comfortable but hygienic
Doppler Imaging
surface.
· Most Doppler recordings can be made from the
Patient Preparation
left parastermal views, with the subcostal view
Clipping
preferred for aortic velocities. Color Doppler
· Most dogs will need to be clipped for echo-
used in the right parastermal views can be used for
cardiography. In some short-coated breeds and
 screening for mitral and aortic insufficiency. The
cats, good acoustic contact may be obtained with
features of blood fow across each valve are listed
liberal use of alcohol and acoustic gel (but check
in the following sections. Normal values for blood
first that the transducer used is not damaged by
fow velocity are derived from several studies (See
alcohol).
reference list) and are summarized below.
Chapter4
Echocardiography and Doppler Ultrasound
89
wave is sometimes recorded corresponding to
Pulmonary Artery Flow
vena caval inflow.
· Recorded from the right parastermal short-axis
view or the left cranial parastermal position (see
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHIC
Figure 4-3, E). Both should be recorded, in an
MEASUREMENTS
attempt to record the highest velocity. A large
sample volume should be used to minimize
· Echocardiography is ideally suited to identifica-
aliasing.
tion of structural lesions, but quantitative assess-
· There is usually one single systolic envelope,
ment of cardiac dimensions and function is also
away from the transducer, with peak veloci-
important. Echocardiography allows quantifica-
ties < 1.5 m/s.
tion of chamber dimensions, systolic and diastolic
· There may be some positive fow (toward the
perfonmance, valve function and hemodynamic
transducer) during diastole associated with pul-
estimates (e.g., intracardiac pressures).
monic insufficiency. A small amount of pulmonic
insufficiency is common in healthy dogs and is
Chamber Dimensions
usually considered a normal finding.
·LV diameter
· LV wall thickness
Aortic Flow
·Left atrial (LA) and aortic dimensions
· Recorded from the left caudal parastermal (apical)
5 chamber (see Figure 4-3, B) or from the sub-
Left Ventricular Diameter
costal position (see Figure 4-3, C). The subcostal
view usually allows the best alignment with fow.
· LV diameter is typically measured from M-mode
A large sample volume should be used to mini-
images (see Figures 4-2, A, and 4-6, A).
mize aliasing.
· There should be one single systolic envelope,
M Mode Measurement Technique
away from the transducer, with peak veloci-
· Measure from "leading edge" to "leading edge"
ties <1.7 m/s (left caudal parastermal view)
· Diastolic measurements made at onset of QRS
or < 2.0 m/s (subcostal).
(LVDd)
· Systolic measurements made at peak excursion
(LVDs)
Mitral Inflow
· Average several beats, particularly if the rhythm
· Recorded from the apical four- or two-chamber
is irregular
view (see Figure 4-3, A). As small a sample
volume as possible should be used, with the
Problems with Left Ventricular Dimension
sample volume placed at the leaflet tips during
Measurements
diastole.
· Poor alignment may result in diameter inaccuracies
· Two peaks of fow are generally recorded, cor-
· Difficulties in establishing normal values for a
responding to early passive filling at the start of
widely varying canine population
diastole (the E wave: 0.5 to 1.0 m/s) and filling
· One suggestion is to divide every measurement by
across the mitral valve during atrial contraction
the aortic diameter in the same animalthis should
(the A wave: 0.3 to 0.6 m/s).
"normalize" for body size, although normal refer-
ence ranges derived for specific breeds are the ideal.
Tricuspid Inflow
Index of Sphericity
· Tricuspid fow is recorded one or two intercos-
tal spaces cranial to the position for mitral inflow
· One solution to the problem of identifying LV
(see Figure 4-3, D). As small a sample volume as
dilation (eccentric hypertrophy) in a wide range
possible should be used.
of breeds is to measure the long axis from a 2D
· Two peaks of flow are recorded, corresponding to
image and divide by the M-mode LV diameter,
early passive filling at the start of diastole (the E
as LV dilation usually results in a more spherical
wave: 0.3 to 0.9 m/s) and filling across the tricus-
chamber (due to a bigger increase in diameter
pid valve during atrial contraction (the A wave:
than length). The LV length: diameter ratio should
0.3 to 0.6 m/s). In addition, a systolic forward
be > 1.65.
90
SECTION IDiagnosis of Heart Disease
Left Ventricular Wall Thickness
Left Ventricular Fractional Shortening
· This is more important in cats than in dogs, as
· LV fractional shortening (FS%) is the most
detection of LV hypertrophy is an important
commonly used echo index of systolic function
clinical goal in feline myocardial disease. In cats,
(Figure 4-8, A).
M-mode imaging planes may miss localized ar-
·Calculated using
the following formula:
eas of hypertrophy, or erroneously include papil-
FS% = [(LVDd - LVDs)/ LVDd] x 100
lary muscles, so that wall thickness may be best
· FS% will increase with improved contractility,
measured from 2D images. 2D ec hocardiography
increased preload, or decreased afterload, and
has the advantage of allowing measurements ir-
only assesses shortening in the minor axis
respective of the location of hypertrophy.
dimension.
· Normal reported mean values range from 25% to
KEY POINT
 39% or 40%. Note that individual normal dogs
Measurements must be made at end-diastole,
may have values less than 25%.
when the walls are at their thinnest. There is a
risk of overestimating wall thickness from 2D
E Point to Septal Separation
· E point to septal separation (EPSS) may be
increased with reduced systolic function. It is
Left Atrial Diameter
unreliable in the presence of mitral stenosis or
· LA size can be estimated from M-mode, 2D short
aortic regurgitation.
axis, or 2D long axis.
· Measured from an M-mode recording at the
mitral valve level as the distance between the
M-Mode Measurements
septum and peak opening of the anterior mitral
· The aortic diameter is measured in diastole (Ao),
valve leafet (see Figure 4-6, B).
and the LA diameter is measured in systole. The
· Normal reported mean values range from 5 mm
LA:Ao ratio should be approximately 1.0, but in
to 8 mm in giant breeds.
many dogs alignment is difficult, so that the left
auricle is measured rather than the left atrium. In
End-Systolic Volume Index
cats, the cursor is more likely to cross the main body
of the LA rather than the auricle, so that M-mode
· End-systolic volume index (ESVI) should be mea-
measurements may more accurately refect LA size
sured from 2D images, not from indices derived
than in dogs (see Figures 4-2, C, and 4-6, C).
from M-mode such as with the Teichholz formula
· Endocardial borders of left ventricle are traced
Two-Dimensional Measurements
in a right parastermal long-axis or left caudal
· Short axis: the LA:Ao ratio should be < 1.6. Mea-
parastemal view, and an area-length formula or
surements are usually made in diastole. There can
modifed Simpson's rule are generally used to
be problems avoiding pulmonary veins, and the LA
calculate LV volumes (see Figure 4-8, B).
size may vary throughout diastole (Figure 4-7, A).
· ESVI is end-systolic volume divided by body
· Long axis: the LA:Ao ratio should be < 2.5,
surface area
where the aortic diameter is measured from a
· Normal EsVI is often quoted as 30 m/'m2,
right parastermal long-axis view at the valve level
although this value has been extrapolated from
during systole (Figure 4-1, B, and 4-7, B).
human reference ranges and relationship with
·In cats, there is no need to normalize the LA
bodyweight may not be linear.
diameter to the aortic diameter; absolute diameter
should be < 1.6 cm (note, however, that this is a
Ejection Fraction
technically difficult view to achieve in cats).
· Calculation of LV volumes allows calculation of
ejection fraction (EF%).
Systolic Function
EF% = [(end-diastolic volume - end-systolic
· Many different echocardiographic measurements
volume)/ end-diastolic volume] × 100
can be made to assess systolic performance, but
virtually all are affected by loading conditions.
· Nonmal EF% in dogs is 50% to 65%
Chapter4
Echocardiography and Doppler Ultrasound
91
Systolic Time Intervals
Mitral Insufficiency
· The ratio of pre-ejection period (PEP) and LV
· 2D echocardiography should be used to deter-
ejection time (LVET) is another global index
mine whether the underlying cause of mitral in-
of systolic function, and can be measured from
sufficiency is structural valve disease or whether
the spectral Doppler aortic velocity wavefonm
the mitral regurgitation is functional (i.e., second-
(see Figure 4-8, C). Normal PEP/LVET should
ary to diseases such as dilated cardiomyopathy
be <0.40.
[DCM]). Functional mitral regurgitation often
results in a central jet, whereas the jet is often
eccentric or multiple with myxomatous valve
Diastolic Fumction
disease.
· Diastolic function is complex: clinically rel-
 Mitral insufficiency can be graded as mild,
evant aspects of diastolic function include LV
moderate, or severe (see Figure 4-4, A through
relaxation, LV compliance, LA pressures, LA
C). The grade of mitral regurgitation can be as-
systolic function and heart rate and rhythm.
sumed to be severe when the following criteria
Clearly, no single echocardiographic measure-
are present:
ment will provide a complete overview of dia
· Large regurgitant jet area compared with LA area
stolic function. However, a range of Doppler
· Increased width of the vena contracta (see
measurements can be used to give a composite
Figure 4-4, D)
assessment of diastolic function or highlight
· Presence of large proximal fow convergence
specific aspects, and Doppler echocardiog-
region (see Figure 4-4, E)
raphy has become the technique of choice
· High-intensity CW spectral Doppler signal
for evaluation of diastolic function in human
· Increased mitral E wave velocity
patients.
· Chamber remodeling (dilated left atrium or left
ventricle)
● Similar principles apply to tricuspid regurgitation.
Transmitral Flow
· Transmitral flow reflects the instantaneous
Aortic Insufficiency
pressure gradient across the mitral valve.
There is a progressive change in the ventric-
Less common than mitral insufficiency, aortic in-
ular filling patterm with advancing disease
sufficiency is considered severe when the following
across a range of underlying cardiac diseases
criteria are present:
(see Figure 4-5, A through D). The principal
· Large insufficiency jet size compared with LV area
difficulty with use of transmitral flow pattems
· Increased width of vena contracta
is the confounding effect of a "pseudonor-
· Rapid deceleration of aortic insufficiency spec-
mal" phase, where the transmitral flow pattern
tral Doppler sigmal
is similar to that seen in the normal animal.
Transmitral flow pattems should therefore be
Aortic and Pulmonic Stenosis
interpreted in the context of other clinical and
echocardiographic findings. Pulmonary ve-
· The severity of aortic or pulmonic stenosis is
nous flow patterms and Doppler tissue imaging
 generally assessed in terms of the magnitude of
of mitral annular velocities (see Figure 4-5, E)
have been used to distinguish pseudononmal
filling from normal.
Assessment of Pressure Gradients
· Pressure gradients (PGs) across a valve or be-
tween chambers can be estimated by using the
Valve Function
modified Bermoulli equation (Figure 4-9).
· Color Doppler can be used as a quick screen for
PG(inmm Hg) = 4x(V²)
valve function, but caution should be used in de-
termining severity of valvular regurgitation on
where V = velocity of blood fow distal to the ori-
regurgitant jet size alone, or in relying on the
fice (m/s). For example, if the velocity in the aorta
 presence of turbulent signals to identify valvular
is 5 m/s, then the pressure gradient can be estimated
stenosis.
as 4× (52), or 4× 25 = 100 mm Hg.
92
SECTIONI
Diagnosis of Heart Disease
IVSd
IVSs
A
LVDdI
LVDs
LVFG
LTEW
丹
Figure 4-6.  M-mode measurements ofthe left heart and aorta. A, M-mode at chordal level, showing measurements at end-diastole
(onset of QRS) and end-systole (peak septal motion). Septal thickness in diastole (IVSd), left ventricular diameter in diastole (L VDd), left
ventricular free wall in diastole (L VFWd), septal thickness in systole (VSs), left ventricular diameter in systole ( VDs), left ventricular free
1 5.6 mm. C, M-mode measurements at the atrial and aorta level showing measurement of left atrial (LA) and aortic (Ao) diameter.
Chapter4
 Echocardiography and Doppler Ultrasound
93
B
Figure 4-7.  Measurement of the left atrial (LA) and aortic (Ao) diameters from the right parasternal short-axis view (A) and LA
diameter from the right long-axis view optimized for the left ventricular inlet (B).
COMMON ACQUIRED CARDIAC
CONDITIONS
· Dilation of LA and LV
· The LV systolic function usually appears hyper-
Degenerative (Myxomatous) Mitral Valve
dynamic (see Figure 4-8, A)
Disease
· Tricuspid valve may also be affected, with pro-
· Degenerative mitral valve disease (endocardiosis)
lapse or fail leaflets sometimes seen
must be distinguished from mitral infectious en-
 docarditis, although this generally occurs in dogs
with a different signalment and presenting signs,
as well as differing subtly in lesion morphology.
KEY PoINT
Infectious endocarditis usually does not
Two-Dimensional Changes
result in mitral valve prolapse and is more
likely to result in oscillating focal vegeta-
· Thickened, distorted mitral leaflets (Figure 4-10)
tions than degenerative mitral valve dis-
· The mitral valve motion is usually abnormal-
ease.
often with prolapse or fail with chordal rupture
94
SECTION IDiagnosis of Heart Disease
DCM
A
Normal
VS
V
MR
LVFW
Figure 4-8.
.Echocardiographic evaluation of ventricular systolic function. A, M-mode of ventricular hypokinesis from a dog
with dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) (eft panei), normal ventricular motion from a healthy dog (middie panel), and ventricular
hyperkinesis from a dog with mitral regurgitation (MR) (right panel).
Continued
Dilated Cardiomyopathy
basis of a low fractional shortening value alone
· Overt DCM is a relatively easy diagnosis to make,
(especially in dogs of nonpredisposed breeds).
with global hypokinesis of a dilated heart in the
· Dilation of LA and LV
absence of any other lesions (Figure 4-11). Occult  · ± Dilation of RA and RV
DCMmay be more difficult, and caution is required · LV hypokinesis (↓ FS %, EF%)
 in diagnosing DCM in asymptomatic dogs on the
·↑EPSS
Chapter 4Echocardiography and Doppler Ultrasound
95
RV
RA
B
PEP
LVET
c
traced, with the left ventricular length measured from a line drawn across the mitral annulus to the apex. LA, Left atrium; RA, right atri
um; RV, right ventricle. C, Spectral Doppler aortic blood flow velocity, showing preejection period (PEP) and LV ejection time (LVET).
Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy
· Thrombus or spontaneous echocontrast ("'smoke")
· Feline hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is
may be present in left auricle
very common, and a spectrum of disease exists.
Severe HCM is easy to diagnose (Figure 4-12),
Pericardial Disease
but mild HCM may be very difficult (focal hy-
pertrophy may be the only recognizable feature
· Pericardial effusions can be identified as an
that distinguishes mild HCM from a normal heart
echo-free space around the heart, although
with a functional murmur).
they may be confused with pleural effusions.
· Septal or free wall thickness in diastole > 6.0
Tamponade may be suggested by collapse of
mm on 2D and/or M-mode
the right atrial wall. The heart may be affected
· LA may or may not be dilated (depending on
by a number of different neoplasms which can
degree of hemodynamic compromise)
 result in pericardial effusions, and these may
· Systolic anterior motion of the mitral valve often
 be best imaged while some pericardial fuid is
 present (hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy)
present.
96
SECTIONIDiagnosis of HeartDisease
VEL
547Cm/s
PG
119.8mmH9
19/03/200512:26:09
1:267
Figure 4-10.  Right parasternal long-axis view of dog with myxomatous mitral valve disease, showing thickened, distorted 
mitral leaflets with prolapse of the anterior leaflet.
Chapter 4Echocardiography andDopplerUltrasound
97
LV
Figure 4-11.  Right parasternal long-axis view of a dog with dilated cardiomyopathy, showing a rounded LV with normal mitral
valve morphology (and no mitral valve prolapse).
MAAL
Figure 4-12.
.. Right parasternal long-axis view of a cat with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, showing marked LV hypertrophy.
· Chemodectomas generally involve the heart base
to image at this site. They may also infiltrate
and may be imaged as homogeneous soft tissue
other areas of the heart (such as the septum
 densities encircling the aortic and pulmonary ar-
      
tery roots. They may be associated with pericar-
an irregular echotexture compared with sur-
dial effusion.
 rounding myocardium. Right atrial hemangio-
· Hemangiosarcomas frequently affect the right
sarcomas are often associated with pericardial
atrium, although they can be very difficult
effusions.
98
SECTION I[
 Diagnosis of Heart Disease
Frequently Asked Questions
SUGGESTED READINGS
1. How can you tell when the left ventricle is dilated
Bonagura JD, et al: Doppler echocardiography I: pulsed
when there are no breed-specific normal reference
and continuous wave studies, Vet Clin N Am Small
vatues?
Anim Pract 28:1325, 1998.
A. A number of approaches can be used
Boon JA: Manual of veterinary echocardiography, Balti-
when there are no breed-specific reference
more, 1998, Williams & Wilkins.
intervals. Reference intervals based simply
Brown DJ, Rush JE, MacGregor J, et al: M-mode echo-
on bodyweight are not reliable, because
cardiographic ratio indices in normal dogs, cats, and
the relationship between  LV dimensions
horses: a novel quanti tative method, J Vet Intern Med
and bodyweight is not linear. One solution 
17:653, 2003.
has been to reference the LV diameter to
Brown DJ, et al: M-mode echocardiographic ratio indices
another dimension, such as aortic diameter.
in normal dogs, cats, and horses: a novel quantitative
An alternative solution is to look for signs of
method, J Vet Intern Med 17:653, 2003.
chamber remodeling. A decrease in the index of
Bussadori C, et al: Guidelines for the echocardiographic
sphericity to < 1.65 would support a suspicion
studies of suspected subaortic and pulmonic stenosis,
 of LV dilation (eccentric hypertrophy).
J Vet Cardiol 2:17, 2000.
2. How does one interpret a low value for fractional
Dukes-McEwan J, Borgarelli M, Tidholm A, et al: Pro-
shortening in an otherwise healthy dog?
posed guidelines for the diagnosis of canine idiopathic
dilated cardiomyopathy, J Vet Cardiol 5:7, 2003.
A. Caution should be used when making a
Hansson K, Haggstrom J, Kvart C, et al : Left atrial to aor-
diagnosis of DCM in an asymptomatic dog
tic root indices using two-dimensional and M-mode
based on a fractional shortening value < 25%.
echocardiography in cavalier King Charles spaniels
Multiple other variables should be assessed,
including evidence of chamber dilation, any
with and without left atrial enlargement, Vet Radiol
Ultras ound 43:568, 2002.
increase in end-systolic volume index, whether
O'Grady MR, Bonagura JD, Powers JD, et al: Quantita-
the EF% is also subnormal, and systolic time
tive cross-sectional echocardiography in the normal
intervals (PEP/LVET). Guidelines have been
proposed for a scoring scheme for diagnosis
dog, Vet Radio1 27:34, 1986.
of DCM in asymptomatic dogs (see Dukes-
Thomas WP, Gaber CE, Jacobs G, et al: Recommenda-
McEwan J, et al. in Suggested Readings).
tions for standards in transthoracic two-dimensional
echocardiography in the dog and cat, I Vet Intern Med
3. Does an increased aortic blood fow velocity
7:247, 1993.
atways indicate aortic stenosis?
Yuill CDM, O'Grady MR: Doppler-derived velocity of
A. A fixed LV outflow tract obstruction such as
blood fow across the cardiac valves in the normal
subaortic stenosis will result in increased
dog, Can J Vet Res 55:185, 1991.
blood fow velocity, with the velocity
correlating with the severity of obstruction.
The velocity recorded also depends on fow,
so with increased blood fow, the velocity will
be increased even without any decrease in LV
outflow tract diameter. An ex treme example is
the increased aortic blood fow velocity often
recorded with patent ductus arteriosus, where
the left-to-right shunting across the ductus 
leads to an increased volume of blood fowing
through the aortic valve, sometimes resulting
in dramatically  elevated  aortic  velocities
(which return to normal after ductal ligation).
Other conditions with increased stroke volume
(e.g., anemia, bradycardias) may also result
in increased aortic blood fow velocity. A
diagnosis of subaortic stenosis is supported by
the presence of anatomic lesions imaged with
2D echocardiography
Special Diagnostic Techniques for
Evaluation of Cardiac Disease
Meg M. Sleeper
INTRODUCTION
Technique
Many special diagnostic techniques are available
 Continuous electrocardiographic monitoring re-
for evaluation of animals with cardiovascular dis-
quires an ECG unit with an oscilloscope or light-
ease. Ambulatory electrocardiographic equipment
emitting diode (LED) display.
is available through various services, continu-
· Use of a chest lead configuration with adhesive
ous  in-hospital  electrocardiographic monitoring
electrode patches will minimize artifacts on the
equipment is widely available, and several large
tracing while allowing the patient the most free-
diagnostic laboratories provide specialized clinical
dom for mobility.
pathology services. Additionally, veterinary car-
· Clip two 2- to 3-cm square areas at the left apex
 diology referral centers are increasingly available
 and the heart base (where the apex beat is pal-
for special diagnostic techniques such as cardiac
pable on the left chest and at the heart base caudal
catheterization.
to the right or left scapula).
· Clean and de-fat the area with 70% isopropyl al-
cohol. Allow to dry.
CONTINUOUS IN-HOSPITAL
· Place the positive electrode patch at the left api-
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHIC
cal site and the negative electrode at the heart
MONITORING
base site. A ground electrode may be placed at
Continuous  electrocardiographic  monitoring  is
either site (Figure 5-1).
recommended for hospitalized patients at risk of
· Apply a light chest wrap to secure the electrodes
heart rate or rhythm disturbances. These patients 
and wires.
include:
· Ifa multiple-lead electrocardiographic (ECG) unit is
· Patients with congestive heart failure
being used, then use the left arm electrode forthe pos-
· Patients hospitalized with clinical signs (e.g.
itive electrode, the right anm electrode for the nega-
tive electrode lead, and lead I for display/recording.
· Patients with systemic disease that puts them at
· Ifthe patient is recumbent and unlikely to move, leads
risk for arrhythmias (e.g., shock, sepsis, gastric
 attached directly to the patient limbs can be used.
dilation-volvulus, etc.)
· Depending on the unit available, the signal
is transmitted to the machine by cables or by
John Karl Goodwin contributed to previous versions of this chapter.
radiotelemetry.
99
100
SECTION I[
 Diagnosis of Heart Disease
or neurologic disease, or is associated with primary
cardiac conduction system disease. If the bradycar
dia is due to elevated vagal infuence, then atropine
administration or exercise will result in its abolition.
Vagal Maneuver
· The techniques listed below can be used for ele-
vating vagal tone. The patient should be restrained
and calm so that a good quality lead II ECG is
 obtained prior to and during the tec hnique.
Figure S-1. Chest lead preparation in a Boxer. The
Ocular Pressure
negative lead should be placed in the upper patch behind
the scapula and the positive lead should be placed at the
· Moderately finm digital pressure is applied over
left apex (behind the elbow). This configuration can be used
the closed eyelid to one or both eyes for a period
for in hospital continuous ECG monitoring or ambulatory
of 5 to 10 seconds or until significant slowing of
monitoring.
the heart rate occurs.
· Many ECG units will print out an ECG strip, which
Carotid Body Massage
can be added to the permanent patient record.
· The carotid bodies are located in the area behind
the larynx. Apply moderate digital pressure around
the larynx while monitoring the ECG. Initiation of
Limitations
a gag response or a cough yields similar results
· Excessive patient motion may result in displace-
 and suggests adequate pressure has been applied.
ment of electrodes or motion artifact in the ECG.
· Adhesive patches may occasionally result in con-
Inhibition of Vagal Tone
tact dermatitis.
· Two techniques are possible for abolishing vagal
PROVOCATIVE
tone and are usefulif the patient is suspected to have
a vagally mediated bradycardia. With either tech-
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHIC
nique, it is important to first obtain a baseline ECG.
TECHNIQUES
In some patients,the history or baseline ECG is sug-
Postexercise Electrocardiography
gestive of pathologic arrhythmias, but a definitive
· Typically, strenuous leash running is used; how-
diagnosis is elusive. In these cases, vagal stimula-
ever, the duration of exercise is not standardized.
tion or abolition may be informative. A provocative
Evidence of exertion, such as panting, is sufficient
vagal maneuver will transiently elevate parasympa-
      
thetic tone. In normal animals, the technique typi-
ECG is obtained. A delay of as little as 30 seconds
cally slows the heart rate or has no effect. However,
may alter results, and heavy panting can result in
when there is sinoatrial or atrioventricular (AV)
artifacts making the ECG difficult to interpret.
nodal dysfunction, or an abnormal sensitivity to
parasympathetic tone, transient sinus arrest or sig-
Atropine Response Test
nificant AV block may occur. Similarly, a vagal ma
· Atropine (0.04 mg/kg IV or IM) will result in
neuver may be diagnostic and/or therapeutic for an
abolition of vagal infuence. An ECG should be
ectopic supraventricular tachycardia. A sinus tachy.
obtained 10 to 15 minutes after administration of
cardia typically slows over several seconds while an
the drug for comparison with the baseline ECG.
ectopic supraventricular tachycardia may terminate
Clinical Utility
abruptly (see Frequently Asked Questions).
An ECG recorded immediately post exercise may
Vagal Maneuver
demonstrate cardiac arrhythmias associated with in-
 Clinically useful in two scenarios:
creased sympathetic tone. Likewise, an atropine re-
· In the evaluation of dogs with a history of syn-
sponse test can be used to detenmine if a slow heart
 cope, a vagal maneuver may demonstrate sinus
rate is associated with elevated vagal tone, as can oc-
 arrest or AV block, suggestive of parasympathetic
cur with respiratory disease, gastrointestinal disease
Chapter 5
 Special Diagnostic Techniques for Evaluation of Cardiac Disease
101
· In dogs with tachycardia, abrupt termination of the
recording of the ECG increases the sensitivity of
arrhythmia with a vagal maneuver suggests an ec-
 arrhythmia detection. Major indications include:
topic supraventricular origin because ventricular
· Detection of transient arrhythmias associated
tachycardias are not usually sensitive to vagal tone;
with syncope or periodic weakness.
however, lack of response is not helpful in differen-
· Screening of high-risk breeds for cardiomyopathy
tiating the origin of the tachycardia. The maneuver
(e.g., Boxers, Dobenman Pinschers).
can also be useful to differentiate sinus tachycardia
· Evaluation of frequency, severity, and significance
(no response or gradual slowing of heart rate) from
of arrhythmias detected on in-hospital ECG.
 pathologic ectopic supraventricular tachycardia (no
· Monitoring efficacy of antiarrhythmic therapy
 responce or abrupt termination of tachycardia)
(e.g., control of heart rate in patients with chronic
atrial fibrillation).
Postexercise Electrocardiography
· Determining the true incidence and type of ar-
· This test can be performed in the evaluation of
rhythmia in heart disease patients.
dogs with subaortic stenosis or occult cardio-
myopathy. In affected dogs, the combination of
Technique
exercise, myocardial disease and left ventricular
hypertrophy may result in electrocardiographic
Modern Holter monitors use a high-fidelity digital
 indicators of myocardial ischemia (i.e., ST seg-
recorder to capture and store the cardiac electrical
ment depression or ventricular ectopy). Lack of re-
activity for 24 hours. Some digital recorders are
sponse does not necessarily rule out heart disease.
now capable of monitoring the patient for up to 7
In dogs with bradycardia, abolition of the arrhyth-
days. Two to three simultaneous ECG chest leads
mia after exercise suggests a vagally mediated
 are typically recorded.
etiology. The increased availability of ambulatory
· Electrode sites are prepared by clipping, shaving,
ECG recordings has markedly reduced the use of
cleaning and drying the chest.
post exercise ECGs in clinical practice.
· Adhesive patches are firmly adhered to the skin
(see Figure 5-1).
Atropine Response Test
· A chest wrap is essential for securing electrodes,
· Sinus tachycardia with a heart rate greater than 135
wires and the recorder. A vest or harmess can also
beats per minute suggests normal sinus node func-
be used (Figure 5-2).
tion in the dog. Additionally, this response suggests
· Once the monitor has been applied, the animal re-
that medical management with vagolytic therapy
tums home to resume normal activity. Very small
may be effective if the bradycardia is associated
dogs and cats that find it cumbersome to ambu-
with clinical signs such as syncope or collapse and
late with the monitor in place may respond better
implantation of a pacemaker is not possible.
to hospitalization with cage restraint during the
24-hour recording session.
KEY POINT
Provocative ECG techniques are easily per-
formed, relatively inexpensive, and can be
very helpful for diagnostic and therapeutic
purposes in animals with bradycardias and/or
tachycardias.
AMBULATORY
ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY
(HOLTER MONITORING AND
CARDIAC EVENT RECORDING)
Indications
Routine in-hospital electrocardiography only pro-
vides a glimpse of the daily electrocardiographic
activity. Moreover, arrhythmia detection may be con-
Figure 5-2.
 A vest can be placed over the light wrap, which
founded by iatrogenic changes in the autonomic ner-
secures Holter or CER monitor electrodes in place. The vest has
(     s 
pockets to hold the monitor and helps keep the device in place.
102
SECTION IDiagnosis of Heart Disease
· Owners or caretakers should maintain a diary of
Use of Cardiac Event Recorders
significant changes in activity, such as sleeping.
· The CER will not store an ECG unless the activa-
exercising, and so on. Any clinical signs such as
tion button is pressed; therefore, the event must
syncopal events must be noted.
be witnessed by the owner. If an event does not
· At least 24 hours should be evaluated in order to
occur during the time the unit is wom, then a de-
assess a full circadian cycle.
finitive diagnosis is not possible.
· At the conclusion of the recording period, the
· CERs may be rented from a commercial service
components are removed and the monitor is ana-
 or the patient may be referred to a specialty prac-
lyzed with the aid of automated computer-based
tice offering this service.
software. Operator interaction and editing is es-
sential for diagnostically accurate results.
Implantable Cardiac Event Recorders
· Consultation with a veterinary cardiologist is
· Implantable loop recorders are available for those
recommended regarding the significance of
unusual cases in which syncope is very rare and
arrhythmias found and the need for therapy.
difficult to capture with a 7 day CER. These de-
-   lm so l A
vices are small enough to implant subcutaneously
tricular premature complexes and/or sinus
in most dog or cat patients. They are capable of
 pauses noted during a 24 hour period. Assess
 monitoring the ECG for longer than 18 months, and
ment of arrhythmia significance and risk/ben-
 can be activated to store the ECG by a person ob-
efit ratio of anti-arrhythmic medications
is
serving an episode, or can be programmed to store
essential.
the ECG if the heart rate is slower or faster than
the programmed limits (set at the time of implanta-
tion). The device is interrogated by a radiotelem-
Cardiac Event Recorders
etry device (similar to those used for pacemakers)
The cardiac event recorder (CER)is an ambulatory
to detenmine if unobserved episodes occurred. The
microprocessor with a solid-state memory loop ca-
devices are expensive; however, they can be very
pable of storing portions of ECG tracings when acti-
helpful in cases with rare clinical signs.
vated. The CER is lightweight, activated by a person
KEY POINT
witmessing an event (e.g., weakness or syncope) and
can be wom by small dogs and cats without restrict-
If syncope is very infrequent, then a CER is
ing activity. Unlike most 24 hour Holter monitors,
much more likely to result in definitive ciag-
which are worm for only 1 day, the CER can be wom
nosis than a 24-hour Holter recording.
for up to a week, increasing the diagnostic yield in
animals with infrequent clinical signs.
· CERs can be programmed to store up to five sep-
NONSELECTIVEANGIOGRAPHY
arate, one minute duration, single channel ECGs,
Indications
or fewer ECGs of longer duration.
· Recording is activated by pressing the event but-
· Nonselective angiography is occasionally helpful
ton on the device. The CER utilizes a memory
to identify congenital and/or acquired abnonmali-
loop to store the ECG (most commonly 30 sec-
ties of intracardiac or intravascular blood fow. Ab-
onds before activation to 30 seconds after activa-
normalities of the right side of the heart (e.g., right
tion); however, these times may be changed as
atrium, right ventricle, pulmonary arteries) are
 indicated for the individual patient.
most readily identified by this technique; however,
· After one or more events, the CER is detached
echocardiography and ultrasound have superseded
and the stored ECG is transmitted and down-
the need for this technique at most facilities.
loaded to a receiving station for computer-based
analysis and interpretation.
Technique
Application
· Sedation or a light plane of anesthesia is usually
· The CER uses two adhesive electrodes in a
necessary.
o Asea iai si e u xae-as
· A large bore catheter (18 gauge or larger) is placed
apply.
intravenously (preferably in the jugular vein)
· A light chest wrap is used to secure the unit over
· The animal is placed in the most appropriate
the dorsum. As with Holter monitoring, the patient
position for opacification of the structures of
 may be discharged to resume routine activity.
interest (i.e., lateral recumbency for most cardiac
Chapter5
 Special Diagnostic Techniques for Evaluation of Cardiac Disease
103
defects, stermal recumbency to visualize pulmo-
The standard cardiac catheterization procedure
nary arteries).
for evaluation of congenital or acquired cardiac
· A large bolus of contrast is rapidly injected intra-
diseases typically includes measurement of intra-
venously. Typically, 1 ml of radiopaque contrast
cardiac pressures, blood oximetry, and selective
per kg of body weight is used for the injection.
angiocardiography. The most common indica-
Altematively, the dose of iodine to be injected
tion for cardiac catheterization is to ameliorate
can be calculated using 400 mg iodine/kg body
congenital heart disease (e.g., pulmonic stenosis
weight as the desirable dose.
Or patent ductus arteriosus). For the purposes of
· A fuoroscopy unit allows continuous assessment.
diagnosis, advances in echocardiography have
If fuoroscopy is not available, radiographic expo-
markedly reduced the need for routine cardiac
sures are obtained 2 to 8 seconds after the injection
catheterization.
is initiated (depending on the structures of interest
and cardiovascular performance). Shorter times
Technique
should be used for evaluation of the right heart and
pulmonary arteries, longer times for evaluation of
· Anesthesia is usually required.
structures on the left side of the heart or animals
· Surgical preparation of the neck (carotid artery
with heart failure and slow circulation.
or jugular vein) or inguinal area (femoral vein or
 artery) is required.
·Vascular access can be obtained by dissecting
Clinical Utility
 down to the vessel or with a percutaneous cath-
· Nonselective angiography is an altemative tech-
 eter introducer system using a modifed Seldinger
nique primarily used to evaluate lesions that in-
tec hnique.
volve the right side of the heart, particularly when
· Catheter advancement to the chamber of interest
echocardiography or cardiac catheterization is ei-
is performed under fuoroscopic or pressure wave
ther not an option or is inconclusive.
form guidance (Figure 5-3).
· Intravascular pressures are recorded from cham-
 bers of interest. Pressures are typically recorded
Limitations, Risks, and Costs
 before and after therapeutic interventions (e.g..
· Dilution of contrast material occurs as it moves
balloon valvuloplasty) to assess
procedure
through the circulation. Thus, nonselective angi-
efficacy.
ography results in poor opacification of structures
that are very distal to the site of injection (e.g.,
Oximetry
left heart and systemic arteries).
· Blood samples are obtained from various cardiac
· Timing of radiographs is difficult to predict and
Or great vessel locations to measure oxygen satu-
several attempts are often required unless fuoros-
ration and to calculate shunt fraction in animals
copy is available.
with congenital shunting defects.
· Intravenous contrast agents may result in tran-
sient hypotension, cardiac arrhythmias, nephro-
Angiocardiography
toxicity (especially in patients with pre-existing
· Radiopaque contrast material is injected
renal dysfunction), and allergic reactions.
through the catheter(s) located at the appropri-
ate areas of interest, and the image is recorded
KEY POINT
on videotape, radiographic film, by cineangi
Nonselective angiography is significantly
ography or is digitally stored (Figure 5-4). Post
limited, particularly in the assessment of left
processing can be performed on digital im-
heart structures. Echocardiography and/or ul-
ages using digital subtraction techniques. The
trascund are preferred diagnostics.
primary advantage over nonselective angio-
 graphy involves superior opacification of struc-
tures of interest.
CARDIAC CATHETERIZATION
· Cardiac output may be determined using thenmo-
dilution or indicator dye techniques.
Indications
· Additional procedures such as balloon valvulo-
· Generally, cardiac catheterization is defined as a
plasty, patent ductus arteriosus coil occlusion,
combined angiographic and hemodynamic study
endomyocardial biopsy, heartwonm retrieval, and
 undertaken for therapeutic or diagnostic purposes.
cardiac pacing can be performed.
104
SECTION IDiagnosis of Heart Disease
M1
FRAME=
M1
FRAME-16
12:02:23
SP=12
24-JAN-06
SP-12
UPT OF RADIDLOGY
CARDIOLOGY
DEPT OF RADIOLOGY
CARDIOLOGY
M1
FRAME=17
M1
FRAME=19
: 03:14
12:03:14
JAN-06
P=
PT OF RADIOLOGY
CARDIOLOGYDEPT OF RADIOLOGY
CARDIOLOCY
Figure 5-3.
 Huoroscopically obtained images of a balloon-tipped cardiac catheter being placed into the right heart. The cath-
eter is advanced to the heart via the jugular vein. The balloon on the tip of the catheter facilitates traversing the tricuspid valve
because it will tend to follow blood flow.
· Contrast solutions can result in hemodynamic ab-
Clinical Utility
normalities. Patients with severe heart disease or
· Angiocardiography is valuable to diagnose cases of
     a  
complex heart disease and to guide therapeutic in-
·Infection, cardiac arrhythmias, air embolism,
terventions such as balloon valvuloplasty or patent
vascular thromboembolism or  perforation are
 possible complications. With appropriate experi-
useful morphologic and physiologic information re-
ence and case selection, mortality rate is low.
garding interventional responses to therapy.
SEROLOGIC TESTING
Limitations, Risks, and Costs
Indications
· Cardiac  catheterization requires
specialized
equipment and training and is typically limited to
Animals with clinical signs suggestive of myo-
tertiary care facilities.
cardial dysfunction resulting from infectious or
· The technique can be time consuming.
immune-mediated etiologies and animals at risk of
Chapter 5Special Diagnostic Techniques for Evaluation of Cardiac Disease
105
3401203
CARDIAC NEUROHORMONES
FRAN
AND BIOMARKERS
Cardiac Troponins
Indications
· Cardiac troponin I and T are specific markers of
myocyte injury, ischemia, and necrosis. Cardiac
troponin Iis more sensitive than cardiac troponin
T. Specific indications include cases of suspected
myocardial infarction, toxic myocardial disease
(e.g., secondary to doxorubicin), myocarditis, or
blunt myoc ardial trauma (e.g., vehicular injury).
Technique
· A variety of human cardiac troponin I assays that
Figure 5-4.
 Selective aortogram demonstrating a patent
 cross-react with canine and feline cardiac tropo-
ductus arteriosus with radiographic contrast material crossing
 nin I are available, but standardization is lacking.
the ductus and entering the pulmonary artery (left to right
making it difficult to compare results from dif-
flow).
ferent machines. Most cardiac troponin assays
 accept either serum or heparinized or ethylenedi-
aminetetra acetic acid (EDTA) plasma. Some use
myocardial toxicity from chemotherapeutic agents
whole blood. If testing is not performed within 12
are candidates.
hours after collection, then the samples should be
· Trypanosoma titer. Animals from Mexico, south-
frozen until testing is done.
ern Texas, or other regions where Chagas disease
is endemic, with right-heart failure.
Clinical Utility
· Antinuclear antibody titer. Animals with heart
· Elevated cardiac troponin I has been demon-
failure or arrhythmias in addition to other clinical
strated in a wide range of cardiac and extracar-
signs suggestive of immune-mediated disease.
diac diseases. Concrete diagnostic, prognostic
· Toxoplasmosis titer. Cats with myocardial dys-
 and therapeutic recommendations based on assay
function, fever, pneumonia, neurologic disease,
results are not yet available; however, cardiac tro-
chorioretinitis or other signs compatible with
toxoplasmosis.
mation to the electrocardiographic, radiographic,
and echocardiographic findings in some patients.
Technique
Serial testing of individual patients is more likely
to be useful than one measurement at a single
· Serum or plasma should be submitted to a labora-
point in time.
tory that has the appropriate facilities to perform
the indicated serologic testing.
Limitations
· Since cardiac troponin I can be elevated with both
cardiac and extracardiac disease, the test does not
Clinical Utility
appear to be a useful screening tool for cardiac
· In selected cases, these tests can be very useful in
disease.
establishing an etiologic agent and in monitoring
patients at risk for myocardial toxicity. Results
must be interpreted in concert with the patient's
NATRIURETIC PEPTIDES (ATRIAL
 clinical signs.
AND B-TYPE)
Indications
Limitations, Risks, and Costs
Atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) and B-type natriuretic
· These tests are only limited by correct interpre-
peptide (BNP) are produced by myocardial tissue in
tation. Otherwise, there are no particular risks.
response to increased pressure and wall stress and are
Costs are dependent on the laboratory.
markers for cardiac dysfunction and heart failure.
106
SECTION I[
 Diagnosis of Heart Disease
Figure 5-5.
 Simultaneous lead I, Il, and Ill ECG showing the effect of a vagal maneuver on a supraventricular tachycardia (atrial
fibrillation in this example). Note the dramatic slowing of the heart rate which results in clearer demonstration of the hallmarks of
atrial fibrillation (irregularly irregular rhythm, lack of P waves and fibrillation waves). 50 mm/sec; 10 mm/mv.
Technique
Limitations, Risks, and Costs
· Mature ANP and BNP have short half-lives.
· Natriuretic testing in veterinary medicine is a
and clinical assays that target prohonmones
relatively recent phenomenon and caution should
(proANP and NT-proBNP) are more useful. De-
be exercised when using new diagnostic tests
pending on the assay being used, heparinized or
until they are more fully validated. Further stud-
EDTA plasma or serum is submitted to the ap-
ies are necessary to better characterize the util-
propriate laboratory. Samples should be centri-
 ity of these tests for prognostic and therapeutic
fuged and separated after collection. If analysis
monitoring.
is delayed more than a day, samples should be
frozen.
NEWER CARDIAC IMAGING
Clinical Utility
TECHNIQUES
· These assays have the potential to differenti-
· Although these techniques are not widely avail-
ate between cardiac and extracardiac causes of
able, familiarity with their potential applications
dyspnea, allow prognostication, and monitor
is helpful for identifying referral candidates.
response to cardiac disease therapy. The follow-
Computed tomography and magnetic resonance
ing guidelines have been established for canine
imaging are useful adjunctive techniques that are
proANP (Vetsign proANP, Guildhay Ltd, UK):
less invasive than angiocardiography, and may be
proANP > 1700 fmol/ml is consistent with con-
advantageous over echocardiography for certain
gestive heart failure; proANP < 1350 fmol/ml is
 diseases such as cardiac neoplasia and pericar-
considered normal; proANP 1351 to 1700 fmol/ml
dial disease. Nuclear scintigraphy is particularly
is suggestive for heart failure, but results are
useful for quantitative assessment of intracardiac
not conclusive. In dogs presenting to emergency
shunts.
services with dyspnea, EDTA plasma proANP
concentrations >1350 fmol/ml were consistent
with dyspnea due to congestive heart failure (as
Computed Tomography
opposed to dyspnea caused by primary respiratory
disease). The following guidelines appear use-
· An x-ray technique that displays cross-sectional
ful for canine NT-proBNP (Canine CardioCare,
images of the body.
Veterinary Diagnostics Institute, Irvine, CA): NT-
· Assessment of cardiac function and precise defi-
proBNP > 450 pmol/L is consistent with heart
nition of intracardiac anatomy requires either
disease (but not necessarily congestive heart fail-
electrocardiographic gating or a millisecond
ure), NT-proBNP > 1000 pmol/L accompanied
computed tomography (CT) scanner.
by clinical signs of dyspnea is consistent with
· An intravenous injection of iodinated contrast is
congestive heart failure.
used to define the blood pool.
Chapter5
 Special Diagnostic Techniques for Evaluation of Cardiac Disease
107
the blood pool. A scintillation (gamma) camera
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
interfaced with a computer analyzes and stores
· A high natural contrast exists between blood and
the data.
cardiovascular structures; therefore, contrast me-
· The direction and severity of congenital intra-
dium is not required to discriminate the blood
cardiac shunts can be determined. Regional dis-
pool.
tribution of myocardial perfusion can also be
· Physiologic gating of the imaging sequence is
visualized.
 necessary for cardiac imaging.
· Magnetic resonance images give useful infonma-
Limitations
tion on cardiovascular morphology, function, and
tissue character.
The required technical expertise and expense of
equipment limit their use in general veterinary
Nuclear Cardiology
cardiology.
· Gamma ray-emitting radiopharmaceuticals (ra-
SUGGESTED READINGS
dionuclides) are injected intravenously and are
either extracted by the myocardium or remain in
Daniel MD, Bright JM: Nuclear imaging, computed to-
mography, and magnetic resonance imaging of the
heart. In Fox PR, Sisson DD, Moise NS, eds: Text-
Frequently Asked Questions
book of canine and feline cardiology, Philadelphia,
1999, WB Saunders.
How is a vagal maneuver helpful when assessing a
Kittleson MD: Syncope. In Kittleson MD, Kienle RD,
dog with a suspected supraventricular tachycardia?
eds: Small animal cardiovascular medicine, St Louis,
 An effective vagal maneu ver will transiently increase
1999, Mosby.
vagal tone. The technique can be helpful to differen-
Miller MS, Calvert CA: Special methods for analyzing
tiate between sinus tachycardia, as during a normal
arrhythmias. In Tilley LP, ed: Essentials of canine
physiologic response to pain, fever, and so on, and
and feline electrocardiography, ed 3, Malvern, Penn,
1992, Lea & Febiger.
(SVT), such as paroxysmal atrial tachycardia. A grad-
Rush JE: Syncope and episodic weakness. In Fox PR,
ual slowing of the heart rate (over several seconds)
suggests the focus is sinus because the sinus node
Sisson DD, Moise NS, eds: Textbook of canine and
feline cardiology, Philadelphia, 1999, WB Saunders.
accelerates and decelerates gradually. An abrupt ces-
Thomas WP, Sisson D: Cardiac catheterization and angio-
ooloued e jo sayseaans si eipieoA yoel sun jo uo ges
focus (ie., SVT). Lack of responsetoa vagal maneuver
graphy. In Fox PR, Sisson DD, Moise NS, eds: Text-
can occur with either condition and is nondiagnostic.
book of canine and feline cardiology, Philadelphia,
Occasionally an SVT will respond to a vagal maneu-
1999, WB Saunders.
ver with slowed AV nodal conduction resulting in
second degree Av block with an underlying rapid
P-wave rate.
SECTION II
Cardiovascular Disease
6. Acguired Valvular Disease
11. Pericardial Disorders and Cardiac
jonathan A. Abbott
Tumors
7. Canine Cardiomyopathy
Anthony H.Tobias and Elizabeth A.McNiel
Mark A. Oyama
12. Congenital Heart Disease
8. Feline Cardiomyopathy
Keith N. Strickiand
Richard D. Kienle
13. Cardiovascular Effects of Systemic
9. Cor Pulmonale and Pulmonary
Diseases
Francis W. K. Smith, fr., Donald
Thromboembolism
P. Schrope, and Car! D. Sammarco
Lynelle R. johnson
14. Systemic Hypertension
10. Heartworm Disease
Rosemary A. Henik and Scott A. Brown
Clay A. Cafvert and fustin David Thomason
MR
口
0.5
[m/s]
6
0.5
2.1
Acquired Valvular Disease
Jonathan A. Abbott
INTRODUCTION
Prevalence and Incidence
Acquired primary valvular disease in dogs and cats
· Degenerative MVD is the most common car-
generally is degenerative or less commonly, infec-
diac disease in the dog; it is an acquired disease,
tive. Other pathologic processes, such as neoplasia,
and the prevalence is greatest in the geriatric
rarely affect the cardiac valves. Myxomatous de-
population.
generation of the mitral valve is the most common
· Clinical evidence of degenerative valvular dis-
cardiac disease in the dog. Mitral valve incompe-
ease is detected in approximately 30% of dogs
tence due to valvular degeneration can result in pro-
 aged 13 years and older.
 gressive cardiac enlargement and, in some cases,
· MVD is a progressive disease, and subtle changes
congestive heart failure (CHF). Clinical signs, par-
 in valve structure precede the development of
ticularly cough due to compression of the mainstem
clinically evident valvular dysfunction. Conse-
bronchi by an enlarged left atrium, may precede the
quently, the prevalence of MVD detected by post-
 development of CHF. The clinical consequences of
mortem examination is higher than that reported
degenerative valvular disease are observed primar-
in clinical studies.
ily in elderly, small-breed dogs.
· Postmortem evidence of advanced degenerative
Infective endocarditis (IE) is an uncommon form
valvular disease was found in 58% of dogs older
of acquired valvular disease that is observed oc-
than 9 years; when mild degenerative changes
casionally in dogs and rarely in cats. Middle-aged
 are included, the postmortem prevalence exceeds
medium- and large-breed dogs are affected most of-
90% in dogs older than 13 years
ten. The clinical signs of IE relate to sepsis, throm-
· MVD may affect any breed of dog, but clinical
boembolism, and CHF.
consequences of MVD are observed most often
 in small-breed dogs. Miniature Poodles, Pomera-
nians, Yorkshire Terriers, Chihuahuas, and other
DEGENERATIVE MITRAL VALVE
small dogs are commonly affected. The prevalence
DISEASE
of MVD in Cavalier King Charles Spaniels is par-
Based on its clinical and pathologic features, nu-
ticularly high, and in dogs of this breed, the disease
merous designations for degenerative mitral value
 is sometimes clinically evident at a young age.
disease (MVD) have been proposed. The terms
· Male dogs are affected somewhat more often than
myxomatous valvular degeneration,myxomatous
females.
transformation,mucoid degeneration,endocardio-
· Degenerative valvular disease is uncommon in
sis, chronic valvular disease, and degenerative val-
cats, and when it occurs it seldom results in clin-
vular disease all refer to the same disorder.
ical consequences.
110
Chapter6
Acquired Valvular Disease
111
KEY PoINT
Etiopathogenesis
Degenerative MvD is the most common
·The cause of MVD is unknown.
cardiac disease in the dog; it is an acquired
·MVD is often observed in chondrodysplastic dog
disease, and the prevalence is greatest in the
breeds. Because MVD has been associated with
geriatric population.
concurrent disorders such as bronchomalacia and
intervertebral disc disease, it has been suggested
Pathology
that MVD is but one expression of a systemic
connective tissue disease.
· Grossly, MVD is characterized by nodular distor-
· Recent evidence suggests a possible role for the
tion of the valve leaflets as well as by thicken
vasoactive peptide endothelin in the pathogenesis
ing and, sometimes, lengthening of the chordae
of MVD. Relative to mitral valve tissue obtained
tendineae. The appearance of a small number
from healthy young dogs, degenerative mitral
of nodules at the free edge of the valve leaflet is
 leafets had a greater density of endothelin recep-
the initial pathology. As the disease progresses,
tors. Furthermore, the density of endothelin re-
these nodules increase in number and size and co-
 ceptors was related to the severity of MVD.
alesce. In severe cases, the leaflets are contracted,
· Because distinct breed predispositions are recog-
and the free edge of the leafet rolls inward to-
nized, it is likely that there is a genetic predis-
ward the ventricular endocardium (Figure 6-1).
position for the development of MVD. Available
When severe, these abnonmalities prevent coapta-
evidence suggests that the tendency to develop
tion of the valve leafets, resulting in mitral valve
MVD is not subject to simple Mendelian inheri-
incompetence.
tance but rather is a poly genic trait.
·MVD is histologically characterized by the
· In Cavalier King Charles Spaniels, parental sta-
 deposition of mucopolysaccharides primarily
tus with respect to age and murmur intensity is
within the spongiosa layer of the valve leafet.
an important determinant of the prevalence of
Fibrosis of the valve is also present, but is not
murmurs in 5-year-old offspring. Based on this,
the dominant histologic feature. Infammatory
it appears that the age at which MVD develops is
infiltrates are absent; MVD is a sterile, degen-
inherited.
erative disease that bears no known relationship
KEY POINT
to endocarditis.
 The cause of MVD is not known but genetic
factors are likely important.
KEY POINT
 The prevalence of endocarditis is no greater
Pathophysiology
in dogs affected by MvD than in other dogs.
· The mitral valve apparatus consists of the mitral
valve leaflets, the fibrous valve annulus, the chor-
 dae tendineae, and the left ventricular papillary
muscles
· The two mitral leafets are known as the septal
(anterior) and the caudal (posterior) leafets. In
health, the mitral leafets are thin, translucent
structures that are tethered to the left ventricular
papillary muscles by the chordae tendineae. The
two left ventricular papillary muscles arise from
the caudal (free) wall of the left ventricle. The
basilar attachment of the mitral leaflets is to the
fibrous left atrioventricular valve ring,. known as
the mitral annulus.
Figure 6-1.
 A specimen that demonstrates the gross features
· The initiation of valve closure is a passive pro-
of severe mitral valve degeneration. The mitral valve leaflets
 cess; in early systole, when left ventricular pres-
are abnormally thick and nodular. (The author acknowledges
sure exceeds left atrial pressure, the mitral valve
the Department of Veterinary Pathology, Western College of
Veterinary Medicine, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon,
leafets are forced into apposition. In normal
SK, Canada S7N 5B4, for providing this photograph.)
individuals, the tethering effect of the chordae
112
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
tendineae prevents prolapse, or bowing, of the
·Due to maladaptive neuroendocrine responses
leafets into the left atrium.
associated with heart failure, cardiac dysfunc
· Coaptation of the nonmal mitral leafets is
tion tends to be progressive. Because of this, the
complete, and there is little or no regurgitation
elimination of congestive signs does not signify
through the valve orifice. The nonmal mitral
resolution of the heart failure state. When the
valve ensures that the entirety of the left ventric-
disorder responsible cannot be definitively cor-
ular stroke volume is ejected through the aorta.
rected, heart failure is a terminal syndrome.
When the mitral valve is incompetent, a fraction
· The imposition of a chronic volume load on the
of the left ventricular stroke volume is ejected
heart can result in deterioration of systolic myo-
through the mitral valve regurgitant orifice into
cardial function, a state sometimes known as
the left atrium.
cardiomyopathy of overload. In general, MR is
· Mitral valve regurgitation (MR) may be mild and
relatively well tolerated by the myocardium be-
 have minimal consequences, or it can be severe.
cause the left atrium represents a low-pressure
The severity of MR is determined principally
reservoir into which the ventricle can eject blood.
by the size of the regurgitant orifice and the re-
In fact, dogs that develop CHF due to MR often
lationship between left atrial and left ventricular
do so at a time when systolic myocardial function
systolic pressure. Potentially, both of these deter-
(contractility) is, based on echocardiographic in-
minants can be pharmacologically manipulated
dices, normal or only mildly diminished.
by administration of vasodilators.
· MR may remain clinically silent until it is advanced.
· MR increases left atrial pressure which poten-
When CHF results from MR, clinical signs may in-
tially results in left atrial dilation. When the mi-
clude weakness, syncope, cough, and dyspnea.
tral valve leaks, the pulmonary venous retum is
· Cough is a centrally mediated refex, and most
augmented by the regurgitant volume; in conse-
 cough receptors are located in the large airways.
quence, the ventricle is filled in diastole not only
The etiology of cough associated with MR in
by blood that has retumed from the lungs, but
 small-breed dogs is probably multifactorial and
also by blood that has been regurgitated into the
may result from any of the following:
atrium. Therefore, MR imposes a volume load on
· Pulmonary edema when fuid foods the alveoli
the left ventricle and the left atrium.
· Compression of the mainstem bronchi by an
· High end-diastolic pressures and volumes result
enlarged left atrium
in ventricular dilation and hypertrophy. Hyper-
· Refexes mediated through stimulation of the
trophy of this type, in which the ratio of wall
juxtapulmonary (J) receptors; these receptors
- r s as  p ssa
are associated with the pulmonary capillaries
changed, is known as eccentric hypertrophy
and are sensitive to increases in pulmonary ve-
·Severe MR may increase left ventricular filling
nous pressure.
pressures. High filling pressures are refected
backward, raising pulmonary vein pressure and
kev PoinT
potentially initiating the development of pulmo-
It is important to recognize that cough can
nary edema.
be associated with MvD in the absence of
· The syndrome of clinical signs and neuroendo-
pulmonary edema. when this is the case, the
crine activation that results from cardiac dysfunc-
cough is a sign of heart disease but not a sign
tion is known as heart failure. Because veterinary
 of heart failure; this distinction is important
patients cannot offer subjective observations-
because a diagnosis of CHF carries important
the perception of breathlessness during exertion
 prognostic and therapeutic implications.
for example—the presence of congestive signs
is generally used as an objective criterion for the
diagnosis.
Clinical Presentation
· CHF is the syndrome of clinical signs caused by
venous pressure elevations that result from car-
History
diac dysfunction. Left-sided CHF is defined by
· MVD exhibits a broad spectrum of severity. In
the presence of cardiogenic pulmonary edema.
most affected dogs, MVD does not cause clinical
Right-sided CHF refers to clinical signs that
signs, and the disease is detected when a cardiac
result from systemic congestion; in dogs, asci-
murmur is incidentally identified in patients pre-
tes is the most common manifestation of right-
 sented for routine health care or for management
sided CHF.
of noncardiac disease.
Chapter6
Acquired Valvular Disease
113
· In cases in which MVD does become clinically
apparent, cough is usually the clinical sign that
is first observed by the dog owner. Coughing due
to bronc hial compression is often dry and harsh.
When coughing is due to pulmonary edema or
congestion, other signs, such as exercise intol-
erance and tachypnea, are usually present. The
cough associated with pulmonary edema may be
moist and productive. The expectoration of pink
S1SM
froth is sometimes observed in patients with ful-
minant pulmonary edema.
· Occasionally, syncope is the clinical sign that is
seen first in dogs with MVD. Syncope is a tran-
sient loss of consciousness that is usually related
to a sudden and precipitous decline in cerebral
perfusion. MVD can be responsible for syncope
when cardiac enlargement predisposes to arrhyth.
mias. Additionally, exertional syncope may result
Figure 6-2.  A phonocardiogram recorded from a 13-year-
old female spayed mixed-breed dog with a grade 4/6 systolic
when MR limits stroke volume so that cardiac
murmur. The systolic murmur (SM) begins at the first heart
output does not adequately increase to meet the
sound (St), is evident throughout systole and obscures the
physiologic demands of exercise. Altermatively.
second heart sound.
syncope on exercise or excitement or associated
with paroxysmal cough can result from sudden
 present when the murmur intensity is grade V/VI
 onset of reflex-mediated bradycardia.
Or greater.
· Other clinical signs related to reduced cardiac
· A high-frequency, mid-systolic click (Figure 6-3) is
performance, including tachypnea, exercise in-
sometimes heard in older, small-breed dogs. These
tolerance, and abdominal distention caused by
clicks may be associated with prolapse of the mitral
ascites, occasionally prompt owners of affected
valve. In many dogs, clicks are a precursor of MR.
dogs to seek veterinary attention.
Often, a soft systolic murmur of MR can also be
 heard in patients that have systolic clicks.
Physical Findings
·When MR is severe, the third heart sound some-
·The most notable feature of the physical ex-
times is audible and results in an S3 gallop. Care
amination is a systolic munmur that is usu-
must be taken to distinguish a mid-systolic click
ally heard best over the left cardiac apex. The
from a gallop. In general, a systolic click is louder
murmur of MVD is indistinguishable from the
than is the third heart sound, and in patients with
murmur caused by other disorders, such as IE
MVD, a click typically is heard in association with
or dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM), which also
findings that suggest mild MR. In contrast, an S3
can result in MR. Importantly, however, an ac-
gallop usually reflects severe MR and generally
quired, left apical, systolic murmur in an older,
is heard in patients with loud murmurs. Note that
small-breed dog is almost always due to MVD.
S3 is sometimes audible in patients with DCM.
The intensity of the murmur depends on a num-
However, DCM is typically a disorder of large
ber of factors, but severe MR usually causes
and giant breed dogs.
a loud munmur. Severe MR associated with a
· The femoral arterial pulse is usually of normal
nonrestrictive regurgitant orifice can result in a
strength when MR is present, but the pulse may
soft murmur but this is extremely uncommon in
have a rapid rise. Very severe MR can be associ-
MVD. Phonocardiographically, the murmur of
ated with diminished pulse strength.
MR typically has a plateau-shaped confgura-
· Crackles may be heard in patients with pulmo
tion meaning that the munmur has a similar in-
nary edema. It should be recognized that the
tensity throughout systole; when the murmur is
 prevalence of primary respiratory diseases such
loud, the second heart sound may be obscured
as chronic bronchitis in the patients most often
(Figure 6-2).
affected by MVD is relatively high. Primary re-
· An exaggerated apical impulse is often evident
spiratory tract diseases can explain adventitious
 On precordial palpation of patients with moderate
pulmonary sounds, such as crackles, in the ab-
or severe MR. By definition, a precordial thrill is
sence of pulmonary edema.
114
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
S2
click
Figure 6-3.
 A phonocardiogram recorded from an 11 -year-old male castrated Shih-Tzu. A mid-systolic click (cick) is shown.
· Abdominal palpation is usually normal in patients
· The presence of respiratory sinus arrhythmia (RSA)
with MVD, but hepatic enlargement or even asci-
can also be of diagnostic value. Much of the mo-
tes may be present when there is severe tricuspid
ment-to-moment heart rate variability observed in
valve disease, or when pulmonary hypertension
 healthy dogs is due to the effect of vagal discharge.
 complicates the presentation of MVD.
In patients with severe cardiac disease, there is little
vagal infuence on heart rate and rhythm and as a
KEY POINT
result, RSA is not prominent. In contrast, sinus ar-
Patients with clinically evident MvD have car-
rhythmia is often preserved or even accentuated
diac murmurs. The intensity of the murmur
when primary respiratory tract disease is respon-
roughly parallels disease severity so that se-
sible for clinical signs. The physical finding of RSA
vere MR usually results in a loud murmur.
 is virtually incompatible with a diagnosis of CHF.
· Although exceptions occur, clinical signs are usu-
Patients with Mitral Regurgitation and
ally related to respiratory tract disease in patients
Concurrent Respiratory Tract Disease
that are overweight, have sinus arrhythmia and a
· Primary diseases of the respiratory tract, such
soft cardiac murmur.
as collapsing trachea and chronic bronchitis, are
· In contrast, the clinical signs of thin patients with
common in the patient group that is affected by
loud murmurs and tachycardia are more likely to
MVD. In an individual patient, it can be diffcult
result from cardiac disease or CHF.
to determine whether cardiac disease or respira-
· Coughing in elderly, small-breed dogs that do not
tory disease bears the greatest responsibility for
have cardiac murmurs is almost always due to
the development of clinical signs.
KEY POINT
· In general, patients that have severe MR are more
likely than patients with respiratory disease to
 Primary respiratory tract disease is relatively
common in the patient group affected by
have poor body condition.
MVD. The patient history and physical find-
· Although loud murmurs of MR are sometimes
ings are helpful in distinguishing clinical signs
 clinically inconsequential,it is extremely uncom-
caused by cardiac disease from signs caused 
mon for soft murmurs to indicate severe MR with
by respiratory disease.
cardiac enlargement.
 primary respiratory tract disease (Table 6-1).
Chapter6
Acquired Valvular Disease
115
Table 6-1
Guidelines for Clinical Assessment
Diagnostic Findings
of Elderly Small-Breed Dogs With
Cough and Cardiac Murmur*
Thoracic Radiography
In most cases, thoracic radiography is the most im-
Cardiac
Respiratory
Disease
Disease
portant element of the diagnostic approach to MVD.
MVD is extremely common but progresses at a rate
Body
Thin
Obese
that varies greatly among individuals. Many patients
 condition
with MVD are subclinical ("asymptomatic'") and
Cardiac
Loud
Often soft, occa-
never develop clinical signs related to MR. Early in
1nunu
 sionally loud
the course of MVD, the cardiac silhouette is normal.
Heart rate
Rapid
 Normal or slow
If clinically consequential MR develops, then there
Rhythm
Exaggerated
is enlargement of the cardiac silhouette. It should be
 Regular, unless 
 pathologic arrhyth-
 respiratory ar-
recognized that the ability of thoracic radiographs to
rhythmia may
 delineate specific cardiac chambers is limited. In gen-
mias are present
 be present 
eral, the left atrium can be assessed with the greatest
certainty. This is fortunate because, in the overwhelm-
*lt is important to recognize that exceptions to these generali-
ing majority of cases, left atrial enlargement precedes
ties certainly occur. However, when a patient exhibits all of 
the findings in the left-hand column, it is likely that cardiac
the development of CHF. A diagnosis of left-sided
disease or, perhaps, congestive heart failure, is responsible
CHF secondary to MVD rarely can be supported in
for the cough. It must be recognized that some patients have
the absence of radiographic left atrial enlargement.
both respiratory tract disease and cardiac disease. Ultimately.
the distinction between respiratory tract disease and cardiac
Radiographic Appearance of Left A trial
is made through diagnostic imaging; thoracic radiographs are
indispensable, and echocardiography often provides useful,
Enlargement
complermentary data.
· The left atrium is left of, and caudal to, the right
atrium. Radiographically, it occupies the cau-
dodorsal area of the cardiac silhouette in the lat-
Large-Breed Dogs with Mitral Valve Disease
eral projection.
· A syndrome of severe MR and concurrent myo-
· In the absence of left atrial enlargement, the cau-
cardial dysfunction is recognized in medium- and
 dal portion of the trachea curves ventrally over
large-breed dogs. The fact that this observation
the caudal aspect of the cardiac silhouette.
was made relatively recently is probably explained
·When the left atrium is enlarged, the caudal border
by the increasing availability of echocardiog-
of the cardiac silhouette straightens, and the trachea
raphy and not by a change in the epidemiology
is forced dorsally to varying degrees. With marked
 Of MVD. Before widespread availability of this
left atrial enlargement, the left mainstem bronchus 
technology, large-breed dogs with heart failure
is narrowed, and the trachea adopts a path that is
parallel to the thoracic vertebrae. Occasionally, se-
dial disease.
vere left atrial enlargement has the appearance of a
· For reasons that are not known but may relate to
mass that splits the mainstem bronchi
the geometry or pattem of contraction of inher-
· In the ventrodorsal projection, the left atrium is
ently larger ventricles, large-breed dogs with MR
located near the center of the cardiac silhouette.
are more apt to develop echocardiographically
When enlarged, the left atrium splits the mainstem
evident myocardial dysfunction than are small-
bronchi to varying degrees. This is apparent in well-
breed dogs
penetrated radiographs and results in an appearance
· The gross appearance of the valvular lesions in
that is sometimes knowm as the "crab sign" or the
large dogs tends to be less impressive than it is in
"bowlegged cowboy" (Figures 6-4 and 6-5).
small breed dogs.
· Additionally, in the ventrodorsal view, enlargement
· Perhaps because myocardial dysfunction compli-
 a g      a g
cates MVD in large dogs more often than it does
 sents the atrial appendage at the 3 o'clock position.
in small dogs, the prognosis may be worse than in
smaller dogs.
Radiographic Findings of Pulmonary
Congestion and Edema
· The radiographic finding of pulmonary venous
distention reflects increases in pulmonary venous
 pressure. Pulmonary venous distention suggests
116
SECTIONIICardiovascularDisease
A
B
Figure 6-4.
erative mitral valve disease. There is relatively mild but distinct left atrial enlargement, as evidenced by elevation of the trachea
and loss of the caudal waist in the lateral film.
D
Figure 6-5.  A lateral thoracic radiograph obtained from a 14-year-old female spayed mixed-breed dog with severe mitral valve
Chapter6
 Acquired Valvular Disease
117
Figure 6-6.  Lateral (A) and ventrodorsal (B) thoracic radiographs obtained from an 11-year-old female spayed Miniature
Poodle with degenerative mitral valve disease. The cardiac silhouette is markedly enlarged, and there is evidence of left atrial
enlargement. Pulmonary opacities compatible with edema are distributed throughout the lung; the edema is most noticeable in
the caudodorsal lung field.
·When tissue fuid weeps into the pulmonary
velopment of pulmonary edema.
alveoli, it provides contrast with air-filled
· A central, or perihilar, distribution often charac-
structures such as the bronchi, resulting in air
terizes cardiogenic pulmonary edema in dogs.
bronchograms. Alveolar pulmonary opacities
· The development of interstitial pulmonary edema
together with radiographic evidence of left atrial
 precedes the appearance of alveolar edema.
enlargement are diagnostic of left-sided CHF
·Blurring of vascular detail in the presence of left atrial
(Figure 6-6). The presence of alveolar pulmo-
 enlargement and, sometimes, concurrent pulmonary
 nary edema indicates severe CHF that is almost
 venous distention characterizes the radiographic ap-
 invariably associated with noticeable respiratory
pearance of interstitial pulmonary edema.
distress.
118
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
~
Figure 6-7.
with severe mitral valve regurgitation. The left atrium (LA) is markedly enlarged; the dimension of the body of the atrium is more
than twice the diameter of the aorta (Ao).
LV
A
一
enlarged and there is distinct prolapse of the mitral valve leaflets. LV, Left ventricle; LA, left atrium.
KEY POINT
the left atrium in systole is commonly observed
In most cases, thoracic radiography is the
(Figure 6-8).
most important aspect of the diagnostic ap-
· The echogenicity of affected leafets is gener-
proach to MVD.
ally unifonm and nodular thickening is diffuse. In
contrast, infective vegetations typically are local-
ized, may exhibit motion that is independent of
Echocardiography
the valve leaflet and are more, or less, echogenic
· Echocardiographic examination of patients with
than the valve leaflet.
 MVD demonstrates variable degrees of left atrial
· Often, the tricuspid leaflets are affected, although
(Figure 6-7) and left ventricular dilation. Hypertro-
seldom as markedly as the mitral valve.
 phy is usually adequate to preserve a near-normal
·Evaluation of myocardial function in patients
relations hip between the diastolic luminal dimen-
with MR is difficult. When MR is moder-
sion and wall thickness.
ate or severe, loading conditions imposed on
· The mitral leafets may be noticeably thicker
the left ventricle are altered and left ventricu-
than nonmal, and prolapse of the leaflets into
lar performance is hyperdynamic (Figure 6-9)
Chapter6
 Acquired Valvular Disease
119
Figure 6-9.
 M-mode echocardiogram obtained at the level of the left ventricular papillary muscles from an 11 -year-old female
spayed Cavalier King Charles Spaniel. Left ventricular dilation and hypertrophy are evident. Left ventricular systolic performance
is hyperdynamic; the fractional shortening is 46%.
provided myocardial function (contractility) is
scaling. in which echocardiographic dimensions
preserved.
are related to the cube root of body weight, and the
· Ejection phase indices of systolic performance
use of aorta-based ratio indices overcome some of
such as fractional shortening are elevated because
the theoretical and practical limitations of compar-
these variables are highly load-dependent. When
ing cardiac dimensions to body weight.
 MR is present, impedance to ventricular empty-
· The end-systolic volume index calculated as
ing is reduced because the ventricle is able to
LVIDs3/BSA,where LVIDs is the end-systolic
eject blood into the low-pressure reservoir of the
left ventricular dimension and BSA is body sur-
left atrium. Additionally, end-diastolic ventricular
face area has been used in the assessment of
stretch associated with MR increases the force of
myocardial function in dogs with MR. An in-
contraction and contributes to the finding of hy-
dex greater than 30 ml/m2 suggests myocardial
perdynamic ventricular performance. A nonmal
dysfunction.
or subnormal fractional shortening in the setting
· Doppler echocardiography is used to evaluate ve-
of moderate or severe MR suggests systolic myo-
 locity, direction, and character of blood fow.
cardial dysfunction (Figures 6-10 and 6-11).
· Doppler evidence of disturbed fow within the
· Because the end-systolic left ventricular dimen-
left atrium during systole is noninvasive confir-
sion is determined by relatively few factors, it is
mation of the presence of MR (see Figure 6-8).
ikely a better index of myocardial function but,
When stroke volume is severely affected by MR
because cardiac dimensions are related to body
Or systolic failure,reductions in aortic outflow
size, end-systolic left ventricular dimension has
velocities may be apparent.
the disadvantage that it must be interpreted in the
· Assessment of the severity of MR can be evalu-
context of body weight or perhaps more appro-
ated quantitatively or more often, semi-quantita-
priately, the cube root of body weight. Recently
tively by Doppler echocardiography.
a method of echocardiographic mensuration in
· Quantitative methods include evaluation of the
which cardiac dimensions are indexed to aortic
radius of color Doppler proximal fow conver-
diameter or the aortic diameter predicted based
 gence and the calculation of regurgitant fractions
on body weight was proposed. Both allometric
through volumetric fow analysis; however, these
Figure 6-10.   M-mode echocardiogram obtained at the level of the left ventricular papillary muscles from 1 2-year-old male cas-
ventricular systolic performance evaluated by fractional shortening is normal (38%) but the end-systolic left ventricular dimension is
 markedly enlarged which provides evidence of systolic myocardial dysfunction. The cardiac rhythm is atrial fibrillation.
10
1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00
Figure6-11.
M-mode echocardiogram obtained at the level of the left ventricular papillary muscles from 12-year-old male
castrated Dalmatian. There was Doppler evidence of severe mitral regurgitation due to degenerative valve disease. Left ventricu-
 e l a  p  en i b  a pa d s ee
before this one had demonstrated mitral valve regurgitation and mildly hyperdynamic systolic performance. In the interim, the
end-diastolic and end-systolic left ventricular dimensions had enlarged. Large dogs are more apt to develop systolic myocardial
Chapter6
Acquired Valvular Disease
121
LV
MR
Figure 6-12.
 A right parasternal long-axis echocardiographic image obtained from a 5-year-old female spayed Cavalier King
Charles Spaniel with mitral regurgitation due to early onset cegenerative disease.Color-flowDoppler mapping demonstrates mild
mitral valve regurgitation (MR). The color mosaic occupies less than 50% of the area of the left atrium and the jet is relatively
narrow at its origin (arrow). IV, Left ventricle.
Figure 6-13.
. A right parasternal long-axis echocardiographic image obtained from a 1 2-year-old female spayed whippet with
mitral regurgitation due to degenerative disease. Color-flow Doppler mapping demonstrates marked mitral valve regurgitation.
The color mosaic nearly fills the enlarged left atrium and more importantly with respect to evaluation of the severity of regurgita-
tion, the jet is very broad at its origin. IV, Left ventricle.
methods are time consuming and have not found
means of evaluating the severity of regurgita-
widespread clinical application.
tion; a greater width indicates a larger orifice
· The area of the color Doppler regurgitant jet
and, more severe regurgitation (Figures 6-12 and
relative to that of the receiving chamber is one
6-13). The appearance of proximal fow conver-
means of semi-quantitatively evaluating the se-
gence—the color Doppler appearance of accel-
verity of valvular regurgitation; however, many
eration through the regurgitant orifice—suggests
physiologic and technical factors infuence the
that MR is at least of moderate severity (Figure
size of the jet and this intuitively simple method
6-14).
has limitations. The width of the regurgitant jet
· The density of the regurgitant continuous wave
at its origin is another, perhaps more accurate,
 spectral Doppler signal is roughly proportional
122
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
Figure 6-14.
4.A left parasternal apical echocardiographic image from a 13-year-old male castrated mixed-breed dog with mitral
regurgitation due to degenerative disease. Color-flow Doppler mapping demonstrates marked mitral valve regurgitation. The
region of proximal flow acceleration (arow) is evident within the left ventricle (LV).
to the number of cells that move into the receiv-
echocardiography cannot provide a diagnosis of
ing chamber and is an altermative means of semi-
CHF; it can only demonstrate that cardiac disease is
quantitatively
 evaluating regurgitant severity
sufficiently severe that a diagnosis of CHF is plau-
(Figure 6-15).
sible. Although the clinical signs associated with
· Ultimately, it is important that the echocardio-
MVD may have a sudden onset, the disease pro-
graphic assessment is clinically relevant: in vet-
cess itself is chronic. Therefore, left atrial dilation
erinary patients in whom valvular repair is seldom
and, usually, concurrent left ventricular dilation are
 perfonmed, the effect of valvular regurgitation might
expected prior to the onset of clinical signs. Echo-
be of greater importance than its magnitude
cardiographic evidence of MR in the absence of left
 imformation regarding chamber size and myocardial 
atrial and left ventricular dilation is seldom of clini-
function is essential in placing Doppler findings in
cal importance. In most cases, then, echocardiogra-
 the appropriate clinical context.
phy is not essential for the clinical management of
patients with MR. In patients with suspected MR,
Relative Merits of Radiography and
echocardiography is likely to provide clinically
Echocardiography in Mitral Valve Regurgitation
useful information in the following scenarios:
It should be emphasized that MVD exhibits a broad
·When the cause of a cardiac murmur is uncertain
spectrum of severity. Often, the presence of MR
(for example, patients in which the signalment is
is incidental to the presentation, and clinical signs
atypical or there is the possibility that the murmur
such as cough are not the result of CHF or even
is congenital)
heart disease, but, rather, result from primary re-
· When it is difficult to discem from thoracic radio-
spiratory disease. Therefore, in most cases, the
 graphs whether or not the left atrium is enlarged
thoracic radiograph provides the most useful diag-
· When sudden deterioration has occurred, and
nostic and prognostic information in patients with
rupture of the chordae tendineae or left atrium is
MVD. Thoracic radiography not only provides an
suspected
assessment of cardiac size but also allows visual-
· When it is important to evaluate systolic myocar-
ization of the pulmonary vessels and parenchyma.
dial function
Thus, thoracic radiography provides an indirect
· When pulmonary hypertension is suspected
assessment of cardiac performance, and currently
it is the only widely available noninvasive route to
a diagnosis of CHF.
KEY PoINT
Echocardiography
provides
a
noninvasive
Echocardiography is not essential to the man-
means by which to evaluate valvular structure, as-
agement of most cases of MVD but often pro-
sess cardiac dimensions, evaluate left ventricular
vides useful, noninvasively acquired, ancillary
systolic performance, and, with Doppler studies,
information.
confinm the clinical diagnosis of MR. However,
Chapter6
AcquiredValvularDisease
123
[m/s]
0.5
1.0
MR
[m/s]
10
1.00
0.75
0.50
1.25
0.00
tive mitral valve disease. The pulsed wave sample volume was placed within the left atrium; during systole there is a dense, aliasing
to degenerative mitral valve dlisease. The signal is quite dense, suggesting severe regurgitation.
124
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
Electrocardiography
· Unfortunately, despite evidence that angiotensi-
· Electrocardiography is useful primarily for the
converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors favorably
diagnosis of arrhythmias but also can provide in-
affect prognosis in people with asymptomatic
direct evidence of chamber enlargement.
ventricular dysfunction, only limited efficacy
· The electrocardiogram is an insensitive gauge of
of ACE inhibitors in subclinical MVD has been
cardiac chamber size. Nevertheless, it is likely
demonstrated.
that findings such as P mitrale are relatively spe-
· The possibility thatenalaprilmight delay the onset of
cific; that is, when P waves in the caudal fron-
 heart failure in subclinical MVD has been addressed
tal leads (i.e., II, IlI, and aVF) are wide, the left
by two separate clinical trials. In both the Scandina-
 atrium is usually enlarged (Figure 6-16).
vian Veterinary Enalapril Prevention (SVEP) Trial
· Arrhythmias can complicate the presentation of
and the Veterinary Enalapril Trial to Prove Reduc-
MVD. Most often, arrhythmias in MVD take the
tion in Onset of Heart Failure (VETPROOF), dogs
form of supraventricular tachyarrhythmias that
with subclinical MR were randomized to receive
refect atrial stretch. Atrial premature complexes
placebo or enalapril. Neither trial demonstrated a
and paroxysms of atrial tac hycardia are relatively
statistically significant effect of enalapril on time
common in patients with MVD. Atrial fibrillation
to development of CHF. Although the result of the
 develops occasionally and generally indicates
VETPROOF trial was not statistically significant
advanced disease with marked atrial dilation.
with respect to the primary end point, the data did
Ventricular arrhythmias (ventricular premature
show a tendency toward a favorable treatment ef-
complexes) may develop in association with left
fect. Atrial enlargement was an inclusion criterion
ventricular dilation and myocardial fibrosis.
for VETPROOF but not for SVEP; however, it is
Therapy
worthy of consideration that both trials included
patients with relatively mild MR. Patients with
Subclinical ("Asymptomatie'") Mitral Valve
 mild and slowly progressive disease tend to expe-
Disease
rience few events of interestdeath or occurrence
· Definitive published evidence that medical ther-
of heart failure, for example—even during rela-
 apy slows the progression of subclinical (*"asymp-
tively long periods of follow-up. The inclusion of
tomatic") MVD is lacking.
 mildly affected patients in a clinical trial might
· A theoretical, ideal treatment for MVD could be
mask a treatment effect that is evident only for
used to prevent or reverse myxomatous degenera-
patients with severe disease. It is therefore possible
tion. Unfortunately, drug therapy that affects this
that a subpopulation of preclinical patients with
pathologic process has not been identified.
severe MR and cardiomegaly would benefit from
·In the absence of evidence that medical
ACE inhibition. Although this hypothesis has not
therapy can alter the progression of valvular
been specifically tested, it is partly refuted by the
degeneration, interest has been directed toward
results of SVEP; in that trial, a treatment effect
the possibility that drug therapy might improve
was not observed in the subset of dogs that had
prognosis in subclinical MVD by decreasing
Aa s e a do
MR or by modifying the process of ventricular
· The reason that ACE inhibitors do not appear
remodeling.
to improve prognosis in subclinical MVD is not
RHYTHM
There is P-mitrale, and the R amplitude exceeds 3 mV, suggesting left atrial enlargement and left ventricular hypertrophy, respec-
tively. (Lead Il, 50 mm/s, 1 mV = 1 cm.)
Chapter6
Acquired Valvular Disease
125
kmown; however, it should be recognized that the
Cough caused by Airway Compression
widely cited clinical trials of ACE inhibition in
· Some dogs with MVD develop a cough that ap-
people with heart disease generally have enrolled
pears to result from compression of the mainstem
people with past myocardial infarction or idio-
bronchi by an enlarged left atrium. This type of
pathic DCM. MVD in people is generally treated
cough can develop prior to the development of
surgically, and, indeed, medical therapy is not
pulmonary edema.
recommended for asymptomatic people with MR.
· Radiographically, there is an enlarged cardiac
· Pathophysiologic differences between people with
silhouette with distinct evidence of left atrial
ventricular myocardial dysfunction and dogs with
enlargement. The mainstem bronchi may be
MVD might also be relevant. In contrast to the
noticeably narrowed. The pulmonary veins are
effect of renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system
sometimes distended, but the pulmonary intersti-
a  s  sss (
tium and parenchyma have a normal appearance.
induced, primary myocardial disease, neither ACE
· It is important to recognize that primary respiratory
inhibitors nor angiotensin II antagonists favorably
tract diseases such as tracheal collapse and chronic
affect ventricular remodeling in dogs with experi-
bronchitis are common in the same patient group
mentally induced MR. However, the syndrome
that develops MVD. With very few exceptions,
that results from acute disruption of the mitral
clinical signs related to MVD do not occur in the
valve in the laboratory may differ markedly from
 absence of radiographic left atrial enlargement.
spontaneous valvular degeneration associated with
· When radiographic fndings suggest that the
chronic, progressive MR. Therefore, the clinical
cause of cough is airway compression but not
relevance of these research findings is uncertain.
pulmonary edema, the use of an antitussive such
· Theoretical considerations aside, definitive evi-
 as hydrocodone or butorphanol is rational.
dence that ACE inhibitors improve prognosis in
· Vasodilation causes a decrease in systemic vas-
subclinical MVD is lacking. Although it might be
cular resistance and, in the setting of MR, can
argued that trials to date have had inadequate sta-
increase stroke volume through a decrease in
tistical power, it is likely that a favorable effect of
the regurgitant fraction. Potentially these effects
ACE inhibition, if one exists, is modest; the results
can decrease left atrial and pulmonary venous
 of VETPROOF suggest that 2 years oftherapy with
pressures and perhaps, reduce left atrial size.
enalapril may delay the onset of pulmonary edema
· Cough due to compression of the airways gener-
by approximately 4 months. Based on available
ally is associated with considerable chamber en-
data, the author generally does not treat dogs with
largement and this latter finding is a risk factor
subclinical MVD. On a pragmatic level, the prac-
for the ultimate development of heart failure. Be-
titioner is sometimes presented with subclinical
cause of the proven favorable effect of ACE inhi-
patients for which radiographic findings suggest
bition in patients with heart failure due to MVD,
that the development of frank heart failure is im-
it is reasonable to administer an ACE inhibitor
minent. In cases where there is marked left atrial
in addition to an antitussive, when cough results
enlargement and pulmonary venous distension, the
from bronchial compression.
author prescribes an ACE inhibitor. It is notewor-
·Some of the benefits of ACE inhibition likely
thy that long-term ACE inhibition has not been as.
relate to their neuroendocrine effects. Because
sociated with detrimental effects. Furthenmore, it is
of this and because the ACE inhibitors are not
possible that these drugs have benefits that relate
 potent vasodilators, a case might be made for
to effects on other geriatric disorders such as hy-
the use of hydralazine or perhaps amlodipine
pertension or renal disease. Based on this and the
for dogs with MVD and cough due to bronchial
suggestion of a favorable effect in the VETPROOF
compression. Caution must be exercised if these
trial, ACE inhibition may be a therapeutic consid-
drugs are used and patients should be monitored
 eration for some patients with cardiac enlargement 
for the development of systemic hypotension.
and subclinical MR; however, the evidence to
·Diuretic administration effectively reduces car-
diac volumes and may also be efficacious. The
 argument can be advanced that this may result in
harmful activation of the renin-angiotensin axis.
KEY POINT
Therefore, in this clinical situation, add furose-
Medical therapy that slows the progression of
mide to the drug regimen only when ACE inhibi-
MVD has not been identified.
tion in combination with an antitussive, fails to
result in clinical improvement.
126
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
Table 6-2
 Suggested Strategies for Diagnostic and Therapeutic Management of Canine
 Degenerative Valvular Disease
Cough caused by
Subclinical MR
Airway Compression
CHF
Advanced CHF
Diagnostic
 X-rays as indicated
X-rays
X-rays
X-rays
approach
by clinical
Echocardiography
Echocardiography
Echocardiography
circumstances (i.e.,
recommended
not usually
EKG when auscultation
prior to elective
when radiographic
necessary but provides
suggests pathologic
anesthesia, loud
evidence of left
potentially useful
arrhythmia
murmurs particularly
atrial enlargement is
ancillary information
if associated with
equivocal
in most cases
tachycardia)
EKG when
EKG when
EKG when
auscultation
auscultation suggests
auscultation
suggests pathologic
pathologic arrhythmia
suggests pathologic
arrhythmia
arrhythmia
Therapeutic
 Generally none
Antitussive agent and
 Standard therapy for
The following can be
approach
indicated although in
 an ACE inhibitor
CHF due to MR
 considered in additi on
some circumstances,
Short-term anti-
consists of furosemide,
 to standard
the use of an ACE
inflammatory dose
an ACE inhibitor, and
 therapy—treatment 
inhibitor might be
corticosteroids or 
 moderate dietary salt
should be tailored to
considered for patients
therapeutic diuretic
restriction
the individual
with distinct cardi ac
 trial considered for 
· Triple diuretic therapy
enlargement (see text)
refractory cases
· Amlodipine (or
Hy dralazine)
· Carvedilol
· Spironolactone
· Pimobendan
·Nitroglycerin
· When cough fails to respond to ACE inhibition
marily of interventions that manipulate the deter-
and modest diuresis, it is important to consider
minants of cardiac output and others intended to
the possibility that the cough results not from
blunt the maladaptive neuroendocrine response
heart disease but rather from primary respiratory
to cardiac dysfunction.
tract disease.
· In CHF due to MR, left ventricular filling pres-
sure (preload) is excessive, and the consequent
Treatment of Congestive Heart Failure caused
increase in venous pressures causes tissue fuid to
by Mitral Valve Disease
· When MR causes clinical signs in people, the
The administration of agents that reduce intravas-
disorder is treated surgically. Mitral valve re-
cular volume, such as diuretics, or of agents that
pair with preservation of chordal attachments
increase venous capacitance, such as nitroglyc-
is generally preferred to replacement of the
erin, are therefore a mainstay of therapy.
valve with a prosthesis. Surgical treatment of
 Nitroglycerinis usually administered transder-
dogs with MVD has been reported. However,
mally and is used most often as short-tenm therapy
expense and the need for expertise in open-
in patients with fulminant edema, or occasionally
heart surgery performed during cardiopulmo-
as adjunctive therapy in patients with advanced
nary bypass have limited the availability of this
disease. The efficacy of transdermal nitroglycerin
approach.
is uncertain, and in dogs with experimentally in-
· Heart failure due to MVD generally is treated
duced MR, the effect of nitroglycerin on filling
medically (Table 6-2). Unless the cause can be
pressure did not differ from that of placebo.
definitively treated, heart failure is a terminal
· Furosemide, a potent agent that acts on the loop
syndrome. Therefore, medical management is in-
of Henle, is the diuretic that is used most often
tended to alleviate clinical signs and to prolong
in veterinary practice. It can be administered
life. Drug therapy of heart failure consists pri-
orally or parenterally; the route of administration
Chapter6
 Acquired Valvular Disease
127
is chosen based upon the clinical status of the
pimobendan increases the sensitivity of the con-
patient. The resultant decrease in intravascular
tractile apparatus to available calcium, an effect
volume reduces left ventricular filling pressures,
which also contributes to the inotropic effect.
allows lymphatic drainage of tissue fuid and,
This latter property may be favorable because
resolution of edema.
the increase in inotropic state is associated with a
· It should be recognized that diuretics reduce pre-
relatively low cost in terms of myocardial oxygen
load; this decrease in ventricular filling pressures
consumption.
is generally well tolerated by patients with ven-
· Two recent clinical trials compared the ef-
tricular dilation and has obvious benefits when
fects of pimobendan with an ACE inhibitor
edema is present. However, excessive diuresis
in dogs with heart failure due to MVD. These
 can result in hypotension related to low cardiac
trials demonstrated that the clinical effects of
output, prerenal azotemia, and electrolyte distur-
pimobendan and furosemide were not inferior
bances. It is generally believed that the optimal
to established therapy consisting of furosemide
 dose of furosemide is the lowest one that controls
and an ACE inhibitor. For some clinical vari-
signs of congestion.
ables, pimobendan was superior to the ACE
· Importantly, many dogs with clinically
evi-
inhibitor. The effect of pimobendan when used
 dent MVD cough in the absence of pulmonary
together with an ACE inhibitor in dogs with
edema, and many of these patients have concur-
valvular disease has not been addressed in
rent primary respiratory tract disease. Therefore,
published trials to date. Therefore, the stage of
aggressive diuresis following radiographically
 disease at which pimobendan is most appro-
demonstrated resolution of pulmonary edema
 priately added to conventional therapy can be
is to be avoided. In most cases of CHF due to
debated. It is reasonable to add pimobendan to
MVD, the administration of furosemide rap-
the therapeutic regimen when there is clinical
idly and effectively resolves signs. Failure of
deterioration despite administration of furose-
patients with MR and respiratory distress to
mide and an ACE inhibitor. The concurrent use
respond promptly to diuretic administration
of pimobendan, an ACE inhibitor, and furose-
should cause the practitioner to question the di-
mide as initial therapy can probably be justi-
agnosis of CHF.
fied when MVD results in severe heart failure.
· Most patients that develop radiographic pulmo-
When pet owners are constrained financially.
nary edema due to MR require lifelong diuretic
and it is possible to prescribe only pimobendan
therapy. Early in the course of the syndrome, a
 Or an ACE inhibitor, the available data suggest
dose of 1 mg/kg PO every 12 hours may be ade-
that the use of either drug likely is appropriate.
quate, although the inevitable progression of MR
· In Beagles with mild MVD, chronic, oral adminis-
 and CHF and renal tubular adaptations ultimately
tration of pimobendan was associated with histo-
necessitate higher doses.
logic valvular lesions that were more severe than
· Moderate dietary salt restriction is suggested for
those in a similar group of Beagles that received
patients with CHF due to MVD.
benazepril. These data and a clinical case report
·The benefits of ACE inhibition in CHF due to
suggest that in some circumstances, pimobendan
MR have been demonstrated. Thus, the use
might accelerate the development of degenerative
of an ACE inhibitor together with furosemide
valvular lesions. Pimobendan is not indicated for
has become standard therapy for CHF due to
the management of subclinical MVD.
MVD.
· When atrial tachyarrhythmias, particularly atrial
· Pimobendan has recently been approved by the
fibrillation, complicate MVD, the use of digoxin
United States Food and Drug Administration for
(0.22 mg/m? PO every 12 hours) is generally ac-
use in dogs;itis indicatedforthe management ofthe
cepted. However, the role of digoxin in the man-
signs of mild, moderate, and severe CHF resulting
 agement of patients with CHF who are in normal
from DCM or atrioventricular valve insufficiency.
sinus rhythm remains a point of controversy.
Previously, pimobendan had been licensed for
· Dgoxin has two principal effects; it acts as a posi-
use in dogs with heart failure in Canada, Europe,
tive inotrope and as a negative chronotrope. The
and Australasia.
latter property is related to the autonomic effects
· Pimobendan is an "inodilator" that has com-
of the drug, which include a central vagomimetic
plex phanmacologic properties. It inhibits phos-
effect and effects that may serve to nonmalize the
phodiesterase and therefore causes vasodilation
baroreceptor dysfunction associated with CHF.
and an increase in inotropic state. Additionally,
There is evidence to suggest that chronic activation
128
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
of the adrenergic nervous system is detrimental,
adrenergic nervous system and RAS is ultimately
a  a   s  
maladaptive and contributes to the progressive
 by the administration of digoxin.
nature of heart failure. The use of beta blockers
· The need for digoxin in the patient with CHF due
in this setting is consistent with this paradigm
to MVD is difficult to assess. Because the com-
· Acutely, beta blockers have a negative effect on
monly used echocardiographic indices of contrac-
 cardiac performance and should be used in canines
tility depend on preload and afterload as well as
with heart failure only with caution. Beta blocks-
myocardial function, they are difficult to interpret
ers must be initiated at very low doses and titrated
when MR is severe. Furthenmore, the results of
to effect or target dose over the course of weeks.
clinical trials that enrolled people with heart fail-
· The use of beta blockers in patients with systolic
ure cast doubt on the intuitive notion that chronic
failure is predicated on the belief that these agents 
inotropic therapy is beneficial.
preserve myocardial function. Although invasive
· The effect of digoxin on dogs with heart failure
 measures may disclose myocardial function in dogs
and sinus rhythm has not been evaluated. How-
with MR, the primary cause of clinical signs in pa-
ever, based on the results of a clinical trial that
tients with MVD is likely the mechanical effect of
addressed the role of digoxin in people with heart
the volume load. Nevertheless, studies of dogs with
failure, it seems likely that the magnitude of ef-
experimentally induced MR suggest that beta block-
fect in dogs—-whether it is positive or negative-
 ade may have a role in the management of MVD.
is probably small.
· Garvedilol is a third-generation beta blocker that
· In patients with MVD and sinus rhythm, it
is also an alpha adrenergic antagonist. Because of
seems most reasonable to reserve the use of
this latter property, carvedilol is a weak vasodila-
digoxin for patients with advanced CHF and
tor, which might make this beta blocker particu-
 preserved renal function as digoxin is excreted
larly well suited to the management of MVD.
almost entirely through the kidneys. When ad-
· The author considers the use of carvedilol, or a
ministering digoxin to dogs in sinus rhythm,
 less expensive alternative such as metoprolol or
aim for a blood concentration of 0.5 to 1 ng/mg
 atenolol, when echocardiographic findings sug-
on a sample obtained 8 to 10 hours postdose.
 gest incipient or patent myocardial dysfunction.
Higher concentrations likely are necessary and
 appropriate when atrial fibrillation is present.
Therapy of Severe Congestive Heart Failure
caused by Advanced Mitral Valve Regurgitation
Neuroendocrine Modulation
· The use of triple diuretic therapy—combining
· ACE inhibitors are part of the standard therapeu-
furosemide with a thiazide and a potassium-
tic approach to heart failure caused by MR. It is
sparing diuretic such as spironolaetone—can be
likely that the favorable effect of ACE inhibition
considered for patients that require high doses of
is not simply the result of vasodilation. In ad-
furosemide to remain free of congestive signs.
dition to this mechanical effect, ACE inhibition
The use of three different diuretic agents inter-
serves to protect the heart from the apparently
feres with nephron function at anatomically and
detrimental effects of RAS activation.
functionally distinct sites; together, the drugs may
· Pharmacologic ACE inhibition generally is not
 have synergistic effects, allowing the use of lower
complete, and because aldosterone may con-
doses of the individual agents. Additionally, the
tribute to the development of myocardial fibro-
use of a potassium-sparing agent such as spirono-
sis, more complete suppression of the RAS may
lactone serves to limit some of the adverse effects
yield positive results. Accordingly, the use of
that are associated with the use of high doses of
spironolactone—a weak diuretic that antagonizes
loop diuretics such as furosemide.
the effect of aldosterone—is considered as adjunc-
· Despite proven efficacy in the management of
tive therapy for patients with severe CHF due to
heart failure due to MVD, the ACE inhibitors
MVD. In humans with CHF, the use of subdiuretic
are not potent vasodilators. In some patients with
 doses of spironolactone prolongs survival.
CHF due to severe MVD, the use of hydrala-
 Beta blockers decrease mortality in people with
zine or perhaps the vasoselective calcium chan-
heart failure. Because these drugs have a po-
nel blocker, amlodipine, in addition to an ACE
tent negative inotropic effect, the mechanism by
inhibitor may be helpful. When vasodilators are
which beta blockers improve survival is not in-
used in addition to ACE inhibitors, the initial dose
tuitively obvious. However, it is now recognized
should be low; ideally, the dose is titrated to effect
that seemingly compensatory activation of the
based on serial blood pressure detenminations.
Chapter6
Acquired Valvular Disease
129
Figure 6-17.
            
male spayed Papillion. The anterior mitral valve leaflet (orow) was flail—the leaflet is perpendicular to plane of the mitral
annulus—-because of rupture of a chorda tendineae. LV, Left ventricle.
KEY POINT
also develop azotemia when ACE inhibitors are
administered.
 The author's standard medical therapy for
·It should be recalled that there are essentially
heart failure due to MvD consists of furose-
 mide, an ACE inhibitor, and in some cases, di-
no circumstances under which diuresis will in-
goxin. Pimobendan has been approved for the
crease stroke volume and renal blood fow. In
treatment of mild, moderate, and severe CHF
contrast, judicious vasodilation in the setting of
due to MVD. Spironolactone and beta block-
MR can do exactly that. Thus, the development
ers may have roles as adjunctive therapy.
of azotemia is usually managed first by a cau-
tious reduction in the diuretic dose. Should cre-
atinine values fail to decrease, the diuretic can be
 discontinued; the patient's respiratory rate and
Complications of Mitral Valve Disease and
character should be carefully monitored. If azo-
Its Treatment
temia persists after discontinuation of diuretic
therapy, the ACE inhibitor can be discontinued,
Development of Azotemia Associated with
Diuretic and Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme
 and cautious intravenous infusion of fuid can be
Inhibitor Administration
initiated.
· Monitoring of renal function is suggested for
patients that are treated with diuretics and ACE
Rupture of Chordae Tendineae
inhibitors. ACE inhibitors are not generally
· Rupture of chordae tendineae is a relatively com-
mon complication of MVD. When a primary
thought to be directly nephrotoxic; however, ACE
inhibition results in relatively selective dilation of
chorda ruptures, the attached mitral leaflet be-
the efferent arteriole of the nephron, a hemody-
comes suddenly fail (Figure 6-17), potentially
namic effect that can predispose to the develop-
resulting in catastrophic MR, marked elevations
 in ventricular flling pressures, and fulminant pul-
ment of prerenal azotemia. Those patients with
monary edema. Rupture of minor chordae may
overly aggressive doses of diuretics are most
result in less impressive clinical signs or may be
likely to develop azotemia. In addition, patients
subclinical.
with severe cardiac dysfunction that are criti-
· Rupture of a primary chorda tendinea may occur
cally dependent upon the effects of angiotensin
in patients that have substantial, preexisting MR
 II to maintain glomerular filtration fraction may
and cardiac enlargement and result in clinical de-
compensation the severity of which varies. How-
ever, the development of acute pulmonary edema
130
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
TR
[m/s]
2
6
1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00
1了
Figure 6-18.
endocardiosis. There is tricuspid valve regurgitation (TR); the peak velocity of the TR jet was nearly 5 m/s. This corresponds to a
systolic right atrial-right ventricular pressure difference that is close to 1oo mm Hg and provides evidence of severe pulmonary
pulmonary artery pressure was out of proportion to any credible estimate of left atrial pressure. Reactive vasoconstriction of the
in patients with nonmal cardiac dimensions is
P is the pressure difference and v is the veloc-
uncommon.
ity of the regurgitant jet). The right atrial pressure
· Acute CHF due to chordal rupture is treated
is approximated based on clinical findings; in
similarly to acute or decompensated heart failure
the absence of right-sided CHF, the right atrial
caused by other disorders although there may be
pressure is likely less than 10 mm Hg. Provided
a particular role for the intravenous administra-
pulmonary stenosis (PS) is excluded by Doppler
tion of nitroprusside in addition to parenteral di-
evaluation of the right ventricular outfow tract,
uretic administration.
 right ventricular and pulmonary artery pressures
· The prognosis depends on numerous factors
are equal during systole. Thus, measurement of 
of which response to therapy is probably most
the velocity of the TR jet can provide noninvasive
important.
estimates of systolic pulmonary artery pressure
(Figure 6-18).
Pulmonary Hypertension
· The cause of pulmonary hypertension associated
· Pulmonary hypertension occasionally compli-
with MVD is probably multifactorial. The pri-
cates the clinical presentation of MVD in the
mary function of the right ventricle is to propel
dog. Doppler studies can provide noninvasive
the stroke volume through the pulmonary vascu-
estimates of pulmonary artery pressure. Dop-
lar tree to the left atrium. Elevations in left atrial
pler  echocardiographic  evidence  of  tricuspid
pressure cause commensurate increases in right
valve regurgitation (TR) is commonly observed
ventricular systolic pressure; if mean pulmonary
in patients with MVD. The velocity of the TR jet
 artery pressure does not exceed mean left atrial
is related to the systolic pressure difference be-
pressure, there is no impetus for forward fow.
tween the right atrium and the right ventricle by
The tendency for left atrial hypertension to cause
the modified Bermoulli equation (△P = 4v2, where
Ad au Aiqeqoid si uisuaddy Aeuund
Chapter6
 Acquired Valvular Disease
131
ten go on to develop CHF. When CHF develops,the
in most cases; however, in some patients, the
disease is generally terminal. Even with palliative
increase in estimated pulmonary artery pressure
medical therapy, survival is usually measured in
is disproportionate to any credible estimate of left
months, with 8 to 14 months being typical.
atrial pressure. In these cases, pulmonary arte-
rial constriction—sometimes known as "reactive
INFECTIVE ENDOCARDITIS
vasoconstriction" probably contributes. Alterma-
tively, pulmonary hypertension may be also re-
IE occurs occasionally in dogs and rarely in cats.
 lated to the presence of concurrent pulmonary or
The prognosis is generally grave, and most cases
airway disease.
are terminal even with aggressive medical therapy.
· There is no established therapy for patients with
This latter point emphasizes the importance of de-
tecting IE, a disease that sometimes poses a consid.
Most vasodilators have a relatively predictable
 erable diagnostic challenge.
effect on the systemic vasculature; however, the
pulmonary arterioles respond inconsistently
/to
Prevalence and Incidence
the commonly used vasodilator agents, and, in
consequence, it should be recognized that the
· IE is a relatively uncommon disease that is ob-
use of vasodilators in patients with pulmonary
served occasionally in dogs but rarely in cats.
hypertension due to severe pulmonary vascular
Mural endocarditis and infection of the tricuspid
disease is not without risk. If a vasodilator with
valve are observed occasionally, as is infection
 potent peripheral effects fails to decrease pulmo-
of endocardial pacing leads; however, bacterial
 nary vascular resistance, systemic hypotension or
infection of the aortic or mitral valve leaflets is
detrimental increases in right ventricular pressure
most common.
and myocardial oxygen demand may result.
· Middle-aged, large-breed male dogs, including
· As initial therapy, interventions that reduce left
German Shepherds and Boxers, are affected most
 atrial pressure are reasonable. Diuretic therapy
often.
should be tailoredtorid the patient of radiographic
· In people, the presence of a congenital cardiac
evidence of pulmonary congestion or edema. Al-
malformation is a risk factor for the development
veolar hypoxia is a stimulus for constriction of
of IE. An association between congenital subval-
the pulmonary arterioles. If bronchoconstriction
vular aortic stenosis and IE of the aortic valve has
associated with primary respiratory disease has
been demonstrated, and it is likely that subvalvu-
contributed to the development of pulmonary
lar aortic stenosis and, perhaps, other congenital
hypertension, the administration of bronchodila-
malformations, are important factors in the epi-
tors may be helpful.
demiology of IE in dogs.
· When effective control of pulmonary conges-
tion or therapy of primary respiratory tract dis-
Etiopathogenesis
ease fails to lower pulmonary artery pressure,
and clinical signs such as weakness can plausi-
· Based on experimental studies, it is likely that the
  d c   
following factors are important in the pathogen-
use of sildenafl in addition to an ACE inhibitor
esis of infective valvular endocarditis:
can be considered. Sildenafil is an inhibitor of
· Endocardial damage (which may result from
phosphodiesterase-V that appears to have a rela-
valvular insufficiency, stenosis, or a shunting
tively selective effect on pulmonary arterioles.
lesion)
When possible, systemic blood pressure should
· Activation of clotting factors
be monitored when therapy with this drug is initi-
· Bacteremia and colonization of a noninfective
ated (see Chapter 9).
thrombus
· The development of a noninfective thrombus
Prognosis
precedes valvular infection. Episodes of bac-
· The prognosis associated with the development of
teremia can result in infection of the thrombus
MVD depends on numerous factors. The major-
and the initiation of a variably aggressive in-
ity of patients with MR due to MVD succumb to
fammatory process that results in distortion and
noncardiac disease. In the absence of noncardiac
destruction of the valve leaflets and their associ-
disease, patients with cough or syncope and distinct
ated structures.
radiographic evidence of left atrial enlargement of-
132
SECTION IICardiovascular Disease
· In clinical cases of canine IE, a congenital car-
valve leafets contributes to valvular incompe-
diac malformation may represent a predisposition
tence. The hemodynamic consequences of MR
for the development of the disease. Prostatitis,
 have been discussed previously.
pyelonephritis, or even dental disease can pro-
· IE of the aortic valve typically results in aortic valve
vide a source for the development of bacteremia;
incompetence, which is a potentially catastrophic
 often, however, the site of bacterial entry into the
hemodynamic lesion. When the aortic valve be-
bloodstream remains undiscovered.
comes incompetent, the left ventricle is filled dur-
· Degenerative valvular disease has no known as-
ing diastole by the pulmonary venous retum and
sociation with IE. Interestingly, despite the preva-
by the blood that enters through the regurgitant
lence of dental disease in patients with MR due to
orifice. When severe, the increase in ventricular
MVD, IE is extremely uncommon in this patient
filling pressures (diastolic ventricular pressures) is
group.
· Gram-positive bacteria such as the streptococci
tion, resulting in pulmonary congestion and edema.
and staphylococci are most often implicated in
In contrast to MR, aortic valve insufficiency (AI)
the development of IE. Valvular infection with
causes a substantial increase in left ventricular after-
gram-negative organisms such as Escherichia
load and therefore, myocardial oxygen demand. As
coli is less common.
a result, myocardial dysfunction (cardiomyopathy
· With regards to the etiology of IE, there has been
of overload) is observed commonly and early in the
recent interest in the fastidious, intracellular or-
course of aortic valve IE.
ganisms of the genus Bartonella. Four species
· Embolization of fragments from the endocardi-
of Bartonella have been documented to cause
tis lesion occurs commonly. Sites where infected
canine IE. Although geographical distribution of
thrombi lodge include the spleen, the kidney, and
Bartonella IE may not be uniform, Bartonella is
occasionally the brain. Most often, embolization
an important cause of IE in northem Califormia
of the spleen is clinically silent; infarction of the
and probably elsewhere. Patients with Bartonella
kidneys or central nervous system can be cata-
infection are often concomitantly seropositive
 strophic, resulting in renal failure and nervous sys-
for tick-bome diseases and Bartonella itself
tem signs such as head tilt. Embolization of joints,
may be arthropod borme. Bartonella spp. are
 resulting in bacterial arthritis, can also occur.
difficult to culture using standard microbiological
Clinical Presentation
techniques. The diagnosis depends on docu-
mentation of serum antibodies to Bartonella or
History
more specifically, demonstration of Bartonella
· IE in dogs is observed most commonly in a sub-
antigens through polymerase chain reaction
acute form. In these cases, historical evidence of
testing performed on bacterial isolates or valve
prior illness or of infectious disease may be lack-
tissue.
ing. A congenital cardiac murmur may or may
not have been detected. IE is also observed in an
Pathophysiology
 acute fonm.
· Clinical signs in subacute IE are often vague;
· The clinical signs of IE relate to sepsis, thrombo-
lameness, inappetence, dyspnea, syncope, and ex-
embolism, and cardiac dysfunction. IE results in
ercise intolerance are observed most commonly.
intermittent shedding of bacterial organisms into
The lameness is often mild and may be difficult to
the bloodstream, resulting in episodes of bacte-
localize. The embolization of infected thrombi to
remia. Signs of sepsis, including pyrexia and,
joints contributes to lameness, although immune
rarely, circulatory collapse, may be observed
· Sequelae of sepsis related to chronic antigenic
importance.
stimulation and the consequent development of
· Clinical signs of sepsis may be more prominent in
immune complex disease are observed fairly
patients that develop acute IE. The sudden onset of
commonly in IE. Polyarthritis is observed often,
fever and the development of a new cardiac mur
 and glomerulonephritis can also develop.
mur in the critically ill suggest the presence of IE.
· In canine IE, it is often the destruction of the
valve leaflets and associated structures that is of
Physical Findings
 greatest clinical importance. The development
· Fever is a common but not necessarily a consis-
of infected thrombi results in failure of the valve
tent finding in patients with IE. Published cases
leaflets to coapt. Occasionally, perforation of the
series of canine IE reflect the experience of re.
Chapter6
Acquired Valvular Disease
133
ferral centers and are therefore biased. At some
tachyarrhythmias, including atrial fibrillation,
point in the natural history of the disease it is
are also observed.
likely that most patients are pyrexic; however,
· The association of third-degree atrioven-
fever associated with IE can be intermittent and
tricular block with IE deserves mention. Occa-
may resolve before clinical presentation.
sionally an aggressive aortic lesion will invade
· The pulse rate is often elevated, as some degree
the interventricular septum or, altermatively,
 of cardiac dysfunction is commonly present at
embolize the nodal coronary artery, resulting
the time of presentation.
in destruction of the atrioventricular node or AV
· The respiratory rate is elevated, and respiratory
bundle. This catastrophic complication is relatively
distress is usually apparent, in patients that have
uncommon, but lesser degrees of atrioventricular
developed CHF.
block or intraventricular conduction delays, such as
· A cardiac murmur is present in the majority of
left bundle branch block, are observed fairly often.
 patients with established valvular infection. MR
· Electrocardiographic evidence of cardiac cham-
results in a systolic murmur that is most easily
ber enlargement is observed in patients that
heard over the left cardiac apex. Aortic valve
survive long enough for the volume overload as-
IE usually results in a diastolic decrescendo
sociated with IE to result in chamber dilation and
murmur that is typically heard most easily over the
hypertrophy.
left cardiac base. A concurrent systolic murmur
related to the increase in left ventricular stroke
Echocardiographie Findings
volume associated with AI results in a murmur
· The tenm vegetative endocarditis is generally used
to refer to cases in which there is a macroscopic,
·Diastolic munmurs are uncommon in veterinary
infected thrombus associated with a valve leaflet.
patients and are usually soft; consequently, they
· The echocardiographic findings in vegetative IE
may escape detection. Despite this, they are of
are distinctive. In most cases, nodular distortion
considerable diagnostic and prognostic impor-
of the valve leafets is readily apparent (Figure
tance; acquired diastolic munmurs in dogs most
 6-20). Often the valvular abnormality is discrete
often result from aortic valve IE.
and the lesion may oscillate independently of
· When moderate or severe AI is present, the arte-
valve motion.
rial pulses are hyperkinetic, or bounding, a physi-
·When these abnormalities are associated with
cal finding that should prompt consideration of
the aortic valve leaflets, the diagnosis is usually
IE whenever signalment and other clinical find-
assured.
ings are suggestive.
· Nodules affecting the mitral valve leaflets are of
Diagnostic Findings
lesser diagnostic specificity (Figure 6-21), as it
can be difficult to distinguish severe MVD from
Thoracie Radiography
infection of the mitral valve leaflets. To some
· Radiographic findings in IE are variable. Car-
extent, this distinction is made based upon the
diac enlargement is apparent when valvular le-
patient's signalment. As stated previously, IE
sions have imposed a chronic volume overload
is very uncommon in elderly small-breed dogs
on the heart. Pulmonary congestion or edema is
which are, of course, the patients most likely to
commonly observed (Figure 6-19). Occasion-
develop severe MVD.
ally, IE results in severe and acute AI; this is
· The interpretation of subtle valvular abnormali-
one of the few clinical scenarios in which car-
ties detected by echocardiography poses a diffi-
diogenic pulmonary edema is observed in as-
cult clinical problem, and other, ancillary clinical
sociation with a normal or minimally enlarged
data, including the results of blood cultures, must
cardiac silhouette.
be considered.
· The absence of a readily detectable valvular
Electrocardiography
nodule on echocardiographic examination does
· There are no electrocardiographic findings that
 not eliminate IE from the differential diagnosis.
are diagnostic of IE. However, all manner of
· When vegetative IE of the aortic or mitral valve is
cardiac arrhythmias can be observed in asso-
present, there is often echocardiographic evidence
ciation with this disease. Ventricular tachyar-
of left atrial and left ventricular enlargement. Pre-
rhythmias, including ventricular tachycardia,
mature diastolic closure of the mitral valve and
are relatively common, and supraventricular
diastolic futter of the anterior mitral valve leaflet
indicate severe AI (Figure 6-22). Some degree of
134
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
A
B
Figure 6-19.  Lateral (A) and ventrodorsal (B) thoracic radiographs obtained from a 1-year-old German Shepherd with aor-
indicate the presence of pulmonary edema.
is relatively mild, and evidence of acute inflam-
ent when cardiac enlargement results from AI.
mation may or may not be present.
 Doppler echocardiography is used to confinm the 
· Abnonmalities in the serum chemistries are not
 presence of valvular incompetence.
specific and, when present, are secondary to the
disease process. Azotemia is relatively common
Laboratory Data
and can be pre-renal, as a result of poor renal per-
· In many cases of IE, the hemogram reveals leu-
 fusion, or it can result from renal infarction. Hypo-
kocytosis, but this finding is not consistently
 albuminemia, hyperglobulinemia, and elevations in
 present. In subacute cases of IE, the leukocytosis
serum alkaline phosphatase may also be observed.
Chapter6
Acquired Valvular Disease
135
06-MAR-91
03:01:31PM
S3194 35HZ
120
CARDIACI
PWR
8P0
40dB
A/2/8
Figure 6-20.
five-chamber view demonstrates the presence of a large, highly echogenic nodule attached to one of the aortic valve leaflets.
Figure 6-21.
scher with mitral valve endocarditis. There is a discrete nodule attached to anterior mitral valve leaflet (arrow).
· Bacteria are cultivated from whole blood samples in
Therapy
60% to 80% of IE cases. When possible, three whole-
· Therapy of IE is directed toward the control of
blood samples are obtained over a 12- to 24-hour
 period from a central vein after aseptic preparation
sepsis, the prevention of thromboembolism, and
the management of cardiac dysfunction that re-
of the overlying skin. When clinical circumstances
sults from valvular incompetence.
allow, blood samples are obtained prior to the
· Antibacterial therapy is best guided by the re-
institution of antibacterial therapy, and the results
 are used to guide treatment. Taking samples over a
sults of bacterial culture and sensitivity testing
of whole blood samples. When culture results are
shorter time period, say 1 to 3 hours, likely is reason-
able when the clinical findings suggest that institu-
unavailable, or when attempts to isolate bacteria
from blood are unsuccessful, antibiotics are cho-
tion of antibiotic therapy should not be delayed.
 sen on an empirical basis.
136
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
CAL=10mm
RS
20
CAL=10mm
NIARO
B
140.
Figure 6-22.
.M-mode echocardiograms obtained from dogs with severe aortic valve incompetence due to bacterial endocardi-
tis. A, An M-mode echocardiogram obtained at the mitral valve level. There is cdiastolic flutter of the anterior mitral valve leaflet and 
premature closure of the mitral valve—-indirect echocardiographic evidence of severe aortic valve incompetence. B, An M-mode
echocardiogram obtained at the aortic level. The motion of the visible aortic valve leaflet is chaotic because it is flail, having been
·Most often, IE in dogs results from gram-positive
nous route because high serum levels of drugs are
organisms, and agents such as the clavulanate
achieved quickly and with certainty.
potentiated penicillins or the cephalosporins are
   ss  sis  a a
appropriate. Azithromycin may have a role in
 blood culture results are negative, initial therapy
the management of IE due to Bartonella spp.
using a combination of intravenous gentamicin
In general, bactericidal agents are preferred. A
(or amikacin) and ampicillin (or a cephalosporin)
long course of therapy, 6 to 8 weeks, is generally
is justified. When patients are free of gastroin-
recommended. There may be some advantage
testinal signs such as vomiting or diarrhea, oral
to initiating antibiotic therapy using the intrave-
 antibiotic therapy is probably appropriate.
Chapter6
Acquired Valvular Disease
137
1.=5.75
2.=4.75
VHS= 5.75 +4.75 = 10.5
Figure 6-23.
heart sum (VHS) are shown. The vertebral bodies, beginning at the fourth thoracic vertebra are used as a scale.
· Cardioactive agents are chosen based on the results
Prognosis
of radiographic and echocardiographic examina-
· The long-term prognosis for patients with echo-
tions. When there is left atrial and left ventricular
enlargement due to AI therapy with ACE inhib-
cardiographic evidence of vegetative, subacute IE
is grave. By the time the disease is detected, most
itors is generally employed. Furosemide (1 to 2
cases of IE have progressed to the extent that there
mg/kg PO every 12 hours) is used together with an
is irreversible damage to the valve. Failing surgi-
ACE inhibitor in cases where there is radiographic
cal valve replacement, which is rarely practical in
evidence of CHF. Digoxin may have a role in the
management of patients with severe CHF. Careful
veterinary patients, the clinical picture of IE is one
of progressive cardiac dysfunction. A few dogs die
attention to renal function must be paid when di-
of renal failure related to renal infarction or are eu-
goxin is used in patients with IE. In addition to the
presence of CHF and the use of ACE inhibitors,
thanized after septic thrombi have embolized to the
which are themselves risk factors for the develop-
central nervous system. However, in most cases,
ment of azotemia, patients with IE may develop
renal dysfunction related to renal infarction.
Frequently Asked Questions
Monitoring of Therapy
Subjective evaluation of cardiac size from thoracic
radiographs is diffcutt. Are there objective criteria
·As with other patients with CHF, it is prudent
that define radiographic cardiac enlargement?
to monitor serum electrolytes and renal func-
Thoracic radiographs are indispensable in the diag-
tion. Further monitoring of patients with IE may
nostic evaluation of dogs with MVD, but it is likely
include serial blood cultures and follow-up echo-
that the accuracy of subjective evaluation of radio-
cardiographic studies.
graphic cardiac size is dependent on observer experi-
· It is tempting to believe that appropriate anti-
ence. It is relevant that the patients that most often
biotic therapy will result in resolution of echo-
develop clinically important MV D are small dogs that
that have roughly cylindrical thoraces. In the lateral
cardiographically detected valvular lesions. The
projection particularly, patients with this conforma-
valvular lesions of dogs with the more common
tion tend to have a large cardiothoracic ratio even
form of IE, in which the presentation is subacute
when the heart is, in fact, normal.
and there is ec hocardiographic evidence of severe
One method that can be used to overcome some
valvular incompetence, do not generally resolve.
of the limitati ons inherent in the subjective eval uati on
Serial echocardiographic studies in these cases
of radiographic cardiac size is the use of the vertebral
usually demonstrate progressive valvular incom-
heart scale. Beginning at the fourth thoracic vertebra
and using the vertebral bodies as a scale, the cranio-
petence and myocardial dysfunction.
caudal and dorsoventral dimensions of the cardiac
silhouette are summed (Figure 6-23). This index of
cardiac size is less than 10.5 in most healthy dogs.
Higher values suggest cardiac enlargement.
death occurs as a result of medically refractory
138
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
Atkins CD, Keene BW, Brown WA, et al: Results of the
There is current interest in the use of spironolactone
veterinary enalapril trial to prove reduction in on-
as adjunctive therapy for heart failure in dogs. What
set of heart failure in dogs chronically treated with
are the indications for spironolactone in MVD?
enalapril alone for compensated, naturally occurring
ticoid aldosterone. It is not a potent diuretic and in-
mitral valve insufficiency, J Am Vet Med Assoc 231:
terest in the use of this drug primarily relates to its
1061-1069, 2007.
 presumed extrarenal effects. Cardiac dysfunction is
Buchanan JW: Chronic valvular disease (endocardiosis)
associated with neuroendocrine responses that result
in dogs, Adv Vet Med 21:75, 1979.
in supraphysiologic aldosterone activity. Aldosterone
 Buchanan JW, Bucheler J: Vertebral scale system to mea-
is a ligand for specific renal receptors that mediate
sure canine heart size in radiographs, J Am Ved Med
retention of sodium and excretion of potassium. Ad-
Assoc 206:194, 1995.
ditionally, there are data that support a role for aldo-
Bulmer BJ, Sisson DD: Therapy of heart failure. In
 sterone in the development of myocardial fbrosis in
Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC,eds: Textbook of veterinary
animals with experimentally induced cardiovascular
internal medicine, ed 6, Philadelphia, 2005, WB
disease. Inhibition of aldosterone activity by spirono-
Saunders.
lactone reduced mortality in people with severe heart
Calvert CA: Valvular bacterial endocarditis in the dog,
failure and this effect was evident at a dose that did
J Am Vet Med Assoc 180:1080, 1982.
not have a diuretic effect. Although invasive studies
Chetboul V, Lefebvre HP, Sampedrano CC, et al: Com-
 may disclose systolic myocardial dysfunction in dogs
parative adverse cardiac effects of pimobendan and
with mild but experimentally induced MR, contrac.
tility is apparently preserved until late in the natural
tive mitral valve disease: a prospective, controlled,
history of MVD. Based on this, it seems reasonable
blinded, and randomized study, J Vet Intern Med
to reserve spironolactone for patients with heart fail-
ure due to MVD. Additionally, the use of spirono-
21:742-753, 2007.
Dell'Italia LJ: The renin-angiotensin system in mitral
lactone is apparently safe but not entirely benign.
 Because this drug generally is used in conjunction
regurgitation: a typical example of tissue activation.
with ACE inhibitors, there is potentially a danger of
Curr Cardiol Rep 4:97, 2002.
hyperkalemia resulting from excessively diminished
Ettinger SJ, Benitz AM, Ericsson GF, et al: Effects of
 aldosterone activity. Indeed, after publication of the
enalapril maleate on survival of dogs with naturally
 major study which documented the favorable effect
acquired heart failure, J Am Ved Med Assoc 213:
of spironolactone in people, a number of reports of 
1573-1577, 1998.
 adverse effects appeared in the literature. Based on
Griffths LG, Orton EC, Boon JA: Evaluation of tech-
retrospective evaluation of clinicopathologic data, the
niques and outcomes of mitral valve repair in dogs,
use of spironolactone together with ACE inhibitors 
J Am Ved Med Assoc 224:1941, 2004.
oaemoy isoop ul ares Auaedde st opiuosoiny pue
Haggstrom J, Hansson K, Kvart C, Swenson L: Chronic
 it is prudent to monitor serum electrolytes and renal
valvular disease in the cavalier King Charles spaniel
 function.
in Sweden, Vet Rec 131:549-553, 1992.
Haggstrom J, Kvart C, Pedersen HD: Acquired valvular
disease. In Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC, eds: Textbook
CHF, or suddenly from malignant arrhythmia even
of Veterinary internal medicine, ed 6, Philadelphia,
when antibiotic therapy is successful in controlling
2005,WB Saunders.
signs related to sepsis. In general, when an echo-
Haggstrom J, Pedersen HD, Kvart C: New insights into
cardiographic diagnosis of IE is made in a dog.
degenerative valve disease in dogs, Vet Clin North
Am Sm Anim Pract 34:1209-1226, 2004.
survival is usually measured in weeks or months.
Kvart C, Haggstrom J, Pedersen HD, et al: Efficacy of
With aggressive medical therapy, survival of 4 to
enalapril for prevention of congestive heart failure
8 months is occasionally observed. The prognosis
-dase pue aseosp saiea snoeuoxau yim soop u
associated with more acute fonms of IE that are
tomatic mitral regurgitation, J Vet Intern Med 16(1):
treated early and aggressively is likely better.
80-88,2002.
MacDonald KA, Chomel BB, Kittleson MD, et al: A
SUGGESTED READINGS
prospective study of canine infective endocarditis
in northern california (1999-2001): emergence of
Bartonella as a prevalent etiologic agent, J Vet Intern
Anderson CA, Dubielzig RR: Vegetative endocarditis in
dogs, I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20:149, 1984.
Med 18:56, 2004.
Sisson D, Thomas WP: Endocarditis of the aortic valve in
the dog, J Am Ved Med Assoc 184:570, 1984.
Sisson D, Kvart C, Darke PG: Acquired valvular heart
disease in dogs and cats. In Fox PR, Sisson D, Moise
NS, eds: Textbook of canine and feline cardiology:
Canine Cardiomyopathy
Mark A. Oyama
DILATED CARDIOMYOPATHY
INTRODUCTION
Prevalence and Signalment
Cardiomyopathy is defined as a primary disease of
the heart muscle of unknown etiology. Disease of
Surveys indicate that between two and six dogs are
the heart muscle secondary to toxins, nutritional de-
diagnosed with DCM per 600 case referrals. In cer-
ficiencies, endocrinopathies, and infectious agents
tain breeds, the prevalence of DCM is remarkably
is often regarded as a "secondary cardiomyopathy."
high. Approximately 25% of Irish Wolfhounds,
The most common form of canine cardiomyopathy
50% of male Doberman Pinschers, and 33% of
 is dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM), which is charac-
female Doberman Pinschers develop DCM. The
terized by progressive ventricular dilation and loss of
typical age at diagnosis is between 6 and 8 years;
myocardial contractility. Other forms of cardiomyo-
however, it is not uncommon to diagnose DCM in
pathy, such as hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM),
dogs as young as 3 years and as old as 12 years.
are rare in dogs. DCM is most common in adult
Male dogs appear to be more frequently affected,
large breed dogs, and in particular the Doberman
especially in the Doberman Pinscher breed.
Pinscher, Irish Wolfhound, Scottish Deerhound, and
Great Dane. The important features of canine DCM
Natural History
include (1) the presence of an asymptomatic or occult
phase during which diagnosis of disease is difficult,
The clinical progression of DCM is best described
(2) the high prevalence of congestive heart failure.
as occurring in two distinct phases.
 and sudden death in severely affected dogs, and (3)
the need for aggressive and comprehensive medical
Asymptomatie Occult Phase
therapy to help alleviate clinical signs. Boxers with
· No clinical signs are evident; however, myocar-
cardiomyopathy possess a unique pathophysiology,
dial or electrical abnormalities are present and
clinical presentation, and natural history, such that
may include:
disease is best described as arrhythmogenic right
· Increased left ventricular and atrial dimensions
ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC). Sudden death
·Decreased myocardial contractility
from ventricular arrhythmias is very common in
· Ventricular premature beats
Boxers with ARVC, much more so than chronic con-
· The duration of the occult phase is highly vari-
gestive heart failure. Secondary cardiomyopathies
able and thought to last for months to years.
due to nutritional deficiencies appear in breeds of 
· During this phase, progressive heart enlargement
small and medium size, most notably in the Ameri-
 and worsening arrhythmias occur.
can Cocker Spaniel. A highly fatal juvenile form of
· Occult phase ends with the appearance of the first
DCM is seen in the Portuguese Water Dog.
clinical signs of disease.
139
140
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
·Approximately 40% of Doberman Pinschers
· Weakness
experience sudden cardiac death as the first
· Occasional findings include:
clinical sign.
· Jugular vein distension or pulses
·Hepatomegaly
Overt Clinical Phase
·Ascites
· Clinical signs develop
· Pale mucous membranes
· Congestive heart failure
· Hypothermia
·Syncope
· Pulmonary crackles
·Exercise and activity intolerance
· Depressed mentation
·Arrhythmias in the fonm of ventricular premature
beats, ventricular tachycardia, and atrial fbrilla-
Diagnostic Tests
tion are common.
· Death is due either to advanced congestive heart
Ideally, all dogs should receive an electrocardio-
failure that is refractory to medical therapy or
gram (ECG), chest radiographs, echocardiogram,
sudden death.
urinalysis, and serum chemistry. In many cases,
· Between 30% and 50% of Doberman Pinschers
additional diagnostics, such as 24-hour ambulatory
die suddenly
ECG (Holter) monitoring, are performed.
· Many dogs with advanced heart failure are eutha-
nized due to chronic respiratory distress, severe
Electrocardiography
activity intolerance, anorexia, and weight loss.
· Electrocardiography is the test of choice for de-
History and Physical Examination Findings
tecting arrhythmias and may provide evidence of
heart enlargement; however a normal ECG does not
Asymptomatic Occult Phase
rule out the presence of cardiomyopathy.
· Common findings include:
·Asymptomatic occult phase
· Soft systolic heart murmur
·Arrhythmias are often the first indication of
· Irregular heart rhythm with pulse deficits
disease and screening is recommended in
· Occasional findings include:
breeds at high risk for DCM.
· Diastolic gallop rhythm
· Routine ECG detects frequent arrhythmias
· Decreased intensity of heart sounds
m sio u iias pl aa  ing
·Weak femoral pulse quality
 infrequent or intermittent arrhythmias.
· Jugular vein distension or pulses
· Detection of the following ECG signs is as-
sociated with a high index of suspicion for
Overt Clinical Phase
 occult cardiomyopathy:
· History may include exercise intolerance, syn-
· One or more ventricular premature beats
cope, lethargy, anorexia, difficulty breathing,
in a Dobenman Pinscher or Boxer. In Box-
coughing, abdominal distension
ers, ventricular premature beats with a left
· Common findings include:
 bundle branch block morphology (upright
· Moderate intensity systolic heart murmur
QRS complex in lead I) are highly sugges-
· Irregular heart rhythm with pulse deficits
tive of ARVC (Figure 7-1).
· Increased respiratory rate and effort
· Criteria for left ventricular or atrial enlarge-
· Increased bronchovesicular sounds
ment (QRS duration > 0.06 sec, R wave am-
· Decreased intensity of heart sounds
plitude > 3.0 mV, P wave duration > 0.04 sec)
thy. Ventricular premature beats with left bundle branch block morphology are a common finding in dogs with this condition.
25 mm/sec; 0.5 cm/mv.
Chapter7
 Canine Cardiomyopathy
141
· In Irish Wolfhounds, atrial fibrillation is of-
· The chest radiographs in Doberman Pinschers
ten an early sign of disease as opposed to
are often misleading in that heart enlargement
other breeds where atrial fibrillation is as-
is less striking than in other breeds with simi-
sociated with advanced stages of disease.
lar clinical signs. In these instances, cardiac
· Holter monitoring detects arrhythmias with
ultrasound helps to determine the magnitude
greater sensitivity and is recommended in
of left-sided heart enlargement and systolic
dogs at high risk (i.e., dogs with a familial
dysfunction.
history of disease).
· The chest radiographs in Boxers with ARVC
· Greater than 100 ventricular premature
are usually nonmal.
beats in a 24-hour period is highly sugges-
tive of occult DCM or ARVC
Echocardiography
· A total of 50 to 100 ventricular premature
· Echocardiography is widely used to quantify
beats in a 24 hour period is suspicious for
 heart enlargement and systolic function. Routine
disease and should be followed by another
echocardiography is not particularly sensitive in
Holter ex amination in 2 to 6 months.
detecting early changes in occult disease, nor is it
· Day-to-day variability in the frequency of
particularly helpful after a diagnosis of end-stage
arrhythmia can produce false-negative re-
disease is made. As such, the utility of echocar-
sults, and if the initial Holter examination
diography increases as disease moves out of the
is inconclusive, multiple Holter examina-
occult phase to the overt clinical phase then de-
tions may be indicated, especially in dogs
clines again as the patient advances into end-stage
with a family history of disease or in those
 disease. Early in the course of disease, many dogs
 that have experienced syncope.
 possess normal echocardiographic examinations,
· During the overt clinical phase, the following
 despite having a significant numbers of ventricu-
may be detected:
lar arrhythmias.
· Occasional to frequent ventricular or supra-
· Echocardiographic criteria are used to help di-
ventricular premature beats
agnose occult DCM.
·Ventricular tachycardia
· In Doberman Pinschers, a left ventricular
· Criteria for left ventricular or atrial enlarge-
end-diastolic diameter (LVTDd) > 46 mm
ment (see previous section)
or a left ventricular end-systolic diameter
· Left bundle branch block
(LVIDs) > 38 mm is highly suggestive of
· Atrial fibrillation (Figure 7-2)
early disease. These values may not be ap-
plicable to Dobenmans with very large body
weights, and LVIDd > 49 mm or LVIDs
KEY POINTS
> 42 mm may be better guides in this
The author regards Holter monitoring as
 population.
the current gold standard for detection of
· In Doberman Pinschers, fractional shortening
occult DCM in Doberman Pinschers. Holter
is an unreliable index for occult DCM, as this
monitoring is relatively easy to perform and
equipment is readily available to the general
breed typically has fractional shortening val-
ues in the mid or low 20% range. Similarly.
 practitioner through human and veterinary
 medical suppliers. Many veterinary telemedi-
large-breed dogs with athletic lifestyles com-
cine or remote consulting practices lease
monly display fractional shortening values in
Holter units and assist in result analysis.
the mid 20% range, and longitudinal echo-
cardiographic studies or Holter monitoring is
required to determine whether disease is truly
Chest Radiography
present.
· Chest radiographs are relatively insensitive to mild
· In Irish Wolfhounds, occult disease is defined
increases in the heart size. A single set performed
as LVTDd > 61.2 mm, LVTDs > 41 mm, frac-
in the asymptomatic occult phase contributes
tional shortening < 25%, end-systolic volume
relatively little to the immediate diagnosis; how-
index > 41 ml/m?, or E-point to septal separa-
ever, serial radiographs are well suited to monitor
tion > 10 mm.
progressive heart enlargement and progression of
· Newer ultrasound modalities such as Dop-
disease. In the overt clinical phase, radiographs
pler tissue imaging may be more sensitive in
are invaluable in helping to diagnose congestive
detecting early abnonmalities of myocardial
failure and to monitor response to treatment.
contractility.
142
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
Figure 7-2.
2.Lead Il ECG tracing from a dog indicating atrial fibrillation and left ventricular enlargement. Note the irregular
rhythm, lack of P waves, and widened QRS complex. 50 mm/sec; 10 mm/mV.
R
LV
Figure 7-3.
 2-dimensional echocardiogram of the left ventricle (IV) and atrium (LA) of a Great Dane with dilated cardiomyo-
pathy. Note the dilated ventricular and atrial chambers. RV, Right ventricle; RA, right atrium.
· As disease progresses from occult to overt,
· Decreased systolic thickening of the left ven-
echocardiography helps monitor heart enlarge-
tricular wall and interventricular septum.
 ment, assess contractility, and evaluate second-
· The echocardiogram in Boxers with ARVC is
ary mitral regurgitation. Echocardiography is
usually normal. Subtle right ventricular dilation
used in conjunction with chest radiographs to
or wall motion abnormalities may be noted.
 help decide when to initiate therapy.
· Common echocardiographic findings in dogs
Concomitant Abnormalities in Moderate or
with advanced occult or overt clinical disease
Severe Dilated Cardiomyopathy
include the following:
· Moderate to severe left ventricular and atrial
·Azotemia is commonly detected in dogs that
enlargement (Figure 7-3).
are receiving diuretic therapy and is typically
· Reduced systolic motion of the left ventricular
prerenal in nature.
wall and interventricular septum (Figure 7-4).
· Mild azotemia (blood urea nitrogen < 60 mg/
· Mild to moderate mitral regurgitation sec-
dl and creatinine < 2.5 mg/dl) usually does
ondary to mitral annulus dilation.
not require specific treatment or cessation or
· Incomplete systolic opening of the aortic
reduction of diuretic therapy.
valves.
· More severe azotemia (blood urea nitrogen
· Decreased aortic blood fow velocity.
> 80 mg/dl and creatine > 3.0 mg/dl) can con-
· Increased mitral valve E-point to septal sepa-
tribute to patient morbidity and may require
ration (normal < 6 mm) (Figure 7-5).
reduction of angiotensin-converting enzyme
Chapter7
Canine Cardiomyopathy
143
80
Figure 7-4.
 M-mode echocardiogram of the left ventricle of a Cocker Spaniel with dilated cardiomyopathy. Note the decreased
systolic motion of the interventricular septum (arow) and left ventricular free wall(arrowhead).
70J
Figure 7-5.
M-mode echocardiogram of the left ventricle and mitral valve of a Brittany Spaniel with dilated cardiomyopathy.
Electronic calipers are being used to measure the E-point to septal separation (EPsS), which is markedly increased over normal.
(ACE) inhibitor and diuretic dose or parenteral
require specific treatment. Severe hypoka-
fuid supplementation.
lemia (K+ < 2.5 mEq/l) can cause cardiac
· If fuids are administered, then administer-
arrhythmias and contribute to muscle weak-
ing half-strength saline or Ringer's solution
ness. Reduction of potassium-wasting di-
will reduce the sodium load to the patient.
uretics (e.g., furosemide) or institution of
· ACE inhibitor therapy can be temporarily
 potassium-sparing agents (e.g., ACE inhibi-
discontinued or the dosage reduced. Initia-
tors, spironolactone) is performed. Clini-
tion of the ACE inhibitor therapy should be
cally important hyperkalemia is uncommon
delayed or done with caution.
and usually associated with reduced car-
· Aggressive parenteral fuid therapy can ag-
diac output, poor renal perfusion, and renal
gravate congestive heart failure and should
failure.
be used with caution.
· Mild hyponatremia is common and is di-
· Many instances can be treated by reduc-
lutional in nature. Serum concentration of
tion of diuretics and allowing the patient to
sodium is decreased secondary to water re-
drink enough water to reestablish hydration
tention and expansion of the plasma volume
on their own.
despite elevated total body sodium content.
· Azotemia reduces renal clearance of digoxin
Mild hyponatremia does not require spe-
and predisposes to toxicity. Serum digoxin
cific treatment. In the author's experience.
levels should be determined especially if the
profound hyponatremia (Nat < 130 mEq/l)
patient displays anorexia, vomiting, diarrhea,
signals a poor prognosis. Treatment requires
or frequent arrhythmias.
reduction of diuretic dose, water restriction,
· Electrolyte abnonmalities are common in dogs
and dietary sodium supplementation.
with congestive heart failure due to DCM. Most
· Hypothyroidism is a common concurrent dis-
changes are mild and do not require specific
ease in middle-aged to older dogs, especially
treatment.
in Doberman Pinschers. A causal relationship
· Potassium levels may be either increased
between hypothyroidism and DCM is doubtful.
or decreased. Mild hypokalemia (K+ = 2.5
to 3.0 mEq/l) is commonly associated with
· Natriuretic peptides are produced by the atrial
high doses of diuretics and usually does not
 and ventricular tissues in response to increased
144
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
wall stress. Their biologic actions counter
Treatment
those of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone sys-
tem. Atrial and B-type natriuretic peptide are
Standard treatment involves the use of diuretics,
elevated in dogs with symptomatic DCM and
positive inotropes, and ACE inhibitors. Ventricu-
refect severity of disease. Atrial and B-type
lar arrhythmias and atrial fibrillation requires use
natriuretic peptide are able to distinguish be-
of specific antiarrhythmics. More recently, beta
tween cardiogenic and noncardiogenic causes
adrenergic blocking agents and combined posi-
 of dyspnea in dogs. In humans, natriuretic pep-
tive inotropic-vasodilator drugs have been used.
tides provide infonmation regarding diagnosis,
Treatment depends on the breed, stage of dis-
 prognosis, and efficacy of treatment. A similar
ease, and presence of congestive heart failure or
utility is likely to exist for dogs.
arrhythmias.
· Cardiac troponin-I forms part of the actin-
myosin contractile apparatus and is released
Drug Classes Used for Treatment
into circulation following myocyte injury or
· Diuretic therapy alleviates signs of congestion.
necrosis. Cardiac troponin-Iis elevated in dogs
As disease worsens, use of multiple diuret-
with DCM and modestly correlates with degree
ics helps achieve increased diuresis. Diuretic
of left ventricular hypertrophy. One study indi-
monotherapy increases activity of the renin-
 angiotensin-aldosterone system and concomitant
 > 0.20 ng/ml have shorter survival times versus
ACE inhibition should be used. Diuretic therapy
those with lower values.
is commonly accompanied by mild azotemia
and hypokalemia. The potent loop diuretic, fu-
 rosemide, is routinely used in symptomatic pa-
Nutritional Deficiencies
tients. Thiazide diuretics, though less potent,
· Taurine deficiency is a contributing cause of
have a longer half-life, act at a site separate from
DCM in the American Cocker Spaniel, and a
furosemide, and provide additional diuresis in pa-
potential contributing  factor in Dalmatians,
tients already receiving high doses of furosemide.
Labrador Retrievers, and Golden Retrievers.
Spironolactone is a weak potassium-sparing di-
In contrast, the incidence of taurine-responsive
uretic that is typically administered in conjunc-
disease is virtually nonexistent in the traditional
tion with a thiazide. Spironolactone's beneficial
breeds of dogs with DCM. Recognition of tau-
effects are probably due to its anti-proliferative
rine deficiency is important in that heart func-
actions and subsequent reduction of ventricular
tion may be substantially improved following
remodeling and fibrosis, rather than its very weak
supplementation. In any nontraditional breed of
diuretic action.
dog, that is, in any dog that is not a Dobenman
· Positive inotropic therapy is used to improve
Pinscher, Boxer, Great Dane, Irish Wolfhound,
contractility. Drugs include digoxin, beta adren-
or Scottish Deerhound, the author recommends
ergic agonists (e.g., dopamine, dobutamine),
plasma taurine assay. Interestingly, most tau-
phosphodiesterase inhibitors (e.g., milrinone),
rine-deficient dogs are receiving an adequate
and calcium sensitizers (e.g, pimobendan). As
meat-based diet, and abnormalities of taurine
a positive inotrope, digoxin is a relatively weak
absorption, metabolism, or excretion are the
 and not useful in the emergency setting. Digoxin
likely cause of disease.
is, however, useful as an antiarrhythmic used to
· Most dogs with taurine deficient DCM have
control the ventricular rate in patients with atrial
plasma taurine < 25 nmol/ml.
fibrillation. The beta adrenergic agonists and
· L-Carmitine deficiency is not a primary cause of
phosphodiesterase  inhibitors  are  administered
canine DCM; however, some dogs that are taurine
using constant rate infusion and are useful in the
deficient require both L-carmitine and taurine in
emergency setting. Pimobendan is a unique drug
order to improve.
due to its combined inotropic and vasodilatory
· Plasma L-carmitine concentration is not reflec-
 properties. Survival and quality of life is likely
tive of myocardial tissue concentration and
 improved by this drug.
plasma assays are of little clinical utility. As
· Venous vasodilators reduce preload and arterial
such, diagnosis of myocardial L-carmitine defi-
vasodilators reduce afterload.
 ciency requires myocardial biopsy. A presump-
· ACE inhibitors blunt activity of the renin-
tive diagnosis of deficiency is often considered
angiotensin-aldosterone system, reduce salt
when dogs are concurrently taurine deficient.
and water retention, and elicit mild arterial
Chapter7
 Canine Cardiomyopathy
145
vasodilation. ACE inhibitors improve survival
no known treatments that definitively slow pro-
and quality of life in dogs with DCM. Dogs
gression of disease in the occult state. Insofar as
with severe heart failure and poor renal per-
 gradual derangement of neurohormonal activity is
fusion may become uremic while taking ACE
associated with worsening cardiac function, use of
inhibitors, especially when high doses of di-
ACE inhibitors, beta blockers, and spironolactone
uretics are being concurrently used.
has been suggested. Current recommendations are
· Sodium nitroprusside elicits potent arterial
based on small veterinary trials and extrapolation
and venous vasodilation and is very effective
from human medicine. Three drug classes are typi-
in cases of life-threatening heart failure. Due to
cally considered during the occult phase.
the risk for hypotension, arterial blood pressure
· Use of beta blockade is scientifically supported in
monitoring is required during its use. Sodium
virtually all human patients with left ventricular
nitroprusside is administered as a constant-rate
systolic dysfunction with current or prior symp-
infusion (CRI).
toms, and consensus opinion extends this recom-
· Topical nitroglycerin produces minimal ve-
mendation to use in asymptomatic patients. In
nous vasodilation in dogs due to poor absorp-
dogs, sympathetic tone is increased during the Oc-
tion and low plasma concentrations.
cult phase, thus providing rationale for administra-
· Antiarrhythmic agents suppress life-threatening
tion of beta blockers in dogs with early disease.
ventricular arrhythmias and control the ventricu-
· Use of ACE inhibition is scientifically supported
lar rate during atrial fibrillation. For ventricular
 in virtually all human patients with left ventricular
arrhythmias, drugs in classes I (e.g., lidocaine
systolic dysfunction regardless of symptoms. In
and mexiletine), II (beta blockers), and IMI (e.g.,
dogs, the time course of ACE activation is uncer-
sotalol) can be used alone or in certain combi-
tain. Although several studies indicate that height-
nations. Drugs in class II and IV (calcium chan-
 ened activity of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone
nel blockers) and digoxin are used for atrial
is not present in early disease, there is a need to
fibrillation.
distinguish between circulating and local tissue
· Beta-adrenergic blocking agents are extensively
ACE activity. Though circulating ACE activity
used in humans with DCM. In dogs, little clini-
is not upregulated until later in disease, evidence
cal data exists. Beta-blocking agents blunt the
suggests that a locally contained myocardial ACE
effects of chronic sympathetic nervous system
system contributes much earlier in disease. Thus,
activity (i.e., tachycardia, arrhythmias, myocyte
tissue-penetrating ACE inhibitors, such as benaz-
death, ventricular remodeling, elevated activity
epril or ramipril, may be beneficial.
of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system).
· Spironolactone is primarily used in humans with
 Overly aggressive use may exacerbate conges-
 symptomatic DCM; however, the beneft in pre-
tive heart failure, and patients should be clini-
venting aldosterone-mediated remodeling may
cally stable before being titrated onto this class
begin in earlier stages of disease.
of drug.
·Due to the high incidence of sudden death in
· Inodilators are drugs that improve cardiac con-
 Boxers and Doberman Pinschers, antiarrhythmic
tractility and elicit vasodilation. Pimobendan
therapy is often initiated in asymptomatic dogs
is a calcium-sensitizing inodilator that increases
based on Holter monitor findings. Dogs with runs
the myocardial response to calcium. Pimobendan
should be used in dogs with symptomatic disease
that are already receiving conventional therapy.
KEY POINts
Pimobendan improves quality of life and is likely
The natural history of cardiomyopathy is
to improve survival.
substantially influenced by breed. Large- or
giant-breed dogs commonly develop atrial
fibrillation and congestive heart failure, while
Treatment of Asymptomatic Occult Disease
Doberman Pinschers and Boxers with ARVC
commonly exhibit syncope, ventricular ar-
Treatment in the occult phase represents both an
rhythmias, and sudden death. Thus, in Great
opportunity and a challenge. Clearly, treatments 
 Danes, lrish wolfhounds, and similar affected 
that slow progression in this phase would help
breeds, treatment efforts should focus on the
delay or prevent symptomatic disease, yet the dis-
resolution of heart failure, whereas in Dober-
covery of effective drugs is hindered by the diffi-
man Pinschers and Boxers, antiarrhythmic
culty in performing large-scale prospective clinical
 therapy is commonly prescribed.
trials with sufficient statistical power. There are
146
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
of ventricular tachycardia or R-on-T phenome-
· Oral pimobendan (0.25 mg/kg every 12 hours)
non are started on sotalol (1.5 to 2.0 mg/kg every
may be useful if intravenous positive inotrope
12 hours) or the combination of mexiletine (5 to
therapy is not available.
8 mg/kg every 8 hours) and atenolol (0.3 to 0.4
· When given orally, digoxin requires several days
mg/kg every 12 hours). The efficacy of this treat-
to reach effective concentration, and as such, has
 ment in preventing sudden death is unproven.
little role as an emergency positive inotrope. In-
Treatment of Overt Clinical Disease
travenous digoxin commonly produces toxicity
and is not recommended.
Treatment of Severe Life-Threatening
· Supplemental oxygentherapy is administered either
Congestive Heart Failure
= uasxo padsu go uony) a uaxo ue ui
Congestive heart failure is relieved through aggres-
40%) or given nasally (50 to 100 ml/kg/min).
sive diuretic, vasodilator, and positive inotropic
· One of the most difficult clinical decisions is
therapy.
whether or not to specifically treat ventricular
· Manual removal of heart failure fuid should be
arrhythmias. Overly aggressive treatment may
performed in all patients with clinically significant
pleural or abdominal effusion, as this will rapidly
malignant arrhythmias.
improve respiratory effort and alleviate distress.
· Ventricular premature beats and short runs of
· Intravenous or intramuscular furosemide (3 to 8 mg/
ventricular tachycardia that occur at relatively
kg) is administered. When given parenterally, dura-
slow heart rates (< 160 bpm) typically do not
tion of effect is approximately 2 hours; therefore,
require treatment. Often, resolution occurs
additional doses should be administered if the pa-
spontaneously once congestive heart failure
tient's respiratory rate and effort have not improved
and hypoxia are successfully treated.
within this time period. Patient recovery can be sig-
· Rapid ventricular arrhythmias that are life-
nificantly hindered due to insufficient dosing of fu-
threatening are accompanied by clinical signs
rosemide during the first 12 hours of treatment.
(i.e., weakness, syncope, hypotension, blanch-
· Efficacy of diuretic therapy is assessed by mon-
 ing of mucous membranes). Intravenous lido-
 itoring patient respiratory rate and effort, urine
caine (2 mg/kg IV bolus followed by CRI of
 output, and body weight. To confimm the reso-
40 to 80 mcg/kg/min) or procainamide (6 to
 lution of pulmonary edema or to reassess pa-
 8 mg/kg IV bolus followed by CRI of 20 to 40
tients that are not responding to therapy, chest
mcg/kg/min) is often effective.
radiographs are performed 12 to 24 hours after
· Due to the high incidence of sudden death in
 initiation of therapy.
 Boxers and Dobenman Pinschers, aggressive anti-
· The presence of severe underlying renal dys-
arrhythmic therapy in these species is more com-
function may necessitate lower doses and less
monly warranted, and especially in dogs that have
frequent dosing.
 previously experienced syncope. Once stabilized,
· Sodium nitroprusside (2 to 5 mcg/kg/min CRI)
either oral sotalol or combination of mexiletine
is a very effective vasodilator. Nitroprusside can
and atenolol are prescribed (see next section).
 produce profound hypotension, and arterial blood
pressure monitoring is required when using it.
Transitioning the Improved Emergency Patient
The infusion rate is adjusted to elicit a 15 mm Hg
to Chronic Oral Treatment
 decrease in mean blood pressure as long as the
Aggressive emergency therapy successfully resolves
mean value does not fall below 70 mm Hg
acute heart failure in approximately 75% of dogs. In
· Intravenous positive inotropes such as dopamine
most dogs, significant improvement in clinical signs
(2 to 10 mcg/kg/min CRI) or dobutamine (5 to
will be apparent within 48 hours. Patients refractory to
15 mcg/kg/min CRI) help improve cardiac out-
therapy beyond this point have a grave prognosis. As
put. High doses may aggravate ventricular ar-
the patient becomes increasingly stable, intravenous
rhythmias or cause sinus tac hycardia.
· Milrinoneis a potent positive inotrope that acts
 Oral medications. During this time, patient hydration
downstream of the myocardial beta adrenergic
status, body weight, appetite, respiratory effort, elec-
receptor. It increases contractility in patients re-
trolytes, and renal function continue to be monitored.
ceiving beta blockers or in patients that are not
· Once the patient's respiratory rate and effort has im-
responding to dopamine or dobutamine therapy.
 proved, parenteral furosemide is discontinued in fa-
Milrinone is administered as a 30 to 50 mcg/kg
vor of oral furosemide (typical oral dose: 1 to 2 mg/kg
loading bolus given intravenously over 10 min-
every 8 to 12 hours). Nitroprusside and dopamine
utes then CRI of 1 to 8 mcg/kg/min.
or dobutamine are gradually reduced over 12 to 24
Chapter7
Canine Cardiomyopathy
147
hours and replaced by an ACE inhibitor (enala-
Treatment of Dilated Cardiomyopathy
pril 0.5 mg/kg every 12 hours or benazepril 0.5
Accompanied by Atrial Fibrillation
mg/kg every 24 hours) and digoxin (0.003 mg/kg
Atial fibrillation commonly occurs in dogs with
every 12 hours) or pimobendan (0.25 mg/kg every
advanced DCM. The incidence of atrial fibrillation
12 hours). Due to the potential for side effects (i.e.,
is higher in giant-breed dogs (e.g., Great Danes,
 anorexia, vomiting) some clinicians stagger the ini-
Irish Wolfhounds) than in Dobenman Pinschers
tiation of digoxin and ACE inhibitor. In these cases,
and Boxers. Atrial fibrillation with rapid ventricu-
digoxin is withheld for 3 to 5 days untilthe patient is
lar rates (> 180 bpm) exacerbates congestive heart
known to be tolerating the ACE inhibitor. In patients
failure and low cardiac output. Conversion of atrial
with atrial fibrillation, the urgency for digoxin treat-
fibrillation back to normal sinus rhythm is usually
 ment is more acute, and digoxin can be started first.
futile, and management is targeted at slowing the
followed by an ACE inhibitor in 5 to 7 days.
ventricular rate. One of three drugs can be adminis-
· Iidocaine or procainamide is gradually reduced
tered for this purpose.
over 12 to 24 hours and replaced by sotalol (1.5 to
Digoxin(0.003 mg/kg every 12 hours)
2.5 mg/kg every 12 hours) or a combination of mex-
Dltiazem (0.5 to 2.0 mg/kg every 8 hours) or Dil-
iletine (5 mg/kg every 8 hours) and atenolol (0.3 to
tiazem XR (1.5 to 4.0 mg/kg every 12 to 24 hours)
0.4 mg/kg every 12 hours).
·Atenolol(0.25 to 1.0 mg/kg every 12 hours)
· Aggressive use of beta adrenergic blocking anti-
In most instances, digoxin is preferred due to
arrhythmics, such as sotalol or atenolol, may ex-
its concomitant positive inotropic effects. If rate
acerbate heart failure (see next section). Gradual
control is not achieved by digoxin alone, then the
titration of these agents may be required.
addition of diltiazem or atenolol is warranted.
· Dietary sodium restriction (40 to 70 mg Na/100 kcal)
Overly aggressive dosing of atenolol or ateno-
lol co-administered with diltiazem can produce
Treatment of Refractory Heart Failure
bradycardia, heart block, and hypotension. Intra-
· Patients that are already receiving high doses of
venous administration of digoxin is not recom-
loop diuretics may benefit from additional diuret-
mended due to the high likelihood of toxicity. In
ics that target areas of the nephron other than the
patients that require immediate rate control due
loop of Henle.
to extremely rapid ventricular rates, oral loading
· Hydrochlorothiazide (1 to4 mg/kg every 12to 48
of digoxin (0.006 mg/kg for the first one or two
hours) is a moderately potent diuretic that acts in
doses) or intravenous diltiazem (0.1 to 0.2 mg/kg
the distal convoluted tubule and has a longer half-
IV bolus then 2 to 6 mcg/kg/min CRI) can be
life than furosemide. Initially, it is given in con-
attempted.
 junction with furosemide and gradually increased
· The ideal heart rate for dogs with DCM and atrial
as needed to control congestion. Hydrochlorothi-
fibrillation is not known; however, most clinicians
azide is also supplied as a tablet combined with
use a value of 150 bpm as their threshold between
equal amounts of spironolactone (hydrochloro-
 an acceptable rate and need for more aggressive
thiazide-spironolactone; 2 to 4 mg/kg every 12 to
treatment.
24 hours).
·24-hour ambulatory ECG (Holter) monitoring
· In patients with right heart failure or severely de-
is the preferred method to determine mean heart
creased cardiac output, absorption and renal deliv-
rate and efficacy of long-term oral treatment.
ery of oral furosemide may be decreased. In these
cases, substituting subcutaneous injections of fu-
Additional Oral Medications
rosemide often restores effectiveness. Usually, the
In addition to the combination of diuretics, ACE
total daily dose of furosemide can be modestly
inhibitor, and pimobendan, other medications are
decreased when administered in this fashion.
likely beneficial in DCM. The use of these medica-
· End-stage DCM is often accompanied by inappe-
tions is based on beneficial effects demonstrated in
tence and weight loss. The author has occasion-
human or animal model studies. As clinical data be-
 ally prescribed anabolic steroids (stanozolol 1 to
come increasingly available in dogs, the use of these
2 mg per dog every 12 hours) to counteract this
medications will continue to grow. The following
catabolic state. The long-term safety of this treat-
recommendations are based on a limited number of 
ment is questionable.
reports in dogs and the author's own experience.
· Pimobendan(0.25 mg/kg every 12 hours), when
· In addition to their antiarrhythmic use, beta adren-
 added to conventional therapy often helps control
ergic blockers such as metoprolol and carvedilol
heart failure and improves appetite and demeanor
 are used to slow progression of heart enlargement
of patients with refractory disease
and systolic dysfunction. Initiation of these drugs
148
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
is done in patients with clinically stable heart
calcium overload, myocardial oxygen demand,
disease, and as such, beta blocking agents should
and arrhythmia formation. Agents with combined
not be used in patient with active signs of con-
vasodilatory properties may offer additional adv-
gestion (the exception would be emergency beta
vantages in patients with severe DCM.
 blocker use to control rapid atrial fibrillation). Ini-
·]
Pimobendan(0.25 mg/kg PO every 12 hours)
tiation of beta blockade can acutely worsen con-
results in substantial improvement in quality of
tractility; thus patients are gradually titrated onto
life. Pimobendan is typically used in patients
the medications over 4 to 8 weeks. Adverse side
with severe disease, and as such, is used in con-
effects include bradycardia, hypotension, and ex-
junction with diuretics, ACE inhibitors, and oc-
acerbation of congestive heart failure. Clinicians
casionally, digoxin. Benefit from pimobendan
who prescribe beta blockers must be prepared to
during occult disease is possible, but requires
manage acute heart failure secondary to drug ini-
additional study.
tiation. In humans, beta blockers slow progression
· Aldosterone antagonists, such as spironolactone,
of disease and improve survival but do not dramat-
act as mild diuretics but even more importantly,
ically improve quality of life. Beneficial effects re-
reduce the proliferative effects of aldosterone
quire several months of continuous treatment, and
within the myocardium and vasculature. Other
in dogs with end-stage disease, treatment may not
beneficial properties include blunting of sym-
be practical. Accordingly, both the maximum ben-
 pathetic nervous activity and nonmalization of
efit and the minimum risk of beta blocker use are
baroreceptor function. In the presence of severe
probably early in the course of disease.
 heart disease, ACE inhibition alone may not be
·Metoprolol (initial dose of 0.1 to 0.2 mg/kg PO
sufficient in suppressing aldosterone production,
every 12 hours followed by gradual titration to
and in humans with heart failure, spironolactone
0.4 to 0.8 mg/kg P0 every 12 hours 0ver 4 to 8
improves survival.
weeks).
· Spironolactone (1 to 2 mg/kg PO every 12 hours)
· Carvedilol(initial dose of 0.1 mg/kg PO every
is commonly prescribed with hydrochlorothia-
12 hours followed by gradual titration to 0.5
zide in dogs with severe heart disease. Due to
mg/kg PO every 12 hours over 4 to 8 weeks).
its anti-proliferative effects, spironolactone
· Calcium-sensitizing agents purportedly increase
may also be beneficial in the occult and early
cardiac contractility while reducing cellular
symptomatic stages of disease.
· Amino acid deficiency is present in some breeds
with DCM (e.g., American Cocker Spaniels).
KEY POINTS
 Burine supplementation (500 mg PO every
Beta blockade represents one of the comerstones
12 hours for Cocker Spaniels) is recommended
of treatment in human patients with DCM. In
in dogs with low plasma taurine concentration.
these patients, beta blockers slow progression of
· Concurrent L-carnitine supplementation (1
disease, improve systolic function, and prolong
g every 12 hours for Cocker Spaniels) is rec-
survival. These benefits are dose dependent and
aggressive therapy yields the greatest results. In
ommended in dogs with taurine deficiency.
canine patients, little is known about the ideal
Altermatively, due to the relative expense of
timing, dose, and drug that should be used. In
L-carmitine compared to taurine, L-carmitine is
healthy dogs, oral carvedilol doses ranging from
withheld during the initial three months of tau-
0.5 to 1.5 mg/kg PO every 12 hours blunt re-
rine treatment and administered only to those
sponse to sympathetic stimulation with isopro-
dogs that have not responded to taurine alone.
terenol. The appropriate dose for dogs with heart
· L-Carnitine deficiency was detected in a fam-
cisease is unknown, but it is likely to be lower
ily of Boxers with left ventricular dilation and
than that used in healthy dogs. In dogs with
systolic dysfunction. Supplementation (50
experimental mitral valve disease, oral carve-
mg/kg PO every 8 to 12 hours) should be
dilol at 0.4 mg/kg PO every 24 hours reduced
heart rate, whereas in a small study of dogs with
considered in dogs with this presentation. The
value of supplementation in Boxers with ar-
advanced naturally occuring DCM, oral carve-
dilol at 0.3mg/kg PO every 12 hours did not re-
rhythmias and no left ventricular dilation (which
sult in any measurable improvement in echocar
is the most common presentation) is doubtful.
diographic heart size or systolic function. Thus,
· Dogs that respond to amino acid supplementa-
the effective dose of carvedilol in affected dogs
tion can often reduce or discontinue conventional
is likely to be > 0.3mg/kg PO every 12 hours.
heart failure medications (i.e., furosemide, ACE
inhibitors, digoxin); however, taurine and/or
Chapter7
 Canine Cardiomyopathy
149
carnitine supplementation should continue in-
majority of dogs reported to have HCM are male
definitely.
and of young age (typically < 3 yrs), suggesting a
· Heart disease is accompanied by elevations of
heritable etiology. The left ventricular hypertrophy
circulating cytokines and alterations of energy
associated with HCM can be symmetrical (i.e., af-
production, both of which may contribute to the
fecting both the interventricular septum and left
heart failure syndrome of weight loss, muscle
ventricular posterior wall equally) or asymmetric
wasting, and poor appetite.
(in humans, the septum is typically more affected
·Fish oil supplements can reduce interleu-
than the posterior wall). In the author's experience,
kin concentrations and help improve cardiac
most cases of canine HCM involve symmetric
cachexia.
LV hypertrophy. Significant left ventricular hy-
· Coenzyme Qio is part of the mitochondrial re-
pertrophy causes diastolic dysfunction, left atrial
 spiratory transport chain and supplementation
enlargement, heart failure, and arrhythmias. Most
 may improve quality of life.
dogs with HCM are asymptomatic and the diag-
· The benefit of supplementary antioxidant vita-
nosis is made during evaluation of a heart murmur
mins E, A, or C is unknown.
or arrhythmia. Echocardiography is the diagnostic
method of choice. Treatment is aimed at abolish-
ing the obstructive component of disease with beta-
Prognosis
blocking agents (atenolol 0.5 to 1.0 mg/kg every
The time course from occult to symptomatic DCM
12 to 24 hours), alleviating heart failure with di-
is highly variable and can be years. During this
uretics, and suppressing arrhythmias. Sudden death
phase, serial echocardiographic and electrocardio-
appears to be more common than congestive heart
graphic exams are recommended. Sudden death can
failure. Many dogs with HCM remain asymptom-
 Occur during the occult phase, especially in Boxers
atic for years.
and Doberman Pinschers. Once clinical signs such
as congestive heart failure develop, the long-term
 prognosis is poor. Survival times derived from clin-
Frequently Asked Questions
ical studies are difficult to assess due to nonstan-
What Causes DCM?
dardized treatment, lack of ACE inhibitor use, and
The etiology of primary DCM is unknown. DCM is a
statistical issues surrounding euthanasia. Median
description of the heart's response to injury (i.e., dila-
survival time is likely 3 to 4 months in Doberman
tion and systolic dysfunction), and as such, may be the
Pimschers and 5 to 6 months in other breeds. Dogs
end result of multiple causes. In fact, given the forms of
that survive greater than 7 months may do well
DCM that are unique to different breeds, it is likely that
 more than one etiology exists. Possible causes include
for an extended period of time. One-year survival
genetic/familial, immune-mediated, infectious, toxic,
is approximately 10% to 15%. The presence of
Or nutritional. DCM in Doberman Pinschers may in-
atrial fibrillation, biventricular congestive failure,
volve specific components of the cytoskeleton or extra-
and young age at time of presentation (< 5 years)
cellular matrix. Cellular energy production is markedly
are associated with worse prognosis. Although the
reduced in affected Doberman Pinschers, but whether
Overall survival rate is disheartening, it is difficult
these changes are primary abnormalities or secondary
changes has yet to be determined. Boxers with ARVC
to assess how any individual dog may fare. The au-
thor suggests aggressive intravenous management
are thought to possess abnormal calciu m cycling, which
is detected in certain forms of ARVC in humans.
of dogs with fulminant heart failure and reevalua-
tion after 24 to 72 hours of therapy.
Combination Therapy with Beta Blockers and
Pimobendan
There is a wealth of data supporting use of beta block-
HYPERTROPHIC
ers in humans with DCM. Although these agents are
effective at slowing pathologic ventricular remodel-
CARDIOMYOPATHY
ing and improving survival, they do relatively little
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is an un-
to improve quality of life or exercise tolerance. In
common myocardial disease of dogs. HCM is char-
contrast, pimobendan, though not proven to improve
acterized by idiopathic concentric left ventricular
survival in humans, has a marked benefit on quality
of life in dogs. A practice adopted by some cardiolo-
 hypertrophy, and can lead to heart failure or sud-
gists is to combine pimobendan and beta blocker use
den death. HCM, if accompanied by systolic ante-
in dogs with symptomatic DCM. The positive ino-
rior motion of the mitral valve and left ventricular
tropic effect of pimobendan may increase the like-
outflow tract obstruction, is specifically referred to
lihood of successful titration and tolerance of beta
 as hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy. The
150
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
Kittleson MD, Keene B, Pion PD, Loyer CG: Results
 blockers, and thereby achieve both increased quality
of the multicenter spaniel trial (MUST): taurine- and
and quantity of life.
carnitine-responsive dilated cardiomyopathy in Ameri-
can cocker spaniels with decreased plasma taurine con-
centration, J Vet Int Med 11(4):204-211, 1997.
Monnet E, Orton EC, Salman M, Boon J: Idiopathic di-
SUGGESTED READINGS
-sousoid pue [eaiains :ssop ut AyedoKuopieo panel
tic indicators, J Vet Int Med 9(1):12-17, 1995.
Borgarelli M, Tarducci A, Tidholm A, Haggstrom J: Ca-
O'Grady MR, O'Sullivan ML: Dilated cardiomyopa-
nine idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy. Part II: Patho-
thy: an update, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
physiology and therapy, Vet J 162(3):182-195, 2001.
34(5):1187-1207, 2004.
Calvert CA, Pickus CW, Jacobs GJ, Brown J: Signal-
Tidholm A, Svensson H, Sylven C: Survival and prog-
ment, survival, and prognostic factors in Doberman
pinschers with end-stage cardiomyopathy, J Vet Int
Med 11(6):323-326, 1997
thy, I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 33(4):364-368, 1997.
Tidholm A, Haggstrom J, Borgarelli M, Tarducci A:
Fuentes VL, Corcoran B, French A, et al: A double-blind,
Caninei
idiopathic dilated
cardiomyopathy.
I.
randomized, placebo-controlled study of pimobendan
 Aetiology,clinical characteristics, epidemiology and
 n a r edoo pe m so u
pathology, Vet J 162(2):92-107, 2001.
16(3):255-261, 2002.
Feline Cardiomyopathy
Richard D. Kienle
INTRODUCTION
sumed primary myocardial disease that do not
The term cardiomyopathy literally means "heart
meet the criteria for making a diagnosis of hyper-
muscle disease' and designates a disorder of the
trophic or dilated cardiomyopathy.
 heart in which the primary abnormality lies within
· The widespread use of echocardiography in vet-
the muscle tissue (myocardium). Primary indicates
erinary practice allows for more frequent and ac-
the myocardial disease is not secondary to valvu-
curate recognition of myocardial disease in cats.
lar disease, pericardial disease, coronary vascular
KEY POINT
genital abnormalities, or systemic disease. Most
In domestic cats, cardiomyopathies are the
primary cardiomyopathies are of unknown etiol-
dominant form of cardiac disease.
ogy (idiopathic). A secondary cardiomyopathy is a
disease that affects the myocardium secondary to
infectious, toxic, metabolic, or other disease pro-
Classification
cesses. The World Health Organization has cat-
egorized the types of cardiomyopathies and based
· Cardiomyopathies are classified according to
the categorization scheme primarily on the domi-
their morphologic appearance. Within each
nant pathophysiology produced by the myocardial
classification, a wide range of morphologic and
disease.
clinical presentations may be seen. In some cats
it may be diffcult to comfortably place a cat's
myocardial disease into one of these categories.
FELINE CARDIOMYOPATHIES
Also, since cardiomyopathies are so common in
General Comments
cats it is common for other forms of cardiac dis-
ease to be misidentifed as one of the forms of
· The majority of cardiomyopathies diagnosed in
cardiomyopathy.
cats are idiopathic (primary). Only one etiology,
taurine deficiency in dilated cardiomyopathy,
Primary Cardiomyopathies
has been identified for a feline cardiomyopathy.
·Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM)
· Intermediate (or intergrade) cardiomyopathy and
· Idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM)
restrictive cardiomyopathy are poorly defined
· Restrictive cardiomyopathy (RCM)
· Unclassified cardiomyopathies (UCM)
been assigned to many feline patients with pre-
·Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy
151
152
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
· Biventricular CHF is present when elevated
KEY POINT
systemic and pulmonary venous, and therefore
In this chapter, I chose not to perpetuate the
capillary, pressures manifest as any combination
pretense that what have been called RCM
and intermediate cardiomyopathy represent
of the previously mentioned signs, or as pleural
distinct and well-known disease processes
effusion.
for   which  substantiated  recommendations
· Low-output heart failure, or cardiogenic shock, is
 inadequate cardiac output, often a result of myo-
regarding treatment and prognosis can be
made. The term unciassified cardiomyopathy
cardial failure.
has been used as a reminder that the only
· High-output heart failure is CHF, left or right
conclusions that can be drawn about these
sided, resulting from excessive fow through a
cats' hearts is that they have myocardial dis-
capillary bed.
ease.
· Myocardial failure is a reduction in myocardial
 contractility characterized by a reduced shorten-
ing fraction and an increased end-systolic dimen-
Specific/Secondary Cardiomyopathies
sion on the echocardiogram.
·Nutritional (taurine deficiency)
· Metabolic (hyperthyroidism, acromegaly)
KEY PoINT
· Infi ltrative (neoplasia, amyloidosis)
It is important to realize that heart failure
· Inflammatory (toxins, immune reactions, infec-
and myocardial failure represent heart dis-
tious agents)
ease, and that heart failure, either conges-
· Genetic (HCM, DCM)
tive or low-output, may, in some cases,
· Toxic (doxorubicin, heavy metals)
be a result of myocardial failure; however,
heart failure can be, and often is, present
in the absence of myocardial failure. Simi-
Clinical Classification and Pathophysiology
larly, myocardial failure may be present in
·Abnormalities in myocardial function during sys-
association with or in the absence of heart
failure (Figure 8-1).
tole or diastole can underlie or infuence the clini-
cal signs observed. Systolic dysfunction is present
when the ability of the ventricle to eject blood is
Signalment and Presenting Complaints
impaired and may result in signs of low output
 and possibly congestive heart failure (CHF). Dia-
KEY POINT
stolic dysfunction is present when the ability of
 The clinical presentation, physical exam find-
the ventricle to relax is impaired and may result
ings, radiographic findings, and electrocar-
in signs of CHF.
forms of myocardial disease and generally
KEY POINT
 cannot be used to differentiate among them.
Ildeally an understanding of the underlying
 Echocardiography is necessary to determine
etiology of a disease dictates specific therapy
the specific disorder that is present.
to reverse the condition; however, in most
cases, treatment of cardiac disease is pallia-
· The typical clinical presentation, physical exam
tive. Therefore, when tailoring rational ther-
fndings, radiographic findings, and ECG find-
apy for a patient with cardiac cisease, the
ings will be discussed in this section. The echo-
dinical status of the patient is the primary
 cardiographic findings will be discussed with the
consideration.
 specific disease later.
· The most common historical clues in cats with
· Right-sided CHF is present when elevated sys-
myocardial disease include:
temic venous, and therefore capillary, pressures
· Dyspnea/tachypnea
resulting from cardiac disease manifest as ascites
· Poor general condition, weakness, lethargy, or,
 Or peripheral edema.
rarely, exercise intolerance
· Left-sided CHF is present when elevated pulmo-
*Anorexia
nary venous, and therefore capillary, pressures
· Acute posterior paresis or paralysis
 resulting from cardiac disease manifest as pulmo
 Coughing and abdominal distention, common
nary edema (and likely also as pleural effusion
findings in dogs with cardiac disease, are rare
in cats).
findings in cats with cardiac disease.
Chapter8
 Feline Cardiomyopathy
153
KEY POINtS
Heart Disease
 A normal thoracic radiograph does not pre-
clude the diagnosis of a cardiomyopathy.
Myocardial
Many asymptomatic cats with mild chang-
 Failure
es and normal LA size will have a normal
thoracic radiograph.
Echocardiography,
induding
Doppler
echocardiography, is essential for nonin-
vasive detemmination of a functional and
anatomic diagnosis. Before assigning a
dliagnosis of cardiomyopathy based solely
Low
 Congestive
upon morphologic/functional appearance,
μndno
Heart 
a concerted effort should be made to rule
Failure
Failure
out cardiac and extracardiac diseases that
 might mimic the echocardiography of pri-
mary myocardial diseases.
 Other diagnostic tests do not usually con-
tribute to the ciagnosis of myocardial dis-
Figure 8-1.  Venn diagram illustrates the various potential
ease but are important for determining the
combinations of congestive heart (backward) failure, low-out-
overall status of the patient, identifying con-
put (forward) heart failure, and myocardial failure (each repre-
comitant disorders, and assessing the effi-
sented by a circle) that may be detected in patients with heart
cacy or untoward effects of therapy. when
dlisease (the box). As allthe circles resicde in the box, each rep-
possible, routine biochemistries, urinalysis,
resents a form of heart disease, and the overlapping portions
of the circles illustrate how the conditions may coexist.
and hemogram should be performed prior
to pharmacologic intervention to establish
Physical Examination
baseline values for the patient and to rule
out concurrent or secondary metabolic or
·Early detection of disease should be a primary
hematologic disturbances.
goal. A thorough physical examination, with
 Chemical and cytologic evaluation of pleural
careful attention to auscultation, should be per-
fluid with respect to protein concentration
formed. Many patients present with acute onset
and cellularity can help determine whether
of dyspnea, paresis, lethargy, or anorexia; how-
CHF underlies the production of pleural fluid.
ever, the majority of patients is asymptomatic and
Cats with CHF can develop true chylous
will be identified after a murmur, gallop sound,
effusion.
or other abnormality is identified during a routine
 Plasma and whole blood taurine concen-
physical examination. The most common physi-
trations should be measured in all cats
cal clues suggesting myocardial disease include:
with  echocardiographically  documented
· Systolic murmur (commonly heard along the ster-
 myocardial failure (see Taurine Deficiency-
Induced Myocardial Failure).
nal border). This murmur may relate to either mitral
regurgitation or outfow tract obstruction or both.
· Gallop sound, At normally rapid heart rates these
gallop sounds often represent a summation of the
der and alert the clinician to secondary ramifications
third and fourth sounds.
that may require attention; however, neither elec-
· Dysrhythmia
trocardiography nor thoracic radiography provides
· Tachypnea/dyspnea
adequate evidence for ruling out, confirming, or clas-
· Muffled or harsh lung sounds
sifying feline cardiac disease. Contrast radiography
· Hypothermia
or, preferably, echocardiography, is required to con-
· Jugular pulses/distention
finm or rule out and categorize myocardial disease.
· Acute paresis associated with pain in regions
· Electrocardiography often shows:
with evidence of reduced peripheral perfusion
· Intraventricular conduction abnormalities (left
bumdle branch block, left anterior fascicular
block patterm, pre-excitation syndrome)
Ancillary Tests
·Increased amplitude of R waves
· Thoracic radiography and electrocardiography may
· Ventricular arrhythmias are common but are
direct or reinforce suspicion that a cardiac disorder is
 generally mild with relatively infrequent single
 present. They may also further characterize the disor-
 premature ventricular contractions.
154
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
B
megaly. B, Dorsoventral thoracic radiograph from the same cat as in A.
· Occasionally cats will have more complex ar-
radiography. The author often delays radiography
rhythmias.Some cats with severe LA enlarge
until after stabilizing the patient (Figure 8-4).
ment will develop atrial fibrillation.
 Diagnostic and potentially therapeutic thoraco-
· Thoracic radiography is most useful for detect-
 centesis should precede radiography in dyspneic
 ing gross cardiac enlargement and clinical se-
cats.
quelae to cardiac dysfunction (e.g.. pulmonary
venous congestion, pulmonary edema, enlarged
Therapy
great veins, pleural efusion) (Figures 8-2 and
 8-3). Restraint for radiographic procedures can
· Therapy should be based upon the clinical
be life threatening to dyspneic cats. Extreme
and functional classification of the disease
caution should be taken before proceeding with
 process in the individual patient and not by
Chapter8
Feline Cardiomyopathy
155
Figure 8-3.
 Lateral thoracic radiograph from a cat with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy demonstrates marked left atrial enlarge.
ment, pulmonary venous engorgement, and pulmonary edema.
Dyspneic Cat
· All patients with evidence of significant and
Take
life-threatening CHF (pulmonary edema, pleural
Airway
appropriate
 effusion) require immediate therapy (i.e., appro-
obstruction
or very pale
action
priate combinations of pleurocentesis, diuretics,
No
oxygen).
Pleurocentesis
· Furosemide is the diuretic of choice in cats. Fu-
rosemide should be administered intravenously
Pleural
Diagnostic &
air or
therapeutic
(1 to 2 mg/kg every 1 to 2 hours as needed) or
fluid
pleurocentesis
intramuscularly (1 to 2 mg/kg every 2 hours as
No
needed) depending upon the stress level of the
No
 Stabilize prior to 
Much
cat. Dosing must be dramatically reduced once
further diagnostics or
improved
 the respiratory rate begins to reduce. Generally,
stressful therapeutics
Yes
 aggressive diuretic therapy is continued until the
O2, lf tolerated,
respiratory rate is below 40 breaths per minute.
furosemide, sq or im
· Not all cats respond well to being placed in an
consider steroid if 
history suggests
oxygen cage. Carefully observe patients after
feline asthma
placing in a closed oxygen cage and opt for a
 Further diagnostics.
quiet, unox ygenated environment if the patient
 including radiography.
 appears more distressed in the oxygen cage.
 and therapeutics
· Tranquilization with an agent such as acepro-
Figure 8-4.
 Algorithm outlining choices and decisions en-
mazine may be indicated to calm distressed
 countered in the management of life-threatening dyspnea in
the cat. The most important point illustrated is not to proceed
patients.
with stressful diagnostic or therapeutic procedures until the
· The use of topical nitroglycerin as a preload
patient is stable. Stressed cats die.
reducing agent in acute and chronic situations
is recommended by some, but evidence of ef-
following a standard approach based solely
ficacy is lacking.
upon the diagnosis.
· Cats with significant pleural effusion will benefit
· With only two exceptions, the indications for
most from immediate pleurocentesis. Patients
and benefits of therapeutic intervention in
with significant pericardial effusion and cardiac
asymptomatic cats with myocardial disease are
tamponade require pericardiocentesis and should
controversial. These exceptions are:
not receive diuretics prior to pericardiocentesis.
· Myocardial failure secondary to taurine deficiency
· Maintenance therapy is generally aimed at mini-
· Thyrotoxic heart disease
mizing signs and prevent acute crisis. Lower doses
· Dyspneic cats are easily stressed and may acutely
of furosemide (6.25 mg twice a day to 12.5 mg
 deteriorate and die if stressful diagnostic or thera-
three times a day PO) are indicated for chronic
peutic interventions are initiated too early. An al-
maintenance control of CHF. Angiotensin-convert-
gorithm for management of the dyspneic cat is
ing enzyme (ACE) inhibitors (enalapril 0.25 to 0.50
 presented in Figure 8-4.
mg/kg PO every 24 to 48 hours or benazepril 0.25
156
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
to 0.50 mg/kg PO every 24 hours) are also quite
· Medical therapies—most are untested and
effective in cats with CHF. Antiarrhythmic drugs
unproven
may be indicated to control significant arrhythmias.
· Anticoagulation with heparin (220 units/kg IV fol-
Inotropic agents may be indicated in patients with
lowed 3 hours later by maintenance dose of 66 to
myocardial failure or low-output heart failure.
200 U/kg SQ four times a day) is used to prevent
· The judicious use of intravenous fuids may in-
further thrombosis. Adjust dose to maintain the acti-
frequently be indicated in patients with signs of
low-output heart failure, primarily in situations
the upper limit of the normal reference range.
where the patient has stopped taking in oral
· Vasodilation with acepromazine (0.2 to 0.4 mg/
fuids, has received excessive treatment with
kg SQ three times a day) or hydralazine (0.5 to
diuretics, or has concurrent renal dysfunction
0.8 mg/kg PO three times a day) is used to pro-
 and there is concerm about maintaining adequate
mote collateral blood flow.
renal perfusion.
· Sreptokinase and urokinase are significantly
 Specific therapies designed to alter the natural
less expensive than newer fbrinolytic agents
history of disease should be instituted concur-
(e.g., tissue plasminogen activator), but little
rently and may, in some cases, in time, eliminate
clinical experience has been reported. Tis-
the need for drugs to control heart failure (see
sue plasminogen activator: Though clinically
specific conditions discussed later).
effective thrombolysis has been documented in
· All cats with myocardial failure should be sup-
the cat, expense, morbidity associated with rapid
 plemented with taurine (see section on Taurine
 reperfusion, and inability to prevent recurrence
Deficiency-Induced Myocardial Failure) until
make this option impractical in most cases.
 proven to be not taurine deficient and not taurine
responsive.
Prognosis
· Several strategies to prevent an initial thromboem-
bolic event or to avoid recurrence of aortic throm-
· Inadequate infonmation is available to make broad
boembolism in cats with cardiomyopathy have
generalizations regarding prognosis for cats with
been devised and recommended. None of these
myocardial diseases. Although echocardiography
strategies has been evaluated by controlled studies.
provides the basis for diagnosis, clinical and ra-
· Low-dose aspirin (25 mg/kg PO every 2 to 3
diographic data should be strongly considered for
days) is the most widely employed prophylactic
 prognostication.
measure. Although aspirin is known to exert anti-
· Cats with severe myocardial disease and
thrombotic effects, there is no objective evidence
no evidence of heart failure may survive for
of its efficacy for the prophylaxis of systemic
long periods of time. Conversely, cats with
aortic thromboembolism in cats. Recurrence of
much less severe echocardiographic evidence
thromboembolic events in aspirin-treated cats
of disease presenting with significant and
were as high as 75% in one study.
difficult to control signs of heart failure may
·Lovenox(enoxaparin)a low molecular weight
survive for very short periods under the best of
 heparin, has shown promise in anecdotal clini-
situations.
cal settings. No large clinical trials have been
· The long-term prognosis for cats with thrombo-
completed. The most commonly used dose is
embolic disease is grave because mortality asso-
1 mg/kg SQ every 12 to 24 hours.
ciated with individual episodes is high, and recur-
· Left untreated, the outcome of arterial occlusion
rence is common despite prophylaxis.
will depend upon the extent of occlusion and time
to spontaneous reperfusion, either via the primary
Pathology
vessel or the collateral circulation. Cats may lose
the affected leg(s) because of ischemic necrosis,
· Gross examination of the heart provides use-
die of toxemia, remain paralyzed from peripheral
ful anatomic information and should be per-
nerve damage, or regain full or partial function of
formed when possible to confimm antemortem
the leg. Overall, response to presently available
findings.
conservative or aggressive clinical intervention
· In most cases histopathologic evaluation adds
has been poor.
little useful information and, unless readily avail-
· Therapeutic options include:
able at low cost, is not recommended unless
· Surgical removal of emboli
specific indications are present (see the section
· Catheter embolectomy
Specific Diseases).
Chapter8
 Feline Cardiomyopathy
157
due to a de novo mutation in these cats, or is asso-
HYPERTROPHIC
ciated with a completely different disease process
CARDIOMYOPATHY
is unknown although suspicion of inheritance has
HCM is a disease of the ventricular (primarily left
been reported in mixed breed cats.
ventricular [LV])  myocardium  characterized  by
 mild to severe thickening (concentric hypertrophy)
Clinical Classification and Pathophysiology
of the papillary muscles and ventricular walls. The
word primary in this context means that the hyper-
· HCM is characterized by enlarged papillary
trophy is due to an inherent problem in the myocar-
muscles and a thick LV myocardium with a
dium and is not secondary to a pressure overload or
normal to small LV chamber. These changes
to hormonal stimulation.
may be mild, moderate, or severe and may
be symmetrical or asymmetric. When it is se-
vere, the concentric hypertrophy by itself
General Comments
increases chamber stiffness. In addition, blood
· When any other disease process that may lead
flow and especially blood flow reserve to severely
to concentric hypertrophy is present, the diag-
thickened myocardium is compromised, which
nosis of HCM is excluded. Secondary disor-
may cause myocardial ischemia, cell death, and
ders typically produce symmetric concentric
replacement fibrosis. Increased concentrations of
hypertrophy and typically produce a maximum
circulating neurohonmones may also stimulate
increase in wall thickness of 50% or less, even
interstitial fibrosis. These also increase chamber
with severe disease. If severe or asymmetric
stiffness and are probably the primary reasons
concentric hypertrophy is present in a patient
for the marked diastolic dysfunction seen in this
with one of these disorders, then concomitant
disease. The stiff chamber causes an increase in
HCM should be considered.
diastolic intraventricular and LA pressures, LA
· HCM is the most commonly diagnosed cardiac
enlargement, and may lead to CHF. The concen-
 disease in cats and its prevalence appears to be in-
tric hypertrophy may also result in a decrease in
creasing; however, echocardiographic screening
afterload because of the increase in wall thickness
for the disease has also become more prevalent
which may result in a decrease in end-systolic
over the past ten years so increased awareness
volume, often to zero (cavity obliteration).
and ease of diagnosis may be a major contribut-
· Abnormal papillary muscle orientation and other
ing factor to this increase.
unexplained factors commonly produce SAM of 
· In most cases the etiology is unknown (idio-
the mitral valve. In one survey of 46 cats, SAM
pathic). The disease is known to be inherited in
was present in 67% of cases. Cats with HCM and
some breeds of cats. The first "family” of cats
SAM are commonly said to have the obstructive
with an inherited form of HCM was identified in
type of HCM or to have hypertrophic obstructive
Maine coon cats in 1992 and reported in 1999.
cardiomyopathy. SAM of the mitral valve pro-
The disease is inherited as a simple autosomal
duces a dynamic subaortic stenosis that increases
dominant trait in this breed and 100% expressed
systolic intraventricular pressure in mid to late
in experimental cats housed in a colony. A fam-
systole. The dynamic subaortic stenosis increases
ily of American shorthair cats, primarily with
the velocity of blood fow through the subaortic
systolic anterior motion (SAM) of the mitral
region and often produces turbulence. Simultane-
valve, but with other evidence of HCM as well
ously, when the septal leaflet is pulled toward the
has also been identified. The disease in this
interventricular septum, this leaves a gap in the
breed also appears to be inherited as an auto-
mitral valve creating mitral regurgitation which is
somal dominant trait. In addition to these breeds,
typically only mild to moderate in degree. These
there is anecdotal evidence of HCM being in-
abnormalities are by far the most common cause
herited in numerous other breeds, including
of the heart munmur heard in cats with HCM. The
Persian, British shorthair, Norwegian forest, Rag-
 degree to which SAM and mitral insufficiency
 doll, Turkish van, and Scottish fold cats, along
contribute to the development of left-heart failure
with others.
in cats with HCM is unknown and deserves fur-
· HCM is most likely inherited when it is identified
ther study.
in a specific breed; however, HCM is most com-
· Sudden death may occur in any individual and may
monly identified in domestic (mixed-breed) cats.
be unrelated to disease severity. The incidence of
Whether the disease is inherited in these cats, is
sudden death in cats with HCM is unknown.
158
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
· Pleural effusion is common in cats with heart failure.
· Cats with severe HCM and moderate to severe
It can be a modifed transudate, pseudochylous, or
heart failure are usually presented to a veterinar-
tue chylous in nature. The exact pathophysiology
ian because of respiratory abnormalities (tachy-
of pleural effusion secondary to heart failure is un-
 pnea and/or dyspnea) due to pulmonary edema,
kmown. The most likely possibility is that feline vis-
 pleural effusion, or both.
ceral pleural veins drain into the pulmonary veins
·Catswith
HCM
may
develop
systemic
such that elevated pulmonary vein pressure causes
thromboembolism.
the formation of pleural effusion.
· Cats with HCM may die suddenly, often with no
· Thrombi in cats with HCM may form in the
prior clinical signs referable to heart disease or
left atrium or left auricle. LA thrombi commonly
failure. The cause of the sudden death in these
break loose (become emboli) and are carried by blood
cats is unknown.
fow most commonly tothe terminal aorta where they
· In humans, sudden death appears to be either due
lodge. These thromboemboli occlude aortic blood
to an arrhythmia, acute worsening of the outflow
fow and elaborate vasoactive substances that con-
tract obstruction associated with stress or exer-
strict collateral vessels. The net result is cessation of
cise, or a large thrombus occluding fow in the
blood fow tothe caudallegs resultingin acuteparesis/
left.
 paralysis and pain.
· The incidence of sudden death in feline HCM
is probably under represented in the veterinary
literature because cats that die suddenly are not
Signalment and Presenting Complaints
 presented or reported to veterinarians.
· In cats the disease has been observed as young
as 6 months of age and as old as 16 years of age.
Echocardiography
In Maine coon cats that are going to develop
severe disease, HCM most commonly develops
· Cats with severe HCM have papillary muscle hy-
to its most severe stage in males by around 2
 pertrophy, markedly thickened LV walls (7 to 10
years of age. Females are more variable but most
mm), and usually an enlarged left atrium (Figure
frequently develop to an end-stage of wall thick-
8-5). The hypertrophy can be global, affecting all
ening by three years of age. The average age of
areas of the LV wall or can be more regional or
 onset and rate of progression in mixed breed cats
segmental. Segmental forms can have the entire or
is unknown.
a region of the interventricular septum or free wall
· Males are affected more commonly than females.
primarily affected, the apex primarily affected,
· Cats with HCM may be completely asymptom-
or the papillary muscles (and often the adjacent
atic, may be presented to a veterinarian with sub-
free wall) primarily affected. Papillary muscle
tle signs of heart failure, may have moderate to
hypertrophy may be the only manifestation of the
severe heart failure, or may be presented because
disease.
of thromboembolic disease. Sudden death is also
· Because of these forms, HCM is a diagnosis that
a common "presentation"
should be made by examining several different
· Asymptomatic cats can have mild to severe LV
two-dimensional echocardiographic views and
thickening; however, those with severe thicken.
measuring wall thicknesses in diastole from the
ing usually go on to develop heart failure. Cats
thickest region or regions on the two-dimen-
with severe disease that appear to have no clini-
sional images. M-mode echocardiography may
cal signs may show subtle signs of heart fail-
miss regional thickening unless it is guided by
ure (e.g., tachypnea) that may be detected by
the two-dimensional view. The LV end-diastolic
an observant owner. The respiratory rate is of-
or end-systolic dimension may be normal or
ten increased in these cats at rest and they may
decreased and end-systolic cavity obliteration
become more tachypneic or even dyspneic if
may occur. An enlarged left atrium indicates
stressed. Stressed cats with severe HCM may
increased LV end-diastolic pressure. Occa-
recover quickly following stress or may go on to
sionally, a thrombus is imaged in the LA or its
develop fulminant heart failure. Cats with mild
appendage.
to moderate thickening may never develop clini-
· SAM of the mitral valve may be identifed by
cal signs referable to their disease and may live
two-dimensional or, more commonly, by M-mode
normal lives. In others, the LV wall may pro-
examination (Figure 8-6). Color fow Doppler
gressively thicken and complications may de-
echocardiography can be used to demonstrate
velop when they are older.
the hemodynamic abnormalities associated with
Chapter8
Feline Cardiomyopathy
159
VMTHUCDCARDIOLOGY
99
AUC-93
05:10:12PM
V714
WAB
DEPTH=
60
FELINE
PWR
43dBB/A/D
CAIN=
-1dB
OCINE
UCDVMTHCARDIOLOCYSERVICE
01:07:08P
V714
WAB
DEPTH
CANINE
PHR
46dBB/A/D
CAIN--10dB
OCINE
B
UCDVMTHCARDIOLOGYSERVICE
21-0CT-92
01:12:26PN
13s
30dBB/
PHR
DEPTH=
CANINE
CINE
CAL=
5mm
C
505
Figure 8-5.
Echocardiograms from a cat with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. A, Right parasternal long-axis view shows concen-
tric hypertrophy of the left ventricle (IV) and left atrial (LA) dilation. B, Right parasternal short-axis view shows the thick interven-
tricular septum and left ventricular wall and a comparatively small left ventricular chamber. C, M-mode echocardiogram at the 
level of the left ventricle, showing the thickened myocardium and small LV cavity.
160
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
日
RV
60]
Figure 8-6.M-mode echocardliogram of the mital valve from a cat with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy clemonstrates systolic
anterior motion of the mitral valve. The mitral valve moves toward the interventricular septum in early systole (uniabeied arrows) and
returns to normal position shortly before the beginning of diastole. LV, Left ventricle; RV, right ventricle; MV, mitral valve. (Courtesy
Mark D. Kittleson, D.v.M., Ph.D.)
SAM. Two turbulent jets originating from the LV
are likely many cats with mild to moderate HCM
outflow tract are seen—one regurgitating back
in the cat population that never progress to a more
 into the left atrium and the other projecting into
severe form of the disease, condemning owners to
the aorta. Spectral Doppler can be used to deter-
pill their cat twice or even once a day for the rest
mine the pressure gradient across the region of
of the cat's life is questionable, given the lack of
dynamic subaortic stenosis produced by the SAM.
data. Many veterinarians feel compelled to treat a
The pressure gradient roughly correlates with the
 patient with a disease, and some owners demand
severity of the SAM although it can be quite la-
treatment for their pet, even if there is only a theo-
bile, changing with the cat's level of excitement.
retical case for using a drug. Consequently, when-
SAM is not present in all cats with HCM. The
ever HCM is diagnosed in a cat the veterinarian
majority of cats with severe HCM have SAM.
must explain the situation to each owner and try to
However, on the other end of the spectrum, some
let the owner make an informed decision based on
cats develop SAM before they have any evidence
their wishes and life style. Because no intervention
of wall thickening. when their papillary muscles
is known to change the course of the disease, there
are thickened or long. Although the basilar region
is no mandate to treat at this stage.
of the interventricular septum is often thickened
· Two classes of agents, oral beta blockers and oral
in diastole in cats with HCM, the basilar LV out-
calcium channel blockers, have been advocated
fow tract does not need to be narrowed for SAM
to improve LV filling and cardiac performance
to occur.
in cats with HCM. Although there is no clear
· Diastolic dysfunction in cats with severe HCM
evidence as to which therapy is more beneficial
 has been documented using Doppler tissue imag-
in symptomatic individuals, many cardiologists
ing and measures of transmitral fow and relax-
believe patients with documented HCM should
ation time. Cats with severe HCM routinely have
receive one or the other as part of their chronic
a decrease in early diastolic wall motion of the LV
management. Whatever the initial choice, re-
free wall and mitral valve annulus using Doppler
sponse to therapy should dictate whether dose
tissue imaging. In addition, peak E wave veloc-
adjustment, changing drug class, or discontinua-
ity is reduced, peak A wave velocity is increased,
tion of therapy is warranted.
isovolumic relax ation time is prolonged, and rate
of deceleration of early inflow is reduced.
Adrenergic Beta Blockers
·Atenolol 6.25 to 12.5 mg/cat every 12 hours.
Therapy
Atenolol is supplied as 25 mg tablets.
·There currently is no evidence that any drug alters
Calcium Channel Blockers
the natural history of HCM in domestic cats until
· Diltiazem is currently the preferred calcium
they are in heart failure. Diltiazem, atenolol, bena-
channel blocker. Beneficial effects include less-
zepril, and enalapril are commonly administered
ened edema fonmation and decreased wall thick-
to cats with mild to severe HCM that are not in
ness in some cats. Exactly how these beneficial
heart failure on an empirical basis. Because there
effects occur is open to debate. Only a few cats
Chapter 8  Feline Cardiomyopathy
161
experience a clinically significant decrease in
· In general, cats that present with heart failure
wall thickness in my experience.
have a poor prognosis. A median survival time
· Cardizem7.5 mg PO every 8 hours. This product
after diagnosis of about 3 months is reported. Cats
is supplied as 30 mg tablets. One-quarter tablet is
that present in heart failure and respond favorably to
given every 8 hours.
therapy may do well for prolonged periods of time.
· Dilacor XR: 30 mg PO every 12 hours. This
· In general, cats presenting with aortic throm-
product is supplied as 120, 180, and 240 mg cap-
boembolism have a poor prognosis. A median
sules. Each large capsule can be opened to yield
survival, after diagnosis, of about 2 months is re-
two, three, or four 60 mg tablets, which are then
 ported. Cats that survive the thromboembolic epi-
halved to achieve a 30 mg dose.
sode may do well for extended periods; however,
· CardizemCD: 45 mg PO every 24 hours. Cardi-
these cats are generally at high risk for recurrence
zem CD is supplied as 180 mg capsules that con-
of thromboembolism.
tain many smaller capsules. The larger capsule
· Owners should always be warmed of the potential
can be opened and the smaller capsules divided
for sudden death. The exact incidence of sudden
'asop aepdoidde ue sanpaid yeu raqunu e ou
death in cats with HCM is unknown. It is in some
The smaller capsules can be divided into groups
cats, it is the first and only clinical sign.
of four (45 mg each) and placed in smaller gelatin
capsules for administration. One capsule is then
Pathology
 administered once per day.
· In severe cases the entire LV wall may be im-
 pressively thick. Papillary muscle hypertrophy is
usually prominent, and the LV cavity is usually
KEY POINT
decreased in size owing to encroachment. Both
The authors generally use diltiazem first in cats
symmetric and asymmetric (asymmetric septal
without outflow tract obstruction, tachycardia
hypertrophy) fonms of hypertrophy are recog-
or arrhythmias. The authors generally use aten-
nized in cats. The left atrium is often enlarged,
olol first in cats with cutflow tract obstruction,
tachycardia or arrhythmias. The authors may
and, occasionally, a thrombus is present within
switch to the alternate therapy if the response
the left atrium.
is suboptimal or becomes suboptimal
· Cats with milder forms have less dramatic wall
thickening and normal or near-normal LV cham-
ber size. The LA may be normal or only mildly
enlarged. Occasionally, the disease is manifested
Prognosis
only by papillary muscle hypertrophy with nor-
· Prognosis is generally based upon clinical pre
 mal LV free wall and septal thickness. There is
sentation, echocardiographic evidence of elevated
considerable variability in the degree and loca-
 intracardiac pressures, and response to therapy.
tion of the hypertrophy.
 Inadequate data has been published to reach de-
· Myocyte hypertrophy is the hallmark of histo-
fnitive conclusions; therefore, statements on prog-
nosis are largely based upon clinical experience
of the cases also having myocardial fiber disarray
 and conjecture.
involving at least 5% of the septal myocardium.
· Asymptomatic cats with mild to moderate
hypertrophy and no LA enlargement are believed
FELINE (IDIOPATHIC) DILATED
to have a good long-tenm prognosis. Reported
CARDIOMYOPATHY
average survival times are generally in the
range of 4 to 6 years. Asymptomatic cats with
DCM is a disease of the ventricular myocardium
obvious wall thickening and LA enlargement
(predominantly left) characterized by primary
 are likely at higher risk for developing heart fail-
myocardial failure.
ure. These cats are also believed to be at risk for
developing thromboembolic disease. Asymptom-
General Comments
 atic cats with severe wall thickening and normal
LA size are occasionally observed. Although
·Prior to 1987, DCM was one of the most com-
it is tempting to predict that these cats are at
monly diagnosed heart diseases in cats. Most
greater risk for progressive disease, inadequate
cases at that time were likely a secondary car-
data are available.
diomyopathy associated with nutritional taurine
162
SECTION II  Cardiovascular Disease
deficiency. Primary idiopathic DCM is currently
· The degree to which alterations in diastolic func-
not a common cardiac condition in cats. Because
tion contribute to decompensation of patients with
there are no published reports defining differences
 DCM is likely larger than previously appreciated.
between cats with myocardial failure associated
with taurine deficiency and with idiopathic DCM,
Signalment and Presenting Complaints
there is very little, if anything, known about idio-
pathic DCM in cats.
· The reported age at diagnosis ranges from 5
· There is no reason to expect that clinical findings
months to 14 years (mean age 7 to 8 years).
and results of ancillary tests (other than blood
· No sex predilection is evident.
taurine concentration and funduscopic examina-
· Cats with DCM may have a variable period of
tion) should be dramatically different between
lethargy, anorexia, and malaise prior to overt
these disorders.
signs of CHF.
· Myocardial failure secondary to other causes
· Cats may present with no prior signs and an acute
(e.g., long-standing congenital or acquired LV
onset of CHF or systemic thromboembolism.
volume overload or toxic, ischemic, nutritional,
or metabolic problems that may underlie myo-
Physical Examination
cardial failure) must be ruled out to definitively
assign a diagnosis of idiopathic DCM.
· Physical examination is similar to that of other
· The underlying etiology remains unknown and may
forms of myocardial disease.
represent a common endpoint to many processes.
Ancillary Tests
KEY POINT
· Ancillary tests are similar to taurine deficiency
Although myocardial  failure secondary  to
myocardial failure (see next section); however,
taurine deficiency is now quite rare in cats,
one must rule out taurine deficiency using whole
all cats with myocardial failure should be as-
 blood and plasma taurine assays.
sumed to be taurine deficient until shown not
to be taurine responsive.
Therapy
· For acute CHF, see the earlier section on treatment of
Pathophysiclogy
CHF in the Therapy section of General Information.
· The underlying abnormality leading to clini-
· Cats with DCM and signs of low-output heart
cal manifestations in cats with idiopathic DCM
failure (cardiogenic shock) represent a therapeu-
is primary systolic myocardial failure. End-
tic challenge. Suggestions based upon clinical
systolic LV volume increases owing to a reduc-
experience with cats with myocardial failure as-
tion in myocardial pump function. As a result,
sociated with taurine deficiency are presented in
stroke volume and cardiac output decrease. Neu-
the section on this disorder.
rohumoral compensatory mechanisms promote
an increase in intravascular volume and end-dia-
Prognosis
stolic pressures, stimulating eccentric hypertrophy
(dilation). At these larger LV end-diastolic vol-
· There are no reports documenting the clinical char-
umes, the geometry of the ventricle is such that
acteristics of cats with idiopathic DCM that do not
small changes in chamber dimension during sys-
respond to taurine supplementation. There is no
tole provide adequate stroke volume and cardiac
evidence that clinical intervention alters the pro-
output; however, working at these larger volumes
gression of myocardial failure in patients that do
is energetically ineffcient for the ventricle. At any
not respond to taurine supplementation. The ex-
point in this degenerative process that end-diastolic
pected survival time for patients is more a function
pressures rise too high or cardiac output drops to0
of their clinical condition at the time of diagnosis
low, the patient may present with signs of CHF or
than of the treatment they receive.
low-output heart failure, respectively (Figure 8-7).
· Asymptomatic cats diagnosed because a murmur
· The factors that contribute to patients going from
Or gallop is identified during a routine physical
asymptomatic, well-compensated myocardial
ex amination may survive for years with myocar-
failure, to a symptomatic, uncompensated state
dial failure before developing signs of CHF or
are poorly understood.
low-output heart failure.
Chapter8
Feline Cardiomyopathy
163
B
V
C
D
Figure 8-7.
Dilated cardiomyopathy in a cat. A, Right parasternal long-axis view showing dilation of the left atrium (LA)
and left ventricle (I V). B, Systolic color Doppler image of the same view as in A showing modest secondary mitral and tricus-
pid valve regurgitation. C, Left apical four-chamber view showing the dilated left atrium and ventricle. D, Right parasternal
short-axis view showing left ventricular dilation. E, Right parasternal short-axis view at the heart base showing moderately
is marked dilation of the left atrium and left ventricle and decreased left ventricular systolic motion. In addition, the opening
motion of the mitral valve is decreased, and the distance between the open mitral valve and ventricular septum (EPsS) is
markedly increased (10 mm). RA, Right atrium; RV, right ventricle. (From Nyland TG, Mattoon JS: Small animal diagnostic
ultrasound, ed 2, Philadelphia, 2002, WB Saunders.)
· Cats presenting with signs of CHF or low-out-
Pathology
put heart failure have a very guarded prognosis.
These cats usually either die soon after admission
· There is currently noinfonmation available, butthere is
from cardiogenic shock or succumb to refractory
no reason to suspect that findings should be different
CHF or thromboembolism. Based upon a small
from taurine-deficient cats with myocardial failure or
number of documented cases, expected survival
patients with DCM in other species in which there
is 1 to 2 months after diagnosis.
 are no specific or pathognomonic changes found.
164
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
· Although not reported, in my experience cats with
FELINE RESTRICTIVE
RCM are more likely to have intraventricular con
CARDIOMYOPATHY
duction abnormalities (left bundle branch block.
RCM is a diverse group of conditions characterized
 left anterior fascicular block patterm, pre-excitation
by restriction of diastolic filling. Specific clinical and
syndrome) on electrocardiograms and seem to have
morphologic criteria for this diagnosis in the cat have
a higher frequency of ventricular arrhythmias.
 not been as clearly defined as they have in humans.
· There is ofen very dramatic LA enlargement on
thoracic radiographs and pulmonary veins are often
enlarged and tortuous. When CHF is present, pulmo-
General Comments
 nary edema is more common than pleural effusion
· Without the use of invasive diagnostic procedures
· The echocardiographic findings in RCM (Figure
 or necropsy examination, it is not possible to dis-
 8-8) are quite variable. Severe LA dilation is a com-
tinguish this disorder from infiltrative diseases of
mon feature. The LV intemal dimensions are normal
the myocardium and UCM.
Or mildlly reduced and LV systolic fumction is generally
· This disorder is uncommon in the author's experi-
normal. Two-dimensional echocardiography may dem-
ence. Much of what follows is summarized from the
onstrate loss of nonmal LV symmetry and distorted
literature and not from direct clinical experience.
or fused papillary muscles. Some authors report
increased endocardial echogenicity. Mitral regur-
gitation is detectable with spectral and color-fow
Pathophysiology
Doppler in most affected cats. Intracardiac throm-
· In the most widely recognized fonm in cats, endo-
 bus (most commonly left atrium) may be present.
cardial, subendocardial, or myocardial fibrosis or
infiltration results in diastolic dysfunction.
Therapy
· LV pathology predominates. In most cases systolic
function is preserved. Papillary muscle fibrosis, dis-
· For acute CHF, see the earlier section on treat
 tortion of the mitral valve apparatus, and changes
ment of CHF in the Therapy section of General
 in LV geometry may contribute to the development
Information.
 of mitral regurgitation and left-sided CHF.
· No specific therapy for controlling the fibrous tis-
· Similar pathophysiology may result from pericar-
sue reaction is available.
dial fibrosis (restrictive pericarditis) or infiltrative
· Beta blockers or calcium channel blockers are not
neoplastic and inflammatory diseases of the epi-
effective for improving diastolic function due to
cardium or myocardium. Signs referable to bi-
fibrosis. Negative chronotropic, dromotropic, and
ventricular restriction predominate in pericardial
antiarrhythmic effects of these drugs may be ben.
disease.
eficial in cats with ventricular or supraventricular
tac hyarrhythmias.
Signalment and Presenting Complaints
Prognosis
· Signalmentis difficult toreport accurately because
there is little agreement among cardiologists as
· As with other forms of cardiomyopathy, progno-
to which cases fall within this classification. Pre-
sis is difficult to predict for individual cases prior
senting complaints are similar to those of other
to observing the initial response to therapy; how-
forms of myocardial disease.
 ever, in general the prognosis is relatively poor
even when initial response to therapy is good.
Average survival time in the authors' experience
Physical Examination
is usually only 4 to 6 months
· Physical examination findings are similar to that
·A high incidence of serious arrhythmias, sys-
of other fonms of cardiomyopathy.
temic thromboembolism, and refractory CHF has
been reported by some authors.
Ancillary Tests
Pathology
· As with other forms of myocardial disease, ancil-
lary tests rarely help discriminate the diagnosis.
· The postmortem changes are unique to this form
In general the findings are similar to what is dis-
of cardiomyopathy and may be used to differenti-
cussed earlier in the chapter.
ate it from other disorders.
Chapter8
Feline Cardiomyopathy
165
RV
RA
R
RA
C
D
Figure 8-8.
    s          
the left atrium (LA), right atrium (RA), and right ventricle (RV). Note that the left ventricle (lV) is neither dilated nor thickened.
B, Right parasternal short-axis view from the same cat as in A showing marked right and left atrial dilation. In addition, a ball-like
thrombus is visible within the dilated left auricle (arow). C, Right parasternal long-axis view of another cat with biatrial dilation,
a nonhypertrophied and nondilated left ventricle, and mild secondary tricuspid valve regurgitation. D, M-mode recording at the
mitral valve level from the same cat as in A and B. The right ventricular wall, septal, and left ventricular wall thicknesses are normal,
but all show mildly hyperdynamic systolic motion. The mitral-septal distance (EPSS) is normal. (From Nyland TG, Mattoon JS:
Small animal diagnostic ultrasound, ed 2, Philadelphia, 2002, WB Saunders.)
· Patchy or diffuse endocardial, subendocardial, or
General Comments
myocardial deposition of fibrous tissue is charac-
teristic. Fibrosis without eosinophilia is the most
· In recent years, increasing numbers of cats have
common form reported in the cat. Fibrous adhe-
been recognized with obviously abnormal hearts,
sions between papillary muscles and the myocar-
many presenting in heart failure, but not fiting
dium, with distortion and fusion of the chordae
 into any recognized disease classification. It is not
tendineae and mitral valve leaflets, may be noted.
known whether these cases represent a single dis-
 As with most cardiomyopathies, the LV appears
ease category. It is not known whether these cases
to be most severely affected.
represent a congenital or acquired disease. It is not
· Extreme LA and left auricular enlargements are
known whetherthese cats are afficted by a primary
common.
myocardial disease or by a secondary condition.
· Although no controlled studies have been per-
formed, taurine deficiency or metabolic abnor-
UNCLASSIFIED FELINE
malities (e.g., hyperthyroidism) have not been
CARDIOMYOPATHIES
consistent findings in affected cats.
The author (and other colleagues) has chosen to apply
the term unclassified cardiomyopathies to a diverse
Pathophysiology
set of cardiac presentations in cats. They are unclas-
sifed because the lesions do not conform to expecta-
· The pathophysiology is unknown; however, clini-
tions for HCM or DCM, or to other known cardiac
cal observations suggest diastolic dysfunction,
disorders. What follows is intended to describe the
similar to that described for RCM, is the predom-
spectrum of lesions that are labeled UCM.
inant functional abnonmality in these cats.
166
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
· For cats with chronic CHF, diuretics and ACE in-
Signalment and Presenting Complaints
hibitors are recommended (see previous section)
· No sex, breed, or age predispositions are known.
· Cats in this category are generally older adults.
Prognosis
· Presenting complaints are believed to be similar
to other forms of myocardial disease.
· The prognosis is generally based upon clinical pre-
sentation, echocardiographic and radiographic evi-
 dence of elevated diastolic pressures, and response
Physical Examination
to therapy.
· Physical examination is similar to that of other
· Asymptomatic cats with mild LA enlargement are
forms of myocardial disease.
 believed to have a good long-tenm prognosis. Asymp-
tomatic cats with marked LA enlargement are likely
to be at higher risk for developing heart failure.
Ancillary Tests
· In general, cats that present in heart failure have
· Common thoracic radiographic findings include
a poor prognosis. Although cats that present in
often severe left or bi-atrial enlargement. When
 heart failure and respond favorably to therapy
CHF is present, pulmonary edema is more com-
may do well for prolonged periods of time.
 mon than pleural effusion although both may be
· In general, cats with aortic thromboembolism
observed.
have a poor prognosis. Cats that survive the throm-
· By nature of the definition the echocardiographic
boembolic episode may do well for extended
fndings are extremely variable. In my opinion, the
periods; however, these cats are generally at high
most consistent echocardiographic finding is severe
risk for recurrence of thromboembolism.
dilation of the left atrium (see Figure 8-7). The left
ventricle is usually nonmal sized or only mildly di-
TAURINE DEFICIENCY-INDUCED
lated; however, severe LV dilation may be observed
MYOCARDIAL FAILURE
 along with normal wall thickness (eccentic hyper-
trophy). Various pattems of mild regional myocar-
Taurine deficiency-induced myocardial failure is
dial hypertrophy are observed in the septum or LV
associated with low plasma, whole blood, and tis-
free wall of some cats. Enlargement of the right
sue taurine concentrations that and may be revers-
heart is variable but may be marked in some cases.
ible after taurine supplementation. In 1987 it was
Systolic contractile indices may be nonmal or mildly
determined that many cats presenting with DCM
depressed. Mitral, and on occasion tricuspid, regur-
were taurine deficient and that supplementation
gitation can be detected with spectral and color-fow
with taurine reversed the myocardial failure.
Doppler in most affected cats. It is generally mild
Therefore, much of the literature published be-
but may be moderate in some cases. A thrombus
fore 1987 referring to idiopathic DCM in cats
may be observed within the LA (Figure 8-9)
should be considered to be referring to this condi-
tion, not to idiopathic DCM.
Therapy
General Comments
· For acute CHF, see the earlier section on treat-
ment of CHF in the Therapy section under
· Supplementation of commercial cat foods with
General Information.
additional taurine has greatly reduced the preva-
· As the underlying etiology and pathophysiology
lence of this near-uniformly fatal condition.
have not been defined, no specific therapy can be
· Not all taurine-deficient cats develop myocardial
recommended for these disorders.
failure. The other factor(s) required for taurine
· With the presumed pathophysiology of this
deficiency to lead to the development of myocar-
group of disorders, the use of calcium chan-
dial failure are unknown. A genetic predisposi-
nel blockers to support or improve diastolic dys-
tion has been proposed.
function makes sense; however, no studies have
· It is reasonable to assume that nutritional taurine
confimmed that this therapy has any benefit for
 deficiency combined with other causes of myo-
supporting CHF or improving survival in cats with
cardial failure (e.g., long-standing congenital or
UCM. I generally use diltiazem in these cats (see
acquired LV volume overload or toxic, ischemic,
earlier HCM section) unless there is a direct contra-
nutritional, endocrine, or metabolic problems)
indication or untoward effects of the medication.
may lead to synergistic complicating effects.
Chapter 8
 Feline Cardiomyopathy
167
 is marked dilation of both let and right atria and mild dilation of
C
+CINE
CAL
UCD VMTH CARDIOLOC
UCD VMTH CARDIOL
There
Ilong-axis view.
PSRBB/-D
PR
Right
opathy
UCD-VMTH CARDIOLOGY SERVICE 140
I
90
visible within the dilated left auricle. AO, Aorta. C and D, P
CARD
HINA-CON
Figure 8-9.
168
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
· A precise requirement for taurine cannot be de-
· Diet history should be accurately ascertained
termined for all foods because the requirement
during the initial workup of any cat with myocar
is dependent upon many factors. Nocommercial
dial failure. Many owners have managed to for-
diet should be assumed to be taurine sufficient
mulate diets with inadequate amounts of taurine
until the manufacturer has provided feeding
and need to be educated to prevent recurrence.
trial data documenting that the food maintains
In addition, it is likely that a small number of
normal taurine concentrations in blood and tis-
cases will continue to be the result of commer
sue during a trial of at least 6 months.
cial cat foods containing inadequate amounts of
taurine, and the veterinary profession, to whom
Pathophysiology
these cats will present for diagnosis and treat-
ment, remains the most effective sentinel for de-
· The hemodynamics and pathophysiology are be
tecting patterms with regard to diet and disease
lieved to be similar to idiopathic DCM as previ-
occurrence.
ously outlined.
· Cats diagnosed with any form of myocardial fail-
· In most cases, taurine deficiency is believed to
ure should have plasma and whole blood taurine
be nutritionally derived, as a result of inadequate
concentrations determined from blood samples
amounts of taurine in the diet. The role that tau-
obtained prior to supplementation. Even a single
rine, an essential amino acid in the cat, plays in
 dose of taurine may make interpretation difficult
the maintenance of myocardial function remains
-noe ioy jeno st supuu adues iadoid pue
unknown.
rate results.
· The following guidelines should be used in han-
dling samples for taurine analysis:
Signalment and Presenting Complaints
· Submit both heparinized plasma and heparin-
· Signalment and presenting complaints are similar
ized whole blood.
to those of other forms of cardiomyopathy.
· Place the sample on wet ice or centrifuge the
sample and separate plasma immediately.
· Make sure the sample contains no clots or he-
Physical Examination
molysis.
· The physical examination is similar to that of
· Store and ship samples frozen (dry ice or ice
other fonms of cardiomyopathy.
packs).
· Funduscopic evaluation may reveal the presence
· Normal values:
of taurine deficiency-induced central retinal
· Plasma: taurine greater than 60 nmol/ml (at
degeneration.
risk when less than 30 mmol/ml). Note: Plasma
taurine concentration is very labile; 24 hours of 
fasting can cause plasma concentrations to fall
Ancillary Tests
below 30 nmol/ml.
·Ancillary tests do not provide a definitive diag-
· Whole blood: taurine greater than 200 nmol/
nosis. The results of electrocardiography and
ml (at risk when less than 100 nmol/ml).
thoracic radiographs are similar to other forms of
Whole blood taurine concentration is not as
myocardial disease. The echocardiographic find-
labile. Fasting does not significantly affect
 ings are similar to those for idiopathic DCM.
values.
· The primary echocardiographic abnormality is an
increase in end-systolic diameter (more than 12
Therapy
mm) with a reduced shortening fraction (less than
35%). The end-diastolic dimension is also often
· During the initial phase of therapy, proper
enlarged (more than 17 mm) (Figures 8-10 and
supportive and symptomatic care for CHF (as
8-11). Significant LA enlargement is common.
described previously under general comments
The E-point to septal separation (EPSS) is often
on therapy) is essential if CHF is present. Cats
 increased ( > 2 mm). The right ventricle and right
with documented taurine deficiency should be
atrium are variably affected. Mitral regurgitation
supplemented with 250 mg every 12 hours un-
may be detected with spectral and color-flow
til echocardiographically determined LV dimen-
Doppler. In some cases, a thrombus is observed
sions normalize. This usually occurs within 4 to
within the body of the left atrium or in the left
 6 months. Clinical improvement is usually evident
auricular appendage.
within about 2 weeks.
Chapter8
 Feline Cardiomyopathy
169
UCD YMTH CARDIOLOCY
137
12-AUC-
12:01:
S7146#21
WAB
DEPTH
60
CANINE
PHR
OdB
44dBB/A/D
GAIN
-13dB
CINE
T:UCD VMTH CARDIOLOCY
137
12-AUC-92
87146
WAB
WR
8
B
Figure 8-10.  Two-dimensional echocardiograms from a cat with myocardial failure associated with taurine deficiency. Right
parasternal long-axis (A) and short-axis (B) views, respectively, demonstrate marked dilation of all four cardiac chambers. IV, Left
ventricle; LA, left atrium; RV, right ventricle; RA, right atrium.
· Diuretics and ACE inhibitors can be discontin-
mmol/ml). Taurine supplementation can be dis-
ued when signs of CHF resolve, and radiographic
continued once echocardiographic values retum
improvement in cardiac size is noted. The ACE
to within normal limits, and the cat is eating a diet
inhibitor should be removed frst and then the
with adequate amounts of taurine.
diuretic tapered over a period of 2 weeks. The
· Taurine concentration in plasma and whole blood
owner should be taught to monitor respiratory
should be monitored periodically to be certain
rate while withdrawing heart failure medications.
that the diet fed is maintaining concentrations
and clinical and radiographic evaluation should
within acceptable limits . If taurine concentrations
be repeated 1 week after withdrawing medica-
are depleted again, then many cats will again de-
tions to detect any decline in the cat's condition.
velop myocardial failure.
· Dgoxin is not routinely administered as a part of ther-
apy, but there is no contraindication to doing so. When
Prognosis
used initial dose should be one fourth of a 0.125 mg
tablet PO every 48 hours. Digoxin levels are taken 6
· Because results of taurine analysis are not imme-
to 8 hours after the seventh dose and are used to adjust
diately known and a recent dietary change may
therapy. I rarely increase the dose to more than one
normalize taurine values, all cats with myocar-
fourth of a 0.125 mg tablet PO every 24 hours.
 dial failure should be supplemented with taurine
·The diet should be altered to maintain normal
 and given an initially guarded-to-grave prognosis.
plasma taurine concentrations (greater than 60
In one large study, 30% of cats with myocardial
170
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
failure died within the first week after diagnosis.
enlarged. There are no specific histologic or elec-
Hypothermia and thromboembolic disease were
tron microscopic lesions.
associated with a poor prognosis. Taurine supple-
· In the past, many of these cases were classifed as
mentation did not provide benefit with regard to
 RCM or intermediate cardiomyopathy. The echo-
survival until 2 weeks after treatment is begun.
Cats that survive 1 week and respond to treat-
that the hemodynamics resemble those of RCM;
ment for CHF can be upgraded to a fair progno-
 however, few cases have documented characteristic
sis. Cats that survive 2 weeks and are shown to
 histopathologic lesions. The term intermediate sug-
be taurine deficient can be upgraded to a good
 gests a combination of or transition between states.
prognosis.
There is no evidence that this represents a combina-
· Most taurine-responsive cats have complete re-
tion of or a transitional state between two forms of
versal of echocardiographic and clinical evidence
cardiomyopathy. In fact, as stated previously, there
of myocardial failure after supplementation with
is no evidence that these cases represent a single dis-
taurine (see Figure 8-11). Occasionally cats may
ease entity or are proven to be a cardiomyopathy.
have residual mild myocardial failure (LV short-
·The whole blood analysis is most important.
ening fraction 25% to 30%); however, these cats
are generally asymptomatic and rarely require
THYROTOXIC HEART DISEASE
any form of therapy other than maintaining nor-
mal plasma taurine concentrations.
Thyrotoxic heart disease is cardiac changes result-
ing from direct and indirect effects of elevations in
Pathology
circulating thyroid honmone (hyperthyroidism).
· The most predominant pathologic features are
General Comments
severe LV and LA enlargement. The LV walls
may appear thin and the papillary muscles and
·A frequently recognized secondary cardiomyop-
trabeculations are less prominent than normal.
athy that may be confused with primary myocar-
The right ventricle and right atrium may also be
dial diseases in older cats
ESD
1cm
EDD
A
1cm
EDD
B
ESD
Figure 8-11.
M-mode echocardiograms from a cat with myocardial failure associated with taurine deficiency before (A) and
after (B) taurine supplementation and diet modification. Before therapy the left ventricle was markedly dilated, and the left ven-
tricular shortening fraction was severely reduced. Those parameters both normalized after taurine supplementation. EDD, Left
ventricular dimension at end-diastole; EsD, left ventricular dimension at end-systole.
Chapter 8  Feline Cardiomyopathy
171
· Thyrotoxic heart disease or hyperthyroidism does
energy economy of the heart and increases the
not cause HCM.
overall work of the heart. Additionally, the thyro-
· The prevalence and severity of thyrotoxic heart
 toxic heart, although hyperkinetic when the patient
disease has been decreasing in recent years,
is at rest, has less "reserve capacity” available for
likely as a result of increased awareness and
when increased cardiac work is necessary (e.g..
therefore early diagnosis and treatment of
exercise). This situation, placed on top of preex-
 hyperthyroidism.
isting cardiac disease (e.g., HCM, RCM, or DCM,
valvular disease) can lead to decompensation of a
Pathophysiology
previously well-compensated cardiac disease.
· Reduced systemic vascular resistance in the pres-
· The effects of thyroid hormone on the heart are
ence of an increased intravascular volume (not
believed to be both direct and indirect.
documented in cats) associated with significant
· Direct actions
increases in cardiac output are what define the
· Increased protein synthesis (mitochondrial,
high-output state of the cardiovascular system
ion pump, and contractile proteins)
in hyperthyroid cats. This high-output state can
· Alteration of myosin subtype ("slow"' to "fast"
(especially in the presence of underlying primary
type myosin; V3 to > V1)
cardiac pathology, such as valvular insufficiency)
· Less economical energy conversion from
progress to result in clinically apparent signs of
chemical (adenosine triphosphate) to me-
CHF in hyperthyroid cats.
chanical (force) by the myocardium
· Despite the reduced systemic vascular resistance
· Increased rate of calcium cycling by the sar-
that is part of the high-output, hyperthyroid state,
coplasmic reticulum
hypertension, rather than hypotension, is ob-
· Up-regulation of cardiac beta receptors
served in many (87% of 39 cats in one study)
· Enhanced rate of spontaneous depolarization
hyperthyroid cats. Hypertension resolves in most
by sinoatrial node cells
treated cases once a euthyroid state is reached.
· Shortened action potential duration
· Indirect actions
Signalment and Present Complaints
· Enhanced metabolic demand by other tissues
results in a "high-output state;" the heart must
· Cats are generally older, with no gender or breed
increase its throughput to meet the increased
predispositions.
demands of the peripheral tissues that are sim-
· Most cats present for routine examination or be-
ilarly stimulated to a higher metabolic state
cause of signs or symptoms of hyperthyroidism
 by the excess circulating thyroid hormone.
(e.g., polyphagia, polyuria/polydipsia, weight loss).
· Reduced systemic vascular resistance (not the
· Occasionally cats present with CHF or low-out-
 same as hypotension) plays an important role
 put heart failure.
in the overall cardiac status of patients with
hyperthyroidism. Afterload is reduced while
Physical Examination
 preload is increased in the presence of an in-
 creased intravascular volume.
· Classic signs of hyperthyroidism, including evi-
· In some, hypertension is a predominant find-
dence of weight loss, unkempt hair coat
ing and leads to:
· Systolic heart munmur or gallop rhythm may be
· Significant concentric hypertrophy of the
present
left ventricle
· Sinus tachycardia is usually present
· Risk of retinal detachment or hemorrhage
· A thyroid nodule may be palpable
· The sum of these effects when there is excess
thyroid hormone (hyperthyroidism) is a heart
Ancillary Tests
that operates at a faster rate (tachycardia), is
hypertrophied, can contract faster and more
· Electrocardiography
powerfully (enhanced contractility), and has a
· Sinus tachycardia is commonly present
propensity to abnormal electrical depolarizations
· Tall R waves suggestive of LV hypertrophy or
(arrhythmias).
dilation
· Although these might at first glance sound like
· Variable arrhythmias, including atrial prema-
beneficial changes (bigger, faster, stronger, more
ture complexes and ventricular premature com-
excitable), the thyrotoxic state greatly strains the
plexes
172
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
· Uncommonly, intraventricular conduction dis-
KEY PoINT
turbances are seen
We have found beta blockade therapy ben-
· Thoracic radiography: Common findings include
· Generalized cardiomegaly with or without LA
eficial in cats with hyperthyroidism that are
unable to complete specific antithyroid ther-
enlargement
· When CHF is present, pulmonary edema and
 apy because of concurrent renal insufficiency.
Beta blockers are also helpful in controlling
pleural effusion are equally likely to be present.
cardiovascular signs of thyrotoxicosis pend-
· Echocardiography
ing a euthyroid state in cats started on me-
· Reported echocardiographic changes in cats
thimazole (Tapazole).
with hyperthyroidism include increased aortic
root dimension, LA enlargement, increased
end-diastolic or end-systolic LV dimensions,
in most cases. The authors recommend beta-
mild to moderate concentric hypertrophy of the
adrenergic blockade in the following situations:
 LV free wall or septum, and an increased (or,
· To manage significant supraventricular or ven-
rarely, decreased) LV shortening fraction.
tricular tachyarrhythmias
· In the author's experience the typical echo-
· In hyperthyroid cats undergoing anesthetic pro-
cardiographic changes in cats with hyperthy.
cedures
roidism without CHF include hyperkinetic LV
wall and septal motion with mild LV dilation
Prognosis
 a  (o 
of LA enlargement. In general the LV wall
· Asymptomatic cats can be managed very well
and septal thicknesses are not excessive in re-
without the use of specific cardiovascular therapy
lation to the chamber dimensions and do not
prior to appropriate therapy for the hyperthyroid
resemble the typical changes associated with
state, and most evidence indicates that the cardio-
HCM.
vas cular changes are reversible.
· There are reports of cats with myocardial failure
· Most cats with CHF can be managed successfully
 demonstrating marked increases in LV end-dia-
if the hyperthyroid state is controlled.
stolic and end-systolic dimensions, moderate to
· Most cats with severe systolic myocardial fail-
severe LA enlargement, and a reduction in short-
 ure have a poor prognosis, as the changes appear
ening fraction. The relationship of this presenta-
to be irreversible unless influenced by taurine
tion to a deficiency of the amino acid taurine is
deficiency.
unknown, but may also represent late irrevers-
ible changes associated with hyperthyroidism.
ACROMEGALIC HEART DISEASE
Therapy
Acromegalic heart disease is cardiac changes result-
ing from direct and indirect effects of elevations in
·For acute CHF, see the section on treatment
circulating growth honmone (hypersomatotropism).
of CHF in the Therapy section under General
Information.
General Comments and Historical
· Signs of CHF may be difficult to control prior to
Perspective
beginning to control the hyperthyroid state. Be-
gin with pharmacologic manipulations; thyroid-
· A syndrome resembling acromegaly in humans
ectomy or the physical isolation required after
pe pae-aipiu jo dno e un panodau uaaq seu
radioactive iodine therapy present a high risk to
older cats with growth hormone-secreting tumors
uncompensated animals. Once signs of CHF are
of the pituitary gland.
well controlled and the hyperthyroid state is at-
· In 14 cases all affected cats had insulin-resistant di-
tenuated, more specific therapy may be pursued.
abetes mellitus and enlargement of the liver, heart,
· In cats with asymptomatic thyrotoxicosis, therapy
kidneys, or tongue. Various cardiovascular abnor-
 is generally aimed at controlling the hyperthyroid
malities were seen in most of the affected cats
state (i.e., Tapazole, thyroidectomy, or radioac-
· An increase in serum growth hormone concen-
tive iodine therapy).
tration in about 60% of the cats with HCM but
· Beta-adrenergic blockade is a common recommen-
without signs of acromegaly. Growth honmone
dation in the literature. There is no contraindication
is a known inducer of myocardial hypertrophy,
to its use, but benefits have not been documented
 and cats with acromegaly can have quite severe
Chapter 8   Feline Cardiomyopathy
173
concentric hypertrophy of the LV myocardium.
· Documentation of a pituitary mass on com-
     a 
puted tomographic scan or magnetic resonance
concentration is the cause, is the result, or is un-
imaging provides further support.
related to feline HCM is unknown.
· A definitive diagnosis requires demonstration
 of increased baseline serum growth hormone
Pathophysiology
concentration.
· The pathogenesis of heart disease in cats with
Therapy
acromegaly is unclear. The importance of a di-
rect trophic effect of excessive growth hormone on
· Generally, therapy is aimed at controlling the
the myocardium as opposed to secondary effects
diabetic state and renal failure. If CHF is present,
resulting from volume expansion, hypertension,
supportive care (diuretics and vasodilators) may
or other secondary effects requires further study.
also be beneficial.
· The increased plasma growth honmone concen-
· Successful therapy for feline acromegaly has not
tration in some cats with HCM suggests a poten-
been reported. Potential therapeutic modalities
tially important role for growth hormone in cats
include radiation therapy, medical therapy, and
with hypertrophic heart disease.
hypophysectomy.
· Supportive therapy for CHF should be employed
 in those cats with consistent clinical fndings.
Signalment and Presenting Complaints
(See the section on treatment of CHF in the
· Cats with acromegaly generally do not present
Therapy section under General Information.)
for signs referable to cardiovascular disease.
Of the six reported cases of CHF, four of these
· Presenting complaints commonly include poly-
cats died, three of which had concurrent renal
uria/polydipsia and weight loss referable to un-
failure.
controlled diabetes.
· Although no breed predilections have been iden-
Prognosis
tifed, almost all of the reported cases have oc-
curred in older neutered male cats.
· The short-term prognosis is good. Pituitary tu-
mors grow slowly, and neurologic signs are
Physical Examination
uncommon; the diabetes can be relatively well
controlled with high doses of insulin.
· Systolic murmurs were noted in 9 of the 14 cats
· Mild to moderate CHF responds fairly well to
described.
symptomatic therapy.
· Physical features of acromegaly include progna-
·Most cats eventually died or were euthanized
thia inferior, cranial and abdominal enlargement,
owing to refractory CHF or renal failure. Re-
organomegaly (especially kidneys and liver), in-
ported survival ranged from 4 to 24 months after
creased body size, and weight gain.
diagnosis.
· Signs of CHF may develop late in the course of
the disease.
Pathology
· LV hypertrophy is the hallmark pathologic feature.
Ancillary Tests
Myocardial histologic lesions include myofiber
· Electrocardiography: abnormalities were not de-
hypertrophy, multifocal myocytolysis, interstitial
tected in any of the 14 cats reported.
fibrosis, and intramural arteriosclerosis.
· Thoracic radiography: radiographic cardiomeg-
aly was identifed in 12 of 14 cats.
NEOPLASTIC INFILTRATION
hypertrophy, resembling HCM, was identified in
OF THE HEART
seven of eight cats examined.
General Comments and Historical
·Other
Perspective
· The diagnosis of acromegaly is tentatively
 based on the presence of insulin-resistant dia-
·Rare in cats
betes mellitus or renal failure in a cat with clin-
· Echocardiography is generally required for non-
ical features of acromegaly.
surgical detection.
174
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
· Cardiac tumors reported in cats include:
neutrophils. A viral etiology was suspected but
· Lymphoma
never identified.
· Chemodectoma
· One report describes a transmissible myocarditis/
·Hemangiosarcoma
diaphragmitis in cats. No organism has been iso-
· Metastatic pulmonary carcinoma
lated, but transmission between cats by injecting
· Metastatic mammary gland carcinoma.
blood from infected cats into other cats does re-
· Lymphoma is the most common tumor of the feline
liably reproduce the disease. All cats developed
myocardium. Reported cardiac abnormalities in
high fever (103.8° to 105.7° F), were lethargic,
cats with lymphoma include complete heart block,
and were partially anorexic. Complete blood
 pericardial effusion, and CHF.
counts and chemistries were normal in all cats
· Echocardiographic findings in cats with diffuse
for 6 weeks except for an elevation of creatine
neoplastic infiltration of the myocardium can
phosphokinase in three of seven cats. The dis-
mimic those of HCM.
ease resolved on its own in these cats. Necropsy
· Regression of neoplastic infiltration was reported
revealed pale 1 to 3 mm discrete foci surrounded
in one cat with lymphoma following treatment
by hemorrhage on ventricular myocardium and
with combination chemotherapy.
on the diaphragm. No clinical signs referable to
the cardiovascular system were noticed.
· The relationship of endomyocarditis to the other
Drugs, Toxins, and Physical Injury
cardiomyopathies of cats is unknown. Other re-
· A large number of drugs and toxins are reported
ported causes of myocarditis in cats include toxo-
to cause myocardial injury in domestic animals,
plasmosis and metastatic infection from sepsis or
but very few are likely to be encountered in clinical
bacterial endocarditis.
small animal practice. Of these, doxorubicin has
received the most attention in cats.
SUMMARY
· Decreased fractional shortening and increased
 LV end-systolic dimensions were reported in four
· HCM is very common and probably represents
of six experimental cats given cumulative doses
the largest percentage of cardiac diseases cur-
of doxorubicin of 170 to 240 mg/m2. However,
rently diagnosed in the cat.
clinical signs of heart failure were not observed
· Presumed myocardial diseases that cannot be
even after a cumulative dose of 300 mg/m2, and
classifed into one of the known primary disor-
no cat showed electrocardiographic abnonmali-
ders, but that also lack common features allow-
ties during the study. As in other species, patho-
ing classification as a single clinical entity, are
logic studies revealed extensive areas of myocyte
increasing in frequency. Little is known about the
vacuolization and myocytolysis. Similar clinical
etiology, pathophysiology, therapy, and progno-
observations have been reported in cats with ma-
sis associated with these UCMs.
lignancies treated with doxorubicin. None devel-
· Of the secondary cardiomyopathies discussed,
oped overt heart failure, and arrhythmias were
only nutritional (taurine-responsive) DCM and
only rarely observed.
thyrotoxic heart disease are encountered with
· With the possible exception of heat stroke and
any frequency. Both of these disorders have
hypothermia, physical causes of myocardial
been well classifed, and both respond dramati-
damage are infrequently recognized in cats. Trau-
cally to appropriate specific therapy. The other
-uosun raua aq on sieadde snpeoou oneu
mon or unrecognized in most cats that experience
and are generally poorly understood. The gen-
thoracic trauma.
eral approach, diagnosis, and therapy for these
disorders are similar to those for other feline
cardiom yopathies.
INFECTIOUS MYOCARDITIS
· One must recognize that the associated clinical
· Infectious myocarditis is infrequently recog-
and diagnostic findings frequently overlap, often
nized in cats. Liu and associates described a syn-
making a definitive diagnosis diffcult. Echocar-
drome of acute nonsuppurative myocarditis in
diography is the one diagnostic aid that reliably
25 young cats (mean age 2.6 years). Most cats
allows differentiation among the different cardio-
died unexpectedly, and necropsy revealed focal
myopathies encountered in cats; however, even
or diffuse infiltration of the endocardium and
with a thorough ultrasound examination, distinc-
myocardium with mononuclear cells and a few
tions are still often unclear.
Chapter8
 Feline Cardiomyopathy
175
Frequently Asked Questions
per nutritionist instructions) so perhaps heat is
There was a young male cat that was admitted for rou-
damaging the taurine in the home-made food.
Commercial manufacturers put in higher levels of
tine orchiectomy. His pre-operative complete blood
taurine into canned food recipes to allow for this
 count, chemistry screen and urinalysis were normal.
intraproces sing des truction of taurine.
 His pre-operative thoracic radiographs also appeared
3. Though most DCM cases are taurine deficiency-
 normal. Physical examination was within normal lim-
associated, some DCMs are not clearly associated
its, except the cat appeared small for his age.
with low blood levels.
The lightly sedated cat was subjected to mask induc
 4. It is important to test taurine levels before any
tion with isoflurane because the attending veterinari-
an sometimes used this approach in quiet healthy cats.
 taurine supplementation is started.
They were able to intubate,but not resuscitate this pa
In cats, what do the UCMs represent? Key points to
tient. Why did this cat die during this induction?
consider:
In this case, post-mortem confirmed cardiomyopathy
1. Cats do not always fall into clear categories of
it was not a laryngospasm. Key points to consider:
heart disease.
1. HCM can be present, and the thoracic radiographs
 2. Even with echocardiography the parameters may
still be normal.
not clearly fit into one specific type, but rather
 2. Many cats with cardiomyopathy are asymptomatic.
share features of more than one type.
 3. Sudden death may occur in otherwise healthy
3. Most cases of cardiomyopathy
in
cats  are
appearing cats.
idiopathic.
4. As per the anesthesia chapter, caution is needed as
 4. These UCMs only allow one to assume cardiac
follows, quoted, "Mask induction with isofurane
 disease is present —no more.
Or sevofurane is not recommended in cardiac
patients. Most animals become very excited during
mask induction, even with adequate preanesthetic
 medication, which could predispose to arrhy thmias
SUGGESTED READINGS
and increased myocardial work secondary to the
stress response."
Atkins CE: The role of noncardiac disease in the develop-
 Cats are not good candidates for mask induction. Safe
ment and precipitation of heart failure, Vet Clin North
combination anesthetic regimens are available that
Am Small Anim Pract 21: 1035, 1991.
 make the technique of inhalant induction by mask un-
Fox PR: Feline myocardial disease. In Fox PR, ed: Canine
necessary today. In the past, many of these anesthetic
and feline cardiology, New York, 1988, Churchill Liv-
accidents were attributed to rare adverse primary
ingstone.
anesthetic reactions if cause of death was not deter-
Fox PR: Myocardial diseases. In Ettinger SJ, ed: Text-
 mined by testing.
book of veterinary internal medicine, ed 2, Philadel-
phia, 1989, WB Saunders
What is the significance of SAM in a cat with cardio-
myopathy? Key points to consider:
Harpster NK: Feline myocardial diseases. In Kirk RW,
1. Key point is the pressure gradient across the region 
ed: Current veterinary therapy IX, Philadelphia,
of dynamic subaortic stenosis produced by the
1986, WB Saunders.
SAM. The pressure gradient roughly correlates with
Jacobs G, Panciera DL: Cardiovascular complications of
the severity of the SAM although it can be quite
feline hyperthyroidism. In Kirk RW, Bonagura JD,
labile, changing with the cat's level of excitement.
eds: Kirk's current veterinary therapy XI, Philadel-
2. SAM is not present in all cats with HCM. The
phia, 1992,WB Saunders.
 majority of cats with severe HCM have SAM.
Kittleson MD: Management of heart failure: concepts,
3. SAM can develop in advance of chamber wall
therapeutic strategies, and drug pharmacology. In
changes, so it may be an early finding in some cats.
Fox PR, ed: Canine and feline cardiology, New York,
A cat is diagnosed with DCM—and you have not seen
1988, Churchill Livingstone.
a case since changes in food formulations 20 years
Kittleson MD, Kienle RD: Small animal cardiovascular
ago?Key points to consider:
medicine, St Louis, 1998, Mosby
1. Taurine is not processed as efficiently in some dog
Liu SK, Tilley LP: Animal models of primary myocardial
breeds when compared with others—this may
disease, Yale J Biol Med 53:191-211, 1980.
happen in certain lines/breeds of cats perhaps too?
Liu SK, Maron FJ, Tilley LP: Feline hypertrophic cardio-
(conjecture—not yet confirmed in published studies)
myopathy, Am J Path 102:388-395, 1981.
2. It is known that the commercial processing of
Pion PD, Kittleson MD, Rogers QR: Cardiomyopathy in
tinned cat foods results in the destruction of some
the cat and its relation to taurine deficiency. In Kirk
 of the taurine due to presumed damage from high
RW, ed: Current veterinary therapy X, Philadelphia,
temperature processing. The owner is using a high
1989, WB Saunders.
temperature pressure cooker to make her home-
 Pion PD, Kittleson MD: Therapy for feline aortic throm-
made diet (she is not simmering constituents as
boembolism. In Kirk RW, ed: Current veterinary ther-
apy X, Philadelphia, 1989, WB Saunders.
Cor Pulmonale and Pulmonary
Thromboembolism
Lynelle R. Johnson
INTRODUCTION
The pulmonary circulation maintains low right
Cor pulmonale is defined as right-heart failure
ventricular pressure in the face of increases in
caused by pulmonary or thoracic disease. It may be
cardiac output through recruitment of closed cap-
characterized by clinical signs of fuid accumulation
illaries and distension of existing capillaries.
 or by radiographic or echocardiographic evidence
 Distribution of pulmonary blood fow is altered by
of right ventricular overload. By definition, pul-
hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction and is also
 un uasaid aq isn (Hd) uisuaad Aru
modulated by endothelial release of vasoconstric-
pulmonale in order for the right heart to fail. Heart-
tors and vasodilators. Hypoxic pulmonary vaso-
worm disease with pulmonary vascular obstruction
constriction is a protective mechanism that prevents 
is the most common cause of cor pulmonale in the
 de-oxygenated blood from entering the circulation
-sa Aeuound Xue qsnoue ‘uonendod auus
by preferentially constricting vascular supply to
cular obstruction has the potential to result in PH
poorly ventilated lung regions. Thus, local alveolar
and cor pulmonale. Pulmonary arterial obstruction
hypoxia results in local vascular constriction that
can result from lodging of clot material (pulmonary
preserves gas exchange. However, global hypoxia
thromboembolism [PTE]) or from embolization of
or diseases that disrupt the normal response to hy-
fat, septic material, neoplastic cells, or heartworms
poxia can result in a deleterious rise in pulmonary
in the pulmonary arteries or capillary bed.
 artery pressure. Alterations in endothelium-derived
 e rnd p ose u sa
sures. The most potent vasoconstrictor is endo-
COR PULMONALE
thelin-1; thromboxane A2 and superoxide also
AND PULMONARY
mediate vasoconstriction. Vasodilators produced
THROMBOEMBOLISM
by the endothelium include nitric oxide and pros-
Physiology
tacyclin. Release and activity of these vasoreactive
mediators can be altered in disease states, and im-
· Pulmonary circulatory pressures are maintained
balance among the various mediators can result in
at a level much lower than systemic pressures in
 a rise in pulmonary artery pressure.
order to reduce the workload on the thin-walled
· PTE results in abnormal gas exchange, altered vas-
right ventricle. Normal pressures in the dog and
cular control, changes in pulmonary mechanics,
cat are reported as a systolic pulmonary artery
 and loss of ventilatory control. Physical obstruc-
pressure of 15 to 25 mm Hg, end-diastolic pulmo-
tion of large pulmonary arteries leads to increased
nary artery pressure of 5 to 10 mm Hg, and a mean 
vascular pressure and reactive pulmonary vaso-
pulmonary artery pressure of 10 to 15 mm Hg.
 constriction from release of clot associated factors
176
Chapter 9
Cor Pulmonale and Pulmonary Thromboembolism
177
such as thromboxane that imcrease vascular resis-
Box 9-2
Predisposing Conditions for
tance. Secondary alterations in pulmonary physi-
Pulmonary Thromboembolism
sa un suaueap aemadad pue uasm Aono
exchange. Release of humoral mediators such as
Immune mediated hemolytic anemia
serotonin from platelets results in bronchoconstric-
Neoplasia
tion and increased airway resistance. Surfactant
Sepsis
function is altered leading to loss of elastic recoil
 Protein-losing nephropathy/enteropathy
and atelectasis, decreased pulmonary compli-
Cardiac disease
Hyperadrenocorticis m
ance, and increased right-to-left shunting. Work of
Central catheter use
breathing increases because of augmented alveolar
Hemodialysis
 dead space from nonperfused lung regions.
Total parenteral nutriti on
Hip replacement surgery
Trauma
Etiology
· Cor pulmonale can result from disorders that im-
pact the pulmonary vasculature, such as obstruc-
rapidly lysed and removed by the local fibrinolytic
tive or obliterative diseases of the pulmonary
system; however, occlusion of larger pulmonary
circulation, or sustained hypoxic vasoconstric-
 arteries or massive showering of emboli to a large
tion associated with chronic parenchymal or
circulatory volume can lead to acute right ventric-
tracheobronchial disease. Rarely, an increase in
ular overload.
pulmonary blood fow will result in PH. Not all
animals with associated disorders will develop
Clinical Presentation
PH and cor pulmonale, and it is likely that ge-
netic or other infuences will determine the vas-
History and Clinical Signs
cular response. PH and cor pulmonale appear to
· Dogs or cats with PH and cor pulmonale can
be encountered more commonly in dogs than in
be of any age, depending on the underlying eti-
cats. Primary PH is relatively uncommon; how-
ology of elevated pulmonary artery pressures.
ever, various pulmonary conditions can lead to
Generally there is a history of signs referable to
secondary PH in the dog or cat, including chronic
the pulmonary system or to congestive failure.
tracheobronchial disorders, pneumonia, or inter-
Animals can display any combination of signs
stitial lung disease (Box 9-1). A minority of these
including lethargy, weakness, cough, respiratory
animals will develop overt clinical signs of right-
distress, tachypnea, abdominal distention, and
 heart failure.
syncope. Historical features and clinical signs are
· PTE is a secondary condition that occurs in as-
not specific for PH or cor pulmonale but instead
sociation with diseases that cause blood stasis,
reflect the underlying cardiopulmonary disease.
alter endothelial integrity, or increase coagulabil-
· PTE is generally a disorder of older animals, and
ity. PTE has been linked most commonly with
history and clinical signs refect the underlying
immune-mediated hemolytic anemia, neoplasia,
 disease process. Difficulty in clinical recognition
sepsis, protein losing nephropathy, cardiac disease,
of this disorder is high, and animals with PTE are
and hyperadrenocorticism (Box 9-2). Clinically
 often presented for signs of weight loss lethargy.
silent pulmonary embolism occurs in a majority
and anorexia rather than for respiratory signs, al-
of dogs (82%) undergoing total hip replacement
though tachypnea is often present on admission.
surgery. Small pulmonary thromboemboli are
Secondary PTE should be suspected in an animal
with a predisposing condition that develops an
Box 9-1
Causes of Cor Pulmonale
acute onset of tachypnea, cyanosis, and/or hypox-
emia that is refractory to oxygen therapy.
 Pulmonary vascular disease
Heartworm disease
Chronic pulmonary thromboembolism
KEY POINT
Chronic pulmonary disease
Tracheobronchial disease or collapse
 PTE occurs secondary to a variety of underly-
Pulmonary fibrosis/interstitial pneumonia
ing conditions. Affected animals may present
Pneumonia
for signs reflecting the primary condition or
 Primary pulmonary hypertension
for refractory respiratory distress.
178
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
arterial oxygenation does not exclude the diagno-
Physical Examination
sis of PTE. Some but not all animals with PTE will
· Animals with cor pulmonale will generally dis-
respond to supplemental oxygen administration
play tachypnea or respiratory distress due to
with normalization of arterial oxygen. Animals
Huid accumulation (ascites or pleural effusion)
with additional cardiac or pulmonary pathology
or because of underlying pulmonary disease. A
that increases shunt fraction will not necessarily
systolic heart murmur due to mitral or tricuspid
 have a complete response to exogenous oxygen
regurgitation is found in the majority of dogs
s upplementation.
with PH. Animals that develop clinical signs
of overt right-heart failure will display jugu-
Radiographs
lar venous distention, ascites, or subcutaneous 
· Radiographic evidence of right-heart enlarge-
edema.
ment in an animal with lung or pulmonary vas-
· Dogs and cats with PTE have tachypnea and hy-
cular disease is supportive of cor pulmonale.
 perpnea that is not alleviated by oxygen admin-
(Figure 9-1) Retrospective review of radiographs
istration. Cough is relatively uncommon. Harsh
in animals with PTE may allow the detection of
lung sounds or loud bronchovesicular sounds can
regional oligemia, lack of normal vascular ta-
be detected; however, crackles or wheezes are
pering, or enlarged central pulmonary arteries;
less common. Physical examination abnormali-
 however, in the clinical setting, radiographic
ties will reflect the underlying disease, such as
 changes appear less obvious, because PTE is of-
pale mucous membranes in the case of immune
soop jo uoodod aei au u paadsns nou ua
 mediated hemolytic anemia or a pot-bellied ap-
that die with PTE.
pearance due to Cushing's disease.
· Thoracic radiographic abnormalities are com-
 mon in PTE but are rarely specific. Pulmonary
Diagnostic Testing
infiltrates may be interstitial, alveolar, or lobar in
 dogs and cats. Alveolar infiltrates may represent
Laboratory Testing
 hemorrhage, edema, or infarction. Cardiomegaly
· Basic laboratory tests generally reflect the under
and mild to moderate pleural effusion are com-
lying disease and do not add to the diagnosis of
mon in dogs and cats. Importantly, normal chest
PH, cor pulmonale, or PTE. The diagnosis of PTE
radiographs are reported in 7% to 27% of dogs
is particularly problematic. Testing for plasma
and cats with necropsy confirmed PTE, and PTE
D-dimer, a breakdown product resulting from the
should be a top differential diagnosis in an animal
action of plasmin on cross-linked fibrin, has been
with marked respiratory distress and normal tho-
shown in human medicine to have high sensitiv-
racic radiographs.
ity but low specificity in the diagnosis of PTE. In
veterinary medicine, several diseases can result
in a positive D-dimer test, although the magnitude
KEY PoINT
of the elevation may enhance the suspicion of
Normal chest radiographs in a tachypneic
pulmonary embolization. It is unclear whether a
animal that fails to respond to oxygen admin-
negative test excludes the possibility of PTE.
istration should be considered suggestive of
· Pulse oximetry and arterial blood gas analysis are
pulmonary embolism.
useful for detecting abnormal gas exchange. He-
moglobin saturation (SpO2) is related to arterial
 Oxygen partial pressure by a sigmoidal relation-
ship, with values above 95% indicating normox-
Electrocardiography
emia. Below 95%, values for SpO2 lie on the
· Reported abnormalities with right ventricular en-
exponential part ofthe curve, and small changes in
largement due to PH or PTE include deep S waves
SpO2 reflect very large changes in arterial oxygen.
in leads II and aVF and a right axis deviation. Right
Thus, pulse oximetry provides only a crude esti-
atrial enlargement is supported by tall or peaked P
 mate of lung function. Arterial blood gas analysis
waves; however, electrocardiographic evaluation
provides more precise assessment of oxy genation
of right heart enlargement is insensitive, and ab-
and can be used to follow response to therapy.
 normalities have been reported in < 15% of dogs
 Arterial blood gas analysis often reveals hypox-
with PH. The electrocardiogram should be closely
emia, hypocapnia, and increased alveolar-to-arte-
examined for rhythm disturbances, which may be
rial gradient in dogs with PTE; however, normal
found in up to 25% of dogs with PH.
Chapter9
Cor Pulmonale and Pulmonary Thromboembolism
179
A
B
Figure 9-1.  There is generalized enlargement of cardiac silhouette on the right lateral (A) and dorsoventral (B) views. Pulmo-
nary arteries are enlarged and appear to taper slowly. Numerous pleural fissure lines are identified, and there is a diffuse heavy
interstitial and peribronchial pattern identified within the lung.
Echocardiography
Doppler echocardiography can be used to esti-
· Two-dimensional echocardiography can provide
mate pulmonary artery pressure when tricuspid
subjective evidence of PH leading to cor pul-
 regurgitation or pulmonic insuffciency is pres-
monale (when pulmonic stenosis has been ruled
ent. (Figure 9-2) Using the modified Bermoulli
out). Supportive evidence of right ventricular
equation
(Pressure
overload includes right ventricular concentric
   s ro 
hypertrophy and dilation, dilation of the main
timation of right ventricular systolic pressure via
pulmonary artery, systolic flattening of the inter-
 measurement of tricuspid regurgitation velocity,
ventricular septum, and paradoxical septal motion.
and estimation of pulmonary artery diastolic
180
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
3.5MHZ
77
AXVEL4.EI M/S
CANPG B5.O mmHg
1.8MHZ
22
+
Figure 9-2.
Tricuspid regurgitant jet in a dog with pulmonary hypertension.Based on the mocified Bernoulli equation, the right
ventricular-to-right atrial pressure gradient is 85 mm Hg. (Courtesy Dr. Fiona Campbell, University of California, Davis)
pressure via measurement of pulmonic insuffi-
identify reversible vasoconstriction. Lowering
ciency velocity. PH is documented by a tricuspid
of the pressure gradient in response to inter-
-jnsui juond  o sasu gz<paf yuna
vention would suggest a potential response to
ficiency jet > 2.2 m/sec.
medicaltherapy. Unfortunately, sedation or gen-
· Echocardiographic features consistent with pul-
eral anesthesia is required for catheterization,
monary embolization overlap with those found
and animals with PH are at increased risk
in PH. In addition, a thrombus can occasionally
for anesthetic complications. Therefore, this
be visualized within the heart or great vessels.
procedure is rarely performed in the clinical
Therefore, animals with predisposing conditions
situation.
that develop an acute onset of respiratory distress
· Pulmonary angiography has been considered the
 could benefit from echocardiographic assessment
gold standard for diagnosis of PTE in humans;
for right ventricular dilatation, pulmonary artery
although contrast helical computed tomography
enlargement, or septal fattening that might sug-
is being used increasingly more often. Neither
gest pulmonary embolization.
imaging modality is used commonly in veteri-
nary medicine because anesthesia is required,
KEY POINT
and patients with severe PH or PTE are high-risk
 Echocardiography should be considered in
anesthetic candidates. Definitive angiographic
dogs suspected of PTE.
diagnosis of PTE depends on visualization of an
 intraluminal flling defect in a pulmonary artery
or loss of visualization of an artery.
 Catheterization and Advanced Ima ging
· Ventilation:perfusion scanning uses technetium-
· Direct measurement of pulmonary artery pres-
99m-labeled macroaggregated albumin as  a
sure through right heart catheterization is the
vascular marker and technetium-99m-labeled di-
gold standard for diagnosing PH. Cardiac
ethylenetriaminepentacetic acid as a ventilatory
catheterization also allows performance of
marker to define segmental or lobar perfusion
acute phanmacologic testing of vasodilators to
defects in areas of normal ventilation. Ventilation
Chapter 9
 Cor Pulmonale and Pulmonary Thromboembolism
181
scans are rarely performed on nonanesthetized
drugs require sophisticated or complicated de-
animals; however, perfusion scanning alone can
livery and result in only minimal reductions
be completed without anesthesia and can assist
in pulmonary artery pressures. Although these
in documentation of perfusion deficits. This is
reductions are statistically significant and pro-
a safe, noninvasive technique for evaluation of
vide some clinical benefit in human patients, it
PTE, although it is somewhat nonspecific be-
is unclear whether these small changes in pul-
cause perfusion deficits can reflect true regions of
 monary arterial pressures would be beneficial in
thrombosis or simply a lung region experiencing
veterinary patients.
hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction.
· An orally available nitric oxide donor silde-
nafil (Viagra), which causes accumulation of
Therapy
cyclic guanosine monophosphate in vascular
smooth muscle and resultant vasodilation, has
· Currently, little is known about the optimal
some efficacy in reducing pulmonary artery
therapy for either PH or PTE. In animals with
pressures in both humans and experimental
cor pulmonale, cautious diuretic therapy is
animals. Occasional reports in dogs suggest
warranted to reduce fuid accumulation, and
that it might also be beneficial in some veteri-
judicious use of thoracocentesis or abdomino-
 nary patients. Supplementation with arginine
centesis can be used to improve respiration.
has been investigated for use in human medi-
Excessive removal of fuid is to be avoided since
cine since arginine is converted into nitric oxide
animals may develop volume contraction or
through combination with molecular oxygen. A
systemic hypotension.
nonselective endothelin antagonist (Bosentan)
-  p a q  su H r a a
has been shown to be efficacious in lowering
erinary medicine. Systemic vasodilators are not
 pulmonary artery pressures in patients with PH,
generally effective in lowering pulmonary artery
although again, the reduction in pressure was
pressures and can cause deleterious side effects
quite modest. Endothelin antagonists have not
because of excessive hypotension. Standard treat-
been evaluated in veterinary patients. Anti-
ment of the underlying cardiopulmonary condi-
coagulants may be beneficial by reducing in situ
tion should be employed and may lessen PH.
thrombosis, progressive vascular occlusion, and
Anticoagulant therapy is recommended in hu-
continued proliferative vascular disease.
man patients with PH associated with PTE or to
limit in situ thrombosis that can result in progres-
sive vascular obstruction. Low molecular weight
heparin therapy is often used because of reduced
risk of bleeding due to its favorable factor X:
factor II activity. However specific information
on  pharmacokinetics  and  phanmacodynamics
of the available products is currently lacking in
Frequently Asked Questions
veterinary medicine. Ultra-low-dose aspirin
(< 1 mg/kg every 24 [dog] to 72 [cat] hours) can
What clinicat findings would support the diagnosis
be used also in an attempt to inhibit platelet ag-
of cor putmonale and how could this be confirmed?
 gregation. Newer antiplatelet drugs are currently
Animals with clinical signs relative to cor pulmonale
generally display respiratory abnormalities (tachy-
under investigation.
pnea, hyperpnea, and/or cough) and may also ex hibit
· Insight into various therapies for PH has been
signs of right-heart failure (ascites, jugular venous
gained by reviewing treatment of primary PH
distention, and/or subcutaneous edema). Radiographi-
in humans, which is partially mediated by al-
cally, cor pulmonale is evident as right-sided heart en-
terations in endothelium-derived vasodilators
largement. Right atrial enlargement and dilation of the
amd constrictors and by vascular proliferation.
caudal vena cava support the diagnosis. Two-dimen-
Drugs that have been employed include intra-
sional echocardiography reveals eccentric dilation of
the right ventricle. With chronic PH or PH in a young
venous or inhaled prostacyclin (a breakdown
animal, right ventricular hypertrophy can be found.
product of arachidonic acid metabolism) and
In the presence of tricuspid regurgitation or pulmonic
inhaled nitric oxide. These vasodilators are se-
insufficiency, Doppler echocardiography can confirm
lective for the pulmonary circulation and have
PH by detection of a velocity jet greater than 2.8 or
more pronounced impact on pulmonary pres-
2.2 m/sec, respectively.
sures than systemic pressures. However, these
182
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
Glaus TM, et al: Clinical and pathological characterisa-
What tests confirm the diagnosis of PTE and provide
support for institution of anticoagulant therapy?
 o e un uoisudy Aeuond Ad yo uon
Rec 154:786, 2004.
Unfortunately, ante-mortem diagnosis of PTE re-
 mains challenging, and definitive diagnosis is often
Johnson L, Boon J, Orton EC: Clinical characteristics of
 53 dogs with Doppler derived evidence of pulmonary
not achieved in the clinical setting. Suspicion for PTE
should be present in an animal with a recognized
hypertension: 1992-1996, J Vet Intern Med 13:440,
predisposing condition (see Box 9-2) that develops
1999.
an acute onset of respiratory distress. Normal chest
Johnson LR, Lappin MR, Baker DC: Pulmonary throm-
radiographs do not preclude the diagnosis. Support-
ive evidence of PTE would include a positive D-dimer
13:338,1999
 test, echocardiographic evidence of right ventricular
Koblik PD, Hornoff W, Harnagel SH, et al: A compari-
overload, and perfusion deficits on pulmonary scin-
son of pulmonary angiography, digital subtraction
tigraphy in an animal with refractory respiratory
angiography, and
199mTc-DTPA/MAAventilation-
distress. Anticoagulant therapy with low molecular
perfusion scintigraphy for detection of experimental
wei ght heparin would often be instituted in a patient
pulmonary emboli in the dog, Vet Radiol Ultrasound
with these findings. Thrombolytic therapy is rarely
30:159, 1989.
employed because of the risk of generating a sys-
La Rue MG, Murtaugh RJ: Pulmonary thromboembo-
temic fibrinolytic state or creating ischemia-reperfu-
lism in dogs: 47 cases (1986-1987), J Am Vet Med
 sion injury. Because of the diffculty in establishing
Assoc 197:1369, 1990.
a diagnosis of PTE and the morbidity and mortality
Liska WD, Poteet BA: Pulmonary embolism associated
with canine total hip replacement, Vet Surg 32:178,
lactic anticoagulant therapy should be considered in
2003.
animals with recognized predisposing conditions.
Michelakis ED, et al: Long-term treatment with oral
What type of treatment can be considered for PH?
sildenafl is safe and improves functional capac-
Aggressive  management  of  underlying  cardio-
ity and hemodynamics in patients with pulmonary
pulmonary  conditions  should be instituted.  Ani-
arterial hypertension, Circulation 108(17):2066,
mals with chronic bronchitis or small airway col-
2003.
lapse often require steroids (oral or inhaled)
and
Nelson OL, Andreason C: The utility of plasma D-dimer
extended-release theophylline (10 mg/kg PO
ev-
to identify thromboembolic disease in the dog, J Vet
ery 12 hours [dog] or 15 to 19 mg/kg P0 in the
Int Med 17:830, 2003
evening [cat ]). Interstitial lung diseases are less likely
Norris CR, Griffey SM, Samii VF: Pulmonary throm-
to respond to medical therapy. In either group of ani-
boembolism in cats: 29 cases (1987-1997), J Am Vet
Med Assoc 215:1650, 1999.
Suges jendsoy au ul 1o auou je beue Adeeun uoa
Pyle RL, Abbott J, MacLean H: Pulmonary hypertension
can improve clinical presentation. Use of sildenafl
and cardiovascular sequelae in 54 dogs, Intern J App1 
(0.5 to 2.0 mg/kg every 8 to 12 hours) can be consid-
Res Vet Med 2:99, 2004.
ered for animals with severe PH. Blood pressure and
 echocardiographic monitoring for side effects and ef-
Schermerhorn T, Pembleton-Corbett JR, Kornreich B:
ficacy are recommended.
Pulmonary thromboembolism in cats, J Vet Int Med
18:533,2004
Schober K, Baade H, Ludewig E, et al: Cor pulmonale in
terrier breed dogs with chronic-progressive, idiopathic
SUGGESTED READINGS
pulmonary fibrosis: 19 cases (1996-2001), Tierarztliche
Praxis Ausgabe K, Kleintiere/Heimtiere 30: 180, 2002.
Bach JF, Rozanski EA, MacGregor J, et al: Retrospec-
Thomas D, Steiz M, Rtanabe G, et al: Mechanism of
tive evaluation of sildenafl citrate as a therapy for
bronchoconstriction produced by thromboemboil in
pulmonary hypertension in dogs, J Vet Intern Med
dogs, Am J Phys 206:1207, 1964.
20(5):1132-1135, 2006
Uehara Y: An attempt to estimate the pulmonary artery
Berger M, Haimowitz A, Van Tosh A, et al: Quantitative
pressure in dogs by means of pul sed Doppler echocar-
assessment of pulmonary hypertension in patients
diography, J Vet Med Sci 55:307, 1993.
with tricuspid regurgitation using continuous wave
Doppler ultrasound, J Am Coll Cardiol 6:359, 1985.
 Fluckiger MA, Gomez JA: Radiographic findings in dogs
with spontaneous pulmonary thrombosis or embo-
lism, Vet Rad 23:124, 1984.
Heartworm Disease
Clay A. Calvert and Justin David Thomason
INTRODUCTION
· Larvae development to the third stage usually
Heartworm disease is a common problem in tropi-
requires 1 to 2.5 weeks, depending on the ambi-
cal and subtropical regions. Heartworm infection
ent temperatures. Mosquitoes can survive the de-
has spread throughout most areas of the United
velopment of only low numbers (< 10) of larvae.
States, but the prevalence is still low at high el-
Larvae development within the mosquito requires
evations and in most northerm states. Endemic foci
an average daily temperature of at least 57° Fahr-
frequently occur in regions with otherwise low
enheit. The cooler the temperature, the longer
prevalence and it is diffcult to eliminate heart-
the time required for Ls to develop and vice
wonms from a region once they have been estab-
versa. Transmission is unlikely to occur during
lished. Wild animal reservoirs include wolves,
the cold months of the year, even in most south-
coyotes, foxes, Califomia gray seals, sea lions,
erm regions of the United States. This is because
raccoons, and ferrets.
when the temperatures are moderately low, the
time required for development from L, to L may
exceed the life-span (30 days) of the mosquito.
HEARTWORM DISEASE
Third-stage larvae (L3) infect the dog via the bite
wound created during feeding.
Etiology and Life Cycle
· Larvae migrate through the subcutaneous tissues
Heartworm infection is produced by the parasite
and vascular adventitial tissues for about 100
Dirofilaria immitis and is transmitted to dogs mostly
days. During this time, two molts occur. Young
by 10 to 15 species of mosquitoes. Mosquitoes can
adults (L; larvae) enter the vascular system at 3
transmit infective larvae (L3) 2 to 3 weeks after in-
to 3.5 months post-infection and are in the small
gesting a blood meal. Infection rates vary among
pulmonary arteries after 5 to 6 months.
cats in endemic regions but are usually 10% to 20%
· In the dog, adult worms and microflaria are
of that of dogs within the same enzootic region. Be-
thought to have a natural life-span of 3 to 5 years
ing male, a large breed, and outdoors increases the
and 1 to 2 years, respectively
risk of infection in dogs.
Canine Infection Life Cycle
KEY POINT
· Female mosquitoes are the intenmediate hosts
Adult worms are present in the pulmonary ar-
 and acquire the first-stage larvae (microfilaria) by
teries approximately 6 months after transmis-
feeding on infected dogs. Two molts then occur
sion from the mosquito
to produce the infective Ls stage.
183
184
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
Life Cycle
Heartworms invade the
Mature heartworms (6-7
heart and pulmonary
months] may also
arteries, reach maturity in
reproduce and release
microfilarice (heartworm
67 months, and shed
antigen into the
offspring! into the
bloodstream.
bloodstream.
Larvae remain in tissue
Microfilarice are ingested
forapproximatelytwo
months,then develop into
by a mosquito.
immature adults and
travel to the pulmonary
arteries in 3-4 months.
Infective larvae are
transferred to the dog
Microfilarice develop into
through the wound
infective larvae within the
produced by the
mosquito.
mosquito.
@IDExX Corp., 1990
Figure 10-1.
Life cycle of Dirofilaria immitis. (Courtesy Idexx Corp., Westbrook, Maine.)
· See Figure 10-1.
Feline Infection Life Cycle
· Microfilaria can appear after 6 months, in-
· Some mosquito species do not like to feed on
crease in concentration for 6 months, plateau
cats and cats are relatively resistant to infection,
for several months, and then decrease in con-
requiring a greater L inoculation. Therefore, the
centration as long as super-infection does not
 infection rate in unprotected cats is at least 80%
occur.
lower than that of unprotected dogs. The numbers
· Microfilaria-specifc antibody-mediated, occult
 of infective larvae that mature are fewer than in
infections occur in the presence of persistent host
dogs, and the pre-patent period is usually 1 to 2
antibody excess. Antibody-dependent leukocyte
months longer. The natural survival time of adult
adhesions entrap microfilaria in the pulmonary
wonms in the cat is thought to be no more than
microcirculation. Between 10% and 67% of all
2 years.
heartworm infections are occult, and some of
these are due to immune-mediated host reaction.
Prevalence
In most endemic regions, the incidence of occult
infections is approximately 20% to 25% of all
Heartworm infection is most common in tropi-
infections. Dogs administered macrolide prophy-
cal and subtropical climates. Infection is in-
laxis that are, or become, infected will not have
evitable in chronically unprotected dogs along
microf laremia.
the southern Atlantic and Gulf coasts and other
· Microfilaria-leukocyte (neutrophils and eosino-
highly endemic regions. The prevalence in cats
phils) complexes are engulfed by phagocytic
varies by geographic region. It is much lower
cells of the mononuclear phagocyte system, re-
s n s    as   
sulting in granulomatous inflammation.
areas, and the incidence is probably underesti-
·Predominately eosinophilic infammation, with
mated. Dogs housed outdoors have a four- to
minimal granulomatous inflammation, produces
five-fold increased risk compared to those
allergic pneumonitis.
housed indoors. Infection is most common
· Progressive granulomatous 
inflammation
OC-
in dogs 4 to 7 years of age, but in highly en-
casionally occurs and leads to lethal pulmonary
demic regions infection is common in younger
eosinophilic granulomatosis.
dogs.
Chapter /0Heartworm Disease
185
blood fow become impaired to varying degrees
Pathogenesis
and severe arterial disease results in pulmonary
Disease onset and severity largely reflect the
 hypertension, increased right ventricular after-
number of adult heartworms. In infected cats, the
load, and eventually right-sided congestive heart
average number of adult worms is 3 to 6, depending
failure (CHF). Parenchymal lung disease (in-
on the concentration of infected mosquitoes and the
farction and consolidation) develops secondary
 ambient temperature in any given region.
to pulmonary arterial thromboembolism and in-
creased vascular permeability.
Worm Location
History
· Until the adult worm burden exceeds 50 in a 25
kg dog, nearly all worms are located in the pul-
Dogs
 monary arteries. Worm burdens of approximately
· The history in dogs with heartwonm infection
75 are associated with worms located in the right
varies considerably. Many infections are dis-
atrium. Caval syndrome typically is associated
covered in asymptomatic dogs by immunodiag-
with worm burdens of 100 or greater.
nostic screening. Some dogs are totally without
signs; others have unexplained tachypnea, exer-
 Response to Live Worms in Dogs
cise intolerance, or cough. Signs consistent with
· Pulmonary pathology is produced beginning with
pulmonary hypertension, with or without overt
the young adults. Even if infection is identified 7
 right-sided CHF, are associated with severe heart-
months post-infection, the L, have already been
wonm disease.
in the pulmonary arteries for a few months and
some pathology has occurred. Pulmonary arterial
Cats
endothelial damage and subsequent myointimal
· The history in cats also varies considerably. Leth-
proliferation most severely affects the caudal and
argy and decreased appetite may be reported by
intenmediate lung lobes, which are those receiv-
the owners. Coughing, emesis, and sudden or epi-
ing the highest blood fow.
sodic dyspnea are typical signs in cats. However,
· Pulmonary lobar arterial enlargement,tortuosity, and
sudden death may be the first sign of infection.
 obstruction of smaller branches begin within a few
CHF is uncommon.
weeks of worm arival. Intrapulmonary blood flow
is obstructed as the disease progresses, and blood is
Clinical Signs
diverted to less severely affected lobes. Small down-
stream arterioles become damaged and leak plasma
The clinical signs associated with heartwonm in-
 and inflammatory cells into the surrounding lung
fection refect the adult worm burden, duration of
parenchyma. This causes interstitial and alveolar
infection, and host-parasite interaction. Respiratory
lung infiltrates and granulomatous infammation.
signs are most prominent.
· Pulmonary arterial obstruction and lung inflam-
mation cause fever, coughing, dyspnea,
he-
Dogs
moptysis, leukocytosis, and thrombocytopenia.
· Exercise intolerance, coughing, dyspnea, and re-
Pathology is more severe and accelerated in ac-
spiratory crackles occur in dogs with moderate and
tive dogs, relative to inactive dogs, for any given
advanced heartworm disease. Hemoptysis occurs
worm burden. Small dogs do not tolerate heart-
with severe disease and is caused by pulmonary
worm infection as well as large dogs.
thromboembolism. It can be seen before, but oc-
curs more often after adulticide treatment. Acute
Response to Live Worms in Cats
dyspnea and increased pulmonary radiographic
· The response in cats and ferrets is similar to that
infiltrates may develop secondary to spontaneous
of dogs but there is more pulmonary arterial mus-
worm death. Syncope is associated with severe
cular hypertrophy and the barrier to oxygen dif-
fusion is more severe than in the dog. Mortality in
tension. Signs of elevated central venous pressure
cats and ferrets is higher than in dogs.
indicate severe pulmonary hypertension with in-
cipient or overt right-sided CHF. Physical find-
Response to Dead Worms
 ings include prominent jugular pulse, distended
· The most severe disease is seen in response to
 jugular veins, hepatomegaly, and ascites.
dead worm fragments that are swept into small
· Hemoglobinuria commonly occurs in associa
arterioles. Pulmonary vascular compliance and
tion with caval syndrome (i.e., acute hemolytic
186
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
 crisis caused by obstruction of the vena cava with
Box 10-1
 Clinical Signs Associated with
adult worms) and occasionally when severe pul-
Feline Heartworm Disease
 monary arterial disease results in hemolysis due
to fibrin-thrombus related RBC trauma. Throm-
Acute Signs
Chronic Signs
bocytopenia is usually a consequence of these
Sudden death*
PIE↑ syndrome
complications.
Respiratory
Coughing
· Nephrotic syndrome occasionally occurs as the
 Pulmonary embolism
Dyspnea
result of severe glomerular disease (amyloidosis
Collapse; shock
Cardiopulmonary
or immune complex glomerulonephritis). Mani-
 Hemoptysis
Lethargy
festations include proteinuria, hypoalbuminemia,
Dyspnea; cough
Weakness
hypercholesterolemia, ascites and occasionally
Pneumonitis
Right-sided CHFt
Dyspnea; cough
Anorexia
 peripheral edema and azotemia.
Neurologic
Gastrointestinal
Blindness
Vomiting
Cats
Seizures
·Clinical signs in cats are differentthan in dogs. The
Ataxia
common signs are vomiting, collapse or syncope,
Coma
asthma-like syndrome, coughing, sudden death,
Circling
and occasionally central nervous system signs.
Syncope
Gastrointestinal
Signs occur most often early in the infection and
Vomiting
again when young adult worms arrive in the pul-
monary arteries. Severe pulmonary complications
*From severe pulmonary thromboembolism or heartworm
and death are most likely to occur whenever one
occlusion of main pulmonary artery.
 or more adult worm dies, either spontaneously or
Pulmonary infiltrates of eosinophilia.
as a result of Immiticide administration.
Congestive heart failure.
· Asthmatic signs are a common manifestation and
Modified from Calvert C. Feline heartworm disease. In Fox PR,
ed: Canine and feline cardiology, New York, 1988, Churchill
often occur about 3 to 4 months post-infection. A
Livingstone.
 strong antibody response at this time may destroy
the developing larvae. If not, then a period of
quiescence occurs only to have asthma-like signs
recur in some cats 7 to 8 months post-infection.
direct smear or a concentration test (modified Knott
· Vomiting is a common, sporadic sign. It often is
test or millipore filter test) in dogs with or without
not associated with eating, may include food, but
clinical or radiographic findings consistent with the
mucus and bile are often the major components.
 disease. Testing puppies younger than 6 months of
Vomiting and coughing in a cat should increase
age is not indicated.
the index of suspicion.
Affected cats usually lack circulating microf-
· Sudden death related to spontaneous wonm death
and thromboembolism is more common in cats
ties, and echocardiography is very useful. A positive
than in dogs.
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) test
· Neurologic signs, usually seizures, occur occa-
for heartwonm antigen, antibody or both may be
sionally when aberrant worm migration to the
present.
brain occurs.
· See Box 10-1.
Laboratory Studies
·The minimum data base varies depending on
KEY POINT
the patient's age, clinical signs, and preference
The combination of vomiting, eosinophilia,
of individual clinicians. The minimum pretreat-
and hyperglobulinemia warrant a high index
ment database for all dogs suspected of having
of suspicion of heartwomm infection in cats.
heartworm infection includes packed cell vol-
ume, blood urea nitrogen, urine specific gravity.
urine protein determination, and heartworm an-
Diagnosis
tigen test. Thoracic radiographs should always
be taken because they reveal more about disease
The diagnosis of heartwonm infection in dogs is
severity than any other single test.
based on immunodiagnostic antigen testing. Micro-
· The minimum data base for cats should include
filaria in the peripheral blood can be detected by a
thoracic radiographs. Echocardiography and
Chapter10
Heartworm Disease
187
fecal studies for lungworms are useful for the
Screening in Dogs
differential diagnosis of heartwonm infection,
· Screening in dogs is usually recommended for
feline asthma, cardiomyopathy, bronchitis, pul-
the late spring in cooler climates to maximize the
monary fibrosis, and lung parasites. A tracheal
likelihood of detecting infections acquired in the
or bronchial wash may be useful for detecting
previous year. In hotter climates, infections may
lung parasitic lesions, such as those produced by
be acquired as late as November or early Decem-
Aelurostrongylus spp.
ber and these infections are not detectable until
May or June. Run an antigen test 7 months after
Clinical Pathology
the end of the previous transmission season (Fig-
ure 10-2).
No abnormal test results are pathognomonic for
heartwonm infection.
Sereening in Cats
· Infections in cats can usually be identified by
Complete Blood Count
echocardiography. Combined antibody and anti-
· Eosinophilia and basophilia are the most common
gen testing is recommended for cats. A negative
abnonmalities in dogs. Eosinophilia is more com-
antibody test weighs against the diagnosis. Al-
mon and the highest counts tend to occur with
though a positive antigen test confinms infection
occult infections. Dipetalonema (Acanthocheilo-
in cats, many infected cats are antigen test nega-
nema) reconditum infections produce eosinophil
tive (Figures 10-3 and 10-4).
counts as high as those associated with D. immitis
infection.
Immunodiagnostie Testing
· Neutrophilic leukocytosis with a left shift is
· These tests must be performed in strict compli-
usually the result of pulmonary thrombo-
ance with the manufacturer's instructions. False-
embolism.
positive test results are usually the result of poor
· Thrombocytopenia is usually present when
technique. Serodiagnosis of adult heartworm an-
there is severe pulmonary arterial disease and
tigens in dogs is accomplished readily by mem-
thromboembolism.
 brane and microwell ELISA tests and membrane
· Hemoglobinuria,
usually
 accompanied
by
immunochromatographic tests. Numerous spe-
thrombocytopenia, is seen with caval syndrome
cific and sensitive tests are available. Test time
and with severe pulmonary thromboembolic
duration is less than 30 minutes and for some
disease.
tests is approximately 10 minutes. All of these
tests can be performed with plasma or serum
Serum Biochemistry and Urinalysis
samples, and the majority can be run with whole
· Azotemia may occur in dogs with complicated
blood.
infections. Prerenal azotemia can be caused by
· Positive antigen test results are the result of the
dehydration or right-sided CHF. Primary azote-
presence of adult female worms. The antigen is
mia can result from glomerulopathies. Increased
associated with the worm's reproductive tract.
hepatic enzyme activities may occur; however,
· The particular test employed is influenced by the
increases up to 10-fold do not affect treatment,
number of tests performed daily, the amount of
complications, or survival. Hepatic failure with
whole blood or serum required, and the speed of
icterus can occur in dogs with chronic right-sided
results. Some tests, such as DiroCHEK (Synbiot-
CHF.
ics), are very efficient for testing multiple sam-
· Proteinuria is common and is most pronounced
ples simultaneously.
in patients with severe infections or renal amy
· Weakly positive test results should be verified by
loidosis. Mild proteinuria usually resolves after
repeat testing using a different test.
Immiticide treatment.
· Most immunodiagnostic tests (ELISA based) are
·Hypoalbuminemia occurs in some dogs with se-
semi-quantitative because rapid and strong posi-
vere infections; hyperglobulinemia is common in
tive test results are thought to be related to higher
dogs and cats with chronic heartwonm disease.
 antigen concentrations. Low antigenemia indicates
· Loss of albumin into the third space occurs with
 a low adult heartworm burden and reduced risk of
right-sided CHF and is complicated by hepatic in-
 post-adulticide thromboembolic complications.
sufficiency, intestinal congestion, and free-water
· High-antigenemia may be the result of a heavy
retention. Hyponatremia and/or mild hyperkale-
worm burden and may indicate increased risk of
mia may result.
thromboembolism; however, large quantities of
188
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
Diagnosis of Heartworm Infection in Dogs
 Perform an antigen test 
Positive
Negative
 Heartworm infection
No heartworm infection or
 low heartworm burden
Run a modified Knott 
 Start macrolide or
diethylcarbamazine (DEC)
 or filter test
therapy
Negative
Positive
Perform:
Perform:
· Complete blood count 
· Complete blood count 
· Serum chemistry panel
· Serum chemistry panel
· Thoracic radiography
  Thoracic radiography
Start:
 Start:
· Macrolide
· "Slow kill" macrolide*
•- Adulticidal therapy
· Adulticidal therapy
If milbemycin or high-dose
ivermectin (50 μg/kg) is
preferred, the patient should
be observed for adverse
reaction or pretreated as
described in the text.
Figure 10-2.
 An algorithm approach to the diagnosis of heartworm infection (Hwl). (Modified from Ettinger SE, Feldman EC:
Textbook of veterinary internal medicine: diseases of the dog and cat, ed 6, St Louis, 2005, WB Saunders.)
Routine Screening for Feline Heartworm Infection
Antibody
Positive
Negative
”
 Antigen
 No heartworm infection
or low heartworm burden
Positive
Negative
Heartworm infection
 Possible heartworm
Preventative okay
infection
· Start preventative
Perform (optional):
· Treat symptomatically.
· Complete blood count
 as needed 
· Thoracic radiography
· Echocardiography
- Microfilaria tests
Start:
· Preventative
Figure 10-3.
An algorithm demonstrating a reasonable approach to screening cats for heartworm infection.
Chapter10
Heartworm Disease
189
Diagnosis in Cats Suspected to Have Heartworm Infection
Antibody and antigen test 
Positive antigen
Negative antigen
 Negative antigen
Positive antibody
 Negative antibody
Heartworm infection
 Cat exposed to heartworm
Exposure to heartworm
 Heartworm infection
unlikely
unlikely
 Heartworm infection
unlikely
Start preventative
 Treat as needed 
Perform other tests (e.g..
 Perform (as clinical signs
 thoracic radiographs and
 Perform additional tests 
 blood tests)
dictate):
 (as clinical situation 
· Repeat antigen test 
dictates; false-negative
· Complete blood count
results do occur)
· Thoracic radiography
· Echocardiography
● Microfilaria test 
· Nonselective
angiography
Start preventative
Start preventative
 Positive antigen or
 Negative antigen
Eosinophilia or thoracic
positive microfilaria test or
 Negative microfilaria test
 radiographic findings
positive echocardiogram
 Negative echocardiogram
suggestive
 or positive nonselective
 Negative NSA
 angiogram (NSA)
Heartworm infection 
Heartworm infection
 Presumptive diagnosis
 unlikely
 of heartworm infection 
may be made as a result
 of clinical signs 
 Continue preventative 
Continue preventative
 Treat as needed
 Continue preventative
Treat as needed 
Figure 10.4.
 An algorithm demonstrating a reasonable approach to diagnose Hw in cats in which heartworm infection is
suspected. (Modified from Ettinger SE, Feldman EC: Textbook of veterinary internal medicine: diseases of the dog and cat, ed 6,
St Louis, 2005, WB Saunders.)
antigen released from dead worms results in a
· In cats, antigen tests are specific, but false-negative
quick, strong test reaction, but does not necessar-
 results are common. False-negative test results are
ily mean that the worm burden is high.
explained by low worm burden, male-only infec-
· Immunodiagnostic tests are required for diagnosis
tions, and infections with young (< 7 months old)
 in dogs receiving monthly macrolide prophylaxis.
female worms that have immature reproductive
190
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
tracts. The antigen test is usually positive if there
· If the lobar arteries are at least 1.5 times the
are 3 or more mature female worms.
diameters of the ninth ribs, then severe (class 3)
arterial pathology has occurred.
Heartworm Antibody Test
·Patchy ill-defined infiltrates around the lobar ar-
·Heartworm-associated antibody tests are use-
teries can result from plasma leakage and inflam-
ful to rule out infections in cats. Antibodies may
 mation in the lung parenchyma.
appear by 2 to 3 months post-infection and are
· Lobar artery dilation and tortuosity are indicative
usually present by 5 months. A positive antibody
of severe pathology.
test indicates exposure but not necessarily active
infection. Approximately 10% of infected cats do
ible resulting from obstructed blood fow due to
not produce antibodies.
 myointimal proliferation and thrombus formation.
· Asthma-like signs due to developing larvae often
occur months before the antigen test can become
Electrocardiography
positive.
· The electrocardiogram (ECG) is not a component
· Larvae induced antibodies can persist after the
of the minimum data base although it is sometimes
 larvae have been killed by a macrolide drug.
helpful. The ECG is not a sensitive test for identi-
fication of mild-to-moderate right ventricular hy-
infection, live adult infection or persistent (at
pertrophy. Even though the ECG will reflect severe
least 6 months) antibodies after adult heartworm
hypertrophy, clinical signs and thoracic radiographic
death. Antigen testing and echocardiography are
 analysis provide much more clinical information.
needed to confinm the diagnosis. Intenmediate ti-
· A right ventricular hypertrophy patterm (S waves
ters should be repeated in 1 month.
 in leads I, II, aVF, V2, and V4) is common in dogs
· Tests that may support a diagnosis and should be
with severe pulmonary hypertension and is found
evaluated include: thoracic radiographs, echocar-
in 90% of dogs with overt right-sided CHF (asci-
diography, serum globulins (hyperglobulinemia),
tes). However, significant pulmonary hypertension
and CBC (eosinophilia, basophilia).
may exist in the absence of ECG abnormalities.
· Cardiac rhythm disturbances,including atrial fibril-
Microfilaria Detection
 lation, can occur in dogs with severe infections.
· In dogs, the incidence of occult (amicrofilaremic)
infections is greater than the incidence of false-
Echocardiography
negative antigen test results.
· Evidence of right ventricular and pulmonary artery
· Annual microfilarial detection tests are required
enlargement can be detected by two-dimensional
for dogs receiving diethylcarbamazine prophy-
echocardiography. Occasionally, worms may be
laxis. Otherwise, microflarial detection tests are
 detected in the right ventricle, the main pulmonary
mostly indicated if the intent is to kill the micro-
artery and the right/left lobar arteries (Figure 10-6).
 filaria rapidly using Interceptor. Evaluate a direct
Echocardiography is particularly useful in antigen
blood smear immediately after procurement of
negative cats.
a diagnostic blood sample. If the direct smear is
· Echocardiography is the test of choice for diagno-
negative, then a concentration test is performed.
sis of caval syndrome (a mass of worms is found in
The Knott test (a centrifugal concentration test)
the tricuspid valve orifice and in the vena cava).
or a filter test is at least 25% more sensitive for
· The echocardiographic features of severe heartwonm
 the detection of microfilaria compared to a direct
disease include right ventricular eccentric hypertro
smear analysis.
phy, septal fHattening, underloading of the left ven-
tricle and left atrium (Figure 10-7), dilation of the
Radiography
 (-o a) s Ar And u
·A common finding in heartwonm infected
main arteries, and high-velocity tricuspid and pul-
 dogs is dilation of the main pulmonary artery
monic regurgitations (Figure 10-9). The latter two
segment at the one o'clock position on the ven-
findings are indicative of pulmonary hypertension.
trodorsal or dorsoventral projection. The main
pulmonary artery segment is not visible in the
KEY POINT
cat because of its midline position. Next, evalu-
Thoracic radiography is the most important
ate the lobar pulmonary arteries. The caudal
diagnostic test for determining the severity of
lobar arteries are the first and most severely
heartworm disease.
effected (Figure 10-5).
Chapter10
Heartworm Disease
191
Figure 10-5.
 Dorsoventral (A) and lateral (B) radiographic projections of the heart in a dog with class Ill heartworm disease.
the lateral projection (arrows), and the right cranial lobar artery (o) is enlarged.
SEQUELAE OF HEARTWORM
INFECTION
KEY POINT
Parenchymal Lung Disease
Echocardiography is a sensitive test for heart-
Parenchymal lung disease results from pulmo-
worm infection in cats.
 nary arteriolar thromboembolism with leakage of
plasma and inflammatory cells into the adjacent
192
SECTIONIICardiovascularDisease
heartworms in the right heart. The dog had class Ill disease. RA, Right atrium; RV, right ventricle; IV, left ventricle.
06/02/200401:40:46PM
Froq:1.7MHz/3.4MHz
Dcta
epth:15.0cm
RV
15
126
Figure 10-7.
 Right parasternal, short-axis, two-dimensional cardiac ultrasound of the left and right ventricles. Note the severely
enlarged right ventricle. The arowhead points to echogenic worms within the right ventricle. RV, Right ventricle; IV, left ventricle.
06/02/200401:41:45 PM
Dctave
Freq:1.7 MHz/3.4MHz
PS:79.2
Depth: 15.0 cm
15
PA
125
Figure 10-8.  Right parasternal, short axis, two-dimensional cardiac ultrasound of the heart base showing the severely dilated 
main pulmonary artery (PA). The arrow head points to echogenic worms within the right atrium.
Chapter10
Heartworm Disease
193
/3.4MH
：2.5MHz
A
P
H2
z/3.4MH
B
Figure 10-9.
9.A, Color flow Doppler echocardiogram obtained from the same position as Figure 10-8.Note the aliasing color
flow pattern consistent with significant pulmonary valve regurgitation. RA, Right atrium; PA, pulmonary artery. B, Continuous
 s   r a a  d an   a ea 
pulmonary valve regurgitation and pulmonary hypertension.
tissues. Severity varies, disease is most preva
Allergic Pneumonitis
lent in the caudal and intermediate lung lobes,
and it is most concentrated surrounding the lobar
The incidence is 10% to 20% of occult infections.
arteries. The degree of caudal lobar arterial dis-
It is associated with eosinophilia, coughing, and
ease is best assessed by the dorsoventral radio-
dyspnea. This mixed diffuse interstitial-alveolar
graphic projection. The caudal lobar arteries,
 lung disease is best visualized in the caudal lobes.
especially the right, are the first to enlarge and
It often occurs with minimal pulmonary arterial
typically are the most severely diseased. The di-
enlargement and can be mistaken for left-sided
ameters of the caudal lobar arteries should not
CHF (pulmonary edema) or blastomycosis.
exceed that of the ninth rib at the point of their
superimposition. Tortuosity and pruning of the
Pulmonary Eosinophilic Granulomatosis
arteries (the latter due to thromboembolism)
are best seen on the dorsoventral projection; the
This uncommon complication of occult heart
caudal lobar vessels are the most severely ef-
wonm disease probably results from the granu-
fected. The cranial lobar arteries are best evalu-
lomatous inflammation known to be associated
ated on the lateral projection; their diameters
with occult infections. The reaction in some
should not exceed that of the proximal portion
cases is progressive and assumes a neoplastic-
of the fourth rib.
like behavior.
194
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
Table 10-1
Classification of Heartworm Disease Severity Based on Signs, Physical Examination,
and Radiographic Findings
Class
Clinical Signs
Examination Findings
Radiographic Findings
1
None to occasional cough
Normal examination
No lesions
2
Occasional cough and
Increased lung sounds
Slight pulmonary
 mild-to-moderate exercise
Fair general condition
arterial enlarge-
intolerance
 ment. Circumscribed
 perivascular density
plus mixed al veolar-
interstitial lesions 
Persistent cought,
Increased lung sounds
Moderate-to-severe
moderate-to-severe exercise
Accentuated or Split S2
 pulmonary arterial
intolerance
Right apical gallop
enlargement
Weight loss, cachexia
Tachypnea, dyspnea
RV enlargement
Respiratory distress
Diffuse and severe
Overt right heart failure
 pulmonary infiltrates
General loss of condition
Feline Asthma-Like Syndrome
The outcome in class 1 and 2 patients is excellent
Coughing, wheezing, and dyspnea are consistent
when proper treatment and restriction of activity
with feline heartworm infection and the radio-
are accomplished. The outcome for class 3 patients
graphic picture resembles feline asthma. The syn-
 is less encouraging and treatment can be intensive
drome first appears about 4 months after infection
and expensive.
 and tends to be episodic. A quiescent period fol-
lows the initial few weeks of clinical signs, but
Treatment
latent relapse of intermittent asthma-like signs
may occur.
The goal of treatment is to kill all adult heartworms
with minimal drug toxicity and a tolerable degree
of pulmonary thromboembolism caused by the dy-
CLASSIFICATION OF HEARTWORM
ing worms. Microfilaria should be eliminated, but
DISEASE SEVERITY
it is not necessary to administer a rapid-kill micro-
Severity of heartwonm disease is determined by
filaricide such as Interceptor. Gradual elimination
worm burden, duration of infection, and host re-
of microfilaria over a period of 6 to 8 months with
sponses to the wonms. Most severe pulmonary
monthly macrolide administration is acceptable.
complications are associated with occult infections.
Three classes are defined which correlate with
Patient Selection
clinical signs and pulmonary arterial disease. Class
Although most heartwonm infected dogs can be
assignment may assist in customizing Immiticide
 treated successfully, there are exceptions.
treatment (Table 10-1).
· Class 1: Asymptomatic or mild clinical signs.
Contraindications to Adulticide Treatment
· Class 2: Moderate clinical and radiographic
Immiticide should not be administered to cats because
abnornmalities.
a safe and effective regimen of melarsomine dihy-
· Class 3: Severe clinical and radiographic abnor-
drochloride (Immiticide, Merial) has not been de-
malities, including right-sided CHF.
veloped. Major organ failure such as hepatic failure,
· Caval syndrome: This syndrome is sometimes
nephrotic syndrome, and severe renal failure are con-
referred to as class 4. However, caval syndrome
traindications in dogs. The combination of right-sided
is not a reflection of the severity of pulmonary
CHF and icterus is a contraindication to treatment.
arterial disease. Rather it is a syndrome caused
by obstruction of blood fow into and through the
Treatment of Old Dogs
right heart. Caval syndrome causes mechanical
Heartworm disease pathology may be nonprogres-
hemolysis and hepatic failure due to acute pas-
sive in old dogs that have chronic infections with
sive congestion.
low worm burdens. Adulticide treatment may not be
Chapter10
Heartworm Disease
195
necessary for dogs with class 1 infection that have
· 2.5 mg/kg Immiticide injected intramuscularly,
low-level antigenemia; however, it is recommended
once. This dose contains 0.75 mg/kg of total ar-
by the American Heartwonm Society. Monthly ad-
senic. The injection is given into the epaxial mus-
ministration of ivermectin (Heartgard, Merial) at
culature at the level of the third to fifth lumbar
the standard prophylactic dosage will gradually kill
vertebrae.
adult worms over a period of 16 to 30 months; how-
· The appropriate volume of the reconstituted drug
     
is aspirated into a syringe, and then a new needle
time and resistance may develop in dogs treated in
 is placed on the syringe.
this manner.
· For dogs weighing more than 10 kg. use a 1%2-
inch, 22-gauge needle, and for smaller dogs, use
Treatment of Cats
a 1-inch, 23-gauge needle.
Treat asthma-like signs with prednisolone (1.0 to
· The injection should be completed before the
2.0 mg/kg, daily for 10 days; then taper the dose
needle is withdrawn, and finger pressure should
to prevent signs of disease). Do not use aspirin in
be applied over the needle tract during and for a
cats. Immiticide should not be used. Each worm
short time after withdrawal.
will cause pulmonary thromboembolism when it
· Approximately 50% (most males and some of the
dies and if multiple wonms die simultaneously, se-
females) of adult worms are killed.
vere pulmonary thromboembolism will occur. It is
· Two follow-up injections (2.5 mg/kg each) at
generally believed that 30% to 50% of cats survive
a 24-hour interval are administered after 1 to 3
their infections.
 months. Post-treatment thromboembolism recurs,
but the severity is reduced because fewer wonms
Wolbachia (Rickettseae): Is It Important?
are present.
Wolbachia is a vertically transmitted endosym-
· Data indicate that 100% of male and 98% of fe-
biotic, gram-negative, intracellular bacterium
male worms are killed by the 3 doses.
that is harbored by D. immitis larvae and adults.
It is possible that metabolic products and surface
KEY POINT
 proteins from Wolbachia can illicit an inflamma-
tory response in the host dog or cat. The host
 Use the graded-kill Immiticide protocol 
is exposed to Wolbachia when larvae or adult
wonms die or are killed and Wolbachia may be
expulsed from the uterus of females or the ex-
Treatment of Class 3 Heartworm Disease
cretory system of either gender of D. immitis.
· Severe pulmonary arterial disease occurs in 10%
Organs most vulnerable to inflammation are the
of infected dogs in highly endemic regions, and in
lungs and kidneys. Doxycycline may be lethal
some patients, the adult worm burden is very great.
to Wolbachia and it is postulated that the admin-
Extraction of adult worms from the vena cava, right
istration of doxycycline aimed at reducing Wol-
atrium, right ventricle, and main puhmonary arteries
bachia numbers prior to Immiticide treatment
is possible. Worm extraction is only for patients with
might reduce post-Immiticide inflammation.
Clinical studies testing this hypothesis have not
ies. These patients have a high antigen concentration,
been reported.
and the high burden is confirmed by echocardiogra-
phy. The technique requires fHuoroscopy and long.
Adulticide Therapy in Dogs
fexible alligator forceps or a horsehair brush that is
The approved available adulticidal agent is Immiti-
introduced into the right jugular vein via a surgical
cide. The following regimens have proved to be ef-
approach and manipulated through the heart into the
fective. The manufacturer recommends an initial 2
pulmonary arteries. Numerous passages to grasp
dose, separated by 24 hours, regimen for dogs with
and remove worms are required, and the procedure
class 1 and 2 infections. The authors do not recom-
is aided by fluoroscopy. This procedure is highly ef-
mend this protocol.
fective in experienced hands.
· After the patient has been stabilized, treat with
Graded-Kill Immiticide Protocol
Immiticide to kill any remaining worms. It is as-
· We recommend this protocol for classes 1, 2, and
sumed that some wonms are not removed. Sub-
 3 infections. This regimen kills worms gradually
sequently, remaining worms can be detected by
 and reduces subsequent pulmonary thromboem-
  aasd    o
bolism severity.
result after 4 to 6 months.
196
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
Side Effects and Eficacy of Immiticide
 are removed and the obstruction to blood fow is
Treatment
alleviated.
· Mild myositis of 1 to 3 days, duration often is ob-
· Clinical signs are variable, including a sys-
served after Immiticide injections. Approximately
tolic heart murmur, diastolic gallop, and
 one third of treated dogs experience some swell-
 hemoglobinuria.
ing, and a sterile seroma occurs uncommonly.
· Echocardiography is diagnostic.
· If an injection of Immiticide causes a local re-
· Surgical retrieval of the worms is the only recom-
action, then consider administration of an anti-
mended acute treatment.
histamine and rapid acting corticosteroid before
· Minimal or no sedation is used. Rather local an-
subsequent injections.
esthesia is used to perform a surgical cut-down
· Hepatic and renal toxicity associated with Im-
on the right jugular vein. A long, fexible alliga-
miticide is uncommon; excessive dosage can
tor forceps or horsehair brush is introduced and
produce noncardiogenic pulmonary edema.
advanced to the heart base in order to retrieve
· Confirmation of efficacy can be established af-
as many wonms as possible from the vena cava
ter 6 months by antigen testing. Mean antigen
and right atrium with multiple passages. The
concentration is reduced to 1% of pretreatment
procedure is finished when several passages
levels, indicating nearly complete elimination of
fail to retrieve additional worms. This is highly
wonms.
effective but experience is required for optimal
results.
Drug Storage
· After a period of stabilization, Immiticide is ad-
· Immiticide is purchased as a lyophilized powder
ministered to eliminate remaining worms.
that does not require refrigeration and has a shelf
life of at least 2 years. The reconstituted drug
When to Initiate Macrolide Prophylaxis in
must be kept refrigerated.
Infected Dogs
Post-Adulticide Complications
Macrolide prophylaxis should be initiated as soon
· Strict patient confinement is essential for 4 to 6
as infection is confinmed. Heartgard, Revolution, or
weeks post-treatment. Reduced blood fow de-
Advantage Multi can be initiated for prophylaxis
mand through the pulmonary arteries is benefi cial
in microfilaremic infections. Interceptor should
to diminish endothelial damage and to promote
not be administered to microfilaremic dogs unless
vascular repair.
rapid kill is intended. In fact, in patients that have
· Thromboembolic
complications
may
occur
neither clinical signs nor obvious radiographic ab-
from several days to 4 to 6 weeks post-Immiti-
normalities, it is appropriate to initiate prophylaxis
cide. Most complications occur between 1 to
and wait for several months before administering
3 weeks.
Immiticide. This approach eliminates migrating
· Most severe thromboembolism occurs in dogs
larvae that might not be killed by Immiticide.
with class 3 infections with high antigen con-
centrations.
Coughing,
gagging,
lethargy,
Rapid Microfilaricide Therapy
anorexia,
tachypnea,
dyspnea, syncope, he-
moptysis, and fever are common.
.Thrombo-
We recommend against the use of Interceptor or
cytopenia and an infammatory leukogram are
high-dose ivermectin to kill microfilaria rapidly.
usual.
Eliminating the microflaria with monthly pro-
· Radiographic evidence of parenchymal lung dis-
phylaxis is acceptable.
ease is always present.
KEY POINT
Treatment of Caval Syndrome
· Caval syndrome (class 4) is uncommon except in
 Rapid kill of microfilaria is unnecessary.
highly endemic regions. It is associated with large
numbers of worms in the right heart and vena cava.
Confirmation of Adulticide Efficacy
It is seen most often in the late spring and early
summer in young dogs that have received a heavy
 Anantigen test should be performed 6 months af-
inoculation over a short time period the previous
ter the third Immiticide injection. Occasionally, a
year. Acute cardiovascular collapse and shock
weakly positive test result may occur. Wait two
occur and is fatal within hours unless the worms
additional months and retest. Whether to retreat is
Chapter10
Heartworm Disease
197
controversial. Very few worms are likely to have
·Administer heparin at 200 units/kg SQ every 8
survived and re-treatment may not be necessary
hours.
· Re-reatment is recommended for class 3 infections,
· Administer prednisone (1.0 mg/kg PO every 24
if clinical signs persist, and for perfonmance dogs.
hours for 3 to 10 days).
· Use intranasal or cage-administered oxygen for
Adjuncts to Adulticide Therapy
 dyspneic patients.
KEY POINT
Allergic Pneumonitis
Test for Immiticide efficacy no sooner than 6
months after the last dose.
·This complication occurs in 10% to 20% of patients
with occult infections. The clinical signs include
dyspnea, coughing, respiratory crackles, and exer-
Heparin
cise intolerance. Thoracic radiographs contain dif-
· Recommended for rapidly
ydropping platelet
fuse interstitial-alveolar infiltrates. Eosinophilia is
counts and hemoglobinuria.
common, and eosinophils predominate in tracheal
· Administer 75 to 100 units/kg SQ every 8 hours,
lavage cytology. The syndrome responds well to oral
for several days up to 1 week.
prednisone (1 to 2 mg/kg every 24 hours for sev-
· Combine with strict cage confinement.
and begin Immiticide therapy as soon as dyspnea,
Corticosteroids
coughing, and pulmonary infiltrates have resolved.
· Reduce parenchymal inflammatory disease in
the lungs but promote thrombosis and reduce
Pulmonary Eosinophilic Granulomatosis
pulmonary arterial blood fow if used for longer
than 10 to 14 consecutive days. Do not use corti-
· This uncommon complication of occult heart-
costeroids routinely, but only as needed to control
worm disease probably results from the granulo-
sequelae.
matous inflammation known to be associated with
occult infections. Prednisone (2 mg/kg PO every
Oxygen
24 hours for 7 to 14 days; then gradually taper
· The only effective means of dilating the pulmo
dose) with azathioprine (50 mg/m2 PO every 24
nary arteries.
hours for 7 days; then 25 mg/m2 every 24 hours
· For class 3 infections associated with dyspnea,
for 7 days; then 25 mg/m2 every 48 hours) may in-
orthopnea, or CHF.
duce partial or complete remission. Relapses are
· Administer intra-nasally or by oxygen cage.
common even in the face of medical therapy. The
prognosis is guarded, and surgical excision of lo-
bar lesions may be required. Adulticide treatment
TREATMENT OF SEQUELAE
should be delayed until remission is attained.
Pulmonary Thromboembolism
· This common complication of moderate to
Feline Asthma-Like Syndrome
severe pulmonary arterial disease can occur
· Treat asthma-like signs in cats with prednisolone
before adulticide therapy, but is most common 7
(1.0 to 2.0 mg/kg PO daily for 10 days; then taper
to 21 days after adulticide therapy. In dogs, clini-
the dose to prevent signs of disease).
cal signs include coughing, dyspnea, fever, and
hemoptysis.
PREVENTION
· A regenerative leukocytosis with thrombocytope-
nia usually is present.
·Amicroflarial examination always is indicated be-
· Positive d-dimers (>500mg/dl) may be a sen-
fore initiation of drugs that can be associated with
sitive indicator. However, in the authors'
 an acute adverse reaction. These drugs are Intercep-
experience, negative d-dimers do not exclude
tor and diethylcarbamazine. Prevention should be
thromboembolism.
· Thoracic radiographs reveal severe pulmonary
exceeds about 57° F. Year-round prevention is prac-
arterial disease  with  periarterial parenchymal
ticed in hotter climates, even though transmission
disease of variable severity.
is uncommon in December and January in the
· Initiate cage confinement for 5 to 10 days.
continental United States.
198
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
· Start as early as 6 to 8 weeks of age. In cooler cli-
· It is not as effective as ivenmectin at preventing
mates, start puppies on prophylaxis as soon after
the maturation of larvae when monthly adminis-
8 weeks of age as dictated by seasonal risk.
tration is started 4 months post-L inoculation.
· Heartgard, Interceptor, Revolution, and Advan-
· It also controls hookwonm, roundwonm, and
tage Multi should be started within 1 month of
whipworm infestations.
the transmission season. These drugs kill migrat-
· One dose of Interceptor at the prophylactic dos-
ing larvae during the first 6 to 8 weeks after L3
age will kill most microfilaria within 24 hours. If
inoculation.
the microfilaria concentration is high, an adverse
· Successful prophylaxis is confirmed by a nega-
reaction is likely.
tive antigen test result one year after initiation.
· Macrolides are safe for collies when prescribed
Moxidectin
according to the label.
· Macrolide prophylaxis not only interferes with lar-
·A topical solution formulation (Advantage Multi)
val embryogenesis, which reduces the circulating
 is an effective once-a-month heartworm preven-
levels of microfilaria, but also gradually kills exist-
tative agent for dogs and cats. Advantage Multi
ing microfilaria over a period of 6 to 8 months.
also controls feas, hookworms, roundwonms,
whipworms, and ear mites.
KEY POINT
KEY POINT
In all studies to date, owner administration
compliance has been poor.
All macrolide preventive drugs eliminate micro-
filaria, either quickly or slowly. For this reason,
chronic dosing with Heartgard, Revolution, In-
Ivermectin
terceptor, or Advantage Multi leads to "occult"
 status in infected dogs. All monthly prophylac-
· Ivermectin (Heartgard), at a dosage of 6 to 12
tic drugs can be administered without prior
micrograms/kg given monthly, is an effective pre-
testing and fear of adverse reactions.
ventive drug. A chewable formulation of Ivenmec-
tin plus pyrantel pamoate (Heartgard Plus) is an
effective heartworm preventive that also controls
Diethylcarbamazine
ascarid and hookwonm infestations. Drug reac-
 tions are rare at the recommended dosage.
· Diethylcarbamazine (2.5 to 3.0 mg/kg, PO) given
· The reach-back larvacidal action is 100% at
daily is an effective prophylactic drug. If the
1 month and nearly 100% at 2 months.
owner skips more than a few days of treatment,
· If initiated 4 months following L3 inoculation
 do not reinstitute preventive treatment before per-
and continued for at least 1 year, the likelihood of
forming a microfilarial concentration test. Dieth-
developing infection is reduced by at least 98%.
ylcarbamazine has been largely supplanted by the
·When administration is begun 5.5 months post-L3
macrolide drugs. The duration of action of dieth-
inoculation, the subsequent adult worm burden is
ylcarbamazine is short because the drug affects
reduced by about 50%
the L3-L4 (larval) molt 9 to 12 days postinfection.
·When administration is begun 6.5 months post-
· Begin therapy before mosquito season and con-
L3, the subsequent adult worm burden is reduced
tinue for 2 months after the first frost (or year-
by about one third.
round in regions that have mosquitoes all year)
· Heartgard Plus kills adult heartworms slowly
· Combination diethylcarbamazine and oxibenda-
over a 16- to 30-month period and microfilariae
zole (Filaribits Plus) controls intestinal helminths.
Over a period of 6 to 8 months.
An occasional side effect of oxibendazole is in-
· A dose of 24 μg/kg administered monthly is an
creased liver enzyme activity, icterus, and hepatic
effective heartworm prophylaxis in cats, and it
insufficiency, which is reversible after the drug is
controls hook worms.
discontinued.
KEY POINT
Milbemycin
Never initiate diethylcarbamazine treatment
· Milbemycin (Interceptor), at a dosage of 0.5 to 0.99
in microfilaremic dogs because a severe reac-
mg/kg, is an effective once-a-month preventive
 tion may occur.
 agent for heartworm disease in dogs and cats.
Chapter10
Heartworm Disease
199
MISSED DOSES OF ORAL
How likely is it that a cat will survive heartworm
MACROLIDE PROPHYLACTIC
infection?
DRUGS
Estimates are that mortality is about 50% whether or
not Immiticide is administered.
· One dose of any macrolide will kill all lar-
What is the most practical method to rule out
vae that have infected a dog in the previous
heartworm infection in cats?
month.
A negative antibody test is associated with a high
· One dose of Heartgard, Interceptor or Revolution
likelihood that infection is absent. If there is still con-
will kill virtually all larvae that have infected a
cern, then echocardiography is indicated.
dog during the prior two months.
Why is it unnecessary to kill microflaria quickly?
Microflaria will be eliminated in 6 to 8 months with
· Heartgard, Interceptor, and Revolution will pre-
macrolide prophylaxis and the likelihood of the in-
vent almost all infections from maturing after
fected dog being responsible for spread during this
three consecutive doses are missed, providing
period is low.
that at least 12 consecutive subsequent monthly
What is the proper course of action if 3 consecutive
doses are administered.
prophylactic doses are missed?
Administer Heartgard, Interceptor or Revolution for
at least 12 consecutive months and the likelihood of
MACROLIDE EFFICACY AGAINST
maturation of heartworm larvae is extremely low. In
ADULT HEARTWORMS
fact, if the infection is only about 2 months old, one
dose of any of these preventatives will stop almost all
· Heartgard will kill almost all adult heartworms if
infections.
administered every month for 30 months.
Is Heartgard
recommended as an aduiticide
· We rarely recommend Heartgard for adulticide
treatment?
 treatment because progressive pulmonary pathol-
No. Almost all dogs with adult heartworm infection
ogy can occur and resistance is a possibility.
should be treated with Immiticide. The slow kill-rate
of Heartgard against adults may allow progressive
pulmonary pathology and resistance is possible.
RETESTING DOGS RECEIVING
MACROLIDE PROPHYLAXIS
· Macrolide prophylactic drugs are highly effica-
cious, and therefore annual retesting often is not
SUGGESTED READINGS
perfonmed; however, we recommend annual re-
testing because:
Atkins C: Canine heartworm disease. In Ettinger SJ Feld-
· Owner compliance has been proven to be poor in
man EC, eds: Textbook of veterinary internal medi-
all regions examined.
cine, Philadelphia, 2005, WB Saunders.
· Inadequate dosing is likely in growing puppies.
Atkins C: Feline heartworm disease. In Ettinger SJ, Feld-
man EC, eds: Textbook of veterinary internal medi-
cine, Philadelphia, 2005, WB Saunders.
 Frequently Asked Questions
Heartworm disease. In Kahn CM, ed: The Merck manual.
Whitehouse Station, NJ, 2005, Merck and Co.
Is Immiticide an effective adulticide in cats and should
Heartworm disease, In Birchard SJ, Sherding RG, eds:
treatment be attempted?
Saunders manual of small animal practice, St. Louis,
An Immiticide dosage schedule that is both safe and
2006, WB Saunders.
effective in cats has not been developed. Dying worms,
whether the result of Immiticide or natural death, will
always cause pulmonary thromboembolism which
may be fatal. Immiticide dosages have been investi-
 gated but some were too low to kill worms and others
were high enough to cause acute pulmonary toxicity
(acute respiratory distress syndrome).
Pericardial Disorders
and Cardiac Tumors
Anthony H. Tobias and Elizabeth A. McNiel
study population, average age among dogs with
INTRODUCTION
confirmed pericardial effusions was 9.7 (± 2.2)
· Most pericardial disorders in small animals are as-
years and average weight was 31.2 (± 12.6) kg.
sociated with pericardial effusions (abnormal accu-
·Males and females were nearly equally repre-
 mulations of fuid within the pericardial sac) leading
sented (46 [53%] males to 41 [47%] females).
to cardiac tamponade (significant compression of
· Pericardial effusions were most frequently di-
 the heart by accumulating pericardial contents).
agnosed in Golden Retrievers (23 [26%] of the
· Most pericardial effusions in dogs are associated
87 cases), and this was the only breed that was
with cardiac tumors. Similarly, most cardiac tumors
overrepresented when compared to the general
are associated with pericardial effusions. Conse-
hospital population (odds ratio =4.4; 95%
quently, cardiac tamponade typically dominates the
confidence interval 2.7 to 7.0).
clinical presentation in dogs with cardiac tumors.
· Pericardial effusions in cats occur most commonly
Chief Complaints and History
among cases suffering from congestive heart fail-
ure; however, pericardial effusions in this species
 In most cases, clinical signs in dogs with pericardial
are usually mild and incidental manifestations of
effusions are nonspecific and have an acute onset.
underlying disease, rather than the primary cause
Presenting signs in the UMVMC study population
for the presenting signs. Consequently, the ensu-
included:
 ing discussion pertains primarily to dogs.
· Lethargy (53%)
· Respiratory difficulty (44%)
· Collapse (40%)
PERICARDIAL EFFUSIONS
· Reduced appetite (38%)
·Vomiting (30%)
Incidence and Signalment
·Abdominal distention (23%)
· Atthe University of Minnesota Veterinary Medical
 Less common complaints included polydipsia,
Center (UMVMC) from January 1999 to Decem-
weakness, and coughing.
ber 2001, pericardial effusions were confirmed as
the primary cause for clinical signs in 87 dogs. This
Physical Examination Findings
represents an incidence of 0.43%, or 1 in every 233
new canine admissions to the UMVMC.
· Dogs with pericardial effusions present with clin-
· Symptomatic pericardial effusions most commonly
ical signs ranging from subtle to hemodynamic
occur in older and larger dogs. In the UMVMC
collapse (severe clinical tamponade).
200
Chapter I!
 Pericardial Disorders and Cardiac Tumors
201
· In the UMVMC study population, muffed heart
· Low voltage QRS complexes (R waves < 1 mV
sounds were the most common physical examina-
  nsd a (s q  
tion abnormality, occurring in 71 % of the cases.
half of the cases (Figure 11-2, A, B).
· Other physical examination findings included:
· Electrical altermans, a beat-to-beat variation in
· Depression (63%).
the contour and amplitude of the QRS and ST-T
·Weak pulses (62%).
complexes (Figure 11-2, C), is strongly sugges-
·Abdominal distention with a fuid wave due to
tive of a pericardial effusion. Electrical altermans
ascites (43%). Ascites, when present, is usu-
is present in up to approximately 20% of dogs
ally mild, and consequently not recognized by
with pericardial effusions.
owners in about half of the dogs in which it is
detected on physical examination.
Pericardial Fluid Analysis
· Thorough physical examination usually discloses
· Pericardial effusions in dogs irrespective of cause
jugular distention.
are virtually always sanguinous or serosangui-
· Pulsus paradoxus, phasic variations in pulse
nous sterile inflammatory exudates.
quality associated with respiration, is occasion-
· Total nucleated cell counts, red cell counts, pro-
ally identified.
tein concentrations and pericardial fuid pH over-
lap extensively between the various neoplastic
Diagnostic Procedures
and non-neoplastic causes.
· Hemangiosarcoma and aortic body tumors, the
Radiology
· Thoracic radiographic features that support a di-
dial effusions in dogs, are rarely identified on
agnosis of pericardial effusion are:
cytologic evaluation of pericardial fuid. Also,
· An enlarged and globoid cardiac silhouette with
 pericardial diseases that lead to effusion result in
 tracheal elevation and widening of the caudal
 dramatic mesothelial proliferation, and exfoliated
vena cava
mesothelial cells often have characteristics that
· Overlap of the cardiac silhouette and diaphragm
mimic malignancy. Cytology must be interpreted
 and bilateral contact between the pericardial
very cautiously.
sac and the costal margins
· However, some of the less common causes of peri-
·A sharply delineated edge to the cardiac silhouette
cardial effusion, such as infectious pericarditis and
 because the distended pericardial sac undergoes
lymphosarcoma, are diagnosed primarily on the
little, if any, motion during systole and diastole
basis of pericardial fuid cytology. Consequently,
· Lung fields that show no evidence of left-sided
the authors submit pericardial fuid for analysis
 congestive heart failure (i.e., no cardiogenic
in all cases with pericardial effusions, despite the
 pulmonary edema, Figure 11-1)
 generally low diagnostic yield of this test.
· However, these "typical’ radiographic findings are
only present in more chronic cases with large volume
 kEy PoINT
 pericardial effusions. With smaller pericardial effu-
 Cytologic examination of pericardial effusates
sions, the cardiac silhouette is variably enlarged, and
is unreliable in distinguishing neoplastic vs.
it is not necessarily globoid. Also, pericardial effu
non-neoplastic (i.e., inflammatory) etiologies
sions in dogs are frequently accompanied by pleural
in the large majority of cases of pericardial ef-
effusions that may obscure the cardiac silhouette
fusion in the dog.
· Despite these limitations, thoracic radiographs are
 important in the diagnostic evaluation of cases with
suspected pericardial effusions. In addition to fa-
Echocardiography
cilitating a diagnosis of pericardial effusion in many
· Echocardiography is the most sensitive and spe-
cases, thoracic radiographs may demonstrate the
cific noninvasive method to confinm the presence
 presence of abnormalities such as pulmonary metas-
of pericardial effusion.
tases, or radiopaque intrapericardial foreign bodies.
· With two-dimensional echocardiography, peri-
cardial effusion appears as an anechoic space
Electrocardiography
surrounding the heart. In cases with concurrent
· Most dogs with pericardial effusions have either
pleural effusion, the pericardium is well visual-
a normal sinus rhythm or a sinus tachycardia.
ized with anechoic fuid on either side.
· Ventricular arrhythmias are fairly common and
· The heart may show swinging motions within the
supraventricular arrhythmias occasionally occur.
 pericardial fuid.
202
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
A
B
Figure 11-1.  Thoracic radiographs from a dog with pericardial effusion. A, The lateral projection shows a markedly enlarged
cardiac silhouette, tracheal elevation, and overlap of the cardiac silhouette and diaphragm. B, The ventrodorsal projection shows
bilateral contact between the pericardial sac and the costal margins. The edge of the cardiac silhouette is sharply delineated, and
the lung fields are clear of any infiltrate that would indicate the presence of left-sided congestive heart failure.
· The various heart chambers may appear small
systole for a variable period before normalizing
and the walls may show thickening or pseudohy-
(Figure 11-3, A).
pertrophy due to extermal compression.
· Cardiac tamponade leading to right ventricu-
· The right atrial free wall is nonmally rounded
lar diastolic collapse is characterized by inward
throughout the cardiac cycle, reflecting the nor-
motion of the right ventricular free wall (Figure
mal positive right atrial transmural pressure. Any
1 1-3, B). This may range from transient and local-
inversion or collapse of the right atrial free wall
ized concavity of the right ventricular free wall, to
 provides indirect evidence of elevated intraperi-
virtual complete right ventricular chamber oblitera-
cardial pressure and transient reversal of trans-
tion throughout diastole.
mural pressure (echocardiographic evidence of
· In addition to confirming the presence of pericar-
 cardiac tamponade). Right atrial inversion occurs
 dial effusion and cardiac tamponade, echocardiog-
in late diastole and continues into ventricular
 raphy is the noninvasive procedure of choice to
Chapter l!
 Pericardial Disorders and Cardiac Tumors
203
Figure 11-2.
A, Before pericardiocentesis, the complexes are low voltage (R wave <1 mV) and heart rate is 140 beats per minute (bpm).
B, After pericardiocentesis, R wave amplitude is almost 2 mV and heart rate is 100 bpm. C, Beat-to-beat variations in amplitude
and contour of the QRS and ST-T complexes that characterize electrical alternans. (Modified from Tobias AH: Pericardial disorders.
In Ettinger S], Feldman EC, eds: Textbook of veterinary internal medicine, ed 6, St Louis, 2005, WB Saunders.)
detect associated intrapericardial masses such as
cavitary appearance, and the tumors are occa-
hemangiosarcoma and heart base tumors. Whereas
sionally cystic (see Figure 11-4)
histopathology is necessary to confinm and de-
· Hemangiosarcoma, when present, is usually
finitively identify a tumor, the echocardiographic
demonstrated while imaging from the right
location and characteristics of an intrapericardial
parastermal long- and short-axis views. How-
or myocardial mass provides important informa-
ever, these tumors may be small and elusive.
tion about the probable tumor type.
Imaging from the left parastermal locations to
· The following echocardiographic features are
provide altermate imaging planes, especially of 
consistent with a diagnosis of hemangiosarcoma:
the right auricle, is necessary to demonstrate the
·Hemangiosarcoma most commonly arises from
 presence of hemangiosarcoma in some cases.
the wall of the right atrium or auricle, protrudes 
· Hemangiosarcoma involving the wall of the left
 into the pericardial space, and moves with the
ventricle has been described.
right auricle or atrium (Figure 11 -4).
· The following echocardiographic features are
· These tumors may also protrude into the right
 characteristic for heart base tumors:
atrial chamber, spread to involve other areas of the
· Heart base tumors are usually associated with
heart base and pericardium, and involve the right
the ascending aorta (Figure 11-5, A).
atrioventricular groove (see Figure 11-3, A).
· They vary from small ovoid structures attached to
· Hemangiosarcoma typically contains small hy-
the ascending aorta, to very extensive masses that
poechoic spaces, giving the tumor a mottled or
surround the aorta and main pulmonary artery.
204
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
PE
Mass
A
B
PE
Figure 11-3.
 Echocardiographic tamponade in a dog with pericardial effusion (PE). The images were recorded from the right
parasternal location. A, Late diastolic inversion of the right atrium (arrow). The mass at the atrioventricular groove was confirmed
as hemangiosarcoma by surgical biopsy. B, Diastolic inversion of the right ventricular wall (arow). RV, Right ventricle.
·Tumorindentation orimvasion oftheatria and ma-
· Benign intrapericardial cyst.
jor blood vessels may be seen (Figure 11-5, B).
· Intrapericardial thrombi associated with left
·Heart base tumors tend to have a more homog-
atrial perforation. Left atrial perforation is
enous appearance than the mottled or cavitary
 suspected when signs of acute tamponade de-
 appearance of hemangios arcoma.
velop in smaller breed dogs with significant
·Heart base tumors are usually, but not invari-
 mitral regurgitation.
ably, associated with pericardial effusions.
· Echocardiography may also demonstrate:
Initial Patient Stabilization:
· Cardiac tumors other than hemangiosarcoma
Pericardiocentesis
and heart base tumors.
· The presence of abdominal viscera within the
· Pericardiocentesis to remove as much pericar
pericardial sac in cases with peritoneoperi-
dial fuid as possible is necessary for initial pa-
cardial diaphragmatic hermia.
tient stabilization in any case with a pericardial
Chapter I!
 Pericardial Disorders and Cardiac Tumors
205
KEY POINT
· The catheter is then advanced over the needle into
the pericardial space (Figure 11-6, C), the needle
The presence of pericardial fluid greatly facili-
is removed, the extension tube is connected to the
tates the detection of intrapericardial masses,
and this is particularly relevant to the diagno-
catheter (Figure 11-6, D), and a small amount of
sis and delineation of hemangiosarcoma and
fuid is aspirated (Figure 11-6, E).
heart base tumors. Pericardial fluid forms an
echolucent zone around the right atrium and
invariably indistinguishable from blood. To con-
auricle and the ascending aorta, the locations
r d a u i rn a  u
at which these tumors most commonly occur.
an aliquot of fuid is placed in an activated clotting
In the absence of pericardial fluid, these loca-
time tube. Blood will nonmally clot in an activated
tions are obscured by lung interference. Con-
clotting time tube within 60 to 90 seconds. In con-
sequently, whenever the clinical condition of
 trast, sanguinous effusions in body cavities are rap-
the patient permits, pericardiocentesis should
idly depleted of clotting factors and thrombocytes,
be deferred until a thorough echocardio-
and pericardial fuid will consequently not clot. If
graphic examination has been completed.
no clots form within the activated clotting tube af-
ter 3 to 5 minutes, samples are collected for fuid
analysis and culture, and all of the pericardial fuid
effusion that is causing significant hemodynamic
is aspirated. The catheter is then removed.
compromise (clinical cardiac tamponade).
· Ventricular arrhythmias are common during peri-
· The authors' preferred approach is to restrain the
 cardiocentesis and ECG monitoring during the
 animal in left lateral recumbency and to approach
 procedure is recommended.
the pericardium from the right side. This reduces
· In virtually all cases with pericardial effusion,
the risk of lacerating a coronary blood vessel dur-
 pericardiocentesis results in rapid and marked he-
ing the procedure.
modynamic improvement. Clinical signs, pulse
· Dogs usually tolerate the procedure without seda-
quality, and mucous membrane perfusion im-
tion, but mild sedation is necessary in some cases.
prove, and heart rate decreases. However, ventric-
·The authors usually use a 14- or 16-gauge over-
ular and supraventricular arrhythmias (including
the-needle catheter system to perform pericardio-
atrial fibrillation) are common both during and
centesis in dogs. Two small side holes are made
following pericardiocentesis. These arrhythmias
near the tip of the catheter to avoid any blockages
seldom require therapy and usually resolve spon-
and aspirating the myocardium against a single
taneously. Nevertheless, we prefer to hospitalize
end hole during the procedure.
and monitor cases for 12 to 24 hours following
· The catheter system is coupled to a large volume
 pericardiocentesis and to provide supportive care
syringe via an extension tube and a three-way
as indicated.
stopcock.
· The right thorax is shaved and the ideal location
to perform the procedure is determined by echo-
SPECIFIC CAUSES OF
cardiography. The location is selected to avoid
PERICARDLAL EFFUSIONS.
lung and to approach the pericardium perpen-
EPIDEMIOLOGY, TREATMENT
dicularly with the catheter system. This usually
AND PROGNOSIS
coincides with the fifth or sixth intercostal space
Neoplastic Causes
 at about the level of the costoc hondral junction
· The skin, intercostal muscles, and parietal pleura
Cardiae Hemangiosarcoma
are infiltrated with local anesthetic, and the area
· Hemangiosarcoma, a highly malignant neoplasm
is surgically prepared.
of vascular endothelium, is the most commonly
· A small skin incision is made (Figure 11-6, A)
diagnosed cardiac tumor in dogs. It occurs with
and the catheter system is advanced towards the
pericardium (Figure 11-6, B).
the second most common cardiac tumor, aortic
· Slight negative pressure is applied and maintained
body tumors. Primary and metastatic cardiac
via the syringe and extension tube as the catheter
hemangiosarcoma has been reported in cats, but
 system is advanced.
it is rare in this species.
· Once the needle and catheter enters the peri-
· At the UMVMC, cardiac hemangiosarcoma was
cardium, fuid fows into the extension tube and
diagnosed either by echocardiography, or echo-
syringe.
cardiography and histopathology in 53 of 87 dogs
206
SECTIONIICardiovascularDisease
RA
PE
AO
Figure 11-4.
 Echocardiographic images from a dog with cardiac hemangiosarcoma recorded in the short-axis view from the right
parasternal location. A, A cavitary and cystic mass (arrow) is associated with the right auricle (RA). B and C, The mass moves back and
forth with right auricular motion during different phases of the cardiac cycle. AO, Aorta; PE, pericardial effusion.
Chapterl!
 Pericardial Disorders and Cardiac Tumors
207
AO
LVOT
A
B
Figure 11-5.
 Echocardiographic images from a dog with a heart base tumor recorded from the left cranial parasternal location.
A, A large homogeneous mass (arow) is attached to the caudal aspect of the aorta (AO). B, The tumor has infiltrated the main
pulmonary artery (PA). LVOT, Left ventricular outflow tract; LA, left atrium.
(61%) in the study population with pericardial ef-
(odds ratio, 5.3; 95% confidence interval, 2.9 to
fusion. Cardiac hemangiosarcoma with pericardial
9.4), which is consistent with data from the Veteri-
effusion was nearly three times more prevalent
 nary Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania.
than the second most common form of pericardial
· Treatment for all forms of hemangiosarcoma is
effusion, idiopathic pericardial effusion.
challenging, and a diagnosis of cardiac heman-
· The average age among the affected dogs was 9.8
giosarcoma confers a grave prognosis. By the
(±2.1) years, and their average weight was 32.0
time of diagnosis, cardiac hemangiosarcoma usu-
(±12.2) kg.
ally has metastasized, and it should be considered
· There was no sex predisposition. Although males
a systemic disease.
outnumbered females (31 [58.5%] males: 22
· Many owners of dogs with cardiac hemangiosar-
[41.5%] females), this was not significantly dif-
coma elect palliation with pericardiocentesis alone.
ferent from the sex distribution among dogs in
Pericardiocentesis is predictably associated with
the general hospital population.
 marked clinical improvement, but clinical signs of
· A total of 16 of the 53 dogs (30%) were Golden
tamponade typically recur within a few days, often
Retrievers, and the breed was over-represented
 resulting in death or prompting euthanasia.
208
SECTION IICardiovascular Disease
B
C
E
the-needle catheter system with 2 side holes is advanced towards the pericardium.Slight negative pressure is applied via a syringe
the needle into the pericardial space. D, The extension tubing is removed from the needle and coupled to the catheter. E, Pericardial
effusion is aspirated. The gross appearance of pericardial effusion is almost invariably sanguinous, irrespective of cause.
· In the UMVMC study population, median sur-
vival time for 30 dogs with cardiac hemangio-
and splenectomy in cases with splenic metastases.
sarcoma that were treated by pericardiocentesis
A recent retrospective study from the University of
alone on one or more occasions was just 11 days
Pemmsylvania reported on 23 cases in which tumor
(range, 0 to 208).
resection was performed. In addition, pericardec-
· More aggressive approaches to the treatment of car-
tomy was performed in 21 of the dogs, 3 had sple-
diac hemangiosarcoma include various combinations
 nectomies, and 8 received adjuvant chemotherapy.
Chapter 11
Pericardial Disorders and Cardiac Tumors
209
· Median survival time from time of surgery for
metastases occur in both dogs and cats. The bio-
all 23 cases was 56 days (range, 0 to 229), once
logic behavior of ectopic thyroid tumors at the
again emphasizing the extremely poor progno-
heart base is less well described, and both ecto-
sis associated with cardiac hemangiosarcoma.
pic thyroid adenomas and adenocarcinomas with
Adjuvant chemotherapy following tumor resec-
metastases have been reported.
s ym shop un leananns suonond Ae uon
· Complete surgical resection of heart base tumors
hemangiosarcoma, especially with protocols that
is seldom possible because the tumors are highly
include doxorubicin. However, the data are not
vascular, located close to major blood vessels.
compelling and the survival advantage is small.
and usually extensive by the time of diagnosis.
Nevertheless, management of cardiac heman-
However, palliation with pericardectomy alone
giosarcoma should always include consultation
often results in prolonged survival with an excel-
with an oncologist to take advantage of continu-
lent quality of life.
ally emerging modalities for the treatment of this
 rm saop u s asn a e u e
 highly malignant tumor.
tic body tumors in which surgery was performed,
only pericardectomy had a significant effect on
Heart Base Tumors
survival, and the survival advantage was remark-
· The term heart base tumor is used to designate any
able. Median survival time among dogs following
mass located at the base of the heart in associa-
 pericardectomy was 730 days, whereas median
tion with the ascending aorta and main pulmonary
survival time among those that did not have a
artery. Most heart base tumors in dogs are aortic
 pericardectomy was only 42 days.
body tumors, although 5% to 10% of heart base
tumors in dogs are thyroid tumors (both adeno-
Mesothelioma
 mas and adenocarcinomas) that arise from ectopic
· Mesothelioma, a diffuse neoplasm of the peri-
thyroid tissue at the base of the heart. Aortic body
cardium and other serosal surfaces is emerging
tumors have occasionally been reported in cats.
P     s
· Heart base tumors were diagnosed either by echo
effusion. Mesothelioma was confirmed in 4 of 87
cardiography, or echocardiography and histopa-
dogs (5%) in the UMVMC study population of
thology in 6 of the 87 dogs (7%) with pericardial
 dogs with pericardial effusion.
effusion in the UMVMC study population, which
· Average age among the affected cases at time of
is consistent with a recent review of the epidemi-
presentation was 9.5 (±2.2) years, average weight
ology of cardiac tumors in dogs. Despite being the
was 37.5 (±11.1) kg, and males and females were
second most common cardiac tumors in dogs, the
equally represented.
incidence of aortic body tumors is approximately
· No breed predisposition has been reported, and
10-fold lower than cardiac hemangiosarcoma.
affected breeds in the UMVMC population were
· English Bulldogs, Boxers, and Boston Terriers
Akita, Golden Retriever, Labrador Retriever, and
 are predisposed to aortic body tumors, although
Springer Spaniel.
these tumors also occur in nonbrachycephalic
· Mesothelioma causing pericardial effusion has
breeds. In various studies, brachycephalic breeds
been described in a cat, but pericardial mesothe-
have accounted for between 39% and 85% of
lioma is rare in this species.
dogs with aortic body tumors. Chronic hypoxia
· The clinical course of pericardial effusion due to
induces hyperplasia and neoplasia of chemore-
mesothelioma in the UMVMC study population
ceptors, which may explain the predisposition of
followed a characteristic patterm.
brac hycephalic breeds to aortic body tumors.
· Presenting and clinical signs were no differ-
· Among the predisposed breeds, males may be at
ent from other cause of pericardial effusion.
increased risk for developing aortic body tumors,
In all four cases, a provisional diagnosis of
idiopathic pericardial effusion was made af-
tistically significant in all studies.
ter various diagnostic procedures, including
· The age range at time of diagnosis of aortic
echocardiography and pericardial fluid anal-
body tumors is 6 to 15 years, with an average of
 ysis failed to disclose a cause for the pericar-
10 years.
dial effusion.
· Between 5% and 10% of tumors at the heart base
· Pericardiocentesis was performed, and this was
are ectopic thyroid tumors.
repeated 31 to 133 days later, when the dogs
· Aortic body tumors tend to be slow-growing
developed recurrent effusions with clinical
and locally expansive, but local invasiveness and
tamponade.
210
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
· Pericardectomies were then perfonmed in all
Other Cardiac Tumors
cases, and histopathology of the excised peri-
 Cardiac lymphosarcoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, and
cardia was consistent with idiopathic pericardi-
fibrosarcoma with pericardial effusion have been
tis in three cases and mesothelioma in one.
reported in both dogs and cats. Cardiac lympho-
· Severe and umremitting pleural effusions re-
sarcomais diagnosed in approximately 1% of dogs
quiring repeated thoracocentesis began 48 to
with pericardial effusion, whereas rhabdomyo-
148 days following pericardectomy.
sarcoma and fibrosarcoma are rare. Among the
· Intracavitary cisplatin was administered in 2
various cardiac tumors, cardiac lymphosarcoma
dogs, but this did not appear to significantly
is unique because cytology of the pericardial fuid
change the course of the disease
establishes the diagnosis in many cases and the tu-
· Thoracocentesis was necessary every 2 to 3
 mor is amenable to combination chemotherapy.
weeks until death or euthanasia, and median sur-
vival time from the initial episode of pericardial
Infections
effusion was 312 days (range, 206 to 352).
· In all cases, mesothelioma that had spread
·Bacterial, fungal, and viral infections are occa-
throughout the thoracic cavity was confinmed
sionally associated with pericardial effusions in
on post-mortem examination.
small animals
· The signalment and clinical course among
· Most cases of pericardial effusions due to bacterial
 cases with pericardial effusion due to meso-
infections are thought to arise as a consequence of
thelioma in the UMVMC study population are
intrapericardial foreign body penetration, usually
strikingly similar to those described by others.
by migrating foxtails (Hordeum spp.). In contrast
It is extremely difficult to distinguish between
to most other causes of pericardial effusion, peri-
idiopathic  pericardial  effusion  and  pericar-
cardial fuid cytology and culture is crucial for
dial effusion due to mesothelioma, even with
the diagnosis of infectious cases. In the largest
series of bacterial pericarditis reported in dogs
chemistry. However, accumulations of signifi-
(5 cases), treatment involved pericardectomy
cant amounts of pleural effusion within 4 to 6
and removal of any foreign bodies, chest drain-
 months of pericardectomy increase the index
age, and antibiotic therapy for up to 6 months.
of suspicion for mesothelioma.
 All dogs recovered without complications, sug-
· In addition to being a diagnostic challenge,
gesting that dogs with bacterial pericarditis have
mesothelioma is difficult to treat. However,
a good prognosis when treated aggressively with
long-tenm survival has been reported in a dog
 a combination of surgical and medical therapy.
in which a histopathological diagnosis of peri-
· Systemic coccidioidomycosis in dogs is occa-
cardial mesothelioma was made following
sionally associated with pericardial disease. In
 pericardectomy for recurrent pericardial effu-
most cases the fungal infection results in effu-
sion. Treatment in that case was initiated 48
sive-constrictive or constrictive pericarditis. Coc-
hours after surgery with intracavitary cisplatin
cidioidomycosis should be considered especially
and intravenous doxorubicin, and the dog was
in dogs with pericardial disease that reside in or
free of disease 27 months later.
       
the soil fungus Coccidioides immitis is endemic,
such as the southwestem United States. Treat-
ment involves pericardectomy, chest drainage,
and anti-fungal therapy (usually beginning with
KEY POINT
Amphotericin B). Based on limited published in-
Pericardial mesothelioma represents both a
fonmation and experience, the prognosis for cases
diagnostic and therapeutic challenge. Unlike
of coccidioidomycosis with pericardial involve-
other cardiac tumors, mesothelioma does not
ment is guarded. A single case of effusive-con-
form ciscrete tumor masses that are read-
strictive pericarditis due to Aspergillus niger has
ily detectable using echocardiography. Even
been reported in a dog.
with pericardial biopsy with histopathology.
· Feline infectious peritonitis is occasionally as-
the diagnosis may be elusive, and only after
recurrent pleural or pericardial effusions result
sociated with pericardial effusion in the cat. Vo-
in mortality and post-mortem examination is
luminous pericardial effusion may be present in
the diagnosis confirmed.
some cats suffering from this systemic and invari-
ably fatal viral disease.
Chapter I!
 Pericardial Disorders and Cardiac Tumors
211
· Pericardial effusions associated with intraperi-
Hemorrhage
cardial foreign bodies (e.g., pellets) are occasion-
· Left atrial perforation is an uncommon cause of
ally seen.
pericardial effusion that occurs in smaller breed
dogs with chronic degenerative valve disease. At
Idiopathic Causes
the UMVMC, left atrial perforation is diagnosed
 in approximately 1 % of dogs with pericardial ef-
Idiopathic Pericardial Effusion
fusion. Affected cases have a history consistent
· Idiopathic pericardial effusion is a diagnosis
with acute pericardial effusion, and a loud left
of exclusion. It is made in cases with pericar-
apical murmur is usually apparent despite muf-
dial effusion where no intrapericardial masses
fing of the heart sounds. Echocardiography dis-
 are identified after thorough echocardiographic
closes intrapericardial fuid, a mobile thrombus
evaluation, and the results of ancillary tests such
caudal to the left ventricle, and substantial mitral
as pericardial fuid analysis fail to disclose an
regurgitation. We have diagnosed left atrial per-
etiology. Pericardial histopathology and immu-
foration in several dogs following an episode of
nohistochemistry from dogs with idiopathic peri-
weakness or collapse. In many of these cases, the
cardial effusion demonstrate changes consistent
dog is either recovering or clinically normal by
with pericarditis of undetermined etiology.
the time of their echocardiogram, and relatively
· As with any diagnoses of exclusion, a diagnosis
little pericardial fuid and only mild echocardio-
of idiopathic pericardial effusion should be made
 graphic evidence of tamponade is demonstrated.
cautiously.
In such cases, we provide no therapy other than
· Small intrapericardial tumors may elude detec-
congestive heart failure medications if appro-
tion, especially in cases where echocardiogra
priate (i.e., for cases with left-sided congestive
 phy is performed following pericardiocentesis.
heart failure due to mitral regurgitation). Repeat
· Mesothelioma does not result in appreciable
echocardiograms 7 to 10 days later have demon-
thickening of the pericardium on echocardiog-
strated complete resolution of both the pericar-
raphy. Routine cytology of pericardial effusion
dial effusion and the intrapericardial thrombus.
does not distinguish between idiopathic pericar-
 On the other hand, pericardiocentesis is required
dial effusion and mesothelioma. Consequently,
for cases with left atrial perforation that are he-
mesothelioma should always be considered as
modynamically compromised as a result of tam-
an important differential diagnosis for idio-
 ponade. Furthermore, the possibility of continued
pathic pericardial effusion.
hemorrhage exists, necessitating blood transfu-
· Idiopathic pericardial effusion has not been re-
sion and thoracotomy to remove larger clots from
ported in cats.
the pericardial space and to repair the left atrium.
· Idiopathic pericardial effusion was diagnosed in
The prognosis in such cases is grave.
8 of 42 dogs (19%) with pericardial effusion in a
· Pericardial effusions secondary to coagulation
 retrospective study from the Veterinary Teaching
disorders are rare causes of clinically significant
Hospital, Colorado State University. Idiopathic
tamponade. A single case of pericardial effusion
pericardial effusion was provisionally diagnosed
and cardiac tamponade secondary to anticoagulant
in 24 of 87 dogs with pericardial effusion in the
rodenticide toxicity has been reported in a dog.
UMVMC study population, but mesothelioma
Pericardial effusions secondary to disseminated
was subsequently confirmed in 4 of these cases.
intravascular coagulation, warfarin toxicity, and
Thus, 20 of the 87 cases (23%) with pericardial
other coagulopathies have been reported in cats.
effusion were fnally diagnosed as having idio-
pathic pericardial effusion, which is similar to
Miscellaneous
the Colorado State University data.
· Average age among the cases with idiopathic
· Pericardial effusion is frequently detected in both
pericardial effusion in the UMVMC study pop-
dogs and cats with congestive heart failure, but
ulation was 9.4 (±2.2) years, average weight
usually not in suffcient quantity to cause signif-
was 28.9 (±14.5) kg, and there was no apparent
cant hemodynamic compromise.
sex predisposition (11 [55%] males to 9 [45%]
· Pericardial effusion secondary to uremia has been
females).
recognized in small animals.
·Five of the 20 dogs (25%) were Golden Retriev-
· A case of cholesterol-based pericardial effusion
ers, and the breed was over-represented (odds
has been reported in a dog with hypothyroidism.
ratio, 4.2; 95% confidence interval, 1.6 to 11.2).
212
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
· We have frequently treated first episodes of idio-
· Echocardiography is the method of choice to de-
pathic pericardial effusion by pericardiocente.
tect cardiac tumors, and the procedure should be
sis alone, followed by pericardectomy in cases
performed before pericardiocentesis whenever
that develop recurrent effusions. However, the
the clinical condition of the patient permits.
UMVMC data show that:
· Pericardiocentesis provides initial patient stabili
· Tamponade recurs in approximately one third
 zation. Pericardiocentesis alone is rarely, if ever,
of dogs with idiopathic pericardial effusion
curative.
within a month or two.
· Virtually all remaining cases develop recurrent
occasionally provide a definite diagnosis of the
tamponade, often witheffusive-constrictive peri-
cause of pericardial effusion.
carditis, within 3 years of pericardiocentesis.
· Depending on the underlying cause, the progno-
· Consequently, the authors currently recommend sur-
ses for cases with pericardial effusions vary from
gical or minimally invasive thoracoscopic pericardec-
 grave to excellent. Pericardectomy forms part or
tomy with the initial episode of idiopathic pericardial
all of the therapy in virtually all cases that have
effusion. Although pericardectomy is by no means
prolonged, disease-free survival.
devoid of morbidity and mortality, it is an extremely
successful procedure for idiopathic pericardial ef-
fusion. Pericardectomy avoids the risk of recurrent
 life-threatening cardiac tamponade and the potential
for developing effusive-constrictive and constrictive
 Frequently Asked Questions
pericarditis. In addition, surgical pericardectomy
permits examination of thoracic and intrapericardial
Why do dogs with pericardial effusion develop putsus
structures to rule out other causes of pericardial effu-
snxopn.md
sion, including tumors and foreign bodies
Pulses paradoxus refers to the phasic change in pe-
·Colchicine, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatories, and
ripheral arterial pulse quality that corresponds to the
patient's phase of respiration. Dogs demonstrating
corticosteroids are prescribed for humans with re-
pulsus paradoxus have stronger pulse quality during
current idiopathic pericarditis. Colchicine and non-
expiration and weaker or absent pulses during inspi-
steroidal anti-infammatories are recommended in
ration. Pulsus paradoxus is due to the limitation to
most cases, and the use of corticosteroids is limited
cardiac filling imposed by the presence of significant
to very severe cases. Colchicine for the treatment
pericardial effusion. When the dog inspires, intratho-
 of recurrent pericarditis in humans is promising.
racic pressure falls and increases venous return to the
thorax and right side of the heart. The right heart is
although data from large controlled prospective
constrained by the presence of the pericardial effu-
 studies are lacking. The safety and effcacy of
sion and right heart filing occurs at the expense of
colchicine, nonsteroidal anti-infammatories, cor-
left heart volume. This phenomenon causes left heart
ticosteroids, and any other medical therapies in the
volume and output to fall during inspiration, which
management of idiopathic pericardial effusion in 
produces poor systemic arterial pulse quality. The op-
small animals have yet to be established.
posite effect occurs during expiration and quality of
the systemic arterial pulses increases.
What are the primary clinicat signs in a dog with
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
clinically significant pericardial effusion?
Commonly, dogs with significant pericardial effusion
· Pericardial effusions causing clinical tamponade
present with three cardinal signs, historically referred
are common in dogs and Golden Retrievers are
to as Beck's triad. These signs include muffled heart
over-represented.
sounds, weak femoral pulses, and jugular venous
· Chief complaints, histories, and physical exami
distension. Careful examination of dogs suspect for
nation findings in dogs with pericardial effusions
pericardial effusion usually reveals the presence of all
are diverse and often vague.
three components of the triad. Successful inspection
· Whereas thoracic radiography and electrocardi-
 of the jugular veins sometimes necessitates shaving.
ography may be helpful to diagnose the presence
the hair from the patient's jugular groove in order to
 of pericardial effusion, echocardiography is the
properly visualize the vein. Inspection of the jugular
vein should be done with the patient standing. The
most sensitive and specific procedure to confimm
finding of jugular venous distension is a quick and
its presence.
reliable way to help distinguish cardiac versus non-
· The great majority of dogs with pericardial effu-
cardiac causes of abdominal effusion that is often
sion have an associated cardiac tumor, of which
overlooked.
hemangiosarcoma is the most common.
Chapter I!
Pericardial Disorders and Cardiac Tumors
213
Churg A, Colby TV, Cagle P, et al: The separation of
What are the advantages and disadvantages of surgi-
cal versus thorascopic pericardectomy?
benign and malignant mesothelial proliferations, Am
J Surg Path 24:1183, 2000.
Surgical pericardectomy using a median sternotomy
allows for complete resection of the ventral two thirds
Closa JM, Font A, Mascort J: Pericardial mesothelioma
 of the pericardial sac. The surgical approach allows
in a dog: long-term survival after pericardiectomy in
for visual inspection of the heart base and right heart
combination with chemotherapy, J Small Anim Pract 
saey Aeu jeu sioun ies Auopi on ndue ue u1
40:383, 1999.
been undetected during cardiac ultrasound. The dis-
Cobb MA, Brownlie SE: Intrapericardial neoplasia in 14
poseaiout spn pout yoeoidde peobins sul jo soseueape
dogs, I Small Anim Pract 33:309, 1992.
invasiveness, morbidity, cost, and length of hospital
Constantino-Casas P, Rodriguez-Martinez HA, Guter-
 stay as opposed to thorascopy. Thorascopy is best
Iez Diaz-Ceballos ME: A case report and review: the
 performed in larger dogs and enables the operator to
 gross, histological, and immunohistochemical char-
acteristics of a carcinoma of ectopic thyroid in a dog,
 surface. A lesser amount of pericardium is removed
Br Vet J 152:669, 1996.
 during the thorascopic technique as opposed to the
Day MJ, Martin MWS : Immunohistochemical character-
subtotal pericardectomy, but resealing of the peri-
ization of the lesions of canine idiopathic pericarditis,
cardium after window procedures is rare. The main
J Small Anim Pract 43:383, 2002.
disadvantage of the thorascopic procedure is the lim-
Dunning D, Monnet E, Orton EC, et al: Analysis of
ited ability to inspect the heart base and right heart for
 d  s n s s
small tumors that may have been undetected during
fusion: 46 cases (1985-1996), J Am Vet Med Assoc
anssg pepieoued su go Asdoig punosenn oeipieo
212:1276,1998
can be accomplished using either technique.
Ehrhart N, Ehrhart EJ, Willis J, et al: Analysis of factors
affecting survival in dogs with aortic body tumors,
Vet Surg 31:44, 2002.
Fine DM, Tobias AH, Jacob KA: Use of pericardial fuid
SUGGESTED READINGS
pH to distinguish between idiopathic and neoplastic
effusions, J Vet Intern Med 17:525, 2003.
Adler Y, Finkelstein Y, Guindo J, et al: Colchicine treat-
George C, Steinberg H: An aortic body carcinoma with
ment for recurrent pericarditis: a decade of experi-
multifocal thoracic metastases in a cat, J Compar
ence, Circulation 97:2183, 1998.
Pathol 101:467, 1989.
Alleman AR: Abdominal, thoracic, and pericardial effu-
Gliatto JM, Crawford MA, Snider TG III, et al: Multiple
sions, Vet Clin Small Anim Pract 33:89, 2003
organ metastasis of an aortic body tumor in a boxer,
Aronsohn MG, Carpenter JL: Surgical treatment of idio-
J Am Vet Med Assoc 191:1110, 1987.
pathic pericardial effusion in the dog: 25 cases (1978-
Gonin-Jmaa D, Paulsen DB, Taboada J: Pericardial ef-
1993), J Am Amim Hosp Assoc 35:521, 1999.
fusion in a dog with rhabdomyosarcoma in the right
Aronson AR, Gregory CR: Infectious pericardial effu-
ventricular wall, J Small Amim Pract 37:193, 1996.
sion in five dogs, Vet Surg 24:402, 1995.
Hayes HM, Sass B: Chemoreceptor neoplasia: a study
Balli A, Lachat M, Gerber B, et al: Cardiac tamponade
of the epidemiological features of 357 canine cases,
due to pericardial mesothelioma in an 1l-year-old
J Vet Med 35:401, 1988.
dog: diagnosis, medical and interventional treatments,
Heinritz CK, Gilson SD, Soderstrom MJ, et al: Subtotal
Schweizer Archiv fur Tierheilkunde 145:82, 2003.
Berg RJ, Wingfield W: Pericardial effusion in the dog: a
of coccidioidomycosis-induced effusive-constrictive
review of 42 cases, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20:721,
pericarditis in dogs: 17 cases (1999-2003), J Am Vet
1983.
Med Assoc 227:435, 2005.
Bonagura JD: Electrical alternans associated with peri-
Holt D, Van Winkle T, Schelling C, et al: Correlation be-
cardial effusion in the dog, J Am Vet Med Assoc
tween thoracic radiographs and findings in dogs with
178:574, 1981.
hemangiosarcoma: 77 cases (1984-1989), J Am Vet
Buergelt CD, Das KM: Aortic body tumor in a cat, Patho-
Med Assoc 200: 1535, 1992.
logia Veterinaria 5:84, 1968.
 Jackson J, Richter KP, Launer DP: Thoracoscopic partial
Capen CC: Tumors of the endocrine glands. In Moulton
pericardectomy in 13 dogs, J Vet Intern Med 13:529,
 JE, ed: Tumors in domestic animals, ed 2, Berkeley,
1999.
1978, University of California Press.
Johnson KH: Aortic body tumors in the dog, J Am Vet
Carpenter DH Jr, Mackin AJ, Gellasch KL: Cardiac tam-
Med Assoc 152:154, 1968.
ponade secondary to Aspergillus niger-induced con-
 Keene BW, Rush JE, Cooley AJ, et al: Primary left ventric-
strictive pericarditis, I Am Vet Med Assoc 218:1890,
ular hemangiosarcoma diagnosed by endomyocardial
2001.
biopsy in a dog, I Am Vet Med Assoc 197:1501, 1990.
Cho KO, Park NY, Park JC, et al: Metastatic intracavi-
Kerstetter KK, Krahwinkel DJ Jr, Millis DL, et al: Peri-
tary cardiac aortic body tumor in a dog, J Vet Med Sci
cardiectomy in dogs: 22 cases (1978-1994), J Am Vet
60:1251, 1998.
Med Assoc 211:736, 1997.
214
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
MacGregor JM, Faria MLE, Moore AS, et al: Cardiac
Sisson D, Thomas WP, Ruehl WW, et al: Diagnostic
lymphoma causing pericardial effusion in 12 dogs,
value of pericardial fuid anal ysis in the dog, J Am Vet
J Am Vet Med Assoc 227: 1449, 2005.
Med Assoc 184:51, 1984.
MacGregor JM, Rozanski EA, McCarthy RJ, et al:
Speltz MC, Manivel JC, Tobias AH, et al: Primary car-
Cholesterol-based pericardial effusion and aortic
diac fibrosarcoma in a Labrador retriever, Vet Pathol
thromboembolism in a 9-year-old mixed-breed dog
44:403, 2007.
with hypothyroidism, J Vet Intern Med 18:354, 2004.
 Stephens LC, Saunders WJ, Jaenke RS: Ectopic thyroid
Maisch B, Ristic AD, Seferovic PM: New directions in
carcinoma with metastases in a Beagle dog, Vet Pathol
the diagnosis and treatment of pericardial disease: a
19:669, 1982.
project of the taskforce on pericardial disease of the
Stepien RL, Whitley NT, Dubielzig RR: Idiopathic or
World Heart Federation, Herz 25:769,2000.
mesothelioma-related pericardial effusion: clinical
 Mathiesen DT, Lammerding J: Partial pericardectomy
-oedsonei peipns ssop LI ul [eaiins pue ssupuy
for idiopathic pericardial effusion in the dog, J Am
tively, J Small Anim Pract 41:342, 2000.
Anim Hosp Assoc 21:41, 1985.
Thake DC, Cheville NF, Sharp RK: Ectopic thyroid ad-
McDonough SP, MacLauglin NJ, Tobias AH: Canine
 enomas at the base of the heart of the dog, Vet Pathol
pericardial mesothelioma, Vet Pathol 29:256, 1992.
8:421, 1971.
Merlo M, Bo S, Ratto A: Primary right atrium hemangio-
Tilley LP, Owen JM, Wilkens RJ, et al: Pericardial mesothe-
sarcoma in a cat, J Feline Med Surg 4:61, 2002.
lioma in a cat, J Am Amim Hosp Assoc 11:60, 1975.
Owen TJ, Bruyette DS, Layton CE: Chemodectoma in
Tobias AH: Pericardial disorders. In Ettinger SJ, Feldman
dogs, Compend Cont Ed Practic Vet 18:253, 1996.
EC, eds: Textbook of veterinary internal medicine,
Petrus DJ, Henik RA: Pericardial effusion and cardiac
ed 6, St Louis, 2005, WB Saunders.
tamponade secondary to brodifacoum toxicosis in a
Walsh KM, Diters RW: Carcinoma of ectopic thyroid in
dog, J Am Vet Med Assoc 215:647, 1999.
a dog, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20:665, 1983.
Prosek R, Sisson DD, Oyama MA: Pericardial effusion
Walsh PJ, Remedios AM, Ferguson JF, et al: Thoraco-
with a clot in the pericardial space likely caused by
left atrial rupture secondary to mitral regurgitation,
 comparison of postoperative pain and morbidity, Vet
J Am Vet Med Assoc 222:441, 2003.
Surg 28:472, 1999.
Rush JE, Keene BW, Fox PR: Pericardial disease in the
Ware WA, Hopper DL: Cardiac tumors in dogs: 1982-
cat: a retrospective evaluation of 66 cases, J Am Anim
1995, J Vet Intern Med 13:95, 1999.
Hosp Assoc 26:39, 1990.
Weisse C, Soares N, Beal MW, et al: Survival time in
Sadanaga KK, MacDonald MJ, Buchanan JW: Echocar-
dogs with right atrial hemangiosarcoma treated by
diography and surgery in a dog with left atrial rupture
means of surgical resection with or without adjuvant
and hemopericardium, J Vet Intern Med 4:216, 1990.
chemotherapy: 23 cases (1986-2000), J Am Vet Med
Shubitz LF, Matz ME, Noon TH,et al: Constrictive peri-
Assoc 226:575, 2005.
carditis secondary to Coccidioides immitis infection
Willis R, Williams AE, Schwarz T, et al: Aortic body
in a dog, J Amer Vet Med Assoc 218:537, 2001.
chemodectoma causing pulmonary oedema in a cat,
Sims CS, Tobias AH, Hayden DW, et al: Pericardial effu-
J Small Anim Pract 42:20, 2001.
sion due to primary cardiac lymphoma in a dog, J Vet
Yates WD, Lester SJ, Mills JH: Chemoreceptor tumors
Intern Med 17:923, 2003.
diagnosed at the Western College of Veterinary Medi-
Sisson D, Thomas WP, Reed J, et al: Intrapericardial
cine: 1967-1979, Can Vet J 21:124, 1980.
cysts in the dog, J Vet Intern Med 7:364, 1993.
Congenital Heart Disease
Keith N. Strickland
INTRODUCTION
· Less common defects in cats include persistent
truncus arteriosus, PS, atrial septal defect, tricus-
Incidence
pid stenosis, and right ventricular hypoplasia.
· The incidence of congenital heart disease in dogs
has been reported to be 6.8 to 8.0 per 1000 hos-
Hereditary Aspects
pital admissions. On average, this equates to one
case per 15 litters. The actual incidence is likely
· Congenital heart diseases are the most common
higher, as some defects result in neonatal death
type of heart disease in young dogs and cats, but
and are unreported.
are occasionally diagnosed in adult animals.
· The most common congenital heart defects in
· Congenital heart defects are generally recog-
 dogs include patent ductus arteriosus (PDA), pul-
nized in the young animal and usually represent
monic stenosis (PS), aortic stenosis, ventricular
a heritable trait or a defect that originated during
septal defect (VSD), and tetralogy of Fallot (Box
gestation. A primary genetic mutation or environ-
12-1). Several breed predispositions have been
mental infuences may exist, resulting in signifi-
identified (see Appendix 1: Canine Breed Predi-
cant variation of disease severity.
lections for Heart Disease).
· Four common forms of congenital heart disease
· Less common defects in dogs include mitral
 have been shown to be inherited in dogs:
valve dysplasia, atrial septal defects, tricuspid
· PDA in the Poodle
valve dysplasia, cor triatriatum dexter, and mitral
· Subaortic stenosis in the Newfoundland
stenosis. Rare defects include persistent truncus
· Tetralogy of Fallot in the Keeshond
arteriosus, tricuspid stenosis, right ventricular
· PS in the Beagle
hypoplasia, double outlet right ventricle, and
transposition of the great vessels
Diagnosis
· Congenital heart disease is less common in cats than
 in dogs. The reported incidence is 0.2to 1.0 per 1000
· Generally, a congenital heart defect is suspected
hospital admissions. No consistent breed or gender
when a heart murmur is detected in a young dog
predilections have been adequately demonstrated.
or cat (Table 12-1).
· The most common congenital heart defects in cats
· Other supporting clinical features may include:
include mitral valve dysplasia, tricuspid valve
· Failure to thrive
dysplasia, PDA, VSD, aortic stenosis, tetralogy
· Exercise intolerance
of Fallot, persistent common atrioventricular ca-
·Cyanosis
nal, and endocardial fibroelastosis.
· Collapse or seizure
215
216
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
Box 12-1
 Classification of Congenital Defects According to Pathophysiology
CANINE
FELINE
Defects primarily causing volume overload
Defects primarily causing volume overload
Systemic to pulmonary (left-to-right) shunting
Common
Common
 Patent ductus arteriosus 
Ventricular septal defect
Ventricular septal defect
 Patent ductus arteriosus
Uncommon
 Atrial septal defect
 Atrial septal defect
Endocardial cushion defect
Endocardial cushion defect
Uncommon
(Pseudo) truncus arteriosus
 Truncus arteriosus
Val vular regurgitation
Valvular regurgitation
Common
Common
Mitral dysplasia
Mitral dysplasia
Tricuspid dysplasia
Tricuspid dysplasia
Uncommon
Pulmonic insufficiency
Aortic insufficiency
Defects primarily causing pressure
Defects primarily causing pressure
overload
overload
Common
Common
 Pulmonic stenosis
 Dynamic subaortic stenosis
Subaortic stenosis
Uncommon
Uncommon
Pulmonic stenosis
Valvular aortic stenosis
 Pulmonary artery branch stenosis
Coarctation and interruption of the aorta
Fixed subaortic stenosis
Cor triatriatum dexter
Valvular aortic stenosis
Cor triatriatum dex ter
Cor triatriatum sinister
Defects primarily causing cyanosis
Defects primarily causing cyanosis
Common
Common
Tetralogy of Fallot
 Tetralogy of Fallot
Uncommon
Endocardial cushion defect
 Pulmonary to systemic shunting (ventricular septal defect [VSD]) Uncommon
 Pulmonary to systemic shunting (VSD)
 Tricuspid atresia/right ventricular hypoplasia
Pulmonary to systemic shunting (PDA)
Double outlet right ventricle
Double outlet right ventricle
 Transposition of the great vessels
Truncus arteriosus
 Truncus arteriosus
Aorticopulmonary window
Miscellaneous cardiac and vascular defects
Miscellaneous cardiac and vascular defects
Common
Common
 Peritoneopericar dial diaphar agmatic her mia
 Peritoneopericardial diapharagmatic hernia
 Persistent ri ght aortic arch
Endocardial fibroelastosis
Persistent left cranial vena cava
Uncommon
Uncommon
Persistent right aortic arch
Endocardial fibroelastosis
 Pericardial defects
Anomalous pulmonary venous return
Double aortic arch
Retroesophageal left subclavian artery
Situs inversus
Chapter12
Congenital Heart Disease
217
Table 12-1
Auscultatory Findings in Congenital Heart Disease
Point of Maximum
Lesion
Timing
Features
Intensity
Comments
Atrial septal
Systolic
Ejection
Left base
Systolic murmur ends
defect
(diastolic)
(diastolic rumble)
prior to Sz, which is
usually split; murmur
(or murmurs) due to
relative pulmonic
(tricuspid) stenosis
(Sub) aortic
Systolic*
Ejection (crescendo-
Left base
Often nearly as loud at the right
stenosis
decrescendo)
 base; diastolic murmur of
 aortic regurgitation may also
occur
Mitral val ve
Systolic
Regurgitant (holosys- Left apex
May radiate widely
dy spl asiat
tolic)
 Patent ductus
Continuous
Machinery
Left base
Murmur peaks at Sz, often radi-
arteni osus
 ates to right base and thoracic
inlet
Pulmonary
None
Split Sz (ejection)
Left base
Accentuated and split S2;
hypertension
(systolic)
 systolic murmur of tricuspid
(Eisenmenger's
regurgitation or blowing,
syndrome)
decrescendo diastolic murmur
of pulmonic regurgitation
may also occur
Pulmonic stenosis
Systolic
Ejection
Left base
Occasional systolic
(crescendo-
ejection sound; blowing.
decrescendo)
decrescendo
diastolic murmur of
pulmonic regurgitation
 may occur
Tetralogy of Fallot Systolic
Ejection
Left base
Murmur due to pulmonic steno-
(crescendo-
sis; may be soft or absent with
decrescendo)
 pulmonary artery hypoplasia
Tricuspid valve
Systolic
Regurgitant
Right
 Often low pitched and rumbling
dy spl asiat
(holosystolic)
 midprecordium
Ventricular septal
Systolic*
Regurgitant
Right base
Often higher pitched and
defect
(holosystolic)
 more cranially located than
tricuspid regurgitation; may
also be loud at left base
From Etinger SE, Feldman EF: Texbook of veterinary internal medicine, ed 6, St Louis, 2005, WB Saunders.
*At times a diastolic murmur of aortic regurgitation may also be present.
fMitral stenosis and tricuspid stenosis are rare but may cause diastolic murmurs over the affected valve and ventricle.
PMI, Point of maximum intensity.
· Jugular venous distention
cally is also helpful in determining the severity of
· Electrocardiographic (ECG) abnormalities
the defect, especially if Doppler techniques are used
· Radiographic evidence of cardiac enlargement.
(measurement of blood velocities within the heart).
·A tentative diagnosis can be made based on
results of a complete cardiovascular physical
Therapy
examination, routine ECG, and radiography (see
Table 12-1).
· Advances since the early 1990s allow for the
· The specific diagnosis is confirmed in most cases
treatment of certain stenotic lesions by balloon
by echocardiography, and rarely by cardiac cathe-
valvuloplasty, a tec hnique employing a small bal-
 terization. Infonmation obtained echocardiographi-
loon located at the end of a cardiac catheter, and
218
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
transcatheter occlusion of PDA using a Gianturco
tion, the ductus is penmanently closed by fibrous
coil or similar device. Surgical correction or pal-
contracture, which produces the ligamentum ar
liation is possible for certain defects.
teriosum. Failure of the ductus to close is termed
· Medical treatment is primarily for the control
patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) or persistent duc-
or prevention of complications, such as conges-
tus arteriosus.
tive heart failure, arrhythmias, and endocarditis,
rather than for correction of the defect. Medical
Pathophysiology
therapy is discussed briefly in this chapter.
· The consequences of a PDA depend primarily
 on the diameter of the ductus and the pulmonary
INNOCENT (FUNCTIONAL)
vascular resistance.
MURMUR
· When pulmonary vascular resistance is nonmal,
Not all young dogs and cats with heart murmurs
blood continually shunts from the aorta (high
have congenital heart disease. Innocent, or func-
resistance) into the pulmonary circulation (low
tional, munmurs are created by mild turbulence
resistance). Shunting in this fashion (systemic
within the heart and great vessels and usually di-
to pulmonary) is referred to as left-to-right and
minish in intensity or resolve by 4 to 5 months
represents the most common patterm in PDA
of age. The following characteristics of innocent
(Figure 12-1).
murmurs help differentiate them from pathologic
· When pulmonary vascular resistance increases
murmurs.
and exceeds systemic vascular resistance, blood
· Innocent murmurs are systolic in timing, usually
will shunt from the pulmonary artery into the
occurring early in systole and of short duration
aorta (so-called right-to-left or reversed PDA).
(ejection-type). They are “soft" (i.e., grade III/VI
· Failure of ductal closure is due to an abnormal
or less in intensity) and often have a low-pitched,
amount of elastic fibers compared to contractile
vibrating, or musical quality.
smooth muscle fibers (so-called extension of the
· Innocent munmurs are usually loudest along the
noncontractile wall structure of the aorta into the
left stemal border and are poorly transmitted.
ductus arteriosus). Varying amounts of normal
Their intensity may vary with changes in posi-
smooth muscle causes varying degrees of ductal
tion, with the phase of respiration, with exercise,
closure; this creates a structure that ranges from
and from day to day.
a funnel-shaped ductus that narrows on the pul-
· The most important characteristic of the innocent 
monary artery side of the ductus (Figure 12-2)
murmur is that it is heard in the absence of any
to a tubelike structure without narrowing.
other demonstrable evidence of cardiovascular
· Blood fow through the ductus is also dependent
disease (e.g., lack of clinical signs or radiographic
upon ductal diameter. With a small ductus, the
abnormalities).
volume of blood shunted is restricted and there
· Loud systolic murmurs (grade IV/VI or greater),
may be no hemodynamic effects. In cases with
precordial thrills, and diastolic murmurs are in-
a large ductus and significant shunting, one of
dicative of cardiac disease and should prompt
two major consequences usually occurs. In most
further diagnostics.
cases, volume overloading of the left atrium and
left ventricle results in eventual left-sided fail-
ure. In the largest of shunts, the excessive pul-
SPECIFIC DEFECTS
monary blood fow induces dramatic increases
in pulmonary vascular resistance, pulmonary
Patent Ductus Arteriosus
 hypertension and shunt reversal (Eisenmenger's
· In fetal circulation, the ductus arteriosus serves
physiology).
to shunt matemally oxygenated blood into the
Diagnosis
aorta, thereby bypassing the nonfunctional lungs.
Shortly after birth, several factors contribute to
Etiology and Breed Disposition
effect closure of the ductus.Pulmonary vascu-
· PDA occurs in both the dog and cat, with higher
lar resistance drops dramatically, vasodilatory
frequency in the dog. There is also a higher fre-
prostaglandin levels decrease, and oxygen ten-
quency in the female.
sion increases, resulting in a marked increase in
· Breeds predisposed or at increased risk include
pulmonary blood fow and vasoconstriction of
Bichon Frise, Chihuahua, Cocker Spaniel, Collie,
the ductus. Following closure by vasoconstric-
English Springer Spaniel, German Shepherd,
Chapter12
Congenital Heart Disease
219
Dilation
↑ pulmonary
flov
Venous
return
PDA
Dilation
RA
↑LVDP
31
S2
S1
Patent ductus
 arteriosus
_+R shunt
Figure 12-1.
Pathophysiology and genesis of clinical finclings in PDA. (Modlified from Fox PR, Sisson D, Moise N, eds: Textbook
of canine and feline cardiology: principles and clinical practice, ed 2, Philadelphia, 1999, WB Saunders.)
· Cats seldom display signs of cardiac failure until
 decompensation is advanced and life threatening.
Physical Examination
Palpation
· Water-hammer, or bounding, arterial pulses are
usually present in animals with left-to-right shunt-
ing PDA. This type of pulse represents a widened
pulse pressure secondary to the loss of diastolic
pressure through the ductus, and elevation of sys-
Figure 12-2.
 Postmortem specimen from a young German
tolic blood pressure from the volume-overloaded
Shepherd of the transverse and proximal descending aorta on
left ventricle. Usually, the larger the ductus (and
top, the pulmonary artery branches ventrally, and a left-to-
therefore the shunt), the more prominent the arte-
right shunting patent ductus arteriosus between them. The
rial pulse.
aortic end of the PDA is wide open. The pulmonary artery
end is partially constricted. This results in a funnel shape to
· In the majority of cases, a precordial thrill can
the PDA. (From Kittleson MD, Kienle RD, eds: Small animal
be palpated over the cranial left-heart base and
cardiovascular medicine, St Louis, 1998, Mosby. Courtesy Dr.
the left apical impulse is prominent. In cases
Mark Rishniw.)
with right-to-left shunting, there is no precor-
 dial thrill, and the right apical impulse is more
Keeshond, Labrador Retriever, Maltese, New-
prominent.
foundland, Poodle, Pomeranian, Shetland Sheep-
dog, and Yorkshire Terrier.
General
· The defect has been shown to be inherited in the
· Caudal cyanosis is an important physical find-
 Miniature Poodle, transmitted as a polygenic trait.
ing in animals with right-to-left shunting PDA.
Owing to the location of the ductus (distal to
History and Clinical Signs
the arteries supplying the head and forelimbs),
· Clinical signs are related to the degree of shunt-
cyanosis is limited to the caudal half of the body.
ing and may range from none to severe conges-
This differential cyanosis is best appreciated by
tive heart failure.
examining caudal mucous membranes, although
· Depending on the degree of heart failure, owners
occasionally cyanosis of the skin caudal to the
 may report signs such as cough, labored breath-
costal arch can be seen.
ing, exercise intolerance, and collapse. Reports of
· Polycythemia (packed cell volume greater than
60) is usually present in cases with right-to-left
to-left shunting PDA.
shunts.
220
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
Auscultation
· Dorsoventral radiographs often reveal three
· A continuous-type machinery murmur is a hall-
prominences along the left cardiac silhouette.
mark of left-to-right shunting PDA. The murmur
· The aneurysmal bulge of the aortic arch
is loudest in mid-to-late systole, and gradually
· The enlarged pulmonary outflow tract
decreases in intensity through diastole. In some
· The enlarged left atrial appendage
cases, this characteristic munmur is restricted to
· Mild to moderate left ventricular and left atrial
the cranial left-heart base, and may be missed if
enlargement are usually present.
auscultation is limited to the apex. The systolic
· Overcirculation of the lung field can often be
component of the murmur is usually quite promi-
visualized.
nent at the cardiac apex; however, a systolic mur-
· Severe cardiomegaly, pulmonary congestion, and
mur secondary to mitral regurgitation because
 pulmonary edema will be present when there is
of annular dilation as the heart enlarges is also
congestive heart failure.
possible.
· Right ventricular enlargement and prominent
·In cases with a right-to-left shunting PDA,
tortuous pulmonary arteries are seen in animals
there is no murmur associated with the shunt (in
with severe pulmonary hypertension (R to L
these cases blood fows through the shunt rather
PDA).
than "jetting"); however, a split second heart
sound is often present in these cases. Rarely,
Echocardiography
 a diastolic murmur of pulmonic insuffciency
· Echocardiographic changes refect the volume-
is present owing to pulmonary hypertension.
overloaded state of the left side of the heart and
In cases undergoing reversal of a left-to-right
include left atrial dilation, left ventricular dila-
shunting PDA, there is initially a loss of the
tion, and normal to excessive wall motion (frac-
 diastolic component of the continuous murmur,
tional shortening). In some cases the ductus can
followed by a loss of the systolic component. A
be visualized
murmur of tricuspid regurgitation may be pres-
· Shunting of left to right blood fow through the
ent in some cases.
 ductus can be detected by Doppler echocardio-
Diagnostic Testing
graphy, and can be visualized with color-fow
Doppler echoc ardiography.
Electrocardiogram
· In cases with pulmonary hypertension and re-
ECG abnormalities are present in most cases of
versed-shunting. right ventricular hypertrophy is
PDA. Evidence of left ventricular and left atrial en-
evident, along with enlargement of the main pul-
largement includes the following:
 monary artery; Doppler echocardiography may
· Tall R waves present in leads II (greater than
reveal pulmonic insufficiency.
3.0 mV), II, and aVF
· Contrast echocardiography can be used to con-
· Deep Q waves are often present in leads II, III,
firm the presence of a right-to-left shunting PDA.
and aVF
 In this technique, agitated saline is injected into a
· The QRS complexes are increased in duration
peripheral vein during echocardiographic examina-
(greater than 80 ms)
tion (frst injection) and abdominal aortic imaging
· The mean electrical axis may be shifted to the left
(second injection) to detect right-to-left shunting
(less than 40 degrees)
of blood. The absence of intracardiac shunting
· P-mitrale (widened P wave) is often present
with the presence of microbubbles within the ab-
· Atrial fibrillation and ventricular arrhythmias may
dominal aorta is diagnostic of reversed PDA.
occur in association with congestive heart failure
· Animals with pulmonary hypertension may show
Cardiac Catheterization
evidence of right ventricular hypertrophy:
and Angiocardiography
· Deep S waves in leads I, II, III, and aVF; right
· Cardiac catheterization and angiocardiography
shift of the mean electrical axis (more than 100
should be considered when PDA is accompanied
degrees).
by other anomalies.
· Routinely used to characterize and measure the
Thoracic Radiographs
 ductus prior to transarterial coil occlusion.
· The radiographic signs of PDA (Figures 12-3
and 12-4) vary considerably with the volume of
Selective Angiocardiography
blood being shunted, the age of the animal, and
· The diagnosis ofa left-to-right PDA can be made
the degree of cardiac decompensation.
by injecting contrast media into the aortic arch.
Chapter 12
CongenitalHeartDisease
221
Figure 12-3.  Patent ductus arteriosus (lateral projection) in a 3-month-old Poodle. There is generalized heart enlargement, en-
gorgement of the right cranial lobar artery (white arrows), and engorgement of the right cranial lobar vein (biack arrows). Vascular
enlargement of the left auricle (straight arrow). Aveolar infiltrate due to pulmonary edema is present in the caudal lung lobes.
222
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
The simultaneous filling of the main pulmonary
KEY POINT
artery and the aorta is diagnostic for PDA. Like-
· Presence of a continuous murmur should
never be considered a normal physical ex-
tion can be used to confirm the diagnosis of a
amination finding.
right-to-left shunt (simultaneous filling of main
● Eisenmenger's syndrome is the clinical sce-
pulmonary artery and aorta).
nario when a very large left to right shunt
results in persistent pulmonary hyperten-
Nonselective Angiocardiography
sion and reversal of the shunt direction.
· Nonselective angiocardiography is perfonmed
by injecting contrast material through a large-
diameter venous catheter and taking radiographs
Therapy and Prognosis
in quick succession. Nonselective angiocardi-
ography may be used to support the diagnosis
Surgery
of a right-to-left shunting PDA; however, this
· As discussed previously, several deleterious ef-
technique is of no value in the diagnosis of left-
fects are to be expected in cases with uncorrected
to-right shunts.
PDA. In addition, dogs with long-standing PDA
are predisposed to the development of bacte-
rial endocarditis; therefore, every effort should
Differential Diagnosis
be made to correct left-to-right shunting PDA
· Echocardiography or angiocardiographic studies
cases.
may be used to differentiate PDA from other con-
· In asymptomatic animals with left-to-right shunt-
genital cardiac defects. Two cardiac defects that
ing PDA, surgical correction of the ductus should
can resemble PDA are as follows:
be performed as soon as possible. Current surgi-
·Aorticopulmonary window
 cal ligation success rates are 95%. Recent studies
· A round or oval communication between the
 have shown asymptomatic large dogs and older
aorta and the main pulmonary artery close
dogs (more than 2 years) have no significant
to their origin from the heart base. This rare
added risk.
 defect usually results in severe pulmonary
· In cases with mild to moderate left-sided heart
hypertension.
failure, resolution of pulmonary edema must pre-
· Concurrent aortic stenosis and insufficiency
cede anesthesia and surgery.
· The systolic munmur of aortic stenosis and
· In cases with severe heart failure, patient sta-
the diastolic munmur of aortic insuffciency
bilization should be attempted; however, these
 combine to mimic the machinery murmur of
patients are poor anesthetic risks. Presence of
PDA. Echocardiography easily differenti-
 myocardial failure and atrial fibrillation are nega-
ates between these differentials.
tive prognostic indicators.
Advantages
Natural History
· Best approach for patients with large PDA (fre-
quently observed in German Shepherds)
· Mortality is high in affected, untreated dogs; ap-
· May be best approach for very small dogs
proximately 64% die before 1 year of age if left
Disadvantages
untreated.
· Requires thoracotomy and hospitalization for
· Constant volume overload of the left atrium and
48 to 72 hours with post-operative analgesia
left ventricle results in chamber dilation, myocar-
· Success depends on the experience of the surgeon
dial dysfunction, and arrhythmias.
· A thoracoscopic technique to occlude the PDA
· Left-sided cardiac strain and pulmonary con-
utilizing titanium ligation clips has been described
gestion leads to congestive heart failure.
and may be available as an additional option.
· Sudden death following exertion has been ob-
· Correction of PDA is contraindicated when right-
served in young, affected dogs.
to-left shunting is present. Acute right failure and
· When there is right-to-left shunting, progres-
death will occur, as the patent ductus functions as
sive polycythemia and hypoxemia occurs. Sur-
a relief valve for the right ventricle.
vival to 3 to 5 years of age is not uncommon.
 Phlebotomy is indicated if the packed cell vol-
Transcatheter Occlusion
ume is elevated to greater than 65% and symp-
· Shunting through the ductus may be stopped
toms are present.
by a relatively noninvasive method termed
Chapter12
Congenital Heart Disease
223
transcatheter occlusion. This procedure employs
transvalvular blood velocity without other struc-
delivery of a Gianturco coil, resulting in emboli.
tural abnormalities.
zation of the ductus.
· Coils are composed of prothrombotic poly-Dacron
Pathophysiology
fibers. The size of the coil selectedis based on the
approximate size of the ductus (as determined by
·Stenosis of the left ventricular outflow tract re-
 angiography or echocardiography). The device(s)
sults in pressure overload of the left ventricle
 are delivered from a catheter passed up the fem-
(Figure 12-6). The left ventricle responds to this
oral artery and into the ductus (Figure 12-5).
chronic pressure overload by undergoing con-
Multiple coils may be needed for full occlusion
centric hypertrophy. As blood is forced through
of the ductus.
the stenotic area, its velocity increases, result-
Advantages
ing in turbulence, a systolic ejection murmur,
· Less invasive procedure with short hospitaliza-
and a post-stenotic dilation of the aorta. The
tion period.
velocity of blood through the lesion is directly
· Little need for post-operative analgesia.
proportional to the severity of stenosis. Left
Disadvantages
ventricular hypertrophy increases the myocar-
· Difficult to catheterize femoral artery of very
 dial oxygen demand.
small dogs due to size constraints.
·Myocardial hypertrophy,
 decreased  capillary
· Ineffective in patients with large, tubular PDA
density, and increased wall tension all contribute
· Requires fuoroscopy.
to produce myocardial hypoxia/ischemia. Focal
 areas of myocardial infarction and fibrosis, par-
Medical Management
ticularly involving the papillary muscles and
· In cases deemed unacceptable anesthetic-surgical
subendocardium, have been commonly observed
candidates, medical management of congestive
in patients with severe stenosis. These cases are
heart failure is indicated (see Chapter 15).
 prone to sudden death, presumably from fatal
· There are no drugs currently effective for closing
ventricular arrhythmias induced by hypoxia.
the patent ductus in dogs and cats.
· Infrequently, left-sided heart failure develops.
· The presence of aortic/subaortic stenosis may
increase the risk of the development of infective
AORTIC STENOSIS
endocarditis.
Anatomy
Diagnosis
·Aortic stenosis is a narrowing or reduction of
Etiology and Breed Predisposition
the left ventricular outflow tract dimension at the
· A polygenic inheritance pattem has been iden-
subvalvular (fbrous ring or muscular), valvular,
tified in the Newfoumdland, which is most con-
Or supravalvular level.
sistent with an autosomal dominant mode of
·The subvalvular fonm (subaortic stenosis) is the
transmission with modifying genes.
most common form in the dog. With this defect,
· Other commonly affected breeds include Bouvier
a fibrous band or ring located just below the
de Flanders, Boxer, English Bulldog. German
aortic semilunar valves impedes left ventricular
Shepherd, German Shorthair Pointer, Golden Re-
emptying.
triever, Great Dane, Rottweiler, and Samoyed.
· Fixed valvular and supravalvular stenosis have
· Bull Terriers are predisposed to valvular aortic
 been reported in the cat
stenosis characterized by thickened aortic valve
· Some patients demonstrate a dynamic subaortic
leaflets and a hypoplastic annulus.
stenosis associated with systolic anterior motion
of the anterior mitral valve leaflet. This condition
History and Clinical Signs
has been described in patients with fixed aortic/
· In mildly to moderately affected cases, there are
subaortic stenosis, hypertrophic cardiomyopa-
 often no clinical sigmns, and the suspicion of aortic
thy, mitral valve dysplasia, and other conditions
stenosis occurs when a murmur is detected dur-
that cause hypertrophy of the interventricular
ing routine ex amination.
septum.
· In severe cases, owners may report failure to
· Some breeds (boxers, bull terriers, golden retriev-
thrive, exercise intolerance, collapse, and labored
ers) have mildly decreased left ventricular outflow
 breathing. In some cases, the first clinical sign is
tract dimensions that result in mild elevations of
sudden death.
224
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
M2
M2
FRAME=49
FRAME=104
13:14:44
18-JAN-00
SP=12
SP=12
NN
UNIV OF PENN
TOF RADIOLOGY
CARDIOLOG
VHUP
-SECT OF RADIOLOGY
CARDIOLOG
M2
P7D4901L
M2
FRAME=156
FRAME=168
Figure 12-5.
 Serial angiocardiograms obtained during a PDA coil embolization procedure. Note the catheter access is via a femoral
artery (right femoral artery) and the placement of one coil completely occludes contrast (and blood) flow across the ductus arteriosus.
Chapter12
Congenital Heart Disease
225
Dilatior
AS
RA
LVP
AS
 Subaortic
LVH
stenosis
Figure 12-6.
 Pathophysiology and genesis of clinical signs in congenital subaortic stenosis. (From Fox PR, Sisson
D, Moise NS, eds: Textbook of canine and feline cardiology: principles and clinical practice, ed 2, Philadelphia, 1999,
WB Saunders.)
Physical Examination
Diagnostic Testing
Palpation
Electrocardiogram
· Animals with aortic stenosis have easily palpa-
· The ECG may be nonmal.
 ble left ventricular impulses, and those with se-
· Altermatively there may be evidence of left ven-
vere stenosis usually have a palpable precordial
tricular hypertrophy (tall R waves in leads II
thrill over the aortic valve area. Femoral pulses
[greater than 3.0 mV], III, and aVF).
are often weak and late rising (pulsus parvus et
· Ventricular or supraventricular arrhythmias are
tardus).
occasionally detected.
Auscultation
Thoracic Radiographs
·Aortic stenosis is manifested by a systolic ejec-
· Radiographic changes tend to parallel severity of
tion-type murmur heard best over the left fourth
the stenosis. Characteristic features include en-
intercostal space at the level of the costochon-
largement of the aortic arch (post-stenotic dila-
dral junction (aortic valve area). Frequently, the
tion) and left ventricle (Figures 12-7 and 12-8).
murmur radiates up the carotid artery and can be
· Left atrial enlargement will be present in advanced
 auscultated in the midcervical area. Occasionally,
 cases with concurrent mitral insufficiency.
the murmur may be loudest in the right third or
fourth intercostal space midway up the thorax.
Echocardiography
Rarely, a concurrent diastolic murmur of aortic
· Echocardiography is the most sensitive nonin-
 insufficiency is present.
vasive method to diagnose and grade subaortic
stenosis.
· This technique provides visualization of the defect
 and secondary cardiac changes. In most cases, there
 is significant left ventricular hypertrophy. In severe
226
SECTION IICardiovascular Disease
Figure 12-7.
. Aortic stenosis (lateral projection). There is marked enlargement of the aortic arch cranial to the heart base (arrows).
Figure 12-8.  Aortic stenosis (dorsoventral projection). The enlarged aortic arch extends to the heart base (arows). The left
or advanced cases, the papillary muscles and myo-
provides reliable data regarding severity. The ve-
cardium become hyperechoic (bright) secondary to
locity of blood (m/s) through the stenosis, mea-
calcium deposition, ischemia and/or fibrosis
sured by Doppler echocardiography, provides a
· Doppler echocardiography allows measurement
reliable and noninvasive measure of the pressure
of blood fow velocity through the defect and
gradient across the stenosis. The pressure gradient
Chapter12
Congenital Heart Disease
227
 demonstrate symptoms such as syncope or lack
KEY PoINT
of exercise capacity.
The differentiation between patients with
trivial to mild stenosis and normal patients
Therapy and Prognosis
with physiologic-induced accelerated trans-
Surgery
aortic velocities can be difficult, if not impos-
· There are several surgical techniques used to
sible. A diagnosis of trivial to mild subaortic/
aortic stenosis based solely on elevations of
relieve left ventricular obstruction. There are
transaortic velocity can be problematic; the
only a limited number of institutions currently
diagnosis should include a combination of
performing these techniques owing to their com-
the following: accelerated transvalvular ve-
plexity, special equipment requirements (cardio-
locities, turbulent blood flow, visualization
pulmonary bypass), and expense.
of an anatomical lesion, concurrent aortic
· Surgery is not indicated for cases with mild ste-
insufficiency, and/or a cistinct "step up" in
nosis (low gradients). Surgery should only be
velocity across a discreet region of the out-
considered for those cases with severe obstructive
flow tract.
disease causing clinical signs such as syncope,
and without evidence of irreversible myocardial
damage.
(in mm Hg) can be readily derived with the modi-
Balloon Dilation
fied Bermoulli equation:
· As in PS, balloon valvuloplasty may be effective 
in alleviating outfow obstruction. This technique
Pressure gradient = 4 (maximum velocity)2
 has much less morbidity than corrective surgery
because it requires insertion of an arterial cath-
· Pressure gradients between 80 to 100 mm Hg
eter rather than a thoracotomy.
represent moderate stenosis; pressure gradients
·Studies have documented significant reduc-
greater than 100 mm Hg are consistent with se-
tions (50%) in pressure gradients immediately
vere stenosis.
following balloon dilation. However, although
short-term (2 to 3 months) effects are favorable,
Cardiac Catheterization
there does not appear to be a long-term survival
· Cardiac catheterization may be used to confinm
benefit.
the diagnosis, but this procedure is usually un-
necessary since the advent of echocardiography.
Medical Management
Cardiac catheterization and angiography are Oc-
· Beta blockers (propranolol, atenolol) are used to
casionally used when multiple cardiac defects are
reduce myocardial oxygen demands. They appear
suspected.
to be of some benefit in reducing the frequency of
· Angiography will illustrate the stenosis and
arrhythmias.
poststenotic dilation. Pressure measurements ob-
· Antibiotics should be administered when bactere-
tained during selective catheterization are used
mia is suspected or likely (e.g., dental procedures)
to detenmine the gradient across the stenosis.
 to reduce the chance of endocarditis developing.
 Unlike echocardiography. general anesthesia is
· Treatment with various cardiac drugs, diuretics,
required, which can significantly lower pressure
low-salt diets, and rest is usually of some benefit
gradients.
 in those severe cases that have developed conges-
tive heart failure.
Natural History
PULMONIC STENOSIS
· The clinical manifestations of aortic/subaortic
stenosis are variable. Up to 25% of dogs with se-
PS is the third most commonly reported con-
vere stenosis may die suddenly during the first 3
genital defect in the dog. Obstruction to the ejec-
years of life. In others, congestive heart failure
tion of blood from the right ventricle may occur
may develop. A serious, but rare complication
at the following levels. The latter two types are
is the development of infective endocarditis, re-
uncommon.
sulting in metastatic infection and aortic insuf-
· Valvular (pulmonic valve dysplasia)
ficiency. Cardiac arrhythmias are common in
· Subvalvular
affected dogs. Other affected individuals may
· Supravalvular
228
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
Pathophysiology
History and Clinical Signs
· Animals with mild or moderate PS are usually
· The consequences of this defect are in direct
asymptomatic and many live apparently normal
 proportion to the severity of the obstruction. The
lives with mild disease.
major clinical manifestations are secondary to
·Symptomatic animals with PS have clinical signs
pressure overload of the right ventricle.
of dyspnea and fatigue secondary to low cardiac
·Hemodynamically, valvular PS results in a pressure
output. Exercise-induced syncope may occur be-
 gradient across the stenotic valve because of resis-
cause of the limitation in cardiac output imposed
tance to right ventricular outfow (Figure 12-9).
by the stenotic valve. Approximately 35% of dogs
The severity of the lesion is directly related to this
with severe stenosis develop clinical signs.
pressure gradient. Right ventricular hypertrophy is
· Decompensation and signs of right-heart failure
almost always present; the degree varies with the
may occur.
severity of stenosis.
· Cyanosis may be present in dogs with concurrent.
· Turbulence associated with the increase in veloc-
right to left shunting patent foramen ovale or co-
ity of blood across the stenotic valve is the cause
existing atrial septal defect or VSD.
of the post-stenotic dilation in the main pulmo-
·Similar to subaortic stenosis, severe hypertrophy
nary artery segment.
can result in myocardial hypoxia and ventricular
· The valvular lesion may be characterized by fu-
arrhythmias.
sion of the valve leaflets, dysplasia of the valvular
Physical Examination
apparatus, or both.
· Depending on the severity of the right ventricular
Palpation
hypertrophy, some patients will have a dynamic,
· Animals with moderate to severe PS have easily
infundibular stenosis in addition to the fixed val-
 palpable right ventricular impulses. A precordial
vular stenosis.
thrill is usually present at the left lower third or
fourth intercostal space.
Diagnosis
· Jugular venous distention and pulsations may be
Etiology and Breed Disposition
-soo ou unnau pidsn j suasaid
· PS occurs in both the dog and cat (rare).
tive heart failure is present.
· The defect is more common in the following
breeds: Airedale Temier, Beagle, Boykin Spaniel,
Auscultation
Boxer, Chihuahua, Cocker Spaniel, English Bull-
· A systolic, crescendo-decrescendo munmur is
 dog, Bull Mastiff, Samoyed, Schnauzer, and West 
heard best at the left lower third or fourth inter-
Highland White Terrier.
 costal space. If the murmur is severe, it may radi-
· A polygenic inheritance pattem has been identi-
ate over the cranial thorax and be audible at the
fied in the Beagle.
thoracic inlet.
· Some authors note that supravalvular stenosis Oc-
· A split second heart sound due to delayed closure
curs with increased incidence in Giant Schnauzers
of the pulmonic valve may also be present.
Dilated PA
a wave
↑RA
RAP
LV
Pulmonic
2TR
RVSP
stenosis
RVH
Septal flattening
eds: Textbook of canine and feline cardiology: principles and clinical practice, ed 2, Philadelphia, 1999, WB Saunders.)
Chapter12
Congenital Heart Disease
229
· It can be difficult to differentiate between the
A post-stenotic dilation of the main pulmonary
murmurs of subaortic/aortic stenosis and PS
artery is usually evident.
· Doppler echocardiography provides a sensitive
Diagnostic Testing
and noninvasive method to determine the sever-
Electrocardiogram
· Signs of right ventricular hypertrophy are pres-
across the obstruction in a similar manner as with
ent in almost all cases. There are deep S waves
aortic stenosis: mild (less than 50 mm Hg), mod-
present in leads I, II, and ImI, and a right shift of
erate (50 to 80 mm Hg), and severe (greater than
the mean electrical axis in the frontal plane (more
80 mm Hg).
than 120 degrees).
· Ventricular arrhythmias may be present. Atrial
Other Diagnostic Techniques
fibrillation may be present in severe cases.
· Cardiac catheterization may be used to confinm
the diagnosis of PS, but this procedure is usually
Thoracic Radiographs
unnecessary since the advent of echocardiogra-
· The primary radiographic features (Figures 12-10
phy. Cardiac catheterization and angiography are
 and 12-11) include the following:
occasionally used when multiple cardiac defects
· Right ventricular enlargement and right atrial
are suspected.
enlargement
· Cardiac catheterization and angiography are per-
· Enlargement of the main pulmonary segment
formed routinely prior to an interventional pro-
· Decreased pulmonary vascularity; pulmonary ar-
cedure such as balloon valvuloplasty. Selective
teries smaller than normal
coronary angiography is required to rule out the
presence of an anomalous left main coronary ar-
Echocardiography
tery in English Bulldogs and Boxers if surgery or
· Echocardiography has proven to be highly sensi-
 balloon valvuloplasty is considered.
tive in the diagnosis and detenmination of severity
of PS.
Differential Diagnosis
· Characteristic findings include the following:
· Right ventricular dilation and hypertrophy of the
·Atrial septal defect: The right ventricular volume
right ventricular wall and interventricular sep-
overload associated with a left-to-right shumting
tum. Owing to increased pressures within the
atrial septal defect may result in a systolic ejection
right ventricle, the septum is typically fattened
murmur over the pulmonic valve. Such murmurs
(Figure 12-12).
are usually softer than those associated with PS.
· The right ventricular outfow tract is often di-
· Immocent or physiologic munmurs: These murmurs
lated, and in cases of valvular stenosis, the pul-
are usually much softer than typical PS murmurs and
monic valve cusps are thickened and immobile.
 do not typically persist beyond 6 months of age.
Figure 12-10.  Pulmonic stenosis (lateral projection) in a 2-month-old mixed-breed dog. There is increased sternal contact of
230
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
Figure 12-11.
Pulmonic stenosis (dorsoventral projection) in a 2-month-old mixed-breed dog. There is marked right-heart
enlargement and prominence of the main pulmonary artery (arrows).
26
PHILIPS
RV
12386
GAIN
HS
Figure 12-12. Right parasternal short-axis 2-dimensional echocardiogram obtained from a West Highland White Terrier with
severe pulmonic stenosis. Note the severely thickened right ventricle. RV, Right ventricle; LV, left ventricle.
Natural History
with moderate to severe PS may develop signs
·Uncomplicated survival to adulthood may oc-
of right-sided congestive heart failure, cardiac
cur in dogs with mild to moderate Ps. In gen-
arrhythmias, exertional syncope, and/or sudden
eral, the natural history correlates well with
death. Concurrent tricuspid valve dysplasia in-
disease severity (pressure gradient) and the
creases the risk of the development of conges-
degree of right ventricular hypertrophy. Dogs
tive heart failure.
Chapter12
Congenital Heart Disease
231
Therapy and Prognosis
· This procedure is generally recommended
for patients with moderate to severe stenosis,
· The need for treatment and the prognosis are de-
particularly those patients with symptoms such
pendent upon the severity of the defect as deter-
as syncope and/or decreased exercise capacity.
mined by Doppler echocardiography or cardiac
· Reduction in the transvalvular pressure gradient
catheterization. Cases with mild stenosis (less than
 by balloon valvuloplasty may be accompanied by
50 mm Hg; ejection velocity less than 3.5 m/s)
exacerbation of the dynamic subvalvular (infun-
do not require treatment and have a favorable
dibular) obstruction.
prognosis. Those with severe stenosis (more than
 80 mm Hg; ejection velocity more than 4.5 m/s)
Medical Management
are candidates for surgery or balloon valvulo-
· Signs of right-sided congestive heart failure
plasty, and may have a poor prognosis if uncor-
should be treated as described in Chapter 15.
rected. Intermediate cases should be followed to
· Beta blocker therapy (atenolol 0.25 to 1.5 mg/kg
monitor for progression of the stenosis.
PO every 12 hours) is routinely administered to
patients with moderate to severe right ventricular
Surgery
hypertrophy in an effort to decrease myocardial
· The method of surgical correction depends on the
Oxygen consumption and to suppress ventricular
type of stenosis present and its severity.
arrhythmias.
· Supraventricular PS may be palliated by circum-
venting the stenosis with a conduit.
· Repair of valvular or discrete subvalvular PS can
VENTRICULAR SEPTAL DEFECT
 be accomplis hed by pulmonary arteriotomy (us-
Anatomy
 ing infow occlusion). The patch graft technique
is effective in young animals with valvular PS.
· The interventricular septum separates the left
The bistoury technique or the modified Brock
ventricle and the right ventricle. It is muscular at
 procedure has also been used effectively.
e uopod snounquau e on siaden pue xade a
· In general, surgical correction is not recom-
the heart base near the origin of the aorta. Septal
 mended unless the surgeon is experienced with
g ds a go ea  un o A s
the procedure.
 are most commonly located in the membranous
portion.
Balloon Valvuloplasty
· VSDs may occur as isolated defects, may coexist
· In this procedure, a special cardiac catheter is
with concurrent defects (e.g., PDA and atrial sep-
guided through the stenotic valve, and a balloon
tal defect), or may be a component of complex
situated at the end of the catheter is inflated, ef-
cardiac anomalies.
fectively enlarging the valve diameter. Balloon
valvuloplasty is most effective when valves are
Pathophysiology
thin and fused, and hypoplasia of the annulus is
not present.
· There are two major factors that determine the con-
· Generally, balloon valvuloplasty results in a sig-
sequences of a VSD, the size of the defect and the
nificant (40% to 60%) decrease in the pressure
relative pressures (or resistances) of the ventricles.
gradient and is maintained in 60% to 70% of
When left and right ventricular pressures are normal,
the patients; however, the long-term effects on
blood will shunt left to right, as the left ventricular
survival improvement have not been definitely
systolic pressure is roughly five times greater than
determined.
right ventricular systolic pressure (Figure 12-13).
In the typical VSD (left-to-right shunting membra-
KEY POINT
nous defect), most of the blood is shunted into the
right ventricular outflow tract or the main pulmo-
English Bulldogs and some Boxers may have
 a a  s  s  
an anomalous left main coronary artery
load to the pulmonary circulation, the left atrium,
arising from a single right coronary artery
and the left ventricle. When pulmonary resistance
associated with the stenosis that precludes
surgical or catheter-based intervention due
remains relatively normal, the right ventricle is
to the risk of vessel rupture and subsequent
spared most of the effects of the shunting.
death.
· Small defects may be of no hemodynamic signifi-
cance, although they may predispose the animal
232
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
 to the development of endocarditis. In some cases,
Physical Examination
small defects close spontaneously
· Moderately sized defects may allow significant
Palpation
shunting and usually produce clinical signs.
· In many cases, a precordial thrill is present at
· Very large defects may create a functional single
the right-heart base (third to fourth intercostal
ventricle with equilibration of left and right ven-
spaces, (just above the costochondral junctions).
tricular pressures.
Volume overloading of the left ventricle often
· If right ventricular resistance increases (e.g.,
accentuates the left-sided impulse. In cases with
PS, pulmonary hypertension), right ventricular
significant pulmonary hypertension, precordial
pressure will increase proportionately, thereby
thrills are unusual, and the right apical impulse is
decreasing the shunt volume. If right ventricular
accentuated.
pressure increases to a point where it exceeds left
ventricular pressure, blood will shunt right to left,
Auscultation
and signs of cyanosis may develop.
· Typically, the murmur is harsh, holosystolic, and
heard best at the right stermal border, at the sec-
Diagnosis
 ond through fourth intercostal spaces.
Etiology and Breed Predisposition
·A murmur of functional PS may be heard over the
· Breed studies in the keeshond have shown the
 pulmonic valve area. This is due to the extra vol-
defect to be polygenic.
ume of blood passing through the pulmonic valve
· The English bulldog appears to have a higher in-
 and not related to a structural valve problem.
cidence than other breeds, but the defect is seen
·A split-second heart sound occasionally is pres-
in many purebred and mixed-breed dogs.
ent due to slightly prolonged right ventricular
· Breed incidence in the cat has not been determined.
ejection time.
· When the defect causes destabilization of an
History and Clinical Signs
aortic valve cusp, a diastolic murmur of aortic
· The clinical course of animals with VSD is vari-
insufficiency may be present in addition to the
able and to a large extent dependent upon the size
systolic munmur. This combination is referred to
of the defect and the ventricular pressures. Small
as a to-and-fro murmur and is not a continuous
defects may cause little or no functional distur-
mummur.
bances and may cause no clinical signs. Mod-
erate to large defects usually produce signs of
sion, elevations in right ventricular resistance
left-sided failure subsequent to the chronic left-
result in diminished shunting. With very large
sided volume overload. In cases that develop pul-
 defects and/or severe pulmonary hypertension, a
monary hypertension, signs of right-sided failure
murmur may be absent because of the lack of a
and cyanosis will predominate.
pressure differential across the septum.
↑Pulmonary
flow
↑ Oz sat.
↑venous return
→ R shunt
RA
LVDP
Ventricular
septal defect
VSD
+/- RVH -
S1
S2
Figure 12-13.
book of canine and feline cardiology: principles and clinical practice, ed 2, Philadelphia, 1999, WB Saunders.)
Chapter12
Congenital Heart Disease
233
 present in cases of pulmonary hypertension and
Diagnostic Testing
right-to-left shunting (Figure 12-14).
Electrocardiogram
· ECG abnormalities usually parallel the degree of
Echocardiography
hemodynamic compromise.
· The diagnosis of VSD can usually be confirmed
· The ECG may be normal when a small defect is
by routine echocardiography. Typical findings for
present.
a moderate to large shunt include left ventricular
· The ECG may show evidence of left, right, or bi-
and left atrial dilation, and a defect in the inter-
ventricular enlargement, depending on hemody-
ventricular septum with 2D echocardiography.
namic consequences of the shunt.
It is important to distinguish the septal dropout
· Right bundle branch block may also be observed.
normally present in the membranous septum
from a VSD. In most VSD cases, the interven-
Thoracic Radiographs
tricular septum is slightly blunted just apical to
· Small defects usually do not cause radiographic
the defect, whereas the septum tapers gradually
changes.
in normal animals.
· Left ventricular enlargement, left atrial enlarge-
· Contrast echocardiography will confinm the pres-
ment, and increased pulmonary artery promi
ence of a right-to-left shunting VSD. Agitated
nence are seen with larger defects resulting in
saline is rapidly injected into a peripheral vein,
significant left-to-right shunting.
resulting in the appearance of microbubbles
· Right ventricular enlargement accompanied by
(contrast) within the heart. In the absence of a
prominent tortuous pulmonary arteries may be
right-to-left shunt, all contrast remains right-sided.
B
c
Figure 12-14. Ventricular septal defect. A routine examination of a 3-month-old Doberman revealed a grade 2 systolic murmur
Over the mitral and aortic valve areas. There were a weak pulse and a split R wave. A to C, The plain lateral radliograph shows
fluid in an interlobar fisure and increased pulmonary vascular markings. The right heart cannot be evaluated on the lateral view
because of the fluid. The lateral and dorsoventral views show left ventricular enlargement. A thymic sail is seen. Selective cath-
eterization of the left ventricle and angiocardiography show simultaneous filling of the left and right ventricles. The aorta and the
pulmonary arteries are also seen.
Continued
234
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
D
6.5MH2
60dB
TdE
G
Figure 12-14, cont'd.  D, A 4-month-old German Shepherd puppy presented for vaccination. A murmur was auscultated, and a
pronounced precordial thrill was palpated. A 1 -cm septal defect is seen high in the interventricular septum (arrow). Diagnosis: inter-
ventricular septal defect. ra, Right atrium; rv, right ventricle; ia, left atrium; v, left ventricle. E, A Staffordshire Bull Terrier presented for
vaccination. A murmur was auscultated, and a palpable thrill was felt on the thoracic wall. A small interventricular septal defect (proved
at autopsy) is seen between the left and right ventricles. The edges of the septal defect are thickened and hyperechoic. The defect was
visible only when the image orientation was optimized for the left ventricular outflow tract. Diagnosis: interventricular septal defect.
(From Kealey JK, McAllster H: Diagnostic radiology and ultrasonography of the dog and cat, ed 3, Philadelphia, 20oo, WB Saunders.)
KEY PoINT
Other Diagnostic Procedures
· Cardiac catheterization and angiography may be
 High-velocity flow (greater than 4.5 m/s,
used to confinm the diagnosis of VSD. As with
as defined by Doppler echccardicgraphy)
other congenital defects, the use of cardiac cath-
 across the VsD and normal transpulmonic
eterization has decreased with the availability of
valvular velocities indicate that the defect
echocardiography. Determination of oxygen sat-
is associated with a small shunting volume.
These "restrictive" shunts are hemodynami-
uration of blood from each chamber may be used
cally insignificant and are unlikely to be as-
to confinm shunting. Left-to-right shunts produce
sociated with clinical signs.
a step-up in oxygen saturation in the right ven-
Low-velocity flow (less than 4.5 m/s) across
tricle compared with the right atrium.
the VSD and increased transpulmonic valvu-
lar velocities indicate that the defect is asso-
ciated with a large shunting volume. These
Therapy and Prognosis
"unrestrictive” shunts are hemodynamically
· The prognosis and need for therapy are dependent
significant and are likely to be associated
upon the severity of the defect. With small defects,
with clinical signs.
spontaneous closure may occur within the first 2
years of life. Indications for surgical intervention
include a large septal defect, the presence of clinical
signs, or a calculated shunt ratio of 3:1 or greater.
In right-to-left shunting VSD, microbubbles will
be seen traversing the defect.
Surgery
· Doppler echocardiography will confinm the
shunting of blood through the defect (Figure
sonable success. Although curative, these tech-
12-15).
niques are available at a very limited number of
Chapter12
Congenital Heart Disease
235
25
JR VHUP
GAIN64
85BPM
A
Figure 12-15.F
Right parasternal long-axis-2 cimensional echocarcdiogram obtained from a 9-week-old Golden Retriever puppy
with a right sided systolic murmur. Note the aliased color flow pattern crossing the interventricular septum. This finding is consis-
locations and are often prohibitively expensive.
· The right ventricular hypertrophy is secondary to
Reduction of the shunt can be accomplished by
the obstruction in right ventricular outfow. The
pulmonary artery banding. a technique result-
PS may be valvular, infundibular, or both.
ing in elevation of the right ventricular systolic
pressure. As right ventricular pressure increases,
Pathophysiology
the shunt volume decreases, and the pulmonary
circulation is spared the deleterious effects of
The hemodynamic consequences of tetralogy of
chronic volume overload.
 Fallot depend primarily on the severity of the PS
and the size of the VSD.
Medical Management
· The direction and magnitude of the shunt through
· In patients where surgical correction or palliation
the septal defect are dependent upon the degree
is not an option, medical management of con-
of right ventricular obstruction. If the PS is mild,
gestive heart failure may be required. Treatment
and right ventricular pressures are only modestly
should be tailored to the type and degree of fail-
elevated, then blood will shunt primarily from
ure (see Chapter 15). Animals with VSD should
left to right. Pathophysiologically, these cases
receive antibiotic prophylaxis prior to proce.
are similar to VsD cases with pulmonary artery
dures likely to produce bacteremia (e.g., dental
banding (i.e., the mild right ventricular obstruc-
cleaning).
tion protects the pulmonary vasculature from ex-
cessive shunting).
Prognosis
· When PS is severe, the elevated right ventricu-
· Prognosis is excellent for animals with small
 lar pressures will result in right-to-left shunting.
defects or for those with surgically corrected de-
Consequences include reduced pulmonary blood
fects. Cases with moderate to large defects have a
fow (resulting in fatigue and shortness of breath)
variable clinical course and prognosis, depending
and generalized cyanosis (resulting in weakness).
on shunt volume.
· Owing to the shunting of venous blood into the
aorta and consequent hypoxemia, the kidneys are
TETRALOGY OF FALLOT
stimulated to release erythropoietin. Chronic el-
evations in erythropoietin result in polycythemia.
Tetralogy of Fallot is the most common cyanosis-
The increased blood viscosity associated with
 producing defect and results from a combination of
polycythemia can have significant hemodynamic
PS, high VSD, right ventricular hypertrophy, and
effects, resulting in sludging of blood and poor
varying degrees of dextroposition and ovemiding of
capillary perfusion. Animals with severe polycy-
the aorta.
themia may seizure.
236
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
Diagnosis
Therapy and Prognosis
Etiology and Breed Predisposition
Surgery
· Breeds predisposed to tetralogy of Fallot in-
· Surgical correction of tetralogy of Fallot is un-
clude the Keeshond, English Bulldog, Miniature
commonly performed because of the attendant
Poodle, Miniature Schnauzer, and Wire-Haired
mortality and expense. Palliative surgical options
Fox Terrier. This defect has also been recognized
include the Blalock anastomosis and the Potts
in other canine breeds, and in cats.
anastomosis. In the Blalock anastomosis, the left
· Based on breeding studies and genetic analysis (pri-
subclavian artery is anastomosed with the pulmo-
marily in the keeshond), conotruncal malformations
nary artery in order to increase pulmonary blood
 are thought to be recessive, but not simply inherited.
fow. The Potts anastomosis consists of a side-to-
side anastomosis of the aorta and pulmonary ar-
History and Clinical Signs
tery. These procedures are generally effective in
· Typical historical features include stunted growth,
reducing signs of pulmonary hypoperfusion and
exercise intolerance, cyanosis, collapse, and sei-
systemic hypoxia.
zure activity.
· In some cases, palliation can be provided by re-
ducing PS. Surgical valvuloplasty or balloon val
Physical Examination
vuloplasty are options.
Palpation
· A precordial thrill may be felt in the third left in-
Medical Management
tercostal space, near the costochondral junction.
· Beta-adrenergic blockade has been used to reduce
the dynamic component of right ventricular out-
Auscultation
fow obstruction and to attenuate beta-adrenergic-
·In most cases, a murmur of PS is present. The
mediated decreasesin systemic vas cular resistance.
intensity of the munmur is attenuated when severe
 Increasesin systemic vascularresistance willlower
 polycythemia is present.
the magnitude of right-to-left shunting.
· Polycythemia should be controlled by periodic
Diagnostic Testing
phlebotomy. When the packed cell volume exceeds
Electrocardiogram
68, intervention is indicated. Up to 20 ml/kg of
· A right ventricular enlargement patterm is usually
blood can be removed and replaced with a crystal-
present.
loid solution, such as lactated Ringer's or saline.
· Arrhythmias may be present.
· If the required frequency of phlebotomy is poorly
tolerated by the patient, hydroxyurea, an oral
Thoracic Radiographs
myelosuppressive agent, can be used. However,
· Variable right-heart enlargement is present.
administration of this drug requires close patient
· Pulmonary vessels are undersized, and the main
monitoring with periodic complete blood and
pulmonary artery is often diminished.
platelet counts.
Echocardiography
ATRIOVENTRICULARVALVE
· Echocardiography will confinm the diagnosis,
DYSPLASIA
with malposition of the aortic root, right ventricu-
lar hypertrophy, and VSD.
Congenital malfonmation of the mitral and tri-
· Routine contrast echocardiography will dem-
cuspid valves has been reported in dogs and cats.
onstrate right-to-left shunting at the level of the
Malformation of the valve may result in a range
VSD. Flow through the defect can also be deter-
of hemodynamic consequences including valvu-
mined by Doppler echocardiography.
lar regurgitation, mitral or tricuspid stenosis, and
dynamic left ventricular outfow obstruction. Con-
Cardiac Catheterization
genital malformation of the mitral valve complex
· Selective angiocardiography of the right ventricle
(mitral valve dysplasia) is a common congenital
demonstrates simultaneous filling of the aorta and
cardiac defect in the cat. In addition, several canine
pulmonary artery in cases with right-to-left shunts.
breeds are predisposed including Bull Terriers, Ger-
· Nonselective angiocardiography may support a
man Shepherds, and Great Danes. Tricuspid valve
diagnosis of tetralogy of Fallot, but this tec hnique
dysplasia has been shown to have a genetic basis in
is much less sensitive than echocardiography.
Labrador Retrievers.
Chapter12
Congenital Heart Disease
237
· In some cases, malformation of the mitral valve
Anatomy
complex causes a degree of valvular stenosis as
· Mitral valve dysplasia most commonly results in
well as insufficiency.
valvular insufficiency and systolic regurgitation
· If the tricuspid valve is involved, then atrial
of blood into the left atrium.
and ventricular enlargement secondary to vol-
· Any component of the atrioventricular valve com-
ume overload with subsequent systemic venous
plex (valve leaflet, chordae tendineae, papillary
 hypertension and right-sided congestive heart fail-
muscles) may be malformed. Often, more than
ure is a likely outcome if regurgitation is severe.
one component is defective. A wide spectrum
Diagnosis
of valvular malformations has been described:
thickening of the valve leaflets; incomplete sepa-
History and Clinical Signs
ration of the valvular structures from the ventric-
· Clinical signs correlate with the severity of the
ular wall; shortening or elongation, thickening.
defect. Affected animals usually display signs
and fusion of the chordae tendineae; and mal-
of left-sided heart failure, including weakness,
positioning and/or malformation of the papillary
cough, and exercise intolerance if the mitral valve
muscles.
is affected. Altermatively, signs of right heart fail-
ure (abdominal distention associated with ascites)
Pathophysiology
may be present if the tricuspid valve is affected.
· Malformation of the atrioventricular valve com-
Physical Examination
plex can result in significant valvular insuf-
fciency. In the case involving the mitral valve,
Palpation
chronic mitral regurgitation leads to volume
· Affected animals may have a precordial thrill
 overload to the left heart, which results in dilation
over the left cardiac apex (mitral valve) or right
of the left ventricle and atrium in the same man-
cardiac apex (tricuspid valve).
ner as does chronic degenerative valvular disease
(see Chapter 6).
Auscultation
·When mitral regurgitation is severe, cardiac
· A holosystolic murmur of mitral regurgitation
output decreases, resulting in signs of cardiac
is most prominent at the left cardiac apex. A
failure.
diastolic heart sound (gallop) is present in some
· Dilation of the left-sided chambers predisposes
cases. The murmur of tricuspid regurgitation is
affected animals to arrhythmias. Severe atrial en-
 best heart at the right cardiac apex. Some patients 
largement increases the risk of tachyarrhythmias
with clinically significant tricuspid regurgitation
such as atrial fibrillation.
may have "silent" regurgitation.
MI:0.8
14:37:18
RA
Figure 12-16.
 Echocardiogram from a dog with tricuspid valve dysplasia. Note the severely thickened tricuspid valve leaflets
(arrow). RV, Right ventricle; LA, left atrium; RA, right atrium.
238
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
Diagnostic Testing
· Continuous murmurs begin at the onset of
Electrocardiogram
systole, peak in intensity during mid to late
·Atrial arrhythmias (atrial premature contractions,
systole, and continue into diastole.
· Systolic murmurs begin at the onset of systole,
atrial fibrillation) are common.
maintain a consistent intensity throughout the
· Evidence of left atrial enlargement (widened P
systolic period, and terminate at the end of
waves) and left ventricular enlargement may be
systole. The termination of a systolic murmur
present.
may occur during or just after the second heart
 Splintered QRS complexes are common ECG
sound depending on the left ventricular systolic
·
pressures and the severity of the valvular
findings in cats and dogs with tricuspid valve
 dysplasia. Right heart enlargement patterms may
insufficiency. The duration of a systolic murmur
is, for the most part, consistent regardless of
also be present.
the cardiac rhythm (excluding premature beats 
and tachyarrhythmias). In general, systole has
Thoracic Radiographs
a defined duration and, therefore, a systolic
· The most prominent abnormality with mitral valve
murmur has a defined duration. So even during
dysplasia is severe left atrial enlargement. Left
prominent sinus arrhythmias, a systolic murmur
ventricular enlargement is also present. Pulmo-
sounds like it has a consistent duration.
 nary veins may be distended and evidence of left-
· The scenario is different for continuous
 murmurs; the duration of the murmur changes
sided congestive heart failure may be present.
during periods of sinus arrhythmia. In fact, the
· Right atrial and ventricular enlargement may be evi-
intensity of a conti nuous murmur during diastole
 dentif severe tricuspid valve regurgitation is present.
may become inaudible during long pauses.
Distention of the caudal vena cava may be noted if
Which is the best approach for treatment of PDA:
 right-sided congestive heart failure is present.
Surgical ligation or transarteriat coit occiusion?
Both approaches have been demonstrated to be effec-
Echocardiography
tive and safe when performed by experienced indi-
· Echocardiography demonstrates malformation of 
viduals; therefore, the best approach is the approach
the mitral valve complex (fused chordae tendineae
that is most readily available (there are geographical
 and thickened, immobile valve leafets) and left
limitations for transarterial coil occlusion because
there are a limited number of individuals trained to
atrial and ventricular dilation.
 perform transcatheter interventi onal procedures).
· Doppler echocardiography demonstrates severe
mitral regurgitation. If present, mitral stenosis
Does the intensity of a cardiac murmur associated
with congenital heart disease correlate with the se-
can be identified.
verity of the disease?
· The echocardiographic findings with tricuspid
In general, the intensity of the murmur roughly approx-
valve dysplasia mirror those changes seen with
imates the severity of the defect; however, there are
mitral valve dysplasia, only involve the right
some exceptions. Patients with small, restrictive VSDs
heart instead (Figure 12-16).
often have very loud systolic murmurs, but are unlikely
to be clinically affected. With regards to defects that
cause obstruction to ventricular outfow, presence of
Therapy and Prognosis
myocardial failure can decrease the intensity of the
 murmur. Some patients with tricuspid valve dysplasia
· Prognosis for the severely affected animal with
have "silent' regurgitati on that can only be detected by
clinical signs is poor. Mildly affected animals
echocar diography or angiocardiography. Patients with
may remain free of clinical signs for several
reversed PDA have severe cardiovascular derangement
years. Therapy for progressive congestive heart
but often have no audible cardiac murmurs.
failure is detailed in Chapter 15.
What is the most important diagnostic test for a patient
suspected of having a congenitat heart defect?
Echocardiography is the most important part of the
 Frequently Asked Questions
evaluation of a patient suspected of having a congeni-
tal heart defect. Two-dimensional echocardiography
How do I differentiate between a continuous murmur
provides an anatomical image of the cardiac struc-
and a systolic murmur?
tures that can be observed in real time for assessment
The differentiation between a continuous murmur
of structural and functional abnormalities. M-mode
and a systolic murmur is important because there is
echocardiography can be used to quantify cardiac di-
only one clinically important cause of a continuous
mensions and function. Doppler echocardiography is
murmur——-patent ductus arteriosus.
Chapter12
Congenital Heart Disease
239
Kittleson MD, Kienle RD, eds: Small animal cardiovas-
a critical part of the echocardiographic evaluation of
cular medicine, St Louis, 1998, Mosby.
a patient with a cardiac murmur. Color fow Doppler
Oyama MA, Sisson DD, Thomas WP, Bonagura JD:
 allows for rapid detection of abnormal fow patterns
Congenital heart disease. p. 972. In Ettinger SJ, ed:
and spectral Doppler can be utilized for quantification
Textbook of veterinary internal medicine, ed 6, Phila-
of blood flow characteristics such as velocity.
delphia, 2005, WB Saunders.
SUGGESTED READINGS
Bonagura JD, Lehmkuhl LB: Congenital heart disease.
In Fox PR, Sisson D, Moise NS, eds: Textbook of ca-
nine and feline cardiology, Philadelphia, 1999, WB
Saunders.
Cardiovascular Effects
of Systemic Diseases
Francis W. K. Smith, Jr., Donald P. Schrope, and Carl D. Sammarco
INTRODUCTION
nonfunctional adenocarcinomas that don't
Many systemic diseases are capable of profoundly
cause hyperthyroidism. Iatrogenic hyperthy
affecting cardiovascular structure and function (Box
 roidism can result from over supplementation
13-1). The veterinarian may detect cardiovascular
of thyroxin in hypothyroid dogs.
abnormalities as the predominant clinical sign or sys-
temic disease manifestations may overshadow cardiac
Cardiac Pathophysiology
abnormalities. A lthough cardiovascular manifestations
may sometimes be of no clinical significance, at other
Direct Effects
times they may constitute the major medical concerm.
· Positive inotropic effects (i.e., increased contractil-
Detection of cardiovascular involvement may be based
ity) result from an increased sodium-potassium -
 On clinical signs, radiographic changes, electrocardio-
exchanging adenosine triphosphatase (Na+, K+-
graphic (ECG) or echocardiographic abnonmalities, or
ATPase) activity, increased mitochondrial protein
laboratory findings. Emphasis in this chapter is given
synthesis, and increased synthesis and enhanced
to diseases having the greatest cardiovascular effects
contractile properties of myosin. Thyroid hormone
or incidence in practice. The focus of discussion is the
favors the production of the alpha heavy chain myo-
cardiovascular effects and their treatment.
sin isoenzyme, which has the fastestATPase activity.
but is less efficient at converting ATP to mechanical
energy. Thyroid hormones increase the number of
Endocrine Diseases
 L-type calcium channels and expression of sodium
 calcium ATPase, which improves the recycling of
calcium by the sarcoplasmic reticulum. Systolic and
HYPERTHYROIDISM
diastolic performances are both altered.
· Hyperthyroidism is the most common systemic
· Positive chronotropic effects (i.e., increased heart
disturbance to affect cardiac function in cats
rate) result from an increased rate of sinoatrial fir-
and is rare in dogs. Hyperthyroid heart disease
ing, decreased threshold of atrial activation, and
can be a severe problem, leading to heart failure
shortened refractory period of the conduction tis-
in some animals.
sue. The effect on atrial activation may increase
· Hyperthyroidism is a disease of middle-aged
the risk for atrial arrhythmias.
to geriatric cats (range, 4 to 22 years; mean,
13 years) that is generally caused by a thyroid
Indirect Effects
 adenoma. Clinical evidence of thyrotoxic heart
· The effect of thyroid hormones on the adrenergic
disease is unusual before the age of 6 years.
system is controversial. The number of myocar-
Thyroid tumors in dogs are generally rare and
dial beta-adrenergic receptors and their affinity are
240
Chapter13
Cardiovascular Effects of Systemic Diseases
241
Box 13-1
Classification of Important
Systemic Disorders That Affect
cardiac output. Peripheral vasodilation increases
the Heart
tissue perfusion and decreases afterload. As blood
volume increases, increased venous retum to the
heart and increased preload result. The combina-
Endocrine
tion of increased preload, increased contractil-
Thyroid gland
Hyperthyroidism
ity, increased heart rate, and decreased afterload
Hypothyroidi sm
results in increased cardiac output. Chronic vol-
Adrenal gland
ume overload and high metabolic rate can result
Hyperadrenocorticism
in heart failure even though the cardiac output
Hypoadrenocorticis m 
is still greater than normal. This is referred to as
Pheochromocytoma
Pituitary
high-output heart failure.
 Acromegaly (hypersomatotropism)
· Hypertension is a frequent although usually not
Pancreas
severe sequela of hyperthyroidism in cats, with
 Diabetes mellitus (hyperglycemia)
one study showing an incidence of mild to mod-
erate hypertension in 73% of cases. This occurs
Metabolic
in spite of peripheral vasodilation, and probably
Hypercalcemia
Hypocalcemia
reflects the increased stroke volume and heart rate
Hyper kalemia
which increases cardiac output in these animals.
Hypokalemia
Blood pressure is a function of cardiac output and
Hypoglycemia
systemic vascular resistance.
Uremia
· The combination of volume and pressure over-
Anemia
 load alters myocardial protein synthesis and deg-
Neoplastic and infiltrative heart diseases
radation, which results in myocardial hypertrophy
Physical and chemical agents
and chamber dilation. These changes are most
Hyperpyrexia (heat stroke)
notable in the left heart. In rare cases, hyperthy-
Hypothermia
roid cats with congestive heart failure develop a
Carbon monoxide
Toad poisoning
cardiomyopathy of overload that resembles di-
Oleander toxicity
lated cardiomyopathy.
Chocolate (theobromine) toxicity
Doxorubicin cardiotoxicity
Infectious/inflammatory myocardial diseases
KEY PoINT
Bacterial (Lyme disease)
The net effects of hyperthyroidism on the
Viral (parvovirus)
cardiovascular system are enhanced cardiac
Mycotic
contractility, tachycardia, cardiomegaly, left 
Protozoal (trypanosomiasis)
ventricular hypertrophy, high cardiac output,
Miscellaneous
systemic hypertension, and occasionally high-
 Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)
 output heart failure.
Neurologic disease
Gastric dilatation-volvulus (GDV)
Pancreatitis
Diagnosis
Traumatic myocarditis
History and Physical Examination
· Historical findings and clinical signs include
weight loss, polyphagia, unkempt hair coat,
increased in hyperthyroid animals. However, this
polydipsia, diarrhea, nervousness, hyperactivity.
does not always explain or result in an increased
vomiting, tremor, polyuria, lethargy, aggression,
responsiveness to catecholamines. Postreceptor ef-
decreased appetite, weakness, episodic panting.
fects of thyroid hormone are probably mediated by
and bulky, foul-smelling stool.
changes in intracellular G protein populations that
· Cardiovascular abnormalities that may be present
result in an enhanced response to adrenergic ago-
on physical examination include tachycardia, pre-
mists. Circulating catecholamine levels are normal.
mature heart beats, gallop rhythm, apical systolic
 Hyperthyroidism results in an increased meta-
murmur, accentuated heart sounds, forceful pre-
bolic rate, and consequently an increased tissue
cordial beat, strong femoral pulses, jugular venous 
oxygen demand. The need for increased tissue
distention, and dyspnea when stressed.
242
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
· Noncardiac findings can include thinness, pal-
day and may dip into the normal range in mildly
pable thyroid gland, hyperactivity, dehydration,
hyperthyroid animals.
easily stressed, small kidneys, depression, weak-
ness, and ventral fexion of the neck.
Specialized Diagnostic Tests
· Additional diagnostic tests may occasionally be
Electrocardiography
needed to confinm the diagnosis of hyperthy-
· ECG findings in hyperthyroid cats are sinus tachy
roidism in cats with normal resting T4 values on
cardia (42%), right bundle branch block (7%), tall
repeated assessment.
R waves in lead II (22%), left anterior fascicular
Free T4 by Equilibrium Dialysis
block (4%), ventricular premature complexes
· Cats with mild hyperthyroidism and normal T4
(1%), atrial premature complexes (5%) atrial
levels often have a high free T4 level, whereas
tachycardia or atrial fibrillation (2%). Ventricu-
cats with nonthyroidal illness often have a normal
lar tachycardia, ventricular bigeminy, ventricular
free T4 (specificity and sensitivity > 90%).
pre-excitation and atrioventricular (AV) block
· Not recommended as a screening test for hyper-
have also been described.
thyroidism, as some cats with nonthyroidal ill-
· Sinus tachycardia and increased R wave volt-
ness will have a high free T4 level.
age resolve with treatment of hyperthyroidism.
T, Suppression Test
Atrial and ventricular premature contractions
· Administer triodothyronine (T3) at 25 μg PO
(APCs and VPCs) may decrease in frequency
every 8 hours for seven doses for a cat. Collect
 or become abolished. Conduction disturbances
blood for a T4 determination prior to the first dose
may or may not resolve. If arrhythmias or R wave
 of T and 2 to 4 hours after the last dose.
amplitude changes persist after hyperthyroid-
· A normal cat's T4 level will suppress to less than
ism is controlled, the patient should be evalu-
1.5 μg/dL. Values between 1 .5 to 2 μg/dL are non-
ated for idiopathic cardiomyopathy or systemic
diagnostic whereas values greater than 2 μg/dL
hypertension.
support diagnosis of hyperthyroidism. T values
can be measured concurrently to assess owner
Radiography
compliance. T values should rise regardless of
· Mild to severe cardiomegaly is seen in 50% of
the cat's thyroid status.
cases.
Thyroid-Releasing Hormone
· Evidence of congestive heart failure (pulmonary
Response Test
edema or pleural effusion) is reported in fewer
· To perform the thyroid-releasing hormone (TRH)
than 5% of cases.
response test, inject 0.1 mg/kg of TRH and ob-
tain blood samples before and 4 hours after TRH
Echocardiography
injection.
· In nonmal cats, the post-TRH T4 is at least 60%
left atrial enlargement, left ventricular wall and
greater than baseline. A hyperthyroid cat's T4 levels
septal hypertrophy, increased aortic amplitude,
change less than 50% following TRH administration.
hyperkinetic left ventricular wall and septum, left.
Values between 50% and 60% are not diagnostic.
ventricular dilation (eccentric hypertrophy), and
· The TRH response test takes less time to perform
increased fractional shortening.
than the T suppression test and does not depend
·A dilated fonm of cardiomyopathy occasion-
on the owner's ability to medicate the cat. TRH
ally develops and is characterized by left atrial
can cause vomiting, salivation, tachypnea, and
and ventricular dilation and low fractional
defecation following the injection. TRH is sub-
shortening.
stantially more expensive than T3
· Results not superior to repeated assessment of
Clinical Pathology
total T4 coupled with free T4 by equilibrium
· Elevated serum values for alkaline phosphatase,
dialysis, if necessary.
aspartate aminotransaminase, and alanine amino-
Thyroid Imaging
transaminase are common.
· Thyroid imaging with radioactive technetium-
· Mild azotemia is present in approximately 34%
99m will identify the affected gland(s). This im-
of cases.
aging study is recommended prior to surgery in
· The thyroxine (T4) value is usually elevated and
 any hyperthyroid cat with nonpalpable thyroid
is the diagnostic screening test of choice; how-
glands, because the thyroid glands can migrate
ever, thyroid hormone levels fuctuate during the
into the chest, rendering them inoperable.
Chapter 13
3Cardiovascular Effects of Systemic Diseases
243
doses of beta blockers may be needed because of
Therapy
an imcreased rate of metabolism and elimination.
Management of Hyperthyroidism
Supraventricular arrhythmias in asthmatic cats
· Radioactive iodine is curative and does not re-
should be managed with diltiazem (7.5 mg PO
quire anesthesia or surgery. In most instances it is
every 8 hours).
the safest and most effective treatment.
· Supraventricular arrhythmias in patients with con-
· Surgical treatment effectively cures the condition
gestive heart failure can be managed with digoxin,
and eliminates the need for chronic medication.
beta blockers, or diltiazem. Exercise caution when
Medical management generally is instituted to
using beta blockers in the presence of congestive
stabilize the patient prior to surgery. The most
heart failure, because these agents depress cardiac
frequent complication of surgery is transient
contractility and may exacerbate heart failure.
 postoperative hypocalcemia.
Cats with hyperthyroidism almost always have in-
creased contractility, so worsening of congestive
tering methimazole (Tapazole) at 2.5 to 5 mg PO
heart failure with beta blockade is rare. Ideally,
every 8 to 12 hours in cats. Start with a low dose and
congestion should be treated and controlled with
titrate up as needed and tolerated. A transdermal
diuretics before prescribing a beta blocker. Diltia-
formulation in pleuronic lecithin organo gel can be
zem also depresses contractility, but less so than
used, but the rate of clinical improvement is slower
beta blockers. The vasodilating effects of diltia-
than with oral administration. Carbimazole is an
zem usually offset its negative inotropic effects.
altermative to methimazole, available in Europe, and
is dosed at 5 mg PO every 8 hours in cats. Propyl-
Management of Hypertension
thiouracil is no longer recommended because of a
· Usually accomplished with control of the hyper-
high incidence of side effects. These drugs inhibit
thyroid state. The use of beta blockers, vasodila-
the formation of thyroid hormones, but do not in-
tors (e.g., angiotensin-converting enzyme [ACE]
hibit or block the release of already formed T and
 inhibitors, amlodipine), and other agents is oc-
T4. Thus serum thyroid levels do not drop acutely.
casionally indicated
· Inorganic iodine therapy is rarely used. Iodine
blocks thyroid hormone synthesis and release,
Management of Congestive Heart Failure
and thyroid levels rapidly drop. Rapid reduc-
· Diuretics are used to control pulmonary edema
tion of thyroid levels may benefit patients with
and pleural effusion.
severe congestive heart failure. Preoperative use
· Nitroglycerin ointment can be used in patients
may decrease the vascularity of the thyroid gland.
with critical congestion or in those refractory to
Administer one dose of methimazole prior to the
diuretics alone. Enalapril or benazepril also
iodine, so that the iodine is not incorporated into
may be helpful in refractory cases.
new thyroid honmone. Administer one drop of
· Treat arrhythmias as discussed previously.
saturated solution of potassium iodide orally
 Digoximmay be useful in cases where chronic hy-
once a day for 7 to 10 days.
 perthyroidism results in dilated cardiomyopathy.
· Sodiumor calcium ipodate at 15 mg/kg PO ev-
ery 12 hours blocks the conversion of T4 to T3. It
Prognosis
is not effective in all cats and should be consid-
ered a treatment of last resort.
· The prognosis for remission of sinus tachycar-
dia, voltage changes, arrhythmias, and conges-
Management of Arrhythmias
tive heart failure is generally favorable when the
· The expedient way to manage tachyarrhythmias
hypenmetabolic state is controlled through the
is to start methimazole therapy. Even before
medical or surgical techniques discussed.
euthyroidism is restored, many arrhythmias im-
· The prognosis is poor if dilated cardiomyopathy
 prove or are abolished. In this fashion, ancillary
 has developed secondary to chronic overload of
therapy is usually unnecessary.
the heart.
· Severe tachyarrhythmias (i.e., atrial tachycardia,
 multifonm VPCs, ventricular tachycardia) in pa-
HYPOTHYROIDISM
tients without heart failure are best managed with
beta blockers such as atenolol (3.125 to 6.25
· Hypothyroidism is a common endocrinopathy in
mg PO every 12 hours) or propranolol (2.5 to
 dogs and is rarely encountered as a naturally oc-
7.5 mg PO every 8 hours). Higher than normal
curring condition in cats. It is most commonly
244
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
diagnosed in middle-aged dogs (22% are 2 to 3
years old; 32% are 4 to 6 years old; 22% are 7 to
Diagnosis
9 years old). Many breeds are affected, and there
History and Physical Examination
appears to be a breed predilection in the Golden
· Historical findings in hypothyroid animals include
Retriever, Doberman Pinscher, Dachshund, Irish
alopecia and other dermatologic problems, lethargy.
Setter, Miniature Schnauzer, Great Dane, Poo-
weakness, depression, infertility, and diarrhea
dle, and Boxer. There is no gender predilection.
· Cardiovascular abnonmalities noted on physical ex-
Hypothyroidism is rare in cats and generally lim-
amination can include muffled heart sounds, weak
ited to postoperative cases following surgical re-
apex heart beat, weak pulses, and bradycardia.
moval of unilateral or bilateral functional thyroid
s n  s sd  a
tumors.
metric alopecia, seborrhea, myxedema, pyo-
· The cardiac effects of hypothyroidism are gener-
derma, hypothermia, depression, and lameness.
ally the opposite of those found in hyperthyroid-
ism. The cardiac effects of hypothyroidism rarely
Electrocardiography
have severe consequences. However, hypothy-
· ECG changes in hypothyroidism refect decreased
roidism can aggravate heart failure and compli-
automaticity of pacemaker tissue and depressed
cate the management of cardiac patients.
conduction. Changes that refect decreased automa-
ticity may include sinus bradycardia, pronounced
Cardiac Pathophysiology
sinus arrhythmia, and atrial and ventricular arrhyth-
mias. Changes that refect depressed conduction
· Cardiac contractility is decreased as a result of
may include AV block, widened QRS complexes,
decreased Na+,K+-ATPase activity, decreased mi-
 and inverted T waves. The most common findings
tochondrial protein synthesis, and decreased syn-
 reported in dogs are sinus bradycardia and inverted
thesis of contractile properties of myosin.
T waves.
· Cardiac conduction is decreased as a result of
· Low-voltage QRS complexes are frequently seen
 a decreased rate of sinoatrial fring, increased
in hypothyroid animals.
threshold of atrial activation, and prolonged
· Atrial fibrillation in giant-breed dogs occasion-
refractory period of the conducting tissue.
ally accompanies hypothyroidism, usually in
Enhanced vagal tone in hypothyroidism also
association with dilated cardiomyopathy. Supple-
slows the heart rate and accentuates sinus
 mentation with thyroid hormone rarely causes
 arrhythmias.
conversion to sinus rhythm.
· Radiographs are generally normal.
KEY POINT
 Evaluate the thyroid status in any dog in con-
Echocardiography
gestive heart failure with an inappropriately
· May reveal mild to marked decreases in indices
slow heart rate.
of cardiac contractility and mild chamber en-
largement. Decreased contractility is documented
by increase in left ventricular interval diameter
· Thyroid honmone plays an important role in
in systole, prolongation of the preejection period,
lipid and cholesterol metabolism. Hypothyroid-
decrease in left posterior wall thickness in systole
ism predisposes animals to increased levels of
and decrease in septal wall thickness in systole
cholesterol and, to a lesser extent, triglycerides.
and diastole. There is a decrease in aortic root
Although rare in dogs, hypercholesterolemia can
diameter, decrease in velocity of circumferential
result in atherosclerosis and myocardial infarc-
shortening and decrease fractional shortening.
tion. Lipid abnormalities resolve with thyroid
·Always check thyroid status when depressed
hormone supplementation.
contractility is noted in an animal of a breed not
· Hypothyroidism decreases the metabolic rate,
 predisposed to dilated cardiomyopathy.
thus lessening the required cardiac output.
Correcting hypothyroidism increases the work-
Clinical Pathology
load on the heart. This is important to remem-
· The hemogram may reveal a low-grade nonre-
ber when treating animals in congestive heart
 generative anemia.
failure.
· The most common abnormality on the serum
· Hypothyroidism decreases digoxin clearance,
chemistry profile is hypercholesterolemia and,
 predisposing patients to digoxin toxicity.
occasionally, hypertriglyceridemia.
Chapter13
Cardiovascular Effects of Systemic Diseases
245
· A normal serum T4 value generally is sufficient
Box 13-2
Some Drugs and Diagnostic
to rule out hypothyroidism. Unfortunately, a low
Agents that Can Alter Basal
serum T4 does not confinm the diagnosis. Con-
Serum Thyroid Hormone
current systemic ailments and numerous drugs
Concentrations in Humans and
can cause depressed serum T4 values in animals
Possibly Dogs
with normal thyroid function (euthyroid sick syn-
drome) (Box 13-2). To make a diagnosis in these
Decrease T4 and/or T3
Increase T4 and/or T3
cases requires integration of the history, physical
Amiodarone (T)
Amiodarone (T4)
findings, and other blood test results, or confir-
Androgens
Estrogens
Cholecystographic
mation by specialized diagnostic tests.
5-Fluorouracil
agents
Halothane
· Serum T values are less reliable than T4 values at
Diazepam
Insulin
diagnosing hypothyroidism.
Dopamine
Narcotic anal gesics
 Flunixin
Radiopaque dyes
Specialized Diagnostic Tests
Furosemide
(ipodate)
·The thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)response
Glucocorticoids
Thiazides
na u  , a a s r
Heparin
medicine for diagnosing hypothyroidism. Ani-
Imidazole
mals with hypothyroidism have low baseline T4
Iodide
Methimazole
values and fail to increase their T4 values above a
Mitotane
 predetermined level following administration of
Nitroprusside
TSH. Animals with euthyroid sick syndrome will 
Penicillin
also have low baseline T4 levels, but following
Phenobarbital
TSH administration, their T4 values will increase
Phenothiazines
above an absolute cutoff value. Unfortunately,
Phenylbutazone
TSH is often difficult to obtain and expensive.
 Phenytoin
· Free T4 by equilibrium dialysis as a diagnostic
 Primidone
 Propranolol
test of canine hypothyroidism has a sensitivity
 Propylthiouracil
of 98% and specificity of 92%, versus a total T4
Radiopaque dyes
sensitivity of 90% and specificity of 90%. The
(ipodate) (T)
free T4 by ED should be low in a hypothyroid
Salicylates
animal.
Sulfonamides
· Canine TSH levels as a diagnostic test for canine
(sulfamethox azole)
Sulfonylureas
hypothyroidism has a sensitivity of 75% and
specificity of 90% . The TSH level should be high
From Feldman EC, Nelson RW: Canine and feline endocrinol-
in a hypothyroid animal.
ogy and reproduction, 3rd ed. St Louis: WB Saunders, 2004.
· When the endogenous TSH is high and the free
T4 by equilibrium dialysis is low, the diagnostic
accuracy approaches 100%.
· Treatment in patients with congestive heart fail-
ure is more complicated. Supplementation will
Therapy
increase the metabolic rate and demand on the
heart. If the failing heart is unable to meet these
· Treatment of hypothyroidism is simple and inex-
demands, heart failure will worsen. Therefore,
 pensive. L-Thyroxin is administered at 20 μg/kg
implement thyroid hormone supplementation
PO every 12 hours, 0r 0.5 mg/m? every 12 hours
gradually in patients with cardiac disease, espe-
with a maximum dose of 0.8 mg/dose for a dog.
cially if they are already in failure. Start with
After 6 to 8 weeks, evaluate a serum T4 value 4
one fourth of the standard dose and increase it
to 6 hours after a dose of L-thyroxin. If the post-
by one-fourth dose weekly. It should be empha-
pill T4 value is normal and clinical signs have re-
sized that hypothyroidism rarely causes heart
solved, you can try decreasing the frequency to
failure, but may significantly exacerbate car-
once a day. Ideally, a post-pill T4 value should
 diac function in an animal with underlying heart
then be obtained in another month at 4 to 6 and 24
disease.
hours after a dose of thyroxin. This is important
·The risk of digoxin toxicity is increased in hy.
to make sure that there is an adequate duration of
 pothyroid states. Monitor hypothyroid animals
effect with once daily dosing.
closely for signs of digoxin toxicity, and consider
246
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
assessing thyroid status in any animal with nor-
· Cortisol has a positive inotropic effect on the
 mal renal function that develops digoxin toxic-
heart.
ity on reasonable doses of digoxin. Ideally the
· Cortisol affects the distribution and elimination
digoxin level on a sample obtained 8 hours post-
of body water.
dose should be between 0.5 to 1 ng/dL.
· Cortisol is important in helping the body deal
with stress. This is why so many addisonian cri-
ses follow stress, and why glucocorticoid supple-
Prognosis
mentation must be increased during periods of
· There are few complications in the treatment of
stress.
hypothyroidism.
Cardiovascular Effects of Aldosterone
· Aldosterone acts on the distal renal convoluted
HYPOADRENOCORTICISM
tubule and collecting duct to enhance sodium
(ADDISON'S DISEASE)
retention and potassium elimination. Aldoste-
· Hypoadrenocorticism is a potentially life-threat-
rone deficiency results in hyponatremia and
ening endocrinopathy that is uncommon in dogs
hyperkalemia.
and rare in cats. The disease is more common in
· Hyponatremia decreases plasma osmotic pres-
female dogs and usually occurs in young to mid-
sure, causing fuid shifts out of the vascular com-
dle-aged animals. Approximately 76% of cases
 partment. This contributes to hypovolemia and
Occur before 7 years of age, with an age range of
 hypotension.
5 weeks to 16 years.
· Hyperkalemia alters cardiac conduction, result-
· Primary hypoadrenocorticism (Addison's dis-
ing in numerous arrhythmias. The cardiac effects
ease) results from destruction of the zona glomer-
of hyperkalemia are aggravated by low sodium,
ulosa and zona fasciculata of the adrenal gland.
low calcium, and acidosis.
These areas of the adrenal gland produce aldo-
sterone and cortisol, respectively. Destruction
is generally immune mediated, but also can oc-
KEY POINT
cur secondary to infection, neoplasia, infarction,
 Net cardiovascular effects of hypoadrenocorti-
and drugs such as o,p'-dichlorodiphenyldichlo-
cism are hypovolemia, systemic hypotension,
roethane (o,p'-DDD) (Lysodren, [mitotane]).
altered carciac conduction, and depressed
· Secondary hypoadrenocorticism results from de-
myocardial function. These changes can be
creased production or release of adrenocorticotropic
fatal if not rapidly diagnosed and aggressively
hormone (ACTH) from the pituitary gland. Second-
treated.
ary adrenal insufficiency may occur following acute
withdrawal of long-tenrm, high-dose glucocorticoid
therapy that has suppressed the hypothalamic-pi-
Diagnosis
tuitary-adrenal axis. These patients have normal
mineralocorticoid activity, so electrolyte values are
History and Physical Examination
normal. Cortisol values are depressed.
· A history of waxing and waning of clinical signs,
· Adrenal destruction occurs gradually, so basal
with more severe signs during periods of stress,
hormone levels remain nonmal. It is only when
generally is present.
the animal is stressed and the adrenal reserve is
· Patients often present with history of anorexia,
inadequate that signs develop. Eventually, the
vomiting, diarrhea, depression, weakness, and
destruction proceeds to the point that basal hor-
cardiovascular collapse. Other signs include
mone levels are depressed and clinical signs are
weight loss, polyuria, polydipsia, melena, and
 present without stress.
shivering.
· Transient improvement after intravenous fuid
Cardiac Pathophysiology
therapy or corticosteroid administration followed
by subsequent relapse days or weeks later can
Cardiovascular Effects of Cortisol
occur.
· Cortisol is important in maintaining vascular
· Findings on physical examination include de-
integrity and responsiveness to catecholamines.
pression, weakness, dehydration, hypothermia,
Cortisol  deficiency  predisposes  animals
to
slow capillary refill time, shaking, bradycardia.
hypotension.
and weak femoral pulses.
Chapter13
Cardiovascular Effects of Systemic Diseases
247
Rights were not granted to include this figure in electronic media
Rights were not granted to include this figure in electronic media
Please refer to the printed publication.
A
B
Figure 13-1.
 A, Hyperkalemia in a dog in cardiovascular collapse, consistent with an Addisonian crisis. P waves are absent (atrial
and the T wave is of smaller amplitucdle. Serum potassium is now 4.8 mEq/L. (From Tilley LP: Essentials of canine and feline elec-
trocardiography: interpretation and treatment, ed 3, Malvern, Penn, 1992, Lea & Febiger.)
Electrocardiography
Radiographs
· ECG changes vary with the magnitude of the
· Approximately 80% of untreated dogs have one
hyperkalemia and are aggravated by hyponatre-
or more radiographic abnormalities. Abnormali-
mia, hypocalcemia, and acidosis. The follow-
ties in order of reported frequency include narrow
ing ECG findings are seen with experimentally
caudal vena cava, microcardia, narrow cranial lo-
induced hyperkalemia (Figure 13-1):
bar pulmonary artery and microhepatica. These
· Peaking of the T wave with a narrow base is the
changes are the result of hypovolemia and rapidly
earliest ECG abnormality and may be observed
resolve with steroid and volume replacement
when serum K+ exceeds 5.7 to 6.0 mEq/L
· P wave morphology is altered, its amplitude
Clinical Pathology
reduced, intra-atrial conduction delayed, and
· A low-grade normocytic, nonmochromic nonre-
PR interval prolonged when serum K+ exceeds
 generative anemia is present in 25% of cases, but
7.0 mEq/L.
may be masked by the effects of hemoconcentra-
· Pwaves become unrecognizable(atrial standstill)
tion. Eosinophilia and lymphocytosis may also
 at plasma K+ levels greater than 8.5 mEq/L.
 be present.
· The QRS widens uniformly at plasma K+ levels
·A serum chemistry profile frequently reveals
greater than 9 mEq/L
azotemia, hyponatremia, and hyperkalemia. A
· Sinoatrial exit block or junctional rhythms with
sodium: potassium ratio of less than 27 supports 
and without escape complexes may be present.
hypoadrenocorticism, but is not pathognomonic
· Ventricular fibrillation and ventricular asystole may
for the disease. Hypercalcemia and hypoglyce-
occur at plasma K+ levels greater than 10 mEq/L
mia are not uncommon.
· In clinical cases, ECG changes do not correlate 
· Mild-to-moderate metabolic acidosis is common
as closely with potassium concentrations as
 during a crisis.
they do in published experimental studies
· It is unusual for a dog with untreated Addison's
· The rhythm with atrial standstill secondary to
disease to have a urine specific gravity greater
hyperkalemia is generally slow and may be reg-
than 1.030, and it is often less than 1.020.
ular or irregular. It is a sinoventricular rhythm.
· In patients with secondary hypoadrenocorti-
The sinus node continues to fire, and impulses
cism, sodium and potassium levels are normal.
are transmitted to the AV node and ventricles
The other abnormalities described above may be
 by intermodal pathways. P waves are absent be-
present.
cause atrial myocytes are not activated.
Specialized Diagnostie Tests
KEY POINT
· A tentative diagnosis is frequently obtained from
Hyperkalemia is the most common cause of
the history and results of the complete blood
atrial standstill. Atrial standstill also occurs
count and serum chemistry profle. However,
with fibrous replacement of atrial muscle cells
there are numerous causes of hyperkalemia, and
secondary to severe atrial distention (valve
disease, cardiomyopathy) in dogs and cats,
acid-base and electrolyte changes associated
with severe gastrointestinal disease and renal
with cardiac arrest, and secondary to an atrial
myopathy in dogs, a condition most com-
failure can cause an abnormal sodium: potassium
monly seen in English springer spaniels.
ratio that would erroneously suggest Addison's
disease.
248
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
· An ACTH response test is helpful in confirming
ml/kg slowly IV over 10 to 15 minutes. Monitor
Addison's disease and essential for document-
the ECG while administering calcium. Calcium
ing secondary hypoadrenocorticism.
will temporarily correct rhythm disturbances by
countering the effect of potassium on the conduc-
Therapy
tion tissue. Calcium has no effect on serum po-
tassium levels. Calcium overdose can also cause
Addisonian Crisis Therapy
severe cardiac disturbances, so careful monitor-
· Patients that present with cardiovascular collapse
 ing is required.
and atrial standstill require aggressive therapy.
Therapy is directed at rapidly correcting hypovo-
Maintenance Therapy
lemia, correcting rhythm disturbances, correcting
· Mineralocorticoid replacement is initiated with
electrolyte imbalances, and replacing mineralo-
either fudrocorticosterone acetate at 0.02 mg/
corticoids and glucocorticoids.
kg/day given orally or DOCP at 2.2 mg/kg every
· Volume replacement and correction of hyponatre-
25 days given IM. These doses—and dose inter-
mia and hypochloremia is initially achieved with
val for DOCP—are adjusted as needed to main-
rapid infusion of 0.9% saline at 60 to 80 ml/kg/
tain normal electrolyte balance. Therapy must be
hr for 1 to 2 hours and then modified according to
individualized to the patient. A large trial with
 patient needs. The ACTH response test can be per-
DOCP showed a dose and interval range of 1.5 to
formed while saline is being administered.
2.2 mg/kg every 25 to 30 days.
· Glucocorticoid deficiency is corrected with ej-
· Glucocorticoid replacement is achieved with ej-
ther methylprednisolone sodium succinate
ther prednisone at 0.2 mg/kg PO every 24 hours
(1 to 2 mg/kg IV) or dexamethasone sodium
  a od y 01  a 1
 phosphate (0.5 to 2 mg/kg IV) and then repeated
Some patients receiving fudrocorticosterone ac-
every 2 to 6 hours. After the initial high dose of
etate or DOCP do not need glucocorticoid sup-
a rapidly acting water-soluble glucocorticoid has
plementation except during periods of stress
been administered, glucocorticoid therapy can be
continued with dexamethasone at a dosage of
Prognosis
0.05 to 0.1 mg/kg PO every 12 hours added to
· Excellent prognosis with therapy
the IV fuids. Once the patient is stable, switch to
· Many dogs appear to do better with a small daily
oral prednisone. It should be noted that predniso-
maintenance dose of prednisone or cortisone.
lone interferes with cortisol assays, so ideally it
During illness or other stressful periods, however,
should be started after the ACTH response test
larger doses of glucocorticoids are necessary to
is performed. Dexamethasone has no mineralo-
avoid relapse into acute adrenal crisis.
corticoid effects and does not interfere with the
cortisol assay.
HYPERADRENOCORTICISM
· Mineralocorticoid deficiency is initially corrected
(CUSHING'S DISEASE)
(after the ACTH response test is performed) with
desoxycorticosterone pivalate (DoCP) at 2.2
· Hyperadrenocorticism is a common endocni-
mg/kg IM or fludrocortisone acetate (Florinef)
nopathy in older dogs and is rarely reported in
at 0.02 mg/kg/day PO if the dog is not vomiting
cats. The syndrome is associated with exces-
· Hyperkalemia is corrected in several different
sive levels of cortisol that result from excess
ways.
pituitary ACTH or excess ACTH from ectopic
· Saline infusion results in rapid dilution of potas-
nonendocrine tumors, functional adrenocortical
sium and is often the only treatment needed.
adenoma, or carcinoma. Iatrogenic Cushing's
· Severe hyperkalemia associated with significant
syndrome occurs with excessive glucocorticoid
cardiac conduction abnonmalities often requires
administration.
 more aggressive therapy. Treatment options include
· Pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism ac-
sodium bicarbonate (1 to 2 mEq/kg) given slowly
counts for 80% to 85% of cases of hyperadre-
 IV over 5 minutes or a combination of regular in-
nocorticism. It is a disease of middle-aged and
sulin (0.5 U/kg IV) and 50% dextrose (1 g/kg IV).
older dogs (usually older than 6 years), although
Dextrose can also be administered alone, as it will
a few cases have been diagnosed under l year
stimulate endogenous insulin secretion.
of age. There is no sex predilection. Poodles,
· If life-threatening cardiac arrhythmias are noted,
Dachshunds, and Beagles may be at increased
administer calcium gluconate (10%) at 0.5 to 1
risk.
Chapter 13
Cardiovascular Effects of Systemic Diseases
249
· Dogs with functional adrenocortical tumors
· The triad of mitral/tricuspid insufficiency, respi-
tend to be older, ranging from 6 to 16 years of 
ratory disease, and Cushing's syndrome may cre-
age with a mean age of 1l years. Females are af-
ate intractable dyspnea due to cardiopulmonary
fected more frequently. German Shepherds, Toy
failure.
Poodles, Dachs hunds, and Terriers are most com-
monly affected.
Diagnosis
· Hyperadrenocorticism rarely produces signif-
cant cardiac disease; however, signs and side
History and Physical Examination
effects of hyperadrenocorticism can mimic car-
· The major historical features are systemic mani-
diac disease. Systemic effects of hyperadreno-
festations of hypercortisolism; they include poly-
 corticism can also exacerbate underlying cardiac
dipsia, polyuria, polyphagia, panting, alopecia,
disease.
 anestrus, exercise intolerance, and lethargy.
· Findings on physical examination may include
Pathophysiology
abdominal enlargement, hepatomegaly, muscle
weakness, testicular atrophy, symmetric alopecia,
Systemic Hypertension
skin atrophy, hyperpigmentation, calcinosis cutis,
· Hypercortisolism increases vascular resistance
bruising, and obesity.
by increasing smooth muscle sensitivity to cat-
·ECGs show no characteristic changes. ECG
echolamines and increasing production of an-
evidence of left ventricular enlargement is often
giotensinogen. Mineralocorticoid properties of
present in cushingoid dogs with mitral valvular
cortisol enhance the renal resorption of sodium
insufficiency.
and secondary fuid retention, resulting in an in-
creased vascular volume. Hypertension is present
Radiography
in 57% to 82% of cushingoid dogs.
· Hypercortisolism causes changes on thoracic ra-
· Systemic hypertension may cause myocardial
diographs that include calcification of the tracheal
hypertrophy.
 and bronchial rings and osteoporosis of the tho-
· Many affected dogs have coexisting AV valvular
racic vertebrae. Metastatic pulmonary lesions are
insufficiency and its associated cardiac changes.
seen infrequently with adrenal tumors.
Hypertension might exacerbate underlying car-
· Radiographic changes associated with pulmonary
diac problems.
thromboembolism include hypoperfusion of the
infarcted lung lobes, overcirculation within the
Pulmonary Thromboembolism
normal lung lobes, pleural effusion, and blunting
· Patients with hyperadrenocorticism are predis-
and thickening of the pulmonary arteries. Tho-
posed to pulmonary thromboembolism, with
racic radiographs may be nonmal.
most cases diagnosed while the animal is being
· Echocardiography is rarely part of the workup of
treated for Cushing's disease. Factors causing
Cushing's disease.
thromboembolism with Cushing's disease in-
clude obesity, high hematocrit, hypertension, and
Clinical Pathology
increased levels of clotting factors.
· The excessive production of cortisol may result
· Pulmonary thromboembolism should be sus-
in neutrophilia, lymphopenia, eosinopenia, and
 pected in any cushingoid patient with a history of
erythrocytosis (females).
acute onset of dyspnea or cyanosis.
· Chemistry abnormalities include fasting hy-
perglycemia, high serum alkaline phosphatase
Panting and Dyspnea
(sometimes extremely elevated), high alanine
· Altered ventilation mechanics are often present
aminotransferase, high cholesterol, lipemia, and
owing to weakness in the muscles of respiration,
low blood urea nitrogen.
increased thoracic fat deposition (decreasing
· Urinalysis shows specific gravity less than 1.015
chest wall compliance), and increased diaphrag-
and often less than 1.008. Proteinuria, glycosuria,
matic abdominal pressure resulting from adi
and bacterial cystitis are sometimes noted.
pose tissue and hepatomegaly. Mild respiratory
distress or rapid respiratory rate at rest often
Specialized Diagnostic Tests
results.
· A urine cortisol:creatinine ratio is a quick screen-
· Many cushingoid dogs have variable degrees of
ing test for Cushing's disease. This test has a
high sensitivity, but low specificity for Cushing's
250
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
disease. The ACTH response test and low-dose
· Management of pulmonary embolism and sys-
dexamethasone suppression tests are the standard
temic hypertension, if present, is undertaken
tests used to confirm the diagnosis.
through standard therapeutic protocols (see Chap-
· A high-dose dexamethasone suppression test or
ters 9 and 15).
serum ACTH level is used to try to differentiate
between adrenal tumors and pituitary-dependent.
Prognosis
Cushing's disease.
· Ultrasound or computed tomography scan can
· Excellent prognosis is confirmed with resectable,
 be used to try to differentiate pituitary-dependent
benign adrenal tumors.
Cushing's disease from adrenal tumors in patients
· Nonresectable or metastatic adrenal adenocarci-
that do not suppress with the high-dose dexa-
nomas have a poor prognosis.
methasone suppression test.
· Chemotherapy with o,p'-DDD (Lysodren) or
ketoconazole for pituitary-dependent hyperadre-
Therapy
nocorticism has potential side effects, but most
treated dogs respond well to therapy. Average
Pituitary-Dependent Hyperadrenocorticism
survival in one study was 2 years, with a range
· Chemotherapy using mitotane (Lysodren) is the
of 18 days to 7 years. Clinical experience with
standard treatment. Lysodren selectively, and
trilostane is not as extensive as with o,p'-DDD,
usually reversibly, destroys the zona fasciculata
but side effects with trilostane are negligible and
(cortisol) and zona reticularis (sex hormones) of
therapy appears to be efficacious in most dogs.
the adrenal gland. The zona glomerulosa (aldo-
· Systemic hypertension generally resolves with
sterone) is occasionally affected.
control of hypercortisolism.
· Ketoconazole (Nizoral) can be substituted in ani-
mals that do not tolerate Lysodren. Ketoconazole
HYPERSOMATOTROPISM
blocks an enzymatic step that is necessary for the
(ACROMEGALY) IN CATS
production of cortisol.
· Tilostane (Vetoryl) inhibits adrenal steroido-
· Acromegaly is a syndrome associated with high
 genesis through enzyme inhibition and can also
levels of growth hormone (hypersomatotropism).
be substituted for Lysodren. This drug is not cur-
· In cats, acromegaly occurs secondary to a pitu-
rently approved by the FDA but is licensed for
itary tumor. It is a rare endocrinopathy that is
use in dogs in Europe.
seen in middle-aged to old cats (mean age: 10
· Hypophysectomy and bilateral adrenalectomy
years; median age: 9 years; range: 4 to 17 years).
with replacement hormone therapy are rarely
It is most common in males and rarely seen in
used altermatives to medical management.
females.
· In dogs, hypersomatotropism is associated with
Adrenocortical Tumor
 progestogen treatment or endogenous progesto-
· Surgical removal of the affected adrenal gland(s)
 gens that are produced during diestrus. It does ot
is recommended if possible.
cause clinically significant cardiac problems in
dogs. The syndrome is seen in females and is
KEY POINT
reversible with discontinuation of progestogen
There is a high morbidity associated with sur-
therapy or resolves spontaneously with the end of
gery. ldeally, the patient is stabilized first by
diestrus.
decreasing cortisol synthesis with ketocon-
azole.
Cardiovascular Pathophysiology
· The trophic effect of growth honmone results
· If the tumor is inoperable or metastasis is identi-
in generalized organomegaly, including the
fed, manage the patient with either mitotane or
heart. Cardiac changes are those of myocardial
ketoconazole. Very high doses of mitotane are
 hypertrophy, interstitial fibrosis, myocytolysis
usually required in patients with adrenal tumors.
and intramural arteriosclerosis. Heart failure is a
Many dogs with adrenal tumors respond poorly
common sequela of acromegaly in cats.
to medical management.
· Systemic hypertension is seen frequently in hu-
· Replacement steroid therapy is necessary both
mans with acromegaly. Systemic hypertension
 during and after surgery.
is sometimes present in cats with acromegaly
Chapter 13
Cardiovascular Effects of Systemic Diseases
251
and is usually accompanied by evidence of renal
· Supportive medical care includes high doses of
insufficiency.
insulin for insulin-resistant diabetes mellitus and
diuretics for congestive heart failure.
Diagnosis
Prognosis
History and Physical Examination
· Most cats present with a history of polyuria, poly.
· Survival in cats with acromegaly ranges from 4 to
dipsia, and weight gain.
60 months (generally 1.5 to 3 years) from time of
· Cardiac abnormalities noted on physical exami-
diagnosis.
nation may include a systolic murmur, gallop
· Most cats die or are euthanized owing to severe
rhythm, and signs of congestive heart failure
congestive heart failure, renal failure, or expand-
(dyspnea, cyanosis, muffed heart sounds, or
ing pituitary tumor.
crackles).
Note: Hypersomatotropism without acromegaly has
· Other abnormalities include hepatomegaly, neph-
been associated with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
romegaly, large head, arthritis, prognathism, pot
in some cats. A total of 31 cats with hypertrophic
belly, large tongue, and circling.
cardiomyopathy were shown to have growth hor-
· ECG abnormalities have not been observed in
mone levels that were four times the control levels.
these patients.
None of the cats that were examined postmortem
· Radiographs of the thorax usually demonstrate
had pituitary tumors, and none demonstrated hy-
cardiomegaly and, less commonly. pulmonary
 perinsulinism or diabetes mellitus.
edema or pleural effusion.
· Echocardiograms generally reveal hypertrophy
PHEOCHROMOCYTOMA
of the intraventricular septum and left ventricular
free wall.
· These tumors of adrenal medullary origin are
uncommonly detected in dogs. They are typi-
Clinical Pathology
cally seen in old dogs (mean age, 1l years, with
· The hemogram is generally unremarkable, but
range of 1 to 16 years) and extremely rare in
some cats have erythrocytosis.
cats.
· All cases are hyperglycemic and glucosuric. Most
· Pheochromocytomas are catecholamine-produc-
cats are also hyperproteinemic, azotemic, and
ing tumors derived from chromaffin cells.
hyperphosphatemic. Hypercholesterolemia, high
· In addition to important effects on the cardiovas-
alanine aminotransferase, high serum alkaline phos-
cular system, catecholamines have significant
phatase, and ketonuria are seen less frequently.
metabolic effects, stimulating glycogenolysis and
gluconeogenesis.
Specialized Diagnostic Tests
· A commercially available validated growth hor-
Cardiac Pathophysiology
mone assay is not currently available for cats.
· Insulin-like growth factor I level was high in two
· The cardiovascular effects of pheochromocyto-
cats with acromegaly that were tested. This test is
mas result from the alpha-1, beta-1, and beta-2
commercially available.
effects of norepinephrine and epinephrine. Stim-
· Computed tomography can be used to identify
ulation of alpha and beta-adrenergic receptors
the pituitary tumor.
generally causes opposite effects. The dominant
· Evaluate blood pressure in any suspected or con-
effect varies with relative receptor density and
firmmed cases.
activation thresholds. For example, in vascular
smooth muscle, alpha adrenergic effects predomi-
Therapy
nate. Thus, hypertension results when both alpha-
and beta-adrenergic receptors are stimulated.
· Treatment options include hypophysectomy, ra-
· Beta-1 adrenergic effects include sinus tachycar-
diation therapy, and medical management with
 dia, increased cardiac conduction velocity, and
bromoeriptine or octreotide (a somatostatin ana-
increased contractility.
 logue). Hypophysectomy has not been reported in 
· Beta-2 adrenergic effects on the cardiovascular
cats. Radiation therapy is difficult to obtain and
 system include venous and arteriole vasodilation.
has only resulted in transient improvement to date.
· Alpha-l adrenergic effects on the cardiovas-
Medical management is generally unsuccessful.
cular system include venous and arteriole
252
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
vasoconstriction. Approximately 50% of dogs
· Angiography can be used in some situations to
with pheochromocytomas are hypertensive at
evaluate adrenal masses invading the caudal vena
the time of testing.
cava.
· Myocardial injury may result from catecholamine
· Computed tomography, nuclear imaging, and pro-
excess (i.e., myonecrosis with subsequent fibrosis
vocative testing to induce hypertension (with his-
and interstitial infammation is reported in some
tamine, tyramine, and glucagon) or hypotension
 humans with pheochromocytomas) and coronary
(with phentolamine) may be useful, but rarely are
vasoc onstriction.
 practical or available in general practice.
Diagnosis
Therapy
History and Physical Examination
· Alpha- and beta-adrenergic blocking drugs may
· Historical observations include weakness, col-
 help control hypertension and arrhythmias, respec-
lapse, anorexia, vomiting, weight loss, panting.
tively. Always start with an alpha-adrenergic blocker
dyspnea, lethargy, diarrhea, whining, pacing,
such as phenoxybenzamine (0.2 to 1.5 mg/kg PO
polyuria, polydipsia, shivering, and epistaxis.
every 12 hours). If a hypertensive crisis is identi-
· Abnormalities noted on physical examination
fied, administer phentolamine at 0.02 to 0.1 mg/kg
include lethargy, tachypnea and dyspnea, ar-
IV, followed by an intravenous infusion. If tachyar-
rhythmias, systolic murmur, pulmonary crackles,
rhythmias remain a problem, then add a beta blocker
tachycardia, weak pulses, pale mucous mem-
such as propranolol. Using a beta blocker without
branes, and muscle wasting.
 alpha blockade can result in severe hypertension.
· Other physical findings are emaciation, periph-
· Surgical tumor removal is the only definitive
eral edema, ascites, and abdominal mass.
treatment. This should be attempted after medi-
· Many signs and physical findings are reported to
cal stabilization in patients without metastasis.
be episodic because of the episodic release of cat-
echolamines by the tumor.
Prognosis
Electrocardiography
· Dogs with inoperable lesions have a poor progno-
· Nonspecific ST segment and T wave changes
sis. Long-term alpha- and beta- adrenergic block-
may be noted.
ers may be used in these instances.
· Arrhythmias can occur, especially ventricular
 premature complexes and paroxysmal ventricular
DIABETESMELLITUS
tachycardia.
· Diabetes mellitus causes devastating cardiovascu-
Radiography
lar problems in humans. The cardiovascular sys-
· Generalized cardiomegaly and pulmonary edema
tems of dogs and cats are relatively immune to the
can develop, probably owing to sustained chronic
effects of hyperglycemia. Recent studies reported
hypertension.
hypertension (defined as a pressure higher than
· Adrenal tumors can be identified in one third of
160 mm Hg systolic, 100 mm Hg diastolic, and
the cases.
120 mm Hg mean) in 46% of 50 dogs with diabe-
tes. Subclinical reduction of myocardial contractil-
Clinical Pathology
ity has also been reported
· No consistent abnormalities are present on the
hemogram or chemistry profile.
Cardiac Pathophysiology
· Demonstration of elevated 24-hour urinary ex-
cretion of vanillylmandelic acid, total metaneph-
· Systemic hypertension in diabetic dogs is associ-
rines, fractionated catecholamines, and plasma
ated with the duration of disease and an increased
catecholamines is diagnostic in humans.
urine albumin to creatinine ratio. Severity of
mean and diastolic hypertension correlated with
Special Diagnostic Tests
 duration of disease. In humans, severity of hy-
· Abdominal ultrasound may be helpful as a local-
pertension correlates with degree of glycemic
izing procedure. The presence of an adrenal mass
control. This association has not been reported in
on ultrasound with no evidence of Cushing's dis-
dogs. Hypertension is rarely reported in cats with
ease is highly suggestive.
diabetes.
Chapter 13
Cardiovascular Effects of SystemicDiseases
253
· The cause of hypertension is not known, but may
Radiography
relate to changes in vascular compliance sec-
· No changes related to diabetes
ondary to changes in lipid profile, generalized
glomerular hyperfiltration, and immune medi-
Clinical Pathology
ated microangiopathy affecting the basement
· Fasting hyperglycemia, hypercholesterolemia,
membrane.
hypertriglyceridemia, increased alanine amino-
· Diabetic cardiomyopathy occurs in humans and
transferase activity, increased alkaline phospha-
is associated with myocardial hypertrophy, fi-
tase activity
brosis, microvascular disease and glycoprotein
· Glucosuria, variable ketonuria; sometimes pro-
accumulation. Myocardial changes result in dia-
teinuria, microalbuminuria, and bacteriuria
stolic and systolic dysfunction. In the absence
· High fructosamine and glycosylated hemoglobin
of coronary microvascular disease and systemic
hypertension, diabetic cardiomyopathy in hu-
Special Diagnostic Tests
mans is a mild condition. In alloxan-induced
· Evaluation is systemic blood pressure may reveal
diabetes in dogs, mild reductions in fractional
hypertension.
shortening and left ventricular ejection fraction
· Echocardiography may demonstrate mild reduction
have been reported along with increased aor-
 in fractional shortening, increase in pre-ejection
tic stiffness and increased collagen type I and
 period (PEP), decrease in left ventricular ejection
type IMI protein content. Diastolic changes have
time (LVET) and increase in PEP/LVET.
 been mild and inconsistent. Functional coronary
artery hyperemia is attenuated and the balance
Therapy
between coronary blood fow and myocardial
metabolism is impaired in alloxan-induced dia-
· Treat hypertension with an ACE inhibitor (e.g
betic dogs.
enalapril or benazepril), amlodipine, or a beta
· Dysfunction of the autonomic nervous system is
blocker (see Chapter 12).
common complication of diabetes mellitus with
· Manage diabetes with insulin. Optimizing glyce-
 parasympathetic dysfunction typically preceding
mic control should reduce the risk of secondary
sympathetic dysfunction. Cardiac manifestations
cardiovascular complications.
of autonomic dysfunction in human diabetics
include sinus tachycardia, arrhythmias, blunted
Prognosis
response to vagal maneuvers and pharmacologic
autonomic interventions, postural hypotension
· Cardiac complications with diabetes mellitus
and increased incidence of cardiac arrest un-
in dogs and cats are generally mild and easy to
der anesthesia. ECG studies in alloxan induced
control.
diabetes in dogs have not demonstrated any evi-
 dence of impaired parasympathetic autonomic
Metabolic Disturbances
function.
KEY POINT
DISORDERS ASSOCIATED
 Decreased cardiac performance in dogs with
WITH HYPERKALEMIA
diabetes mellitus is mild and unlikely to cause
dinical  problems  unless  accompanied  by
· Over 95% of body potassium is intracellular, with
other forms of heart cisease such as dilated
only 2% to 5% extracellular. Therefore, serum
cardiomyopathy.
potassium values are not always reliable indica-
tors of total body potassium stores.
· Clinical causes of hyperkalemia include the
Diagnosis
following:
History and Physical Examination
· Excessive administration of oral potassium
· No cardiovascular signs associated with diabetes
supplements or potassium supplemented fuids
·Polyuria, polydipsia, polyphagia with weight
· Decreased renal elimination associated with
loss, cataracts (dogs)
oliguric or anuric renal failure
· Hypoadrenocorticism (Addison's disease)
Electrocardiography
· Drugs (potassium-sparing diuretics and ACE
· No changes related to diabetes
inhibitors)
254
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
· Ruptured urinary tract and urethral obstruction
· ECG changes are manifested in delayed and
· Translocation from intracellular to extracel-
abnormal repolarization, increased automaticity,
lular space (metabolic acidosis, rapid release
and increased duration of the action potential
from tissue during severe injury such as aortic
thromboembolism)
Diagnosis
History and Physical Examination
Diagnosis, Therapy, and Prognosis
· Muscle weakness may be mild or present as pro-
· ECG changes caused by hyperkalemia are depen-
found weakness and depression.
dent on magnitude and also rate of development
· Ventroflexion of the head is frequently seen in
of hyperkalemia (see p. 247).
symptomatic cats.
· Polyuria and polydipsia may occur.
KEY POINT
Majority of patients with clinically signifi-
Electrocardiography
cant hyperkalemia will have bradycardia but
· QT interval prolongation and U waves may occur.
uncommonly tachycardia can also develop
· ST segment may become depressed (Figure
(Figure 13-2).
13-3), with a gradual blending of T waves and
what appears to be a tall U wave.
· Ventricular and supraventricular arrhythmias may
· Identification and treatment of the underlying
occur.
cause of hyperkalemia are essential. See Hypo-
· Clinical pathology may be refective of the
adrenocorticism (Addison's Disease).
underlying disease process contributing to hy-
pokalemia. Urine concentrating ability may be
impaired.
DISORDERS ASSOCIATED
WITH HYPOKALEMIA
Therapy
· When severe potassium loss has occurred, severe
· Treat the primary disease process.
 muscle weakness or paralysis may develop.
· Parenteral replacement with potassium chloride
· Clinical causes of hypokalemia include
the
is recommended when potassium loss is severe
following:
and the animal is symptomatic for hypokalemia
· Decreased intake (anorexia, especially when
(Table 13-1).
combined 
with
potassium-deficient
fuid
KEY POINT
administration)
· Excessive gastrointestinal loss
When administering potassium chloride, do
· Chronic vomiting
not exceed 0.5 mEq/kg/hr.
· Severe diarrhea
· Overuse of enemas, laxatives, or exchange
· Parenteral administration may initially decrease
resins
the serum K+ level. This effect is minimized by
· Excessive urinary loss
avoiding dextrose-containing fuids, adminis-
· Renal (renal tubular acidosis, postobstructive
tering K+ at correct rate and concentration, and
diuresis, chronic pyelonephritis)
starting oral potassium gluconate supplementa-
· Drugs (diuretics, amphotericin B)
tion early.
· Secondary hyperaldosteronism (liver failure,
· Retum to alimentation and treatment of the pri-
congestive heart failure, nephrotic syndrome)
mary disease responsible for hypokalemia will
·Extracellular to intracellular transfer
replace potassium deficits. Therefore, prolonged
· Metabolic alkalosis
oral maintenance therapy is rarely indicated
· Insulin and glucose administration
except when ongoing excessive loss of potassium
· Hyperinsulinism (insulinoma)
owing to diuretic administration or polyuric renal
· Ketoacidotic diabetes mellitus
disease is present.
· Hypokalemia markedly increases the likeli-
Cardiac Pathophysiology
hood of toxicity when digitalis is being admin-
istered. Serum potassium should be promptly
· Severe hypokalemia causes hyperpolarization of
checked and corrected when digitalis toxicity
nerve and muscle fiber membranes.
is suspected.
Chapter 13
Cardiovascular Effects of Systemic Diseases
255
Figure 13-2.  A, Hyperkalemia in cat with urinary obstruction resulting in a wicde-complex bradycardia. B, Same cat developed
wide complex tachycardia as treatment with insulin and dextrose was initiated. Normal sinus rhythm developed as treatment was
continued.
Rightswere not granted to include this figure in electronicmedia
Pleaserefertotheprintedpublication.
Figure 13-3.
(From Tilley LP: Essentials of canine and feline electrocardiography: interpretation and treatment, ed 3, Malvern, Penn: 1992,
Lea&Febiger.)
256
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
Table 13-1
· Paraneoplastic syndromes (lymphoma, anal sac
Guidelines for Potassium
Supplementation
apocrine gland adenocarcinoma, occasionally
other soft tissue tumors, primary and metastatic
Serum
mEq KCl
Maximum
bony tumors)
Potassium
to Add to
Fluid Rate
· Hypoadrenocorticism
(mEq/L)
250 mL Fluid
(mL/kg/hr)
·Renal failure
20
· Skeletal lesions (septic osteomyelitis, disuse
< 2.0
6
15
osteoporosis, hypertrophic osteodystrophy)
2.1-2.5
8
· Nutritional (hypervitaminosis D, hypervitamin-
2.6-3.0
10
12
osis A, calcium administration)
3.1-3.5
7
18
· Primary hyperparathyroidism
3.6-5.0
5
25
· Other (hemoconcentration, hyperproteinemia,
severe hypothermia, laboratory error)
From Greene RW, Scott RC: Lower urinary tract disease.
In Ettinger SJ ed: Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine.
Philadelphia, 1975, WB Saunders.
Cardiac Pathophysiology
· Cardiovascular effects of experimentally induced
acute hypercalcemia include elevated systolic
·Hypokalemia increases the risk of ventricular
 and diastolic blood pressure, especially with re-
arrhythmias and decreases the responsiveness to
nal failure.
class I antiarrhythmic agents (lidocaine, mexi-
· Clinically, elevated calcium levels have little if any
letine, procainamide, quinidine). Serum potas-
direct adverse effect on cardiac function. In hyper-
sium should be promptly checked and corrected
calcemic crisis (more than 16 mg/dL serum cal-
when refractory ventricular arrhythmias are
cium), cardiac arrhythmias or arrest may occur.
identified.
· Animals with hypercalcemia may be more predis-
posed to complications of digitalis intoxication.
· Long-standing hypercalcemia may predispose to
Prognosis
calcification of myocardium, blood vessels, and
· The prognosis is good if the underlying condition
Other soft tissues.
 can be corrected or managed.
Diagnosis
DISORDERS ASSOCIATED WITH
History and Physical Examination
HYPERCALCEMIA
· Regardless of its cause, hypercalcemia affects the
· Hypercalcemia occurs when serum calcium con-
kidney (renal dysfunction, polyuria, polydipsia,
centration consistently exceeds 12 mg/dL in ma-
nocturia, nephrocalcinosis, renal failure, uremia),
ture dogs and 11 mg/dL in cats. Young, actively
gastrointestinal system (anorexia, constipation,
growing dogs may normally have calcium values
and vomiting from decreased gastrointestinal
of greater than 12.0 mg/dL
smooth muscle excitability), and nervous system
· Many different conditions can cause hypercalce-
(generalized skeletal muscle weakness from de-
mia. Hypercalcemia results from calcium bone
creased neuromuscular activity).
resorption, increased gastrointestinal calcium ab-
sorption, increased serum protein binding of cal-
Radiography
cium, increased calcium binding to anions, and
· Thoracic radiographs may indicate mediastinal
decreased renal and intestinal calcium removal
mass(es), metastasis, abnormal bony densities, or
from serum.
osteolysis.
· The following conditions are associated with
· Abdominal radiographs may show organomeg-
hypercalcemia:
aly, abnormal bone density, sublumbar masses,
· Young growing puppy (normal)
or sublumbar lymphadenopathy.
Chapter13
Cardiovascular Effects of Systemic Diseases
257
· Skeletal survey radiographs may exhibit isolated
· Preexisting dehydration should be corrected
bony lesions that could account for hypercalce-
and hydration maintained.
mia. Osteopenia, metastatic calcification, or focal
·Administration of 0.9% saline should be
bony lesions may be present.
used to enhance the renal excretion of
calcium.
Electrocardiography
· Furosemide (5 mg/kg IV bolus initially then 2to
· The characteristic ECG finding is a short QT in-
4 mg/kg PO every 8 to 12 hours thereafter) and/
terval. In extreme cases, the ST segment may fuse
or sodium bicarbonate (1 mEq/kg IV every 10
with the upstroke of the T wave.
to 15 minutes, up to 4 mEq/L maximum dose)
may also help in cases of moderate-to-severe
KEY POINT
hypercalcemia.
· Glucocorticosteroids may limit bone resorp-
ECG changes do not correlate closely with se-
tion, decrease intestinal calcium absorp-
rum calcium concentration.
tion, increase renal calcium excretion, and
be cytolytic in certain neoplasms. Admin-
istration may interfere with diagnosis of
· With severe hypercalcemia, bradycardia may
neoplasia.
occur.
· Definitive treatment is directed at the underlying
· Hypercalcemia may predispose to arrhythmias of
etiology.
digitalis intoxication.
· ECG changes resolve after normalization of se-
Prognosis
rum calcium.
· The prognosis depends on early detection, abil-
Clinical Pathology
ity to establish a definitive diagnosis, and success
· Hypercalcemia often causes diminished urinary
of treatment. The prognosis of many causes of
 concentrating ability. The urine is usually hypos-
hypercalcemia is guarded to poor.
thenuric or isosthenuric.
· Renal failure with azotemia may develop from
DISORDERS ASSOCIATED WITH
 progressive structural and fumctional alterations
HYPOCALCEMIA
in the kidney.
· Hypophosphatemia or hyperphosphatemia may
· Hypocalcemia, although infrequently encoun-
be recorded, depending on the presence or ab-
tered, can cause profound clinical signs. It occurs
 sence of renal failure and the underlying etiology
when serum calcium concentration is less than 8
of hypercalcemia.
mg/dL in the dog and less than 7 mg/dL in the cat
· Serum alkaline phosphatase may be elevated if
(ionized calcium less than 5 in dogs and less than
severe bone disease or concomitant hepatic dis-
4.5 im cats).
ease is present.
· The following conditions may be associated with
· A hemogram may be normal, display hemo-
hypocalcemia:
concentration or anemia, or occasionally show
· Renal failure
evidence of leukemia (when this disease is asso-
· Eclampsia (puerperal tetany)
ciated with the underlying etiology).
· Canine acute pancreatitis
· Bone marrow evaluation may be unremarkable
· Hypoparathyroidism
or disclose evidence of lymphoma, leukemia, or
· Idiopathic
multiple myeloma.
· Postoperative (during bilateral thyroid surgery)
· Ethylene glycol toxicity
Therapy
· Hyperphosphatemia
· Hypocalcemia due to hypoalbuminemia, where
· Initial treatment is directed at reducing the sys-
calcium values are not adjusted for serum pro-
temic effects of hypercalcemia.
tein concentration
258
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
Rights were not granted to include this figure in electronic media.
Please refer to theprinted publication.
(From Tilley LP: Essentials of canine and feline electrocardiography: interpretation and treatment, ed 3, Malvern, Penn: 1992,
Lea & Febiger.)
Cardiac Pathophysiology
Therapy
· Hypocalcemia causes an excitatory effect on
· Severe hypocalcemia (less than 6 mg/dL) is a
nerve and muscle cells. Neuromuscular irritabil-
life-threatening emergency.
ity, tetany, and seizures may result.
·En percent calcium gluconate is adminis-
·Animals with coexisting congestive heart failure
tered intravenously (0.5 to 1.5 ml/kg) slowly
 may experience decreased cardiac function that
over a 15- to 30-minute interval.
improves with restoration of calcium levels (ow-
·Calcium should be administered slowly as
ing to the augmenting effect of calcium on myo-
ECG changes do not closely conform to se-
cardial contractility).
rum calcium levels, especially when other
· Acutely induced hypocalcemia (i.e., treatment
electrolyte and acid/base disturbances are
with chelating agents) can potentially cause sharp
present.
reductions in blood pressure resulting in cardio-
· ECG
monitoring
should
accompany
vascular shock.
administration.
· Calcium infusion should be temporarily inter-
rupted if ST segment elevation or bradycardia
Diagnosis
occurs, to be reinstated at a slower rate when
History and Physical Examination
these changes have abated.
· Tetany, seizures, anorexia, vomiting, and abdom-
· Gradual QT interval shortening from its pro-
inal discomfort are the predominant signs in af-
longed state may accompany calcium infusion.
fected animals.
· Aggressive rubbing of the ears, nose, face, and
KEY POINT
eyes can also be seen.
Calcium is cardiotoxic if replaced too quickly;
· Handling or stress may precipitate tetany.
even a normal concentration of serum calci-
um may be toxic if replenished to that level
Electrocardiography
too rapidly.
· The typical ECG manifestation of hypocalcemia
consists of QT prolongation, but is heart rate de-
· Subsequent intravenous calcium administra-
pendent. (Figure 13-4)
tion may be repeated every 6 to 12 hours, or as
needed.
Clinical Pathology
· Clinical signs of hypocalcemia may abate slowly,
· Clinical pathology will refect abnonmalities as-
despite calcium infusion. Resolution of clinical
sociated with the underlying disease process.
 signs may not provide a reliable guide as an end
Hypocalcemia is usually diagnosed when low
point of adequate calcium administration. Some
serum calcium levels are detected during clini-
hypocalcemic signs may persist (i.e., weakness, an-
cal investigation of tetany, seizures, renal failure,
orexia) if cardiotoxic doses of calcium are infused.
pancreatitis, or other disorders through analysis
· Vitamin D therapy may be required in some
of a serum biochemical profile.
disorders to maintain control of hypocalcemia.
Chapter 13
Cardiovascular Effects of Systemic Diseases
259
 In treatment of postoperative parathyroid insuf-
· Insulin overdose for the treatment of diabetes
ficiency, care must be taken to detect recovery
mellitus.
 of parathyroid function in order to avoid vitamin
· Nonpancreatic tumors
 D-associated hypercalcemia.
· Glycogen storage diseases
· Neonatal/juvenile hypoglycemia
· Septic shock
Prognosis
· Addison's disease
· For most causes of hypocalcemia that are carefully
· Hepatic disease
managed, the prognosis is good to excellent.
Cardiac Pathophysiology
DISORDERS ASSOCIATED
· Irrespective of the etiology, hypoglycemia trig-
WITH HYPOMAGNESEMIA
 gers catecholamine release, which causes tachy-
AND HYPERMAGNESEMIA
cardia, increases in myocardial oxygen demand,
· Abnormalities in magnesium levels rarely af-
and, potentially, arrhythmias.
fect cardiac function directly, but they may po-
tentiate problems caused by other electrolyte
Diagnosis
derangements.
· Causes of hypomagnesemia are very similar to
History and Physical Examination
causes of hypokalemia.
· Clinical manifestations of hypoglycemia range
from lethargy to episodic weakness and seizures.
Cardiac Pathophysiology
Electrocardiography
· Abnormalities of magnesium have minimal
· ECG findings can include:
effects on the ECG with normal calcium and
· ST depression
potassium levels.
· T wave fattening
· Hypomagnesemia will exacerbate problems due
· QT prolongation
to hypocalcemia.
· Supraventricular and/or ventricular arrhythmias
· Hypomagnesemia
 predisposes
to
digitalis-
· ECG changes usually resolve with correction
induced arrhythmias.
of hypoglycemia
· Hypomagnesemia
prevents
correction
of
hypokalemia.
Laboratory Findings
· A low blood glucose level (less than 60 mg/dL)
Diagnosis
is usually present. A fasting blood glucose level 
may be needed to confirm hypoglycemia.
· Consider hypomagnesemia with conditions that
·Elevated insulin levels or amended insu-
lead to hypokalemia.
lin: glucose ratio may be demonstrated with
· Consider hypomagnesemia when there is diff-
insulinomas.
culty correcting hypokalemia.
Therapy
Therapy
· Hypoglycemic crisis, regardless of cause, is man-
· Treat the underlying disease process.
aged by slow, intravenous administration of 50%
· Parenteral replacement if there is evidence of car-
dextrose to effect. A slow IV bolus of 0.5 to 1.0
diac complications or if there is difficulty correct-
mg/kg could be considered.
ing hypokalemia. Magnesium sulfate at 0.75 to
· Treat underlying disease or improve diabetic
1.0 mEq/kg/day in 5% dextrose in water (D;W)
regulation.
as a constant rate infusion could be considered.
Prognosis
HYPOGLYCEMIA
· Resolution of neurologic signs due to hypoglyce-
· Hypoglycemia may be caused by:
mia is usually abrupt and virtually complete.
· Hyperinsulinism due to a functional islet cell
· Prolonged, untreated hypoglycemia may result
 pancreatic carcinoma.
in  cerebrocortical hypoxic damage.  Lack of
260
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
symptom amelioration after therapy may indicate
Diagnosis
cerebral hypoxia and edema.
History and Physical Examination
· Signs that may accompany uremia include poly-
UREMIA
uria, polydipsia, depression, anorexia, lethargy,
· Uremia is generally associated with renal failure.
vomiting, diarrhea, and weight loss.
· Uremia is common in geriatric populations.
· Uremic pneumonitis and metabolic acido-
· Renal failure can affect cardiac function and re-
sis cause dyspnea and/or tachypnea that may
duce elimination of many cardiac drugs (digoxin,
be confused with signs of congestive heart
most ACE inhibitors, many beta blockers).
failure.
Electrocardiography
Cardiac Pathophysiology
· Nonspecific ECG abnormalities may be attrib-
· Hypertensive cardiovascular disease, electrolyte
uted to hypertension, anemia, electrolyte abnor-
imbalance, fuid overload, and anemia can con-
malities, and pericarditis.
tribute to the production of cardiac disturbances.
· Conduction defects or arrhythmias may occur.
· Renal failure can cause elevations or reductions
of potassium and calcium; associated changes
Echocardiography
may register on the ECG.
· Echocardiography may show changes consistent
· Systemic hypertension is a common sequela of
with hypertension and chronic anemia.
chronic renal failure in dogs and cats and is re-
ported in 50% to 93% of dogs and 65% of cats.
Clinical Pathology
· Pericardial effusion is reported as an uncommon
· Clinical pathology may reveal abnormalities in
sequela of uremia in cats and dogs. The effusion
the hemogram, urinalysis, and biochemistry pro-
 may occur secondary to uremic serositis.
file consistent with uremia (increased blood urea
· Pulmonary thromboembolism may occur
as-
nitrogen, creatinine, and phosphorus, nonregen-
sociated with protein-losing glomerulopathy.
erative anemia, and isosthenuria).
(Figure 13-5)
· Uremic pneumonitis can uncommonly 
cause
Therapy
 noncardiogenic pulmonary edema.
· Treatment is directed at managing uremia and
its underlying causes. Therapy generally in-
KEY POINT
cludes parenteral fuids, protein and phosphorus
Uremic toxins have a cardiodepressant effect.
restriction, phosphate binders, and sometimes
calcitriol and erythropoietin.
· Management of severe azotemia in patients with
concurrent heart disease is extremely challenging
and often frustrating.
·Azotemia identified while treating congestive heart
failure may be prerenal and/or renal in origin.
·Rehydrate cautiously.
·Consider low-sodium fuids (half-strength
saline)
· Consider reduced administration rates (start
P
at maintenance rate)
· May take 48 hours to see improvement in
azotemia.
· Monitor clinically and radiographically for de-
velopment of congestive heart failure.
· Reduce doses or avoid cardiac drugs elimi-
nated by the kidneys. If using ACE inhibitors
Figure 13-5.  Right parasternal short-axis view at the base
of the heart in a dog with protein-losing nephropathy. A well
or digoxin, monitor kidney function and elec-
circumscribed thrombus can be seen at the bifurcation of the
trolytes frequently. Monitor digoxin levels
pulmonary artery. Ao, Aorta; PA, pulmonary artery.
periodically. Pimobendan, or hydralazine
Chapter13
Cardiovascular Effects of Systemic Diseases
261
and nitroglycerin can be substituted for ACE
anemia is usually well tolerated because of
inhibitors.
compensatory mechanisms that include in-
· Monitor and control hypertension, electrolyte,
creased cardiac output, redistribution of
and acid-base disturbances.
blood fow, and decreased oxygen affinity of
red blood cells.
· Uncommonly the volume overload can result
Prognosis
in congestive heart failure. In many of these
· Resolution of the uremic state may improve ECG
cases, pre-existing subclinical heart disease
 abnonmalities but arrhythmias may persist.
may be a factor.
· The development of congestive heart failure in the
· Pulmonary thromboembolism may
/occur
face of severe azotemia carries a poor prognosis.
with autoimmune hemolytic anemia.
ANEMIA
Diagnosis
· Anemia is a sign of a disease, not a disease
History and Physical Examination
entity.
· Chronic anemia produces variable symptoms that
· Evaluation should emphasize history (drug or
may include fatigue and mild exertional dyspnea.
toxin exposure), clinical signs related to other
In rare situations chronic anemia can lead to
disorders complicated by anemia (fever, leth-
syncope.
argy, bleeding, weight loss), physical examina-
· Acute anemia may present with collapse, weak-
tion (petechiae, lymphadenopathy), and clinical
ness, lethargy, stupor, and dyspnea.
pathology
· Physical exam may reveal precordium that is hy-
· Symptoms of reduced cardiac reserve associated
 perkinetic, bounding or pistol shot arterial pulses,
with anemia depend on the severity of anemia,
pale or icteric mucous membrane color, and pro-
rate of anemia development, and on the presence
longed capillary refill time.
and extent of underlying cardiac disease.
· A soft, systolic murmur at the left apex, generally
 grade I to II/VI, is common with severe anemia.
Cardiac Pathophysiology
· Heart sounds may be accentuated.
· The combination of tissue hypoxia and reduced
Radiology
blood viscosity leads to decreased systemic
· Thoracic radiographs may display cardiac en-
vascular resistance. The body responds to de-
largement, but this will vary depending on the
creased systemic vascular resistance by increas-
 presence and extent of previously existing heart
  sa  m p o 
disease.
 increased stroke volume and cardiac output.
· Uncommonly cardiac changes can result in evi-
· Tissue hypoxia may also result in sinus
dence of pulmonary venous congestion, pulmo-
tachycardia.
nary edema, and/or pleural effusion.
·When anemia is associated with increased viscos-
ity (multiple myeloma or macroglobulinemia),
Electrocardiography
cardiac output may fail to rise.
· Sinus tachycardia is often present. The heart
· Physiologic consequences depend on the devel-
rate varies with the rate of onset and degree of
opmental rate of anemia.
anemia.
·With acute blood loss (i.e., hemorrhage), hypo-
· Ventricular premature complexes may be seen.
volemic shock may predominate.
· Evidence of left ventricular enlargement (wide
· Acute blood loss leads to volume depletion and
QRS complex and/or tall R waves) may be
a resultant decrease in cardiac output. Addition-
present.
ally, acute anemia can lead to myocardial hy
 poxia and resultant depressed cardiac function.
Echocardiography
· With chronic anemia blood volume is main-
· May show evidence of left ventricular, left atrial,
tained but cardiac output may rise as described
right ventricular, and/or right atrial dilation.
previously.
· Hyperdynamic cardiac function (increased frac-
· The augmented stroke volume associated
tional shortening. decreased end-systolic left
with the increased cardiac output may result
ventricular diameter) is usually seen in the pres-
in cardiac dilation and hypertrophy. Chronic
ence of volume overload.
262
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
· Evidence of pre-existing cardiac disease may be
CHEMODECTOMA
present.
· Tumor originates from neuroepithelial cells most
Clinical Pathology
commonly found in the aortic bodies.
· The laboratory database varies considerably de-
· Masses are typically seen at the heart base.
pending on the cause of anemia.
Because of the complexity of the heart base, small
masses can be difficult to identify (Figure 13-7).
Therapy
· Rare in cats.
· Treatment of anemia depends on the underlying
cause.
· Animals with congestive heart failure secondary
to anemia should be given furosemide as needed.
PE
Once the anemia is controlled, chronic cardiac
therapy may not be necessary.
· Animals with concurrent congestive heart failure
and life-threatening anemia should be given fu-
rosemide and transfused simultaneously. Packed
red blood cells may be more appropriate than
whole blood owing to the smaller volume that
can be administered to correct the anemia.
· Caution with fuid administration should always
be exercised when cardiomegaly is present in the
face of significant anemia.
·A decision as to when to transfuse a patient is
based on the clinical assessment, which includes
the rate of anemia development, the patient's
state of compensation, and progression of contin-
Figure 13-6.
Slightly oblique right parasternal long-axis
ued red blood cell loss.
view. A large soft tissue mass effect (*) can be seen in the wall
of the right atrium. Moderate pericardial effusion (PE) is pres-
ent resulting in diastolic collapse of the right atrium. LV, Left
Prognosis
ventricle; LA, left atrium.
· Successful management of anemia and underly-
ing causes confers a good short-term prognosis.
 Long-term prognosis depends on the cause of the
anemia.
Neoplastic and Infiltrative
RA
Heart Diseases
HEMANGIOSARCOMA
· Tumor originates from endothelial cells.
· Can be seen in any portion of the heart, but
appears to be more common in the wall of the
right atrium (Figure 13-6).
·Rare in cats
· Average age of affected dogs is 10 years; no
gender predilection; incidence increased in
German Shepherds.
Figure 13-7.
. Slightly oblique right parasternal short-axis
· Metastasis is common.
view high on the base above the left atrium. A small soft tis-
sue mass effect (*) can be seen associated with the aorta and
· Other common sites of hemangiosarcoma in-
above the left atrium. Mild to moderate pericardial effusion is
 clude the spleen, liver, and lungs.
also present. Ao, Aorta; RA, right atrium.
Chapter 13
Cardiovascular Effects of Systemic Diseases
263
Diagnosis
History and Physical Examination
· Cardiac involvement may not always lead to
clinical signs. Signs depend on the site and extent
Ao
of metastasis. Resultant cardiac dysfunction may
cause signs of congestive heart failure, weakness,
and/or syncope.
· Pericardial effusion and tamponade may lead to
similar clinical signs.
· Possible physical findings include muffed heart
sounds on auscultation, jugular venous disten-
tion, ascites, weakness (often acute), hypokinetic
Figure 13-8.
Transverse section through the heart of a dog
diagnosed with cardiac lymphoma. Multiple pale nodules
pulses, tachypnea, weight loss, and pale mucous
can be seen in the left and right ventricular myocardium. Ao,
membranes.
Aorta; IV, left ventricle; LA, left atrium.
Radiography
· More common in dogs over 6 years old; no gen-
· Radiographic evidence of a cardiac mass is un-
der predilection; increased incidence in boxers
commonly seen (Figure 13-11).
and Boston Terriers.
· Cardiac enlargement and rounding of the cardiac
· Metastasis is uncommon, but can appear in lungs,
silhouette may be observed if pericardial effusion
liver, lymph nodes, and bone.
is present.
· Dilation of the caudal vena cava may present sec-
OTHER ETIOLOGIES
ondary to cardiac tamponade or obstruction to
blood fow within the lumen of the right heart.
· Lymphoma is the most common tumor that me-
 In general, the diameter of the caudal vena cava
tastasizes to the heart in cats but also can be seen
should be less than the length of the vertebra
in dogs. (Figures 13-8 and 13-9)
above the carina.
· Ectopic thyroid carcinomas occur at the heart base
· Pneumopericardiography or angiocardiogra-
and, rarely, in the right ventricular outflow tract.
phy may assess the thickness and any irregu-
· Cardiac myxomas are rare but are more com-
larities of the pericardium, epicardium, and
mon in the right heart (right atrial lumen). (Fig
endocardium.
ure 13-10)
· The use of magnetic resonance imaging may
· Rarely, cardiac fbroma, fbrosarcoma, and rhab-
allow visualization of a cardiac mass.
domyosarcoma are diagnosed in young dogs
· Infiltrative myocardial disease (e.g., amyloido-
Electrocardiography
sis, hypereosinophilic syndrome) involving non-
· Reduced QRS voltage on the ECG and electrical
neoplastic cells is rare in dogs and uncommon in
altermans occur in many, but not all, cases with
cats.
 pericardial effusion.
· Atrial or ventricular arrhythmias, conduction dis-
Cardiac Pathophysiology
turbances, and complete heart block can occur.
· Tumors from other tissues gain access to the heart
Echocardiography
· Echocardiographic evidence of pericardial effu-
spread by hematogenous or lymphatic vessels.
sion may be demonstrated. Diastolic right atrial
· The relative infrequency of cardiac metastasis
or right ventricular collapse signifies pericardial
has been attributed to metabolic peculiarities of
 tamponade. Dilation of the abdominal vena cava
striated muscle, rapid coronary blood flow, effer-
and/or hepatic veins is also typically seen with
ent lymphatic drainage from the heart, and the
tamponade.
vigorous kneading action of the myocardium
· Two-dimensional echocardiography may facili-
· Myocardial neoplasia may cause congestive heart
tate identification of cardiac neoplasia. Unfortu-
failure owing to diastolic dysfunction, obstruc-
nately due to the elusive nature of some cardiac
tion to ventricular infow or outfow, pericardial
masses, the lack of a mass on echocardiogram
tamponade, or arrhythmias.
does not rule out neoplasia.
264
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
B
Figure 13-9.
.Right parasternal long-axis (A) and short-axis (B) views in a cat with cardliac lymphoma confirmed on histopathol-
ogy. Note the marked thickening of the left ventricular and left atrial myocardium. Ao, Aorta; IV, left ventricle; LA, left atrium.
Therapy
· Pericardiocentesis may offer temporary relief
from cardiac tamponade.
· If recurrent pericardiocentesis is necessary, then
R
partial pericardectomy via thoracotomy, or a
pericardial window via thoracoscopy could be
considered.
· Surgery would likely improve the patient's qual-
ity of life but may not prolong life.
· Other than standard thoracotomy concems and
risks, the main complication with surgery is on-
going hemorrhage from the tumor. This can result
in hemothorax.
·Animals with myocardial infltration of tumors
sensitive to chemotherapy or radiotherapy may
respond favorably, but this is uncommon.
· Congestive heart failure and arrhythmias result-
Figure 13-10.
Right parasternal long-axis view in a dog.
 ing from cardiac neoplasia can be diffcult to
A large, well-circumscribed mass effect (*) is seen filling the
majority of the right atrial lumen. The mass was confirmed as
treat.
a myxoma on histopathology.
· Surgical resection or debulking of cardiac masses
is uncommonly possible.
· Masses confined to the right atrial appendage can
· Whenever safely possible, an echocardiogram
periodically be removed with resection of the
should be performed while pericardial fuid is
appendage.
present. The fuid can be helpful in identifying a
· Some intraluminal cardiac masses can be re-
mass.
moved using cardiac bypass or infow occlusion.
· Pericardiocentesis may detect cytologic evidence
- yns wm day u r ss
of neoplasia. The majority of the time, though,
tients are not available.
fuid analysis will come back as nonspecific hem-
Prognosis
orrhagic effusion.
· Uncommonly, biopsy of the tumor is possible
Hemangiosarcoma
without thoracotomy using techniques such as
· Surgical resection may be possible, but distant
myocardial biopsy or thoracoscopy.
microscopic metastasis is almost always present.
Chapter 13
Cardiovascular Effects of Systemic Diseases
265
A
B
Figure 13-11.  Lateral (A) and ventrodorsal (B) radiographs in a Boxer with a large heart base mass. A bulge in the area of the
 Cranial waist of the cardiac silhouette can be seen on the lateral. A similar bulge can be seen on the ventrodorsal projection at the
2 o'clock position on the cardiac silhouette.
· Poor response to chemotherapy in general al-
· Radiation therapy may be beneficial in some cases,
though a combination of surgical resection and
but general response to chemotherapy is poor.
chemotherapy may improve the prognosis to
some degree.
KEY POINT
· Pericardectomy may improve quality of life.
In general, long-term prognosis with cardiac
cancer is poor owing to difficulty in surgical 
Chemodectoma
· Debulking surgery is an option, but complete re-
resection, minimal response to chemotherapy
and radiation therapy, and detrimental side
section of the tumor is rarely possible.
effects of chemotherapy and radiation thera-
 py on the heart.
266
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
·Animals that recover from heat stroke may
Physical and Chemical
be prone to subsequent occurrences owing to
 heat-induced damage to the thermoregulatory
Agents that Affect the
zone of the hypothalamus.
Cardiovascular System
Diagnosis
· Many noninfectious stimuli can cause myocar
dial injury. Damage can be acute and transient
History and Physical Examination
or chronic and lead to permanent myocardial
· The diagnosis is usually made on the reported
change. Effects are usually related to the severity,
history of an animal being exposed to high en-
dose, and rate of exposure.
virommental temperatures. However, some cases
 have more subtle history
· Depending on the duration and severity of the
HYPERPYREXIA (HEAT STROKE)
 heat stroke, clinical signs may include panting.
· Hyperpyrexia is usually associated with heat
sinus tachycardia, bright red oral mucous mem-
stroke when the rectal temperature rises to 41° to
branes, and hyperthermia. Extremities become
44° C (106° to 111° F). Experimentally, signs of
hot to the touch.
heat stroke develop consistently at temperatures
· Red mucous membranes may turm pale because
above 439 C (109° F) in dogs.
 of diminished circulation or vasoconstriction.
yu o pasoxa see ui sdoraaap ayons pea ·
· Watery diarrhea may occur, which can progress
u   sn r
to bloody diarrhea.
activity in wanm environmental temperatures. It
· Stupor and coma with respiratory arrest can
commonly occurs in animals left in unventilated
follow.
automobiles during the summer months.
· With malignant hyperthermia, an acute, profound
· High humidity reduces evaporation of water from
temperature elevation may be the first noticeable
the oral and nasal cavities, and reduces the ability
sign to the surgeon.
of small animals to regulate their temperatures.
· If the heart rate is monitored, tachycardia may be
· Animals that are obese, brachycephalic,
very
the earliest indication.
young or old, or have cardiopulmonary disease
· Skeletal muscle hypertonus may occur.
are predisposed to heat stroke.
· ECG may show tachycardia, extrasystoles (espe-
· Malignant hyperthenmia is a rare but potentially
cially if DIC develops), and ST segment and T
fatal abnormal response to anesthetic agents. It
wave abnormalities.
is characterized by an acute, rapid rise in body
· Clinical pathologic alterations relate to the stage
temperature and severe biochemical changes ac-
and severity of the hyperpyrexia.
companied by muscle rigidity.
Therapy
Cardiac Pathophysiology
· Therapy should begin with lowering body tem
·Heat-induced vasodilation results in hypotension
perature. Submergence in cool water and wet-
and decreased organ perfusion.
ting the extremities with rubbing alcohol are
· Respiratory alkalosis may result from panting.
useful techniques. Rectal temperature should
· Dehydration with hemoconcentration may occur, as
be recorded every 5 to 10 minutes. Discontinue
well as mild hyperkalemia and hypophosphatemia
cooling when the body temperature drops below
· Tachyarrhythmias and cardiogenic shock can oc-
39.5° C (103° F), to avoid hypothermia.
cur owing to myocardial hemorrhage, ischemia,
· If laryngeal paralysis, laryngeal edema, and
and necrosis.
tracheal stenosis are present, they may impede
· Disseminated intravascular coagulopathy (DIC)
may develop owing to destruction of clotting
conditions are present, then a temporary trache-
factors.
otomy or endotracheal intubation may have to be
· Right-heart dilation may occur.
perfonmed.
· Mechanisms suggested for myocardial injury
· Supportive care should include isotonic fuid therapy
include direct thermal effects, circulatory collapse
(0.45% saline or half-strength lactated Rimger's solu-
with secondary myocardial hypoxia, decreased cor-
tion, with 2.5% dextrose), correction of acid-base and
 onary blood fow, and secondary metabolic injury.
electrolyte abnormalities, and treatment for DIC.
Chapter 13
Cardiovascular Effects of Systemic Diseases
267
· Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs or anti-
82.4° to 89.6° F) and severe (lower than 28° C or
pyretics (e.g., aspirin, funixin meglumine) are
82.4° F).
contraindicated. The use of glucocorticoids re-
· Signs include lethargy, ataxia, stupor, shivering
mains controversial, but they are often used when
 and bradycardia. Cardiopulmonary arrest may
cerebral edema is suspected.
occur with severe hypothermia.
· When malignant hyperthermia is anesthetic re-
lated, all inhalation agents and relaxants should
Electrocardiography
be discontinued. Hyperventilation with 100%
a go uounoid u snsan euaou P ·
 Ox ygen should be started.
PR interval, QRS duration, and QT interval; atrial
· For malignant hyperthermia, dantrolene, 2 mg/kg
 premature complexes; and inverted T waves.
IV up to 10 mg/kg IV has been used in the dog.
· Moderate hypothermia produces atropine-resis-
No proven efficacy is known. Its use is based on
tant bradycardia and ventricular arrhythmias
experience from humans, horses, and pigs. Dan-
· Severe hypothermia may cause cardiac arrest sec-
trolene exhibits muscle relaxation activity by
 ondary to ventricular fibrillation or asystole.
direct action on muscle.
· Administer mannitol (0.25 to 2 gm/kg of a 20%
Therapy
solution over 15 to 20 minutes) if cerebral edema
is suspected or if stupor or coma develops
· Treatment initially involves warming the patient.
· The patient should be monitored for several days
· Active extermal warming with wanm-water blan-
for the development of complications, such as re-
kets is recommended for mild to moderate hypo-
nal failure and DIC.
thermia. Extermal warming causes vasodilation of
skin vessels, which may initially transfer cooled
blood to the body core, further lowering intermal
Prognosis
temperature. This is rarely a significant clinical
· The prognosis for heat stroke is guarded to good
complication with mild to moderate hypothermia.
if detected and treated early.
· Intermal (core) warming is recommended if the
· Malignant hyperthenmia is rare, but seems to of-
rectal temperature is less than 30° C (86° F)
fer a worse prognosis.
or the cardiovascular status is unstable. This is
· Coagulopathy and renal failure confer a worse
prognosis.
sate fuids warmed to 45° C (113° F).
· Appropriate supportive care (e.g., intravenous
fuids, ventilation) must be administered. Se-
HYPOTHERMIA
vere hypothermia can cause cardiopulmonary
· Lowering of body temperature can occur acciden-
collapse. Keep these patients well oxygenated,
tally, owing to deep cooling from extermal cold, drugs,
and administer warmed intravenous fuids.
or interference with thermoregulatory centers during
· Cardiac output and ECG abnormalities improve
aesthesia. Physiologic consequences of hypother-
after warming.
mia depend on the extent and duration of exposure.
· Evaluation of the patient for underlying systemic
disorders that could have predisposed it to hypo-
Cardiac Pathophysiology
thermia should be made once normothenmia has
been achieved
· Cardiac dilation with epicardial and subendocardial
hemorrhage can result from severe hypothermia.
CARBON MONOXIDE TOXICITY
Microinfarcts can occur in myocardial tissue.
· Lesions may result from circulatory collapse, he-
· Carbon monoxide is a colorless, odorless, taste-
moconcentration, sludging of blood in capillar-
less, toxic gas that has the molecular fonmula CO.
ies, or decreased cellular metabolism.
CO is produced by the incomplete combustion of
the fossil fuels—gas, oil, coal and wood used
in boilers, engines, oil burmers, gas fires, water
Diagnosis
heaters, solid fuel appliances and open fires. CO
History and Physical Examination
is a commercially important chemical. It is also
-    a   s a
formed in many chemical reactions and in the
duction in core temperature), mild (32° to 35° C
thermal or incomplete decomposition of many
or 89.6° to 95° F), moderate (28° to 32° C or
organic materials.
268
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
· Dangerous amounts of CO can accumulate when
dopamine, serotonin, bufotenine, bufagenins,
as a result of poor installation, poor maintenance
and bufotoxins. The animal does not have to
or failure or damage to an appliance in service,
ingest the toad to become poisoned. Toxic pa-
the fuel is not bumed properly, or when rooms
rotid secretions can be absorbed through the
are poorly ventilated and the CO is unable to
oral mucous membranes just holding the toad
escape.
in its mouth.
Cardiac Pathophysiology
Cardiac Pathophysiology
· CO competes with oxygen for binding sights on
· Bufagenins and bufotoxins can have digitalis-like
hemoglobin, diminishing oxygen transport ca-
effects on the heart.
 pacity. This results in myocardial hypoxia. Myo-
cardial hemorrhage and necrosis may occur.
Diagnosis
History and Physical Examination
Diagnosis
· The pet is often observed playing with the toad.
History and Physical Examination
· Clinical signs occur within minutes and may in-
· The history often supports exposure to fumes
clude hypersalivation, vomiting, diarrhea, weak-
from a gasoline-burming engine.
ness, pulmonary edema, and seizures. Coma and
· Clinical signs are often associated with cardiac
 death can occur within 30 minutes.
hypoxia (sudden death) or hypoxia to the brain
(convulsions, disorientation, coma).
Electrocardiography
· The physical examination is often unremarkable.
· In experimental studies, the digitalis-like effect of
· A blood sample will be cherry red.
the toxin may result in any type of arrhythmia. In
natural exposure, arrhythmias are rare. The most
Electrocardiography
common rhythms noted are sinus arrhythmia and
·ECG abnormalities
 cani
include ST
seg-
sinus tachycardia.
 ment changes, conduction abnormalities, or
· Severely intoxicated dogs with bradycardia.
 arrhythmias.
tachycardia, neurologic disability or signs of
shock should get an initial ECG. Monitoring the
Specialized Diagnostie Test
ECG is recommended if significant arrhythmias
· Carboxyhemoglobin blood
levels
can
be
are noted.
meas ured.
Therapy
Treatment
· The patient's mouth should be rinsed imme-
·One hundred percent oxygen should be
diately. Atropine may help decrease saliva-
administered.
tion, but is reserved for patients with heart
· Any arrhythmias should be treated as needed.
rates less then 50 bpm. Using atropine to treat
· Supportive care should include correction of
excess salivation in dogs with nonmal heart
electrolyte and acid-base imbalances.
rates or tachycardia can lead to more severe
arrhythmias.
·Vomiting should be induced if ingestion was
Prognosis
recent. The venom may enter enterohepatic cir-
· Clinical recovery usually occurs if the situation is
culation. Therefore, multiple doses of activated
detected and treated early.
charcoal should be administered. Sorbitol cathar-
tic is advised.
· Provide supportive care, including anticonvulsive
TOAD POISONING
and antiarrhythmic medication as needed.
· The Colorado river toad (Bufo alvaritus) and
· Pentobarbital anesthesia will control seizures.
the marine toad (Bufo marinas) secrete toxins
· Propranololis quite effective for tachyarrhyth-
from the parotid glands that can cause pro-
mias. In patients without asthma or pre-existing
found cardiotoxicity. The parotid gland se-
heart disease, doses of 0.5 to 2 mg/kg can be
cretions contain epinephrine, norepinephrine,
given slowly IV, to effect.
Chapter 13
Cardiovascular Effects of Systemic Diseases
269
OLEANDER TOXICITY
Therapy
·Oleander (Nerium oleander) is an omamen-
· Symptomatic therapy should include prevention
tal shrub found mostly in the southeast United
of absorption, increasing elimination, mainte-
States.
nance of life support, and control of cardiac ar-
rhythmias and seizures
· Vomiting should be induced if ingestion was
Cardiac Pathophysiology
recent. Activated charcoal (1 to 4 g/kg orally)
· The toxin of oleander is a digitalis-like glycoside.
should be administered. Because methylxan-
thines undergo enterohepatic recirculation, giv-
Diagnosis
ing repeated doses of activated charcoal is usually
beneficial in symptomatic animals.
History and Physical Examination
· Arrhythmia management
· Signs of vomiting and diarrhea occur within 2 to
· Lidocaine is used for control of ventricular ar-
3 hours.
rhythmias, if needed. Beta blockers can be added
· ECG may reveal any type of arrhythmia due to
if additional control and maintenance therapy
the digitalis-like compounds.
reportedly delays renal excretion of methylxan-
Therapy
thines, metoprolol succinate or metoprolol tartrate
is the beta blocker of choice, if available.
· Supportive care that includes Huid therapy, elec-
· Treat supraventricular tachycardia with beta
trolyte replacement, and control of vomiting and
 blockers (i.e., propranolol, metoprolol, atenolol).
diarrhea is recommended.
· Seizure control can be done with diazepam or
· Arrhythmias should be treated as needed.
barbiturate.
CHOCOLATE TOXICITY
DOXORUBICIN CARDIOTOXICITY
· Toxic effects of chocolate are due to methylxan-
· Doxorubicin is an anthracycline antibiotic used
thines, in particular theobromine and caffeine
for its antineoplastic properties. Its mechanism of
· The median lethal dose of theobromine and caf-
action as a chemotherapeutic agent is inhibition
feine is 100 to 200 mg/kg (0.2 to 0.5 oz baking
of nucleic acid synthesis. Cardiotoxicity mani-
chocolate/kg). Mild signs can occur with 20 mg
fested as arrhythmias or dilated cardiomyopathy
kg, severe signs at 40 to 50 mg/kg and seizures at
usually develops after cumulative doses of 240
60 mg/kg.
mg/m2 in dogs, but toxicity can occur at dosages
as low as 130 mg/m2 (dog range, 135 to 265 mg/
Cardiac Pathophysiology
m2; cat range, 130 to 320 mg/m2). Clinical stud-
ies in humans have shown a reduced incidence
· Theobromine increases cyclic adenosine mono
of cardiomyopathy when people are treated with
phosphate, causes release of catecholamines,
prolonged infusions (24 hours) of doxorubicin.
blocks adenosine receptors, and increases cal-
 Prolonged infusion therapy in dogs is still under
cium uptake by the sarcoplasmic reticulum.
investigation.
· The net effect is to increase heart rate and the
· Acute cardiotoxicity is manifested by arrhyth-
force of contractions.
mias during or shortly after administration. Dj-
lated cardiomyopathy may develop with chronic
treatment. Although histologic lesions and echo-
Diagnosis
cardiographic changes may develop, clinical
History and Physical Examination
signs of congestive heart failure are uncommon
· Clinical signs associated with chocolate toxicity in-
in cats treated with doxorubicin.
clude vomiting and diarrhea, hyperactivity, ataxia,
hyperthermia, muscle tremors, coma, and death.
Cardiac Pathophysiology
· Tachycardia is frequently noted, as well as
bradycardia.
 The mechanism by which doxorubicin causes
· ECG findings may include sinus tachycardia, si-
cardiotoxicity is unknown, but free radical gen-
 nus bradycardia, and ventricular arrhythmias.
eration and lipid membrane peroxidation may be
270
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
involved in the pathogenesis. The heart rate at the
· The mechanism for cardioprotection is not under-
time of drug administration may also determine
stood. One suggested mechanism is dexrazoxane
the degree of cardiac toxicity, with slower heart
prevents the formation of the free radicals and
rates associated with less toxicity.
subsequent lipid peroxidation that occurs from
· Histologic lesions consist of myocyte vacuoliza-
free iron and iron associated with the doxorubi-
tion, myocytolysis, and, occasionally, interstitial
cin-iron complex.
fibrosis.
· It is FDA approved for use in women with doxo-
rubicin administration against metastatic breast
Diagnosis
cancer.
· It has been shown in studies to protect mice, rats,
History and Physical Examination
hamsters, pigs and dogs.
· Clinical signs and physical findings are associ
· It appears to prevent cardiotoxicity, but does
ated with dilated cardiomyopathy and include
not protect against other toxic effects by
exercise intolerance, dyspnea and coughing, hep-
anthracyclines.
atomegaly, and ascites. Congestive heart failure
· Dexrazoxane ameliorates anthracycline extrava-
usually develops acutely.
sation lesions.
· The recommended dose ratio of dexrazoxane to
Electrocardiography
doxorubicin is 10:1. It is given as an infusion
· In dogs, ECG abnormalities include ST segment
Over 15 minutes, 30 minutes prior to using
and T wave changes, decreased QRS voltages,
doxorubicin.
intraventricular conduction abnonmalities, and
· Expense of the drug limits its routine use.
atrial and ventricular arrhythmias. ECG changes
are rare in cats treated with doxorubicin.
Infectious/Inflammatory
· ECG changes can occur acutely during drug ad-
Diseases
ministration. In this situation, stopping the drip
and then reinstituting it at a slower rate may re-
solve the problem.
· The heart can be involved in an inflammatory pro-
cess owing to many infectious agents. Myocardial
Radiography
cells, interstitium, or vessels may be affected.
·With dilated cardiomyopathy, radiography may
show cardiomegaly, pulmonary edema, pleural
Cardiac Pathophysiology
effusion, hepatomegaly, and ascites.
· Myocardial injury can occur from direct myo-
Echocardiography
cardial invasion of an infectious agent, from a
· The most consistent abnormalities with doxorubicin
myocardial toxin produced by the agent, or from
cardiotoxicity are increased left ventricular end-sys-
 a secondary immune-mediated reaction.
tolic intermal dimensions and decreased fractional
· Important causes of myocardial injury in small
shortening. As cardiac function deteriorates, pro-
animals include the following:
gressive left atrial enlargement can be seen.
· Bacterial myocarditis
· Pyogenic bacteria originate in septicemic
Therapy
states or from other septic foci.
· Clinical signs range from subclinical and
· If congestive heart failure develops, the patient
nonspecific (weight loss, lethargy) to ap-
should be treated accordingly. Unfortunately,
parent and specific (arrhythmias, conges-
the therapeutic response is poor. An ECG is rec-
tive heart failure).
ommended prior to each doxorubicin treatment,
· Viral myocarditis has been associated with
especially in dogs. If arrhythmias develop, doxo-
rubicin treatment should be discontinued. An
dogs, and with suspected but not yet identi-
echocardiogram is recommended after the third
fied viral pathogens in cats. Clinical abnor-
cycle in dogs or fifth cycle in cats, and every
 malities include cardiomegaly, arrhythmias,
 One to three cycles thereafter. Doxorubicin treat-
and nonspecific ECG abnonmalities. The
ment should be discontinued if contractility is
severity of the cardiac changes ranges from
impaired.
congestive heart failure with canine parvo-
· Protection from cardiomyopathy has been dem
virus to subclinical myocarditis with canine
 onstrated with dexrazox ane (Zinecard).
distemper virus.
Chapter 13
Cardiovascular Effects of Systemic Diseases
271
· Fungi and algae can infect the heart second-
Specialized Diagnostic Tests
ary to a disseminated disease process, often
· Commercial test kits are available, but titers
in conjunction with reduced host defense.
should be interpreted in view of the history, physi-
· Protozoal myocarditis can occur in dogs
cal examination, and clinical signs. False-positive
with canine trypanosomiasis (Trypanosoma
and false-negative titers are not uncommon.
cruzi) or in dogs and cats with toxoplasmosis
(Toxoplasma gondii).
Therapy
· Trypanosomiasis is discussed later.
· Toxoplasmosis can produce signs domi-
· Antibiotics are the treatment of choice for bor-
nated by the extent and severity of multior-
reliosis. Tetracycline, doxycycline, ampicillin,
gan system involvement.
or amoxicillin appear to be the most effective
first-line agents.
Therapy
·Humans with cardiac involvement are often
treated with IV ceftriaxone or cefotaxime.
· Treatment is often supportive and usually focused
· A 5- to 7-day course of anti-infammatory doses
 On the most prominent systemic manifestation of
of corticosteroids may be helpful for heart block
the disease process.
that does not rapidly resolve with appropriate an-
tibiotic therapy.
BORRELIOSIS (LYME DISEASE)
TRYPANOSOMIASIS
· Borreliosis is caused by the spirochete Borrelia
(CHAGAS DISEASE)
burgdorferi. Transmission is by ticks of the Ixodes
species. The incidence of cardiac involvement is
· Trypanosomiasis is a rare disease caused by the
unknown in animals. In humans, 10% of patients
protozoan T. cruzi. It usually occurs in young
with borreliosis have cardiac involvement. Bor-
dogs in the southeasterm United States. Transmis-
reliosis in animals is usually acute and cured by
 sion is via the bite of a reduvid bug.
 antibiotics. However, the prognosis may be poor
if second-stage disease involving the heart, kid-
Cardiac Pathophysiology
neys, or central nervous system (CNS) develops.
· During the acute stage (2 to4 weeks after infection),
Cardiac Pathophysiclogy
ture from myocardial cells. This causes myocardial
· Spirochetes have been isolated from myocardial
failure, conduction disturbances, and arrhythmias.
 biopsies in humans.
· If animals survive the acute stage, they may re-
· DCM has been reported in a few humans with
main asymptomatic for months. During this
Lyme disease. Cardiac damage may involve an
time, myocardial degeneration occurs, and DCM
immune-mediated mechanism.
develops. Myocardial damage during this stage
may be related to immune mechanisms or to the
Diagnosis
release of toxic parasitic products.
History and Physical Examination
Diagnosis
· Ticks may be found on dogs, or owners may re-
 port recent exposure to ticks in endemic areas.
History and Physical Examination
· Although nonspecific, clinical signs include an-
· Clinical signs during the acute stage are related
orexia, depression, and lameness.
to left- and (mainly) right-heart failure. Collapse
· Physical examination reveals fever, joint pain,
and sudden death may be noted in a previously
 and lymphadenopathy.
healthy dog. Gastrointestinal signs of anorexia
and diarrhea are also common. The lymph nodes
Electrocardiography
will be enlarged during the acute stage.
· The most common ECG finding in humans is AV
· Clinical manifestations during the chronic
block.
stage are associated with dilated cardiomyopa-
· Ectopic beats and ST segment abnormalities have
thy, with signs of right-sided heart failure often
 also been reported in humans.
predominating.  Various  cardiac arrhythmias
· AV block secondary to B. burgdorferi in the dog
also occur. The cardiomyopathy is not curable
has been reported in one case
and responds poorly to treatment.
272
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
·Physical findings associated with heart failure-
Diagnosis
pale mucous membranes, weak femoral pulses,
and ascites—can be seen during acute and
History and Physical Examination
chronic stages.
· The cardiac form of parvovirus often results in
sudden death.
Electrocardiography
· Some puppies that survived the acute phase de-
· Conduction disturbances, ectopic beats, and sus-
veloped heart failure weeks to months later, and
tained arrhythmias can be seen during the acute
died from cardiac arrhythmias or dilated cardio-
and chronic stages.
myopathy 6 to 12 months later.
· ECG reveals atrial or ventricular arhythmias.
Radiography
· Radiography may show cardiomegaly, pulmonary
Echocardiography
edema, pleural effusion, hepatomegaly, and ascites.
· In some infected dogs, echocardiography
revealed abnormalities consistent with di-
Echocardiography
lated cardiomyopathy, including decreased
· Echocardiography is normal during the acute
fractional shortening, left atrial and ventricu-
phase. As the disease becomes chronic, ventricu-
lar enlargement, and increased E-point septal
lar contractility and wall thickness decrease, and
separation.
cardiac chambers dilate.
Therapy
Specialized Diagnostie Tests
· Trypomastigotes may be seen on a blood smear
· Heart failure is managed with diuretics, digoxin,
-e saa uaed a 'as ane a sun
and ACE inhibitors.
asitemic 2 to 4 weeks after infection.
· Arrhythmias should be treated accordingly.
·Indirect fuorescent antibody, direct hemagglu-
tination, and complement fixation tests confinm
Miscellaneous Diseases
antibodies to T. cruzi.
· Blood cultures can be performed, but they are
time consuming.
SYSTEMIC LUPUS
ERYTHEMATOSUS
Therapy
· Cardiac disease due to systemic lupus erythema-
· Treatment of this disease is very unrewarding. By
tosus (SLE) is a common finding in humans, rare
the time the diagnosis is made, the disease is often
in dogs, and not reported in cats. Pericarditis is
no longer responsive to antiprotozoal medication.
the most common cardiac abnormality associ-
·Various therapeutic recommendations include
ated with SLE in humans. Other abnormalities
oral benzimidazole (5 mg/kg PO once daily for
in humans include myocarditis, congestive heart
2 months), allopurinol (30 mg/kg PO every 12
failure, and valvular heart disease. Ventricular ar-
hours for 100 days), or nifurtimox (2 to 7 mg/kg
rhythmias were reported in two dogs and heart
PO every 6 hours for 3 to 5 months).
failure in one dog diagnosed with SLE.
· Alert owners and veterinary staff to potential
zoonotic risk.
Cardiac Pathophysiology
· Pericarditis occurs secondary to vasculitis.
PA RVOVIRUS
· Myocarditis and endocarditis can also occur.
· Parvovirus has caused cardiac disease when it in-
fected puppies less than 2 weeks of age. Current
Diagnosis
cases of parvoviral myocarditis are very rare.
History and Physical Examination
· Clinical signs associated with heart disease are
Cardiac Pathophysiclogy
usually overshadowed by systemic signs of SLE.
· Viral multiplication occurs in rapidly dividing
· Clinical findings associated with arrhythmias or
myocardial cells, resulting in cell death and
heart failure may be present.
scarring.
· ECG may reveal ventricular arrhythmias.
Chapter 13
Cardiovascular Effects of Systemic Diseases
273
· Echocardiographic abnonmalities have not been
Therapy
reported in dogs or cats with SLE.
· Appropriate therapy for the CNS disease is ad-
Specialized Diagnostic Tests
vised. Treat arrhythmias as necessary.
· A diagnosis of SLE can be made with a positive 
ANA titer in conjunction with clinical signs.
GASTRIC DILATION-VOLVULUS
COMPLEX
Therapy
· Gastric dilation-volvulus complex (GDV) is a
· Immunosuppressive doses of prednisone (2 mg/
life-threatening emergency in the dog. It is most
kg PO every 12 hours) is advised. If there is no
-ads on 'sop psae-daap rasen un us
improvement after 7 days, more aggressive im-
cific etiology has been determined, but GDV is
munosuppressive therapy should be considered.
often associated with exercise following a large
· Pericardiocentesis is recommended if pericardial
meal. Cardiac arrhythmias occur in up to 40%
effusion is present.
of patients with GDV. Most arrhythmias are
ventricular in origin. Atrial arrhythmias have
also been reported. Arrhythmias usually occur
NEUROGENIC CARDIOMYOPATHY
within 36 hours of admission. The presence of
· CNS disease has been associated with myocar-
 arrhythmias does not worsen the prognosis.
dial lesions in clinical cases in all domestic spe-
cies except the cat. Experimentally, stimulation
Cardiac Pathophysiology
of specific areas of cat's brains can cause myo-
cardial necrosis. Most cases involve trauma to the
· The exact mechanism for the arrhythmias is un-
brain or spinal cord. CNS neoplasia, infection,
known. Theories include acid-base imbalances.
encephalomalacia, and ruptured intervertebral
autonomic imbalances, myocardial hypoxia.
 discs can also result in myocardial damage.
electrolyte imbalances, or a myocardial depres-
sant factor.
Cardiac Pathophysiology
Diagnosis
· Histologic lesions include degeneration or disin-
tegration of myocardial cells, with necrosis and
History and Physical Examination
mineralization. Scar formation may develop. The
· Clinical signs are restlessness, pacing, lethargy,
endocardium is most frequently involved, with
weakness, attempts to vomit, and abdominal
occ asional involvement of the subepicardium.
distention.
· Myocardial necrosis may be evident as early as
· The physical examination findings often include
3 days after the CNS damage, and generally is
pale mucous membranes, rapid heart rate, weak
present within 5 to 10 days in affected animals.
femoral pulses, pain upon abdominal palpation,
Cardiac arrhythmias are the most frequent clini-
distended, tympanic stomach, and signs associ-
cal sequela.
ated with shock.
· The myocardial lesions probably occur owing
to increased sympathetic tone and release of
Electrocardiography
catec holamines.
· The ECG may reveal ventricular and occasionally
atrial arrhythmias. The most common appears to
Diagnosis
be an accelerated idioventricular rhythm (AIR).
The terminology for this arrhythmia is still in dis-
History and Physical Examination
pute. Other terms for this ventricular rhythm are
· Clinical signs are usually referable to the CNS
slow ventricular tachycardia, fast idioventricular
disease and sometimes arrhythmias.
rhythm, or idioventricular tachycardia.
· The features of AIR are a wide, bizarre complex
Electrocardiography
rhythm, typically with a rate similar to the un-
· Atrial and ventricular arrhythmias, ST segment
derlying sinus rate. As the sinus rate slows, the
depression, prolonged QT interval, and T wave
ventricular rate may "capture" the heart rhythm.
abnormalities have been reported.
Commonly, fusion beats are seen as the rhythm
·The diagnosis is often made on necropsy.
waxes between the sinus and the ventricular
274
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
093G18
E
Figure 13-12.  Accelerated idioventricular rhythm. Beats 7 through 13 and the last four beats on the right are ventricular in
pue ieaq snuis aun jo pgy e sieaq uoisng aie tl pue g sieag wuu senuan paieiaiane ue juasaidai seag asaui uno
the ventricular focus.
rhythm. As the underlying sinus rate slows, the
· Sudden death associated with cardiac complica
ventricular rate may slow also (Figure 13-12)
tions can occur.
· ST segment and T wave changes may be evident.
Electrocardiography
Radiography
· Atrial and ventricular arrhythmias and ST seg-
· The stomach is gas-filled, distended, and often
ment changes have been reported.
rotated.
· The cardiac silhouette may be small owing to de-
Radiography
creased venous returm.
· Abdominal radiographs may reveal an increased
density, calcification, or gas in the area of the
Treatment
pancreas.
· Treatment should be directed toward gastric de-
Clinical Pathology
compression and shock therapy.
· Leukocytosis, hyperglycemia, high liver en-
· Any arrhythmias should be treated as needed.
zymes, and high amylase and lipase in serum and
peritoneal fuid are common findings in animals
with pancreatitis.
PANCREATITIS
· Pancreatitis is a disease most frequently diag-
Therapy
nosed in middle-aged, obese dogs and cats. Al-
though many factors have been associated with
· It is important to decrease pancreatic secretions
pancreatitis, the etiology is often unknown.
by withholding food and water.
· Supportive care should include fuid and electro-
Cardiac Pathophysiology
lyte replacement along with antibiotics.
· Cardiac arrhythmias should be treated as needed.
· A myocardial depressant factor is released from
although most arrhythmias will resolve spontane-
the pancreas, which can result in decreased myo-
ously with resolution of the underlying disease.
cardial contractility and arrhythmias.
· Activated pancreatic enzymes may also damage
TRAUMATIC MYOCARDITIS
the myocardium directly or play a role in throm-
bus formation, resulting in myocardial ischemia.
· The tenm traumatic myocarditis is a catchall phrase
· Acid-base and electrolyte imbalances may also
for arrhythmias that may occur following blunt
contribute to arrhythmias
trauma. The arrhythmias seen following blunt
trauma include supraventricular tachycardia, ven-
Diagnosis
tricular arrhythmias, or bradyarrhythmias. The
trauma does not have to occur directly to the chest.
History and Physical Examination
· Clinical signs are nonspecific and include vomit-
Cardiac Pathophysiology
ing, diarrhea, anorexia, and depression.
· Physical ex amination may reveal abdominal pain,
· Blunt trauma mechanisms include the following:
fever, dehydration, and shock.
(1) unidirectional force, (2) bidirectional force
Chapter 13
Cardiovascular Effects of Systemic Diseases
275
(compressive), (3) indirect force, (4) decelerative
total dose given over a 20-minute period should
force, and (5) concussive force.
not exceed 20 mg/kg. The constant-rate infusion
· The actual mechanism for the cause of the ar-
for procainamide is 20 to 50 μg/kg/min. Alterma-
rhythmias is not known. Direct damage to the
tively, oral or intramuscular dosing could be initi-
heart from the trauma does not have to occur to
ated following the IV dose if the dog is receiving
result in the arrhythmias. Autonomic imbalance
nothing by mouth.
Or reperfusion of ischemic tissue may have a
· Other therapies such as beta blockers or magne-
role.
sium (IV) have been suggested.
Diagnosis
Prognosis
· Various arrhythmias, both atrial and ventricular,
· Fortunately, the arrhythmias are generally not
 may be seen following trauma. The most com-
lethal. They have a tendency to resolve over the
mon appears to be an AIR. The terminology for
next 3 to 5 days, as the patient improves clini-
this arrhythmia is still in dispute. Other terms
cally. Generally, progression of the underlying
for this ventricular rhythm are slow ventricular
disorders, and not the arrhythmia, causes the
tachycardia, fast idioventricular rhythm, or idio-
 patient's demise.
ventricular tachycardia.
· If the patient requires antiarrhythmic therapy.
· The features of AIR are a wide, bizarre com-
this is usually discontinued prior to discharge, or
plex rhythm, typically with a rate similar to the
within several days of discharge.
underlying sinus rate. As the sinus rate slows,
the ventricular rate may "capture" the heart
rhythm. Commonly, fusion beats are seen as the
 Frequently Asked Questions
rhythm waxes between the sinus and the ven-
tricular rhythm. As the underlying sinus rate
How useful is the ECG in diagnosing electrolyte
slows, the ventricular rate may slow also (see
disturbances and what changes would you expect to
Figure 13-12).
see?
 The ECG can be helpful in raising suspicion regard-
ing the presence of some electrolyte abnormalities,
Therapy
most notably hyperkalemia, but it is not a very sensi-
tive test for detecting electrolyte abnormalities. One
· The main goal of therapy is supportive care for
of the reasons that the ECG is not very sensitive is that
the underlying disease: fuid therapy, control of
the morphology of the ECG complexes is infuenced
hemorrhage, oxygen therapy, analgesia, and cor-
by several electrolytes (e.g., sodium, potassium, cal-
rection of electrolyte imbalance.
cium) and further infuenced by the patient's acid
base status. As potassium levels rise above normal,
· Therapy for the ventricular arrhythmias may be
T waves become peaked with a narrow base, P wave
 necessary only if the tachycardia is persistent and
 amplitude decreases, and the P-R interval prolongs.
the clinician feels it has a role in the patient's hy-
If potassium is very high, QRS complexes widen and
 potension. If therapy is felt to be necessary, then
P waves disappear (atrial standstill) and with further
lidocaine by intravenous route is recommended
elevation in potassium, conduction delays lead to ven-
at 2 to 4 mg/kg as a bolus. The maximum dose
tricular fbrillation and ventricular asystole. Hypoka-
to be given over a 10-minute period is 10 mg/kg.
lemia produces prolonged QT intervals, U waves, and
Lidocaine can cause nausea, vomiting, hypoten-
ST segment depression, with possible ventricular and
supraventricular arrhythmias. Hypocalcemia may
sion, and seizures. If this suppresses the arrhyth-
cause QT interval prolongation, whereas hypercal-
mias, then a constant-rate infusion of lidocaine
cemia may shorten the QT segment and with severe
can be given at 40 to 100 μg/kg/min. A repeat 4-
hypercalcemia, bradycardia may develop.
to 8-mg bolus of lidocaine may be needed once.
A patient presents with a ventricutar arrhythmia. What
after starting the lidocaine infusion, if more than
systemic disturbances should be considered?
10 minutes elapses after injection of the original
V PCs may be seen with a variety of noncardiac condi-
test bolus. It is not unusual for the constant-rate
tions including pancreatitis, GDV, traumatic myocar-
infusion of lidocaine to lose its effect after several
ditis, splenic disease and neoplasia, cardiac masses,
hours.
hypokalemia, trypanosomiasis, shock, heat stroke and
· If lidocaine is not effective, then procainamide
 Pyrexia. Drugs and plant toxins such as doxorubicin,
methylxanthines (chocolate, theophylline), digoxin,
may be tried. The intravenous dose of procain-
sympathomimetics, oleander can all cause VPCs.
amide is 2 to 3 mg/kg over 2 to 3 minutes. The
Continued
276
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
A dog presents with echocardiographic evidence of
Kienle RD, Bruyette D, Pron PO: Effects of thyroid hor-
mone and thyroid dysfunction on the cardiovascular
myocardiat faiture based on depressed indices of sys-
tolic function (stroke volume, fractional shortening).
system, Vet Clin North Am 24:495, 1994.
What needs to be considered in addition to idiopathic
King JM, Roth L, Haschek WM: Myocardial necrosis
dilated cardiomyopathy?
secondary to neural lesions in domestic animals, J Am
Systolic function can be depressed secondary to several
Vet Med Assoc 180:144, 1982.
systemic diseases, nutritional deficiencies and toxic
Kintzer PP, Peterson ME: Primary and secondary canine
insults. Systemic abnormalities associated with de-
hypoadrenocorticism, Vet Clin North Am 27:349,
 pressed myocardial function include hypothyroidism,
1997.
pancreatitis, sepsis and shock and trypanosomiasis.
Loar AS, Susaneck SJ: Doxorubicin-induced cardiotox-
Taurine and L-carnitine deficiencies can lead to dilated
icity in five dogs, Semin Vet Med Surg 1:68, 1986.
cardiomyopathy. Adriamycin toxicity leads to myocar-
Melian C, Stefanacci J, Peterson ME, Kintzer PP:
dial failure. Note that in some animals, especially large
-inooo-Aeimeu ym saop u souug oudeioipey
breed dogs, fractional shortening may be slightly be-
ring primary hypoadrenocorticism, J Am Anim Hosp
low normal values established for smaller breeds and
Assoc 35(3):208-212, 1999.
 represent a normal variant.
Mount ME: Toxicology. In Ettinger SJ, ed: Textbook
A cat presents with left ventricular hypertrophy on the
of veterinary internal medicine, ed 3, Philadelphia,
echocardiogram. What systemic disturbances need to
1989, WB Saunders.
be considered along with idiopathic hypertrophic car-
Muir WM: Gastric dilatation-volvulus in the dog, with
diomyopathy?
emphasis on cardiac arrhythmias, J Am Vet Med As-
 Consider the possibility of systemic hypertension, acro-
soc 180:739, 1982.
 megaly, hyperthyroidism or infiltrative processes such as
Nichols R: Complications and concurrent disease as-
lymphoma. Dehydration causes a reduction in the size
 sociated with canine hyperadrenocorticism, Vet Clin
of the left ventricular lumen and as a result can give the
North Am 27:309, 1997.
impression of left ventricular hypertrophy.
O'Keefe DA, Sisson DD, Gelberg HB, et al: Systemic
toxicity associated with doxorubicin administration in
cats, J Vet Intern Med 7:309, 1993.
 Palumbo ME, Perri SF: Toad poisoning. In Kirk RW, ed:
SUGGESTED READINGS
Current veterinary therapy VIl1, Philadelphia, 1983,
WBSaunders
Appel MJ: Lyme disease in dogs and cats, Compend
Peterson ME, Taylor RS, Greco DS, et al: Acromegaly in
Cont Ed 12:617, 1990.
14 cats, J Vet Intern Med 4: 192, 1990.
Atkins C: The role of non-cardiac disease in the develop-
Rosenthal DS, Braunwald E: Hematologic-oncologic
 ment and precipitation of heart failure, Vet Clin North
disorders and heart disease. In Braunwald E, ed: Heart
Am Small Anim Pract 21:5, 1991.
disease, ed 4, Philadelphia, 1992, WB Saunders.
Atkins CE: Cardiac manifestations of systemic and meta-
Ruslander D: Heat stroke. In Kirk RW, ed: Current veter-
bolic disease. In Fox PR, Sisson D, Moise NS, eds:
inary therapy X1, Philadelphia, 1992, WB Saunders.
Textbook of canine and feline cardiology, Philadelphia,
Sennello KA, Schulman RL, Prosek R, Siegel AM:
1999, WB Saunders.
Systolic blood pressure in cats with diabetes mellitus,
 Barr SC: American trypanosomiasis in dogs, Compend
J Am Vet Med Assoc 223(2):198-201, 2003.
Cont Ed 13:745, 1991.
Sisson D, O'Grady MR, Calvert CA: Myocardial diseases 
Carson TL: Toxic gases. In Kirk RW, ed: Current veteri-
of dogs. In Fox PR, Sisson D, Moise NS, eds: Text-
nary therapy IX, Philadelphia, 1986, WB Saunders.
book of canine and feline cardiology, Philadelphia,
Chew DJ, Nagode LA, Carothers M: Disorders of calcium:
1999, WB Saunders.
hypercalcemia and hypocalcemia. In Di Bartola SP, ed:
Struble AL, Feldman EC, Nelson RW, Kass PH: System-
 Fluid therapy in small animal practice, Philadelphia,
ic hypertension and proteinuria in dogs with diabetes
1992, WB Saunders.
mellitus, J Am Vet Med Assoc 213(6):822-825, 1998.
DiBartola SP, deMorais HSA: Disorders of potassium:
Tilley LP, Bond BR, Patnaik AK, Liu S-K: Cardiovascu-
hypokalemia and hyperkalemia. In DiBartola SP ed:
lar tumors in the cat, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 17:1009,
 Fluid therapy in small animal practice, Philadelphia,
1981.
1992, WB Saunders.
Williams GH, Lilly LS, Seely EW: The heart in endocrine
Feldman EC, Nelson RW: Canine and feline endocrinology
and nutritional disorders. In Braunwald E, ed: Heart
and reproduction, ed 3, St Louis, 2004, WB Saunders.
disease, ed 5, Philadelphia, 1997, WB Saunders.
Fisch C: Electrolytes and the heart. In Hurst JW, ed: The
Yates RW, Weller RE: Have you seen the cardiopulmo-
heart, ed 5, New York, 1982, McGraw-Hill.
nary form of parvovirus infection? Vet Med April
Hooser SB,Beasley VR: Methylxanthine poisoning
1988, p 380.
(chocolate and caffeine toxicosis). In Kirk RW, ed:
Current veterinary therapy IX, Philadelphia, 1986,
WB Saunders.
Systemic Hypertension
Rosemary A. Henik and Scott A. Brown
INTRODUCTION
Hypertension may exist transiently due to fear or
This practice may occasionally identify a hy-
excitement, or be sustained and pathologic. Small
pertensive cat with subclinical kidney disease;
animal patients most commonly have secondary
however, it should be realized that the risk of a
hypertension, with an underlying disease triggering
false positive result (i.e., high BP measurement)
increased blood pressure (BP). A diagnosis of sys-
 increases when the prevalence of a disease is low
temic hypertension is established when reliable BP
(as in a healthy population).
measurements demonstrate a sustained elevation of
· BP measurement is advised in all cats with:
systolic (= 160 mm Hg) or diastolic (= 120 mm Hg)
· Kidney disease
BP. The prevalence of idiopathic, hypertension in 
·Endocrinopathy
dogs and cats is unknown.
· Compatible ocular signs (e.g., hemorrhage, de-
tachment, retinal vessel tortuosity)
· Neurologic signs (e.g., nystagmus, head tilt,
POPULATION AT RISK
other cranial nerve signs, or seizures)
· A cardiac murmur or gallop
Cats
· Radiographic cardiomegaly
·Chronic kidney disease, with or without protein-
·Echocardiographically determined cardiac wall
uria, and hyperthyroidism are the two most com-
hypertrophy (although this is not a consistent
mon causes of hypertension in cats. Although
change in hypertension)
effective resolution of hyperthyroidism may
reduce BP, some cats will become hypertensive
Dogs
only after therapy for this endocrinopathy.
· Occasionally, diseases such as hyperaldosteron-
·Chronic glomerular disease or tubulointerstitial
ism, pheochromocytoma, or other endocrine dis-
disease associated with proteinuria are most
eases may also be associated with hypertension.
 commonly associated with hypertension in dogs.
· Many cats that are not hypertensive initially will 
· Endocrine diseases including hyperadrenocor-
become hypertensive when fuid therapy, ste-
ticism, diabetes mellitus, pheochromocytoma,
roids, erythropoietin, or vasoconstricting drugs
 and hyperaldosteronism may be associated with
are given.
hypertension.
· Some clinicians are incorporating the routine
· Metabolic abnonmalities including obesity or
measurement of BP into geriatric wellness exams.
 hypercholesterolemia may result in hypertension.
277
278
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
·Resolution of the endocrinopathy may not restore
normal BP in dogs.
· BP measurement is advised in any dog with:
· Kidney disease
·Endocrinopathy
· Ocular signs or neurologic signs as described
previously
· Cardiac hypertrophy (although rare in the dog as
 an acquired change), which should also prompt
the clinician to perform BP measurement
KEY POINT
Chronic kidney disease and endocrinopathies
are most commonly associated with systemic
hypertension in cats and dogs.
Figure 14-1.
A cat with acute blindness due to systemic
CONSEQUENCES AND CLINICAL
hypertension secondary to an aldosterone-secreting adrenal
SIGNS OF HIGH BLOOD PRESSURE
tumor. This cat presented with a systolic blood pressure > 300
mm Hg. There are severe ocular hemorrhages bilaterally.
Ocular Signs
· Severe systemic hypertension can lead to ocular
injury. Findings associated with hypertensive in-
has been correlated to the degree of elevation.
jury include hemorrhage within the retina, vitre-
Potential renal pathologic changes induced by
Ous, or anterior chamber; retinal detachment and
systemic hypertension include both glomerular
atrophy; retinal edema; perivasculitis; retinal ves-
 and tubulointerstitial changes and can result in
sel tortuosity; and glaucoma.
 ischemia, necrosis, atrophy and exacerbation of
· A sudden onset of blindness due to retinal hem-
proteinuria. These gradual and additive changes
 orrhage and detachment is a common presenting
may be difficult to quantify in living animals
complaint (Figure 14-1).
with preexisting kidney disease, but systolic
hypertension at the time of presentation (> 160
Neurologic Signs
mm Hg) increases the odds of uremic crisis and
of death in dogs with chronic kidney disease.
· Signs consistent with cerebrovascular hemor-
Hypertension with systolic BP > 160 mm Hg is
rhage (head tilt, depression, seizures) have been
also likely to be a risk factor for progressive re-
seen clinically in cats and dogs with uncontrolled
nal damage in cats.
hypertension, and are often associated with a
· Proteinuria is perhaps the best marker that high
poor prognosis.
BP is injurious to the kidney. The presence of
· Rarely, cats suffering from severe systemic hy-
 microalbuminuria or an elevated urine protein-to-
pertension (systolic BP > 300 mm Hg) develop a
creatinine ratio (>0.5 in dogs, > 0.4 in cats) in a
syndrome of progressive stupor, head pressing, or
hypertensive animal (systolic BP > 160 mm Hg)
seizures that rapidly resolves with effective anti-
should be considered an indication of ongoing re-
hypertensive therapy. This syndrome is probably
nal damage.
due to cerebral edema caused by high intracapil-
lary hydrostatic pressure that develops once the
Cardiac Signs
systemic arterial pressure exceeds the autoregula-
tory range.
· Because the heart is working against an in-
creased arterial pressure (i.e., afterload), dia-
Renal Signs
stolic dysfunction, left ventricular hypertrophy
and secondary valvular insufficiency may de-
· Persistent elevation of systolic BP to values
velop. Changes may regress with antihyperten-
> 160 mm Hg is associated with progressive re-
sive treatment.
 nal injury in dogs and the severity of renal injury
· Cardiac murmurs or gallops commonly occur.
Chapter14
Systemic Hypertension 
279
· Congestive heart failure secondary to systemic
amplitude and frequency, and the auscultatory
hypertension is rare.
tec hnique is difficult in dogs and cats.
· Doppler fow meters detect blood fow as a
change in the frequency of refected sound (Dop-
MEASUREMENT OF BLOOD
pler shift) due to the motion of underlying red
PRESSURE
blood cells. BP is read by the operator from an
aneroid manometer connected to the occluding
Patient Selection
cuff placed proximal to the Doppler transducer.
· Currently there is no evidence to suggest that BP
· Devices utilizing the oscillometric technique
should be measured in all animals.
detect pressure fuctuations produced in the oc-
· BP should be measured in those animals that
cluding cuff resulting from the pressure pulse.
present with clinical signs attributable to high
 Machines using the oscillometric technique gen-
systemic arterial BP, such as blindness, hyphema,
erally determine systolic, diastolic, and mean ar-
seizures, ataxia, or sudden collapse (signs com-
terial pressures as well as pulse rate.
patible with cerebral vascular hemorrhage,
· Another device for measuring BP indirectly is the
edema, or stroke).
photoplethysmograph, which measures arterial
· Animals with azotemic kidney disease, hyperad-
volume by attenuation of infrared radiation, and
renocorticism, hyperthyroidism, pheochromocy-
is designed for use on the human finger. It can be
toma, mineralocorticoid-secreting tumor, marked
employed in cats and small dogs weighing less
 o    o s
than 10 kg.
 evaluated for hypertension.
· We have evaluated the ultrasonic Doppler and
oscillometric methods in conscious dogs and
cats. In both species, the oscillometric devices
Methods
tend to underestimate BP by increasing amounts
·BP may be measured by either direct or indirect
as pressure increases. Another problem with
methods. Direct BP measurement is the "gold
the oscillometric devices is the excessive time
standard," but is technically difficult in unsedated
required to obtain readings in cats. The major
 dogs and cats, may be painful to the patient, and
 limitation of the Doppler technique is the im-
may be associated with hematoma formation and
precise discrimination of the sounds designat-
other complications.
img the diastolic, and therefore mean, pressures.
· The indirect techniques are more applicable to
Owing to this fact, the Doppler method of BP
a clinical setting. as they require less restraint
measurement may be unreliable for the routine
and are technically easier to perform. Indirect
diagnosis and surveillance of patients with dia-
techniques of BP measurement include the aus-
stolic hypertension.
cultatory, ultrasonic Doppler, oscillometric, and
· On the basis of our studies in conscious animals,
photoplethysmographic methods.
devices using the Doppler principle are recom-
· All of the indirect techniques employ an inflat-
mended for use in cats; either the oscillometric
able cuff wrapped around an extremity. The
 or the Doppler devices are recommended in dogs.
 pressure in the cuff is measured with a manom-
For comparative purposes, the same device should
eter or pressure transducer. A squeeze bulb is
be used each time in an individual animal.
used to infate the cuff to a pressure in excess
of systolic BP, thereby occluding the underly-
ing artery. As the cuff is gradually defated,
KEY PoINT
changes in arterial fow are detected by one
of several means; the value for cuff pressure
Doppler is the preferred method of measure-
at various levels of deflation is then correlated
ment in unsedated cats; the oscillometric
technique may be used in dogs.
with systolic, diastolic, or mean BP. This de-
tection method varies among different indirect
methods.
· For the auscultatory method, a stethoscope is
Cuff Size and Placement
placed over the artery distal to the cuff, and the
listener hears a tapping sound when the inflation
· A complete range of pediatric cuff sizes should
pressure falls below systolic pressure. In animals,
be available for an optimal patient limb circum-
the arterial (Korotkoff) sounds are low in both
ference to cuff width ratio.
280
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
Figure 14-2.
Demonstration of the technique to obtain
Figure 14-3.
Demonstration of cuff placement over the cra-
systemic blood pressure measurements using a Doppler trans-
nial tibial artery in a dog. The oscillometric unit is most reliable
ducer in a cat.
in medlium- and large-breed dogs.
Environment and Personnel
· For dogs, a cuff width that measures 40% of
the circumference of the limb should be used;
· Provide an environment that is quiet and away
for cats, a width of 30% to 40% of the limb
from other animals.
circumference should be used. The cuff width
· The owner may be present to help calm the
should be noted in the medical record for future
animal.
reference.
· Allow for a quiet equilibration time for the ani-
· An oversized cuff may give erroneously low re-
mal of 5 to 15 minutes.
cordings; an undersized cuff may give errone-
· The same individual (preferably a technician)
ously high recordings. If the ideal cuff width is
 should perform all BP measurements following a
midway between two available sizes, the larger
standard protocol.
 cuff should be used, because it will theoretically
· Measurements should be obtained only in a pa-
produce the least error.
tient that is calm, minimally restrained, and mo-
· The cuff may be placed around the brachial, me-
tionless. A blanket on the foor or table will allow
dian, or cranial tibial artery, or around the medial
the patient to be more comfortable.
coccygeal artery.
· Generally, for the Doppler technique, the cuff is
Record Keeping
placed over the median artery, and the transducer
is placed between the carpal and the metacarpal
·A standard form for recording results of the
pads (Figure 14-2). Clipping the hair and apply-
BP measurement should be developed for the
ing acoustic gel at the site of transducer place-
medical record. The following data should
ment may enhance the signal, but clipping the
always be noted, along with each measurement
hair may increase stress-artifact.
obtained:
· For the oscillometric technique, our studies dem-
· Cuff size (30% to 40% of limb circumference
onstrated that the coccygeal or cranial tibial ar-
in cats; 40% in dogs)
tery in dogs may provide more reliable values
· Limb used (including left vs. right)
than other sites (Figure 14-3).
· Time of day
· For comparative purposes, the same site for cuff 
· Time of medication
placement should be used each time in an individ-
· Technique used (i.e., Doppler or oscillometric)
ual animal and recorded in the medical record.
· Degree of agitation, restlessness, or limb movement
· The cuff should be placed at the level of the aor-
· Technician performing measurement
tic valve. If not, a compensation can be made for
· If a different room or unusual environmental con-
gravitational effect, with a 1.0 mm Hg rise in BP
ditions exist (i.e., long wait prior to BP measure-
expected for each 1.3 cm of vertical distance be-
ment with noisy dogs present), then this should
tween the level of the cuff and the level of the
be also noted if higher than normal values are
aortic valve.
obtained.
Chapter14
Systemic Hypertension
281
Techniques
· Medium- and large-breed dogs are positioned on
a blanket on the foor with the technician, who
Doppler
 snugly wraps the cuff as described previously.
· In cats, a Doppler fow meter is used exclusively,
· The oscillometric unit is activated, and the same
whereas dogs can be evaluated with either the Dop-
number of readings is obtained as described
pler or oscillometric unit. Cuff size is determined
above for cats. If for any reason the oscillometric
after measuring the foreleg above the carpus, and
tec hnique yields spurious results (as in very small
the cuff is snugly wrapped around the foreleg and
dogs), the Doppler method is used.
secured with a piece of tape.
· The average of all values obtained, or the average
· The position of the patient and cuff should be one
of all values obtained after the highest and lowest
that is well tolerated with the cuff at, or close to,
 pressure readings are discarded, should be taken
the level of the right atrium. An excellent blood
as the final value. Each measurement, in addi-
fow signal can usually be obtained from the me-
tion to the information mentioned previously in
dian artery between the carpal and metacarpal
"Record Keeping,' should be recorded.
pads by wetting down the hair with alcohol, fol-
· If results are borderline or inconsistent,repeat the
lowed by the application of coupling gel and the
measurement session on another day.
10 MHz (i.e., pediatric) Doppler transducer.
· The transducer should be aligned parallel to
Anxiety-Induced Artifact: The “White
blood fow, so the wire from the transducer is
Coat Effect'
parallel with the limb (i.e., it emerges from un-
 der the paw). Unlike in the operative setting, the 
The visit to the veterinary clinic, hospitalization,
transducer is held in place, not taped.
a strange environment, restraint in the examina
· The cuff is infated to a pressure 30 to 40 mm
tion room, clipper noise and vibration, cuff place-
Hg higher than that required to obliterate the
ment, cuff inflation, and other unusual stimuli in
pulse, and then slowly deflated (about 2 to 5 mm
the setting of a veterinary hospital may induce
Hg/second). A slower heart rate requires a slower
anxiety in an animal during BP measurement.
deflation time in order to accurately determine
As a consequence, a falsely elevated value for
systolic pressure. Too slow of a defation time,
BP may be obtained secondary to catecholamine
however, will result in discomfort to the animal.
release associated with this anxiety. The magni-
·The first sound heard as blood begins to fow
tude of this effect may be minimized by doing
through the artery is the systolic pressure. The
the following:
cuff should be completely defated prior to re-
· Obtain BP measurements prior to a physical ex-
inflation for the next measurement.
amination or other manipulations to which the
· Four to six measurements are advised over a 5-
animal may object.
to 10-minute period because BP often falls with
· Perform all measurements in a quiet room utiliz-
repeated measurements as the patient adjusts to
ing a calm and reassuring manner.
the feel of the cuff inflating and deflating. The
· Allow the animal to acclimate to its surround-
first measurement should be discarded and the
ings for at least 5 minutes before obtaining BP
average of three to five consecutive, consistent
measurements.
indirect measurements should be obtained. Any
measurement obtained during limb movement
CHOICE OF ANIMALS TO TREAT
should be discarded.
· If BP measurements are thought to be borderline
There is a clear association between ocular injury
or falsely high, the animal may be hospitalized
and marked systemic hypertension in dogs and
for several hours in a quiet room to acclimate to
cats. However, most other adverse effects of sys-
the environment and BP measurement repeated.
temic hypertension are theorized on the basis of ex-
trapolation from clinical studies in humans, or from
Oscillometric Techniques
experimental studies in laboratory rodents.
· In dogs, the oscillometric method gives reliable sys-
tolic results, with the addition of diastolic and mean
Treatment Guidelines
arterial pressures. The rear limb is preferred for the
oscillometric technique in dogs in our hospital, and
· In light of the uncertainty and the difficulties
the circumference of the metatarsus (i.e., below the
associated with BP measurement in dogs and
hock) is measured for cuff width detenmination.
cats, only those animals with severe elevations
282
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
of indirectly measured BP, or with clinical
· If an agent or combination of agents is in-
abnonmalities directly attributable to hyperten
completely effective, the dosage(s) may be
sive injury, should be considered candidates for
increased, or additional agents may be added.
treatment.
Often, especially in dogs, multiple agents are
· The authors consider antihypertensive treatment
used concurrently.
to be indicated in any dog or cat with a sustained
· It is usually not possible to restore BP to nonmal
systolic BP > 200 mm Hg or a diastolic BP > 120
      s
mm Hg, regardless of other clinical findings.
should be the veterinarian's goal to lower the BP
· In both species, an animal with a systolic/diastolic
to < 160/100 mm Hg, with emphasis given to the
BP that consistently exceeds 160/100 mm Hg
systolic value.
should be considered for treatment if clinical
evaluation has identifed abnonmalities (e.g.,
Duration of Treatment
retinal lesions or chronic kidney disease) that
could be caused or exacerbated by systemic
· The diagnosis of hypertension associated with
hypertension.
chronic kidney disease necessitates lifelong an-
· In animals in which the BPis moderately elevated
tihypertensive treatment, with periodic dosage
(systolic/diastolic BP that consistently exceeds
adjustments based upon BP measurements.
160/100 mm Hg), but no clinical abnormalities
· Hypertension associated with hyperthyroidism or
related to systemic hypertension are identified,
hyperadrenocorticism can be expected to resolve
the rationale for therapy is less clear. Currently.
within 1 to 3 months following effective treat-
some clinicians recommend treatment for ani-
ment of the underlying condition, unless chronic
mals in this range, whereas others do not.
kidney disease is also present. Occasionally, dogs
· Animals with no clinical signs and mildly el-
with well-controlled hyperadrenocorticism re-
evated BP (systolic BP 120 to 160 mm Hg and
main hypertensive.
diastolic BP 80 to 100 mm Hg) should not be
· In other patients, the duration of treatment can-
treated.
not be predicted, but it may be required lifelong.
 Periodic dosage adjustments based upon BP mea-
surements are indicated.
KEY POINT
Animals with normal BP or in which Bp has not
Dietary Therapy
been measured should not be treated with an-
 tihypertensive agents.
· Though poorly studied, a low-sodium diet that
provides less than 0.25% sodium on a dry-weight
 basis may be introduced. Dietary sodium restric-
tion may be employed as a first step if hyperten-
ANTIHYPERTENSIVETHERAPY
sion is mild (i.e., < 170 mm Hg) and there is no
General
target organ damage present.
· In animals with chronic kidney disease and hy-
· Systemic arterial BP is the product of the cardiac
 pertension, it may be more important to maintain
output and the total peripheral resistance, so anti
adequate caloric intake rather than to insist that a
hypertensive therapy is generally aimed at reduc-
low-sodium diet be fed. Therefore, drug therapy
ing cardiac output, total peripheral resistance, or
is instituted first, and when BP is stabilized, the
both.
animal may be switched to a lower sodium diet.
· Therapy may be loosely classified as dietary and
· Obesity can elevate systemic arterial pressure
pharmacologic.
in human beings and dogs and, perhaps, in cats.
· Treatment is generally conducted by sequential
Consequently, weight loss is desirable in obese,
trials. Generally, dosage adjustments or changes
hypertensive animals.
in treatment should be instituted no more fre-
quently than every 2 weeks, unless extreme hy-
Pharmacologic Agents: General
present.
· Medical treatment of hypertension in dogs and
· When using pharmacologic agents, a wide range
cats has, until recently, been extrapolated from
of dosages should be considered, with initial dos-
human protocols. Recommendations for medical
ages at the low end of the range.
therapy have included:
Chapter14
 Systemic Hypertension
283
· Vasodilators (e.g., angiotensin-converting en-
of an ACEI over other antihypertensive agents in
zyme inhibitors [ACEI])
animals with pre-existing kidney disease. How.
· Dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers
ever, the co-administration of a calcium chan-
·Hydralazine
nel antagonist and an ACEI may block adverse
·Phenoxybenzamine
effects of calcium channel antagonism alone. In
·Prazosin
addition, because calcium channel antagonists
· Diuretics
are usually very effective in cats with systemic
· Beta blockers
hypertension, they should be considered appro-
· These agents are generally given in concert with
priate agents for use in affected cats until further
dietary sodium restriction.
information regarding long-tenm effects on renal
· In animals with systemic hypertension and kid-
function in cats becomes available.
ney disease, ACEI are the preferred initial choice
· Direct-acting arterial vasodilators, such as hydral-
in dogs, and ACEI and amlodipine are the pre-
azine (0.5 to 2.0 mg/kg twice a day), are added to
ferred initial choice in cats, because of the reno-
ACEI and amlodipine for refractory hypertension.
protective effects of the ACEI.
Hydralazine acts quickly, resulting in a rapid de-
crease in pressure, and therefore may result in clin-
ical signs of hypotension (e.g., tachycardia, ataxia,
Vasodilators
syncope, lethargy). Hydralazine should always be
· Vasodilators are considered frst line drugs for
started at the low end of the dose and starting at half
hypertension in veterinary patients
the recommended dose is useful in animals already
 ACE inhibitors (e.g., enalapril 0.5 mg/kg PO
receiving ACEI. Because the renin-angiotensin-
twice a day or benazepril 0.5 mg/kg once or twice
aldosterone system is activated by hydralazine,
a day) will lower BP in many hypertensive dogs. In
ACEI, and possibly spironolactone to counteract
cats, the role of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone
aldosterone, should be given with hydralazine.
· Phenoxybenzamine (0.25 mg twice a day in dogs
sion is less clear, but ACEI are administered for
 0r 2.5 mg twice a day in cats), an alpha-receptor
renoprotection. Benazepril may be every 24 hours
antagonist, lowers systemic arterial BP by lower-
given to those animals with kidney disease due to its
ing peripheral vascular resistance. It is indicated
predominantly biliary excretion, especially in cats.
for those animals diagnosed with pheochromocy-
·Amlodipine besylate(0.625 mg every 24 hours
toma and is given with a beta blocker to block the
in cats or 0.1 to 0.5 mg/kg every 24 hours in
effects of catecholamines on the cardiovascular
dogs), a long-acting dihydropyridine calcium an-
system.
tagonist, reduces total peripheral resistance and
has been used successfully as a single agent in
KEY PoINT
hypertensive cats. Larger cats (more than 4 kg)
 ACEl are first line drugs for hypertensive dogs,
may require 1.25 mg orally once daily. BP de-
creases significantly during amlodipine treatment,
and amlodipine is the antihypertensive of
choice in cats (with the addition of benazepril 
and significant adverse effects (i.e., azotemia, hy-
to amlodipine if kidney disease is present).
pokalemia, and weight loss) are not frequently
identified. Because amlodipine has a slow onset
of action, adverse effects such as hypotension
Beta Blockers
and loss of appetite are usually avoided. In dogs
with chronic kidney disease, a dosage of 0.05 mg/
· Beta blockers exert an antihypertensive effect by
kg given orally once daily lowered BP in initial
reducing cardiac output and decreasing renin re-
pharmacokinetic trials, but in many spontane-
lease, but their efficacy in hypertensive veterinary
ously hypertensive dogs, amlodipine appears to
patients is poor. In hyperthyroid, hypertensive
be less effective.
cats, a cardioselective beta-l antagonist, such as
·Recently, concem has been raised about the po-
atenolol, may be given at a dosage of 6.25 mg
tential for deleterious effects of calcium channel
twice a day (or approximately 1.0 mg/kg twice
antagonists. These concems arise from studies in
a day) for cats to block the cardiotoxic effects of
Ainfun ieuau yum ui ssop onaqep pue sun
thyroid hormone. The addition of amlodipine,
 Or proteinuria is exacerbated during therapy with
however, may be needed to lower BP effectively.
calcium channel antagonists. In addition, there
Beta blockers are not used routinely in hyperten-
are theoretical rationales for preferring the use
sive dogs unless pheochromocytoma is present.
284
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
Diuretics
hypertension should be instituted soon after
 presentation to facilitate the eventual transition to
 Spironolactone an aldosterone-antagonist, is
long-tenm maintenance therapy.
both a diuretic at higher doses (1 to 2 mg/kg PO
twice a day), and neurohormone blocker at lower
FOLLOW-UP CARE AND
doses. It is a potassium-sparing diuretic, and
ADDITIONAL MEDICATIONS
limits the effects of excess aldosterone (hypoka-
lemia, hypertension) associated with hyperaldo-
· In all animals treated for systemic hyperten-
steronism. Aldosterone rebounds in the face of
sion, the routine examination should include a
ACEI treatment; therefore, spironolactone may
fundic examination, evaluation of any underly-
limit fibrosis and fuid retention associated with
ing diseases, and measurement of body weight,
elevated aldosterone levels.
BP, and serum concentrations of creatinine and
· Loop diuretics (furosemide, 2 to 4 mg/kg PO
electrolytes. The owner should be questioned
twice a day in dogs, and 1 to 2 mg/kg PO twice
for evidence of drug toxicity, which may include
-     a r   
mals. These agents lower extracellular fuid vol-
 anorexia. Animals on multiple drug regimes are
ume and cardiac output. The thiazide diuretics,
more likely to exhibit adverse effects than are
which are commonly used as first line drugs in
those on a single antihypertensive agent.
hypertensive people, may cause a profound de-
· Once BP is controlled, the animal should be
crease in serum potassium concentration.
evaluated at 3-month intervals. A complete blood
· Adverse effects include dehydration, volume
count, biochemical panel, and urinalysis should
depletion, and worsening azotemia. Hypokale-
be evaluated at least once every 6 months.
mia may occur with loop diuretics as well as with
  au s is  -
the thiazides, so plasma potassium and creatinine
ease. Other treatments for chronic kidney disease
concentrations should be carefully monitored in
should accompany antihypertensive therapy, as
all animals with chronic kidney disease that are
appropriate. Potassium supplementation is often
receiving a diuretic.
needed in cats with chronic kidney disease. Be-
cause animals with renal dysfunction generally
 have impaired ability to adapt to sudden changes
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
in sodium input, the administration of electrolyte
OF HYPERTENSION
solutions can lead to volume overload, worsened
systemic hypertension, and pleural effusion (or
Patient Selection
peripheral edema) in animals with renal azo-
· Animals with neurologic signs or severe ocular
temia. Similarly, a sudden reduction in dietary
 manifestations of hypertension, such as retinal de.
sodium intake in an animal with renal azotemia
tachment, warrant aggressive treatment. Sodium
can lead to extracellular fuid volume depletion.
nitroprusside (1.0 to 10.0 μg/kg/min constant-
Some treatments, such as the administration of
rate infusion), an arterial (predominantly) and
recombinant erythropoietin to elevate hemato-
venous vasodilator acting as a donor of nitric
crit, may exacerbate systemic hypertension and
oxide inside vascular smooth muscle cells, can be
should not be used until systemic hypertension is
used for the initial treatment of animals in hyper-
controlled.
tensive crisis. This drug must be given by con
stant-rate infusion, can be titrated very precisely
 Frequently Asked Questions
according to the BP response, and usually does
Because dogs are often more refractory to the effects
not cause refex tachycardia. Amiodipine is an
of antihypertensive treatment than cats, what is a
excellent choice, especially in cats.
reasonable stepwise approach to antihypertensive
· If a constant rate of infusion and intensive moni-
therapy in dogs?
toring are not available in a veterinary hospital,
Hypertensive dogs (i.e., those with a sustained systolic
then hydralazine and furosemide can be used
BP > 160 mm Hg) are likely to be proteinuric given
in combination. The hydralazine dose can be re-
 the underlying diseases associated with systemic hy-
pertension in that species.
peated after 2 hours to titrate the effect.
· ACE inhibitors (e.g, enalapril, benazepril, etc)
· Regardless of initial therapy chosen for the man-
have been shown to decrease proteinuria and cause
 agement of an acute hypertensive crisis, a drug
balanced vasodilation, therefore they are usually the
of choice for long-term management of systemic
Continued
Chapter14
Systemic Hypertension
285
starti ng drug in the treatment of cani ne hypertension.
· Perhaps the best index of hypertensive damage
 Enalapril (0.5 mg/kg) is given twice daily, and BP is
   s   go
of
measured after 2 weeks of treatment.
microalbuminuria or an elevated urine protein-
· If hypertension is still present, then amlodipine (0. 1
to-creatinine ratio (>0.5 in dogs, >0.4 in cats) is
 mg/kg PO every 24 hours) can be administered with
generally an indication for the use of an ACEI (e.g.,.
the enalapril. This combination of an ACE inhibitor
enalapril or benazepril 0.5 mg/kg once daily in cats
and a calcium channel blocker may be effective;
or once to twice daily in dogs).
however, sustained hypertension watrants 
the
addition of drugs that act by different mechanisms
 of action.
· Hydralazine, a direct-acting arterial vasodilator,
can be given at a starting dose of 0.5 mg/kg PO
twice a day, and slowly titrated up in 0.5 mg/kg
increments to a maximum dose of 2.0 mg/kg. BP
and serum creatinine should be monitored with
each incremental increase in dose.
· Because hydralazine activates the renin-angiotensin-
SUGGESTED READINGS
aldosterone axis, and aldosterone concentrations
Binns SH, Sisson DD, Buoscio DA, et al.: Doppler ul-
increase in spite of ACEI therapy, the addition of 
spironolactone (1 to 2 mg/kg PO twice a day) is
trasonographic, oscillometric sphygmomanometric,
 ad vised to block the effects of aldosterone.
and photoplethysmographic techniques for noninva-
· If BP remains above 160 mm Hg, then amlodipine
sive blood pressure measurement in anesthetized cats,
may be increased to 0.1 mg/kg twice a day (or 0.2
J Vet Intern Med 9:405, 1995.
mg/kg once daily), or a beta blocker may be added
Bodey AR, Michell AR, Bovee KC, et al.: Comparison
in order to decrease heart rate and renin release.
of direct and indirect (oscillometric) measurements of
arterial blood pressure in conscious dogs, Res Vet Sci
Cats and dogs with chronic kidney disease often
61:17, 1996.
exhibit systemic hypertension. What is the causative
Brown CAJ, Munday J, Mathur S, et al: Hypertensive en-
factor in this relationship and how should these
cephalopathy in cats with reduced renal function, Vet
animais be managed? How can you tell if hyperten-
Pathol 42:642-649, 2005.
sion is damaging to the kidney?
This has often been referred to as a chicken-and-egg
Brown S, Finco D, Navar L: Impaired renal autoregula-
question but it is more properly seen as an example
tory ability in dogs with reduced renal mass, J Am
of a complex positive feedback loop that complicates
Soc Nephro1 5:1768, 1995
therapy in animals affected with both problems. High
Brown S, Atkins C, Bagley R, et al.: Guidelines for the
identification, evaluation, and management of systemic
systemic arterial BP produces baro trauma within the
 microvasculature of the kidney, effectively destroying
hypertension in dogs and cats: ACVIM Consensus
renal tissue over time (weeks to months). On the other
Statement, J Vet Intern Med 21:542-558, 2007.
hand, chronic kidney disease produces abnormalities
Brown SA, Brown CA: Single-nephron adaptations to
in body fuid volumes and can alter neurohumoral
partial renal ablation in cats, Am J Physiol 269:R 1002,
control of BP. These factors combine to make high BP
1996.
relatively common in dogs and cats with chronic kid-
Brown SA, Finco DR, Crowell WA, et al.: Single-nephron
ney disease. Furthermore, it is still generally accepted
adaptations to partial renal ablation in the dog, Am J
that something has to be wrong with the kidney for
Physio1 258:F495, 1990.
sustained systemic hypertension to be present.
Brown SA, Walton CL, Crawford P, et al.: Long-term ef-
· Interestingly, in the short-term, high BP tends to
fects of antihypertensive regimens on renal hemody-
improve glomerular filtration rate. This is why the
namics and proteinuria, Kidney Int 43:1210, 1993.
level of azotemia should al ways be assessed shortly
Cowgill LD: Systemic hypertension. In Kirk RW, ed:
(5 to 14 days) after any changes in antihypertensive
Current veterinary therapy IX, Philadelphia, 1986,
therapy.
WB Saunders.
· Furthermore, vasodilators with intrarenal effects are
Cowgill LD, Kallet AJ: Recognition and management
often preferred for antihypertensivetherapyin animals
with kidney disease, largely because the vasodilatory
-     o    go
rent veterinary therapy V1l, Philadelphia, 1983,
effect may help to preserve renal function.
WB Saunders.
● Typical agents to select for initial therapy when both
soop ul usid ane eioze ei pue uoisuendy
Finco DR: Association of systemic hypertension with
would be an ACEI such as enalapril or benazepril
l r siney leuai paonpun ym siop ui A1nfut peui
(0.5 mg/kg once to twice daily) and in cats a calcium
Intern Med 18:289, 2004.
channel blocker such as amlodipine (0.1 mg/kg PO
Henik R, Snyder P, Volk L: Treatment of systemic hyper-
every 24 hours).
tension in cats with amlodipine besylate, J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 33:226, 1997.
286
SECTION II Cardiovascular Disease
Jacob F, Polzin DJ, Osborne CA, et al.: Association be-
temic hypertension in dogs: five cases (1981-1983),
tween initial systolic blood pressure and risk of devel-
J Am Vet Med Assoc 193:486, 1988.
oping a uremic crisis or of dying in dogs with chronic
Ortega TM, Feldman EC, Nelson RW, et al.: Systemic
renal failure, J Am Vet Med Assoc 222:322, 2003.
arterial blood pressure and urine protein/creatinine
Jensen J, Henik RA, Brownfield M, et al: Plasma renin
ratio in dogs with hyperadrenocorticism, J Am Vet
activity, angiotensin I and aldosterone in feline hyper-
Med Assoc 209:1724, 1996.
tension associated with chronic renal disease, Am J
 Remillard RL, Ross JN, Eddy JB: Variance of indirect blood
Vet Res 58:535, 1997.
pressure measurements and prevalence of hypertension
Kallet A, Cowgill L, Kass P: Comparison of blood pres-
in clinically normal dogs, Am J Vet Res 52:561, 1991.
sure measurements in dogs by use of indirect oscil-
Ross LA: Hypertension and chronic renal failure, Semin
lometry in a veterinary clinic versus at home, J Am
Vet Med Surg Small Anim 7:221, 1992.
Vet Med Assoc 210:651, 1997.
Snyder PS, Henik RA: Feline systemic hypertension.
Labato MA, Ross LA: Diagnosis and management of hy-
Proc Twelfth Annual Vet Med Forum. San Francisco,
pertension. In August JR, ed: Consultations in feline
1994, p. 126.
internal medicine, Philadelphia, 1991, WB Saunders.
Stiles J, Polzin DJ, Bistner SI: The prevalence of retinop-
 u sy nss sns  
athy in cats with systemic hypertension and chronic
cats, J Vet Intern Med, 8:79, 1994.
 renal failure or hyperthyroidism, J Am Anim Hosp
Littman MP, Robertson JL, Bovee KC: Spontaneous sys-
Assoc 30:564, 1994.
SECTION III
Treatment of Cardiovascular
Disease
15. Pathophysiology and Therapy
18. Emergency Management and
 of Heart Failure
Critical Care
Keith N. Strickiand
Steven G. Cole and Kenneth j. Drobatz
16. Treatment of Cardiac Arrhythmias
19. Anesthesia of the Cardiac Patient
and Conduction Disturbances
Thomas K. Day
Marc S. Kraus, Anna R. M. Geizer, and
20. Cardiac Surgery
Sydney Moise
E. Christopher Orton
17. Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation
 21. Pacemaker Therapy
Steven G. Cole and Kenneth j. Drobatz
Janice Mcintosh Bright
MR
0.5
[m/s]
6F
0.5
.1
Pathophysiology and Therapy
of Heart Failure
Keith N. Strickland
INTRODUCTION
· Heart failure results in a reduction in the previ-
ously described functions of the cardiovascular
Definitions
system. If blood pressure and cardiac output are
· Heart disease is any structural (microscopic or
 not maintained, or if venous and capillary pres-
macroscopic) abnormality of the heart that may
sures are markedly increased, then death can
or may not res ult in heart failure.
occur within hours to weeks (depending on the
· Heart failure is the pathophysiologic state that
severity of the abnormality). Heart failure can be
 occurs when the heart is unable to function at a
associated with systolic or diastolic dysfunction.
level commensurate with the requirements of the
metabolizing tissues or can only do so at elevated
filling pressures.
HEART FAILURE
· Preload is the degree of muscle fiber stretch just
Pathophysiology
prior to contraction. This correlates to the volume
of blood within the ventricle just prior to contrac-
 Our understanding of the progression from asymp-
tion (cardiac preload, venous retum)
tomatic heart disease to symptomatic heart failure
· Afterload is the load against which a muscle ex-
 has changed from the traditional concept of bio-
erts its contractile force. Cardiac afterload refers
mechanical dysfunction to a concept emphasizing
to the blood pressure the ventricle must overcome
neuroendocrine dysfunction secondary to chronic
 in order to eject blood.
biomechanical dysfunction.
· The current model embodies the idea that some
cardiac damage or dysfunction results in chroni-
Overview
cally altered hemodynamics that lead to activa-
· The function of the cardiovascular system is
tion  of  neurohumoral  mechanisms  designed
to maintain normal arterial blood pressure and
to promote cardiac function and tissue perfu-
fow (cardiac output) while maintaining normal
sion. Chronic activation of these compensatory
venous and capillary pressures during rest and
mechanisms leads to progressive cardiovascular
exercise. This function is necessary to provide
dysfunction culminating in life-threatening con-
adequate blood fow for oxygen and nutrient
 gestive heart failure (CHF) low-output failure or
delivery to vital tissues (such as the brain, the
sudden death.
heart, and the kidneys) as well as for the re-
· Cardiac dysfunction that leads to the clinical
moval of metabolic waste products from these
syndrome of heart failure can be subdivided
tissues.
into systolic and diastolic dysfunction. Systolic
288
Chapter 15
Pathophysiology and Therapy of Heart Failure
289
dysfunction occurs when the ability of the heart
Valvular Insufficiency
to pump blood in a forward direction is impaired.
Components of systolic function include myocar-
· Valvular insufficiency is one of the most com-
dial contractility, valvular competence, preload,
mon causes of systolic dysfunction encoun-
afterload, and heart rate.
tered in veterinary medicine. Incompetency
of an atrioventricular valve (endocardiosis,
Phases of Heart Failure
endocarditis, congenital malformation) allows
retrograde ejection (regurgitation) of blood
· Phase 1: Cardiac Injury
into the corresponding atrium during systole,
· Phase 2: Compensatory mechanisms
reducing forward fow and decreasing cardiac
· Phase 3: Cardiac failure with clinical signs of car-
output. Severe regurgitation also increases
diac dysfunction
atrial and ventricular filling pressures, with the
risk of CHF.
KEY POINtS
· Valvular insufficiency can be primary (myxoma-
· CHF occurs when cardiac diastolic flling
tous degeneration) or secondary (associated with
pressures result in elevated venous and
other conditions that alter valvular function such
capillary hydrostatic pressures with subse-
as ventricular hypertrophy, ischemia, etc.).
quent edema formation. Therapy for CHF is
 directed toward reducing cardiac diastolic
Excessive Afterload
filling pressures so that edema fluid can be
mobilized.
· Normally, an abrupt increase in afterload causes
 Low-output failure occurs when cardiac
a positive inotropic effect (Anrep effect). How-
function does not produce adequate car-
ever, when the hemodynamic overload is severe
diac output to maintain blood pressure and
or chronic, myocardial contractility may be de-
tissue perfusion.
pressed. Chronically increased afterload leads to
a reduction in the rate of ejection and the amount
of blood ejected at any given preload, and in-
Myocardial Failure
creased myocardial oxygen consumption with
· Impaired contractility may occur with primary
the risk of ischemic damage.
heart disease (idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy
· Pulmonary/systemic hypertension or ventricular
[DCM]] or secondary heart disease.
outfow obstructions (aortic or pulmonic steno-
· Chronic heart disease of varying causes may
sis) are examples of clinically significant causes
mimic primary cardiomyopathy. Systolic
of increased afterload.
failure following chronic overload may be
secondary to chronic valvular insuffciency
Inadequate Preload
and left-to-right shunting lesions, such as
patent ductus arteriosus or ventricular septal
· In cases in which inadequate preload is the
defect.
primary hemodynamic abnonmality (such as
· Nutritional deficiencies, such as taurine de-
cardiac tamponade), the reduction in preload
ficiency, have been recognized as a cause of
decreases stroke volume and cardiac output.
myocardial failure in the cat, and have been as-
Normally, the reduced preload may be compen-
sociated with DCM in certain breeds of dogs
sated for by systemic mechanisms that result in
(American Cocker Spaniels, Golden Retriev.
increased venous returm and ventricular end-dia-
ers, Dalmatians, Boxers, Welsh Corgis, New-
stolic volume; however, significant pericardial
foundlands). Myocardial deficiency of L-cami
effusion obstructs venous infow and limits the
tine has been reported in Boxers and Doberman
end-diastolic volume, precluding the circulatory
Pinschers.
system from fully compensating for the reduced
· Metabolic cardiomyopathies include feline
cardiac output.
hyperthyroidism, canine hypothyroidism, and
chronic uremia.
· Toxic cardiomyopathy: doxorubicin-induced
Diastolic Dysfunction
DCM
· Diastolic dysfunction may result in heart failure.
· Infiltrative cardiomyopathy: neoplastic (e.g..
Indeed, most cases of overt heart failure have
lymphosarcoma), amyloidosis
some degree of diastolic dysfunction. Adequate
290
SECTION III
Treatment of Cardiovascular Disease
ventricular filling is dependent on several
contraction (Frank-Starling mechanism), and
factors:
(3) reduced afterload associated with reduced
· Ventricular relax ation
peripheral vascular resistance. In this way
· Ventricular elasticity (change in muscle length
cardiac perfonmance is enhanced during ex-
for a change in force)
ercise in the absence of heart failure. In the
· Ventricular compliance (change in ventricular
 presence of heart failure, cardiac output and
volume for a given change in pressure).
ventricular performance may be maintained
·Ventricular relaxation may be decreased in sev-
within normal limits at rest only because the
eral diseases or disorders (e.g., idiopathic hyper-
ventricular end-diastolic fber length and the
trophic cardiomyopathy, ischemia).
preload are elevated (ventricular performance
· Ventricular compliance may be reduced when el-
is maintained through the Frank-Starling
mechanism).
can be associated with:
· In the failing heart, these factors that normally
· Volume overloading
help increase cardiac output during exercise are
· An increase in muscle mass or wall thickness,
chronically active and cause increased preload
 as with myocardial concentric hypertrophy
 and ventricular end-diastolic pressures (espe-
· A decrease in ventricular distensibility (usually
cially in a noncompliant, dilated ventricle), with
associated with extrinsic compression of the
the threat of edema formation. Exercise drives the
heart)
ventricle along the fat portion of the ventricular
· Diseases that result in myocardial fibrosis (e.g.,
performance curve, where increases in ventricu-
restrictive cardiomyopathy, ischemic heart dis-
lar volume and diastolic pressure do not increase
ease) also cause a decrease in ventricular com-
ventricular performance.
pliance.
· Diastolic dysfunction may increase ventricular
Renin-Angiotension-Aldosterone System
end-diastolic pressure, which is then transmitted
to the corresponding atrium and the venous sys-
· The
renin-angiotensin-aldosterone
system
tem. Elevation in venous and capillary pressures
(RAAS) is a complex neurohonmonal compensa-
may result in interstitial and alveolar pulmonary
tory system that functions to maintain relatively
edema or ascites through hydrostatic factors.
normal blood pressure and tissue perfusion when
cardiac output is reduced. Reduced renal perfu-
sion detected by renal baroreceptors results in
COMPENSATORY MECHANISMS
release of renin (Figure 15-1). Other factors caus-
IN CHRONIC HEART FAILURE
ing release of renin include decreased sodium de-
livery to the macula densa, and SNS stimulation
Frank-Starling Mechanism
of beta-1 adrenoceptors in the juxtaglomerular
· The Frank-Starling mechanism is an adaptive
apparatus of the kidney. Renin initiates a cascade
mechanism by which an increase in preload
resulting in the formation of angiotensin HI, a
enhances cardiac performance. Venous re-
 potent vasoconstrictor. Angiotensin II also causes 
tum detenmines the preload of the ventricle.
activation of the SNS, increases synthesis and
Physiologic increases in ventricular end-dia-
release of aldosterone from the zona glomerulosa
stolic volume are associated with increases in
of the adrenal cortex and release of antidiuretic
myocardial fber length. This allows the sar-
honmone.
comere to function near the upper limit of its
· Aldosterone causes sodium retention in the distal
maximal length (optimal length), where it is
renal tubules to promote fuid retention. Aldoste-
able to generate the maximal amount of force
rone also promotes fibrosis of the myocardium
during contraction.
and vascular smooth muscle.
· To better understand the role of the Frank-Star-
·The RAAS can be subdivided into:
ling mechanism, consider the hemodynamic
· Systemic or renal RAAS
changes associated with exercise. Cardiac out-
·Tissue RAAS
put is increased during exercise through the
· The tissue RAAS (brain, vascular, and myocar-
following mechanisms: (1) increased heart rate
dial tissues) can generate angiotensin II indepen-
amd contractility through increased sympathetic
dently of the circulating RAAS.
nervous system (SNS) activity, (2) increased
· Angiotensin II stimulates the release of growth
venous retum (preload) with a more vigorous
factors that promote remodeling of the vessels
Chapter 15
Pathophysiology and Therapy of Heart Failure
291
Renin 
Angiotensinogen
Angiotensin I
ACE
Angiotensin II
Aldosterone
Vasoconstriction
Reabsorption of Na+ & H20
Increased blood volume
INCREASE IN BP
Figure 15-1.
RAA cascade. Reduced renal perfusion is the primary stimulus for renin release, which leads to activation of the
angiotensin-aldosterone system. RAAS activation results in sodium and water retention and peripheral vasoconstriction.
and myocardium. Vascular remodeling (smooth
becomes maladaptive when chronically activated
muscle cell growth and hyperplasia, hypertrophy,
(Figure 15-2).
 and apoptosis; cytokine activation; myocyte and
vascular wall fibrosis) results in decreased vas-
Sympathetic Desensitization:
cular responsiveness to alterations in blood fow,
· Chronic activation of the SNS is associated with
decreased vascular compliance, and increased
elevated levels of plasma norepinephrine (NE),
afterload. Angiotensin II also causes pathologic
cardiac NE depletion, down-regulation and de-
ventricular hypertrophy, exerts cytotoxic effects
sensitization of beta-1 adrenergic receptors, and
resulting in myocardial necrosis and loss of myo-
abnormal barorefex function. Plasma NE levels
cardial contractile mass with resultant cardiac
appear to be increased because of a combination 
dysfunction.
of increased release of NE from adrenergic nerve
endings and reduced uptake of NE by adrenergic
Sympathetic Nervous System Activation
nerve endings. The depletion of myocardial NE
Sympathetie Nervous System Activation
(serum NE levels increase and myocardial levels
· The autonomic nervous system plays a crucial
decrease) probably represents the depletion of the
role in the compensation of heart failure. The
neurotransmitter in adrenergic nerve endings
activity of the SNS is increased in part by baro-
· The down-regulation of beta-1 adrenergic re-
refex-mediated parasympathetic withdrawal, as
well as by activation by the RAAS. Early activa
after the initial SNS activation, making it pro-
tion of the SNS helps to maintain cardiac output,
gressively more difficult for the SNS to counter
blood pressure, and tissue perfusion by increas-
impaired contractility.
ing venous retum to the heart (vasoconstriction
 Chronic activation of the SNS also overloads
of the splanchnic vessels), vasoconstriction of
the heart by increasing venous returm (to a heart
other various vascular beds, and positive inotro-
that is already volume-overloaded), by increasing
pic and chronotropic cardiac effects. Activation
myocardial oxygen consumption (by increasing
of the SNS early in heart failure is beneficial, but
heart rate and volume overloading of the heart)
292
SECTION III
TreatmentofCardiovascularDisease
Decreased BP
Baroreceptors
Vasomotor center
Receptors
 Increased sympathetic tone
Blood flow to
Conserve flow
Vasocon-
↓ kidneys and
to
 striction
brain
↓ muscles
heart
Receptors
个 Blood returned to
heart and
个 contractility
Heart rate 个
 Strength
 of contraction个
 Improved venous
return
Increased cardiac output
Increased blood pressure 
Figure 15-2.
ices which are deleterious in the long
term.
and by damaging the myocardium, creating a
hormone/vasopressin effect) retention as well
substrate for arrhythmogenesis.
as to venoconstriction of the splanchnic vascu-
lar bed (RAAS and SNS effect). Chronic heart
failure represents a nonosmotic (mediated by
Myocardial Hypertrophy
SNS and RAAS,instead of osmotic hypertonic)
 Myocardial hypertrophy occurs as a compensatory
stimulus for antidiuretic hormone release from
 mechanism directed toward normalizing cardiac
the hypothalamus. Antidiuretic hormone prob-
output, wall tension, and filling pressures. The he-
ably plays a limited role in the pathogenesis of
modynamic load imposed on the heart (either vol-
CHF. However, chronic volume overload causes
ume or pressure overloading) determines the type
an increase in diastolic wall stress, and this leads
of hypertrophy (eccentric vs. concentric). Chronic
to replication of sarcomeres in series, elongation
activation of the RAAS and the SNS produces
 of myocytes, and ventricular dilation.
pathologic changes (remodeling) within the ven-
· Concentric myocardial hypertrophy (or pres-
tricular myocardium, which contribute to cardiac
sure-overload hypertrophy) is characterized by
dysfunction. The result can be myocardial failure
thickening of the ventricular walls in response
with low-output signs or elevated filling pressures
to increased systolic wall stress, and occurs as
with the risk of CHF.
a compensatory mechanism to normalize sys-
· Eccentric myocardial hypertrophy (or volume-
tolic wall tension. Increased systolic wall stress
overload hypertrophy) occurs with heart dis-
stimulates the replication of sarcomeres in paral-
ease as a compensatory mechanism to allow the
lel, increasing myocardium thickness and thereby
ventricle to pump a relatively normal amount
normalizing systolic wall stress (via the La Place
of blood in spite of abnonmal systolic function.
relationship, wall tension = pressure x radius/
Eccentric hypertrophy is characterized by cham-
wall thickness). The increase in thickness of the
ber dilation, a response to the increase in blood
ventricular wall compensates for the increased
volume and venous returm associated with acti-
systolic wall stress in a pressure-overloaded
vation of the RAAS and SNS. More specifically,
ventricle. If the compensatory concentric hy-
the increased venous retum is secondary to so-
pertrophy is inadequate and the systolic wall
dium (aldosterone effect) and water (antidiuretic
stress is increased, then afterload-mismatch
Chapter 15
Pathophysiology and Therapy of Heart Failure
293
amd decompensation occur. Interestingly, when
and chronic valvular insuffciency in dogs, and
significant eccentric hypertrophy occurs in a
cardiomyopathy in cats).
volume-overloaded ventricle, systolic wall ten-
· Atrial, brain, and C-type natriuretic peptides
sion is increased secondary to the increase in ven-
have been identified (ANP, BNP, and CNP,
ticular diameter. Therefore, both eccentric and
respectively)
some degree of concentric hypertrophy are pres-
· BNP is primarily produced in the atria and is re-
ent in severely volume-overloaded ventricles.
leased in response to atrial stretch resulting in na-
triuresis, diuresis, and balanced vasodilation.
KEY POINTS
· Natriuretic peptides antagonize the RAAS and
In the syndrome of heart failure, changes in
SNS, inhibit release of antidiuretic hormone,
ventricular mass and geometry are a culmi-
prevent myocardial fibrosis, and modulate cell
nation of compensatory hypertrophy (in re-
growth and myocardial hypertrophy.
sponse to pressure or volume overload) and 
· Circulating natriuretic peptide levels may be used
pathologic hypertrophy (in response to acti-
to differentiate between symptoms associated
vation of the RAAS and SNS).
with cardiac disease and from symptoms asso-
ciated with primary pulmonary disease. Lack of
· These compensatory mechanisms require days to
elevated BNP levels does not support a diagnosis
weeks to become fully activated. If the cardiac
of symptomatic heart failure.
dysfunction is acute and severe, then the compen-
· Infammatory and immune mediators such as
satory mechanisms do not have sufficient time to
tumor necrosis factor alpha, interleukins (IL-1,
become fully activated (with the exception of the
IL-2, and IL-6), nuclear factor-kappa-B, and re-
SNS, which is immediately activated).
active oxygen species are thought to play a role
· For example, most dogs with idiopathic DCM
in the progression of heart failure. The "cytokine
have insidious, progressive cardiac dysfunction
hypothesis" suggests that heart failure progresses
that worsens over a period of years, therefore
because cytokine pathways are activated in re-
allowing the compensatory mechanisms to be-
sponse to cardiac dysfunction and exert negative
come fully activated. Although these dogs have
effects on the cardiovascular system.
compensated heart failure chronically, at some
point they may acutely decompensate, mimick-
Course of Events: Compensatory
ing an acute disease process.
Mechanisms
· Conversely, a dog with a peracute disease syn-
drome (such as a very rapid supraventricular
· Reduced cardiac output leads to decreased tissue
tachyarrhythmia like atrial fibrillation) may de-
perfusion
velop heart failure without activating compen-
· Activation of baroreceptors in kidney, carotid ar-
satory mechanisms other than the SNS.
teries, aorta, and heart results in SNS activation
and parasympathetic nervous system withdrawal
· SNS activation (positive inotropic and chro-
Additional Compensatory Mechanisms/
notropic activity, vasoconstriction to increase
Neuroendocrine Mechanisms
venous retum and maintain blood pressure, stim
· Endothelins, a vasoactive family of peptides that
ulation of antidiuretic hormone and renin)
are released from endothelial cells, play an im-
· RAAS activation associated with the reduced re-
portant role in the regulation of vascular tone and
nal perfusion, decreased sodium delivery to the
blood pressure. Endothelin-1 is a strong, vaso-
macula densa, and SNS activation
constrictive agent with inotropic and mitogenic
· Renal sodium and water retention to increase
actions; it is a strong stimulus for activation of
blood volume and, therefore, venous retum to the
the RAAS and SNS. Additionally, Endothelin-1
heart
 may play an important role in the pathogenesis of
· Myocardial hypertrophy (dilation of the affected
 pulmonary hypertension.
 atrium and ventricle) to maintain relatively nor-
· Natriuretic peptides are regulators of salt and
mal cardiac output and systolic wall tension
water homeostasis and blood pressure control
while preventing diastolic filling pressures from
with potential value as diagnostic and prognostic
rising
 markers in patients with CHF. Natriuretic peptide
· Stretch-induced release of atrial natriuretic fac-
levels are elevated in many disease conditions re-
tor serves to facilitate sodium excretion. The ef-
sulting in expanded fuid volume (such as DCM
fects of this factor are quickly negated owing to
294
SECTION III   Treatment of Cardiovascular Disease
degradation by neutral endopeptidases and the ef-
· Once the compensatory limits are reached,
fects of overstimulation of the RAAS and SNS.
further increases in blood volume (associ-
· Initially, these mechanisms allow the body to
ated with sodium and water retention) and
compensate for the decreased cardiac output by
venous retum cause an increase in cardiac
increasing blood volume and blood pressure.
filling pressures, with threat of CHF develop-
However, with chronicity, the compensatory
ment.
mechanisms are maladaptive and facilitate pro-
 gression of heart failure.
Volume Overload
· Overstimulation of inf ammatory/immune media-
tors (tumor necrosis factor-alpha, IL-1, IL-2,
· Volume overload is associated with two common
IL-6, reactive oxygen species) exert deleterious
causes of heart failure:
effects on the heart and circulation.
·Valvular insufficiency
· The sustained effects of the SNS and RAAS con-
· Shunts
tinue to increase the workload of the heart by
increasing blood volume and venous retum to a
A trioventricular Valvular Insufficiency
heart that has maximized its ability to compen-
sate by eccentric hypertrophy. Ventricular filling
· Atrioventricular valvular insufficiency can result
pressures begin to increase, with the threat of
from:
edema formation. The onset of edema formation
· Degenerative valvular disease
is variable, depending on the severity and onset
· Valvular endocarditis
 of ventricular dysfunction. Dogs with cardiomy-
· Congenital valvular dysplasia
opathy may have mild edema for days to weeks
· Chamber dilation
and only show minimal clinical signs, such as
· Valvular insufficiency may result in systolic
tachypnea and exercise intolerance.
 dysfunction and activation of compensatory
mechanisms which maintain cardiac output
and tissue perfusion by vasoconstriction and
TYPES OF HEART FAILURE
fuid retention. As with impaired contractil-
Myocardial Failure
ity, valvular insufficiency forces the ventricle
to achieve larger end-diastolic dimensions
· Myocardial failure is associated with decreases in
to compensate for the decrease in forward
 contractility. It can be associated with:
stroke volume. The difference between vol-
·Primary
myocardial   disease   (idiopathic
ume overloading secondary to impaired
DCM)
contractility (DCM) and valvular insuffi-
· Secondary myocardial diseases (chronic con-
ciency (MR) is associated with the changes
 genital and valvular heart disease, thyrotoxico-
in TSV (end-diastolic volume minus end-
sis, taurine deficiency, infectious/inflammatory
systolic volume). In MR without myocardial
and infiltrative diseases)
failure, TsV is increased to compensate for
· Myocardial failure causes systolic dysfunction
the amount of blood leaking through the in-
and activation of compensatory mechanisms
competent valve. The end-diastolic volume
which increase sodium and water retention to
increases, but the end-systolic volume re-
increase venous retum to the heart. The ven-
mains nonmal (evidence of normal contrac-
tricles must obtain a larger end-diastolic di-
tility), thereby resulting in an increased TSV.
mension to maintain a relatively normal total
With impaired contractility, TsV is normal
stroke volume (TSV). As the myocardial func-
or decreased (depending on the stage of
tion deteriorates (as noted by a decrease in
the disease) because both end-diastolic and
fractional shortening and a decrease in ejection
end-systolic volumes have increased. End-
fraction), the ventricles progressively enlarge
diastolic volumes increase to compensate for
so that the TSV is maintained, even though the
the increased end-systolic volumes, reflect-
percentage of blood being ejected is decreas
 ing impaired contractility.
ing. Severe left ventricular dilation causes
· Shunts such as patent ductus arteriosus, ventricu-
distortion and dilation of the mitral valve an-
lar septal defect, and arteriovenous fistula are
nulus, resulting in mitral regurgitation (MR)
similar to valvular leaks in that the heart increases
and further volume overloading of the left
TSV to compensate for the reduction in forward
ventricle.
fow.
Chapter 15
 Pathophysiology and Therapy of Heart Failure
295
o ss u susu (uisna pind) as
Pressure Overload
right-heart failure and low-output failure. Eleva
· Lesions that cause increased intraventricular sys-
tion of intracardiac pressure, progressive limita-
tolic pressures usually do not cause CHF because
tion of ventricular diastolic filling, and reduction
the heart is usually able to compensate for the
of stroke volume and cardiac output characterize
increased intraventricular systolic pressures with
 cardiac tamponade. The clinical course depends
concentric hypertrophy (La Place principle), and
on the size and rate of accumulation of the effu.
the ventricular systolic function remains rela-
sion, and the compliance of the pericardial sac.
tively nonmal. Only when the obstruction to fow
· Acute tamponadeis usually associated with
 is severe (critical stenosis) or acute does pres-
an acute hemorrhage from a neoplastic lesion,
sure overload result in myocardial failure and
such as hemangiosarcoma, but may also be
heart failure. More commonly, CHF occurs when
associated with rupture of the left atrium sec-
there is a concurrent valvular insufficiency (e.g.,
ondary to chronic severe MR. As the effusion
pulmonic stenosis with tricuspid regurgitation,
accumulates, intrapericardial pressures increase
subvalvular aortic stenosis with MR or aortic re-
and eventually exceed the diastolic pressures in
 gurgitation, pulmonary hypertension with tricus-
the right atrium and ventricle, thereby restrict-
 pid regurgitation).
ing the venous infow to the right heart. The
· Altematively, sudden death may occur in dogs
restriction of venous retum causes a reduction
with severe (noncritical) congenital subvalvu-
in right ventricular cardiac output, pulmonary
lar aortic stenosis or possibly valvular pulmonic
blood fow, and left-sided venous retum that is
stenosis. When the ventricle is severely hyper-
associated with a reduction in left ventricular
trophied, coronary perfusion is impaired, and re-
stroke volume and cardiac output, and signs of
 gions of the myocardium (especially the papillary
low-output heart failure.
muscles and subendocardial regions) are at risk
· Chronic tamponadeassociated with the slow
of hypoxia. Myocardial hypoxia can result in im-
accumulation  of  pericardial  effusion  differs
paired contractility as well as ventricular tachyar-
from acute tamponade in that the body has time
rhythmias which may degenerate into ventricular
to compensate for the impediment of cardiac
fibrillation, leading to sudden cardiac death.
inflow, secondary reduction in stroke volume,
and cardiac output. Although compensation
Decreased Ventricular Compliance or
may somewhat normalize cardiac output, signs
 Of right-sided CHF are often present (jugular
Abnormal Ventricular Relaxation
distention and ascites).
· In idiopathic hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, the
increase in ventricular or septal wall thickness is
CLINICAL DESCRIPTIONS
associated with decreased ventricular compliance
OF HEART FAILURE
(increased ventricular stiffness). Myocardial or
endocardial fibrosis (restrictive cardiomyopathy)
· CHF is the accumulation of fuid in tissues as-
can also increase ventricular stiffness.
sociated with increased capillary hydrostatic
· Decreased ventricular compliance and abnormal
pressures and elevated diastolic intra-atrial and
ventricular relaxation may result in elevated dia-
intraventricular pressures. Diseases that cause
stolic intraventricular pressures (flling pressures),
diastolic or systolic dysfunction are capable
even though the ventricular diastolic volume is
 of increasing cardiac filling pressures, leading
not increased. During the course of diastole, for
to CHF.
any increase in preload, there is an abnormal in-
· Low-output failure can be defined as poor car-
crease in intraventricular pressure. Over time, the
diac output, resulting in reduced tissue perfusion
corresponding atrium dilates to compensate for
and inadequate tissue oxygenation. Generally.
the elevated filling pressure. Once compensatory
the term low-output failure is used to describe
dilation of the atrium has reached its limit, further
clinical scenarios in which cardiac output is dra-
elevation of the ventricular filling pressure results
 matically reduced by end-stage, primary, systolic
in the development of edema (or pleural effusion
dysfunction.
in cats).
· Right-sided heart failure may result when the
· Pericardial disease with cardiac tamponade is
right atrium or right ventricle develops elevated
the clinical syndrome in which there is compres-
filling
pressures associated with valvular
sion of the heart by fuid within the pericardial
insufficiency, pericardial disease, outfow tract
296
SECTION III  Treatment of Cardiovascular Disease
 obstruction, or pulmonary hypertension. Volume
weakness are common complaints of clients
and pressure overloading of the right ventricle
with pets with symptomatic heart disease or
can cause hepatic congestion accompanied by
heart failure. Additionally, pets with heart fail-
ascites, pleural effusion, and, rarely, peripheral
ure may have a history of inappetence, weight
subcutaneous edema. These diseases may also
loss, and syncope.
reduce the forward fow of blood into the pul-
· Coughing is a very common historical find-
monary circulation and the left heart, resulting in
ing in dogs with heart failure, especially those
reduced stroke volume, cardiac output and, pos-
with chronic MR. In this scenario, a cough re-
sibly, signs of low-output heart failure.
fex is associated with left atrial compression
· Left-sided heart failure may result when the left
of the left mainstem bronchus. Altermatively.
side of the heart develops elevated filling pres-
 dogs with severe alveolar pulmonary edema
sures associated most commonly with valvular
may also cough. It is important to be cognizant
insufficiency, impaired contractility, or diastolic
that other, noncardiac diseases may also cause
dysfunction. Elevated left ventricular filling pres-
coughing, and that coughing is not specific for
sures are transmitted to the left atrium and pul-
heart failure. Diseases such as tracheal collapse
monary venous and capillary beds, with the threat
and chronic pulmonary disease also cause
of fluid accumulation in the interstitial and alveo-
coughing and may occur concurrently with
lar spaces (pulmonary edema). In dogs, pleural
heart disease.
effusion may develop when biventricular or right
· Tachypnea (increased respiratory rate) is a
ventricular failure is present. Cats may develop
common sign of heart failure. Tachypnea can
pleural effusion with pure left-sided heart failure
be caused by many nonpathologic mecha-
apparently because the visceral pleural lymphat-
nisms and is often overlooked by the client
ics drain into the pulmonary venous circulation.
and the clinician. Left-sided CHF with inter-
Pulmonary venous hypertension creates a func-
stitial pulmonary edema causes stimulation of
tional obstruction, thereby restricting the ability
    
of the lymphatics to maintain a normal amount of
that refexively increase the respiratory rate.
fuid in the pleural space.
 The increase in respiratory rate can occur with
or without the presence of hypoxia. Because
 of this concept, the resting respiratory rate
DIAGNOSIS OF HEART FAILURE
may be used effectively to monitor the status
of patients with left-sided CHF. The nonmal
resting respiratory rate for most small animals
KEY POINTS
is usually below 30 to 35 breaths per minute.
● The diagnosis of CHF is considered to be
Typically, trends of increasing resting respira-
a multimodal diagnosis, based on a careful
tory rate indicate progressive decompensation
history, physical examination, and ancillary
of left-sided heart failure and the need for car-
diagnostics including electrocardiography.
diac medication adjustments (i.e., an increase
thoracic radiography, and echocardiogra-
in furosemide dosage or frequency of admin-
phy.
istration).
 Good quality thoracic radiographs should
· Dyspnea (perception of difficult breathing)
always be obtained.
· Exclude diseases that mimic CHF (e.g.,
usually accompanies severe heart failure that
has resulted in pulmonary edema or pleural ef-
chronic broncho-interstitial disease is often
fusion. Dyspnea is exacerbated by exercise in
present in patients with cardiac disease).
 patients capable of exercising.
· Orthopnea (difficult breathing during recum-
History
bency) may occur before dyspnea. Often,
the client may recognize orthopnea because the
·A complete medical history is important to
patient is reluctant to lie down or because the
establish the clinical course of the present-
patient has difficulty breathing when it is lying
ing complaint, as well as the presence of con-
down.
current diseases that may complicate heart
· Noctumal
disease.
occurs after the patient has been recumbent
· Coughing, tachypnea, dyspnea (respiratory
for some time. It is not specific for left-sided
distress), exercise intolerance, lethargy, and
CHF.
Chapter 15
 Pathophysiology and Therapy of Heart Failure
297
· Exercise intolerance may be a very early sign of
Cardiac Rhythm Disturbances
heart failure in animals that are active; however,
· Arrhythmias are relatively common in animals
it may be difficult to identify in animals that are
with heart failure.
inactive. Reduced tolerance for exercise results
· Atial fibrillation is a common supraventricu-
because cardiac function is abnonmal, and the
lar arrhythmia present in some dogs with DCM
metabolic demands of tissues (especially the
and chronic MR secondary to primary valve
working muscles) are not met, leading to hy-
disease, as well as in cats with cardiomyo-
poxia, lactic acidemia, muscle weakness, and
pathy.
fatigue.
· Ventricular tachyarrhythmias may be present
·Abdominal distention secondary to ascites
in dogs with heart failure or with extracar-
may be associated with right-sided or biven-
diac disease, such as thoracic trauma, splenic
tricular failure and must be differentiated
disease, and gastric dilatation-volvulus. Ven-
from effusions associated with other condi-
tricular arrhythmias are especially common in
tions, such as hypoproteinemia, liver disease,
Boxers and Dobenman Pinschers with cardio-
and abdominal neoplasia. Evaluation of the
myopathy.
jugular and abdominal subcutaneous veins
· Bradyarrhythmias such as third-degree (com-
may aid in determining that ascites is associ-
plete) atrioventricular block may cause signs
ated with right-sided CHF. With right-sided
 of reduced cardiac output (lethargy, weakness,
heart failure, these vessels are often distended
 and exercise intolerance) and, occasionally,
and engorged.
CHF.
· Gallop sounds are abnormal heart sounds in
Cardiovascular Physical Examination
 dogs and cats that are often associated with heart
Findings
failure. A third heart sound (Ss) gallop occurs
Murmur
just after the second heart sound (S2) during
·A cardiovascular murmur is a series of auditory
the rapid diastolic phase of ventricular filling.
vibrations associated with turbulent (nonlami-
An S gallop occurs commonly in dogs with
nar) blood fow and, occasionally, with vibrating
heart failure associated with volume overload,
valve leafets. When blood fow velocities are
particularly dogs with DCM. During early dia-
supraphysiologic (i.e., higher than normal physi-
stolic filling, blood rushes out of the atrium into
ologic velocities), or when blood viscosity is re-
a noncompliant ventricle, which then vibrates,
duced (e.g., with anemia), blood fow tends to be
resulting in a low-frequency sound just after S2.
nonlaminar and turbulent. Nonlaminar blood fow
A fourth heart sound (S4) gallop occurs just be-
generates acoustic energy that vibrates the struc-
fore the first heart sound (S,) and is associated
tures within the heart or the associated vessel(s).
with atrial contraction. Ventricular filling in
The intensity (loudness), timing in the cardiac
late diastole associated with atrial contraction
cycle, frequency (pitch), configuration (shape),
vibrates the noncompliant ventricle, creating
quality, duration, location, and direction of radia-
a low-frequency sound just before S and the
tion of the sound created by the blood flow are
onset of systole. S4 gallop are commonly aus-
important characteristics of cardiac murmurs.
cultated in cats with hypertrophic or restrictive
·The intensity of the munmur refers to the loud-
cardiomyopathy. Summation gallops (S3 and
ness of the murmur and is graded on a scale
S4) may occur during periods of tachycardia.
from 1 to 6 (1 being the least audible murmur,
and 6 being the loudest).
Diagnostics
· The timing is defined as being systolic, diastol-
ic, or continuous.
Electrocardiography
· The configuration of the murmur refers to the
· Electrocardiographyis usedtodetect cardiac rhythm
shape of the sound created by the abnonmal
disturbances, chamber enlargement, or conduction
blood fow, and is described as being either a
abnonmalities that may be associated with cardiac
plateau (regurgitant murmur) or a crescendo-
disease. Electrocardiographic abnonmalities are not
decrescendo (ejection munmur) sound.
specific for heart failure and therefore should not
· A cardiac munmur is present in many dogs
be used to determine the presence of heart failure.
with heart failure, but the presence of a
 Furthermore, a normal electrocardiogram does not
cardiac munmur is not specifc for heart
rule out the possibility of severe heart disease with
failure.
secondary chamber enlargement.
298
SECTIONIII
Treatment of Cardiovascular Disease
Thoracic Radiography
· The combination of thoracic radiographs and
· Thoracic radiography is important in the evalu-
echocardiography allows the clinician to define
ation of patients with suspected heart disease or
structural heart disease and identify CHF in most
CHF. In general, with respect to heart disease and
cases. Typically, heart failure is not present with-
heart failure, three questions should be answered
out atrial enlargement (with the exception of
when evaluating a thoracic radiograph:
pericardial diseases and some other uncommon
· Is cardiomegaly present? If so, which side of
diseases). The atria are usually compliant and en-
the heart is affected?
large as filling pressures increase.
· What is the pulmonary vascular pattern (e.g..
nonmal, undercirculated, overcirculated, ve-
Differential Diagnoses
nous distention, or arterial distention)?
·Is there evidence of heart failure (pulmonary
· Primary pulmonary disease may mimic cardiac
edema, pleural effusion, or ascites)?
 disease or failure because both may cause cough-
· With compensated left-heart failure, the earliest
ing, abnormal bronchovesicular sounds, and re-
evidence of pulmonary edema formation is pul-
spiratory distress. The presence of pulmonary
monary venous congestion (stage I of pulmo-
crackles, a respiratory sinus arrhythmia, and re-
nary edema fonmation). That is, the pulmonary
spiratory distress in a dog without a cardiac mur-
veins are distended and larger than their respec-
mur is almost always associated with pulmonary
tive arteries. At this time pulmonary capillary
disease rather than with heart failure.
 pressures are approximately 15 to 20 mm Hg.
· Ascites and pleural effusion may occur second-
· As pulmonary venous and capillary pressures
ary to diseases other than heart failure. Evalua-
 progressively increase with left-sided heart fail-
tion of the jugular veins may aid in differentiating
ure, decompensation occurs, and fuid leaks into
ascites associated with heart failure from ascites
the interstitium (interstitial edema, stage II).
associated with hypoproteinemia secondary to
· As pulmonary venous and capillary pressures
liver or renal disease.
continue to rise (e.g., 30 to 40 mm Hg), the al-
veoli are fooded with edema fuid, and stage III
Therapy of Heart Failure
(alveolar edema) is present.
· Pulmonary edema may be primarily perihi-
· The medical management of heart failure is
lar (centrally located) in distribution, or it may
aimed at relieving symptoms and cardiac dys-
be diffuse and generalized. In cats, pulmonary
function because, in most cases, heart disease and
edema may appear as a patchy mixed interstitial-
heart failure are not curable entities. In addition
alveolar patterm that is not primarily located in
to relieving heart failure symptoms, heart failure
the perihilar region.
therapy is also directed toward increasing the sur-
· Pleural effusion may be evident in cases with bi-
vival time of the patient.
ventricular or severe right-sided heart failure in
· Signs of congestion can be treated with agents
dogs, and may be present with left-sided or bi-
that reduce cardiac filling pressures (preload re-
ventricular heart failure in cats.
ducers such as diuretics and venodilators) and
agents that facilitate cardiac performance (posi-
Echocardiography
tive inotropes and arterial dilators). Modulation
· The three principal modalities of echocardiogra-
of the compensatory mechanisms that exacerbate
phy are two-dimensional, M-mode, and Doppler
evaluation of the heart. Because of the noninva-
 portant in the therapy of heart failure as under-
sive nature of echocardiography, it has essentially
standing of the genesis of heart failure (especially
replaced cardiac catheterization in the diagnosis
chronic heart failure) has evolved.
 of heart disease in small animals. Echocardiogra-
· Monotherapy with diuretics and simply restrict-
phy enables the trained specialist to identify dis-
ing dietary sodium intake are no longer accepted
eases that may cause or be associated with heart
therapies for treating chronic heart failure. In
failure, such as:
fact, these therapies may actually promote the
· Valvular leaks
activation of the compensatory mechanisms
· Myocardial failure
that are responsible for overloading the failing
· Intracardiac or extracardiac shunts
heart.
· Decreased ventricular compliance
· It is important to note that the appropriate therapy
· Pericardial disease
for a given patient is determined by the clinical
Chapter 15
Pathophysiology and Therapy of Heart Failure
299
signs present, the severity of the clinical signs,
· Severe heart failure is characterized by the
and the underlying disease entity.
presence of overt clinical signs associated with
· In general, combinations of angiotensin-convert-
heart failure at rest. These patients are critically
ing enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, diuretics, ± a posi-
ill and may require intensive monitoring and
tive inotrope represent the conventional therapy
aggressive therapy, including combinations of
for chronic heart failure. Adjunctive therapy in
ACE inhibitors, furosemide, pimobendan, di-
selected patients may include additional agents
goxin, nitrates, and sympathomimetic agents
for heart rate control, nutritional supplementation
such as dopamine or dobutamine. The progno-
(e.g., taurine), or additional medications for re-
 sis for severe heart failure is guarded to poor,
fractory symptomatic heart failure.
and these patients generally have short survival
· Occult heart disease refers to heart disease
times (i.e., days to weeks).
that has resulted in the first detectable chang-
es associated with heart disease (myocardial
dysfunction, chamber dilation, arrhythmias).
THERAPEUTIC STRATEGIES
This description is usually used to describe
FOR THE MANAGEMENT OF
cardiomyopathic patients (e.g., Doberman
HEART FAILURE
 Pinschers with idiopathic DCM). Therapy
Dietary Modifications
with ACE inhibitors and, potentially, beta-
adrenergic receptor blocking agents is advo-
· A reduction in dietary sodium intake can blunt
cated in these cases in hopes of slowing the
the tendency to conserve sodium and to develop
 progression of heart dysfunction and increas-
edema. Theoretically, the use of low-sodium di-
ing the time before clinical signs associated
ets in combination with vasodilators and ACE in-
with heart failure appear. However, there is
hibitors may allow for less reliance on diuretics to
no peer-reviewed evidence supporting their
control edema and signs of congestion. Early in
effectiveness in altering the disease course in
the course of heart failure, dietary sodium restric-
canine chronic valve disease or DCM. In any
tion should be in the form of elimination of high-
case, these patients typically have a good to
salt-containing snacks. We tend to rely on diuretics
guarded prognosis for long-tenm survival (i.e.,
in combination with vasodilators and ACE inhibi-
years).
tors early in the course of heart failure, and to insti-
· Mild heart failure is associated with clinical
tute salt restriction when excessively high diuretic
signs such as exercise intolerance. These clini-
dosages are required to control signs. Chronic
cal symptoms are usually apparent only when
administration of salt-restricted diet may cause
the patient is pushed beyond its heart's capacity
sodium conservation through the RAAS, causing
to maintain an appropriate cardiac output during
further progression of heart failure. Reduced di-
exercise. These patients show minimal signs of
etary sodium intake stimulates the synthesis and
heart failure and, in general, are compensating.
secretion of aldosterone. Another disadvantage
Radiographically, cardiomegaly and pulmonary
to salt-restricted diets is the unpalatable nature of
 venous congestion are present. In cases such as
such diets. Salt makes food taste good, so without
these, ACE inhibitors and possibly a positive
it, the patient may be reluctant to eat the food, and
intrope/negative chronotrope such as digoxin
this may lead to client noncompliance.
and/or a positive inotrope/vasodilator such as
 pimobendan are indicated. These patients typi-
KEY POINts
cally have a guarded prognosis for long-term
The general theme regarding sodium restric-
survival (i.e., months to years).
tion in patients with heart failure is to avoid
· Moderate heart failure is associated with more
treats or foods with excessive sodium content.
persistent clinical signs such as coughing, ex-
ercise intolerance, and tachypnea at rest. These
patients have pulmonary edema (or ascites de-
* L-Carnitine supplementation may be indicated in
 pending on which side of the heart is affected)
patients that have myocardial failure associated
and require more aggressive therapy with ACE
with definitive myocardial L-carmitine deficiency.
inhibitors, a diuretic such as furosemide, and
Some Boxers with cardiomyopathy may respond
possibly digoxin and/or pimobendan. These
to L-carmitine supplementation. In most cases,
patients typically have a guarded prognosis for
 however, it is likely that myocardial L-carmitine
long-term survival (i.e., months).
deficiency is a result of the underlying disease
300
SECTION III Treatment of Cardiovascular Disease
and myocardial failure rather than the etiology of
Aorta
the myocardial failure. The dosage for L-camitine
supplementation in dogs is 50 to 100 mg/kg
PO three times a day.
· Taurine supplementation (sometimes in combina-
tion with L-carmitine) has been effective in reversing
some secondary DCMs associated with taurine defi-
ciency in cats, American Cocker Spaniels, and other
Spaniel breeds. The addition of taurine to feline di-
ets after 1987 dramatically reduced the incidence of
LV
taurine deficiency-induced DCM in cats. Although
DCM secondary to taurine deficiency in cats is un-
Figure 15-3.
Drawings of the left heart from a dog with
commonly encountered today, it is prudent to evalu-
severe mitral regurgitation before and after administration
ate plasma taurine levels or to supplement taurine
of an afterload reducing agent. Note that forward flow (out
on a trial basis in all cats with DCM. In patients
the aorta) increases with afterload reduction because of the
suffering from taurine deficiency-induced DCM,
reduction in systemic vascular resistance. IV, Left ventricle; LA,
left atrium.
supplementation with taurine results in clinical and
echocardiographic improvement typically within 2
to 3 months. Dosage for taurine supplementation:
· Dogs: 500 to 1000 mg PO once or twice a day
capacitance vessels and the splanchnic veins) and
· Cats: 250 to 500 mg PO once or twice a day
reducing venous returm, which results in lower
· n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids levels are reduced
filling pressures (preload).
 in dogs with CHF and fish oil supplementation can
· Classification of vasodilators based on ves-
normalize these plasma fatty acid abnormalities.
sels affected:
The author currently recommends a fish oil dosage
·Arterial (e.g., hydralazine)
to provide 40 mg/kg/day EPA (eicosapentaenoic
Venous
(e.g.，
 nitroglycerin, isosorbide
acid) and 25 mg/kg/day DHA (docosahexaenoic
dinitrate)
acid) for patients with anorexia and/or cardiac
· Mixed (e.g., nitroprusside, prazosin, ACE
cachexia.
 inhibitors, pimobendan)
· Classification of vasodilators based on mech-
Vasodilator Therapy
anism of action:
· Direct acting (e.g., nitroprusside, nitro-
·Indications: Arterial vasodilators are used to re-
glycerin, isosorbide dinitrate, hydralazine)
duce systemic vascular resistance in patients with
Alpha-adrenergic blocking agents (e.g..
CHF. In doing so, cardiac function is improved.
prazosin)
Myocardial systolic wall tension is an important
· Calcium channel blocking agents (e.g..
determinant of  myocardial  oxygen  consump-
amlodipine, verapamil, diltiazem)
tion. By decreasing systemic vascular resistance
ACE inhibitors (e.g., captopril, enalapril,
(and, therefore, afterload and systolic wall tension),
lisinopril, benazepril)
arterial vasodilators reduce myocardial oxygen
·Phosphodiesterase inhibitors (e.g. pimo-
consumption. Additionally, the reduction in after-
bendan)
load results in an increase in cardiac output. Arterial
vasodilators decrease the volume of regurgitation
Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme Inhibitors
across an insufficient valve, and, therefore, increase
forward fow in patients with mitral or aortic regur-
· ACE inhibitors cause mixed vasodilation by pre-
gitation (Figure 15-3). Arterial vasodilators may
venting the conversion of angiotensin I to angio-
lessen the magnitude of left-to-right shunting in
tensin II. Angiotensin II is a potent vasoconstrictor.
patients with ventricular septal defects. However
The decrease in angiotensin II levels results in a re-
arterial vasodilators may exacerbate right-to-left
duction in the level of vasoconstriction, as well as
shunting in patients with tetralogy of Fallot or with
decreased SNS activity. Furthenmore, ACE inhibi-
nonrestrictive ventricular septal defects.
tion also results in decreased aldosterone synthesis
·Indications: Venous vasodilators are used to re-
 and secretion, so that there is less sodium and water
duce congestive symptoms by redistributing
retention, among many other benefits beyond the
blood volume within the circulatory system (the
 scope of this discussion.
Chapter 15
Pathophysiology and Therapy of Heart Failure
301
· Large, multicenter clinical trials have demon-
of ACE inhibitor therapy. Azotemia secondary to
strated the safety and efficacy of ACE inhibitors
 decreased renal perfusion represents the most im-
in the therapy of CHF secondary to DCM and
portant clinical consideration. Azotemia and re-
primary valve disease. ACE inhibitors appear to
nal dysfunction secondary to a decrease in renal
significantly decrease the clinical signs of heart
perfusion result from loss of protective mecha-
failure when used in combination with conven-
nisms to maintain filtration pressures. Angioten-
tional therapy (diuretics with or without digoxin).
sin II causes vasoconstriction of the renal efferent
Enalapril has been extensively studied in veteri-
arterioles in an effort to maintain glomerular fil-
 nary medicine and is approved for the use in dogs
tration pressures in the face of decreased renal
 in the United States:
perfusion. The relative decrease in angiotensin II
· The Invasive Multicenter Prospective Veterinary
can significantly decrease glomerular perfusion
Enalapril (IMPROVE) study showed a decrease
 and filtration, resulting in azotemia. Furthermore,
l pue anssand apam Aedeo Aeuound u
renal dysfunction is more likely to occur in pa-
 provement of heart failure status with enalapril.
tients with pre-existing renal disease. As a result,
·The Cooperative Veterinary Enalapril (COVE)
renal function should be evaluated before and 5
study showed that enalapril with digoxin and/or
to 7 days after instituting ACE inhibitor therapy,
furosemide significantly decreased clinical signs
especially during concurrent diuretic therapy.
of heart failure in DCM or MR.
·Most complications are likely to occur shortly
· The Enalapril Long-Tenm Effcacy Study
after beginning therapy, in association with acute
showed increased survival times for dogs treat-
cardiac decompensation, or in conjunction with
ed with enalapril.
systemic disease that may alter the patient's hydra-
· Enalapril studies in cats in the late 1990s ap-
tion status (e.g., vomiting or diarrhea). Side effects
pear to suggest that ACE inhibitors improve
are much more likely to occur with captopril than
control of CHF associated with hypertrophic
with the other commonly used ACE inhibitors.
and other forms of cardiomyopathy.
· Benazepril therapy has been demonstrated to be
KEY POINtS
effective in the treatment of systemic hypertension
secondary to chronic renal disease or hypertrophic
ACE inhibitors are recommended for patients
cardiomyopathy, as well as in the control of CHF.
with asymptomatic myocardial dysfunction;
·The earliest time at which ACE inhibition is indi-
in patients with symptomatic CHF secondary
to chronic valvular disease, DCM, and other
cated has not been accurately determined, but it
causes of CHF; and in patients with systemic
may be reasonable for ACE inhibitor therapy to be
hypertension.
initiated in dogs and cats with signs of advanced,
compensated heart failure (e.g., cardiomegaly
 and pulmonary venous congestion), regardless of
· Agents and dosages
their symptoms. ACE inhibitor therapy in asymp-
Captopril (Capoten)
tomatic Doberman Pinschers with occult DCM
· Dogs: 0.5 to 2.0 mg/kg PO three times a day
may delay the onset of symptomatic CHF.
·Ehalapril (Enacard, Vasotec)
· However, there is no indication for therapy with
· Dogs: 0.5 mg/kg PO once or twice a day
ACE inhibitors in patients with asymptomatic,
· Cats: 0.25 to 0.5 mg/kg PO twice a day to
chronic valve disease. A large multicenter pla-
every other day
cebo controlled double blind study in Europe was
· lisinopril (Zestril)
unable to demonstrate a delay in symptomatic
· Dogs: 0.5 mg/kg PO once daily
heart failure in patients with chronic valve dis-
· Benazepril (Lotensin)
ease when given enalapril.
· Dogs: 0.25 to 0.5 mg/kg PO once or twice a
· ACE inhibitors should not be used as a primary
Aep
· Cats: 0.25 to 0.5 mg/kg PO once or twice a
acute CHF. Significant clinical improvement at-
day
tributable to ACE inhibition may not be evident
until 2 to 3 weeks after initiation of therapy.
· Side effects associated with ACE inhibitortherapy
Calcium Channel Blocking Agents
occur infrequently.
·Verapamil, diltiazem, nifedipine, and amlodipine
· Anorexia or inappetence, vomiting, hypotension,
are calcium channel blocking agents. In general,
 and azotemia are the most common side effects
they differ with regard to their antiarrhythmic
302
SECTION III Treatment of Cardiovascular Disease
effects, their vasodilating effects, and their nega-
 and cats; and (3) in the treatment of systemic (amlo-
tive inotropic effects.
s () d  (
· Verapamil is used primarily (intravenously) for
Direct-Acting Arterial Vasodilators
the short-term control of supraventricular ar-
rhythmias (negative chronotropic effect). It pos-
Hydralazine
sesses minimal vasodilating properties, but exerts
· Hydralazine has been evaluated in dogs with
a significant and sometimes detrimental negative
spontaneous CHF secondary to MR.
inotropic effect in patients with heart failure.
· Hydralazine has been shown to decrease MR, in-
· Nifedipine is a more potent vasodilator with more
crease forward fow, reduce left atrial pressures,
limited direct effects on the heart when compared
and improve exercise capacity. Whereas these
with verapamil. Nifedipine is not commonly used
studies provide a reasonable basis for the short-
in veterinary medicine.
term use of hydralazine in dogs with decompen-
· Diltiazem's (Cardizem, Dilacor) vasodilating ac-
sated left-heart failure caused by MR, poor patient
tion is weaker than that of nifedipine and more
tolerance and lack of owner compliance limit the
pronounced than that of verapamil. Diltiazem
usefulness of hydralazine for long-term therapy.
exerts a negligible negative inotropic effect in
· We curently use hydralazine only in cases with
normal, conscious dogs, but when given rap-
refractory heart failure associated with MR that no
idly intravenously, it may cause a pronounced
longer are responding well to ACEinhibitor-diuretic-
negative inotropic effect in animals with heart
Adan uopuquoo (upuaqund ao) uxo
failure. The antiarrhythmic and negative chro-
· Onset of action for orally administered hydrala-
notropic effects of diltiazem are similar to those
zine is approximately 1 hour, the peak effect is
of verapamil. A positive lusitropic (enhanced
achieved within 3 hours, and the effect remains
relaxation) effect may also be associated the ad-
stable for several hours, with a total duration of
ministration of diltiazem to cats with hypertro-
effect of about 12 hours.
phic cardiomyopathy.
· Agents and dosages
Agents and Dosages
· Diltiazem(Cardizem, Cardizem CD, Dilacor)
·Hydralazine (Apresoline):
· Dogs: 0.5 to 2.0 mg/kg PO two or three
· Dogs: Initial dose at 0.5 mg/kg PO; the dose is
times a day
gradually increased untila clinical response is elic-
· Cats: 7.5 mg PO two or three times a day
 ited or up to a maximum dose of 3.0 mg/kg BID.
or 45 to 60 mg PO every day of sustained-
The endpoints of drug titration can be determined
release formulations
by monitoring blood pressure, by the patient's
·Amlodipine (Norvasc)
clinical response, and by obtaining radiographic
· Primarily used as therapy for systemic hyper-
evidence that pulmonary edema has resolved.
tension in cats and dogs.
· Cats: 2.5 mg PO once or twice a day
· Dogs: 0.05 to 0.2 mg/kg PO once or twice
· Hydralazine may play a role in emergency therapy for
a day
severe MR secondary to ruptured chordae tendineae.
· Cats: 0.625 to 1.25 mg PO once 0r twice a
        a
Aep
heart failure.
· In general, we use calcium channel blockers (1) to
· Many side effects are associated with administra-
control heart rate and to facilitate ventricular filling
tion of hydralazine and limit its usefulness:
and relaxation in cats with hypertrophic cardiomy-
· Hypotension
opathy; (2) as supplemental therapy for control of
· Gastrointestinal disturbances
the ventricular response rate in some supraventricu-
· Refex tachycardia
lar tachycardias such as atrial fibrillation in dogs
· Furthermore, there is evidence of enhanced
neurohonmonal activity (increased aldosterone
KEY POINTS
levels) in dogs receiving hydralazine.
Amlodipine can be added to the protocol for
Sodium Nitroprusside
patients with chronic valve disease for addi-
· Nitroprusside is the only direct-acting mixed va-
tional afterload reduction in selected cases.
 sodilator available (not approved) for use in dogs
A systemic systolic blood pressure (as deter-
mined noninvasively) around 100 mm Hg is
with CHF. It is an extremely potent vasodilator that
the target blood pressure range.
is primarily used to rescue dogs with severe, de-
compensated CHF associated with MR or DCM.
Chapter 15
 Pathophysiology and Therapy of Heart Failure
303
· The indications for nitroprusside therapy are short-
ited to the short-term treatment of acute heart
term treatment of refractory, life-threatening CHF
failure when other agents are ineffective or con-
in dogs with MR or DCM or critical systemic
traindicated. Rarely used in veterinary medicine.
hypertension. Combination therapy with dobuta-
· Agents and Dosages: Prazosin (Minipress),
mine, digoxin and/or pimobendan, and diuretics
titrated to effect
provides the best effect.
· Small dogs and cats: 0.25 to 1 mg PO three
· Agents and dosages
times a day
· Nitroprusside(Nipride):
· Medium dogs (<40 lb): 1 to 3 mg PO three
· Dogs: intravenous (IV) constant rate infu-
times a day
sion at an initial rate of 1.0 μg/kg/min (fol-
· Large dogs (>40 lb): 3 to 10 mg PO three
lowing dilution in 5% dextrose), titrated to
times a day
effect, by monitoring blood pressure and
pulmonary capillary wedge pressure, to a
Diuretic Therapy
maximum dose of 10 μg/kg/min.
· Hypotension, tachycardia, nausea, and vomit-
Loop Diuretics
ing are the most significant adverse effects of
Furosemide (Lasix)
nitroprusside administration.
· The mechanism of action of loop diuretics is the
· Cyanide poisoning may also occur with chronic
reversible inhibition of the sodium/potassium/
administration.
chloride co-transporter in the thick ascending
· Hypotension is easily managed by slowing the
limb of the loop of Henle.
rate or by discontinuing the infusion (nitroprus-
· Furosemide is the most commonly used agent in
side has a very short half-life).
this class of diuretics because it is the most po-
tent and has a fast onset of action. The result is
Venous Vasodilators (Nitroglycerin,
the obligatory loss of sodium and water into the
Isosorbide Dinitrate)
urine. Intravenous and intramuscular furosemide
· These nitrate vasodilators are excellent preload re-
 acutely increases venous capacitance secondary
ducers. The development of nitrate tolerance lim-
to release of vasodilatory prostaglandins. This
its the continuous use (i.e., more than 36 hours) of
vasodilatory effect occurs within the first 20 min-
these agents. Tolerance may be avoided by intenmit-
utes after IV or intramuscular (IM) administra-
tent use (24 hours on and 24 hours off) and possibly
tion, and the peak diuretic effect occurs after 30
concurrent use of ACE inhibitors.
to 45 minutes.
· Agents and dosages
· Of interest tothe clinician, there is a bioavailability
· 2% nitroglycerin paste (Nitrol, Nitro-BID)
difference between Lasix and generic oral formu-
· Dogs: 1%4 to 2 inches cutaneously three or
lations; we therefore do not recommend switching
four times a day; 1 inch per 2.27 kg of
back and forth from one formulation to the other.
body weight
· The peak effect after oral administration of Lasix
· Cats: 's to 14 inch three or four times a
is 30 minutes to 2 hours.
day
· Agents and dosages: Furosemide (Lasix, Salix)
· Nitroglycerin paste should be applied to hair-
· Chronic oral administration
less areas such as the pinna or the axillary
· Dogs: 1 to 2 mg/kg PO two to four times a day
region. If perfusion to the ears is poor (e.g..
· Cats: 1 to 2 mg/kg PO twice a day
ears are cold), the axilla or groin will provide
· Parenteral administration (IM or IV)
better absorption. Because nitroglycerin is
· Dogs: 2 to 8 mg/kg as needed to control edema
absorbed transcutaneously, gloves should be
· Cats: 1 to 2 mg/kg as needed to control edema
worm during administration.
· Continuous-rate infusion: 0.66 mg/kg IV bo-
· Isosorbide dinitrate (Isordil)
lus followed by 0.66 mg/kg/hour
· Dogs: 0.2 to 1.0 mg/kg PO three times a day
·Adverse side effects of furosemide (Lasix)include
electrolyte abnonmalities, such as hypokalemia,
Alpha-Adrenergic Receptor Antagonists
hyponatremia, and hypochloremia (hypochlore-
(Prazosin)
mic metabolic alkalosis).
· The use of prazosin has been reported in dogs with
· Typically, withdrawal of the drug or a reduction
CHF, but neither its short-term hemodynamic nor
in the dose usually results in resolution of the al-
long-term clinical effects have been documented.
kalosis. Severe metabolic alkalosis can be treated
Current indications for its use appear to be lim-
with judicious use of half-strength saline with
304
SECTION III  Treatment of Cardiovascular Disease
or without 2.5% dextrose. Overzealous diuretic
· Because of their potassium-sparing effects, they
therapy may cause dehydration, low cardiac out-
should be used with caution with concurrent ACE
put, and, possibly, circulatory collapse. Further-
inhibitor therapy.
more, diuretics activate systemic compensatory
· Spironolactone (Aldactone), an aldosterone an-
mechanisms, such as the RAAS and SNS
tagonist, is usually used in conjunction with
· In the therapy of heart failure, furosemide should
Lasix or Diuril.
always be used in combination with an ACE in-
· Aldosterone antagonism may serve a cardio-
hibitor; chronic monotherapy with furosemide is
protective effect by reversing and inhibiting
not recommended.
myocardial and vascular fibrosis. The anti-
aldosterone effect may prove to be an important
KEY POINT
part in the management of chronic heart fail-
ure, particularly in patients with "aldosterone
The lowest dose of furosemide effective in con-
escape” (a non-RAAS associated increase in
trolling the clinical signs of congestion should
aldosterone).
be used. Monitoring of the patient's resting
· Agents and Dosages: Spironolactone (Aldactone):
respiratory rate can facilitate achieving the
appropriate maintenance dose. Once clinical
· 1 to 2 mg/kg PO twice a day
signs of congestion have resolved, the dose is
tapered to the lowest effective dose based on
KEY POINT
the patient's resting respiratory rate. There is
 no recommended goal number for resting re-
● The appropriate timing for the initiation of
spiratory rate in dogs or cats; however, trends
spironolactone or cther aldosterone antag-
of increasing rate suggest the development of
onist therapy is not clear at this time. The
interstitial pulmonary edema (stimulation of
author routinely administers spironolactone
J-type receptors in the pulmonary interstitium
to patients with refractory heart failure.
 Administration of spironolactone may also
that stimulate tachypnea). A trend of increas-
be appropriate in patients with evidence of
ing resting respiratory rate may suggest that
myocardial remodeling.
the maintenance dose of furosemide is inad-
 Spironolactone may reduce the risk of hy-
equate, and that dosage adjustment is indi-
pokalemia in patients treated with chronic
cated.
furosemide therapy.
Thiazide Diuretics (Chlorothiazide,
Hydrochlorothiazide)
Digitalis Glycoside Therapy
· Thiazide diuretics act by inhibiting distal tubule
Digoxin
electrolyte reabsorption. These diuretics are less
· Digoxin acts by inhibiting sarcolemmal Nat,
potent natriuretic agents and are usually not suc-
K+-ATPase,which causes an accumulation of
cessful in controlling signs of congestion when
sodium which is then available for exchange
used as a monotherapy. In general, thiazide di-
with extracellular calcium through the Na+-
uretics are administered when heart failure is
Cat+ exchanger. The exchange results in
refractory and conventional therapy (digoxin and/
increased intracellular calcium. Calcium is
or pimobendan, ACE inhibitor, and furosemide)
then available for interaction with the sarco-
fails to control the clinical signs of congestion.
plasmic reticulum (calcium-induced release of
· Agents and Dosages
sarcoplasmic reticular calcium), and therefore
· Chlorothiazide (Diuril): 20 to 40 mg/kg
the release of more calcium for interaction with
PO once or twice a day
the contractile elements (positive inotropic
· Hydrochlorothiazide (Hydrodiuril): 2 to 4
effect). Digitalis glycosides shift the Frank-
mg/kg PO once or twice a day
Starling curve upward by increasing the velocity
and force of contraction of the myocardium at
Potassium-Sparing Diuretics
any given level of preload. Additionally, digi-
Spironolactone
talis glycosides slow conduction through the
· Generally, the potassium-sparing diuretics are
atrioventricular node by both direct and vagal
weak diuretics that are rarely used as single-agent
effects. Digoxin may also partially restore
therapy to control edema in heart failure patients.
baroreceptor reflexes that are desensitized
They are most commonly used together with a
by the chronically elevated sympathetic tone
more potent diuretic to control refractory edema.
associated with CHF.
Chapter 15
Pathophysiology and Therapy of Heart Failure
305
· Indications for digoxin therapy:
0.008 mg/kg every day or every other day). Se-
· Theoretically, digoxin is indicated in virtually
rum digoxin levels should be determined 5 to 7
every patient with CHF and a supraventricu-
days after initiation of therapy (therapeutic se-
lar tachycardia (e.g., atrial tachycardia, futter,
rum levels = 1.0 to 2.0 ng/ml in most laboratories
or fibrillation). Digoxin is also indicated for
[8 to 12 hours post dosing]). The oral dose is
echocardiographically documented myocardial
then adjusted based on this trough serum level.
failure and systolic dysfunction (i.e., reduced
fractional shortening); however digoxin has
KEY POINT
only modest positive inotropic effects. Digoxin
The author initiates digoxin at a chronic oral
is not indicated in patients with pericardial dis-
maintenance dosage of 0.005 mg/kg every 12
ease, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy with out-
hours and never uses the other methods (in-
fow tract obstruction, or restrictive myocardial
travenous or rapid oral) to initiate therapy with
disease, unless these conditions are accompa-
digoxin. The most common indications for di-
nied by myocardial failure or supraventricular
 goxin therapy include heart rate control in pa-
tachycardias.
tients with supraventricular tachyarhythmias,
· Method of administration:
myocarcial failure, or chronic heart failure.
· Oral and intravenous routes of administra-
tion are available for digoxin. The urgency of
digitalization determines the route of adminis-
· There are several special tips regarding the
tration. The intravenous route is reserved for
use of digoxin. A 20-lb dog usually gets 1 ml
patients with severe acute heart failure and a
of the 0.05 mg/ml elixir; a 10-lb dog gets 0.5
fast, sustained supraventricular tachyarrhyth-
ml, and so forth. Do not use the elixir in cats,
mia (i.e., atrial fibrillation at a rate of more
as it makes them froth at the mouth. The elixir
than 240 bpm).In most cases,digoxin can
has a small amount of alcohol in it, which may
be administered orally at maintenance levels,
cause gastrointestinal disturbance without drug
with the desired effect occurring 3 to 5 days
toxicity. Signs of digitalization include the fol-
after initiation of the drug (depending on the
lowing: slowing of the heart rate, relief of clini-
patient).
cal signs of heart failure, increased PR interval
·Agents and
Dosages:1
Digoxin(
(Cardoxin,
(unreliable), and demonstration of therapeutic
Lanoxin)
blood levels (a therapeutic trough level of di-
· Rapid IV digoxin:
goxin is 1 to 2 ng/ml, animals with serum levels
· Dogs: 0.0025 mg/kg IV bolus, repeat hourly
 greater than 3 ng/ml usually demonstrate signs
3 to 4 times (total up to 0.01 mg/kg)
of toxicity).
·Arrhythmias ("any arrhythmia in the book") may
·Determinants of digoxin dosages:
be the first sign of toxicity with IV digoxin.
· Many factors (such as dosage form, electro-
· Rapid oral digoxin:
lyte status, renal status, thyroid status, and
· Dogs: Rapid oral digitalization can be em-
concurrent medications) affect the serum lev-
ployed in animals that require therapeutic
 els attained in a particular patient receiving
blood levels priortothe 72to 92 hours required
digoxin.
with maintenance dosage schedules; however,
· Digoxin elixir is more completely absorbed
rapid oral digitalization (similar to IV digita
than the tablet form, resulting in higher blood
lization) is usually not necessary. A variety
levels at a given dosage. Do not switch patients
of methods that involve giving five times the
back and forth from one to the other.
daily maintenance dose over 48 hours, or giv-
· Hypokalemia and hypercalcemia are associ-
ing the maintenance dose three times instead
ated with the development of digitalis toxic-
of twice a day for the first 1 or 2 days (not
ity at lower digoxin doses. Electrolyte status
to exceed 1.5 mg/day), have been employed.
should be monitored periodically (every 2 to
We typically administer digoxin at the main-
3 months), or after changes in therapy (i.e.,
tenance dose instead of rapid digitalization.
increases in furosemide or ACE inhibitor), or
· Maintenance oral digoxin dose
changes in the patient's clinical status.
· Dogs: 0.22 mg/m2 PO twice a day, or 0.005 to
· Concurrent medications such as quinidine,
0.01 mg/kg PO twice a day
verapamil, and drugs that inhibit hepatic micro-
· Cats: One fourth of a 0.125 mg tablet PO ev-
somal enzymes (tetracycline, chloramphenicol)
ery day or every other day (approximately
 may result in increased digoxin serum levels,
306
SECTION III  Treatment of Cardiovascular Disease
requiring a reduction in digoxin dosage. Use
 3 ng/ml (still in the toxic range). If the drug
an altermative medication in place of quinidine
is discontinued for yet another 1% days, the
whenever possible (e.g., procainamide).
serum level should drop from 3 ng/ml to 1.5
· Hypothyroid animals often require less digoxin
 ng/ml. Therefore, in this example, the digoxin
than euthyroid animals. Hyperthyroid animals
should be discontinued for approximately 3 to
may also require a decreased dose. Digoxin is
4 days and then continued at approximately
excreted primarily by the kidneys. The pres-
one third of the original dose to achieve se-
ence of renal dysfunction often necessitates a
rum levels in the therapeutic range. Check
reduction in digoxin dosage or frequency of
electrolyte status and correct hypokalemia
administration.
if present. Life-threatening arrhythmias may
· Dosage should be based on lean body weight.
be treated with atropine, lidocaine, or a beta
 Obesity, pregnancy, or the presence of ascites
blocker (depending on the arrhythmia present).
should be noted, and the dose should be ad-
Additionally, a specific antidote (Fab-antibody
justed accordingly.
fragments that scavenge the free drug from
Adverse and toxic effects of digitalis glycosides:
the body) is available,but its use may be cost
· Caution must be used when administering digi-
prohibitive.
talis glycosides
s intravenously. When given
 pr a  i i
Pimobendan (The "Inodilator")
strictive effects.
· Pimobendan is a phosphodiesterase (PDE) III
· The main determinants of myocardial oxygen
inhibitor that has positive inotropic activity (via
consumption are ventricular wall tension, heart
increasing the sensitivity of the contractile ap-
rate, and the state of contractility. Increased con-
paratus to calcium) and vasodilatory (via phos-
tractility associated with digoxin therapy results
 phodiesterase inhibition) effects. Current studies
in increased myocardial oxygen consumption
have demonstrated it to increase survival time
that is usually offset by the decrease in heart rate
and quality of life in CHF patients with DCM or
and ventricular size (and thus wall tension) and
with chronic valve disease.
increased coronary perfusion.
· There are several clinical trials (some only in ab-
· The signs of toxicity are variable, but in general
stract form) assessing the use of pimobendan in
fall into one or more of three categories:
patients with chronic valve disease, include the
· Neurologic (lethargy and depression)
PITCH Trial, the Edinburgh Study, the Guelph
· Gastrointestinal (inappetence, anorexia, diar-
Study, the PERMTT Study, and the VetSCOPE
rhea, nausea, vomiting)
Study. The general consensus at this time is that
·Cardiac (arrhythmia)
pimobendan has beneficial effects, with regards
·With oral administration, gastrointestinal signs
to survival and quality of life, when administered
almost always occur before arrhythmias. Some
to patients with symptomatic chronic valve dis-
of the more common arrhythmias associated
ease or DCM.
with digitalis toxicity are first and second-degree
· Dosage:
atrioventricular block, accelerated junctional
· Dogs: 0.1 to 0.25 mg/kg PO every 12 hours;
rhythms, ventricular premature complexes, ven-
 give 1 hour prior to food ingestion
tricular tachycardias, and atrioventricular dis-
· Cats: no current recommended dosage
sociation. A nonrespiratory sinus arrhythmia in
a patient receiving digoxin may indicate high
Miscellaneous Agents/Adjunctive
serum levels.
Therapy for Heart Failure
· The treatment of digoxin toxicosis is based on
the elimination half-life of the drug and the
·Bronchodilators, antitussives, S
sympathomi-
goal is to returm digoxin serum levels to within
 metics, positive inotropes, and sedatives/tran-
therapeutic range (1 to 2 ng/ml). In healthy
quilizers are all agents used as adjunctive
dogs, the serum half-life of digoxin is approxi-
therapy in the management of CHF. None of
mately 24 to 36 hours. Therefore, it takes about
these agents when used as monotherapy is
11 days to decrease the serum level to half the
capable of effectively ameliorating the signs of
original level.
CHF. However, these agents may be useful in
· CASEEXAMPLE: if the starting serum level
decreasing some of the signs associated with
is 6 ng/ml, then if the drug is discontinued for
heart failure (coughing, cardiac asthma, and
1% days, the serum level should be around
signs of low-output failure).
Chapter 15
 Pathophysiology and Therapy of Heart Failure
307
Bronchodilators
· Dogs: 0.1 to 1.0 mg/kg SQ, IM
· Theophylline (Theo-Dur) is a bronchodilating
· Acepromazine(reduces anxiety, vasodilator):
agent by inhibition of phosphodiesterase. Phospho-
· Dogs: 0.1 to 0.2 mg/kg SQ, IM
diesterase is the enzyme responsible for reducing
· Butorphanol:
intracellular levels of cyclic adenosine monophos-
· Dogs, cats: 0.1 to 0.3 mg/kg IV or IM
phate (cAMP). Inhibition of this enzyme results in
the accumulation of AMP, which causes increased
Potassium Supplements
calcium influx. An increase in calcium infux in the
· Usually not necessary in most patients with CHF
smooth muscles of the airways results in smooth
 as long as they are eating and drinking. Dogs and,
muscle relaxation and bronchodilation. Addition-
especially, cats may become hypokalemic as a re.
 ally, the change in calcium ion movement in other
 sult of inappetence/anorexia and aggressive con-
tissues, such as nodal and myocardial tissue, results
current diuretic therapy. Potassium supplement
in a positive chronotropic and inotropic effect. This
dose; cats: 2 to 6 mEq PO per day.
agent may be helpful in dyspneic patients with fa-
tigue of the muscles of respiration. Dogs and cats
Oxygen Therapy
 may experience transient gastrointestinal distur-
· As needed in cases with acute pulmonary edema
bance (usually self-limiting and resolving within
the first 2 weeks of drug administration), tachy-
Positive Inotropie Therapy
cardia, and hyperexcitability and/or restlessness.
· The bipyridines, amrinone and milrinone, are
 Occasionally, we use theophylline in patients with
agents that are referred to as inotropic vasodilators
complete atrioventricular block that are not candi-
because they have mild arteriolar dilating prop-
 dates for permanent pacemaker implantation.
erties in addition to their inotropic effects. The
· Agents and dosages:
mechanism of action is an increase in cardiac lev-
·Theophylline (Theo-Dur)
els of cAMP by inhibition of phosphodiesterase.
· Dogs: 9to 20 mg/kg PO two to four times a day
Increased cAMP levels mediate increased calcium
· Cats: 4 mg/kg PO three times a day
delivery to the contractile elements of the myocyte,
·Aminophylline (Aminophyllin)
as well as possibly increasing calcium availability
· Dogs: 11 mg/kg PO two to four times a day
 by augmenting the storage and release of calcium
· Cats: 5 mg/kg PO three times a day
by the sarcoplasmic reticulum. Increases in cAMP
in vascular smooth muscle result in muscular re-
Cough Suppressants
laxation and a direct-acting arterial vasodilator
-onpa u aanoaa aq Aeu suessaddns qano ·
effect.
ing the frequency of coughing in dogs with left
· The indications for bipyridine therapy are similar
mainstem bronchial compression secondary to
to those for digoxin. Amrinone and milrinone are
left atrial enlargement. If chronic airway disease
more potent inotropic agents than digoxin, but
is also present, the long-term results of antitus-
lack the antiarrhythmic properties. Both agents
sive therapy are often disappointing.
tend to increase heart rate and may potentiate ar-
· Hydrocodone (Hycodan)
rhythmias in some patients.
· Dogs: 0.22 mg/kg PO every day to four times
· Their use at the present time is limited to the
a day
treatment of severe refractory myocardial failure.
· Cats: Do not use.
The route of administration for amrinone and
· Butorphanol (Torbutrol)
 milrinone is intravenous. Amrinone is approved
· Dogs: 0.05 to 1 mg/kg PO two to four times a
 only for short-tenm IV administration in humans.
day
·Amrinone (Inocor):
·Cats: No established antitussive dose
· Dogs: 1.0 to 3.0 mg/kg IV bolus or 10 to 80
pg/kg/min as a continuous rate infusion
Sedatives and Tranquilizers
· Adverse and toxic effects associated with amrinone
· May be usefulin selected cases. Respiratory distress
and milrinone have been described. Thrombocyto-
may cause anxiety and stress in a patient with CHF.
 penia, a dose-related increased heart rate, gastroin-
 Agents with minimal cardiovascular effects should
testinal signs (diarrhea, anorexia), and hypotension
be chosen to prevent exacerbation of the CHF by
(at high doses) have been reported. Additionally,
causing hypotension or reduced contractility.
these agents appear to be arrhythmogenic (i.e., po-
· Morphine sulfate (reduces anxiety, decreases
tentiate the development of arrhythmias) in some
sympathetic tone):
humans and dogs with heart failure.
308
SECTIONIII
1  Treatment of Cardiovascular Disease
· The presence of serious ventricular arrhythmias rep-
· Dopamine hydrochloride(Intropin):
resents a contraindication for the use of these agents.
· Dogs: 2 to 8 μg/kg/min IV continuous infu-
Because the half-life of the parental formulations is
sion diluted in 5% dextrose
quite short, discontinuing the medication is the treat-
ment for toxicosis. We rarely use these agents in the
therapy of heart failure in dogs and cats.
KEY POINT
"Quick Dobutamine Drip Tip:" Dilute 1 ml
dobutamine (Dobutrex, 250 mg in a 20 ml 
Sympathomimetics (Dobutamine, Dopamine,
vial or 12.5 mg/ml) for each 20 Ib of body
and Isoproterenol)
weight in 250 ml of 5% dextrose. Deliver by
· Sympathomimetics are agents that mimic the ac-
continuous rate infusion at a rate of 1 ml/min
tions of the SNS (i.e., alpha- and beta-adrenergic
(1 drop every 4 seconds) to obtain a dose of 5
receptor agonists).
μg/kg/min if using a venoset delivery system.
· Dobutamine and dopamine are used only in the
therapy of acute severe heart failure. Both dobu-
tamine and dopamine exert a positive inotropic
· The adverse and toxic effects associated with
effect by stimulating myocardial beta-l adren-
sympathomimetic administration are usually
ergic receptors, which results in increased cAMP
dose related and may include:
levels through adenylate cyclase stimulation. The
·Tachycardia
increased levels of cAMP cause an increase in
·Arrhythmias
the slow inward calcium currents as well as an
· Gastrointestinal
disturbances
(anorexia,
increase in calcium storage by the sarcoplasmic
nausea)
reticulum, making more calcium available to
· Hypertension (dopamine)
the contractile elements. Dobutamine stimulates
· Hypotension (isoproterenol)
 both beta-1 and beta-2 adrenergic receptors in the
· Phlebitis may occur if the agent goes extra-
peripheral vasculature, and this combination re-
vascular.
sults in no major changes in blood pressure.
· Dobutamine should not be initiated prior to dig-
· The positive chronotropic effect that is seen with
 italization for heart rate control in patients with
dobutamine at higher doses should be avoided in
severe heart failure and rapid atrial fibrillation.
most cases. The effects of dopamine are similar to
Prior digitalization is necessary for ventricular
dobutamine with the exception of the following:
rate control because administration of dobuta-
· Dobutamine favors blood fow to myocardial
mine may speed atrioventricular nodal conduc-
and skeletal muscle, whereas dopamine favors
tion and increase the ventricular response rate
fow to the renal and mesenteric systems.
to atrial fibrillation.
· Dopamine infusion rates above 10 μg/kg/min
· The treatment for catecholamine toxicity in-
may be associated with vasoconstriction.
volves stopping or slowing the administration
· Dopamine may increase diastolic intraventric-
of the drug.
ular pressures.
· All sympathomimetic agents are best suited to
KEY PoINT
short-term IV use. Isoproterenol stimulates beta-1
Therapy with positive inotropic agents in
and beta-2 receptors, resulting in increased myo-
cardial contractility, increased heart rate, and pe-
veterinary medicine is, for the most part, lim-
ited to the use of dobutamine or dopamine
ripheral vasodilation. Isoproterenol is used mainly
 in emergency scenarios, digoxin for chronic
for the temporary control of heart rate in animals
heart failure, and, more recenty, pimoben-
with symptomatic bradycardia. The chronotropic
dan for chronic heart failure.
 and arrhythmogenic effects make it unsuitable for
the treatment of animals with CHF.
·Agents and dosages:
Beta-Adrenergic Receptor Blockers
· Isoproterenol hydrochloride (Isuprel):
· Beta-adrenergic receptor blockers  (selective
· Dogs: 0.04 to 0.1 μg/kg/min IV infusion
beta-l agents such as atenolol and nonselective
following dilution in dextrose
agents such as propranolol or carvedilol) are
· Dobutaminehy drochloride (Dobutrex ):
 agents that in the past have primarily been used
· Dogs: 5 to 20 μg/kg/min IV continuous
as antiarrhythmic agents in the control of the ven-
infusion diluted in 5% dextrose (monitor
tricular response rate to atrial fibrillation. Recent
closely for arrhythmia)
evidence has suggested that beta blockade may
Chapter 15
 Pathophysiology and Therapy of Heart Failure
309
be effective in the therapy of mild to moderate
· Dosage: Sildenafil (Viagra): 0.5 to 1.0 mg/kg
CHF. Chronic SNS stimulation results in down-
PO two or three times a day
regulation and desensitization of cardiac beta re-
ceptors. Beta bloc kers have been demonstrated to
TREATMENT PROTOCOLS
prove myocardial function in dogs, using certain
· When considering heart failure therapy for dogs
models of heart failure.
with chronic valve disease or DCM, it is helpful
· However, if severe heart failure is present, beta
to think of patients with heart disease and/or heart
blockade must be used very cautiously.
failure as being on a continuum of stages ranging
· Patients with pathologic concentric hypertro-
from:
phy (e.g., hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, aortic
· Stage A (risk for heart disease)
or pulmonic stenosis, and tetralogy of Fallot)
· Stage B (heart disease is present; no symptoms)
beneft from administration of beta blockers.
· Stage C
These patients may become symptomatic dur-
· C1: stabilized CHF
ing exercise because of myocardial ischemia or
· C2: mild to moderate CHF
dynamic outfow tract obstruction. Marked con-
· C3: severe and/or life threatening CHF
centric hypertrophy predisposes the myocar-
· Stage D (refractory CHF)
dium to hypoxia, and tachycardia exacerbates
this scenario. Beta blockers reduce myocardial
Stage A
Oxygen consumption by reducing the heart rate.
Additionally, the negative inotropic effects of
· This refers to those patients with a risk of de-
beta blockers may reduce the dynamic outfow
veloping heart disease such as those with cer-
tract obstruction seen in some of these patients.
tain genetics, a family history of heart disease,
· Carvedilol(CoReg), a third-generation, non-
a breed predisposition, or concurrent systemic
selective beta blocker with alpha-1 blocking
disease with cardiovascular implications. Exam-
activity as well as antioxidative effects, can be
ples include the following: cavalier King Charles
administered to stable patients with heart fail-
Spaniels are at risk for developing chronic valve
ure for cardioprotective effects at a dosage of
disease; Doberman Pinschers are at risk for de-
1.56 mg PO every 24 hours for 1 to 2 weeks,
veloping DCM; Boxers are at risk for developing
then 1.56 mg PO every 12 hours, and then up-
arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopa-
ward titration to the maximal tolerated dosage
thy, and so on.
(0.4 mg/kg P0 every 12 hours).
· No therapy is indicated for dogs in stage A
· Manage predisposing conditions
· Manage systemic hypertension, if present
KEY POINT
· No dietary sodium modifications necessary
 In general, beta blockers in patients with ad-
vanced cardiac disease should be used only
Stage B
under the guidance of a specialist.
· Heart disease is present, but there are no clinical
signs of CHF.
Novel Vasodilators (Sildenafil)
· Same as in stage A
· Sildenafil is a phosphodiesterase V inhibitor that
· Increase the awareness of signs of CHF (tachy-
has been shown to improve both exercise toler-
pnea, dyspnea, coughing)
ance and quality of life in humans with pulmo
nary hypertension.
 gression and complications
·Initial clinical observations indicate that sildena-
· For patients with chronic valve disease, there is
fil may also have a positive effect in dogs with
no evidence indicating that there is any benefi-
cial effect of using an ACE inhibitor or pimo-
to chronic valve disease, congenital heart dis-
 bendan at this stage
ease, chronic pulmonary disease, and heartwonm
· For patients with DCM, there are no drugs
disease.
recommended for routine use; however, ACE
· Can be used in combination with pimoben-
inhibitors, pimobendan, digoxin (if atrial fibril-
dan (Vetmedin) for additional inodilator
lation is present), or beta blockers may be initi-
effect.
ated in selected patients.
310
SECTIONIII
 Treatment of Cardiovascular Disease
Stage C1
response rate if atrial fibrillation is present. Beta
blockers should not be introduced at this time,
· Stabilized CHF; historical signs of CHF, but no
but may be continued if the patient is already
symptoms are currently present
receiving them.
· Goals are to keep clinical signs stabilized, use
· Avoid, if possible, excessive sodium intake,
the minimum effective dosage of furosemide,
beta blockers, corticosteroids, IV fuids (unless
ACE inhibitor at not less than minimum rec
required for concurrent disease; requires care-
ommended dosage, modulate neurohormones
ful monitoring of the respiratory rate trend).
(optional aldosterone antagonist and/or beta
blocker), and to preserve renal and myocardial
Stage C3
function. Additional drugs may be added at this
stage for their cardioprotective effects.
· Severe or life threatening CHF
· Drugs for routine use: furosemide (mandatory),
· Treat hypoxemia, increase cardiac output, con-
ACE inhibitor, pimobendan
tinue previous cardiac drugs (see Stage C2),
· Drugs for selected patients: spironolactone,
and stabilize the patient in hospital with intra-
digoxin, thiazide, amlodipine/hydralazine or
venous drugs.
other vasodilator
· Drugs for routine use: as for stage C2 plus oxy-
· Avoid, if possible, excessive sodium intake,
 gen, IV furosemide, nitroglycerin
 beta blockers, corticosteroids, IV fuids (unless
· Drugs for selected patients: dobutamine, nitro-
required for concurrent disease; requires care
prusside
ful monitoring of the respiratory rate trend)
KEY POINT
KEY POINT
Aggressive diuresis (repeated IV boluses or
The dose of furosemide should be adjusted
continuous rate infusion of furosemide) is in-
(within a range specified by clinician) based
cicated when life threatening CHF is present.
on the resting respiratory rate trend and oth-
er clinical signs as monitored by the owners.
Stage D
· Refractory, chronic CHF.
Stage C2
· Drugs for routine use: continue current cardiac
· Mild to moderate CHF is present
 medications as in stage C plus spironolactone,
· Goals are to attain stage C1 (eliminate pulmonary
thiazides, digoxin, subcutaneous furosemide,
edema and/or effusions), improve hemodynam-
repeated centesis for effusions, and very low
ics, and to modulate neurohormonal activation.
sodium intake.
· In patients with chronic valve disease, the use
· Drugs for selected patients: As per stage C3
 of furosemide is mandatory and the addition of
· For chronic valve disease, consider additional
ACE inhibitor with or without pimobendan is
vasodilation with amlodipine or hydralazine.
recommended. There is currently no consensus
· For DCM, dobutamine (continuous rate in-
on which to use frst in combination with fu
fusion for 48 hours every 3 weeks) may be
rosemide, although initiation of both agents is
helpful.
reasonable (at this time there are no studies that
have evaluated the efficacy of the combination
Specific Disease Treatment
of an ACE inhibitor and pimobendan with fu-
rosemide). Digoxin (with or without diltiazem)
Chronie Valve Disease: Mitral Regurgitation
is recommended to control the ventricular re-
without Congestive Heart Failure (Stage B)
sponse rate if atrial fibrillation is present. Beta
· ACE inhibitor therapy is initiated when there is
blockers should not be used.
clinical evidence that the heart disease present
· In patients with symptomatic DCM, furose-
has led to heart failure and activation of com-
mide, ACE inhibitor, and pimobendan are rec-
pensatory mechanisms (RAAS). Compensated
ommended. Digoxin (with or without diltia-
heart failure can usually be identified with tho-
zem) is recommended to control the ventricular
racic radiography. For example, the presence of
Chapter 15
 Pathophysiology and Therapy of Heart Failure 
311
pulmonary venous congestion with left atrial and
respiratory rate indicates adequate preload reduc-
ventricular enlargement in a 10-year-old Minia
tion. Once the respiratory rate has stabilized in the
ture Poodle with a loud left apical holosystolic
normal range (usually less than 30 breaths per min-
Murmur secondary to MR Probably represents
ute), the diuretic dose is tapered down to the lowest
compensated heart failure.
dose capable of controlling the signs of CHF.
· In this scenario, enalapril (0.5 mg/kg) or some
· A trend of increasing resting respiratory rate sug-
other ACE inhibitor may be initiated (with pre-
 gests worsening of the pulmonary edema and the
treatment and 1-week post-treatment renal evalu-
need for higher dosages of diuretics or the ad-
 ations) once daily, although there is no evidence
dition of other medications such as intermittent
that this therapy will delay the onset of clinical
nitrate therapy (nitroglycerin /4 to 1 inch cutane-
signs. Some dogs with primary valve disease
ously every 8 to 12 hours). Beware of nitroglyc-
develop significant left atrial enlargement sec-
erine tolerance as described previously.
ondary to MR. These dogs become symptom-
atic (coughing) because there is compression of
Chronic Valve Disease with Symptomatic
the left mainstem bronchus by the enlarged left
Congestive Heart Failure (Stage C3)
atrium.
· Dogs with severe CHF secondary to primary valve
· These cases require the therapeutic efforts to be
disease are symptomatic at rest and may require
aimed at reducing the MR (vasodilation with ACE
aggressive therapy to control pulmonary edema.
inhibitors, preload reduction with diuretics, and
heart rate control with digoxin) and suppressing
doses of furosemide as well as optimized doses
the cough refex (butorphanol or hydrocodone)
of ACE inhibitor and pimobendan.
Coughing in these patients often becomes refrac
· If the patient is dyspneic, hospitalization is in-
tory to medical therapy.
dicated to provide oxygen therapy in addition to
close monitoring and parenteral administration of
Chronie Valve Disease with Symptomatic
furosemide. Adjunctive therapy with nitroglyc-
Congestive Heart Failure (Stage C)
erin is also indicated.
· Decompensated heart failure usually leads to the
· Thoracocentesis may be necessary if pleural ef-
 clinical signs of moderate CHF. The earliest signs
fusion is present. Furosemide (2 to 4 mg/kg IV)
of decompensation are usually not noticed by the
is administered, and the respiratory rate is moni-
pet's owner. Elevated respiratory rates during rest
tored for a trend of decreasing respiratory rate. If
(tachypnea) may be mistaken for panting, and are
no decline in respiratory rate is observed within
often overlooked. Tachypnea is associated with the
1 to 2 hours, furosemide is again administered at
onset of interstitial (stage II) pulmonary edema.
the same or a slightly higher dose. The respira-
· In addition to tachypnea, dogs with moderate
tory rate is again monitored, and the preceding is
CHF may also exhibit exercise intolerance or
repeated if there is no improvement. As the respi-
coughing. Again, thoracic radiography can reveal
ratory rate decreases, the dosage and frequency
the presence of interstitial pulmonary edema (in-
of administration are reduced to the lowest dose
 creased interstitial patterm, enlarged pulmonary
effective in controlling the pulmonary edema.
veins with fuzzy, indistinct borders, and concur-
Pretreatment evaluation of renal function and
rent left atrial and ventricular enlargement) as
 hydration status aids in selecting the appropriate
well as bronchial compression, if present.
furosemide dose.
· The appropriate therapy for this patient includes
· In the presence of refractory, severe, chronic CHF,
ACE inhibitor therapy (enalapril 0.5 mg/kg PO
the addition of spironolactone with or without a
twice a day), furosemide (2 to 4 mg/kg PO two or
thiazide to conventional therapy may help control
three times a day), with or without pimobendan
edema formation. Furthermore, intermittent ther-
(0.25 mg/kg PO every 12 hours on an empty stom-
apy with nitrates, such as nitroglycerin or isosor-
ach). Digoxin is usually initiated if:
bide dinitrate, may also aid in reducing ventricular
· Myocardial failure is present
filling pressures and the formation of edema.
· Atrial fibrillation or other supraventricular
tac hycardia is present
Mild Heart Failure Secondary to Dilated
· Therapy with ACE inhibitors, pimobendan and
Cardiomyopathy (Stage B)
 diuretics has not produced an adequate response.
· The presence of ventricular ectopy, chamber dila-
· The resting respiratory rate can be used to monitor
tion, or evidence of myocardial failure (reduced
 the response to therapy. A trend of decreasing resting
fractional shortening percentage and increased
312
SECTION III Treatment of Cardiovascular Disease
· Furosemide (up to 6 to 8 mg/kg IV) may be given
larly in dogs that are predisposed to idiopathic
every 1 to 2 hours until the resting respiratory rate
DCM (e.g., Doberman Pinschers and others),
is decreasing. Then administer furosemide (2 to 4
suggests a diagnosis of occult DCM.
mg/kg IV) every 4 to 8 hours, depending on the
· Although these dogs are usually asymptomatic,
status of the patient. The goal is to taper the dose
they often have progressive heart failure. ACE in-
to the lowest effective dose and the frequency
hibitor therapy (enalapril 0.5 mg PO once or twice
of administration to two to three times a day as
a day or benazepril 0.25 mg PO once a day) can
quickly as possible.
be initiated in these dogs in an attempt to prolong
· If intravenous dobutamine/nitroprusside therapy is
the as ymptomatic phase of the disease course.
necessary to control the symptoms of heart failure,
· Beta-adrenergic blocking agents may also be in-
the nitroprusside dose should be adjusted to de-
dicated in these patients.
crease mean or systolic arterial blood pressure by
· Digoxin and/or pimobendan therapy is also in-
15 to 30 mm Hg. The long-term survival of dogs
dicated in patients with myocardial failure,
with severe, life-threatening heart failure is poor.
    s  
CHF is present. Some Spaniel breeds (American
Feline Cardiomyopathy (Dilated
Cocker Spaniels) may develop DCM secondary
Cardiomyopathy, Restrictive Cardiomyopathy,
to taurine deficiency. Therefore, plasma taurine
and Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy)
levels should be evaluated and taurine supple-
· The medical approach for the feline with cardio-
mentation instituted (500 mg PO twice a day) if
myopathy is based on the type of cardiomyopa-
indicated.
thy present and the presence of symptoms (i.e..
symptomatic CHF). Evaluation of the patient
Moderate Heart Failure Secondary to Dilated
with electrocardiography, thoracic radiography.
Cardiomyopathy with Symptomatie Congestive
 and echocardiography usually enables the clini-
Heart Failure (Stage C)
cian to characterize the cardiomyopathy as be-
· As heart failure progresses, flling pressures even-
ing associated with myocardial systolic failure
tually become elevated and pulmonary edema
(DCM and, sometimes, restrictive cardiomyopa-
 may develop.
thy [RCM]) or diastolic dysfunction (hypertro-
· The therapeutic protocol in this patient is essen-
phic cardiomypathy [HCM] and RCM).
tially the same as that for a patient with moderate
· In general, cats with primary systolic dysfunction
heart failure secondary to MR. The only differ-
 are symptomatic at diagnosis. These cats receive
ence is that pimobendan and/or digoxin is initiated
combinations of digoxin (a fourth of a 0.125 mg
earlier in the disease course of cardiomyopathy.
tablet PO once a day or every other day, with dose
· Conventional therapy for this patient with symp
adjustment based on trough serum levels about 2
tomatic heart failure consists of an ACE inhibi-
weeks after initiation of therapy), enalapril (1 to
tor, furosemide, and pimobendan. These patients
 2 mg PO every other day to twice a day for cats
frequently have cardiac rhythm disturbances that
depending on renal status), and furosemide (6.25
may be associated with symptoms or may be ag-
to 12.5 mg PO once or twice a day).
 gravating the CHF. In this scenario, antiarrhythmic
· There seems to be an increased risk of intracar-
therapy is indicated (e. g., digoxin with or with-
diac thrombus formation if marked left atrial
 out diltiazem to control the ventricular response
enlargement is present. In this scenario, aspirin
to atrial fibrillation). Antiarrhythmic therapy is
(25 mg/kg PO every 3 days) or warfarin sodium
typically not indicated in patients with arrhyth-
(Coumadin) can be initiated. The initial dose for
mias that are not associated with clinical signs of
warfarin is 0.5 mg every 24 hours for a 3- to 5-kg
reduced cardiac output and poor tissue perfusion.
cat, monitored with either prothrombin time (PT),
activated partial thromboplastin time, or proteins
Severe Heart Failure Secondary to Dilated
induced by vitamin K antagonists. Anticoagulants
Cardiomyopathy (Stage C3)
(warfarin-based products) may be more effective
· Aggressive therapy is indicated in patients with
at preventing thromboembolic episodes when
severe symptomatic heart failure. Oxygen ther-
compared with antiplatelet agents such as aspirin.
apy, ACE inhibitors, pimobendan, furosemide,
However, serious side effects (hemorrhage) and
and, possibly, dobutamine and nitroprusside may
the need for close monitoring of bleeding times
be necessary to control pulmonary edema in life-
 may limit their use. Furthermore, the recurrence
threatening heart failure.
rate  for thromboembolism in cardiomyopathic
Chapter 15
Pathophysiology and Therapy of Heart Failure
313
cats is high, regardless of the agent used. There
IV every 3 to 4 hours) andtopical 2 % nitroglycerin
is some evidence that Plavix (clopidogrel; 18.75
(14 to %z inch every 8 hours) are usually effective
snquu yuaaid Ae (snou t Aiaaa Od S
 in reducing filling pressures, therefore facilitating
formation in cats at risk of intracardiac thrombus
the resolution of the pulmonary edema. The dosing
formation. Low-molecular-weight heparins such
frequency and dosage of furosemide are reduced
as dalteparin (Fragmin; 100 U/kg subcutaneously
once clinical improvement is noted, as evidenced
every 24 hours) or enoxaparin (Lovonox; 1 to 1.5
 by a reduction in resing respiratory rate.
mg/kg subcutaneously every 12 to 24 hours) may
· In addition to preload reducers, an agent to im-
also have beneficial effects in cats at risk. How-
prove diastolic function (beta blocker or cal-
ever, these dosages have largely been borrowed
cium channel blocker) may be used. Caution
from the human literature and specific dosages
should be exercised when administering beta
have not been established in cats.
blockers to patients with severe CHF and pos-
· Cats with HCM may be completely asymptomatic
sible myocardial failure. Oxygen therapy is also
-osse vaudsp pue eaudyon ym puasand Aeut o
indicated.
ciated with decompensated diastolic heart failure.
· The medical management of feline RCM is simi-
· There is some controversy as to which agent is the
lar to the therapy for DCM because systolic dys-
drug of choice in cats with diastolic dysfunction.
function is usually present in both. Combinations
Calcium channel blockers (diltiazem) and beta
of enalapril, digoxin, and furosemide are cur-
blockers (atenolol) facilitate diastolic function,
 rently recommended.
but in different ways. Beta blockers probably fa-
cilitate diastolic function only by decreasing the
Pericardial Disease
heart rate and myocardial oxygen consumption.
· The management of chronic pericardial effusion
Calcium channel  blockers  facilitate diastolic
and cardiac tamponade is quite straightforward.
function by improving myocardial relaxation
An echocardiogram is perfonmed to confinm the
through normalization of abnormal myocardial
diagnosis of pericardial effusion and to attempt
calcium currents as well as by coronary vasodila-
to ascertain if the underlying cause is neoplasia.
tion to improve myocardial perfusion.
If the prognosis is favorable, pericardiocentesis is
· In asymptomatic cats with HCM, the therapy is
performed to relieve the compression on the heart
based on the presence of tachycardia, dynamic left
by the elevated intrapericardial pressure. If the ef-
ventricular outflow obstruction, and the severity of
 fusion retums more than once, a pericardectomy
concentric hypertrophy and left atrial enlargement.
is recommended (see Chapter 11).
If tachycardia (heart rate more than 200 beats per
minute), dynamic left ventricular outflow obstruc-
 Congestive Heart Failure Associated with
tion, and marked hypertrophy are present, therapy
Chronic Heartworm Disease:
with a beta blocker is initiated (atenolol 6.25 to 12.5
· The approach to dogs with CHF associated
mg PO once or twice a day). Beta blockers appear
with chronic heartwonm disease involves cage
to be more effective than calcium channel blockers
rest, diuretic therapy, and heartworm adulticide
 in controlling the heart rate in tachycardic cats. Ad-
- e s an a sd asa 
ditionally, beta blockers are probably more effective
mum of 1 week before adulticide therapy (staged
in reducing the dynamic outflow tract obstruction
melarsomine adulticide protocol). Heart failure
seen in some cats with HCM. Beta blockers should
medications (ACE inhibitors, furosemide, spi-
be avoided if decompensated CHF is present.
ronolactone, pimobendan, sildenafil) may be
· Tachycardia, CHF, and thromboembolism are
discontinued in some patients 4 to 8 weeks after
considered to be negative prognostic indicators
adulticide therapy (see Chapter 10).
in cardiomyopathic cats.
· The number one priority when presented with a
Frequently Asked Questions
cat with CHF is to avoid stressing the patient with
When is activation of the SNS maladaptive to the car-
diagnostic tests such as radiographs or electrocar-
diac health of the animal?Select one.
diograms. Cats with symptomatic heart failure typ-
A. in a normal animal that is in a fight or fight
S    d  
stress response
If the cat is dyspneic, suffering from life-threaten-
 B. in an animal with RAAS activation
C. in an animal with early heart failure
ing heart failure, a thoracocentesis is performed to
D. in an animal with chronic heart failure
rule out the presence of pleural effusion. Preload
D Is the correct answer.
reducers such as furosemide (1 to 4 mg/kg IM or
314
SECTION III
Treatment of Cardiovascular Disease
Fox PR, Sisson DD: Angiotensin-converting enzyme in-
Rationates:
hibitors. In Bonagura JD, ed: Kirk's current veterinary
 A. The activation of the SNS is essential for the animal
therapy X11, Philadelphia, 1995, WB Saunders.
under stress. By increasing heart rate, cardiac output, and
Goodwin JK, Strickland KN: The emergency manage-
selective vasoconstriction (e.g., to gut) and vasodilation
ment of dogs and cats with congestive heart failure,
(e.g., to muscles) the animal may engage the cardiovas-
Vet Med 93:818-823, 1998.
cular system effectively to deal with an acute threat.
Goodwin JK, Strickland KN: The role of dietary modi-
B. The acute activation of the SNS results in stimu-
fication and nondrug therapy in dogs and cats with
lation of beta-1 adrenergic receptors in the juxtaglo-
congestive heart failure, Vet Med 93:919-926, 1998.
 merular apparatus of the kidney. Angiotensin I also
Goodwin JK, Strickland KN: Managing arthythmias in
causes activation of the SNS so these two systems are
closely intertwined, not maladaptive.
dogs and cats with congestive heart failure, Vet Med
93:818-823,1998.
C. Early activation of the SNS in early stages of heart
Hamlin RL: Physiology of the failing heart. In Fox PR,
failure helps to maintain:
·Blood pressure
Sisson D, Moise NS eds: Textbook of canine and fe-
snd snss .
line cardiology: principles and clinical practice, ed 2,
·Cardiac output
Philadelphia, 1999, WB Saunders.
(How? By increasing venous return to the heart via
Kelly RA, Smith TW: Drugs used in the treatment of
vasoconstriction of the splanchnic vessels, vasocon-
heart failure. In Braunwald E, ed: Heart disease: a
striction of other various vascular beds, and positive
textbook of cardiovascular medicine, ed 5, Philadel-
inotropic and chronotropic cardiac effects)
phia 1997,WB Saunders.
D. This is a maladaptive situation because chronic
 Kittleson MD: Management of heart failure. In Kittleson 
SNS overactivity produces:
MD, Kienle RD, eds: Small animal cardiovascular
· Down-regulation and desensitization of beta-1
medicine, St Louis, 1998, Mosby.
adrenergic receptors
Kittleson MD: Pathophysiology of heart failure. In Kit-
· Abnormal barorefex function.
tleson MD, Kienle RD, eds: Small animal cardiovas-
● Overloads the heart by increasing venous return
cular medicine, St Louis, 1998, Mosby.
· Increases myocardial oxygen consumption (by
Sisson D, Kittleson MD: Management of heart failure:
increasing heart rate)
principles of treatment, therapeutic strategies, and
· Cardiac NE depletion and elevated plasma NE
pharmacology. In Fox PR, Sisson D, Moise NS, eds:
· Damage to the myocardium, resulting in
Textbook of canine and feline cardiology: principles
potential alrhythmogenesis
and clinical practice, ed 2, Philadelphia, 1999, WB
How are natriuretic peptide leveis usefut in assess-
Saunders.
ment of heart disease?
Smith TW, Kelly RA, Stevenson LW, Braunwald E:
Though not yet widely used, these assays may be an
Management of heart failure. In Braunwald E, ed:
important addition to the diagnostic toolkit for selected
Heart disease: a tex tbook of cardiovascular medicine,
heart diseases. Circulating natriuretic peptide levels may
ed 5, Philadelphia, 1997, WB Saunders.
be used to differentiate between symptoms associated
Strickland KN: Advances in antiarrhythmic therapy. In
with cardiac disease versus primary pulmonary disease.
Goodwin JK,ed:Advances in cardiovascular diag-
Natriuretic peptides are salt and water homeostasis
nostics and therapy, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
regulators, and are involved in blood pressure con-
Pract, 28:1515-1546, 1998.
trol so changes in these parameters may help us to
Strickland KN: Canine and feline caval syndrome, Clin
understand the stage of the cardiovascular condition.
Tech Small Anim Pract 13:88-95, 1998.
Their potential value is as diagnostic and prognostic
Strickland KN: Management of chronic congestive heart 
markers in patients with CHF particularly.
failure, Vet Med 93:913-919, 1998.
Natriuretic peptide levels are elevated in many dis-
ease conditions resulting in expanded Auid volume
(e.g., DCM, chronic valvular insuffciency in dogs,
 and cardiomyopathy in cats).
SUGGESTED READINGS
Bulmer BJ and Sisson DD: Therapy of heart failure. In
   o x   
cine, ed 6, Philadelphia, 2005, WB Saunders.
Colucci wS, Braunwald E: Pathophysiology of heart
failure. In Braun wald E, ed: Heart disease: a textbook
of cardiovascular medicine, ed 5, Philadelphia, 1997,
WBSaunders.
Treatment of Cardiac Arrhythmias
and Conduction Disturbances
Marc S. Kraus, Anna R. M. Gelzer, and Sydney Moise
· Atrial or ventricular myocardium: Depolarization
INTRODUCTION TO TREATMENT
 is sodium channel gated and repolarization is po-
OF CARDIAC ARRHYTHMIAS
tassium channel dominated. To treat arrhythmias
Cardiac arrhythmias are defined as variations ofthe car-
that originate from the atrial and ventricular myo-
diac rhythm from normal sinus rhythm. Some cardiac
cardium, Na channel blockers (NCB), K channel
arrhythmias are benign and clinically insignificant and
blocker (KCB) or combinations thereof are often
require no specific therapy whereas other arrhythmias
used in conjunction with BBs. The NCB used for
may cause severe clinical signs such as syncope or de-
treatment of arrhythmias in dogs are lidocaine (IV
generate into malignant arrhythmias (i.e., ventricular
only) and mexiletine and rarely procainamide.
fibrillation [VF]) leading to cardiac arrest and sudden
The most important KCB is sotalol, which also
death. The goal of this section is to discuss treatnent
has BB properties. The authors also use amioda-
strategies for management of arhythmias.
rone, which is predominantly a KCB, but also has
potent NCB and some CCB and BB activity. For
drug dosages consult Table 16-1 and Table 16-2.
General Remarks
 For optimal long-term management of most ar-
Antiarrhythmic drugs commonly target two general
rhythmias, a 24-hour Holter recording should be ac-
areas of the heart due to their specific electrophysi-
quired in addition to the electocardiogram (ECG).
ologic properties:
Even though a correct diagnosis of an arrhythmia
· Sinoatrial and Atrioventricular (AV) nodal tissue:
may be obtained by a short in-hospital ECG, in
Depolarization is calcium channel driven. To treat
some patients with an intermittent arrhythmia, the
arhythmias that originate from the sinoatrial and
24-hour Holter recording is required to establish a
AV nodal tissue calcium channel blockers (CCB)
definitive diagnosis.
and beta blockers (BBs) are primarily used. The
 The decision regarding how and when to treat an
most commonly prescribed CCB for treatment of
arrhythmia should be based on the clinical signs and
arrhythmias is diltiazem (available PO and IV).
 urgency of intervention. Emergency management
The beta-l selective BB atenolol and esmolol
using intravenous drugs may be required before a
(TV only) are the most frequently used antiarrhyth-
24-hour Holter recording can be obtained. Both dil-
mic BB. Digoxin has a vagomimetic effect and
tiazem and esmolol are available in an IV formula-
can therefore indirectly prolong AV node conduc-
tion, allowing emergency treatment of excessively
tion time. Its antiarrhythmic application is limited
rapid supraventricular arrhythmias (SVAs), Lido-
to the treatment of atrial fibrillation (AF). For drug
caine is the most important intravenous drug used
dosages consult Table 16-1 and Table 16-2.
for life-threatening ventricular arrhythmias.
315
316
SECTION III Treatment of Cardiovascular Disease
Table 16-1
Agents for Rate Control/Abolishing Arrhythmias in Canine Patients with
Supraventricular Arrhythmias
Drug
Oral administration
Intravenous administration
Indication
Diltiazem XR
3-4 mg/kg BID
AF, AFl,
(Dilacor)
AT OAVRT
Diltiazem
0.5 mg/kg TID titrated up
0.1-0.2 mg/kg bolus, then CRI
Acute AF,
(Cardizem)
(max 1.5-2 mg/kg TID)
 2-6 μg/kg/min
AFl, OAVRT
Atenolol
0.25-1 mg/kg SID to BID
AFI, AT,
(Tenormin)
OAVRT
Esmolol
50- 100 μg/kg bolus
Acute AF, AFl,
(Brevibloc)
(repeat up to max 500 μg/kg);
AT or OAVRT
50-200 μg/kg/min CRI
Sotalol
1-2.5 mg/kg BID
AF, AFl, AT
(Betapace)
 Digoxin
0.003-0.005 mg/kg BID
AF
(Lanoxin)
 Liquid suspension available
for small dogs
Max dose for Dobermans:
0.25 mg BID
Procainamide
10- 15 mg/kg IV bolus
AT
(Procain)
slowly over 2 minutes,
if needed start a
CRI: 25-50 μg/kg/min
Amiodarone
10 mg/kg BID for
AF, AT
(Cordarone)
1 week (loading dose)*
5 mg/kg SID
(maintenance dose)*
Lidocaine
 2 mg/kg IV bolus, repeat
AF if due to
if needed
narcotics
*Recommended dose ran ge in veterinary medicine is anecdotal and variable.
BID, Twice a day; AF, atrial fibrillation; AFt, atrial futter, AT, atrial tachycardia, OAVRT, orthodromic atrioventricular reciprocating
tachycardia; TID, three times a day; CRI, constant-rate infusion; SID once daily.
· The benefits of a 24-hour Holter recording
· If treatment is instituted, it is critical to obtain a re-
include in-depth assessment of quantity and
 peat Holter recording after 1 or 2 weeks to determine 
quality of the arrhythmia(s). The following
if the drugs are efficacious at suppressing the ab-
parameters should be examined: Number of
normal rhythms, or possibly hanmful by being pro-
abnormal beats (supraventricular and or ven-
arrhythmic, that is causing ventricular arrhythmias or
tricular) relative to overall number of beats, du-
excessive pauses. This can only be established if a
ration and rate of runs of abnonmal beats; the
comparison to the pre-drug baseline is performed.
average hourly and daily heart rate, the amount
· If a Holter shows that a drug is effective, we rec-
of time when the heart rate is greater than 120
ommend monitoring the progression of the ar-
or lesser than 50 bpm as well as the presence
rhythmia by repeat Holter recordings every 6to 12
and length of pauses. A diary kept by the cli-
months. If an animal experiences recurrent syn-
ent or hospital staff with the sleep/wakefulness
 cope during that time, an immediate repeat Holter
activity or observed events such as syncope
is recommended.
or excessive anxiety or panting help correlate
· In animals that need to be stabilized immediately
ECG changes on the Holter with clinical signs.
(no time for a baseline 24-hour Holter record-
These parameters are vital for a baseline evalu-
ing prior to intravenous antiarrhythmics), it is
ation of a patient's arrhythmias and needs for
still advised to acquire a post-treatment Holter
antiarrhythmic therapy.
recording to evaluate drug efficacy and possible
Chapter16
Treatment of Cardiac Arrhythmias and Conduction Disturbances
317
Table 16-2
Agents for Rate Control/Abolishing Arrhythmias in Canine Patients with Ventricular
Arrhythmias
Drug
Oral administration
Intravenous administration
Indication
Sotalol
0.5-2 mg/kg BID
VA, VT
(Betapace)
Mexiletine
4-8 mg/kg TID
VA, VT,
(Mexitil)
 Usually not effective
 as monotherapy
Amiodarone
10 mg/kg BID for
Refractory VA, VT
(Cordarone)
1 week (loading dose)*
5 mg/kg SID
(maintenance dose)*
Lidocaine
2 mg/kg IV bolus,
Life-threatening VT
repeat 3 times,
if needed start a CRI:
30-80 μg/kg/min
Procainamide
10-15 mg/kg IV bolus
Life-threatening VT
slowly over 2 minutes,
if needed start a CRI:
25-50 μg/kg/min
Atenolol
0.25-1 mg/kg
VA, VT,
(Tenormin)
SID to BID
effective only in
combi nation with
 mexiletine
Esmolol
50-100 μg/kg bolus,
Life-threatening VT
(Brevibloc)
repeat up to max 500 μg/kg)
if needed start a CRI:
50-200 μg/kg/min
*Recommended dose ran ge in veterinary medicine is anecdotal and variable.
BID, Twice daily; VA, ventricular arrhythmias; VT, ventricular tachycardia; TID, three times daily; SID, once daily; CRI,
continuous-rate infusion.
toxicity once the dog is stabilized and receiving
·An SVA is AV node independent, if the ECG
chronic oral antiarrhythmic therapy.
contains P waves not conducted to the ventricle
without termination of the SVA. Interventions
Supraventricular
such as vagal maneuvers or drugs that slow AV
 node conduction can help identify the underlying
Arrhythmias
mechanism:
· If the atrial activation rate is unchanged (PP
SVAs include rhythms that originate in the sinus
interval the same) following the intervention,
 node, atrial tissue and AV junction. Importantly,
but the ventricular rate slows due to AV block,
SVA must be differentiated from accelerated normal
the SVA is likely AV node independent.
sinus rhythm. Physiologic sinus tachycardia can be
 If the intervention results in abolishment of the
caused by many conditions including febrile states
SVA and restoration of a normal sinus rhythm
anemia, heart failure, adrenergic medications and
(even if it is only transient), the arrhythmia is
anxiety. In these cases, management should fore
likely AV node dependent.
most be focused on correcting the underlying cause
· Examples of AV node-independent rhythms in-
or disease resulting in increased sympathetic tone
clude sinus node reentrant tachycardia, AF, AFL,
· Because of the mechanism of action of antiarrhyth-
and ectopic atrial tachycardia. These arrhythmias
mic drugs, it is useful to assess SVA as either AV
can be challenging to manage, since the antiarrhyth-
node independent (does not need the AV node to
mic drugs (NCB, KCB or combinations thereof)
sustain the rhythm) or AV node dependent (path-
are often not very efficacious for suppression of
way requires the AV node to sustain the rhythm).
these arrhythmias. If the abnormal rhythm cannot
318
SECTION III Treatment of Cardiovascular Disease
be abolished with drugs, the secondary mode of
clinical signs of heart failure. AF can also occur in
treatment aims at controlling the ventricular re-
the absence of overt structural heart disease (lone
sponse rate by slowing the AV node conduction
Or primary AF). In these cases, the ventricular re-
with CCBs, BBs or digoxin.
sponse rate can be normal or only mildly elevated.
· AV node-dependent SVAs include AV reentrant
tachycardia (accessory pathway [AP] mediated)
and AV nodal reentrant tachycardia. AV node-
KeY PoInT
dependent arrhythmias can usually be treated with
The management of AF largely depends on 
drugs that target the AV node (CCBs and BBs).
the average heart rate. A baseline 24-hour
Holter recording, acquired in the home en-
vironment is ideal to determine the average
heart rate of a patient.
KEY POINT
To help guide treatment of SVAs, they should
be characterized as AV node dependent or in-
· The following flow chart (Figure 16-1) should
dependent.
serve to identify patients in need of treatment
for AF and to decide which therapeutic ap-
 proach might be best in each individual case.
ATRIAL FIBRILLATION
· AF is one of the most commonly seen SVAs in
Therapy
veterinary practice. In dogs and cats, AF is usually a
chronic arrhythmia associated with advanced stages
·AF is anAV node-independent arrhythmia, caused
 of chronic AV valve insufficiency or cardiomyopa-
by multiple simultaneous intra-atrial reentrant cir-
thy. In those patients, the ventricular response rate
cuits. Medical conversion of AF to sinus rhythm
is often markedly elevated, which contributes to the
with drugs is very difficult and rarely achieved in
AF on ECG
Obtain average HR
by 24h Holter recording
HR > 180 bpm:
HR 140 to 160 bpm:
HR ≤ 120 bpm:
 other signs of 
 early myocardial failure
lone AF or occult DCM 
heart disease
Rate control:
Rhythm control:
No treatment
drugs
electric cardioversion
Or
 at this time
Recurrence of AF
Recheck average HR in 6
months by 24h Holter recording
Figure 16-1.Flow chart describing the approach to treatment of atrial fibrillation (AF) based on the average heart rate (HR) of a patient
as determined by a 24-hour Holter recording. Af, Atrial fibrilation; HR, heart rate; bpm, beats per minute; DCM, dilated cardiomyopathy.
Chapter16
Treatment of Cardiac Arrhythmias and Conduction Disturbances
319
Rate control if HR is fast:
(average HR >180 bpm)
Stable
Unstable patient:
outpatient
severe congestive
heart failure
点
Diltiazem XR plus digoxin PO
● Diltiazem IV/ CRI
● Esmolol IV/CRI 
Monitor blood pressure and
ECG continuously
Recheck 24h Holter recording after 1 week:
Target HR: 100-130 bpm
Patient stabilized
· Assess HR control during exercise and rest 
 Proarrhythmia:
0 Pauses > 4 sec
 0  Ventricular arrhythmias
Check digoxin levels:
If HR still ≥ 140-150:
●6-8 h post pilling: (0.5 to 1.5 ng/dl)
· Increase ditiazem dosage
 Recheck Holter recording:
watch for excessive pauses
Increase digoxin only if
blood levels < 0.5 ng/dl
Figure 16-2.
 Management of dogs with AF with a fast heart rate (average heart rate > 180 bpm). HR, Heart rate; bpm; beats
per minute; CRi, constant-rate infusion.
canine patients. In most cases, ventricular rate con-
average heart rate. The authors prioritize treat-
trol via slowing of AV node conduction with diltia-
ment according to three general categories of
zem and or digoxin is the goal (drug dosages are
ventricular response rate: (1) fast (Figure 16-2:
listed in Table 16-1). The veterinary literature also
average heart rate faster than 180 bpm), (2) mod-
cites atenolol as effective for rate control of AF.
erate (Figure 16-3: average heart rate 130 to 160
The authors do not have much personal experience
bpm) and (3) slow (Figure 16-4: heart rate around
with atenolol for this purpose. The reluctance to
100 bpm). The dosages for the drug listed in
use atenolol for rate control stems in part from the
Figures 16-2, 16-3 and 16-4 are provided in
concomitant degree of advanced myocardial fail-
Table 16-1.
ure in many patients with AF. In our experience
· Treatment of AF in cats is challenging. There is
diltiazem XR is very well tolerated even in dogs
usually significant underlying heart disease pres-
with severe systolic myocardial dysfunction.
ent, resulting in markedly enlarged atria and very
· Dogs with normal cardiac function or only mild
rapid AF. Medical management for rate control
dysfunction and normal to moderately elevated
with a target heart rate of 130 to 150 bpm may
ventricular response rates may be candidates for
be achieved using either CCB or BB (for drug
electric cardioversion of AF to sinus rhythm.
dosages for antiarrhythmic drugs in cats see
· Medical management varies with the initial aver-
Table 16-3).
age heart rate and overall condition of the dog
· Occasionally, the administration of narcotics has
(Figures 16-2 through 16-4). Treatment can be
 been associated with the induction of AF in large
tailored to the patient based on the approximate
dogs. This is likely caused by the increased vagal
320
SECTION III
Treatment of Cardiovascular Disease
Rate control if HR is moderately high:
(average HR: 130-160 bpm)
Diltiazem XR PO
Electric
+/- digoxin PO
cardioversion
▼
Recheck 24h Holter recording after 1 week:
Recheck by ECG or
Target HR: 90-110 bpm
auscultation monthly
 Assess HR control during exercise and rest
for recurrence of AF
Check for proarrhythmia:
0P
Pauses > 4 sec
 O  Ventricular arrhythmias
Check digoxin levels:
6-8 h post pilling: (0.5 to 1.5 ng/dl)
I HR still ≥ 130-150 bpm:
 Diltiazem XR plus digoxin PO
 Increase diltiazem dosage
Recheck Holter recording: watch for excessive
pauses
Increase digoxin only if blood levels < 0.5 ng/dl
Figure 16-3.
 Management of dogs with AF with a moderately elevated average heart rate of 130 to 160 bpm. HR, Heart rate;
bpm, beats per minute; Af, atrial fibrillation.
tone that occurs with narcotics. Treatment with
and the goal of cardioversion is to avoid structural
 2 mg/kg lidocaine IV within 4 hours of onset has
or functional remodeling from chronic AF, even if
been demonstrated to restore sinus rhythm. Va-
the heart rate is slow. The rate of recurrence of AF
golytic drugs (atropine) should prevent onset or
after successful cardioversion is high and morbidity
recurrence of AF in such cases.
associated with repeat transthoracic cardioversions
under general anesthesia make this management
KEY PoInT
less practical. Pretreatment with sotalol, amiodarone
or angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors may
Digoxin monotherapy does not control the
improve the chances of cardioversion and lessen
ventricular response rate adequately during
times of excitement, stress or exercise. Thus,
the rate of recurrence of AF; however, no studies in
cogs with AF and moderate to fast heart rates
veterinary medicine have proven these concepts.
will require combination therapy of digoxin
with diltiazem or atenolol.
Transthoracic Electrical Cardioversion
Procedure
· Procedure requires a brief general anesthesia
Electric Cardioversion (Rhythm Control)
· Fast Patch electrodes are recommended instead
In a subgroup of canine patients with mild struc-
of hand-held paddles to optimize electrode posi-
tural heart disease or lone AF, electric cardioversion
tion for cardioversion.
of AF to sinus rhythm can be achieved. The patients
· Dog is shaved before application of the patch
selected for this treatment are well compensated
Over the heart on both lateral sides of the thorax.
Chapter16
Treatment of Cardiac Arrhythmias and Conduction Disturbances
321
Rate control if the HR is slow
(average HR: ≤ 100 bpm)
▼
Digoxin PO
Electric
No treatment
1
Or
cardioversion
at this time
Recheck 24 h Holter recording after 1 week:
Target average HR: 70-90 bpm
Assess HR control during exercise and rest
Recheck by ECG
Recheck average
Check for bradyarrhythmias:
 or auscultation
HR in 6-12 
monthly for
months by 24h
O
Pauses > 4 sec
recurrence of AF
Holter recording
Check digoxin levels:
6-8 h post pilling: (0.5 to 1.5 ng/dl)
Figure 16-4.
Af, atrial fibrillation.
Table 16-3
Agents for Rate Control/Abolishing Arrhythmias in Feline Patients with Arrhythmias
Drug
 Oral administration
Intravenous administra tion
Indication
 Diltiazem XR
30-60 mg SID-BID
AF, AT, accessory
(Dilacor@)
(start with 30 mg SID)
pathway
 Diltiazem
10 mg/kg SID
0.1-0.2 mg/kg bolus,
Acute AF,
(Cardizem@)
then CRI at 2-6
 access ory path way
μg/kg/min
Atenolol
6.25 mg-12.5mg
AT, accessory
(Tenormin@)
SID-BID
pathway, VT
 Esmolol
NA
50-100 μg/kg bolus
Acute AF, AT,
(Brevibloc@)
(repeat up to
 access ory path way,
max 500 μg/kg);
life-threatening VT
 50-200 μg/kg/min CRI
Sotalol
% of an 80 mg
VT
(Betapace@)
tablet BID*
 Procainamide
2-5 mg/kg
10-15 mg/kg IV bolus 
AT, accessory
(Procain@)
BID-TID
slowly over 2 minutes
pathway
 or CRI at 25-50 μg/kg/min
Lidocaine
NA
0.25-1 mg/kg IV bolus
Life-threatening VT
(us with extreme
caution in cats)
*Recommended dosage range is anecdotal and variable.
SID, Once daily; BID, twice a day; AF, atrial fibrillation; AT, atrial tachycardia; CRI, continuous-rate infusion; VT, ventricular
tachycardia; NA, not available.
322
SECTION III   Treatment of Cardiovascular Disease
· Dog is positioned in lateral recumbency to optimally
with CCBs or BBs is used effectively in dogs (for
"position' heart between the two patch electrodes
drug dosages see Table 16-1). Digoxin monother-
· Defibrillator ECG cables need to record patient's
 apy is ineffective for management of AFL.
ECG and synchronize to the R waves. With false
·A post-drug 24-hour Holter should be obtained to
synchronization to T waves (occurs if T wave is
 determine if drugs are effective at suppressing the
taller than the R wave) the cardioversion shock
AFL or producing the desired AV block, thereby
can induce VF!
slowing the ventricular response adequately. It
· Using a monophasic defibrillator:
also allows survey for drug toxicity, manifest as
Start with 4 J/kg; If no cardioversion occurs,
bradycardia or pauses secondary to excessive AV
increase dose by 50 J and repeat until a maxi-
block. Pauses, if they occur only during sleep or
mum of 360 J.
rest, are usually of no concerm.
· Using a biphasic defibrillator:
· Start with 1 to 2 J/kg; If no cardioversion
ECTOPIC ATRLAL
occurs, increase dose by 50 J and repeat until
TACHYCARDIA
a max of 360 J.
· Short, transient runs of ventricular tachycardia
·Atrial tachycardia (AT) occurs when ectopic foci in
(VT) or sinus pauses or AV block are common
the atria develop the ability to fire rapidly on their
following electric cardioversion.
own. It is an AV node-independent arrhythmia.
Ectopic AT is often paroxysmal and may display a
gradual onset and offset (warm-up and cool-down
ATRIAL FLUTTER
 period) if the underlying mechanism involves ab-
·Atrial flutter (AFL) is relatively uncommon in
normal automaticity. The heart rate can vary from
veterinary patients. Theoretically, AFL could
150 to 300 bpm and can cause anxiety or panting
set the stage for development of AF due to the
in affected dogs. In cats ectopic AT is rare.
remodeling that occurs with continuous rapid
· A baseline 24-hour Holter should be obtained to
activation of the atrial myocardium. In some
 determine what percentage of time a dog is in AT,
patients AFL co-exists with AF on a 24-hour
 and how fast the heart rate is during the AT.
Holter, which might represent a transition phase
to chronic AF. AFL is an AV node-independent
Therapy
 intra-atrial macro-reentry rhythm. The atrial acti-
vation rate (PP interval) is 300 to 600 bpm. AFL
-oy lne Suy Aipidu  jo uissans ea ·
is paroxysmal or chronic and can be associated
cus is attempted by using sotalol, amiodarone or
with excessively high ventricular response rates.
 procainamide. In people, propafenone is used for
AV conduction usually changes between 1:1 and
treatment of AT, but we have not found these agents
3:1 or 2:1 due to variable degrees of AV block.
efficacious in our patients. In fact, targeting the ab-
· A baseline 24-hour Holter is recommended to de-
nonmal rhythm directly with these drugs is often
termine of the arrhythmia is chronic or paroxys-
unsuccessful. Thus, as a second choice, therapy for
mal. If it is chronic, drug therapy is indicated
AT should be aimed at slowing AV node conduction
· If it is paroxysmal and infrequent, treatment
with CCBs or BBs toreduce the ventricularresponse.
 may be postponed, but a reevaluation by Holter
Digoxin is ineffective for management of AT.
6 months later should be performed to check for
· A post-drug 24-hour Holter should be obtained to
progression from paroxysmal to chronic AFL or
 detenmine if drugs are effective at suppressing the
presence of concurrent AF.
AT or producing the desired AV block, thus slowing
the ventricular response adequately. The Holter also
allows survey for excessive AV block; this may be
Drug Therapy
umdesired if it occurs other than during rest or sleep.
· Ideally, therapy is aimed at suppressing the atrial
reentry circuit using sotalol, amiodarone or pro-
 kEy PoInT
cainamide; however, abolishing the AFL with
 Although amiodarone is a potent antiarrhythmic
drugs is often unsuccessful; propafenone and
drug, its benefits must be balanced against its
fecainide are used in humans with AFL, but the
slow onset to action and adverse effects which
authors have had little success in dogs with these
include hepatic toxicity, gastrointestinal distur-
drugs. The adequate dose for dogs has not been
bances and blood dyscrasias in canine patients.
identifed. Rate-control via slowing of the AV node
Chapter 16
Treatment of Cardiac Arrhythmias and Conduction Disturbances
323
ATRIOVENTRICULAR NODAL
AP, which allows rapid, early activation of the ven-
tricles. The ECG morphology of a P wave slurring
REENTRANT TACHYCARDIA
directly into the upstroke of the QRS complex (delta
·Atrioventricular  nodal  reentry
 tac hycardia
wave) is a distinct feature of AP. Presence of delta
(AVNRT) is a form of micro-reentry within the
waves may create the appearance of wide-complex
AV node that gives rise to rapid, simultaneous
tachycardia and thus resemble VT.
activation of the ventricles and atria. AVNRT is
 AV node dependent, thus AV node slowing medi-
Therapy
cation may terminate the arrhythmia. The prev-
alence in dogs is likely very low, but definitive
· Treatment with oral diltiazem or atenolol is the
 diagnosis requires intracardiac mapping studies
first choice for suppression of AVRT or AVNRT
to prove dual AV node physiology.
in dogs and cats. For acute management intra-
· For treatment of AVNRT see the following dis-
venous diltiazem or esmolol is effective. For re-
cussion of treatment of atrioventricular reentrant
fractory cases in dogs sotalol, procainamide or
tachycardia (AVRT).
amiodarone may be added, because they slow
conduction the atria, APs and ventricles.
· To determine if antiarrhythmic therapy of inter-
ATRIOVENTRICULAR REENTRANT
mittent AVRT or AVNRT is effective, a post-drug
TACHYCARDIA
 24-hour Holter should be compared to the base-
· AVRTis a macro-reentry arrhythmia whose circuit
line 24-hour Holter. This Holter also allows to
comprises the AV node as well as an AP that can
check for excessive AV block; this may be unde-
conduct impulses from the atria to the ventricles
 sired if it occurs other than during rest or sleep.
directly, thereby bypassing the AV node and His-
· Some dogs with orthodromic AV reciprocating
Purkinje system. Response to a vagal maneuver
tachycardia display antegrade conduction over the
or intravenous drug challenge may be used to
AP (pre-excitation) and display a delta wave on sur-
confirm its AV node-dependent properties. One-
face ECG after antiarrhythmic drug administration.
to-one AV association is a requisite of AVRT
· In severely affected dogs drug therapy may be
because the atria and ventricles are both integral
ineffective. In such cases cure may be achieved
parts of the arrhythmia circuit. If AV dissociation
using transvenous catheter ablation of the AP
occurs spontaneously without termination of the
using radiofrequency energy. This procedure can
SVA, AV reentrant tachycardia can be excluded.
only be performed at specialized electrophysiol-
· AVRT is a parox ysmal, intenmittent SVA and 24-
ogy laboratories, available at very few veterinary
hour Holter may be required to make a definitive
referral centers.
diagnosis of this SVA, as well as determine its
clinical significance. Animals with AVRT may be
Bradyarrhythmias and
asymptomatic, or present with syncope, episodic
weakness or lethargy.
Conduction Disturbances
· In dogs the arrhythmia most commonly follows a
patterm of orthodromic conduction through the AV
The bradyarrhythmias that require treatment are
node (from atria down to the ventricles) and ret-
usually due to sinus node dysfunction (e.g., sinus
rograde over the AP back up to the atria, implying
bradycardia or sick sinus syndrome), atrial con-
that the AP is only able to conduct in one direction
duction disturbances causing atrial standstill or AV
(concealed conduction). This form is prevalent
node conduction abnormalities causing high grade
in Labrador Retrievers and termed orthodromic
second- or third-degree AV block. Ventricular con-
AV reciprocating tachycardia or orthodromic AV
duction disturbances such as left and right bundle
reciprocating tachycardia.
branch block as well as left anterior fascicular
· Most APs in dogs do not allow conduction in the
block do not warrant treatment, per se.
antegrade direction (concealed conduction) and
are therefore not identifiable during normal sinus
SINUS BRADYCARDIA
rhythm. In cats with AVRT however, the AP may
conduct in both directions, such that ventricular pre-
· Sinus bradycardia is diagnosed when the sinus
excitation is present during normal sinus rhythm.
node disc harge rate is low (< 50 bpm) in an awake
Pre-excitation occurs, when the atrial depolariza-
dog. Sinus bradycardia of 45 to 60 bpm during
tion travels through both the AV node as well as the
sleep is nonmal. Sinus bradycardia can exist in
324
SECTION IIITreatment of Cardiovascular Disease
the form of a pronounced sinus arrhythmia or
 and a sympathomimetic (e.g., albuterol: Proventil
regular sinus bradycardia. This pathologic brady.
0.02 to 0.05 mg/kg PO two to three times a day) or
cardia often persists during excitement or exer-
a phosphodiesterase inhibitor (e.g.,theophylline;
cise. The bradycardia is either primary, which is
Theo-Dur 20 mg/kg PO twice a day).
a form of sick sinus syndrome (see next section)
· In the authors' experience, erratic and poor efficacy
or secondary to an underlying systemic disease or
 as well as adverse effects such as anxiety, excessive
drug toxicity (e.g., narcotics or overdosing of
 panting, anorexia or gastrointestinal signs are signif-
BBs, CCBs, or digoxin).
icant disadvantages to these therapies; therefore, we
· Secondary sinus bradycardia is usually caused by
usually do not prescribe these drugs in our clinic.
excessive vagal tone elicited by a systemic disease.
Central nervous system disease (increased intra-
SICK SINUS SYNDROME
cranial or intraocular pressure or head trauma),
severe pain, or respiratory or gastrointestinal dis-
· The spontaneous sinus node discharge is either
ease can all cause increased vagal tone and sinus
slower than normal (primary sinus bradycardia)
bradycardia. A vagal maneuver (e.g., carotid sinus
or intermittently absent (sinus arrest or exit block
 massage) can cause transient sinus bradycardia by
from the sinus node). In the latter, there are pauses
the same mechanism of action. Correction of the
of various durations without P waves or an escape
underlying condition or discontinuation of drugs
rhythm. The subsidiary pacemaker tissue (AV node
will usually resolve secondary sinus bradycardia
 and Purkinje fibers) is often also abnormal, resulting
· Clinical signs may be absent (incidental finding) or
in inadequate escape rhythms, such that complete
 dogs may display weakness, exercise intolerance
asystole (pauses) can last up to 10 seconds. Minia-
 Or syncope. A 24-hour Holter may be required to
ture Schnauzers, Cocker Spaniels, West Highland
 determine the severity of bradycardia and possible
White Terriers and Dachshunds are over-repre-
association of clinical signs with the slow heart rate.
sented. Doberman Pinschers are also reported to
Mild exercise intolerance is often underrecognized
have syncope associated with long sinus pauses,
by owners and mistakenly attributed to "old age:"
 suggestive of sick sinus syndrome (SSS).
· In cats, sinus rhythm at less than 120 bpm can
· Clinical signs range from exercise intolerance
be considered bradycardia, and heart rates below
and lethargy to syncope. Dogs with SSS manifest
100 bpm are often associated with lethargy Or
 as primary sinus bradycardia typically show only
syncope in cats.
mild exercise intolerance, which is often under-
recognized by owners and mistakenly attributed
to "old age." SSS may be incidentally diagnosed
Treatment
 during a routine pre-anesthesia workup in a ge-
· The decision to treat sinus bradycardia should be
riatric dog. If these dogs are treated with a pace-
based on clinical signs and the degree of brady-
maker, owners often are delighted by the retum
cardia. In patients experiencing syncope or epi-
: ssop pio, 1aun uy As1aua pue ynos jo
sodic weakness, pacemaker therapy is indicated.
· Due to the intermittent nature of the sinus pauses in
· In an animal with no clinical signs, sinus bradycar-
some cases, a 24-hour Holter is often necessary to
dia may be "waited out'’ with close monitoring.
 definitively determine the cause of clinical signs.
· If the animal appears unstable and pacemaker
therapy is not an option, medical therapy aimed
Treatment
at abolishing high vagal tone can be attempted for
-     si arn  a
help identify patients that would benefit from such
thargic dogs with SSS. In dogs with intact AV node
medical management. Following injection of atro-
function, transvenous placement of a pacing lead
pine 0.02 mg/kg (0.01 to 0.04) IM or IV, the baseline
in the right atrium or auricle can successfully abol-
heart rate should increase by 50% to 100% within
ish the sinus pauses. In dogs with concomitant AV
5 to 10 minutes (initial worsening of AV block is a
node dysfunction, the lead should be placed in the
normal transient response). Patients experiencing
right ventricle or dual chamber pacing performed.
at least a partial response to atropine may be candi-
· Some cases have brady-tachy syndrome, where
dates for medical management of sinus bradycar-
in addition to the sinus pauses, supraventricular
dia. Treatment options include either a combination
tachyarrhythmias (e.g., atrial tachycardia, fut-
of a vagolytic drug (e.g., probantheline bromide:
ter or fibrillation) are present. In such cases a
Pro-Banthine 0.25 to 0.5 mg/kg PO twice a day)
24-hour Holter should be obtained to determine
Chapter16
Treatment of Cardiac Arrhythmias and Conduction Disturbances
325
the clinical relevance of the SVA and require-
therapy will lead to insulin secretion that will drive
 ment for antiarrhythmic therapy. Antiarrhythmic
potassium back into the cells. More aggressive
therapy may be necessary if the SVA persists
therapy involves intravenous sodium bicarbonate
post pacemaker implantation. In many cases,
(1 to 2 mEq/kg IV slowly over 20 minutes) to drive
SVA spontaneously resolves once the long sinus
K back into the cell. Altermatively, slow intravenous
pauses are prevented by the pacemaker.
administration of 0.5 U/kg of regular insulin cou-
· If the animal does not have syncope and shows
pled with 2 g of dextrose per unit of insulin can be
either no or only mild clinical signs, medical
administered. Monitoring for hypoglycemia post
management can be attempted (see medical treat-
 treatment is required. Calcium gluconate (0.5 to
ment of sinus bradycardia).
1 ml/kg of a 10% solution) may be given by very
· However, many of the mild forms of SSS tend
slow intravenous administration for refractory
to progress over weeks or months to the point of
cases of hyperkalemia. This is "cardioprotective'
syncope, and pacemaker implantation will even-
because the increased extracellular Ca2+ makes
tually be required.
more sodium channels available for activation.
· It is the authors' experience that medical man-
agement is ineffective in dogs with syncope and
 pacemaker therapy is always recommended.
ATRIOVENTRICULAR (AV)
CONDUCTION ABNORMALITIES
ATRIALSTANDSTILL
AV Block, First Degree
· Atrial standstill occurs when the atrial myocar
· Prolonged conduction time through the AV node.
dium is not able to depolarize, and P waves cannot
results in an increased PR interval of 0.13 second
be identified on the surface ECG. The two main
in dogs and 0.09 second in cats. There are normal
causes are (1) persistent atrial standstill or "silent
 P waves and QRS complexes, conducting at a
atrium' due to primary atrial muscle disease and
1 :1 ratio. No treatment is required
(2) secondary atrial standstill caused by hyper-
kalemia (i.e., renal failure, ruptured bladder, Ad-
AV Block, Second Degree
disons' disease, or other electrolyte imbalances).
 Hyperkalemia alters atrial transmembrane resting
· There are normalP wave and QRS complexes with
 potential and the atria become inexcitable at very
a constant PR interval, but intermittently P waves
high plasma K+ levels. Atrial standstill is uncom-
 are not followed by QRS complexes. In Mobitz type
mon in dogs and exceedingly rare in cats.
I (Wenckebach) AV block, the PR interval gradu-
ally prolongs before a P wave is blocked. This fonm
Therapy
of second-degree AV block is less frequent in dogs.
Mobitz type II AV block demonstrates a consistent
· If atrial muscle disease is causing atrial standstill,
PR interval prior to a blocked P wave. Mobitz type
pacemaker therapy is required. Because the atria
II AV block may represent a more advanced degree
 are structurally abnormal, the pacing lead has to
of conduction abnormality that occurs in the AV
be placed in the right ventricle. Unfortunately, the
junction, His bundle, or below. Occasional single
primary cardiac muscle disease progressively af-
blocked P waves are of no clinical significance.
fects the ventricles. Within 1 to 2 years, ventricular
· In "high grade" second-degree AV block, there
myocardial dysfunction and significant AV valve
are several consecutive blocked P waves. Clinical
regurgitation may develop and pacemaker failure
signs depend on the length of ventricular asys-
may ensue due to lack of capture.
tole. In cases with intenmittent high grade sec-
· For atrial standstill secondary to hyperkalemia,
ond-degree AV block, a 24-hour Holter may be
required to make a definitive diagnosis. If clinical
hyperkalemia and bradycardia is required. Intra-
signs such as lethargy or syncope are observed,
venous fuids are the primary treatment. This will
 pacemaker therapy is indicated.
lower potassium values by dilution and increased
excretion. Acceptable fuids include normal sa-
AV Block, Complete or Third Degree
lne, half-strength saline with 2.5% dextrose, or
5% dextrose in water. Altermatively, potassium
· None of the P waves conduct through the AV
can be lowered by promoting entry of K ions back
node, thus the atrial and ventricular activities
into the intracellular space. The dextrose in fluid
are independent. The atrial rate (PP interval)
326
SECTION III  Treatment of Cardiovascular Disease
is faster than the ventricular (escape) rate dif-
and Great Danes with dilated cardiomyopathy
ferentiating complete AV block from AV dis-
(DCM), and German Shepherds with inherited
sociation due  to accelerated idioventricular
ventricular arrhythmias. Dogs with congenital
rhythms. The ventricular escape rhythm is usu-
heart disease, such as severe subaortic or pulmonic
ally regular and below 40 bpm, whereas a low
stenosis are predisposed to development of
AV junctional escape rhythm has a rate of 40
ventricular arrhythmias, likely due to abnonmal
to 60 bpm in dogs. In cats with complete AV
myocardial perfusion secondary to myocardial
block the ventricular escape rhythm varies from
hypertrophy. These arrhythmias can be worse
60 to 100 bpm.
during exercise and may be exacerbated during
· Complete AV block is a primary abnormality of
cardiac catheterization for angiography or in-
the AV conducting system (AV node). However,
terventional therapy. Catheter contact with the
it is important to evaluate the animal's elec-
endocardium can elicit ventricular arrhythmias
trolyte and acid-base status. Systemic diseases
and even cause VF.
 causing hyperkalemia such as Addison's disease
 Furthermore, significant ventricular arrhythmias
or urethral obstruction can cause AV block that
can be seen in any dog hit by a car (traumatic myo-
is reversible with normalization of K levels.
carditis), large breed dogs with gastric torsion or
· In cats hyperthyroidism can cause significant AV
dogs with neoplasia involving the myocardium.
node disease, which may or may not be reversible
However, in many patients with ventricular arrhyth-
with normalization of thyroid levels. Third-degree
mias a cause can not be identified.
AV block is often not as life threatening in cats as
in dogs, and cats with collapse episodes may live
TREATMENT OF VENTRICULAR
for longer than 1 year without pacemaker im-
TACHYCARDIA
 plantation. They often succumb to other systemic
 diseases or structural heart disease rather than the
· VT is recognized by abnonmally wide and bizarre
actual bradyarrhythmia
QRS complex morphology. P waves are present
but may be hiding in the QRS-T complexes. AV
dissociation occurs due to the accelerated ventric-
Treatment of Complete AV Block
ular rate as compared to the sinus rate. VT can be
· If no underlying abnonmalities are discovered, a
monomorphic (where each QRS complex is iden-
permanent cardiac pacemaker is the only effec-
tical) or polymorphic (where the QRS complexes
tive treatment. Ideally, pacing systems that allow
are constantly variable). Rapid, polymorphic VT
sensing of P waves in the atria and subsequent
is considered the most unstable arrhythmia, be-
pacing of the ventricles are used (i.e., dual-cham-
cause it is most likely to degenerate into VF.
ber or single lead atrial sensing-ventricular pac-
· From a treatment perspective it is also important
ing systems).
to differentiate between "fast" VT (170 to 350
bpm) and "slow" VT (rate 80 to 160 bpm).
Ventricular Arrhythmias
·Fast VT causes significantly reduced cardiac
 output and clinical signs depend on the duration
of the episode of abnormal rhythm. Affected an-
General Remarks
imals may experience syncope or weakness or
Ventricular arrhythmias may occur in structurally
sudden death, or no signs at all. It warrants anti-
normal hearts (hereditary arrhythmias) or may be
arrhythmic therapy either to convert the arrhyth-
a consequence of myocardial abnormalities associ-
mia to sinus rhythm or at least to slow down the
ated with cardiomyopathy, significant valvular dis-
rate of the VT or reduce the length of the runs.
ease or myocarditis. To date, there is no medical
· Slow VT may be unrelated to structural cardiac
therapy available that is known to prevent sudden
disease but associated with underlying systemic
death in animals afficted with ventricular tachyar-
disease or can occur transiently after a gastric
rhythmias. However, clinical signs such as syncope
dilatation-volvulus or hit-by-car (traumatic myo-
or episodic weakness can be alleviated in some
carditis). It often does not require antiarrhythmic
animals with appropriate medical therapy. Clini-
treatment. Instead supportive care and monitor-
cally important ventricular arrhythmias are most
ing of the underlying condition is imperative;
commonly identified in certain breeds such as
however, if affected animals show signs of hy.
Boxers with arrhythmogenic right ventricular
potension or lethargy, then they may benefit from
cardiomyopathy (ARVC), Doberman Pinschers
treatment of slow VT.
Chapter16
Treatment of Cardiac Arrhythmias and Conduction Disturbances
327
· A baseline 24-hour Holter is essential prior to ini-
Chronic Oral Antiarrhythmic Therapy
tiation of therapy of VT to determine the percent-
(see Tables 16-2 and 16-3 for drug
age of ventricular ectopic beats and the duration
dosages)
and rate of runs of VT as well as the presence and
length of pauses. A diary kept by the client or hos-
· The first-line oral antiarrhythmic drug for treat-
pital staff documenting the activity of a dog and the
ment of VT in most dogs is sotalol, the exception
exact time of observed syncope can help correlate
being German Shepherds, due to proarrhythmic
ECG changes on the Holter with clinical signs.
effects in this specific breed.
· This infonmation is critical both to institute suit-
· If a dog has very advanced myocardial systolic
able antiarrhythmic therapy and to assess drug ef-
dysfunction (fractional shortening < 15%), then
ficacy by comparison of a post-treatment Holter
sotalol may not be tolerated due its beta-blocker
to the baseline Holter.
effect.
· Cats with severe forms of cardiomyopathy, hy-
· Altermatively, mexiletine in combination with
perthyroidism, sepsis, neoplasia, and severe
atenolol is very effective, particularly in Boxers.
electrolyte imbalances may develop ventricular
The atenolol dosage can be started at the lower
arrhythmias. Clinical signs depend on duration
end, in case of poor myocardial function. A prac-
 and rate of the VT, but may include lethargy or
tical disadvantage of this treatment regimen is the
syncope if the rate is > 250 bpm.
frequency of drug administration (mexiletine is
given every 8 hours).
- o      a
Acute Intravenous Antiarrhythmic
bination of sotalol with mexiletine is often ef-
Therapy (see Tables 16-2 and 16-3
fective. These drugs should be initiated in a
for drug dosages)
staggered protocol (usually sotalol first, mexi-
· For treatment of acute, life-threatening VT intra-
letine added after 2 days) to avoid side effects,
venous lidocaine is the first choice. Up to 3 bolus
such as AV block or inappetence. Because this is
injections can be repeated and if effective a con-
a treatment protocol for refractory arrhythmias,
tinuous-rate infusion should be instituted. A lido-
the patients often already are on sotalol or mexi-
caine bolus can causes a transient drop in blood
 letine, in which case addition of the second drug
pressure and can lead to vomiting or seizures.
is usually well tolerated.
If serum potassium levels are too low, lidocaine
· Oral procainamide or atenolol monotherapy usu-
 may not be effective. Lidocaine should be used
ally are both not efficacious for treatment of VT
judiciously for life-threatening VT in cats due to
in dogs.
their low threshold for seizures with this drug.
· As a last resort, oral amiodarone is effective for
·If the lidocaine is not successful at restoring sinus
treatment of refractory VT. It has less negative
rhythm or slowing of the VT, then procainamide
inotropic effects than sotalol or atenolol, thus
IV can be added or administered instead. Pro-
can be used in dogs with end-stage myocardial
cainamide is given initially as a slow bolus, fol-
failure. But caution is advised when considering
lowed by a constant rate infusion. Procainamide
amiodarone therapy because of its adverse ef-
can lead to hypotension, so careful monitoring of
fects. Signs of toxicity include anorexia, vomit-
the patient during the infusion is recommended.
ing, lethargy and hepatic enzyme elevation.
· Intravenous esmolol may be effective, especially in
· Oral atenolol or sotalol may be effective for
cases where high catecholamine levels may be con-
treatment for VT in cats.
tributing to the presence of ventricular arrhythmias.
· Amiodarone toxicity in dogs
Also in dogs developing VT while undergoing an
· A maintenance dosage of 200 mg PO every
interventional procedure (i.e. balloon valvulo-
24 hours is usually well tolerated but a main-
plasty for pulmonic stenosis), esmolol alone or
tenance dose of 400 mg every 24 hours is con-
in combination with lidocaine can be effective.
sistently associated with toxicity.
Combination of esmolol with procainamide may
 Monitoring of serial serum chemistries is rec-
cause a significant drop in cardiac output and hy
ommended, because increases in liver enzyme
potension. Esmolol may be safer to use than lido-
activities usually precede the onset of clinical
caine in cats with acute life-threatening VT.
signs of amiodarone toxicity. Liver enzymes
· The authors have limited experience with intrave-
should be measured after 7 days of drug loading
nous amiodarone for acute, refractory VT. We have
 and once monthly during maintenance therapy.
not used it successfully, and it is very costly.
If after 3 months of maintenance therapy no
328
SECTION III Treatment of Cardiovascular Disease
enzyme elevations develop, the time interval
Ventricular Tachycardia in Boxers with
between testing may be increased to 2 months.
Arrhythmogenic Right Ventricular
 Amiodarone hepatopathy is reversible after
Cardiomyopathy (see Table 16-2 for
reduction of dosage or discontinuation of the
drug dosages)
drug. Overt clinical signs of toxicity resolve
within a few days of stopping amiodarone.
Chronic Oral Antiarrhythmic Therapy
Hepatic enzyme activity gradually returns to
· Due to the association of VT with ARVC
normal within three months after amiodarone
and myocardial systolic dysfunction, it is rec-
is discontinued or the dosage is reduced.
ommended to obtain an echocardiogram be-
Doberman Pinschers have a higher preva-
fore
making specific antiarrhythmic drug
lence of inherent hepatopathies and thus the
recommendations.
incidence  amiodarone toxicity  is possibly
· Sotalol is the treatment of choice for VT in Boxers,
increased in this breed. Pre-existing liver en-
if the myocardial function is normal or only mildly
zyme elevations are a contraindication for
decreased. If a Boxer has significantly reduced
amiodarone therapy in Doberman Pinschers,
myocardial function sotalol administered at its most
unless no other altermative is available.
effective antiarrhythmic dosage may reduce con-
· A post-treatment 24-hour Holter is essential both
tractility and lead to worsening of heart failure.
to check efficacy and assess possible proarrhyth-
·In such cases mexiletine in combination with
mic effects of the drugs. Worsening of VT follow-
atenolol can be used. The atenolol dosage can
ing sotalol therapy has been documented both in
be started at a lower dose, to limit the BB effect
Boxers and German Shepherds.
on myocardial contractility.
· For refractory VT and recurrent syncope the
 combination of sotalol with mexiletine is useful.
BREED-SPECIFIC ARRYHYTHMIAS
 If the dog is already receiving sotalol with inad-
equate success, addition of mexiletine is usually
Arrhythmogenic Right Ventricular
Cardiomyopathy in Boxers
well tolerated.
·If VT persists or the dog does not tolerate
· Ventricular arrhythmias and DCM, both mani-
sotalol or mexiletine/atenolol, amiodarone may
festations of arrhythmogenic right ventricular
be beneficial. However amiodarone hepatopa-
cardiomyopathy (ARVC), are a common cause
thy may occur with long-term use. Monthly
of morbidity and mortality in the Boxer. The
monitoring of
liver
enzyme activities
1S
clinical presentation of ARVC can be grouped
recommended.
into three categories: (1) isolated subclinical
ventricular arrhythmias, (2) arrhythmia-associ-
Acute Intravenous Antiarrhythmic Therapy
 ated syncope or sudden death with normal myo-
· See under general section: Treatment of VT
cardial function, and (3) systolic myocardial
failure with or without ventricular arrhythmias.
Ventricular Arrhythmias and Dilated
ARVC is inherited in an autosomal dominant
Cardiomyopathy in Doberman Pinschers
 patterm in Boxers.
· The morphology of the VT in Boxers is character-
· Ventricular arrhythmias, syncope and sudden
istically positive in the ventrocaudal leads (leads
death associated with DCM are common in
II, Ml, and aVF) or a "left bundle branch block
Dobemman Pinschers.The DCMis characterized
patterm," suggesting a right ventricular origin of 
by a slowly progressive, clinically occult phase
the arrhythmia.
during which ventricular premature contrac-
· Syncope is often the first clinical sign and usually.
tions first appear. This phase is followed by the
but not always, associated with rapid runs of VT.
development of left ventricular dysfunction
Boxers can have multiple syncopal episodes and
and usually, progressively more severe ventric-
recover. These episodes may be more common
ular tachyarrhythmias. The natural outcome in
during exercise or stress.
cardiomyopathic patients is usually either
· A subset of Boxers also has a form of sick sinus
sudden death due to ventricular arrhythmias
syndrome.
or end-stage congestive heart failure, often
·Some Boxers also have SVAs including AF,
associated with AF. The incidence of sudden
especially if they have advanced stages of DCM
death prior to the onset of CHF is between
and congestive heart failure.
30% and 50%.
Chapter16
 Treatment of Cardiac Arrhythmias and Conduction Disturbances
329
KEY POINTS
in the general Genman Shepherd population is
unknown. Affected dogs have abnormal sym
VT in Doberman Pinschers has both mono-
pathetic innervation of the heart and ventricular
morphic and polymorphic characteristics.
arrhythmias may be initiated by early afterdepo-
 Syncope or episodic weakness has been
larizations documented in the Purkinje fibers of
documented in Dobermans due to VT as
these dogs.
well as bradyarrhythmias such as paradoxi-
cal sinus bradycardia and cardiac asystole.
· German Shepherds develop ventricular arrhyth-
Unlike Boxers with ARVC, Doberman Pin-
mias at 12 to 16 weeks of age, and the frequency
schers with VT and DCM may die suddenly
and severity increase until 24 to 30 weeks of age.
during their first syncopal episode.
After that time, some dogs remain severely af-
fected, whereas others show a progressive decline
 in the frequency of the arrhythmias. The dogs typi-
cally do not have syncope or other clinical signs.
Ventricular Tachycardia in Doberman
Most dogs have a low incidence of VT. If dogs
Pinschers with Dilated Cardiomyopathy
reach the age of 18 months, the probability of sud-
(see Table 16-2 for drug dosages)
 den death declines markedly.
Chronie Oral Antiarrhythmic Therapy
Therapy of German Shepherds with Ventricular
·For treatment of VT in Doberman Pimschers so-
Tachycardia (see Table 16-2 for drug dosages)
talol is effective. A combination of mexiletine
· Dogs with mild to moderate amounts of ventricu-
with sotalol or atenolol may be more powerful.
lar arrhythmias do not warrant antiarrhythmic
With both drug regimens monitoring by echocar-
therapy.
diogram is recommended to check for worsen-
/sunu 01 <) yeap uappns jo ysu yay e ssop ul ·
ing of myocardial function due to beta blockade.
 24 hours ) based on a 24-hour Holter, antiarrhyth-
In cases with only moderate VT or significantly
mic therapy may be administered until the dog
reduced myocardial function monotherapy with
has "survived"' the vulnerable time period.
mexiletine may be beneficial, because mexiletine
·Intravenous lidocaine is effective in eliminating
 does not affect contractility.
the ventricular arrhythmias acutely. However, the
· Amiodarone is also effective in Dobermans with
oral NCB mexiletine does not suppress the ven-
significant VT and end-stage myocardial failure;
tricular arrhythmias sigmificantly. Sotalol mono-
however, in this particular breed careful monitor-
therapy has proarrhythmic effects (i.e., causes
ing of liver enzyme levels is imperative, because
increased numbers of runs of VT) in this specific
Dobermans have a high incidence of amiodarone
breed, probably due to the action potential pro-
toxicity (more details see under general section:
 longing effects, which can exacerbate early after-
Treatment of VT)
depolarization-induced triggered activity.
·The authors have found the combination ther-
Acute Intravenous Antiarrhythmic Therapy
apy of mexiletine and sotalol to be beneficial in
· See under general section: Treatment of VT
reducing the incidence and rate of VT in severely
affected dogs; however, it is unknown if the risk
Of sudden death is reduced with this treatment.
Inherited Ventricular Arrhythmias in
·We have not tested amiodarone therapy
Young German Shepherds
in this breed. There is a poor response to
· Inherited ventricular arrhythmias and a propen-
 procainamide.
sity for sudden death occur in young German
Shepherds. This disorder has a wide phenotypic
VENTRICULARASYSTOLE
spectrum in which some German Shepherds have
very few ventricular premature complexes, and
· Ventricular asystole is characterized by a com-
others have frequent, rapid (rates > 350 bpm)
plete absence of a ventricular rhythm. P waves
polymorphic VT and sudden death. Only dogs
may be present if AV block exists, but no QRS
with VT die. Of German Shepherds with more
complexes are observed. Primary asystole occurs
than 10 runs of VT per 24 hours, approximately
when the Purkinje fibers intrinsically fail to gen-
50% die suddenly; however, this represents
erate a ventricular depolarization. It is usually is
about 10% to 15% of the total affected popu-
preceded by a bradyarrhythmia due to complete
lations studied. The prevalence of this disorder
heart block, sick sinus syndrome, or both.
330
SECTION IIITreatment of Cardiovascular Disease
Therapy
· If VF occurs secondary to electrolyte imbalances
or systemic disease, then the prognosis is usually
· Immediate extemal cardiac pacing with either
 grave, despite aggressive cardiopulmonary resus-
transthoracic, transvenous or epicardial elec-
citation efforts.
trodes (temporary pacing lead) may be effective,
· Animals with a predisposition to ventricular
if the asystole is the result of advanced com-
arrhythmias or that fibrillate during an anesthetic
plete AV bock. Permanent pacemaker therapy
 procedure performed for catheter treatment of
is indicated. During cardiopulmonary resuscita-
heart disease but that are otherwise relatively
tion epinephrine, isoproterenol or atropine can
healthy can usually be treated successfully with
be administered intravenously, but little effect is
electric defibrillation.
to be expected.
· VF has a grave prognosis if not corrected within
· Secondary asystole occurs when noncardiac
the first 3 minutes of onset. Development of
factors suppress the electrical conduction sys-
myocardial ischemia during VF contributes to
tem, resulting in a failure to generate any electri-
worsening prognosis as time goes by. If VF has
cal depolarization. Massive pulmonary embolus,
been present for 3 minutes or longer, cardiopul-
hyperkalemia, hypothermia, untreated VF or VT
monary resuscitation with chest compression
that deteriorates to asystole, unsuccessful defi-
should be perfonmed briefy prior to defibrilla-
brillation or narcotic overdoses leading to respi-
tion, to provide some blood fow to the myo-
ratory failure can lead to secondary asystole. In
cardium and increase chances of successful
such cases, the final common pathway is usually
defibrillation.
severe tissue hypoxia with metabolic acidosis.
Transthoracic Electrical Defibrillation
asystole, because extermal pacing is not effective
Procedure
in such cases.
· Dogs in VF become unconscious within 10 sec-
onds due to the lack of blood flow to the brain.
VENTRICULARFIBRILLATION
· Defibrillation should be attempted using trans-
·No distinctive QRS complexes are identifiable on
the ECG. Instead there is an irregularly undulating
electrodes."
baseline of variable amplitude due to a rapid and
·Animals should be placed in dorsal recum-
chaotic activation of the ventricles. The sinus node
bency and copious contact gel applied to the
is usually discharging regularly, but P waves are
thorax if hand-held paddles are used. For op-
buried in the VF waveform. There is no mechanical
timal current fow, the chest is first shaved, but
contraction of the ventricles during VF; thus blood
that may not be feasible in the interest of time.
 pressure drops to zero instantaneously. The rhythm
The dorsal recumbent position is safest for the
 ss n s n  
operator but may not be optimal for defibril-
causes death within a few minutes due to lack of
lation success in deep-chested dogs. If patch
cardiac output. VT can degenerate to VF in any of
electrodes are available, the dogs can also be
the described scenarios of VT (previous section).
placed in lateral recumbency, which might
VF can also occur secondary to systemic disease
allow the defibrillation electrodes to be closer
(i.e., severe hyperkalemia). Dogs with congenital
to the heart.
heart disease predisposed to ventricular arrhyth-
· Defibrillator ECG cables or the hand-held paddles
mias may develop VF during cardiac catheteriza-
placed on the thorax should be used to ascertain
tion for angiography or interventional therapy due
 presence of VF prior to defibrillation.
to "catheter iritation'" of the myocardium.
· Using a monophasic defibrillator:
·Start with 6 J/kg
· If VF persists, increase the dose by 50 J and
Therapy
repeat until a maximum of 360 J.
· Drug therapy is not effective for treatment of
· Using a biphasic defibrillator:
VF. Since there is no blood pressure or blood
·Start with 3 J/kg
fow during VF, drugs administered in a periph-
· If VF persists, increase the dose by 50 J and
eral vein will not reach the myocardium. Electric
repeat until a maximum of 360 J.
 defibrillation is the only viable treatment option
· Short, transient runs of VT or sinus pauses or
for VF.
AV block are common following defibrillation.
Chapter16
 Treatment of Cardiac Arrhythmias and Conduction Disturbances
331
 Frequently Asked Questions
What are the disadvantages of cardioversion (electri-
What are idioventriucutar rhythms and shoutd they be
cat or pharmacologic conversion)?
 The main disadvantages of electical cardioversion
treated?
are that it requires general anesthesia, risk of car-
Idioventricular rhythm is a form of ventricular ar-
diac atrest from "'shocking," hospitalization, and ex-
rhythmias characterized by a rate that is slow or com-
pensive equipment. Pharmacologic cardioversion's
parable to the sinus rates (60 to 150 bpm in the dog.
and > 100 bpm in cats). The ventricular rate usually
main disadvantage includes side effects from drug
administration; owner compliance can be of concern
remains within 10 to 15 bpm of the sinus rate and the
due to the daily need to administer drugs. There is
a risk of reoccurrence of AF even after successful
the two competing pacemaker sites. This arrhythmia
cardioversion with either method of cardioversion.
Generally, in our clinic the majority of patients are
eases (e.g., anemia, splenic hemangiosarcoma), drugs
treated with rate control (see Figures 16-1, 16-2, and
(e.g., digoxin, opiods) and electrolyte abnormalities
16-3) because the majority of our canine patients have
(e.g., hypokalemia). Generally, no clinical signs are
advanced cardiac disease.
associated with idioventricular rhythms. If clinical
signs are present, they are ofen associated with the
underlying process. Idioventricular rhythms usually do
not require treatment. Management of the underlying
cardiac disease or metabolic abnormality is required.
MANAGEMENT OF AF: RYTHYM CONTROL
VERSUS RATE CONTROL
What should veterinarians do for the management
SUGGESTED READINGS
of AF?
The answer is not straight forward and unfortunately,
Basso C, Fox PR, Meurs KM, Towbin JA, Spier AW,
we are lacking appropriate clinical trials to answer
Calabrese F, Maron BJ, Thiene G: Arrhythmogenic
this question satisfactorily; howevet, we do know it is
right ventricular cardiomyopathy causing sudden car-
 important to slow the heart rate. What we do not know
diac death in Boxer dogs: a new animal model of hu-
is if cardioversion is necessarily superior to rate con-
man disease, Circulation 109(9):1180-1185, 2004.
trol. The main advantages and disadvantages of rate
control and cardioversion are summarized hereafter.
tion of supraventricular tachyarrhythmias. In Fogoros
They are intended to aid in clinical judgment and one
RN: Electophysiologic testing, ed 3, Malden, Mass,
 must always consider a patient's individual needs.
1998, Blackwell Science.
What are the advantages of rate control?
 Gelzer RM, Kraus MS: Management of atrial fibrillation.
Management is relatively simple because it can be
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 34:1127-1144,
achieved in the home environment with oral medi-
2004.
cation. Rate control successfully achieves improved
Gelzer ARM, Moise NS, Koller ML: Defbrillation
left ventricular function, reduction in clinical signs,
of German  shepherds with inherited ventricular
limited hospitalizations, and prevention of tachycar-
arthythmias and sudden death, J Vet Cardiol 7(2):
diomyopathy.
97-107,2005
What are the disadvantages of rate control?
Gelzer ARM, Kraus MS, Moise NS, Pariaut R, Charter
Heart rate control is not "perfect" as compared to si-
ME, Renaud-Farrell S: Assessment of antiarrhyth-
nus rhythm and side effects from antiarrhythmic med-
mic drug efficacy to control heart rate in dogs with
ication can occur (gastrointestinal signs, hypotension,
atrial fibrillation using 24-hour ambulatory electro-
 worsening of heart failure or arrhy thmias ). In addition,
cardiographic (Holter) recordings, J Vet Intern Med
owner compliance and cost for lifelong therapy must
18(5):779, 2004.
 be taken into consideration. If done properly, optimal
 Jacobs G, Calvert C, Kraus M: Hepatopathy in 4 dogs
rate control can only be achieved with periodic Holter
treated with amiodarone, J Vet Intern Med 14(1):
recordings—-which increases costs to the client.
96-99, 2000.
What are the advantages of cardioversion (electricat
Kraus MS, Moise NS, Rishniw M: Morphology of ven-
tricular tachycardia in the Boxer and pace mapping
or pharmacologic conversion]?
Cardioversion has similar advantages to adequate
comparison.J Vet Intern Med 16:153-158, 2002.
rate control in that tacycardiomyopathy is avoided,
Kraus MS, Ridge LG, Gelzer ARM, Pariaut R, Moise
reduction in clinical signs and improved exercise
NS, Calvert C: Toxicity in Doberman pinscher dogs
tolerance can be achieved. Probably, the most im-
with ventricular arrhythmias treated with amiodarone,
portant advantage is that the patient has a "normal"
J Vet Intern Med 19(3):407, 2005.
sinus rhythm which is physiologic compared to
Meurs KM: Boxer dog cardiomyopathy: an update,
"slow" AF.
et Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 34:1235-1244,
2004.
332
SECTIONIIITreatment of Cardiovascular Disease
Meurs KM, Spier AW, Wright NA, et al: Comparison of
Moise NS: Diagnosis and management of canine
the effects of four antiarrhythmic treatiments for famil-
alrrhythmias. In Fox PR, Sisson D, Moise NS, eds:
ial ventricular arrhythmias in Boxers, J Am Vet Med
Textbook of canine and feline cardiology, ed 2, Phila-
Assoc 221(4):522-527, 2002.
delphia, 1999, WB Saunders.
Moise NS, Gilmour RF Jr, Riccio ML, Flahive WF Jr: Di-
agnosis of inherited ventricular tachycardia in German
shepherd dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 210(3):
403-410, 1997.
Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation
Steven G. Cole and Kenneth ]. Drobatz
INTRODUCTION
· The prognosis for patients requiring CPR is
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) describes
guarded, and long-term survival is generally
a set of techniques to provide circulatory and
less than 10%. The likelihood of a successful
ventilatory support following cardiopulmonary
outcome is improved when an arrest is rapidly
arrest (CPA). CPR encompasses both basic life
recognized and a reversible cause is identifed
support and advanced life support. Basic life
and addressed.
support includes the ABCs of resuscitation and
CPR is most likely to be successful when the team
 involves establishing an airway, providing man-
is prepared, the techniques are practiced, commu-
ual ventilation, and performing extemal chest
nication is clear, and the resuscitation takes place
compressions or intermal cardiac compressions
 in a well-equipped area within the hospital.
to generate blood flow. Advanced life support in-
cludes the Ds and Es of resuscitation, including
KEY POINT
drug therapy, defibrillation, and electrocardio-
CPR is a potentially lifesaving procedure that
gram (ECG) analysis during resuscitation. The
goal of CPR is to maximize blood flow and oxy-
requires preparation, coordination, and com-
munication to achieve optimal results.
gen delivery to the heart and brain until return
of spontaneous circulation (ROSC) is achieved
and the underlying cause of the arrest may be
addressed.
· CPA is defined as the cessation of spontane-
BASIC LIFE SUPPORT
ous circulation and ventilation. Causes of CPA
Airway
include primary myocardial disease (although
this is rare in veterinary patients), hypotension
· Establishing an airway is the first step in perform-
(secondary to hypovolemia, sepsis, or drug
ing basic life support. Orotracheal intubation is
administration), hypoxemia (secondary to hy-
generally performed in a routine fashion, and this
poventilation or lung disease), metabolic de-
may be facilitated by the use of a laryngoscope
rangements (e.g., severe metabolic acidosis) or
and/or a stylet for the endotracheal tube. It is also
electrolyte abnormalities (e.g., hyperkalemia).
helpful to have suction available if secretions or
 It is important to recognize that these predis-
blood obscure visualization of the glottis. In situ-
ations where the glottis cannot be visualized, the
either reversible or irreversible underlying dis-
larynx may be directly palpated and the endotra-
ease processes.
cheal tube may be guided by feel.
334
SECTION III  Treatment of Cardiovascular Disease
· In rare situations, an emergency tracheostomy
(e.g., pneumothorax, pleural effusion, diaphrag-
is required. This technique may be performed in
matic hemia, mass lesions).
less than 30 seconds after rapidly clipping and
prepping the ventral cervical region. A midline
Circulation
incision is performed and sharp dissection is
used to expose the trachea. Care is taken dur-
· Artificial circulation during CPR may be pro-
ing dissection to remain on midline (between the
vided by performing extermal chest compressions
stermohyothyroideus muscles) in order to avoid
or intermal cardiac massage. The goal of either
vascular structures. Once the trachea has been
tec hnique is to maximize blood flow to the coro-
isolated, a transverse incision is made between
nary and cerebral vasculature.
cervical rings (approximately 50% of the diam-
· Myocardial perfusion pressure is the best predictor
eter) and a cuffed tracheostomy tube is inserted.
of ROSC in human patients and animal models of
A standard endotracheal tube may also be used in
CPR, and it is represented by the following equa-
this situation.
tion: MPP = aortic diastolic pressure - central
· Once an airway is in place, it is important to con-
venous pressure.
finm correct tube placement. This may be done by
· Cerebral perfusion pressure drives cerebral blood
direct visualization, cervical palpation, auscul-
fow and is represented by the following equa-
tation of lung sounds, and observing chest wall
tion: CPP = Mean arterial pressure - Intracranial
movement. The use of end-tidal carbon dioxide
pressure.
(CO) monitoring in this situation is also use-
· There are two theories describing the mechanism
ful, as tracheal gas is always higher in CO, than
of blood fow during extermal chest compres-
esophageal gas. Once placement is confirmed, it
sions. The cardiac pump theory describes actual
is vital to secure the endotracheal tube, as inad-
 compression of the heart through the chest wall
vertent tube dislodgement is very common in an
and is likely to occur in small patients (< 15 kg).
arrest situation.
The thoracic pump theory describes blood fow as
· Problems during an arrest (i.e., unable to auscult
a result of phasic increases in intrathoracic pres-
lung sounds, chest wall not moving with venti-
 sure and has been documented in larger animals
lation) should prompt rapid reevaluation of en-
(> 15 kg).
dotracheal tube placement. It is also important
· Extermal chest compressions should be per-
to ensure that the cuff has been infated, as this
formed with the patient in lateral recumbency.
is often the source of problems. If airway prob-
The chest may be compressed circumferen-
lems have been ruled out, difficulty ventilating a
tially or directly over the heart in small patients
 patient during an arrest suggests severe pleural
(< 15 kg) and at the widest point of the chest
space, airway, or parenchymal disease.
in larger patients (> 15 kg). The rate of chest
compressions should be 100 to 120 per min-
Breathing
ute with a ratio of compression to relaxation
of 50:50. While higher compression rates have
· Patients should be manually ventilated with 100%
 been shown to generate greater cardiac output,
oxygen. Methods for providing positive pressure
it is difficult to sustain higher rates for extended
ventilation in an arrest situation include the use of
periods of time during CPR. Compressions
an Ambu-bag or an anesthesia machine.
should be given with enough force to decrease
· Respiratory rate should be between 10 to 24
the diameter of the chest wall by approximately
breaths/minute. It should be noted that excessive
25% to 33%
ventilation often occurs during CPR. It has been
· Interposed abdominal compression (IAC) may
shown in animal models that increasing respira-
be used to improve the efficacy of extermal chest
tory rates results in higher mean intrathoracic
compressions. With this technique, the abdo-
pressures, decreased myocardial perfusion pres.
sure, and decreased survival
phase of chest compression) in order to increase
· Normal chest wall motion should be observed
the pressure gradient favoring blood returm to the
and peak pressure of less than 20 cm HzO should
chest, thereby improving cardiac output, blood
be maintained if possible. Problems with de-
 pressure, and myocardial and cerebral perfusion
creased compliance or diminished chest wall
pressure.
motion may include airway obstruction, severe
· Even optimal extermal chest compression produces
parenchymal disease, or pleural space disease
approximately 20% of normal cardiac output.
Chapter17
Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation
335
Open-chest CPR and intermal cardiac compres-
sion may produce 100% of normal cardiac output,
ADVANCED LIFE SUPPORT
with dramatic increases in blood fow to the heart
Establishing Access for Drug and Fluid
and brain. Indications for open-chest CPR include
Therapy
pleural space disease (e.g., pneumothorax, pleural
effusions, diaphragmatic hermia), pericardial effu-
· Rapid access tothe circulation is vital in CPR. Cen-
sion, penetrating wounds, chest wall trauma, intra-
tral venous access (e.g. jugular vein) is ideal, as
operative arrests, hemoperitoneum, large dogs in
drug circulation times are significantly decreased
which closed-chest compressions are unlikely to
when compared to peripheral sites. Because of the
generate effective blood flow, or in prolonged re-
low-fow state that occurs during CPR, large fush
suscitations (> 2 to 5 min without ROSC).
volumes are necessary, especially when peripheral
· To perfonm open-chest CPR, the heart may be ac-
catheters are employed. Short, large bore catheters
cessed via a left lateral thoracotomy (or transdia-
are ideal, as these provide the highest fow rates
phragmatically in patients undergoing abdominal
 for drug and fuid administration.
surgery). Following a rapid clip and preparation
· Surgical cutdown should be perfonmed imme-
 of the left chest, an emergency thoracotomy may
diately if an initial attempt at percutaneous vas-
be performed in approximately 30 seconds. A
cular access is not successful. Surgical cutdown
skin incision is made in the fourth or fifth inter-
 involves making a skin incision adjacent and par-
costal space and is extended through the chest
allel to the long axis of the vein (usually jugu-
wall musculature. Ventilation is temporarily sus-
lar, cephalic, or saphenous) to be isolated. Blunt
pended and the pleural space is accessed. A rib
dissection with a hemostat is used to expose the
spreader is used to retract the ribs. Once the heart
vein, and an intravenous catheter is introduced.
is exposed, the ventricles may be compressed
Cutdown catheters should be secured with suture
with one or two hands depending upon the size
and bandaged appropriately.
of the patient. A rate of 100 to 120 compressions
· Intraosseous (IO) access is an altemative to
per minute is recommended. It is often easier to
peripheral venous access, especially in small
perfonm direct cardiac compression once an inci-
 puppies, kittens, and exotic species. The inter-
 sion has been made in the pericardium (below the
trochanteric fossa of the femur, proximal hu-
level of the phrenic nerve).
 merus, and proximal tibia are readily accessible
· Open-chest CPR allows for compression or
sites to obtain intraosseous access.
cross-clamping of the descending aorta to direct
· Intratracheal (IT) administration is an excellent
blood flow to the heart and brain, and to avoid ad-
 method to deliver drugs when intravenous access
ditional volume loss in cases of abdominal hem-
is not available. Most drugs used in CPR (with
orrhage. In the absence of an atraumatic vascular
the exception of sodium bicarbonate) may be de-
clamp, the aorta may be manually compressed,
livered by this route. When delivering drugs in-
or a Penrose drain or red rubber catheter may
tratracheally, the dose of the drug is doubled, the
be tightened around the aorta. When appropri-
medication is diluted to 2 to 5 ml (depending upon
ate, aortic fow may be gradually restored (over
 patient size), and the drug is delivered through a
5 to 10 minutes).
red rubber catheter placed through and beyond
· Open-chest CPR requires that appropriate facili-
the tip of the endotracheal tube (at the level of the
ties and expertise be available for post-resusci-
carina). Air may be used to fush the catheter.
tation care and management of the emergency
· Intracardiac drug administration is not recom-
thoracotomy.
mended in CPR, as there is a risk for inadvertent
laceration of the lung or coronary vasculature, as
well as the potential for intramyocardial drug ad-
ministration (which may exacerbate arrhythmias
or ischemia in the case of epinephrine).
KEY POINT
 Basic life support measures are the basis for
Electrocardiography
all resuscitation efforts. These techniques are
easily learned and are effective in maintaining
· ECG monitoring is integral to providing ad-
ventilation and artificial circulation in patients
vanced life support. The course of action taken
suffering CPA.
during CPR depends upon the rhythm that is pres-
ent, and changes in the rhythm during the course
336
SECTIONIII
I Treatment of Cardiovascular Disease
of an arrest often dictate changes in therapy
(dogs and cats, 0.01 to 0.02 mg/kg) is favored
(Figure 17-1).
in people, due, in part, to worse neurologic out-
· A retrospective study of veterinary patients
comes with initial high dose therapy. Conversely,
undergoing CPR has shown that common ini-
high-dose epinephrine (dogs and cats, 0.1 to 0.2
tial arrest rhythms include pulseless electrical
mg/kg) has been shown to improve results in dog
activity, asystole, ventricular fibrillation, and
models of CPR. Epinephrine may be given IV, IT
sinus bradycardia.
or IO, and a shortcut for high-dose epinephrine
·Although ventricular fibrillation is most respon-
is 1 ml/10 kg, and the dose may be repeated at
sive to treatment (defibrillation), a recent study
5-minute intervals.
of veterinary patients surviving CPR found that
· Msopressin is a noncatecholamine vasopressor
asystole was the most common initial rhythm
drug that has recently been included in human
identified.
CPR guidelines . Potential advantages of vasopres-
Drug Therapy
in the presence of acidosis, lack of potentially
 harmful beta effects, and a longer half-life. The
· See Table 17-1 for drug therapy guidelines
role of vasopressin in CPR is still being inves-
· Intravenous fluids may be administered in shock
tigated, however there is evidence that this drug
doses (90 ml/kg in dogs and 60 ml/kg in cats) to
may be equivalent to or even superior to epineph-
patients that are hypovolemic. Intravenous fuids
rine is some situations. The dose of vasopressin is
may also be useful to help flush drugs from pe-
0.8 μ/kg (dogs and cats), and the dose may be re-
ripheral sites into the central circulation. It should
 peated at 5 minute intervals.
be noted, however, that myocardial perfusion
· Lidocaine is indicated in ventricular fibrilla-
 pressure may be reduced by significant increases
tion or pulseless ventricular tachycardia that is
in central venous pressure, and that bolus fuid
 not responsive to initial defibrillation attempts.
therapy may be counterproductive in patients that
 Like other antiarhythmic drugs, lidocaine may
are euvolemic or volume overloaded at the time
increase the defibrillation threshold. Addition-
of arrest.
ally, lidocaine must be used with care in the post-
·Atropineis a vagolytic drug that abolishes para-
 arrest period, as its use may suppress a functional
sympathetic tone. It is indicated in patients with
ventricular escape rhythm. The dose of lidocaine
bradycardias (as may occur in vagal events), as
is 2 mg/kg (dogs, IV, IO, IT), and a shortcut dose
well as in pulseless electrical activity and asys-
for the 2% (20 mg/ml) solution is 1 ml/10 kg.
tole. It should be noted that high doses of atro-
· Amiodaronehas been incorporated into human
pine may cause a profound tac hycardia in patients
CPR guidelines, and has been favorably com-
with perfusing rhythms, and that the dose is often
pared to lidocaine in ventricular fibrillation that
reduced by 50% to 75% in these situations. The
is refractory to defibrillation. There is limited ex-
dose of atropine is 0.04 mg/kg (dogs and cats, can
perience with amiodarone in the context of CPR
be given IV, IT, IO). Atropine is available in a con-
in veterinary patients. The dose of amiodarone
centration of 0.54 mg/ml, and a shortcut dose is
is 5 to 10 mg/kg (dogs, IV), and it is diluted in
1 ml/10 kg. The dose may be repeated at 5 minute
5% dextrose prior to administration. Hypoten-
intervals.
sion is a common occurrence during amiodarone
· Epinephrine is a potent alpha and beta cate
administration.
cholamine receptor agonist. Experimental studies
· Sodium bicarbonate is not routinely recom-
have shown that it is the alpha (vasoconstrictor)
mended for use in all arrest situations. It is in-
effects rather than the beta (chronotropic/inotro-
dicated, however, in patients with a preexisting
pic) effects that are most important in achieving
acidosis, patients with hyperkalemia, and in pro-
ROSC. This is due to the increased peripheral
longed (> 10 minute) arrests. The dose for sodium
resistance created by adrenergic stimulation and
bicarbonate is 1 to 2 mEq/kg (dogs and cats, IV,
the resultant increase in aortic pressure. This
IO). A shortcut dose is 1 ml/kg of a standard 1
increase in aortic pressure leads to an increase
mEq/ml solution. Sodium bicarbonate should not
in myocardial perfusion pressure and increased
be given intratracheally, as this will inactivate
likelihood of successful resuscitation. Epineph-
surfactant and have deleterious effects on pulmo-
rine is indicated in all cardiac arrest situations.
nary function.
There are both high- and low-dose recommen-
· Galcium gluconate is also not routinely recom-
dations for epinephrine in CPR. The low dose
mended in all arrest situations, as its use may
Cardiopulmonary Arrest
Begin basic life support
Airway
Assess for airway obstruction, assess for breathing
 Perform intubation
Breathing
Venilate with 100% oxygen, avoid hyperventilation
 Provide 10-24 breaths/minute
Circulation
 Assess for heartbeat and pulses
If absent, begin chest compressions 
Provide 100-120 compressions/minute
Minimize interruptions
Begin advanced life support
Place ECG and determine arrest rhythm
 Obtain access for drug therapy
VF/Pulseless VT
Asystole/Bradycardia/PEA
Defibrillate
2-10 joules/kg (external)
Drug therapy
Atropine (0.04 mg/kg IV)
0.2-1 joule/kg (internal)
Use lower dose if palpable pulse
Provide up to 3 consecutive shocks
Or suspected vagal arrest
before resuming CPR for 1-2 min.
Epinephrine (0.01-0.1 mg/kg IV)
Drug therapy
Epinephrine (0.01-0.1 mg/kg IV)
May be repeated at 3-5 min.
or
intervals
Vasopressin (0.8 units/kg IV)
or
Vasopressin (0.8 units/kg IV)
Lidocaine (2 mg/kg IV)
Give one time only
or
Amiodarone (5 mg/kg IV)
Repeat defibrillation (escalating dose)
Anesthesia-related arrest
Turn off vaporizer, flush circuit
 Administer specific drug reversal agent
Low-dose epinephrine (0.01 mg/kg) where indicated
During CPR
Consider interposed abdominal compression
Consider open-chest CPR
Especially with prolonged arrests or in large patients
Transdiaphragmatic approach during laparotomy
Consider sodium bicarbonate (1-2 mEq/kg IV)
 Indicated in patients with significant pre-exsting metabolic
acidosis, hyperkalemia, or with prolonged (>10 min) CPA
Consider calcium gluconate (50-100 mg/kg IV)
 Indicated in patients with hyperkalemia or ionized hypocalcemia
Consider magnesium sulfate (30 mg/kg IV)
Indicated in patients with hypomagnesemia
Monitor ongoing resuscitation
Use end-tidal COz monitoring if available
 Search for underlying causes of arrest
 Run 'stat bloodwork (PCV/TS/BG/Blood Gas/Electrolytes)
Figure 17-1.
 Algorithm for performing CPR in veterinary patients. (Adapted from Cole SG, Otto CM, Hughes D: Cardiopulmo-
nary cerebral resuscitation in small animals: a clinical practice review. Part Il. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 1 3[1]:13-23, 2003.)
338
SECTION III Treatment of Cardiovascular Disease
Table 17-1
Guidelines for Drug Therapy and Initial Defibrillator Settings (Monophasic Waveform
Defibrillators) During CPR
Weight (lb)
5
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Weight (kg)
2.5
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Drug (conc.)
Dose
ml
Epi 1ow (1:10,000)
0.01 mg/kg
0.25
0.5
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
Epi high (1:1,000)
0.1 mg/kg
0.25
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4.5
5
 Atropine (0.54 mg/ml)
0.05 mg/kg
0.25
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4.5
5
Lidocaine (20 mg/ml)
2 mg/kg
0.25
0.5
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4.5
5
 Sodium bicarbonate
1 mEq/kg
2.5
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
(1 mEq/ml)
Calcium gluconate
50 mg/kg
1
2.5
5
7.5
10
12.5
15
17.5
20
22.5
2.5
(100 mg/ml)
 Magnesium sulfate
0.2 mEq/kg
0.1
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
1.25
1.5
1.75
2
2.25
2.5
(4 mEq/ml)
Vasopressin (20 units/ml)
0.8 μ/kg
0.1
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
 Amiodarone (50 mg/ml)
5 mg/kg
0.25
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
Naloxone (0.4 mg/ml)
0.04 mg/kg
0.25
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
 Flumazenil (0.1 mg/ml)
0.02 mg/ml
0.5
1
2
3
4
5
6
?
8
9
10
External defibrillation
2-10 J/kg
20
30
50
100
200200
200
300
300
300
360
 Internal defibrillation
0.2-1 J/kg
2
3
5
10
20
20
20
30
30
30
50
11. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 13( 1): 13-23, 2003.
exacerbate ischemia-reperfusion injury. It is indi-
attachments for an accessory fat paddle (often
 cated in patients with hyperkalemia and in patients 
called a posterior paddle) that may be placed un-
with known hypocalcemia. The dose of calcium glu-
der the patient, with the handheld paddle placed
 conate is 50 to 100 mg/kg (dogs and cats, IV, I0)
Over the heart on opposite sides of the chest wall.
· Magnesium sulfate is indicated in patients with
· It is important to use large amounts of contact gel
kmow hypomagnesemia, and in rare ventricular ar-
in order to prevent the current from "arcing" across
rhythmias (e.g. torsades de pointes). The dose of mag-
the surface of the skin rather than being delivered
nesium sulfate is 30 mg/kg (dogs and cats, IV, I0)
through the chest. Arcing of current is inefficient,
and may be potentially dangerous, especially if al-
cohol has been placed on the patient. Because of the
Defibrillation
risk of combustion during defibrillation, alcohol (to
· See Table 17-1 for defibrillation guidelines
 increase ECG contact) should not be used during
· Electrical defbrillation is the only effective
CPR. ECG contact gel is a much safer altermative.
method to convert ventricular fibrillation to a per-
· Clear communication during defibrillation is
fusing rhythm. Defibrillation is also indicated in
also important to ensure safety. The operator
 patients with pulseless ventricular tachycardia.
must both inform the other resuscitation team
· The defibrillator must be used properly to mini-
members of an impending defibrillation attempt
mize risks to members of the resuscitation team. It
and confirm that no member of the team is in
is strongly recommended that the patient be placed
contact with the patient or table prior to deliver-
in lateral recumbency for both CPR and defibril-
 ing a shock. Because of this, a standard protocol
lation. Attempting to defibrillate a patient in dor-
 is followed for each defibrillation. This protocol
sal recumbency may allow the limbs to contact a
is as follows: (1) confinm ventricular fibrillation
team member. This may lead to the unintentional
 Or pulseless ventricular tachycardia, (2) apply
delivery of current to a staff member and a poten-
 contact gel, (3) confirm current to be delivered
tially harmful situation. Most defibrillators have
and charge defibrillator, (4) halt ongoing CPR,
Chapter17
 Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation
339
(5) call "Clear," (6) confinm that all personnel
tilation that typically occurs during CPR). On
are clear of the patient (especially limbs) and
the other hand, venous blood gas results refect
table, (7) deliver current, (8) monitor success of
the metabolic and respiratory acidosis that char-
defibrillation.
acterizes the local tissue environment in the face
· The dose of energy for initial defibrillation is 3 to
of hypoperfusion and decreased clearance of
5 J/kg. This corresponds to 10 to 15 J for a cat,
metabolic byproducts. Because of this, venous
30 to 100 J for a small dog, 100 to 200 J for a
 blood gas results are more useful in the monitor-
medium dog, and 200 to 300 J for a large dog.
ing of CPR.
· If an initial shock is not successful, up to 2 ad-
ditional shocks are given, increasing the energy
delivered by 50%. If there is no conversion of the
KEY POINT
rhythm after a total of three shocks, CPR is re-
Advanced life support techniques include the
sumed for 1 to 2 minutes before defibrillation is
implementation of drug therapy and defibril-
attempted again.
lation. These interventions are based upon
the circumstances unique to each arrest and
Monitoring CPR Efforts
 provide options to augment the effectiveness
 of basic life support.
· Patient monitoring during CPR can be difficult,
and some standard techniques may be potentially
misleading in an arrest situation.
SPECIAL SITUATIONS
· Palpation of femoral pulses during chest com-
Anesthetic Arrests
 pression is an encouraging finding; however, the
presence of pulses (and a discermible pulse pres-
· In general, anesthetic related arrests are rare;
sure) does necessarily correspond to adequate
however, arrests that occur in conjunction with
arterial blood pressure or perfusion pressures.
anesthesia are usually rapidly recognized, and
Direct arterial pressure measurement is ideal, al-
some retrospective veterinary studies demon-
though this is generally only feasible in patients
strate that these patients are the most likely to
with a previously placed arterial line.
be successfully resuscitated.
· As mentioned above, ECG monitoring is vital
· Steps to take in an anesthetic related arrest in-
during CPR, as this often dictates the type and
clude turming off gas anesthesia and fushing
timing of intervention. ECG findings must always
the anesthetic circuit, reversing injectable an-
be interpreted in the light of physical ex amination
esthetic agents with naloxone (for opioids) at
parameters. This is especially important when an
0.02 to 0.04 mg/kg (dogs and cats, IV), fumaze-
apparent escape rhythm is present. The presence
nil (for benzodiazepines) at 0.02 to 0.04 mg/kg
of auscultable heart sounds and, often, palpable
(dogs and cats, IV), or yohimbine/atipamenzole
pulses, indicates ROsC. Without these findings,
(for alpha-2 agonists) at 0.1 to 0.2 mg/kg (dogs
the rhythm represents pulseless electrical activity
and cats, IV) and instituting standard CPR.
and CPR should be continued.
· Immediate open-chest CPR should be performed
· End-tidal CO2 monitoring is an easily applied
in patients undergoing thoracotomy and should
and extremely useful monitoring tool in CPR. If
be considered in patients undergoing celiotomy
ventilation is constant, end-tidal CO2 is linearly
(via a transdiaphragmatic approach).
related to pulmonary blood flow and, by exten-
· Possible underlying causes such as hypoven-
sion, cardiac output. As with myocardial perfu-
tilation, hypoxemia, hypotension, or arrhyth-
sion pressure, higher end-tidal CO2 during CPR
mias should be investigated and corrected
has been shown to correlate with increased like-
immediately.
lihood of successful resuscitation. Additionally,
because end-tidal CO2 is a surrogate marker for
Vagal Events
blood fow, marked increases in this parameter
 serves as a useful indicator of ROSC.
· Vagal events, characterized by bradycardia, hy-
· Blood gas analysis may be misleading during
potension and collapse, may occur in critically ill
CPR. Despite the low-fow state and global tissue
patients, especially in conjunction with cough-
ischemia that occurs, arterial blood gas results
ing, retching, vomiting, or straining to defecate.
may appear relatively nonmal after equilibration
In extreme cases, bradycardia may be profound
with alveolar gas (especially with the hyperven
and lead to asystole.
340
SECTION IIITreatment of Cardiovascular Disease
· Atropineis the treatment of choice in patients
and normocapnia should be maintained. This
with symptomatic bradycardia, and it should be
limits increases in intracranial pressure created
noted that significant (although transient) tachy
by hypercapnia-induced cerebral vasodilation,
cardia is often seen in patients with perfusing
as well as prevents hypocapnia-related cerebral
rhythms given a full arrest dose (dogs and cats,
vasoconstriction and diminished cerebral blood
0.04 mg/kg IV, IM, IT). Because of this, the at-
fow. Many patients that suffer protracted periods
ropine dose may be reduced to a fourth to half of
of CPA do not ventilate effectively in the imme-
the arrest dose (dogs and cats, 0.01 to 0.02 mg/kg
diate (< 24 hour) post-arrest period and require
IV, IM, IT) in patients with palpable pulses.
mechanical ventilation to maintain normocapnia.
· Respiratory arrest may accompany these events,
· Induced hypothermia has been shown to be bene-
 and prompt intubation and manual ventilation is
ficial in improving neurologic outcome following
indicated.
CPR in human patients. Although this is difficult
· Most patients suffering a witnessed vagal arrest
to translate to clinical veterinary patients, over-
respond remarkably well to prompt intubation,
zealous rewarming of mildly hypothermic pa-
ventilation, and atropine administration. Full
tients is not recommended.
CPR should be instituted if no response to initial
therapy occurs.
Intensive Care
· Patients resuscitated from CPA may suffer a range
POST-RESUSCITATION CARE
of post-resuscitation syndromes affecting multiple
 Organ systems. The severity of these abnormalities
Preventing Rearrest
is dependent on the duration of the arrest as well as
· Many patients that are initially resuscitated suffer
 the condition of the patient prior to the episode.
an additional episode of CPA within the first few
· In addition to neurologic dysfunction, post-ar-
hours, and often few minutes, following ROSC.
rest patients often have significant cardiovas-
· A rapid search for underlying causes of the arrest
cular
(arrhythmia, myocardial  dysfunction,
must be undertaken, and these must be addressed
hypotension), renal (acute renal failure), and
immediately. Special emphasis should be placed
gastrointestinal (shock gut) sequelae. The low-
on finding reversible disease processes, such as
fow state during CPA and CPR creates global
drug-induced hypotension, hypovolemia,
hy
ischemia followed by subsequent reperfusion
poventilation, anemia, or electrolyte abnormali-
and leads to systemic inflammation (systemic
ties, as these situations are most likely to result in
tion of the coagulation cascade and disseminated
intravascular coagulation. There is also the pos-
sibility that CPR has created iatrogenic injury
Cerebral Protection
(rib fractures, pulmonary contusion) or has re-
· Cerebral ischemia (and subsequent reperfusion)
sulted in additional management concerms (post-
 may lead to long-term neurologic dysfunction in pa-
thoracotomy or post-tracheostomy patients).
 tients suffering CPA and subsequent resuscitation.
· Intensive monitoring and supportive care is re-
This has led to the creation of the acronym CPCR,
quired to address these conditions, as well as con-
which stands for cardiopulmonary cerebral resusci-
ditions underlying the arrest. It is not common for
tation and reflects the importance of neurologic out-
post-CPA patients to require pressor therapy, me-
come when assessing the success of resuscitation
chanical ventilation, or other advanced therapy to
· Measures to limit progressive neurologic injury in
survive the post-arrest period and be discharged
 post-CPA patients include head elevation to 30 de-
from the hospital.
 grees. This should be accomplished by elevating the
entire chest, neck, and head to avoid acute kinking
KEY POINT
 of the neck and possible jugular vein compression.
 Post-resuscitation care is essential  to the
ultimate success of CPR. Intensive monitoring 
gram/kg IV (dogs and cats) over 20 minutes to treat
and supportive care is necessary to identify
cerebral edema, improve cerebral microvascular
and address the underlying cause of CPA
fow, and to provide free radical scavenging effects.
as  well as  to  manage post-resuscitation
· Ventilatory status should be evaluated (either by
syndromes.
end-tidal CO2, or ideally by blood gas analysis,
Chapter17
 Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation
341
 Frequently Asked Questions
SUGGESTED READINGS
When should CPR not be performed?
Cole SG, Otto CM, Hughes D: Cardiopulmonary cere-
The decision to perform CPR can be difficult, espe-
bral resuscitation in small animals: a clinical practice
cially when this decision needs to be made in a cri-
review. Part I, J Vet Emerg Crit Care 12(4):261-267,
sis situation. Retrospective studies have shown that
2002.
survival to discharge is generally less than 10% for
Cole SG, Otto CM, Hughes D: Cardiopulmonary cere-
patients suffering a full CPA. In general, the greatest
bral resuscitation in small animals: a clinical practice
chance for a successful outcome involves a patient in
review. Part I1, J Vet Emerg Crit Care 13(1):13-23,
which a cause for the arrest can be rapidly identified
2002.
 and treated. This is not often the case for patients with
Kass PH, Haskins SC: Survival following cardiopulmo-
advanced or multisystemic diseases. Although many
nary resuscitation in dogs and cats, J Vet Emerg Crit
of these patients can be initially resuscitated, survival
Care 2(2):57-65, 1992.
to discharge is extraordinarily unlikely. Speaking to
Lehman TL, Manning AM: Postarrest syndrome and the
 an owner about a resuscitation code (full CPR, limited
respiratory and cardiovascular systems in postarrest
CPR, or Do Not Resuscitate) is recommended in the
patients, Compend Contin Ed Practic Vet 25(7):492-
instance that a critically ill patient with an advanced
 disease is admitted to the hospital. In this way, futile
503,2003.
resuscitation efforts may be avoided, and appropriate
Lehman TL, Manning AM: Renal, central nervous, and
 end of life decisions may be made.
gastrointestinal systems in postarrest patients, Com-
pend Contin Ed Practic Vet 25(7):504-513, 2003.
What is the neurologic outcome of veterinary patients
Waldrop JE, Rozanski EA, Swanke ED, et al: Causes of
surviving CPA?
cardiopulmonary arrest, resuscitation management,
As mentioned previously, the survival rate of patients
and functional outcome in dogs and cats surviv-
suffering CPA is poor. Additionally, many veterinar-
ing cardiopulmonary arrest, J Vet Emerg Crit Care
ians have concerns about the potential for neurologic
14(1):22-29, 2004.
dysfunction in patients that do survive to hospital
Wingfield WE, Van Pelt DR: Respiratory and cardiopul
discharge. Although this is a major concern in people
monary arrest in dogs and cats: 265cases (1986-1991),
that have received CPR, a recent retrospective study
demonstrated that 16 of 18 veterinary patients that
J Am Vet Med Assoc 200(12):1993-1996, 1992.
survived CPA were neurologically normal at the time
of hospital discharge, and that l of the remaining
 2 patients was normal within 2 months.
Emergency Management
and Critical Care
Steven G. Cole and Kenneth J. Drobatz
INTRODUCTION
Cardiac Rhythm Disturbances
 In general, cardiac emergencies may be divided
· The most common cardiac arrhythmias causing
into three groups:
emergent presentations are third-degree heart
block and tachyarrhythmias. These animals gen-
Heart Failure
erally present with low output failure and signs of
weakmess or collapse.
· Congestive heart failure (CHF) (commonly
regarded as "backward’" failure)
Thromboembolism
· CHF patients generally present with respira-
tory signs (due to pleural effusion or pulmo-
· Thromboembolic disease typically presents with
nary edema) or abdominal distension (due to
acute dysfunction of the area of compromised
ascites).
blood supply. In cats with cardiomyopathy, this is
· Low output (commonly regarded as "forward"
most often the hind limbs due to an aortic saddle
failure)
thrombus, although other limbs may also be af-
· Animals with low-output heart failure most
fected. Pulmonary thromboembolism may be an
commonly have signs of weakness or collapse
acute cause of respiratory distress and low output
that are typically due to dilated cardiomyopa-
heart failure in dogs with a variety of underlying
thy or pericardial effusion.
diseases. Thromboembolic disease is also encoun-
·The term myocardial failure is used to
tered in animals with infectious endocarditis
denote the presence of reduced myocardial
contractility (e.g., dilated cardiomyopathy)
ASSESSING CARDIOVASCULAR
FUNCTION IN THE EMERGENCY
KEY POINT
PATIENT
It is important to remember that the ultimate
Physical Examination
cardiac
 emergency   is   cardiopulmonary
· Historical complaints that support a primary car-
arrest. The management of cardiopulmonary
arrest and  strategies for cardiopulmonary
diac emergency are varied and include weakness,
resuscitation in small animals are covered in
lethargy, collapse or syncope, as well as cough,
a separate chapter.
tachypnea, or respiratory distress. Additional com-
 plaints such as anorexia, vomiting, or diarrhea are
342
Chapter18
Emergency Management and Critical Care
343
 not uncommon, as primary cardiovascular prob-
vasculature, pulmonary parenchyma and pleural
lems may have wide-ranging effects on all major
space. It represents the gold standard in docu-
organ systems.
menting CHF in the form of pulmonary edema
· Physical examination findings consistent with
and/or pleural effusion.
primary cardiac emergencies are variable de-
· Echocardiography provides information about
 pending upon the specific condition.
cardiac structure and function. It is typically used
· Mucous membranes may be pale secondary
to confinm a suspected diagnosis, determine se-
to vasoconstriction or cyanotic secondary to
verity of disease, assess myocardial contractility,
hypoxemia. Capillary refill time is commonly
and detect intracardiac or proximal pulmonary
prolonged due to diminished cardiac output
artery thrombi. Echocardiography is particularly
 and hypoperfusion. Decreased tissue perfusion
useful in assessing patients with pericardial effu-
is more commonly seen in instances of low
sion for cardiac neoplasia.
 Output failure vs. congestive failure.
· The majority of cases of canine and feline heart
KEY PoINT
failure are accompanied by an audible murmur
Animals presenting with emergency prob-
 Or gallop. Diminished heart sounds occur in
lems related to heart disease are often not
cases of pericardial or pleural effusion or se-
stable enough for prolonged diagnostic tests.
vere myocardial failure.
Empiric therapy for the most likely cardiac
· Bradyarrhythmias or  tachyarrhythmias
are
problem based on signalment, history, physi-
common, and are often associated with irreg-
cal examination, and chest radiographs is
  asnd prs  sr 
often performed. In many cases, appropriate
 pulse deficits.
therapy can be instituted without the need 
· Pulsus paradoxus, where pulse strength gets
for an immediate echocardiographic exam.
weaker on inspiration is detected in approxi-
mately 50% of cases of pericardial effusion.
· Tachypnea and respiratory distress is often
EMERGENCY TREATMENT
present. In cases of pulmonary edema, auscul-
OF HEART FAILURE
tation will commonly reveal harsh lung sounds
or crackles. In cases of pleural effusion, lung
· Treatment of heart failure involves the following:
sounds are commonly diminished ventrally.
· Identification and remediation of underlying
· Animals suffering from low output failure of-
causes
ten have a low body temperature and depressed
· Elimination of aggravating conditions (i.e., car-
mentation.
diac depressants, hypertension, arrhythmias)
· Jugular pulses or distension is commonly de-
· Control of congestion
tected in animals with right-sided heart failure.
· Improvement of myocardial contractility
· Improvement of myocardial relaxation
· Reduction of cardiac work
Diagnostic Tests
· Reduction of pathologic remodeling and neu-
· Diagnostic tests include electrocardiography
rohonmonal activation
(ECG), pulse oximetry, blood pressure measure-
ment, chest radiographs and echocardiography.
Congestive Heart Failure
·A lead II ECG is usually sufficient for the rapid
diagnosis of most cardiac rhythm disturbances.
· CHF results from elevated cardiac filling pres-
· Pulse oximetry provides a useful estimate of he-
sures that cause pulmonary or systemic venous
moglobin saturation and arterial oxygen content,
 hypertension and extravasation of fuid into the
findings that may be further evaluated by arterial
interstitial space or a body cavity
 blood gas analysis.
· The location of this fuid is dependent upon the
· Noninvasive blood pressure measurement may be
failing ventricle (left-sided, right-sided, or bi-
accomplished via Doppler or oscillometric tech.
ventricular failure) and the subsequent signs
niques, and reflects cardiac output and vasomotor
of CHF relates to the magnitude of the fuid
tone. It is useful in the recognition of shock states
accumulation.
and in monitoring therapeutic interventions.
· CHF is the result of many cardiac diseases in-
· Chest radiography is the ideal method to assess
cluding chronic valvular disease, cardiomy-
size and shape ofthe cardiac silhouette, pulmonary
opathies, infectious endocarditis, myocarditis,
344
SECTIONIII
Treatment of Cardiovascular Disease
 persistent arrhythmia, or congenital cardiovascu-
· Echocardiography provides definitive informa-
lar anomalies.
tion regarding the size of the cardiac chambers as
well as indicators of systolic and diastolic cardiac
function.
Left-Sided Congestive Heart Failure
· Many patients that present with LCHF have se-
· Left-sided congestive heart failure (LCHF) re-
vere respiratory distress and cannot tolerate a full
sults from elevated left atrial pressure. Elevated
diagnostic workup. Because of this, therapy is
left atrial pressure may result from mitral valve
often instituted prior to obtaining radiographs or
insufficiency, mitral valve stenosis, or systolic
an echocardiogram. In these cases, the decision
or diastolic dysfunction of the left ventricle. In
to treat for CHF is based on the history, clinical
dogs, LCHF causes pulmonary edema, whereas
signs, and physical examination findings at the
in cats it may be associated with both pulmonary
time of presentation. If access to a portable ul-
edema and pleural effusion.
trasound machine is available, additional infor-
·Clinical sigms
 mation may be obtained from a brief screening
· Clinical signs of LCHF failure result from pul-
examination of the thorax for the presence of
 monary compromise and include tachypnea,
pleural effusion or grossly recognizable changes
respiratory distress, lethargy, and exercise in-
in cardiac structure (e.g., dilated left atrium, myo-
tolerance. Dogs with pulmonary edema fre-
cardial chamber dimension or wall thickness) or
quently have a cough, whereas a cough is rare
function (e.g., markedly diminished fractional
in cats with heart failure.
shortening).
· Physical examination findings include harsh
lung sounds and crackles in patients with
Treatment
 pulmonary edema. Cats with pleural effusion
· Emergency treatment of LCHF involves the use
usually have dull lung sounds in the ventral
of diuretics, vasodilators, and in some cases,
lung felds, especially when compared to the
inotropic agents. Additionally, oxygen therapy
degree of respiratory effort. Severely com-
 is vital in patients with compromised pulmonary
promised patients will present in respiratory
function, and some patients may benefit from
distress, and cyanosis is not uncommon. Most
the judicious use of anxiolytic drugs. Cats with
patients with LCHF will be tachycardic and
significant pleural effusion require therapeutic
usually have abnormalities on auscultation
thoracocentesis.
such as a heart murmur, gallop rhythm, or an
Diuretie Therapy
arrhythmia.
· The goal of diuretic therapy in the treatment of
LCHF is to reduce the circulating blood volume,
Diagnostics
thereby reducing the preload of the left ventricle
· Confirmation of LCHF is made by obtaining
and left atrial pressure. The primary diuretic used
chest radiographs to document the presence and
in the acute management of CHF is furosemide.
· Furosemide may be administered intravenously.
· In dogs, pulmonary edema tends to be most
although the intramuscular route may be used in
evident at the perihilar region, although all lung
 patients without vascular access.
lobes may be affected in severe cases. Pulmonary
· The dose is dependent upon the severity of clini-
edema in cats does not follow this patterm, and
cal signs and patient response. In dogs, an ini-
the location of affected lung tissue is variable.
tial dose of 2 to 6 mg/kg IV, IM, or SC may be
Pleural effusion in cats may be found either with
followed by additional doses every 1 to 2 hours
or without concurrent pulmonary edema. Other
until the respiratory character improves. Follow-
changes supportive of LCHF include cardio-
ing improvement, additional doses of 2 mg/kg
megaly, evidence of left atrial enlargement, and
are typically given at 6 to 12 hour intervals de-
dilated pulmonary vasculature, particularly the
pendent on clinical status. Cats tend to be more
 pulmonary veins.
sensitive to furosemide therapy, and initial doses
· ECG analysis may show a variety of changes,
of 1 to 2 mg/kg IV, IM, or SC every 1 to 2 hours
including prolongation of P wave duration
followed by 1 to 2mg/kg every 8 to 12 hours are
(P-mitrale), increased R wave amplitude or dura-
 recommended following initial clinical response
tion, a left axis shift, bundle branch block, supra-
·Side effects of furosemide include dehydration,
ventricular or ventricular premature complexes
azotemia, hypokalemia, metabolic alkalosis, and,
or tac hycardia, or atrial fibrillation.
 potentially, volume depletion.
Chapter18
 Emergency Management and Critical Care 
345
Vasodilator Therapy
arterial dilators, hydralazine may be associated
· Vasodilator therapy has two purposes. First,
with hypotension and refex tachycardia in the
venodilation decreases preload by providing ad-
face of decreased peripheral resistance.
ditional vascular capacitance. Second, arterial
Positive Inotropic Agents
vasodilation reduces left ventricular afterload,
· Positive inotropic agents are indicated in manag-
thereby reducing myocardial work and promot-
ing LCHF associated with systolic dysfunction of
ing forward flow.
the left ventricle. These drugs are administered
· Sodium nitroprusside (dogs; 2 to 10 mcg/kg/
in conjunction with diuretic and vasodilator ther-
min constant-rate infusion [CRI]) increases the
apy. Dilated cardiomyopathy is the most common
concentration of nitric oxide, a potent vasodilator,
disease producing this condition; however, myo-
 and is considered to be a balanced vasodilator pro-
cardial failure secondary to advanced chronic
viding both venous and arterial dilation. Combined
valvular disease, or end-stage forms of other car-
with aggressive diuretic therapy, the use of sodium
diomyopathies may also result in severe systolic
 nitroprusside is very effective in resolving severe
dysfunction.
pulmonary edema. Because of its potency and the
 Dobutamine(dogs, 2 to 15 mcg/kg/min CRI;
 potential for excessive vasodilation and secondary
cats, 1 to 5 mcg/kg/min CRD is a beta-adrener-
hypotension, it is recommended that blood pres-
gic sympathomimetic. Side effects of dobuta-
sure be monitored closely during infusion.
mine may include tachycardia and ventricular
· In all cases, the initial dose should be at the
 arrhythmias. Cats may develop gastrointestinal
low end of the range, and the dose increased
 or neurologic signs associated with administra-
based upon clinical response and blood pres-
tion.
sure measurement. In general, mean arterial
Dopamine(dogs and cats, 2 to 8 mcg/kg/min
pressure should be maintained above 60 mm
CRI) should be used with caution, as it has al-
Hg, while systolic pressures should not be less
 pha-adrenergic effects at higher doses and may
than 90 mm Hg.
cause deleterious vasoconstriction and tachy-
· Sodium nitroprusside is light sensitive and may
cardia in the face of diminished myocardial
induce precipitation of co-administered IV
function.
drugs. Thus, it is ideally administered through
· Additional options for inotropic support in-
a separate, light-protected IV set and catheter.
clude phosphodiesterase inhibitors such as
· Long-tenm nitroprusside therapy is limited by
milrinone. Milrinone (dogs, 50 mcg/kg slow
the production of molecular cyanide, although
IV bolus followed by 0.40 to 0.75 mcg/kg/min
toxic doses are not usually reached until 36 to
CRI) is a drug that has both positive inotropic
 48 hours following onset of therapy.
and vasodilatory properties, similar to a com-
· Nitroglycerin ointment (2%) is a commonly
bination of dobutamine and sodium nitroprus-
used venodilator in small animal emergency
side. Experience with clinical use in emergen-
patients. The ointment is applied topically to a
cy patients is limited, but milrinone may be an
 n    
and is dosed according to body size. A Ys-inch
of LCHF associated with systolic dysfunction.
strip is used in cats and small dogs (< 10 kg), a
Oxygen Therapy
14-inch strip in medium dogs (10 to 25 kg), and a
· Oxygen therapy (40% to 60% fraction of inspired
1/-inch strip in large dogs (> 25 kg). The ointment
oxy gen) helps to maintain the arterial oxygen con-
may be applied every 12 hours for the first 24 to
tent in the face of pulmonary dysfunction (in the
36 hours of treatment and should be handled with
fonm of ventilation-perfusion mismatch) induced
gloves, as it may be absorbed transdermally
by pulmonary edema. Oxygen therapy may also
· Although the use of nitroglycerin ointment
reduce pulmonary vascular resistance by amelio-
is common, it should be noted that topically
rating hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction.
applied therapy is limited in severe CHF, es-
· An oxygen cage is often the most effective
method to administer supplemental oxygen to
constriction that exists in these patients, and
 patients with heart failure, although other al-
efficacy is questionable.
termatives (such as nasal, mask, fow-by, hood,
· Hydralazine (dogs: 0.5 to 1 mg/kg IV or PO
or intratracheal oxygen supplementation) ex-
every 12 hours) is an arterial dilator that causes
ist. Although an oxygen cage provides a quiet
a marked reduction in afterload and is useful in
environment that can achieve high concentra-
cases of severe mitral regurgitation. As with other
tions of oxygen, these concentrations decrease
346
SECTION III  Treatment of Cardiovascular Disease
rapidly when the cage is opened. Thus, an oxy-
· The needle should be introduced just cranial
 gen cage is less effective when patients require
to a rib to avoid the intercostal vessels and
frequent treatments or physical examination.
advanced into the pleural space. The needle
· Patients should receive oxygen supplementa-
should be redirected or the procedure tenmi-
tion until their respiratory rate and effort have
nated once lung tissue is felt at the tip of the
improved and/or objective measurements of
needle or fuid is no longer able to be aspirated.
pulmonary function (i.e., pulse oximetry or
Both sides of the chest should be aspirated as
arterial blood gas) have retumed to normal. If
bilateral fuid accumulation is found in the ma-
possible, the fraction of inspired oxygen should
jority of cats with pleural effusion secondary
be tapered over 6 to 12 hours to allow the pa-
to CHF. It is not uncommon to remove 200 to
tient to adjust to breathing room air.
300 ml of fuid from the thorax of cats with
· For patients with fulminant LCHF and massive
severe pleural effusion.
pulmonary edema, standard oxygen supple-
mentation may not be sufficient to prevent ei-
Right-Sided Congestive Heart Failure
ther respiratory or ventilatory failure. In these
cases, only early intubation and mechanical
· Right-sided congestive heart failure (RCHF) is
ventilation will provide the respiratory support
much less common in patients presenting to the
 necessary to sustain life. Mechanical ventila-
emergency room. An exception is pericardial
tion is a significant commitment for both the
effusion and cardiac tamponade (see Pericar-
s      
dial Effusion below). RCHF results from ele-
mechanical ventilation may be weaned after
vated right atrial and central venous pressures.
 only a short period (1 to 2 days) following ag-
Conditions that may result in elevated central
 gressive medical management of CHF.
vencus pressure (CVP) include tricuspid valve
· The use of anxiolytic agents in the treatment
insufficiency or stenosis, pulmonic valve in-
of CHF is common in human medicine and
sufficiency or stenosis, pulmonary hyperten-
 may also be useful in veterinary patients. Low-
sion, and right ventricular systolic or diastolic
dose morphine (dogs, 0.1 mg/kg IV every 4
dysfunction.
to 6 hours as needed), butorphanol (dogs and
· Climical signs of RCHF are related to the presence
cats, 0.1 to 0.2 mg/kg IV every 4 hours), diaz-
of pleural effusion, ascites, or peripheral edema
epam or midazolam (dogs and cats, 0.1 to 0.3
that results from increased right atrial pressure.
mg/kg IV every 4 hours), or low doses of
Patients with large volume pleural effusion may
acepromazine (dogs and cats, 0.005 to 0.02 mg/
 present in respiratory distress and with dull lung
kg IV every 6 to 8 hours) can be administered.
sounds. Patients with ascites will present with a
Therapeutie Thoracocentesis
distended abdomen and may have respiratory
· Cats with significant pleural effusions associated
compromise. Additional indications of RCHF
with LCHF experience significant benefit from
are the presence of distended jugular veins and
therapeutic thoracocentesis. Some cats will tol-
 prominent jugular pulses, as well as the presence
erate the thoracocentesis with minimal restraint,
of a heart murmur (particularly with a maximal
although many cats require some degree of se-
intensity at the left heart base or the right side of
dation (butorphanol [0.1 to 0.2 mg/kg] in com-
the chest). Other changes such as a split S2 sound
bination with diazepam or midazolam [0.1 to
or gallop rhythm are variable dependent upon the
0.3 mg/kg]).
underlying disease.
· Thoracocentesis is generally performed be-
· Emergency therapy for RCHF consists of tho-
tween the seventh and ninth intercostal spaces
racocentesis for large volume pleural effusions
at the level of the costochondral junction. The
(see previous section).
 area is clipped and aseptically prepared prior
· In animals with tense ascites, abdominocentesis
to initiating the procedure. Thoracocentesis in
may be performed to reduce pressure on the dia-
cats is generally performed with a 2l-gauge
phragm and improve ventilation. Abdominocen-
butterfly catheter attached to a three-way stop-
tesis can be performed with equipment similar to
 cock and a 10-ml or 20-ml syringe. In extreme-
thoracocentesis.
ly obese cats, a 22-gauge needle and extension
· The procedure may be performed standing
set is used in place of the butterfly catheter. In
 or with the patient in left lateral recumbency,
larger dogs, a 16- or 18-gauge catheter with a
which reduces the likelihood of lacerating
60-ml syringe may be used.
the spleen. An area caudal to the umbilicus
Chapter18
Emergency Management and Critical Care
347
is clipped and prepared aseptically, and the
of metastatic lung disease may be present. The
needle or catheter is induced on or just lateral
cardiac silhouette often has a classic "globoid"
to the midline. An altemative technique uses
appearance; however, this may not be true in
two or more short 16- to 18-gauge catheters
cases of acute pericardial effusion. A brief echo-
placed just caudal and to either side of the
cardiographic exam can generally confirm the
umbilicus. The animal remains standing dur-
 presence of pericardial effusion.
ing the procedure and fuid is allowed to drain
passively. Debate exists about the volume of
fuid that can be removed safely from an ani-
KEY PoINT
mal with ascites. Most dogs will tolerate the
The   differentiation  of  pericardial  effusion
removal of 50 to 100 ml/kg of ascites without
from pleural effusion on echocardiographic
untoward effects.
exam can be challenging. Pericardial effusion
is recognized by the circular appearance of
hypoechoic fluid surrounding the heart. This
Pericardial Effusion
fluid is bordered by the hyperechoic pericar-
cium. Cardiac tamponade may be recog-
· Pericardial effusion typically results from an un-
nized as collapse of the right atrium, and in
derlying neoplasia, such as hemangiosarcoma,
some cases, an underlying cause for the ef-
heart base tumors, lymphoma, or mesothelioma.
fusion is seen, such as a mass involving the
 Other causes of pericardial effusion include in-
right atrium or atrioventricular (AV) groove.
fammatory or infectious pericarditis, restrictive
 In patients with pleural but not pericardial ef-
 pericarditis, coagulopathy, atrialrupture second-
fusion, the fluid does not encircle the heart,
 ary to chronic dilation, and blunt or penetrating
and lung tissue as well as mediastinal tissue
thoracic trauma. Small volume pericardial effu-
may be seen within the effusion.
sions associated with CHF may also occur, and
this phenomenon is relatively common in cats.
· Clinical signs result from cardiac tamponade and
Although blood tests are not often a primary di-
RCHF and may include abdominal distension
agnostic tool in the diagnosis of pericardial effu-
from ascites, tachypnea from pleural effusion,
sion, documenting the presence of a coagulopathy
weakness, lethargy, or collapse.
is vital in the management of those patients in
·Physical examination findings
include tachy
which this is a primary cause of the pericardial
cardia and dull heart sounds on auscultation.
effusion. Additionally, it should be recognized
In some cases, pulsus paradoxus (decrement of
that patients with more chronic pericardial ef-
pulse pressure pulse quality that occurs during
fusions may develop hyponatremia and hyper-
the inspiratory phase of the respiratory cycle)
kalemia. These pseudo-Addisonian electrolyte
may be recognized. Additional physical exam
changes result from the enhanced antidiuretic
fndings may include jugular distension and
hormone secretion and decreased renal perfu-
prominent jugular pulses, abdominal distension
sion that occurs secondary to decreased effec-
with a palpable fuid wave, and dull ventral lung
tive circulating volume in these patients. These
sounds if pleural effusion is present. A depressed
abnonmalities rapidly resolve with the resolution
 mentation and delayed capillary refill is sugges-
of cardiac tamponade.
tive of cardiovascular collapse and hypoperfusion
· The emergency treatment of symptomatic peri-
in severe cases.
cardial effusion and cardiac tamponade involves
· Diagnostic test results consistent with pericar-
volume expansion and pericardiocentesis.
dial effusion and cardiac tamponade include
· Volume expansion using partial shock doses
sinus  tachycardia with diminished  complex
(30 to 45 ml/kg) of an isotonic crystalloid tran-
size on the ECG, with or without the pres-
siently increases right atrial pressure. This may
ence of electrical altemans. Electrical altermans
improve stroke volume and cardiac output and
describes an altermation in the height of the
often results in clinical improvement while
R wave of the QRS complex, and results from
steps are taken to perform pericardiocentesis.
beat to beat changes in the mean electrical axis
· Pericardiocentesis is the treatment of choice for
as the heart moves within the fuid filled pericar-
the initial management of cardiac tamponade
dium. Chest radiographs often demonstrate an en-
and is a life-saving procedure in many cases.
larged cardiac silhouette, as well as distension of
To perform pericardiocentesis, the patient is
the caudal vena cava. Pleural effusion or evidence
 placed in left lateral recumbency. Sedation may
348
SECTION III Treatment of Cardiovascular Disease
be required in some patients, and conservative
Following the procedure, the patient should
doses of an opioid in combination with a ben
be monitored for recurrent effusion. Fur-
zodiazepine are generally well tolerated. Other
ther management of pericardial effusion
patients require only local anesthesia.
involves a complete echocardiogram and
·An area from the third to the seventh inter-
the consideration of more definitive therapy
costal spaces is clipped and prepared asep-
such as a subtotal pericardectomy or a tho-
tically, and a local anesthetic is infiltrated
racoscopic pericardial window.
at the fifth intercostal space at the level of
the costochondral junction. A small stab in-
KEY POINT
cision is made in the skin, and a catheter
In patients that are clinically stable, a com-
is advanced through the chest wall, just
plete echocardiographic examination is often
cranial to the sixth rib. In large dogs, a 14-
performed prior to pericardiocentesis as the
 gauge, 12-cm over-the-needle catheter is
presence of effusion supplies useful echocar-
used, whereas a 16-gauge, 8-cm over-the-
diographic contrast in the attempt to identify
needle catheter is used in smaller dogs. In
cardiac neoplasms.
very small dogs, or in cats, an 18-gauge, 2-
inch over-the-needle catheter may be used.
· The catheter is slowly advanced toward the
Forward (Low-Output) Heart Failure
pericardium. Generally, the catheter may
be felt as first the chest wall and then the
· Forward heart failure is the result of impaired
 pericardium is punctured. Entrance into the
myocardial function and results in diminished
pericardium is accompanied by the presence
cardiac output and cardiogenic shock. Common
of fuid fashing back into the catheter hub.
causes of forward heart failure include dilated
This may be recognized sooner if a syringe
cardiomyopathy and myocardial failure second-
is attached to the needle and a slight nega-
ary to end-stage chronic valvular disease, or
tive pressure is applied as it is advanced,
doxorubicin toxicity. Significant tachyarrhyth-
or if the needle has been filled with sterile
mias and bradyarrhythmias may also result in a
saline prior to the procedure.
form of forward heart failure.
· Once the pericardium has been punctured,
· Climical signs of cardiogenic shock include weak-
the catheter is advanced off the stylet, and
ness, lethargy, and collapse. Respiratory signs may
attached to an extension set with a three-way
be seen if CHF is also present. Physical examina-
stopcock and syringe. The pericardial fuid
tion findings associated with forward heart failure
is aspirated, and fuid should be immediately
include hypothermia, pallor, delayed capillary re-
placed into an activated clotting time tube.
fill time, tachycardia, and poor pulse quality. Heart
This allows pericardial fuid, which should
sounds may be diminished or a heart murmur and/
not clot, to be differentiated from peripheral
or gallop rhythm may be heard. The presence of
blood, which should clot. As the pericardi-
pulmonary edema or pleural effusion will produce
um is drained, additional samples should be
 characteristic changes on auscultation.
 obtained for fuid analysis and cytology.
· The clinical diagnosis of forward heart failure is
· The ECG should be monitored during the
made by finding evidence of decreased myocar-
procedure for the presence of ventricular
 dial function in combination with hypotension
arrhythmias that occur when the catheter
and clinical signs of hypoperfusion. Decreased
contacts the epicardium. If present, these ar-
systolic function is documented using echo-
rhythmias may be treated by slightly with-
cardiography and is evidenced by diminished
drawing the catheter or with an intravenous
fractional shortening, increased left ventricular
bolus of lidocaine (dogs, 2 mg/kg). The ECG
end-systolic dimension, increased E-point to sep-
is also useful to confinm the effectiveness of
tal separation, and decreased aortic and pulmonic
the procedure, as the heart rate often retums
fows. Chest radiographs may document the
 to the normal range and electrical altermans
presence and severity of concurrent CHF, and a
 disappears as the heart is decompressed.
lead II ECG will help identify significant rhythm
· Once fuid can no longer be aspirated,
disturbances.
the catheter is withdrawn. Confirmation
· Treatment of forward heart failure involves efforts
of a successful pericardiocentesis may be
to improve myocardial performance and cardiac
obtained with a brief recheck ultrasound.
output. This may be accomplished by ensuring
Chapter18
Emergency Management and Critical Care
349
that adequate preload is present and by providing
· Cardiac arrhythmias are common in emergency
inotropic support.
patients and may be associated with alterations
· Clinical estimates of preload may be obtained
in autonomic tone or responsiveness, drug expo-
by measuring left and right ventricular filling
sure, electrolyte abnormalities, impaired myo-
pressures.
cardial oxygen delivery, myocardial trauma or
· Right ventricular filling pressures may be
inflammation, and primary myocardial disease.
assessed by placing a central venous cath-
· In many situations, these cardiac rhythm distur-
eter and measuring the CVP. Normal CVP
bances represent the cardiac effects of a systemic
ranges between 0 and 8 cm H2O, although
disease and do not require specific treatment. In
wide variability exists between patients
other cases, aggressive intervention is required to
· Left ventricular filling pressures may be
address unstable rhythms or life-threatening per-
assessed by placing a pulmonary artery
fusion deficits.
-eo Aeuond sunsa pue ra
· Physical examination findings consistent with a
lary wedge (occlusion) pressures (PCWP).
cardiac rhythm disturbance include bradycardia
Normal PCWP ranges between 5 and 14 cm
or tachycardia, an irregular rhythm on auscul-
H2O. In animals with low CVP or PCWP,
tation, and the identification of pulse deficits.
judicious fuid therapy may be used to in-
Depressed mentation or collapse may also be en-
crease preload and cardiac output. If the
countered, and syncope may be observed in cases
CVP or PCWP is normal or high, fuid ther-
of acute, arrhythmia-induced decreases in cere-
apy is not likely to be of benefit and may
 bral perfusion.
precipitate CHF.
· Confirmation of cardiac rhythm disturbances is
· Inotropic support is indicated in cases of cardio-
achieved by ECG. Obtaining a lead II rhythm
genic shock secondary to myocardial systolic
strip is often sufficient to diagnose most rhythm
dysfunction
disturbances. However, a 6- or 10-lead ECG may
·Dobutamine(dogs, 2 to 15 mcg/kg/min; cats,
be helpful to accurately identify and characterize
1 to 5 mcg/kg/min) is generally the first line
complex arrhythmias.
 agent in dogs due to its ability to increase con-
tractility without significant increases in heart
KEY POINT
rate. Dobutamine may also be used in cats, al-
Cardiac rhythm disorders may be intermit-
though gastrointestinal and neurologic side ef-
tent and may not be noted on a single lead 
fects usually limit utility.
II ECG. Detection of rhythm disorders some-
· Dopamine(dogs and cats, 2 to 8 mcg/kg/min)
times reguires 24-hour telemetric, Holter, or
may also be used. Dopamine should be used
event monitoring.
with caution; however, as it has alpha-adren-
ergic effects at higher doses and may increase
afterload and cause reductions in cardiac out-
Bradyarrhythmias
put. In patients with a pulmonary artery cath-
eter, cardiac output may be obtained by the
· Bradycardia is a relatively uncommon finding in
thermodilution method. Combined with mea-
 patients presenting to the emergency room.
surements of direct arterial blood pressure and
· Clinical signs associated with bradyarrhythmias in-
calculation of systemic vascular resistance,
clude weakness, lethargy, depression, and syncope.
this allows for the most effective clinical as-
· Causes of symptomatic bradyarrhythmias
1m
sessment of hemodynamics and the response
emergency patients include increased vagal tone,
to therapy.
electrolyte abnormalities, hypothermia, drug tox-
· Oral pimobendan therapy (0.25mg PO every
icities, and significant disturbances of the cardiac
12 hours) should be considered if intravenous
conduction system.
therapy is not possible.
· ECG rhythms seen in bradycardic patients in-
clude sinus bradycardia, atrial standstill, sinus
CARDIAC RHYTHM
arrest, and high-grade second- or third-degree AV
block.
DISTURBANCES
· See Chapter 16, Treatment of Cardiac Arrhyth-
Sinus Bradycardia
mias and Conduction Disturbances, for further
· In emergency patients, sinus bradycardia is most
discussion.
often seen associated with increased vagal tone.
350
SECTION III  Treatment of Cardiovascular Disease
· Increased vagal tone may result from intra-
agents such as glycopyrolate. Although the car-
abdominal or intrathoracic diseases, or from
diac arrest dose of atropine is 0.04 mg/kg, lower
coughing. vomiting, retching. or straining to
doses (0.005 to 0.01 mg/kg) are often effective
urinate or defecate. The Cushing refex, which
in patients with bradycardia, and these doses are
occurs secondary to head trauma or other
less likely to be associated with rebound sinus
causes of elevated intracranial pressure, also
tachycardia. Intravenous administration is ideal
produces sinus bradycardia. In this situation,
(rarely, a brief centrally induced exacerbation of
bradycardia is associated with hypertension
 bradycardia may occur with this route), although
 aos aasss e  pod s e
atropine may also be administered via intra-
the medullary vasomotor center.
tracheal, intraosseous, or intramuscular routes.
· Other causes of sinus bradycardia include abso-
Along with atropine administration, efforts to
lute or relative drug overdoses, especially of an-
identify and correct the underlying cause of the
esthetic agents such as opioids, benzodiazepines,
increased vagal tone are necessary.
or alpha-2 adrenergic agonists. Cardiac or vaso-
· Atropine is also indicated in treating sinus bra-
active medications, including calcium channel
dycardia associated with anesthetic agents, as
blockers, beta-adrenergic blockers, digoxin, and
are measures to decrease the depth of anesthesia
cholinergic agents, may also produce sinus bra-
and to administer specific drug reversal agents.
dycardia either by increases in vagal tone or by
Opioids may be reversed with Naloxone (0.03
reducing sympathetic tone.
 mg/kg IV, IM, or SQ) and benzodiazepines may
· Sinus bradycardia may also be associated with
be reversed with Flumazenil (0.03 mg/kg IV,
hypothermia or severe hypoglycemia (blood glu-
IM, or SQ). Sinus bradycardia associated with
cose less than 50 mg/dl).
the administration of parasympathomimetics is
· Management of symptomatic sinus bradycardia
 also atropine responsive. There are specific rec-
generally centers on the identification and treat-
ommendations for the management of patients
ment of underlying factors. In cases of hypother-
receiving overdoses of cardiac medications
 mia or hypoglycemia, the heart rate and clinical
such as digoxin, calcium channel blockers or
signs often improve markedly once these factors
 beta-adrenergic blockers. These guidelines are
 are identified and addressed. Hypothermia is best
discussed later.
managed by the use of an indirect heating method
such as a warm air blanket. This may help mini-
Second- and Third-Degree Atrioventricular Block
mize overheating or detrimental vasodilation that
· High-grade second-degree AV block and third-
 degree AV block represent severe disruptions
ing pads or hot water bottles. Intravenous fuids
of the nonmal cardiac conduction system. Al-
that have been warmed to body temperature are
though structural heart diseases, such as myo-
 also appropriate in patients without contraindica-
cardial fibrosis, inflammation, or infiltration,
tions to fuid therapy.
are thought to be responsible for most cases
· Although neurologic signs usually predominate
of severe AV block, these rhythms may also
over bradycardia, symptomatic hypoglycemia
be seen in patients with systemic disease or
may be treated with a bolus of 0.25 to 1 gram/
drug toxicities. Drugs associated with second
kg of 50% dextrose that has been diluted 50:50
or third-degree AV block include digoxin, cal-
with 0.9% saline. Additional dextrose bolus
 cium channel blockers and beta-adrenergic
therapy or a dextrose infusion may be necessary
blockers
while causes of hypoglycemia (such as insulin
· Most emergency patients with high-grade second
Overdose, hypoadrenocorticism, paraneoplastic
and third-degree AV block will have clinical signs
syndrome, systemic infammatory response syn-
relating to decreased cardiac output such as leth-
drome, or sepsis) are investigated.
argy, depressed mentation, and, commonly, syn-
· Increased vagal tone secondary to intrathoracic
cope. Rarely, these rhythms will be documented
disease, intra-abdominal disease, coughing, gag-
in an otherwise asymptomatic patient. These
ging. retching, or straining may cause severe
asymptomatic patients (generally cats) often
sinus bradycardia that results in cardiovascular
have third-degree AV block with a relatively high
collapse or syncope. In these situations, immedi-
ventricular rate supporting an adequate cardiac
ate administration of a parasympatholytic agent
'indano
is necessary. Due to its rapid onset of action and
· Medical management of high-grade second-
short half-life, atropine is preferred over other
and third-degree AV block consists of initial
Chapter18
 Emergency Management and Critical Care
351
parasympatholytic therapy followed by sympa-
This is most common in cats with urethral ob-
thomimetic drugs.
struction, but also occurs in cases of acute renal
· Initially, atropine may be given at the full va-
failure, uroperitoneum, hypoadrenocorticism,
golytic dose of 0.4 mg/kg IV. This is often ef-
 and reperfusion injury.
fective in elevating the rate of discharge of the
· Hyperkalemia produces a characteristic set of
sinus node, but is only rarely effective in im-
changes on the ECG, however, the concentra-
proving the AV block in these patients.
tion at which these changes are noted is vari
· Altermate therapy consists of beta-l agonist
able. Changes rarely occur if K+ is < 6 mmol/L.
drugs given in an effort to accelerate the ven-
The sequence of changes involves tented/
tricular escape rate. Isoproterenol (dogs, 0.04
spiked T waves, fattening of the P waves, pro-
to 0.08 mcg/kg/min) is commonly used in this
longation of the P-R interval, bradycardia, loss
manner, although this drug can cause hypoten-
of P waves (atrial standstill), prolongation of
sion secondary to vasodilation. An altermative
the QRS complex, and finally merging of the
drug is dopamine (dogs and cats, 2 to 8 mcg/
QRS and T wave complexes to form a "sine
kg/min) at the beta agonist dose. Dobutamine
wave" pattem.
is another beta-1 agonist; however, it has less
· Ventricular arrhythmias, ventricular fibrillation,
of a positive chronotropic effect than dopamine.
and asystole may also occur secondary to severe
· Beta-1 agonists are also indicated in the treat-
hyperkalemia.
ment of beta-adrenergic blocker overdose.
· The management of life-threatening hyperkale-
Whereas these drugs may be effective in some
 mia involves three phases: immediate cardiopro-
cases, an altermative therapy involves the use
tection, redistribution of serum potassium, and
of glucagon (dogs, 200 mcg/kg). A bolus
removal of potassium from the body.
of may increase cardiac rate and contractil-
· Immediate cardioprotection is achieved via the
ity. If a response is noted then glucagon may
use of intravenous calcium gluconate (dogs
be continued (dogs, 150 mcg/kg/min CRI).
and cats, 50 to 100 mg/kg as a slow [3 to 5
Glucagon may be used in dogs with calcium
minute] IV bolus). Overly rapid administra-
channel blocker overdose at a similar dosage.
tion results in worsening bradycardia and po-
· When medical management is ineffective, artifi-
tentially severe ventricular arrhythmias. The
cial pacemaker therapy is indicated in the treat-
onset of action of calcium gluconate is usually
ment of symptomatic AV block (see Chapter 21,
rapid (within 5 minutes). The duration of effect
Pac emaker Implantation).
is limited, however, and hyperkalemic ECG
· Temporary transthoracic or transvenous pacing
changes will recur unless steps are taken to re-
are considered emergency treatment to stabi-
duce the serum potassium level.
lize a patient until diagnostic tests may be per-
· Serum potassium may be transiently lowered
formed or definitive therapy may be planned. If
 by redistribution into the intracellular space us-
no underlying cause, such as a drug overdose or
 ing regular insulin (dogs and cats, 0.25 μ/kg;
toxicity, is identified, patients with symptomatic
accompanied by dextrose bolus of 0.5 g/kg to
AV block require the placement of a penmanent
help prevent iatrogenic hypoglycemia). Dex-
pacemaker.
trose supplementation is also added to ongoing
intravenous fuid therapy for 6 to 12 hours to
Sinus Arrest
 prevent a decrease in blood glucose later in the
· The most common cause of symptomatic sinus
course of treatment.
arrest is sick sinus syndrome, a condition charac-
· An altemative or adjunct to regular insulin
terized by periods of supraventricular tac hycardia
therapy is the use of sodium bicarbonate
interspersed with periods of sinus arrest. A lthough
(dogs and cats, 1 to 2 mEq/kg given over
this condition may occur in a number of breeds, it
10 to 15 minutes).
is seen most often in Miniature Schnauzers. Man-
· Definitive management involves removing
 agement is similar to patients with symptomatic
potassium from the body. This is generally
AV block.
accomplished by establishing urine fow (re-
lieving urethral obstruction, placing a perito-
Hyperkalemic Cardiotoxicity
neal drainage catheter) and fuid diuresis. If
· Although not a primary cardiac abnormality, hy-
adequate urine fow is unable to be achieved,
perkalemic cardiotoxicity is a frequent cause of
 patients are considered candidates for either
symptomatic bradycardia in emergency patients.
 peritoneal dialysis or hemodialysis.
352
SECTION III
Treatment of Cardiovascular Disease
Tachyarrhythmias
· Supraventricular tachycardia results from abnor-
malities within the atrial or junctional myocardial
· Tachyarrhythmias are common in emergency pa-
tissue. This may occur due to grossly identifiable
tients. Clinical signs associated with pathologic
diseases, such as atrial dilation in the presence
tachyarrhythmias include weakness, lethargy,
of elevated filling pressures or volume overload,
amd collapse. On rare occasions, tachyarrhyth-
myocardial fibrosis in the presence of cardiomy-
mias may result in sudden death. Causes of
Opathy, or infiltrative diseases such as cardiac neo-
symptomatic   tachyarrhythmias   include 
im-
 plasia. Other conditions, including most patients
creased sympathetic tone, toxicities, electrolyte
with re-entrant circuits, cause supraventricular
abnormalities, myocardial disease or ischemia,
tachycardia in a heart that appears to be struc-
amd re-entrant circuits within the myocardium.
turally normal. This is also the case in patients
While isolated or infrequent supraventricular or
where supraventricular is due to electrolyte ab-
ventricular premature complexes are often seen
normalities or phanmacologic causes. Common
in the emergency room, most symptomatic pa-
 agents that can result in supraventricular tachy-
tients have sustained tachyarrhythmias. These
cardia include digoxin toxicity, caffeine, and am-
rhythms include sinus tachycardia, supraven-
 phetamines or other illicit drugs.
tricular tachycardia (including atrial or junc-
· Patients with supraventricular tachycardia usually
tional tachycardia, and atrial fibrillation), and
present with symptoms such as weakness, leth-
ventricular tachycardia.
argy, or collapse. Pulse quality is variable, but is 
often diminished. In cases of stimulant toxicosis,
Sinus Tachycardia
supraventricular tachycardia may be associated
· Sinus tachycardia is associated with increased
with excitement, hyperesthesia, or seizure activity.
sympathetic tone. Common causes of sinus
· Treatment of supraventricular tachycardia in-
tachycardia in emergency patients include hypo-
volves attempts to identify and specifically treat
volemia, hypotension, anemia, hypoxemia, pain,
 any underlying cause of the tachycardia, such as
stress, fear, and excitement. No specific treatment
an electrolyte abnonmality or digoxin overdose.
is usually required. Rather, the heart rate responds
Additionally, variations in sympathetic tone
when the underlying cause of the tachycardia is
may affect conduction through the AV node, and
identified and addressed.
causes of increased sympathetic tone should be
· The use of beta-adrenergic blockers, such as
investigated. If no underlying cause of the tachy-
esmolol (dogs and cats, 0.05 to 0.25 mg/kg IV,
cardia can be determined, a vagal maneuver may
followed with by 50 to 200 μg/kg/min CRI) or
be attempted.
 propanolol (dogs and cats, slow IV boluses of
· Vagal maneuvers include firm ocular pressure
0.02 mg/kg up to 0.1 mg/kg), is indicated in cases
and carotid massage and are undertaken in an at-
of sinus tachycardia secondary to drug or toxin
tempt to slow conduction through the AV node.
exposures, or in cases where all other underly-
In some instances, vagal maneuvers may tempo-
ing causes of tachycardia (hypovolemia, hypox-
rarily terminate a supraventricular tachycardia.
emia, anxiety) have been addressed. Side effects
· Pharmacologic therapy of supraventricular tachy-
of beta-adrenergic blockers include bradycardia,
cardia in an emergency situation involves the
negative inotropy, and hypotension.
use of injectable anti-arrhythmic agents. Ini-
tial choices for anti-arrhythmic therapy include
Supraventricular Tachycardia
beta adrenergic blockers, which limit the rate of
· Supraventricular tachycardias may be atrial or
spontaneous depolarization in ectopic pacemak-
junctional in origin. Atial fibrillation is alsc
ers, and calcium channel blockers, which slow
considered to be an atrial tachycardia. Junctional
conduction through the AV node. Both classes of
tachycardias originate from within the AV node
drug have potent negative chronotropic effects,
or involve re-entrant circuits within the AV node.
and may also have profound negative inotropic
Supraventricular tachycardias are also known as
 properties. These negative inotropic effects are
narrow-complex tachycardias, as the QRS com
-de uaaia ae sanp au uaum paounouoid aou
plex resembles normal sinus complexes. In rare
idly, in high doses, or in combination with other
instances, a wide-complex tachycardia may result
 agents that impair contractility. This consideration
from a supraventricular focus due to the presence
is especially important in patients with significant
of a bundle branch block in the specialized con-
structural heart disease and limited cardiovascu-
duction system.
lar reserve.
Chapter 18
 Emergency Management and Critical Care
353
·Esmolol(see dose listed under Sinus Tachycar-
disease, such as dilated cardiomyopathy,
dia) is generally preferred to other beta-block-
arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy, hypertrophic
ing agents, such as propanolol, due to its short
cardiomyopathy, chronic valvular diasease, aor-
half-life that allows rapid titration of effect.
tic or pulmonic stenosis, myocarditis, or cardiac
· The use of a calcium channel blocker is an al-
neoplasia. Ventricular arrhythmias may also be
termative to beta-blocking agents. Diltiazem
seen in a variety of noncardiac conditions, es-
(dogs and cats, 0.1 to 0.25 mg/kg and followed
pecially in patients with elevated sympathetic
by 2 to 5 mcg/kg/min CRD has a less pro-
tone or infammatory mediators, and with elec-
nounced negative inotropic effect than equiva-
trolyte disturbances such as hypocalcemia and
lent doses of esmolol.
hypokalemia.
· Other choices for anti-arrhythmic therapy of
· As with supraventricular tachycardia, long-stand-
supraventricular  tachycardia  include procain-
ing ventricular tachycardia may produce myo-
amide and amiodarone.
cardial failure in patients with otherwise nonmal
· Procainamide (dogs, 6 to 8 mg/kg, followed
 hearts. This tachycardia-induced cardiomyopathy
by 25 to 50 mcg/kg/min CRI) is a fast sodium
results in chamber dilation and diminished sys-
channel blocker, and can be used for both
tolic function, and can result in CHF.
supraventricular and ventricular arrhythmias.
· Patients with symptomatic ventricular tachy-
· Amiodarone (dogs, slow (20 to 30 minute)
cardia usually present with symptoms such as
bolus of 5 to 10 mg/kg diluted in 5% dextrose
weakness, lethargy, or collapse. Paroxsysmal
in water) acts to prolong the action potential.
ventricular tachycardia may result in syncope or
Amiodarone may cause significant hypo-
episodes of near-s yncope.
tension, vasodilation and pruritis during IV
· Treatment of ventricular tachycardia involves at-
administration, and long-term use may be as-
tempts to identify and specifically treat any un-
 sociated with hepatic dysfunction in dogs.
derlying cause of the tachycardia.
● In many patients, ventricular arhythmias respond
Ventricular Tachycardia
to interventions such as fuid resuscitation in hy-
· Ventricular arrhythmias are very common in
povolemic patients, the administration of blood
emergency patients, and ventricular complexes
products in anemic animals, the implementation
are recognized by a wide and bizarre QRS mor-
 of oxygen therapy in hypoxemic patients, and
phology. In many cases, such as isolated ven-
the use of analgesics in painful patients.
tricular premature complexes, these rhythm
disturbances do not require treatment. However,
dia in an emergency situation involves the use of
treatment is recommended if there are frequent
injectable anti-arrhythmic agents. Initial choices
or multifocal ventricular premature complexes,
for anti-arrhythmic therapy include class I agents
if the coupling interval is very rapid creating
such as lidocaine or procainamide. Altermatives
an R-on-T morphology, if there is sustained
include beta-adrenergic blockers, or class III
ventricular tachycardia (rates greater than 160
agents such as amiodarone.
bpm), or if there are clinical or hemodynamic
Lidocaine (dogs, 2 mg/kg IV bolus up to 8
sequelae.
mg/kg and followed by 25 to 80 mcg/kg/min
· An accelerated idioventricular rhythm is very
CRI is generally a frst line choice in dogs.
common in patients with noncardiac disease
Cats are much more likely to develop adverse
This rhythm is recognized as a regular, mono
effects (gastrointestinal signs, neurologic signs
 morphic ventricular rhythm that is very simi-
including seizures) and the dose is significantly
lar in rate to the underlying sinus rhythm, and
decreased to prevent these signs (cats, 0.25 to
fusion complexes may be recognized during
0.5 mg/kg IV bolus followed by 10 to 20 mcg/
transitions between the ventricular and sinus
kg/min CRI).
rhythm. In general, this rhythm does not pro-
 Procainamide (dogs, 8 to 15 mg/kg slow IV
duce significant hemodynamic abnormalities
bolus followed by 25 to 50 mcg/kg/min) may
 and does not require therapy.
also be used to treat ventricular tachycardia.
· Ventricular tachycardias result from abnor-
Rapid administration may cause significant hy-
malities within the ventricular myocardium and
 potension.
occur due to abnormal automaticity, triggered
 Esmolol (see dose listed under sinus tachycar-
activity, or re-entrant circuits. Ventricular ar-
dia) is generally preferred to other beta blockers
rhythmias may occur due to primary cardiac
due to its short half-life. As with procainamide.
354
SECTION IIITreatment of Cardiovascular Disease
esmolol may cause hypotension, which is sec-
acute limb paresis secondary to obstruction of ar-
ondary to potent negative inotropic effects.
terial blood fow and subsequent tissue ischemia.
· Amiodarone (see dose under supraventricular
· Cats most commonly present with paraparesis,
tachycardia) may also be used for the treatment
but may also present with unilateral hindlimb
symptomatic ventricular tachycardia, however
paresis or forelimb paresis. Cats may also em-
vasodilation and systemic hypotension are
bolize other organs, such as the brain, kidneys,
common during administration in dogs.
Or gastrointestinal tract. CHF may be present,
· As mentioned previously, in rare cases, a wide-
although arterial embolization may occur alone.
complex tachycardia may result from a su-
All cats benefit from analgesia and from treat-
praventricular focus due to the presence of a
ment of any concurrent heart failure while in the
bundle branch block in the specialized conduc-
 emergency room. Thrombolytic agents such as
tion system. Lidocaine is unlikely to be effec-
streptokinase or tissue plasminogen activator
tive, whereas procainamide, beta blockers, or
may accelerate clot dissolution, however their
calcium channel blockers are more likely to be
use has not provided definitive evidence of bene-
useful in the diagnosis and management of these
fit in clinical trials. In addition, these agents may
patients.
cause significant complications including severe
hemorrhage and fatal reperfusion syndromes
KEY POINT
· Conservative therapy involves the provision of
supportive care and analgesia and some cats will
The morphology of ventricular premature
 re-establish arterial blood fow and regain func-
complexes and ventricular escape beats is
identical. The use of anti-arrhythmics in a pa-
tion in ischemic limbs within 2 to 3 days.
tient with ventricular escapes may cause sup
· Analgesia in the fonm of fentanyl (cats, 2 to 5
pression of the escape rhythm with disastrous
μg/kg/hr CRI for 12 to 18 hours as a fentanyl
consequences.
patch takes effect), butorphanol (cats, 0.1 to
0.2 mg/kg IV every 4 to 6 hours), or buprenor-
phine (cats, 0.005 to 0.015 mg/kg IV every 6
to 8 hours) is used. Other opioids such as hy.
THROMBOEMBOLIC DISEASE
 dromorphone, oxymorphone, or morphine may
· See Chapter 8 for additional discussion.
also be used.
· Cardiac emergencies associated with thrombo-
· Anticoagulation with unfractionated or low-
embolic disease may either be the cause or the
molecular-weight heparin may be useful to help
result of severe cardiac disease. Massive pul-
reduce clot propagation, and is generally well
monary thromboembolism may cause heart
tolerated by cats. Unfractionated heparin (cats,
disease by significantly increasing right ven-
150 to 250 μg/kg SQ every 6 to 8 hours or as a
tricular afterload. This results in severe pulmo-
CRI of 20 to 50 μg/kg/hr at a low fuid rate) or
nary hypertension, and may precipitate acute
low-molecular-weight heparin (e.g., dalteparin,
right-sided heart failure and cardiogenic shock.
cats, 100 to 150 μg/kg SQ every 12 to 24 hours)
This occurs more commonly in dogs than cats
is used. Unfractionated heparin will cause pro-
and is generally associated with an underlying
longation of the PTT, and a clinical target is to
hypercoagulable state that results in pathologic
achieve a PTT 1.5 to 2.5 times the normal value.
clot formation. Conditions associated with pul-
Low-molecular-weight heparin activity is typi-
monary thromboembolism include hyperadreno-
cally monitored via a factor Xa assay that is not
corticism, immune-mediated hemolytic anemia.
readily available to veterinarians. However, the
sepsis, disseminated intravascular coagulation
PTT will be prolonged in patients at risk for
protein losing nephropathy and enteropathy, and
hemorrhage secondary to low-molecular-weight
neoplasia.
heparin administration. All heparinized patients
· More commonly, emergency patients present
should be monitored for signs of clinical bleed-
with thromboembolic disease resulting from car-
ing and should not have jugular venipuncture or
diac disease. This is especially common in cats
 cystocentesis performed. In addition, all cats that
with cardiomyopathy and associated left atrial en-
present to the emergency room with feline aor-
largement. These patients are prone to the devel-
tic thromboembolism should be monitored for
opment of blood clots that subsequently embolize
 hyperkalemia, azotemia, hypotension, cardiac
the systemic arterial tree. This condition, known
arrhythmias and signs of cardiovascular collapse
as feline aortic thromboembolism, often causes
Chapter18
 Emergency Management and Critical Care 
355
Frequently Asked Questions
SUGGESTED READINDS
Why don't animals with pericardial efusion present
Bonagura JD: Electrical alternans associated with peri-
with LCHF and putmonary edema?
cardial effusion in the dog, J Am Vet Med Assoc
Pericardial effusion results in preload reduction to the
178(6):574-579, 1981.
 heart. The pressure that develops around the heart due
Cote E: Cardiogenic shock and cardiac arrest, Vet Clin
to effusion prevents the heart chambers from being
North Am 31(6):1129- 1146, 2001.
able to accommodate venous return to the heart. This
effect is most pronounced on the right side because it
DeFrancesco TC, Hansen BD, Atkins CE,et al. Noninva-
sive transthoracic temporary cardiac pacing in dogs,
is the "low pressure" side of the heart. Therefore, with
severe pericardial effusion, the right side cannot fill
J Vet Intern Med 17(5)663-667, 2003.
adequately because the pericardial fuid accumulation
 Kittleson MD: Management of heart failure. In Kittleson 
compresses that side more readily than the left side,
MD, Kienle RD, eds: Small animal cardiovascular
 and right-sided heart failure develops.
medicine, St Louis, 1998, Mosby.
What is the purpose of oxygen supplementation and
Laste NL: Cardiovascular pharmacotherapy: hemody-
namic drugs and antiarthythmic agents, Vet Clin
sedative drugs in the treatment of CHF with putmo-
North Am 31(6):1231-1252, 2001.
nary edema?
Moise NS: Diagnosis and management of canine ar-
When an animal develops severe pulmonary edema,
 hypoxemia can result. The fuid accumulation within 
rhythmias. In Fox PR, Sisson D, Moise NS, eds:
Textbook of canine and feline cardiology: principles
the lung and the hypoxemia stimulate ventilation.
The hypoxemia and the fuid accumulation within the
and clinical practice, ed 2, Philadelphia, 1999, WB
lung cause anxiety and decreased lung compliance of
Saunders.
the lung, resulting in tachycardia, increased work of
Moise NS: Diagnosis and management of feline ar-
breathing due to poor lung compliance, and increased
rhythmias. In Fox PR, Sisson D, Moise NS, eds:
 oxy gen demand. Oxygen helps relieve the hypoxemia
Textbook of canine and feline cardiology: principles
which can in turn decrease anxiety helping slow the
and clinical practice, ed 2, Philadelphia, 1999,WB
heart down. Sedative drugs help relieve anxiety which
Saunders.
decreases another stimulus for tachycardia. This com-
Smith SA, Tobias AH, Jacob KA, et al. Arterial throm-
 bination of therapies will ultimately increase oxygen-
boembolism in cats: acute crisis in 127 cases (1992-
ation of the blood, slow the heart rate, and decrease
2001) and long-term management with low-dose
oxygen demand by the respiratory muscles, all of
aspirin in 24 cases, J Vet Intern Med 17:73-83,
which are favorable for an ailing heart.
2003.
Anesthesia of the Cardiac Patient
Thomas K. Day
INTRODUCTION
anesthetic drugs, the presence of arrhythmias,
Anesthesia of the patient with heart disease can be
and the potential for anesthetic drugs to predis-
 a challenge. Most veterinary patients with heart dis-
pose to the production of arrhythmias.
ease that are presented for sedation or anesthesia do
 Knowledge of the length of sedation or anesthe-
not have clinical signs of heart failure. Anesthetic
sia that is desired and recognition of the need for
 protocols that are routinely used for normal patients
analgesia are also important.
without heart disease can result in acute decompen-
· Virtually all anesthetic drugs directly depress
 sation in patients with heart disease. Differences be-
cardiac function, alter vascular tone, or modify
tween dogs and cats in the response to anesthetic and
normal cardiovascular regulatory mechanisms.
analgesic drugs can compound the complex nature
of cardiac anesthesia. In addition, most patients with
safely anesthetize any dog or cat with heart dis-
heart disease may be treated with a variety of cardiac
ease does not exist.
drugs that may interact with anesthetic drugs. This
· Each patient and each etiology of cardiac disease
chapter provides a general view of anesthetic drugs
should be considered on an individual basis to provide
that are indicated and contraindicated in dogs and
the safest sedation, analgesic or anesthetic protocol.
cats with heart disease. Anesthetic considerations for
specific cardiac diseases are also presented.
key PoinT
KEY PoINT
The general rule of thumb is to devise an an-
 esthetic plan that provides minimal cardiopul-
Suggested anesthetic protocols for dogs and
monary depression and returns the patient to
cats are presented based on the functional
preanesthetic status as soon and as safely as
dasses of heart failure.
possible.
PREANESTHETIC
GENERAL PRINCIPLES
CONSIDERATIONS
· The veterinary anesthetist must understand and
Diagnosis of the Etiology of Heart Disease
recognize several factors to provide safe and
effective sedation or anesthesia, including the he-
· The decision on which sedation or anesthetic pro-
modynamic changes produced by heart disease,
tocol to administer to a patient with heart disease
the possible interactions between cardiac and
should be made primarily on the specific etiology.
356
Chapter 19
 Anesthesia of the Cardiac Patient
357
Classification of Physical Status
therapy instituted immediately by parenteral ad-
Table 19-1
for Anesthetized Patients
 ministration and clinical signs controlled as much
as possible prior to anesthesia. Continuous and
Description
aggressive monitoring will be required for this
ASA
of Physical
Category
classification of patient during and immediately
Status
Example
 after sedation or anesthesia. Cardiac drug therapy
Normal, healthy No cardiac disease,
should continue during anesthesia and surgery
1
elective surgery (spay,
 and in the immediate postoperative period.
castration)
· The third classification describes when advanced
I1
Mild systemic
 Compensated heart
clinical signs of heart failure are immediately ob-
disease
disease (no cardiac
vious. Patients severely affected can present in
medications), fracture
cardiogenic shock, and death or severe debilita-
without shock
tion is likely without therapy.
111
Severe systemic
 Compens ated heart
disease
disease (cardiac medi-
cations), anemia, fever,
compensated renal
disease, dehydration
KEY PoInts
IV
Severe systemic
 Decompensated heart
● Anesthesia is contraindicated in this third
disease and a
disease, electrolyte im-
category of patients until clinical signs are
constant threat
balance, uncontrolled 
immediately stabilized with aggressive drug
to life
 internal hemorrhage
therapy.
Moribund
· Clients should be advised of the increased
Decompensated heart
risk of death or severe debilitation during
patient not
disease refractory to
or immediately after anesthesia if patients in
expected to live
cardiac drugs, terminal
malignancy
this third category of heart failure are anes-
with or without
surgery
thetized following aggressive cardiac drug 
therapy.
 Adapted by the Armerican Society of Anesthesiologists.
Anesthetic Risk Classification
Once the etiology of heart disease has been de-
termined, specific recommendations can be pro
· The anesthetic risk of a patient can be determined 
vided on the choice of sedation or anesthesia.
 based on physical status.
· Five categories of physical status have been de-
Functional Classification of Heart Failure
veloped for veterinary patients and parallel the
classification scheme adopted in human medicine
· Three functional classifications of heart failure are
by the American Society of Anesthesiologists
based on clinical signs. The decision on whether
(ASA) (Table 19-1)
 or not to immediately sedate or anesthetize a pa-
· Most clinically stable cardiac patients will be
tient with heart disease should begin with placing
ASA II or III, depending on the presence of any
the patient in one of the three classifications.
other underlying disorders.
·The first classification describes the asymptom-
atic patient that has confirmed heart disease, yet
KEY POINtS
is not exhibiting clinical signs of heart failure.
Patients that fulfill criteria for this classification
● Unstable patients with clinical signs of car-
 of heart failure can be safely anesthetized without
diac decompensation and heart failure that
fulfill the criteria of ASA IV should not be
further stabilization.
·The second classification describes when mild to
anesthetized until the cardiac disease has
been stabilized.
moderate clinical signs of heart failure are evident
 There may be patients that present in the
at rest or with mild exercise. Stabilization of clin-
ASA V category, especially patients with a
ical signs and the lack of clinical signs for several
long history of heart disease that is curently
days with drug therapy are recommended prior
refractory to all cardiac drugs. Stabilization
to sedation or anesthesia. Patients with this clas-
of the signs of heart failure may not be pos-
sification of heart failure that require life-saving.
sible, and death during anesthesia is likely.
emergency surgery should have cardiac drug
358
SECTION III   Treatment of Cardiovascular Disease
Hypokalemia and hypomagnesemia may produce
Preanesthetic Diagnostic Evaluation
or predispose to tachy arrhythmias.
and Laboratory Tests
· The patient with heart disease should have a com-
Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme Inhibitors
plete diagnostic cardiac evaluation.
· All patients should have the following diag-
· Enalapriland benazepril are the mostcommonly used
 nostic and laboratory tests prior to sedation or
angiotensin-converting enyme inhibitors (ACEIs).
anesthesia:
Each results in arterial vasodilation that can be
enhanced by acepromazine, isofurane, and sevo-
Physical Examination
furane predisposing to arterial hypotension. Arte.
rial blood pressure should be monitored closely
· Particular attention should be paid to thoracic
during sedation protocols involving acepromazine
 auscultation of the heart and lungs. The character
 and during isofurane and sevofurane anesthesia.
of the peripheral pulse, jugular veins, mucous
membranes, and capillary refill time should be
KEY POINT
noted and the peripheral pulse should be palpated
simultaneously with thoracic auscultation of the
 All patients receiving ACEls should be moni-
heart sounds to detect pulse deficits.
tored with direct or indirect blood pressure
during inhalation anesthesia.
Additional Tests
Digitalis Glycosides
· Thoracic radiography and an electrocardiogram
(ECG) should be performed as well. If a complete
·A common side effect of digoxin administra-
cardiac diagnostic evaluation has been perfonmed
tion is ventricular arrhythmias. There is the pos-
less than 1 to 2 weeks previous to anesthesia, and
sibility of an increase in arrhythmogenesis with
the patient's physical status has not changed, a
concurrent use of sympathomimetics (dopamine,
 physical examination and electrocardiogram are
 dobutamine, norepinephrine, epinephrine) during
the only diagnostic tests that require repetition.
anesthesia. Isoflurane, sevoflurane and opioids
Complete blood count and serum chemistries
have not been associated with increased inci-
should be performed at the discretion of the vet-
dence of arrhythmias secondary to digitalis.
erinarian, with particular attention to renal val-
· Hypokalemia, most commonly caused by chronic
ues and electrolytes.
use of loop diuretics, can exacerbate digitalis toxic-
ity. Acute onset of hypokalemia can occur during an-
esthesia as a result of hyperventilation (hypocarbia
CARDIAC DRUGS AND
and concurrent respiratory alkalosis) and can exac-
POTENTIAL ANESTHETIC
erbate preexisting hypokalemia caused by diuretics.
DRUG INTERACTIONS
Diuretics
KEY POINT
· The loop diuretic, furosemide, is the most com-
Always obtain a blood digitalis level prior to
monly used diuretic in patients with heart disease
anesthesia.
The most common electrolyte disturbance pro-
duced by furosemide is hypokalemia. Hypokale
Vasodilators
mia can result in tachyarrhythmias or predispose
to digoxin toxicity. Furosemide may promote de-
· Hydralazine is an arteriodilator that can cause
hydration and predispose the patient to hypoten-
reflex tachycardia and fuid and water retention.
sion during sedation or anesthesia.
Tachycardia secondary to use of sympathomi-
· The potassium sparing diuretic, spironolactone,
metics (dopamine, dobutamine, norepinephrine,
can result in hyperkalemia if used alone for ex
epinephrine) during anesthesia can be exacer-
tended periods of time. Hyperkalemia may result
bated with the use of hydralazine. Fluid adminis-
in arrhythmias, with equal likelihood of tachyar-
tration must be minimized and monitored closely.
rhythmias or bradyarrhythmias.
Acepromazine, isofurane and sevofurane may
· The thiazide diuretic, chlorothiazide, has similar
exacerbate arteriodilation and predispose to arte-
side effects as the loop diuretics with chronic use.
rial hypotension.
Chapter 19
 Anesthesia of the Cardiac Patient
359
· Prazosin causes arterial and venodilation by
Combination Drug Therapy
alpha-l  adrenergic  blockade.  Acepromazine  is
contraindicated, as arteriodilation may be excessive
· Most patients with heart disease are commonly
and produce severe hypotension. Isofurane may
administered more than one cardiac drug. The
exacerbate arteriodilation and may predispose to
potential side effects of each drug must first be
 arterial hypotension.
considered individually. Potential side effects of
the combination of drugs should be considered
Calcium Channel Blockers
 next. The addition of anesthetic drugs may in-
troduce a greater possibility of side effects. For
· Diltiazem is used to treat supraventricular arrhyth-
example, a dog with compensated mitral insuf-
mias and to improve diastolic function in cats with
ficiency could have been prescribed digoxin,
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM). Potential
furosemide, and enalapril. There is a great poten-
side effects include vasodilation, bradycardia, and
tial for hypotension produced by excessive arte-
 decreased myocardial contractility. Concurrent use
riodilation, bradycardia, or decreased myocardial
of acepromazine, isofurane, and sevofurane may
contractility based on the combined side effects
exacerbate vasodilation and produce hypotension.
of each drug. Isofurane and sevoflurane, which
Concurrent use of opioids and inhalation anesthet
minimally decrease myocardial contractility and
ics (isofurane and sevofurane) may exacerbate
cardiac output, could produce severe hypotension
bradycardia. Decreased myocardial contractility
in this patient secondary to peripheral vasodila-
may be exacerbated by propofol.
tion. Inhalation anesthesia should not be consid-
ered the primary anesthetic of choice in this dog.
Antiarrhythmic Agents
· The beta-adrenergic blocking agents proprano-
ANESTHETIC DRUG SELECTION
lol and atenolol are commonly used to treat ar-
AND SUPPORTIVE CARE
rhythmias in dogs and cats and for treatment
Choice of either Sedation or General
of HCM in cats. Potential side effects include
Anesthesia
bradycardia and decreased myocardial contrac-
tile function. Bradycardia may be exacerbated
· The definition of general anesthesia is the admin-
with use of opioids and inhalation anesthetics.
istration of injectable anesthetics, inhalation an-
 Decreased myocardial contractility may cause
esthetics, or a combination to produce hypnosis
hypotension during anesthesia, may be less
(sleep), analgesia, and muscle relaxation. General
responsive to sympathomimetics (dopamine
 anesthesia is not solely produced by the admin-
and dobutamine), and may be exacerbated by
istration of inhalation anesthetics. Many useful
propofol.
and safe general anesthetic protocols for cardiac
 patients are combinations of injectable anesthetic
Class I Antiarrhythmic Agents
agents.
· Procainamide and tocainide can have side effects
Oxygenation and Ventilatory Support
include decreased myocardial contractility and
 possible bradycardia. Decreased myocardial con-
· All cardiac patients that are sedated or anesthe-
tractility may be exacerbated by propofol.
tized should have oxygen administered in some
form. Sedated patients should have oxygen de-
Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs
livered by mask at an insufflation rate of no less
than 5 L/min. All intubated patients should be at-
· Cats with heart disease may be prescribed aspirin
tached to an anesthetic machine to deliver 100%
to potentially prevent thromboembolic disease.
 Oxygen, regardless of whether or not an inhala-
Aspirin impairs platelet function. Acepromazine
tion anesthetic is delivered.
should be avoided in cats receiving aspirin that
· All cardiac patients anesthetized and maintained
are presented for surgery, as acepromazine also
 on isofurane, sevoflurane or using injectable
impairs platelet function. Clopidogrel (Plavix)
anesthetics should have ventilatory support pro-
may be used in the future and will likely have
vided. Isoflurane and sevoflurane are both potent
the same anesthetic concerms (impaired platelet
respiratory depressants and can predispose the
function) as aspirin.
patient to hypoxemia or hypercarbia. Hypoxemia
360
SECTION IIITreatment of Cardiovascular Disease
and hypercarbia can result in the production or
production of arrhythmias, especially ventricular
worsening of arrhythmias. All intubated patients
arrhythmias. Halothane should not be used in a
should also have ventilation supported. The gen-
dog or cat with cardiac disease.
eral rule is that four to six breaths should be de-
· Methoxyflurane is of more historical significance
livered each minute. Expired carbon dioxide can
than is used in practice. The effects on inotropy
 be monitored with a capnometer (see Monitoring)
and the possibility for arrhythmias fall between
to ensure adequate ventilation.
those of isoflurane, sevoflurane (discussed later)
 and halothane. Methoxyfurane is more likely to
produce a prolonged recovery.
Anesthetic Drugs that are Contraindicated
· Mask induction with isofurane or sevofurane
im Patients with Cardiac Disease
is not recommended in cardiac patients. Most
· The following sedatives and anesthetic drugs
animals become very excited during mask in-
 are contraindicated in patients with heart dis-
 duction, even with adequate preanesthetic medi-
ease, regardless of the etiology. The benefits of
cation, which could predispose to arrhythmias
convenience, effectiveness, or ease of admin-
and increased myocardial work secondary to the
istration and lower cost do not justify the use
 stress response. Isofurane has a very pungent
of these drugs because of the profound cardio
odor and may result in laryngospasm, especially
 pulmonary depression, the increased possibil-
in cats, though sevofurane is less pungent. En-
ity of arrhythmia production, or the length of
vironmental contamination with isofurane and
recovery time.
sevofurane administered by mask is a very
important consideration for the safety of all
Alpha-2 Adrenergie Drugs
personnel.
· Xylazine and medetomidine are potent respiratory
and cardiac depressants. Decreased heart rate is
usually responsive to anticholinergics. Xylazine
ANESTHETIC DRUGS THAT
can also decrease heart rate by a central mecha-
SHOULD BE USED WITH CAUTION
nism of decreased sympathetic outflow that will
Preanesthetic Medication
not be responsive to anticholinergics. Xylazine
decreases myocardial contractility, resulting in
Tranquilizers
decreased cardiac output and hypotension. Me-
· The phenothiazine, acepromazine, is considered
detomidine results in intense vasoconstriction
a major tranquilizer owing to the high reliability
and decreased cardiac output. Decreased heart
of producing mental calming. It is also the most
rate is usually a result of intense vasoconstriction.
commonly used tranquilizer in small animals.
Administration of an anticholinergic will greatly
The primary cardiovascular effect is peripheral
increase cardiac work.
vasodilation, with minimal effects on contractil-
ity and respiration. Hypotension can occur, and is
Barbiturates
primarily treated with intravenous fuids and, in
· Pentobarbital has a duration of action of approxi-
severe cases, peripheral vasoconstriction agents
mately 45 to 60 minutes and results in prolonged
(phenylephrine, norepinephrine). The sedative and
recoveries. Pentobarbital is also a potent respi-
cardiovascular effects are of long duration (4 to
ratory and cardiovascular depressant at dosages
6 hours), though the effects are not reversible.
used for general anesthesia.
Acepromazine can be used effectively and safely
· Amobarbital (intermediate duration) and phe-
at very low dosages in otherwise healthy cardiac
nobarbital (long duration of action) are barbitu-
patients
rates with an extremely long duration of action
and have cardiopulmonary effects inappropri-
Anticholinergics
ate for use as anesthetics or sedatives in cardiac
· Atropine and glycopyrrolate are primary used
patients.
to maintain heart rate during anesthesia or seda-
tion and are generally not recommended unless
Inhalation Anesthetics
used with anesthetic drugs that are likely to lower
· Halothane is not used commonly, but is still
heart rate (opioids) through increased parasym-
available to some extent. Halothane is the most
pathetic tone. The potential side effects include
potent negative inotrope of the inhalation anes-
the production of tachyarrhythmias (ventricular
thetics and it predisposes the myocardium to the
Or supraventricular). The increase in myocardial
Chapter 19
 Anesthesia of the Cardiac Patient
361
 Ox ygen consumption produced by an increase in
USEFUL ANESTHETIC DRUGS
heart rate above normal values may predispose
the patient with heart disease to focal ischemia
Preanesthetie Medication
and the possibility of arrhythmias. There is little
· The benefits of preanesthetic medication in pa-
difference between atropine and glycopyrrolate
tients with heart disease include reducing preop-
in the effectiveness of producing an increase in
 heart rate, though glycopyrrolate will likely have
analgesia, lowering the requirement of intrave-
a longer duration.
nous induction agents and inhalation anesthetics,
Intravenous Induction Agents
and ensuring a smooth recovery. Preanesthetic
medication can be administered intramuscularly,
Thiobarbiturates
subcutaneously, or intravenously. In most cardiac
· Thiopental can be used safely in cardiac pa-
patients, the author recommends intramuscular
tients, though it is not recommended in patients
administration of preanesthetic medications.
with pre-existing arrhythmias. Thiopental can
produce transient ventricular arrhythmias by
Tranquilizers
sensitizing the heart to catecholamines. Tran-
sient decrease in blood pressure as a result of
Benzodiazepines
decreased contractility. Can be used effectively
· Diazepam and midazolam are considered minor
and safely in otherwise healthy cardiac patients
tranquilizers because when used alone, benzo-
at very low dosages following adequate preanes-
diazepines do not produce profound sedation in
thetic medication.
the normally mentated patient. Benzodiazepines
may produce a profound effect on patients with
Propofol
advanced age or disease. The most common use
· Propofol has cardiovascular effects similar to
 is in combination with an opioid (neuroleptanal-
thiopental, though the likelihood of arrhythmia
 gesia). Both drugs minimally depress cardiopul-
production is less. Apnea can be profound, and
monary function. Both diazepam and midazolam
is closely related to speed of injection. Propofol
are effectively absorbed after  intramuscular
is rapidly redistributed, resulting in very rapid
administration, though diazepam may produce
recovery.
more pain on injection (propylene glycol based).
Clinical effects of midazolam compared with
Dissociatives
diazepam are identical in dogs and cats, though
· Ketamine and the combination of tiletamine
midazolam is more expensive. The benzodiaz-
and zolazepam are usually very safe and effec-
epine antagonist, fumazenil, is available, though
tive in cardiac patients. Transient increases in
the effects of benzodiazepines rarely require
heart rate can predispose to arrhythmias and are
antagonism.
not recommended in patients with pre-existing
arrhythmias. Increased heart rate is less severe
Opioids
if administered after preanesthetic medica-
· The primary use of opioids in veterinary anesthe-
tion. Ketamine should not be used as the sole
sia is to provide analgesia. Most opioids do not
anesthetic agent in cats with HCM. Acute
 possess profound sedative effects when adminis-
fulminate congestive heart failure has been
tered alone; however, when used in combination
reported in cats with HCM administered ket
with tranquilizers for neuroleptanalgesia (see
amine and combinations of ketamine/diazepam
following), adequate sedation can be achieved.
as sole anesthetic.
Opioids do not affect myocardial contractility or
vascular tone, which makes them very attractive
Inhalation Anesthetics
for use in patients with heart disease. All effects
· Inhalation anesthetics used as the sole anes-
produced by opioids can be antagonized by ad-
thetic agent to induce (mask induction) and
ministration of naloxone, though repeat adminis-
 maintain anesthesia must be used with extreme
tration will likely be required as naloxone has a
caution. Both isofurane and sevofurane are
very short duration of action.
potent vasodilators that could lead to hypo-
Morphine
tension and increased cardiac work. Both iso-
· Minimal sedation is produced when used alone
furane and sevofurane are potent respiratory
in normal patients, though profound sedation
depressants.
can occur in compromised patients. Primary side
362
SECTION III Treatment of Cardiovascular Disease
effects are vomiting and bradycardia. Bradycardia
and an opioid. The neuroleptanalgesia com-
is usually anticholinergic responsive. Depression
binations that are recommended for patients
 of respiration is dose dependent.
with heart disease include any combination of
Hydromorphone and Oxymorphone
a benzodiazepine and an opioid. Intravenous or
· Opioid agonists have similar clinical effects and
intramuscular administration may be used to
are 10 times more potent analgesia compared
produce an effect.
with morphine. Usually more effective than mor-
Opioid-Diazepam Combinations
phine in producing sedation when used alone,
· The preferred neuroleptanalgesia for patients
though even more effective in a neuroleptanal-
with heart disease is the combination of an opi-
gesic combination. Potential for decreased heart
oid with a benzodiazepine. The most reliable se-
rate (parasympathomimetic). Less respiratory
dation occurs with an opioid agonist (morphine,
depression than with morphine. Vomiting likely,
hydromorphone/oxymorphone, fentanyl) com-
though less likely compared with morphine. Can
also be used as an induction agent in compro-
nol) and partial opioid agonist (buprenorphine)
mised patients.
combinations. Intramuscular administration
Butorphanol
produces effects within 15 minutes. Panting is
· Opioid agonist/antagonist that is usually less
a prominent feature when opioid agonists are
effective than ox ymorphone or hydromorphone in
used in dogs (not cats), and respiratory depres-
 producing sedation alone or in a neuroleptanalgesic
 sion can be pronounced. Bradycardia is more
combination. There is minimal cardiopulmonary
likely with opioid agonist combinations, and is
depression, and it is unlikely to produce bradycar-
responsive to anticholinergics.
dia. A"ceiling effect" occurs regarding sedation
and analgesia. This means that higher doses be-
yond the recommended maximum dose (approxi-
KEY POINT
mately 0.8 mg/kg) do not produce more sedation
Or analgesia. Vomiting is a rare side effect. Very
A
 neuroleptanalgesia
a combination using
poor analgesic for moderate to severe pain.
acepromazine will produce the most pro-
Buprenorphine
found sedative effect; however, aceproma-
· Buprenorphine is a partial opioid agonist that
zine has a long duration of effect, including
 is 20 times more potent in producing analgesia
the effect of vasodilation, and has no reversal
when compared with morphine. It is generally
agent. The clinician must weigh the risks and 
a poor sedative when used alone, though
benefits of using acepromazine.
slightly more effective in a neuroleptanalgesia
combination. There is minimal cardiopulmonary
depression and a ceiling effect occurs similar
to butorphanol. The onset of action is 20 to 30
INTRAVENOUS INDUCTION
minutes and there is a long duration of effect.
AGENTS
Repeat injections of naloxone are required to
maintain antagonism of effects, if required.
Fentanyl
Barbiturates
· Fentanylis an opioid agonist that is 100times more
 ar  aans as aq u pa -
potent in producing analgesia when compared
patients with cardiac disease. Rapid induction
with morphine. The onset of action is very rapid
and recovery follow a single intravenous
and it can be used as an intravenous induction
dose as a result of rapid redistribution to lean
agent in dogs. The duration of action is extremely
tissue. Cumulative effects occur if more than
short, making fentanyl an ideal agent for a con-
one intravenous dose is administered, which
tinuous-rate infusion (CRI) to maintain general
will result in prolonged recovery. Transient
anesthesia. Bradycardia is more likely to occur
decreases in blood pressure occur as a re-
and responds to anticholinergic administration
sult of decreased contractility. Apnea can be
(preferred) or a decrease in the rate of infusion.
 prominent, and may be partly related to speed
of induction. Thiopental can be used effectively
Neuroleptanalgesia
 and safely in otherwise healthy patients at very
·Neuroleptanalgesia is defined as the effect
low dosages following adequate preanesthetic
 produced by the combination of a tranquilizer
medication.
Chapter 19
 Anesthesia of the Cardiac Patient
363
Dissociatives
Etomidate
· Ketamine is used commonly as an induction
· Etomidate is an imidazole derivative unrelated to
agent in patients with heart disease but should
barbiturates and opioids. Etomidate induction is
not be used alone. Always combine ketamine
 characterized as a very rapid induction with a very
with diazepam or midazolam to minimize ad-
rapid and smooth recovery. Induction with etomi-
verse effects of rigidity and possible seizures.
date results in a much less desirable induction and
Induction with ketamine and diazepam results
recovery if administered alone without preanes-
in a rapid induction of anesthesia. The combi-
thetic medication. Severe myoclonus activity can
nation will increase heart rate, maintain arte-
occur when used alone. Minimal cardiopulmonary
rial blood pressure, and have minimal effects
depression and minimal effect on cardiac electrical
activity makes etomidate an ideal intravenous in-
with ketamine-diazepam combination. Poten
duction agent for the less stable patient with heart
tial side effects include myoclonus activity and
 disease after appropriate preanesthetic medication.
rough recovery. Cats with HCM should not be
Etomidate is prepared in a propylene glycol base
administered ketamine or ketamine-diazepam
and has a high osmolality. Intermittent bolus or
as sole agents. Administration of ketamine or
constant rate infusion is not recommended owing
ketamine-diazepam  after  neuroleptanalgesia
to possibility of acute red blood cell lysis.
may decrease untoward cardiovascular effects
related to dissociatives.
Tiletamine and Zolazepam
MAINTENANCE OF ANESTHESIA
· The effects are similar to ketamine-diazepam
Inhalation Anesthetics
when administered as an intravenous bolus for
induction. There is less myoclonus activity
Isoflurane and Sevoflurane
amd a generally smoother induction. There are
· Each inhalation anesthetic has a very similar clini-
longer and potentially rougher recoveries than
cal effect of rapid induction and recovery. Minimal
ketamine-diazepam when used as a sole agent
effects on cardiac rhythm and contractility result
without preanesthetic medication. Preanes.
in minimal decreases in cardiac output. The main
thetic medication is highly recommended prior
cardiovascular effect is dose-dependent peripheral
to use of tiletamine-zolazepam. Higher doses
vasodilation, which is the primary mechanism of
will be required if no preanesthetic medication
 hypotension induced by isofurane and sevofu-
is administered, and there is a potential for lon-
rane. A general rule is to administer the lowest ef-
 ger recoveries. There are likely the same con-
fective concentration of isofurane or sevofurane
siderations in cats with HCM as with ketamine
that will maintain a surgical depth of anesthesia.
combinations.
The use of preanesthetic medications and intrave-
 nous induction agents is highly recommended, and
will lower the amount of isofurane necessary to
Nonbarbiturates
maintain a surgical depth of anesthesia. Each are
potent respiratory depressants that can be additive
Propofol
with opioids, and manual ventilation is mandatory
· Propofol is classifed as a phenolic compound
to prevent hypoxemia and hypercarbia.
unrelated to opioids, barbiturates, or steroid
anesthetics. Propofol induction is character-
Nitrous Oxide
ized as a very rapid and smooth induction with
· Nitrous oxide used in combination with oxygen
a very rapid and smooth recovery. Noncumu-
cannot alone produce anesthesia. Therefore, it is
lative effects make propofol an ideal drug for
used as an adjunct to inhalation anesthesia only.
constant rate infusions. Transient decreases in
Use of nitrous oxide can lower the inhalation
arterial blood pressure occur and are produced
anesthetic requirement. Safety considerations
by a decrease in myocardial contractility. A re-
(life threatening hypoxemia) prevent widespread
fex increase in heart rate is likely. Apnea can
use of nitrous oxide.
be profound, and is closely associated with
speed of injection. Use of preanesthetic medi-
KEY POINT
Only experienced anesthetists should use ni-
quired for induction of anesthesia, and reduces
trous oxide.
the possibility of decreases in blood pressure.
364
SECTION III   Treatment of Cardiovascular Disease
Opioids
INJECTABLE GENERAL
· Cats are more likely to become excited from the
ANESTHESIA
effects of opioids and, at times, to neuroleptanal-
·Injectable anesthetics can be used to maintain a
gesic combinations of diazepam and an opioid.
surgical plane of general anesthesia. The defi-
· Cats do not have as profound sedative effects
nition of general anesthesia is the production
from neuroleptanalgesic combinations. Some
of sleep, muscle relaxation, and analgesia. All
dogs become laterally recumbent after certain
three criteria can be met effectively and safely
neuroleptanalgesic combinations, whereas cats
with injectable anesthetics. Specific examples
rarely respond in the same manner. The general
will be offered at the end of the chapter, though
rule is that an effective neuroleptanalgesia in
 general concepts of using all injectable agents
cats occurs when the cat assumes stermal recum-
are offered below.
bency, is very amenable to mild restraint and has
mydriasis.
Preanesthetic Medication and Propofol
· Vomiting occurs less frequently in cats.
· The neuroleptanalgesic combination 
of
an
· Dogs develop miosis when an opioid is adminis-
opioid and a benzodiazepine is administered
tered and cats develop mydriasis.
intramuscularly.
· Induction and CRI of propofol with an initial
Dissociatives
induction dose of 1 to 5 mg/kg, IV followed
· The dissociatives are the primary class of anes-
by a CRI administered by syringe pump or drip
thetic drugs recommended for chemical restraint
at a rate of 0.14 to 0.4 mg/kg/min, IV, depend-
in cats. The dissociatives are used primarily as
ing on other anesthetic drugs used as preanes-
intravenous induction agents in dogs. Ketamine
thetic medication and the achieved effect. Higher
should never be used as a sole anesthetic in the
infusion rates are required to maintain surgical
 dog. Ketamine can be used alone in the cat, though
plane of anesthesia and to maintain an endotra-
muscle rigidity and salivation can be profound.
cheal tube.
· Tiletamine and zolazepam are metabolized dif-
· Intermittent boluses of propofol can be used
ferently in cats and dogs, which can explain the
instead of a CRI. Administer propofol by slow
general recovery characteristics. Tiletamine is
bolus at a dosage of 0.5 to 1.0 mg/kg, IV fol-
metabolized at a more rapid rate than zolazepam
lowing initial induction dose, depending on
in cats, and recoveries tend to be smooth. The
other anesthetic drugs used as preanesthetic
reverse occurs in dogs, where zolazepam is me-
 medication.
tabolized at a more rapid rate, and recoveries tend
to be rough. Use alone with extreme caution in
Preanesthetic Medication
cats with HCM. Anecdotal reports of pulmonary
 and Ketamine-Diazepam
edema have been reported in cats.
· The neuroleptanalgesic
：combinationofan
opioid and a benzodiazepine is administered
Propofol
intramuscularly.
· There is evidence that multiple exposures (con-
· The induction dose of ketamine and diazepam is
secutive days) of cats to propofol can result in
1 ml/10 kg of a 50:50 mixture. Generally, one
oxidative injury to feline red blood cells. One an-
fourth to one third of the initial induction dose
esthetic episode of propofol (induction, CRI, or
can be administered as an intermittent bolus, de-
intermittent boluses) will not produce oxidative
pending on other anesthetic drugs used as pre-
injury to feline red blood cells. Propofol should
anesthetic medication.
not be used as an anesthetic tec hnique for consec-
utive, multiple use therapy as in radiation therapy
or bandage care in cats.
SPECIES DIFFERENCES
(DOG VS. CAT) IN ANESTHETIC
DRUG EFFECTS
ADJUNCT TECHNIQUES
Local and Regional Anesthesia/Analgesia
Tranquilizers
· Compared with dogs, cats are less responsive to
· Local and regional anesthesia/analgesia tech-
the mental calming effects of an equivalent dose
niques are highly effective at reducing the amount
of acepromazine when used alone.
of inhalation anesthetic required to maintain
Chapter19
 Anesthesia of the Cardiac Patient
365
anesthesia. Many tec hniques are available and the
residual analgesia occurs following surgery due
specific technique is dependent upon the location
to the short duration of action.
of the surgical procedure. Please refer to specific
· Bupivicaine (0.25%) used as a sole agent is not
anesthesia and analgesia texts for description of
 recommended for surgery, unless 15 to 20 minutes
the available techniques.
of time is allotted prior to surgery to penmit maxi-
mum effect of bupivacaine. A dose of 1 ml/4.5 kg
Local Anesthetic Drugs
is administered.
·A combination of morphine, lidocaine (2%),
· Lidocaine (2%) and bupivacaine (0.25%) are the
and bupivacaine (0.5%) can be used to provide
most commonly used local anesthetics. Lidocaine
immediate and postoperative analgesia. Morphine
has a rapid onset (5 minutes) and short duration
(0.1 mg/kg) is diluted with a 50:50 mixture of li-
(60 minutes) of action. Bupivacaine has a lon-
Jo asop e e (%g'0) augidnq pue (%g) aue5op
ger onset (15 to 20 minutes) and duration (2 to 4
1 ml/4.5 kg. The end concentration of bupivacaine
hours) of action. All nerve types are blocked with
is 0.25% as 0.5% bupivacaine is contraindicated
local anesthetics. Therefore, regional analgesia
in the epidural space.
techniques such as lumbosacral anesthesia will
· Occasionally. an epidural technique in dogs
result in temporary rear limb paralysis.
results in appearance of cerebrospinal fHuid in
the spinal needle. There is no cerebrospinal fuid
within the epidural space; therefore, the spinal
Opioids
needle has entered the subarachnoid space. The
· Morphine can be used in lumbosacral epidural
anesthetist can either remove the spinal needle
techniques for prolonged analgesia. However,
and attempt the procedure again, or half of the
morphine should not be used alone to provide sur-
agents can be administered in the subarachnoid
gical anesthesia, as morphine blocks nerves that
 space. Administration of local anesthesia in the
conduct pain pathways only and is meant for post-
subarachnoid space is called spinal anesthesia.
operative analgesia. The onset of action is up to
· A common complication of epidural anesthesia
one hour and analgesia has been reported to be up to
 is inadvertent needle puncture of a blood ves-
12 to 24 hours. Movement of limbs is maintained,
sel. The local anesthetic combination should
as motor nerves are not affected by morphine
not be administered if blood enters the spinal
needle.
Infiltration Techniques
Lumbosacral Epidural-Cats
· Lidocaine (2%) can be infiltrated subcutaneously
· A major anatomical difference in cats com-
to a maximum dose of 10 mg/kg in dogs and cats.
pared to dogs is that the spinal cord terminates
Lidocaine can be diluted to 1 % to obtain more to-
in the sacral vertebral segments in cats com-
tal volume to block a larger area. Bupivacaine is
pared to the caudal lumbar (L4-5) in dogs. Epi-
not recommended as a sole agent for infiltration
dural techniques are more difficult in cats and
due to a long onset of action.
the chance of entering the subarachnoid space
is more likely in cats. Administer half of the
volume of local anesthetic if cerebrospinal fuid
REGIONAL TECHNIQUES
is obtained in the spinal needle. Administration
of local anesthesia in the subarachnoid space is
Lumbosacral Epidural—-Dogs
called spinal anesthesia. There is also the pos-
· Anesthesia and/or analgesia is produced caudal
sibility of spinal cord injury in cats.
to the umbilicus.
· The combinations of local anesthetics and opi-
· Morphine used as a sole agent—0.1 ml/kg di-
oids used in dogs are the same for cats.
luted with 1 ml/4.5 kg sterile saline. A mor-
phine epidural must be administered prior
Intercostal Nerve Blocks
to the surgical procedure. Analgesia effects
· Regional anesthesia for a lateral thoracotomy can
should be expected primarily during the post-
be obtained by placing the local anesthetic at the
operative period and should not be relied upon
dorsal most aspect of the intercostal nerves at
during surgery.
the site of incision and two intercostals spaces
· Lidocaine (2%) used as a sole agent is admin-
cranial and caudal. The maximum dose of lido-
istered at 1 ml/4.5 kg prior to surgery. Minimal
caine (10 mg/kg) should not be exceeded.
366
SECTIONIII
 Treatment of Cardiovascular Disease
Intrapleural Analgesia
assessment of jaw tone. An adequately anesthetized
· Regional anesthesia for a lateral thoracotomy can
patient has moderate jaw tone. A deeply anesthe
be obtained by placing the local anesthetic within
tized patient has extremely loose or no jaw tone.
the pleural space after surgery. Bupivacaine
The only true sign of inadequate anesthetic depth is
(0.25%; 1.5 mg/kg undiluted) is administered
gross, purposeful movement. Heart rate, respiratory
through a thoracostomy tube or by a pleurocente.
rate and jaw tone can all increase prior to movement
sis puncture and the patient is then placed surgery
and should be monitored continuously. The use of
side down for 15 to 20 minutes to penmit the ade
monitoring devices to assess cardiopulmonary pa-
quate onset of action of bupivacaine.
rameters is highly dependent upon several factors
including the severity of cardiac disease, the length
KEY POINT
of anesthesia, and the procedure being performed.
Intrapleural administration of bupivacaine is
Minimal equipment will be required for sedation
painful and should be administered with ex-
and short procedures compared to anesthesia for
treme caution in conscious patients.
major surgical procedures, both cardiac and non-
cardiac. The physical parameters of heart rate, re-
spiratory rate, mucous membrane color, capillary
Nondepolarizing Muscle Relaxant Drugs
refill time, and pulse character should be monitored
· Nondepolarizing
muscle
 relax ants
drugs
 at regular intervals of no more than 5 minutes dur-
(NMRDs) block effects of acetylcholine at the
ing anesthesia and sedation of any duration, even if
neuromuscular junction resulting in complete
monitoring equipment is used.
paralysis. Use of NMRDs is reserved for specific
instances during anesthesia and surgery when the
 patient has poor blood pressure and there is gross
KEY POINT
purposeful movement. The NMRDs will permit
lack of movement to complete the procedure. Ven-
There is no accurate method to determine
inadequate anesthetic depth when using
tilatory support and use of anesthetic drugs to pro-
NMRDs (see later).
duce sleep are mandatory when using NMRDs.
·Aracurium (0.25 mg/kg, IV initially and 0.1
mg/kg, IV for repeated administration) is a short-
acting NMRD with a duration of action (20 to 25
Noninvasive Monitoring
minutes). Atracurium is metabolized by Hoffman
degradation in the plasma and does not require he-
Electrocardiography
 patic metabolism or renal excretion. Hypothermia
· Continuous ECG monitoring should be per-
and acidosis will prolong the effect of atracurium.
formed in all patients with heart disease during
· Pancuronium (0.02 to 0.04 mg/kg, IV initially
sedation and anesthesia of any duration. The de-
and 0.01 to 0.02 mg/kg, IV for repeated adminis-
cision to continue ECG monitoring during the
tration) has a longer duration of action (30 to 40
postoperative period should be determined based
minutes). Hepatic metabolism and renal excre-
on the procedure and the status of the patient.
tion is required for elimination. A mild increase
 in heart rate can occur after initial administration
Arterial Blood Pressure Measurement
 due to parasympatholytic action.
· Indirect methods are less accurate than direct
· Reversal of NMRDs is accomplished with neo-
measurements (see later). However, monitor-
stigmine (0.02 mg/kg, IV) and atropine (0.02 mg/
ing the trends of indirect arterial blood pres-
kg, IV) combined in the same syringe. Occasion-
sure can provide valuable information. The two
ally, a second dose is required using half of the
indirect methods are Doppler ultrasound and
original dose of both neostigmine and atropine.
oscillometric.
Doppler Ultrasound Method
MONITORING AND SUPPORTIVE
· Systolic arterial blood pressure can be consis-
CARE DURING SEDATION AND
tently obtained using the Doppler method, and
ANESTHESIA
diastolic values can be detenmined in some pa-
· There are two aspects of monitoring during anes-
tients. Doppler is easier to perform in small dogs
thesia: anesthetic depth and cardiopulmonary pa-
and cats. Accuracy of obtained values is highly
rameters. Anesthetic depth is best monitored by
dependent on several factors (cuff size, skin
Chapter19
 Anesthesia of the Cardiac Patient
367
thickness, contact of crystal, positioning of limb.
Invasive Monitoring
vasoconstriction); therefore, trends in blood pres-
sure are monitored. The advantage of Doppler
· The more invasive and complicated surgical
ultrasound is that active arterial blood flow can
procedures should incur more invasive moni-
be heard at all times.
toring techniques. Whereas the noninvasive
techniques can provide general trends, inva-
sive monitoring can provide more accurate
KEY POINT
data concerming cardiovascular function. Di-
Do not make therapeutic decisions regarding.
rect monitoring is less likely to provide false
fluid therapy solely on any indirect method of
 negative values and is less likely to fail during
blood pressure monitoring, especially in cats
anesthesia.
and small dogs.
Direct Arterial Blood Pressure Measurement
· A catheter placed in a peripheral artery (dorsal
Oscillometrie Method
pedal most common). Requires fairly expensive
· Systolic, diastolic, and mean arterial blood
equipment, though refurbished units are afford-
 pressure and heart rate are determined. Systolic
able and very useful. Technically more difficult
pressure is the most accurate, though values
to place a catheter in a peripheral artery.
can be underestimated. Accuracy of obtained
values is highly dependent on several factors
(cuff size, skin thickness, contact or position-
KEY POINT
ing of cuff in relation to the artery, choice of
The advent of affordable, refurbished moni-
artery, positioning of limb, vasoconstriction);
toring devices allows veterinarians to provide
therefore, trends in blood pressure are moni-
 the ability to perform invasive, accurate blood 
 tored. Oscillometric blood pressure monitoring
 pressure monitoring.
is extremely inaccurate in small dogs, cats, and
animals in states of hypotension, despite ad-
vances in technology.
Central Venous Pressure
· The central venous pressure (CVP) monitors
Pulse Oximetry
right heart function and is the most clinically
· Pulse oximetry provides indirect determination
 reliable indicator of intravascular volume. CVP
of arterial ox ygenation. Active pulsation of an ar-
uses a properly placed jugular catheter with
terial bed is required to determine oxygenation.
the tip within the thoracic cavity. Inexpensive
Pulse oximetry is inaccurate in states of hypoten-
equipment (manometers) can be used to mea-
sion and peripheral vasoconstriction (hypother-
sure central venous pressure, though the same
mia, pain). It is most accurate when placed on
device used to monitor direct arterial blood
the tongue; therefore, heavy sedation or general
pressure can be used to monitor CVP. CVP
anesthesia is required.
can be a valuable tool during anesthesia or in
the postoperative period to detect early cardiac
Capnometry
failure or fuid overload.
· Capnometry determines the partial pressure of
ex haled carbon dioxide, which is closely related
Arterial and Venous Blood Gas
to arterial partial pressure of carbon dioxide. It
· Arterial blood gas monitoring provides infor-
indirectly provides infonmation on cardiac out-
mation on ventilation (PaCO2) and oxygen-
put. Exhaled carbon dioxide is dependent upon
ation (PaO2). Venous blood gas monitoring
adequate perfusion of the lungs (delivery of
from a central vein (jugular, cranial vena cava,
carbon dioxide to the lungs). Hypoventilation
pulmonary artery) provides indirect infonma-
(increased partial pressure of carbon dioxide
tion on perfusion of tissues and cardiac out-
in arterial blood) can be detected on a breath.
put. Arterial and venous blood gas monitoring
by-breath basis. Capnometry requires intuba-
combined with cardiac output information can
tion in most cases for the most accurate values,
be used to calculate oxygen delivery variables
though tight-fitting facemasks can provide the
(see later). Devices used for blood gas analysis
environment to obtain infonmation on ventila-
are affordable and are commonly being used in
tory status.
clinical practice.
368
SECTIONIII
Treatment of Cardiovascular Disease
in patients with heart disease, especially if a
Box 19-1
Cardiovascular Equations
bolus of colloids is to be administered.
DO, = CO x CaOg
CO = HR x SV
CaO = (Hb × SaO × 1.39) + (PaO x 0.003)
AFTERCARE
ABP= CO × SVR
Basic Nursing Care
DO2, Delivery of oxygen; CO, cardiac output; HR, heart rate;
SV, strove volume; CaO2, content of oxygen in arterial blood;
· Maintain body temperature using extermal warm-
SaO2, saturation of oxygen in arterial blood; I.39, constant that
ing devices such as wanm water bottle, incuba-
describes the number of milliliters of oxygen in 100 ml of blood;
tors or other devices that will raise the extermal
PaO2 partial pressure of oxygen in arterial blood; 0.003, per-
centage of oxygen dissolved in plasma (0.3%) expressed as a
temperature.
decimal; ABP, arterial blood pressure; SVR, systemic vascular
· Reduce stress and anxiety by providing a quiet,
resistance.
dry, and comfortable environment.
Advanced Cardiovascular
Oxygen Therapy
Monitoring—Cardiae Output
· Cardiac output monitoring requires pulmonary
· Some patients may require oxygen by facemask,
artery catheterization to obtain cardiovascu-
nasal cannula, oxygen cage, or incubator until
lar values that can provide information regard-
completely recovered from anesthesia or sedation
 ing ventricular function. (Box 19-1). Cardiac
to maximize oxy gen delivery parameters.
output computers remain extremely high-cost
expenditures.
Electrocardiographic Monitoring
KEY POINTS
· Monitor cardiac rate and rhythm continuously
until the patient is completely recovered from
· Cardiac output is not synonymous with
anesthesia or sedation. Some anesthetic drugs
arterial blood pressure. Please note in Box
19-1 that cardiac output is a determinant of
(ketamine and inhalation anesthetics) can predis-
the calculation for blood pressure.
pose to cardiac arrhythmias.
· An advance in cardiac output monitoring
that may become clinically available for dogs
Cardiovascular Monitoring
and cats is lithium dilution cardiac output.
· The decision to monitor blood pressure and
CVP should be determined by the severity
of heart disease, stability of the patient, the
Fluid Therapy
reason for surgical intervention and the car-
· Most patients with heart disease that are anes-
diovascular status during anesthesia and sur-
thetized with inhalation anesthetics will re-
gery. Some patients will not require further
quire intravenous fuid support. The fuid of
monitoring while some patients, such as a
choice for the patient with heart disease is usu-
dog with dilated cardiomyopathy undergoing
ally a sodium-restricted crystalloid fuid (0.45%
surgery to correct gastric dilatation-volvulus,
NaCl/2.5% dextrose or 0.45% NaCl). The rate
may require all available monitoring. Invasive
 Of fuid therapy administration, however, is far
postoperative monitoring may be required in
more important than the type of fuid adminis-
some patients.
tered. The rate should be less than the recom
mended fuid rate during anesthesia of normal,
ANALGESIA
healthy patients (10 ml/kg/hr). A general rule
would be to decrease the fuid rate to approxi-
· Always provide analgesiaif an invasive procedure
mately one fourth to one third of the rate for a
or surgery was performed. Preemptive analgesia
normal patient, yielding a rate of 2 to 3 ml/kg/h.
should be practiced at all times. Preemptive anal
Less stable patients with heart disease and those
gesia is defned as analgesic techniques that are
 rans aa  asa s
applied prior to surgical stimulation. Incorporat-
present with signs of heart failure should have
ing analgesic agents (opioids) in the preanesthetic
CVP measured to aid in monitoring fuid ther-
medication is the easiest method of preemptive
apy. Colloid fuids should be used with caution
analgesia. Analgesia should be performed on a
Chapter 19
 Anesthesia of the Cardiac Patient
369
predetermined schedule (intermittent administra-
initial intraoperative administration is typically the
tion) or by continuous administration techniques
anesthesia rate of fuids (10 ml/kg/hr). However,
for at least 12 to 24 hours after surgery.
many cardiac patients will require a limited rate
of fuids (2.5 ml/kg/hr) that may delay the onset of
Opioid Analgesia Techniques
action of this combination. The postoperative ad-
Transdermal Fentanyl
ministration rate will be 2.5 ml/kg/hr regardless of
· Transdermal fentanyl is very effective in provid-
the intraoperative administration rate.
 ing postoperative analgesia. Transdermal fentanyl
Fentanyl-Lidocaine-Ketamine
patches are available in two sizes based on the de-
· The following drugs are administered to a l-L bag
livery of fentanyl: 25 and 50 μg/hr. Patches should
of 0.45% NaCl or 0.45% NaCl and 2.5% dextrose:
sop ioy Aains o ioud snou t o zi paydde aq
lidocaine (2%; 20 mg/ml; 15 ml) and ketamine
and 8 to 12 hours prior to surgery in cats.
(100 mg/ml; 0.6 ml) are prepared as above. The
· The weight of the dog will determine which patch
volume of fentanyl (50 μg/ml) will vary based
or patches to be applied. Dogs weighing less than
on the rate of fuid administration.A volume to
3 kg can have half of a 25 μg/hr applied by using the
provide a CRI of 3 μg/kg/hr should be prepared
 protective plastic portion of the patch to partially
for intraoperative and postoperative administra-
expose only half of the patch. Dogs weighing be-
tion. The fuid rates are similar to those used for
tween 3 and 10 kg can have 25 μg/hr applied. Dogs
morphine-lidocaine-ketamine preparations.
weighing 10 to 20 kg can have a 50 μg/hr patch
Opioid Combinations-Cats
75 μg/hr (one each of a 25 and 50 μg/hr patch)
· Continuous rate infusions of opioid combinations
applied simultaneously. Finally, dogs weighing
for cats are prepared and administered differently
more than 30 kg will require 100 μg/hr (two 50
than for dogs. Cats tend to be more likely to have
 μg/hr patches) applied simultaneously.
side effects from lidocaine. Therefore, lidocaine
· Cats weighing less than 3 kg can have half of a 25
is not used in the combinations. Cats can become
μg/hr applied as described previously using the
excited or dysphoric from the opioid combina-
 protective plastic portion of the patch to expose
tions. Tranquilizers such as acepromazine (0.025
 only half of the patch. Cats weighing greater than
mg/kg, IV) can be used to decrease any side ef-
 3 kg can have an entire 25 μg/hr patch applied.
fects caused by opioids.
Continuous Rate Infusion of Opioids and
KEY POINT
Opioid Combinations
Opioid agonists should not be avoided be-
· Opioids alone or in combination with the local
cause of possible side effects of excitement or
anesthetic lidocaine and the dissociative drug
dysphoria in cats.
ketamine can be used to provide analgesia in the
binations exist and it is the decision of the clini-
Morphine-Ketamine
cian as to which CRI to administer. Decisions can
· The following drugs are administered to a 1-L
be made based on severity of postoperative pain
bag of 0.45% NaCl or 0.45% NaCl and 2.5%
and experience of the clinician.
dextrose: morphine (15 mg/ml; 1.8 ml) and keta-
mine (100 mg/ml; 0.6 ml). The initial intraop-
Opioids
erative administration is typically the anesthesia
· Both morphine and fentanyl can be used alone to
rate of fuids (10 ml/kg/hr). However, many car-
provide postoperative analgesia. The administra-
diac patients will require a limited rate of fuids
tion rate of morphine is 0.12 mg/kg/hr and the
(2.5 ml/kg/hr) that may delay the onset of action
rate of fentanyl is 2 to 10 μg/kg/hr.
of this combination. The postoperative adminis-
tration rate will be 2.5 ml/kg/hr regardless of the
Opioid Combinations-Dogs
intraoperative administration rate.
Morphine-Lidocaine-Ketamine
Fentanyl-Ketamine
· The following drugs are administered to a 1-L bag
· Ketamine (100 mg/ml; 0.6 ml) is added to a
of 0.45% NaCl or 0.45% NaCl and 2.5% dextrose:
1-L bag of 0.45% NaCl or 0.45% NaCl and
morphine (15 mg/ml; 1.8 ml), lidocaine (2%; 20
2.5% dextrose. The volume of fentanyl (50
mg/ml; 15 ml), ketamine (100 mg/ml; 0.6 ml). The
μg/ml) will vary based on the rate of fuid
370
SECTION III  Treatment of Cardiovascular Disease
administration. A volume to provide a CRI of
Dilated Cardiomyopathy
3 μg/kg/hr should be prepared for intraopera-
· Inotropic support with dobutamine or dopamine
tive and postoperative administration. The fuid
is recommended for any major surgery regardless
rates are similar to those used for morphine-
of ASA status. Tachycardia may predispose to
ketamine preparations.
ventricular arrhythmias and the judicious use of
atropine or glycopyrrolate is not recommended.
Mild arterial vasodilation can maximize cardiac
ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
output.
FOR SPECIFIC CARDIAC
DISEASES AND RECOMMENDED
Congenital Defects
ANESTHETIC PROTOCOLS
Aortie and Pulmonic Stenosis
· Cardiac output is highly dependent upon heart
Recommended for All Patients
rate and inotropic agents contribute little to no
· Preoxygenation with 5 L/min oxygen via face-
increase in cardiac output. Tachycardia may
-onpu on omd poqau Aq moiq, io yseu
predispose to ventricular arrhythmias and the
tion of anesthesia is used to maximize arterial
judicious use of atropine or glycopyrolate
-pe on iomd Araaap uasAxo pue uoneuAxo
is not recommended. The dose of atropine or
ministration of induction drugs. ECG moni-
glycopyrrolate should be decreased by half.
toring prior to induction of anesthesia is also
Bradycardia can result in severe decreases in
recommended. Ventilatory support should be
cardiac output.
 provided to all patients maintained with inha-
Patent Ductus Arteriosus and Ventricular
lation anesthesia to reduce adverse effects of
Septal Defect
hypoventilation.
· Pulmonary over circulation results in a rapid
uptake of inhalation anesthetic and a more
rapid inhalation anesthetic induction. There
ANESTHETICS PROTOCOLS
may be a delay in distribution of intravenous
IN DOGS AND CATS
anesthetics, though a clinical effect is likely
· The choice of anesthetic protocol should be
 not evident. Mild arterial vasodilation may re-
based on the ASA classification (see p. 357) and
duce the amount of blood fow across the pat-
not the specific cardiac disease. There are several
ent ductus arteriosus or the ventricular septal
differences to be noted regarding specific cardiac
defect.
diseases, anesthetic drug effects and cardiovascu-
lar support. Therefore, a short discussion of the
ASA HI Patients: Medical Procedure
specific cardiac disease will be followed with the
or Minor, Minimally Invasive Surgical
choice of anesthetic protocol based on the ASA
Procedures
classification. Anesthetic techniques (including
injectable techniques) for medical and minor sur-
Injectable Anesthesia Technique
gical procedures will be discussed followed by
· The preanesthetic medication of choice would be
techniques for major surgical procedures within
a neuroleptanalgesic combination of aceproma-
each ASA classification.
zine (0.025 mg/kg, IM) and butorphanol (0.4
mg/kg. IM). Prophylactic use of atropine is
Common Cardiac Diseases and Anesthesia
not recommended to minimize production of
Techniques for Dogs
tac hyarrhythmias.
· Induction can be achieved using ketamine-
Mitral Valve Insufficieney
diazepam (1 ml/10 kg of a 50:50 mixture,
·Mild arterial vasodilation from anesthetic drugs
IV) and anesthesia can be maintained using
can result in a decrease in the regurgitant frac-
intermittent boluses of a third to a fourth the
tion across the mitral valve and maximum cardiac
initial dose of ketamine-diazepam if additional
output.
anesthesia time is required. Altematively,
· Supraventricular and ventricular arrhythmias are
induction and maintenance of anesthesia can
 common sequelae to mitral regurgitation and the
be achieved using propofol (2 to 6 mg/kg, IV)
ECG should be monitored at all times. Extremes
for induction followed by either CRI (0.14 to
in heart rate (bradycardia or tachycardia) can re-
0.4 mg/kg/min) or intermittent bolus (0.5 to 1.0
sult in decreased cardiac output.
mg/kg, IV).
Chapter 19
 Anesthesia of the Cardiac Patient
371
· Physical parameters, ECG, and Doppler blood
A CRl of morphine-lidocaine-ketamine or 
pressure can be used for monitoring during the
fentanyl-lidocaine-ketamine should com-
procedure.
mence at the beginning of surgery at the
anesthetic rate of fluid administration (10
Inhalation Anesthesia Technique
ml/kg/hr). An epidural injection of a com-
·Preanesthetic medication and induction as pre-
bination   of  lidocaine-bupivacaine-mor-
viously described above.Ketamine-diazepam
phine analgesia should be administered
is preferred over propofol due to a longer dura-
prior to the beginning of surgery for all 
tion of action, which will require less inhalation
abdominal procedures. Other local anes-
anesthetic
thetic technigues can be dictated by the
· Isofurane or sevofurane in oxygen at the lowest
location of surgery. An intermittent bolus
of opioid agonists may also be necessary
effective dose can be used to maintain anesthesia,
during surgery. NMRDs can be used if
using opioids intraoperatively as needed. Ventila-
blood pressure is low and the patient is
tion should be provided at all times during anes-
not adequately anesthetized. Pancuroni-
thesia and surgery.
um (0.02 to 0.04 mg /kg, IV) has a longer
· Physical parameters, ECG, Doppler blood pres-
duration of action than atracurium (0.25
sure, and capnometry can be used for monitoring
mg/kg, IV). Ventilation should be pro-
during the procedure.
vided at all times curing anesthesia and
surgery.
kEY POINT
Potent opioid agonists are usually not re-
ASA III or IV Patients: Medical Procedure
quired for these types of minor procedures.
or Minor, Minimally Invasive Surgical
Procedures
Injectable Anesthesia Technique
ASA II Patients: Major Surgery
·A neuroleptanalgesic combination of diazepam
(0.4 mg/kg, IM) and butorphanol (0.4 mg/kg,
· An injectable anesthesia technique to maintain an-
 IM) is administered as the preanesthetic medica-
esthesia is usually not required as these patients are
tion. Atropine is not recommended to minimize
considered very stable priorto amesthesiaand surgery
production of tachyarrhythmias.
 and should be able to tolerate inhalation anesthetics
· Induction can be achieved using ketamine-
as the primary technique to maintain anesthesia.
diazepam (1 m/10 kg of a 50:50 mixture, IV)
and anesthesia can be maintained using intermit-
Inhalation Anesthesia Technique
tent boluses of a third to a fourth the initial dose of
· A neuroleptanalgesic combination of aceproma-
ketamine-diazepam if additional anesthesia time is
zine (0.025 mg/kg. IM) and hydromorphone
required. Altermatively, induction and maintenance
(0.2 mg/kg, IM) can be used for preanesthetic
of anesthesia can be achieved using propofol (2 to
medication. Atropine (0.22 mg/kg, IM) is rec-
6 mg/kg, IV) for induction followed by either CRI
ommended for smaller dogs (< 5 kg) only.
(0.14 to 0.4 mg/kg/min) of intermittent bolus (0.5
to 1.0 mg/kg, IV). Etomidate (1 to 2 mg/kg, IV)
should be used as the induction agent if cardiac ar-
KEY POINts
rhythmias are present. Endotracheal intubation may
● Potent opicid agonists are preferred over
be necessary, but is not required. Supplemental oxy-
opioid agonist/antagonists to provide ad-
 gen should be administered with this technique.
equate preemptive analgesia.
· Physical parameters, ECG, and Doppler blood
 Ketamine-diazepam (1 ml/10 kg of a
 50:50 mixture, IV) is preferred to induce
pressure can be used for monitoring during the
anesthesia over propofol (2 to 6 mg/kg.
procedure.
IV) due to a longer duration of action that
KEY POINT
will initially reduce the dose of inhalation
anesthetic.
 An inhalation anesthetic technique for a med-
 Adjuncts to general anesthesia can be used
ical or minor surgical procedure is not indi-
to minimize use of inhalation anesthetics.
cated for ASA Ill-IV cardiac patients.
372
SECTION III Treatment of Cardiovascular Disease
· Sedation techniques for dogs not compliant to
ASA III or IV Patients: Major Surgery
local anesthesia only include a neuroleptanalge
· An injectable anesthetic tec hnique using low-dose
sia combination of diazepam (0.2 mg/kg. IV)
inhalation, only if necessary, is recommended
and hydromorphone (0.2 mg/kg, IV). Atropine
over a technique that relies on an inhalation anes-
should only be used if bradycardia occurs.
thetic to maintain anesthesia.
ASA IV Dogs—Emergency
KEY POINtS
Pericardiocentesis
● Anesthesia of ASA Ill or IV patients for major
surgery will require intensive monitoring of
· Dogs that require an emergency pericardiocen-
anesthesia, cardiovascular parameters, and
tesis typically present with signs of collapse,
the patient.
right heart failure and/or ventricular arrhythmias
● Neuroleptanalgesic combination of diaze-
all related to pericardial tamponade. Most dogs
pam (0.2 mg/kg, IV) and fentanyl (1 μg/kg.
will require only an infiltration of local anesthetic
iV) should be administered as preanesthetic
(lidocaine) in the skin and intercostals muscula-
medication. Atropine (0.22 mg/kg, IV) may
ture at the site of needle puncture for pericardio-
be necessary if bradycardia occurs.
centesis. Occasionally, dogs will require sedation
 Fentanyl (5 to 10 μg/kg) is recommended
in addition to local anesthesia. The neuroleptan-
for induction of anesthesia. Induction with
algesia combination of diazepam (0.2 mg/kg,
fentanyl is not considered a rapid induction
IV) and butorphanol (0.2 mg/kg, IV) is recom-
and may take 30 to 60 seconds or more.
mended. Cardiac output is highly dependent on
Alternative induction with etomidate (1
to 2 mg/kg, IV) should be administered for
heart rate during pericardial tamponade and bu-
 induction if arrhythmias are present.
torphanol is least likely to decrease heart rate. At-
· A CRl of fentanyl (5 to 10 μg/kg/hr) ad-
ropine is not recommended. An induction agent
ministered by a cedicated syringe pump is
may be necessary in addition to sedation in some
recommended to maintain a surgical plane of
instances. Etomidate (1 to 2 mg/kg, IV) is the
anesthesia.
 drug of choice as there are minimal to no cardio-
· Ventilation should be provided at all times
pulmonary effects.
during anesthesia and surgery. Lidocaine and
ketamine can be administered for analgesia
in a separate bag of fluids. Epidural analgesia
COMMON CARDIAC DISEASES
for abdominal procedures is recommended.
AND ANESTHESIA TECHNIOUES
Other local anesthetic techniques are dictat-
FOR CATS
ed by the location of surgery. NMRDs can be
used if blood pressure is low and the patient
Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy
 is not adequately anesthetized. Pancuronium
(0.02 to 0.04 mg /kg, IV) has a longer duration
· The most common cardiac disease in cats is hyper-
of action than atracurium (0.25 mg/kg, IV).
trophic cardiomyopathy (HCM). Hypertrophic car-
● Blood pressure (direct is preferred over in-
diomyopathy is characterized primarily as diastolic
direct methods), ECG, capnometry, pulse
dysfunction with nonmal ventricular contraction.
oximetry, and physical parameters are con-
Increases in heart rate and ventricular tachyarrhyth-
tinuously monitored.
mias caused by anesthetic drugs are best avoided.
ASA I and II Cats with HCM: Medical
Procedure or Minor, Minimally Invasive
CANINE PERICARDIAL
DISEASE: PERICARDIOCENTESIS
Surgical Procedures
ASA I or II Dogs that Require
Injectable Anesthesia Technique
Pericardiocentesis
· A neuroleptanalgesic combination of aceproma-
zine (0.025 mg/kg. IM) and hydromorphone (0.2
· Dogs not showing signs of pericardial tampon-
mg/kg, IM) is administered as preanesthetic medi-
ade may only require only an infiltration of local
cation. Ketamine (6 to 10 mg/kg, IM) is adminis-
anesthetic (lidocaine) in the skin and intercostals
tered 10 to 15 minutes after the neuroleptanalgesic
musculature at the site of needle puncture for
combination. This three drug combination may be
pericardiocentesis.
 all that is required to perform the procedure.
Chapter 19
 Anesthesia of the Cardiac Patient
373
· Propofol (1 to 3 mg/kg, IV) can be administered
● Lumbosacral epidural analgesia for abdomi-
if additional anesthesia is required. Propofol ad-
nal procedures is recommended.
ministered as either a CRI (0.14 to 0.4 mg/kg/
 NMiRDs can be used if blood pressure is low
min) of intermittent bolus (0.5 mg/kg, IV) can be
and the patient is not adequately anesthe-
used for longer procedures.
tized. Pancuronium (0.02 to 0.04 mg/kg.
· Physical parameters, ECG, and Doppler blood
V) has a longer duration of action than
pressure can be used for monitoring during the
atracurium (0.25 mg/kg, IV).
procedure.
Inhalation Anesthesia Technique
ASA IHI or IV patients: Medical Procedure
· Preanesthetic medication and induction done as
or Minor, Minimally Invasive Surgical
previously described previously.
Procedures
 Isofurane or sevofurane in oxygen is adminis-
tered at the lowest effective dose.
Injectable Anesthesia Technique
· The three drug preanesthetic will greatly reduce
· A neuroleptanalgesic combination of diazepam
inhalation anesthetic requirement.
(0.2 mg/kg, IV) and hydromorphone (0.2 mg/kg.
 IV) is administered as preanesthetic medication.
KEY POINTS
· Use of an induction agent may not be neces-
· Ventilation will be required during surgery
sary following the neuroleptanalgesic combina-
 in all cats that receive the three drug pre-
tion. Propofol (2 to 4 mg/kg, IV) may be used
anesthetic combinations and inhalation an-
if needed. Propofol administered as either a CRI
esthesia.
(0.14 to 0.4 mg/kg/min) or intermittent bolus (0.5
· Physical parameters, ECG, Doppler blood
to 1.0 mg/kg, IV) can be used if additional time is
pressure, and capnometry can be moni-
required. Etomidate (1 to 2 mg/kg, IV) should be
tored during the procedure.
used as the induction agent if cardiac arrhythmias
 are present. Endotracheal intubation may be nec-
essary, but is not required. Supplemental oxygen
ASA II Patients: Major Surgery
should be administered with this technique.
· Injectable anesthesia technique is usually not re-
· Physical parameters, ECG, and Doppler blood
 quired as patients are considered very stable prior
pressure can be monitored during the procedure.
to anesthesia and surgery and should be able to
tolerate inhalation anesthetics as the primary
KEY POINT
technique to maintain anesthesia.
 An inhalation anesthetic technique for a med-
ical or minor surgical procedure is not indi-
Inhalation anesthesia Technique
cated for ASA IlI-IV cardiac patients.
· Aneuroleptanalgesic combination of acepromazine
(0.025 mg/kg, IM) and hydromorphone (0.2 mg/
kg, IM) is followed in 10 to 15 minutes by ketamine
ASA IHI or IV Patients: Major Surgery
(6 to 10 mg/kg, IM) for preanesthetic medication.
·An injectable anesthetic technique using low dose
inhalation, only if necessary, is recommended
KEY POINts
over a technique that relies on an inhalation anes-
● Potent opicid agonists are preferred over
thetic to maintain anesthesia.
opicid agonist/antagonists to provide ad-
equate preemptive analgesia.
key Points
· Some cats may be able to be intubated
without use of an induction agent. Propo-
● Anesthesia of ASA Ill or IV patients for major
fol (1 to 2 mg/kg, IV) can be used to effect
surgery will require intensive monitoring of
to permit intubation.
anesthesia and the patient.
● Ventilation should be provided at all times
● A neuroleptanalgesic combination of diaz-
during anesthesia and surgery. A CRl of
epam (0.2 mg/kg, IM) and hydromor-
morphine-ketamine is recommended
to
phone (0.2 mg/kg, IM) is followed in 10 to
provide analgesia and minimize use of inha-
15 minutes by ketamine (6 to 10 mg/kg)
lation anesthetics.
for preanesthetic medication.
374
SECTION III  Treatment of Cardiovascular Disease
· Propofol (2 to 4 mg/kg, IV) may be used
administered. The combination of a benzodiazepine
if needed. Etomidate (1 to 2 mg/kg, IV)
and opioid in a cat could result in excitement. Clini-
should be used as the induction agent if 
cians should realize that cats will not be as heavily
 cardiac arrhythmias are present.
sedated (compared with dogs), and recoveries could
· A CRl of fentanyl (3 to 5 μg/kg/hr) admin-
be rough as well. Overall, the safety of opioids should
 istered by a dedicated syringe pump is rec-
outweigh these concerns.
 cmmended to maintain a surgical plane of
What would be the most important cardiopulmonary
anesthesia
side effect of anesthesia for the patient with cardiac
● Ventilation should be provided at all times
disease?
curing anesthesia and surgery. Ketamine
By far, the most important aspect of anesthetizing
can be administered for analgesia in a sepa-
a dog or cat with heart disease is respiratory depres-
rate 1-L bag of fluids. Epidural analgesia for
sion. The opioids, dissociatives, and the inhalation
 abdominal procedures is recommended.
anesthetics are all respiratory depressants. Severe re-
● NMRDs can be used if blood pressure is low
spiratory depression will occur if all three of these
anesthetic classes of drugs are used in the same anes-
and the patient is not adequately anesthe-
tized. Pancuronium (0.02 to 0.04 mg/kg,
thetic protocol. The most common cause of anesthetic
death is respiratory arest. Dogs and cats with cardiac
M) has a longer duration of action than atra-
disease undergoing anesthesia should have ventila-
curium (0.25 mg/kg, V).
tion maintained either manually or with an anesthesia
● Blood pressure (direct is preferred over in-
ventilator to eliminate the effects of respiratory depres-
cirect methods), ECG, capnometry, pulse
sion. Monitoring with techniques such as capnometry
 oximetry, and physical parameters should 
 pue sisouaep Aeo on peel lm Anuxo ssind pue
 be monitored during surgery.
treatment of respiratory depression. The use of the
nondepolarizing muscle relaxants dictates the use of
ventilation.
Frequently Asked Questions
Why should isofurane and sevofurane be used with
caution to maintain anesthesia in patients with car-
diacdisease?
SUGGESTED READINGS
Isofurane can certainly support cardiac output and
heart rate, but it is a potent arterial vasodilator. Se-
Cornick-Seahorn JL: Anesthetic management of patients
vere hypoperfusion and hypotension can occur during
with cardiovascular disease, Comp Cont Ed 16:1121,
anesthesia if isofurane or sevofurane is used as the
1994.
 sole anesthetic agent to maintain anesthesia. Hypo-
 Day TK: Intravenous anesthetic techniques for emergency
perfusion and hypotension can be worse if the dog
and critical care procedures. In Bonagura JD, ed:
or cat is receiving an ACEI drug such as enalapril or
Kirk's current veterinary therapy XII1. Philadelphia,
benazapril. The less isofurane or sevofurane used,
2000, WB Saunders.
the less likely it is that adverse cardiovascular effects
 Drugs used for preanesthetic medication. In Muir wW,
will occut.
Hubbell JAE, Skarda RT, Bednarski RM, eds: Hand-
Why are the main differences in the clinicat effects of
book of veterinary anesthesia, ed 4, St Louis, 2007,
opioids in dogs and cats important?
Mosby.
We learned long ago in our profession that cats were
General anesthesia. In McKelvey D, Hollingshead KW,
not small dogs. The ex treme popularity of opioids for
eds: Veterinary anesthesia and analgesia, ed 3, St Louis,
anesthesia in dogs, and the advent of advanced anal-
2003, Mosby.
 gesia techniques including CRIs of opioids, has led to
Hellyer PW: Anesthesia in patients with cardiovascu-
the extension of opioid use to the feline species. How-
lar disease. In Kirk RW, Bonagura JD, eds: Cur-
ever, many clinicians have been disappointed because
rent veterinary therapy X1, Philadelphia, 1992, WB
cats do not respond in the same way to the drugs as
Saunders.
dogs, and opioids are a possible detriment to cats.
Ilkiw JE: Anaesthesia and disease. In Hall LW,
Opioid use in cats is essential to prevent the untoward
Taylor PM, eds: Anaesthesia of the cat, London,
effects of higher doses of ketamine in cats with HCM.
1994, Bailliere Tindall.
 Opioids are extremely safe in cats with HCM, as the
Injectable anesthetics. In Thurmon JC, Tranquilli WJ,
myocardial contractility is not affected, and the heart
Benson GJ, eds: Lumb and Jones’ veterinary anes-
 rate is reduced. The most effective use of opioids in
cats is with the concurrent use of tranquilizers. The
thesia, ed 3, Baltimore, 1996, Williams & Wilkins.
more potent the tranquilizer, the better the clinical
Mason DE, Hubbell JAE: Anesthesia and the heart.
effect. Cats administered acepromazine with the opi-
In Fox PR, Sisson D, Moise NS, eds: Textbook of
 oid are better sedated than when a benzodiazepine is
canine and feline cardiology, Philadelphia, 1999,
WB Saunders.
Chapter 19   Anesthesia of the Cardiac Patient 
375
Paddleford RR, Harvey RC: Anesthesia for selected dis-
 Preanesthetics and anesthetic adjuncts. In Thurmon JC,
eases: cardiovascular dysfunction. In Thurmon JC,
Tranquilli WJ, Benson GJ, eds: Lumb and Jones'
Tranquilli WJ, Benson GJ, eds: Lumb and Jones'
veterinary anesthesia, ed 3, Baltimore, 1996,
veterinary anesthesia, ed 3, Baltimore, 1996, Wil-
Williams & Wilkins.
liams & Wilkins.
Cardiac Surgery
E. Christopher Orton
INTRODUCTION
Cardiac surgery is increasingly an option for man-
 little or no operative mortality when performed by
agement of congenital and acquired cardiac condi-
 experienced surgeons.
tions in small animals. Some cardiac surgeries are
 PDA ligation is undertaken through a left fourth
widely available, whereas open cardiac repairs that
 thoracotomy in the dog and a left fifth thoracotomy
require cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) are currently
in a cat (Figure 20-1). The most frequent surgical
only performed at a few regional centers. Some car-
complication is hemorrhage during ductus dissec-
diac surgeries are performed with curative intent,
tion. If significant hemorrhage occurs during dis-
whereas others are considered palliative only. Car-
section, the ductus should be closed with
diac surgeries include closed cardiac surgeries, car-
pledget-buttressed mattress sutures with or without
diac surgeries perfonmed during infow occlusion, 
division of the ductus.
and cardiac surgeries performed under CPB.
Pulmonic and Aortic Valve Dilation
CLOSED CARDIAC SURGERY
Pulmonic stenosis (PS) and subvalvular aortic ste-
Patent Ductus Arteriosus Ligation
defects in dogs. Despite the relative importance of
With few exceptions, closure of patent ductus arteri-
PS, the natural history of untreated PS in dogs is
osus (PDA)is indicated in all small animals with this
 not well documented. Dogs with moderate PS may
defect. Closure can be accomplished by catheter-
 tolerate the defect relatively well for many years.
based occlusion methods or surgical ligation. Al-
Transpulmonic pressure gradients > 100 mm Hg
though each has theoretical advantages, both
 are considered an indication for intervention, espe-
approaches are successful in the hands of an experi-
cially if animals are ex hibiting activity intolerance,
garded as always superior or preferred. Choosing an
 The natural history of untreated SAS in dogs is bet
approach depends on several factors, including cli- t
ter understood. Dogs with transaortic pressure gra-
ent preference, availability of equipment and exper-
dients >80mmHg are known to be at risk for
tise, and urgency of the procedure. PDA closure is S
 sudden cardiac death early in life. Gradient reduc-
curative when performed early in life before the on-
 tion by valve dilation is assumed, but not proven, to
set of severe ventricular remodeling, systolic dys-
be palliative for dogs with Ps. Valve dilation for
function, or functional mitral regurgitation (MR).
 SAS does not result in sustained decreases in trans-
Surgical ligation of PDA can be accomplished with
 aortic pressure gradients. Current evidence suggests
376
Chapter 20
Cardiac Surgery
377
B
C
Figure 20-1.  PDA ligation. The vagus nerve courses over the ductus arteriosus and serves as an anatomic landmark for
identification of the ductus arteriosus (A). The vagus nerve is isolated at the level of the ductus and gently retracted with one or two
sutures (B). Occasionally a persistent left cranial vena cava may overlie the ductus arteriosus. In this case, the vein should be
carefully isolated and retracted with the vagus nerve. The ductus arteriosus is isolated by blunt dissection without opening the
pericardium. Dissection of the caudal aspect of the ductus is accomplished by passing right-angled forceps behind the ductus
1e Aiepnes sdaioy aun bubue Aq pausdosse s! snionp aun jo ioadse peueio aun jo uosassa aueld asiaasue aun ot lalieied
approximately a 45-degree angle. Dissection is completed by passing the forceps medial to ductus from a caudal to cranial cdirection
(C). Two heavy silk ligatures are passed around the ductus by grasping the ligature with right-angled forceps. The ductus
arteriosus is closed by slowly tightening and tying the ligature.
little or no palliative benefit from valve dilation or
for animals that fail balloon-catheter placement
surgical treatment of SAS.
across the PS, or when equipment for cardiac cath-
Catheter-based balloon valvuloplasty is preferred
eterization is not available. Surgical valve dilation
to surgical valve dilation of PS because it as a less
of PS is performed through a left fourth thoracot-
invasive. Surgical valve dilation of PS is indicated
omy (Figure 20-2).
378
SECTION III Treatment of Cardiovascular Disease
B
Figure 20-2.
: Pulmonary valve dilation. The pericardium over the right outflow tract is opened and sutured to the thoracotomy
incision. A buttressed mattress suture is placed in the right ventricular outflow tract and passed through a tourniquet (A).A stab
incision is made in the ventricle within the confines of the mattress suture. A dilating instrument is passed into the right ventricular
outflow tract and across the pulmonic valve (B). The pulmonic valve is cilated several times. The ventricular incision is closed by
tying the mattress suture.
Pulmonary Artery Banding
of the band or late-term progressive constriction of
the band leading to reversal of shunt fow. Worsen-
 Pulmonary artery banding is a palliative surgery for
ing of concurrent tricuspid regurgitation is also a
ventricular septal defect (VSD) that consists of
possible adverse outcome.
 placement of a constricting band around the pulmo-
 Pulmonary artery banding is performed through a
nary artery. The intent is a measurable increase in
left fourth thoracotomy (Figure 20-3). The appropri-
right ventricular systolic pressure that thereby de-
ate degree of pulmonic constriction is based on pul-
creases the driving pressure gradient for shunt flow
monary artery pressure distal to the band and
across the defect. The procedure provides protec-
systemic arterial pressures. Pulmonary artery pres-
tion against both progressive heart failure and pul-
sure is measured intraoperatively by a catheter intro-
 uondo ana e sh pue suisuaady Ae
duced through a small purse-string suture in the
both cats and dogs with hemodynamically signifi-
pulmonary artery. Optimal banding is where pulmo-
cant VSD. Diagnostic parameters that suggest
nary artery pressure distal to the band is decreased to
hemodynamically significant VSD include radio-
less than 30 mm Hg (assuming significant pulmo-
graphic evidence of pulmonary over circulation,
nary vascular remodeling is not present), and when
ec hocardiographic evidence of left ventricular dila-
the increase in systemic arterial pressure just begins
tion (increased left ventricular diastolic diameter,
to plateau. As a general rule, optimal banding re-
left ventricular diastolic volume [index > 150 ml/
quires a two-thirds reduction in the diameter of the
m²], Doppler-measured shunt fow velocity < 3.5
pulmonary artery although this will vary depending
m/sec, or pulmonic ejection velocity > 2.5 m/sec.
on the degree of pulmonary artery dilation.
Evidence of progressive pulmonary hypertension
based on Doppler echocardiography or direct cath-
Systemic-to-Pulmonary Artery Shunt
eter measurement is also a reason to consider sur-
gery. Long tenm palliation of VSD is possible with
Creation of a systemic-to-pulmonary artery shunt is
this procedure. Possible complications of pulmo-
a palliative surgery for tetralogy of Fallot. The func-
nary artery banding include acute over tightening
tional goal of a systemic-to-pulmonary artery shunt
Chapter20
Cardiac Surgery
379
A modified Blalock-Taussig shunt is performed
through a left fourth thoracotomy (Figure 20-4). A
 continuous thrill should be palpable on the pulmo-
nary artery and hypoxemia should be lessened im-
mediately after surgery.
Pericardiectomy
 Pericardial disease can result from neoplasia, bac-
terial or mycotic infection, foreign body, or idio-
pathic causes. Pericardial disease can take the fonm
of acute or chronic pericardial effusion, constrictive
pericarditis, or constrictive-effusive pericarditis.
These conditions can result in pathophysiologic
syndromes of acute cardiac tamponade, chronic
cardiac tamponade, or pericardial constriction.
Pericardiectomy is indicated for the management
of chronic pericardial effusions, particularly when
the effusion recurs after pericardiocentesis. Pericar-
diectomy is either palliative or curative depending
 Pulmonary artery banding. The pericardium
on the underlying cause of pericardial effusion.
Figure 20-3.F
is opened and sutured to the thoracotomy incision. The pul-
Pericardiectomy is the only viable treatment for an-
monary artery is separated from the aorta by sharp and blunt
imals with constrictive or constrictive-effusive
dissection. A large cotton or Teflon tape is passed around the
pericarditis.
pulmonary artery just distal to the pulmonic valve. The tape is
tightened to reduce circumference of the pulmonary artery.
 Pericardiectomy can be perfonmed via either a
right or left thoracotomy, or a median stermotomy.
 Median sternotomy has the advantages of provid-
ing access to both ventricles and requiring less car-
 diac manipulation, and thus is preferred by many
is to increase pulmonary blood fow without creating
surgeons (Figure 20-5). Excision of the pericardium
an overwhelming left-to-right shunt. The desired re-
ventral to the phrenic nerves (i.e., subphrenic peri-
sult is a measured increase in pulmonary blood fow
cardiectomy) is adequate in most cases. In animals
that lessens hypoxemia by lessening the shunt-to-
with constrictive pericarditis, the pericardium may
pulmonary fow ratio. Systemic-to-pulmonary shunt
 have to be separated from the epicardium by blunt
 is indicated for animals that have resting cyanosis,
and sharp dissection. Additionally, epicardial de-
 debilitating activity intolerance or persistent polycy-
cortication may be necessary to relieve constrictive
themia (polycythemia vera > 70%) that requires fre-
physiology in animals with pericarditis. Epicardial
quent phlebotomy. Most veterinary experience is
decortication entails careful separation of a fibrous
based on various modifications of the classic Blalock-
layer from the myocardium by sharp dissection.
Taussig shunt. The original Blalock-Taussig shunt
Decortication should not be attempted over the atria
consisted of dividing the left subclavian artery and
or portions of the ventricles containing major coro-
performing an end-to-side anastomosis of the distal
nary vessels.
end of the divided artery to the pulmonary artery.
 In animals, the left subclavian artery generally does
Atrial Appendectomy
not have sufficient length to reach the pulmonary ar-
tery without kinking. Several modifications of
Atmial appendectomy is occasionally indicated for
the classic procedure have been devised including
palliative removal of a right atrial hemangiosar-
a synthetic vascular graft matched in size to the
coma or for thrombosis of the right or left atrial ap-
subclavian artery, harvesting the left subclavian ar-
pendage associated with atrial fibrillation. In the
tery as a free autogenous graft, or using autogenous
case of hemangiosarcoma, atrial appendectomy is
jugular vein. Animals can receive significant pallia-
often combined with pericardiectomy and is per-
tion from any of the previous methods so long as
formed via a median stermotomy. Atrial appendec-
 pulmonary blood fow is increased to an appropriate
tomy for atrial thrombosis is performed via fifth
degree.
thoracotomy on the right or left side (Figure 20-6).
380
SECTION III  Treatment of Cardiovascular Disease
Figure 20-4.
 Systemic-to-pulmonary artery shunt. The pericardium is opened and sutured to the thoracotomy incision.
Tangential vascular clamps are placed on the pulmonary artery and ascending aorta, and incisions are made in each vessel
(A). The autogenous or synthetic graft is interposed between the aorta and pulmonary artery by two end-to-side anastomosis
using simple continuous suture patterns with polypropylene or polytetrafluoroethylene suture. The vascular clamps on the pul-
monary artery and aorta are released (B).
indicated for cardiac surgeries that require only a lim-
ited period when the heart is open. Its principal advan-
tages are its simplicity, lack of need for specialized
equipment, and minimal cardiopulmonary, metabolic,
and hematologic derangements after surgery. The
principal disadvantages of infow occlusion are the
limited time available to perfonm cardiac surgery, mo-
tion of the surgical field, and the unavailability a fall
back or rescue strategy should something delay com-
pletion of surgery. As a result, cardiac surgery per-
formed during inflow occlusion must be meticulously
planned and fawlessly executed.
Circulatory arrest in a normothermic patient
should be 2 minutes or less to minimize the risk
of cerebral injury and ventricular fibrillation. Cir-
culatory arrest time can be extended up to 4 min-
utes with mild whole body hypothenmia (32° to
Figure 20-5.  Pericardiectomy. Pericardiectomy may be
34° C) however the risk for ventricular fibrillation
performed via median sternotomy to provide access to both
ventricles without extensive cardiac manipulation. In ani-
increases. Mild hypothermia is achieved readily
mals with constrictive pericarditis, adhesions may be present
in small animals by avoiding measures to keep
between the pericardium and epicarcdium.
the animal wanm with or without surface cooling
with ice packs depending on the size of the animal.
Infow occlusion requires careful and balanced an-
CARDIAC SURGERY WITH
esthetic techniques that minimize inhalation anes-
INFLOW OCCLUSION
thetic agents. Animals should be well ventilated,
Inflow occlusion is a strategy for performing open car-
and acid-base balance should be optimized prior to
diac surgery that entails brief cessation of venous fow
inflow occlusion. Ventilation is discontinued dur-
to the heart and complete circulatory arrest. It is
ing inflow occlusion and immediately resumed
Chapter20
Cardiac Surgery
381
A
B
Figure 20-6.
 Atrial appendectomy. Excision of the atrial appendage is accomplished by placing a continuous mattress suture
pattern across the base of the atrial appendage with the aid of a vascular clamp (A). The atrial appendage is excised and the
atriotomy incision is over sewn with a continuous suture pattern (B).
upon release of inflow occlusion. Drugs and
invasive balloon-dilation valvuloplasty. Dogs with
equipment for full cardiac resuscitation must be
severe PS characterized by valve dysplasia or dy-
immediatelyavailable after infowocclusion.
namic outflow obstruction, or both, are more likely
Gentle cardiac massage may be necessary after
to require a patch-graft. Several surgical tech-
inflow occlusion to reestablish cardiac function.
miques for applying a patch-graft to the right ven-
Digital occlusion of the descending aorta during
tricular outflow tract during brief infow occlusion
 this period helps direct cardiac output to the heart
have been described. All techniques are plagued
and brain.
by relatively high operative risk and inconsistent
Infow occlusion can be accomplished from a
results, even in the hands of experienced surgeons.
left or right fifth thoracotomy, or a median ster-
notomy depending on the cardiac surgery being
complished with the aid of CPB, which reduces
performed. Direct access to the cranial and cau-
operative risk and allows for more deliberate
dal vena cava and azygous vein for inflow occlu-
placement of the graft, thereby enhancing the ef-
sion is obtained readily from a right thoracotomy
fectiveness of the procedure.) A well-executed
Or median stermotomy. The vena cavae and azy-
patch-graft generally results in more effective and
gous vein are accessed by dissecting through the
more sustained pressure gradient reduction com-
mediastinum from a left thoracotomy. Tape tour-
pared to valve dilation techniques. Occasionally
niquets are passed around the vena cavae and
dogs will develop right-sided congestive heart
azygous vein for infow occlusion. The right
failure as a late sequela to pulmonary patch-graft
phrenic nerve should be excluded from the tour-
despite good pressure gradient reduction. The
niquets to avoid nerve injury.
cause of this late failure is not entirely clear and
may be multifactorial. Contributing causes could
Pulmonary Patch-Graft
include tricuspid regurgitation, right ventricular
 Pulmonary patch-graft can be considered for dogs
systolic dysfunction, and pulmonic insufficiency.
with severe PS who are exhibiting activity intoler-
Pulmonic insufficiency is an expected conse-
ance or are considered at risk for developing heart
quence of the patch-graft procedure and may be
failure or sudden cardiac death. Because of the
less tolerated than previously thought. English
risk associated with this surgery, the threshold for
bulldogs and boxers with PS must be evaluated for
performing this surgery should be fairly high. Pul-
 the presence of an anomalous left coronary artery.
monic patch-graft generally is undertaken in dogs
 If present, this anomaly precludes pulmonic
who have failed to be adequately palliated by less
patch-graft.
382
SECTION III Treatment of Cardiovascular Disease
4
B
Figure 20-7.  Pulmonary patch graft. Tape tourniquets are passed around the vena cavae and azygous vein for inflow occlusion
(A). Access to the azygous vein is obtained by dissecting dorsal to the descending aorta. A partial-thickness incision is made in
lotomy incision and the cranial aspect of the pulmonary artery (C). After initiation of venous inflow occlusion, an incision is made
in the pulmonary artery beneath the patch and extended full thickness across the pulmonic valve annulus and previously made
partial-thickness incision in the right ventricular outflow tract. The unsutured portion of the patch graft is closed with a tangential
vascular clamp to minimize circulatory arrest time. Inflow occlusion is discontinued and the heart is resuscitated as necessary. The
unsutured portion of the patch graft is then closed and the vascular clamp removed.
Patch-graft correction of the PS by inflow occlu-
 brief inflow occlusion. The surgery is performed via a
sion is performed through a left fifth thoracotomy
right fifth thoracotomy. Tapes are placed around the
(Figure 20-7).
cranial and caudal vena cavae and azygous vein for
infow occlusion. The pericardium is opened ventral
Cor Triatriatum Repair
to the phrenic nerve. The location of the membrane is
often apparent by an indentation in the atrial wall.
Cor triatriatum is an uncommon congenital defect
Stay sutures are placed in the lateral atrial wall to con-
in companion animals that results from persistence
trol the atriotomy incision during inflow occlusion.
of an embryonic membrane that divides the atrium
The atrium is opened transversely across the defect
into two chambers. The separation can occur in ei-
during infow occlusion. The abnormal membrane is
ther the right (cor triatriatum dexter) or left atrium
excised. A tangential vascular clamp is used to close
(cor triatriatum sinister).
the atriotomy as inflow occlusion is discontinued. Ve-
Surgical correction of cor triatriatum dexter is by
nous blood should fow from the atriotomy as the
 membranectomy through a right atriotomy during
clamp is placed to remove air from the heart.
Chapter 20   Cardiac Surgery
383
The atriotomy is closed with a continuous horizontal
 by one of two strategies depending on the cardiac ap-
mattress pattem over sewn with a simple continuous
 proach. Bicaval venous cannulation utilizes two angled
patterm.
cannulae, one in each vena cava, and is required when-
Successful surgical correction of cor triatriatum
ever the cardiac approach is through the right atrium.
sinister with resolution of pulmonary edema by closed
Atriocaval cannulation utilizes a single two-stage can-
dilation of the atrial septum is reported in a cat.
nula introduced into the right atrium and caudal vena
cava via the right atrial appendage. Lastly, a cannula is
Intracardiac Masses and Foreign Bodies
placed in the ascending aorta for administration of car-
dioplegia solution and to vent the left heart during dis-
Intracardiac masses can include benign and malig-
contimuation of CBP. During the open cardiac repair,
nant neoplasias, atrial or ventricular thrombus, and
the aorta is cross-clamped and cardioplegia solution is
 penetrating foreign bodies. These intracardiac masses
administered to arrest and cool the myocardium.
and foreign bodies can, under certain circumstances,
be removed from the heart with the aid of inflow oc-
Ventricular Septal Defect Repair
clusion. Most cardiac neoplasia in dogs is malignant
 and attempts at surgical excision of these tumors is
Definitive repair of VSD in dogs can be undertaken
rarely rewarding. Myxomas are an exception to this
with the aid of CPB. Indications are the same as de-
 general rule. These benign pediculated cardiac tu-
scribed for pulmonary artery banding. Definitive
mors can become large enough to obstruct cardiac
VSD repair, like PDA closure, is curative so long as
fow and are amendable to excision during inflow oc-
it is undertaken before severe myocardial dysfunc-
clusion. Intracardiac thrombus should be considered
tion or pulmonary hypertension develop.
for surgical removal when it is not associated with
Open repair of perimembranous VSD is accom-
severe underlying cardiomyopathy. Penetrating for-
plished through a right fth thoracotomy. Venous can-
eign bodies such as pellets or bullets should be re-
nulation is bicaval to allow complete isolation of the
moved if they lodge within a cardiac chamber.
right atrium. The defect is approached through a right
Frequently these foreign bodies are surrounded by
atriotomy. The septal leaflet of the tricuspid valve is
large amounts of hair that cause complications if not
retracted to expose the defect. The defect is closed
removed. Whenever possible intracardiac masses
with a Dacron or polytetrafuoroethylene (PTFE)
should be approached via an atriotomy rather than a
patch secured with pledget-buttressed mattress su-
ventriculotomy. An exception would be a large myx-
tures. Mattress sutures should be placed with partial
 Oma in the right ventricular outfow tract.
thickness bites from the right side to avoid injury to
atrioventricular conduction.
CARDIAC SURGERY WITH
CARDIOPULMONARY BYPASS
Atrial and Atrioventricular
Septal Defect Repair
CPB is a procedure that provides fow of oxygenated
blood to the patient by diverting fow away from the
Various forms of atrial septal defect and atrioventricu-
heart and lungs through an extracorporeal circuit.
lar septal defect have been described in small animals.
CPB provides a motionless and bloodless operative
As with VSD, surgical closure of atrial septal defect
field, and time to perform complex cardiac repairs.
can be undertaken with the aid of CPB with curative
The disadvantages of CPB are its cost and consider-
intent. Indications for surgery include cardiomegaly.
able associated cardiopulmonary, metabolic, hemato-
the size defect on echocardiography, pulmonary over-
logic, and systemic inflammatory derangements.
circulation on radiographs, hepatic venous congestion
CPB is perfommed by a team consisting of the sur-
on ultrasound, and a Doppler-measured transatrial
 geon, perfusionist, anesthesiologist, and their assis-
septal fow velocity > 0.45 m/sec. Surgical correction
tants. A principal role of the surgical team is to perfomm
of atrial septal defect under CBP is similar to that of
a series of cannulations to connect the animal to the
VSD and has been described.
CPB circuit. Prior to cannulation the patient is com-
pletely anticoagulated with sodium heparin (300 units/
Tetralogy of Fallot Repair
kg IV). Arterial cannulation for the returm of oxygen-
ated blood to the patient is accomplished via a single
Definitive repair of tetralogy of Fallot under CPB
camula placed in a femoral artery. Blood is diverted
can be undertaken in dogs with curative intent. In-
from the right heart to the CBP circuit by means of
a pagosap s as au ar arans rg s
venous cannulae. Venous cannulation is accomplished
384
SECTION III Treatment of Cardiovascular Disease
The repair is accomplished via a median stermotomy
chance of surviving mitral valve replacement is
and involves closure of the VSD and correction of
60% to 90% depending on the patient. Options for
PS via a right ventriculotomy.
mitral valve replacement are mechanical valves or
glutaraldehyde-fixed tissue valves. Glutaralde-
Double-Chambered Right Ventricle Repair
hyde-fixed tissue valves include porcine aortic
valves and bovine pericardial valves. Mechanical
Double-chambered right ventricle (DCRV) is an
valves have infinite durability, but require life-
long anticoagulation therapy to prevent valve
terized by a fibromuscular diaphragm at the junc-
thrombosis. Despite low operative mortality and
tion of the inflow and outflow portions of the right
excellent short-term results, valve replacement
ventricle. The defect obstructs fow through the
with mechanical prostheses is not recommended
mid-portion of the ventricle and causes hypertro-
in dogs because of a high incidence of late-tenm
phy of the proximal portion of the right ventricle
thrombosis despite anticoagulation therapy. Tis-
giving it a "double-chambered" appearance. The
sue valves have a finite lifespan (about 7 to 15
years in human patients), but are less susceptible
 presumed to be similar to PS. Indications for sur-
to thrombosis, and thrombosis is less catastrophic
gery are essentially the same as for PS although
when it occurs. Other mechanisms of tissue valve
dogs with DCRV may tolerate less of a pressure
prosthetic failure are structural tearing of leaflets,
 gradient compared to dogs with PS.
leafet calcification, or an exuberant inflammatory
Surgical correction for DCRV is undertaken with
 response known as pannus. Anticoagulation ther-
CPB and has been described. The pulmonic valve
apy with warfarin is required for 3 months after
is preserved. Surgical correction can be expected to
valve replacement with a tissue valve. Atrial f-
improve exercise capacity and reduce the risk of
brillation occurs in about 20% of human patients
developing heart failure.
umdergoing mitral valve surgery and this sequela
has been observed in dogs undergoing valve re-
Mitral Valve Replacement
placement as well. Adminstration of amiodarone
10 days before and after surgery decreases the risk
MR is the most common cause of cardiac disabil-
 of developing atrial fibrillation after mitral valve
ity and death in dogs. Causes of MR include degen-
 surgery and is currently recommended for dogs.
erative mitral valve disease, congenital mitral valve
Dogs that develop atrial fibrillation or futter after
dysplasia, and functional MR secondary to dilated
 valve replacement should undergo pharmacologic
cardiomyopathy. Mitral valve replacement can be
Or electrical cardioversion if the arrhythmia per-
performed in dogs to correct severe MR second-
 sists for more than 6 weeks after surgery. Dogs
ary to acquired mitral valve disease or congenital
with chronic atrial fibrillation at the time of mitral
 mitral dysplasia. Indications for considering mitral
valve replacement should undergo prophylactic
valve replacement are diuretic-dependent conges-
left atrial appendectomy to decrease the risk of
tive heart failure or severe left ventricular or atrial
atrial thrombosis after surgery. While the long-
dilation (left ventricular diastolic volume index
tenm durability of glutaraldehyde-fixed tissue
> 180 ml/m?), or both. Relative contraindications for
valves in dogs has not been established, the short.
 mitral valve surgery are very severe left ventricular
tenm results have been encouraging. The proce-
dilation ( > 300 ml/m²), or severe secondary systolic
dure is limited to dogs with a lean body weight of
dysfunction ( > 90 ml/m). Atrial fibrillation is not a
about 10 kg by the size of the smallest available
contraindication for surgery, but it does complicate
valve prosthesis (19 mm). Mitral valve replace-
the management after surgery. Serious systemic or
ment is considered a palliative therapy in that the
noncardiac diseases are strong contraindications for
consequences of a diseased native valve are sub-
the surgery.
stituted by the inherent management and potential
Mitral valve replacement is currently the pre-
complications of a valve prosthesis. That said,
successful mitral valve replacement generally re-
MR and heart failure. The advantages of mitral
verses congestive heart failure so long as second-
valve replacement are perfect correction of MR
ary changes in the myocardium are not too
 and a lower operative death. Disadvantages of mi-
advanced at the time of surgery. Mitral valve re-
tral valve replacement are the need for a prosthe-
placement can be expected to remain curative for
sis (expense, limitations on patient size) and for
heart failure so long as the prosthesis remains
anticoagulation therapy after surgery. The estimated
functional.
Chapter 20   Cardiac Surgery
385
Surgical procedure for mitral valve replacement
on the case. As with mitral valve replacement,
under CPB in the dog has been described.
glutaraldehyde-fixed tissue valves are currently rec.
ommended over mechanical valves. Three months
Mitral Valve Repair
 of anticoagulation therapy is required after tricuspid
valve replacement with a tissue valve. Expected out-
Mitral valve repair can be undertaken for dogs with
come is similar to dogs undergoing mitral valve
moderate to severe MR caused by acquired degen-
replacement. Dramatic reductions in heart size and
erative mitral valve disease. Dogs with congenital
resolution of heart failure can be expected so long as
mitral valve dysplasia are sometimes amendable to
the valve prosthesis remains functional.
valve repair. The principle advantages of mitral
Tricuspid valve replacement is performed via a
valve repair are the avoidance of anticoagulation
right fifth thoracotomy. Bicaval venous cannulation
after surgery and the lack of a need for an expensive
is utilized to isolate the right atrium. Approach to
prosthesis. The disadvantages of mitral valve repair
the tricuspid valve is through the right atrium. Sur-
are a less predictable outcome compared to valve
gical technique for tricuspid valve replacement is
replacement and a higher operative death rate. The
similar to mitral valve replacement.
later is directly related to the difficulty in achieving
perfect correction of MR when the valve is repaired.
SUGGESTED READINGS
Mitral valve repair is best undertaken in dogs that
have structural defects isolated to one valve leafet
Bureau S, Monnet E, Oton EC: Evaluation of survival
before the onset of congestive heart failure. Most
rate and prognostic indicators for surgical treatment
 dogs are beyond mitral valve repair by the time they
of left-to-right patent ductus arteriosus in dogs: 52
are in severe heart failure. Because of the inherent
cases (1995-2003), J Am Vet Med Assoc 227:1794,
difficulty of mitral repair, the estimated chance of
2005.
success is 60% to 75% depending on patient size,
Griffiths LG, Boon J, Orton EC: Evaluation of techniques
age, duration of heart failure, severity of left ven-
and outcomes of mitral valve repair in dogs, J Am Vet
tricular dilation, and degree of secondary systolic
Med Assoc 224: 1941-1945, 2004
dysfunction.
Kienle RD, Thomas WP, Pion DP: The natural history of
Mitral valve repair employs a variety of surgical
canine congenital subaortic stenosis, J Vet Intern Med
8:423,1994.
techniques to address the fundamental causes of
Linn KA, Orton EC: Closed transventricular valve dila-
MR. Surgical techniques for mitral valve repair in
tion of subvalvular aortic stenosis in dogs, Vet Surg
the dog have been described.
21:441, 1992.
Martin J, Orton EC, Boon J, et al: Surgical correction of
double-chambered right ventricle in dogs, J Am Vet
Tricuspid Valve Replacement
Med Assoc 220:770-774, 2002.
Congenital tricuspid dysplasia is a malformation of
Meurs KM, Lehmkuhl LB, Bonagura JD: Survival times
in dogs with severe subvalvular aortic stenosis treated
the tricuspid valve that occurs in several large
breeds of dog including Labrador retrievers,
with balloon valvuloplasty or atenolol, J Am Vet Med
Assoc 227:420, 2005.
Golden retrievers, and Genman shepherds. Tricus-
Monnet E, Orton EC, Gaynor J, et al: Partial atrioven-
 pid regurgitation is the most common hemody-
tricular septal defect: diagnosis and surgical repair in
namic manifestation, although tricuspid stenosis is
two dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 211:569-572, 1997.
possible. Tricuspid valve replacement can be con-
Orton EC, Hackett TA, Mama K, Boon JA: Technique
sidered for dogs with severe tricuspid regurgitation
and outcome of mitral valve replacement in dogs,
due to congenital tricuspid dysplasia. Tricuspid
J Am Vet Med Assoc 226:1508-1511, 2005.
valve replacement must be undertaken sooner dur-
Orton EC, Mama K, Hellyer P, Hackett TB: Open surgi-
ing the course of disease than mitral valve replace-
cal repair of tetralogy of Fallot in two dogs, J Am Vet
ment. General indications for tricuspid valve
Med Assoc 219: 1089-1093, 2001.
Orton EC, Herndon GD, Boon J, et al: Intermediate-
sulting in severe or progressive cardiomegaly or
term outcome in dogs with subvalvular aortic steno-
hepatic venous enlargement, or both. Dogs with
sis: infuence of open surgical correction, J Am Vet
Med Assoc 216:364,2000
medically refractory congestive heart failure should
Wander KW, Monnet E, Orton EC: Surgical correction
not undergo tricuspid valve replacement. Atrial
of cor triatriatum sinister in a kitten, J Am Anim Hosp
fibrillation is a complicating factor, but not an con-
Assoc 34:383, 1998.
traindication for surgery. The estimated chance
of surviving surgery is 70% to 90% depending
Pacemaker Therapy
Janice Mclntosh Bright
"It struck me how easily excitable the
advanced (high-grade second- or third-degree)
myocardium is.You just touch it and it gives
atrioventricular (AV) block. Antibradycardia pac-
you a run of extra beats—so why should the
ing is also indicated in dogs with sinus node dys-
heart that is so sensitive..die because there's
function (sick sinus syndrome) and penmanent
nothing there to stimulate the chest?"
atrial standstill. Less often permanent pacing is
PAUL M. ZOLL, INVENTOR OF THE FIRST CLINICALLY
used to prevent vasovagal syncope.
SUCCESSFUL EXTERNAL PACEMAKER (JEFFREY K: PACE
· Whereas most dogs needing pacemaker therapy
22:1713;1999)
have little to no underlying structural heart dis-
ease, many cats have AV conduction block asso-
ciated with underlying myocardial disease.
INTRODUCTION
Pacemaker therapy has become a common method
PRE-IMPLANTATION EVALUATION
of treating symptomatic bradycardia in dogs and
cats. Pharmacologic therapy may provide tempo-
· A standard electrocardiogram (ECG) should be
rary chronotropic support for patients with bra
obtained for definitive diagnosis of the arrhythmia.
dycardia, but successful long-term management
Occasionally, serial ECGs are needed to confinm an
usually requires implantation of a permanent pace
intermittent bradycardia. If it is umclear whether a pa-
maker. The ultimate objective of cardiac pacing is
tient's clinical signs are due to bradyarrhythmia, cor-
to normalize cardiac function by providing optimal
relation of the clinical signs with arrhythmia should
 heart rate and rhythm chronically.
be obtained using some fonm of ambulatory ECG
monitoring (Holter monitoring or event recording).
INDICATIONS FOR PACING
Ambulatory ECG monitoring allows the ECG to be
recorded over a longer period of time, either continu-
· Permanent pacemaker implantation is indicated
ously for 24 to 48 hours (Holter monitoring) or inter-
for treatment of patients with chronic symptomatic
mittently during weeks to months (event recording).
bradyarrhythmias. In dogs the most frequent clini-
· After confirming that an indication for penmanent
cal manifestations of bradycardia are syncope, col-
cardiac pacing exists, the most appropriate pac-
lapse, exercise intolerance, and/or lethargy. Less
ing system and pacing mode for the patient should
commonly, bradyarrhythmia results in congestive
be determined. Factors to be considered for this
heart failure or seizures. In cats the most frequent
detenmination include: (1) specific underlying
 complaint associated with bradycardia is syncope.
rhythm disturbance, (2) overall physical condition,
· The most common bradyarrhythmia necessi-
(3) nature of any associated medical problems, and
tating pacemaker therapy in dogs and cats is
(4) exercise requirements of the patient.
386
Chapter21
Pacemaker Therapy
387
· Therefore, all patients needing implantation of a
permanent pacemaker should receive a thorough
medical and cardiovascular evaluation prior to
implantation to identify presence and severity of
structural heart diseases or noncardiac diseases.
Certain co-existing conditions may require ad-
ditional medical treatment. Furthermore, these
conditions often affect the type and programming
 of the pacing system used.
COMPONENTS AND TYPES
OF PACING SYSTEMS
· A permanent artificial cardiac pacing system con-
sists of a pulse generator (pacemaker) and a pac-
ing lead. The pulse generator contains electronic
circuitry and a lithium-iodide power cell (battery)
sealed within a metal case with a connector block
into which the lead is inserted. The pacing lead
consists of an insulated wire or set of wires to
conduct electrical impulses from the generator
to the myocardium, but the lead also enables the
Figure 21-1.
The cistal ends of several transvenous (enclocar-
generator to detect or sense native (endogenous)
dial) pacing leads are shown. The lead at the top is a passive fixa-
tion lead. Note the collar oftines (arrow) which become trapped
cardiac electrical activity.
within trabeculae to anchor the tip of the lead to the right ven-
· Moderm cardiac pacemakers have sophisticated
tricular endocardium. At the bottom are two active fixation
electronic circuitry capable of discharging pacing
kads, one showing the helix retracted into the lead for place-
impulses of varying duration and voltage, sensing
ment and the other showing the helix extruded for as it would
be for attachment into the endomyocardium (arrowhead).
intracardiac signals, filtering signals, providing
rate response functions, and storing rhythm data.
 Data retrieval and generator programming are
metal helix that exits the tip of the lead to penetrate
 done via telemetry using a pacemaker program-
the endomyocardium (see Figure 21-1). Although
mer. The programmer is also used to display real-
the type of fixation of a transvenous lead does not
time ECG and intracardiac electrograms and to
 appear to affect the incidence of lead dislodgement,
test battery life, lead impedance, retrograde ven-
it is wise to avoid use of passive fixation in animals
triculoatrial conduction, and pacing thresholds.
with significant right ventricular dilation.
· The heart can be paced by an epicardial lead
· Another consideration for selection of the pacing
   (s) s
system is whether a unipolar or bipolar system is
 permanent endocardial pacing lead placed transve-
desired. A unipolar pacing system uses the lead
nously. Permanent transvenous pacing has largely
tip as the cathode (negative pole) of the electrical
replaced epicardial pacing because of its ease and
circuit and the metal case of the pulse generator
safety; however, epicardial leads remain available
 as the anode (positive pole). The impulse travels
and may be preferred when venous access is lim-
from generator to myoc ardium via the lead and re-
ited or when there is an associated condition that
turms to the generator via the soft tissues. A major
would increase likelihood of bacteremia or embo-
disadvantage of unipolar pacing is the proximity
lism with a permanent transvenous lead (e.g.. a
of the electrical circuit to skeletal muscle which
focus of sepsis or a hypercoaguable state). Epicar-
may result in skeletal muscle twitching. Advan-
dial leads are often used in feline patients.
tages of unipolar pacing include smaller diameter
· Permanent transvenous pacing leads use ei-
of the pacing lead, a single attachment site of
ther active or passive fixation for attachment of
the lead to the epicardium when epicardial pac-
the lead tip to the endomyocardium. A passive
ing is used, and superior sensing of endogenous
fixation transvenous lead has a "collar" of tines en-
cardiac potentials. Bipolar pacing systems have
circling the distal tip which anchor the lead by be.
two closely spaced electrodes located distally on
coming enmeshed in the right ventricular trabeculae
a transvenous lead or closely adjacent at two ends
(Figure 21-1). An active fixation lead has a small
of an epicardial lead (Figure 21-2). One electrode
388
SECTIONIII
Treatment of Cardiovascular Disease
Pacing with Chronotropic Competence
(Rate Responsiveness)
· Initially, permanent cardiac pacing systems used
in people and in dogs had a single lead that paced
the ventricles at a constant rate. Later, rate re-
sponsive pacing generators became available,
which allowed the paced rate to vary depending
on the activity of the patient.
· Rate response is achieved through use of sensors
in the pacemaker, often motion sensors or minute
ventilation sensors, which adjust the paced rate
between programmed upper and lower limits to
match changing metabolic requirements. Thus,
rate responsive pacing better mimics the normal
physiologic response of the heart to exercise.
Single- vs. Dual-Chamber Pacing
Figure 21-2.
 Shown are distal tips of two epicardial pac-
ing leads. The lead at the bottom of the photo is a unipolar
· The original goal of permanent cardiac pacing
lead with a single electrode (cathode) which has an epicardial
stab-in fixation mechanism. The lead at the top of the photo
was to alleviate hemodynamic instability resulting
is a bipolar lead with two suture-on electrodes (cathode and
from an abnormally low ventricular rate, and this
anode).
in most veterinary patients. However, it is now
recognized that cardiac output is dependent, not
(usually the distal electrode on a transvenous
solely on ventricular rate, but also on physiologic
bipolar lead) is the cathode, and the other is the
heart rate variation, synchrony between atrial
 anode. Electrical impulses travel to the cathode
and ventricular contraction, and the ventricular
from the pulse generator and retum to the anode
activation sequence. Modem cardiac pacing has
to complete the circuit. In the majority of cases a
evolved in people from single-chamber ventricu-
bipolar pacing system is preferred because there
lar pacing to dual-chamber (atrial and ventricular
is less potential for electromagnetic interference
sensing and pacing) primarily to provide pacing
(EMI) with bipolar pacing and because of absence
with AV synchrony.
of skeletal muscle stimulation.
· AV synchrony is attained either by pacing the
· Although lead length should be given consider-
 n p s s q  
ation prior to pacemaker implantation, length is
tracking this activity. Either a paced atrial depo-
often determined by availability. Most leads are
larization or an endogenous atrial depolarization
longer than necessary, and excess length can be
triggers an AV delay, programmable in length,
accommodated within the generator pocket; how-
after which the ventricle is paced (if intrinsic
ever, in large or giant breed dogs, adequate lead
ventricular activity is not sensed). Atrial synchro-
length may become an important factor.
nous pacing provides not only AV synchrony but
 also physiologic heart rate variation (see Pacing
Modes).
·Although AV synchrony may not be clinically
important for many dogs and cats needing
KEY POINT
chronotropic support, pacing that provides
When selecting a permanent pacing lead,
AV synchrony will provide higher systemic
it is imperative that the lead be compatible
d  a rn  s
with the pacing site selected (epicardial vs.
sures than single-chamber ventricular pacing.
endocardial, atrial vs. ventricular), that the
lead and generator be of compatible size
Therefore, dual-chamber pacing to provide
AV synchrony is likely to be important in ani-
(typically IS-1), that the polarity of the lead
matches polarity of the generator, and that
mals with underlying structural heart disease
the lead is of sufficient length.
 or in working animals such as military dogs and
agility dogs.
Chapter 21
PacemakerTherapy
389
Table 21-1
Pacemaker Nomenclature for Antibradycardia Pacing
Position
11
III
IV
V
Chamber(s)
Chamber(s)
Response to
 Rate modulation
Multisite
paced
sensed
sensing
pacing
O =None
O = None
O=None
O = None
O=None
A = Atrium
A = Atrium
=
R = Rate
A =Atrium
responsive
V =Ventricle
V =Ventricle
I = Inhibited
V =Ventricle
D = Dual (A + V)
D = Dual (A + V)
D = Dual (T + I)
D = Dual (A + V)
Manufacturers' designation only: S = Single (A or V).
From Bernstein AD et al: North American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology/British Pacing and Electrophysiology Group:
260-264,2002.
· Dual-chamber pacing is becoming increasingly
position the letter I indicates that a sensed ele-
used in veterinary medicine as a means of provid-
 ctrical event inhibits the output pulse and causes
ing both heart rate response and AV synchrony.
the generator to recycle for one or more tim-
 Disadvantages of dual-chamber pacing include its
ing cycles. The letter T indicates that an output
more complex programming, increased expense
pulse is triggered in response to a sensed elec-
(when two leads are used), and the technical chal-
trical event. A letter D in this position indicates
lenge of placing atrial sensing/pacing leads in
that both I and T responses can occur, and
small patients.
this designation is limited to dual-chamber
·Normalization of the left ventricular activation
systems.
sequence may be achieved by means of site-
· The fourth letter (position IV) of the pacemaker
 specific pacing within the right atrium and right
 nomenclature code refers to presence or absence
ventricle.
of rate modulation. A letter R in this position
designates that the generator has one or more
sensors (such as a motion sensor or a minute
Pacemaker Nomenclature
ventilation sensor) to adjust the paced heart rate
· Pacing nomenclature was established in 1974 and
 independently of intrinsic cardiac activity.
updated in 2002 for use in human medicine. This
· The fifth letter (position V) of the code is used
nomenclature also applies to veterinary pacemaker
to indicate whether multisite pacing is present in:
therapy, and awareness of the nomenclature is
A = one or both atria, V = one or both ventricles,
 important for understanding cardiac pacing. Pac-
 D = any combination ofthe atria and ventricles, or
ing nomenclature classifes pacing based on the
O = none of the cardiac chambers. For example,
site and mode of both pacing and sensing using a
a patient with a dual-chamber rate-responsive
series of three to five letters (Table 21-1).
pacemaker with biventricular stimulation would
· The first letter (position I) indicates the cardiac
be designated having a DDDRV pacing system.
chamber or chambers in which pacing occurs:
Currently, the fifth letter is often omitted when
A = atrium, V = ventricle, D = dual chamber
 describing pacing of veterinary patients because
(both A and V), and O = none.
 multisite pacing within the atria and ventricles is
· The second letter (position I) indicates the
rarely done.
chamber or chambers in which sensing of elec-
trical activity occurs. The letters are the same
Pacing Modes
as those for the first position. (Some pacemaker
manufacturers use the letter S in both the first and
· At the present time, the most commonly used
the second positions to indicate that a generator is
pacing mode in veterinary patients and in human
capable of pacing or sensing only a single cardiac
patients worldwide is single-chamber, ventricular
chamber.)
inhibited synchronous pacing either with (VVTR)
· The third letter (position Ill) refers to the mode
Or without (VVI) rate response. In this mode
of response to sensed electrical activity. In this
the artificial pacing stimulus is delivered to the
390
SECTION III Treatment of Cardiovascular Disease
Figure 21-3.
. This figure shows a lead Il ECG rhythm strip (top) and a simultaneous intracardiac electrogram (bottom) recorded
from the pacing lead of a canine patient with complete AV block and a bipolar VvIR pacemaker. Small arrows labeled P indicate
pacing stimuli, and each small pacing stimulus artifact results in a paced QRS complex. The tenth QRS complex is an endogenous
ventricular depolarization that is sensed by the generator resulting in brief interruption of the paced rhythm. The sensed intrinsic
activity resets the timing of the next paced beat (25 mm/s).
ventricle (the right ventricle if transvenous) and
ventricular sensing allows sensed endogenous
ventricular events to inhibit the pacemaker out-
 put. Inhibition of the output in response to endog-
enous ventricular activity is an important feature
that prevents competitive rhythms and potentially
fatal consequences of an electrical stimulus deliv-
ered during the vulnerable period of the cardiac
cycle. A VVI (or VVIR) pacemaker is refractory
for a specified, programmable interval after either
a paced or sensed ventricular depolarization. This
interval is the ventricular refractory period, and
ventricular events occurring within the ventricu-
lar refractory period will not reset the ventricu-
lar timing. However, an endogenous ventricular
depolarization occurring after the ventricular
refractory period will be sensed, the generator out-
Figure 21-4.
 Lateral radiograph obtained from a canine
put inhibited, and the timing cycle restarted from
with a transvenous VDD pacing system. The ventricular elec-
the intrinsic QRS complex. Thus, the cardiac
trodes are within the right ventricle with the cathode at the
rhythm may be irregular on auscultation in patients
ventricular apex. The atrial sensing electrodes, located more
proximally on the lead, are within the right atrium.
with VVI or VVTR pacing and RR intervals may
vary on the ECG if there is intrinsic ventricular
activity (Figure 21-3).
tracking of sensed atrial activity. In other words,
·Single-chamber, atrial inhibited pacing (AAI or
there is ventricular pacing in response to endoge-
AAIR) is identical to VVI pacing with the obvi-
nous P waves. A single pacing lead with a pair of
ous difference that pacing and sensing occur from
sensing electrodes located on the intratrial por-
the atrium and pacemaker output is inhibited by
tion of the lead is typically used (Figure 21-4).
sensed atrial events. Although this pacing mode is
However, VDD pacing can also be accomplished
appropriate for patients with sinus node dysfunc-
using separate atrial and ventricular leads. In the
tion (sick sinus syndrome) and normal AV conduc.
VDD pacing mode sensed atrial events initiate an
tion, its obvious disadvantage is lack of ventricular
AV delay. If an endogenous ventricular depolar-
depolarization should AV block occur. Because
ization occurs during the AV delay, ventricular
most dogs with sinus node dysfunction have co-
stimulation is inhibited, and the timing cycle is re-
existing dysfunction of the AV node and/or bundle
set. If no endogenous ventricular activity occurs,
branches, AAI pacing is not widely used
then a paced ventricular beat occurs at the end
· Atrial synchronous pacing (VDD) is becom-
of the AV delay resetting the timing cycle. If no
ing increasingly popular for use in dogs with
atrial event occurs, the pacemaker escapes with a
AV block. With this mode pacing occurs only in
paced ventricular depolarization at the lower rate.
the ventricle, sensing occurs in both chambers,
In other words, with VDD pacing the patient will
and ventricular output is inhibited by intrinsic
be paced VVI in absence of sensed atrial activ-
ventricular activity but stimulated by ventricular
ity. VDD pacing is appropriate only for animals
Chapter21
Pacemaker Therapy
391
25mm/s
10mm/mV
nofilter
HF:93
1/1
Figure 21-5.
 This six-lead ll ECG was recorded from a dog with a transvenous VDD pacing system implanted because of
high-grade second-degree AV block. The dog has normal sinus node function resulting in normal-appearing P waves with sinus-
arrhythmia. The P waves are sensed by the generator and after a delay of 120 ms, there are pacing stimulus artifacts (arrow)
followed immediately by paced QRS complexes, which have left bundle branch block morphology (arrowhead). The ninth and
complexes have right bundle branch block morphology (25 mm/s).
with AV block and normal sinus node function.
PACEMAKER IMPLANTATION
If a single VDD pacing lead is to be used, the
patient must be large enough for the atrial sens-
· The rate of complications associated with pace-
ing electrodes (located 11.5, 13.5, or 15.5 cm
maker implantation is inversely related to the ex-
from the ventricular electrodes) to be placed in
perience of the implanter. Therefore, only highly
a stable position within or closely adjacent to the
experienced, well qualified veterinarians should
right atrium. Figure 21-5 shows an ECG recorded
attempt pacemaker implantation.
from a dog with a VDD pacing system.
· Whereas transvenous pacemaker implantation is
· Dual-chamber pacing and sensing with inhibi-
generally done with sedation and local anesthesia
tion and tracking (DDD) is a common mode of
in human patients, general anesthesia is used for
antibradycardia pacing in man. The primary dif-
nearly all veterinary patients to maintain aseptic
ference between this mode and VDD mode is that
tec hnique during the implantation.
in DDD mode when there is absence of sensed in-
· Application of a temporary extermal pacing sys-
rinsic atrial activity, the atrium is paced and the
tem prior to induction of anesthesia is strongly
atrial paced beat is tracked by ventricular pacing.
 recommended because a rapid and profound de-
Thus, with exception of ectopic endogenous ven-
crease in heart rate may occur unpredictably at
tricular depolarizations AV synchrony is continu-
any time after induction of anesthesia.
ously present. This mode of pacing is important
· Regardless of the type of pacing lead used,
in human patients who frequently have both sinus
specific measurements of lead impedance, am-
node dysfunction and AV block; however, most
plitude and slew rate of intrinsic cardiac elec-
dogs with complete AV block have a normal sinus
trical events (measured through the lead), and
node making atrial pacing unnecessary. Further-
pacing threshold(s) should be obtained using a
more, DDD pacing alone does not provide rate
pacemaker system analyzer at the time of im-
response during AV sequential pacing (DDDR is
plantation. These measurements assure optimal
required).
placement of the lead for pacing and sensing.
392
SECTION IIITreatment of Cardiovascular Disease
A
B
Figure 21-6.   Lateral (A) and ventrodorsal (B) thoracic radiographs showing typical placement of a transvenous pacing lead in
a dog. The lead tip is at the right ventricular apex.
·Radiographs should be obtained immediately after
implantation to document final lead position(s).
tempted after implantation, and a halter or gentle
· Permanent transvenous pacing leads are typi-
 leader should be used instead of a neck lead to
cally inserted into the right extermal jugular vein
 avoid damaging transvenous pacing wires.
and advanced fuoroscopically into the ventricle
·When a transvenous pacing system is used, the
leaving the lead tip in the most apical portion of
generator is usually placed into a subcutaneous
the right ventricle angled toward the diaphragm
 pocket made on the dorsolateral region of the
(Figure 21-6). The rare exception would be site
neck. If a unipolar system has been used, skeletal
specific placement of a transvenous ventricular
 muscle twitching may occur with each paced beat
lead in the right ventricular outflow tract done in
in the area of the generator pocket.
 attempt to reduce mitral regurgitation and remod-
· Perioperative antibiotics are generally adminis-
eling in patients with valvular disease or dilated
tered intravenously at the time of implantation
cardiomyopathy.
 and 8 hours following implantation.
Chapter21
Pacemaker Therapy
393
Figure 21-7.
 Lateral thoracic radiograph obtained from the same dog as in Figure 21 -6 after dislodgement of the lead. Note
that the clistal tip of the lead is now located at the level of the tricuspid valve rather than at the apex. This radiograph was taken
after reoccurrence of bradycardia caused by lack of contact between the cathode and the myocardium.
PACEMAKER COMPLICATIONS
· Another potential cause of lead malfunction is in-
termittent or complete failure of pacing due to a
· Permanent artificial cardiac pacing, whether endo-
loose connection at the interface of the lead and
cardial or epicardial, is relatively safe but not com-
the connector block of the generator. This problem
pletely innocuous. A 5-year retrospective study of
 is usually the result of inadequate securing of the
154 dogs receiving permanent cardiac pacemakers
lead at the time of implantation. When connection
showed that 84 dogs (55%) had complications.
of the lead to the generator is loose, manipulation
Furthermore, the complications were life threaten-
of the generator or generator pocket may induce
ing in 51 dogs (33%). There was no significant dif-
the pacing malfunction. The poor connection may
ference in the rate of major complications between
also be apparent radiographically (Figure 21-8). A
epicardial and endocardial pacing systems.
second operative procedure to secure the lead pin
· The most frequent major complication in dogs with
into the generator connector block is needed to
artificial cardiac pacemakers is lead malfunction
restore reliable pacemaker function.
due to lead dislodgement. Lead dislodgement oc
· Lead fracture or lead insulation breaks are causes
curs more often with transvenous leads than with
of pacemaker malfunction occasionally encoun-
epicardial leads, but is equally likely to occur
tered in veterinary patients. Fractures or insula-
with either active or passive fixation leads. Sur-
tion breaks may cause impaired sensing, impaired
 prisingly, this complication does not appear to be
pacing, or both. These complications may result
affected by the experience of the implanter, and
from biting injuries, venipuncture, excessive re-
may be either acute or chronic (hours to months
petitive lead motion, or traction with a neck leash.
after implantation). Lead dislodgement may be
Lead fracture or lead insulation breaks are often
radiographically  apparent  (macrodislogement)
or not radiographically apparent (microdislodge-
 pedance measurements. Lead fractures may also
ment), and radiographs showing lead position
be identified radiographically (Figure 21-9).
should be compared to radiographs taken at the
· Exit block refers to failure of the pacing stimulus
time of implantation (Figures 21-6 and 21-7).
to depolarize the myocardium (failure to capture),
Lead dislodgement often necessitates a second
a complication most often due to development of
procedure to reposition the lead. Occasionally,
fibrous tissue at the electrode cardiac interface
the generator can be programmed to higher out-
(Figure 21-10). Fibrosis is frequently secondary to
put to reestablish effective pacing without reposi-
inflammation incited at the time of implantation, and
tioning of the lead.
use of leads with steroid eluting tips may minimize
394
SECTION III Treatment of Cardiovascular Disease
A
Figure 21-8.
. A, This radiograph was obtained from a dog with intermittent failure to pace caused by a loose connection at the
interface of the unipolar lead and the connector block. The loose connection occurred because the lead pin was not adequately
secured at the time of pacemaker implantation. Note that the connector pin (arrow) has withdrawn from the block (arrowhead)
and is not passing all of the way through the block screw. B, For comparison, this radiograph shows an appropriately engaged
connector pin from a patient with a bipolar pacing lead. The connector pin (arrow) is visible beyond the connection block
screw (arrowhead).
· Minor complications associated with pacemaker
implantation include formation of hematomas
and seromas at the generator or cervical lead site,
skeletal muscle twitching at the generator site,
transient or minor arrhythmias, and suture line
dehiscence. To avoid contamination or lead dam-
age, needle aspiration or other forms of mechani-
cal drainage of seromas or hematomas should be
avoided; conservative management with pressure,
warm compresses, and prophylactic antibiotics
Figure 21-9.  This radiograph was taken from a dog that
 are the recommended management.
experienced failure of a pacemaker system because of lead
· EMI is a pacemaker complication that occurs
fracture. The fracture is visible at the tip of the arrow.
when any signal, biologic or nonbiologic, origi-
nating outside of the heart is detected by the sens-
or prevent this problem. However, exit block may
ing circuitry of the pacemaker. EMI can result in
 also occur from progression of underlying myocar-
inappropriate inhibition of pacing, asynchronous 
dial disease.
pacing, damage to the generator or myocardium,
· Perforation of the right ventricular wall by a transve-
 or reprogramming of the pacing parameters.
nous pacing lead is a rare complication that may oc-
Sources of EMI include electrocautery, electrical
cur at implantation or chronically. This complication
cardioversion or defibrillation, magnetic reso-
 may result in acute, fatal hemorrhage or loss of ef-
 nance imaging, and electroshock therapy.
fective cardiac pacing caused by failure to capture.
· Pacemaker infections may involve the pocket,
PACEMAKER PROGRAMMING
lead, or both and may cause fatal septicemia or
AND FOLLOW-UP
endocarditis. In dogs most pacemaker infections
occur within 3 months following implantation.
· State of the art pacemakers have programmable
With very few exceptions treatment of an infected
 parameters that can be evaluated and altered to op-
pacemaker or lead requires removal and replace-
timize and monitor function of the pacing system.
ment of the entire system.
Although there is some variation between genera-
· Other potentially lethal pacemaker complications
tors, typical data obtained during a pacemaker pro-
reported in dogs and cats include generator failure;
gramming and evaluating session would include
significant arrhythmias such as ventricular asys-
output current, output voltage, lead impedance,
tole, atrial fibrillation, ventricular tachycardia and
battery status, sensitivity (sensing parameters),
ventricular fibrillation; infection; development of
event records, ECG monitoring, pacing histogram,
congestive heart failure; and chylothorax. Extensive
and pacing thresholds. A real time intracardiac
thrombosis and thromboembolism may also occur.
electrogram can be displayed with a simultaneous
Chapter21
Pacemaker Therapy
395
Vertical tick=0.5mv,Horizontal tick=1.0 second.
Figure 21-10.
 A simultaneous lead I, Il, and Ill ECG recorded from a dog with a malfunctioning unipolar pacemaker. The ECG
shows numerous pacing stimuli that do not depolarize the myocardium (intermittent failure to capture) (arrows).
surface ECG to show timing of pacing and sensing
QRS complexes may cause multiple restarting
on the monitor, and a hard copy tracing may also
of the refractory period causing the generator
be obtained (see Figure 21-3).
to switch to asynchronous pacing. The recom-
· Output programming, referring to programming
 mended method for programming of the refrac-
of the pulse width and voltage amplitude of the
tory period is that the refractory period should
pacing signals, is the most important aspect of
include the T wave and be slightly longer than the
programming that should be done routinely. Out-
QT interval; however, dogs and cats with concur-
 put should be high enough to provide an adequate
rent tachyarrhthmias may require programming
pacing margin of safety while also maintaining
with a slightly shorter refractory period to pre-
output as low as possible to maximize battery
vent noise reversion.
longevity. Although there is no consensus regard-
· Although a pacemaker programmer is often
ing the best way to program output parameters,
necessary for trouble shooting and thoroughly
acceptable methods include doubling the thresh-
evaluating pacemaker function, standard ECG
 old voltage amplitude, tripling the pulse width at
recording may also be helpful. The ECG ap-
threshold, and plotting strength duration curves.
pearance of paced beats differs from that of en-
Because capture threshold usually increases im-
dogenous beats. A paced beat includes a pacing
mediately after pacemaker implantation as heal-
stimulus artifact, a depolarization wave, and a re-
ing occurs, energy output should be set relatively
polarization wave. The pacing stimulus artifact is
high at implant and then reprogrammed after
typically small with bipolar pacing and relatively
healing (approximately 8 weeks after implant).
large with unipolar pacing (see Figures 21-5 and
· Sensing parameters also need to be programmed
21-10). The QRS morphology of a paced beat
and checked. Appropriate sensing of intrinsic
will depend on location of the ventricular pacing
cardiac activity is extremely important for proper
lead; transvenous pacing from the right ventricu-
pacemaker function whether the patient has a
lar apex usually produces QRS complexes with
single- or dual-chamber pacingsystem.A common
a left bundle branch block configuration in the
 programming error is over sensing of T waves in
frontal plane leads (see Figure 21 -5). If the pacing
canine patients. This problem can usually be cor-
mode is VVI or VVIR the paced beats are inhib-
rected by increasing the sensing threshold.
ited by sensed spontaneous beats, and the basic
· Appropriate programming of the refractory pe-
pacing cycle is reset.
riod is also essential for correct pacemaker func-
· ECG abnormalities in patients with pacemakers
tion. If the refractory period is too long. intrinsic
may be broadly classifed as failure to capture,
396
SECTION III  Treatment of Cardiovascular Disease
failure to output, and abnormal sensing. Failure to
mode is that it is appropriate only for treatment of
capture is recognized as a pacing stimulus artifact
patients with bradycardia caused by AV block. There-
without ventricular depolarization (see Figure
fore, this method of pacing cannot be used in patients
 21-10). Causes of failure to capture include lead
with atrial fibrillation, atrial standstill, or sinus node
dislodgement, high thresholds with inadequately
dysfunction. Furthermore, VDD pacing is limited to
 programmed output, partial lead fracture, insula-
patients large enough to accommodate two leads or a
tion defect, impending battery depletion, poor or
special VDD lead.
incompatible connection of the lead to the gen-
-od p iof yonoiddo ssouapip zipuidoiddn um si mum
erator, and functional noncapture (pacing stimu-
tient with an implanted pacemaker that has reoccur-
rence of clinical signs suggestive of bradyarrhythmia?
lus during the refractory period of a spontaneous
beat).
A physical examination and standard ECG should be
done. The physical examination will confirm brady-
· Failure to pace is recognized as failure of the gen-
cardia if the pacemaker dysfunction is continuous.
Occasionally, event recording or Holter monitoring is
This problem is often caused by oversensing, but
needed to confirm bradycardia that is episodic as a re-
it may be due to true failure of the generator or
sult of intermittent pacemaker dysfunction. Physical
to circuit interruption (the electrical signal does
exam may occasionally reveal a cause of pacemaker
not reach the heart). Reasons for true failure to
dysfunction such as significant generator migration
causing traction on a pacing lead. Standard ECG is
 output include circuit failure, complete or inter-
used to identify underlying rhythm which, in turn,
mittent lead wire fracture, intermittent or perma-
may confirm sustained pacemaker malfunction. In
nent loose screw set, incompatible lead, battery
addition, standard ECG may help identify a specific
depletion, intermal insulation fracture (bipolar
cause of pacemaker malfunction. For example, regu-
lead), and lack of anodal contact (unipolar lead).
lar pacing stimuli that occur at a rate below the lower
When a pacemaker battery reaches the end state
programmed rate suggest battery depletion. Pacing
of depletion, either failure to capture because of
stimuli with appropriate timing but without capture
 may indicate lead dislodgement, lead fracture, lead
reduced voltage output or failure to pace because
of total battery depletion may occur.
insulation defect, or inadequate capture threshold.
Survey radiographs may confirm fractures or macro-
· Sensing abnormalities, both under sensing and
dislodgements of pacing leads. Use of a pacemaker
oversensing, may also be recognized on a surface
programmer to evaluate output and sensing, to test
ECG in many patients. Causes of sensing abnor-
lead impedance, and to determine capture thresholds
malities include lead dislodgement or poor lead
is often necessary for defimitive diagnosis of the cause
positioning, lead insulation failure, circuit failure,
of pacemaker dysfunction.
 magnet application, malfunction of the generator
(reed switch), EMI, and battery depletion.
Frequently Asked Questions
SUGGESTED READINGS
When and why should duat-chamber pacing be done?
Bernstein AD, Daubert JC, Fletcher RD, et al: North
 Dual-chamber pacing provides AV synchrony where-
American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology/
as single-chamber ventricular pacing does not. Pac-
British Pacing and Electrophysiology Group: The re-
ing with AV synchrony reduces ventricular filling
vised NASPE/BPEG generic code for antibradycar-
 pressures and mitral regurgitation compared to VVI
dia, adaptive-rate, and multisite pacing, Pacing Clin
(or VVIR) pacing. Therefore, dual-chamber pacing
Electrophysiol 25:260-264, 2002.
is preferable in patients with chronic valvular disease
Bonagura JD, Helphrey ML, Muir WW: Complications
Or myocardial disease. AV synchrony is also essential
ass ociated with permanent pacemaker implantati on in
for high level athletic activity, and, therefore, dual-
the dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 182:149-155, 1983.
chamber pacing should be considered in athletic dogs
Bulmer BJ, Oyama MA, Lamont LA, et al: Implantation of
and working dogs. Placement of a VDD lead or two
a single-lead atrioventricular synchronous (VDD) pace-
conventional transvenous leads is technically difficult,
maker in a dog with naturally occurring 3rd-degree atrio-
however, in animals weighing less than 10 kg.
ventricular block, J Vet Intern Med 16:197-200, 2002.
What are the major advantages of atriat synchronous
Bulmer BJ, Oyama MA, Sisson DD: Acute hemodynamic
pacing (VDD pacing) compared to ventricular inhib-
soop u suoed aaA ooloisud jo soounbesuoo
(lA) Sund snouoxyouss pa
with naturally occurring third degree atrioventricular
Advantages of VDD pacing include chronotropic
block, J Vet Intern Med 16(abstract):341, 2002.
competence based on intrinsic sinus rate and restora-
Gammage M, Lieberman RA: Selective site pacing.
tion of AV synchrony. A disadvantage of this pacing
Medtonic Technical Concept Paper, Minneapolis,
2004, Medtronic Inc.
Chapter21
PacemakerTherapy
397
Moise NS, Estrada A: Noise reversion in paced dogs,
Prosek R, Sisson DD, Oyama MA: Runaway pacemaker
J Vet Card 4:13-21, 2002.
in a dog, J Vet Inter Med 18:242-244, 2004.
Oyama MA, Sisson DD, Lehmkuhl LB: Practices and
Sisson D, Thomas WP, Woodfield J, et al: Permanent
transvenous pacemaker implantation in forty dogs,
Intern Med 15:229-239, 2001.
J Vet Intern Med 5:322-331, 1991.
 Petrie J-P: Permanent transvenous cardiac pacing, Clin
Tech Small Anim Pract 20:164-172, 2005.
 Phibbs B, Marriott HIL: Complications of permanent trans-
venous pacing, N Engl J Med 312:1428-1432, 1985.
APPENDIX
Canine Breed Predilections for
Heart Disease
Kathleen E. Cavanagh and Francis W. K. Smith, Jr.
Disease
Disease
DCM
Chow Chow
Afghan Hound
PS
VSD
Airedale
PS
Akita
VSD
Cocker Spaniel
PDA
 Basset Hound
PS
PS
 Degenerative valve disease
VSD
DCM
Beagle
PS
 Sick sinus syndrome
VSD
Collie
PDA
Bichon Frise
PDA
 Dachshund
Degenerative valve disease
 Degenerative val ve disease
Mitral valve prolapse
Bloodhound
SAS
 Sick sinus syndrome
PDA
 Boston Terriel
Degenerative val ve disease
DCM
Dalmatian
DCM
 Chemodectoma
Mitral valve dysplasia
(± pericardial effusion)
 Doberman Pinscher
ASD
Bouvier des Flandres
SAS
DCM
Boxer
SAS
 Bundle of His degeneration 
PS
English Bulldog
PS
ASD
(Bulldog)
Tetralogy of Fallot
DCM
VSD
 Arrhythmogenic right venl-
SAS
tricular cardiomyopathy
Chemodectoma
(Boxer cardiomyopathy)
(± pericardial effusion)
Chemodectoma
Mitral valve dysplasia
(± pericardial effusion)
 Persistent right aortic arch
Boykin Spaniel
PS
 English Sheepdog
DCM
Degenerative val ve disease
English Springer
PDA
 Brittany Spaniel
 Persistent ri ght aortic arch
Spaniel
VSD
 Bullmastiff
 Persistent atrial standstill
PS
DCM
Fox Terrier
 Degenerative valve disease
 Bull Terrier
Mitral val ve dysplasia
PS
Mitral val ve stenosis
 Tetralogy of Fallot
(wirehaired)
SAS
German Shepherd
SAS
Cavalier King Charles
Inherited ventricular
Spaniel
arrhythmias
Mitral valve dysplasia
Tricuspid valve dysplasia
Right atrial hemangiosar-
 Persistent right aortic arch
coma (± pericardial
effusion)
Inherited ventricular
PDA
 atthythmias
 Degenerative val ve disease
Right atrial hemangiosarcoma
(± pericardial effusion)
Chihuahua
PDA
Infective endocarditis
PS
DCM
Degenerative val ve disease
PDA
DCM, Dilated cardiomyopathy, PS, pulmonic stenosis; VSD,
Continued
ventricular septal defect; PDA, patent ductus arteriosus; SAS,
399
subaortic stenosis; ASD, atrial septal defect.
400
Appendix
Breed
Disease
Breed
Disease
German Shorthair
SAS
 Lakeland Terrier
VSD
 Pointer
Lhasa Apso
 Degenerative valve disease
Golden Retriever
SAS
Maltese
PDA
Mitral val ve dysplasia
Mastiff 
 Mitral valve dysplasia
Tricuspid valve dysplasia
Tauri ne deficient familial
PS
DCM
Canine X-linked muscular
Miniature Pinscher
 Degenerative valve disease
dystrophy
Newfoundland
SAS
Pericardial effusion,
 Mitral valve dysplasia
idiopathic
Mitral valve stenosis
Right atrial hemangiosar-
PDA
coma (± pericardial
PS
effusion)
DCM
Great Dane
Mitral val ve dysplasia
ASD
Tricuspid valve dysplasia
Old English Sheepdog
Tricuspid val ve dysplasia
SAS
 Persistent atrial standstill
PS
DCM
Persistent right aortic arch
Pekingese
 Degenerative valve disease
DCM
Lone atrial fbrillation
Poodle
PDA (toy and miniature
Great Pyrenees
poodle)
Tricuspid valve dysplasia
Degenerative valve disease
Greyhound
Persistent ri ght aortic arch
(toy and miniature
Husky
VSD
poodle)
VSD
Irish Setter
Persistent right aortic arch
ASD (standard poodle)
DCM
Pomeranian
Right atrial hemangio-
PDA
 sarcoma (± pericardial
 Degenerative valve disease
effusion)
Sick sinus syndrome
Irish Wolfhound
DCM
Portuguese Water Dog
Inherited juvenile DCM
 Lone atrial fibrillation
Pug
Atri oventricular block
Keeshond
Conotruncal Defects 
Rottweiler
SAS
(Keeshonden)
(CTD)——A series of 
DCM
genetically related congen-
St. Bernard
DCM
ital cardiac malformations
 that include conal septum,
Samoyed
PS
conal vSD, Tetralogy of
SAS
 Fallot, and persistent 
ASD
 truncus arteriosus 
Schnauzer, Miniature
PS
PDA
PDA
PS
Degenerative valve disease
 Mitral val ve dysplasia
Sick sinus syndrome
Kerty Blue Terrier
PDA
Scottish Deerhound
DCM
 Labrador Retriever
 Tricuspid valve dysplasia
Scottish Terrier
PS
PDA
Shetland Sheepdog
PS
PDA
DCM
Degenerative valve disease
 Pericar dial effusion,
Shih Tzu
VSD
idiopathic
 Degenerative valve disease
 Right atrial hemangiosar-
 coma (± pericardial
Springer Spaniel
DCM
effusion)
Terrers (e.g., Fox Terrier,
PS
Mixed Terriers)
 Degenerative valve disease
DCM, Dilated cardiomyopathy; PS, pulmonic stenosis; VSD,
ventricular septal defect; PDA, patent ductus arteriosus; SAS,
Continued
subaortic stenosis; ASD, atrial septal defect.
Appendix 1
401
Breed
Disease
Hyun C, Park IC: Congenital heart diseases in small
animals. Il. Potential genetic aetiologies based on
Weimaraner
Tricuspid valve dysplasia
human genetic studies. Vet J 171(2):256-262, 2006.
Peritoneopericar dial
Comment in Vet J 171(2): 195-197, 2006.
diaphragmatic hernia
Kittleson MD, Kienle RD, eds: Small animal cardio-
vascular medicine. Philadelphia, 1998, Mosby.
West Highland White
PS
 MacDonald KA: Congenital heart diseases of puppies
Termier
VSD
and kittens. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
Tetralogy of Fallot
36(3):503-531, 2006.
Degenerative val ve disease
Meurs KM: Inherited heart disease in the dog. In Pro-
Whippet
Degenerative val ve disease
ceedings, 2003 Tufts Genetics Symposium, 2003.
Yorkshire Terrier
PDA
 Meurs KM: Update on Boxer arhythmogenic right ven.
 Degenerative val ve disease
tricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC). In Proceedings,
The Annual ACVIM Forum, p 106, 2005.
DCM, Dilated cardiomyopathy, PS, pulmonic stenosis; VSD,
Meurs KM, Fox PR, Nogard M, et al: A prospective ge-
ventricular septal defect; PDA, patent ductus arteriosus; SAS,
netic evaluation of familial dilated cardiomyopathy in
subaortic stenosis; ASD, atrial septal defect.
the Doberman Pinscher. J Vet Intern Med 21:1016-
1020,2007.
Meurs KM, Spier AW, Miller MW, et al: Familial ven-
RESOURCES
tricular arrhythmias in boxers. J Vet Intern Med
Alroy J, Rush JE, Freeman L, et al: Inherited infantile
13(5):437-439, 1999.
dilated cardiomyopathy in dogs: genetic, clinical,
Meurs KM, Spier AW, Wright NA, et al: Comparison
biochemical, and morphologic findings. Am J Med
of the effects of four antiarrhythmic treatments for
Genet 95(1):57-66, 2000.
familial ventricular arrhythmias in Boxers. J Am Vet
Basso C, Fox PR, Meurs KM, et al: Arrhythmogenic right
Med Assoc 221(4):522-527, 2002.
ventricular cardiomyopathy causing sudden cardiac
Moise NS: Update on inherited arrhythmias in German
death in boxer dogs: a new animal model of human
Shepherds. In Proceedings, The Annual ACVIM
disease. Circulation 109(9):1180-1185, 2004. e-pub:
Forum, pp 67-68, 2005.
March 1, 2004.
Olsen LH, Fredholm M, Pedersen HD: Epidemiology and
Belanger MC, Ouellet M, Queney G, et al: Taurine-
inheritance of mitral valve prolapse in Dachshunds.
deficient dilated cardiomyopathy in a family of
J Vet Intern Med 13(5):448-56, 1999.
Golden Retrievers. JAAHA 41:284-291, 2005.
Parker HG, Meurs KM, Ostrander EA: Finding cardio-
Chetboul V, Charles V, et al: Retrospective study of 156
vascular disease genes in the dog. J Vet Cardiol 8:
atrial septal defects in dogs and cats. J Vet Med A
115-127, 2006.
Physiol Pathol Clin Med 53(4):179-184, 2006.
Schober KE, Baade H: Doppler echocardiographic pre-
Chetboul V, Trolle JM, et al: Congenital heart diseases
diction of pulmonary hypertension in West Highland
in the boxer dog: a retrospective study of 105 cases
(1998-2005). J Vet Med A Physiol Pathol Clin Med
Intern Med 20:912-920, 2006.
53(7):346-351, 2006.
Spier AW, Meurs KM, Muir WW, et al: Correlation of
Dambach DM, Lannon A, Sleeper MM, et al: Familial
QT dispersion with indices used to evaluate the sever-
dilated cardiomyopathy of young Portuguese water
ity of familial ventricular arrhythmias in Boxers. Am
dogs. J Vet Intern Med 13(1):65-71, 1999)
J Vet Res 62(9):1481-1485, 2001.
Fox PR, Sisson D, Moise NS, eds: Textbook of canine
Tidholm A: Retrospective study of congenital heart
and feline cardiology, ed 2, Philadelphia 1999, WB
defects in 151 dogs. J Small Anim Pract 38(3):94-98,
Saunders.
2006.
Gordon SG, Saunders AB, et al: Atrial septal defects in
Vollmar AC, Fox PR: Assessment of cardiovascular dis-
an extended family of standard poodles. In Proceed-
eases in 527 Boxers. In Proceedings, The Annual
ings, The Annual ACVIM Forum, p 730, 2006
ACVIM Forum, p 65, 2005.
Gunby JM, Hardie RJ, Bjorling DE: Investigation of the po-
Vollmar AC, Trotschel C: Cardiomyopathy in Irish Wolf-
tential heritability of persistent right aortic arch in Grey-
hounds. In Proceedings, The Annual ACVIM Forum,
hounds. J Am Vet Med Assoc 224(7):1120-1122, 2004.
p 66, 2005.
Hyun C, Lavulo L: Congenital heart diseases in small
Werner P, Raducha MG, Prociuk U, et al: The Keeshond
 animals. I Genetic pathways and potential candidate
defect in cardiac conotruncal development is oligo-
genes. Vet J 171(2):245-255, 2006. Comment in Vet J
genic. Human Genet 116(5):368-377, 2005. e-pub:
171(2):195-197, 2006.
Feb 12, 2005.
APPENDIX2
Common Cardiovascular Drugs
Francis W. K. Smith, Jr., Larry P. Tilley, Mark A. Oyama,
and Meg M. Sleeper
Advancing technology has provided clinicians with
Drugs are listed in alphabetical order by generic 
ever more powerful and effective drugs for treating
name. The order of presentation in no way refects the
diseases. As more drugs become available, it be-
preference for use. Generalrecommendations for ther-
comes progressively more difficult for practitioners
apy may be found in the main body of this document.
to make rational choices between similar drugs. It is
also difficult tobe aware ofthe numerous side effects,
 contraindications, and drug interactions of the many
KEY TO FORMULARY
 cardiopulmonary drugs available. The following
ABBREVIATIONS
tables and charts have been designed and provided
in the hope of facilitating rational drug selections for
ACE
Angiotensin-converting enzyme
 the treatment of cardiopulmonary disease.
ACT
Activated clotting time
An attempt has been made to make these tables as
ADP
Adenosine diphosphate
complete as possible, while focusing on the more com-
APTT
 Activated partial thromboplastin time
 mon or serious side effects and drug interactions. For a
BP
 Blood pressure
more exhaustive review of individual drugs, the reader
Cap
Capsule
 should refer to the package insert and drug chapters in
CHF
 Congestive heart failure
this book. The reader should also follow the current
COPD
 Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
veterinary literature, as new dosing recommendations
CRI
Constant-rate infusion
may become available as a result of clinical use and
CV
Cardiovascular
 scientific research. This advice is especially appropri-
D5W
5% dextrose in water
 ate for new or infrequently used drugs.
ECG
Electrocardiogram
g
Gram
GFR
Glomerular filtration rate
DISCLOSURE
GI
Gastrointestinal
Medicine is a science that is constantly changing.
IM
Intramuscular
Changes in treatment and drug therapy are re-
Inj
Injectable
quired with new research and clinical experiences.
INR
Intermational normalization ratio
The author, editor, and publisher of this book have
10
Intraosseous
made every effort to ensure that the drug dosage
IT
Intratracheal
schedules are accurate. The drug dosages are based
IV
Intravenous
on the standards accepted at the time of publica-
LRS
 Lacated Ringer's solution 
tion. The product information sheet included in the
mcg
Microgram
package of each drug should be checked before the
mg
Milligram
 drug is administered to be certain that changes have
mL
Milliliter
not been made in the recommended dose of or in
PO
Per os (oral)
the contraindications for administration. Primary
PT
Prothrombin time
responsibility for decisions regarding treatment of
b
Every, as in q 8 h = every 8 hours
 patients remains with the attending clinician. All
SC
Subcutaneous
patients should be carefully monitored for desired
Tab
Tablet
efficacious and undesired toxic effects while insti-
U
Units
tuting, titrating, and maintaining therapy.
WPW
Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome
402
Appendix2
403
Less bronchoconstriction and vasoconstriction
U'se as last resort for recurrent unstable ven-
tricular tachycardia; takes weeks to achieve
Reduce dose by 50% first 4 days to prevent
Dihydropyridine calcium chanel blocker
Positive inotrope with arterial vasodilating
Not 100% effective in preventing emboli
Can use with digoxin and catecholamines
 Reduce dose with CHF, liver disease 
Taper dose when discontinue therapy
    
Methylxanthine bronchodilator
Beta-2 agonist bronchodilator
Beta- 1 selective beta-blocker
 Phosphodiesterase inhibitor
Class II antiathythmic
 Monitor for hypotension
anxiety side effect
therapeutic levels
Platelet inhi bitor
 See Triamterene
fibrillation
Comments
properties
q 12 h for 1 week, thereafter 5 mg/kg
D: 1-3 mg/kg bolus,then 30-100 mcg/
 D: 1.25 mg/10 kg PO q 12-24 h with
D: 11 mg/kg q 6-8 h, PO, IV, IM
 D: Loading dose of 10 mg/kg PO
D: 0.25-1.5 mg/kg PO q 12-24 h
C: 6.25-12.5 mg PO q 12-24 h
C: 5 mg/kg q 8-12 h; PO)
(81 mg/cat q 72 h PO)
mg/cat q 24 h)
PO q 12-24 h
(①) aS0I 30I
Cat Dose (C)
(slowly IV)
Same
C: None
pooj
28
28
Prevention of thromboembolis m
myopathy, hypertension, aortic
 pur esesip sun sagonnsqo
 and ventricular arrhythmias
  s o
 Atrial and ventricular arrhyth-
mias, hypertrophic cardio-
patients with reversible
 Symptomatic bradycardia
 Symptomatic bradycardia
 Short-term management
Severe refractory atrial
Systemic hypertension
Bronchodilation in
Asthma, COPD
See Triamterene
Indications
asthma
stenosis
Oral solution: 21 mg/mL
Ampules: 25 mg/mL
Tab: 25, 50, 100 mg 
 Syrup: 0.4 mg/mL
Tab: 100, 200 mg
Tab: 2.5, 5, 10 mg 
Ampule: 5 mg/mL
Tab: 81, 325 mg
Formulation
Tab: 2, 4 mg
Tab: 200 mg
Acetylsalicylic
Aminophylline
(Aminophyllin)
Trade Name
Amiodarone
Ventolin)
(Midamor)
(Cordarone)
Amiloride
(Tenormin)
(Aspirin)
Albuterol
Proventil,
bes ylate
(Norvasc)
Amrinone
lactate
Atenolol
(Inocor)
anIT
404
Appendix
Can use with loop diuretics for increased diure-
Monitor closely for worsening of heart failure
 More potent chronotropic effects than glyco-
Monitor electrol ytes and renal function
Do notuse with atrioventricular block
 More potent than dextromethorphan
Alpha and nonselective beta blocker
 Absorption highly variable in dogs
 patients with severe liver disease
Less potent than loop diuretics
Narcotic cough suppressant
Excreted in bile and urine
Not effective in all cases 
L isomer is active form
Thiazi de diuretic
Anticholinergic
ACE inhibi tor
Comments
pyrrolate
Amino acid
PO q 12 h for 2 weeks; up-titrate
D: 0.01-0.04 mg/kg IV, IM, 10
D: 0.25-0.50 mg/kg PO q24h
able to titrate to 1.5 mg/kg
y/a 0  71-9 b 
: 50-100 mg/kg PO q 8 h
 20-40 mg/kg PO q 12 h 
0.055-0.11 mg/kg
(IT: double dose)
(2.5 mg/cat/day)
 0. 1-0.5 mg/kg q
 Not established
12 h (based on.
Dog Dose (D)
() )
16-12 h PO
Start slowly :
C: Same
None
None
Same
8
80
6
2
6
6
Balanced vasodilation in CHF.
Canine dilated cardiomyopathy
 ppuos-sahesoa 'suoesipul 'suonenwos-shnja Aeuowndopiey
accompanied by taurine or
sy ndrome, cardiac afrest
(COPD, tracheal collapse)
Sinus bradycardia, atrio-
nephrotic syndrome),
Renal disease in cats 
 carnitine deficiency
with fuid retention 
Myocardial failure
hypertensi on
Indications
Inj: 0.05, 0.1, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5,
Tw/su 7 1 s0 u1
 in bulk as powder 
0.8, 1.0 mg/mL
 Can be purchased
Tab: 3.125, 6.25,
Tab: 250, 500 mg 
Tab: 1, 5, 10 mg 
Formulation
Tab: 5, 20 mg
(Torbutrol)
Tab: 330 mg
 50 mg/mL
12.5 mg
(Fortekor-Canada).
(Torbutrol, Stadol)
 Atropine sulfate
Chlorothiazide
Trade Name
Benazepril
Lotensin
(Carnitor)
Carvedilol
(Coreg)
(Diuril)
Appendix2
405
 -eeyd pue sueuny woiy paeqodenxa asos
ee sinoy 8 uu 7-s'o suei onnade n
Can be used in combination with aspirin or
 natremia, hypercalcemia, hypoth yroi dism,
ym eaiains pouol mous sueuny ui spms 
 Only cough suppressant safe for use in cats
range of 0.5-1 ng/ml than with 1-2 ng/ml.
Dose on lean body weight, reduce dose
Low-molecular-weight heparin 
 Nonnarcotic cough suppressant
 dogs and cats unknown
10% -15% with elixirs
anticoagulants
than warfarin
Expensive
heparin
hypoxia
a dose.
 jsiy au iog esop sue uu i
C: 0.01 mg/kg PO q 48 h (Tab
D: 100-150 U/kg SC q 8 h
C: 180 U/kg SC q 6 h
D: 2 mg/kg PO q 6-8 h
(w/Lasix and aspirin)
24-48 h
C: Same
Prevention of thromboembolism 
high risk for thromboembolism
 Nonproductive cough (COPD,
 Supraventricular arrhythmias,
tracheal collapse)
myocardial failure
 Antithrombotic
(2500 U)/0.2 mL; 32 mg
4 mg (10,000 U)/mL
Cap: 0.05, 0.1, 0.2 mg
(5000 U/0.02 mL)
prefilled syringes;
multidose vials
cough formulas
Tab: 0.125, 0.25,
 In many OTC
Su S q
 Inj: 16 mg
 Dextromethorphan
Clopidogrel
Dal teparin
())
(Fragmin)
Digoxin
406
Appendix
Dilacor XR capsules contain 60-mg tablets that
Prefer able to dopamine in CHF but more
Increased survival in heart failure patients
Inotropic effect is dose dependent
Can administer intraosseously
Calcium channel blocker
are used for dosing cats
Use with caution in cats
Dopaminergic agonist
ACE inhibitor 
Comments
expensive
OCCurS
D: 0.5 mg/kg PO q 12-24 h titrate
01 dn senn uw/ay/ao 01-7 
C: 0.25-0.5 mg/kg PO q 24-48 h
 2-6 mcg/kg/min IV CRI
D: 0.5-2 mg/kg PO q 8 h
(consider higher dose of
(titrate up to effect)
saline, or LRS
C: Same
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
Cardiopulmonary Drugs——Formulations, Indications, Dosages—cont'd
 of severe myocardial failure
Anuric or oliguric renal failure
 Supraventricular arthyth mias,
 Balanced vasodilation in CHF,
management of severe
myocardial failure
Shock, short-term
hypertension
hypertension
Indications
Tab: 30, 60, 90, 120 mg
Tab: 1,2.5, 5, 10, 20 mg
Dilacor XR: 120, 180,
 Inj: 12.5 mg/mL
Formulation
 Inj: 5 mg/mL
 Inj: 40, 80, or
160 mg/mL
240 mg
(Cardizem, Dilacor)
(Intropin, Dopastat)
 Enal april maleate
Dopamine HC1
Trade Name
Dilti azem
(Dobutex)
(Enacard)
ana
Appendix2
407
-ud pue suuny uoy ie odenxs-osoe
cokinetic studies in animals. Opti mal dose in
yw goo go ssop popususi risnoad
Ultra-short-acting beta-selective beta adrener-
ess likely to cause bleeding complications
Maintain APTT or ACT at 2-2.5 times the
Hypokalemia uncommon in dogs unless 
onger duration of action with less of a
 Monitor hy dration and electrolytes
patients with severe liver disease
Bioavailability reduced with food
 chronotropic effect than atropine
Low-molecular-weight heparin
Anti dote: Protamine sulfate
anorexic or high dose
 pretreatment values 
 is not available
sieo pue s3op
than warfarin
Anticholinergic
Loop diuretic
Anticoagulant
 gic blocker
unknown
Expensive
口
AI Sy/Bowu (00I-0s Aensn) 00s-0s :
bolus every 5 min (up to 500 mcg/kg
C: 1-4 mg/kg PO, IM, IV q 12-48 h.
 D: 2-6 mg/kg PO, IM, IV q 8-48 h,
Titrate to lowest effective dose for
Chronic dose: 10-50 w/kg q 6-8 h
 dose for IT administration
D: 0.005-0.01 mg/kg IV, IM,
 100-500 U/kg SC q 8 h
100-300 U/kg SC q 8 h
D: 0.8 mg/kg SC q 12 h
 pul monary edema
D: Loading dose:
maintenance
C: Same
C: Same
C: Same
tachyarrhythmias, ventricular 
disease, nephrotic syndrome).
Pinu uim pieisosse sostss
ventricular block, sick sinus 
tachycardia, and systemic
 Short-term management
Sinus bradycardia, atrio-
 of supraventricul ar
 Short-term prevention
 of thromboembolism
 Antithrombotic
Cardiac arrest
hypertension
hypertension
syndrome
 Inj: 30mg/0.3 mL
 Inj: 1:1000conc
40, 50, 80 mg
 Inj: 0.2 mg/mL
Inj;: 1000, 5000,
Tab: 12.5, 20,
10,000 U/mL
(1 mg/mL)
1 : 10000 conc
 250 mg/mL
Inj: 10 and
 50 mg/mL 
10 mg/mL
Inj: 100,
Glycopyrrolate
Liquaemin)
Enoxaparin
(Lovenox)
(Brevibloc)
Furosemide
Esmolol
(Robinul)
(XI5ET)
Heparin
408
Appendix
e rn san a ue se ps
Decreasing dose 50% -75% for 1-2 weeks and
 pue An on poued saly-anp inou-ZI npeyos 
then titrating upward may reduce risk of
sis, but reduce inital thiazide dose by 50%
 More potent than dex tromethorphan 
patients with severe liver disease
 Direct-acting arterial vasodilator
Less potent than loop diuretics
pacing can be accomplished
 Sympathomimetic agent
Narcotic antagonist
Similar to atropine
 Nitrate venodilator
Thiazide diuretic
diuretic doses
Anticholinergic
avoid tolerance
vasodilati on
Comments
vomiting
s
dn aenn) A1 uw/ay/3ow 60'0-t00 (
D: 1-3 mg/kg PO q12h (titrate up to
C: 0.5-0.8 mg/kg PO q 12 h
: 0.22 mg/kg PO q 6-12 h
D: 0.003-0.006 mg/kg q 8 h
D:0.2-1.0 mg/kg PO q 12 h
: 2-4 mg/kg PO q 12 h 
Dog Dose (D)
Cat Dose (C)
: Do not use
C: Same
C: Same
effect)
80
 pauos-sabesoa suoevpul 'suoejnuos-shng Aeuoujndopie
disease, nephritic syndrome),
ventricular block, sick sinus
ventricular block, sick sinus
(COPD, tracheal collapse)
 Short-term management of
retention (CHF, hepatic
Arterial dilation in CHF,
 sinus bradycardia, atrio-
 Sinus bradycardia, atrio-
Nonproductive cough
Venodilation in CHF
hypertension
hypertension
Indica tions
syndrome
syndrome
Inj: 1:5000 (0.2 mg/mL)
Tab: 5, 10, 20, 30, 40 mg
Tab: 25, 50, 100 mg
 Oral solution: 10,
Syrup: 1 mg/mL
 Inj: 20 mg/mL
Formulation
100 mg/ml
0.125 mg/5 cc
SU S :q
release)
Hydrochlorothiazide
Isosorbide dinitrate
(Isordil, Sorbitrate)
Hydralazine HCl
(HydroDIURIL)
Levsin, Anaspaz,
Trade Name
(Apresoline)
Hydrocodone
Cy stospaz,
Donnamar)
soproterenol
bitartrate
(Hycodan)
(Isuprel)
BnIT
Appendix2
409
Use with caution in cats as may cause seizures
Drug of choice for initial control of ventricular
ess bronchoconstriction, and interference with
 Take with food to reduce gastrointestinal side
insulin therapy than with nonselective beta
Dose should be slowly titrated over several
 ssd   r s
Monitor renal function and electrolytes 
weeks in dogs with myocardial failure
Seizures controlled with diazepam
For treating refractory arrhythmias
 decreased by low potassium
 Less expensive than carvedilol
Reduce dose with liver disease
Beta-1 selective beta blocker
Taper dose when stopping
Class I antiarrhythmic
Heartworm adulticide
tachycardia
ACE inhibitor
Electrolyte
Society
blockers
effects
S-z ne dup Ai Aq pemooy sosngog
uu/ay/sow1 (001 0n dn Aeuo1soo)
0.15-0.30 mEq/kg IV over 5-10 min.
 aee  i snu 
y30 mcg/kg/min for 3 hours CRI,
1  4 / I40 
D: 2.5 mg/kg/day IM give a single
 injection of 2.5 mg/kg and then in
(double the dose IT) in 2 mg/kg
: 0.25-0.75 mg/kg IV over 5 min
(50% of total dose can be given
OI 10 AI AImos yBU 8-7 
: 0.25-1.0 mg/kg PO q 8 h
CRI: 10-40 mcg/kg/min
C: None
Same
 None
CRI
D:
?
?
 Balanced vasodilation in CHF,
 Atrial and ventricular arrhyth-
mias, hypertrophic cardio-
my opathy, hypertension,
Ventricular arrhythmias
Ventricul ar arth ythmias-
hypomagnesemia can
potentiate ventricular
Ventricul ar arrh ythmias
Heartworm disease
myocardial failure
hypertension
tachycardia
 Inj: 5, 10, 15, 20 mg/mL
 Prinivil unscored tablets,
2.5, 5, 10, 20, 40 mg 
 20% MgClg, solution for 
mEq of Mgt+ per mL)
Tab: 25, 50, 100 mg
Mexitil, 250 mg for
 Inj: 25 mg/mL
 Inj: 1 mg/mL
injection
(Prinivil, Zestril)
(Xylocaine)
Magnesium
(Immi ticide)
Lidocaine
Lisinopril
Metoprolol
(Mexitil)
410
Appendix
Can combine with hydralazine for balanced
Schedule 12-hour drug-free period to try and
Adjust drip rate to maintain mean arterial
iscontinue if metabolic acidosis develops
 Do not use in aortic stenosis, hypertrophic
 9sneo Aew 9sn pesuo1o1d 10 9sop 981e7
an augmentation of cardiac output is
 Protect solution from li ght
 Direct acting vasodilator
 Nitrate venodilator
 cyanide toxicity
avoid tolerance
 Side effects rare
Comments
 
6
D: 0.25 inch/5 kg cutaneously q 6-8 h;
Patch: 2.5-10 mg (small-giant dog)
D: 1 mg/15 kg PO q 8 h. Titrate to
C: %-14 inch cutaneously q 6-8 h
Short-term balanced vasodilation D: 1-10 mcg/kg/min in D5W
Heart failure (to counter cachex-D: C: 50-250 mg/kg/24 h PO
C: Unknown
effect
C: None
 Licensed for treating dogs with
 severe CHF (modified NYHA
 Cardiopulmonary Drugs——Formulations, Indications, Dosages—cont'd 
 Balanced vasodilation in CHF,
signs of mild, moderate, 0r
dilated cardiomyopathy or
valvular insuffciency.
Venodilation in CHF
in severe CHF
hypertension
Indications
Chewable tablets: 1.25 mg:
Capsules: 1.25 mg. 2.5 mg.
 mg (Canada, Europe,
(1 inch = 15 mg)
(nsn pur
 [/w os jun wnpos spissnidonin
Cap: 1, 2, 5 mg
Formulation
 2% ointment 
5 mg (USA)
(Nipride, Nitropress)
patches 2.5, 5, 10,
Omega-3 fatty acids
(ALA, EPA and/or
(Nitro-BID, Nitrol,
Trade Name
Nitroglycerin
Prazosin HCl
Nitrostat)
Pimobendan
Vetmedin)
(Minipress)
DHA)
 BnII
Appendix2
411
Reduce dose with severe renal and liver disease
[os pue sue xo Aa peoedei aae as 
 Su1 991 = qen su1 00z ( %e8) aens su1puno
poos pue sxu q poeda re  
May be effective for pulmonary hypertension*
Monitor ECG: 25% prolongation of QRS is
Reduce dose in CHF, hepatic disease, and
Effects increased by high potassium and
 1es supunb yoee ut ( %) aseq supuino
 oi sen pe ssop mot uim jei
 Beware of possible bronchoconstriction
Has vagolytic, negative inotropic, and
uinidine polygalacturonate (60%); 
Reduce dose with liver disease
 Class l antiarrhythmic agent 
decreased by low potassium
Nonselective beta blocker
tab = 200 mg quinidine
 effects than quinidine
Use with caution in cats
Class 1 antiarrhythmic
hypoalbuminemia
 sign of toxicity
 sign of toxicity
quinidine
Expensive
 w 01-s 10 A1 3y/31 900-200
 sI-s 1o1y 90-200
paeoi aq Aeu y g b ay/u e-z jo
Note: Dose calculated for quinidine
 base equivalent, which varies with
D: 0.5-1 mg/kg q 12 h (higher dose
C: 3-8 mg/kg PO, IM, q 6-8 h
D: 6-20 mg/kg PO, IM q 6 h;
 Sy/su o1-s ishonpod sseaol
D: 0.2-1.0 mg/kg PO q 8 h;
>4.5 kg: 5 mg PO 8-12 h;
 each quinidine salt.
 IV (very slowly)
See Comments.
None
C: Same
6
Ventricular and supraventricular
Atrial and ventricular arrhyth-
mias, hypertr ophic cardio-
 Pulmonary hypertension
arthythmias,WPW
thyrotoxicosis
Solution: 4, 8, 80 mg/mL
 Inj: 100, 500 mg/mL
*09 0+ 02 01 :91.
Tab: 25, 50, 100 mg 
750, 1000 mg
Tab SR: 300 mg
 Inj: 200 mg/mL
Tab: 324 mg
gu
Quinidine gluconate
Quinidine sul fate
Quinidine poly-
Procainamide
Propranolol
(Quinidex)
(Inderal)
Sildenafil
()
412
Appendix
Clinical improvements noted in 4-10 days 
sid o1 sep t1s1y %os Aq ssop snpey
aid oi sep  isiy %os Aq asop sonpey
Antiarthythmic agent with class II (beta-
Ulcerative facial dermatitis in third of cats
Extended release dose based on In wood
Usually combines with a loop diuretic
by6 weeks
cimeti dine, orbifloxacin, enrofloxacin
 i   s
Beta-2 agonist bronchodilator
Methylx anthine bronchodilator
Potassium-sparing diuretic
Dose on lean body weight
Class I Antiarrhythmic
Oral analog of lidocaine
restless behavior.
anxiety side effect
correcting diet
Weak diuretic
Comments
upset
Extended release cap: 19 mg/kg PO
xg yzig bod y a
D,C: 0.5-1.0 mg/kg/day (possible
D: 1.25-5 mg/dog PO q 8-12 h
release: 10 mg/kg PO q 12 h
D: 10-20 mg/kg PO q 8-12 h
 cardiac anti-remodeling)
D: 1-2 mg/kg PO q 12 h
0.05 mg/kg SC, IM, IV
: 250 mg PO q12 h
q 24 h at might 
Dog Dose (D)
Cat Dose (C)
C: None
nephrotic syndrome), hyperten-
p,suoy-sabesoa suoesipu 'suogeinwoy-shnig Aeuoundopien
 Dilated cardiomyopathy (cats)
and selective cases in dogs
Asthma, COPD, sick sinus
Ventricular arth ythmias
Ventricul ar arth ythmias
sion, hypokalemia
Asthma, COPD
Indications
 syndrome
Cap: 500 mg as a generic
Cap: 50, 75, 125, 200 mg 
Tab: 80, 160, 240 mg 
Tab: 25, 50, 100 mg
Tab: 100, 200, 300,
Tablet: 2.5, 5 mg 
Tab: 400, 600 mg
Formulation
Tab: 250 mg
 Inj: 1 mg/mL
450 mg
(Brethine, Bricanyl)
(Extended Release)
Spironolactone
Trade Name
Theoph ylline
(Betapace)
(Aldactone)
(Taurine V)
Terbutaline
Tocainide
(Tonocard)
Sotalol
 8n.1I
Appendix2
413
Initiate therapy with 4 days of heparin to pre-
01 ne pe as s, l e poo
Potent vasodilator and negative inotrope
Usually combined with loop diuretic
baseline value or INR of 2-3
Potassium-sparing diuretic
 Calcium channel bloc ker 
 minimi ze risk of trauma
Weak diuretic
Anticoagulant
Comments
minute intervals (to effect) to a maxi-
: 0. 1-0.2 mg/kg PO q 24 h 
(①) as0I 30I
Cat Dose (C)
Same
None
 Same
6
retention (CHF, hepatic disease,
Prevention of thromboembolism 
nephrotic syndrome), hyperten-
Ping uim peieiosse sosss
 hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
 Supraventricular arrhythmias,
 sion, hypokalemia
Indications
Tab: 2, 2.5,5, 7.5, 10 mg
Tab: 80, 120, 240 mg 
Cap: 50, 100 mg 
Formulation
*Bach et al. JV1M 20(5).
Trade Naine
Triamterene
(Dyrenium)
(Coumadin)
BnIT
414
Appendix
CALCULATING A CONSTANT-RATE
REFERENCES
INFUSION FOR LIDOCAINE
Tilley LP, Smith FWK, eds: The five minute veterinary
consult, ed 4. Ames, Iowa, 2008, Blackwell Publishing.
A CRI dosage of 25 to 75 mcg/kg/min of lidocaine
Kittleson MD, Kienle, RD: Small animal cardiovascular
can be used in dogs with an intravenous loading dose
medicine. Philadelphia, 1998, Mosby.
of 1-2 mg/kg. In cats, various sources support a CRI
 Papich MG: Saunders handbook of veterinary drugs, ed 2.
dosage of 10-40 mcg/kg/min of lidocaine with an in-
St Louis, 2007, WB Sanunders.
travenous loading dose of 0.25 to 0.75 mg/kg. Use
with caution in cats because it may cause seizures.
Lidocaine solution is made up by replacing
75
ml of fuid from a liter bag with 75 ml of 2% li-
docaine (half the amount if 500 ml bag). Using the
 appropriate body weight and corresponding fuid
rate in the table below will achieve a CRI dosage of
50 mcg/kg/min.
BW (kg)
1/Tu
5
10
10
20
20
40
30
60
40
80
50
100
60
120
70
140
APPENDIX
、
Echocardiographic Normals
Normal Canine Echocardiographic Values*
Weight(kg)
Parameter
3
5
7
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
50
LVIDd
24.6
27.4
30.0
32.7
37.1
41.4
44.8
48.3
51.7
54.8
60.7
(mm)
(6.2)
(5.2)
(4.5)
(3.5)
(2.4)
(2.2)
(2.9)
(3.9)
(5.0)
(6.1)
(8.3)
LVID,
13.6
16.0
17.9
20.6
24.3
28.0
31.0
33.9
36.9
39.6
44.6
(mm)
(5.5)
(4.7)
(4.0)
(3.1)
(2.1)
(2.0)
(2.5)
(3.4)
(4.5)
(5.4)
(7.4)
LVPWa
5.0
5.4
5.7
6.2
6.8
7.4
7.9
8.4
8.9
9.3
10.2
(mm)
(2.1)
(1.7)
(1.5)
(1.2)
(0.8)
(0.7)
(1.0)
(1.3)
(1.7)
(2.0)
(2.8)
LVPWs
7.2
7.9
8.4
9.2
10.2
11.3
12.1
13.0
13.8
14.5
16.0
(uu)
(1.7)
(1.6)
(1.4)
(1.3)
(1.1)
(1.1)
(1.2)
(1.3)
(1.5)
(1.7)
(2.2)
IVSd
5.8
6.2
6.5
7.0
7.6
8.2
8.7
9.2
9.7
10.2
11.0
(mm)
(2.1)
(1.7)
(1.5)
(1.2)
(0.8)
(0.7)
(0.9)
(1.3)
(1.7)
(2.0)
(2.7)
IVS,
9.8
10.2
10.4
10.9
11.5
12.3
13.0
13.9
14.6
15.4
(mm)
(2.6)
(2.2)
(2.0)
(1.7)
(1.2)
(1.1)
(1.5)
(2.3)
(2.6)
(3.5)
LA
12.7
14.0
15.0
16.3
18.3
20.2
21.8
23.3
24.8
26.2
28.8
(mm)
(5.3)
(4.5)
(3.8)
(3.0)
(2.0)
(1.9)
(2.4)
(3.3)
(4.3)
(5.2)
(7.1)
Ao
13.8
15.3
16.4
18.1
20.4
22.8
24.6
26.4
28.3
30.0
33.1
(mm)
(3.6)
(3.0)
(2.6)
(2.0)
(1.4)
(1.3)
(1.6)
(2.2)
(2.9)
(3.5)
(4.8)
              s    
medicine. St. Louis, 1992, Mosby. Data from Bonagura JD, O'Grady MR, Herring DS: Echocardiography: principles of interpretation.
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 15: 1177, 1985.
LVID。 Left ventricular internal dimension at end diastole; LVID, left ventricular internal dimension at end systole; LVPW, left 
ventricular posterior wall at end diastole; LVPW, left ventricular posterior wall at end systole; /VS。, interventricular septum at end
diastole; /VS, interventricular septum at end systole; LA, left atrium (systole); Ao, aortic root (diastole).
*Fractional shortening: 28% to 40%; mitral valve E point to septal separation: <5 to 6 rmim. Mean value given,±SD in parentheses
below.
415
416
Appendix
Normal Feline Echocardiographic Values
Parameter
Range (Unsedated)* (n =30)
Range (Sedated With Ketamine) (n = 30)
RVIDg (mm)
2.7-9.4
1.2-7.5
LVID (mm)
12.0-19.8
10.7-17.3
LVID, (mm)
5.2-10.8
4.9-11.6
SF (%)
39.0-61.0
30-60
LVPWg (mm)
2.2-4.4
2.1-4.5
LVPW, (mm)
5.4-8.1
IVSg (mm)
2.2-4.0
2.2-4.9
IVS, (mm)
4.7-7.0
LA (mm)
9.3-15.1
7.2-13.3
Ao (mm)
7.2-11.9
7.1-11.5
LA/A0
.95-1.65
.73-1.64
EPSS (mm)
.17-.21
PEP (s)
.024-.058
LVET (s)
.10-.18
.093-0.176
PEP/LVET
.228-.513
Vcf (circumf/s)
2.35-4.95
2.27-5.17
RVID, Right ventricular intemal dimension at end diastole; LVIDa, left ventricular internal dimension at end diastole; LVID, left ven-
tricular intermal dimension at end systole; SF, shortening fraction; LVP W&, left ventricular posterior wall at end diastole; LVPW, left
ventricular posterior wall at end systole; /VSa, interventricular septum at end diastole; IVS, interventricular septum at end systole; LA,
Jeft atrium (systole), Ao, aortic root (end diastole) EPSS, E pointto septal separation; PEP(s), prejection period (seconds); LVET(s),
Jeft ventricularejection time (seconds); Vcf (circumf/s), velocity of circumferential fiber shortening.
heart rate, and other variables. Am J Vet Res 46: 1705, 1985.
Data from FoxPR, Bond BR, Peterson ME: Echocardiographic reference values in healthy cats sedated with ketamine hydrochloride.
Am J Vet Res 46: 1479, 1985.
Appendix3
417
Median and Range of Observed Heart Rate and Echocardiographic Measurements of Dogs of Four
Different Breeds (Differing Somatotypes)
Miniature Poodle
Pembroke Welsh
Afghan Hound
Golden Retriever
Measurement
(n=20)
Corgie (n=20)
(n=20)
(n=20)
Weight (kg)
3* (1.4-9)
15 (8-19)
23 (17-36)
32 (23-41)
Heart rate (bpm)
150 (100-200)
120 (80-160)
120 (80-140)
100 (80-140)
LVWD (mm)
5 (4-6)
8 (6-10)
9 (7-11)
10 (8-12)
LVWS (mm)
8(6-10)
12 (8-13)
12 (9-18)
15 (10-19)
LVCD (mm)
20 (16-28)
32 (28-40)
42 (33-52)
45 (37-51)
LVCS (mm)
10 (8-16)
19 (12-23)
28 (20-37)
27 (18-35)
FS (%)
47 (35-57)
44 (33-57)
33 (24-48)
39 (27-55)
 EPSS (mm)
0 (0-2)
2 (0-5)
4 (0-10)
5 (1-10)
RVCD (mm)
4 (2-9)
10 (6-14)
10 (5-20)
13 (7-27)
IVSD (mm)
5 (4-6)
8 (6-9)
10 (8-12)
10 (8-13)
IVSS (mm)
8(6-10)
12 (10-14)
13 (8-18)
14 (10-17)
AO (mm)
10 (8-13)
18 (15-22)
26 (20-34)
24 (14-27)
LA (mm)
12 (8-18)
21 (12-24)
26 (18-35)
27 (16-32)
From Morrison, S.A., et al: Effect of breed and body weight on echocardiographic values in four breeds of dogs of differing somato-
types,JVet InternMed,6:223,1992.
LVWD, Left ventricular wall thickness at end-diastole; LVWS, left ventricular wall thickness at systole; LVCD, left ventricular cham-
ber dimension at end-diastole; LVCS, left ventricular chamber dimension at systole; FS, percent fractional shortening: EPSS, E-point 
septal separation; RVCD, right ventricular chamber dimension at end-diastole; /VSD, interventricular septal thickness at end-diastole;
IVSS, interventricular septal thickness at systole; AO, aortic root; LA, left atrium.
*Median.
Range.
nd
P
3M Littman electronic stethoscope, 16f
AF. See Atrial fibrillation (AF)
AFL. See Atrial futter (AFL)
A
Agents
Abdominal palpitation, 13-14
antiarrhythmic, 145
 Aberrant conduction, atrial premature complexes (APCs) with,
 beta-adrenergic blocking, 145
74
Airway compression, cough caused by, 125-126
Abnormal heart sounds, 18-20
Aldactone (spironolactone), 148, 284, 304
causes of, 20t
 Aldosterone antagonists, 148
 Abnormal jugular pulses, causes of, 12b
Allergic pneumonitis, 193, 197
Accelerated idioventricular rhythm, 274f
Alpha-2 adrenergic drugs, 360
ACE inhibitors, 300-301
 Alpha-adrenergic receptor antagonists, 303
benazepril, 283
Ambulatory electrocardiography, 101-102
enalapril, 283
cardiac event recorders(CERs), 102
Acepromazine,307
application, 102
Acquired cardiac disease, radiographic signs of
implantable CERs,102
congenital and, 43t
use of CERs, 102
Acquired valvular disease, 110-138
indications, 101
Acromegalic heart disease, 172-173
technique, 101-102
ancillary tests, 173
Amino acid deficiency, 148
historical perspective, 172-173
Amino acid supplementation, 148
pathology, 173
Aminophylline (Aminophyllin), 307
pathophysiology, 173
Amiodarone, 336
physical examination, 173
Amlodipine (Norvasc), 302
presenting complaints, 173
Amlodipine besylate, 283
prognosis,173
Amrinone (lnocor),307
signalment, 173
Anemia, 261-262
therapy, 173
cardiac pathophysiology, 261
Acromegaly in cats, 250-251
diagnosis, 261-262
Acute tamponade, 295
prognosis, 262
Addison's disease, 246-248
therapy, 262
Adrenergic beta blockers, 160
Anesthesia, maintenance of, 363
Adrenergic drugs, alpha-2, 360
inhalation anesthetics, 363
Adult heartworms, macrolide effcacy against, 199
isoflurane, 363
Advanced life support, 335-339
nitrous oxide, 363
Advantage Multi, (moxidectin), 198
sevoflurane, 363
Note: Page numbers followed by b, f or tindicate boxes,
figures, or tables.
418
Index
419
Anesthesia of cardiac patient, 356-375
Anesthetic drug interactions, cardiac drugs and (Continued)
adjunct techniques, 364-365
combination drug therapy, 359
infiltration techniques, 365
digitalis glycosides, 358
local and regional anesthesia/analgesia, 364-365
diuretics, 358
local anesthetic drugs, 365
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, 359
opioids,365
vasodilators, 358-359
aftercare,368
 Anesthetic drugs contraindicated in patients with cardiac disease
analgesia, 368-370
alpha-2 adrenergic drugs, 360
continuous rate infusion of opioids, 369-370
barbiturates, 360
opioid analgesia techniques, 369
inhalation anesthetics, 360
anesthetic drug selection and supportive care, 359-360
Anesthetics
anesthetic drugs contraindicated in patients with cardiac
inhalation, 360
disease, 360
protocols in dogs and cats, 370-372
oxygenation and ventilatory support, 359-360
Anesthetized patients, classification of physical status for, 357t
sedation or general anesthesia, 359
Angiography, nonselective, 102-103
anesthetic drugs that should be used with caution, 360-361
Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEls), cardiac
intravenous induction agents, 361
drugs and anesthetic drug interactions, 358
preanesthetic medications, 360-361
Anterior fascicular block, left, 72
anesthetics protocols in dogs and cats, 370-372
Anterior mitral valve leaflet, 129f
canine pericardial disease, 372
Antiarrhythmic agents, 145
cardiac diseases and anesthesia techniques for cats, 372-373
cardiac drugs and anesthetic drug interactions, 359
cardiac drugs and anesthetic drug interactions, 358-359
 Antibradycardia pacing, pacemaker nomenclature for, 389t
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEls), 358
Anticholinergics, 360-361
antiarrhythmic agents, 359
Aorta
calcium channel blockers, 359
enlargement of aortic arch and, 39
class I antiarrhythmic agents, 359
 M-mode measurements of left heart and, 92f
combination drug therapy, 359
Aortic arch and aorta, enlargement of, 39
digitalis glycosides, 358
causes of aortic arch enlargement, 39
diuretics, 358
differential diagnosis, 39
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, 359
radiographic signs, 39
vasodilators, 358-359
Aortic diameters, measurement of, left atrial and, 93f
care during sedation and anesthesia, 366-368
Aortic stenosis, 223-227, 226f See also Subaortic stenosis,
invasive mionitoring, 367-368
congenita]
noninvasive monitoring, 366-367
anatomy,223
injectable general anesthesia, 364
diagnosis, 223
intravenous induction agents, 362-363
diagnostic testing, 224-227
maintenance of anesthesia, 363
natural history, 227
pericardiocentesis,372
pathophysiology, 223
preanesthetic considerations, 356-358
physical examination, 224
additional tests, 358
prognosis, 227
anesthetic risk classification, 357
therapy, 227
diagnosis of etiology of heart disease, 356-357
Aortic valve
functional classification of heart failure, 357
dilation, 376-378
laboratory tests, 358
endocarditis, 134f, 135f
physical examination,358
incompetence, 136f
preanesthetic diagnostic evaluation, 358
APCs. See Atrial premature complexes (APCs)
regional techniques, 365-366
Appendectomy atrial, 379, 38 1f
intercostal nerve blocks, 365
Apresoline (hydralazine), 283, 284, 302
intrapleural analgesia, 366
Arrhythmias
Jumbosacral epidural - cats, 365
breed-specific,328-329
Jumbosacral epidural - dogs, 365
cardiac,49, 315-332
nondepolarizing muscle relaxants drugs (NMRDs), 366
classification of cardiac, 62b
species differences in anesthetic drug effects, 364
and conduction disturbances, 63-65
specific cardiac diseases and recommended aesthetic
feline patients with, 321t
protocols, 370
heard on auscultation, 20
useful anesthetic drugs
normal, sinus, 65
preanesthetic medication, 361
supraventricular, 316t, 317
tranquilizers, 361-362
ventricular, 317t,326
Anesthetic drug interactions, cardiac drugs and, 358-359
Arterial vasodilators, 144-145
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEls), 358
Arterial vasodilators, direct-acting, 302-303
antiarrhythmic agents, 359
alpha-adrenergic receptor antagonists, 303
calcium channel blockers, 359
prazosin (Minipress), 303
class I antiarrhythmic agents, 359
420
Index
Arterial vasodilators, direct-acting ( Continued)
Auscultatory method, 279
hydralazine, 302
AV. See Arterioventricular (AV)
sodium nitroprusside, 302303
AVNRT. See Atrioventricular nodal reentrant tachycardia (AVNRT)
nitroprusside (Nipride), 302-303
AVRT. See Atrioventricular reentrant tachycardia (AVRT)
venous vasodilators, 303
Azotemia, development of, 129
jsosorbide dinitrate,303
B
nitroglycerin, 303
Artery banding, pulmonary, 378, 379f
Balloon-tipped cardiac catheter, 104f
Artery shunt, systemic-to-pulmonary, 378-379, 380f
Banding, pulmonary artery, 378, 379f
Artificial pacemaker, 76
Barbiturates, 360, 362-363. See atso Thiobarbiturates
Artioventricular valve dysplasia, 236-238
Basal serum thyroid hormone, altering, 245b 
anatomy, 237
Beat
diagnosis, 237
junctional escape,74
diagnostic testing, 238
ventricular escape, 74-76
pathophysiology, 237
Benazepril, 283
physical elimination, 237
Benzodiazepines, 361
prognosis, 238
Beta blockers, adrenergic, 160
therapy, 238
Beta-adrenergic blocking agents, 145
Ascites, 7-8
Beta-adrenergic receptor blockers, 308-309
Ascites in dogs, 8f
 Biomarkers, cardiac neurohormones and, 105
Ascites in dogs, cause of, 8b
Bipolar standard leads, three, 53f
Ashman's phenomenon, 76
Bipolar VV1R pacemaker, 390f
Asthma-like syndrome, feline, 194, 197
Blindness, cat with acute, 278f
Asymptomatic MVD, 124-125
Block. See atso Left bundle branch block (LBBB); Right
Asymptomatic occult disease, treatment of, 145-146
bundle branch block (RBBB)
Asystole, ventricular, 74, 329-330
complete heart, 72
AT. See Atrial tachycardia (AT)
first-degree AV, 71
Atenolol, 160, 283
left anterior fascicular, 72
 Atrial and aortic diameters, measurerment of, left, 93f
second-degree AV, 71
Atrial and atrioventricular septal defect repair, 383
sinus, 67
Atrial appendectomy, 379, 38 1f
third-degree AV, 72
Atrial enlargement, dog with severe left, 34f
Blocking agents
Atrial fibrillation (AF), 66, 142f 318-322, 318f
beta-adrenergic, 145
dogs with, 319f 320f, 321f
calcium channel, 301-302
therapy, 318-322
Blood pressure
Atrial flutter (AFL), 66, 322
compensatory sympathetic system and reduction in, 292f
drug therapy for, 322
consequences and clinical signs of high, 278-279
 Atrial premature complexes (APCs), 66
measurement of, 279-281
 Atrial premature complexes (APCs) with aberrant
Borreliosis (Lyme disease), 271
conduction,74
Boxer with large heart base mass, 265f
Atrial standstill, 67
Bradyarrhythmias, 349-35 1
 Atrial tachycardia (AT), 66
 hyperkalemic cardiotoxicity, 351
ectopic, 322
second and third-degree AV block, 350-351
Atrial thrombus, left, 10f
sinus arrest, 351
Atrioventricular (AV) block
sinus bradycardia, 349-350
canine patient with complete, 390f
Bradyarrhythrias and conduction disturbances, 323
dog with high-grade second-degree, 391f
Bradycardia pacing. See Antibradycardia pacing
first-degree, 71
Bradycardias
second-degree, 71
recurrence of, 393f
third-degree, 72
sinus, 65, 323-324
Atrioventricular (AV) conduction abnommalities, 325-326
Breed, 2
AV block
Breed-specific arrhythmias, 328-329
complete or third degree, 325-326
 Buprenorphine, 362
first degree, 325
Butorphanol (Torbutrol), 307, 362
second degree 325
C
treatment of cormplete AV block,326
Atrioventricular (AV) junctional tachycardia, 67
Cachexia,cardiac,9b
 Atrioventricular nodal reentrant tachycardia (AVNRT), 323
Calcium channel blockers, 160-161
Atrioventricular reentrant tachycardia (AVRT), 323
cardiac drugs and anesthetic drug interactions, 359
Atropine, 336
Calcium channel blocking agents, 301-302
Auscultation, 16-17
amlodipine (Norvasc), 302
arrhythmias heard on, 20
diltiazem (Cardizem, Dilacor), 302
in dog, 16f
nifedipine, 302
in dog and cat, 17t
verapamil,302
Calcium gluconate, 336-338
Index
421
Calcium-sensitizing agents, 148
Cardiac disease, diagnostic techniques for
Canine. See aiso Dogs
evaluation of (Continued)
degenerative valvular disease, 126t
technique, 101-102
pericardial disease, 372
cardiac catheterization, 103-104
with transvenous VDD pacing system, 390f
clinical utility, 104
Canine and feline ECG valves, normal, 57t
indications, 103
Canine and feline electrocardiography, lead systerms
limitations, risks, and costs, 104
used in, 52b
technique, 103-104
Canine cardiomyopathy, 139-150
cardiac neurohormones and biomarkers, 105
dilated cardiomyopathy, 139-149
cardiac troponins, 105
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), 149
continuous in-hospital electrocardiographic
Canine patients
monitoring, 99-100
with complete AV block, 390f
Jimitations, 100
supraventricular arrhythrmias in, 316t
technique, 99-100
ventricular arrhythmias in, 3 17t
 Holter monitoring and cardiac event recording, 10l-102
Carbon monoxide (CO), 267-268
cardiac event recorders (CERs), 102
Cardiac arrhythmias
indications, 101
classification of, 62b
technique,101-102
documentation of, 49
natriuretic peptides (atrial and B-type), 105-106
Cardiac arrhythmias and conduction disturbances,
clinical uility, 106
treatment of, 315-332
indications, 105
atrial fbrillation (AF), 318-322
Jimitations, risk, and costs, 106
therapy, 318-322
technique, 106
atrial flutter (AFL), 322
newer cardiac imaging techniques,106-107
atrioventricular (AV) conduction abnormalities, 325-326
computed tomography (CT), 106
AV block, complete or third degree, 325-326
Jimitations, 107
AV block, first degree, 325
magnetic resonance imaging (MRl), 107
AV block, second degree, 325
nuclear cardiology, 107
treatment of complete AV block, 326
nonselective angiography, 102-103
atrioventricular nodal reentrant tachycardia (AVNRT), 323
clinical utility, 103
atrioventricular reentrant tachycardia (AVRT), 323
indications, 102
breed-specific arrhythmias, 328-329
Jimitations, risk, and costs, 103
ectopic atrial tachycardia (AT), 322
technique, 102-103
sick sinus syndrome (SSS), 324-325
provocative electrocardiographic techniques, 100-101
treatment, 324-325
clinical utility, 100-101
sinus bradycardia, 323-324
inhibition of vagal tone, 100
treatment, 324
vagal maneuver, 100
treatment of cardiac arrhythmias, 315-318
serologic testing, 104-105
treatment of ventricular tachycardia (VT), 326-328
clinical utility, 105
acute intravenous antiarrythymic therapy, 327
indications, 104-105
chronic oral antiarrythymic therapy, 327-328
limitations, risk, and costs, 105
ventricular asystole, 329-330
technique, 105
ventricular fibrillation, 330
Cardiac diseases
Cardiac cachexia in dog, problems contributing to, 9b
and anesthesia techniques for cats, 372-373
Cardiac catheter, balloon-tipped, 104f
radiographic signs of congenital and acquired, 43t
Cardiac catheterization, 103-104
Cardiac diseases, anesthetic drugs contraindicated
indications, 103
in patients with
technique, 103-104
alpha-2 adrenergic drugs, 360
angiocardiography, 103-104
barbiturates, 360
oximetry, 103
inhalation anesthetics, 360
Cardiac chamber activation, 56f
Cardiac drugs and anesthetic drug interactions, 358-359
Cardiac conditions, common acquired, 93-97
angiotensin-converting enzyme
2 D changes, 93-94
inhibitors (ACEls), 358
 degenerative mitral valve disease, 93
antiarrhythmic agents, 359
dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM), 94-95
calcium channel blockers, 359
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), 95
class I antiarrhythmic agents, 359
pericardial disease, 95-97
combination drug therapy, 359
Cardiac conduction and genesis of waveforms, 5 1-52
digitalis glycosides, 358
Cardiac conduction system, 55f
diuretics,358
Cardiac disease, diagnostic techniques for
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, 359
evaluation of, 99-107
vasodilators, 358-359
ambulatory electrocardiography, 10l-102
Cardiac event recorders (CERs), 102
cardiac event recorders (CERs), 102
Cardiac hemangiosarcoma, 205-209
indications, 101
Cardiac hemangiosarcoma, dog with, 206f
422
Index
Cardiac imaging techniques, newer, 106-107
Cardiac patient, anesthesia of {Continued)
computed tomography (CT), 106
regional techniques, 365-366
Jimitations, 107
intercostal nerve blocks,365
magnetic resonance imaging (MRl), 107
intrapleural analgesia, 366
nuclear cardiology, 107
lumbosacral epidural - cats, 365
Cardiac lymphoma
lumbosacral epidural - dogs, 365
cat with, 264f
nondepolarizing muscle relaxants drugs (NMRDs), 366
dog diagnosed with, 263f
species differences in anesthetic drug effects, 364
Cardiac masses and foreign bodies. See intracardiac masses
specific cardiac diseases and recommended aesthetic
and foreign bodies
protocols,370
Cardiac murmur, cough and, 115t
useful anesthetic drugs
Cardiac neurohormones and biomarkers, 105
preanesthetic medication, 361
cardiac troponins, 105
tranquilizers, 361-362
clinical utility, 105
Cardiac rhythm disturbances, 297, 342, 349-354
indications,105
bradyarrhythrmias, 349-35 1
limitations, 105
hyperkalermic cardiotoxicity, 351
technique, 105
second and third-degree AV block, 350-351
Cardiac patient, anesthesia of, 356-375
sinus arrest, 351
adjunct techniques, 364-365
sinus bradycardia, 349-350
infltration techniques, 365
tachyarrhythmias
local and regional anesthesia/analgesia, 364-365
sinus tachycardia, 352
local anesthetic drugs, 365
supraventricular tachycardia, 352-353
opioids,365
ventricular tachycardia, 353-354
aftercare, 368
Cardiac silhouette, generalized enlargement of, 179f
analgesia, 368-370
Cardiac size, vertebral scale system of, 31f
continuous rate infusion of opioids, 369-370
Cardiac surgery, 376-385
opioid analgesia techniques, 369
with cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB), 383-385
anesthetic drug selection and supportive care, 359-360
atrial and atrioventricular septal defect repair, 383
anesthetic drugs contraindicated in patients with cardiac
double-chambered right ventricle (DCRV) repair, 384
disease, 360
mitral valve repair, 385
oxygenation and ventilatory support, 359-360
mitral valve replacerment (MR), 384-385
sedation or general anesthesia, 359
tetralogy of Fallot repair, 383-384
anesthetic drugs that should be used with
tricuspid valve replacement, 385
caution, 360-361
ventricular septal defect (VSD) repair, 383
intravenous induction agents, 361
closed, 376-380
preanesthetic medications, 360-361
atrial appendectomy, 379
anesthetics protocols in dogs and cats, 370-372
patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) ligation, 376
canine pericardial disease,372
pericardiectomy, 379
cardiac drugs and anesthetic drug interactions, 358-359
pulmonary artery banding, 378
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors
pulmonic and aortic valve dilation, 376-378
(ACEls), 358
systemic-to-pulmonary artery shunt, 378-379
antiarrhythmic agents, 359
with inflow occlusion, 380-383
calcium channel blockers, 359
cor triatriatum repair, 382-383
class I antiarrhythmic agents, 359
intracardiac masses and foreign bodies, 383
combination drug therapy, 359
pulmonary patch graft, 381-32
digitalis glycosides,358
Cardiac tumors, 210
diuretics, 358
Cardiac tumors, pericardial disorders and, 200-214
nonsteroidal anti-infarmmatory drugs, 359
causes of pericardial effusion, 205-212
vasodilators, 358-359
cardiac hemangiosarcoma, 205-209
care during sedation and anesthesia, 366-368
neoplastic,205-210
invasive monitoring, 367-368
pericardial effusions, 200-205
noninvasive monitoring, 366-367
chief complaints and history, 200
injectable general anesthesia, 364
diagnostic procedures, 201-204
intravenous induction agents, 362-363
incidence,200
maintenance of anesthesia, 363
physical examination findings, 200-201
pericardiocentesis, 372
signalment, 200
preanesthetic considerations, 356-358
Cardiac-related pathology, projection selection in, 27-28
additional tests, 358
pleural effusion, 28
anesthetic risk classification, 357
pulmonary edema, 27-28
diagnosis of etiology of heart disease, 356-357
Cardiogenic pulmonary edema, 27f
functional classification of heart failure, 357
Cardiology, nuclear, 107
laboratory tests, 358
Cardiomyopathies
physical examination, 358
canine, 139-150
preanesthetic diagnostic evaluation, 358
dilated cardiormyopathy, 139-149
Index
423
Cardiomyopathies {Continued)
Cardiomyopathies,feline(Continued)
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), 149
prognosis, 169-170
in cat, 165f
signalment,168
cat with unclassified form of, 167f
therapy, 168-169
dilated, 154f
therapy, 154-156
neurogenic, 273
thyrotoxic heart disease, 170-172
right ventricular, 140f
ancillary tests, 171-172
Cardiomyopathies, feline, 151-175
pathophysiology, 171
acromegalic heart disease, 172-173
physical examination, 171
ancillary tests, 173
present complaints, 171
historical perspective, 172-173
prognosis, 172
pathology, 173
signalment, 171
pathophysiology, 173
therapy, 172
physical examination, 173
unclassified feline cardiomyopathies, 165-166
presenting complaints, 173
ancillary tests, 166
prognosis, 173
pathophysiology, 165
signalment,173
physical examination, 166
therapy, 173
presenting comiplaints, 166
ancillary tests, 153-154
prognosis,166
classification, 151-152
signalment, 166
clinical classification and pathophysiology, 152
therapy, 166
feline dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM), 161-163
Cardiomyopathies, unclassified feline, 165-166
ancillary tests, 162
ancillary tests, 166
pathology, 163
pathophysiology, 165
pathophysiology, 162
physical examination, 166
physical examination, 162
presenting complaints, 166
presenting complaints, 162
prognosis, 166
prognosis, 162-163
signalment, 166
signalment, 162
therapy, 166
therapy, 162
Cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB), cardiac
feline restrictive cardiomyopathy (RCM), 164-165
surgery with, 383-385
ancillary tests, 164
atrial and atrioventricular septal defect repair, 383
pathology, 164-165
double-chambered right ventricle (DCRV) repair, 384
pathophysiology, 164
mitral valve repair, 385
physical examination, 164
mitral valve replacement (MR), 384-385
presenting complaints, 164
tetralogy of Fallot repair, 383-384
prognosis, 164
ventricular septal defect ( VSD) repair, 383
signalment, 164
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR), 333-341
 therapy, 164
advanced life support, 335-339
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
defibrillator, 338-339
clinical classification, 157-158
-9  p
echocardiography, 158-160
electrocardiography, 335-336
pathology, 161
establishing access for drug and fuid therapy, 335
pathophysiology, 157-158
monitoring CPR efforts, 339
presenting complaints, 158
basic life support, 333-335
prognosis,161
airway, 333-334
signalment, 158
breathing, 334
therapy, 160-161
circulation,334-335
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), 157-161
performing in veterinary patients, 337f
infectious myocarditis, 174
post-resuscitation care, 340
neoplastic infiltration of heart, 173-174
cerebral protection, 340
drugs, toxins, and physical injury, 174
intensive care, 340
historical perspective, 173-174
preventing rearrest, 340
pathology, 156
special situations, 339-340
physical exammination, 153
anesthetic arrest, 339
presenting complaints, 152-153
vagal events, 339-340
prognosis,156
Cardiotoxicity
signalment, 152-153
doxorubicin, 269-271
taurine deficiency - induced myocardial failure, 166-170
hyperkalemic, 351
ancillary tests, 168
Cardiovascular collapse, hyperkalemia in, dog with, 247f
pathology, 170
Cardiovascular effects of systermic diseases, 240-276
pathophysiology, 168
anemia,261-262
physical examination, 168
cardiac pathophysiology, 261
presenting complaints, 168
diagnosis, 261-262
424
Index
Cardiovascular effects of systemic diseases (Continued)
Cardiovascular effects of systemic diseases (Continued)
prognosis,262
diagnosis, 246-248
therapy, 262
therapy, 248
borreliosis (Lyme disease), 271
hypoglycemia, 259-260
carbon monoxide (CO), 267-268
cardiac pathophysiology, 259
Chagas disease, 271-272
diagnosis, 259
chemodectoma,262-266
prognosis, 259-260
cardiac pathophysiology 263
therapy, 259
diagnosis, 263-264
hypothermia, 267
prognosis, 264-265
hypothyroidism, 243-246
therapy, 264
cardiac pathophysiology, 244
chocolate toxicity, 269
diagnosis, 244-245
diabetes mellitus, 252-253
therapy, 245-246
cardiac pathophysiology 252-253
infectious/inflammatory diseases, 270-271
diagnosis, 253
Lyme disease, 271
prognosis, 253
metabolic disturbances, 253
therapy, 253
neurogenic cardiomyopathy, 273
disorders associated with hypercalcemia, 256-257
oleander toxicity, 269
cardiac pathophysiology, 256
pancreatitis, 274
diagnosis, 256-257
parvovirus, 272
prognosis, 257
pheochromocytoma, 251-252
therapy, 257
cardiac pathophysiology, 251-252
disorders associated with hyperkalemia, 253-254
diagnosis, 252
disorders associated with hypocalcemia, 257-259
prognosis,252
cardiac pathophysiology, 258
therapy, 252
diagnosis, 258
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), 272-273
prognosis, 259
toad poisoning, 268
therapy, 258-259
traumatic myocarditis, 274-275
disorders associated with hypokalemia, 254-256
trypanosomiasis (Chagas disease), 271-272
uremia,260-261
diagnosis, 254
cardiac pathophysiology, 260
prognosis, 256
diagnosis, 260
therapy, 254-256
prognosis, 261
 disorders associated with hypomagnesemia and
therapy, 260-261
hypermagnesemia, 259
Cardiovascular function, assessing in emergency
doxorubicin cardiotoxicity, 269-271
patient, 342-343
cardiac pathophysiology, 269-270
diagnostic tests, 343
diagnosis, 270
physical examination, 342-343
therapy, 270
Cardiovascular system, physical and chemical agents
endocrine diseases, 240
that affect, 266
gastric dilation-volvulus complex (GDV), 273-274
Cardizem (diltiazem), 160-161, 302
hemangiosarcoma, 262
Cardizem CD, 161
hyperadrenocorticism, 248-250
Care, critical, 342-355
diagnosis, 249-250
Carvedilol (CoReg), 148, 309
pathophysiology, 249
Catheter, balloon-tipped cardiac, 104f
prognosis,250
Catheterization, cardiac, 103-104
therapy, 250
Cats
hyperpyrexia, 266-267
acromegaly in, 250-251
cardiac pathophysiology 266
with acute blindness, 278f
diagnosis, 266
anesthetics protocols in dogs and, 370-372
prognosis, 267
atypical cardiomyopathy in, 165f
therapy, 266-267
auscultation in dog and, 17t
hypersomatotropism in cats, 250-25 1
cardiac diseases and anesthesia techniques for, 372-373
cardiovascular pathophysiology, 250-251
with cardiac lymphoma, 264f
diagnosis, 251
characteristics of coughs in, 4t
prognosis, 251
with dilated cardiomyopathy, 154f
therapy, 251
dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) in, 163f
hyperthyroidism, 240-243
hypersomatotropism in, 250-251
cardiac pathophysiology, 240-241
diagnosis, 241-242
life-threatening dyspnea in, 155f
prognosis, 243
with myocardial failure associated with taurine
therapy, 243
deficiency, 169f 170f
hypoadrenocorticism, 246-248
with myxoma, 264f
cardiac pathophysiology 246
with saddle thrombus in, 10f
Index
425
Cats (Continued)
Conduction disturbances, treatment of cardiac
screening for heartworm infection, 188-189f
arrhythmias and (Continued)
syncope causes in dogs and, 7b
sick sinus syndrome (SSS), 324-325
with unclassified form of cardiomyopathy, 167f
treatment, 324-325
with urinary obstruction, hyperkalemia in, 255f
sinus bradycardia, 323-324
CERs. See Cardiac event recorders (CERs)
treatment,324
Chagas disease, 271-272
treatment of cardiac arrhythmias, 315-3 18
Chamber enlargerment, vessel and, 36f 37f
treatment of ventricular tachycardia (VT), 326-328
Chambers and outflow tract of right side of heart, 34f
acute intravenous antiarrythymic therapy, 327
Channel blockers, calcium, 160-161
chronic oral antiarrythymic therapy, 327-328
Chemical agents that affect cardiovascular system,
ventricular asystole, 329-330
physical and, 266
ventricular fibrillation, 330
Chemodectoma, 262-266
Conduction system, cardiac, 55f
cardiac pathophysiology, 263
Congenital and acquired cardiac disease, radiographic signs of, 43t 
diagnosis, 263-264
Con genital defects according to pathophysiology, 216b
prognosis, 264-265
Con genital heart disease, 215-239
therapy, 264
aortic stenosis, 223-227
CHF. See Congestive heart failure (CHF)
anatomy, 223
Chlorothiazide (Diuril), 304
diagnosis, 223
Chocolate toxicity, 269
diagnostic testing, 224-227
Chronic heart failure, compensatory mechanisms in, 290-294
natural history, 227
additional compensatory mechanisms, 293
pathophysiology, 223
compen satory mechanisms, 293-294
physical examination, 224
Frank-Starling mechanism, 290
prognosis,227
myocardial hypertrophy, 292-293
therapy, 227
neuroendocrine mechanisms, 293
artioventricular valve dysplasia, 236-238
renin-angiotension-aldosterone system (RAAS), 290-291
anatomy, 237
sympathetic nervous system activation, 291-292
diagnosis, 237
Chronic tamponade,295
diagnostic testing,238
Class I antiarrhythmic agents, cardiac drugs and anesthetic
pathophysiology, 237
drug interactions, 359
physical elimination, 237
Closed cardiac surgery, 376-380
prognosis, 238
Coenzyme Qio, 149
therapy, 238
Collapsed trachea, 58f
auscultatory findings in, 217t
Color flow Doppler, 83
diagnosis, 215-217
Color flow echocardiographic studies of mitral
functional murmur, 218
regurgitation, 86f
hereditary aspects, 215
Compensatory sympathetic system and reduction in blood
incidence,215
pressure, 292f
innocent murmur, 218
Complexes
pulmonic stenosis (PS), 227-231
 atrial premature, 66
diagnosis, 228
 junctional premature, 66
diagnostic testing, 229
Computed tomography (CT), 106
differential diagnosis,229-230
Conduction
natural history, 230
atrial premature complexes (APCs) with aberrant, 74
pathophysiology, 228
electrical impulse,56f
physical education, 228-229
Conduction abnormalities, atrioventricular (AV), 325-326
prognosis,231
Conduction disturbances
therapy, 231
arrhythmias and, 63-65
specific defects, 218-223
bradyarrhythmias and, 323
diagnosis, 218-219
Conduction disturbances, treatment of cardiac
diagnostic testing, 220-222
arrhythmias and, 315-332
differential diagnosis, 222
atrial fibrillation (AF), 318-322
patent ductus arteriosus (PDA), 218
therapy, 318-322
pathophysiology, 218
atrial flutter (AFL), 322
physical examination, 219-220
atrioventricular(AV) conduction abnormalities, 325-326
prognosis,222-223
AV block, complete or third degree, 325-326
therapy, 222-223
AV block, first degree, 325
Tetralogy of Fallot, 235-236
AV block, second degree, 325
diagnosis, 236
treatment of complete AV block, 326
diagnostic testing, 236
atrioventricular nodal reentrant tachycardia (AVNRT), 323
pathophysiology, 235
atrioventricular reentrant tachycardia (AVRT), 323
physical examination, 236
breed-specific arrhythmias, 328-329
prognosis,236
ectopic atrial tachycardia (AT), 322
therapy, 236
426
Index
Congenital heart disease (Continued)
Degenerative mitral valve disease (MVD), 1l6f, 117f
therapy, 217-218
Degenerative valvular disease, canine, 126t
ventricular septal defect (VSD), 231-235
Detector, flat-panel, 44f
anatomy, 231
Diabetes mellitus, 252-253
diagnosis, 232
cardiac pathophysiology, 252-253
diagnostic testing, 233-234
diagnosis, 253
pathophysiology,231-232
prognosis,253
physical examination, 232
therapy, 253
prognosis, 234-235
Diastolic dysfunction, 289-290
therapy, 234-235
Diazepam. See atso Ketamine-diazepam; Opioid-diazepam
Congenital subaortic stenosis, 225f
combinations
Congestive heart failure (CHF), 110, 153f, 288, 343-344
Diethylcarbamazine, 198
caused by advanced MR, 128-129
Diffusion, pericardial, 42f
treatment of severe life-threatening, 146
Digital radiography, introduction to, 42-46
Continuous-wave (CW) Doppler, 81
 Digitalis glycosides, cardiac drugs and anesthetic drug
Cor pulmonale and pulmonary thromboembolism, 176-182
interactions, 358
clinical presentation, 177
Digoxin, 304-306
history and clinical signs, 177
Dilacor (diltiazem), 160-161, 302
diagnostic testing, 178-181
Dilacor XR, 161
catheterization, 180-181
Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM), 94-95, 139-149, 142f, 143f
echocardiography, 179-180
in cat, 163f
electrocardiography, 178
cat with, 154f
laboratory testing, 178
concomitant abnormalities in moderate or severe, 142-144
radiographs, 178
diagnostic tests, 140-142
etiology, 177
chest radiography, 141
physical examination, 178
echocardiography, 141-142
physiology, 176-177
dog with, 97f
 therapy, 181
history and physical examination findings, 140
Cor pulmonale, causes of, 177b
asymptomatic occult phase, 140
Cor triatriatum repair, 382-383
overt clinical phase, 140
CoReg(carvedilol), 148,309
natural history, 139-140
Coughing, 4-5
asymptomatic occult phase, 139-140
Coughs
overt clinical phase, 140
and cardiac murmurs, 115t
nutritional deficiencies, 144
caused by airway cormpression, 125-126
prevalence,139
characteristics in dogs and cats, 4t
prognosis, 149
CPB. See cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB)
signalman, 139
CPR. See Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR)
treatment, 144-145
Critical care, emergency management and, 342-355
of asymptomatic occult disease, 145-146
assessing cardiovascular function, 342-343
drug classes used for, 144-145
diagnostic tests, 343
treatment of overt clinical disease
physical examination, 342-343
additional oral medications, 147-149
cardiac rhythm disturbances, 342, 349-354
chronic oral treatment, 146-147
 bradyarrhythmias, 349-35 1
treatment of DCM accompanied by atrial fibrillation, 147
tachyarrhythmias, 352-354
treatment of refractory heart disease, 147
emergency treatment of heart failure, 343-349
treatment of severe life-threatening CHF, 146
congestive heart failure (CHF), 343-344
Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM), feline, 161-163
forward (low-output) heart failure, 348-349
ancillary tests, 162
left-sided congestive heart failure (LCHF), 344-346
pathology, 163
pericardial effusion, 347-348
pathophysiology, 162
right-sided congestive heart failure (RCHF), 346-347
physical examination, 162
heart failure, 342
presenting complaints, 162
 thromboembolic disease, 354
prognosis, 162-163
thromboembolism, 342
signalment, 162
CT. See Computed tomography (CT)
therapy, 162
Dilation
Cushing's disease, 248-250
pulmonary valve, 378f
CW. See Continuous-wave(CW) Doppler
pulmonic and aortic valve, 376-378
Cyanosis, 8
Diltiazem (Cardizem, Dilacor), 160-161, 302
Dirofilaria immitis, lifecycle of, 184f
D
Diseases
DCM. See Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM)
Addison’s, 246-248
DCRV. See Double-chambered right ventricle (DCRV)
canine degenerative valvular, 126t
Defibrillator settings, drug therapy and initial, 338t
Chagas, 271-272
Index
427
Diseases (Continued)
Diuretic therapy, 144, 303-306
Cushing's, 248-250
digitalis glycoside therapy, 304-306
 dog with myxomatous mitral valve, 96f
digoxin, 304-306
 infectious/inflammatory, 270-271
long diuretic, 303-304
Lyme, 271
furosemide (Lasix), 303-304
parenchymal lung, 191-193
pimobendan, 306
pericardial, 95-97
potassium-sparing diuretics, 304
thromboembolic,354
spironolactone (Aldactone), 304
Diseases, acquired valvular, 110-138
thiazide diuretics, 304
degenerative mitral valve disease (MVD), 110-131
chlorothiazide (Diuril), 304
clinical presentation, 112-115
hydrochlorothiazide (Hydrodiuril), 304
diagnostic findings, 115-124
Diuretics, 358
etiopathogenesis, 111
Diuril (chlorothiazide), 304
incidence, 110
Dobutamine hydrochloride (Dobutrex), 308
pathology, 111
Dobutrex (dobutamine hydrochloride), 308
pathophysiology, 11l-112
Dog and cat, auscultation in, 17t
prevalence, 110
Dog with cardiovascular collapse, hyperkalemia in, 247f
infective endocarditis, 131-137
Dogs
clinical presentation, 132-133
with atrial fibrillation (AF), 319f, 320f, 321f
diagnostic findings, 133-135
auscultation in, 16f
etiopathogenesis, 131-132
cardiac cachexia in, 9b
incidence, 131
with cardiac hemangiosarcoma, 206f
pathophysiology, 132
characteristics of coughs in,4t
prevalence, 131
with collapsed trachea, 58f
prognosis, 137
cuff placement over cranial tibial artery in, 280f
therapy, 135-137
diagnosed with cardiac lymphoma, 263f
Diseases, heartworm, 183-199
diagnosis of heartworm infection (HWl) in, 188f
classification of severity, 194-197
with dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM), 97f
adjuncts to adulticide therapy, 197
with heart base tumor, 207f
confirmation of adulticide effcacy, 196-197
with heartworm disease, 191f
 initiating macrolide prophylaxis in infected
heartworms in right heart of, 192f
dogs, 196
with high-grade second-degree AV block, 391f
rapid microfilaricide therapy, 196
with hypokalemia, 255f
treatment, 194-196
with intermittent failure to pace, 394f
clinical pathology, 187-191
Jeft bundle branch block (LBBB) in, 72f
clinical signs, 185-186
with malfunctioning unipolar pacemaker, 395f
diagnosis, 186-187
with mitral regurgitation, 300f
etiology, 183
with MVD, 115
history, 185
with myxomatous mitral valve disease, 96f
lifecycle, 183
with pericardial effusion (PE), 202f, 203f, 204f
macrolide efficacy against adult heartworms, 199
pericardiocentesis in, 208f
missed doses of oral macrolide prophylactic
with pulmonary hypertension, 180f
drugs, 199
with pulmonary stenosis, 58f
pathogenesis, 185
receiving macrolide prophylaxis, 199
prevalence, 184
with severe hypocalcemia, 258f
prevention, 197-198
with severe left atrial enlargement, 34f
diethylcarbamazine,198
with severe pulmonic stenosis, 96f
jvermectin (Heartgard), 198
severe right ventricular enlargement in, 58f
milbemycin (lnterceptor), 198
with systolic murmur (SM), 113f
moxidectin (Advantage Multi), 198
transvenous pacing lead in, 392f
retesting dogs receiving macrolide prophylaxis, 199
ventricular pre-excitation in, 71f
sequelae of heartworm infection, 191-194
Dogs and cats
allergic pneumonitis, 193
anesthetics protocols in, 370-372
feline asthma-like syndrorme, 194
syncope causes in, 7b
parenchymal lung disease, 191-193
Dopamine hydrochloride (lntropin), 308
pulmonary eosinophilic granulomatosis, 193
Doppler
 treatment of sequelae, 197
color flow, 83
allergic pneumonitis, 197
continuous-wave (CW), 81
feline asthma-like syndrome, 197
echocardiographic studies, 84-85f
 pulmonary eosinophilic granulomatosis, 197
echocardiography, 78-81, 226
pulmonary thromboembolism, 197
flow meter, 279
Dissociative, 364
high-pulse repetition frequency, 81-83
Dissociatives, 361, 363
 pulsed wave, 81
Distended jugular veins, causes of, 12b
Doppler imaging. See Tissue Doppler imaging (TD1)
428
Index
Doppler ultrasound, echocardiography and, 78-98
Echocardiographic evaluation
common acquired cardiac conditions, 93-97
of ventricular diastolic function, 87f
2 D changes, 93-94
of ventricular systolic function, 94-95f
degenerative mitral valve disease, 93
Echocardiographic measurements, 89-93
dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM), 94-95
Echocardiographic studies
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), 95
Doppler, 84-85f
pericardial disease, 95-97
 of mitral regurgitation, 86f
echocardiographic measurements, 89-93
Echocardiographic technique,8788
aortic and pulmonic stenosis, 91-93
Echocardiographic views, 88-89
aortic insufficiency, 91
Echocardiographic views, right parasternal, 79-8 1f
chamber dimensions, 89
Echocardiography
diastolic function, 91
Doppler, 78-81, 226
E point to septal separation (EPSS), 90
M-rmode, 78
ejection fraction (EF%), 90
spectral Doppler, 81
end-systolic volume index (ESVl), 90
two-dimensional, 78
index of sphericity, 89
Echocardiography and Doppler ultrasound, 78-98
LA diameter, 90
common acquired cardiac conditions, 93-97
LV diameter, 89
2 D changes, 93-94
LV fractional shortening (FS%), 90
degenerative mitral valve disease, 93
LV wall thickness, 90
dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM), 94-95
mitral insufficiency, 91
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), 95
systolic function, 90
echocardiographic measurements, 89-93
systolic time intervals, 91
aortic and pulmonic stenosis, 91-93
transmitral flow, 91
aortic insufficiency, 91 
valve function, 91
chamber dimensions, 89
echocardiographic technique, 87-88
diastolic function, 91
echocardiographic views, 88-89
E point to septal separation (EPSS), 90
types of imaging, 78-87
ejection fraction (EF%), 90
applications, 83-87
end-systolic volume index (ESV1), 90
color flow Doppler,83
index of sphericity, 89
continuous-wave (CW) Doppler, 81
LA diameter, 90
Doppler echocardiography, 78-81
LV diameter, 89
high-pulse repetition frequency Doppler, 81-83
LV fractional shortening (FS%), 90
M-mode echoc ardiography, 78
LV wall thickness, 90
 pulsed wave Doppler, 81
mitral insuffciency, 91
spectral Doppler echocardiography, 81
systolic function, 90
tissue Doppler imaging (TDl), 83
systolic time intervals, 91
two-dimensional echocardiography, 78
transmitral flow, 91
Dorsoventral and ventrodorsal projections, 32-35
valve function, 91
cardiac parameters, 32-35
echocardiographic technique,87-88
vessel parameters, 35
echocardiographic views, 88-89
Dorsoventral projection, pulmonary vasculature in, 33f
types of imaging, 78-87
Dorsoventral/ventrodorsal projection, 26-27
applications, 83-87
Dorsoventral/ventrodorsal thoracic radiographic projection, 26f
color flow Doppler,83
Double-chambered right ventricle (DCRV) repair, 384
continuous-wave (CW) Doppler, 81
Doxorubicin cardiotoxicity, 269-271
Doppler echocardiography, 78-81
cardiac pathophysiology, 269-270
high-pulse repetition frequency Doppler, 81-83
diagnosis, 270
M-mode echocardiography, 78
therapy, 270
pulsed wave Doppler, 81
Drug therapy
spectral Doppler echocardiography, 81
combination,359
tissue Doppler imaging (TDl), 83
and initial defibrillator settings, 338t
two-dimensional echocardiography, 78
 Drugs. See atso specifically named drugs
Echogenic worms, 192f
alpha-2 adrenergic, 360
Ectopic atrial tachycardia (AT), 322
macrolide prophylactic, 199
Edema
Dysplasia
cardiogenic pulmonary, 27f
artioventricular valve, 236-238
pulmonary,27-28
tricuspid valve, 237f
Effusions
Dyspnea, 5-6
pericardial, 42,200-212, 347-348
in cat, 155f
pleural, 28, 28f 29f
causes of, 5b
Electrical impulse conduction, 56f
E
Electrocardiograms (ECGs), 386
atrial fbrillation, 61f
ECGs. See Electrocardiograms (ECGs)
atrial premature complexes, 60f
Echocardiograms (ECGs) of left heart, 82-83f
Index
429
Electrocardiograms (ECGs) (Continued)
Electrocardiography (Continued)
atrial standstill, 68f
sinus tachycardia, 65-66
atrial tachycardia, 61f
disturbances of supraventricular impulse
electrical alternans, 59f
formation, 66-67
electrode positioned for surgical monitoring, 54f
atrial fibrillation, 66
evaluation of, 52-54
atrial flutter, 66
first-degree AV block, 68f
atrial premature complexes, 66
hand-held wireless, 54f
atrial tachycardia, 66
heart sounds and relationship to, 18f
atrioventricular junctional tachycardia, 67
multiform ventricular premature complexes, 70f
junctional premature complexes, 66
normal canine and feline valves, 57t
supraventricular tachycardia, 67
 normal sinus arrhythmia, 60f
disturbances of ventricular impulse formation, 73-74
recording, 50-51
ventricular asystole, 74
right bundle branch block, 69f
ventricular fibrillation, 74
run of ventricular premature complexes, 70f
ventricular premature complexes ( VPCs), 73
second-degree AV block, 68f
ventricular tachycardia, 73-74
sinus arrest, 60f
electrocardiograrms in clinical practice,49-50
ST segment depression ion, 59f
chamber enlargerment patterns, 49
ST segment elevation, 59f
documentation of cardiac arrhythmias, 49
third-degree AV block, 69f
miscellaneous indications for
unifocal ventricular premature complexes, 69f
electrocardiography, 49-50
wireless printout report, 55f
escape rhythms, 74-76
Electrocardiograms (ECGs) in clinical practice
 junctional escape beat, 74
 chamber enlargement patterns, 49
junctional rhythm, 74
 documentation of cardiac arrhythmias, 49
ventricular escape beat, 74-76
miscellaneous indications for electrocardiography, 49-50
ventricular escape rhythm, 76
Electrocardiographic monitoring, continuous in-hospital, 99-
evaluation of electrocardiograms, 52-54
100
evaluation of waveforms, 54-63
Jimitations, 100
P wave, 54-55
technique, 99-100
PR interval, 55
Electrocardiographic techniques, provocative, 100-101
QRS complex, 55-62
clinical utility, 100-101
QT interval, 62-63
atropine response test, 101
ST segment, 62
post exercise ECG, 101
T wave, 63
vagal maneuver, 100-101
lead systems used in canine and feline, 52b
 inhibition of vagal tone, 100
miscellaneous
atropine response test, 100
artificial pacemaker, 76
postexercise ECG, 100
Ashman's phenomenon, 76
vagal maneuver, 100
parasystole, 76
cardioid body massage, 100
normal rhythms, 65
ocular pressure, 100
normal sinus arrhythmia, 65
Electrocardiography, 49-77
normal sinus rhythm, 65
ambulatory, 101-102
wandering sinus pacemaker, 65
arrhythmias and conduction disturbances, 63-65
recording electrocardiograms, 50-51
cardiac conduction and waveforms, 51-52
sick sinus syndrome (SSS), 75f
 disturbances of both impulse formation and irmpulse
ventricular fibrillation, 75f
conduction, 74
ventricular tachycardia, 75f
atrial premature complexes (APCs) with aberrant
Electrocardiography, principles of, 50
conduction,74
obtaining electrocardiographic leads, 50
sick sinus syndrome (Sss), 74
standard lead systerms, 50
disturbances of impulse conduction, 67-73
Electronic stethoscope, 3M Littman, 16f
atrial standstill, 67
Emergency management and critical care, 342-355
complete heart block, 72
assessing cardiovascular function, 342-343
first-degree AV block, 71
diagnostic tests, 343
left anterior fascicular block, 72
physical examination, 342-343
left bundle branch block (LBBB), 72
cardiac rhythm disturbances, 342, 349-354
right bundle branch block (RBBB), 72-73
bradyarrhythmias, 349-351
second-degree AV block, 71
tachyarrhythrmias, 352-354
sinus block, 67
emergency treatment of heart failure, 343-349
third-degree AV block, 72
congestive heart failure (CHF), 343-344
ventricular pre-expectation syndrome, 67-71
forward (low-output) heart failure, 348-349
 disturbances of sinus impulse formation, 65-66
left-sided congestive heart failure (LCHF), 344-346
sinus arrest, 65
pericardial effusion, 347-348
sinus bradycardia, 65
right-sided congestive heart failure (RCHF), 346-347
430
Index
Emergency management and critical care (Continued)
Feline cardiomyopathies ( Continued)
heart failure, 342
prognosis,173
thromboembolic disease, 354
signalment,173
thromboembolism, 342
therapy 173
Enalapril, 283
ancillary tests, 153-154
Endocarditis, aortic valve, 135f
classification, 151-152
Endocarditis, infective, 131-137
clinical classification and pathophysiology, 152
clinical presentation, 132-133
feline dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM), 161-163
history, 132
ancillary tests, 162
 physical findings, 132-133
pathology, 163
diagnostic findings, 133-135
pathophysiology, 162
electrocardiographic findings, 133
physical examination, 162
electrocardiography, 133
presenting complaints, 162
thoracic radiography, 133
prognosis, 162-163
etiopathogenesis, 131-132
signalment, 162
incidence, 131
therapy 162
pathophysiology, 132
feline restrictive cardiomyopathy (RCM), 164-165
prevalence, 131
ancillary tests, 164
prognosis,137
pathology, 164-165
therapy, 135-137
pathophysiology, 164
Endocarditis, mitral valve, 135f
 physical examination, 164
Endocarditis, severer, 130f
presenting complaints, 164
Endocrine diseases, 240
prognosis, 164
Epicardial pacing leads, 388f
signalment, 164
Epinephrine,336
therapy, 164
Escape beat
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), 157-161
junctional, 74
clinical classification, 157-158
ventricular, 74-76
echocardiography, 158-160
Escape rhythms, 74-76
pathology, 161
junctional escape beat, 74
pathophysiology, 157-158
 junctional rhythm, 74
presenting comiplaints, 158
ventricular, 76
prognosis, 161
ventricular escape beat, 74-76
signalment,158
ventricular escape rhythm, 76
therapy, 160-161
Etomidate,363
infectious myocarditis, 174
Examination, physical, 10-23
neoplastic infiltration of heart, 173-174
 abdominal palpitation, 13-14
drugs, toxins, and physical injury, 174
 abnormal heart sounds, 18-20
historical perspective, 173-174
arrhythmias heard on auscultation, 20
pathology, 156
auscultation, 16-17
physical examination, 153
femoral pulses, 14-15
presenting complaints, 152-153
head, 1l-12
prognosis, 156
miscellaneous sounds auscultated in thorax, 21-23
signalment,152-153
murmurs, 20-21
taurine deficiency - induced myocardial failure, 166-170
neck, 12-13
ancillary tests, 168
normal heart sounds, 17-18
pathology, 170
 observation, 10-11
pathophysiology, 168
percussion,15
physical examination, 168
skin, 14
 presenting complaints, 168
stethoscope, 15-16
prognosis,169-170
 tracheal palpitation, 13
signalment, 168
Exercise intolerance, weakness and, 7, 7b
therapy, 168-169
F
therapy, 154-156
thyrotoxic heart disease, 170-172
Fascicular block, left anterior, 72
ancillary tests, 171-172
Feline. See also Cats
pathophysiology, 171
Feline asthma-like syndrome, 194, 197
physical examination, 171
Feline cardiomyopathies, 151-175
present complaints, 171
acromegalic heart disease, 172-173
prognosis,172
ancillary tests, 173
signalment, 171
historical perspective, 172-173
therapy, 172
pathology, 173
Feline cardiomyopathies, unclassifed, 165-166
pathophysiology, 173
ancillary tests, 166
physical examination, 173
 pathophysiology, 165
presenting complaints, 173
Index
431
Feline cardiomyopathies, unclassified (Continued)
Heart, radiology of, 24-48
physical examination, 166
evaluation of heart chamber enlargement, 36-39
 presenting complaints, 166
right atrial enlargement, 36-38
prognosis,166
evaluation of pulmonary circulation, 40
signalment,166
under circulation,40
therapy, 166
introduction to digital radiography, 42-46
Feline dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM), 161-163
introduction to teleradiology 47
ancillary tests, 162
noncardiac-related variables and cardiac disease, 35-36
pathology, 163
cardiac position, 35-36
pathophysiology, 162
cardiac size and lateral projection, 36
physical exammination, 162
projection selection in cardiac-related pathology, 27-28
presenting complaints, 162
pleural effusion, 28
prognosis, 162-163
pulmonary edema, 27-28
signalment, 162
radiographic anatomy, 28-35
therapy, 162
dorsoventral and ventrodorsal projections, 32-35
Feline ECG valves, normal canine and, 57t
lateral thoracic radiographic projection, 28-32
Feline electrocardiography,lead systerms used in canine and, 52b
radiographic diagnosis of heart failure, 40-42
Feline lead, close-up normal, 56f
left-heart failure, 41-42
 Feline patients with arrhythmias, 321t
right-heart failure, 40-41
 Feline restrictive cardiomyopathy (RCM), 164-165
radiographic diagnosis of pericardial effusion, 42
ancillary tests, 164
radiographic interpretation, 35
pathology, 164-165
radiographic technique, 24-27
pathophysiology, 164
exposure technique, 24
physical examination, 164
film quality, 24
presenting complaints, 164
radiographic projections, 24-27
prognosis, 164
summary of radiographic signs, 42
signalment, 164
Heart and aorta, M-rmode measurerments of left, 92f
 therapy, 164
Heart base mass, Boxer with large, 265f
Femoral pulses, 14-15
Heart base tumors, 209
Fentanyl, 362
dog with, 207f
Fibrillation. See aiso Atrial fibrillation (AF)
Heart block, complete, 72
atrial, 66, 142f
Heart chamber enlargement, evaluation of, 36-39
ventricular, 74, 330
enlargement of aortic arch and aorta, 39
Film scanner, x-ray, 46f
causes of aortic arch enlargement, 39
First (S ) heart sound, changes in, 19b
differential diagnosis, 39
First-degree AV block, 71
radiographic signs, 39
Fish oil supplements, 149
enlargement of pulmonary artery, 39
Flat-panel detector, 44f
causes of pulmonary artery segment enlargement, 39
Flow meter, Doppler, 279
differential diagnosis, 39
Flutter, atrial, 66
radiographic signs, 39
Forward (low-output) heart failure, 348-349
Jeft atrial enlargement, 38-39
Frank-Starling mechanism, 290
causes of left atrial enlargement, 39
Functional murmur, 218
differential diagnosis, 39
Furosemide (Lasix), 284, 303-304
radiographic signs, 38-39
Jeft ventricle enlargement, 39
G
causes of ventricular enlargement,39
Gastric dilation-volvulus complex (GDV), 273-274
radiographic signs, 39
GDV. See Gastric dilation-volvulus complex (GDV)
right atrial enlargement, 36-38
Graft, pulmonary patch, 381-382, 382f
causes of right atrial enlargement, 37
Granulomatosis, pulmonary eosinophilic, 193, 197
differential diagnosis, 37-38
radiographic signs, 36-37
H
right ventricular enlargement, 38
Hand-held wireless ECG, 54f
causes of right ventricular enlargements, 38
HCM. See Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM)
radiographic signs, 38
Head, 11-12
Heart chamber, lateral thoracic radiographic
Heart
projection of, 30f
 chambers and outflow tract of right side of, 34f
Heart disease, acromegalic, 172-173
important systemic disorders that affect, 241b
ancillary tests, 173
lateral thoracic radiographic projection of, 29f 30f
historical perspective, 172-173
left ventricular outlow tract of, 33f
pathology, 173
limb leads surround, 51f
pathophysiology, 173
M-mode echocardiograms of left, 82-83f
physical examination, 173
Heart, neoplastic infiltration of, 173-174
presenting complaints, 173
drugs, toxins, and physical injury, 174
prognosis, 173
historical perspective, 173-174 
432
Index
Heart disease, acromegalic (Continued)
Heart disease, thyrotoxic (Continued)
signalment, 173
physical examination, 171
therapy, 173
present complaints, 171
Heart disease, auscultatory findings in congenital, 217t
prognosis, 172
Heart disease, congenital, 215-239
signalment, 171
aortic stenosis, 223-227
therapy, 172
anatomy,223
Heart diseases, neoplastic and infitrative, 262
diagnosis, 223
Heart enlargement
diagnostic testing, 224-227
left, 38f
natural history, 227
right, 37f
pathophysiology, 223
Heart failure. See also Congestive heart failure (CHF)
physical examination, 224
diastolic dysfunction, 289-290
prognosis, 227
excessive afterload, 289
therapy, 227
inadequate preload, 289
artioventricular valve dysplasia, 236-238
myocardial failure, 289
anatomy, 237
pathophysiology, 288-289
diagnosis, 237
phases of, 289
diagnostic testing,238
valvular insuffciency, 289
pathophysiology, 237
Heart failure, clinical descriptions of, 295-296
physical elimination, 237
con gestive heart failure (CHF), 295
prognosis,238
left-sided failure, 296
therapy, 238
low-output failure, 295
diagnosis, 215-217
right-sided heart failure, 295-296
functional murmur, 218
Heart failure, cormpensatory mechanisms in chronic 
hereditary aspects, 215
 additional compensatory mechanisms, 293
incidence,215
compensatory mechanisms, 293-294
innocent murmur, 218
Frank-Starling mechanism, 290
pumonic stenosis (PS), 227-231
myocardial hypertrophy, 292-293
diagnosis, 228
neuroendocrine mechanisms,293
diagnostic testing,229
renin-angiotension-aldosterone system
differential diagnosis, 229-230
(RAAS), 290-291
natural history, 230
sympathetic nervous system activation, 291-292
pathophysiology, 228
Heart failure, diagnosis of, 296-299
physical education,228-229
cardiovascular physical examination findings, 297
prognosis, 231
cardiac rhythm disturbances, 297
therapy, 231
murmur, 297
specific defects,218-223
diagnostics, 297-298
diagnosis, 218-219
differential diagnoses, 298
diagnostic testing, 220-222
history, 296-297
differential diagnosis, 222
therapy of heart failure, 298-299
patent ductus arteriosus (PDA), 218
Heart failure, emergency treatment of, 343-349
pathophysiology, 218
congestive heart failure (CHF), 343-344
physical examination, 219-220
forward (low-output) heart failure, 348-349
prognosis,222-223
left-sided congestive heart failure (LCHF), 344-346
therapy, 222-223
diagnostics, 344
Tetralogy of Fallot, 235-236
diuretic therapy, 344
diagnosis, 236
oxygen therapy, 345-346
diagnostic testing, 236
positive inotropic agents, 345
pathophysiology, 235
therapeutic thoracentesis, 346
physical examination, 236
treatment, 344
prognosis, 236
vasodilator therapy, 345
therapy, 236
pericardial effusion, 347-348
therapy, 217-218
right-sided congestive heart failure
ventricular septal defect (VSD), 231-235
(RCHF), 346-347
anatomy, 231
Heart failure, management of, 299-309
diagnosis, 232
ACE inhibitors, 300-301
diagnostic testing, 233-234
calcium channel blocking agents, 30l-302
pathophysiology 231-232
dietary modification, 299-300
physical examination, 232
L-Carnitine, 299-300
prognosis, 234-235
n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids, 300
therapy, 234-235
taurine supplementation, 300
Heart disease, thyrotoxic, 170-172
direct-acting arterial vasodilators, 302-303
ancillary tests, 171-172
hydralazine (Apresoline), 302
pathophysiology, 171
nitroprusside (Nipride), 303
Index
433
Heart failure, management of (Continued)
Heart failure, types of, 294-295
diuretic therapy, 303-306
abnormal ventricular relaxation, 295
miscellaneous agents/adjunctive therapy for
atrioventricular valvular insuffciency, 294
heart failure, 306-309
decreased ventricular compliance, 295
vasodilator therapy, 300
myocardial failure, 294
Heart failure, miscellaneous agents/adjunctive
pressure overload, 295
therapy for, 306-309
volume overload, 294
beta-adrenergic receptor blockers, 308-309
Heart murmurs, types and their causes, 21t
carvedilol (CoReg),309
Heart sound, changes in first (S), 19b
bronchodilators, 307
Heart sound, changes in second (S2), 19b
aminophylline (Aminophyllin), 307
Heart sounds
theophylline (Theo-Dur), 307
abnormal, 18-20, 20t
cough suppressants, 307
causes of changes in, 13b
 butorphanol (Torbutrol), 307
normal, 17-18
hydrocodone (Hycodan), 307
and relationship to ECG, 18f
novel vasodilators, 309
Heartgard, (ivermectin), 198
sildenafil ( Viagra), 309
Heartworm disease, 183-199
oxy gen therapy, 307
classification of severity, 194-197
positive inotropic therapy, 307-308
adjuncts to adulticide therapy, 197
amrinone (lnocor), 307
confirmation of adulticide efficacy, 196-197
 potassium supplements, 307
initiating macrolide prophylaxis in infected dogs, 196
sedatives and tranquilizers, 307
rapid microfilaricide therapy, 196
acepromazine, 307
treatment, 194-196
butorphanol (Torbutrol), 307
clinical pathology, 187-191
morphine sulfate, 307
clinical signs, 185-186
sympathormimetics,308
clinical signs associated with feline, 186b
dobutamine hydrochloride (Dobutrex), 308
diagnosis, 186-187
dopamine hydrochloride (Intropin), 308
dog with, 191f
jsoproterenol hydrochloride (lsuprel), 308
etiology, 183
Heart failure, pathophysiology and therapy of, 288-314
history, 185
clinical descriptions of heart failure, 295-296
lifecycle, 183
compensatory mechanismis in chronic heart failure, 290-294
macrolide efficacy against adult heartworms, 199
definitions,288
missed doses of oral macrolide prophylactic drugs, 199
diagnosis of heart failure, 296-299
pathogenesis, 185
management of heart failure, 299-309
prevalence, 184
specific disease treatment
prevention, 197-198
CHF associated with chronic heartworm disease, 313
diethylcarbamazine, 198
chronic valve disease, 310-311
jvermectin (Heartgard), 198
chronic valve disease with symptomatic CHF, 311
milbemycin (lnterceptor), 198
feline cardiomyopathy, 312-313
moxidectin (Advantage Multi), 198
mild heart failure secondary to DCM, 311-3 12
retesting dogs receiving macrolide prophylaxis, 199
mitral regurgitation without CHF, 310-311
sequelae of heartworm infection, 191-194
moderate heart failure secondary to DCM with symptom
allergic pneumonitis, 193
atic CHF, 312
feline asthma-like syndrome, 194
pericardial disease, 313
parenchymal lung disease, 191-193
severe heart failure secondary to DCM, 312
pulmonary eosinophilic granulomatosis, 193
treatment protoco]s, 309-313
treatment of sequelae, 197
specific disease treatment, 310-313
allergic pneumonitis, 197
Stage A, 309
feline asthma-like syndrome, 197
Stage B, 309
pulmonary eosinophilic granulomatosis, 197
Stage C1, 310
pulmonary thromboembolism, 197
Stage C2, 310
Heartworm disease, classification of, 194t
Stage C3, 310
Heartworm infection (HWl)
Stage D,310
diagnosis in cats, 189f
types of heart failure, 294-295
in dogs, 188f
Heart failure, radiographic diagnosis of 4042
screening cats for, 188-189f
left-heart failure, 41-42
sequelae of, 191-194
physiologic phenomenon, 41
allergic pneumonitis, 193
radiographic signs, 41-42
parenchymal lung disease, 191-193
right-heart failure
Heartworms, macrolide efcacy against adult, 199
causes of pleural effusion secondary to right-heart
Heartworms in right heart of dog, 192f
failure, 40-41
Heat stroke, 266-267
physiologic phenomenon, 40
Hemangiosarcoma, 262
radiographic signs, 40-41
Hemangiosarcoma, cardiac, 205-209
434
Index
Hemoptysis, 6
Hypersomatotropism in cats, 250-251
causes of, 6b
cardiovascular pathophysiology, 250-251
High blood pressure, consequences and clinical
diagnosis, 251
signs of, 278-279
prognosis, 251
High-grade second-degree AV block, dog with, 39 1f
therapy, 251
High-pulse repetition frequency Doppler, 81-83
Hypertension, systemic,277-286,278f
History, medical, 2-4
antihypertensive therapy, 282-284
history, 3-4
beta blockers, 283
signalment, 2-3
dietary therapy, 282
age,2
diuretics, 284
breed, 2
 duration of treatment, 282
sex, 2-3
pharmacologic agents, 282-283
utilization of animal, 3
vasodilators, 283
weight, 3
choice of animals to treat, 281-282
 specific symptoms, 4-10
treatment guidelines, 281-282
ascites, 7-8
consequences and clinical signs of high blood pressure,
coughing.4-5
278-279
cyanosis, 8
cardiac, 278-279
dyspnea, 5-6
neurologic, 278
hemoptysis, 6
ocular, 278
paresis, 10
renal, 278
syncope,6-7
emergency management of hypertension, 284
weakness and exercise intolerance, 7
patient selection,284
weight loss, 8-9
follow-up care and additional medications, 284 
History and physical examination, 2-23
measurement of blood pressure, 279-281
Holter monitoring and cardiac event recording
anxiety-induced artifact, 281
cardiac event recorders (CERs), 102
cuff size and placement, 279-280
application, 102
environment, 280
implantable CERs,102
methods,279
use of CERs, 102
patient selection, 279
 indications, 101
personnel, 280
technique,101-102
record keeping,280
Holter of CER monitor electrodes, vest secures, 10 1f
techniques, 281
Hormones, altering basal serum thyroid, 245b
white coat effect, 281
HW1. See Heartworm infection (HW1)
population at risk, 277-278
Hycodan (hydrocodone), 307
cats, 277
Hydralazine (Apresoline), 283, 284, 302
dogs, 277-278
Hydrochlorothiazide (Hydrodiuril), 304
Hyperthyroidism, 240-243
Hydrocodone (Hycodan), 307
cardiac pathophysiology, 240-241
Hydrodiuril (hydrochlorothiazide), 304
diagnosis, 241-242
Hydromorphone, 362
prognosis, 243
Hyperadrenocorticism, 248-250
therapy, 243
diagnosis, 249-250
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), 95, 149, 155f, 157-161
pathophysiology, 249
cat with, 159f, 160f
prognosis,250
clinical classification, 157-158
therapy, 250
echocardiography, 158-160
Hypercalcemia, disorders associated with, 256-257
pathology, 161
cardiac pathophysiology, 256
pathophysiology, 157-158
diagnosis, 256-257
presenting complaints, 158
prognosis, 257
prognosis, 161
therapy, 257
signalment,158
Hyperemic mucous membranes in dog, 1lf
therapy, 160-161
Hyperkalemia
adrenergic beta blockers, 160
in cat with urinary obstruction, 255f
calcium channel blockers, 160-161
disorders associated with, 253-254
Hypertrophy, myocardial, 292-293
in dog with cardiovascular collapse, 247f
Hypoadrenocorticism, 246-248
Hyperkalemic cardiotoxicity, 351
cardiac pathophysiology, 246
Hypermagnesemia, disorders associated with hypomagnesemia
diagnosis, 246-248
and, 259
therapy, 248
Hyperpyrexia, 266-267
Hypocalcermia, disorders associated with, 257-259
cardiac pathophysiology, 266
cardiac pathophysiology, 258
diagnosis, 266
diagnosis, 258
prognosis,267
prognosis, 259
therapy, 266-267
therapy, 258-259
Index
435
Hypocalcermia, dog with severe, 258f
Innocent murmur, 218
Hypoglycemia, 259-260
lnocor (amrinone), 307
cardiac pathophysiology,259
Inodilators, 145
diagnosis, 259
Interceptor, (milbemycin), 198
prognosis, 259-260
Intracardiac masses and foreign bodies, 383
therapy, 259
Intravenous induction agents, 361, 362-363
Hypokalermia, disorders associated with, 254-256
barbiturates, 362-363
cardiac pathophysiology, 254
dissociatives, 361, 363
diagnosis, 254
inhalation anesthetics, 361
prognosis,256
propofol, 361
therapy, 254-256
thiobarbiturates, 361
Hypokalemia, dog with, 255f
tiletamine, 363
 Hypormagnesemia and hypermagnesemia, disorders associated
zolazepam, 363
with, 259
Intropin (dopamine hydrochloride), 308
Hypothermia, 267
lsoflurane, 363
Hypothyroidism, 243-246
Isoproterenol hydrochloride (lsuprel), 308
cardiac pathophysiology, 244
Isordil (isosorbide dinitrate), 303
diagnosis, 244-245
Isosorbide dinitrate (lsordil), 303
therapy, 245-246
Isupre] (isoproterenol hydrochloride), 308
Jvermectin (Heartgard), 198
Idiopathic pericardial effusion, 211-212
ldioventricular rhythrm, accelerated, 274f
Jugular pulses, abnormal, 12b
Imaging, cardiac, 106-107
Jugular veins, distended, 12b
Impulse conduction, disturbances of, 67-73
 Junctional escape beat, 74
 atrial standstill, 67
Junctional premature complexes, 66
complete heart block, 72
Junctional rhythm, 74
first-degree AV block, 71
K
left anterior fascicular block, 72
Jeft bundle branch block (LBBB), 72
Ketamine-diazepam, 364
right bundle branch block (RBBB), 72-73
L
second-degree AV block, 71
sinus block, 67
Large-breed dogs with mitral valve disease, 115
third-degree AV block, 72
Lasix (furosemide), 284, 303-304
ventricular pre-expectation syndrome, 67-71
Lateral thoracic projection, pulmonary vascular
Impulse formation and impulse conduction, disturbances of
anatomy in,32f
both, 74
Lateral thoracic radiographic projection, 25f
 atrial premature complexes (APCs) with aberrant conduc-
of heart, 29f 30f
tion, 74
of heart chamber, 30f
sick sinus syndrome (SSS), 74
of pleural effusion, 28f
Independence, technique, 45f
LBBB. See Left bundle branch block (LBBB)
Infectious myocarditis, 174
L-Carnitine, 148, 299-300
Infectious/inflammatory diseases, 270-271
LCHF. See Left-sided congestive heart failure (LCHF)
pathophysiology, 270-271
Leads
 therapy, 271
close-up normal feline, 56f
Infective endocarditis,131-137
epicardial pacing, 388f
clinical presentation, 132-133
systems used in canine and feline electrocardiography, 52b
history, 132
three bipolar standard, 53f
physical findings, 132-133
Left anterior fascicular block, 72
diagnostic findings, 133-135
Left atrial and aortic diameters, measurement of, 93f
electrocardiographic findings, 133
Left atrial enlargement
electrocardiography, 133
causes of left atrial enlargement, 39
thoracic radiography, 133
differential diagnosis, 39
etiopathogenesis, 131-132
dog with severe, 34f
incidence,131
-8 sis odeio
pathophysiology, 132
Left atrial thrombus, 10f
prevalence,131
Left bundle branch block (LBBB) in dog, 72f
prognosis, 137
Left heart and aorta, M-mode measurerments of, 92f
therapy, 135-137
Left heart, M-mode echocardiograms of, 82-83f
Infiltrative heart diseases, neoplastic and, 262
Left ventricle enlargement, 39
Inflammatory diseases. See Infectious/inflammatory diseases
causes of ventricular enlargement, 39
Inhalation anesthetics, 360, 361, 363
radiographic signs, 39
Inhibitors, ACE, 300-301
Left ventricular outflow tract of heart, 33f
In-hospital electrocardiographic monitoring.
Left ventricular papillary muscles, 119f 120f
continuous,99-100
Left-heart enlargement, 38f
436
Index
Left-sided congestive heart failure (LCHF), 344-346
Mitral regurgitation, 121f
diagnostics, 344
color-flow echocardiographic studies of, 86f
duretic therapy, 344
comipensated, 58f
oxygen therapy, 345-346
dog with, 300f
positive inotropic agents, 345
due to degenerative disease, 12lf 122f
therapeutic thoracentesis, 346
Mitral valve degeneration, severe, 111f
 treatment, 344
Mitral valve disease (MVD)
vasodilator therapy, 345
asymptomatic,124-125
Lidocaine,336
dog with myxomatous, 96f
Life support advanced, 335-339
large-breed dogs with, 115
defibrillator, 338-339
mitral valve incompetence due to degenerative, 123f
  
subclinical, 124-125
amiodarone, 336
treatment of CHF caused by, 126-128
atropine, 336
Mitral valve disease (MVD), degenerative, 110-131, 116f 117f
calcium gluconate, 336-338
clinical presentation, 112-115 
epinephrine,336
history, 112-113
intravenous fluids, 336
large-breed dogs with MVD, 115
lidocaine, 336
 patients with MR and concurrent respiratory tract disease,
magnesium sulfate, 338
114-115
sodium bicarbonate, 336
physical findings, 113-114
vasopressin, 336
complications of MVD and its treatment, 129-131
development of azotemia, 129
establishing access for drug and fluid therapy, 335
diuretic and ACE inhibitor administration, 129
monitoring CPR efforts, 339
prognosis, 131
Lifecycle of Diroflaria immitis, 184f
pulmonary hypertension, 130-131
Ligation, PDA, 377f
rupture of chordae tendineae, 129-130
Limb leads surround heart, 51f
diagnostic findings
Littman electronic stethoscope, 3M, 16f
echocardiography, 118-122
Lung disease, parenchymal, 191-193
electrocardiography, 124
Lyme disease, 271
merits of radiography and echocardiography in MR, 122
Lymphoma, cardiac, 263f 264f
radiographic appearance of left arterial enlargement, 115
M
radiographic findings of pulmonary congestion and
edema, 115-118
 Macrolide effcacy against adult heartworms, 199
thoracic radiography, 115
Macrolide prophylactic drugs, missed doses of oral, 199
etiopathogenesis, 111
Macrolide prophylaxis, retesting dogs receiving, 199
incidence, 110
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRl), 107
pathology, 111
Management, emergency, 342-355
pathophysiology, 111-112
Mannitol, 340
prevalence, 110
Medical history, 2-4
therapy, 124-129
history, 3-4
asymptomatic MVD, 124-125
signalment, 2-3
cough caused by airway compression, 125-126
age,2
neuroendocrine modulation,128
breed, 2
subclinical MVD, 124-125
sex, 2-3
therapy of severe CHF caused by advanced MR, 128-129
utilization of animal, 3
treatment of CHF caused by MVD, 126-128
weight, 3
Mitral valve endocarditis, 135f
specific symptoms, 4-10
Mitral valve incompetence
ascites, 7-8
due to degenerative mitral valve disease (MVD), 123f
coughing, 4-5
severe, 116f
cyanosis,8
Mitral valve leaflet, anterior, 129f
dyspnea, 5-6
Mitral valve regurgitation (MR), 112, 118f, 124f
hemoptysis, 6
therapy of severe CHF caused by advanced, 128-129
paresis, 10
Mitral valve repair, 385
syncope,6-7
Mitral valve replacement (MR), 384-385
weakness and exercise intolerance, 7
M-mode echocardiograms of left heart, 82-83f
weight loss, 8-9
M-rmode echocardiography, 78
Medications. See Specifically named medications
M-mode measurements of left heart and aorta, 92f
Membranes in dog, hyperemic mucous, 11f
Morphine, 361-362
Mesothelioma, 209-210
Morphine sulfate, 307
Metabolic disturbances, 253
Moxidectin (Advantage Multi), 198
Metoprolol, 148
MR. See Mitral valve reguritation (MR)Mitral valve
Mid-systolic click, 114f
replacement (MR)
Milbemycin (lnterceptor), 198
MR1. See Magnetic resonance imaging (MRl)
Minipress (prazosin), 303
Index
437
Mucous membranes in dog, hyperemic, 1lf
Nonselective angiography (Continued)
Murmur. See atso Systolic murrmur (SM)
limitations, risk, and costs, 103
Murmurs, 20-21
technique, 102-103
cardiac, 115t
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, cardiac drugs and
functional, 218
anesthetic drug interactions, 359
heart, 21t
Normal feline lead, close-up, 56f
innocent, 218
Normal heart sounds, 17-18
timing and duration of, 22f
Norvasc (amlodipine), 302
timing and quality of, 22f
Nuclear cardiology, 107
  d e  s
0
Myocardial failure, 289
Myocardial failure associated with taurine deficiency, cat with,
Observation, 10-11
169f, 170f
Occult disease, treatment of asymptomatic, 145-146
Myocardial failure, induced, 166-170
Oleander toxicity, 269
ancillary tests, 168
Opioid-diazepam combinations, 362
pathology, 170
Opioids, 361, 364, 365
pathophysiology, 168
Oscillometric technique, 279
physical examination, 168
Outflow tract of right side of heart, chambers and, 34f
presenting complaints, 168
Oxymorphone, 362
prognosis, 169-170
P
signalment, 168
therapy, 168-169
P wave, 54-55
Myocardial hypertrophy, 292-293
Pace, dog with intermittent failure to, 394f
Myocarditis
 Pacemaker nomenclature for antibradycardia pacing, 389t
infectious, 174
Pacemaker system, failure of, 394f
traumatic, 274-275
Pacemaker therapy, 386-397
Myxoma, cat with, 264f
components and types of pacing systems, 387-391
Myxomatous mitral valve disease, dog with, 96f
pacemaker nomenclature, 389
N
pacing with chronotropic competence, 388
N-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids, 300
rate responsiveness, 388
Natriuretic peptides (atrial and B-type), 105-106
single- vs. dual-chamber pacing, 388-389
clinical utility, 106
indications for pacing, 386
limitations, risk, and costs, 106
pacermaker complications, 393-394
technique, 106
pacemaker implementation, 391-393
Neck, 12-13
pacemaker programiming and follow-up, 394-396
Neoplastic and infiltrative heart diseases, 262
 pre-implantation evaluation, 386-387
Neoplastic infiltration of heart, 173-174
Pacemakers
 drugs, toxins, and physical injury, 174
artificial, 76
historical perspective, 173-174
bipolar VV1R, 390f
Neuroendocrine modulation, 128
dog with malfunctioning unipolar, 395f
Neurogenic cardiomyopathy, 273
wandering sinus, 65
Neurohormones, cardiac, 105
Pacing leads
Neuroleptanalgesia, 362
in dog, 392f
Newer cardiac imaging techniques, 106-107
epicardial, 388f
computed tomography (CT), 106
transvenous, 387f, 392f
Jimitations, 107
Pacing system, canine with transvenous VDD, 390f
magnetic resonance imaging (MRl), 107
Palpable apex beat, causes of shifting of, 13b
nuclear cardiology, 107
 Palpitation
Nifedipine, 302
abdominal, 13-14
calcium channel blocking agents, 302
tracheal, 13
Nipride (nitroprusside), 302-303
Pancreatitis, 274
Nitroglycerin paste (Nitrol, Nitro-BID), 303
     
Nitrol, Nitro-BID (nitroglycerin paste), 303
Parasternal echocardiographic views, right, 79-81f
Nitroprusside (Nipride), 302-303
Parasystole, 76
Nitrous oxide, 363
Parenchymal lung disease, 191-193
Nonbarbiturates
Paresis, 10
etomidate,363
Parvovirus, 272
propofol, 363
Patch graft, pulmonary, 381-382, 382f
 Noncardiac-related variables and cardiac disease, 35-36
Patent ductus arteriosus, 105f
cardiac position, 35-36
Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA), 218
cardiac size and lateral projection, 36
in 3-month old poodle, 221f
Nonselective angiography, 102-103
coil embolization procedure, 224f
clinical utility, 103
Jigation, 376, 377f
indications, 102
 pathophysiology and genesis of clinical findings in, 219f
438
Index
Pathophysiology, congenital defects according to, 216b
Pimobendan, 148, 306
PDA. See Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA)
Pleural effusion, 28
PE. See Pericardial effusion (PE)
lateral thoracic radiographic projection of, 28f
Peptides, natriuretic, 105-106
ventrodorsal thoracic radiographic projection of, 29f
 Percussion, 15
PMl. See Point of maximum intensity (PMl)
Pericardial disease, 95-97
Pneumonitis, allergic, 193, 197
 Pericardial disorders and cardiac tumors, 200-214
Point of maximum intensity (PMl), 13, 13b
causes of pericardial effusion, 205-212
Poisoning, toad, 268
cardiac hemangiosarcoma, 205-209
 Poodle, patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) in
neoplastic, 205-210
3-month old, 221f
pericardial effusions, 200-205
 Positive inotropic therapy, 144
chief complaints and history, 200
Potassium supplementation, guidelines for, 256t
diagnostic procedures, 201-204
PR interval, 55
incidence, 200
Prazosin (Minipress), 303
physical examination findings, 200-201
Preanesthetic considerations, 356-358
signalment,200
additional tests, 358
Pericardial effusions (PEs), 42f, 200-205, 262f, 347-348
anesthetic risk classification, 357
causes of, 205-212
diagnosis of etiology of heart disease, 356-357
cardiac hemangiosarcoma, 205-209
functional classification of heart failure disease, 357
heart base tumors, 209
Jaboratory tests, 358
hemorrhage, 211
physical exarmination, 358
preanesthetic diagnostic evaluation, 358
infectious, 210
Preanesthetic medications
mesothelioma, 209-210
anticholinergics, 360-361
miscellaneous, 211
tranquilizers, 360
miscellaneous cardiac tumors, 210
Pre-excitation syndrome, summary of, 71t
neoplastic,205-210
Printout report, wireless ECG, 55f
 chief complaints and history, 200
Propofol, 361, 363, 364
diagnostic procedures, 201-204
PS. See Pulmonic stenosis (PS)
dogs with, 202f, 203f, 204f
Pulmonary artery (PA)
incidence, 200
banding, 378, 379f
initial patient stabilization, 204-205
enlargement of, 39
pericardiocentesis, 204-205
causes of pulmonary artery segment enlargement, 39
physical examination findings, 200-201
differential diagnosis, 39
radiographic diagnosis of, 42
radiographic signs, 39
signalment, 200
severely diluted, 192f
Pericardiectomy, 379, 380f
shunt. See Systemic-to-pulmonary artery shunt
Pericardiocentesis, 204-205
 Pulmonary circulation, evaluation of
in dog, 208f
under circulation, 40
Phenoxybenzamine,283
causes of pulrmonary under circulation, 40
Pheochromocytoma, 251-252
differential diagnosis, 40
cardiac pathophysiology, 251-252
radiographic signs, 40
diagnosis, 252
overcirculation,40
prognosis, 252
causes of pulmonary overcirculation, 40
therapy, 252
differential diagnosis, 40
Photoplethysmograph, 279
radiographic signs, 40
Fhysical and chemical agents that affect cardiovascular system, 266
Pulmonary edema, 27-28
Physical examination, 10-23
Pulmonary edema, cardiogenic, 27f
abdominal palpitation, 13-14
 Pulmonary eosinophilic granulomatosis, 193, 197
 abnormal heart sounds, 18-20
Pulmonary hypertension, dog with, 180f
 arrhythmias heard on auscultation, 20
Pulmonary patch graft, 381-382,382f
auscultation, 16-17
 Pulmonary thromboembolism, 197
fermoral pulses, 14-15
predisposing conditions for, 177b
head, 1l-12
 Pulmonary thromboembolism, cor pulmonale and, 176-182
history and, 2-23
clinical presentation, 177
miscellaneous sounds auscultated in thorax, 21-23
history and clinical signs, 177
murmurs, 20-21
diagnostic testing, 178-181
neck, 12-13
catheterization, 180-181
normal heart sounds, 17-18
echocardiography, 179-180
 observation, 10-11
electrocardiography, 178
percussion, 15
laboratory testing, 178
skin, 14
radiographs, 178
stethoscope, 15-16
etiology, 177
tracheal palpitation, 13
physical examination, 178
Index
439
 Pulmonary thromboermbolism, cor pulmonale and ( Continued)
Restrictive cardiomyopathy (RCM), feline (Continued)
physiology, 176-177
 pathophysiology, 164
 therapy, 181
physical examination, 164
Pulmonary valve
presenting complaints, 164
dilation, 378f
prognosis, 164
regurgitation,193f
signalment, 164
 Pulmonary vascular anatomy in lateral thoracic projection, 32f
therapy, 164
Rhythm disturbances, cardiac, 297, 342, 349-354
Pulmonary venous vasculature, 27f
Rhythms
Pulmonic and aortic valve dilation, 376-378
accelerated idioventricular, 274f
Pulmonic stenosis (PS), 227-231, 228f, 229f, 230f
escape, 74-76
diagnosis, 228
 junctional, 74
diagnostic testing, 229
normal sinus, 65
differential diagnosis, 229-230
ventricular escape, 76
dog with, 58f
Right bundle branch block (RBBB), 72-73
dog with severe, 96f
Right parasternal echocardiographic views, 79-81f
natural history, 230
Right sided systolic murmur, 235f
pathophysiology, 228
Right ventricular cardiomyopathy, 140f
physical education, 228-229
Right-heart enlargement, 37f
prognosis, 231
Right-sided congestive heart failure (RCHF), 346-347
therapy, 231
S
 Pulsed wave Doppler, 81
Pul ses
Saddle thrombus in cat, 10f
abnormal jugular, 12b
Scanner, x-ray film, 46f
femoral, 14-15
Second (S2) heart sound, changes in, 19b
types and causes of, 14t
Second-degree AV block, 71
Second-degree AV block, dog with high-grade, 391f
Q
Septal defect. See Ventricular septal defect (VSD)
QRS complex, 55-62
Serologic testing, 104-105
QT interval, 62-63
clinical utility, 105
R
indications,104-105
limitations, risk, and costs, 105 
RAA cascade, 291f
technique, 105
RAAS. See Renin-angiotension-aldosterone system (RAAS)
Serum thyroid hormone, altering basal, 245b
Radiographic anatomy, 28-35
Sevoflurane, 363
 dorsoventral and ventrodorsal projections, 32-35 
Shunt, systemic-to-pulmonary artery, 378-379, 380f
cardiac parameters, 32-35
Sick sinus syndrome (SSS), 74, 324-325
vesse] parameters, 35
treatment, 324-325
lateral thoracic radiographic projection, 28-32
Signs, radiographic, 42, 43t
cardiac parameters, 28-32
Sildenafil ( Viagra), 309
vessel pararmeters, 32
Sinus arrest, 65, 351
Radiographic interpretation, 35
Sinus arrhythmia, normal, 65
Radiographic projections
Sinus block, 67
 dorsoventral/ventrodorsal projection, 26-27
Sinus bradycardia, 65, 323-324, 349-350
 dorsoventral/ventrodorsal thoracic, 26f
treatment,324
Radiographic signs
Sinus pacemaker, wandering, 65
of congenital and acquired cardiac disease, 43t
 Sinus rhythm, normal, 65
summary of, 42
Sinus tachycardia, 65-66, 352
Radiographic technique
Skin, 14
exposure technique, 24
SLE. See Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)
film quality, 24
SM. See Systolic murmur (SM)
radiographic projections
 Small animal thoracic radiographic
dorsoventral/ventrodorsal projection, 26-27
technique chart, 25t
lateral projection, 24-26
Sodium bicarbonate, 336
Radiography, digital, 42-46
Sodium nitroprusside, 284, 302-303
Radiology of heart, 24-48
Sounds
RBBB. See Right bundle branch block (RBBB)
abnormal heart, 18-20, 20t
RCHF. See Right-sided congestive heart failure (RCHF)
auscultated in thorax, 21-23
RCM. See Restrictive cardiomyopathy (RCM), feline
heart, 13b, 18f, 19b
Renin-angiotension-aldosterone system (RAAS), 290-291
normal heart, 17-18
Repair, cor triatriatum, 382-383
Spectral Doppler echocardiography, 81
Report, wireless ECG printout, 55f
Spironolactone (Aldactone), 148, 284, 304
Restrictive cardiomyopathy (RCM), feline, 164-165
SSS. See Sick sinus syndrome (SSS)
ancillary tests, 164
ST segment, 62
pathology, 164-165
440
Index
Stenosis
Systemic diseases, cardiovascular effects of (Continued)
aortic,223-227,226f
Chagas disease, 271-272
con genital subaortic, 225f
chemodectoma, 262-266
pulmonic. See Pulmonic stenosis (PS)
cardiac pathophysiology, 263
Stethoscope, 15-16
diagnosis, 263-264
3M Littman electronic, 16f
prognosis, 264-265
Subaortic stenosis, congenital, 225f
therapy, 264
SubclinicalMVD,124-125
chocolate toxicity, 269
Supraventricular arrhythrmias, 3 17
diabetes mellitus, 252-253
Supraventricular arrhythmias in canine patients, 3 16t
cardiac pathophysiology, 252-253
Supraventricular impulse formation, disturbances of, 66-67
diagnosis, 253
atrial fibrillation, 66
prognosis,253
atrial flutter, 66
therapy, 253
atrial premature complexes, 66
disorders associated with hypercalcemia, 256-257
atrial tachycardia, 66
cardiac pathophysiology, 256
atrioventricular junctional tachycardia, 67
diagnosis, 256-257
 junctional premature complexes, 66
prognosis,257
supraventricular tachycardia, 67
therapy, 257
Supraventricular tachycardia, 67,106f 352-353
disorders associated with hyperkalemia, 253-254
Surgery, cardiac, 376-385
diagnosis, therapy, and prognosis, 254
with cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB), 383-385
disorders associated with hypocalcemia, 257-259
atrial and atrioventricular septal defect repair, 383
cardiac pathophysiology, 258
double-chambered right ventricle (DCRV) repair, 384
diagnosis, 258
mitral valve repair, 385
prognosis,259
mitral valve replacement (MR), 384-385
therapy, 258-259
tetralogy of Fallot repair, 383-384
disorders associated with hypokalemia, 254-256
tricuspid valve replacement, 385
cardiac pathophysiology, 254
ventricular septal defect ( VSD) repair, 383
diagnosis, 254
closed, 376-380
prognosis, 256
atrial appendectomy, 379
therapy, 254-256
patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) ligation, 376
disorders associated with hypomagnesermia and hypermag-
pericardiectomy, 379
nesemia, 259
pulmonary artery banding, 378
doxorubicin cardiotoxicity, 269-271
pulmonic and aortic valve dilation, 376-378
cardiac pathophysiology, 269-270
systemic-to-pulmonary artery shunt, 378-379
diagnosis, 270
with inflow occlusion, 380-383
therapy, 270
cor triatriatum repair, 382-383
endocrine diseases, 240
intracardiac masses and foreign bodies, 383
gastric dilation-volvulus complex (GDV), 273-274
pulmonary patch graft, 381-382
hemangiosarcoma, 262
Surgical monitoring, probes positioned for, 54f
hyperadrenocorticism, 248-250
Symptoms, specific, 4-10
diagnosis, 249-250
ascites, 7-8
pathophysiology, 249
coughing,4-5
prognosis,250
cyanosis, 8
therapy, 250
dyspnea, 5-6
hyperpyrexia, 266-267
hemoptysis,6
cardiac pathophysiology, 266
paresis, 10
diagnosis, 266
syncope, 6-7
prognosis,267
weakness and exercise intolerance, 7
therapy, 266-267
weight loss, 8-9
hypersomatotropism in cats, 250-251
Syncope, 6-7
cardiovascular pathophysiology, 250-251
causes in dogs and cats, 7b
diagnosis, 251
Syndromes
prognosis, 251
summary of pre-excitation, 71t
therapy, 251
ventricular pre-expectation, 67-71
hyperthyroidism, 240-243
Systemic blood pressure, obtaining, 280f
cardiac pathophysiology, 240-241
Systermic diseases, cardiovascular effects of, 240-276
diagnosis, 241-242
anemia,261-262
prognosis, 243
cardiac pathophysiology, 261
therapy, 243
diagnosis, 261-262
hypoadrenocorticism, 246-248
prognosis, 262
cardiac pathophysiology, 246
therapy, 262
diagnosis, 246-248
borreliosis (Lyme disease), 271
therapy, 248
carbon monoxide (CO), 267-268
hypoglycemia, 259-260
Index
441
Systermic diseases, cardiovascular
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), 272-273
effects of (Continued)
Systemic-to-pulmonary artery shunt, 378-379, 380f
cardiac pathophysiology 259
Systolic click. See Mid-systolic click
diagnosis, 259
Systolic murmur (SM)
prognosis, 259-260
dog with, 113f
therapy, 259
right-sided, 235f
hypothermia, 267
T
hypothyroidism, 243-246
cardiac pathophysiology 244
T wave, 63
diagnosis, 244-245
Tachyarrhythrmias
therapy, 245-246
sinus tachycardia, 352
 infectious/inflammatory diseases, 270-271
supraventricular tachycardia,352-353
Lyme disease, 271
ventricular tachycardia, 353-354
metabolic disturbances, 253
Tachycardias
neurogenic cardiomyopathy, 273
atrial, 66
oleander toxicity, 269
atrioventricular junctional, 67
pancreatitis, 274
sinus, 65-66
parvovirus, 272
supraventricular, 67,106f 352-353
pheochromocytoma, 251-252
ventricular, 73-74
cardiac pathophysiology, 251-252
Tarmponades
diagnosis, 252
acute, 295
prognosis,252
chronic, 295
therapy, 252
Taurine deficiency, cat with myocardial failure associated with,
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE),272-273
169f, 170f
toad poisoning, 268
Taurine deficiency - induced myocardial failure, 166-170
traumatic myocarditis, 274-275
ancillary tests, 168
trypanosomiasis (Chagas disease), 271-272
pathology, 170
uremia, 260-261
pathophysiology, 168
cardiac pathophysiology,260
physical exarmination, 168
diagnosis, 260
presenting complaints, 168
prognosis, 261
prognosis, 169-170
therapy, 260-261
signalment, 168
Systemic hypertension, 277-286, 278f
therapy, 168-169
antihypertensive therapy, 282-284
Taurine supplementation, 148, 300
beta blockers, 283
TDl. See Tissue Doppler imaging (TD1)
dietary therapy, 282
Technique independence, 45f
diuretics, 284
Teleradiology, introduction to, 47
duration of treatment, 282
Temperature probe positioned for surgical monitoring, 54f
pharmacologic agents, 282-283
Tetralogy of Fallot, 1lf, 235-236
vasodilators, 283
diagnosis, 236
choice of animals to treat, 281-282
diagnostic testing, 236
treatment guidelines, 281-282
pathophysiology, 235
consequences and clinical signs of high blood
physical examination, 236
pressure, 278-279
prognosis, 236
cardiac,278-279
repair, 383-384
neurologic,278
therapy, 236
ocular, 278
Theo-Dur (theophylline), 307
renal, 278
Theophylline (Theo-Dur), 307
emergency management of hypertension, 284
Therapies
patient selection, 284
diuretic, 144
 follow-up care and additional medications, 284
positive inotropic, 144
measurement of blood pressure, 279-281
Therapies, pacemaker, 386-397
anxiety-induced artifact, 281
components and types of pacing systems, 387-391
cuff size and placement, 279-280
pacemaker nomenclature, 389
environment, 280
pacing modes, 389-391
methods, 279
pacing with chronotropic competence, 388
patient selection, 279
rate responsiveness, 388
persomnel,280
single- vs. dual-chamber pacing, 388-389
record keeping, 280
indications for pacing, 386
techniques, 281
pacemaker complications, 393-394
white coat effect, 281
pacemaker implementation, 391-393
population at risk, 277-278
pacemaker programming and follow-up, 394-396
cats, 277
pre-implantation evaluation, 386-387
dogs, 277-278
Thiobarbiturates, 361
Third-degree AV block, 72
442
Index
Thoracic projection, pulmonary vascular anatomy in lateral, 32f
Utrasound, Doppler (Continued)
Thoracic radiographic projection, lateral, 25f
dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM), 94-95
Thoracic radiographic projection of heart chamber , lateral, 30f
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), 95
pericardial disease, 95-97
Thoracic radiographic projection of pleural effusion
echocardiographic measurements, 89-93
lateral, 28f
aortic and pulmonic stenosis, 91-93
ventrodorsal, 29f
aortic insufficiency, 91
Thoracic radiographic technique chart, small animal, 25t
chamber dimensions, 89
Thorax
diastolic function, 91
miscellaneous sounds auscultated in, 21-23
E point to septal separation (EPSS), 90
right lateral view of, 44f
ejection fraction (EF%), 90
Thromboembolic disease, 354
end-systolic volume index (ESVl), 90
Thromboembolism, 342
index of sphericity, 89
Thromboembolism, pulmonary, 176-182, 177b, 197
LA diameter, 90
Thrombus
LV diameter, 89
left atrial, 10f
LV fractional shortening (FS%), 90
saddle, 10f
LV wall thickness, 90
Thyroid hormone, altering basal serum, 245b
mitral insufficiency, 91
Thyrotoxic heart disease, 170-172
systolic function, 90
ancillary tests, 171-172
systolic time intervals, 91
pathophysiology, 171
transrmitral flow, 91
physical examination, 171
valve function, 91
present complaints, 171
echocardiographic technique,87-88
prognosis,172
echocardiographic views, 88-89
signalment, 171
types of imaging, 78-87
therapy, 172
applications, 83-87
Tiletamine,363
color flow Doppler, 83
Tissue Doppler imaging (TD1), 83
continuous-wave (CW) Doppler, 81
Toad poisoning, 268
Doppler echocardiography, 78-81
Torbutrol (butorphanol), 307, 362
high-pulse repetition frequency Doppler, 81-83
Toxicity. See atso Cardiotoxicity
M-mode echocardiography, 78
chocolate, 269
pulsed wave Doppler, 81
oleander, 269
spectral Doppler echocardiography, 81
Trachea, dog with collapsed, 58f
tissue Doppler imaging (TDl), 83
Tracheal palpitation, 13
two-dimensional echocardiography, 78
Tranquilizers, 360, 361-362, 364
Unclassified feline cardiormyopathies, 165-166
 ben zodiazepines, 361
ancillary tests, 166
buprenorphine, 362
pathophysiology, 165
butorphanol, 362
physical examination, 166
fentanyl, 362
presenting complaints, 166
hydromorphone, 362
prognosis, 166
morphine, 361-362
signalment, 166
neuroleptanalgesia, 362
therapy, 166
opioid-diazepam combinations, 362
Unipolar pacemaker, dog with malfunctioning, 395f
opioids,361
Uremia, 260-261
oxymorphone, 362
cardiac pathophysiology, 260
Transvenous pacing lead in dog, 392f
diagnosis, 260
Transvenous pacing leads, 387f
prognosis, 261
Transvenous VDD pacing system, canine with, 390f
therapy, 260-261
Traumatic myocarditis, 274-275
Urinary obstruction,hyperkalemia in cat with, 255f
Tricuspid valve dysplasia, 237f
V
Tricuspid valve replacement, 385
Trypanosomiasis (Chagas disease), 271-272
Valve dysplasia
Tumors
artioventricular, 236-238
cardiac, 200-214
tricuspid, 237f
dog with heart base, 207f
Valvular disease, acquired, 110-138
heart base, 209
 degenerative mitral valve disease (MVD), 110-131
miscellaneous cardiac, 210
clinical presentation, 112-115
Two-dimensional echocardiography, 78
diagnostic findings, 115-124
etiopathogenesis, 111
U
incidence, 110
Utrasound, Doppler, 78-98
pathology, 111
common acquired cardiac conditions, 93-97
pathophysiology, 11l-112
2 D changes, 93-94
prevalence,110
degenerative mitral valve disease, 93
infective endocarditis, 131-137
Index
443
Valvular disease, acquired (Continued)
Ventricular systolic function, echocardiographic evaluation of,
clinical presentation, 132-133
94-95f
diagnostic findings, 133-135
Ventricular tachycardia (VT), 73-74, 353-354. See atso
etiopathogenesis, 131-132
Supraventricular tachycardia
incidence, 131
Ventricular tachycardia (VT), treatment of, 326-328
pathophysiology, 132
acute intravenous antiarrythymic therapy, 327
prevalence, 131
chronic oral antiarrythymic therapy, 327-328
prognosis,137
Ventrodorsal thoracic radiographic projection of pleural
therapy, 135-137
effusion, 29f
Valvular disease, canine degenerative, 126t
Verapamil, 302
Valvular insuffciency, 289
Vertebral heart sum (VHS), 137f
Vasodilator therapy, 300
Vertebral scale systerm of cardiac size, 31f
Vasodilators
Vesse] and chamber enlargement, 36f 37f
arterial, 144-145, 302-303
Veterinary patients, performing CPR in, 337f
cardiac drugs and anesthetic drug interactions, 358-359
VHS. See Vertebral heart sum (VHS)
venous,144
Viagra (sildenafil), 309
Vasopressin, 336
VPCs. See Ventricular premature complexes (VPCs)
VDD pacing system, canine with transvenous, 390f
VSD. See Ventricular septal defect (VSD)
Veins, distended jugular, 12b
VT. See Ventricular tachycardia (VT)
Venous vasodilators, 144, 303
VV1R pacemaker, bipolar, 390f
Ventricular arrhythmias, 326
W
Ventricular arrhythmias in canine patients, 317t
Ventricular asystole, 74, 329-330
Waveforms, cardiac conduction and genesis of, 51-52
Ventricular cardiomyopathy,right,140f
Waveforms, evaluation of, 54-63
Ventricular diastolic function, echocardiographic
P wave, 54-55
evaluation of, 87f
PR interval, 55
Ventricular enlargement in dog, severe right, 58f
QRS complex, 55-62
Ventricular enlargement, left, 142f
QT interval, 62-63
Ventricular escape beat, 74-76
ST segment, 62
Ventricular escape rhythm, 76
T wave, 63
Ventricular fibrillation, 74, 330
Weakness and exercise intolerance, 7
Ventricular impulse formation, disturbances of, 73-74
causes of, 7b
ventricular asystole, 74
Weight, 3
ventricular fibrillation, 74
Weight loss, 8-9
ventricular premature complexes (VPCs), 73
Wireless ECG
ventricular tachycardia,73-74
hand-held, 54f
Ventricular outflow tract of heart, left, 33f
printout report, 55f
Ventricular papillary muscles, left, 119f, 120f
Worms,echogenic,192f
Ventricular pre-excitation in dog, 71f
X
Ventricular pre-expectation syndrome, 67-71
Ventricular premature complexes ( VPCs), 73
X-ray film scanner, 46f
Ventricular septal defect (VSD), 23 1-235, 233-234f
Z
anatomy, 231
diagnosis, 232
Zolazepam, 363
diagnostic testing, 233-234
pathophysiology, 231-232
 pathophysiology and genesis of clinical fndings in, 232f
physical examination, 232
prognosis, 234-235
repair, 383
therapy, 234-235