VETERINARY
COMPUTED
TOMOGRAPHY
EDITEDBY
TOBIASSCHWARZ&JIMMYSAUNDERS
SELECTED ILLUSTRATIONSBYMARCELKOVALIK
WILEY-BLACKWELL
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.com
VETERINARY
COMPUTED
TOMOGRAPHY
VETERINARY
COMPUTED
TOMOGRAPHY
Edited by
Tobias Schwarz
MA Dr. med. vet. DVR DipECVDI DACVR MRCVS
Royal (Dick) School of Veterinary Studies
The University of Edinburgh
Roslin, Scotland
UK
Jimmy Saunders
Dr. med. vet. PhD CertVR DipECVDI
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine
Ghent University
Merelbeke
 Belgium
WILEY-BLACKWELL
A John Wiley & Sons, Ltd., Publication
This edition first published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd
@ 2011 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
[eqoa s, Aam jo iauau aya Aq pauog suos z Aam uuof jo uudur ue s! [amyg-Aa 
Scientific, Technical and Medical business with Blackwell Publishing
Registered offe: John Wiley & Sons Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex,
PO19 &SQ, UK
Editorial offrces: 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, UK
The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 &SQ, UK
2121 State Avenue, Ames, lowa 50014-8300, USA
For details of our global editorial offices, for customer services and for information about
how to apply for permission to reuse the copyright material in this book please see our
website at www.wiley.com/wiley-blackwell.
The right of the author to be identified as the author of this work has been asserted in
accordance with the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
 5ystem, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying.
o suaed pue suaisaa uauido An ay Aq pauad se idaoxa 'asmiayo io uproal
1988, without the prior permission of the publisher.
 Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed a5
trademarks. All brand names and product names used in this book are trade names, service
marks, trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective owners. The publisher is not
as5ociated with any product or vendor mentioned in this book. This publication is designed 
to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to the subject matter covered. It 
is sold on the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering professional
e jo saoaias aua 'paunbai st aouensisse juadxa iayno io aoape [euorssajoid jI 'saaias
competent professional should be sought.
Library ofCongress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Veterinary computed tomography / edited by Tobias Schwarz, Jimmy Saunders.
p.; cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-8138-1747-7 (hardcover : alk. paper) 1. Veterinary tomography.
2. Radiography, Medical—Digitaltechniques. 1. Schwarz, Tobias. I1. Saunders,Jimmy, 1965
[DNLM: 1. Tomography, X-Ray Computed—veterinary—Practice Guideline.  SF 757.8] 
SF757.8.V48 2011
636.089'60757dc22
2010051093
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
This book is published in the following electronic formats: ePDF 9780470960127;
ePub 9780470960134; Mobi 9780470960141
panu eipauai 1as-sag ueddoi Aq ouge[ed id szl/ot ur 1as 
12011
ONTENTS
Contributors  ix
Preface  xi
Acknowledgements  xv
1. CT Physics and Instrumentation - Mechanical Design  1
Jimmy Saunders and Stefanie Ohlerth
2. CT Acquisition Principles 9
Tobias Schwarz and Robert O'Brien
 3. Principles of CT Image Interpretation
29
 Jimmy Saunders and Tobias Schwarz
4. Artifacts in CT 35
Tobias Schwarz
5. CT Contrast Media and Applications 57
Rachel Pollard and Sarah Puchalski
6. Special Software Applications 67
 Jennifer Kinns, Robert Malinowski, Fintan McEvoy.
 Tobias Schwarz and Allison Zwingenberger
7. Digital Environment 75
Robert Malinowski
8. CT Planning for Radiotherapy 77
Lisa J. Forrest
9. Interventional CT 81
Tobias Schwarz and Sarah Puchalski
10. Purchase Considerations 89
Victor Rendano Jr.
11. Nasal Cavities and Frontal Sinuses 93
Jimmy Saunders and Tobias Schwarz
12. Oral Cavity, Mandible, Maxilla and Dental Apparatus 111
Lisa J. Forrest and Tobias Schwarz
vi CONTENTS
13. Temporomandibular Joint and Masticatory Apparatus  125
Tobias Schwarz
14. Orbita, Salivary Glands and Lacrimal System 137
Susanne Boroffka (orbita), Sophie Dennison, Tobias Schwarz
and Jimmy Saunders
15. External, Middle and Inner Ear  153
Randi Drees
16. Calvarium and Zygomatic Arch  161
Federica Morandi
17. Lymph Nodes of Head and Neck
171
Olivier Taeymans
18. Pharynx, Larynx and Thyroid Gland 175
Olivier Taeymans and Tobias Schwarz
19. Brain 185
Silke Hecht
20. Pituitary Gland 197
Silke Hecht and Tobias Schwarz
21. Cranial Nerves and Associated Skull Foramina  205
Laurent Couturier
22. Vertebral Column and Spinal Cord 209
Gabriela Seiler, Jennifer Kinns, Sophie Dennison,
Jimmy Saunders and Tobias Schwarz
23. Heart and Vessels 229
Marc-André d'Anjou and Tobias Schwarz
24. Trachea 243
Tobias Schwarz and Jimmy Saunders
25. Mediastinum 249
 Audrey Petite and Robert Kirberger
 26. Lungs and Bronchi 261
Tobias Schwarz and Victoria Johnson
27. Pleura 279
Wilfried Mai
28. Thoracic Boundaries 285
Jimmy Saunders, Massimo Vignoli and Ingrid Gielen
vii CONTENTS
29. Liver, Gallbladder and Spleen 297
Federica Rossi, Federica Morandi and Tobias Schwarz
30. Pancreas 315
Ana V. Caceres
31. Gastrointestinal Tract 325
 Massimo Vignoli and Jimmy Saunders
32. Urinary System 331
 Tobias Schwarz
33. Genital Tract 339
Jimmy Saunders, Federica Rossi and Tobias Schwarz
34. Adrenal Glands 351
 Federica Morandi
35. Systemic and Portal Abdominal Vasculature 357
Tobias Schwarz
 36. Abdominal Lymph Nodes and Lymphatic Collecting
System 371
Federica Rossi, Michail Patsikas and Erik R. Wisner
37. Long Bones 381
Ryan M. Schultz and Erik R. Wisner
38. Joints 387
Valerie Sami (stifle), Ingrid Gielen (shoulder, elbow, tarsus),
 Eberhard Ludewig (carpus), William H. Adams (hip), Ingmar
Kiefer (carpus), Henri van Bree (shoulder, elbow, tarsus) and
Jimmy Saunders
39. Particularities of Equine CT 421
Jimmy Saunders, Alastair Nelson and Katrien Vanderperren
40. Equine Sinonasal and Dental  427
Jimmy Saunders and Zoe Windley
41. Equine Calvarium, Brain and Pituitary Gland  443
Jennifer Kinns and Russ Tucker
42. Equine Neck and Spine 451
Jimmy Saunders and Hendrik-Jan Bergman
43. Equine Fractures 457
Hendrik-Jan Bergman and Jimmy Saunders
44. Equine Foot 463
Sarah Puchalski
vili CONTENTS
45. Equine Fetlock 473
 Katrien Vanderperren and Hendrik-Jan Bergman
46. Equine Upper Limbs (Carpus, Tarsus, Stifle) 483
Hendrik-Jan Bergman and Jimmy Saunders
47. Ruminant and Porcine 503
Fintan McEvoy and Stefanie Ohlerth
48. Rabbits and Rodents 509
Randi Drees
49. Avian 517
 Michaela Gumpenberger
50. Chelonians 533
 Michaela Gumpenberger
Index 545
ONTRIBUTORS
William H. Chess Adams, BS DVM DACVR
Randi Drees, Dr. med. vet. DipECVDI DACVR
DACVR-RO
School of Veterinary Medicine
School of Veterinary Medicine
 University of Wisconsin-Madison
 University of Wisconsin-Madison
Madison
Madison
Wisconsin
Wisconsin
USA
USA
Lisa J. Forrest, VMD DACVR DACVR-RO
Hendrik-Jan Bergman, DVM DipECAR certISELP
 School of Veterinary Medicine
 Lingehoeve Diergeneeskunde Equine Referral
 University of Wisconsin-Madison
Hospital
Madison
Lienden
Wisconsin
The Netherlands
USA
Susanne Boroffka, MA Dr. med. vet. PhD DipECVDI
 Ingrid Gielen, MSc Dr Med Vet PhD
 University Clinic for Companion Animals
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine
Ghent University
Utrecht University
The Netherlands
Merelbeke
Belgium
Ana V. Caceres, BS DVM DACVR
University of Pennsylvania
Michaela Gumpenberger, Dr. med. vet.
 School of Veterinary Medicine
 Clinic of Diagnostic Imaging
University of Veterinary Medicine
Philadelphia
Pennsylvania
Vienna
USA
Austria
Laurent Couturier, Dr Med Vet DipECVDI,
Silke Hecht, Dr. med. vet. DipECVDI DACVR
University of Tennessee
AZURVET
 Referral Center in Diagnostic Imaging and
 College of Veterinary Medicine
Neurology
Knoxville
 Cagnes sur Mer
 Tennessee
France
USA
Victoria Johnson, BVSc DVR DipECVDI MRCVS
Marc-André d'Anjou, DMV DACVR
Vet CT Specialists Ltd
Université de Montréal
Cambridge
Saint-Hyacinthe
Québec
UK
Canada
 Ingmar Kiefer, Dr med. vet.
 Department of Small Animal Medicine
Sophie Dennison, BVM&S DACVR MRCVS
Veterinary Faculty
San Francisco
University of Leipzig
California
Germany
USA
ix
CONTRIBUTORS
Jernifer Kinns, BSc VetMB DipECVDI DACVR
Alastair Nelson, MA VetMB CertVR CertESM
MRCVS
MRCVS+
VDIC-Idexx
 Rainbow Equine Clinic
Stirling
Old Malton
UK
 North Yorkshire
UK
 Robert Kirberger, BVSc MMedVet(Rad) DipECVDI
 Faculty of Veterinary Science
 Robert O'Brien, MS DVM DACVR
University of Pretoria
 Department of Veterinary Clinical Medicine
 Onderstepoort
University of Illinois
 South Africa
Urbana
Illinois
Marcel Kovalik, Dr. Med. Vet. PhD MRCVS
USA
 Royal (Dick) School of Veterinary Studies
 The University of Edinburgh
Stefanie Ohlerth, Dr. med. vet. habil. DipECVDI
Roslin
 Division of Diagnostic Imaging
UK
Vetsuisse Faculty
University of Zirich
Eberhard Ludewig, Dr. med. vet. DipECVDI
Zirich
 Department of Small Animal Medicine
Switzerland
Veterinary Faculty
University of Leipzig
Michail Patsikas, MD DVM PhD DipECVDI
Germany
School of Veterinary Medicine
Aristotle University of Thessaloniki
Wilfried Mai, MS Dr. Med. Vet. PhD DipECVDI
Thessaloniki
DACVR
Makedonia
 University of Pennsylvania
Greece
School of Veterinary Medicine
 Philadelphia
Audrey Petite, Dr. med. vet. DVDI DipECVDI
 Pennsylvania
MRCVS
USA
Pixelvet
Kent
Robert Malinowski, MA DVM
UK
College of Veterinary Medicine
 Michigan State University
Rachel Pollard, DVM PhD DACVR
East Lansing
University of California Davis
Michigan
 School of Veterinary Medicine
USA
Davis
California
Fintan McEvoy, MVB PhD DVR DipECVDI
USA
Faculty of Life Sciences
 University of Copenhagen
Sarah Puchalski, BSc DVM DACVR
Copenhagen
School of Veterinary Medicine
 Denmark
 University of California Davis
Davis
Federica Morandi, MS Dr. Med. Vet. DipECVDI,
California
DACVR
USA
 College of Veterinary Medicine
 The University of Tennessee
Victor Rendano Jr., MSc VMD DACVR DACVR-RO
Knoxville
Veterinary Multi-Imaging Pllc
Tennessee
Lansing
USA
New York
USA
xi CONTRIBUTORS
Federica Rossi, Dr. med. vet. SRV DipECVDI
Russ Tucker, DVM DACVR
 Clinica Veterinaria dell'Orologio
Veterinary Clinical Sciences
Sasso Marconi
 College of Veterinary Medicine
Bologna
Washington State University
Italy
Pullman
Washington
Valerie Samii, DVM DACVR
USA
College of Veterinary Medicine
The Ohio State University
Henri van Bree, DVM PhD DipECVS DipECVDI
Columbus
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine
Ohio
Ghent University
USA
Merelbeke
Belgium
Jimmy Saunders, Dr. med. vet. PhD CertVR
DipECVDI
Katrien Vanderperren, DVM PhD
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine
Ghent University
Ghent University
Merelbeke
Merelbeke
Belgium
Belgium
Ryan M. Schultz, DVM DACVR
Massimo Vignoli, Dr. med. vet. PhD SRV DipECVDI
 Seattle Veterinary Specialists
 Clinica Veterinaria dell'Orologio
Kirkland
 Sasso Marconi
Washington
 Bologna
USA
Italy
Tobias Schwarz, MA Dr. med. vet. DVR DipECVDI
Zoe Windley, BVetMed Hons MRCVS
DACVR MRCVS
 Royal Veterinary College
 Royal (Dick) School of Veterinary Studies
North Mymms
The University of Edinburgh
UK
Roslin
UK
Erik R. Wisner, DVM DACVR
School of Veterinary Medicine
Gabriela Seiler, Dr med. vet. DipECVDI DACVR
University of California Davis
 College of Veterinary Medicine
Davis
 North Carolina State University
California
Raleigh
USA
 North Carolina
USA
 Allison Zwingenberger, DVM MAS DipECVDI
DACVR
 Olivier Taeymans, DVM PhD DipECVDI
 School of Veterinary Medicine
 Cummings School of Veterinary Medicine
 University of California Davis
Tufts University
Davis
North Grafton
California
Massachusetts
USA
USA
PREFACE
 Since its development in the 1970s computed tomog-
published depicting the computed  tomographic
raphy (CT) has undergone continuous technological
anatomy of the dog and selected other species. The
improvement and refinement, contributing greatly to
reader is referred to these for detailed anatomic infor-
the advancements in clinical medicine. As radiography
 mation. A large body of scientific publications describ-
 in the 1890s, CT was initially developed by physicists
 ing the computed tomographic features of diseases in
and engineers but was very quickly adapted to the
animals has also been published to date. This book
needs of clinical medicine. The first scanners offered
 closes a gap as the first comprehensive textbook of CT,
 an amazing new way to indirectly visualize the brain
and other organs, something that had previously been
and computed tomographic disease features for most 
impossible. Veterinary CT was introduced in the late
 species treated in veterinary practice. We have been
1980s, initially by scanning animal patients in human
fortunate enough to attract more than forty veterinary
medical institutions. The installation of a CT scanner
 specialists from 13 different countries to provide state-
at the Centre Radiothérapie-Scanner on the campus of
 of-the-art expertise on the wide spectrum of veterinary
the Ecole Nationale Veterinaire d'Alfort in Paris in
 computed tomography.
1989 perhaps marks the beginning of dedicated veteri-
We wish you pleasant reading and hope that we can
nary CT. At first it was primarily used for imaging of
provide some answers for you and stimulate your
the head in dogs and cats with neurological or nasal
 curiosity for veterinary CT.
diseases. The development of slip ring technology.
which allowed helical scanning, and the design of
Tobias Schwarz & Jimmy Saunders
better and smaller detectors, opened up new avenues
Edinburgh & Ghent, January 2011
 for veterinary use, including thoracic imaging and
high-definition scanning of lungs and bone. With the
 advancement of multi-detector-row technology a new
 chapter begins for veterinary CT. Long body parts can
be scanmed within a couple of seconds in amazing
detail and with minimal image artifacts. For large
domestic animals, small mammals, birds, reptiles, and
REFERENCES
 even wildlife and zoo animals, CT enables us to obtain
a quick and accurate diagnosis of many disorders.
 -ajan un pasn Alapim mou st Audeigouoi panduro
Assheuer J and Sager M (1997) MRI and CT atlas of the dog.
 Berlin: Blackwell Science.
Davies AS, Garden KL, Young MJ and Reid CSW (1987) An
imaging modalities for many disorders, and has
atlas of X-ray tormographic anatomy of the sheep. DSIR Bulletin
psouep juaya pue pidei e se lenuanod asua
 No 243. Wellington, New Zealand: Department of Scientific
 tool for a wide range of indications.
and Industrial Research.
Several atlases (Assheuer and Sager, 1997; Davies et
 Mihaljevic M, Kramer M and Gomeric H (2009) CT und MRT
al., 1987; Mihaljevic et al., 2009) and articles have been
atlas. Transversalanatomie des Hundes. Stuttgart: Parey.
xii
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This book represents the collaborative effort of more
Hendrik Haers, Stijn Hauspie and others, such as
 Simon Kidd and David Williamson, who helped us
The high quality of their contributions and their timely
with difficult technical issues.
manuscript submissions deserve a special thank you.
 We are particularly appreciative of the support we
 We are also indebted to Marcel Kovalik for providing
received from our families throughout this project and
the wonderful illustrations, often at very short notice.
would like to thank our wives Aaike and Deborah
We would like to thank Edouard Cauvin for help in
for their patience and understanding. Also Aurélie,
translation of Chapter 21 and all other individuals who
 Deborah, Virginie, Alice, Ingrid and Misha receive our
kindly contributed images to this textbook as acknowl-
thanks for understanding why we could spend so little
edged in the figure legends
s poaod s i addeu le ae am au um a
This textbook would not have been possible without
now come to a conclusion.
 the hard work and endless patience of the publishing
 This book is a tribute to our friend, colleague and
team at Wiley-Blackwell, in particular Justinia Wood
 co-author Alastair Nelson, a true pioneer in equine
 computed tomography, whose untimely death meant
 greatly appreciated.
a great loss to all of us.
 Our colleagues have assisted us a great deal in the
 A final mention goes to all animals who patiently
clinics while we were working on this textbook and we
sat, stood or laid down for their CT examinations and
would like to express our gratitude in this regard to
whose images provide the core of this book.
Maya Esmans, Carolina Urraca, Tiziana Liuti, Mairi
Frame, Elizabeth Munro, Pascaline Pey, Elke Van der
Tobias Schwarz & Jimmy Saunders
Vekens, Anais Combes, Els Raes, Yseult Baeumlin,
Edinburgh & Ghent, January 2011
CHAPTER ONE
CT PHYSICS AND
INSTRUMENTATION -
MECHANICAL DESIGN
Jimmy Saunders and Stefanie Ohlerth
BASIC CT UNIT ANATOMY
electrons when heated. The anode consists of a disk of
tungsten or a tungsten alloy with an anmular target,
called the focal track, close to the edge. The anode disk
A computed tomography (CT) unit consists of a gantry.
a patient table, hardware equipment, an operator
is supported on a long stem that is supported by ball
bearings within the tube. The anode can be rotated by
console and optionally additional workstations.
 The gantry is a doughnut-shaped ring containing
electromagnetic induction from a series of stator wind-
ings outside the evacuated tube.
the X-ray tube, the detector array and associated equip-
The X-ray tube is enclosed in a housing unit filled
ment. The central hole in the gantry accommodates the
with insulating oil. This oil provides electric shielding
patient on a sliding table. The X-ray tube rotates
from the tube voltage, X-ray protection and transmits
around a slice of patient anatomy. This slice represents
heat generated in the housing unit to the unit's surface.
the X-Y plane, with the X-axis being horizontal and the
The exterior of the housing unit is cooled with a fan,
Y-axis vertical. The isocenter of the gantry is the central
and insulating oil is cooled by passing it through a heat
point of this plane. The third dimension is represented
exchanger.
by the Z-axis, which is along the orientation of the
 Low-power applications use stationary anode tubes,
patient table. The patient bed is a sliding tray on a
while for most mid-range and high-performance
fixed table with an adjustable height and a defined
 applications there is a need to utilize rotating anode
capacity of forward motion. The operator console is
tubes.
located in another room or behind radioprotective
screening, and allows operation of the CT units.
Additional workstations can be used to review
Basic physiology of the X-ray tube
processed image data, but usually not raw data
processing.
A current of a few amperes (4-8A) heats the tungsten
filament that releases electrons (thermoionic emission)
in the vacuum. A high-voltage power source ('tube
X-RAY TUBE
voltage') ranging from 30 to 150 kilovolts (kV) is con-
nected across cathode and anode to accelerate the elec-
Basic anatomy of the X-ray tube
trons producing an electron flow ('tube current'). These
An X-ray tube is a vacuum tube that produces X-rays.
electrons collide with the anode material and about 1%
It is composed of a cathode (filament) and an anode
 of their kinetic energy is converted into X-rays, usually
(target). The cathode cup is negatively charged and
 perpendicular to the path of the electron beam. The
incorporates a wound tungsten filament that emits
remainder of energy is converted into heat, causing the
saunes Auu 'ziemups sa q pauis fy pan 
@ 2011 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
1
2 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
X-ray tube to warm up during operation. The tempera-
increase in the thermal capacity of the anode
-0 o b a r yn ro a jo am
by increasing its diameter and mass. This system
1500°C. Heat diffuses by conduction throughout the
has obvious limitations, as it still uses radiative
 anode body and by thermal radiation (infrared radia-
cooling.
tion) to the tube housing (80%). Heat is removed from
The 'material approach' is based on a slow evolu-
the tube housing by convection to the surrounding
tion in the materials used for the anode.
atmosphere.
Direct:
Many X-ray systems, including CT, have built-in
 Use of circular grooves in the anode support to
safety features that will not allow the equipment to be
 increase the contact and improve cooling.
operated in ‘overheated' conditions. The temperature
 Use of special liquid metal vacuum bearings
cannot be measured directly in the focal track. It has
that allow faster anode rotation.
to be evaluated based on indirect values that character-
 Focal track made of a mixture of rhenium and
ize the ability of the anode to store the heat generated
tungsten. Rhenium has a higher linear expansi-
during the X-ray emission, such as the anode heat
bility than tungsten and slows the rate at which
capacity, the anode dissipation/cooling rate or the
'ssso Suzeno apoue
tube dissipation.
Anode ‘compound'/increased thermal capaci-
 ties: use of molybdenum or graphite with tung-
sten in the anode disk. Molybdenum has twice
Specificities for CT
the specific heat capacity and half the density of
Since the invention of CT, its demands regarding the
sads rai taaa ue s ader rs
Xlabiel aie pue aseaiou on pasean raaau anmos Aei-x
heat capacity and a quarter of the density of
superior to those of radiography. These specific require-
molybdenum. It increases thermal capacity.
'Tamod uess iau um pazireuums aq uen sjua
 Replacement of the ball bearings by a liquid
metal (gallium) that allows the evacuation of
 shorter cool-down times and smaller focal spots
heat by conduction.
without compromise on resolution and image quality.
Indirect:
 In older CTs, the generator capacities and anode disk's
 Multiple detectors allow reduction of the heat
heat storage capacities were insufficient and long time
produced via reduced scan duration by a factor
 interruptions were needed.
approximately equivalent to the number of
 Scan power. typical values for the maximum power
rows. Manufacturers developed systems with
 are 20/40-100kW with the high voltage range ranging
up to 1000 rows.
from 80 to 150kV.
u suoeaoui on spuodsanos us usipnd, au
 Focal spots: X-ray tubes use typical focal spot sizes of
X-ray tubes.
 0.5-1.2mm. Specific innovations for CT are the 'flying
focus' allowing for control of the focus position on the
In 2000, Siemens developed the Straton tube, also
 anode during the scan or the electromagneic control
called the rotating envelope tube, for its high-tech
of the electron beam, which allows switching of the
Scanner. This tube uses direct convective cooling.
focal spot position both in the fan andin the Z-direction,
 exclusively of the anode, with a cooling oil stream at
providing overlapping sampling.
 the anode's back surface. As a result, the cooling rate
Rotation speed: the traditional glass tube technology
is vastly increased to 4.8MHU/min, eliminating the
is not adequate in terms of required precision and
need for large heat storage capacities of the anode disk
dn 'pads uogi yo Aiaa au usns on Aqs
and reducing waiting times due to anode cooling in
to 10500rotation/min, of high-performance tubes.
the clinical workflow.
Despite its higher thermic dissipation and lower cost,
This lighter tube also presents a solution for the
 glass has been replaced by the metal ceramic technol-
acceleration/pressure centrifuge high G (above 20 G).
ogy, which is more precise and better able to sustain
Another innovation on the X-ray tube in relation to
 the constraints related to the rotation speed.
CT is the dual-source CT (two tubes, two detector
Cool-dowon time: different approaches can be used on
fans); the main advantage of this architecture is its
their own or in combination to shorten the cool-down
'siauues L s,Aepoi ul uognqosai [enodual paaoidu
times and improve the heat storage capacities of CT.
the gantry rotation time is reduced to about 0.35s and
it is mechanically challenging to reduce that time even
The ‘brute force approach' was the main way used
further, which justifies the renewed interest in multi-
ue jo sisisuon qoeondde shui 'sapeoap aanl 1oy
source architectures.
3  CT PHYSICS AND INSTRUMENTATION
COLLIMATORS AND
Filtration
FILTRATION
 The X-ray photons emitted by the X-ray tube exhibit a
wide spectrum. The soft, low-energy X-rays, which
CT systems feature various collimators, filters and
contribute strongly to the patient dose and scatter
shielding designs, which provide filtration of the X-ray
radiation but less to the detected signal, should be
 spectra, definition of the measured slices, guarding
removed. To achieve this goal, most CT manufacturers
detectors against scattered radiation and general radi-
use X-ray filters.
 The inherent filtration of the X-ray-tube, typically
ation protection. These vary from scan to scan but
 always offer the same functions.
 3mm aluminium equivalent thickness, is the first filter.
In addition, flat or shaped filters can be used. Flat
Collimation
filters, made of copper or aluminium, are placed
 between the X-ray source and the patient. They modify
 Collimation in CT serves to ensure good image quality
the X-ray spectrum uniformly across the entire field of
and to reduce unnecessary radiation doses for the
view. Because the cross-section of a patient is mostly
 patient.
 oval-shaped, some manufacturers use shaped (or
 Collimators are present between the X-ray source
bow-tie) filters. These filters have an increased thick-
and the patient (tube or pre-patient collimators) and
 ness from center to periphery, allowing them to attenu-
between the paient and the detectors (detector or
Xoons nq iajuan a ul ie ie Xipieq uoneipei ae
 post-patient collimators).
 in the periphery. They are made from a material
The tube collimator is used to shape the X-ray fan
se yons Xsuap y pue iaqumu sruoe mon e ym
 beam before it penetrates the patient resrict the X-ray
Teflon.
 jo adeus aui sauap uonan mou e oi pandde xm 
 In some machines comb-shaped collimators close to
the X-ray beam). It consists of a set of collimator blades
the detector array are used to decrease the effective
made of highly absorbing materials such as tungsten
 detector element width and thus increase the achiev-
 Or molybdenum. The opening of these blades is
 able geometrical resolution.
adjusted according to the selected slice width and the
 as saap in 'ods deo a ro toisod pue azis
ness for single-slice CT. Tube collimators define the
DETECTOR SYSTEMS
dose profile according to the required slice thickness.
 Post-patient collimators improve the slice sensitivity
 profile by giving a more rectangular shape. Table 1.1
The detector is the system for quantitative recoring
shows the features of CT collimators.
 of the incident ionizing radiation. It acts in two steps.
Table 1.1
CT collimator features.
Collimator
Tube side -
Fixed;
type
detector side
Location
adjustable
Aim
 Pre patient  Tube
Very close to the
Fixed
-- To reduce the generated radiation roughly to the
focus (tube housing)
maximally anticipated beam for the given 
 detector and geometry
- Blocks 99% of the photons emitted by the tube 
Pre patient 
 Tube
Fixed
- To exactly define the maximum permitted beam 
 Pre patient  Tube 
As far as possible
Adjustable
Variable collimation to the desired slice width or
from the focus (close
multiple slice widths
to gantry housingy
- To minimize penumbra caused by finite focus size 
Post
Detector
Fixed
- To minimize signal contributions from scattered
patient
radiation
- Width = maximal collimation 
Post
Detector*
Between the single 
Adjustable
 - To minimize signal contributions from scattered
 patient 
(optional)
detector elements 
radiation
*Can only be implemented in scanners with a rotating detector.
4 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
1. The reception of the incident X-ray photon via
corresponding to a ring in the image. Detectors close
X-ray-sensitive detector elements with a specific
to the center of the detector array are responsible for a
geometrical configuration.
ring with a smaller diameter than those detectors
2.
 The transformation of the X-ray photon into a
towards the periphery of the detector array. Because
corresponding electrical signal, that is then ampli-
there is always a certain amount of electronic drift 
fied and converted from an analog to a digital form
associated with each detector, this causes gain changes
(via analog-to-digital converters). This step is rela-
between detectors, finally leading to ring artifacts.
may o panuqns pue paoads Aisea kiaan
Today, modern technology has overcome this problem
fluctuations.
So that third-generation CT scanners are free of ring
 artifacts.
There are two detector types.
 Multislice CT systems always use a third-generation
technology and they provide scan times as short
· Ionization chambers, mostly filled with the noble
as 0.5 s.
 gas xenon under high pressure. Gas detectors have
become obsolete due to their limited detection effi-
Fourth generation
ciency and the difficulty in manufacturing them for
multi-row design.
 Because of the problem of ring artifacts with third-
 Scintillation detectors, in the form of crystals such
 generation scanners, fourth-generation CT scanners 
as cesium iodide or cadmium tungstate, and
were designed. The detectors are placed separately in
ceramic materials such as gadolinium oxysulfide.
a stationary 360° ring around the patient and only
These detectors are now predominantly
/used
the X-ray tube rotates (rotate/stationary geometry).
mainly because of their short decay time, which is
Whereas in third-generation scanners, data are
an essential factor in subsecond scanning times
acquired by the detector array simultaneously, a single
since. Ultra-fast ceramic (gadolinium oxysulfide
detector collects the data in fourth-generation CT over
based) have superior characteristics in this area,
the period of time that is needed for the X-ray tube to
making them the best choice for spatial resolution
rotate through the arc angle of the fan beam. Each
and image quality.
detector also represents its owm reference detector. In
this way, ring artifacts were avoided in fourth-
The alternative detector concept is the flat-panel tech-
 generation scanners.
nology. Potential advantages are the possibility to scan
 This technology requires many detectors because
with wider cone angles without the need to develop
the detector array covers a 360° angle. It is not
detectors with 1024 rows or more and the high spatial
used nowadays to design multislice CT units because
resolution, particularly in medium to large field of
Jo raqumu asuaunn ue ypns ioy sison qoiu an jo
view scans. Flat-panel detectors were developed for
detectors.
 digital radiography and their use for CT is currently
 being explored by manufacturers.
Slip-ring technology
 In third- and fourth-generation scanners, the X-ray
GANTRY ANATOMY
 tube rotates around the object. This also applies to the
detectors in third-generation scanners. In combination,
Third generation
this is also referred to as a 'rotating gantry', although
With third-generation CT, simultaneous rotation of the
not all parts of the gantry rotate. These components
 X-ray tube and detector array became possible (rotate /
 require a number of electrical connections for high-
rotate geometry, rotating gantry). Moreover, the
voltage power, data transmission and control. In most
number of detectors and the angle of the fan beam
early CT systems, the conmections between the compo-
eaq Kei-x a ie os Aiqerapisuon paseanul aram
 nents on the rotating side of the gantry bearing and the
could scan the entire patient. The translational motion
power sources, computers, etc., on the stationary side
of first- and second-generation CT scanners could
of the bearing were made using cables. They were of
therefore be eliminated, which reduced the scan times
finite length and allowed a rotation of perhaps 700°.
substantially.
As a result, these systems had to stop and reverse rota-
 In the beginning, third-generation scanners suffered
tion directions between images.
from the problem of ring artifacts. Each detector in
The altermative to this cable system is the slip-ring
third-generation scanners is responsible for the data
technology. It allows the continuous circular rotation
5 CT PHYSICS AND INSTRUMENTATION
of the X-ray tube and other components of a CT system.
element is actively detecting radiation, and slice thick-
In a slip ring, electrical brushes allow connections
ness is determined by the collimator width. Per default,
between continuously rotating and stationary compo-
the collimator width is always smaller than the detec-
nents. The slip-ring design made it possible to achieve
tor width. Therefore, for single-slice CT, slice thickness
greater rotational velocities allowing shorter scan
times. It finally enabled the design of the modern
however, utilization of the X-ray beam is lower, there-
helical CT scanner.
fore signal-to-noise-ratio decreases as well. This may
 be partially compensated by increasing the mAs. As
an advantage, partial volume averaging decreases
Multislice CT
and spatial resolution is improved with thinner slice
Helical CT represents a CT system using slip-ring tech-
thickness.
nology in which continuous X-ray tube rotation is used
With multislice CT, detectors are much smaller
along with simultaneous and continuous table transla-
(e.g. <1 x 1mm). The detector size determines the
tion through the gantry. The X-ray tube describes a
smallest possible slice thickness and the collimators
 , , ai a alqo an poe ed 
determine the number of detectors used. If only the
equivalent to spiral CT, which is actually an inaccurate
central two detectors are used, the slice width can be
term (a spiral decreases in diameter). Helical CT scan-
reduced below the detector width. To allow for varia-
ners are named single section (single slice, single
tion in slice width and to decrease scan time, the
detector row), dual section (dual slice, dual detector
 signals from multiple rows of detector elements can be
row) or multisection (multislice, multidetector, multi-
 combined, so-called binning. Binning can be per-
row) according to the maximum number of slice
formed during the requisition or from raw data after
'uoejo Anue iad paieiauag sage
 scanning.
 There are two detector array designs in multislice
a given volume much more quickly (e.g. 30s for the
 systems: those with detector elements of equal width
entire abdomen). More importanly, though, it allows
(equal-width design) in each detector row and those
a volume to be imaged during a more consistent phase
with detector elements of unequal width in the differ-
of contrast enhancement. It is of significant benefit
 ent detector rows (unequal-width design).
[euuopqe aseydnmun pue Xudenotue  1og
With multislice CT, a much higher anatomic cover-
imaging. The extent of sequential coverage, or the total
as pue yoid aues a wim paaanuoe aq ueo aoe
time of scanning, is generally limited by X-ray tube
thickness than in single-slice CT. For the same
heating.
 anatomic coverage and scan time, with single-slice
 The relationship between the incremental table
CT one has to either increase the pitch or the
 movement and the selected slice width during one
 slice thickness. But image quality is then degraded
-aours un uiid, se paqosp si Au an jo uogeia
considerably.
slice CT the pitch describes the ratio of the table move-
 There are many advantages with multislice CT.
 Scanning is faster, providing better temporal and con-
(collimator pitch). In multislice CT, the detector pitch
trast
resolution
and
fewer  motion artifacts.
describes the ratio of the table movement per 3609
 Consequently, multiphase studies (e.g. arterial, venous,
gantry rotation to the detector width.
1. The collimator
portal phase studies) became possible. Thinner slice
pitch, then, defines the ratio of the detector pitch to the
 thicknesses are possible, which improves spatial reso-
number of detector rows in multislice technology.
lution and reduces partial volume averaging. Due to
The pitch influences patient dose, scan time and
lauau 'uoneon iad Sumuess ysual juaged arou
image quality. Increasing the pitch decreases scan time
 X-ray tube current settings may be used, which in turn
 and reduces motion artifacts. However, the effective
reduces image noise.
section thickness as well as image noise increases,
 Table 1.2 shows typical performance characteristics
 too. For clinical studies, a pitch of 1-1.5 is commonly
for a CT scanmer in 2010.
used.
 Since the helical data set does not correspond to
Moving gantry
sequential plane data, it needs to be reconstructed via
interpolation into planar image data sets before the
Most CT units include a moving table and a fixed
actual CT reconstruction.
 gantry housing. However, for certain purposes, moving
With single-slice CT, detectors are rather wide in the
or sliding gantries have been developed. Instead of the
Z-axis, e.g. 1× 20mm. Almost the entire detector
 table moving into the gantry, as in conventional CT, in
6 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Table 1.2
Sequential scanning (axial scanning.
 Performance characteristics for a CT scanner in 2010.
single-slice scanning!
Power
60-100 kW
 For a long time, CT examinations consisted of scanning
Rotating time per 3609
0.33-0.4s
0.5-0.6mm
single slices sequentially. A single slice is scanned, then
Slice width
the patient is transported for a scan increment, mostly
Simultaneously sca nned slices 
64
Data per helical scan
200-4000 MB
 equal to the chosen slice thickness. Then, a second scan
Image matrix
512 x 512
is taken and the procedure is repeated. This examina-
z-coverage per rotation 
20-40 mm
 tion mode is relatively time-consuming and has been
Scan times 'whole body'
10-30 s
largely replaced by the faster helical CT. One fumda-
Scan range
>1000mm
0.4-0.6mm
 mental disadvantage is that overlapping images for 3D
Isotropic spatial resolution
 Contrast resolution
 image reconstruction are generally not available.
3HU
 Effective dose
1-20mSv
Modern scanmers offer automated and therefore fast
modes for scanning single slices sequentially. Cardiac
scanning may be a future indication.
Dynamic scanning (serial scanning!
this case the table is fixed and scanning is accom-
UI quaed au raao Kues au Suaou Aq pausid
Dynamic CT is used to record temporal changes in the
human oncology, for example, it may be an advantage
density characteristics of an object. Typically, dynamic
during the course of irradiation if a CT scan can be
scanning is used to assess contrast medium dynamics.
 performed for treatment planning adjustments imme-
 A representative selected slice is scanned repeatedly or
diately prior to irradiation. For this, patients are posi-
multiphase examination of a complete organ is per-
tioned on a common and fixed treatment table, which
 formed before, during and/or after administration of
is integrated in a combined CT and linear accelarator
-aidai Aeu sasueup paaiasqo auL umipau iseuon
irradiation system. The irradiation system and the CT
 breathing, or pathological processes such as portosys-
gantry are positioned on opposite ends of the table so
that, by rotating the treatment table,linac radiotherapy
 temic shunts. Dual-phase CT angiography is a mini-
or CT scanning can be performed. Moving gantry
 mally invasive technique, which provides an excellent
systems are also designed for usage during surgery or
rssea oedau pue renod jo uonuasadan 
angiography.
 anatomy.
Material-selective scanning
SCANNING MODES
(dual-energy CT)
 Dual-energy methods serve to obtain information
A routine scan requires a scout radiograph for ana-
about the material composition in the tissues exam-
tomical orientation and scan region (slice) selection
ined. To achieve this, a selected slice is scanned with
 apou leau io jenuanbas u paunoiad uess pue
two different spectra, i.e. with different high-voltage
n si uoge puaa wim Aiqissod pue sanea
Scout radiograph (survey radiograph,
be done in two successive scans or by switching the
localizer radiograph, scanogram,
high voltage rapidly from projection to projection.
topogram, scout view!
TABLE DESIGN
 A survey radiograph, similar to a conventional radio-
graph, is very useful for selection of single slices or
complete scan regions. This radiograph is taken with
Many CT tables are made of a carbon fiber material
a low dose and low spatial resolution by transporting
because it will not cause artifacts when scanned. The
the patient slowly through the field of measurement
 movement of the table is referred to as incrementation
with the X-ray tube in a fixed position with radiation
(incrementation indexing). All table designs have
emitted continuously or in pulsed mode. Lateral scan-
 weight limits that if exceeded may compromise incre-
ograms are particularly useful to select the gantry tilt
 ment accuracy. The maximum table load on actual CT
according to anatomy.
machines is between 200kg and 330kg. Various table
7  CT PHYSICS AND INSTRUMENTATION
 attachments and positional aids are available for spe-
PROPRIETARY CT
cific body parts. For large animal CT these are usually
TERMINOLOGY (TABLE 1.3)
custom made (for details, see Chapter 39).
Table 1.3
Proprietary CT terminology.
GE Medical
Siemens
 Philips
Toshiba
 X-ray tube preparation
pue dn wueM
Tube warm-up
 Check-up calibration 
Tube co nditioning
Warm-up
calibration
Scanning modes
 Planning radiograph
 Scout
Topogram
 Pilot or surview
Scano
 Planning single CT scan 
N/A
N/A
N/A
S&V
(scan & view)
 Sequential scan mode 
Axial
 Seq uential
Axial
S&S
(scan &scan)
 Thick slice reformatting 
Addition 
Average
N/A
 StackScan
 of sequential thin slices 
 Helical scan mode
Spiral
Helical 
Spiral
Helical
 Dynamic CT
 Dynamic
Cine
Dynamic
Dynamic
cine (continuous scanning)
(dynamic, serio)
Scan planning
Table
Couch
Couch
 Patient table
Couch
Tube heat
Heat units 
Heat
Tube heat (load)
Tube (OLP)
 Scan range, length 
 Range
Range
1500
Range
Scan FOV
 Scan FOV
 Scan FOV
 Scan FOV
C FOV
 Reconstruction FOV
D FOV
Recon FOV (ZOOM)
FOV
D FOV
Bolus tracking
 Smart prep 
Care bolus
Bolus Pro 
SureStart 
 Collimator pitch
Pitch
Pitch
Pitch
(Thickness)
 Dose management
 Smart mA & Auto mA
 Care dose 4D
Dose Wise
Sure
software
Exposure 
Image reconstruction
Interval
Increment 
Continuous,
Interval
interval
 Overlapping
Image reconstruction 
Algorithms 
Kernels
 Recon algorithm
Recon FC
algorithm
 Additional image 
E1-4
Filters
 Custom Image 
Filter (QDS}
filtration
Filters
 Matrix, reconstruction
Center X,Y (0,0)
Center X,Y (0,0)
Center X,Y (0,0)
Center X,Y
(256,256)
Cone beam
Cross beam
AMPR/ASSR
COBRA
TCOT
reconstruction
algorithm
(Continved)
8 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Table 1.3
(Continved)
GE Medical
Siemens 
 Philips
Toshiba 
Post-processing
Archive
Image works
Browser
 Patient catalogue 
Directory
Visualization software
 Image display 
Sub-tree
Viewer
I-selector
Multiplanar
 Direct MPR
Real-time MPR
 Real-time MPR
Multiview
reconstruction (MPR)
(auto MPR)
DICOM protocols 
 Network
Export
Copy series
Transfer
transfer
 Subtraction software
Innova 3D
 Subtraction
 Subtraction
Sure
Syngo neuro DSA
 Subtraction 
Cardio software
 CT Cardiac Imaging
Syngo circulation
Cardiac tools/Best
Sure Cardio
to beat
Plaque analysis
 Color mapping 
Syngo plaque MAP 
Plaque Analysis
 SurePlaque
software
Gating software
 SnapShot Pulse 
Syngo circulation
Step & shoot
 SureCardio
application
cardiac
 Prospective
Fluoro CT software
CT fluoro
Care vision
 CCT (continuous
CT Fluoro
CT)
SureFluoro
CT endoscopy/endo 3D
Navigator
Fly
Endoview
3D
FURTHER READING
Leidholdt EM and Boone JM (eds) The essential physics of
medical imaging (2e), pp 327-72. Philadelphia, PA:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Bushberg JT, Seibert JA, Leidholdt EM and Boone JM (2002)
Computed tomography. In: Bushberg JT, Seibert JA,
CHAPTER TWO
CT ACQUISITION PRINCIPLES
Tobias Schwarz and Robert O'Brien
IMAGE PARAMETER SELECTION
running some tests and comparing 1 and 2s rotation
time images for artifact magnitude. When selecting the
Introduction
tube rotation time, the effect on the mAs needs to be
 considered. In some units, changing the tube rotation
When running a CT scan the operator of a CT unit is
time will automatically adapt the mA to result in the
faced with a large number of selectable settings, which
can be intimidating. The following guidelines are
same mAs and vice versa, whereas in other units the
mAs will change according to the selected product of
designed to help in the selection process and can be
mA and time.
used to set up individual CT protocols.
Current and mAs product (Figure 2.1)
Body part selection
The current ranges usually from about 50mA to 400 mA
In all modern CT units, the operator needs to preselect
in modern CT units and there are either a large number
a body part folder, which contains different protocol
of selectable settings or it can be selected freely within
options. The body part selection includes hardware
that range. The deciding factor is the applied current
choices such as selection of specifically shaped bow-tie
during the entire rotation of the tube, or mAs product.
ane asaul uoesuaduos Sunuapreq weaq iog siai
In some units, it is the mAs that is selected, whereas
not adapted to veterinary patients and therefore it
in others the mA is selected.
is worth testing other body parts protocol groups as
 There is an inverse proportional relationship
well. There are often restrictions on protocol uses
between mAs and image noise. Thus higher mAs set-
and topogram selections and it is not always
tings will reduce noise. Small slice thickness increases
 possible to reuse topograms when changing protocol
 image noise. Therefore if a small slice thickness is
groups.
selected (2mm or less) the mAs should be increased to
keep the noise at an acceptable level.
Tube rotation time
The mAs and the kilovoltage both contribute to the
heat load of the X-ray tube. Depending on the heat
The tube rotation time selected should be as short
capacity of the tube, the combination of very high mAs
as possible (usually between 0.5 and 1s) for all body
 and kilovoltage settings is usually limited.
parts with anticipated movement, such as thorax,
All CT units have special protocols with low mAs
abdomen and spine, to avoid motion blur. For
setting (usually 80mAs or lower) for infants to mini-
non-moving body parts in anesthetized patients, such
mize radiation exposure levels. Despite the fact that
 shoasejueape aq uen il'sanruanxa pue yrau 'peau se
most small animals usually are close in size to an
to increase the tube rotation time to 2s to reduce
 infant, these low mAs settings do not always generate
view aliasing artifact (see Chapter 4). However, this
high-quality images for the head, spine and abdomen
might not be necessary in modern CT units, where
 in dogs and cats. In small animals, mAs settings
the software is designed to ensure a sufficient number
between 100mAs (thorax) and 250mAs (head and
of views even with shorter rotation times. It is worth
 spine) are usually adequate.
saunes Auu 'ziemups sa q pauis fy pan 
@ 2011 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
6
10 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
A
B
Figure 2.1 CT images of a canine cervical spine acquired with (A) 100mAs and (B) 200mAs, and otherwise identical set-
tings. The image noise is represented by the general graininess of the image, which is reduced in (B).
All modern CT units have one or two adaptive mAs
 output options that can modulate the current along the
Z plane and/ or the X-Y plane. The shoulder region is
a good example where both can be applied. As the
patient's neck travels through the gantry, the increase
in body thickness at the shoulder region (Z plane
current adaptation) requires an increase in mAs set-
tings to minimize noise. But since the shoulder area is
also wider than high, different mAs settings are optimal
at different positions of the gantry circle (X-Y plane
current adaptation). Adaptive mAs setings are
designed to minimize radiation exposure and tube
load and therefore do not always improve image
quality in veterinary patients. This should be tested
before using it.
Kilovoltage
 In CT, the kilovoltage settings are usually high and
there is a limited number of choices, usually 80, 120
marcelKovalik
and 140kV. The 120kV seting is adequate for almost
 all small animal patients, and can be applied univer-
Figure 2.2 Illustration of the gantry with the trace of the
rotating X-ray tube (black ring) and wedge-shaped projec-
sally. In large patients, the 140kV seing would be
tions obtained along its course (yellow wedges). The SFOV
preferential to ensure adequate penetration; however,
baloid e u papnioul st ieul eate aul st (sul pat aul uuim)
the maximum kV settings usually only work in com-
tions. Only for this area is a fall set of data acquired and
bination with relatively low mAs settings. Maximizing
 images can only be reconstructed from within the SFOV.
the mAs at the expense of the kilovoltage setings is
usually the better option in this case.
shaped array of detectors on the opposite side of the
gantry, resulting in a wedge-shaped area of the gantry
Scan field of view (Figure 2.2)
being exposed to radiation. The X-ray tube and the
 During a CT image acquisition, the X-ray tube emits 
detectors circle around the gantry center during the
 radiation that is collimated on all sides to match a fan-
Suddeaao Aemni jo eane ue ul lumsan 'amsodxa
11 CT ACQUISITION PRINCIPLES
A
B
Figure 2.3 Thoracic CT image of a dog obtained with (A) a 42cm DFOV and (B) a 14cm DFOV and otherwise identical
 settings. There is a dramatic increase in image resolution in (B) compared with (A), best visible in the small lung vessels,
wedges of exposed areas within the gantry. The scan
tion from the raw data so that images with a smaller
field of view (SFOV) is the area of the gantry where
DFOV of specific areas can be obtained after the pro-
there is complete overlap of these wedges. Image
cedure. Due to the size and geometry of the detectors,
reconstruction in a matrix requires all data from all
 decreasing the DFOV below 10cm usually does not
projections. As aresult, a CT image can only be selected
further increase the image resolution.
from within the SFOV. In most modern CT units, the
SFOV is no longer selectable, because the maximum
Gantry tilt (Figures 2.4 and 2.5)
SFOV is always preselected. However, in General
 Electrics scanners, the SFOV is selected by the opera-
o02 01 dn oi pa aq ues Anues au sium L isou u
tor, and it is important to select the SFOV larger than
the maximal patient diameter to avoid out-of-field arti-
usually canmot be obtained with tilt, but all CT studies
facts (see Chapter 4). Keeping the SFOV only as big as
can be done tilted. Some older CT unit such as Elscint
scanners even had a table swivel to align in the lateral
orientation. Gantry tilt is useful for optimal alignment
of the image plane with anatomic planes of interest to
Display field of view (Figure 2.3)
 achieve optimally aligned sequentially reconstructed
 The display field of view (DFOV, synonym FOV) is the
 images. The most common use of gantry tilt is to align
area of the SFOV from which an image is reconstructed.
 the scanning plane with the lumbar and particular cer-
The DFOV canmot exceed the SFOV and should be
vical spine. Gantry tilt can be essential to achieve
kept as small as possible. During the reconstruction of
artifact-free images of patients with metallic foreign
 a digital image, the matrix size defines the number of
material or to avoid inclusion of arifact-inducing
pixels used to form the image. For instance, in a 5122
 patient structures such as the head in elbow CT.
matrix, each image will be composed of 262144 pixels.
I ' Anu sn uam sieaa leiaas are ar
Displayed over a 40 cm DFOV, the pixel length will be
 is preferable to adjust tilt at the gantry itself for patient
0.78mm; displayed over a 15 cm DFOV, the pixellength
safety reasons. Since the gantry tilts only in one plane,
will be 0.29mm. Thus sizing of the DFOV has a signifi-
it is essential to position the patient in the appropriate
 cant impact on image resolution.
 recumbency. For instance, aligning with intervertebral
 It is often essential to include the whole body cross-
disk spaces via gantry tilt is not posible in lateral
sectional area to assess the entire patient, so that coning
recumbency. When the gantry is tilted, the scan direc
down too far may not be practical. However, all newer
tion remains along the Z plane, not the tilted plane.
CT scanners allow a targeted retrospective reconstruc-
sasuanbas aunds rabuol 1oy anueisul 1oy samba1 stu
12 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Figure 2.4 The creative use of gantry tilt can facilitate diagnostic images in challenging patients, such as in this dog with a
paraspinal bullet seen on the topogram in (A). The transverse scan plane (red line) results in a non-diagnostic transverse CT
image (B) for the area of interest due to the strong metallic artifact. The tilted (blue line in A) CT image (C) eliminates the
artifact. These images can be retrospectively reconstructed into a transverse aligned CT image (D). A combination of the sagit-
tal reconstructions from both tilted acquisitions (E) displays the diagnostic information from almost all areas obtained with
thisstrategy.
13 CT ACQUISITION PRINCIPLES
A
C
Figure 2.5 There are many ways to CT scan a canine elbow joint. (A) To avoid streak artifacts on elbow CT images emanat-
ing from the head and neck, the head is fixed in a laterally flexed position and the forelimbs are slightly elevated. (B) Lateral
aueid ueos aul u yoau pue peay aul jo aouasaid aul proae on (sau panotos) aueid uess paiu Auas aul Suensnl ueodoi
without extreme flexion of the neck. (C) Resulting artifact-free elbow CT image.
 resolution can be achieved with any orthogonal image
to leave the DFOV sufficiently large to accommodate
reconstruction so there is less of a need for this feature.
the anatomic area of interest within the DFOV over
For veterinary use with non-standardized patients and
its entire length. Some reconstruction softwares are
either unable to reconstruct orthogonal planes from
problems, gantry tilt remains a useful tool.
tilted acquisitions or introduce image distortion
(e.g. in Osirix 3.7). This can be remedied with addi-
Slice thickness
tional software (macros).
General considerations (Figures 2.6, 2.9)
The image reconstruction from helical scans with
 gantry tilt always requires a longer reconstruction time
 Slice thickness (synonym slice width) is arguably the
because the necessary mathematical interpolation is
single most important setting to select for a CT scan.
very complicated: the X-Y plane of the tilted gantry
Slice thickness is directly proporional to the magni-
needs to be normalized to the X-Y plane of the moving
tude of volume averaging (synonym partial volume arti-
 patient table. In some CT scanners multiplanar recon-
fact) and inversely proportional to the magnitude of
structions or helical acquisitions are not even possible
image noise. Thus thick-slice CT images are blurry but
with gantry tilt. The latest generations of CT scanners
contain little noise, whereas thin-slice images are sharp
with 80 or more detector rows often do not have
but noisy. There are several strategies to deal with this
the costly mechanical gantry tilt. An isotropic image
dilemma.
14 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
B
Figure 2.6 Canine elbow CT images acquired with (A) 2mm and (B) 1mm slice thickness and otherwise identical settings.
The increased slice thickness results in more blur but less image noise. For orthopedic settings, the thin-slice image is
preferable.
 Thin-slice images should be obtained with higher
very thin slices. Helical and, in particular, helical multi-
mAs settings to keep the noise at an acceptable
e uess oi Aqe mo paondu Asea aaeu I as
level.
la m uds a sus e u aa puad aie
Structures with a wide inherent object contrast,
slices. Selection of the appropriate slice interval in
such as bone, nasal turbinates and lungs, should be
sequential CT and pitch in helical CT helps to find the
viewed with wide window settings. Wide window
optimal compromise in slice thickness selection.
settings suppress the visibility of noise. Therefore
 Another artifact that can be minimized with thin-
a higher noise level is tolerable as long as these
slice imaging is non-linear partial volume (see Chapter
image series are only reviewed with these window
4), which contributes to the streaks in the caudal fossa
settings.
of the calvarium. By obtaining images with a thin
 Structures with a narrow inherent object contrast,
slice width originally and then fusing the raw data
such as the brain, spinal cord, liver and other soft
 into bigger sections, non-linear partial volume artifact
tissue organs, require viewing with a narrow
is minimized and noise is reduced. Because of the
window setting, which enhances noise. Therefore
binning of thin detectors, all thick-slice images in
a thicker slice width (3 to 5mm) should be selected
multislice CT are obtained as a fusion from smaller
in most circumstances for these structures.
slices, and non-linear partial volume is reduced
 Most CT users have a probably subconscious pref-
automatically.
erence for sharp, thin-sliced images with wide
 Thick-slice images can be appropriate for specific
window settings, because these are aesthetically
purposes and the partial volume arifact can work
-m sa as- aq r Sad ar
favorably to achieve this. It is, for instance, not neces-
 dowed narrowly to the tolerance level for image
 sary to select the smallest slice width to detect pulmo-
noise. It is important to select slice width
pue 1
 nary nodules. Due to the partial volume artifact and
Areuound e 'sun a u sauaap asuap are a
nodule that is smaller than the slice width will still
Another limitation of thin-slice imaging is the limited
Create a visible, albeit blurry, opacity. Therefore a 3 to
coverage of the patient or the prolonged time to scan
5mm slice width is acceptable for lung metastasis
a defined area. The tube heat capacity is also limited,
 SCreening in dogs and cats. A short thin-slice series can
so it is not always possible to scan a large area with
then be obtained as a follow-up.
15 CT ACQUISITION PRINCIPLES
only the central detectors are very thin and the detec-
tor width enlarges symmetrically peripherally. This
design is cheaper and prevalent in older units and
scanmers with fewer detector rows. In an equal-detector-
width design all detectors have a very small width (0.5--
1 mm). This design is more expensive and prevalent in
 the newest generation of scanners with many detector 
rows. The mechanical collimator is used to determine
 the number of detector rows to be exposed.
A CT image sequence can only be reconstructed with
 slices of equal thickness. Therefore in an unequal-
 detector-width-design CT scanmer, only certain binning
combinations are numerically possible. The number in
the multislice CT unit name (e.g. ‘four-slice CT)
usually corresponds to the maximum number of detec-
tor row combinations that can be binned together, not
 the number of detector rows, which is usually greater.
For instance, a so-called ‘four-slice scanner’ usually
has eight detector rows with two 1mm, two 1.5mm,
marcelKovalik
two 2.5mm and two 5mm detectors. Possible binning
combinations are then 4 × 2.5mm,4 × 5mm,2 × 10mm
Figure 2.7 Illustration of a single-slice CT detector array.
and 1 x 20mm. The outermost detector row can be
Two lead jaws restrict the X-ray beam exposure of the detec-
partially collimated by the collimator, adding further
tor elements and thereby determine the slice thickness.
binned slice thickness options of 2 x 0.5mm, 4 × 1 mm,
4 x 8mm.
 Slice thickness selection and detector design
Slice thickness and slice sensitivity profile
[Figure 2.9)
Single-slice CT (Figure 2.7)
In a single-slice CT unit, submillimeter-thin and
Due to the fact that the focal spot of a CT unit is much
usually 10mm long detector cells are aligned in a row
smaller than the selected slice thickness, the X-ray
in the X-Y plane of the gantry. The position of a
sI pue a8pam e inq aois e Amn iou sI I u weaq
mechanical collimator, made of two lead jaws, deter-
 thus thinner at the isocenter of the gantry than at the
mines the exposed width of the detectors and thereby
detector level. The slice sensitioity profile expresses
the slice thickness. Slice thickness cannot be modified
this relationship mathematically and states that the
 -imbse aheu aul rae eep men woy Aaaoadsona
contrast resolution degrades towards the slice periph-
tion in a single-slice CT unit.
ery. It is possible to reconstruct image data only from
the center of the slice (half-width-height-maximum)
Multislice CT (Figure 2.8)
 and some manufacturers (e.g. Siemens) offer two dif-
In a multislice CT unit, several rows of detectors are
ferent reconstruction options for each selected slice
lined up along the Z-axis of the gantry. The slice thick-
thickness: the thin-slice option reconstructs in
ness is determined by the combination of detectors
half-width-height-maximum mode, which increases
from which data are pooled together, a process called
 image resolution; and the thick-slice option recon-
binning. It is possible to reconstruct CT images from
structs the whole slice width data, allowing the use of
the same acquisition both as thin- and thick-slice
higher pitches in helical CT.
 images. The ability to change the slice thickness retro-
 spectively from the raw data is one of the major advan-
Slice interval (Figure 2.9)
 tages of multislice CT. Dual reconstruction should be
part of the standard protocol for almost all body parts
The slice interval (synonym slice increment) is the inter-
with multislice CT.
val at which CT images are acquired in sequential
A basic understanding of the detector alignment
mode CT. In helical mode, data are obtained continu-
 helps in selecting the appropriate slice thickness. Two
 ously, hence slice interval is not applicable here. The
design types exist. In an unequal-detector-oidth design
slice interval is selected in relation to slice width. As a
16 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
1.251.251.251.251.251.251.251.25
1.5
1.251.251.251.251.251.251.251.25
1.251.251.251.251.251.251.251.25
+
+
2.5
1.5111.5
2.5
D
Figure 2.8 Multi-slice CT detector row design and collimation options. (A) Equal-width detector-row design with eight
rows of 1.25mm wide detectors. (B) Unequal-width detector-row design with rows of two each 1mm, 1.5mm, 2.5mm and
5mm wide detectors. This is the typical design of a 'four-slice' CT unit as only a maximum of four consecutive images can
be reconstructed per tube rotation from these eight rows of detectors. (C) The collimator is used to determine the number of
detector rows to be exposed in multislice CT. (D) In addition, the outermost pair of detectors can be partially collimated,
 resulting in more possible slice thickness options. In this case, four images of mm slice thickness are generated. (E) The col-
uass aseai im sul 'pasn st red roioaiap ieuas au Auo j saseun aons u-euin aierauan on pasn aq oste ues roieu
time as it does not use the full array of detectors.
default most units will preselect a slice interval equal
 continuous slices and leave gaps between them.
to the slice width, ensuring a continuous image
For instance for spinal CT the intervertebral disk
acquisition.
aq ues sdes pue Aisnonuguos pauuens aq uen saseds
Continuous scanning is essential if the anatomy
 left over the vertebral bodies. Leaving a slice gap
changes rapidly along the Z plane, which is the case 
will always limit the ability to perform orthogonal
for most body parts. However, some body parts, such
reconstructions.
as the nose, do not rapidly change their anatomic fea-
aeaq paad raei st Surns uddena
tures along the Z plane. In older CT units, where tube
of tube heat issues, but this might be useful if maximum
heating is an issue it might then be better to obtain
image detail is required for a small area. Orthogonal
1 mm thick images for maximal anatomic detail of the
reconstructions in particular will improve with over-
nose, but leave a 2mm slice interval to not overload
lapping images.
the tube. If continuous scanning is essential, such as
for a metastasis check of the lungs, then helical mode
Sequential versus helical mode
should be considered.
 For some body parts another compromise that can
 In sequential CT (synonym axial) mode, a complete set
be made between limited tube heat capacity and
of data is acquired from all angles of the tube position,
optimal image detail is to obtain several small series of
resulting in optimal image resolution. In helical CT, the
17 CT ACQUISITION PRINCIPLES
D
Figure 2.9  (A) The 5mm slice thickness image of the nose reveals ambiguous features of the nasal turbinates due to partial
volume related image blur. (B) The lmm thick image supports the diagnosis of bacterial rhinitis based on the presence of
normal turbinate and secretion. Leaving a gap between thin slices is a better option than obtaining continuous thick slice
images of mediocre quality. (C) Frontally reconstructed view of a canine elbow specimen obtained with sequential scanning
Teaaun ui'o e pue yim as uu I e yim Aeuanbas paseu Adenore I (a) Teaiau pue pim as u e pue
shows a smoother outline of the subchondral bone due to a reduction in stair step artifact (images courtesy of Andrew
Gendler).
data represent a helix of data, and the incomplete data
quality. Body parts with anticipated motion are pref-
set has to be completed by mathematical guesses or
erentially scanned helically in any scanner, as the like-
e a sa  l anonaau suonnoda
lihood of occurrence of motion is lower during the
lower image resolution than sequentially scanned CT
shorter helical acquisition time. Also, the ability to
images. In general, if maximum image detail is
 sn a a 
required, a sequential CT should be performed.
 and the fact that with a multislice CT there is data
However, there are other factors that influence image
redundancy of each anatomic area can make helical
18  VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
collimated width of al included detectors combined
(collimator pitch, similar to single-slice CT) or in relation
to the slice thickness of each detector (or binmed com-
binations thereof, detector pitch) (Boxes 2.1 and 2.2).
The stretch of the helix in Figure 2.10 illustrates the
magnitude of the pitch and its relationship to slice
thickness. The width of the helical band represents the
selected slice width or collimation width. A pitch of
zero would result in a complete ring of data, a sequen-
tial CT scan. With a pitch of 1, the helix is stretched to
a degree that after one rotation the table will have
moved exactly by one slice or collimation width. The
sequential plane CT image is then reconstructed with
mathematical  interpolations  from available data
obtained at other positions of the helix. The higher the
marcelKovalik
pitch, the more stretched is the helical data set and the
more incorrect are these mathematical guesses, result-
 ing in a blurred image.
Figure 2.10 Illustration of a helical CT image reconstruc-
tion. Data are acquired as a helical set of volumetric data.
Pitch selection in single-slice CT (Figure 2.11)
The width of the helical band represents the slice thickness.
In single-slice CT units the optimal compromise
The CT image (red box) is reconstructed in the transverse
plane from the helical data set (black X), by extrapolating
 between the coverage of the object and the image
from and weighting of existing data at similar locations
detail is a pitch of 1.4. If more image detail is required,
along the helix (green X and blue X). The higher the pitch, the
 a pitch of 1 should be selected. Pitches of less than 0.75
more stretched the helix, the more imprecise are these calcu-
resultin a diminishing gain of image quality. If maximal
lations, resulting in image blur.
image quality is required, then a sequential CT scan
should be performed. A pitch of 2 is the maximum that
is advisable for a single-slice CT unit; beyond this the
mode equal to or better than sequential scanning for
image blur becomes too dominant.
overall image quality. In CT units with more than 16
detector rows, there is little more benefit of performing
To cover a certain length of patient area, slice thick-
 ness and pitch are selected in conjunction. Selecting a
a sequential CT. In units with lower numbers of detec-
 pitch between 1 and 2 and matching this with a cor-
tors, it is often still preferential to obtain head and
responding slice thickness should be the guiding prin-
 spine images in sequential mode, but this needs to be
ciple in this process. Because of the different effects of
tested.
slice thickness and pitch on the slice sensitivity profile,
the image resolution is better with a combination of
Helical pitch
narrow slice width and greater pitch than with a
thicker slice and a smaller pitch, as long as the pitch
Introduction (Figure 2.10)
does not exceed 2 and the mAs are sufficiently
In helical CT, the patient moves through the gantry
increased for the smaller slice width.
while parts of the gantry rotate around it. This results 
 in a helical (synonym spiral) set of continuous data that 
 Pitch selection in multislice CT
represents the entire volume of the scarmed area. The
relationship between the table increment during one
 In multislice CT units the manufacturers do not always
full gantry rotation and the slice thickness is expressed
specify which definition of pitch they use. However,
as the pitch, a unitless number. Pitch is directly propor-
this can be deciphered based on the suggested pitch
tional to image blur, therefore a highly pitched CT scan
numbers in their protocols. Detector pitches have rela-
results in a very blurry image. In single-slice CT, the
tively high numbers (3 to 8 in a four-slice unit), whereas
collimation and slice thickness are synonymous. In
the collimator pitch is a lower number (between 0.5
multislice CT, however, this is not the case, and pitch
 and 1.5 in a four-slice unit). As a guiding principle, the
can be defined as the relation of table increment to the
pitches in multislice CT can be comparatively higher
19 CT ACQUISITION PRINCIPLES
Box 2.1
table increment per 360° gantry rotation
 single-slice collimator pitch =
collimation width at isocenter
detector pitch
multislice collimator pitch :
number of selected detectors or binned combinations
table increment per 360° gantry rotation
multislice detector pitch =
detector width
be modified retrospectively. In helical CT, the image
Box 2.2 Examples
 data are acquired as a volume. As a result, a slice image
 can be reconstructed from any point within that
Single-slice CT:
a s m e la a anoaa a
 2.5mm slice width and 2.5 mm table incre-
ment = collimator pitch of 1
 to be reconstructed needs to be defined by the user
 in helical CT. It is critical to understand that changes 
 2.5mm slice width and 5mm table incre-
 in the helical image reconstruction interval (HIRI)
ment = collimator pitch of 2
do not affect the slice width. As a default, the CT
Four-slice CT:
 units will preselect a HIRI that is equal to the selected
2.5mm detector width and 7.5mm table
 slice width, resulting in a continuous set of images.
increment
 Alternatively, one can use gaps between images.
: detector pitch of 3
10y snoasejueape aq Keu inq pasn Krarer sI su
 collimator pitch of 0.75
an initial and quick reconstruction of a contrast
 2.5mm detector width and 10mm table
bolus imaging study. More commonly, interleaved
increment
(synonym  ooerlapping)  reconstruction  is applied,
: detector pitch of 4
which has several advantages. Because of the slice
= collimator pitch of 1
sensitivity profile, the contrast resolution in the
us panpan st auend Z au u Aiadad as 
lesions at the edge of the slice could be missed.
By overlapping the slices, such lesions will then
than in single-slice CT, because each detector scans the
be in the center of another slice, enhancing their
same patient data as the patient passes the gantry
visibility. Equally, the parial volume artifact will
during the scan and the data redundancy is used to
be minimal in one particular slice where the lesion
make more accurate interpolations during the image
location exactly matches the slice location. Because
reconstruction.
the slice images are also overlapping in terms of
 The relationship between slice thickness and pitch
acquision time, any motion artifact will also be 
selection is more complicated in multislice CT. In some
minimized by a smaller HIRI. Finally, multiplanar
CT designs, data from all locations at every angle can
reconstructions are performed by using the total
only be obtained with the use of specific pitches, and
acquired DICOM images. If these images overlap.
therefore the pitch is not freely selectable.
they are also used in an overlapping fashion in these
 reconstructed images, which greatly improves image
Helical image reconstruction interval
quality.
 The optimal compromise between data size-related
(Figures 2.12 and 2.13)
matters (original image reconstruction and transfer
 In a sequential CT acquisition, each slice image is
 r  ra 'as aes '
 obtained separately at one specific location and cannot
planar reconstruction of large DICOM series) and
20
VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
大二
Figure 2.11  Examples of different pitch selections (otherwise identical settings) and their effect on image quality of sagittally
reconstructed cervical spinal CT images acquired with a single-slice CT unit. (A) Sequential CT scan (pitch = O). (B) Helical
series with a pitch of 1 introduces slight image blur, reducing the visibility of the intervertebral disk. (C) Helical series with
a pitch of 2 results in further blurring and loss of intervertebral disk definition.
21 CT ACQUISITION PRINCIPLES
4 mm
D
 Figure 2.12 Illustration of the helical image reconstruction interval (HIRI). (A) A 4mm long patient volume set of data has
been acquired with a helical CT scan and a 1 mm slice collimation. (B) The default option on most CT scanmers is to reconstruct
images with a HIRI equal to the selected slice width. In this example this results in four 1mm thick slice images spaced 1 mm
apart, which is continuous image reconstruction. (C) Another option is to leave gaps between images, resulting in this example
reconstruction increases image resolution for several reasons.
Figure 2.13 Two dorsal reconstructions of an abdominal vascular CT study with different HIRI and otherwise identical
settings (3mm slice width). (A) With a 3mm HIRI the connection between the portal vein (PV) and the shunt vessel (S) is
ambiguous. (B) With a 0.3mm HIRI the connecting branch of the shunt vessel (arrow) is clearly visible.
image quality is a HIRI of half of the slice thickness
Image reconstruction algorithm
 and this can be applied to all helical CT protocols.
(Figure 2.14)
With smaller intervals there is a diminishing gain
 of further image quality that is only occasionally
The image reconstruction algorithm (synonyms filter,
 justified.
kernel) is the mathematical method used to create a
22  VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
tion algorithm (H40', Siemens) with a narrow window setting set at a tolerable noise level (window level 40/width
100 Hounsfield units [HUJ) enhances the subtle density differences between the darker cortical gray matter and the slightly
brighter central white matter of the brain. This is a diagnostic quality for brain assessment, but non-diagnostic for bone assess
ment. (B) With a wide window setting (level 300HU, width 1500HU) this algorithm results in an aesthetically pleasing (less
noise) but non-diagnostic image for the brain and suboptimal blurry display of bone lesions in the temporomandibular joints
(TMJ). (C) A high-frequency image reconstruction algorithm ('H60', Siemens) with the same window settings as in (A) results
in a non-diagnostic noisy image. (D) Displayed with the wide window settings identical to (B), this algorithm results in optimal
 detail of bone lesions (TMJ osteochondritis dissecans),but is non-diagnostic for the brain. (E) Low-frequency algorithm ('H30',
Siemens) image with narrow window settings (level 70HU, width 170HU) of a contrast-medium enhanced CT in a cat dem-
onstrates a pituitary mass. Using a high-frequency algorithm results either in (F) a non-diagnostic noisy image with the same
narrow settings or (G) an aesthetically pleasing image with wide window settings (level 60HU, width 1000HU) in which the
contrast uptake remains invisible. High-frequency algorithm images are non-diagnostic for contrast medium uptake assess-
ment regardless of window setings.
matrix image from projectional raw data via Fourier
Low or medium spatial frequency algorithms ('smooth',
transformation. The spatial frequency of data sam-
‘standard', ‘detail', low number kernels such as ‘H30"
pling and various techniques of edge enhancement or
 in Siemens CT units) smoothen the image and thereby
smoothening are the main variables. The various man-
reduce visible image noise and improve contrast resolu-
ufacturers have different names and types of algorithm
 tion. These algorithms should be used to display body
 that are not exactly identical, but the basic principles
 parts with inherently small object contrast in which a
are the same.
narrow window setting is necessary to maximize the
23 CT ACQUISITION PRINCIPLES
Figure 2.14 (Continued)
difference in grayness between tissues of close density
Special hard and software combinations
values. This is the case for all soft tissue organs, in par-
(Figure 2.15)
ticular the brain, and all post-contrast studies. In some
-ood Suei soads iao siamieme L Aue
 special algorithms the grain size of noise is reduced to
allow better assessment of brain parenchyma.
cols that involve specific hardware and software set-
High spatial frequency algorithms (bone',
，‘lung'’,
tings combined, such as optimized high-resolution
'edge', high kernel numbers such as 'H60') increase
protocols. It often requires central positioning of the
image sharpness at the expense of increased noise.
body parts. Because of the hardware used, such images
Edge enhancement can be part of the algorithm or
can not then be retrospectively reconstructed from
selected separately. These algorithms should be used
normal series.
to display body parts with inherently wide object
contrast, such as the lungs, bone and the nasal tur-
 binates, in which a wide window setting is necessary
PATIENT SET-Up
 to display the wide range of densities within the avail-
able grayscale of the monitor. The wide window
Patient direction and recumbency
settings will reduce the visibility of noise. For this
options (Figure 2. 16)
reason, images that have been generated with a high-
frequency reconstruction algorithm cannot be used
The patient direction (head/tail first) and recumbency
 diagnostically with a narrow window setting or for
(ventral, dorsal, right or left) is specific for the each
 any assessment of intravascular contrast medium
body part and discussed in detail in each organ-specific
uptake.
chapter.
24 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Head-first or tail-first orientation of the patient
adjustable anchoring point; spinal CT should always
should be guided by the area of interest in relation to
be performed in dorsal recumbency to minimize
the gantry and the anesthetic set up. To avoid artifacts
 motion artifacts; thoracic and abdominal CT is usually
-saue ou jeul os juaned au juanio oi alqeiajaid st 1!
 performed in ventral recumbency for various reasons;
e u snu Xnue au yonon sassed juaudmba sa
and exremities are performed in a wide range of
tail-first orientation the anesthetic equipment should
 positioning options to avoid other body parts in the
be on the patient side, whereas with a head-first orien-
imaging plane.
tation it should be positioned on the opposite side of 
the gantry.
Patient positioning
As a general rule, head CT is preferred in ventral
pue aqeis e se sanqpueu au asn oi Kouaqumoan
 For proper positioning, the laser lights of the scanner
should be used and the patient aligned in height and
symmetrically in all three planes. The table height
should be adjusted so that the isocenter of the gantry
is aligned with the body center and not to the area of
interest in a peripheral area such as the spine. For head
 and spine imaging, a very precise alignment in the X-Y
plane is crucial and worth the effort, even if multipla-
nar reconstruction can straighten out the patient virtu-
ally later Radiolucent positional aids that hold the
body part in a fixed orientation but allow positional
adjustments are essential for this purpose. These can
be commercially available troughs, blocks and Velcro
bands, but in addition a range of polystyrene or other
packing material can be helpful. Self-adhesive tape is
 also very useful. For thoracic and abdominal studies a
 roughly precise alignment is sufficient. For extremities,
the degree of desired joint flexion needs to be consid-
ered. In very small animals, such as rodents and birds,
other patient orientations can be used.
Figure 2.15 Sagittal ultra-high resolution image of a
Babyrousa pig skull using a special collimator, small slice
width and restricted scan field of view.
A
B
Figure 2.16 (A) Optimally the anesthetic equipment does not cross the gantry, either in tail-first patient orientation with the
su u (a) Xnue aut jo apis ansoddo ay uo quaudinba au ym uoneuano isng-peay u no apis juaned a uo quaudinba
set-up the anesthetic equipment crosses the gantry and will induce image artifacts.
25 CT ACQUISITION PRINCIPLES
Topogram preparation and selection
heavy sedation or on patients immobilized or uncon-
scious due to pre-existing medical conditions. The
Before the CT scan, radiographic surveys are per-
immobility requirement was largely a function of pro-
formed and used to plan the CT scan location.
longed imaging time and poor quality MPR images
Manufacturers have different names for these views
associated with single-slice CT systems. With the avail-
(topogram, scanogram, survey), and they can be
ability of 8- to 16-slice systems, isotropic imaging is
obtained as dorsoventral, ventrodorsal, left or right
possible and the quality of MPR images greatly
lateral. For almost all applications two orthogonal
improved. Imaging heads (i.e. nasal and bulla series)
 topograms should be performed and used for plan-
-isod asaid spau lau ou sus oosi 
ning. In some scanners (some Toshiba and Phillips
tioning because the original image set is not viewed,
umits) only one topogram can be performed. The length
rather the reformatted transverse, dorsal and sagittal
 and direction of the topogram are determined in the
 plane images form the basis of image analysis.
juaed au u paiedrue aq jsnui sun pue posoiond
The challenges of restricting motion to make use of
10 Suol ooi st uensodoi au ieul st xsi aul dn-ias
 these additional features have been limiting. However,
 scans in a direction that pulls on the anesthetic equip-
 a new device attempts to take advantage of the typical
 ment. To minimize this, it is advisable to start topo-
behavior of ill cats to provide a clinically and image-
 grams in a position of maximum extension of the
-Jand lm sies oaudsp iso quauua anoddns
juaaaou aqei e eoid pue juadmba sasae
erably remain immobile with elbows abducted in
 towards it during the topographic scan. At the end of
sternal recumbency. Even open-mouth breathing cats 
the patient set-up the table position needs to be set to
have rapid, shallow breathing and rarely pant as
the zero position in most scanners.
violently as dyspneic canine patients. This natural
behavior provides an opportunity to provide CT
imaging of the head, neck and thorax with minimal
PATIENT RESTRAINT
movement in a physically restrictive device if appro-
 priate clinically supportive aspects are addressed. The
Introduction
primary clinical supportive aspects are the need to
Due to the relatively high radiation dose, manual
 provide oxygen and intravenous (IV) therapy without
loj uondo ue jou Aensn st [auosiad Aq juiesa
 the build-up of inappropriate levels of moisture, heat
small animal CT, therefore a safe form of restraint for
and carbon dioxide.
1 to 20min is required. With a CT table height of about
The VetMouseTrap was designed to meet these and
1m, a fall from the table could have fatal consequences
additional criteria (Table 2.1).
in a small animal patient and needs to be prevented.
General anesthesia
Table 2.1
Clinical and imaging criteria for patient restraint devices.
General gas inhalation anesthesia is the most common
 Clinical criteria
maging criteria
form of patient restraint for CT studies. It is extremely
safe and controllable, provides a motionless patient
Oxygen access
No metal parts
 and allows hyperventilation to induce apnea during
 Intravenous catheter
No sharp edges 
thoracoabdominal CT studies. Injection anesthetic pro-
access
 tocols, particularly with reversible agents, are gaining
 Non-heating
 Symmetric in cross-section
popularity for performing short CT studies of 1 to
10min duration. This is particularly relevant for multi-
Transparent to view
Movement restrictive
slice CT, which allows for very quick scanning of the
 patient
patient. The development of safe, short-term anes-
Low humidity
Low CT attenuation
thetic protocols will play a major role for the full imple-
 Portable
pab6ny
 mentation of multislice CT in veterinary practice.
 Quick patient removal
Alternative restraining options
Easily cleanable
 Symmetric end-to-
Aaren uaaq seu Sue Adeouon pando
end
limited topatientsunder general anesthesia. Exceptions
include very limited examinations performed under
Secure closure
26 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
The VetMouse Trap is made from transparent acrylic
 shaped disk end plate glued at a distance that provides
(Plexiglas), cut along the long axis into symmetrical
an interlocking device when the top portion is placed
top and bottom components (Figure 2.17). Additional
 on to the bottom portion. The slit in the top portion
 -qeis aproid oi spua yoq oi panls are suoiod bal,
 becomes a circular hole when the top portion is in
ity. Disk-shaped end plates seal the front and back of
place. This slit provides rapid placement or removal of 
the bottom portion. A slit is cut into each disk end plate
the patient from the device without the need to discon-
 providing a notch for IV catheter lines entering either
nect the catheter from the source or patient. Holes in
end of the device. The top portion has a half-circle-
Aaendondde are y aieid-pua uognod wooq yea
D
os Ay s (g) isxa pue Ains uaaxo ro srod ym selaixatd o aeu aap deasaa () Al'z an
cat positioned in a VetMouse Trap securely anchored to the CT table. (C) Originally acquired lung CT image, and (D) transverse
 plane reconstruction of the thorax using multiplanar reconstruction software.
27 CT ACQUISITION PRINCIPLES
sized for oxygen delivery or anesthesia tubing. Various
 panting, making motion more of a limitation to head
sizes (both diameter and length) are available for
and chest imaging.
different-sized patients.
Additional devices should be developed to allow
The VetMouse Trap has been successfully integrated
 awake or minimally sedated imaging in dogs and cats.
as-gl e Sussn angoeid jespau Asuagiaua ue ou
 Current protocols exist for the imaging of sedated dogs
CT system and has shown improvements over
 and cats for portosystemic shumts, nasal disease and
conventional survey thoracic radiographs. Using the
 -sououonq pue Adossoguiel [enjia) Aemie raddn
VetMouseTrap, survey CT imaging has provided
 copy) evaluation. Additional protocols and methodol-
 improved head, upper airway, lung, pleural, mediasti-
 ogy may provide more advanced CT imaging.
nal and diaphragm imaging. With IV iodinated
 expanding the role of CT in clinical imaging.
 contrast there is improved characterization of mass
lesions, overall heart size evaluation, assessment of
FURTHER READING
left ventricular wall thickness and identification of 
left atrial enlargement. Because the patients are not
handld throughout the imaging, imaging is per-
Bushberg JT, Seibert JA, Leidholdt EM and Boone JM (2002)
formed earlier in the clinical work-up than with
Computed tomography. In: Bushberg JT, Seibert JA,
Leidholdt EM and Boone JM (eds) The essentiat physics of
radiographs.
medical imaging (2e),pp 327-72. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott 
 Limitations of the device include its fixed size and
Williams & Wilkins.
the inability to totally restrict movement. While practi-
Oliveira CR, Ranallo FN, Pijanowski GJ et al. (2011) The
cal for many calm or ill canine patients, most dogs do
VetMouseTraptm: a device for computed tomographic
not remain immobile within the device and continue
imaging of the thorax of awake cats. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
to pace or dig. Dogs are also more prone to violent
52: 41-52.
CHAPTER THREE
INTERPRETATION
Jimmy Saunders and Tobias Schwarz
BASIC CT DESCRIPTIVE
Right (Rt): directed to the right of the body. It
 applies to the axial skeleton, thorax and abdomen.
TERMINOLOGY
 Rostral (R): directed towards the nose. It applies to
Basic terminology
the head.
Ventral (V): directed towards the belly. It applies
Terminology of location
to the axial skeleton, thorax and abdomen.
Cranial (Cr): directed towards the cranium. It
applies to the axial skeleton (head, neck, spine and
Terminology of direction
pelvis) thorax, abdomen and the appendicular
The terms craniad, caudad, distad, dorsad, laterad, mediad,
skeleton (proximal to the carpus/tarsus).
Caudal (Cd): directed towards the tail. It applies to
palmad, plantad, proximad, rostrad and ventrad can be
the axial skeleton, thorax, abdomen and appen-
used to describe a direction or motion towards the
dicular skeleton (proximal to the carpus/tarsus).
 equivalent location.
Distal (Di): directed away from the body. It applies
 to the appendicular skeleton.
Scanning planes (Figures 3.1, 3.2
Dorsal (D): directed towards the back for the axial
and 3.3!
skeleton, thorax and abdomen, and towards the
head for the distal part of the appendicular skele-
The standard planes for scanming and reconstruction
ton (carpus/tarsus and distal extremities).
:a.1e
Lateral (L): directed away from the median
plane towards the flank. It applies to the axial skel-
 transverse plane
 eton, thorax, abdomen, appendicular skeleton and
 sagittal plane
tail.
dorsal plane: for the axial skeleton, thorax and
Left (Le): directed to the left of the body. It applies
 abdomen
to the axial skeleton, thorax and abdomen.
 frontal plane: for the appendicular skeleton. The
·Medial (M): directed towards the median plane
plane cuts along the long axis of both front or hind
(midline). It applies to the axial skeleton, thorax,
limbs and is perpendicular to the transverse and
abdomen and appendicular skeleton.
sagittal planes.
Palmar (Pa)/Plantar (Pl): directed towards the tail.
It applies to the distal appendicular skeleton
The terms coronal and para-sagittal should not be
(carpus/tarsus and distal extremities). The term
used. The term dorsal should not be used for a plane
‘palmar' is used for the forelimbs and 'plantar' for
for the appendicular skeleton. Equally, the term axial
the hindlimbs
should not be used to avoid confusion with CT acquisi-
 Proximal (Pr): directed towards the body. It applies
 tion mode (axial versus helical).The term median may
 to the appendicular skeleton.
 be used for a mid-sagittal plane.
Veterinary Computed Tomography, First Edition. Edited by Tobias Schwarz,Jimmy Saunders.
@ 2011 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
29
30  VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
CC
Pa
Figure 3.1
 Terminology of location used in the transverse
Figure 3.3 Terminology of location used in the dorsal
 plane. Cd = caudal; Cr = cranial; Di = distal; Pr = proximal; 
(green and blue) and frontal (brown and yellow) planes.
R =rostral.
Cd = caudal;
 Cr = cranial;
D = dorsal;
;Pa = palmar;
Pl = plantar; V = ventral.
IMAGE LABELS
CT images come with a large amount of additional
R
 information displayed as text on the image periphery.
It is useful to be familiar with the meaning of this dis-
 played information. Usually the information is grouped
into patient, institution and scarning parameters.
 Large amounts of text display can be distracting and
the option of annotation-free display that most viewing
 software programs provide should be considered. For
 medical publications all text overlay should always be
removed.
TOMOGRAPHIC
Figure 3.2 Terminology of location used in the sagittal
RECONSTRUCTION:
plane. L = lateral; Le = left; M = medial; Rt = right.
CT NUMBERS OR
HOUNSFIELD UNITS
Computed tomography measures and computes the
 spatial distribution of the linear attenuation coefficient
Image orientation (Table 3. 1, Figures 3.4,
3.5 and 3.6)
 in each pixel, μ(x,y). However, this coefficient is a
[ads an uo puapuadap kions nunb reisud
 Transverse and frontal plane images of the right and
 energy used. Therefore it cannot be used as such for
left limb are viewed in a mirrored orientation.
image interpretation and comparison. Instead these
 Recumbency-related orientation with the upper patient 
values are displayed relative to the attenuation of
side at image top should only be used for viewing
water. CT values characterize the linear attenuation
coefficient of the tissue in each volume element rela-
pathology
y (relevant fluid-gas interfaces). Three-
tive to the attenuation value of water. The CT values
dimensionally reconstructed images should be ori-
of different tissues are therefore defined to be rela-
 ented along the intended viewing perspective.
tively stable and to a high degree independent of the
31 PRINCIPLES OF CT IMAGE INTERPRETATION
Table 3.1
Image orientation in the three planes.
 Plane 
 Anatomical region
 Orientation
Figure
Transverse
 Thorax, abdomen, axial skeleton
Patient right to image left 
3.4A,B,C
 Most dorsal body part to image top 
Transverse
Appendicular skeleton
·  Patient right to image left 
3.4D,E
·. Most cranial/dorsal extremity part to image top 
Dorsal
Thorax, abdomen, axial skeleton
 Patient right to image left
3.5A,B
Most cranial/rostral body part to image top 
Frontal
 Appendicular skeleton 
· Patient right to image left
3.5C
· Most proximal extremity part to image top
 Sagittal
 Thorax, abdomen, axial skeleton 
 Most cranial/rostral body part to image left 
3.6A,B
Most dorsal body part to image top
 Sagittal
 Appendicular skeleton
 Most cranial/dorsal extremity part to image left 
3.6C
·. Most proximal extremity part to image top
X-ray spectrum. In honor of the inventor of CT, CT
 about 8bits (256 shades of gray). The human eye has
values (CT numbers) are specified in Hounsfield units
a limited ability (30 to 90 shades of gray) and 6 to 8bits
(HU). The two terms can be used interchangeably. For
 is considered sufficient for image display. In practice,
an arbitrary tissue T with attenuation coefficient, the
the window level corresponds to brightness and the
CT value is defined as:
window width corresponds to contrast of a monitor
display. Appropriate windowing is essential for diag-
(NH) 000L. e /(e- r)= an[eA ID
nostic interpretation and should not be performed
solely based on aesthetic criteria. The window level
On this scale, water has the value OHU by definition.
should be matched with the density level of the organ
Air corresponds to a CT value of -10o0HU since
 of interest. The window width needs to match the
μt = Hair = O. In this book, the terms dense and attenuat-
 object contrast latitude. Structures with an inherently
ing are used interchangeably in combination with the
wide range of densities, such as the lungs or the nasal
terms hypo-, iso- or hyper- to describe normal or abnor-
cavities (bone, soft tissue, air), need to be viewed with
 mal tissue density.
a wide window, and structures with a narrow contrast
latitude (all soft tissues, in particular white/gray
matter of the brain) need to be displayed with a narrow
DIGITAL IMAGE DISPLAY:
window width. Any assessment of intravenous con-
WINDOWING TECHNIQUES
 trast medium uptake in soft tissues also requires a
narrow window setting for display. Image noise is
(FIGURES 2.14 AND 4.16)
 most visible on narrow window settings. Since image
noise depends on slice width and the selected image
Once the CT images have been reconstructed, the
reconstruction algorithm, images acquired with certain
image data must be conveyed to the radiologist for
ud au os umoum sads e aman shuas
review and diagnosis. There are some basic post-
 spread effect needs to be considered when selecting
 processing techniques that are applied to all CT images.
the window width. Further particulars about window-
 CT images typically possess 12bits of gray scale, for
ing techniques are given in Chapter 2 in the section on
a total of 4096 shades of gray. Electronic display devices
 image reconstruction algorithm and Chapter 4 in the
such as computer monitors have the ability to display
section on point spread effect.
VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
DORSAL
DORSAL
LATERAL
MEDIAL
LATERAL
RIGHT
LEFT
RIGHT
LEFT
LATERAL
MEDIAL
LATERAL
VENTRAL
VENTRAL
DORSAL
Right
DORSAL
Tarsus
LATERAL
LATERAL
RIGHT
EFT
LATERAL
MEDIAL
VENTRAL
RIGHT
LEFT
CRANIAL
 PLANTAR
LATERAL
LATERAL
MEDIAL
CAUDAL
Figure 3.4 Transverse plane CT images. (A) Canine head, (B) feline thorax and spine, (C) canine abdomen and spine, (D)
both canine elbows, (E) right equine tarsus.
33 PRINCIPLES OF CT IMAGE INTERPRETATION
LATERAL
TERAL
LATERAL
LATERAL
RIGHT
LEFT
CAUDA
PROXIMAL
RIGHT
LATERAL
MEDIAL
LATERAL
DISTAL
Figure 3.5 Dorsal and frontal plane CT images. (A) Canine head (dorsal), (B) canine thorax and cranial abdomen (dorsal),
(C) both canine elbows (frontal).
34
VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
DORSAL
ROSTRAL
CAUDAL
VENTRAL
DORSAI
PLANTAR
DORSAL
CRANIAL
CAUDAL
DISTAL
VENTRAL
Figure 3.6 Sagittal plane CT images. (A) Canine head, (B) canine abdomen and spine, (C) canine tarsus.
CHAPTER FOUR
ARTIFACTS IN C
Tobias Schwarz
INTRODUCTION
neighboring views combine to form the proper pixel
reconstruction. Abruptly changing contributions from
neighboring views, however, lead to incomplete can-
Artifacts are a common phenomenon in CT, which can
-ad Arerala u uogepeap ase aiaas ui nsa
cellation, resulting in a streak. The CT reconstruction
algorithm is extremely sensitive to any error that varies
tice some of those artifacts are particularly marked
abruptly from ray to ray or view to view and is rather
because of the variance in patient anatomy and the fact
tolerant towards gradual changes. Widening of the
that older, less sophisticated CT units are frequently
 display window can always reduce the visibility of
used. Most CT artifacts occur due to interactions
 streaks, but this is usually a very limited practical
between patient and machine, which are all subject to
 remedy, since narrow windowing is essential for eval-
the laws of physics
uation of most soft tissue structures.
A diagnostic imaging artifact can be defined as an
 appearance on an image that is not representative of a
structure within the patient. In CT, any discrepancy
GEOMETRICAL ERRORS
between the reconstructed values in the image and the
true attenuation coefficient of the imaged object repre-
Geometrical errors are caused by imperfect or incon-
O1 paiajai are Aal aqisia aie Aa J ioere ue siuas
sistent positioning of the x-ray beam in relation to the
 as qualitative errors and if the image appears normal
 patient and geometrical inaccuracies that occur during
but CT attenuation measurements are incorrect these
 the processing of image data. These errors are qualita-
are quantitative errors. The concepts of ray and mie
tive in nature.
are essential for the understanding of many CT arti-
facts. The X-ray intensity sampled by one detector to
produce one signal represents a ray (synonym projec-
Aliasing
tion). The sum of the rays from all detectors sampled
Cause and appearance (Figures 4.1 and 4.2)
at a given moment represents one view. As the X-ray
tube revolves around the patient, more views are
 In diagnostic imaging aliasing refers to image artifacts
taken. Most CT artifacts appear as streaks. This is due
caused by insufficient data sampling of a wave leading
to the fact that a CT image is reconstructed as a matrix
to data ambiguity. This principle is intuitively under-
that is derived from muliple projections of attenuated
 standable in other imaging modalities such as ultra-
X-rays. A matrix requires data input from each projec-
sound, where we are dealing with waves in the
tion. Therefore any error or total attenuation that
temporal domain. To understand aliasing in CT we
affects only one projection will be projected in those
Auv Kouanbany [eeds jo jdasuos a dse o aaeu
pixels that lay along the path of this projection. The
object size can be expressed in its relation to the wave-
aer I roy pasn si um uogaloid yeq paa
length of a sine wave. Computation of data requires a
reconstruction, will furthermore enhance streaks, since
sampling of discrete data and the frequency of sam-
the error is filtered similarly to the true value. Also, the
 pling is essential for the true representation of the
filtering and back projection involves some cancella-
wave. A small object with a sharp edge must be
tions of negative and positive contribuions along
expressed by a high-frequency wave (short wave-
image lines. With perfect data, contributions from
 length) and proper representation of this wave requires
saunes Auu 'ziemups sa q pauis fy pan 
@ 2011 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
35
36 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Detector A
Detector B
Detector C
Detector D
Detector E
B
/
Detector A
Detector B
 Detector C
Detector D
Detector E
D
C
F
Figure 4.1 The concept of spaf
set of detectors and a linearly moving, narrowly collimated X-ray tube exposing a cubic object. (A) If the X-ray tube emits
radiation only at the level of every second detector, the sampling frequency (blue sinus wave) is low. (B) If the projectional
attenuation data of this acquisition are expressed as a sinus wave (Fourier transformation) they will poorly represent the
object with blurry margins, but no aliasing occurs. (C) If the X-ray tube emits radiation at each detector level once, the sam-
aq us ioalqo aul jo adrs iea a uana udues iau e y (a) rau st aaem sns pa) uanba ud
 more accurately described mathematically in attenuation values expressed in sinmus and cosinus waves. (E) However, the sharp
edges of an object would require very high-frequency waveforms with at least two samples per detector width. If the sampling
frequency is too low, then the exact location of the edge is ambiguous and could be expressed by two slightly shifted wave-
forms (red and pink sinus waves). Since in CT projections from all angles are used to create a matrix image, there is a random
chance of mismatch of these data and a streak artifact occurs.
high-frequency sampling. The continuous wave of the
the temporal domain.  Consequently there are two
 pattern of X-ray intensities reaching the detector is
m 'us m pue Sus f sene jo sad
sampled discretely by each detector to produce a set
will be discussed separately.
of signals representing one projection (=a ray). The 
 Ray aliasing (synonym projection aliasing) occurs as a
ul aldes mana auo sjuasandan sroioaiap jo Aeire arua
pattern of radial dark and bright streaks emanating
37 ARTIFACTS IN CT
marcelKoralik
Figure 4.3 Illustration of a quarter-detector offset in a CT
Figure 4.2  Anexample of ray aliasing with streaks emanat-
 unit. Because the X-ray tube and detector array are offset by
ing from the sharp margins of the tracheal tube and to a
one-quarter of the detector width in the X-Y plane, the result-
lesser degree the calvarium.
ing eccentric motion of the tube/detector array pair results
in the detector being sampled twice at two slightly different
anatomic locations in the 0° and 180° position, fulfilling the
directly from a high-frequency object. Objects in the
"upim roioaiap iad sandues oml yo irut isinbAN
image cause the artifact, with sharp, well-defined
'suauoduon asuanbaj-uu uons ureuon jeu sapa
sition. As the tube moves around the gantry more
exceeding the Nyquist limit of the imaging system.
views are taken. The combined effect of many adjacent
The Nyquist theorem states that samples must not be
views will result in streak cancellation. If views are
further apart than two samples per wavelength, based
only taken at coarse intervals, this streak cancellation
on the highest-frequency component of the wave. The
will be incomplete with an increasing degree in the
maximum frequency contained in a CT signal is limited
image periphery.
by the focal spot size and the size of the detector cell.
Mathematically it can be shown that at least two
 samples per detector width are necessary to prevent
Remedies (Figures 4.3 and 4.4)
aliasing. In a fourth-generation CT scanner this is not
The simplest way to suppress ray aliasing would be to
 problematic because each stationary detector receives
a multitude of differently angled samples from the
-jes osle pmom sul 'taaamoH sjuauoduos Asuanbanj
revolving X-ray tube. However, in a third-generation
rifice spatial resolution. Avoidance of high-frequency
CT scanner the focal spot and detector cell are in
 objects in the image should be attempted but is not 
a fixed relationship, as they both rotate around
 always practical. In CT engineering two solutions have
the patient. With only one sample per detector
been applied to third-generation CT scanners. One is
width, third-generation CT scanners would always
the so-called quarter detector offset (synonyms quarter
undersample.
ray offset, quarter detector shiff) in which the center of
View aliasing (synonym inter-view aliasing) occurs as
rotation of the central beam is offset from the gantry
isocenter by one quarter detector cell width. When the
 at a distance from highly attenuating objects. View
central detector is rotated 180° from the 0° starting
aliasing is caused by an insufficient number of views
point, a ray sample that is one-half detector width
uao uaag e je saldues Aen lv uogeion weaq rad
s an  s o a  
in time contribute to one view of an object, which will
will be collcted, thereby gathering the required two
be represented as a streak in the image matrix compo-
al st qoeondde raouy ypim ueaq iad sardues 
38 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
encies between views violate a basic requirement of
image matrix composition: accurate data input from
each view. Ghosting describes a faint double margin of
an object. It frequently occurs in abdominal CT, when
a short abrupt movement occurs to a moderately atten-
suosod poalqo omi u Sugmsan 'usreu ueio Suen
'smaa jo raqumu arel Aaanelal e ioy juaisisuos yoea
 Slice mismatch occurs due to patient movement along
the Z-axis during the scan of a larger area. It is fre-
quently observed in cranial abdominal CT in patients
 n sn n ss   n 
spatially out of sequence, with doubling of some body
parts and skipping of others.
Remedies
marcelKovalik
General comments
The problem of patient motion is a particular problem
 in veterinary patients because of their inherent unco-
Figure 4.4 An altermative or additional method to achieve
 operativeness. Many different techmological and oper-
tWo samples per detector width in a third-generation CT
ational remedies have been developed to address
 scanmer is the use of a dynamic focal spot, in which the focal
 motion such as appropriate chemical patient restraint,
spot is slightly shifted between views as the tube rotates
adaptation of technical settings to minimize scan time
around the patient.
and the use of motion correction software.
Technological remedies
so-called dynamic focal spot (synonym focal spot wobble),
Modern CT units have motion correction applications
in which the X-ray focal spot is electrostatically or
electromagnetically alternatively reflected between
 patient motion. One obvious solution to the problem
two positions of ray samples from consecutive views,
is to either scan or collect data from only a part of the
 thus achieving two samples per beam width.
tube revolution, a technique called underscanning
Remedies against view aliasing include avoidance
(synonym partial scan). However, this also significantly
 no  s  s  n
 decreases image resolution. The alternative technique
and increasing the number of views. This can be
 is overscanning, where the tube rotates for about 4009
al Suiseaou Aiduns Aq sium L isou u panan
for each image. This technique takes into account that
tube rotation time. For example, in veterinary practice
the largest data discrepancy will be between the first
head scans are usually acquired under general anesthe-
 sia so that motion artifacts are negligible. Increasing
and the last view because these are separated by the
 longest time span. By averaging the first few views
the tube rotation time from 1 s to 2s will reduce view
with the repeated views, the averaged data of the first
aliasing without   S
significantly  increasing motion
 ad s l o as a  smaa ma 
unsharpness.
issue is the relationship between the motion direction
and the tube position. Motion parallel to the central
Motion artifacts
 beam only minimally affects image quality, since the
Cause and appearance (Figure 4.5)
integration along the path does not change. For
example, respiratory motion has its greatest amplitude
 Motion artifacts in CT can occur as streaks, blurring.
 along the Y-axis of the gantry for a patient in sternal
ghosting and slice mismatch. Commonly observed
 or dorsal recumbence (up and down). Therefore, by
artifact-inducing motions include voluntary patient
starting thoracic scans with the tube in a 0° or 180°
and respiratory movement, and involuntary cardiac
 position, the first and the last views of the tube revolu-
 and peristaltic motion. Streaks emanate from the edge
tion, which are prone to the highest artifact magnitude,
of an abruptly moving and highly attenuating body
will be less affected and the overall motion artifact will
part, whereas blurring occurs with more gradual
 be reduced. Scan modes for specific body parts in CT
 motion patterns. In both cases the geometric inconsist-
units often incorporate the optimal tube start position
39ARTIFACTS IN CT
Figure 4.5 Motion artifacts in CT. (A) Streaks emanating from the heart base due to cardiac motion. (B) Blurring and streaks
of a cat lifting its head during the scan. (C) Double lung margins, called ghost images, in a dog that is breathing during
the scan.
and regional scanning protocols should therefore be
volume, which can be sliced at any interval. Although
plarned within those scan modes. Respiratory and
 each image still represents a full tube rotation time
cardiac gating is a technique based on the fact that the
 span (such as 1s), by reconstructing images at shorter
time taken to acquire a complete set of projections is
 intervals there will be a sufficient number of images
shorter than the entire cardiac or respiratory cycle. By
that are exactly timed within the normal expiratory
acquiring the scan within the cycle period of minimal
 pause of a normally breathing animal and almost
motion with the help of predictive algorithms, image
free of artifacts. Because of the lack of voluntary
quality can be improved. Interleaved reconstructions are
 breath holding in animals, thoracic and abdominal CT
another useful and simple technique to reduce the
 examinations are a particular challenge in veterinary
 effect of motion. Helical CT acquires image data as a
practice.
40VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
B
Figure 4.6 (A) Dorsal reconstruction of a thoracic CT scan obtained in a single-slice CT unit with a slice width of 1mm and
a pitch of 1. There is excellent image detail of lung and mediastimum. (B) Image from a repeat study with a pitch of 5
and otherwise identical settings. There is a noticeable image blur due to the high pitch factor.
Operational remedies
Thoracic and abdominal studies should always start at
au paud iau sun Aq a ns hu
the level of the diaphragm and scan away from it. This
CT settings is essential for motion artifact reduction in
o Anodan is a wm 1ae a Am
 the thorax and ranial abdomen. General gas inhala-
 amplitude is scanned first, when the patient is still
tion anesthesia allows induction of apnea in several
smie pnous suess  leus asned Aioendsan u
ways.
be acquired in dorsal recumbency so that the firmly
 anchored patient back does not move with the expand-
Rigorous hyperventilation prior to scanning with
ing thoracic bellows.
capnometer control. The COz pressure should be
less than 30mm Hg in dogs and less than 25mmHg
High pitch blurring (Figures 2.10
poad s 0f 01 0z e ul msa1 uaqi 1es shul 'sies 
and 4.6)
of apnea. There should be a minimal time delay
(3 to 5s) between the finish of hyperventilation
Helical CT is a volume scanning procedure with the
and the start of the scan for not wasting the valu-
patient moving through the gantry and a continuously
able apnea time span, but long enough for the
spinning X-ray tube. The image resolution of a helical
anesthetist to safely leave the scanning room. A
CT scan depends on the chosen slice width and pitch
close co-ordination with the anesthetist and reduc-
pd A u samns ae (z iad a)
tion to only essential personnel in the scanning
scans will appear blurred and indistinct. This artifact
room is essential to establish a safe and efficient
is the result of the non-planar geometry of helical
protocol.
Bag-holding with the lungs inflated with a long Bain
 data sets. Interpolation is a weighted averaging of
breathing system, allowing the anesthetist to
data from either side of the reconstruction plane
perform this maneuver protected from radiation
with different weighting factors for each projection
behind a shield or in a different room. Extended
angle. By increasing pitch, the averaged data are
lung inflation will reduce the cardiac output and
 sampled between more and more distant points within
this fact needs to be considered in patients with
the scan volume, resulting in a loss of axial and
suspected cardiovascular diseases.
 azimuthal resolution. To avoid this blurring, the pitch
 Drug-induced apnea with neuromuscular blocking
should not exceed a value of 2 in a single-slice CT
agents such as atracurium. The shortest-acting
unit. In multislice CT, manufacturers often have pitches
drugs last about 25min, and the patient needs to
that are specifically matched to the detector selection
be mechanically ventilated for this period under
and collimator pitch, and these should be used (see
 close supervision.
Chapter 2)
41 ARTIFACTS IN CT
tiplanar and three-dimensionally reformatted images
Created with wide slice collimation and interval. To
remedy this effect collimation and increment should
be less than the longitudinal dimension of the object.
In helical CT units, interleaved slice reconstruction
effectively minimizes this effect.
Zebra artifact (Figure 4.10)
 Faint stripes parallel to the X-Y plane can be present
in multiplanar and three-dimensionally reformatted
d u sd    
are affected by this error. An algorithmic correction can
 be applied to remedy this artifact.
Partial volume effect
Figure 4.7 Windmill artifact with a 16-slice CT unit over a
feline shoulder area. The distinct propeller-like pattern of
Cause and appearance (Figures 2.6, 2.9, 4.8
lines over the image is due to the complex interpolation of
and 4.11-4.13)
image data in mulislice CT.
uaan uno uuus) paa aum ered au
partial polume averaging, partial polume artifact occurs if
Helicalmultislice CT artifacts
an object is only partially intruding, traversing
 obliquely or is smaller than the scarming plane. The
Windmill artifact (Figure 4.7)
effect can be noted as blurring of object margins, errone-
The interpolation process from helical data with mul-
ous attenuation measurements, pseudolesions and streaks.
tiple detectors is complex. Data from different projec-
Each detector generates its output signal based on its
tions of different detectors are used and mapped
 X-ray exposure, which is the result of the mean attenu-
d    an  n 
 ation along the path of the beam. Plotting those attenu-
these sections can become apparent as wedge-shaped
 ation measurements into a matrix and considering
compartments of the image, giving it the appearance
 slice width, each volume element (voxel) represents a
of a propeller or windmill blades. This artifact is mini-
mean attenuation value for the used slice thickness.
-odiau aeurl jo sadi juarap Suidde Aq pazu
The true attenuation values of objects that are partially
lasau-ou Susn pue (sioiqodau ia-z) uog
ai un rauu no Susiaann Aranbqo gunnu
pitches in relation to the detector width.
slice width will be averaged with the attenuation
values of neighboring structures. This averaging blurs
Cone beam effect (Figure 4.8)
sharp object margins, and if attenuation values are
measured at such locations they will not be representa-
Aaaelan pue jods resog eus Kaaela au on an
tive for either of the neighboring structures. A pseudole-
larger detector width, the X-ray beam in CT represents
 sion is the visible misrepresentation in such a case.
a wedge and not truly a slice. With multiple detectors
Partial volume streaks are generated by the wedge-
this effect is even more accentuated and results in a
 shaped geometry of the X-ray beam field as discussed
-udad aul un uoisn les y wo weaq paeus-a
in the section on cone beam effect. Partial volume is
 ery of the scan field could then be partially included
dependent on patient anatomy. Abrupt anatomical
in one view and not in the opposing view. The conflict-
 changes along the Z-axis will have the most dramatic
ing density information leads to a streak formation.
 partial volume effects.
Cone beam effect is minimized by adapted forms of
image reconstruction.
Remedies
Stair step artifact (Figure 4.9)
 To remedy volume averaging it is essential to narrow
Stair step-like margins of objects that are obliquely
the slice collimation as much as possible. This reduces
oriented along the Z-axis are commonly seen in mul-
42 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
MarcelKovalih
A
C
Figure 4.8 (A) The X-ray beam in a CT unit is not truly a slice, but a wedge. With multiple detectors, this shape more
papnout Aenred aq Aeu il mata jo piay uress aul jo Aiaudiad aui u paieooi st (aroo pai) ioalqo ue JI (g) aos e sanquasat
in one projection and not at all in the projection along the opposite direction. Contradictory density values for the same point
cause a streak artifact, which can be seen with partial volume and cone beam truncation artifact. (C) Radiating streaks ema-
nating from a canine rib in the lower right corner as a result of cone beam truncation and aliasing in a l6-slice CT unit.
also reduces the likelihood of streaks due to the nar-
Truncated view artifact (Figures 2.2
rower beam angle. There is a linear relationship
and4.14)
between slice width and photon flux. Insufficient
photon flux results in image noise, which is a major
This artifact (synonyms out-of-field artifact, truncated
limitation of slice collimation in clinical practice
projections, peripheral artifact) is characterized by a
Centering patients at the isocenter of the scanner
 bright rim along the image periphery and/or streaks
reduces the likelihood of partial volume streaks.
originating from the area of structures outside the scan
 Changing patient positioning to avoid abrupt anatom-
field of view (SFOV). The SFOV is the part of the
ical changes along the Z-axis should be considered but
 gantry that is included in each view. Its size is limited
can be difficult to achieve.
by the length of the detector array, which dictates the
43 ARTIFACTS IN CT
A
B
Figure 4.9 (A) Sagittal reconstruction of a canine head obtained with 5mm slice width and interval. All anatomic margins
have a large step-like contour. (B) Sagittal reconstruction of another canine head with 1mm slice width and interval has
minimal stair step artifact.
maroelKovalik
Figure 4.11 Display of three objects within a CT image on
the left and their corresponding position when observing
them from the perspective of the X-ray tube looking at the
collimated detector cells on the right. The rectangular object
on top protrudes partially into the width of three detectors.
The thin rectangular object crosses obliquely through the
scanning plane and causes volume averaging for seven
detector cells. The round object is smaller than the slice
 Figure 4.10  Sagittal CT image of the canine cranial cervical
width and causes partial volume for four detectors. Partial
spine with vertically superimposed stripes, a so-called zebra
volume artifact will cause image blur in all three objects.
 artifact, caused by the helical image data interpolation.
fan angle of the X-ray beam in a third-generation CT
ation values in the matrix. If the SFOV is elective it
scanner. Structures outside the SFOV are attenuated
should always be chosen to exceed the patient diam-
 only in some truncated views of the rotating X-ray
eter. Some CT scanners can enlarge their effective
 beam, thus violating a basic assumption of the imaging
ai anaum anbu suus uusn ue Aq Aons
system and resulting in streaks and misplaced attenu-
periphery of the detector array is lined up with the
44 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
ALGORITHM DISTORTIONS
These effects are not due to geometric or physical
errors in the scanning process but are misrepresenta-
tion of density data due to the reconstruction algo-
rithm. The effects are not necessarily undesirable, but 
their presence should be recognized to avoid misinter-
 pretation of image data.
Point spread effect and blooming
(Figures 4.16, 4.17, 4.18 and 4.22)
No image structure is absolutely faithful to the original
wasis Sueu Aue jo uouny esi peaids puo inalqo
Aq aoeds un ino peaids st juod e mou sauap jeu
the imaging process. In CT the point spread function
a low-frequency algorithm protocol and low and
 narrow window settings. Such setings are commonly
used for brain CT, making calvarial structures appear
Figure 4.12 Close up of a CT image of the canine pancreas
artificially thick. Objects appear artificially thin
with a small hypodense area (arrowhead). This is a pseu-
dolesion, the result of volume averaging between the edge
if imaged with a high-frequency algorithm and viewed
with high and wide window settings. Such settings
of the pancreas and mesenteric fat.
are commonly used in bone CT where bony walls
may show artifactual bony thinning and lucencies.
If the inherent object contrast is reduced, such as
isocenter of the gantry. Specific mathematical algo-
with a tympanic bulla filled with fluid instead of
sn azu o siamn aq padde ane su
air, the spatial frequency of the object (bulla
artifact.
wall) decreases and the point spread is widened,
showing an artifactual wall thickening, a finding
Flipped gantry artifact (Figure 4. 15)
that could lead to the misdiagnosis of bulla osteitis.
A related artifact seen with highly concentrated
This is an artifact that is probably unique to a large
contrast media is called bloorming, where contrast-
animal CT setting. The X-ray tube and detector assem-
Aean Aaun ueu nassq readde samnns pasuenua
bly are usually positioned at the side of the patient
are (see also Chapter 5). Clinicians should be aware
table to ease access and minimize the necessary table
 of this phenomenon and compare bone thickness only
motion. However, in CT units that are modified for
in similar image setings and with similar object
standing horses, the patient is usually positioned from
 contrast. The effect can be minimized by choosing a
the opposite side of the gantry. Therefore the imaging
 pue iseuos joalqo aul ot [enba isea[ ie ypim mopuim
ssase ssal Su u au o e paeso si aud
a window level at the mean of object and background
to the relevant anatomy in these already large animals.
density.
 In some institutions the gantry was rotated and rein-
stalled. Apart from the fact that the side and direction
designations are reversed, a detrimental artifact occurs
Edge enhancement and rebound artifact
 -ew je suononnsuoan ae reuedrmu lie uo
(Figure 4.19)
fests with thin streaks along the X-Y plane. This is
related to the fact that each acquired image represents
 Edge enhancement is a feature that can be applied
a slice with two sides on it. When rotating the gantry
leadde saspa Xuoq axeu ol sinn LD Xueu u
without further modifications, the slice order
ris
more sharp and dense. These edges will be surrounded
reversed, but the internal orientation of each slice is 
by an artificial radiolucent halo (synonyms rebound
not. A simple software adaptation is necessary
to
effect, Uiberschoinger effect), which sometimes could
remedy this artifact.
 be misinterpreted as a radiolucent lesion or prevent
45 ARTIFACTS IN CT
marcelKovalik
+
Figure 4.13 (A) Illustrated view of a canine skull half from dorsal (rostral on top) with two detector rows undermeath. In
the bottom detector row, three detectors are affected by partial volume (grayed). In the top detector row, four detectors are
affected by partial volume, because the calvarium crosses the detector row in a more oblique orientation. This will result in
more pronounced blur. (B) CT image at the level of the frontal lobe of the brain where the small calvarium is parallel to the
Z plane, causing only moderate partial volume-related blurring. (C) Several millimeters caudally, the calvarium expands into
the direction of the X-Y plane, causing a marked blurring of the bone margin.
interpretation of this area. This is clinically particularly
 enhancement by blocking visualization of the adjacent
relevant for interpretation of small and potential
structure.
anatomic spaces such as the epidural, subdural and
 pleural space. It is therefore useful to document the use
ATTENUATION MEASUREMENT-
 of edge enhancement and to select it only for appropri-
 ate purposes. In the absence of edge enhancement a
INDUCED ARTIFACTS
vision, the Mach effect, can create an illusion of similar
 These artifacts are caused by errors made by producing
nature. In this case the line should lose its virtual
 or measuring the amount of X-ray beam attenuation.
46 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Faulty output
and temperatures leading to inertia and inconsistent
photon production. Tube arcing (synonym tube spit)
 Image blurring and streaks can be caused by off-focus
appears as a series of parallel streaks through the
radiation from within the X-ray tube, mechanical tube
 image and is caused by free particles within the tube
misalignment or tube rotor wobble. The shaft of the
 Treating a short circuit. At this time no radiation is
rotating anode is exposed to a very high rotation speed
emitted, resulting in a streak pattern corresponding to
the omitted projections. Fourth-generation scanners
with their fixed detector design are more vulnerable
towards inaccuracies in X-ray tube function. Artifacts
caused by a faulty output can only be remedied by the
 hardware service engineer and often require a new
X-ray tube.
Faulty detector (Figures 4.20 and 4.21)
Faulty detector artifacts in third-generation CT scan-
sou Suqenuaeodky 1o/pue -iadAy se ieadde siau
centered on the gantry isocenter. A faulty detector
creates a ring because as the opposing X-ray tube and
detector fan rotate around the patient, the ray between
the tube and the faulty detector traces a tangent to a
circle. The smaller the ring size, the more centrally the
erroneous detector is located on the array. In fourth-
 generation CT units each view is defined by one detec-
tor and each X-ray tube position defines a ray of that
 view. Thus a single bad detector affects all projections
 of one view, which creates a much less severe and non-
Figure 4.14 Truncated view artifact in a canine abdomen
circular artifact. Erroneous detector output can have
in which the ventral abdomen was not included in the scan
field of view, resulting in a white rim in the lower image
 many reasons. Gas or solid-state detector elements
emit a small thermally activated signal even without
periphery.
Figure 4.15 (A) Normal orientation of four consecutive image slices along the Z plane (Z). Each slice has two sides that are
matched in orientation. (B) If the gantry is flpped without further modifications, the scanmed images will align in the opposite
order, resulting in normal transverse plane viewing, but they are not flipped themselves, resulting in mismatching slice sides.
(C) Resulting streaks in the X-Y plane on orthogonal reconstructions of a horse head CT (image courtesy of Sarah Powell).
47
ARTIFACTS IN CT
C
Figure 4.16 Apparent skull bone thickness of a dog with (A) 40/140HU, (B) 400/140 HU and (C) 40/800HU window level
spread effect.
O
B
sar ae Aouanba-uy e (a) pue Aouanban-unpau e (v) um op e jo ssaol aon nys quareddy it't aunbs
struction algorithm. Due to the edge-enhancing properties of the high-frequency reconstruction algorithm the skull appears
thinner in (B).
any exposure to radiation (dark currents). The detector
unit should be performed daily and always after
output signal must be proportional to the exposed
radiation intensity to produce accurate attenuation
 Before calling the service to fix a ring artifact it is worth
measurements. With aging, however, the output line-
recalibrating the CT unit, because in many instances
arity degrades. Many solid-state detectors also suffer
this will eliminate the artifact.
 from hysteresis, radiation damage induced by exposure
history and recovery time. One important cause of
Scatter
hysteresis is afterglovo, which refers to the tendency of
scintillation crystals to emit light after irradiation has
Scattered photons reduce image contrast and make
ceased. However, this does not result in a ring artifact 
structures appear/measure less dense than they really
 but image distortion and loss of resolution, particu-
 are by additively contributing to the exposure in con-
larly noticeable at high tube rotation speed. To prevent
anpoid oste Aal L u o pue Aydeopei leouaa
detector-based artifacts, an air calibration of the CT
 cupping and streaks because they introduce non-linear
48 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
materials severely reduce X-ray transmission and may
result in either no signal generated by the detector or
a signal so small that it is below the recording range
of the data processing system. As explained above, the
ya u ndul eiep aos sambai uosodu xieu
projection. Otherwise a streak will be generated.
Another visible side effect of zero-penetration can be
-uaiu ssaul-imy jo anuereadde motou juaiedde ue
density objects (see section below on beam hardening).
High-density artifacts were particularly marked in
older CT units in which the recording range for attenu-
ation measurements was limited to 2o00Hounsfield
units (HU). Streaming (synonym streamlining) consists
of high-density streaks from vascular structures where
non-enhanced  and contrast-enhanced blood inter-
si mpau jseon aram jassaa Aue un uaas ruo
a uass Arendes e uononu passed uaaq iou
Remedies (Figures 2.4 and 2.5)
 Remedies include the removal or avoidance (patient
 positioning gantry tit) of high-density objects, the use
of contrast media of lower concentration and increased
kilovoltage for higher penetration. Reduction of high-
Figure 4.18 Close-up of a partially fluid-filled maxillary
density streaks is also the main reason why modern
bordered by fluid (black arrow) compared with air (white
CT urits have wider scales with up to 4096HU. This
limit, dictated by the 12-bit storage capacity of the CT
arrow). Low object contrast increases the point spread effect.
values, has been furthermore expanded by an extended
CT scale technique where the 12-bit storage depth is
measurement errors. This is due to the fact that the
 preserved but a scaling factor of 10 is applied. The
attenuation values are based on the logarithm of radia-
extended range of 40960HU covers the density range
tion intensities, and adding the logarithm of scatter-
of metallic implants (8000-20000HU) at the cost of
based intensities results in an exponential rather than
lower contrast resolution. A variety of interpolation
linear increase in value. Production of scattered
 techniques has been used by different CT manufactur-
photons is limited with pre-patient collimation, which
 ers to substitute the over-range values in attenuation
restricts the exposed area of the patient. Scatter radia-
profiles. Metals and minerals simultaneously also
tion reaching the detector can be effectively limited
 pue Suuapreu ueaq se yons sioeyne 1auio annpu
with post-patient collimation in a third-generation CT
partial volume.
 Xsonorpen [euoguaaos ul pig e on renrus iaens
Fourth-generation CT scanners are more prone to
scatter artifacts because post-patient collimation is not
Photon starvation (Figures 4.23 and 38.4A)
 possible. Software algorithms can be employed to
Serious streaking artifacts can occur in highly attenuat-
reduce scatter-related artifacts.
ing body parts such as the shoulders or thighs, where
an insufficient number of photons reach the detector
High-density streaks
 (synonym noise-induced streaks). When the X-ray beam
is in a horizontal posion the attenuation is greatest,
Cause and appearance (Figures 2.4 and 4.22)
resulting in a very noisy projection. The reconstruction
Very dense matter like metals and minerals such
process magnifies this noise, resulting in horizontal
as highly concentrated positive contrast media will
streaks. There is an inverse linear relationship between
create a starburst pattern of black and white streaks
 image noise and slice thickness. The effect of noise will
emanating from the object and widening towards the
 therefore be more marked on thin-slice images. To
periphery (synonyms metal or starburst artifact). Such
 remedy this situation a higher current is required and /
49ARTIFACTS IN CT
Figure 4.19 CT images with different image reconstruction algorithms and edge enhancement causing rebound artifact. (A)
Canine lumbar spine CT reconstructed with a medium frequency algorithm ('detail', GE) which does not enhance edges. The
content of the vertebral canal appears homogeneous, including its border with the vertebral wall. (B) High-frequency algo-
rithm (bone', GE) producing a black ring at the border between the vertebra and the content of the vertebral canal, and a
white ring directly inside of it. This is a rebound artifact and should not be interpreted as a display of the epidural or sub-
pneumothorax.
50 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
marcelKoralik
Figure 4.20 Effect of a faulty detector in different CT designs. (A) In :
third-generation scanner, the ray between the tube
and the faulty detector traces a tangent to a circle, c
eatinga
ocenter of the gantry. (B) In a fourth-
 generation scanner, a single bad detector affects all projections of one view and does not create a circular artifact.
ENERGY SPECTRUM EFFECTS
These are artifacts that arise from the inadequate meas-
-Alod jo umnoads Aiaua au ui sasueup jo juauan
chromatic radiation during patient transmission.
Beam hardening
Appearance and cause (Figure 4.24)
 Beam hardening appears as dark bands or streaks adja-
cent to highly attenuating structures. It is particularly
 prominent in the brainstem and cerebellum between
the temporal bones, where it is also called interpetrosal
lucency or Hounsfield bar. Another manifestation of
 beam hardening is called cupping, where thick, dense 
Figure 4.21 Small ring artifacts over the right temporal
 objects, such as the head, can appear artificially radi-
lobe of the brain in a cat.
olucent centrally. Beam hardening is caused by selec-
tive resorption of low-energy photons from the
 polychromatic X-ray beam by highly attenuating dense
 or the slice thickness should be increased. To minimize
structures. In a thick, round, homogeneously dense
patient exposure CT manufacturers have developed
object, the X-ray beam is continuously hardened as it
automatic tube current modulation to increase the current
 penetrates the object from any angle during the X-ray
for selected projections only. Software correction algo-
tube rotation. Beams that only tangentially penetrate
rithms can also be used. Careful and creative patient
 the object will be less hardened. Putting all attenuation
 positioning is essential to combat those artifacts, such
measurements into a matrix will result in an object the
as by placing extremities out of the scanning plane for
 peripheral density of which was derived from attenu-
 imaging studies of the trunk or bending the head for
ation values of minimally and maximally hardened
extremity imaging.
51 ARTIFACTS IN CT
Figure 4.22 (A) High-density streak artifact and blooming emanating from the hepatic caudal vena cava due to injection
via the saphenous vein creating only limited hemodilution of the iodinated contrast medium. (B) Streak artifacts emanating
 from different parts of the colon due to residual barium content after a gastrointestinal contrast stuady. (C) Streak artifacts and
blooming emanating from the lag screw placed through the sacroiliac joint of a dog. (D) Reconstruction with an extended CT
scale reduces the artifact magnitude.
beams, whereas the object center density was only
 Treated by maximally hardened beams, making it 
appear artificially radiolucent. In other object shapes,
beam hardening will create a streak, because of the
attenuation value inconsistencies between differently
angled views for the same pixel. Because beam hard-
 ening is responsible for neglect of tissue attenuation, it
always makes affected areas darker than they should
appear.
Remedies (Figure 4.25)
 Beam hardening artifacts can be reduced by pre-patient
Figure 4.23  Photon starvation in a canine pelvis where the
hind limbs have not been extended backwards. The selected
beam filtration. In CT, bow-tie filters are used. The
name derives from the cross-sectional profile of these
X-axis where the thighs contribute to additional patient
filters, which is similar to the shape of a bow tie. Their
thickness, resulting in horizontal streaks.
 purpose is to minimize cupping, by adding filtration
52 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Figure 4.24 Different manifestations of beam hardening in CT. (A) Classical interpetrosal lucency in the caudal fossa of a
dog brain between the petrous temporal bones (horizontal black streaks). (B) Between the tentorium cerebelli and the dorsal
calvarium in a cat (vertical black streak). (C) Radiolucent halo around the contrast-enhanced renal pelvis. (D) Lateral to a
contrast-medium enhanced urinary bladder in a dog (black horizontal streaks). (E) The ultimate form of cupping with zero
 penetration of X-ray beams through this metallic lag screw in a canine elbow, giving it an artificially hollow appearance.
53 ARTIFACTS IN CT
to peripheral beams. The shape and size of these filters
explains their limited effectiveness in animals of
various sizes and shapes. The selection of a body
region, which is usually required prior to scanning.
may already incorporate the selection of a filter.
Selecting the scan field of view may also be associated
with filter selection. Beam hardening is independent of
slice thickness. It cannot be completely remedied in
clinical circumstances but it can be reduced by soft-
ware using an iterative correction algorithm. Optimal
e a ue q asn aq pus u
 SFOV and body region. Avoidance of highly attenuat-
ing structures by removing high-density objects,
 pmous in Aques pue Sunuogisod juaned Sugueup
 always be explored.
Non-linear partial volume effect
marcelKovalik
(Figure 4.26)
 Non-linear partial volume artifacts appear as streaks
Figure 4.25 Illustration of a bow-tie filter in CT. The double
ine ym siaqo Asup-uu w uua
concave shape of the filter compensates for the convex body
 margins along the Z-axis of the scanner, such as the
shape of the patient, resulting in a homogeneous filtration of
low energy photons throughout all parts of the patient
 petrous temporal bone. The petrous temporal bone
anatomy. These filters are matched to human body parts and
is the densest bone of the body and has many bony
are not optimized for animals.
protuberances  that can  partially  protrude  into the
A
B
Figure 4.26 (A) Conventionally acquired CT image of the caudal fossa of a canine head with 5mm slice width in a single-
slice CT with mainly hypoattenuating streaks between the petrous temporal bones (horizontal) and between the tentorium
cerebelli and the dorsal calvarium (vertical). (B) Image with 5mm section thickness reformatted from the raw data of five 
slices of 1 mm thickness. There is marked reduction in artifact magnitude due to reduction of non-linear partial volume effect.
54 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
 scanning plane causing partial volume. But since these
protuberances are very dense, they also cause beam
hardening, which distorts the attenuation values non-
linearly resulting in streaks. Avoiding abrupt Z-axis
Asuap-utu jo (eaoua) Auue juaed ui sasueu
objects, change of patient positioning or gantry tilt)
should be considered but can be difficult to achieve.
Narrowing the slice width is essential but problematic
Figure 4.27  Illustration of the mechanism of edge gradient
due to image noise that becomes particularly visible in
artifact. The central ray of one view produced by the X-ray
Uq ioy Aiessanau sase pamopum Aimoiiu a
tube projects along the straight and sharp margin of a
evaluation. A practical solution to this dilemma is
detector being partially exposed to non-linear beam filtra-
tion. In other views from other angles this situation is not
several contiguous thinly collimated slices are added
replicated, leaving to a streak formation.
to form a thick-section image. This effectively adds the
number of photons contributing to image formation
and thus decreases noise without reintroducing the
non-linear partial volume artifact. The effect is related
to the logarithmic function of image reconstruction.
 Whereas in conventional image reconstruction voxel
density is calculated as the logarithm of the sum of the
attenuation values, in a reformatted image each voxel 
density is calculated as the sum of the logarithms of
attenuation values, resulting in a different numerical
value. Thick-section reformatting software is incorpo-
rated in most modern CT units and the procedure
takes less than a minute to perform. In multislice CT,
Suq aq paea are sae as- te aram
of thin detectors, the advantages of thick-section refor-
 mating are automatically included. Other remedies
for this artifact are similar to those against partial
volume and beam hardening.
Edge gradient streaks (Figures 4.27
and 4.28!
Figure 4.28 Fluid-gas interface in the pyloric antrum of a
This artifact (synonyms high-density edge gradient streak,
dog, with a faint streak emanating from it along its course
edge gradient effect, air-contrast interface artifact) appears
(arrows) as an example of an edge gradient artifact.
as a streak emanating from and tracing along the direc-
-ns Asuap-uu jo sapa oies Aiensnm jo uon
tures in the X-Y plane, such as metallic objects or a
contrast media-gas interface in a hollow visceral
 gantry tilt) of high-density objects and the use of low-
 organ. As with non-linear partial volume, an edge gra-
concentration gastrointestinal and urological contrast
dient streak occurs due to beam hardening from a
media.
 dense structure that only partially attenuates the ray
between the X-ray tube and a detector cell. The differ-
ence is that here the high-density edge traces along the
CONCLUSIONS
X-Y plane and thereby partially attenuates the width
 of a detector cell rather than its length. With that, this
 Computed tomography artifacts can originate from a
 phenomenon is highly angle-dependent: only one ray
wide range of erroneous measurements, geometric
of one view of the rotating X-ray beam may be affected
assumptions and algorithmic distortions. Due to the
and result in data inconsistency and thus a dark streak
image reconstruction as a matrix, most CT artifacts
tracing along the direction of the edge. Remedies
result in streaks. Remedies include various hardware
include removal or avoidance (paient positioning.
and software engineering approaches and a number of
55 ARTIFACTS IN CT
 operational solutions. In veterinary CT practice it is
Hsieh J (2000) Image artifacts in CT. In: Goldman L and
particularly important to understand the nature of
Fowlkes J (eds) (2000) Categorical course in diagnostic radiol-
these often detrimental artifacts to be able to apply the
ogy physics: CT and UIS cross-sectional imaging, pp 97-115.
full range of operator-dependent remedies.
Oak Brook: RSNA.
Joseph P (1981) Artifacts in computed tomography. In:
 Newton T and Potts D (eds) (1981) Radiology of the skull and
FURTHER READING
brain, pp 3956-92. St Louis, MO: Mosby.
Link TM, Berning W, Scherf S et al. (2000) CT of metal
 implants: reduction of artifacts using an extended CT scale
Barrett FB and Keat N (2004) Artifacts in CT: recogmition and
technique. J Comput Assist Tomogr 24: 165-72.
avoidance. RadioGraphics 24: 1679-91.
Porat-Mosenco Y, Schwarz T and Kass PH (2004) Thick-
Barthez PY, Koblik PD, Hormof WJ et al. (1996) Apparent wall
section reformatting of thinly collimated computed tom-
thickening in fluid flled versus air filled tympanic bulla in
 ography for reduction of skull-base-related artifacts in
 computed tomography. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 37: 95-8.
dogs and horses. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 45: 131-5.
CHAPTER FIVE
CT CONTRAST MEDIA
AND APPLICATIONS
Rachel Pollard and Sarah Puchalski
INTRAVENOUS CONTRAST
Ionic contrast agents are much more hypertonic (1900-
MEDIUM ADMINISTRATION
2100 mOsm /kg) thannon-ionicagents(290-900 mOsm/
kg) or blood plasma (290mOsm/kg). Traditional con-
Introduction
 trast agents consist of tri-iodinated monomeric benzene
rings. One method of reducing osmolality involves
Intravenous contrast medium  administration  has
creating a dimer by linking two tri-iodinated benzene
become a routine procedure in veterinary CT studies.
rings. A list of commercially available ionic and non-
 Contrast agents are administered through a catheter
 ionic iodinated contrast agents is provided in Table 5.2.
into a peripheral vein with the goal of enhancing the
The greater osmotic pressure exerted by ionic iodi-
ability to see anatomic detail. An indwelling catheter
 nated contrast agents is considered to be one of the
is preferable to minimize the risk of extravasation of
 main reasons why side effects are more common with
these agents in comparison to non-ionic agents.
inflammation and tissue sloughing. Contrast enhance-
Contrast agent reactions are classified as acute, delayed
ment occurs in two ways. First, contrast medium
 Or systemic. Acute reactions are the most common and
reaches an area through the blood vessels so that a
occur within the first hour following contrast agent
major portion of tissue enhancement is a direct reflec-
administration. Acute reactions can be further subdi-
 tion of blood flow. Since most contrast agents are small
vided into mild, intermediate and severe reactions.
 particles, they freely diffuse across endothelial walls so
Mild reactions do not require intervention, while inter-
that the second mechanism of enhancement is a reflec-
mediate and severe reactions require the administra-
tion of vascular permeability.
 tion of medications and/or hemodynamic support.
Adverse effects of ionic iodinated contrast agents in
Procedure for intravenous administration
of contrast medium
tension, cardiac and respiratory arrest have been anec-
dotally described, with a mortality rate of 1 in 80
The standard procedure for intravenous administra-
animals. Two studies looking at the incidence of heart
tion of contrast medium is given in Table 5.1.
rate and systolic blood pressure alterations associated
with contrast medium administration in anesthetized
Contrast agents
dogs and cats found that ionic iodinated agents were
more likely to cause physiologically significant altera-
lodinated contrast agents
tions in blood pressure and heart rate than non-ionic
Iodinated contrast agents are made up of iodine ions
agents. Severe contrast agent reactions appear to be
bound to sodium or meglumine salts, and are further
rare in small animals undergoing CT and can manifest
 subdivided into ionic and non-ionic agents based on
as profound hypotension or hypertension with bron-
their osmolality. The osmotic pressure exerted by a
 chospasm as a result of ionic iodinated contrast admin-
substance depends on the number of particles in solu-
istration. Delayed reactions have not been reported in
tion. Since ionic contrast agents dissociate into two
separate particles, they exert two to three times the
skin rashes and occur after 1 hour but within 7 days of
osmotic pressure of non-dissociative, non-ionic agents.
e are suognean naiss oesrpe jae iseno
Veterinary Computed Tomography, First Edition. Edited by Tobias Schwarz, Jimmy Saunders.
@ 2011 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
57
58 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Table 5.1
ionic iodinated agents are no longer in use. However,
Standard procedure for administration of intravenous
should the cost of non-ionic agents be prohibitive, care
contrast in small animals and equine CT.
should be taken to avoid ionic iodinated agent admin-
 Small animals
Equines
istration in animals with heart disease or severe renal
Mostly
compromise.
Application site
 Mostly cephalic
vein
 jugular vein
Type/ Agent
lodine based, ionic or non-ionic 
Gadolinium contrast agents
Dose
 600-880mg iodine (1)/kg body
Gadolinium-based contrast agents are typically used
weight (bw)*
 for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). However,
 Administration rate
2 ml/s
these agents are radiodense and can also be used to
 Injection mode
Manual or via power injector 
 provide contrast enhancement for CT (Figure 29.1A).
Scan delay
 1-3min after the contrast bolus is
 In people, gadolinium is used for CT under circum-
complete so as to allow contrast
stances where iodinated contrast agents are con-
 medium to reach the target organ
*Most iodinated contrast agents range from 300-400mg /ml, which
needed to provide adequate enhancement (0.3mmol
 equates to a volume of approximately 2ml/kg bw or 1ml/lb.
Gd-DTPA/kg bw).
Gadolinium contrast agents have a lower rate of
Table 5.2
complications with an overall incidence of acute reac-
The iodine concentration and osmolality is shown for a
tions (mild-severe) reported in 0.48-19.9% of people.
variety of commercially available contrast agents.
 More recently, a severe late adverse reaction to gado-
linium contrast agents has been reported called 'neph-
Osmolality
 rogenic systemic fibrosis'. This disease develops in
lodine
at 37°℃
 people with end stage renal disease who receive gado-
 concentration
(mOsm/kg
(mg/ml)
water)
linium and results in necrotizing dermatitis and
 renal sclerosis 2-75 days following contrast medium
lonic monomer
 administration. Very little information is present in
Diatrizoate 
370
2100
 the veterinary literature regarding adverse reactions
lothalamate
400
2400
to gadolinium contrast agents. Two recent reports
loxithalamate
380
2100
described the incidence of adverse hemodynamic
Metrizoate
350
1970
 alterations (heart rate and blood pressure) caused
lonic dimer
320
577
 by gadolinium agents to be less than the incidence
loxaglate
 Non-ionic monomer
 seen with ionic iodinated agents and similar to what
lobitridol
350
915
is seen with non-ionic iodinated agents in both dogs
lohexol
350
823
and cats.
lomeprol
350
610
lopamidol
370
774
lopentol 
350
810
Undesired effects of contrast agents
lopromide 
350
774
loversol
350
790
Streak and blooming artifacts
loxilan 
350
700
Non-ionic dimer
 Streak artifacts are created when high-density material
lodixa nol
320
290
 in the imaging plane results in marked attenuation
lotrolan 
300
290
 of X-rays such that data are missed. This results in
high- and low-density streaks overlying the image
(Figure 5.1). Large quantities of intravascular contrast
separate category of contrast agent side effects related
media can result in streak artifacts, particularly when
al n sh pa sh is m o lsa a
as contrast-induced nephrotoxicity (CIN). Case reports
imaging field. Blooming refers to the blur of vascular
 describing CIN secondary to ionic iodinated contrast
 pue iajaueip lassaa ul aseadun juaiedde pue subieu 
 agent administration in one dog and one cat have been
is related to the altered point spread effect in high-
 published.
 density structures. To avoid these artifacts, one should
 Iodinated contrast agents are contraindicated in
animals that are dehydrated. In many institutions,
 be injected for a given study. For example, a cephalic
59  CT CONTRAST MEDIA AND APPLICATIONS
Figure 5.2 An example of streamlining artifact. Contrast
agent is only seen filling a portion of the portal vein (PV).
Figure 5.1 Anexample of a streak artifact. Contrast medium
 The ventral portion of the portal vein does not contain con-
was injected into a catheter in the right cephalic vein and is
trast medium (asterisk). Notice more uniform filling of the
highly concentrated in the axillary vein (asterisk). Black
aorta (Ao) and caudal vena cava (CVC). This dog was imaged
 streaks are emanating from the high-density contrast material
in dorsal recumbency.
(arrowheads). This dog was imaged in ventral recumbency.
catheter is preferable to a saphenous catheter when
lesions, including tendons, ligaments and synovial
abdominal CT is performed to avoid streak artifact
structures. In most species, a total body systemic dose
 from the caudal vena cava. Contrast agent dilution (to
is given via an intravenous route. However, the sys-
a concentration of 175mg I/ml) isan altermative method
temic dose of contrast media in the horse has not been
for decreasing contrast-associated streak artifacts.
established. Generally, the equine systemic dose is
 extrapolated from humans or small animals, resulting
in a large, unwieldy volume of contrast media. The
Streamlining artifact
large volume is difficult to deliver and may be prohibi-
Streamlining is an artifact that results from non-
 tively expensive. To circumvent these problems while
uniform dispersal of an imaging agent within a vessel.
benefiting from the technique, local delivery of con-
This was first reported during portal scintigraphy but
trast media via a regional artery can be employed in
has also been described during CT portography in
some clinically important anatomic locations.
dogs (Figure 5.2). The result of streamlining is that
 contrast agent is segregated into discrete channels of
Anatomical considerations
portal flow (often the dependent aspect of the portal
 vein) and is consequently not delivered uniformly to
The most common use of intra-arterial contrast is for
the portal branches in the liver. This is a difficult arti-
the evaluation of the distal extremity in equine lame-
fact to eliminate and must simply be recognized as a
ness conditions.
The forelimb
EQUINE INTRA-ARTERIAL
 In the forelimb, the median artery provides the major
blood supply to the entire distal limb and foot.
CONTRAST ADMINISTRATION
The median artery is accessible to puncture above the
carpus by ultrasonographic guidance. At this level,
Introduction
the artery is several centimeters deep and adjacent
Contrast media improve the clinical utility of CT for
to the flexor carpi ulnaris muscle and the flexor
the identification and characterization of soft tissue
carpi radialis muscle. This level is recommended for
60 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Medial
Lateral
A
B
-nun ue Sunp pue (v) arojaq apeu juaurean (snoassoiau) Aosuadsns teuxond aul jo saseun Io paned 's aunbi
Peau epaur au 'sndis au on reuxod Aiae ueau aui u paeid sm iaaes au (an uosru unau seus reare
 of the suspensory ligament is enlarged (small arrows). The normal fat-dense signal expected in the interosseous muscle (large
arrow) has been lost and replaced by tissue of intermediate density to ligament and fat, likely fluid. The contrast study shows
evaluation of the soft tissue structures of the carpus,
the level of the distal crus/tarsocrural joint. It is most
metacarpus (including the suspensory ligament) and
 easily identified at the level of the lateral trochlear
digit (Figure 5.3). The median artery passes through
ridge of the talus (Figure 5.5). At this level it is closely
the carpal canal and is bound by a retinaculum at the
 associated with the lateral digital extensor tendon and
level of the carpus, giving off several branches but 
 the tarsocrural joint. The cranial tibial artery supplies
becoming the medial palmar artery at the level of the
the plantar, proximal metatarsus via the perforating
distal carpus/proximal metacarpus (Figure 5.4). The
 tarsal artery. Catheterization at this level is recom-
medial palmar artery supplies the entire foot via
 mended for evaluation of the proximal suspensory
medial and lateral branches that divide in the metacar-
 ligament and flexor tendons in the metatarsal region.
pal region. The medial palmar artery is easily acces-
 The digit receives the majority, but not all, of its blood
sible in the proximal metacarpal region; it is superficial
 supply from the dorsal metatarsal artery conveniently
and parallel to the skin surface. Proximally, catheter 
 located on the dorsolateral aspect of the third metatar-
placement can be foiled by the carpal refinaculum,
Aq 1o Aiua pamoumd aq ues Aiaire sl aoq les
- rae  pan ra  
ultrasonographic guidance.
flow. If the catheter is placed distally in the proximal
metacarpal region, contrast streaming through the
medial arteries can occur, resulting in only one side of
Catheter placement
the hoof receiving contrast medium.
Procedure
Successful catheter placement is critical for the acquisi-
The hindlimb
tion of a diagnostic contrast- enhanced CT study. For
 In the hindlimb the arterial supply is more complex.
 this reason, ultrasound guidance is recommended for
The cranial tibial artery and its branches supply the
 all but a few arterial catheterization procedures. A
arriving from the caudal tibial artery. The cranial tibial ultrasound probe (7.5-12.5MHz) is held with the scan
 artery is accessible to ultrasound-guided puncture at
1  plane parallel to the long axis of the blood vessel. In
61 CT CONTRAST MEDIA AND APPLICATIONS
C3
C3
B
Figure 5.4 Paired CT images of the distal row of carpal bones and carpal canal made (A) prior to contrast medium admin-
istration and (B) during an intra-arterial infusion of contrast medium administered via the median artery. (A) There is a lesion 
in the superficial digital flexor tendon (arrow) that is hypodense prior to contrast medium administration and (B) shows a
central, avascular core (large arrow) with a peripheral rim of new blood vessels (small arrows) after intravascular contrast
medium has been administered. C2 = second carpal bone, C3 = third carpal bone, C4 = fourth carpal bone.
the forelimb, the arteries run in close proximity to the
is often useful to have an assistant. An 18- to 20-gauge
regional veins. The operator should take time to assess
catheter is adequate. The length of the catheter depends
the blood vessels for the characteristic thick, hypere-
on the depth of the artery. Generally, a 5-10 cm catheter
choic arterial walls and pulsatile blood flow.
is sufficient to be well seated (2cm) within the artery.
Occasionally, color flow Doppler may be necessary to
Once the catheter is placed, it should be attached
 characterize blood flow and ensure its arterial nature.
to a three-way stopcock and flushed with hepari-
In the hindlimb, depending on the location, the arteries
nized saline. Suturing the catheter in place is
may be slightly distant from the veins. The cranial
recommended.
ibial artery is very close to the joint capsule of the
tarsocrural joint and therefore adequate preparation of
the skin surface and aseptic ultrasound probe han-
 Complications associated with catheter
papuauoar are sanbuat su
 The importance of a single, clean, confident punc-
placement
ture of the superficial wall of the artery cannot be
 Common complications of catheter placement include
overstated. Furthermore, accidental pumcture of the
 placing the catheter in the regional vein, vasospasm
 deep wall of the artery will result in marked vasos-
 and perivascular hematoma formation. When vasos-
pasm. Therefore, experience in ultrasound-guided
 pasm occurs, no backflow of arterial blood will occur.
 procedures is helpful for succesful completion of
In this event, the catheter is likely still useful. Observe
catheter placement. The catheter should be directed so
the artery with ultrasound distally while flushing the
that the tip is distal Identification and tracking of the
catheter with saline to check its patency. Perivascular
catheter and stylette tip from first perforation of
hematoma formation occurs with vascular trauma and
the skin surface to initial contact with the arterial wall
 generally resolves with minimal intervention. Catheter
is valuable for optimal control. Once the superficial
 placement that is too distal in the medial palmar artery
wall is punctured, the catheter and stylette should
will result in contrast medium supplying only one side
be fed distally into the artery and then the catheter
of the foot (distal to the lateral branch) or contrast
should be advanced in a routine fashion. It is advanta-
 streaming through either the medial or lateral digital
geous to watch these steps with ultrasound and it
 arteries (Figure 5.6).
62 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Figure 5.6 CT image of the distal phalanx during an intra-
arterial contrast medium infusion administered via the
 medial palmar artery. Contrast streaming is present, result-
 ing in diferential perfusion of the limb. The region of lamina
between the white arrows has decreased perfusion. The dif-
ferential perfusion is evident even at the level of the solar
canal and the proper palmar digital arteries (black arrows).
This artifact of technique should not be confused with a clini-
cally significant perfusion deficit as seen in laminitis and
 distal limb (artery) trauma.
Figure 5.5 CT images of the distal tibia and proximal
tarsus. The radiodense catheter is in the cranial tibial artery
Table 5.3
(arrow). This artery is accessible for puncture with ultrasono-
Standard procedure for administration of intra-arterial
graphic guidance. Care should be taken to use an aseptic
 contrast medium in equine CT.
technique as this artery is immediately superficial to the
tarsocrural joint. C = calcaneus, LTR = lateral trochlear ridge
Application site
Forelimb: median or medial
 of the talus, MTR = medial trochlear ridge.
palmar/plantar artery
 Hindlimb: cranial tibial artery
Type/ Agent
lodine based, ionic or
Contrast medium administration
non-ionic
Dose
150-200mg I/kg bw*
 Iodinated (non-ionic or ionic) contrast medium is used
in intra-arterial infusions. The iodine concentration
Concentration
150-200(400) mg I/ml
should be 150-200mg iodine/ml. Higher concentra-
Administration rate
2ml/s
tions result in blooming artifact and therefore many
Injection mode
 Manual or via power injector
saline to achieve the desired iodine concentration. An
Scan delay post
5-10s (contrast administered
 infusion rate of 2ml/s is recommended, though rates
start injection
 during the complete image
acquisition)
ranging from 1 to 3ml/s are adequate. These rates are
 best achieved by using a pressure injector or infusion
 pump. Generally, the dose is calculated based on the
amount of time necessary to image the desired region.
tissue lesions, quantify blood flow or to perform
 For example, a 50 s scan looking for soft tissue injury
 a selective angiogram. The timing of the start of the
will require approximately 55s or 110ml at 2ml/s. The
 contrast medium infusion should allow for influx and
total dose should not exceed the patient's calculated
extravasation of contrast medium into the injured
systemic dose, but this is rarely a concern. The stand-
regions prior to the actual scan acquisition to better
 ard procedure for intra-arterial administration in 
characterize soft tissue lesions. Five to 10s is generally
equines is described in Table 5.3.
adequate. To quantify blood flow several images
The goals for contrast medium administration via an
should be obtained prior to the arrival of contrast
media to the region. This can be done with specialized
63 CT CONTRAST MEDIA AND APPLICATIONS
Lateral
Media
D
Figure 5.7 (A) Transverse and (B-D) volume-rendered CT images of a horse with severe chronic laminitis during an intra
arterial contrast medium infusion. There is differential perfusion of the laminae. The region between the white arrows has a
complete perfusion deficit while the proper palmar digital arteries of the solar canal (black arrows) have symmetric blood
flow. The bone of the distal phalanx has mottled opacity and an iregular surface consistent with the patient's clinical disease.
(B) A dorsal view of the lamina shows the line of demarcation between avascular and perfused lamina. Compare the lateral
(C) and medial (D) vascular patterm.
heart rate, horses becoming ‘light’ under anesthesia
software. In these protocols, the scanning
will
 and hives. Caution should be taken as with any species
begin prior to the contrast infusion. To perform an
to ensure that contrast medium is only administered
 angiogram for assessment of vascular patency in lam-
into the vascular space, not the subcutaneous tissues.
initis or distal limb trauma, the contrast medium infu-
J0 jasuo au o1 1orId isnl 1o 1e uaq Pmous uos
Interpretation of intra-arterial
scanning (Figure 5.7).
contrast studies
Undesired effects of contrast medium
Interpretation  of  intra-arterial 
contrast-enhanced
-uon yim yoeoidde epouau e saimbai saseun
administration
rent comparison to pre-contrast images. Contrast
Complications associated with contrast administration
medium aids interpretation in several ways, most
-adxa [elopnauv pajnodan uaaq lou aaey sasnoy u
importantly by increasing lesion conspicuity. Contrast
juanbayur aq on teadde Aaul ieul isagans pmom anua
media can also help to characterize lesions, monitor
and include transient elevations in blood pressure and
healing over time and identify regions of hyperemia
64 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
 aq n m paoss aq iou Ae pe
attempt to minimize hemodynamic effects related to
suos Aenaua are suoisan uauei pue uopuan
rapid bolus administration. A rate of 2ml/s into an
enhancing via extravasation of contrast medium or
18-gauge catheter is used for arterial injections in
by neovessel formation. Core lesions are frequently
horses.
 Regardless of whether contrast medium is adminis-
over time, changes to become a smaller lesion with
tered by hand or power injector, the use of saline flush
 central enhancement. Coupling contrast-enhanced soft
 must be considered. Saline flush will add the contrast
 Jo saseueape umou Alapim aul pue Suuuens ans
rajaes au ul pauean uaaq aaeu uou jeu juase
CT for bone imaging provides an excellent technique
to the volume that reaches the patient. This will
for complete evaluation of many anatomic regions
ultimately reduce the quantity and thereby the cost
implicated in equine lameness.
of contrast agent needed for a given examination.
Depending on the capacity of the catheter, this saving
 may or may not be significant. Another benefit of using
CONTRAST ADMINISTRATION
 a saline flush is diminution of contrast pooling in the
METHOD: MANUAL VERSUS
vessel into which it is injected. This will reduce streak
artifact and would theoretically decrease the total dose
POWER INJECTOR
required to achieve satisfactory systemic vascular
enhancement. Finally, if a saline flush pushes contrast
uen sjuase isejuos 'uogismbse aeui Lo prepueis 1o
medium from peripheral to central vessels as a solid
be administered by hand or by use of an automated
 bolus there will be less dilution through mixing with
 power injector. Power injection has certain advantages
blood, resulting in improved systemic vascular
 over hand injection, including uniform contrast agent
enhancement. Saline flush by hand is relatively
delivery, optimal timing of delivery and reduced radi-
ation exposure for associated personnel. When per-
forming   angiographic or  perfusion/dynamic
CT
Table 5.4
studies, a power injector is mandatory to ensure
Chapters with detailed description of 
uniform contrast agent delivery, which will allow for
CT contrast procedures.
-ered aaeuenh rao pue sa ast jo puassase
Chapter
eters. The downside to power injectors is the cost of
 the equipment.
 Small 
 Maximal injection rate is based on the viscosity and
Contrast procedure
animals
Equines
 volume of contrast agent and the cross-sectional area
CT dacryocystography
 of the catheter. In adult people, contrast agents are
14
 CT myelography
22
39
20-gauge peripheral venous catheter at a rate of 4ml/s.
 Biliary contrast medium 
29
This results in a peak injection pressure as high as
excretion
300-325psi. Although uncommon, rupture of the IV
CT portography (transsplenic)
29
tubing can occur, resulting in loss of vascular access,
jo ogenuon poonq pue jseon jo uogesanixa
CT gastro-enterography*
31
the area. Maximum injection rates should be adjusted
CT urography
32
to catheter size so as not to exceed 5ml/s for a 20-
CT vaginography
33
gauge catheter, 3ml/s for a 22-gauge catheter and
1.5ml/s for a 24-gauge catheter with a maximal injec-
CT lymphangiography
36
 tion pressure of 150 psi.
CT arthrography
38
39
The use of power injectors in veterinary patients has
*Specific application of oral and rectal contrast medium applications
administer contrast agents by hand. When using
(Figure 5.8). In some species, such as fish, oral and rectal applica-
tions of contrast medium can be performed successfully to demon-
 power injectors for CT portography in dogs, injection 
 strate the presence of a mass and its effect on the coelomic viscera.
rate and catheter size differ, ranging from 1ml/s
This is particularly helpful in fish, because they do not have contrast-
through an 18-gauge catheter to 5ml/s through 18- to
 ing intracoelomic fat. Due to the time limitations in performing CT
20-gauge catheters. At our institution, catheter size is 
pasend si yoodde eweue wneg eu 'ys peznesaue ui sues
dictated by patient size varying from 18- to 24-gauge
buol e jo bu sapaod pue woed on Asee pue yoinb Aea sill
segment of intestines outlining a mass effect. The barium concentra-
with a maximal injection rate of 2ml/s used in an
tion should be kept very low (1-5% w/v suspension).
65 CT CONTRAST MEDIA AND APPLICATIONS
A
B
Figure 5.8 (A) Cranial coeloma of a sea bass where a low-concentration barium suspension was given into the stomach via
 a gastric tube prior to CT. The coeloma contains very little fat and a contrast study aided in localizing the stomach. (B) Koi
 carp with egg retention in which a rectal barium enema was performed immediately prior to CT. The contrast-enhanced colon 
is displaced to the left dorsal body wall by the retained eggs.
injectors are necessary should saline flush follow con-
 nous administration of an ionic iodinated contrast agent
 trast agent administration by this method.
in two anesthetized dogs. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 233: 274-8.
Pollard RE, Puchalski SM and Pascoe PJ (2008) Hemodynamic
and serum biochemical alterations associated with intra-
OTHER CONTRAST
venous administration of three types of contrast media in
anesthetized dogs. Am J Vet Res 69: 1268-73.
MEDIA APPLICATIONS
 Pollard RE, Puchalski SM and Pascoe PJ (2008) Hemodynamic
and serum biochemical alterations associated with intra-
The different contrast procedures are discussed in
venous administration of three types of contrast media in
more detail in the chapters listed in Table 5.4.
anesthetized cats. Arm J Vet Res 69: 1274-8.
Puchalski SM, Galuppo LD, Hormof WJ and Wisner ER
(2007) Intraarterial contrast-enhanced computed tomogra-
FURTHER READING
 phy of the equine distal extremity. Vet Radiol UIltrasound 48:
21-9.
Shuman WP, Adam JL, Schoenecker SA, Tazioli PR and
Amaral JG, Traubici J, BenDavid G, Reintamm G and
Moss AA (1986) Use of a power injector during dynamic
 Daneman A (2006) Safety of power injector use in children
computed tomography. J Comput Assist Tomogr 10:
 as measured by incidence of extravasation. Art J Roentgenol
1000-2.
187: 580-3.
 Tateishi K, Kishimoto M, Shimizu J and Yamada K (2008) A
Kruger EF, Puchalski SM, Pollard RE, Galuppo LD, Hormof
 comparison between injection speed and iodine delivery
WJ and Wisner ER (2008) Measurement of equine laminar
rate in contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) for
blood flow and permeability by dynamic contrast enhanced
normal beagles. J Vet Med Sci 70: 1027-30.
computed tomography. Armt J Vet Res 69: 371-7.
CHAPTER SIX
SPECIAL SOFTWARE
APPLICATIONS
Jennifer Kinns, Robert Malinowski, Fintan McEvoy,
Tobias Schwarz and Allison Zwingenberger
DENSITOMETRY
arenbs iad suen se uaai8 ul indino sil anbruupal
centimeter (g/cm?). Conventional CT can perform a
similar role and gives a volumetric bone mineral
The CT image is generated from a voxel-by-voxel
 density (g/cm). A phantom, usually containing two
matrix of CT numbers. These CT numbers can be read
types of attenuating material, must be included in the
from the display and are typically given in Hounsfield
u ahueup au parmbai st uo/s u Supeai e ji aheu
units (HU). CT densitometry is concerned with a sta-
-is os Tg Suseaiu ym ieul sI 1aqumu 1
tistical description of the CT number for a particular
cance can be attached to changes in CT number even
tissue. For example, the mean CT number or the inter-
quartile range of CT numbers for lung may be of inter-
without the use of a phantom,
 est. A basic requirement is that the tissue concerned
must be separated or segmented from surrounding
Pulmonary densitometry
tissues. In some cases this can be done by placing
hand-drawn regions of interest around the organ of
The lungs are readily segmented from surrounding
interest. Alternatively, automated software segmenta-
tissues, and significant pathologies are associated with
tion can be used, allwing reproducible segmentation
adod uenuae shui saseaap pue saseaiu oq
on large sequences of CT images. Software to perform
ties. Diffuse disease such as fibrosis and multifocal
these techniques is available from the CT manufactur-
diseases can be difficult to identify on CT or difficult 
ers and may also be created using free and open source
to quantify. Pulmonary densitometry can provide a
image analysis programs.
 single figure that describes the attenuating properties
 Jo juaussasse aul ioy sueumy u pasn sI 1I Suml Jo
Bone mineral density
 pulmonary emphysema and has recently been used in
a veterinary setting to describe changes associated
 The mineral content of bone is of particular interest in
with Angiostrongylus vasorum infection (McEvoy et al.
human medicine for the detection and management of
2009). In that report there was a strong correlation
osteoporosis. There are limited, mainly research
between pulmonary density and the actual worm
accounts of alterations in bone mineral density (BMD)
burden. Here and in other situations there is a correla-
q s a  se s 
 tion between the measured density and the extent of
measured using dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry
disease or function impairment. Data from a densitom-
(DEXA). This technology dates back to the 1980s, but
 etry study are shown in Figure 6.1. The steps required
the dual energy principle for enhancing tissue contrast
are an initial segmentation of the image so that only
has found its way into a very recent development,
 lung is retained. This can be done by a threshold tech-
dual-energy CT (DECT). DEXA measurements are
 nique based on CT numbers. The image data are then
based on the differential attenuation of a dual-energy
 analyzed to quantify the number of voxels in the image
 X-ray beam by tissues, and because it is a projection
at each particular CT number. The resulting data may
saunes Auu 'ziemups sa q pauis fy pan 
@ 2011 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
67
68 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
600
300
500
250-
400
200
300
150
200
100
100 
50-
-1200
-800
-600
-200
-1200
-1000
-800
600
-200
中
-1000
400
-400
CT Number (HU)
CT Number (HU)
B
C
 Figure 6.1 (A) Transverse CT image showing the results of segmentation. All tissues other than pulmonary parenchyma
have been removed from the image. The threshold range was -1024 to -250HU. This dog has extensive lobar emphysema.
 (B) Frequency plot from a normal canine thorax showing the number of voxels present for each CT mumber, indicating how
the data are normally distributed. (C) Frequency plot from the dog in A. Note how the shape of the plot differs from normal.
The mean CT number for this individual's lungs was -897HU, while that for the age-matched normal control was -747HU.
be plotted or descriptive statistics can be used to
AUTOMATED BOLUS TRACKING
describe the data set.
Principle
 Bolus tracking refers to the technique where a CT scan
Perfusion densitometry
is started automatically based on continuous attenua-
Changes is CT number over time are seen in perfusion
tion measurements of target vessels. This software is
studies and are covered elsewhere in this text. The
available for all modern CT scanmers under different
concept of relating CT number to a tissue feature
names ('SmartPrep' on GE, 'CARE bolus' on Siemens,
(iodine concentration in this case) is the same as
"Trigger bolus' on Philips and 'Real Prep' on Toshiba
described here for densitometry. If the numerical
units) and works similarly in all of them.
results from densitometry studies are to be shared
From the survey CT study a target vessel location is 
 across imaging centers, then strict machine calbration 
identified and a single slice image at this location is
is required. CT machines are typically calibrated to a
 then obtained and the scanning is paused. The opera-
water phantom but not to more or less attenuating
 tor now selects a region of interest (ROl) over the target
materials. There can be a significant variation in CT
vessel. At this point personnel must leave the scanning
number for a given tissue across different machines.
 room again, and the contrast medium is injected
69 SPECIAL SOFTWARE APPLICATIONS
of interest on top of missing the phase the software
 tion and CT scanning are started at exactly the same
is designed to match.
 time, and this can be automated with modern power
injectors and CT units. The single-slice CT scan is
CT PERFUSION IMAGING
repeated over the same location at 3 to 4s intervals,
while software reconstructs images and calculates
Principle
density data from the ROI. When contrast medium
arrives at the target vessel, the increased attenuation is
CT is capable of capturing data about blood dynamics
roenado au pue ydei e se paaeldsp Aensa iae
in tissues. Contrast medium travels through major
starts the diagnostic CT scan (semi-automatic mode)
blood vessels to capillary beds in the tissues. As it
or the diagnostic CT series is started completely
reaches these small vessels, a certain amount of con-
automatically.
 trast medium is transferred to the interstitial space by
 diffusion. Most tissues enhance proportionally to their
vascularity, except the brain, which is protected by the
Recommendations for use
 blood-brain barrier.
The proposed advantages of automated bolus tracking
CT measures tissue perfusion by colecting data on
are convenience and maximum contrast enhancement
contrast enhancement in defined pixels over time. This
of the target structure. The alternative for correct
can be accomplished with a dynamic CT scan with
timing of start times for CT scans is to do a test bolus,
1-3s continuous images for 1-3min during and after
which is time-consuming and laborious. Bolus track-
 a constant rate contrast injection. Perfusion software
-nred 'sjuaned ueumq noy uogdo remdod e st Su
 then calculates the perfusion, or blood flow per unit 
larly with multidetector scanmers in which scanming
volume of tissue, relative blood volume and
occurs so fast that it would be easy to miss a vascular
 permeability.
 phase without this technique.
 Software programs calculate these perfusion param-
eters and generate pixel maps to represent the degree
Limitations
 of blood flow to each tissue in the image. These visual
representations of the data can be very helpful in
Automated bolus tracking has several marked disad-
detecting subtle changes in perfusion, and may high-
 vantages for veterinary pafients unless the newest and
light a lesion that cannot be seen on the anatomic
most advanced software is available.
images.
 Because of the considerable delay times between
Recommendations for use
individual monitor scans and between monitor
and diagnostic scans (3-4s), the short pure arterial
 Perfusion imaging is used extensively in human
phase (5-10s in most organs) is usually missed
patients to investigate cerebrovascular disease such as
with this technique.
acute stroke. The abnormal hemodynamics such as
 If a dual-phase scan is performed, the start time
reduced blood volume and blood flow can help to
for the second phase cannot be measured with
 evaluate the extent of tissue damage and ikelihood of
this technology and needs to be guessed a priori
recovery (Figure 6.2). In cancer imaging, perfusion
when setting up the scan protocol. This is the
images can be used to evaluate the vascularity and its
Ba) suodde so u aseud podu so
response to treatment such as chemotherapy or radia-
portal vein for shunts). Missing it would be detri-
tion therapy, which may be more accurate than a
mental to the study and the study cannot easily be
change in size. Perfusion imaging has been used to
repeated.
 evaluate the liver in dogs with portosystemic shunts,
Venous phase imaging should usually start between
the pancreas, nasal tumors and brain tumors. The liver
20 and 40s post start injection. During this time
requires unique perfusion measurements because of
 period the animal should be manually hyperventi-
its dual blood supply from the portal vein and hepatic
lated for thoracoabdominal studies, so that it is in
artery. The hepatic perfusion index can be calculated
 respiratory apnea during the scan. This is not pos-
to describe the proportion of blood contributed by the
 sible with most anesthetic set-ups during a bolus
hepatic artery to the total liver perfusion (Figure 6.3).
tracking CT as the monitor scans occur at frequent
This is normally approximately 25%. Dogs with porto-
intervals during this time. This increases the risk of
 systemic shunts have a higher hepatic perfusion index
motion artifacts for the most relevant structures
 to compensate for reduced portal blood supply.
70 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
150
R
(ml/100g/min)
Figure 6.2 Calculated cerebral blood flow map of a dog with head trauma. There is an oval area of decreased perfusion in
 the olfactory lobe of the brain. This is much more apparent on the perfusion map than the corresponding hypodense area on
the contrast-enhanced image.
Hepatic Perfusion
MULTIPLANAR
Hepatic Perfusion Index
RECONSTRUCTION
Principle
0.8
[art
ynonu sans asaasuen se paimbne ane saseu i
00.6-
the anatomy. The data are stacked along this axis to
二
create a volume, and then re-sliced along the other
0.4
planes to create sagittal, dorsal or oblique projections.
This technique is simple and quick and does not
 require a powerful computer.
Recommendation for use
Normal
Abnormal
 xapun uonsnyiad oueday aun jo joid xog d'g annbi
Multiplanar reconstruction (MPR) can be essential for
normal dogs compared to those with portosystemic shunts.
the accurate evaluation of a CT scan of certain lesion
Arterial perfusion is higher in dogs with reduced portal
types. It may also be necessary to provide measure-
Xiddns poorq
aun Sugeuiap u mydray aq uao ues 1 pue gunu
lesion. Sagittal and dorsal  plane reconstructions
are standard, but oblique plane orientation may
Limitations
be necessary to delineate some lesions or anatomic
 The software generally uses either compartmental
structures.
analysis, or deconvolution, to model the flow of con-
 Trauma to the axial or appendicular skeleton should
 trast between tissues. Each of these models has advan-
be evaluated in multiple planes (Figure 6.4). Fracture
 tages and both have been validated in various tissues.
lines may be difficult to delineate on transverse slices,
 Deconvolution is less susceptible to image noise and
 but when seen in long axis are more easily interpreted.
is good for low-perfusion tumors where data are
Luxations or subluxations, paricularly of the spine, are
scarce. Compartmental analysis has been evaluated
most easily recognized when viewed on reconstructed
'oisnjiad xaduo m sueio u Aunono anou
 images. Long-axis distance is very difficult to appreci-
such as the liver.
 ate on transverse views. The intervertebral disk space,
71  SPECIAL SOFTWARE APPLICATIONS
Figure 6.5  Dorsal plane reconstruction of the caudal thorax
and cranial abdomen of a dog with a paraesophageal mass.
 The reconstruction allows visualization of caudal vena cava
displacement (arrow).
can be limited by obtaining overlapping slices in
Figure 6.4 Dorsal plane reconstruction of the spine of a
helical acquisitions. The spatial resolution of sagittal
dog that was hit by a car. The 1lth thoracic vertebra has a
and dorsal images is also reduced compared with
 compression fracture and multiple fracture lines are visible.
-seau os 'uoneqodiau eiep ot anp saseuil asiaasuen
urements made in these planes will be less accurate
for example, is most readily evaluated on sagittal plane
rd jo an n ad m sas r
 image. Non-traumatic orthopedic cases also benefit
from orthogonal evaluation. The orientation and extent
reconstructions.
of medial coronoid process lesions, for example, are
better evaluated on sagittal reconstructions.
 Mass lesions in any location are usefully evaluated
CURVILINEAR
by MPR. Long-axis lesion measurements are more
RECONSTRUCTION
easily obtained on reconstructed images. The sur-
anou uo panenaidde isaq uao st Auojeue Supunon
Principle
familiar sagittal or dorsal plane images. Multiplanar
Curvilinear reconstruction allows the operator to select
reconstruction may be necessary to determine the ana-
 tomic origin of a lesion. Fascial planes, vascular posi-
 a curved reconstruction plane that follows a structure
of interest, such as a vessel (Figure 6.6). The process
tion and tract (such as trachea) orientation are better
flattens out the structure and allows it to be displayed
appreciated in long axis. Focal pulmonary lesions
 often require MPR to determine the lobar origin, by
 on a single image for direct viewing and more accurate
following the bronchus to that area of pulmonary
measurements. This software function is not available
-Idk1 s pue sueisoid uogonnsuosan reuedmu me u
parenchyma. Differentiation of pulmonary nodules
cally offered as an add-on package.
from end-on vessels can also require orthogonal
reconstruction.
 Angiographic studies may also be evaluated by
Recommendation for use
MPR (Figure 6.5). Determination of portosystemic
shunt direction, the size of a thrombus or the extent of
If available, curvilinear reconstruction is best used to
 intravascular tumor invasion are best appreciated on
evaluate curved or tortuous anatomic structures that
 multiplanar images.
anbiiqo 1o lesiop ‘fenes uo pamooy <isea jou ane
plane images. Single vessels can be followed in this
way, allowing delineation of portosystemic shunt
Limitations
direction, the displacement of a vessel by a mass lesion
 The quality of MPR is limited by the acquisition param-
or intravascular lesions. It can also be useful for flat-
a siere dais ris  a sae  siaa
tening the dorsal plane image of the spinal cord.
72 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Limitations
PADDLE WHEEL
Curvilinear reconstruction can be difficult and time-
RECONSTRUCTION
consuming to use effectively. Software solutions that
(FIGURE 6.7)
automate the segmentation and analysis processes are
costly.
 Reviewing transverse plane images of large volumes
 of thin-sliced thoracic CT studies is laborious and the
image orientation does not match the anatomic orien-
tation of the bronchovascular tree. Circularly oriented
image reconstructions (reminiscent of the paddle
wheels of old steam boats) pivoted around the carina
elegantly solve this problem and provide better ana-
tomic viewing conditions. As with any orthogonal
reconstruction, the image quality largely depends on
the original imaging parameters, namely slice width,
pitch and helical image reconstruction interval. Most
 modern DICOM (digital imaging and communication 
 in medicine) viewers offer circular reconstruction
modes or it can be done manually from the sagittal
reconstruction.
3D RECONSTRUCTION
Principle
B
Figure 6.6 Curvilinear reconstruction of the spine of a dog.
Maximum intensity projection (MIP) depicts the
(A) Standard dorsal plane MPR. (B) Sagittal MPR with the
maximum intensity that each ray encounters and dis-
 curved line within the vertebral canal that is used for recon-
plays this as a two-dimensional projection that can be
struction. (C) The resulting flattened dorsal plane image of
rotated on any plane for three-dimensional evaluation.
the spinal cord.
A
B
Figure 6.7 (A) Sagitally reconstructed thoracic CT image with superimposed purple and blue crossbars. The blue crossbar
represents the selected paddle wheel reconstruction plane, which is pivoted over the carina. (B) Corresponding paddle wheel
reconstruction image demonstrating the caudal bronchovascular structures displayed along their anatomic orientation.
73 SPECIAL SOFTWARE APPLICATIONS
Figure 6.8 Maximum intensity projection image of the
Figure 6.9  Volume rendered image of a comminuted pelvic
abdominal vasculature of a dog that presented with ascites.
fracture in a dog.
 Multiple tortuous vessels are present cranial and axial to the
kidneys.
(Figure 6.9). Angular limb deformities can be assessed
more accurately when presented in three dimensions.
 In volume rendering, each voxel is represented using
This is particularly true when multiple lesions are
 opacity and color to give the resulting image a realistic
present, such as concurrent valgus and rotational
 appearance. The color ranges used can be customized
deformities. Corrective surgery can be rehearsed in
by the user to create a variety of visual effects.
 advance by creating physical rapid prototype models
generated from the surface geometry of the reconstruc-
Recommendation for use
tion. Modeling from the 3D images allows evaluation
 of osteotomy orientation, for example, before the pro-
 Maximum intensity projection reconstruction is most
cedure is carried out on the patient. Three-dimensional
useful in evaluating contrast-enhanced vascular struc-
reconstruction can also aid in planning for interven-
tures (Figure 6.8). As most surrounding structures are
tional procedures such as stent placement or shunt 
removed from the image automatically, the vessels can
 attenuation, although all necessary measurements
be more easily visualized than with standard multipla-
 should be acquired from transverse or MPR images.
nar or 3D reconstructive techniques. It is most useful
 Three-dimensional reconstruction has particular
in assessing vascular structures for filling defects. A
benefits when presenting information to clients.
MIP projection of abdomen, for example, would allow
 Lesions are much easier for the layperson to under-
 stand when visualized using this method. This applies 
 evaluation of the pulmonary arterial system with MIP
not only to orthopedic lesions, but also to soft tissue
would be useful for detection of pulmonary throm-
 mass lesions and vascular anomalies.
 boemboli. MP evaluation may also be used to improve
the detection of pulmonary nodules.
Limitations
 Volume rendering is most useful for surgical plan-
ning and client communication. It should not be relied
The signal-to-noise ratio limits the quality of the
on for diagnosis due to the limitations of spatial and
 volume-rendered image because structures that are
 contrast resolution, and the inherent problem of super-
au uo yons se uaas aq jou Aeu Aiesnuojeue aieiedas
imposition. Orthopedic evaluation particularly bene-
-ogie Supeus pue Suqoous e 'uonppe un aseu (e
fits from 3D reconstruction. Planning of fracture repair
 rithm is used to created the 3D image which can limit
can be improved by 3D visualizaion of the injury.
visualization of subtle lesions such as small non-
particularly with complex lesions of the axial skeleton
displaced fractures. Thick slices will also limit the
74 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
quality of the reconstruction and create a blocky
Miles KA (2004) Brain perfusion: computed tomo-
 appearance on the renderings. This can be minimized
graphy
by using thinner slices or applying an image-smoothing
s194-200.
 process after the initial reconstruction. Real-time 3D
Miles KA (2003) Functional CT imaging in oncology. Eur
Radiot 13 (Suppl 5): M134-8.
reconstruction is very computer processor intensive
Peterson KL, MacLeod AG, Wisner ER, Larson RF and
and requires a high-end workstation to perform.
Pollard RE (2008) Quantitative assessment of blood
volume, blood flow, and permeability of the brain of
REFERENCE
clinically normal dogs by use of dynamic contrast-
enhanced computed tomography. Am J Vet Res 69: 45-50.
Zwingenberger AL and Shofer FS (2007) Dynamic computed
McEvoy FJ, Buelund LE, Strathe AB et al. (2009) Quantitative
tomographic quantitation of hepatic perfusion in dogs
'aseasip Areuound jo uogenieaa Aqdeoouol painduon
with and without portal vascular anomalies. Am J Vet Res 
Vet Radiol Ultrasound 50: 47-51.
68: 9704.
FURTHER READING
Griffith JF and Genant HK (2008) Bone mass and architecture
determination: state of the art. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol
Metab 22: 737-64.
CHAPTER SEVEN
DIGITAL ENVIRONMENT
Robert Malinowski
PICTURE ARCHIVE AND
DICOM
COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
-paw u uogeonmwos pue Sugewl [enp) Noia
cine) is a global standard created to facilitate the
The picture archive and communication system
Kopope1 [enp uapou Aue jo anos aui sl (sovD
exchange of information between medical imaging
 devices. Much as JPEG images have become ubiqui-
network. Ranging widely in size and complexity, PACS
tous on digital cameras, DICOM is the most common
is a computer server (or series of servers) that func-
osle st NODI quaudmba ASoqorpe1 1o 1euoy aheu
tions as a central storage point for studies generated
a network communication protocol. Having a standard
by imaging equipment. PACS indexes and organizes
all of the incoming data, giving users the ability to
format in place ensures that one piece of equipment,
regardless of vendor or modality type, will be able to
search images by patient name, medical record number,
communicate with others. Using DICOM-compliant
modality, clinician and many other criteria. Images are
-euoul jo ajsuen aui sadus Aan juaudimba
viewable wherever they are needed, typically just
 seconds after they were acquired.
tion to PACS, digital film printers and other devices.
 Once a study is stored on the PACS, the images can
 DICOM files contain image data as well as informa-
 tion about the patient and the modality on which they
be viewed using several different methods. The most
were acquired. Single images, as well as ciné loops and
Surmaia aeu pajesipap e asn ot st yoeoidde uouuo
 sequences, can all be stored in DICOM files.
workstation computer with high-resolution grayscale
Three pieces of information are needed to ensure
monitors. Using medical-grade monitors ensures that
that DICOM devices can successfully communicate
the images will be displayed accurately for a valid
with one another:
diagnostic interpretation. Another way to access
images is via a web-based (often called thin-client)
 AE title: application entity, the name given to each
viewer, a common feature on many PACS solutions.
Using a combination of viewers gives access to PACS
modality on the network
IP address:
both inside and outside the clinical environment.
the
umique
 numerical
network
identifier
 PACS software gives radiologists and clinicians a
port number: the data port used to transmit
powerful set of tools to display and manipulate images.
In addition to the most common features (zoom, pan,
information.
windows/level, annotate), many PACS have advanced
functionality  available such  as  three-dimensional
reconstruction, voice recognition, surgical planming/
RIS/HIS (F1GURE 7.1)
 templating and electronic reporting.
PACS is essential for a filmless environment. With a
Ideally, PACS is not installed as a stand-alone system
proper PACS implementation and an adequate number
but rather functions as one component of a tightly
of image viewing workstations, hard copy film can be
integrated system, uniting all electronic clinical
completely eliminated. PACS gives instant access to
systems to reduce errors and maximize efficiency. The
any study, any time, anywhere.
exact functions vary between vendors, but in general
saunes Auu 'ziemups sa q pauis fy pan 
@ 2011 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
75
76 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Radiologist diagnostic
workstations
CT
MRI-
CR
PACS
HIS-RIS
DR
US
Web-based
PACS viewers
Figure 7.1T
Typical structure of a digital radiology network.
the HIS (hospital information system) is used to regis-
isolates DICOM traffic from the rest of the network
ter patients, schedule appointments and perform
and ensures that the system can operate at the highest
accounting operations. The RIS (radiology information
-dmba Asoporper au jo Ile sdaay osle lI paads alqrssod
-edas Alanalduos e 1o SI au jo jied aq Aeu (uass
 ment containing confidential patient information inac-
rate system. It typically functions as the link connect-
cessible to outside intruders, viruses and worms.
ing HIS and PACS, transferring patient information,
 DICOM images can be compressed at the modality
study details and reports between the systems.
 to reduce the amount of time it takes to transmit them
 In a typical RIS/HIS/PACS workflow, an electronic
across the network. Several compression types are
 order for a procedure is placed in the RIS using patient
available depending on the purpose of the final image
demographics supplied by the HIS. Once the order is
and the desired file size.
approved, it is transferred to a work list, where it is
accessible by the modality. The study is then selected
NON-PROPRIETARY
'jxaN pauojiad anpanoid aul pue Aepou aui uo
WORKSTATIONS
the images are evaluated and, if acceptable, are sent
to the PACS. Finally, the order is closed on the RIS
and charges are entered into the HIS. Work flows
Many PACS vendors impose strict constraints on the
ae le inq siopuaa juadmba uaamiaq kean Aiea
type of hardware that can be used to run their soff-
designed to reduce manual data entry and associated
ware. While these guidelines are designed to keep the
errors.
-dn pue anrous yu Aan adond Suuu uass
cally result in the purchase of expensive workstations
directly from the vendor. However, if a web-based
TRANSFER SPEED
viewer for the PACS is available, the hardware require-
 ments are much less severe. The thin-client software
As CT technology continues to advance, the average
will function on most recent computers, provided that
file size of a study has increased. A thin-sliced or recon-
 processor, memory and browser requirements are met.
structed series can easily generate thousands of images
However, due to the fact that standard definition mon-
occupying several gigabytes of space. Special attention
itors are usually used in this scenario, the images must
must be given to the design of the network infrastruc-
be considered non-diagnostic only.
ture to ensure that these data can be transmitted in a
Another option is to instal free or open-source
timely manner. If these details are ignored, transfer
 DICOM viewing software, along with high-resolution
as im uaa pue pasa eai aq lm sa
monitors, and use the configuration for reading elec-
Ideally, all network switches and adaptors will
tronic films. Since DICOM is a standardized format
utilize Gigabit Ethernet for maximum transfer rates. It
and transmission protocol, this non-proprietary work-
is also advisable to place all radiology equipment
station will function as just another node on the
(modalities, PACS, workstations, printers) on a sepa-
 DICOM network, capable of receiving and displaying
 rate VLAN (virtual local area network). This approach
studies.
CHAPTER EIGHT
CT PLANNING FOR
RADIOTHERAPY
Lisa J. Forrest
INTRODUCTION
2.5-3.2Gy fractions for 15-20 treatments for a total
dose of 48-50Gy. Radiotherapy is useful in the treat-
ment of localized tumors and can provide long-term
Veterinary radiation oncology has followed its coun-
local control with preservation of regional function.
 terpart in the human field with advances in treatment
 There are several principles that dictate the prescrip-
plarning and delivery. The introduction of three-
tion of irradiation and therefore the management of
dimensional treatment plarming in the 1980s led to
cancer patients. Tumor staging, biologic behavior of
advances in equipment and software, which in turn
 specific tumor types and defining the goals of therapy
led to the development of multileaf collimators, three-
are all important steps in the evaluation of a cancer
dimensional conformal radiotherapy (3DCRT) and
 patient, but are beyond the scope of this chapter.
intensity-modulated radiotherapy (IMRT). Many vet-
systems to advanced linear accelerators with 3DCRT
and IMRT capabilities. These new systems are capable
PRINCIPLES OF RADIOTHERAPY
 of precise shaping of dose distributions with the use
TREATMENT PLANNING
of computer-controlled multileaf collimators (3DCRT,
IMRT) that can also control the dose intensity (IMRT)
 CT continues to be the imaging choice for radiotherapy
to precisely achieve the plan prescription. The advances
 treatment planning in human oncology. Once a diag-
 in conformal tumor therapy and conformal avoidance
 nosis is obtained and radiotherapy is the treatment
of critical structures adjacent to the tumor place increas-
choice, patients will receive a radiotherapy planning
ing importance on precise daily dose delivery.
CT or CT simulation. The patient will be imaged in the
treatment position and immobilization devices such as
PRINCIPLES OF EXTERNAL
head frames, masks, bite blocks and formable mat-
tresses will be used. These immobilization devices
BEAM RADIOTHERAPY
 ensure that the patient is in the same position for every
delivered fraction of radiation. As the precision of
Radiotherapy is a clinical treatment modality where
 radiotherapy delivery increases so does the impor-
-u ym suaed jean oi pasn st uoepei Suzno
tance of immobilization devices. Larger overall doses
nant tumors. The goal of radiation therapy is to deliver
and dose per fraction are being delivered with equal
a measured dose of radiation to a defined volume with
 importance placed on conformal avoidance of adjacent
minimal damage to surrounding normal tissue, result-
normal structures. The same devices are being used
ing in eradication of the tumor. Radiation doses are
more and more in veterinary medicine (Figures 8.1
 measured in units of absorbed dose, Gray (Gy). AGray
and 8.2).
is equal to 1J/kg energy absorbed in tisue In general,
 The planning CT will be uploaded into the radio-
radiation doses are given in small daily fractions
therapy treatment-planning computer. The basics of
(Monday through Friday) to achieve the desired total
radiotherapy planning are to identify the volumes that
dose over several weeks. Examples of fractionation
will be irradiated and sensitive structures within the
schemes in veterinary radiation oncology include daily
radiation field on the CT image. These include:
saunes Auu 'ziemups sa q pauis fy pan 
@ 2011 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
78  VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Figure 8.1 Bite block immobilization apparatus for treat-
ment of a canine nasal tumor. Dental molding materials are 
mixed together and the dog's maxilla is pressed into the
Figure 8.2 Dog with a nasal tumor placed in a patient-
mold. The material hardens quickly and creates a reproduc-
specific vacuum-formable matress (blue) and bite block
 ible patient set-up for radiotherapy.
immobilization system (same system as Figure 8.1).
the gross tumor volume (GTV)
tron density information provides litle change to
the clinical tumor volume (CTV)
dosimetry calculations, it is essential to image the
 the planning tumor volume (PTV)
patient in the treatment position. In the MR suite it is
the organs at risk (OAR).
difficult to set patients up in the therapy position using
mattresses and bite-block systems, which often contain
The GTV is the tumor volume that can be identified on
ferromagnetic structures. Often dogs and cats are in
imaging, which can include CT, magnetic resonance
 dorsal recumbent position on radiofrequency coil,
imaging (MRI), positron emission tomography (PET)
which is not an optimal treatment position. This makes
and/or other methods such as ultrasonography. The
it
 difficult to reproduce daily patient positioning
CTV is a margin beyond the visible tumor where
during the course of therapy.
 microscopic tumor and tumor spread to lymph nodes
With the increased use of IMRT and the ability to
 or along facial planes is suspected. The PTV is a margin
 achieve steep dose gradients between the PTV and
beyond the CTV to take into account errors in daily
OAR, the need for daily image guidance is essential.
 positioning and organ motion.
 Many new treatment machines have on-board imaging
capabilities. Some examples include an in-room CT
scanner that shares the same couch as the linear accel-
REDUCING SET-Up ERRORS
erator; kilovoltage cone-beam CT where the X-ray tube
is mounted on a retractable arm; and helical tomo-
therapy (HT), which was developed at the University
ued asioand au jo asneaq Suuueld juauean
of Wisconsin-Madison. HT combines a linear accelera-
dimensions and patient electron density information,
 tor and a helical CT scanner where the linear accelera-
which are used by the treatment-planning computer
tor rotates 360° around the patient as the patient is
software to accurately determine dose distribution in
translated through the aperture creating a helical treat-
the tumor and surrounding tissues. Despite the better
ment beam. HT is an advanced form of conformal
soft tissue resolution of MRI, this modality is used as
 IMRT that also uses image verification to precisely
an adjunct to CT rather than replacing it in radio-
therapy treatment planning. This is because MRI does
radiation therapy seeks to remove uncertainties associ-
not image bone well, does not provide the electron
 ated with anatomical positioning at each treatment by
 density of tissues needed for dosimetry calculations,
acquiring images of the patient immediately prior to
and because of the presence of intrinsic system-related
-as Suaen jo Aaiens aui Xiaap weaq uogeip
and object-induced MR image distortions. Even if elec-
sitive normal structures for avoidance while effectively
79 CT PLANNING FOR RADIOTHERAPY
Translational Adjustments(mm)
Lateral
(IECTX)
12.75
Longitudinal(IECTy)
28.4
lical
(ECTz）
-8.44
Pitch
0.84
Roll
6.21
Reset
ZRegistration Cor
raw
-1.86
from OS Log
Coronal
Sagittal
MVCTmageComponont
Color
ROIS
planning kVCT (bottom left) of a dog treated with helical tomotherapy. In the correlated image (large image, right) the tur-
al LAY Buuued au juasardat seare Aai au pue quaunean o toud paueiqo aseun LoAN au juasaidat sarenbs astonb
round light green and blue contours represent the left and right eyes, respectively. The yellow contour is the rostral brain and
the red contour is the PTV. Note the positional changes in millimeters in the upper left of the image in six dimensions after
alignment. The machine automatically will change vertical, longitudinal and roll changes.
jou sem samoa jaea padeus Aehqre suean
volume and OAR. The most important information
possible before the emergence of IMRT. HT acquires a
that is best obtained with CT is the delineation of target
megavoltage CT (MVCT; using the linear accelerator),
volume and surrounding structures with respect to the
which is aligned with the planning kilovoltage CT
external body contour. This is essential for treatment
aeur C-g uo paseg luauean anojaq Aep yoea (LDAY)
planning and optimization of dose distribution.
alignment, patients are repositioned as necessary,
in the lateral, longitudinal, vertical, pitch, roll and
 yaw dimensions after final registration of the images
FURTHER READING
(Figure 8.3).
Harmon J, Van Ufflen D and LaRue S (2009) Assessment of
SUMMARY
radiotherapy patient cranial immobilization device using
daily on-board kilovoltage imaging. Vet Radiol Lultrasound
juauea Aderao u alon jodu ue sheid 
50: 230-4.
ICRU (1993) ICRU Report 50: Prescribing, recording and
plarning and delivery. Accurate patient dose delivery
reporting photon beam therapy. Intermational Commission
is highly dependent on accurate patient data, which
 on Radiation Units and Measurements. Bethesda, MD.
 are best acquired with CT imaging. These data include
Kent MS, Gordon IK, Benavides I, Primas P and Young J
body contour, outline, density of relevant internal
(2009) Assessment of the accuracy and precision of a
structures, and the location and extent of the target
 patient immobilization device for radiation therapy in
80 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
canine head and neck tumors. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 50:
J ss mau oi sha ma  (oo) i 
550-4.
 practice: advances in radiotherapy plarning and delivery.
 Lawrence JA and Forrest LJ (2007) Intensity-modulated radi-
Front Radiat Ther Oncol 40: 18-39.
 Purdy JA (2004) Current ICRU definitions of volumes: limita-
and potential applications in veterinary medicine. Vet Clin
tions and future directions. Semin Radiat Oncot 14: 27-40.
North Am Small Anim Pract 37: 1151-65.
van Herk M (2004) Errors and margins in radiotherapy.
Lyons J, Thrall DE and Pruitt AF (2007) Comparison of
Semin Radiat Oncol 14: 52-64.
r     s n
corrected versus uncorrected treatment plans using 6 MV
photons. Vet Radiol UIltrasound 48: 292-6.
CHAPTER NINE
INTERVENTIONAL
Tobias Schwarz and Sarah Puchalski
INTRODUCTION
 veterinary paients yet and is cost prohibitive at the
moment.
 Stereotactic CT brain biopsy devices have been
 Interventional radiology involves the use of imaging
developed and tested  successfully  on  veterinary
procedures for delivering different treatment options
patients and are commercially available. The proce-
or obtaining diagnostic samples. CT has gained popu-
dure has a high diagnostic yield, but is relatively time-
larity in this field because it is cross-sectional and free
 of magnification errors. This allows precise localiza-
consuming and has potentially serious side effects. It
should only be used in experienced hands.
tion and sizing for stenting and other procedures that
are difficult to match with other modalities with the
 same accuracy. Compared to other imaging modalities,
CT-assisted biopsies (Figures 9.1 and 9.2)
CT is also free of or less vulnerable to image degrada-
'(udeigoper) iaess se yons siere Aq pasnes uog
CT assistance implies that the biopsying device (includ-
 gas and bone (ultrasound), mineral or metal (magnetic
ing full-core biopsies and fine needle aspirates) is
resonance imaging). The biggest restriction of inter-
inserted in steps under CT monitoring. The actual
ventional CT is the limited ability to perform real-time
biopsy relies on trajectory information obtained from
imaging due to the high radiation dose to the operator
the CT scan but it is not performed under real-time
this would involve without the use of special
imaging guidance. In addition to general precautions
equipment.
there are three conditions that need to be met for a
CT-assisted biopsy:
CT FOR BIOPSY PROCEDURES
 The target should not be easily moveable. Because
the final biopsy step is performed blindly, organs
Biopsy mode software applications in CT
that would shift away under pressure cannot be
Most moderm CT scanners have a biopsy software
biopsied safely. Therefore CT-assisted biopsy is not
application that can usually be added to the diagnostic
usually applicable for the abdomen.
I uei-jous jo sisisuon hI quaged al jo fosoiond
The anticipated path of the biopsy needle is entirely
scans that can be quickly and easily repeated, designed
within the X-Y plane. Any deviation would make
for fast checks of biopsy device position. It is advisable
the procedure unsafe because further needle
to select a large display field of view to be able to see
advancement could not be planmed accurately.
the full trajectory of the biopsy needle.
 Expected side effects due to organ perforation are
manageable.
CT-guided biopsy procedures
In most clinical circumstances CT-assisted biopsies
CT guidance implies real-time imaging during the pro-
 are elected if real-time imaging guidance modalities
cedure. In most circumstances this can only be achieved
such ultrasound or fluoroscopy carmot be performed.
with CT-fluoroscopy, a robotic arm device and appro-
This is usually the case for inaccessible body parts
priate personnel shielding. This advanced and often
and organs such as lungs, mediastinum, head and
very specific technology has not been expanded to
 spine.
saunes Auu 'ziemups sa q pauis fy pan 
@ 2011 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
81
82 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
CT assisted biopsy procedure (Figure 9.3)
From the diagnostic CT scan, the area and antici-
pated access point is identified and surgically
In general, a non-bulky biopsying needle device should
be selected to ease the needle positioning and mini-
prepared.
Also from the diagnostic CT scan at the exact
mize artifacts. Biopsy guns with big metal housings
intended biopsy level, the distance between the
cannot be used. For bone biopsies a Jamshidi needle
 or similar device should be available. The procedure is
surface entrance point and a palpable landmark is
aue yed Asdonq reudo aui se liam se 'pamseau
much easier and quicker if only fine needle aspirates
and depth towards vertical.
s are sdas pempaond an inq 'pad ae
 The biopsy depth is then marked with a sterile
 permanent marker on the biopsy needle.
 The entrance point is measured from the landmark
and marked on the patient.
 The needle is inserted into the entrance point just
beyond the skin surface and secured in a sterile
manmner in the anticipated trajectory angle.
·The biopsy location needs to be at the laser light
 location and the laser light needs to be completely
superimposed on the needle shaft.
 A biopsy scan is performed.
 Needle entrance location, trajectory angle and
depth are checked on the biopsy CT scan.
If errors occurred, the needle position is corrected,
otherwise the needle is further advanced and in
either case another biopsy CT scan is performed.
Figure 9.1  Needle positioning for CT-assisted biopsy. The
Scans are repeated until the needle is in the correct
situation on the left needs to be avoided as further needle
position.
advancement cannot be monitored predictably on transverse
 The needle is inserted to the marked target depth
plane images. The needle should be perfectly aligned with
 and the biopsy procedure is performed.
the X-Y plane of the CT scanmer, as shown on the right, with
the help of the positional laser lights on the scanning unit.
C
Figure 9.2 CT-assisted fine needle aspirates for otherwise inaccessible body parts. (A) Pterygoid muscle with a lateral
approach ventral to the zygomatic arch. (B) Temporal muscle between the mandible and skull, dorsal access. (C) Lumbosacral
disk space from ventrolateral in lateral patient recumbence.
83
INTERVENTIONAL CT
'alpaau ipysuref e Susn bop e u uotsat reiqaliaa aageraoid e jo Asdonq paisisse-i e Suinp sdais rernpasoid d'b aunbi
(A) Identify the optimal slice location for a biopsy from the diagnostic CT scan. On the CT image at that location, determine 
the biopsy path by measuring the surface distance of the entrance point to a palpable landmark (spinous process, magenta
arrow), the angle of the path towards vertical (red open angle) and the length of the biopsy path within the body (yellow
arrow). Mark up that length on the biopsy needle shaft. (B) Drive the CT table to the surgically prepared biopsy location level.
-radns arpau Asdotq au jasun yreuut aqedied aui uong aueisip aul unsea Aq suod aoueua Asdotq au auuaia
ficially. The magenta arrow marks the anticipated biopsy path depth. (C) Using the side laser lights, ensure perfect alignmment
of the needle shaft with the X-Y plane. (D) Perform a biopsy CT scan to check needle position. (E) Advance or correct needle
position accordingly and repeat biopsy CT scan. (F) Perform biopsy procedure and harvest material. Final diagnosis: dissemi-
nated blastomycosis.
84  VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Figure 9.3 (Continued)
Particulars of thoracic biopsy procedures
CT MONITORING OF STENTS
(Figure 9.4)
AND OTHER DEVICES (FIGURES
In the authors' opinion, only fine needle aspirates can
9.5, 24.7B AND 26.18C)
be performed safely in the thorax with CT assistance.
However, CT-assisted fine needle aspiration is argua-
bly the most valuable imaging guided sampling pro-
CT can be used to obtain exact size and shape informa-
cedure for the thorax as almost all organs can be 
tion for stenting and catheterization procedures. This
reached safely. It is essential that the patient is scanned
is regularly performed, for instance in preparation of
during the respiratory pause during all procedures to
 prevent organ shift between scans. Hyperventilation
shunts. With CT-fluoroscopy this can be performed in
prior to biopsying is helpful to minimize the risk of
real time. CT is also useful for follow-up monitoring
pleural tearing. The needle cannot be advanced beyond
of stenting devices, other permanent implants or acci-
the skin level during the preparatory stage and there-
dentally dislodged intravascular material.
fore the trajectory has to be more accurately planned
for thoracic procedures. Fine needle aspirates with
CT ASSISTED EMBOLIZATION
CT assistance can be performed with pulmonary tra-
TECHNIQUES (F1GURE 9.6)
jectories for lung lesions or with transpulmonary
trajectories to reach mediastinal structures. The needle
needs to be connected to the suction device (syringe)
If radiopaque material is used for embolization proce-
in the initial set-up and should not be disconnected
 dures in various tissues, CT can be used to document
 during the procedure, to prevent significant pneumot-
the correct location of the embolizing material. With
horax. It is not recommended to perform more
hepatic chemoembolization, an oil-based contrast
than five pulmonary aspirates as the risk of developing
 medium is applied as part of the embolization process,
 significant pneumothorax increases after numerous
increasing the cytotoxic drug concentration and dwell
lung punctures. It is normal to observe mild pneumot-
time. Due to its slow reticuloendothelial clearance the
horax and pulmonary hemorrhage after the procedure
hepatic contrast enhancement can be used to monitor
and a post-biopsy scan should be performed 5 to
drug delivery, persistence and tumor necrosis.
10min afterwards. For this scan it is important to
include the lesion site, and the highest and lowest
T-MONITORED CRYOABLATION
points of the thorax to be able to monitor free
OF TUMORS (F1GURE 9.7)
pleural fluid and gas accumulation respectively. The
-sousep passasse aq osie pmous uess Asdonq-isod
cally, as it often can reveal additional diagnostic
CT has a high sensitivity to detect subtle density
features.
changes. Most soft tissues have density values
85
INTERVENTIONAL CT
Figure 9.4 (A) Set-up for a transpulmonary CT-assisted fine needle aspirate of a perihilar mediastinal mass. (B) The post-
biopsy scan reveals a small pneumothorax (black arrow) and pulmonary hemorrhage along the needle track (white arrow).
(C) Diagnostic CT scan with a mass that could be pulmonary or mediastinal. (D) Biopsy-induced pneumothorax reveals the
mass as pulmonary.
86 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
B
Figure 9.5  (A) Drain check CT in a cat that developed a pneumothorax after drain placement for treatment of chronic pleural
effusion. (B) Follow-up liver CT of a dog with a right-divisional intrahepatic shunt that had undergone an intravascular stent-
ing procedure. There is marked contrast enhancement of the tortuous shunt vessel and mild enhancement of the stented
caudal vena cava, but no enhancement of normal portal veins.
medium as one of the embolizing agents. (A) 30 days and (B) 60 days post-procedure contrast medium is still present and
can be used to monitor the progression of neoplastic growth (images courtesy of Tom Cave).
87  INTERVENTIONAL CT
lameness. CT imaging can be used to guide needle
placement into lesions housed within the hoof capsule
for the adminisration of medications such as biologi-
cal agents (platelet-rich plasma, bone marrow extract
supematant, stem cells). Minimally invasive surgery
 can also be performed using CT guidance. Procedures
such as debridement of osseous cyst-like lesion of the
distal or middle phalanges or osteomyelitis of the
distal phalanx can be performed with minimal disrup-
tion of the hoof capsule. Similarly, CT is very useful
for preoperative planning. Using the CT scanner to
provide external landmarks, which can be perma-
nently affixed to the skin or hoof surface, is used to aid
in implant placement for fracture repair and to mini-
mize the size of hoof wall resections for the removal of
 subcapsular masses.
Figure 9.7 CT-monitored cryoablation procedure of a
 distal radial osteosarcoma in a dog. The frozen soft tissue
FURTHER READING
around the central metallic cryoablation probe is hypodense,
allowing exact sizing of the ice ball.
Moissonier P, Blot S, Devauchelle P et al. (2002) Stereotactic
CT-guided brain biopsy in the dog. J Small Anim Pract 43:
115-23.
Tidwell AS and Johnson KL (1994) Computed tomography-
between 40 and 60HU, which drop in the frozen state
to 20 to 40HU. This makes it an ideal monitoring
guided percutaneous biopsy in the dog and cat: descrip-
tion of technique and preliminary evaluation in 14 patients.
device for cryosurgical procedures in which determi-
Vet Radiol Ultrasound 35: 445-6.
nation of the exact size and location of the ice ball is
Vignoli M, Ohlert S, Rossi F et al. (2004) Computed
 crucial for effective destruction of neoplastic lesions.
tomography-guided fine-needle aspiration and tissue-core
biopsy of bone lesions in small animals. Vet Radiol
UIltrasound 45: 125-30.
INTERVENTIONAL CT IN
uaaraur Papins-aseuI (Lloz) HI siapunes pue N ToustA
EQUINES
tional procedures in the dog and cat. The Vet J 187:
296-303.
Zekas LJ, Crawford JT and O'Brien RT (2005) Computed
 In equine clinical medicine, CT-guided procedures are
 tomography-guided fine-needle aspirate and tissue-core
 performed using the same principles as outlined for
biopsy of intrathoracic lesions in thirty dogs and cats. Vet
small animals. Regions where CT guidance can be par-
Radiol LIltrasound 46: 200-4.
CHAPTER TEN
PURCHASE CONSIDERATIONS
Victor Rendano Jr.
I used to worry about when the coffee would be ready;
Most considerations in a business plan are estimates:
now I worry about whether or not I will have enough
money to buy the coffee beans.
 what it will cost to buy or lease, maintain and
Victor Rendano VMD, MSc, DACVR, DACVR-RO
replace the equipment
what it will cost to outfit and use the space where
The majority of people who will read this chapter are
 the equipment is located
those who depend on the financial success of the CT
what it will cost to maintain the staff to run the
equipment, either directly via its usage or secondarily
equipment
because of not only the cash flow it brings to other
what it will cost to have the ancilary equipment to
departments and the prestige, but also the increased
use the CT unit, e.g. anesthetic equipment, moni-
referrals it brings to the overall entity. Initially, the CT
toring devices, image storage software and hard-
equipment will need to be purchased, then upgraded,
ware, heating and air conditioning.
maintained or replaced. Depending on your situation,
you may need to make all of the decisions or work to
To establish a rapport with you colleagues and clients,
improve some of the decisions that have already been
decisions need to be made about how you will let them
made for you.
know about this equipment and what it can do for
There is no unequivocal right or wrong way to
them. Advertising, continuing education programs,
achieve financial viability. The major considerations
reporting of findings and handling of referrals helps
 for financial viability, however, include:
establish who you are, where you are, what you do
and how you do it.
·the business plan
 Sunq uaum suonuad amsue jo raqunu au
 the service contract
CT equipment is endless. However, the methodical
·case load considerations (Table 10.1).
approach to obtain correct answers to these questions
will be your road map to success. Buying equipment 
Each option has its pros and cons, but the person who
without researching what equipment wil fif your
is ultimately responsible for the viability of the entity
needs, what the space requirements for that equipment
is ultimately responsible for making sure it is done
are, what the heating and air conditioning require-
 ments are, what the radiation safety requirements are,
to get it right the first time, as some mistakes can be so
what the electrical needs are and how the equipment
costly to fix that they could imperil the financial viabil-
would be brought into or removed from the building
ity of your entity.
will ensure you spend money needlessly, and you may
never get the project to completion.
 The number of permutations when letting others
BUSINESS PLAN: INCOME
know about your equipment is finite. These interac-
VERSUS ExPENSES, I.E.
 tions are influenced by the location of the CT facility
and its alignment with other entities. Will you be a
PROFIT OR LOSS
 stand-alone imaging facility, part of a private practice
 group or associated with academia?
 The business plan is a series of questions and answers.
Whatever your work situation, the basic tenets of
The questions are routine; the correct responses require
success are letting others know you have the equip-
someone to research the answers.
ment and what the equipment can do for their patients,
saunes Auu 'ziemups sa q pauis fy pan 
@ 2011 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
89
90 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Table 10.1
buy the equipment, will often be the corner stone of
Major considerations for financial viability.
 Jo jed stun ysni jou pmous nos os 'ssasons [enu
the negotiation. If you self-insure, i.e. have no service
Business plan
contract, then you should have an agreement with a
Location of the facility
 person or company who knows how to diagnose and
· Stand-alone versus specialty group practice
Interaction with primary care facilities
repair the equipment on an as-needed basis. This is
· Interaction with regional specialists 
often an informal discussion with a summary letter
·Advertising
 mox ueuieu no drau oi Suaae 1oy uau Suue
· New versus used equipment purchase
 equipment at a designated fee per hour or fee per call
· Continuing education, training, personnel
plus parts as mutually agreed.
· Business insurance
 If you choose to enter into a formal contract then you
· Malpractice insurance
 must make sure you understand exacly what you are
· Cost to develop site
getting for your money. The service contract will
· Cost to maintain site
 address the following issues:
· Transportation of the patient 
Service contract
· Self-insured versus service contract
type of service
 rates for maintenance
· PM contract
· Contract without tube replacement
oid aueuau Aq paddns sired ron atd
· Contract with tube replacement
basic service to be performed by maintenance
· Availability of repair and parts 
provider
· Same day, evening and weekend repairs
customer's duties
 Case load considerations
reports of service
· Number of cases 
 performance of service
· Cost per case
limitation of service
· Income per study per case
renewal
+
termination
 indemnity and hold harmless
e.g. the disease processes for which CT is most likely
insurance
to add needed information. Cost-effectiveness, avail-
safe working environment
ability and diagnostic accuracy will then solidify its
disclaimer of warranty for products not manufac-
use if the regional resources are adequate to maintain
this level of imaging.
tured by maintenance provider
 juauaaise Supunq pue aiua
no waiver
SERVICE CONTRACT: ALL,
 payment terms
 applicable law /dispute resolution
SOME OR NOTHING AT ALL
 arbitration
waiver of subrogation.
You need to determine the part of your budget specifi-
cally available to buy or lease the equipment. You can
 If these issues read like legalese', it is because that is
then pursue vendors who can provide you with the
what they are. There is never a problem until there is
equipment you can afford. Your objectives are to
 a problem and once the parties pull out the contract to
acquire better equipment than you can afford, at a
see 'exactly what it says', then they are closer to going
price you can afford, with bumper-to-bumper' cover-
 to court for resolution, which means time, money and
age 24hours a day, seven days a week. The vendor's
wasted energy.
objectives are to sell you a piece of equipment that is
 aul jo anlea ayn isnlpe ot pue jaspnq mox unuim
equipment downwards as you ask for more warranty
CASELOAD CONSIDERATIONS:
services. Thus the art of negotiating becomes impor-
FIXED AND VARIABLE COSTS
 pue anmbse noA juaudmba jeum Sunuruanap un jue
how it will be maintained. Sometimes you get lucky:
OF DOING BUSINESS
a desired piece of equipment becomes available on the
market at a reduced price and you need to act imme-
The day has come to do your first study. The number
 diately. However, the methodical approach to a service
 of cases you do and the fee per case will determine if
contract, independent of how much time you have to
you have enough money to buy the coffee beans for
91  PURCHASE CONSIDERATIONS
the amount of coffee you have to make. You put pen
Table 10.2
to paper. What should I charge to meet my financial
Cost calculations worksheet.
obligations? You look at the cost sheet for keeping the
 Practice
 equipment running. It costs you US$100 000 to secure
 Fixed costs per month 
Example
figures
the space, provide the needed utilities, purchase the
anesthetic and monitoring equipment and a few
· Equipment loan
$2207
holding cages, modernize the room, and purchase the
· Service contract
$500
CT equipment and image storage device. If you bor-
· Taxes, utilities, insurance
$650
rowed the money at 8% interest on a five-year note,
- Total: monthly fixed cost
$3177
 your monthly payment would be $2027.
You calculate that your maintenance (cleaning,
 Non-fixed costs per 
Practice
repairs to the room), insurance, taxes and utilities
month
Example
figures
(electric, heating, telephone, water usage, etc.) for the
· Technical help per case
$30
 space will be $650 per month.
Your service contract for routine preventative main-
- Non-technical support
$38
· Fund for part
$50
non os 'ison aenan jd inom  rd
replacement
should consider putting $50 per case into a reserve
· Professional services 
$150
fund to cover catastrophic problems, e.g. tube replace-
· General equipment costs
$100
ment cost.
(anesthesia, monitoring.
 Therefore the monthly payment to the lender, the 
etc.}
insurance, taxes, utilities and the maintenance contract
 are fixed costs, i.e. $3177 whether you image a case
· Total: per case
$368.00
or not.
Practice
 The technical help required to run the equipment
Cost per case worksheet
Example
figures
Aiads- Susixa ue un asen iad oes no isos m
facility. If you are a stand-alone facility, your technical
 6 cases per month
6 cases
$3177 fixed cost
$3177
costs will vary depending on the employment agree-
ment: fee per case, hourly fee or annual salary. General
$368/case non-fixed
$2208
 equipment costs such as anesthetic machine, monitor-
Total: $5385
ing equipment, etc., will cost you $100 per case. Front
$5385/6 =
office support staff, paper supplies and advertisement
for your service will cost you $38 per case. Your time
$897.50
 to oversee the case, review the images, generate the
10 cases per mo nth
10 cases
report, and talk to the owner and the referring veteri-
$3177 fixed cost
$3177
narian should generate you $150 per case. These
 $368/case non-fixed
$3680
numbers add up to $318 per case in variable costs.
miaq Aed im re and A u sua iso
Total: $6857
 $400 and $1000 for the CT study. If you select a target
$6857/10 =
 price of $600-700 per case per CT study, then you need
$685.70
 to do 10 cases per month to meet the financial obliga-
tion (Table 10.2).
As you do more cases your profit margin will
increase. As you doless your costs will need to decrease
tion, you do a CT guided biopsy. The additional fees
perhaps by your answering the telephone, doing the
combined with the base fee will influence the number
study yourself without technical support or discon-
 of cases you need to do per month for financial
tinuing the maintenance contract, otherwise you will
 viability; usually, the base number will be four or five
need to subsidize the CT service with cash flow from
 per month.
 other services. If you do not decrease costs you will go
 There are also peripheral considerations for han-
out of business.
 ding a case that will also need to be considered. If you
The fee you charge the client per CT study can be
are a stand-alone imaging center, you will need to
 increased if you offer additional services while using
orchestrate everything: admitting the pet, ensuring the
 this unit, e.g. you scan more than one area, you scan
pet is stable for anesthesia, overseeing catheter place-
an area prior to and after contrast medium administra-
 ment and anesthesia, housing, recovery and discharge.
92 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
These efforts will be an additional revenue stream for
piece of equipment. However, there is concern when
you. If you are part of a specialty group, you will need
one begins to consider the cost of having a CT scanner,
to decide who will do the patient care before and after
and then there is the pride and usually jubilation of
the patient is in the CT suite and who will monitor the
 owning the CT scanner. The equipment allows us to
pet while the CT scan is being done. Who receives
 do the best we can as imagers for our patients, and at 
these fees will also determine the potential profitability
 the end of the day that, in my opinion, is the ultimate
of having a CT scanner.
reward.
 Usually, there is wild enthusiasm about purchasing
 May you have an abundance of the best coffee beans
the CT scanmer. It has almost become a 'must have'
Xsnoauag aaos moA areus pue
CHAPTER ELEVEN
NASAL CAVITIES AND
FRONTAL SINUSES
Jimmy Saunders and Tobias Schwarz
IMAGING PROTOCOL
basal bony leaf, which attaches to the orbital lamina of
the ethmoid bone.
 The rostral half of the nasal cavities lodges the dorsal
See Table 11.1.
and ventral nasal conchae, which are usually referred
to as nasal turbinates (Figure 11.2A). The dorsal
CT: ANATOMY AND
nasal turbinate is a smooth, curved plate that arises
from the nasal bone as an extension of the first endo-
NORMAL VARIANTS
turbinate. The ventral nasal turbinate is thick but short
Nasal cavities and paranasal sinuses in
and occupies the rostral two-thirds of the nasal cavity
It arises from the maxilla as an extension of the second
carnivores
 endoturbinate, which breaks up to form many longi-
The nasal cavities are surrounded bilaterally by the
tudinal scrolls, greatly enlarging the covering mucosa,
incisive, nasal, maxillary, lacrimal, zygomatic, pala-
which is richly vascularized. The ventral turbinate is
tine, vomer, presphenoid and ethmoid bones (Figure
continued rostrally by the alar fold. The nasal tur-
11.1). They extend from the nostrils rostrally to the
binates restrict the air flow. Variations in the structure
cribriform plate and nasopharynx caudally. The cribri-
 of the ethmoidal turbinates are commonly observed
form plate is a sieve-like partition between the nasal
on CT.
and cranial cavities that is perforate by ± 300 foramina
Four narrow nasal passages, the nasal meati, are
(<1.5mm in diameter) serving for the passage of olfac-
present between and along the turbinates (Figure
tory nerve bundles (Figure 11.2E). On CT, the integrity
11.2C). The dorsal nasal meatus is a passage between
 of the cribriform plate is best evaluated on dorsal
the dorsal nasal turbinate and the dorsal wall of the
planes.
nasal cavity; the middle nasal meatus lies between the
The right and left cavities are separated by a nasal
dorsal and ventral nasal turbinates; the ventral nasal
septum (cartilaginous and membranous rostrally, ossi-
meatus is located between the ventral nasal turbinate
LD uo paams Xuouuos sieadde jeu (<epnes pay
and the floor of the nasal cavity; the common nasal
 in its rostral part in cats and brachycephalic dogs.
meatus is a longitudinal narrow space bounded
The caudal half of the nasal cavities is largely filled
between the nasal septum and the turbinates, and it
by the ethmoidal turbinates (Figure 11.2B, 11.2C) that
 communicates with the three other meati. The nasopha-
attach caudally to the cribriform plate and are covered
ryngeal meatus extends from the dilated caudal portion
by the orbital lamina of the ethmoid bone. The ethmoi-
 of the ventral nasal meatus to the choana and opens
dal turbinates are so extensive that they also invade
into the nasal porion of the pharynx.
the lower part of the frontal sinuses (Figure 11.2C).
The paranasal sinuses of the dog consist of the
They are composed of four long endoturbinates (I to
frontal sinuses, the maxillary recesses and the nasal
IV) and six small ectoturbinates (1 to 6) Figure 11.2B).
fundus. All communicate with the nasal cavities. The
 The difference between the two groups is based on
frontal sinuses are composed of three compartments
their location. Each ethmoidal element possesses a
(rostralis, medialis, lateralis) from which the rostral
saunes Auu 'ziemups sa q pauis fy pan 
@ 2011 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
93
94  VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Table 11.1
 compartment is further subdivided in three compart-
CT imaging protocol (intravenous contrast study: standard
ments (medialis, intermedius, lateralis), which drain
protocol; see Chapter 5).
separately into the nasal cavity via the ethmoidal
 Pre- and
meati. The lateral compartment of the rostral frontal
 Series
post-contrast*
 sinus is the largest and occupies much of the frontal
Bone
Ventral
 bone, including the zygomatic process (Figure 11.2D).
Decubitus
The frontal crest separates the right and left frontal
Scan margins
Nostrils → C2
 sinuses from each other.
Voltage (kvp)
100-120
Current (mAs)
100-120 (250: skull)
Feline anatomical specificities
Tube rotation time (s)
0.8
The rostral half of the nasal cavities lodges the
 Slice width (mm)
1.25
dorsal conchae and the short, but very thick,
 Sequential slice interval (mm)
1.25
ventral conchae. The ethmoturbinates are more
Ker nel frequency
Medium
High
strongly developed in cats compared with dogs
and invade the lower part of the frontal sinuses.
Window level (HU)
+80
+400
The frontal sinuses are not divided into compart-
Window width (HU)
200
2500
ments and are significantly bigger in male cats,
*Intravenous contrast studies are not mandatory for diagnosis in the
giving them their characteristic head shape.
majority of cases. They may be useful to better define the mucosa
The maxillary recess is very small. In contrast
in selected cases or for biopsy guidance.
to dogs, who only have a nasal fundus, cats do
have a true sphenoidal sinus with a curved
septum. A curved nasal septum is a normal
A
feature in cats.
DISEASE FEATURES
 In dogs, sinonasal neoplasms and fungal rhinitis rep-
resent ±75% of chronic nasal disease, while chronic
non-specific rhinitis and foreign body rhinitis are
 responsible for +20% of nasal disorders. Nasal neop-
B
lasia and chronic rhinosinusitis represent ±70% of
chronic nasal disease in cats.
Malformation/Developmental
Dermoid cyst/Meningiocele
Dermoid sinus is a failure of separation of the neural
 tube and cutaneous ectoderm during embryonic devel-
opment resulting in a tract extending from the skin
into the subcutaneous tissues.
CT features (Figure 11.3)
 Abnormal development of the pre-nasal space.
Tract starts on the midline of the nasal planum and
runs along the nasal septum.
Figure 11.1  (A) Lateral, (B) dorsal and (C) ventral views of
the canine skull. The bones surrounding the nasal cavities
Possible extension of the tract into the brain/
Cranial vault causing cerebral abscesses or recur-
and frontal sinuses are colored. Incisive bone (yellow), lac-
rimal bone (purple), maxillary bone (orange), nasal bone
rent meningitis.
(brown), palatine bone (red), presphenoid bone (dark blue),
Contrast medium can help to better define the
vomer bone (pink), zygomatic bone (sky blue), frontal bone
direction of the tract and improve visualization of
(green).
strongly enhancing cerebral lesions.
95 NASAL CAVITIES AND FRONTAL SINUSES
D
二
Figure 11.2 (A-D) Transverse CT images of the nasal cavities and frontal sinuses in the normal dog at the level of: (A)
Triadan 06 (illustrating the region rostral to the maxillary recesses), (B) the maxillary recesses (illustrating the middle part of
the nasal cavities), (C) Triadan 10 (illustrating the region between the maxillary recesses and the frontal sinuses) and (D) the
frontal sinuses. For the facility, these four regions willbe used in this chapter to determine the level at which the figures were
obtained. (E) Dorsaly reconstructed CT image. 1 = nasal fundus; 2 = nasopharyngeal meatus; 3 = common nasal meatus;
4 = cribriform plate;5 = dorsal nasal concha; 6 = dorsal nasal meatus; 7 =ethmoturbinates; 8 = frontal crest; 9 = frontal sinus
(lateral compartment); 10 = frontal sinus (medial compartment); 11 = infraorbital canal; 12 = maxillary recess; 13 = middle
nasal meatus; 14 = nasal septum (cartilaginous); 15 = choana; 16 = olfactory bulb of the brain; 17 = palatine canal; 18 = perpen-
 dicular lamina of the ethmoid bone; 19 = ventral nasal concha; 20 = ventral nasal meatus.
Inflammatory
Non-specific rhinitis
 Nasal polyps
Non-specific  rhinitis  includes  lymphoplasmocytic,
eosinophilic and hyperplastic rhinitis based on the pre-
 Nasal polyps are an uncommon cause of nasal obstruc-
dominant inflammatory cell pattern and the stage of
-a aand n  ( 1-9) o a  
 the disorder. Affected animals show a disruption of the
 pathogenesis is still obscure even if development
 Jo sisis uanbasuo um ss aueea eon
 secondarily to chronic inflammation has been sug-
secretions, mucosal congestion, edema and hyperpla-
U aiei aiaa are Aen leseu a um sdion pai
sia, creating an ideal microenvironment for bacterial
dogs and are usually unilateral.
 proliferation. The underlying etiopathogenesis of non-
 specific rhinitis has still to be elucidated.
CT features (Figure 11.4)
 Soft-tissue opacification of the nasal cavity that
CT features (Figure 11.5)
replaces the normal turbinate pattern.
Distribution of the lesions: diffuse, localized or
 Osteolysis is rarely identified (in contrast to tumors
random; bilateral > unilateral.
and cryptococcosis).
 Increased density of the nasal passages and/or
· Local turbinate destruction, unilateral (dog).
frontal sinuses due to mucosa swelling/infiltration
96 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Figure 11.3 Adult cat with a dermoid cyst. (A) Post-contrast (IV) transverse CT image (mid-nasal cavities) shows a rounded
soft tissue density (asterisk) in the dorsal third of the nasal septum. (B) Pre-contrast transverse CT image (frontal sinuses) shows
a small hyperdensity (arrow) in the left olfactory lobe. (C) Post-contrast CT image (same level as B) shows a markedly contrast
enhancing mass in the middle part of the olfactory lobe (arrows). (D) CT fistulogram (rostral nasal cavities) shows a dorsal
opening of the nasal planum (white arrow) and a small contrast density within it (black arrow). (E) CT fistulogram (same level
as A) shows contrast accumulation within the previously described mass (asterisk). (F) Sagittally reconstructed CT-fistulogram
97 NASAL CAVITIES AND FRONTAL SINUSES
B
C
ss hos Aq o st is i n  () o is e ym   e go s  a t'tl a
 density (asterisk). Remnants of the ethmoturbinates are still visible. The nasal septum is displaced to the left. (B) There is
 is deviated to the left (arrowheads). (C) The right frontal sinus is divided into a medial and a lateral compartment. The latter
is filled with fluid (asterisk).
 by inflammatory cells and fluid accumulation (pus,
Infectious
mucus, hemorrhage).
Fungal rhinitis
·Mild to moderate bone loss (turbinates, facial
 bones, hard palate). Less severe compared to most 
 In Europe and North America, canine fungal rhinitis
nasal neoplasia and fungal rhinitis.
is nearly exclusively due to Aspergillus fumigatus.
98 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
C
() pue p aun (a) tenson au () go iaaal aun ie sae  asraasu 's suads-u ym sop inp i'tl ani
the caudal parts of the nasal cavities. The nasal cavities show diffuse, randomly distributed bilaterally increased density of
the nasal passages due to mucosal swelling and flhuid accumulation. There are no bone lesions.
Sinonasal aspergillosis is far more common in dogs
America. Unlike other systemic mycoses, Cryptoco-
than in cats and is characterized by the formation of
ccosis is more common in cats than in dogs. Patients
superficial mucosal fungal plaques within the nasal
cavity and/or frontal sinus in otherwise healthy
 ment of the nasal cavity and/or nasal planum (nasal
animals. The fungus does not invade beneath the level 
 form) only, with a more extensive nasal cavity disease
of mucosal epithelium but incites a severe chronic
 and local spread (nasal + local form) or with cutane-
inflammatory response. This colonization and inva-
ous tissue, ocular/central nervous system or body
sion of the nasal mucosa by Asp. fumigatus causes a
 cavities organ involvement (nasal + disseminated
destructive rhinitis often accompanied by bone reac-
form).
tion (frontal sinus osteomyelitis), presumably due to
 Other fungal agents have sporadically been reported
 an endotoxin responsible for the turbinate necrosis.
 to cause rhinitis, such as Asp. nigrans, Asp. nidulans,
Cryptococcosis (Cryptococcus neoformans, C. gatti)
 Asp. flaous, Asp. niger and Penicillium species in dogs.
occurs frequently in Australia but it has also been
 Hyalohyphomycosis  and  phaeohyphomycosis  are
reported in New Zealand and the west of North  reported in cats.
99 NASAL CAVITIES AND FRONTAL SINUSES
CT features
non-specific thickening of the mucosa adjacent
 to the inner surface of bones of the frontal sinus,
Canine sinonasal aspergillosis (Figures 11.6 and
maxillary recess and nasal cavity
11.7):
bone changes: thickened reactive bone and/
 moderate to severe cavitary destruction (hyper-
 or destruction of thin bone structures (frontal
lucency) of the turbinates with presence of a
 Crest, cribriform plate, medial border maxillary
variable amount of abnormal soft tissue in the
nasal passages
recess).
Figure 11.6 Transverse CT images show the nasal cavities in four dogs with nasal aspergillosis. (A) There is complete
 destruction of the nasal turbinates on the right side (asterisk) with extension to the contralateral side through the nasal septum.
The nasal mucosa is thickened ventrally (arrowheads). The maxilla is thickened on the right side (arrows). (B) There is severe
destruction of the nasal turbinates in the right nasal passage (asterisk). There is mucosal thickening dorsally and medially,
and maxilla bone reaction (arrow). (C) There is partial destruction of the ethmoturbinates in the dorsolateral aspect of the 
right nasal cavity (asterisk). There is mucosal thickening surrounding the destroyed area (arrowheads). (D) There is a large
amount of soft tissue /flhuid density in the right nasal cavity (asterisk). There is severe turbinate destruction. The palatine bone
and the maxilla are thinmed (arrows).
100VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
A
Figure 11.7 Transverse CT images of the frontal sinmuses in dogs with nasal aspergillosis. (A) There is hyperostosis of the
lateral wall of the left frontal sinus (arrows) with a rim of soft tissue along the inner surface of the bone (arrowheads). There
is lysis of the frontal crest. Abnormal soft tissue is present in the nasal fundus (asterisk). (B) There is lysis of the lateral aspect
of the left frontal bone (arrow) and rim of soft tissue along the dorsal aspect of the sinus (arrowheads). (C) There is increased
density, hyperostosis, of the frontal bone (asterisk).
Feline fungal rhinitis (Figures 11.8 and 11.9):
Bacterial rhinitis
 variable amount of abnormal soft tissue in the
No single bacterium has been identified as a potential
nasal cavity, mostly bilateral and in the dorsal
cause of primary bacterial rhinitis. Secondary bacterial
extranasal soft tissues
infection is common in dogs with chronic nasal disease
turbinate lysis, variable in severity
 and explains the transient response to antibiotics seen
lysis of hard palate, nasal septum, frontal bone
 in some dogs. This accumulation of bacterial organ-
 or cribriform plate
isms in dogs with chronic nasal disease could result
fluid/soft tissue density in the frontal sinus
 from mucus trapping and decreased nasal mucosal
and/or nasopharynx
defense mechanisms.
non-specific contrast medium enhancement
 regional lymphadenopathy
extension of the process to the central nervous
Dental rhinitis
system (via cribriform plate or systemic) (see
 Periapical infections of the upper teeth may result in a
Chapter 19).
 purulent nasal discharge if the infection extends to the
 Parasitic rhinitis
nasal mucosa. A dental rhinitis may also be due to an
abnormal tooth growth, e.g. an impacted tooth.
 Nasal parasites are rare in dogs and cats. Cuterebra spp.
(arthropod) and Linguatula serrata (arthropod) have
CT features (Figure 11.10)
been reported in both species. Eucoleus boehmi (nema-
 Localized increased nasal density, possibly associ-
tode) and Pneumonyssoides caninum (arthropod) have
 ated with turbinate destruction.
-oouuow pue shop ul paodan Alesyioads uaaq
 Periapical infection; see Chapter 12.
nogamus (nematode) in cats.
CT features
Traumatic
 Have not been reported.
Foreign body rhinitis
 Anticipated features on CT:
in most cases, normal CT examination
Foreign body rhinitis is more frequent in dogs, particu-
 increased density of the nasal cavity due to
larly hunting dogs, than in cats. The sneeze reflex is in
mucosal thickening
 most cases an effective way of expelling foreign mate-
 in exceptional cases, facial deformation.
rial from the nose. However, sometimes a foreign body
101  NASAL CAVITIES AND FRONTAL SINUSES
Figure 11.8 Adult cat with cryptococcosis. (A) Transverse
CT image shows severe destruction of the turbinates in the
lateral half of the right nasal cavity (asterisks). (B) Transverse
CT image shows severe hyperostosis of the right frontal bone
(asterisk), the sinus is filled with soft tissue/fluid density
B
(arrow).
Figure 11.9 Adult cat with cryptococcosis and retro-
pharyngeal lymphadenopathy. (A) Transverse CT image
shows complete obliteration of the right nasal cavity (aster-
isk) with extension through the ventral half of the nasal
can become lodged in the nasal turbinates and cause
 local chronic inflammation, possibly accompanied by
the frontal bone in the direction of the orbit (long arrow).
 secondary aspergillosis.
 Remnants of ethmoturbinates are visible and a mineraliza-
The most commonly reported foreign bodies
suos-isod (a) as ieseu juat aul ur juasad st uo
are wooden sticks and grass awns. Less commonly
transverse CT image shows strong contrast enhancement of
fishhooks, bullets and needles may be found in the
 both retropharyngeal lymph nodes (arrows) with central
nasopharynx or oropharynx.
hypodense areas, consistent with necrosis.
CT features (Figure 11.11)
 Foreign bodies have different densities, ranging 
ae pue (a) y Aaa oi (oom) mol wo
non-contrast enhancing.
Traumatic rhinitis
?
eau 'azis o suadap uaed aueredde i
composition of surrounding tissues and the pres-
Traumatic rhinitis in dogs is caused by depression
 ence of inflammatory response.
fractures, bony sequestra and subsequent osteomyeli-
Unilateral,  localized turbinate destruction sur-
tis. Most fractures are caused by dog bites or blunt
rounding the foreign body.
trauma.
102 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Figure 11.10  ransverse CT image of a young dog with an
A
impacted tooth in the left nasal cavity (arrows). A rim of soft 
tissue surrounds the tooth and the nasal turbinates are
destructed. On endoscopy, aspergillus colonies were visible
around the tooth.
CT features (Figure 11.12)
 Fracture, sequestrum or osteomyelitis.
 Increased density in nasal cavities.
Sinonasal neoplasms
Sinonasal tumors are nearly always malignant in
[eaida aq Aeu sioumi 'shop ul 'sies pue shop yioq
(adenocarcinoma, undifferentiated carcinoma, squa-
B
mous cell carcinoma) or mesenchymal (osteosarcoma
Figure 11.11  Foreign body rhinitis in the rostral part of the
and chondrosarcoma) in origin. In cats, lymphoma
nasal cavities in two patients. (A) Transverse CT image shows
and epithelial neoplasms are the most common
a hyperdense, rounded structure (asterisk) surrounded by a
lao Oz ueui anou 'sadki asau 0h 1xaN sadk1 1oum
 rim of soft tissue. There is destruction of the nasal turbinates
a ul paoda1 uaaq aaey sad roumi jueoe
ventrally. (B) Transverse CT image shows a linear hyperdense
 nasal cavity with only a few case reports of benign
structure in the rostral aspect of the right nasal cavity (arrow).
processes.
Sinonasal tumors most commonly start in one nasal
cavity (rarely in the frontal sinus) and progressively
invade the entire nasal cavity, the frontal sinus,
the orbital region or, through bone, the contralateral
that is exposed to environmental carcinogens.
nasal cavity, the oral cavity or the central nervous
Therefore, dolicho- and mesaticephalic dogs have a
system. Distant metastases are rare. Nasal lymphoma
higher risk of developing sinonasal neoplasia than the
originates from nasal tissue, shows a predominance
of B-cells and is generally restricted to the nasal
then more prone to lower respiratory tract disorders.
cavity.
 Some neoplasms arising from the face (e.g. squa-
 In dogs, sinonasal tumors seem to correlate with the
mous cell carcinoma of the nasal plane, osteosarcoma,
nasal length and thus with the amount of surface area
 multilobular tumor of bone) may extend into the nasal
103 NASAL CAVITIES AND FRONTAL SINUSES
ldiopathic chronic rhinitis
 This disorder is likely the consequence of a complex
 progression of microbial, physiological, anatomical,
and immunological interactions. Feline herpesvirus
type 1 has been suggested as an important pathogen
for initiating factor acute rhinitis following acute viral
cytolysis during a bout of acute severe rhinitis is
related to this disorder.
 Idiopathic chronic rhinitis is perpetuated by recur-
 rent bacterial infection, an exuberant inflammatory
response, permanent or cumulative destruction of
nasal epithelium and bony turbinates following chronic 
reactivation of virus from the trigeminal ganglia into
nasal tissue.
Figure 11.12 Transverse CT image in an adult dog with
CT features (Figure 11.18)
traumatic rhinitis shows multiple fractures of the maxilla,
 Soft-tissue opacification of the nasal cavity and
 zygomatic and frontal bones (arrows). There is a diffuse,
 frontal or sphenopalatine sinuses.
bilateral (left >right) increase in density of the nasal pas-
 Lysis of nasal and frontal bones.
sages due to mucosa swelling and fluid accumulation.
Turbinate destruction.
Asymmetry of the cribriform plate.
FURTHER READING
cavity. These neoplasms should be differentiated from
the typical 'nasal' neoplasms because of different treat-
ment options. Other structures included in the nasal
De Rycke LM, Saunders JH, Gielen IM, van Bree HJ and
cavities such as the infraorbital nerve may also show
tomography and cross sectional anatomy of the normal
tumoral processes.
canine nasal cavities and paranasal sinuses in the mesati-
cephalic dog. Am J Vet Res 64: 1093-8.
CT features (Figures 11. 13-11.17)
Ketaki K, Reichle JK, Fischetti AJ and Goggin JM (2009)
 Presence of a space-occupying mass; mostly the
Computed tomographic findings of fungal rhinitis and
convex surface of the mass is visible.
sinusitis in cats. Vet Radiol Lltrasound 50: 65-8.
 Process may be uni- or bilateral. It starts in one
Lefebvre J, Kuehn NF and Wortinger A (2005) Computed
nasal cavity, usually caudally, but may extend in
tomography as an aid in the diagnosis of chronic nasal
the other cavity or causes deviation of the nasal
disease in dogs. J Small Anim Pract 46: 280-5.
septum.
Losonsky JS, Abbott LC and Kuriashkin IV (1997) Computed
 Destruction of the ethmoid bones and bone sur-
tomography of the normal feline nasal cavity and parana-
rounding the nasal cavities.
sal sinuses. Vet Radiol Lultrasound 38: 251-8.
Reetz JA, Mai W, Muravnick KB, Goldschmidt MH, Schwarz
 Turbinate destruction, variable depending on the
T (2006) Computed tomographic evaluation of anatomic
stage and aggressiveness of the disease process.
and pathologic variations in the feline nasal septum and
 Contrast study is not usually needed for diagnosis
 paranasal sinuses. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 47: 321-7.
but may help to differentiate a mass from its sur-
Saunders JH, van Bree H, Gielen I and de Rooster H (2003)
roumding fluid. A moderate to severe enhancement
 Computed tomography in dogs with chronic nasal disease.
is usually seen.
Vet Radiol Lltrasound 44: 409-14.
 Hamartoma: calcified mass.
Saunders JH, Zonderland JL, Clercx C et al. (2002) Computed 
·Fluid in the nasal sinuses.
'sisoaradse ieseu ym shop s u shupuy odeaouol
Vet Radiol UIltrasound 43: 5-9.
 Windsor RC and Johnson L (2006) Canine chronic inflamma-
tory rhinitis. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract 21: 76-81.
104VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Figure 11.13 Adult dog with nasal adenocarcinoma. (A) Transverse CT image shows a completely obliterated (asterisk) left
nasal cavity. The ethmoturbinates are destroyed in the ventral part of the cavity while some are intact dorsally (arrows). The
maxillary recess is filled. (B) Transverse CT image shows the left frontal sinus completely flled with fluid / soft tissue (asterisk).
There is suspicion of cribriform plate destruction ventrally (arrow). (C) Dorsally reconstructed CT image confirms cribriform
plate lysis (arrow). The mass extends over the entire length of the left nasal cavity (asterisk) and slightly into the right cavity.
105 NASAL CAVITIES AND FRONTAL SINUSES
Figure 11.14 Adult cat with nasal adenocarcinoma with cystic extension into the brain. (A) Transverse CT image shows
severe soft tissue swelling with complete obliteration of both nasal cavities. A mass is present on the right side (asterisk) and
displaces the nasal septum to the left. The turbinates are destroyed on the right side. There is severe destruction of the right
maxilla (arrows). (B) Transverse CT image shows a mass invading the caudal nasal cavities and peri-orbital tissues (asterisk).
There is complete lysis of the right frontal bone and cribriform plate (arrows). Both frontal sinuses are filled. (C) Pre-contrast
the same level shows cyst wall enhancement (arrows) surrounding the non-enhancing cystic lumen (asterisk).
106 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Figure 11.15 Adult cat with nasal hemangiosarcoma. (A) Transverse CT image shows rostral obliteration of the nasal cavi-
ties (asterisk), nasal turbinate destruction, nasal bone destruction and exuberant periosteal reactions (arrows). (B) Transverse
CT image shows a mass (asterisk) in the dorsal half of the right nasal cavity with turbinate destruction. The nasal septum is
destroyed dorsally and the process extends to the left nasal cavity. Spiculated periosteal reactions are visible at the dorsolateral
aspect of the maxilla (arrows). (C) Transverse CT image shows the frontal sinuses completely filled with fluid (asterisks) while
the ventral aspect of the nasal cavities appears normal.
107 NASAL CAVITIES AND FRONTAL SINUSES
Figure 11.16 Adult dog with nasal septum neoplasia. (A) Transve
shows a triangular-shaped soft tissue density
located on the midline of the nasal cavities at the normal location 
of the nasal septum (asterisk). There is destruction of the
3s (a) (mo) uid Tes al jo au au u auq Tes5
ethmoturbinates by a large soft tissue density mass located in the middle of the nasal cavities (asterisk).
108VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Figure 11.17 Adult dog with osseous hamartoma. (A) An osseous mass (asterisk) surrounded by fluid is visible in the rostral
 part of the left nasal cavity. The nasal septum is deviated towards the right. (B) Dorsally reconstructed CT image shows the
osseous mass filling the left nasal cavity over almost its entire length. (C) Volume rendering shows the previously described
mass (asterisk).
109 NASAL CAVITIES AND FRONTAL SINUSES
nasal cavity (asterisk). There is lysis of the right maxilla laterally (arrows). Mucosal thickening of the turbinates is present in
the left nasal cavity. (B) Transverse CT image shows extensive ethmoturbinate destruction in the right nasal cavity (asterisk).
Some remnants of turbinates along the outer wall are present with a thickened mucosa/fluid. The right side of the nasophar-
ynx is filled with soft tissue density. Diffuse mucosal thickening is present in the left nasal cavity. (C) Transverse CT image
Trd pue (saise) sus tepiouauds juair al u uorsap aeunqir snus teuog ut au u (smoie) aaat pin e smous
fillingof thenasopharynx.
CHAPTER TWELVE
ORAL CAVITY, MANDIBLE
MAXILLA AND DENTAL
APPARATUS
Lisa J. Forrest and Tobias Schwarz
IMAGING PROTOCOL
are assessed, it is useful to move the tongue away from
the area of interest to prevent silhouetting of gum and
See Table 12.1.
lingual tissue. The ducts of the sublingual and man-
dibular salivary glands open under the body of the
tongue. When the mouth is closed the tongue fills the
CT: ANATOMY AND NORMAL
 oral cavity. The incisive papillae where the incisive
VARIANTS
losioun [enuas Xrexe au on epnes are suado jonp
teeth. These paired ducts extend through the palatine
Oral cavity
fissures to connect the nasal cavity to the oral cavity.
The soft palate continues caudal from the hard
In both dogs and cats the oral cavity contains the teeth
 palate as the separation between the naso- and oral-
and the tongue and is further divided into the vesti-
pharynx, and passes just caudal to the last maxillary
bule and the oral cavity proper. The vestibule is exter-
 molar in mesaticephalic breeds. Whereas in extremely
nal to the teeth and gums and internal to the lips and
brachycephalic breeds the hard palate/soft palate
 cheeks. It opens via the oral fissure between the lips,
junction is more than 1cm caudal to this transverse
rostral. A space on either side, which is caudal to the
level. The soft palate is long in dogs and may be over-
last molars, provides free communication between the
long in brachycephalic breeds leading to obstruction
rostral vestibule and the oral cavity proper. The parotid
of air passage. In the average dog the soft palate is 6 cm
and zygomatic salivary ducts open into the dorsocau-
long, 3cm wide and 0.5cm thick. The thickness gradu-
 dal part of the vestibule. The parotid duct opens on a
ally enlarges to 1 cm at the middle to caudal third, after
small parotid papilla, which is located in the cheek
which it thins to a concave border at its caudal end.
opposite to the maxillary fourth premolar tooth in
 The palatine tonsil is located within the tonsillar fossa
dogs and in the cat opens opposite the maxillary third
 on the dorsolateral oropharyngeal wall and can occa-
or fourth premolar teeth.
sionally be identified due to a small air bubble in this
The dorsal margin of the oral cavity proper is the
fossa. All the soft tissues of the soft palate and pharynx
hard palate and a small part of the adjacent soft palate;
wall are strongly contrast enhancing (Figure 12.2).
the lateral and rostral margins are the dental arches
and teeth; the floor or ventral margin is the tongue and 
Mandible
reflected mucosa beneath the tongue. The tongue occu-
pies the ventral portion of the oral cavity that contains
The mandible is similar in the dog and cat. It articu-
muscles and surrounding layers of fat (Figure 12.1). It
lates with the skull via the temporomandibular
is important to position the tongue as symmetrical as
joint (TMJ; see Chapter 13) and is fused rostrally via
possible, which can be challenging with anesthetic
 the mandibular symphysis. The mandibular symphy-
equipment placement. If specific lesions in other areas
sis contains a fibrocartilage pad rostrodorsally
saunes Auu 'ziemups sa q pauis fy pan 
@ 2011 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
111
112 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Table 12.1
standard protocol; see Chapter 5).
 Series
 Pre- and post-contrast
Bone
 Open mouth
Mandibular traction
 Decubitus
Ventral
 Special positioning 
N/A
Open mouth
Tie hindlegs to one table
maximally with
end, tie mandible (loop 
radiolucent
around canines) to other
 mouth gag
table and under tension 
(see Figure 13.1)
Rostral scan margin
Incisors
Molars
Caudal scan margin
 Medial retropharyngeal lymph nodes 
 Tympanic bullae 
Scan direction
 Rostral or caudal
Voltage (kVp)
120
Current (mAs)
130
Tube rotation time (s)
1 or 2
Slice width (mm)
5
1
2
1
 Sequential slice interval (mm)
5
2
1
Kernel frequency
Medium
High
Medium
High
Window level (HU)
+100 (post-contrast: +80)
+500
A: +80
+500
B: +500
Window width (HU)
150 (post-contrast: 200)
3000
A: 200
3000
B: 3000
Figure 12.1 Transverse post-contrast CT image of the
Figure 12.2 Transverse post-contrast-enhanced CT image
tongue base shows prominent hypodense layers of intermus-
 of a canine oropharynx. Ventral to the soft palate the contrast-
cular fat laterally and ventrally (asterisk). The contrast-
enhancing palatine tonsil (arrow) partially protrudes from its
enhanced tongue vessels (arrow) serve as landmarks.
tonsillar fossa, also containing a small air bubble (asterisk).
113 ORAL CAVITY, MANDIBLE, MAXILLA AND DENTAL APPARATUS
Figure 12.3 Transverse CT image of the normal mandibular
symphysis with interdigitating bony rugosities in (A)a
normal dog, (B) a normal cat and (C) a cat with impingement
of its left coronoid mandibular process lateral to the zygo-
'pauae sueuan )ut sisaqduas enqiueu a re sue
ruling out symphyseal laxity as the cause of impingement.
(synchondrosis) and cruciate ligaments caudoven-
trally (syndesmosis), giving it the required rigidity and
flexibility for the uneven mandibular movements
during mastication. On CT images the interdigitating
bony rugosities supporting the ligamentous structures
 are well visible. In case of abnormal mandibular posi-
tion (TMJ luxation, coronoid impingement), the sym-
 physeal surfaces can be angled, but should not separate
lateromedially or dorsoventrally (Figure 12.3).
Maxilla
The maxilla is similar in the cat and dog. Different
 breeds of cats and dogs will have different cephalic
indices resuling in ranges from short, broad heads
(brachycephalic breeds)  to normal, medium  heads
 (mesocephalic breeds) and long, narrow heads (longi-
 cephalic breeds).
Teeth (Figure 12.4)
Adult dogs and cats have a full set of 42 and 30 teeth
respectively (see Box 12.1). For a dental CT examina-
tion, it is important to be able to identify the correct
number and location of individual roots for each tooth.
The dental anatomic nomenclature is somewhat differ-
 ent in orientation and naming. The modified Triadan
dental numbering system has been developed for une-
quivocal tooth identification across veterinary species
and should be applied in CT reports.
 Box 12.1  Canine and feline dental anatomy
QO
Canine aduft dental
Feline aduit dental
chart
chart
 3l-1C-4P-2M
3I-1C-3P-1M
3I-1C-4P-3M
 3l-1C-2P-1M 
Dental anatomic orientations
Mesial/Dista!
Towards/away from midline of
dental arch
Coronal/Apica!
Towards/away from the tooth crown
Palatal or
Towards hard palate (maxillary
+
Lingua!
teeth) or tongue (mandibular teeth)
Buccal or
Towards the cheek (back teeth) or
Labial
lips (front teeth)
114 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Canine
Feline
101
201
102
D
202
103
203
204
105
206
106
107
08
109
M
209
110
411
410
M
809
409
308
Figure 12.5 Dental CT anatomy of the carmnassial teth.
408
Depicted are the distal root of 208 (P4, top) and the mesial
P
root of 309 (M, bottom). Pulp cavity (asterisk), dentine layer
407
R
(D), enamel layer of the crown (white arrow), tooth root apex
406
405
pue quauein ieuoponad asuapoday Supunoiins m
404
hyperdense lamina dura (black arrow), and the alveolar crest
(arrowhead), demarcating the top of the alveolar socket.
1Root
302
2
403
301
CT features
2Roots
402401
marcelKoralik
Specific skull changes seen on CT include shortened
3Roots
dimensions to the incisive and maxillary bones.
Figure 12.4 Triadan (outside teeth) and traditional ana-
tomic chart (inside teeth) of the canine (left) and feline (right)
Prognathism
dental nomenclature of the permanent teeth. The root
mumbers for each tooth are color coded.
Mandibular prognathism is rostral extension of the
mandible as compared to the maxilla and is often
 present in bulldog breeds. Maxilary prognathism is
In thin-sliced bone algorithm CT images it is possible 
rostral extension of the maxilla as compared to the
to identify all relevant dental and periodontal ana-
mandible.
tomic structures (Figure 12.5). Due to the curved shape
 of the roots and the peculiar dental aligrnment it is 
Trauma
essential to account for and follow each dental root on
subsequent images.
Fractures of the mandible and maxilla can occur in
dogs and cats from vehicular trauma or other head
trauma. Fractures are often comminuted and 3-D
I Sued jestms iog mydaq ane suonsuosan 
NON-DENTAL DISEASES
is also helpful to monitor fracture healing and callus
Malformation/Developmental
formation (for TMJ dislocation and fractures, see
Chapter 13).
Mucopolysaccharidosis (MPS)
CT features (Figure 12.6)
Radiographic skeletal changes in cats with MPS VI
Malalignment of mandible or maxilla.
include epiphyseal dysplasia, generalized osteoporo-
 Bone fragments separated from either the maxilla
sis, pectus excavatum, and vertebral and skull changes.
or mandible.
115 ORAL CAVITY, MANDIBLE, MAXILLA AND DENTAL APPARATUS
Figure 12.6 (A) Transverse CT image of a dog with head trauma demonstrating multiple nasal, maxillary and palatine
aai () 'snus ieuog at aul u eonay asapiaday are e ym uonsna srus ieuog ienaiea (a) pue 'saog
dimensional MIP reconstruction of a dog skull with a view of the left mandible with a comminuted fracture involving the
309 tooth (arrow).
·Adjacent soft tissue swelling with or without
 lodge in the oral cavity or the tongue base. More com-
hyperdense hematoma formation.
monly, such lesions are seen in the pharyngeal walls
3-D reconstruction  and/or  sagittal and  dorsal
 and retropharyngeal space (see Chapter 18).
plane reconstructions assist interpretation
1mm slice thickness through the oral cavity is
CT features (Figure 12.7)
necessary for quality reconstructions.
?
 Fluid density mass in the tongue, oral or pharyn-
geal wall that is hypodense in comparison to oral
mucosa.
Infection and inflammation
Rim contrast enhancement of the mass.
1
 Foreign body remnants may or may not be visible.
Oral and lingual abscesses
Wood is usually not or barely visible on CT images.
 Oral or lingual abscess formation can occur in dogs as
 Enlarged medial retropharyngeal lymph nodes (see
a result of chewing on sharp sticks that can break and
Chapter 17).
116 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
B
Figure 12.7 (A) Transverse post-contrast CT image of a dog with an orally penetrating foreign body abscess medial to the
le e jo aaeu i asiaasuei (a) "ui buouequa-isenuos e pue (v) Aaes asuaodq e ym juof reinqueuonodual nua
With two needle pieces (arrows) in the tongue base and surrounding soft tissue swelling.
Tonsillitis
Craniomandibular osteopathy
Tonsillitis is a relatively common disease in dogs and
See Chapter 16.
leads to uni- or bilateral swelling of the palatine tonsils
with protrusion from the tonsillar fossa. CT images
Neoplasia
may reveal moderate swelling and homogeneous con-
 trast enhancement, as well as mild lymphadenopathy.
 Mandibular and maxillary tumors
Approximately 6% of all canine and 3% of all feline
Osteomyelitis
cancers occur in the oral cavity. Squamous cell carci-
noma commonly occurs in the mandible and maxilla
Infections of the maxilla or mandible can occur second-
 of both dogs and cats. Tumors that occur in the dog
 ary to penetrating trauma, bite wounds and fractures.
but rarely in the cat include fibrosarcoma, malignant
melanoma, osteosarcoma, chondrosarcoma and tumors
CT features
of the periodontal ligament (epulides, see below).
·Bone lysis
focal
moth eaten.
tumors. Primary bone tumors are often highly osteo-
 Bone proliferation can be variable
 lytic and to a lesser extent osteoproductive, but typi-
 palisading
cally only affect one bone. Oral soft tissue neoplasia
spiculating
can invade adjacent bones and cause osteolysis and
expansile.
 periosteal reaction, which is usually not confined to
Bone medullary changes
one bone. It may be possible to distinguish these two
low-density areas
tumor groups based on monostotic/polyostotic behav-
 trabecular
coarsening
and focal
cortical
ior; however, the CT features of specific tumor types
erosions.
 are not pathognomonic.
Soft tissue thickening
lack of contrast enhancement can indicate
CT features (see also Chapter 13)
necrotic tissue.
Squamous cell carcinoma (Figures 12.8 and 13.13)
117 ORAL CAVITY, MANDIBLE, MAXILLA AND DENTAL APPARATUS
A
B
Figure 12.8 Transverse (A) post-contrast and (B) bone algorithm CT images of a cat with a squamous cell carcinoma of the
left mandible. Note the soft tissue mass effect and bony lysis of the left mandible (arrow).
 canine: rostral mandible, variable bony lysis,
 rare metastatic spread
 feline: mandible or maxilla, bony sclerosis and
 lysis, heterogeneous contrast enhancement and
 spread to local lymph nodes is common; other 
common sites include sublingual and maxillary
locations.
·Fibrosarcoma (Figure 12.9)
 often have bony involvement.
●·Malignant melanoma (Figure 12.10)
-  variable bone lysis
 often metastasis to regional lymph nodes and
lungs.
·Osteosarcoma (Figure 13.13)
monostotic
 usually highly osteolytic
varying degrees of periosteal reaction.
· Chondrosarcoma
 monostotic
Figure 12.9
Transverse post-contrast CT image of a dog
- usually highly osteolytic and osteoproductive
with left maxillary fibrosarcoma. Note the maxillary soft
tissue mass with adjacent lysis and tooth loss (arrow).
 varying degrees of periosteal reaction.
·Bone marrow neoplasia
－ focal(plasmacytoma) or  diffuse (multiple
myeloma)
 often arise from the temporo-occipital area of
highly osteolytic, punch-out lesions
the skull, although involvement of the mandi-
locally invasive
 ble, maxilla and hard palate have been reported
- usually lack of periosteal reaction.
 margins are well defined and little bony lysis is
·Mulilobular osteochondrosarcoma (Figure 13.13)
present
118  VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Irregularly
/ contrast-enhancing, can have non-
enhancing core.
Local muscle infiltration.
R
Lysis of hyoid, mandibular and other bones
possible.
DENTAL DISEASES
Malformation/Developmenta!
Abnormal tooth number and position
Auanbai uaal Areraumuadns 1o asuasqe [euasuo
occur in dogs and can be identified on CT. In associa-
tion with brachycephalic skull conformation, mala-
lignement of permanent teeth and persistence of
deciduous teeth can be seen.
Dental cystic lesions
reduced enamel epithelium in association with an
umerupted tooth crown. They are most commonly seen
Figure 12.10 Transverse post-contrast CT image of a dog
with right maxillary malignant melanoma has a soft tissue
around the first premolars in brachycephalic dogs. The
density mass with inhomogeneous contrast enhancement on
 no aa os mon on ano t s
buccal and palatal sides of the tooth (arrows), with bony lysis
 and lead to nasal obstruction or mandibular fracture.
of the right hard palate and maxilla.
Radicular cysts develop from the tooth root and can
become equally expansile.
CT features (Figure 12.12)
central portions of the tumor have a character-
Fluid-filled cyst in rostral maxilla or mandible, sur-
istic coarse granular density.
rounding premolar tooth crown (dentigerous cyst)
 or root (radicular cyst).
 Thin cyst lining, can be contrast-enhancing.
Palatal, tonsillar and lingual neoplasia
Compression  atrophy(
 of  neighboring
bony
The most common tumor of the soft palate is lym-
structures.
phoma, which is seen in dogs and cats. The most
 Possible pathologic fracture.
common tonsillar and lingual neoplasia in dogs is
squamous cell carcinoma, followed by other types of
carcinoma. The tongue base can be a site of ectopic
Dental fractures, extractions and
thyroid neoplasia (see Chapter 18). Most oral neopla-
endodontic treatment
sias are locally very invasive to other soft tissues and
Dental fracture lines usually follow distinct patterns of
bone, and have a high rate of regional metastases. CT
dental anatomy. The canine tooth can be impacted into
is excellent for exact lesion localization, margination
the nasal cavity. Exposed pulp will become necrotic
 and assessment of metastatic spread. An open-mouth 
CT series is best to prevent silhoueting with neighbor-
and dentine will cease to build up. Root fragments can
 be assessed for any reaction in the surrounding tissues.
ing soft tissues.
Endodontic material is radiopaque and treated pulp
cavities can be assessed for complete filling and late
CT features (Figure 12.11)
reactions. However, the beam hardening and high-
·Thickened,
 contrast-enhanced
soft
tissue
 density streak artifacts caused by this material can
neoplasia.
hamper proper assessment.
119 ORAL CAVITY, MANDIBLE, MAXILLA AND DENTAL APPARATUS
a tongue carcinoma. The mass is iregularly contrast enhancing with a non-enhancing core and is displacing the soft palate.
CT features (Figure 12.13)
 asn u An dmd u ram abedoe ·
Fissure lines through the tooth are well visible with
endodontic treatment.
thin-sliced technique.
 Impaction can dislodge the canine tooth into the
 Reactive periodontal bone loss in case of infection.
nasal cavity, where it can serve as a nidus for fungal
●Presence of root remnants possible.
rhinitis in dogs (see Figure 11.10).
120 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
+
Figure 12.12 (A) Transverse CT image of a small dentigerous cyst (arrow) in both rostral mandibles in a bulldog encroach-
ing the unerupted Pl. (B) Apical cyst of 109 (M') in a boxer dog that expands into the orbital cavity with a thin bony rim
(arrow). (C) Transverse post-contrast CT image shows the non-enhancing nature of the cyst fluid.
Caries, pulpitis, tooth root infection,
rounding alveolar bone. In periodontitis, diffuse osteo-
periodontitis
lytic and osteoproductive changes of the alveolar
socket can be seen. Root resorption can frequently be
Caries, cavitary loss of tooth crown material due
observed in feline odontoclastic resorptive lesions in
to bacterial infection, is relatively uncommon in 
older cats.
dogs and cats. Larger lesions can be readily identified 
panaui uaaq seu Aiaes dmd au JI saseunl I uo
CT features (Figure 12.14)
(pulpitis) due to trauma or ascending tooth root
 Odontolytic crown defect in caries.
infection, the pulp chamber may contain gas and
 Gas in pulpal chamber is a sign of an exposed and
over time become enlarged due to the cessation
infected pulp.
of dentine lay-down. The hallmark feature of a tooth
Thinning of the tooth wall indicates non-vital tooth
root infection is lysis of the root apex and the sur-
 due to previous pulpitis.
121  ORAL CAVITY, MANDIBLE, MAXILLA AND DENTAL APPARATUS
C
D
() d) s yn () a non iu  () a yot ym sd go s  ai hh ani
Root remnants of a recently incompletely extracted 109 (M') in a dog and (C) a 204 (C') with a crown fracture in a cat sustained
6 years earlier without evidence of reactive changes (image courtesy of Casey Jarrett). (D) 103 (IP; arrow) and 404 (Ci; arrow-
head) in a dog with mineral-dense endodontic filling material, causing high-density streak artifacts.
·Apical budding with an osteolucent bone socket
Periodontal and odontogenic neoplasia
 indicates tooth root infection. Fistulation into the
 nasal or orbital cavity or external facial swelling are
Epulides (previously described as adamantinomas)
further possible complications.
 are benign gingival proliferations originating from the
· Diffuse loss of periodontal bone and irregular
 pue shop u uouruos ane jeul juauei [euopoiad
periosteal reaction can be observed in severe
 rare in cats. Fibromatous and ossifying epulides do
periodontitis.
not invade the underlying bone, whereas acanthoma-
· Lack of a radiolucent dental ligament, dental neck
tous epulides are locally aggressive and do invade
erosion and root resorption can be seen in feline
 underlying bone. Odontogenic tumors originate from
odontoclastic resorptive lesions.
the dental lamina and are rare in dogs and cats.
122
 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
123 ORAL CAVITY, MANDIBLE, MAXILLA AND DENTAL APPARATUS
hucencies around two visible roots (arrowheads). (B) Caudal root of 208 (P4) in a dog with a periapical osteolucent abscess
non-vital pulp. Compared to 308, the tooth
wall is thinned. (F) Combination of marked lytic and productive periodontal bone changes in a cat with severe chronic peri-
odontal disease.
Figure 12.15 (A) Acanthomatous epulis in a dog. The soft tissue mass is locally invasive and destructive to the mandibular
symphysis. (B) Pre-contrast bone algorithm image of a cementifying fibroma around 109 (M'). This tumor arises from the
periodontal ligament and produces mildly dense cementum. (C) Post-contrast study of the same dog shows marked irregular
contrast enhancement. (D) Compound odontoma in a 9-month-old dog. Notice the expansile cystic nature of the mass con-
taining teeth.
124 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Inductive odontogenic tumors such as compound
FURTHER READING
odontomas produce a large amount of stroma, whereas
non-inductive types such as ameloblastoma do not.
Fayad LM, Carrino JAand Fishman EK(2007)Musculoskeletal
Odontomas are benign but expansile masses that
infection: role of CT in the emergency department.
 include enamel and dentin structures within the mass.
RadioGraphics 27: 1723-36.
Floyd MR (1991) The modified Triadan system: nomencla-
ture of veterinary dentistry. J Vet Dent 8: 18-19.
CT features (Figures 12.15, 13.10D)
Gendler A, Lewis JR, Reetz JA and Schwarz T (2010)
1
Epulis
Computed tomographic features of oral squamous cell
soft tissue mass adjacent to dental arcade
carcinoma in cats: 18 cases (2002-2008). J Am Vet Med Ass0c
usually marked contrast enhancement, but
236: 319-25.
often similar to normal strong gingival and 
George TF and Smallwood JE (1992) Anatomic atlas for com-
labial contrast enhancement
 puted tomography in the mesaticephalic dog: head and
neck. Vet Radiol LIltrasound 33: 217-40.
 subtle irregular periosteal reaction and osteoly-
Hudson JA, Montgomery RD, Hathcock JT and Jarboe 
sis in acanthomatous epulis
JM (1994) Computed  tomography  of craniomandi-
exclusively new bone formation in benign ossi-
bular osteopathy in a dog. Vet Radiot UIltrasound 35: 94-9.
fying epulides possible
Seiler G, Rossi F, Vignoli M, Cianciolo R, Scanlon T and Giger
 differentiation between benign and aggressive
U (2007) Computed tomographic features of skull osteo-
epulides and determination of tumor margin
myelitis in four young dogs. Vet Radiol Uultrasound 48:
remains difficult with CT.
544-9.
 Odontogenic neoplasia
 always involve dental structures
 dental structures within the mass as hallmark
of odontoma.
CHAPTER THIRTEEN
TEMPOROMANDIBULAR JOINT
AND MASTICATORY APPARATUS
Tobias Schwarz
IMAGING PROTOCOL
 both TMJs during mastication. Its elastic properties
allow an unequal hinge and transverse motion of the
TMJs required for the shearing action of the carnassial
See Chapter 12.
 teeth. Further details are given in Chapter 12.
CT: ANATOMY AND NORMAL
Masticatory muscles (Table 13.1)
VARIANTS
DISEASE FEATURES
Temporomandibular joint (TMJ)
Malformation/Developmental/
In dogs and cats the TMJ is a condylar synovial joint
Degenerative
formed by the mandibular condyle and the fossa man-
Canine TMJ dysplasia
dibularis of the squamous part of the temporal bone
with a ventrally extending retroarticular (synonym ret-
 This congenital malformation of the TMJ exists in two
roglenoid) process and a small tubercle extending from
forms (see Box 13.1).
the rostral fossa margin. The TMJ acts as a hinge joint
to open and close the mouth, but there is also a small
CT features (Figure 13.3)
degree of transverse motion to allow the shearing
action of the carnassial teeth.
 Curved to S-shaped condyle and fossa.
 In CT the bony components of the joint can be seen
Various shapes or absence of the retroarticular
in great detail. There are some shape variations of dif-
process.
ferent parts of the mandibular condyle in dogs. The
Stronger medial inclination of joint angle.
mandibular condyle completes ossification relatively
 Mandibular condyle subluxation possible.
late, so that its margins can appear irregular in up to
12 months old dogs (Figure 13.1). In cats the condyle
Temporomandibular degenerative joint disease
is more uniformly cylindric (Figure 13.2). There is an
and osteochondrosis
unnamed fossa in the rosrolateral aspect of the condyle
in the dog that can be pronounced in some breeds.
 Degenerative joint disease of the TMJ is sometimes
 Details of soft tissue components are poorly deline-
suspected in dogs with pain on mastication/reluctance
ated. The TMJ disk is not visible.
to chew in the absence of other dental and masticatory
Mandibular symphysis
lar joint margins and abnormaljoint laxity. Occasionally
when mineralized joint mice are seen with a matching
 The mandibular symphysis can be considered as the
defect in the articular surface, osteochondrosis is
 suspected.
saunes Auu 'ziemups sa q pauis fy pan 
@ 2011 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
125
126 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
l g as  a a m s  sr ()  P- e go f r t'h an
(g) (peaumoire) iaaal aues aul ie st uaureioy [eao auI (moire) auoq Tenodual aul jo essoy relnqipueu aul pue (n) aqpueu
aaeu paornsuonat Aesioa () (moine) ssanond reinoyreonan aul pue Aouaniauos juot au buensuouap aaeu tenaes
 demonstrating joint congruency and the coronoid process (arrow) of the mandible.
CT features (Figure 13.4)
of head trauma and open jaw lock. In most cases the
 Irregular bony articular margins.
mandibular condyle luxates rostrad. Subluxation can
 Subluxation on mandibular traction view.
 be associated with dysplastic and/or degenerative
Cystic defects in mandibular condyle.
e sr assnxa o Supeal sau
Mineralized joint mice with matching bony defects.
CT features
Dislocation and trauma
Luxation (Figure 13.5)
 empty mandibular fossa, usually rostrally dis-
Dislocation
placed condyle
TMJ dislocation can either be complete (luxation) or
dental malocclusion and mandibular shift
 partial (subluxation). It is usually seen as consequence 
- associated with open jaw lock:
127 TEMPOROMANDIBULAR JOINT AND MASTICATORY APPARATUS
Box 13.1  Canine TMJ dysplasia
A Luxating form
 Excessively flat mandibular condyle and fossa
 and absent retroarticular process. This very
rare form can be associated with TMJ subluxa-
tion, luxation and open jaw lock in dogs.
 B Chondrodystrophic malformation
Excessively  curved mandibular  condyle and
fossa, misshapen retroarticular process. This is
 commonly seen in chondrodystrophic breeds
 and is without clinical consequences.
Figure 13.2 Normal feline TMJ with a more cylindrical
mandibular condyle.
Table 13.1
Anatomic details of the canine and feline muscles of mastication.
Name
Insertion 
Function 
Fiber type 
Innervation 
Temporal 
Temporal fossa
 Medial and lateral aspect
Jaw closer
2M
 Mandibular nerve 
and zygomatic arch
 coronoid process of
ma ndible
Masseter
Zygomatic arch
 Lateral, ventral and caudal
Jaw closer
2M
Mandibular nerve 
 aspect mandibular ramus 
 Medial pterygoid 
 Pterygoid fossa
 Medial and caudal aspect 
Jaw closer
2M
 Mandibular nerve
 angular process of mandible 
 Lateral pterygoid
 Pterygoid fossa
 Medial TMJ
Medial TMJ
2M
 Mandibular nerve 
translation
Digastricus
Occipital bone
Caudoventral mandible 
Jaw opener
2A
 Mandibular and
facial nerves
· contralateral to locked coronoid process in
ateral in dogs, ipsilateral in cats). Etiologic theories
dogs
include excessive TMJ or mandibular symphysis laxity.
 usually ipsilateral to locked coronoid process 
pterygoid muscle spasm, old depression fractures or
in cats.
malformation of the zygomatic arch.
 Subluxation (Figure 13.3)
 best demonstrated by mandibular traction CT
CT protoco!
(see protocol)
 Whenever possible, the CT should be performed in
 sagittal reconstruction most helpful
the open jaw lock position.
 signs of underlying degenerative joint disease
1
A post-contrast series is very helpful to identify
or dysplasia may be visible.
 local inflammation caused by friction of current or
 previous coronoid displacement.
Open jaw lock
 A post-reduction series is helpful to ensure normal
sies pue sop ul Aouasiaua aiei e sI Yool Mef uado
TMJ articulation.
Usually, but not always, the condition is caused by the
CT features (Figure 13.6)
coronoid process of one mandible being dislodged lat-
erally to the zygomatic arch. As a consequence, one
 Unilateral lateral coronoid process displacement 
TMJ is also dislocated partially or completely (contral-
 lateral to zygomatic arch.
128 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
D
Figure 13.3 TMJ of a beagle with (A) abnormally curved surfaces of both articulating bones and (B) a very pronounced
retroarticular process. This type of TMJ dysplasia is common in chondrodystrophic dog breeds and may not be clinically
relevant. (C) Sagittal image of a dysplastic TMJ in a dog with masticatory pain. The articular surfaces are flat, there is no
retroarticular process and the mandibular condyle is subluxated caudally. (D) Under applied traction the same mandibular
condyle subluxates rostrally, indicating abnormal joint laxity.
C
pue fi an go suae juot Auoq reinhatn teraea (v) ued Aroiesns ym shop aan go saieay huaeul tel annbi
adjacent sclerosis, consistent with DJD. (B) Subchondral bone cyst in the mandibular condyle. (C) Subchondral bone defect
(arrow) and corresponding free bone fragments in the medial TMJ (arrowheads). The latter two cases are consistent with
osteochondrosis.
· Ipsi- (cats) or contralateral TMJ dislocation (partial
 nal neuropathy, lymphoma or juvenile masticatory
or full).
myositis (see below). Rare differentials include menin-
·Rim enhancement of masseter musculature adja-
 gioma, rabies and botulism.
cent to previously or currently displaced coronoid
CT features (Figure 13.7)
process.
●Marked bilaterally symmetrical masticatory muscle
atrophy.
Jaw drop
·Bilateral CT imaging features of the trigeminal
This is a rare clinical syndrome seen in dogs that
 nerve with neuropathy or lymphoma have not
been reported.
locked. It requires a bilateral flaccid mandibular nerve
·Chronic slow-growing bilateral trigeminal nerve
paralysis seen in conditions such as idiopathic trigemi-
 neoplasia could reveal enlarged contrast-enhancing
130 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
[aen isod Kadond aegs jo rnsn un sie
condylectomy. Mass lesions arising from the TMJ can
also cause ankylosis.
CT features (Figure 13.9)
 Irregular new bone formation around TMJ.
 Irregular joint surfaces, mineralized particles in
joint.
Limited joint extension.
False TMJ ankylosis
This is defined as an abnormal joint immobility due to
 extra-articular lesions that restrict the movement of the
TMJ. Such lesions can include:
 fractures of the mandible, zygomatic or temporal
Figure 13.5 Rostral luxation of the right mandibular
bone
condyle in a cat resulting in an empty mandibular fossa.
 old trauma and insinuating fibrosis 
osseous and soft tissue masses
aural, pharyngeal, retroorbital abscesses
trigeminal nerve roots/ganglia with enlarged oval 
zygomatic sialadenitis
foramina (bone atrophy).
masticatory myositis
tetanus.
TMJ fractures
CT features (Figures 12.7, 13.10-13.12, 14.4,
Fractures involving the mandibular condyle, fossa and
14.5, 14.19)
retroarticular process are an occasional consequence of
 Osseous lesion impinging on coronoid process of
head trauma and are often associated with other frac-
tures of the mandible and zygomatic arch. Most are
 the mandible in open mouth position.
 oriented in a sagittal plane and are best seen on trans-
Osseous masses can have a defect in surface cor-
verse plane images.
 responding to mandible that is sawing into mass.
 Periosteal reaction along impinged mandibular
CT features (Figure 13.8)
surface.
Post-contrast, open mouth position CT scan can
 Incomplete non-displaced fissure or fracture with
reveal impinging soft tissue enhanced mass or
usually displaced lateral condyle or fossa frag-
 contrast-enhanced reactive soft tissue between
ment; fossa is often comminuted.
impinging bones.
 Retroarticular process fractures are often in trans-
verse plane orientation, best seen on sagittal plane
images.
Infection and inflammation
Masticatory muscle infection and abscessation
TMJ ankylosis
 Infection and abscess formation of the masticatory
This is a condition occasionally seen in outdoor cats
muscles are seen in dogs as a result of oral and pha-
with a history of confirmed or suspected old trauma.
ryngeal traumatic lacerations, with or without a
The cats are unable to open their mouth, and have
migrating foreign body penetrating the retro-orbital
varying degrees of fibrosis and new bone formation
 space or mandibular area or salivary glands. External
around one or both TMJs. The condition is thought to
 injuries and bite wounds leading to masicatory and
be the end stage of traumatic hemarthrosis, possibly
 periaural abscesses are seen in dogs and cats.
secondary to a fall from a height. If the condition is
Cellulitis, sialadenitis and otitis externa/media can
unilateral, then a condylectomy is posible, whereas
spread into surrounding masticatory muscles.
131 TEMPOROMANDIBULAR JOINT AND MASTICATORY APPARATUS
B
Figure 13.6 Transverse CT images of a cat with open jaw lock. (A) The coronoid process of the left mandible is dislocated
euao yim juaaueuua alosn ralass mous saseu iseuos-isod (a) (moire) yre sueoz aul on teiaiet paoot pue
necrosis indicating chronic friction. (C) There is ipsilateral rostral subluxation of the mandibular condyle and (D) the man-
 dibular symphysis is subluxated. Mandibular symphyseal laxity is the most likely cause of jaw lock in this cat. Compare with
Figure 12.3C.
CT features (Figures 12.7 and 13.11)
Canine masticatory myositis
● Marked local soft tissue swelling with a post-
This is an immune-mediated disorder in which dogs
contrast contrast-enhanced rim and a large non-
 develop auto-antibodies against type 2M muscle fibers,
enhancing core.
which are exclusively found in the masticatory muscles
Abscess  capsule
 shape  reflects  gravitational
(the digastricus muscle with 2A fibers remains unaf-
fected) Itis predominantly seen in large breed, youg
propensity.
Radiodense foreign body.
to middle-aged dogs that present initially with pain on
?
 Patchy muscular contrast enhancement in case of
n   r   n 
infectious spread.
Audone aosnu Aroieonseu pue Suuado me!
 Mandibular or medial retropharyngeal lymphnode
There is a juvenile form of masticatory myositis seen
enlargement.
 in Cavalier King Charles spaniel puppies with bilateral
132 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
marked osteolytic tendencies, which in the case of
primary bone tumors are confined to one bone.
Mulilobular osteochondrosarcoma (synonyms chon-
droma rodens, mulilobular tumor of bone) is a predomi-
nantly proliferative bone tumor that can arise from the
bones of the TMJ. Other tumors in the vicinity of
the TMJ can cause false ankylosis (see above and
Chapter 12).
CT features (Figure 13.13)
Osteolysis of TMJ or parts of it.
 Irregular periosteal reaction.
Adjacent contrast-enhancing soft tissue swelling.
 Mass lesion resricting coronoid process motion.
Mandibular
and/or
 medial retropharyngeal
lymphadenopathy.
FURTHER READING
Figure 13.7  Severe generalized masticatory muscle atrophy
in a 4-month-old Cavalier King Charles spaniel with atypical
DickieAM, Schwarz TandSullivanM(2002)
'doap mel ym Suuasaid sursoau Aoiesns
Temporomandibular joint morphology in the Cavalier
King Charles spaniel. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 43: 260-6.
Mayhew PD, Bush WW and Glass EN (2002) Trigeminal
masticatory muscle atrophy. This poorly understood
neuropathy in dogs: a retrospective study of 29 cases
condition results in jaw drop (see above).
(1991-2000). J Am Anir Hosp Assoc 38: 262-70.
 Definitive diagnosis requires biopsy, for which CT
Meomartino L, Fatone G, Brunetti A, Lamagna F and Potenta
 10 paoaeum proae on mydrau Airenonied aq uen 
necrotic areas.
of seven cases. J Small Anim Pract 40: 7-10.
Pitcher GDC and Hahn CN (2007) Atypical masticatory
CT features (Figures 13.7 and 13.12)
 muscle myositis in three cavalier King Charles spaniel lit-
termates. J Small Anim Pract 48: 226-8.
Swelling and/or atrophy of masticatory muscles.
 Platt SR, McConnell JF, Garosi LS, Ladlow J, De Stefani A and
 Patchy muscular contrast enhancement in swollen
 Shelton GD (2006) Magnetic resonance imaging in the 
muscles, can have non-enhancing core.
diagnosis of canine inflammatory myopathies in three
 Restrictive jaw opening in absence of osseous
dogs. Vet Radiol UIltrasound 47: 532-7.
restrictive lesions.
Reiter AM (2004) Symphysiotomy, symphysiectomy, and
Mild mandibular 
 medial  retropharyngeal
 intermandibular arthrodesis in a cat with open-mouth jaw
or：
lymphadenopathy.
 Juvenile masticatory myositis is characterized by
147-58.
 Reiter AM and Schwarz T (2007) Computed tomographic
 marked bilaterally symmetric muscle atrophy.
-666l) sases :ssop ur shisour Aiopesnseut jo aouereadde
2006). J Am Vet Med Assoc 231: 924-30.
Neoplasia
 Schwarz T, Weller R, Dickie AM, Konar M and Sullivan
M. (2002) Imaging of the canine and feline temporo-
Neoplasia involving the TMJ is rare in dogs and cats.
mandibular joint: a review. Vet Radiol Uultrasound 43:
m soul aaissane mon-isy uao ane asa
85-97.
Figure 13.8 Features of TMJ fractures in dogs. (A) Sagittal fracture of the medial mandibular condyle compartment due to
a penetrating metal foreign body (hunting arrow tip). (B) Comminuted fracture of the mandibular fossa and fissure of the
mandibular condyle. (C) Dorsally oriented chip fracture of the mandibular condyle.
 Figure 13.9  Bilateral TMJ ankylosis in a cat with complete loss of normal joint surfaces.
134
VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Figure 13.10 Features of false TMJ ankylosis in dogs resulting inability to fully open their mouth. (A) Dorsal plane image
 of a fused fractured left zygomatic arch and mandibular coronoid process (image courtesy of Massimo Vignoli). (B) An old
 mandible, focal masseter muscle contrast enhancement (arrow) and (C) coronoid processimpingement on the zygomatic arch
on the open-mouth CT. (D) A cementifying fibroma arising from the M' periodontal ligament restricting rostral motion of the
coronoid process of the right mandible. (E) An expansile cholesteatoma of the right middle ear restricting the right TMJ.
Figure 13.11 Left temporal muscle abscess from a bite
wound in a dog with contrast-enhancing rim and non-
Figure 13.12 Post-contrast image of a dog with chronic
enhancing content. The ventral propensity of the abscess
 active masticatory myositis. There is right temporalis muscle
material also causes impingement of the coronoid process of
 atrophy, left temporalis, masseter and bilateral pterygoid
the left mandible.
muscle swelling with patchy areas of contrast enhancement.
136 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Figure 13.13 Neoplasia affecting the TMJ in a cat and two dogs. (A) An aggressive squamous cell carcinoma in a cat with
marked osteolysis of the right calvarium, mandibular fossa and condyle. (B) Aggressive osteosarcoma in a dog causing oste-
 olysis exclusively in the right mandible. (C) A multilobular osteochondrosarcoma arising from and invading the left mandibu-
lar condyle causing ankylosis of the TMJ.
CHAPTER FOURTEEN
ORBITA, SALIVARY GLANDS
AND LACRIMAL SYSTEM
Susanne Boroffka (orbita), Sophie Dennison,
Tobias Schwarz and Jimmy Saunders
IMAGING PROTOCOL
acrimal apparatus. Six extraocular muscles originate in
the vicinity of the optic foramen at the apex of the
orbital cone, the seventh arises from a small depression
See Table 14.1.
in the palatine bone.
 The optic nerve is divided in four regions. The optic
THE ORBITA
nerve originates from the optic chiasma (intracranial
part), passes through the optic canal/foramen with the
CT: anatomy and normal variants
internal ophthalmic artery and vein (intracanalicular
part) to enter the orbit (intraorbital part) and join
The eye is located in the orbit and consists of two parts
that are embedded in orbital fat and other soft tissues:
the retina (intraocular part). The optic nerve is sur-
the ocular globe and the ocular adnexa. The optic
rounded by cerebrospinal fluid within the optic nerve
sheath.
nerve connects the eye with the brain.
The oculomotor, trochlear, abducens and ophthal-
The orbit is mainly osseous and six bones (frontal,
lacrimal, maxillary, zygomatic, palatine and sphenoid)
mic branch of the trigeminal nerves, the anastomotic
branch of the external ophthalmic artery and orbital
form its margin. The variation in the shape and size of
venous plexus pass through the orbital fissure and
the skull in different breeds is considerable. For
 supplies the ocular adnexa. The low atenuation of the
example, brachycephalic breeds have a much shal-
 orbital fat facilitates the identification of the optic
lower bony orbit than dolicho- or mesaticephalic
nerve, extraocular muscles, zygomatic gland and
breeds.
medial pterygoid muscle. The fascial structures of the
 The ocular globe consists of the intraocular struc-
orbit, the bulbar sheath (vagina bulbi) and the perior-
tures and conjunctivae. The lens is a hyperdense,
bital sheath cannot be identified.
poorly delineated oval structure, and the anterior
chamber and vitreous are hypodense. The ciliary body
and posterior chamber are not visible, whereas the iris
may be visible as a very thin line anterior to the lens.
Feline anatomical specificities
The optic disk may be seen as a small, round, hyper-
The feline orbit is only slightly larger than the
dense rim with a hypodense core. Sclera, choroid and
globe. The bony floor consists of only a small
retina form a well-defined ring enhancement after con-
 part of maxillary bone holding the last molar
trast medium injection, but cannot be differentiated
teeth. The extraocular muscles and zygomatic
from one another. The ocular adnexa consist of the
salivary gland are small.
seven extraocular muscles, the eyelids and the nasol-
Veterinary Computed Tomography, First Edition. Edited by Tobias Schwarz, Jimmy Saunders
@ 2011 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
137
138 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Table 14.1
CT imaging protocol (intravenous contrast study: standard protocol; see Chapter 5)
Pre- and
 Series
post-contrast
Bone
 Dorsal oblique post contrast 
Decubitus
Ventral
 Special positioning 
 Hard palate parallel with table 
43-459 from plane parallel to skull base
 Scan margins
 Rostral to eyelids → Medial 
 Rostral orbita (→ Rostral tympanic bullae 
retropharyngeal lymph nodes 
Voltage (kVp)
120
Current (mAs)
100
Tube rotation time (s)
1-2
 Slice width (mm)
3
1
Sequential slice interval (mm)
1
 Ker nel frequency
Medium
High 
Medium
Window level (HU)
+80-100
+500
+100
Window width (HU)
150-200
3000
150
Disease features
Endophthalmitis is mostly septic and induced by
 bacteria, virus or fungi entering the eye through the
Malformation/Developmental: Anophthalmos and
ocular blood supply, the cerebrospinal fluid and optic
microphthalmos
nerve, or by perforation of the cornea, conjunctiva
True anophthalmos is due to failure of the optic vesicle
 and/or sclera. Endophthalmitis may also be caused by
ohdas aq Aeu il ases sul u eumen, renso ioanp e
thalmos the optic vesicle starts to develop but stops or
(corneal ulceration/perforation, lens-induced, intraoc-
degenerates, leaving the fetus/young animal with
ular surgery, ocular trauma, primary neoplasia) or
 only residual ocular tissue. In microphthalmos a small
aseptic (cataract, ruptured lens capsule, retained native
 globe is present within the orbital soft tissue. In young
lens material, toxic agents). Feline infectious peritoni-
animals that fail to develop, whose eyes becomes
tis may be a cause in the cat.
phthisical or who lose an eye due to trauma and/or
inflammation, orbital development will be markedly
CT features (Figures 14.1 and 14.2)
reduced.
Deformation of the globe.
Retinal detachment.
Strong heterogeneous contrast enhancement and
CT features
thickening of the intraocular structures and scle-
True anophthalmos: absence of ocular tissue,
roretinal rim
extraocular muscles and lacrimal glands and
 Loss of definition of the exraocular muscles and
ducts.
fat if orbital cellulitis ensues.
 Secondary anophthalmos: residual ocular tissue,
 Foreign material may be identified depending on
extremely small eyes.
its attenuation properties.
Microphthalmos: abnormally small globe, extraoc-
ular muscles and lacrimal glands.
Orbital asymmetry (if unilateral), reduced size of
Orbital cellulitis and abscessation
the bony orbital wall and zygomatic arch.
Cellulitis, inflammation/infection of the orbital fat, is
commonly caused by trauma, foreign bodies, exten-
sion of sinusitis, bone sequestration and tooth root
Endophthalmitis and panophthalmitis
abscesses, periodontal or endodontic disease. Also
Endophthalmitis is an inflammation of the intraocular
hematogeneous, transscleral or transmucosal (con-
cavities affecting both anterior and posterior ocular
junctiva, oral, nasal) injury or disease may result in
segments. Extension of the inflammation to the three
 inoculation of the orbital space with infectious organ-
layers of the globe is called panophthalmitis.
isms. An orbital cellulitis may be diffuse or may
139 ORBITA, SALIVARY GLANDS AND LACRIMAL SYSTEM
 Extraocular polymyositis
Uni- or bilateral extraocular polymyositis is a rare,
 immune-mediated inflammatory myopathy affecting
mostly
young female
edogs.
 Golden retrievers,
Doberman and Springer spaniels seem predisposed.
CT features (Figure 14.5)
?
Acute polymyositis
 bilateral rostral displacement of the globes with
retraction of the upper eyelids (exophthalmos)
 bilateral, symmetrical thickening of the optic
nerve and/or extraocular muscles
loss of definition of the extraocular muscles,
 optic nerve and periorbital fat
Figure 14.1  Adult dog with pyogranulomatous orbital cel-
strong and heterogeneous contrast enhance-
lulitis. Post-contrast transverse CT image shows whispy and
ment of the extraocular muscles
heterogeneous contrast-enhancing soft tissue surrounding
 thickening may be followed up to intracranial
the right globe (asterisks) with associated exophthalmos.
 optic nerve with contrast enhancement of the
 Extraocular muscles cannot be identified clearly due to oblit-
meninges.
eration of the orbital fat (image courtesy of the Department
 Chronic polymyositis
of Surgical and Radiological Sciences, UC Davis).
caudal
 displacement
of
the
globe
(enophthalmos)
 atrophy of the optic nerve and extraocular 
muscles.
 produce a focal mass lesion that should be differenti-
 ated from a neoplasia. Cellulitis may result in an orbital
 Masticatory/Eosinophilic myositis (see also
 abscess or zygomatic sialoadenitis.
Chapter 13)
Foreign bodies commonly penetrate the orbital
cavity via the facial skin or oral cavity, resulting in
Masticatory /eosinophilic
myositis
predominantly
inflammation, i
infection
and 
abscessation
with
 affects large breed dogs with a predisposition for
exophthalmus.
 young German shepherd dogs, Weimaraners, Shetland
sheepdogs, labrador and golden retrievers. It affects
CT features (Figures 14.3 and 14.4)
the temporal, masseter and pterygoid muscles, and is
 Rostral displacement of the globe (exophthalmos)
bilateral in most cases. Cellular and humoral-mediated
and/or of the eyelids.
destruction of type IM myofibers is thought to be the
+1
 Diffuse loss of definition of the extraocular muscles
causative factor It has not been reported in cats.
and optic nerve through obscuration of the peri-
orbital and orbital fat.
CT features in acute masticatory/eosinophilic
 Diffuse heterogeneous contrast enhancement of
myositis
the orbital soft tissues or mass lesion in the orbit
 Acute masticatory /eosinophilic myositis
 that enhances either homogeneously (i.e. pseudo-
 bilateral displacement of the globes rostrally
tumor) or with ring contrast enhancement (i.e.
(exophthalmos)
abscess).
 swelling of the temporal, masseter, and ptery-
 Foreign bodies may be seen sufficiently dense
goid muscles
(metal, bone, glass, stone) or as a filling defect sur-
heterogeneous contrast enhancement of the
rounded by contrast-enhanced tissue (wood,
affected muscles
plastic).
一
 third eyelid protrusion
Fungal cellulitis, such as aspergillosis, has been
swelling of the eyelids.
一
associated with bone lysis.
 Chronic masticatory /eosinophilic myositis
+1
Hypodense area around the root(s) of affected
bilateral caudal displacement of the globe
teeth with possible widening of the pulp cavity.
(enophthalmos)
Sclerosis of the surrounding maxillary bone of the
 atrophy of the temporal, masseter and ptery-
affected tooth/teeth.
goid muscles.
140 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Figure 14.2 Adult dog with severe right-sided panuveitis
caused by a cat scratch. (A) Transverse CT image shows a
severe soft tissue swelling surrounding the right globe with
associated exophthalmos. (B) Post-contrast transverse CT
image shows a severely deformed right globe and the lens is
luxated (white arrow). There are several contrast-enhanced
linear structures within the vitreous representing a detached
retina (arrowhead) and vitreous membranes (black arrow).
No bony involvement is noted. (C) Post-contrast dorsal-
oblique reformatted CT image shows the whispy, ill-defined
 and heterogeneous contrast-enhancing soft tissues surround-
ing the severely deformed right globe with associated exoph-
thalmos. The extraocular muscles and optic nerve cannot be 
identified due to obliteration of the orbital fat and inflamma-
tion tissue. The iris (white arrow) is severely thickened and
contrast enhancing due to iritis. The lens (black arrow) is
displaced posterior and medial. Part of the detached retina
is visible at the lateral aspect (arrowhead).
A
 Optic neuritis
Optic neuritis is an inflammation of one or both optic
nerves and may be a primary disease or secondary to
systemic central nervous system disorder. Causes are
idiopathic, systemic mycosis, canine distemper, feline 
infectious
peritonitis, neoplasia,
;granulomatous-
meningo encephalitis or toxoplasmosis.
CT features
 In most cases, the orbital structures, including the
optic nerve, appear normal.
Thickening of the optic nerve with contrast
enhancement of the optic nerve sheath may be
visible.
B
Cystic orbital disease
Orbital cysts (see also Dacryops below)
-n ro lda  w ase  sis gn
lar tissue within the orbit and/or surrounding tissue,
such as lacrimal gland, gland of the nictitating mem-
 brane, zygomatic salivary gland or mucosa of the para-
C
 nasal sinus, conjunctiva or nasolacrimal apparatus.
Causes are trauma, blocked salivary ducts and/or
infection.
Trauma
CT features (Figure 14.6 - salivary cyst)
 Enlargement of the affected gland or tissue.
Traumatic proptosis of the globe
 Space-occupying,  often  peripherally
contrast-
In proptosis, the globe is displaced rostrally, either
enhancing (ring enhancement), cystic structure
through forces displacing the globe itself or through
containing non-enhancing fluid.
 orbital hemorrhage and edema caused by forward
Possible loss of definition of the extraocular muscles
stretching of the orbital tissues. Brachycephalic animals
'y pue
 are predisposed.
141 ORBITA, SALIVARY GLANDS AND LACRIMAL SYSTEM
Figure 14.4  Adult dog with a zygomatic sialoadenitis with
 sialocele and/or abscess formation. Post-contrast transverse
CT shows an enlarged, fluid-filled and septated left zygo-
matic gland (asterisk). Note the ring enhancement of the 
more dorsal aspect of the gland.
Figure 14.5 Adult dog with extraocular myositis.
Transverse CT image shows bilaterally ill-defined symmetri-
 cal swelling of ocular muscles (asterisks) with obliteration of
the orbital fat.
Figure 14.3 Adult dog with orbital foreign body and sec-
ondary abscessation. (A) Transverse CT image shows a large
 Mass effect caudal to the globe with disintegration
left orbital abscess extending to the temporal muscle (aster-
 of the normal orbital anatomy.
isks), causing marked exophthalmos. (B) Orally penetrated
very dense (glass material) foreign body (arrow) in the left 
pterygoid muscle causing swelling and (C) enhancement
Orbital fractures
(peiay uolg jo Asajano aseu) (smoie) iseyuos isod
 Fractures of the frontal, temporal and zygomatic bones 
may occur after head trauma and may cause exoph-
CT features (Figure 14.7)
thalmos or enophthalmos, strabismus, orbital and
·Rostral displacement of the globe beyond the bony
periocular hemorrhage, and facial asymmetry.
orbital rim with entrapment of the eyelids,
Fractures involving the paranasal sinus may cause
asymmetry.
orbital emphysema with crepitus.
142 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Figure 14.6
 Transverse CT image. A salivary cyst (asterisk)
arising from the left sublingual gland that extends to the
 cranioventral neck (ranula).
Figure 14.7 Dorsally reconstructed CT image in an adult
CT features (Figure 14.8)
dog with severe proptosis of the right eye.
 Rostral or caudal displacement of the globe.
 Mass effect caudal to the globe with disintegration
 of the normal orbital anatomy.
 Fractures of the frontal, temporal and/or zygo-
Retinal detachment.
Extraocular extension, associated distorsion or dis-
matic bone, including infraction fractures of the
placement of the globe.
paranasal sinus and/or nasal cavity.
 Usually strong, homogeneous contrast enhance-
Extension of soft tissue swelling, gas in the soft 
ment of the mass.
tissues.
Identification of hyperdense hemorrhage.
Assessment of involvement of ocular structures,
Feline restrictive orbital myofibroblastic
 optic nerve and brain.
sarcoma (FROMS)
This is a rare, aggressive, progressively fibrosing tumor
Neoplasia
in cats originating from the periorbital subcutis previ-
Ocular neoplasia
ously known as feline orbital pseudotumor. It leads to
eyelid thickening and lagophthalmus and almost
Intraocular neoplasia may mimic or induce ocular
 always extends to the contralateral eye, often to the lips
inflammatory disease also causing hyphema and/or
and other facial tissues, and in a minority of cases to
secondary glaucoma. Ocular tumors most commonly
the gums and palate. The disorder shows quite aggres-
arise from the iris and ciliary body, and less frequently
od r uq as rq a
 from the conjunctiva, including the nictitating mem-
brane, the cornea or the choroidea. In dogs, primary
CT features (Figures 14.10 and 14.11)
and secondary intraocular tumors occur in equal fre-
Loss of retrobulbar fat layers with diffuse soft
oumi remsonu Aeud juanbay isou aul Asuanb
tissue proliferation.
is iridociliary melanoma, which usually occurs unilat-
Sdleral and episcleral thickening of the eyeball.
erally Other uveal tumors are adenomas or adenocarci-
 Ex- or enophthalmos eyelid thickening.
nomas. Lymphosarcoma is the most common metastatic
 Moderate contrast enhancement of the altered
ocular tumor in dogs and cats and may occur uni- or
structures.
bilaterally. Extraocular extension rarely occurs.
 Lysis of the bony structures adjacent to the orbit.
CT features (Figure 14.9)
Orbital neoplasia
 Intraocular mass lesion arising from the intraocu-
lar structures.
In dogs and cats more than 90% of orbital tumors are
 Buphthalmos if secondary glaucoma occurs.
malignant and regional infiltration, including the
143 ORBITA, SALIVARY GLANDS AND LACRIMAL SYSTEM
A
Figure 14.8 Three-month-old dog with multiple fractures involving the orbit. (A) Transverse CT image shows a complex
 fracture involving the frontal, lacrimal, maxillary, palatine and zygomatic bones. (B) Transverse CT image (same level as A)
shows the left globe dorsally displaced by the bone fragments originating from the zygomatic arch and surrounding hematoma.
central nervous system, is seen very often. Various
 -[enauu Aered 'asuedxa seuouuau sndo
types of orbital tumor have been reported with oste-
ized soft tissue mass posterior to the eye that can
Osarcoma, mast cell tumor, reticulum cell sarcoma, fib-
be tracked to the optic nerve. There is often signifi-
rosarcoma and neurofibrosarcoma being the most
cant bone atrophy of the orbital wall and optic
 common canine primary tumors. In cats, squamous
canal.
 cell sarcoma occurs most often. Nasal tumors may also
invade the orbit via destruction of the thin medial
THE SALIVARY GLANDS
orbital wall.
 Optic nerve tumors include neurofibrosarcoma,
CT: anatomy and normal variants
glioma and meningioma. Optic nerve sheath meningi-
 oma may be osteolytic and invade the surrounding
The salivary glands can be seen on CT, but the normal
tissues.
 papillae and ducts are not visualized. Salivary glands 
are normally strongly contrast enhancing structures,
CT features (Figures 14.12-14.16)
rendering them well visible (Figure 14.17).
单
 Space-occupying mass lesion with well-defined
borders within the orbit.
The zygomatic gland is located in the pterygopala-
 Homogeneous or heterogeneous contrast enhance-
 tine fossa lateral to the pterygoid muscle origin and
ment of the mass lesion.
has an irregular trapezoid shape.
 Rostral or caudal displacement of the globe with or
'pues Aieaes isasq a s pue emqruer au
without indention.
located caudally to the mandibular ramus and
 Displacement of the extraocular muscles and optic
is oval.
nerve.
 The parotid gland surrounds the external ear canal
 Often definition of the orbital fat and soft tissues is
ventrally, is dorsally adjacent to the mandibular
preserved.
gland and has the shape of the croissant. It can be
Tumor extension into the surrounding soft tissues
difficult to differentiate its margins from the man-
and/or paranasal sinuses (lysis of the medial bony
dibular gland.
orbital wall and/or zygomatic bone).
 The sublingual gland is small and difficult to iden-
Enlargement and heterogeneous contrast enhance-
tify on CT. It is located at the caudal level of
ment of the mandibular lymph nodes.
the mandible between the tongue base and the
144 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
B
Figure 14.9 Adult cat with intraocular melanoma. (A) Transverse CT image shows a hyperdense intraocular mass lesion
(arrows) most pronounced at the ventromedial aspect of the globe. (B) Post-contrast transverse CT image shows marked
contrast enhancement of the mass.
Figure 14.10  Adult cat with feline restrictive orbital myofi-
broblastic sarcoma. Post-contrast transverse CT image shows
strong contrast-enhancing orbital soft tissue proliferation
restricting the right globe (arrows).
Figure 14.11 Adult cat with feline restrictive orbital myofi-
broblastic sarcoma. Transverse CT image shows extensive
nasal and palatal osteolysis (asterisk). Note the left eye has
been removed surgically.
145 ORBITA, SALIVARY GLANDS AND LACRIMAL SYSTEM
mylohyoideus muscle, which attaches at medial
 [a a puadsns on saa yoq jo poadse
floor of the oral cavity. The sublingual gland has
mono- and polystomatic compartments that cannot
 be differentiated without sialography.
Disease features
Inflammation/Infection
Salivary gland enlargement in limbic epilepsy
(hypersialosis)
 This is an idiopathic, poorly understood condition char-
acterized by hypersalivation, enlarged painful mandib-
ular salivary glands, retching, vomiting and behavioral
Figure 14.12
Adult dog with orbital anaplastic sarcoma.
abnormalities that respond to phenobarbitol treatment.
Post-contrast transverse CT image shows an ill-defined and
mildly heterogeneously contrast-enhancing focal soft tissue
CT features
 mass (asterisk) dorsomedial and caudal to the eye, causing
Symmetrically
Kieaies  emqpueu  pasequa 
mild left-sided exophthalmos. The mass is adjacent to the
glands.
frontal bone cortex and there is a small accumulation of flhuid
Absence of other salivary gland abnormalities.
within the dependent frontal sinus (arrow).
Figure 14.13  Adult dog with intracranial meningioma extending via the optic canal, orbital fissureand rostral alar foramen
into the orbit. (A) Post-contrast CT image shows a wispy, ill-defined and heterogeneous contrast-enhancing mass lesion just
caudal to the globe (asterisk). (B) Dorsal-oblique reformatted CT image shows the extension towards and through the rostral
alar foramen, orbital fissure and optic canal towards the left base of the brain at the level of the pre-sphenoid and basisphenoid
bones (image courtesy of the Department of Surgical and Radiological Sciences, UC Davis, USA).
146 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Figure 14.16  Adult dog with nasal and orbital adenocarci-
noma. CT image shows a large heterogeneous contrast-
enhancing,ill-defined softissue mass occupying the majority
 of the right nasal cavity (asterisk). There is destruction of the
frontal bone of the orbit (arrows). The mass lesion extends
Figure 14.14  Adult dog with optic meningioma. Transverse 
to the ventromedial aspect of the orbital space causing mild
CT image shows a large partially mineralized optic menin-
right-sided exophthalmos (image courtesy of the Department
 gioma (asterisk), causing exophthalmos and adjacent bone 
of Surgical and Radiological Sciences, UC Davis, USA).
Xudo.e
B
Figure 14.15 (A) Post-contrast transverse CT image of an irregularly contrast-enhancing nictitating gland carcinoma (aster-
isk) causing indention of the globe and exophthalmos. (B) Corresponding photograph of the enucleated eye.
147 ORBITA, SALIVARY GLANDS AND LACRIMAL SYSTEM
Figure 14.17 Contrast-enhanced transverse CT images of
the normal canine salivary glands. (A) The parotid gland (P)
surrounds the ventral ear base. Ventral to it is the large man-
dibular gland (M). (B) The zygomatic gland (Z) is located
-uaaonsor aul u (1) ugno aos pioAiaid aul ot Aeiait
 tral aspect of the orbital cavity. (C) The sublingual gland
aul pue aseq anuot aul uaamiaq paieoot st (moire am)
 myelohoid muscle attachment (black arrow) at the medial
 mandible.
Sialolithiasis
 Concretions in the salivary glands and/or ducts can
-ul aq ueo Kaui sae L uo uaas aq Aieuoisesoo
dental or be related with an obstructive sialocele
formation.
CT features (Figure 14.18)
 Sialoliths are usually only slightly hyperdense and
can be difficult to identify on CT.
?
 If parenchymal, usually in center of gland.
Sialadenitis and abscessation
Inflammation of the salivary glands is occasionally
-08<z) uogoajul jooi ylool 01 Xiepuonas shop u uaas
matic gland), penetrating injuries or extension of infec-
u pue an jo Aixond an ui sassanond sno
sialadenitis there is often inflammation of the neigh-
 boring masticatory muscles.
CT features (Figure 14.19)
 Diffuse loss of silhouette of the salivary gland.
-usiau u uogenuane ul aseaDu Auoied 1o asn
boring muscles and fat.
Abscesses may or may
 not have demarcated
 contrast-enhancing rim.
 Sialocele/Sialoadenitis
 A sialocele is a swelling of conmective tissue consisting
of collected mucin due to a ruptured salivary gland
duct usually caused by local trauma in the case of
mucus extravasation phenomenon, and an obstructed
salivary duct usually due to sialolithiasis in the case of
a mucus retention cyst. Most commonly the sublingual
 glands are affected by this condition and the cyst
 extends to the ventral neck, giving the animal a frog-
like neck shape (hence the name ranula).
A zygomatic sialoadenitis is an inflammation of the
Aaas aui uo Supuada puels Areaies seuoskz
of the disease there may be ocular involvement.
148 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
LACRIMAL SYSTEM
CT: anatomy and normal variants
The lacrimal system is composed of secretory and
excretory portions. The secretory portion produces lac-
rimal fluid and consists of the lacrimal gland, superfi-
cial gland of the third eyelid and accessory lacrimal
glands. The excretory portion, or nasolacrimal drain-
 puncta, dorsal and ventral lacrimal canaliculi, and the
nasolacrimal duct. Dogs do not have a distinct lacrimal
sac. The dorsal and ventral canaliculi conjoin in dogs.
The proximal 50% of the nasolacrimal duct is encased
within an osseous canal contained within the lacrimal
and maxillary bones, extending from the lacrimal
foramen to the level of the conchal crest. Once the duct
exits the nasolacrimal canal, it courses deep to the
nasal mucosa along the medial aspect of the maxilla,
terminating on the ventrolateral floor of the nasal ves-
tibule at the inferior lacrimal punctum.
 In meso- and dolichocephalic dogs, the nasolacrimal
duct courses more or less horizontally through the
Figure 14.18 Transverse CT image. Close-up of a left
 nasolacrimal canal and nasal mucosa, parallel to the
canine zygomatic gland containing two mineral concretions
hard palate. However, brachycephalic animals with
(arrow). This was an incidental finding.
facial foreshortening may have right-angled or acute-
angled deviation of the duct. This angulation is most
commonly evident as the duct exits the nasolacrimal
Immune-mediated, secondary to trauma, systemic or
canal, and may cause obstruction to flow.
localized infection are discussed etiologies.
CT features (Figures 14.4 and 14.6)
Feline anatomical specificities
 Enlargement (cystic fluid-distended sac) of the sali-
Cats have a distinct lacrimal sac. The dorsal and 
vary gland.
ventral canaliculi converge at the lacrimal sac
 Obstructive sialoliths may be visible on pre con-
to form the nasolacrimal duct. The nasolacrimal
trast CT.
duct courses in cats as in mesocephalic dogs in
 Possible loss of definition of the extraocular muscles
all except the most severely brachicephalic
and fat.
cats, such as Persians.
 Strong contrast enhancement of the affected gland 
or tissue with possible ring enhancement (abscess
formation and/or mucocele).
Disease features
CT dacryocystography is needed to prove or exclude
Neoplasia
involvement of the nasolacrimal duct in the disease
shop ut arei Aiaa si eiseldoau puels Areaes Areu
process. Survey and intravenous contrast-enhanced CT
 are necessary to evaluate periductal tissue involvement.
and cats and usually manifests as a non-painful swell-
 -u ues euosiesoiqy se yons sioumi anssh yos Su
 trate the salivary glands.
Malformation/Developmental
Brachycephalic nasolacrimal duct obstruction
CT features (Figure 14.20)
 Irregularly contrast-enhancing masses originating
1
Obstruction to nasolacrimal duct flow occursin brachy-
from a salivary gland.
cephalic breeds of dog and cat due to facial foreshort-
 Absence of normal gland in question.
ening. This causes angulation of the nasolacrimal duct,
Can be difficult to differentiate from other soft
typically as it exits the nasolacrimal canal, and is com-
tissue neoplasia.
monly a bilateral condition.
149 ORBITA, SALIVARY GLANDS AND LACRIMAL SYSTEM
Figure 14.19 Transverse CT images. (A) A left parotid gland abscess with marked rim enhancement (arrow) and a non-
enhancing purulent center. (B) A right zygomatic gland inflammation (asterisk) leading to swelling and loss of clear margin
of the gland (compare to normal left zygomatic gland, Z) as well as (C) diffuse infiltration of masticatory muscles (M).
CT features
Infection/Inflammation
·Dacryocystography:
 abnormal nasolacrimal duct course
Chronic dacryocystitis
 obstruction to flow of contrast medium at site
Inflammation  or infection  results  in  alterations  in
of abnormal angulation.
duct diameter, most commonly dilatation. Dacryo-
cystitis occurs in association  with  nasolacrimal
Congenital imperforate nasolacrimal duct
duct  obstruction, including foreign body obstru-
ction (plant awns or seeds are most frequently
Congenital malformation resuling in non-patency of 
 reported). Stagnation of tears permits overgrowth
the nasolacrimal duct.
 by microorganisms. Dacryocystitis has also been
CT features
described in cats suffering from feline herpes
● Dacryocystography: obstruction to flow of contrast.
virus.
150 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Figure 14.22 Adult dog with left-sided dacryops. This
 transverse CT image at the level of the third maxillary
premolar tooth shows a large expansile lesion (asterisk)
Figure 14.20 Contrast-enhanced transverse CT image of a
destroying the left maxilla and partially destroying the left
dog with a large cystic right masseter muscle sarcoma (aster-
ethmoid turbinates. The alveolar bone surrounding the tooth
isk) that also invades the right parotid salivary gland.
is within normal limits and no maxillary bone periosteal
reaction is evident. The lesion is filled with fluid dense mate-
 rial that did not contrast enhance.
Dacryops
Cyst formation due to congenital ectopic lacrimal or
salivary gland tissue or as a sequel to acquired trau-
 matic disruption or inflammation. The expansile lesion
 pue uonsnnsap lesol Sursnes aurn iaao sassarond
malformation. Cysts may form anywhere along the
 nasolacrimal duct, and location has been suggested to
be indicative of the ectopic tissue source. The position
 of the cyst will dictate which adjacent structures are
Figure 14.21  Contrast-enhanced transverse CT image of
an adult dog with dacryocystitis. There is lysis of the left
affected.
maxillary bone and the nasolacrimal duct is severely dis-
tended with contrast medium (asterisk).
CT features (Figure 14.22)
Dacryocystography:
CT features (Figure 14.21)
space-occupying, (
 often peripherally contrast-
·Foreign material may be identified within the
enhancing, cystic structure containing non-
 nasolacrimal duct depending on its attenuation
contrast-enhancing fluid
properties.
 dilatation of the duct proximal to the cyst and
 Periductal osteolysis.
 obstruction to flow if non-communicating with
1
Dacryocystography:
the duct
dilatation of the nasolacrimal duct evident
 contrast may occasionally fill the lesion if there
obstruction to flow of contrast medium second-
is communication with the duct.
ary to accumulation of cellular debris
 Non-aggressive destruction of surrounding osseous 
 foreign material may be identified as a filling
 structures depending on location (turbinates,
defect within the nasolacrimal duct.
nasal/lacrimal/maxillary bone).
151 ORBITA, SALIVARY GLANDS AND LACRIMAL SYSTEM
 Damage secondary to non-lacrimal system
 Bell CM, Schwarz T and Dubielzig RR (2011) Diagnostic fea-
disease processes
 tures of feline restrictive orbital myofibroblastic sarcoma.
Vet Pathol 48: 742-50.
Damage to the nasolacrimal duct may occur secondar-
Boroffka SAEB and Voorhout G (1999) Direct and recon-
ily to facial trauma, nasal tumor invasion or dental
structed multiplanar computed tomography of the orbits
disease, most commonly involving the second and
of healthy dogs. Arm J Vet Res 60: 1500-7.
third maxillary pre-molars. Damage may result in
Boroffka SAEB, Verbruggen A-M, Grinwis GCM, Voorhout
impingement and subsequent obstruction to flow,
G and Barthez PY (2007) Assessment of ultrasono-
erosion of the duct itself or laceration due to adjacent
 graphy and computed tomography for the evaluation of
fracture or soft tissue damage.
unilateral orbital disease in dogs. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 230:
671-80.
CT features
Duvoisin B, Zanella FE and Sievers KW (1998) Imaging
aul jo uoan aun ul pauapi Aonoued Xre
of the normal and pathological orbit. Eur Radiol 8:
?
175-88.
nasolacrimal duct.
Penninck D, Daniel GB, Brawer R and Tidwell AS (2001)
 Dacryocystography: nasolacrimal duct involve-
 Cross-sectional imaging techniques in veterinary ophthal-
ment demonstrated following dacryocystitis
mology. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract 16: 22-39.
 obstruction to flow
 Ramsey DT, Marrtta SM, Hamor RE et al. (1996) Ophthalmic
 leakage out of contrast medium from nasolac-
manifestations of dental disease in dogs and cats. J Am 
rimal duct into surrounding tissues.
Anim Hosp Assoc 32: 215-24.
FURTHER READING
AttaliSoussay K, Jegou JP and Clerc B (2001) Retrobulbar
tumors in dogs and cats: 25 cases. Vet Ophthalrmol 4: 19-27.
CHAPTER FIFTEEN
EXTERNAL, MIDDLE AND
INNER EAR
Randi Drees
IMAGING PROTOCOL
 middle ear and is not always seen on CT images. The
middle ear is contained within the petrous temporal
See Table 15.1.
bone and is comprised of the air-filled tympanic bulla
containing the three auditory ossicles (malleolus, incus
and stapes). The malleolus is the largest of the three
CT: ANATOMY AND NORMAL
bones and its lateral aspect is embedded in the dorsal
VARIANTS (FIGURE 15.1)
aspect of the tympanic membrane. The incus articu-
lates laterally with the malleolus and medially with the
External ear
stapes, the innermost ossicle. The stapes joins the fibro-
cartilaginous ring covering the vestibular (oval)
azis pue adeus u Xea saea rea leaxa a
window, connecting to the inmer ear. Due to their small
 between dog breeds. The pinna is shaped by the auric-
size, the ossicles can only be seen as separate structures
ular cartilage, which is penetrated by a multitude of
 on thinly collimated or high-resolution CT images.
blood vessels. It forms several folds at its base and then
Dorsomedially, the auditory (Eustachian) tube con-
 gains tubular shape to form the external ear canal with
nects the middle ear to the nasopharynx. This canal
the medially adjacent annular cartilage. The annular
can be seen on CT images if filled with contrast
cartilage attaches to the osseous external auditory
material.
meatus formed by the petrous temporal bone. The
 The tympanic bulla is round to ovoid in shape; breed
annular and auricular cartilages are not always seen as
variations of more flattened bullae as seen in the
o pas eran a sa i uo sana aras
Cavalier King Charles spaniel occur. The facial nerve
the external ear canal is vertically oriented and purely
(cranial nerve VII), sympathetic inmervation of the eye
-o s s puauas iepau aul paroddns snouere
and the parasympathetic innervation of the lacrimal
ented and has cartilaginous and osseous support. The
gland are closely associated with the middle ear
auricular muscles attach at the base of the ear. The
small, separate scutiform cartilage serves as attach-
ment for several medial auricular muscles and is
Inner ear
located superficially to the auricular fat pad. Spaniel
breeds tend to have narrow extermal ear canals; evalu-
 The inner ear is enclosed within the petrous temporal
ation of ear canal stenosis has been performed with
 bone dorsomedially to the middle ear. The endolymph
-shporpuouo u Audeigoper prepuens ur sueoreuen
is contained within the membranous labyrinth, con-
trophic breeds, mineralization of the auricular and
sisting of the semicircular ducts, utricle, sacculus,
annular cartilage can be seen as a normal variant on
endolymphatic and cochlear duct. The membranous
CT images.
labyrinth is embedded in the bony labyrinth, consist-
ing of the perilymphatic chamber (vestibulum), three
semicircular canals and their respective ampulla, the
Middle ear
spiral cochlea and the vestibular aqueduct. Due to the
The tympanic membrane spans the entrance to the
small size, there is limited visibility of the structures of
tympanic cavity. It separates the external from the
 the inner ear and their location in the petrous temporal
saunes Auu 'ziemups sa q pauis fy pan 
@ 2011 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
153
154 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Table 15.1
CT imaging protocol (intravenous contrast study: standard protocol; see Chapter 5).
Series
 Pre- and post-contrast
Bone
Canalogram
 Decubitus
Ventral 
Lateral, side to evaluate up
 Special positioning 
 Place forelegs caudal to scan field
Scan margins
 Rostral margin of temporomandibular joint →> Mid C1
Voltage (kVp)
120
Current (mAs)
100
130
100
Tube rotation time (s)
≤1
 Slice width (mm)
1-2
1
 Sequential slice interval (mm)
1-2
1
 Kernel freq uency
Medium
High
Medium 
 Contrast medium application site
N/A
External ear canal
Contrast medium type
N/A
lodinated, no n-ionic
 Contrast medium dose
N/A
2-5 ml (400 mg I/ml)
 Contrast medium injection mode 
N/A
Manual
 Scan delay post start contrast injection
N/A
1 min
Window level (HU)
+250
+500
+100
Window width (HU)
50
3000
150
- no sais paeo Au sae  uo aog
occlusion site can form a large fluid-filled pocket.
resolution CT can enable visualization of the cochlea 
 Bullous effusion can occur sequentially
and vestibular aqueduct, other structures usually
remain poorly visualized.
CT features (Figure 15.2)
 Blind-ending, air-flled external auditory canal
 separated by a soft tissue membrane from the com-
Feline anatomical specificities
monly fluid-filled medial portion of the external
The lateral segment of the external ear canal
ear canal or complete obliteration of the external
is vertically oriented and purely cartilaginously
ear canal.
supported; the medial segment is horizontally
 Possibly fluid-dense material in the tympanic
oriented and has cartilaginous and osseous
cavity.
support. In the cat this segment has an approxi-
 Possible thickening of the tympanic bulla.
mately 90° angle. The feline tympanic bulla has
one or more septa, incompletely dividing the
tympanic cavity into a dorsolateral and ventro-
Trauma
medial portion.
Soft tissue injury to the external ear commonly occurs
with bite wounds; aural hematoma is a common
complication. Fractures of the cranium or mandible
CT DISEASE FEATURES
can involve the tympanic bulla or petrous temporal
 bone. Fissure lines or fracture fragments can be identi-
Malformation/Developmental
fied on CT and aid treatment recommendation and
External ear canal atresia
planning.
 External ear canal atresia is a rare congenital condition
in which the external ear canal is absent or separated
CT features
into a lateral and medial compartment. Trauma can
 Severed soft tissue-dense structures in the aural
lead to acquired occlusion of the external ear canal.
region.
Ceruminous secretions accumulating medial to the
 Sharply marginated fracture lines or fragments.
155 EXTERNAL, MIDDLE AND INNER EAR
Figure 15.1 Transverse CT images of a normal dog: (A) soft tissue window, (B) bone window, (C) post-contrast soft tissue
window; and of a normal cat: (D) soft tissue window, (E) bone window, (F) post-contrast soft tissue window.
156 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Figure 15.3 Adult dog with chronic otitis externa. Post-
contrast transverse CT image shows the ear canal lining
thickened and contrast enhancing (arrowheads) and exten-
sive mineralization of the aural cartilages (black arrows).
Figure 15.2 Adult dog with bilateral extermal ear canal
 Mildly contrast enhancing soft tissue-dense material is adja-
atresia. Post-contrast transverse CT image shows both exter-
 cent to the left tympanic membrane, consistent with inflam-
nal ear canals (arrows) and the right tympanic cavity
matory proliferation (white arrow).
(asterisk) filled with non-enhancing soft tissue-dense mate-
rial. The lining of the extermal ear canals and the right tym-
panic cavity are contrast enhancing.
Infection/Inflammation
Otitis externa
 Inflammation of the external ear canal results from
infection, allergic and hypersensitivity reactions, or
mechanical irritation of the ear canal by parasites or
foreign bodies. Excessive fluid accumulation and
 r a ro n r i  
 Idiopathic or hyperplastic otitis has been described in
 young cocker spaniels. In chronic cases increased soft
tissue volume due to soft tissue swelling, excessive
cerumen production and exudate collection can lead
to ear canal stenosis.
CT features (Figures 15.3 and 15.4)
 Increased contrast enhancement of the thin lining
of the external ear canal in acute cases.
 In chronic cases, increased thickness and folding of 
the ear canal lining with increased contrast
 enhancement. Overall subjective narrowing of the
Figure 15.4 Adult dog with acute right otitis media and
external ear canal.
bilateral otitis exterma. Post-contrast transverse CT image
 Increased amount of non-enhancing soft tissue-
shows fluid-dense, non-contrast-enhancing material in the
dense material in the external ear canal.
right tympanic cavity and extermal ear canal (asterisks) bilat-
 Mineralization of the auricular and annular carti-
erally, enhancement of the lining of the tympanic bulla and
 lages in chronic cases.
external ear canal (arrows).
157 EXTERNAL, MIDDLE AND INNER EAR
A
B
Figure 15.5 Adult dog with chronic left otitis media. Post-contrast transverse CT image shows (A) accumulation of non-
 contrastenhancing soft tissue-dense material (arrow) in the tympanic cavity and (B) true sclerosis and thickening of the
tympanic bulla (arrows) indicating chronicity.
mp aq ues sume sseia se yons sapoq uaiaioh ·
CT features (Figures 15.4 and 15.5)
to detect if they are of similar density to the sur-
 Accumulation of fluid or, if inspissated, soft tissue-
rounding soft tissues.
 to mineral-dense material within the tympanic
cavity.
+
 Possible contrast enhancement of the lining of the
Otitis media
tympanic bulla.
 In chronic cases with marked fibrous proliferation,
Inflammation of the middle earresults from extension
 contrast enhancement of the contents of the tym-
 of external ear disease, hematogeneous spread, aspira-
 panic cavity.
tion of pharyngeal contents through the auditory tube
 Sclerosis and thickening and possible lysis of the
or functional disease of the auditory tube. Dysfunction
 tympanic bulla in severe and chronic cases.
of the auditory tube is thought to be the cause for bulla
Accumulation of contrast medium in the tympanic
effusion in cats with sinonasal disease. In acute to
bulla post canalogram with disruption of the tym-
subacute cases of otitis media, fluid is present in the
 panic membrane.
tympanic cavity. In chronic cases inspissation of fluid
and increased tissue proliferation are common. Osteitis
 of the tympanic bulla is commonly present in chronic
Otolithiasis
cases. However, the wall of a fluid-filled tympanic
Otolithiasis has been described in dogs with external
 or middle-ear disease, vestibular disease or without
 To avoid misdiagnosis of osteitis, acquisition of thin
evidence of current ear disease. Formation of the stones
 -oe uonnsuoan aeul Auanba-ua um sat
is thought to be due to mineralization of necrotic mate-
-as mm adodde um unenea pue um
rial resulting from current or previous otitis media.
 tings are essential. Chronic aggressive disease can lead
 Care must be taken not to confuse auditory ossicles
to osteolysis. Integrity of the tympanic membrane is
with otoliths.
often difficult to evaluate on CT images and can
be determined by positive-contrast canalograms.
CT features (Figure 15.6)
 Intracranial extent with involvement of the brainstem
 Small mineral-dense foci usually adherent to the
has been described.
wall of the gas- or fluid-filled tympanic cavity.
158 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Possible associated focal thickening of the tym-
aei uanbay-uiu um pamboe saeu  paeu
 panic bulla.
reconstruction algorithm are necessary to evaluate the
structures of the inner ear.
 Otitis interna
CT features
Otitis interna is usually caused by extension of inflam-
· Obliteration of the fluid-filled spaces of the inner
mation or neoplasia of the middle ear. Thinly colli-
ear.
 Destruction of the petrous temporal bone in the
region of the inner ear due to neoplasia.
Brainstem  involvement  seen on  post-contrast
images.
Inflammatory polyps
 Inflammatory polyps originate most commonly in the
tympanic bulla, less commonly in the auditory tube or
nasopharynx of cats, and consist of inflammatory and
epithelial cells. They can occur uni- or bilateral and are
able to grow into the external ear canal or through the
auditory tube into the nasopharynx. Concurrent otitis
externa or media can be present, dependent on loca-
tion of the polyp. Suggested causes are ascending
infection or congenital. This disease is more commonly
seen in cats aged 1-5 years without gender predilec-
 tion. Polyps are seen with low incidence in dogs.
CT features (Figure 15.7)
Figure 15.6  Adult cocker spaniel with chronic right otitis
 Soft tissue-dense mass, arising within the tympanic
 media with otholithiasis. Transverse CT image shows
bulla, auditory tube or nasopharynx, possibly
otholiths (arrow) that can persist after resolution of bulla
extending into the  external  ear canal
or
effusion.
nasopharynx.
B
a polyp (asterisk) in the left extermal ear canal showing strong contrast enhancement. (B) Siamese cat with a nasopharyngeal
 polyp (asterisk) that obliterates the nasopharyngeal lumen and shows poor central and strong rim enhancement.
159 EXTERNAL, MIDDLE AND INNER EAR
Figure 15.8 Adult dog with bilateral aural cholesteatoma. Transverse CT images show (A) both tympanic cavities flled with
 mildly and heterogeneously contrast-enhancing soft tissue-dense material (asterisks) and (B) the tympanic bullae that are
expanded and have a mixed lytic and proliferative patterm (arrows).
·Usually strong homogeneous contrast enhance-
Other neoplasia
 ment or poor central enhancement with strong rim
Cats are more commonly affected by malignant auricu-
 enhancement.
lar tumors compared with dogs. Squamous cell carci-
noma, malignant histiocytoma, mast cell tumor,
Neoplasia
sebaceous adenoma and papilloma commonly affect
 Aural cholesteatoma
the pinna and external ear canal. Bones of the skull can
be affected by primary bone tumors such as osteosar-
 Aural cholesteatomas are epidermoid cysts forming,
coma, chondrosarcoma or less commonly benign
usually bilaterally, in the middle ear adjacent to the
tumors such as osteomas.
tympanic membrane. The etiology of those cysts in
dogs is presumably acquired and secondary to chronic
otitis media. Retraction of the tympanic membrane or
CT features (Figure 15.9)
 Mass effect to the soft tissues, potentially obliterat-
 migration of squamous epithelium leads to formation
 ing the external ear canal with auricular tumors.
of a cyst in the middle ear, which contains keratin and/
Squamous cell carcinoma in cats commonly causes
or sebaceous material that causes a mild to severe
inflammatory response of the surrounding tissues.
lysis of the adjacent bony structures.
 Mixed lytic and proliferative lesions with primary
Severe cases can present with difficulty in opening the
bone tumors of the skull.
mouth and vestibular disease. Congenital inclusion of
 a squamous epithelium cyst behind the intact tym-
 panic membrane can ocur as a developmental defect
with similar consequences.
FURTHER READING
CT features (Figure 15.8)
 Concurrent increase of soft tissue and commonly
Barthez PY, Koblik PD, Hormof WJ, Wisner ER and Seibert
?
Sa P P ui a Tm j (6) 1
mineral-dense material in the tympanic cavity and
air flled tympanic bulla in computed tomography. Vet
external ear canal.
Radiol UIltrasound 37: 95-8.
Affection of the bony structures is variable from no
Detweiler DA, Johnson LR, Kass PH and Wisner ER (2006)
involvement to marked lytic and proliferative
Computed tomographic evidence of bulla effusion in cats
changes, that can extend to the temporomandibu-
with sinonasal disease: 2001-2004. J Vet Int Med 20:
lar joint.
1080-4.
160 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
A
contrast-enhancing soft tissue-dense mass (asterisk) obliterating the left external ear canal, secondary accumulation of fluid-
dense, non-enhancing material in the tympanic cavity (arrow) and (B) bone lysis of the tympanic bulla, inmer ear structures
 and temporal bone (arrows).
Doust R, King A, Hammond G et al. (2007) Assessment of
Russo M, Covelli EM, Meomartino L, Lamb CR and Brunetti
middle ear disease in the dog: a comparison of diagnostic
A (2002) Computed tomographic anatomy of the canine
imaging modalities. J Small Anim Pract 48: 188-92.
inner and middle ear. Vet Radiol UIltrasound 43: 22-6.
Garosi LS, Dennis R and Schwarz T (2003) Review of diag-
Seitz SE, Losonsky JM and Marretta SM (1996) Computed
nostic imaging of ear diseases in the dog and cat. Vet Radiol
'ss u sdarod Aroeuurut go auereadde oudeiouon
Ultrasound 44: 137-46.
Vet Radiol Ultrasound 37: 99-104.
Hardie EM, Linder KE and Pease AP (2008) Aural cholest-
Ziemer LS, Schwarz T and Sullivan M (2003) Otolithiasis in
eatoma in twenty dogs. Vet Surg 37: 763-70.
three dogs. Vet Radiol UIltrasound 44: 28-31.
CHAPTER SIXTEEN
ALVARIUM AND
ZYGOMATIC ARCH
Federica Morandi
IMAGING PROTOCOL
CT DISEASE FEATURES
Malformation and developmenta!
See Table 16.1.
diseases
 Occipital dysplasia (keyhole malformation)
CT: ANATOMY AND NORMAL
VARIANTS
The normal foramen magnum is located ventrally
between the occipital condyles and provides an
 opening for passage of the spinal cord. The normal
The calvarium, or roof of the skull, is formed by the
foramen magnum is round to ovoid, with a diameter
frontal, parietal and part of the occipital bones. The
 similar to that of the vertebral canal. Occipital dyspla-
zygomatic arch is formed by the zygomatic process
sia refers to the abnormal dorsal extension of the
of the temporal bone in the caudal half and by the
foramen magnum secondary to abnormal develop-
ane sadeus ims Jeu lensoi a u auoq sgeuoz
ment of the occipital bone. It is most common in mini-
traditionally classifiedasdolichocephalic(long,narrow-
ature and toy breed dogs, and can be identified in
headed, such as the collie), mesaticephalic (heads of
 animals that show no clinical signs.
medium proportion, such as the beagle) and brachyc-
ephalic (short, wide-headed, such asthe Boston terrier).
Cranial length (measured as the distance between the
CT features
junction of the nasofrontal sutures and the external
?
 Abnormal dorsal extension of the foramen
occipital protuberance) is much longer in doli-
 magnum, which assumes a keyhole shape (Figure
chocephalic compared with mesaticephalic and brach-
16.2).
 ycephalicbreeds.Cranial width (thewidest interparietal
 3-D reconstructions can facilitate evaluation of the
distance), however, does not vary significantly among
lesion.
the three skull shapes. Many brachycephalic dogs have
a more dome-shaped appearance of the cranium than
dolichocephalic or mesaticephalic breeds. The flat
Occipital bone malformation (Chiari I-like)
bones of the calvarium are conmected via fibrous joints
 Occipital bone malformation, with underdevelopment
called sutures. Widened, open skull sutures and the
of the occipital bone, results in a smaller than normal
fontanel (between the frontal and parietal bones) can
caudal fossa and can lead to overcrowding of the
'san r m see u us a
caudal fossa, with resulting herniation of the cerebel-
 not necessarily in association with clinical signs
lum and medulla oblongata and obstruction of cere-
(Figure 16.1).
brospinal fluid flow, in turn leading to hydrocephalus
Veterinary Computed Tomography, First Edition. Edited by Tobias Schwarz,Jimmy Saunders.
@ 2011 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
161
162 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Table 16.1
and syringomyelia. This syndrome is termed Chiari
CT imaging protocol (intravenous contrast study:
I-like malformation, and is most common in the
standard protocol; see Chapter 5).
Cavalier King Charles spaniel, but has also been
Series
Pre- and post-contrast
 reported in other brachycephalic breeds. The severity
of the abnormalities is variable, and there does not
 Decubitus
Ventral
 appear to be good correlation between the severity of
 Scan margins
Upper molar 1 → Caudal 
 the anatomical abnormalities and the presenting clini-
 aspect of the first
 cervical vertebra
Voltage (kvp)
120
Current (mAs)
130
Tube rotation time (s)
 Slice width (mm)
5 (medium to large
dogs); 2 (small dogs and 
cats)
 Sequential slice interval
 5 (medium to large
(mm)
dogs); 2 (small dogs and 
cats)
 Kernel frequency
Sharp (high); reformat
with standard (medium)
if post-contrast series is
acquired
Window level (HU)
+350 (post-contrast: +35)
Window width (HU)
2800 (post-contrast: 300)
Figure 16.2 Transverse CT image of a one-year-old Shi-
Tzu shows the elongated, keyhole shape appearance of the
foramen magmum (arrows). The dotted line indicates the
approximate normal dorsal extension of the foramen
 magmum.
RtLV
B
Figure 16.1 Two-year-old Yorkshire terrier with severe congenital hydrocephalus. (A,B) Transverse CT images show the
 open, wide suture between the parietal and temporal bones (arrows). RtLV = right lateral ventricle; LeLV = left lateral ven-
tricle; T = third ventricle.
163 CALVARIUM AND ZYGOMATIC ARCH
cal signs. Because many of the abnormalities associ-
ary to tearing of the middle meningeal artery
ated with Chari I-like malformation affect soft tissue
by a fracture fragment 
structures, they are best evaluated with MRI. Linear,
 acute
epidural
hemorrhage/hematoma
area and volume measurements of the cranial cavity
 appears as a biconvex, well-defined, hyper-
and caudal fossa have been calculated using CT in
 dense mass between the inner surface of the
uosheduos 1oy pasn aq Xeu Kaul pue ‘ssop [euo
skull and the underlying, displaced dura
 a ino pas  op 
and brain.
 Subdural hemorrhage/hematoma:
CT features
 accumulates in the potential space between
 CT images reformatted in the sagittal plane can
the dura and the pia/arachnoid
acute
subdural
hemorrhage/hematoma
help in determining the presence of cerebellar her-
 appears as a hyperdense, crescent-shaped
niation into the spinal canal.
 3-D reconstructions can help in evaluating abnor-
 mass lesion conforming to the inner margin
 mal morphology of the occipital bone.
of the skull
 Hydrocephalus and syringomyelia are best seen on
· because of the close association with the
inner skull margin, and because bone and
soft tissue windows.
 [axid aures au aaey Aeu poolq asuapiadu
density on a narrow window, care must be
Trauma
taken not to mistake subdural hemorrhage /
 hematoma for thickening of the skull.
Head trauma in small animals can be caused by motor
 Subarachnoid hemorrhage:
vehicle accidents, falls, kicks, bites and gunshot
· accumulates in the subarachnoid space,
wounds. CT is superior to radiography in evaluating
uao st pue 'pm leudsoiqaan um Sux
the skull for possible fractures, and it offers the addi-
associated with cortical contusions
tional advantage of allowing simultaneous assessment
 acute subarachnoid hemorrhage
causes
of the brain for possible injuries. CT readily identifies
 increased density of the sulci and fissures.
 pneumocephalus and acute hemorrhage; brain edema
 Acute interventricular hemorrhage/hematoma
and contusions can also be identified, however, it is
 can sometimes be identified as increased density
best documented using MRI. In traumatized and
 or a hyperdense mass in one or both lateral
potentially unstable animals, CT has the additional
ventricles.
 Brain contusions occur commonly after head
 MRI, and may be obtained using only sedation in a
 trauma and consist of heterogeneous area of hem-
neurologically compromised animal
orrhage, edema and necrosis, often in the superfi-
cial gray matter.
CT features
 Initial findings include faint and ill-defined
Displaced fractures are readily identified; multi-
hypodense 
areasi
interspersed  with  small
planar and 3-D reconstructions can help in defin-
 regions of hyperdense acute hemorrhage.
ing displacement (Figure 16.3).
 Contusion with predominant edema and necro-
Open fractures can result in air accumulation inside
sis can become more evident a few days after
the cranial vault (pneumocephalus) (Figure 16.4).
the initial trauma, as hypodense areas with
Fractures of the zygomatic arch are often associ-
associated mass effect.
 ated with temporomandibular joint fractures and/
or luxations.
 Acute hemorrhage is hyperdense; chronic hemor-
Infection/Inflammation
rhage (within 1-2 weeks) becomesiso-tohypodense
 and may be more difficult to identify, especially in
Osteomyelitis/Sequestra
the absence of a significant mass effect. In addition
 Osteomyelis of the calvarium and zygomatic arch
to intraparenchymal hemorrhage, the following
are possible.
wounds and foreign object penetration, and may be a
 Epidural hemorrhage/hematoma:
 complication of trauma. If a fractured bone fragment
 accumulates in the potential space between
is cut off from blood supply a sequestrum will develop.
the dura and inner surface of the skull; often
Sequestra may be septic (a complication of chronic
found in the temporoparietal region second-
osteomyelitis) or sterile.
164 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
D
Figure 16.3  Nine-year-old Chihuahua that was kicked in the head by a horse 3 hours prior to imaging. Maximum intensity
projection (MIP) (A) transverse, (B) parasagittal and (C) dorsal images show a comminuted fracture involving the dorsal
aspect of the left parietal bone, with extension to the midline suture (arrow). The majority of the fragments are displaced
laterally and dorsally, but one fragment is depressed, compressing brain parenchyma. Notice also the severe soft tissue swell-
(white asterisks) and decreased (black asterisks) density within the left cerebral hemisphere, with obliteration of the left lateral
ventricle, and displacement and partial loss of meningeal enhancement in the area of the fracture (arrows), suggesting partial
hermiation of brain tissue into the fracture defect. RtLV = right lateral ventricle.
165 CALVARIUM AND ZYGOMATIC ARCH
A
Figure 16.4 Adult Yorkshire terrier that fell 8 feet down the stairs the day before. Maximum intensity projection (MIP) (A)
dorsal and (B) sagittal images show the axially deviated right frontoparietal bone, indicating a depressed fracture (arrow). A
 gas pocket is visible just inside the margin of the frontal bone (asterisk) indicating pneumocephalus (other skullfractures,
 including fractures at the level of the frontal bone and sinus, were also present, but are not visible on these images).
CT features
CT features (Figure 16.6)
Aggressive lysis and periosteal proliferation of the
 Smooth, benign osseous thickening of the mandi-
1
affected bones.
ble, tympanic bulla, petrous temporal bone and
 A sequestrum will appear as a sharply defined,
calvarium.
 hyperdense fragment of bone without evidence
 No underlying lysis.
of associated lysis and/or production (Figure
16.5)
 osteodystrophy have been concurrently described
 Contrast administration may highlight a draining
in long bones and ribs.
 tract documenting communication with the seque-
CT is especially helpful in determining the location
strum or foreign object.
 of the new bone production with respect to the
temporomandibular joints.
Craniomandibular osteopathy
Calvarial hyperostosis in bullmastiffs
A benign  proliferative bone disease of  umknown
 Calvarial hyperostosis is a benign bone disease of the
etiology that occurs mainly in terrier breeds (espe-
skull recently described in bullmastiffs; it is similar to
cially West Highland White terriers), but also occasion-
 Taniomandibular osteopathy in dogs and infantile
ally in Labrador retriever, Doberman pinscher and
cortical hyperostosis in people. Affected animals are
bullmastiff. Autosomal recessive inheritance is docu-
skeletally immature and present with painful osseous
mented in West Highland White terriers, therwise
swelling of the skull, lymphadenopathy, eosinophilia
 the etiology is unknown. The disorder affects young
 and pyrexia.
(3- to 8-month-old) dogs and involves the mandible,
tympanic bulla, calvarium and petrous temporal
CT features
bone. Bone proliferation stops when skeletal mat-
 Smooth, benign osseous thickening of the calvar-
uration is completed. CT is useful to assess the
ium due to periosteal proliferation of the frontal,
 presence and degree of temporomandibular joint
 parietal and occipital bones, without abnormalities
ankylosis.
of the mandibles.
166 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Figure 16.5 Adult cat with a two-year history of draining
tract below the left pinna. (A) Transverse and (B,C) MIP
transverse images show chronic malunion fracture of the left
zygomatic arch and vertical ramus of the left mandible
(white arrows). A large, sharply outlined separate oseous
 fragment representing a portion of the vertical ramus of the
mandible (black arrow) is not included in the callus and is
surrounded by faint radiolucency, representing a seques-
trum; a second, much smaller fragment (arrowhead) is also
observed medial to the largest one. Both sequestra were
removed at surgery (B) is slightly caudal to (C).
Figure 16.6 One-year-old West Highland White terrier
with previously active unilateral craniomandibular osteopa-
thy. Transverse CT image shows chronic smooth bone prolif-
eration along the tympanic bulla (arrows) (image courtesy of
Randi Drees).
 Occasionally periosteal thickening of the diaphysis
of long bones has also been reported, without met-
 aphyseal involvement.
Neoplasia
Multilobular tumor of bone
Multilobular tumor of bone (also called multilobular
 osteochondrosarcoma, MLO, chondroma rodens and
multilobular osteoma) is a rare tumor of the skull of
older, large breed dogs. The neoplasm has a predilec-
tion for the calvarium and zygomatic arch; it has also
been reported at the level of the orbit, maxilla, mandi-
167 CALVARIUM AND ZYGOMATIC ARCH
Figure 16.7 Adult dog with multilobular tumor of the calvarium. (A,B) At presentation, transverse CT images show a mass
with typical fine granular appearance (black arrows), and invasion into the cranium with brain compression (white arrows).
bone cement layer (BC) that was placed to provide mechanical coverage to the brain. Notice the persistent pneumocephalus
(arrow).
 ble and tympanic bulla. Histologically, multilobular
tumor of bones consists mostly of multiple oval to
 tion with radiotheraphy; metastases can occur.
irregularly shaped islands of osseous, cartilaginous or
ossifying cartilaginous tissue separated from adjacent
island by fibrovascular septa. These tumors often
CT features (Figure 16.7)
invade the cranial vault and compress, but do not
Round to ovoidmass withcoarse,non-homogeneous
invade the brain. About 50% of dogs experience local
 granular mineral density.
168 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Typical stippled or fine granular appearance best
 May compress the brain without invading it.
visible using a bone window display.
 May show more significant aggressive lysis at the
 Underlying lysis of the calvarium/zygomatic arch.
level of the zygomatic arch.
 Compression and displacement of the brain and
Post-contrast: usually mild enhancement of the soft
meninges.
 tissue component of the mass.
Post-contrast: variable, but usually mild enhance-
 ment of the soft tissue component of the mass.
Osteoma
Osteomas are benign, slow-growing tumors that have
Osteosarcoma, chondrosarcoma
 well-defined, smooth margins, and may arise from the
Osteosarcomas are the most common primary bone
calvarium, zygomatic arch, mandible or sinuses.
 tumors of the skull, with up to 37% reportedly arising
from the cranial vault. Compared with osteosarcomas
CT features
of the appendicular skeleton and facial bones, osteosa-
 Solid, very dense mass with little to no underlying
rcomas of the cranial vault tend to be predominantly
lysis.
If centered over the calvarium they may grow
aged to older, large breed dogs. Chondrosarcomas are
eccentrically
om  a ssaon p
the second most common primary bone tumors in
invading it.
dogs; their imaging characteristics can be very similar
Post-contrast: little enhancement of the soft tissue
to osteosarcomas, featuring a combination of aggres-
component of the mass.
sive destructive and productive changes, but some-
times they can have smoother margination than
Soft tissue neoplasia
-OisT aaanioe ol papaau sI Asdotq V seurosiesoaiso
logic diagnosis.
The most common soft tissue tumor of the zygomatic
and calvarial regions, especially in cats, is squamous
CT features (Figures 16.8 and 16.9)
cell carcinoma; soft tissue sarcomas and mast cell
 Osseous mass with aggressive pattern of new bone
 tumors are also possible.
production that may contain granular areas of
mineralization.
CT features (Figure 16.10)
 Usually well-defined margins for osteosarcomas of
Large soft tissue mass with associated variable,
the calvarium.
B
 Figure 16.8  Adult dog with osteosarcoma. Maximum intensity projection (MIP) transverse CT images of maxilla and zygo-
matic arch show iregular, speculated, aggressive periosteal reaction (arrows) at the level of the right maxilla and zygomatic
arch, with associated soft tissue swelling. (A) is slightly rostral to (B).
169 CALVARIUM AND ZYGOMATIC ARCH
A
B
 Figure 16.9 Adult dog with chondrosarcoma. (A) Transverse and (B) MIP transverse CT images of the zygomatic arch with
right exophthalmos show a large, productive osseous mass arising from the right zygomatic arch (arrows). The mass has
smooth margins and a lobulated, popcorm-like appearance. LZ = left zygomatic arch.
Very little associated new bone production.
Garcia-Real I, Kass PH, Sturges BK and Wisner ER (2004)
?
 If periosteal new bone production is visible, it has
 Morphometric analysis of the cranial cavity and caudal
usually aggressive pattern.
 cranial fossa in the dog: a computerized tomographic
Amorphous  mineralizations  1
may be present
study. Vet Radiol Lltrasound 45: 38-45.
within the soft tissue mass.
 Hatchcock JT and Newton JC (2000) Computed tomographic
characteristics of multilobular tumor of bone involving the
 Post-contrast: variable, usually mild, enhancement
of the soft tissue component of the mass.
cranium in 7 dogs and zygomatic arch in2 dogs. Vet Radiol
Lltrasound 41: 214-7.
McConnell JF, Hayes A, Platt SR and Smith KC (2006)
FURTHER READING
Calvarial hyperostosis syndrome in two Bullmastiffs. Vet
Radiol LIltrasound 47: 72-7.
 Seiler G, Rossi F, Vignoli M, Cianciolo R, Scanlon T and Giger
Bar-AM Y, Pollard RE, Kass PH and Verstraete FJ (2008) The
 U (2007) Computed tomograpic features of skull osteomy-
diagnostic yield of conventional radiographs and com-
elitis in four dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 48: 544-9.
Teeoxeu ym sies pue ssop ul Audeoouon paind
Thomas WB (1999) Noneoplastic disorders of the brain. Clin 
trauma. Vet Surg 37: 294-9.
Tech Small Anim Pract 14: 125-47.
 Forrest LJ (2007) Cranial and nasal cavities: canine and feline.
In: Thrall DE (ed.) Textbook of veterinary diagnostic radiology
(5e), pp. 119-41. St Louis, Ml: Saunders Elsevier.
170 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Figure 16.10 Adult dog with fibrous histiocytoma. Maximum intensity projection (MIP) transverse CT images of the caudal
skull (A,B) show an extensive destructive mass associated with the dorsal aspect of the calvarium, with lysis of the occipital
and parietal bones (arrows) (lysis of the temporal and frontal bones was also noted but is not depicted on these images), and
(C,D) heterogeneous contrast enhancement. The mass invades the brain case with ventral displacement of the brain but
without conclusive evidence of invasion of brain parenchyma.
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN
LYMPH NODES OF HEAD
AND NECK
Olivier Taeymans
IMAGING PROTOCOL
digastric muscle and ventrolateral to the longus capitis
muscle. Its craniolateral border is in contact with the
mandibular salivary gland. The afferent vessels are
See Table 17.1.
directed from the draining area of both parotid and
 mandibular lymph nodes, the cranial aspect of the
CT: ANATOMY AND NORMAL
esophagus and trachea (including the thyroid gland),
and almost the entire neck musculature. The efferent
VARIANTS
vessels drain into the truncus trachealis.
Mandibular lymph nodes (Figure 17.1)
Lateral retropharyngeal lymph node
Generally two to three mandibular lymph nodes (up
to five) are very superficially located on the caudoven-
This is only present in about 30% of dogs, where it is
 tral aspect of the angular process of both mandibles,
very small. It is almost always present in cats and
along both sides of the facial vein and rostral to the
similar in size to the medial node. It is superficially
mandibular salivary gland. They measure about 1-2 cm
located between the ear base and the wing of C1. Its
 in length in dogs. The afferent vessels come from the
afferent vessels arise from the parotid salivary gland,
pue xuAiel 'xuAieud 'ansuoi aul idanxa 'peau anua
and the external ear. The efferents lead to the medial
ear. The efferent vessels lead to the medial retropha-
 retropharyngeal node.
ryngeal lymph node.
Superficial and deep cervical
lymph nodes
Parotid lymph node
 Superficial cervical nodes (prescapular lymph
A single parotid lymph node, measuring about 1 cm in
nodes) (Figure 17.3)
dogs and 5mm in cats, is located caudoventral to the
 temporomandibular joint. Its caudal half is covered by
 These are usually paired, located cranial to the suprasp-
the parotid salivary gland, and therefore almost never
inatus muscle, in between the neck musculature, and
discernable when normal (Figure 17.5). Its afferent
-o ane Kaul 'ssop ul qsual ul wn oi dn amseaul
vessels are related to the vast draining area of the
 posed of two dorsal and a smallr ventral node in cats,
mandibular node and also arise from the parotid gland
in which they also are more deeply located. Afferent
and the ear. The efferent vessels lead to the medial
vessels are derived form the cutaneous tissues of the
 retropharyngeal lymph node.
head, neck and ears, the entire front leg and the cranial
thorax. Efferent vessels lead to the truncus trachealis,
 thoracic duct or external jugular vein.
Medial and lateral retropharyngeal
lymph nodes
Deep cervical nodes
Medial retropharyngeal lymph node (Figure 17.2)
The cranial deep cervical node is present in 30% of
This measures 3-4cm in length in dogs. It is located on
 dogs. It is small (1-6mm), and located cranial to the 
the dorsolateral aspect of the pharynx, caudal to the
thyroid gland. It is absent in cats.
saunes Auu 'ziemups sa q pauis fy pan 
@ 2011 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
171
172 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Table 17.1
CT imaging protocol (intravenous contrast study:
standard protocol; see Chapter 5).
 Series
 Pre- and post-contrast
Decubitus
Dorsal
 Special positioning 
 Front legs caudally retracted 
 Scan margins
Last molars é
> Cranial T1
Voltage (kVp)
120
Current (mAs)
160
Tube rotation time (s)
1or 2
 Slice width (mm)
 Sequential slice interval
3
(mm)
 Kernel frequency
 Medium
Window level (HU)
+50 (post-contrast: +100)
Window width (HU) 
 250 (post-contrast: 300)
Figure 17.2 CT anatomy of the medial retropharyngeal
 lymph nodes in a dog. Post-contrast transverse CT image
obtained caudal to the digastric muscles and caudal to the
mandibular lymph nodes. 1 = right medial retropharyngeal
lymph node; 2 = longus capitis m.; 3 = right mandibular sali-
vary gland; 4 = thyroid cartilage; 5 = lingual vein; 6 = lin-
guofacial vein;7 =retromandibular vein; 8 = parotid salivary
 gland; 9 = ocipital condyle; 10 =extermal carotid artery.
DISEASE FEATURES
Neoplasia/Inflammation/Infection
(Figures 17.4-17.6)
Differentiation between lymphoma, metastatic disease,
reactive lymph nodes and infection cannot be made
with certainty on CT, as there is a large overlap in
Figure 17.1
1 CT anatomy of the mandibular lymph nodes
some trends may be observed, as showm in Table 17.2.
in a dog. Post-contrast transverse CT image obtained caudal
to the angular processes of both mandibles. 1 = mandibular
lymph nodes; 2 =linguofacial vein; 3=basihyoid bone;
FURTHER READING
4 = facial artery; 5 = extermal carotid artery.
Hayashi T, Tanaka R, Taira S, Koyama J, Katsura K and
The middle deep cervical node is rarely present in
Kobayashi F (2003) Non-contrast-enhanced CT findings of
dogs and cats. It is located along the mid-portion of 
high attenuation within metastatic cervical lymph nodes 
the trachea, and is similar in size to the cranial deep
in patients with stage I or II tongue carcinoma during a
follow-up period. Am J Neuroradiol 24: 1330-3.
cervical node.
 Pombo F, Rodriguez E, Caruncho MV, Villalva C and Crespo
The caudal deep cervical node is present in 30% of
C (1994) CT attenuation values and enhancing character-
 dogs. It is larger than the cranial and middle nodes,
istics of thoracoabdominal lymphomatous adenopathies. J
and is located ventral to the trachea, underneath
Comput Assist Tomogr 18: 59-62.
the sternothyroid and sternohyoid muscles at the tho-
 Wisner ER, Seibert JA and Katzberg RW (1998) Quantitative
racic inlet. It is composed of multiple smaller nodes
po ra Xydeaouduai  ioau ion spoau
in cats.
Ultrasound 39: 110-16.
173 LYMPH NODES OF HEAD AND NECK
B
Figure 17.3 (A) Post-contrast transverse CT image and (B) dorsally reconstructed CT image of the superficial cervical lymph
nodes in a dog. 1 = left superficial cervical lymph node; 2 = right superficial cervical lymph node; 3 = right humeral head;
4 = right common carotid artery; 5 = C6; 6 = right cleidomastoid muscle; 7 = right cephalic vein; 8 = right intermal jugular vein.
phlegmonous reaction; 4 = right lingual vein.
174 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Figure 17.6 Post-contrast transverse CT image in a dog
Figure 17.5  Adult cat with seruminal gland carcinoma in
 with lymphoma. The medial retropharyngeal lymph nodes
the left extermal ear canal with regional metastatic disease in
are bilaterally severely enlarged (asterisks). The left node is
the parotid and medial retropharyngeal lymph nodes.
almost completely hypodense due to liquefaction. The man-
 Transverse CT image shows the caudal aspect of the tumor
 dibular salivary glands (MSG) (left> right) are bilaterally
(1). 2 = metastatic left parotid lymph node;3 = metastatic left
displaced.
medial retropharyngeal lymph node; 4 =right extermal
jugular vein; 5 = caudal aspect of the right mandibular sali-
vary gland; 6 = right parotid salivary gland.
Table 17.2
 CT features of normal and diseased lymph nodes.
Normal
Reactive
 Metastatic
Lymphoma
Abscess
Pre-contrast HU
30-50
09105
09-09
60-100
30-50
 Post-contrast HU
120-150
100-120
120-150
70-150
70-150
Shape
 Oblong
 Mildly rounded
Mildly rounded
Rounded
Ro unded
Size
Normal 
 Mildly increased 
 Mildly increased
 Moderately
Moderately increased
increased
Homogeneity
Homogeneous
Homogeneous
Heterogeneous
Large hypodense 
 Central hypodense
 pre-contrast 
areas
area
Homogeneity
Homogeneous
Mildly 
Heterogeneous
Large hypodense
 Central hypodense
post-contrast
heterogeneo us
areas
area
CHAPTER EIGHTEEN
PHARYNX, LARYNX AND
THYROID GLAND
Olivier Taeymans and Tobias Schwarz
A single basihyoid bone interconnects both ceratohy.
IMAGING PROTOCOL
 oid bones on the ventral aspect of the hyoid apparatus.
 The thyrohyoid bones connect the whole hyoid appa-
See Table 18.1.
ratus to the larynx (Figure 18.3). The remainder of the
larynx is composed of the epiglottis, the large thyroid
cartilage with the medially located arytenoid cartilage,
CT: ANATOMY AND NORMAL
and the caudally located cricoid cartilage (Figure 18.4).
VARIANTS
Thyroid gland (Table 18.2)
Pharynx
The thyroid gland is composed of two separate lobes.
The nasopharynx is cranially delimited by the choanae
In a few large breeds of dog an isthmus connects the
-iad snuu yoq Aq papioq Aneiaea pue
caudal aspect of both lobes (Figure 18.5). Both lobes
deus (Figure 18.1). Its ventral demarcation consists of
are oblong and span the dorsolateral aspect of the
the soft palate. Both the choanae and nasopharynx
trachea from the first to the eighth tracheal ring. On
should be patent and gas-filled. The tongue base is
CT, the lobes are hyperdense compared with the sur-
located in the rostroventral part of the oropharynx and
rounding soft tissues due to their natural high iodine
the soft palate forms its dorsal margin. Its lumen is
content. In dogs, the right lobe is slightly more crani-
generally collapsed, except when the patient is intu-
ally located than the left lobe. The cranial and caudal
bated. The pharynx extends to the level of the axis.
thyroid arteries and veins can be recognized after
intravenous contrast injection (Figure 18.6). Normal
Auditory (Eustachian) tube
 parathyroid glands cannot be seen on CT.
 The auditory tube is normally collapsed and not visible
on CT. The tube exits the tympanic bulla rostromedi-
Feline anatomical specificities
ally via a short bony canal and continues rostrally
The pharynx extends to the level of C3 and the
as a musculotubular canal, entering the dorsolateral
 larynx is longer than in the dog.
 [epnes isn! laaal e ie umgso lus e era xurieudoseu
to the pterygoid hamulus process (Figure 18.2).
DISEASE FEATURES
Larynx
Malformation/Developmental
The hyoid apparatus vaults the caudal aspect of the
Nasopharyngeal stenosis
pharynx. Itslarge stylohyoid bones attach to the styloid
 process of the temporal bones via a small fibrocartila-
 Nasopharyngeal stenosis is a rare condition consisting
geneous tympanohyoideum that runs along the crani-
 of an obstruction of the nasopharynx as a consequence
olateral aspect of the tympanic bullae. Distally the
of scar tissue formation caudal to the choanae, above
stylohyoid bones articulate with the epihyoid bones
the soft palate. Causes of scar tissue include chronic
that articulate with the ceratohyoid bones. The stylo-
 inflammation, local trauma, congenital malformation,
hyoid and epihyoid bones are almost equal in length.
surgery or a space-occupying lesion.
saunes Auu 'ziemups sa q pauis fy pan 
@ 2011 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
175
176 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Table 18.1
· Morphologic congenital abnormalities have been
CT imaging protocol (intravenous contrast study:
reported as an asymmetric hyoid apparatus, best
standard protocol; see Chapter 5).
identified on 3-D reconstructions.
 Series
 Pre- and post-contrast
Bone
Decubitus
Dorsal
Thyroid goiter
 Special positioning
 Front legs caudally retracted
 Goiter refers to a non-neoplastic, non-inflammatory
 Scan margins
Last molars 
> Cranial C3
 enlargement of the thyroid gland as a result of insuf-
(bone) or C5 (soft tissue)
ficient thyroid hormone synthesis in a functional
Voltage (kVp)
120
hypothalamus-hypophysis-thyroid axis. This condi-
Current (mAs)
160
tion is rare in dogs, and has not been described in cats,
 Tube rotation time (s)
1 or 2
 although an enlarged adenomatous gland is some-
times referred to as a goiter. Goiter in dogs may result
 Slice width (mm)
3
1
 from congenital hypothyroidism or may be diet or
 Sequential slice
3
1
drug-induced.
interval (mm)
 Kernel frequency
Medium
High
CT features
Window level (HU)
+220
+400
 No features have been reported.
Window width (HU)
120
2500
 Anticipated features on CT:
 diffuse increased size with a homogeneous
parenchyma
decreased density in iodine deficiency and a
normal density in the other etiologies.
CT features (Figure 18.7)
 Circumferential narrowing of the nasopharynx by
Thyroid cysts
 a contrast-enhancing or non-enhancing soft tissue
membrane or band that may extend caudally over
Thyroid cysts are very rarely reported and need to
several millimeters.
exceed a few millimeters to show on CT. Ultimobrachial
 Dorsal displacement of the soft palate.
Jo eyuand pnon al u panodan are sis ponp
 Fluid accumulation in the nasal passages with or
 dogs. Cysts have also been observed in canine primary
without destructive rhinitis; possible fluid accumu-
hypothyroidism. Pseudocysts, not lined by epithelium
 lation in the tympanic bullae.
may be more common e.g. as a consequence of neopla-
 Possible concurrent anomalies such as choanal
sia when the tumor outgrows its vascular supply. The
atresia.
majority of thyroid cysts are considered incidental.
 An orifice may or may not be present in the
However, intravenous contrast is needed to differenti-
stenosis.
ate cysts from enlarged parathyroid glands on CT.
Hyoid bone malformations
CT features (Figure 18.8)
Rounded,
well-defined  l
hypodense
structure
(±30HU) of variable size within the thyroid paren-
breeds as a result of brachycephalic airway syndrome,
chyma that may deform the thyroid lobe.
-idsu Sump amssaid aagesau paseaiu ue Suean
ration. Laryngeal cartilages become deformed from
this chronic negative pressure, weaken and collapse.
Infection/inflammation
 In young brachycephalic dogs with laryngeal collapse,
 Nasopharyngeal polyps
a
defect in cartilage
structure is suspected.
Morphological congenital abnormalities of the hyoid
Nasopharyngeal polyps are benign, pedunculated
 aood amenunu e u anuo paodan uaaq aaeu sauog
masses believed to originate from the middle ear or
(Kang et al. 2008).
auditory tube lining, expanding into the nasopharynx
Jo isistos Anidi aui ies Arone [exa pu
CT features
myxomatous to dense fibrous connective tissue,
 Laryngeal collapse as a result of brachycephalic
covered by squamous epithelium. It is the most
syndrome shows a symmetrically reduced laryn-
common nasopharyngeal disease of younger cats and
 geal diameter.
has been reported once in a dog.
177  PHARYNX, LARYNX AND THYROID GLAND
C
Figure 18.1 (A-C) CT anatomy of the nasopharynx in a dog. 1 = right nasopharyngeal meatus; 2 = vomer bone; 3 = maxil-
lary recess; 4 = spina nasalis caudalis; 5 = palatine bone; 6 = choanae; 7 = endoturbinae IV; 8 = hamulus pterygoideus; 9 = eth-
moidal labyrinth (sinus sphenoidalis); 10 = soft palate; 1l = nasopharynx; 12 = oropharynx with tongue base.
CT features (Figure 18.9)
this may result from idiopathic follicular atrophy or
?
 Homogeneous soft tissue density in tympanic
lymphocytic thyroiditis.
bulla, nasopharyngeal area and/or auditory tube.
 Osseous thickening of affected tympanic bulla and
CT features
 possibly petrous temporal bone.
·No CT features have been reported.
Post-contrast: moderate (ring-like) enhancement.
?
Anticipated features on CT:
 the gland will show a decreased density and
increased heterogeneity due to decreased iodine
 Canine hypothyroidism
content (as iodine-containing follicles are grad-
ually replaced by connective tissue)
pon rreud e on panean s wsionuody auue
ag iaao puelg au jo azis ul aseaiap [enpe1g e
gland abnormality in more than 95% of the cases and
will be observed.
178VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
C
D
Figure 18.2 Location and course of the canine auditory tube from caudal to rostral in 3mm intervals. (A) Rostral aspect of
the tympanic bulla (asterisk). NP = nasopharynx; SP = soft palate. (B) Muscular process of the temporal bone (arrow) demar-
 cating the ventrolateral musculotubular canal wall of the auditory tube. (C) A small indentation in the dorsolateral nasopha-
ryngeal wall marks the pharyngeal ostium of the auditory tube (arrow). (D) Directly rostral to the ostium is the bony landmark
of the pterygoid hamulus (arrow).
Trauma
 XuAieudoseu aui ul punoy aq Aeu sume sseia se uons
 or oropharynx.
Pharyngeal foreign body
Most commonly reported pharyngeal foreign bodies
CT features (Figure 18.10)
are wooden sticks in medium to large breed dogs.
 Foreign bodies have different densities, ranging
These usually penetrate the pharyngeal lining, as do
yy AIaA 01 (nHOI+ 01 0SI- :poom) mo uog
fishhooks and needles. Non-penetrating foreign bodies
(metallic) and are non-contrast enhancing.
179 PHARYNX, LARYNX AND THYROID GLAND
1
 Often located in the facial planes in an area from
C1 to C4.
 Foreign bodies are moderately well defined and
surrounded by enhancing soft tissue swelling.
fluid pockets and sometimes gas.
 Regional lymphadenopathy is often present.
With chronic penetrating foreign bodies, fistulous
 tracts can often be seen in conjunction with granu-
loma, cellulitis or abscess formation. The fistula
 walls are contrast enhancing, while the lumen is
hypodense.
Fractures/Luxations of the hyoid apparatus
CT is excellent at detecting laryngeal wall lesions,
Figure 18.3 3-D surface-rendered (SR) reconstruction of
 superior to most other imaging modalities. Hyoid frac-
junapiosyouedui =l gop e u srueredde piony aul
 tures are most often the result of bite wounds, but may
2 = stylohyoid bone; 3 =epihyoid bone; 4 = ceratohyoid
also result from road traffic accidents, gunshot wounds
bone; 5 = basihyoid bone; 6 = thyrohyoid bone; 7 = thyroid
cartilage; 8 = cricoid cartilage.
or shearing injuries by being shaken by the neck.
Laryngeal collapse as a result of trauma is rare.
Table 18.2
Anatomic details of the canine and feline thyroid gland.
Thyroid
Canine
Feline 
Precontrast
108
123
attenuation (HU)
Postcontrast
169
169
attenuation (HU)
Volume
Body weight:
 30kg = 1150 mm?
 Parenchyma
Homogeneous
Homogeneous
Figure 18.4 CT anatomy of the larynx in a dog. 1 = caudal
Shape
 Ovoid - triangular 
 Ovoid
hormof the thyroid cartilage;2 = cricothyroid joint; 3 = cricoid
CrCd location
C2-C4
cartilage; 4 = lamina cricoideae; 5 = tracheotube; 6 = wings
of C1; 7 = body of C2.
3
Figure 18.5 3-D SR reconstruction of the thyroid gland and surroundings in a large breed dog. Left is cranial for this patient.
1 = left thyroid lobe; 2 = isthmus; 3 = left extermal jugular vein; 4 = left intermal jugular vein; 5 = left common carotid artery;
 6 = thyroid cartilage; 7 = cricoid cartilage; 8 = tracheotube. The tracheal rings are not displayed on this window setting.
180 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
CT features (Figure 18.13)
Large, inhomogeneous, soft tissue mass with mod-
erate contrast enhancement. Hypodense areas
 (necrosis or hemorrhage) altermated with hyper-
dense zones (normal parenchyma, areas of dys-
 trophic mineralization or dense conmective tissue).
 Carcinomas are often locally aggressive with an
increased rate of local tissue invasion (blood
vessels, muscles, nerves, trachea, esophagus) with
increased tumor size. Carcinomas also more often
3
contain areas of dystrophic mineralization.
peaids sgeiseau jo als Aieud au ane suml au
Figure 18.6 CT anatomy of a canine thyroid and its sur-
after local invasion of the thyroid veins. Subsequent
roundings. 1 =cranial aspect of left lobe; 2 = left cranial
CT of the thorax is strongly recommended. Other
thyroid vein; 3 = left intermal jugular vein; 4 = left extermal
sites of metastatic spread include the regional
jugular vein; 5 =right common carotid artery; 6 =right
cranial thyroid artery;7 = esophagus; 8 = C2;9 = longus colli
lymph nodes, kidneys, spleen, liver, bone and
muscle; 10 =longus capitis muscle; 11 =stermocephalic
spine.
muscle; 12 = stermothyroid muscle; 13 = stermohyoid muscle.
Pharyngeal neoplasia
 aas) erseldoau [eno on paeqa1 sl eiseldoau [eabuAieu
CT features (Figure 18.11)
 Chapter 12). The most common oropharyngeal neopla-
 Disconinuity in the hyoid apparatus results in
sias are malignant melanoma, squamous cell carci-
asymmetry of the larynx.
 noma and fibrosarcoma in dogs, and lymphoma
 Concomitant soft tissue swelling and possible gas
in cats.
pocket accumulations.
Possible soft tissue defects/drain tracts.
 Regional lymphadenopathy.
Laryngeal neoplasia
 Primary neoplasia of the larynx occurs uncommonly
Neoplasia
in small animals. The most common canine laryngeal
 tumors reported are carcinoma and rhabdomyoma in
Thyroid neoplasia
 dogs, and lymphoma and squamous cell carcinoma in
Thyroid neoplasia in cats is in 99% of cases due to
cats.
adenomas or adenomatous hyperplasia. In 70% of
these, bilateral involvement of the lobes can be
CT features (Figure 18.14)
detected. Adenomas in cats are functional and result
 Laryngeal tumors are asymmetric intramural
 in hyperthyroidism.
tumors with intraluminal and possible extralumi-
In dogs, clinically detected thyroid masses are carci-
 nal extension of the mass, creating varying degrees
nomas in 90% of cases. These are twice as likely to be
 of laryngeal obstruction. CT provides adequate
unilateral as bilateral, and they are large and fast
 assessment of tumor involvement in the perilaryn-
growing. Carcinomas are non-functional in 90% of the
'subieu ioumi pue samions leas
 cases and therefore do not result in hyperthyroidism.
Inhomogeneous soft tissue mass with moderate
 asuapodu lenuan uao uauanuua iseuon
Functional adenomas are even less common. Since
canine thyroid tumors are almost alwaysnon-secreting.
 areas of necrosis or hemorrhage.
thyroid masses will usually only be detected after
Lysis of the hyoid bones can be seen.
gaining a size large enough to cause mechanical
obstruction of the surrounding structures. Ectopic
thyroid tissue located anywhere from the base of
REFERENCE
the tongue to the base of the heart can become neoplas-
tic (Figure 18.12). Predisposed breeds for carcinomas
 Kang H, Lee H, Kwak H, Kim N and Lee K (2008) Imaging
are boxers, golden retrievers and possibly beagle
diagnosis -congenital structural hyoid bone abnormalities
hounds.
in a dog. Vet Radiol US 49: 357-9.
181
. PHARYNX, LARYNX AND THYROID GLAND
Figure 18.7 Adult dog with nasopharyngeal stenosis. (A)
Pre-contrast transverse, and reconstructed (B) sagittal and
(C) dorsal CT images show a circumferential narrowing of
the nasopharynx (arrow) with presence of an orifice, caudal
to the choanae. Note the dorsal displacement of the soft
 palate on the sagittal image.
Figure 18.8 Adult dog with thyroid cyst. Transverse CT
 image shows (1) the right thyroid lobe containing a homo-
 geneous hypodense (30HU) cyst, measuring 1cm in diame-
ter. Normal thyroid parenchyma surrounds the cyst. The
normal left thyroid lobe (2) shows a pre-contrast attenuation
value of 115HU.
FURTHER READING
Allen HS, Broussard J and Noone K (1999) Nasopharyngeal
diseases in cats: a retrospective study of 53 cases (1991-
1998). J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 35: 457-61.
Cole LK and Samii V (2007) Contrast-enhanced computed
tomographic imaging of the auditory tube in mesati-
cephalic dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 48: 125-8.
Drost WT, Mattoon JS, Samii VF, Weisbrode SE and Hoshaw-
Woodard SL. Computed tomographic densitometry of
normal feline thyroid glands. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 45:
112-16.
George TF and Smallwood JE (1992) Anatomic atlas for com-
puted tomography in the mesaticephalic dog: head and
neck. Vet Radiol Uultrasound 33: 217-40.
Nicholson I, Halfacree Z, Whatmough C, Mantis P and
 Baines S (2008) Computed tomography as an aid to man-
 Bop a u Aanun yus feasurudono sus go quauae
J Small Anim Pract 49: 451-7.
 Phillips DE, Radlinsky MG, Fischer JR and Biller DS (2003)
Hosp Ass0c 39: 349-54.
Taeymans O, Schwarz T, Duchateau L et al. (2008) Computed
tomographic features of the normal canine thyroid gland.
Vet Radiol Ultrasound 49: 13-9.
182VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
polyp in the right nasopharyngeal area. Images are from rostral (upper left) to caudal (lower right). 1 = multi-lobulated
nasopharyngeal soft tissue masses with peripheral ring-like enhancement; 2 = multi-lobulated soft tissue masses with periph-
eral ring-like enhancement in the auditory tube; 3 = marked thickening of the right tympanic bulla wall; 4 = soft-tissue mass
in the right tympanic bulla.
183 PHARYNX, LARYNX AND THYROID GLAND
(isenuos-isod nHoot/isenuos-aid nHos) ssassqg Supunoins = z (sase yoq uo nHotl) Apoq usatog= 1 'sanssn
3 = abscess wall (65HU pre-contrast/155 HU post-contrast).
Figure 18.11  (A) Craniocaudal 3D-MIP reconstructed CT image of the hyoid apparatus of a dog that was hit by a car two
days ago. Left on the image is on the patient's right. The left epihyoid bone is medially displaced as a consequence of a luxa-
of the hyoid apparatus of a dog suffering from a gunshot wound. Left is cranial for the patient. Comminuted fractures are
noted at the level of the left ceratohyoid and thyrohyoid bones. The left epihyoid bone is displaced caudally as a consequence
of a luxation between the epihyoid and ceratohyoid bones. 1 = right stylohyoid bone; 2 = right epihyoid bone; 3 = right cera-
tohyoid bone; 4 = right thyrohyoid bone; 5 = thyroid cartilage; 6 = basihyoid bone; 7 = medially displaced left epihyoid bone;
8 = fractured left ceratohyoid and thyrohyoid bones; 9 = transverse process of C1; 10 = left mandibular ramus.
184 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Figure 18.13 Adult dog with thyroid carcinoma. Post-
contrast transverse CT image shows a mass-effect on the left
side, displacing the trachea and left common carotid artery
to the right. No local tissue invasion was detected. 1 = normal
right thyroid lobe;2 = left intermal carotid artery;3 = enlarged
 and heterogeneous left thyroid lobe; 4 = left intermal jugular
vein.
Figure 18.12 Adult dog with neoplastic ectopic thyroid
tissue. Post-contrast MPR dorsal reconstructed CT image
 shows a moderately enhancing soft tissue mass (45HU pre-
contrast, 130HU post-contrast) ventral to the trachea, located
cranial to the thoracic inlet (white cross) and expanding cau-
dally to the level of the heart base (black cross). Note its
caudal cystic component (16 HU).
B
Figure 18.14 Post-contrast transverse CT images of laryngeal masses. (A) Squamous cell carcinoma of the larynx with intra-
luminal extension in a cat. (B) Round cel tumor (suspected plasma cell) of the larynx with intra-luminal extension in a dog.
Note the focal lysis of the right side of the thyroid cartilage. 1 =right mandibular salivary gland; 2 =thyroid cartilage;
 3 = laryngeal mass; 4 = left extermal jugular vein; 5 = left linguofacial vein; 6 = left retromandibular vein.
CHAPTER NINETEEN
BRAIN
Silke Hecht
IMAGING PROTOCOL
the paired lateral ventricles, third ventricle, mesen-
cephalic aqueduct and the fourth ventricle. Cere-
brospinal fluid, gray matter and white matter differ in
See Table 19.1.
density and can be distinguished when a narrow
CT: ANATOMY
window width is used (cerebrospinal fluid ±5-10HU;
white matter ±25-30HU; gray matter: ±35-50HU).
General
Following intravenous administration of contrast
medium, intracranial structures outside the blood-
Based on embryologic development, the brain can be
brain barrier, such as the pituitary gland, choroid
subdivided into prosencephalon (forebrain: telenceph-
plexus and blood vessels, show contrast enhancement,
alon and diencephalon), mesencephalon (midbrain)
while normal brain parenchyma does not enhance.
and rhombencephalon (hindbrain: metencephalon and
myelencephalon). The anatomic subdivision of the
brain is summarized in Table 19.2.
DISEASE FEATURES
 Identification of specific structures of the brain is
 aided by familiarity with their anatomic relationships
General
to surrounding osseous structures and cerebrospinal
Many different disorders of the brain may result in
fluid-filled spaces. The brain is contained within the
 similar CT findings, and familiarity with signalment 
cranial cavity of the skull, which is formed by the
and pertinent history are crucial when evaluating
ethmoid, presphenoid, basisphenoid, occipital, pari-
CT images. Intracranial lesions may be extra-axial
etal, temporal and frontal bones. While the roof of the
(i.e. originating outside actual brain parenchyma) or
cavity remains largely undivided, the base is divided
intra-axial (i.e. originating from brain parenchyma).
into three fossae (Figure 19.1A). The rostral fossa
 Differential diagnoses for extra-axial lesions include
extends from the cribriform plate to the level of the
neoplastic (e.g. meningioma), inflammatory (e.g men-
 optic canals and contains the olfactory bulbs and the
ingitis) and traumatic lesions (e.g. epidural hematoma).
rostral parts of the cerebral hemispheres. The middle
 Differential diagnoses for solitary intra-axial lesions
fossa extends from the optic canals to the petrosal
 include hematoma, cyst, abscess/granuloma, infarct
crests and contains the pituitary gland, temporal and
 and neoplasia. Although inflammatory brain diseases
parietal lobes of the cerebral hemispheres (Figure
sasseu Aieos suorsal lesoyumu se readde Allensn
19.1B). The caudal fossa extends from the caudal limit
may be encountered on occasion.
Differential
of the pituitary fossa to the foramen magnum and
diagnoses for multifocal brain lesions include inflam-
 contains the mesencephalon, pons, medulla and cere-
mation, infarcts, metabolic /toxic/nutritional encepha-
bellum. Additional useful osseous landmarks include
lopathies and some intracranial neoplasms. Contrast 
the falx cerebri separating the two cerebral hemi-
 enhancement of a lesion indicates vascularization and
spheres, the tentorium cerebelli separating cerebellum
disruption of the blood-brain barrier.
and cerebrum, the dorsum sellae turcicae, the chias-
matic sulcus and various bony foramina and canals
Concurrent findings in brain disease
(see also Chapters 16, 20 and 21).
 The brain is surrounded by cerebrospinal fluid in the
 Pathologic sequelae associated with brain disease
subarachnoid space. The ventricular system consists of
 include mass effect, vasogenic edema, brain herniation,
saunes Auu 'ziemups sa q pauis fy pan 
@ 2011 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
185
186 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Table 19.1
 standard protocol; see Chapter 5).
Series
 Pre- and post-contrast
Dorsal plane (following post-contrast scan)*
Decubitus
Ventral
Dorsal
 Special positioning 
N/A
 Dorsal recumbency, head flexed 909
Slice orientation
 Transverse (perpendicular to hard 
 Dorsal (parallel to hard palate)
palate)
Scan margins
 Cribriform plate ←→ Atlas 
 Parietal bones (dorsal) ←→> hard palate/base
of skull (ventral)
Voltage (kVp)
130
Current (mA)
150
Tube rotation time (s)
1
Slice width (collimated, mm)
3-5**
1-2
 Sequential slice interval (mm)
3-5*
1-2
 Kernel frequency
Sta ndard
Window level (HU)
Soft tissue: +30
Bo ne: +600
Window width (HU)
 Soft tissue: 200
Bone: 2000
*Dorsal and sagittal reconstructed imaging is routinely performed and does not require additional image acquisition. Additional image
acquisition with dorsal slice orientation can be performed to evaluate integrity of the cribriform plate or in cases where partial volume
averaging and beam hardening artifacts interfere with evaluation of the caudal fossa on transverse images.
This technique significantly improves image quality and may be considered in cases where artifacts hamper evaluation of the caudal fossa.
Table 19.2
hydrocephalus and hemorrhage. Cerebral necrosis is
Brain anatomy.
 occasionally seen in animals with seizures.
Brain
Major
Mass effect
subdivision
derivates
Lumen
 Space-occupying lesions within the cranial vault (e.g.
Telencephalon
Cerebral cortex
Lateral 
(hemispheres)
ventricles
tumor or edema) are commonly associated with a mass
effect, even if the umderlying lesion itself canmot be
Basal nuclei
delineated.
Limbic system
 Diencephalon
CT features
Epithalamus
Third ventricle
Thalamus
 Shift of the falx cerebri (Figure 19.2)
Hypothalamus
 Compression of the ventricular system.
Mesencephalon
Tectum
Mesencephalic
Tegmentum
aqueduct
Vasogenic edema
 Cerebral 
 Damage to brain capillaries results in leakage of fluid
peduncles
 into the extracellular space, which migrates along the
 Metencephalon
Pons
Fourth ventricle
white matter fiber tracts.
Cerebellum
Fourth ventricle
CT features (Figure 19.2)
Myelencephalon
Medulla 
Fourth ventricle
 Extensive hypodense area, often exhibiting mass
oblongata
effect.
187 BRAIN
A
Figure 19.1  CT anatomy of the canine brain. (A) Sagittally reconstructed CT image illustrating location of rostral (A), middle
(B) and caudal fossa (C). (B) Transverse CT image at the level of the middle fossa showing lateral (asterisk) and third (+)
ventricles, thalamus (Th), parietal (P) and temporal (T) lobes.
CT features
?
 Evaluation
best
performed
LIO
sagittal
reconstructions.
 Foramen magnum herniation: herniation of the
caudal portion of the cerebellum into and through
the foramen magnum.
1
 Caudal transtentorial herniation: displacement of
portions of the cerebral cortex (or cortices) ventral
to the tentorium cerebelli.
Hydrocephalus
Hydrocephalus is defined as abnormal accumulation
 of cerebrospinal fluid within the cranium, which can
be classified in various ways (Table 19.3).
CT features
Figure 19.2 Adult cat with meningioma. Post-contrast
1
 Dilatation of one or more ventricles and/or dilata-
transverse CT image shows a large intracranial extra-axial
tion of the subarachnoid space (Figure 19.3).
Paeiosse rare asuapoday aaisaixg (speaumoie) ssu
 Potential additional findings dependent on etiol-
 Ogy: congenital anomalies, inracranial mass, trau-
of the falx cerebri is consistent with vasogenic edema and
matic lesions.
mass effect (arrows).
 Note: Diagnosis of clinically significant hydro-
cephalus can be challenging. Ventriculomegaly
·Post-contrast: underlying lesion may S
show
and ventricular asymmetry are common find-
 enhancement while edema remains hypodense.
ings in asymptomatic animals and may or may
not represent a clinically significant change.
Additionally, brain atrophy is an expected
 Brain herniation
finding in older animals. Therefore, especially
mild  ventricular and/or subarachnoid space
Increase in intracranial pressure (e.g. due to an intra-
dilation should be judged in light of clinical
 Tanial mass) can lead to compression and displace-
 presentation.
ment of brain parenchyma.
188 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Table 19.3
Classification of hydrocephalus.
Hydrocephalus
 Subclassification
Definition
Location 
Internal
Ventricular system
 External 
 Subarachnoid space
 Etiology
 Obstructive
Blockage of CSF flow
Non-obstructive
Compensatory (decreased volume of brain parenchyma; hydrocephalus ex vacuo)
Decreased resorption or increased production of CsF (very rare) 
 Co ngenital 
Acquired
Pressure
Hypertensive
Increased pressure within dilated CsF-filled space
Normotensive
 Normal pressure within dilated CSF-filled space 
Morphology
 Communicating 
Communication between ventricular system and subarachnoid space
Non-
 No communication between ventricular system and subarachnoid space
communicating
 CSF = cerebrospinal fluid.
marcclKoralik
 Figure 19.4 Classification of intracranial hemorrhage.
Figure 19.3
3 Yorkshire terrier with congenital hydrocepha-
 Schematic transverse image ilustrates location and appear-
lus. Transverse CT image shows severe dilatation of the
ance of epidural (ED), subdural (SD), subarachnoid (SA),
lateral ventricles (asterisks).
 intraparenchymal (IP) and intraventricular (IV) hematoma.
Intracranial hemorrhage
CT features
Intracranial hemorrhage can be classified based on
 location as epidural, subdural, subarachnoid, intrapa-
mass that may cross dural folds such as falx cerebri
renchymal or intraventricular (Figure 19.4). Epidural,
and tentorium cerebelli, but not sutures.
 subdural and subarachnoid hemorrhages are typically
 Subdural hemorrhage: peripheral crescent-shaped
associated with trauma, while intraparenchymal hem-
collection of blood which may cross suture lines
orrhage may occur secondary to a variety of conditions
but is limited by the falx and tentorium.
 including vascular malformation, coagulopathy, neo-
 plasia and parasite migration. Intraventricular hemor
admixture of blood and cerebrospinal fluid;
rhage may be associated with trauma or extension of
 potential separation of fluid into hemorrhagic
intraparenchymal hemorrhage into the ventricular
and non-hemorrhagic strata or formation of
system.
thrombi.
189BRAIN
Table 19.4
Intracranial hemorrhage.
Time after 
hemorrhage
Events
Density
Immediately
Hematoma forms heterogeneous mass consisting
40-60 HU
 of red blood cells, white blood cells, platelet clumps 
 and serum
 Early hours
 Formation of meshwork of fibrin fibrils and globin
60-80 HU
 molecules; clot retraction
Days
 Further clot retraction; serum extrusion and
 80-100HU in center, with hypodense
vasogenic edema
halo
Weeks
 Breakdown of globin molecules
Density decreases 0.7-1.5HU/day from
 periphery to center
Weeks/months
 Digestion of blood degradation products by
 Resolution of hematoma or persistence
macrophages
 of hypodense area
 [e-e anoau leuuaedenu
mass
CT features
lesion(s) of variable size and density.
?
 Dilatation of the ventricular system of variable
 Attenuation properties of intracranial blood are
severity (Figure 19.3).
determined by the aggregation of globin molecules
in the hematoma, i.e. density varies with age of the
hematoma (Table 19.4).
Hydranencephaly/Porencephaly
 Possible concurrent findings dependent on etiol-
 In hydranencephaly there is lack of development and/
 ogy: brain edema, intracranial mass, traumatic
or
near complete 
destruction of the neocortex.
osseous changes (fractures).
 Porencephaly appears as cavities in the cerebrum due
 to cell destruction or failure of development.
Cerebral necrosis
CT features
 Necrosis of hippocampus, piriform lobes and other
 Hydranencephaly: reduction of size of one or both
areas of the cerebral cortex have been described in
cerebral corfices to a thin mantle surrounding a
dogs and cats with seizures. It may not be possible to
large, centrally located cavity.
determine whether brain changes found on CT and/
 Porencephaly: cavitary areas associated with brain
10 asnes Suapun a juasaidai Aonouedoisiu 1o
parenchyma which may communicate with sub-
the result of seizures.
 arachnoid space and/or ventricles.
CT features
Meningo-/encephalo-/meningoencephalocele
Jo seae rao no saqo uod 'snduesoddu um
 These disorders are uncommon in small animals.
the cerebral cortex without mass effect.
·Post-contrast: variable enhancement.
CT features
 Protrusion of brain tissue and/or meninges
Malformation/Developmental
through a calvarial defect.
Congenital and developmental anomalies are fre-
'sies u arei are inq ssop ui pasougep Aluanb
Intracranial intra-arachnoid cysts
 These anomalies arise from spliting/duplication of
Congenital hydrocephalus
the arachnoidea in early embryonic development.
Congenital hydrocephalus is most commonly seen in
 Quadrigeminal cistern cysts dorsal to the quadrigemi-
toy and brachycephalic breed dogs.
nal plate are most common, but cerebellomedullary
190 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Cerebellar hypoplasia
Cerebellar hypoplasia can occur secondary to in utero/
 perinatal viral infection (most commonly parvovirus)
 or as a primary developmental defect.
CT features
 Small size of the cerebellum indicated by increased
cerebrospinal fluid around the cerebellum and
 extending into the folia.
CT diagnosis can be difficult in mild cases.
Dandy-Walker malformation
 jo dno sn u ie d a
disorders is partial or complete absence of the cerebel-
Figure 19.5  Yorkshire terrier with a quadrigeminal cisterm 
 lar vermis and cystic dilation of the fourth ventricle.
cyst. Sagittal reconstructed CT image shows a large
Additional abnormalities may be present.
hypodense structure associated with the caudal cranium
(arrows), with resultant compression of the cerebellum.
CT features
Hydrocephalus is also visible.
 Enlarged caudal fossa flled with an enlarged
fourth ventricle.
 Small size/partial absence of cerebellum.
 Hydrocephalus.
cistern cysts have also been reported. Quadrigeminal
cysts are of variable clinical significance and may be
Trauma
imcidental.
CT is considered an excellent modality to assess
CT features
 patients with head trauma because it is fast and accu-
 Well-circumscribed areas in specific locations con-
rate in the evaluation of bony structures and intracra-
taining fluid isodense to cerebrospinal fluid.
 nial hemorrhage.
Compression
of
 occipital
lobes
10 /pue
cerebellum.
Acute trauma
 Sagittal reconstruction is useful in establishing cyst
location and size (Figure 19.5)
CT features
 Intracranial hemorrhage.
鲁
 Brain edema, mass effect, brain herniation.
 Chiari-like malformation and syringomyelia
 Skull fractures.
A disorder similar to Chiari type I malformation in
humans has been reported in dogs. Cavalier King
 Chronic trauma
Charles spaniels are most commonly affected, but the
CT features
disease is seen in a variety of breeds and can be found
Intracranial hemorrhage.
 in symptomatic and asymptomatic animals.
 Skull fractures (Figure 19.6).
 Meningeal and brain parenchymal changes com-
CT features
patible  with   meningoencephalomyelitis/brain
 Sagittal reconstruction is most useful.
abscess (Figure 19.6).
 Crowding of the caudal fossa with compression
 Parenchymal brain defects with compensatory cer-
and, in severe cases, herniation of the cerebellum
ebrospinal fluid filling (hydrocephalus ex vacuo).
 into or through the foramen magnum.
 Additional findings: hydrocephalus, focal 'kink' of
Inflammation
the cranial aspect of the spinal cord, hypodense
areas associated with spinal cord parenchyma
 Inflammatory brain diseases can affect brain paren-
(syringohydromyelia).
chyma (encephalitis), meninges (meningitis) or both
191BRAIN
Bacterial meningoencephalitis
Mechanisms of bacterial infection of the central
nervous system include hematogeneous spread, con-
 tiguous infection from adjacent structures (inner ears,
cribriform plate, sinuses, eyes and vertebrae), direct
inoculation (trauma, bite wound and surgery) and
migration of foreign bodies or aberrant parasites. In
addition  to meningitis and meningoencephalitis
10 [epqns u euandua no sassnsqe reuuouared
 epidural locations.
CT features
·Meningitis (Figure 19.6):
 meningeal thickening
 post-contrast: contrast enhancement.
 Figure 19.6 Puppy with bacterial meningitis 2 weeks fol-
 Encephalitis:
lowing bite wounds to the head. Post-contrast transverse CT
-1
 hypodensity of brain parenchyma
image shows skull fractures and extensive meningeal
一
 post-contrast: +/- enhancement.
enhancement (arrows).
 Abscess/empyema:
 hypodense mass(es)
 post-contrast: ring enhancement, usually asso-
ciated with edema/mass effect.
(meningoencephalitis), and can be subdivided into
infectious inflammatory and non-infectious inflamma-
 tory disorders. These diseases may or may not cause
 Fungal meningoencephalitis
changes detectable with CT.
Several fungal infections have been reported to affect
the central nervous system, including cyptococcosis,
 Canine distemper virus encephalitis
phaeohyphomycosis, blastomycosis, histoplasmosis,
 aspergillosis and fusariosis.
The two most common clinical forms of distemper
encephalitis are acute encephalitis in young dogs and
CT features
 chronic encephalitis in adult dogs.
Very variable.
 Solitary or mulifocal parenchymal lesions with
CT features
 associated mass effect:
· Focal or multifocal hypodense lesions:
 post-contrast: variable contrast enhancement.
Meningeal，
 post-contrast: uniform or ring enhancement.
ependymal and
snxald proo
Predilection for white matter.
 enhancement.
?
Extension outside the cranial vault possible (Figure
?
 May be associated with edema and mass effect.
19.7).
 Feline infectious peritonitis virus encephalitis
Parasitic meningoencephalitis
Neurological signs are generally associated
with
 Parasitic meningoencephalitis in dogs and cats is
the dry form of feline infectious peritonitis, which
caused by aberrant migration of parasites such as
results in pyogranulomatous inflammation of lep-
Dirofilaria, Baylisascaris, Cuterebra, Taenia, Ancylostoma,
tomeninges, choroid plexus, ependyma and brain
Toxascaris and Angiostrongylus.
parenchyma.
CT features
CT features
 Focal or multifocal parenchymal lesions
Post-contrast: enhancement of ventricular lining.
 post-contrast: peripheral contrast enhancement.
 choroid plexus and meninges.
 Intraparenchymal hemorrhage
Hydrocephalus.
 Meningeal enhancement.
192 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Figure 19.8 Adult Yorkshire terrier with necrotizing
meningoencephalitis/leukoencephalitis.   Transverse   CT
image shows mumerous hypodense lesions (asterisks) in
both cerebral hemispheres with mild to moderate peripheral
Figure 19.7 Labrador retriever with fungal encephalitis
 contrast enhancement.
(blastomycosis). Post-contrast dorsally reconstucted CT
image shows a homogeneously enhancing mass associated
CT features
with the olfactory bulbs, extending through the cribriform
plate into the caudal nasal cavity (white arrows). Midline
 Disseminated granulomatous meningoencephalitis:
shift of the falx cerebri (black arrow) is consistent with mass
 post-contrast: multiple foci of ili-defined con-
effect due to brain edema.
 pue euqouaed Sunoaut juaasuequa jsen
meninges
 possibly associated with edema and mass effect.
Protozoal meningoencephalitis
 Focal granulomatous meningoencephalitis:
Protozoal meningoencephalitis may be caused by
 isodense or hyperdense mass
Toxoplasma and Neospora infection in dogs and
· post-contrast: variable contrast enhancement
Toxoplasma infection in cats.
 possibly associated with edema and mass effect.
 Necrotizing meningoencephalitis/necrotizing leu-
CT features
koencephalitis (Figure 19.8)
Variable.
suoisa asuapody resognmu 
 Focal or multifocal parenchymal lesions.
 post-contrast: variable contrast enhancement
 Post-contrast: mild contrast enhancement.
 necrotizing leukoencephalitis typically affects
 Granulomatous meningoencephalitis and
 meningoencephalitis is usually confined to
necrotizing meningoencephalitis
cerebrum.
 Granulomatous meningoencephalitis is an inflamma-
tory central nervous system disorder of uncertain eti-
Cerebrovascular
ology, which can affect any breed but most often occurs
in young to middle-aged toy breed dogs. Necrotizing
The term 'cerebrovascular diseases' refers to all disor-
-euo st pue asnes uejaum jo si seudasuaouuau
ders in which there is an area of brain transiently or
 acterized by cavitary necrosis in the neuroparenchyma.
 permanently affected by ischemia or bleeding and/or
The disease was initially described in pugs ('pug dog
in which one or more blood vessels of the brain are
encephalitis'), but similar disorders have since been
a ssanond ienonod e Aq paidu Ad
reported in other small breeds. A distinct form of
intracranial aneurysms and cerebrovascular malfor-
necrotizing meningoencephalitis described mainly in
 mations play only a minor role in veterinary medicine,
Sznau, paan uaaq seu siaan an
acute vascular events (stroke, infarct) are relatively
leukoencephalitis'.
193 BRAIN
Figure 19.9 Adult dog with acute hemorrhagic infarct due
Figure 19.10 Adult dog with ceroid lipofuscinosis. Post-
to rupture of a cerebrovascular hamartoma. Transverse CT
contrast transverse CT image shows ventriculomegaly
 image prior to contrast medium administration shows a
(asterisks) and dilatation of cerebral sulci, consistent with
bilobed hyperdense mass within the left temporal lobe
brain atrophy.
(arrow).
Ischemic stroke
neoplasia, coagulopathies, parasite migration, cerebral
vascular malformation, idiopathic).
Ischemic strokes can be categorized according to ana-
 tomical site, size, age, pathology and etiology (e.g.
CT features (Figure 19.9)
atherosclerosis, hypertension, chronic renal disease,
septic or neoplastic thromboemboli, idiopathic).
 Dependent on etiology, size and location of intrac-
 ranial hemorrhage, and time elapsed between vas-
Territorial infarcts most commonly affect the rostral
cular event and CT.
 cerebellar artery, followed by the middle cerebral and
the rostral cerebral artery. Lacunar infarcts, unlikely to
be detected on CT due to their small size, most com-
Metabolic, nutritional, toxic and
 monly affect the caudal perforating arteries, followed
degenerative
by striate arteries (and others).
 A variety of conditions is summarized in this group.
 CT examination may show subtle changes or may be
CT features
normal.
 Dependent on size and location of affected vessel
and time elapsed between infarct and CT.
Acute ischemic stroke:
Metabolic, nutritional, toxic
slight decrease in density and subtle mass effect
 Examples for diseases in this group include lysosomal 
due to edema (3-6h after onset of signs)
storage(
 diseases, mitochondrial encephalopathies,
U) juaurasuqua [eaqdiad :iseuos-isod
hepatic encephalopathy, thiamine
deficiency  and
to 1 week after infarction).
myelinolysis.
· Chronic ischemic stroke:
 increasingly sharp margination of infarcted area
CT features
with ultimate loss of parenchymal volume.
al u suoisal asuapodq oinauss Aenaie
 area of thalamic/deep gray matter nuclei without 
mass effect:
Hemorrhagic stroke
 post-contrast: no contrast enhancement.
Hemorrhagic stroke can be classified according to ana-
 Brain atrophy (ventriculomegaly, enlarged cerebral
 tomical site, size, age and etiology (e.g. intracranial
 and cerebellar sulci) (Figure 19.10).
194 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Degenerative
 Examples of degenerative encephalopathies include
neuroaxonal
dystrophy
pue
cerebellar
cortical
abiotrophy.
CT features
 Cerebellar and/or cerebral atrophy (ventriculom-
egaly, enlarged cerebral and cerebellar sulci).
Neoplasia
 Numerous intracranial tumors have been described in
dogs and cats. They can be characterized by number,
origin, location, size, margination, density, homogene-
ity, contrast enhancement and concurrent imaging
findings (ventriculomegaly, changes associated with
ranium and/or meninges, hemorrhage, mineraliza-
tion, mass effect, edema, cystic or necrotic component,
etc.).
Meningeal tumors
Figure 19.11 Boxer with poorly differentiated glioma.
Post-contrast transverse CT image shows an indistinct intra-
 Meningiomas originate from the meningeal lining of
-d nal luanoaul sseu asuapiaday Suouqua-uou eie
the brain and are the most common brain tumors in
form lobe, parietal lobe and thalamus (arrows). Compression
dogs and cats. Other tumor types that can affect the
 of the left lateral ventricle is consistent with mass effect.
meninges include disseminated histiocytic sarcoma,
lymphoma, granular cell tumor and metastases.
CT features (Figure 19.11)
CT features
Variable in appearance, ranging from an ovoid or
Meningioma (Figure 19.2)
1
amorphous mass to a diffuse infiltrate with distinct
extra-axial rounded or plaque-like smoothly
 to poorly defined margins.
 marginated mass in broad-based contact with
Hypodense, isodense to hyperdense on pre-
underlying bone
contrast images.
usually single, can be multiple
Post-contrast:
isodense or hyperdense to brain parenchyma,
 enhancement ranging from none to strong
mineralization or cystic component possible
uniform,
 non-uniform
 pue
 ring-enhancing
*post-contrast:
patterns
usually
strong
and
 homogeneous
 concurrent brain edema and/or hemorrhage
enhancement
possible.
-euua ieau) ,usis [ien [emp, mous Aeu
cement extending along meninges adja-
Ventricular tumors
cent to the mass)
 may be associated with brain edema, mass
Choroid plexus tumors originate from the choroid
effect, hyperostosis (cat > dog) or pressure
plexus within the ventricular system and predomi-
atrophy of adjacent bone.
nantly occur in the third and fourth ventricle. Other
 Other meningeal neoplasms
ventricular tumors include ependymomas and
variable, may mimic meningiomas.
meningiomas.
CT features (Figure 19.12)
Glial tumors
Variable sized rounded or lobulated mass associ-
Glial tumors (astrocytoma, glioblastoma multiforme,
ated with the ventricular system:
-u asus se readde Aenidki (euonsorpuaposo
-a iseo os Ansn snno-isod
 axial lesions.
ing mass.
195 BRAIN
very variable
 intra- or extra-axial single or multiple mass(es)
 may involve meninges
 may extend beyond cranial vault
一
 post-contrast: usually strongly enhancing-
Metastases
seoiesonueuaq Supnur snouni Aieud Aue
 and carcinomas have the potential for spread to the
brain.
CT features
 Multiple round to ovoid lesions associated with
brain parenchyma and/or meninges
post-contrast: usually strong
enhancement,
ring-enhancement possible.
 Often with associated brain edema.
Figure 19.12 Pug with ventricular tumor (choroid plexus
 Hemangiosarcoma metastases may be associated
papilloma, presumptive). Post-contrast transverse CT image
with hemorrhage.
shows a rounded homogeneously enhancing mass arising
from the third ventricle (arrows) with associated hydroceph-
alus (asterisks).
Central nervous system-associated tumors
Pituitary tumors, trigeminal nerve sheath tumors,
 nasal tumors and tumors of the skull may compress or 
 Additional masses (metastases) common in choroid
invade brain parenchyma. These tumors are discussed
plexus carcinomas.
in Chapters 11, 16, 20 and 21.
 Concurrent hydrocephalus common.
FURTHER READING
Other primary brain tumors
Numerous other neoplasms have been reported to
De Rycke LM, Gielen IM, Van Meervenne SA, Simoens PJ
prouapida Surpnou sies pue sop u ureiq a ioae
and van Bree HJ (2005) Computed tomography and cross-
sectional anatomy of the brain in clinically normal dogs.
/dermoid cysts, hamartomas, medulloblastomas, lym-
Amt J Vet Res 66: 1743-56.
phoma, disseminated histiocytic sarcoma and granular
cell tumors.
Kraft SL and Gavin PR (1999) Intracranial neoplasia. Clin 
Tech Small Anim Pract 14: 112-23.
 Parizel PM, Makkat S, Van Miert E, Van Goethem JW, van
CT features
den Hauwe L and De Schepper AM (2001) Intracranial
 Intracranial epidermoid and dermoid cyst 
hemorrhage: principles of CT and MRI interpretation. Eur
 post-contrast: hypodense cerebellar mass with
Radiol 11: 1770-83.
 peripheral ring enhancement.
Porat-Mosenco Y, Schwarz T and Kass PH (2004) Thick-
Hamartomas
 section reformatting of thinly collimated computed tom-
单
variable, may be associated with hemorrhage
ography for reduction of skullbase-related artifacts in
(Figure 19.9).
dogs and horses. Vet Radiol UIltrasound 45: 131-5.
Medulloblastoma
Summers BA, Cummings JF and de Lahunta A (1995)
 hypodense cerebellar mass
Veterinary neuropathology. St Louis, Ml: Mosby.
strong
Thomas WB (1999) Nonneoplastic disorders of the brain. Clin 
· post-contrast:
mild
to
contrast
Tech Small Anirm Pract 14: 125-47.
enhancement
 Tidwell AS and Jones JC (1999) Advanced imaging concepts:
may
associated
with
cysts
 and/or
a pictorial glossary of CT and MRI technology. Clin Tech
hemorrhage.
Small Anim Pract 14: 65-111.
单
 Lymphoma, disseminated histiocytic sarcoma and
Tucker RL and Gavin PR (1996) Brain imaging. Vet Clin North 
granular cell tumors
Am Small Anim Pract 26: 735-58.
CHAPTER TWENTY
PITUITARY GLAND
Silke Hecht and Tobias Schwarz
INTRODUCTION
CT: ANATOMY
General
The pituitary gland is intimately associated with the
brain, and some pituitary diseases (masses and hemor-
The pituitary gland (hypophysis cerebri) is located
-su sods ooomau u nmsan Ae (a
proudsisq a jo essoy reasuoy a u
guishable from primary brain disorders. Therefore,
bone. The rostral boundary of the fossa is formed by
evaluation of the pituitary gland is routinely per-
the tuberculum sellae and rostral clinoid processes,
formed as part of a CT examination of the brain.
and the caudal border is formed by the dorsum sellae
Specific indications for a specific CT examination of
and caudal clinoid processes (Figure 20.1). Due to the
the pituitary gland include endocrinopathies such as
resemblance of this anatomic area to a Turkish saddle
it is often referred to as 'sella turcica'. During embry-
and insulin-resistant diabetes mellitus/acromegaly in
onic development, Rathke's pouch arising from the
cats. Suprasellar extension indicating gross enlarge-
 primary oral cavity becomes closed and it remains as
ment of the gland is easily identified on a routine brain
a small cavity (Rathke's cleft) between the anterior and
 CT scan without modification of imaging parameters.
 posterior lobes of the pituitary gland.
If further evaluation of a normal-sized pituitary gland
 The pituitary gland consists of two embryologically
is desired, or if dynamic studies are pursued for diag-
distinct components:
nosis and surgical plarning of pituitary microadeno-
mas, the scanning protocol has to be modified
 The adenohypophysis develops from a dorsal
accordingly.
invagination of ectoderm from the oral cavity and
is comprised of three parts (parts distalis, pars
 intermedia and pars tuberalis). The blood supply
IMAGING PROTOCOL
 of the adenohypophysis is provided by a venous
portal system in which the primary capillary
In many instances the pituitary gland is evaluated
e um pana st snueod au jo yomiu
in the frame of a brain CT study (transverse images
secondary capillary network forming the sinusoids
and subsequent multiplanar /sagittally reconstructed
of the adenohypophysis.
images; see brain CT protocol, Chapter 19). Table 20.1
The neurohypophysis develops from an invagina-
specifies imaging parameters for a CT examination tar-
tion of neural ectoderm from the hypothalamus. It
geted at the pituitary gland. Several different protocols
is continuous with the hypothalamus dorsally, con-
for the dynamic examination of the canine and feline
tains a central cavity formed by an outpouching of
pituitary gland have been described. Three sample
the third ventricle, and is more or less centrally
protocols for dynamic studies are listed here, but
located within surrounding adenohypophyseal
parameters may require modification dependent on
tissue. Unlike the adenohypophysis the neurohy-
the equipment available.
pophysis has a direct arterial blood supply.
saunes Auu 'ziemups sa q pauis fy pan 
@ 2011 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
197
198 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Table 20.1
CT Imaging protocol for the pituitary gland.
Standard 
examination 
pre- and
Dynamic CT
Dynamic CT
 Helical CT examination 
 Series
post-contrast
examination (dog)**
examination (cat)***
劳怀务*(bop)
 Decubitus 
Ventral 
Slice orientation
Transverse (perpendicular to skull base)
 Scan margins
Rostral clinoid
 Initial scan to identify maximum size of
 Tuberculum sellae (-→
process ←→
 pituitary gland: rostral clinoid process (→
dorsum sellae
dorsum sellae 
 dorsum sellae
 Serial images 
9-11 images at same
Images at same 
One helical scan before 
table position (largest
table position every
and 8 helical scans 
size of pituitary
 5-7 s for a total of
during and after bolus
gland)
 5min
injection
Voltage (kVp)
110-130
120
Current (mA)
100-150
220
100
63
Tube rotation time (s)
1-3
2.8-4.5
2
1.5
Interscan time (s)
N/A
9.5-11.2
3-5
16-26
 Slice width (collimated,
1-2
1
mm)
 Sequential slice interval
1-2
N/A
(mm)
 Ker nel frequency
 Standard
Bone
 Standard
 Pitch
N/A
2
 Helical image 
N/A
0.5
reconstruction interval
 Contrast medium
Peripheral vein
 Saphenous vein
 Cephalic vein 
 Peripheral vein 
 application site
 Contrast medium type 
lodine based
Contrast medium dose
 800mg l/kg bw
 760 mg I/kg bw
0.5 ml/kg bw
Mq by/ Bu 00z
(370mg /ml)
Contrast medium
 Manual 
 Manual (rapid 
Automated (150 psi;
Manual (rapid injection)
 injection mode 
injection)
5ml/s)
 Scan delay post start
None
 First scan initiated 5s
 Onset of injection 
None
contrast injection
 after start of injection 
timed to acquisition
onset of third 
dynamic image
Window level (HU)
A*: +80
+80
+200
+80
B*: 240
Window width (HU)
A*: +250
250
1000
250
B*: 250
*Use of two different window settings to evaluate the brain-pituitary gland edge (A) and the bone-pituitary gland edge (B), respectively,
improves accuracy in pituitary gland size measurements.
**Van der Vlugt-Meijer (2004).
关**Tyson (2005).
****Van der Vlugt-Meijer (2007).
199 PITUITARY GLAND
 approximately 10 x 7 x 5mm (length x width x height)
 in normal dogs and 5.2 x 3.1mm (width x height) in
normal cats. To address variations in pituitary gland
size between dogs of different sizes and breeds the
 pituitary gland height-to-brain ratio (P:B ratio) was
introduced:
Pituitary gland height (mm)× 100 mm
P:B ratio
Brain area (mm²)
The P:B ratio allows distinction of enlarged (PB
ratio > 0.31) from non-enlarged (PB ratio ≤ 0.31) pitui-
tary glands. It may be useful as an objective standard
to compare different patients or different examinations
 of the same patient over time.
Figure 20.1 CT anatomy of the normal canine pituitary
gland. Sagittally reconstructed post-contrast image illus-
trates location of the pituitary gland (asterisk) in the pitui-
Anatomic variants and pitfalls
tary fossa bordered rostrally by the tuberculum sellae and
caudally by the dorsum sellae with the caudal clinoid
Pseudo pituitary masses in cats (Figure 20.3)
process.
In cats, the prominent dorsum sellae may mimic a
The pituitary gland is surrounded by a venous circle
 pre- and post-contrast images, and comparison of
formed by the venous sinuses laterally and the inter-
 transverse images to sagittally reconstructed images
aso u st in epnes pue Aenson sasnus snoaai
helps to identify this pitfall.
proximity to several components of the central nervous
 system, including hypothalamus, optic chiasm, mamil-
lary bodies and cranial nerves II, IV, Va and VI.
Empty sella in dogs (Figure 20.3)
Herniation of the subarachnoid space into the pituitary
Specific CT features and measurements
fossa with apparent complete lack or reduced size of
 Mean pre-contrast attenuation values of the normal
the hypophysis can be associated with endocrine dis-
turbances in humans. In one MRI study 11/370 dogs
au ul NHos Aiaeuxoidde ane pue[s Areimd auuen
(3%) had a small or missing hypophysis (Konar et al.
central and 70HU in the peripheral parts. Following
2008). Ten of these dogs had no clinical signs of endo-
intravenous administration of  iodinated contrast
 medium, the gland is characterized by rapid and strong
crinopathy, and it was concluded that empty sella may
 be an occasional incidental variant in dogs.
contrast enhancement. If a dynamic study is performed,
initial central enhancement of the gland followed by
complete homogeneous or ring enhancement is com-
monly observed. The reason for the early central neu-
Note: Care must be taken not to confuse an
rohyphophyseal enhancement (pituitary flush') is the
 empty sella with a cyst or cystic mass occupy-
direct arterial blood supply compared to the delayed
ing the pituitary fossa.
enhancement of the adenohypophysis through the
portal blood supply (Figure 20.2). Degree and timing
 of maximum contrast enhancement vary with contrast
 medium dose, speed of injection and individual factors.
DISEASE FEATURES
 In cats, maximum enhancement has been reported to
occur between 14 and 50s from the onset of contrast
Malformation/Developmental
medium injection. In dogs, maximum enhancement of
Rathke's cleft cyst
the central and peripheral parts has been reported to
 occur 0-28 s and 14-70s following maximum enhance-
Rathke's cleft cyst is a cystic malformation of Rathke's
cleft. This is a very uncommon finding in dogs; it may
 -uos Sumooy panseau jsaq s puels Aieimid au
 be associated with pituitary dwarfism or may be
trast medium administration. The gland measures
asymptomatic.
200 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Figure 20.2 (A) Transverse dynamic post-contrast images
demonstrating normal enhancement of the pituitary gland
with an initial central contrast enhancement (pituitary flush,
arrow) representing the arterial blood supply of the neurohy-
 Jo quauasureyua snoauasouou juanbasqns (g) pue sisAudod
the entire pituitary gland. (C) Pituitary brain ratio in a normal
dog with a pituitary height of 3mm and a corresponding
cross-sectional brain area of 1360mm? (P :B ratio 0.21).
CT features
 Well-circumscribed rounded to ovoid hypodense
structure within and possibly extending dorsal to
 the pituitary fossa
 post-contrast: ring enhancement possible.
Can be difficult to differentiate from empty sella.
Vascular
 Pituitary apoplexy-like disease in dogs
This syndrome is uncommon in dogs and may result 
from sudden infarction or hemorrhage in a normal
 oum Aremd e oon anou 'no pue Armd
CT features
· Inhomogeneous pituitary mass with necrotic and/
or hemorrhagic areas (diagnosis made based on
 combination of clinical and imaging findings).
Neoplasia
 Pituitary macrotumors
Pituitary adenomas are fairly common in dogs but rare
in cats. Pituitary adenocarcinomas are rare.
CT features
 Suprasellar extension of the pituitary gland/
 pituitary mass of variable size, homogeneity and
margination (Figures 20.4 and 20.5).
 Adenoma, invasive adenoma and carcinoma have
similar imaging features.
 Osseous involvement and presence of metastases
are consistent with carcinoma (Figure 20.6), but
metastases are rarely found on imaging.
 Concurrent findings (hemorrhage, hydrocephalus,
brain edema, mass effect) possible and similar to
other extra-axial brain tumors (see Chapter 19).
Pituitary microtumors
A diagnosis of a pituitary microtumor is usually made
-ada juapuadap-aenmd ym shop un sonsnxa Aq
201 PITUITARY GLAND
Figure 20.3 Pitfalls in pituitary imaging. (A) In cats, the
o ss Ad e or A aas  juu
transverse images (arrow). (B) Evaluation of a corresponding
sagittally reconstucted image reveals a normal size pituitary
 gland bordered caudally by the dorsum sellae (arrow).(C) A
hypodense non-contrast-enhancing canine pituitary gland
 consistent with an empty sella, an incidental finding.
adrenocorticism if no pituitary macrotumor is identi-
fied on imaging. Dynamic CT studies can identify an
absent or displaced pituitary flush and indirectly
 suggest the presence of a microtumor. If further char-
acterization is required (e.g. for surgical planning) a
'panad keidi si Apnis orup
CT features
 Conventional CT scan: often normal, possibly mild
 enlargement of pituitary gland.
 Dynamic CT scan: displacement of neurohypophy-
seal flush (Figure 20.7).
 Note: A normal pituitary CT study (conventional
and dynamic) does not rule out pituitary
dependent hyperadrenocorticism.
 Craniopharyngiomas and suprasellar germ
cell tumors
These are tumors arising in the suprasellar region
'sies pue shop qoq u panodan uaq aaey yum
Craniopharyngioma is a benign neoplasm that is
 derived from epithelial remnants of the oropharyngeal
ectoderm of Rathke's pouch. Suprasellar germ cell 
 tumors occur in the same location and are histologi-
cally characterized by the presence of several different
 pase-appru oi nmpe Sumon ut msso sadki 1ount uog
animals, are often very large and grow along the 
ventral aspect of the brain.
CT features (Figure 20.8)
Very large masses associated with the ventral
aspect of the brain
 post-contrast: usually strong enhancement of
variable homogeneity.
 Osseous involvement and extension into pharynx,
C
 nasal cavity and tympanic bullae possible.
 Craniopharyngiomas have both solid and cystic
 areas and often have a stalk-like shape.
202 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Figure 20.4 Pituitary macroadenoma in a dog presented with pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism. (A) Transverse
and (B) sagittally reconstructed post-contrast CT images show a large, smoothly marginated and homogeneously contrast
Figure 20.5 Pihuitary tumor (macroadenoma, presump
five) in a cat presented with therapy resistant diabetes mel-
litus and acromegaly. On post-contrast transverse CT image
there is a round, well circumscribed and homogeneously
Figure 20.6 Pituitary adenocarcinoma in a dog presented
for blindness and vestibular signs but no evidence of endo
dorsally
crinopathy. Post-contrast transverse CT image shows a lysis
of the basisphenoid bone with extension of the mass into the
nasopharynx, compatible with aggressive nature of the
tumor.
203 PITUITARY GLAND
Figure 20.7 Dynamic contrast-enhanced transverse CT
Figure 20.8 Transverse CT image shows a stalk-like
study in a dog with pituitary adenoma. Early arterial phase 
images demonstrate lateral displacement of the pituitary
And auis e uo Susine sse Susua-isno
flush (arrow).
 gland consistent with a craniopharyngioma. Other pituitary
 masses should also be considered.
REFERENCES
of the canine pituitary gland height on computed tomo-
graphic images using a phantom. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 48:
113-17.
Konar M, Burgener IA and Lang J (2008) Magnetic resonance
Bertolini G, Rosseti E and Caldin M (2007) Pihuitary
imaging features of empty sella in dogs. Vet Radiol
apoplexy-like disease in 4 dogs. J Vet Intern Med 21:
Ultrasound 49: 339-42.
2151-7.
Tyson R, Graham JP, Bermingham E, Randall S and Berry CR
 Hasegawa D, Uchida K, Kobayashi M et al. (2009) Imaging
(2005) Dynamic computed tomography of the normal
diagnosis - Rathke's cleft cyst. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 50:
feline hypophysis cerebri (Glandula Pituitaria). Vet Radiol
298-300.
LUltrasound 46: 33-8.
 Love NE, Fisher P and Hudson L (2000) The computed tomo-
Van der Vlugt-Meijer RH, Meij BP and Voorhout G (2007)
 graphic enhancement pattern of the normal canine pitui-
 Dynamic helical computed tomographic evaluation of the
tary gland. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 41: 507-10.
pituitary gland in healthy dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 48:
 Pollard RE, Reilly CM, Uerling MR, Wood FD and Feldman
118-24.
EC (2010) Cross-sectional imaging characteristics of
Van der Vlugt-Meijer RH, Meij BP and Voorhout G (2004)
pituitary adenomas, invasive adenomas and adenocarci-
 Dynamic computed tomographic evaluation of the pitui-
nomas in dogs: 33 cases (1988-2006). J Vet Intern Med 24:
tary gland in healthy dogs. Arm J Vet Res 65: 1518-24.
160-5.
FURTHER READING
Auriemma E, Voorhout G and Barthez PY (2007) Determin-
ation of optimal window width and level for measurement
CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE
CRANIAL NERVES AND
ASSOCIATED SKULL FORAMINA
Laurent Couturier
IMAGING PROTOCOL
CT DISEASE FEATURES
 See Table 21.1 and Figures 21.1-21.3.
Trauma
 Trauma to the skull can modify the normal anatomy
 of skull foramina and distort the pathway of cranial
CT: ANATOMY AND NORMAL
nerves.
VARIANTS
CT features
The anatomy of the cranial nerves and associated skull
Images reconstructed with bone algorithms allow
foramina is one of the most complex in the body. Some
identification of small fractures of the base of the skull
of the 12 cranial nerves are of greater clinical impor-
and particularly fractures affecting the skull foramina.
tance than others, especially in the dog. The cranial
Displaced fractures or associated hematoma can com-
 nerves are of soft tissue density, making them impos-
press cranial nerve pathways.
sible to visualize on CT images; they can be visualized
with MRI, because of the higher contrast resolution on
Infection/Inflammation
MR images. Nevertheless, CT allows detailed identifi-
cation of the skull foramina and thus allows indirect
Infectious diseases adjacent to skull foramina
visualization of the emergence of cranial nerves from
 Diseases such as otitis interna, middle-ear disease and
the skull base.
 abscesses in the soft tissues surrounding the head, or
The normal anatomy with corresponding skull
 grass awn migration can result in focal osteitis of the
foramina is showm in Table 21.2.
skull bones, close to or involving the skull foramina
'msai e se Kemued aaiau e Suissanduos pue
CT features
 Bone lysis, and eventual secondary sclerosis, can
be a sign of osteomyelitis, generally associated
Feline anatomical specificities
Cats do not have an alar canal and the maxillary
with soft tissue swelling and/or mass effect
branch of the trigeminal cranial nerve exits
 one example is severe otitis media and second-
through the foramen rotundum on the ventral
ary osteomyelitis of the petrous part of the tem-
aspect of the skull. In dogs, the maxillary branch
 poral bone, which can distort and compress the
of the trigeminal cranial nerve exits through the
facial and vestibulocochlear nerves. Clinically,
the disease can progress from head tilt to uni-
foramun rotundum on the dorsal aspect of the
skull base before joining the alar canal and
lateral paralysis of the facial cranial nerve.
Post-contrast:
exiting through the rostral alar foramen on the
ventral aspect of the skull base.
 diffuse uptake of iodine in the soft tissues adja-
cent to the facial canal for example
Veterinary Computed Tomography, First Edition. Edited by Tobias Schwarz, Jimmy Saunders.
@ 2011 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
205
206 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
 if a fistula is identified it must be followed to
ondary brain tumors can compress the pathway of
delineate the margins of the lesion, looking for
cranial nerves. Most of the cranial nerve tumors are
grass awn migration in particular.
intradural extramedullary tumors. Their histological
characteristics include malignant features in most 
Idiopathic neuritis
Neuritis of the optic, trigeminal and facial cranial
nerves has been described in dogs and can be uni- or
Table 21.1
bilateral (especially for trigeminal neuritis with the 
CT imaging protocol {intravenous contrast study: standard
clinical presentation of 'dropped jaw').
protocol; see Chapter 5).
 Series
Pre- and post-contrast 
Bone
CT features
 Neuritis of the trigeminal cranial nerve is indirectly
Recumbency
Ventral
identified due to bilateral masticatory muscle
 Scan margins
 Cribriform plate →> Occiput 
atrophy.
Voltage (kVp)
120
 No lesion is identified on skull foramina since idi-
Current (mAs)
250
 opathic neuritis does not result in significant cranial 
Tube rotation time (s)
0.5
nerve enlargement.
 Slice width four-slices
4 ×1mm
 Post-contrast: Contrast enhancement has been
 helical CT
described in the normal and abnormal CN V on
Kernel frequency
Medium
High
MRI and can also be seen on CT. Asymmetrical
contrast enhancement is suggestive of pathology
 Collimator pitch
0.75
 Helical image
0.8
Neoplasia
 reconstruction interval
Window level (HU)
+35
+200
Neoplasia can affect cranial nerves primarily or com-
 -bas 1o Areund jo sadi Iv epuonas uan ssaid
Window width (HU)
100
2000
Table 21.2
 Cranial nerves and corresponding skull foramina in the dog.
Dog
Origin
 Skull entrance foramen
 Skull exit foramen 
Olfactory CN I
Olfactory mucosa
 Cribriform plate 
Cribriform plate 
Optic CN Il (Figure 21.4B)
Diencephalon
Optic ca nal
Optic canal
Oculomotor CN Ill (Figure 21.4B)
Mesencephalon
 Orbital fissure 
Orbital fissure
Trochlear CN IV (Figure 21.4B)
Mesencephalon
 Orbital fissure 
 Orbital fissure
Trigeminal CN V
Metencephalon
Ophthalmic branch (Figure 21.4B)
 Orbital fissure
Orbital fissure
Maxillary branch (Figure 21.2A)
Foramen rotundum
 Rostral alar foramen
Mandibular branch (Figure 21.2B)
Foramen ovale
Foramen ovale
Abducens CN VI (Figure 21.4B)
Myelencephalon
Orbital fissure
Orbital fissure
Facial CN Vll (Figures 21.1 and 21.3)
Myelencephalon
Internal acoustic meatus
Stylomastoid foramen
then facial canal
Vestibulocochlear CN VIll
Myelencephalon
Internal acoustic meatus
(Figures 21.1 and 21.3)
Glossopharyngeal CN IX
Myelencephalon
Jugular foramen 
Tympano-occipital fissure
Vagal CN X
 Myelencephalon
 Jugular foramen 
Tympano-occipital fissure 
Accessory CN XI
Myelencephalon 
Jugular foramen 
Tympano-occipital fissure 
Hypoglossal CN Xll 
Myelencephalon
Hypoglossal canal
Hypoglossal canal 
CN = cranial nerve.
207 CRANIAL NERVES AND ASSOCIATED SKULL FORAMINA
cases. The term malignant peripheral nerve sheath
CT features (Figures 21.2-21.4)
tumor or MPNST (neurofibroma/neurofibrosarcoma,
 Enlargement of the cranial nerve pathway or
neurilemoma and schwannoma/neurinoma) is now
 used to include all types of malignant tumor involving
nucleus, which can sometimes be directly identi-
fied, especially on post-contrast CT images, or indi-
nerve sheaths.
Of the cranial nerves, MPNST most commonly
rectly because of enlarged skull foramina.
 involves the trigeminal nerve, producing signs of uni-
lateral trigeminal nerve dysfunction (e.g. unilateral
masticatory muscle atrophy - temporalis and/or mas-
seter). Brainstem compression by a neurofibroma
thought to be of cranial nerve origin, and by a trigemi-
nal
 neurofibrosarcoma/schwannoma,
has  been
reported in dogs. Lymphosarcoma occasionally affects
cranial nerves in dogs and cats, and may extend
intracranially  Myelomonocytic  neoplasia  of  the
 trigeminal nerves, resulting in a dropped mandible
 and symetrical atrophy of the masticatory muscles,
has also been described in this species. Various tumors
 of the ear canal, including squamous cell carcinoma,
ceruminous adenocarcinoma and fibrosarcoma, as
well as osteosarcoma of the skull, may involve the
facial nerve or one of its branches. Neurofibromas
involving the vestibulocochlear nerve are very rare.
Figure 21.1  Transverse CT image at the level of the vesti-
Cranial nerve function may be altered by compression
bule and semicircular canals in a normal dog. Note the
from meningiomas lying on the calvarial floor (plaque-
normal appearance of the internal acoustic meatus (arrow),
like meningiomas).
where the vestibulocochlear and facial cranial nerve enter
together before the facial cranial nerve penetrates the facial
canal in the petrosal part of the temporal bone.
A
Figure 21.2 Adult dog with right trigeminal nerve sheath tumor. (A) Transverse CT image shows an enlarged rostral alar
foramen (arrow) due to enlarged maxillary branch of cranial nerve V and a severe ipsilateral atrophy of the temporalis muscle
(arrowheads). (B) Transverse CT image slightly caudal to A shows a right trigeminal nerve sheath tumor (asterisks) with
suspected enlarged mandibular branch of cranial nerve V and secondarily enlarged oval foramen (arrow). There is severe 
ipsilateral atrophy of the temporalis muscle (arrowheads).
208 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
·A mass can also been identified in intra- or extra-
axial locations and its CT characteristics depend on
the histologic type of the tumor. Mass effect on
 CTranial nerve nuclei or pathways can explain the
clinical signs of the patient.
 The mass can be hypo-, iso- or hyperdense on pre-
and post-contrast images, depending on its attenu-
 ating and histological properties.
FURTHER READING
Bagley RS, Wheeler SJ, Klopp L et al. (1998) Clinical features
 of trigeminal nerve-sheath tumor in 10 dogs. J Am Anim
Hosp Ass0c 34: 19-25.
Couturier L, Degueurce C, Ruel Y, Dennis R and Begon D
Figure 21.3 Adult dog with isolated right-sided facial
(2005) Anatomical study of cranial nerve emergence and
skull foramina in the dog using magnetic resonance
facial canal (arrow) secondary to a suspected nerve sheath
imaging and computed tomography. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
tumor of the right facial cranial nerve. Note the normal
46: 375-83.
 appearance of the contralateral facial canal just dorsal to the
Mayhew PD, Bush WW and Glass EN (2002) Trigeminal
vestibule (arrowhead). The facial canal has an S-shaped
neuropathy in dogs: a retrospective study of 29 cases
pathway through the petrosal part of the temporal bone,
(1991-2000). J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 38: 262-70.
making its identification difficult within the petrosal bone
 Pettigrew R, Rylander H and Schwarz T (2009) Magnetic
(image courtesy of Dr Ariel Cohen-Solal, Belgium).
resonance imaging contrast enhancement of the trigeminal
nerve in 42 dogs without evidence of trigeminal neuropa-
thy. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 50: 276-8.
A
B
Figure 21.4 Adult dog with lymphoplasmocytic lymphoma with asymmetrical distribution. The dog was presented for
acute left-sided blindness and exophthalmos. (A) Post-contrast transverse CT image at the level of the optic canal shows left-
sided enlarged optic canal (arrow) secondary to an optic cranial nerve tumor. There is diffuse uptake of contrast medium in
 the left optic nerve tract. The contralateral optic cranial nerve area has a normal appearance. (B) 3-D reconstructed CT image
of an isolated sphenoid bone. All the oculomotor nerves (oculomotor-trochlear-trigeminal ophthalmic branch - abducens
cranial nerve in the orbital fissure and optic cranial nerve in the optic canal) are enlarged and there is secondary optic canal
and orbital fissure enlargement on the left side. 1 = optic canal, 2 = optical fissure, 3 = rostral alar foramen, 4 = oval foramen,
 5 = caudal alar foramen, 6 = musculotubal canal, 7 = foramen lacerum, 8 = enlarged optic canal, 9 = enlarged orbital fissure.
CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO
VERTEBRAL COLUMN AND
SPINAL CORD
Gabriela Seiler, Jennifer Kinns, Sophie Dennison,
Jimmy Saunders and Tobias Schwarz
IMAGING PROTOCOL
The intervertebral disk consists of a central nucleus
 pulposus (semi-fluid tissue) and a peripheric annulus
fibrosus (fibrous tissue). These disks make an appreci-
See Tables 22.1, 22.2.
able contribution to the articulated column in the
normal animal but show consistently degenerative
CT: ANATOMY AND NORMAL
changes with advance in age, commonly causing back
 trouble. This normal joint pattern is modified in the
VARIANTS
cranial region where the atlanto-occipital and atlanto-
Vertebral column (Figure 22.1)
axial joints allow free movement of the head, and in
the pelvic region where sacral fusion occurs. Ligaments
The vertebral column consists of a large number of ver-
in the occipito-atlanto-axial region mainly ensure the
tebrae firmly but not rigidly joined together. The verte-
stability between vertebrae and no intervertebral disk
brae conform to a common pattern that can be further
is present between these vertebrae.
 distinguished into five vertebral regions (abbreviation
 In addition to the joints, three long ligaments extend
and number of vertebrae): cervical (C7), thoracic (T13),
along substantial portions of the spine. The dorsal lon-
lumbar (L7), sacral (S3) and caudal (Cd variable). A
 gitudinal ligament runs along the floor of the vertebral
typical vertebra consists of a massive vertebral body
canal from the axis to the sacrum, the ventral longitu-
surmounted by an arch. The vertebral body is broadly
dinal ligament follows the ventral aspect of the verte-
cylindrical, somewhat flattened on its dorsal surface,
brae from the mid-thoracic region to the sacrum and
convex cranially and concave caudally. The arch con-
 the (supraspinous) common ligament runs over the
sists of two upright pedicles and a lamina joining
summits of the spinous processes of the thoracic and
them, forming the vertebral canal around the spinal
 lumbar vertebrae. The common ligament has a cranial
cord. The bases of the pedicles are notched and when
continuation in the dog, but not in the cat, which
successive bones articulate, these notches combine to
attaches to the spinous process of the axis.
outline intervertebral foramina, the opening through
Typical CT density values for structures and lesions
which both the spinal nerves and the vessels that
in the vertebral canal are listed in Table 22.3.
supply the structures within the vertebral canal pass.
The vertebrae carry region specific processes, such as
the spinous, articular and transverse process. Inter-
Meninges and spaces (Figure 22.2)
breed variations have been described in the morphol-
Epidural space
ogy of the atlas and dimensions of vertebrae in general.
There are two sets of joints between vertebrae:
The epidural space contains fat and the venous sinuses.
At the level of the intervertebral disk space the ventral
·synovial joints between the articular processes
venous sinuses are paired and exit from either side via
· cartilaginous joints (intervertebral disks) between
the intervertebral foramen. The sinuses merge on the
the vertebral bodies.
-uon ‘reues ieuds a unorn laan Aau se aunu
Veterinary Computed Tomography, First Edition. Edited by Tobias Schwarz, Jimmy Saunders.
@ 2011 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
209
210 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Table 22.1
standard protocol; see Chapter 5).
Series
Pre-co ntrast
Bone
Decubitus
Dorsal
 Special positioning 
Cervical spine: elevate head to maintain extension; tape limbs caudally
1/27 Jo t/o ylm ll Aueh ubiie (Aljeueno sqwll adei :aujds heqwnjoseoul
intervertebral disk 
Lumbosacral: align gantry tilt with L7-S1 intervertebral disk 
 Scan margins
Cervical: occipitoatlantal joint ←→ T2 vertebral body 
Thoracolumbar: cranial T2 vertebral body ←→> L4 vertebral body
Lumbosacral: L4 verterbral body (→ S3 vertebral body 
Voltage (kVp)
120
100
Current (mAs)
200
Tube rotation time (s)
1
Slice width (mm)
1-2
 Sequential slice interval (mm)
1
Kernel frequency
Medium
High
Window level (HU)
+100
+500
Window width (HU)
300
3000
Table 22.2
 CT myelography.
 Series
CT myelography (Figure 22.2)
Access site
 Cervical (cisternal): occiput-C1
Lumbar: L5-L6 or L4-L5 (larger dogs)
Scan margin 
If following conventional myelography, include two vertebral bodies cranial and caudal to 
region of interest for improved multiplanar reconstructions 
Contrast medium
 Lumbar or cervical myelogram injection
application site
 Contrast medium type
 Non-ionic, monomeric, iodinated contrast medium only 
Contrast medium dose 
60mg /kg bw (0.2 ml/kg of 300mg I/ml)
 Maximum dose: 135mg I/kg bw (0.45 ml/kg of 300 mg/ml) or 20ml iohexol
Contrast medium
Manual
injection mode
 Scan delay post start
As soon as possible
contrast injection 
 Side effects
 Post-myelogram seizures: increased risk with cisternal injection (> Iumbar injection) and
larger volumes of contrast medium. latrogenic brainstem injury (for cisternal injection) 
Undesired effect
 Accidental epidural injection can be recognized as the contrast medium will track along
the nerve roots at each intervertebral foramen
Additional comment
 CSF samples (cisternal easier) should be collected prior to contrast medium injection, as 
the contrast medium alters the differential cell count within 24h and can affect the growth
 of bacteria in culture 
211 VERTEBRAL COLUMN AND SPINAL CORD
  ()   ( () a  ()  r e go s  a t 
(L2) with mutrient foramina (arrows). (D) Sacrum and sacroiliac joint. AP = articular process; IL = ilium; L = vertebral lamina;
juiog asiaasuen = Hi issaoaid snouds = ds fuol si-ores = Is fuaueog teioes = Hs isqn = Y faiipad Tenqalraa = d
TP = transverse process; VB = vertebral body; VF = vertebral foramen.
Table 22.3
Subdural space
Typical density values for structures in the vertebral canal.
This is a potential space created by lacerations of the
Tissue
Density {HU)
dura border cell layer post mortem. Intra vitam it is
not usually imaged unless contrast medium is inad-
Fat
-100
 vertently injected into it during a myelographic study.
Spinal cord*
+40
Ligaments
+50
Hematoma
+100
Vertebral cortical bone
+1000
Subarachnoid space
*No signal gray/white matter distinction.
 The subarachnoid space contains cerebrospinal fluid
(CSF) and surrounds the spinal cord. The space is
necting with the basivertebral venous sinuses. There
located between the arachnoid cells adhered to the
are no valves within these venous sinuses thus flow
 dura mater and the pia mater, which is tightly adhered
directionality may vary. Arteries course along the
to the spinal cord. The spinal cord is suspended in
 lateral, dorsal and cranially ventral aspects of the 
the subarachnoid space through the denticulate
spinal cord.
ligament.
212 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
B
Figure 22.2 Normal dog (L3-L4 intervertebral disk space). (A) Transverse CT image shows the epidural fat (arrows), which
is hypodense to the spinal cord. (B) Transverse CT myelogram shows the hyperdense (compared with spinal cord) contrast
medium (arrows) within the subarachnoid space. (C) Transverse CT myelogram shows the nerve roots (arrows). SC = spinal
cord.
Spinal cord (Figure 22.2)
cences are ‘swellings' or enlargements of the spinal
cord that correspond to the segments contributing to
Spinal cord segments become comparatively more
the brachial (C6-T1) and lumbosacral (L4-S1) plexi.
cranial with respect to their corresponding vertebral
 These should not be mistaken for pathologic spinal
body number as one moves caudally. The cord ends at
cord swelling.
approximately the level of L5 vertebral body, although
the exact location of the terminal spinal cord varies
Nerve roots (Figure 22.2)
according to the size of the animal. In general, the
spinal cord terminates further cranially in large dogs
Nerve roots leave the spinal canal via intervertebral
than in small dogs. The cervical and lumbar intumes-
foramen and are named according to the exit location.
213 VERTEBRAL COLUMN AND SPINAL CORD
C1 to C7 nerve roots exit from the intervertebral
CT features (Figure 22.4)
foramen cranial to their respective vertebral body, C8
 Increased width of the space between the odontoid
nerve roots exit caudal to the C7 vertebral body, and
 process and intercentrum of the atlas.
 nerve roots caudal to C8 exit caudal to their respective
Congenital:
vertebral body.
 odontoid process of the axis absent, hypoplastic
 or dysplastic. May be accompanied by an
occipito-atlantoaxial malformation. An abnor-
Cauda equina
mally dorsal dens angulation can cause spinal
cord bruising
The position of the end of the thecal sac and the begin-
incomplete ossification of the atlas
ning of the cauda equina is variable and ranges from
 L6 to the sacrum; in small breed dogs and cats it tends 
 in case of failure of ligaments, the dens tends to
 to be more caudally located than in large breed dogs.
 protrude dorsally in the spinal cord.
 On transverse CT images the thecal sac presents as a
Traumatic:
round, soft tissue-dense structure in the center of the
- fracture of the odontoid process.
vertebral canal. It gradually becomes more dorsally
located and the paired nerve roots can be seen as round
Cavitary disease
 opacities along its ventrolateral margins (Figure 22.3A).
The nerve roots extend laterally until they exit the
intervertebral foramina. The cauda equina is sur-
 are referred to as cavitary conditions. They refer to
 rounded by a large amount of epidural fat and should
dilatation of the central canal, cavitation of the cord
be positioned symmetrically within the vertebral canal
 parenchyma or a combination of the two respectively.
(Figures 22.3B, 22.3C). Within the intervertebral
Hydromyelia may be congenital or acquired but is
foramina the nerve roots are surrounded by fat as well.
 often an incidental finding. The acquired form can
The lumbosacral disk is flat or dorsally convex and
result from a compressive lesion more cranially within
sometimes bulges slightly into the vertebral canal,
the spinal cord or within the brain. It can also be
which is not clinically relevant if no impingement of
 induced during myelography if contrast medium is
the cauda equina is present.
injected directly into the central canal (Figure 22.5A).
Many subclinical CT abnormalities of the lumbosac-
nosse un paodan uaaq seu eauus
sh yns shupuh shop rapno u umou aie auds [en
with
occipitocervical
malformation
syndrome.
vertebral canal or foraminal bone proliferation, loss of
 Syringohydromyelia results when the cavitations com-
 epidural or foraminal fat, intervertebral disk bulging.
municate with the central canal.
 degenerative articular process joint disease, disk min-
eralization and dural ossification should therefore
CT features (Figure 22.5B)
always be correlated with clinical signs.
 Hypodense central canal may be evident within
 the spinal cord.
CT myelography:
DISEASE FEATURES (TABLE
contrast-filled,
dilated central canal with
hydromyelia
22.4)
 contrast-filled cavitations if syringohydromyelia.
Malformation/Developmenta!
I uo pasouep Aisea pou eauourss 
Atlantoaxial subluxation
Cervical spondylomyelopathy
Atlantoaxial subluxation is mostly congenital, rarely
traumatic. Small breed dogs (Yorkshire terriers,
Caudal cervical spondylomyelopathy or wobbler syn-
Chihuahuas, miniature poodle) are more commonly
 drome is a general term to describe different causes of
affected but the disorder may be seen in cats and in
congenital or acquired vertebral canal stenosis in
large breed dogs. Predisposing factors include incom-
several large and giant breed dogs such as the
plete ossification of the atlas, aplasia, malangulation,
 Doberman pinscher and Great Dane. A large variety
hypoplasia of the odontoid process (dens) of the axis,
 of lesions with different proposed etiologies have
failure to the ligaments that maintains the odontoid
been atributed to this condition. Clinical signs result
process in position or a traumatic fracture of the odon-
from extradural compressive myelopathy of the cervi-
toid process.
cal spine. Compression can arise from vertebral
214 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Figure 22.3 Normal canine lumbosacral region. (A)
Transverse CT image (caudal L6) shows the thecal sac visible
as a round, soft tissue-dense structure in the center of the
vertebral canal (arrowhead). Several nerve roots accompany
the thecal sac bilaterally on its ventrolateral aspect. The seg-
mental nerve roots can be seen entering the intervertebral
foramina (arrows). All nerve roots of the cauda equina are
surrounded by hypodense fat. (B) Transverse CT image
 (lumbosacral disk space) shows the nerve roots much thinner
Aesrnauuss pue iey asuapoddy Aq papunoins Tus inq
distributed in the vertebral canal. The dorsal aspect of the
intervertebral disk (IVD) is flat. (C) Dorsally reconstructed
CT image shows the nerve roots of the cauda equina (arrows)
well outlined by epidural fat.
 malformation, vertebral malalignment, hypertrophy
 -le io padonaday 'uma wmuai au jo
formed articular processes or bulging of the fibrous
annulus. Spinal cord compression may be static or
dynamic.
CT protoco!
 Dynamic images can be acquired to evaluate the effect
of extension and flexion on the spinal cord. The study
 is then acquired with the animal in lateral recumbency
 and the neck secured in flexion or extension. This is
aq snur sal aun inq ssop arel Aiaa u uaaa aqissod
aq oste Ae uogoen jo inaa aul Xepnes pamas
 evaluated with the dog in standard dorsal recumbency
using weighted maxillary traction.
CT features
Vertebral body malformations such as flattening of
the cranioventral border or ‘thickening' of the
dorsal arch of the lamina.
 Protrusion of bony structures into the vertebral
canal (Figure 22.6A).
Abnormally positioned vertebral bodies (such as
craniodorsal tilting).
 Narrowed or collapsed intervertebral disk spaces.
Intervertebral foraminal stenosis.
 Articular process abnormalities.
Spondylosis deformans.
 Protrusion of soft tissue-dense material into the
vertebral canal at the level of the intervertebral
disk space.
1
 Dorsal ligament hypertrophy (Figure 22.6B).
-ei a jo uonan au u Sumq pue Suruan
mentum flavum (Figure 22.6C).
pnos leds ai jo ap no/pue Ado
215 VERTEBRAL COLUMN AND SPINAL CORD
Table 22.4
Differential diagnosis for spinal disorders (toxic disorders not included).
Most common disorders
Less common disorders
Malformation/
 Atlantoaxial subluxatio n/dysplasia
 Epidermoid cyst
Developmental
 Cavitary disorders (syringot hydro)myelia)
Hereditary myelopathy
Cervical spondylomyelopathy
Meningomyeloceles
Congenital vertebral malformations
Pilonodal (dermoid) cyst 
Osteochondromatosis
Sacroca udal dysgenesis 
Sacral osteochondritis dissecans
Intravertebral disk herniation (Schmorl's node)
 Spinal cord arachnoid cyst
Tethered cord syndrome
Osteocho ndromatosis
Trauma
Dural tear 
Brachial plexus avulsion myelopathy
Spinal fracture/luxation 
Gunshot injury
Spinal cord hematoma/ hemorrhage
 Sacrocaudal injury
 Traumatic disk injury
Inflammatory
Discospondylitis
Cauda equina neuritis
and infectious
Meningomyelitis
Foreign body migration
 Spinal epidural empyema
Degenerative
 Articular process joint arthrosis/lntraspinal
Cervical fibrotic stenosis 
articular cysts
Leukodystrophies
Degenerative disk disease
Lysosomal storage disease 
Degenerative lumbosacral stenosis
 Sacroiliac joint pain
Degenerative myelopathy
Dural mineralization
Neoplastic
 Primary or secondary neoplasia
 Extradural lipomatosis
Vascular
Ascending myelomalacia
Ischemic neuromyopathy
 Fibrocartilaginous embolism 
Neurogenic claudication
Traumatic feline ischemic myelopathy
 Vascular malformation
Miscellaneous
 Disseminated idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis
Calcinosis circumscripta (idiopathic)
(idiopathic)
Hypervitaminosis A (nutritional)
Diagnostic, radiation, surgical injury (iatrogenic)
Peridural scar (iatrogenic)
Thiamine deficiency (nutritional)
Congenital vertebral malformations
ing it for degenerative lumbosacral stenosis in dogs. It
is a component of the lower back pain syndrome and,
Congenital  vertebral  anomalies/malformations  are
-led auorpuAs eumba epnes aull sases aiaaas isou ul
due to an anomalous vertebral development in the
ticularly in working dogs.
 embryo. They include alterations in vertebral shape
and number Bulldogs, pugs and Boston terriers are
most commonly affected. Most of these malformations
CT features
Ae suis lenonomau anaaas inq rnodse ane
Hemivertebra (Figure 22.7A)
occur. Common disorders include transitional verte-
wedge-shaped vertebra, the degree of failure
bra, hemivertebra (wedge-shaped vertebra), butterfly
formation is variable, most common at mid-
vertebra, block vertebra or spina bifida. A transitional
thoracic level
vertebra has characteristics of two adjacent vertebral
 spinal   angulation 
(scoliosis,
kyphosis or
regions such as having one rib, transverse process or
lordosis).
sacral wing). A lumbosacral transitional vertebra may
 Block vertebra
lead to asymmetry of the lumbosacral junction and
two or more vertebrae are fused.
increased stress on the intervertebral disk, predispos-
Spina bifida (Figure 22.7B)
C6
Figure 22.4 14-month-old Chihuahua with congenital atlanto-axial subluxation. (A) Sagittally reconstructed CT image
shows dorsal displacement of the second cervical vertebra (C2) (arrows). (B) Dorsally reconstucted CT image shows the
absence of the dens of the axis (arrow).
 Figure 2.5 Adult dogs with cavitary disorders. (A) Transverse CT myelogram shows contrast medium (arrow) within a
mildly dilated central canal (canalogram). (B) Transverse CT myelogram shows contrast medium flling cavitations (syringo-
myelia) within the spinal cord (arrows).
217 VERTEBRAL COLUMN AND SPINAL CORD
Figure 22.6  Three different dogs with cervical spondylopa-
thy of different origin. (A) Transverse CT myelogram of the
caudal cervical spine in an adult bullmastiff that presented
sion of the spinal cord (arrow) due to vertebral malalignment 
and an enlarged, degenerative articular process (image cour-
tesy of N. Nelson, Ohio State University). (B) Transverse CT
myelogram shows a ventral displacement of the spinal cord
 due to dorsal ligament hypertrophy (asterisk). The contrast
medium in the subarachnoid space is thinmed dorsally on the
right side (arrow). (C) Transverse CT image shows a dorsal
displacement of the spinal cord due to ligamentum flavum
hypertrophy (arrow).
 defect in the dorsal arch resulting in a split
spinous process
CT-myelogram: meningocele.
 Butterfly vertebra
widened vertebral body with partial or com-
 plete longitudinal split
 adjacent vertebral bodies abnormally shaped
due to adaptation
 dorsalreconstruction: longitudinal dleft through
the body of a vertebra and a furnel shape at the
ends.
 Transitional vertebra (Figure 22.7C)
asymmetry of the lumbosacral junction
 additional transverse processes on the first
 sacral vertebra or joint transverse process of a
 lumbar vertebra with the ilial wing.
Osteochondromatosis (multiple cartilaginous
exostoses)
Osteochondromatosis, a form of skeletal dysplasia,
 shows expansile bony lesions that usually arise from
the osteochondral junction of bones. It results from an
abnormal differentiation of cartilage cells during endo-
 -[axs je sdons Aensn ymon pue uogesyisso [eipuou
a si a a  ra
the
costochondral rib jumction, less frequently the meta-
 physes of long bones and the vertebrae, where it can
 cause spinal cord compression. Neoplastic transforma-
tion may occur.
CT features (Figure 22.8)
 Bone attenuating mass(es) of variable density with
a thin, dense cortex and central low-density cancel-
lous bone.
 Lesion may appear active (homogeneous, smoothly
+
 marginated)
or
inactive
(irregular,
poorly
marginated).
·May invade the vertebral canal.
218 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Figure 22.7  Three different dogs with vertebral malforma-
tions. (A) Dorsally reconstructed CT image of a young dog
CT image of a young dog with spina bifida shows a split of
the dorsal vertebral arch (arrow). (C) Dorsally reconstructed
CT image of an adult dog with a transitional lumbosacral
vertebra shows L7 forming a transverse process on the left
(arrow), whereas the right side articulates with the ilium,
forming a second 'sacral wing'.
Osteochondritis dissecans of the sacrum
Osteochondrosis of the cranial endplate of the sacrum
has been described mainly in the German shepherd
dog. Since the fibers of the fibrous annulus of the lum-
Jo uoan a ul aeidpua a uo qoee xsp [eioesoq
the osteochondritic fragment, the disease usually leads
 to disk herniation and cauda equina compression at a
 young age. The caudal endplate of the seventh lumbar
vertebra may also be affected.
CT features (Figure 22.9)
 Focal defect in the cranial endplate of the sacrum,
surrounded by a sclerotic area in the vertebral
body - usually lateralized.
Osteochondral fragment may be craniodorsally
displaced.
 Lumbsacral disk herniation.
Subarachnoid cyst
 Subarachnoid cysts are focal enlargements of the sub-
arachnoid space. They are not true cysts as they lack
an epithelial lining. In dogs they are an uncommon 
finding and may cause spinal cord compression. The
etiology is unknown but as most cases present at an
early age a congenital origin is likely. Small breeds are
aiel pue aie sioeiou aul u paoae Aquounos arou
breeds in the cervical area. Rottweilers are over-
represented, suggesting a heritable component.
CT features (Figure 22.10)
 CT myelography with cisternal injection required
for diagnosis
 contrast filled focal enlargement of the dorsal
subarachnoid space
issando pro euds jo sanap Srea
Trauma
Dural tear
C
Blunt trauma may cause tearing of the dura, leading
to loss of CSF from the subarachnoid space.
219 VERTEBRAL COLUMN AND SPINAL CORD
Figure 22.8  Adult dog with an osteochondroma. Transverse
CT image shows bone proliferation (asterisk) originating
from the dorsal arch and growing ventrally to invade the left
half of the vertebral canal. The mass distorts the left dorsal
 aspect of the vertebral body (arrows). The spinal cord (SC)
is compressed and displaced to the right.
CT features (Figure 22.11)
Vertebral fracture or dislocation often present in
B
association.
Figure 22.9  Young dog with osteochondritis dissecans of
 CT myelography required for diagnosis 
the sacrum. (A) Transverse CT image shows a separated
 leakage of contrast from the subarachnoid space
bone fragment (arrow) at the dorsal aspect of the first sacral
 at the site of injury
vertebral body on the right aspect. (B) Dorsally reconstructed
contrast  leakage  may
be extradural or
CT image shows a separate bone fragment at the craniodor-
 intramedullary.
sal aspect of the first sacral vertebra in front of a bone defect
(arrows).
 Spinal cord trauma
· Intravenous contrast medium not necessary but CT
Blunt trauma that is sufficient to cause fracture or dis-
myelography useful to rule out dural tear.
 location of the vertebral column is also likely to damage
the spinal cord. Forces may also cause cord contusion
with little bony disruption. Hemorrhage within the
Vertebral fractures and sacroiliac luxation
 [empenxa ul imsan ues aneds [enpida 1o [empqns
Spinal fractures and/or luxations are the result of
compression of the spinal cord.
vehicular injury in around 65% of cases and affect the
lumbar vertebrae more frequently. Other causes of
CT features (Figure 22.12)
 injury include animal attacks or falling from a height.
Vertebral fracture or dislocation often present in
Patients must be positioned very carefully to reduce
association.
the risk of fracture displacement. Fractures of the
 Hyperdense material around the cord consistent
Xmjut oi peal Aeur umioes 1o aeiqajiaa 1equml lepnes 
单
with epidural or subdural hematoma.
or compression of the cauda equina. Avulsion of the
Focal hyperdensity within the cord consistent with
nerve roots of the cauda equina is a serious complica-
contusion.
tion of tail fractures. CT is essential to determine
Hypodensity within the cord due to edema.
fracture/spine stability by evaluating the integrity of
220 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
B
Figure 22.10 Subarachnoid cyst. (A) Transverse CT myelogram image shows a symmetric dilatation of the dorsal contrast
column (asterisk). (B) Sagittally reconstructed CT myelogram shows the transition zone (arrow) between the dilated (cyst)
and the normal dorsal contrast column.
the intervertebral disk, articular process and vertebral
 pasodond uaaq seu apou juaureduon-aani v pog
to evaluate fracture stability.
CT features (Figure 22.13)
Epiphyseal slip fracture in young animals with
often minimal displacement.
 Compression fracture (burst fracture); shortening
of vertebral body.
 Displacement of bone fragments into the vertebral
canal.
 Subluxation of the lumbosacral junction, sacroiliac
 or dorsal articular facet joints.
 Poor delineation of the nerve roots is a sign for
nerve root injury or compression caused by
hemorrhage.
CT allows accurate 3-D description of vertebral or
sacral fractures as well as sacroiliac luxations.
Infection/inflammation
Discospondylitis
 -an uonpuon Aiopeuueu ue si supuodsos
Figure 22.11 Adult dog with dural tear. Transverse CT
tered on the intervertebral disks and involving the
myelogram shows leakage of contrast medium from the sub-
vertebral end plates and adjacent bone of both adjacent
arachnoid space to the extradural space (arrows). The spinal
vertebral bodies. Large breed dogs are most commonly
cord is medially displaced (asterisk).
affected. The disease may be caused by Staphylococcus
intermedius, Streptococcus sp., Escherichia coli or Brucella
221 VERTEBRAL COLUMN AND SPINAL CORD
Figure 22.12 Spinal cord trauma in an adult dog. Transverse
 CT image shows hyperdense material on the left side of the
vertebral canal (arrow). The spinal cord is displaced laterally
(asterisk).
 canis. A fungal cause is also possible, particularly in the
German shepherd dog. Hematogeneous dissemination
from the bladder or other foci is common. Foreign
bodies or iatrogenic cases are other etiologies.
B
CT features (Figure 22.14)
Figure 22.13 (A) Transverse CT image (lumbosacral junc-
 Severe irregular bone destruction involving the
tion) of a dog that was hit by a car. There is a sagittal fracture
through the cranial aspect of the sacrum (arrows) with right
vertebral end plates and adjacent vertebral body.
sacroiliac luxation and narrowing of the vertebral canal. Soft
Associated bone deposition, primarily 
on the
tissue-dense material compressing the epidural fat and the
 ventral aspect of the affected spinal unit.
cauda equina likely represents hemorrhage and/or herni-
ated disk material. (B) Adult dog with T13-L1 subluxation.
Sagittally reconstructed CT image shows malarticulation
Meningomyelitis
 between the articular processes (arrow), increased interver-
tebral space (asterisk) and a step between the vertebral
 Inflammation of the meninges and spinal cord can
bodies of T13 and L1.
 occur with a number of infectious and idiopathic proc-
esses. Granulomatous meningoencephalitis may
involve the spinal cord as well as the brain. Several
CT features
lary cord lesions. Feline infectious peritonitis is the 
·Post-contrast (IV):
most common cause of cord inflammation in the cat,
while cryptococcus lesions are seen in both species.
- contrast enhancement of the spinal cord, often
Other viral, fungal, protozoal and bacterial etiologies
 patchy
are possible, and aberrant intramedullary parasite
 contrast enhancement of the meninges
migration has been reported.
- may have cord swelling
222 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Figure 22.14 Adult dog with discospondylitis. Transverse
CT images show (A) areas of bone lysis at the caudal end
plate of the vertebral body of T9 (arrows) and irregular new
m o () (smie) a d ag
similar areas of lysis in the middle part of the vertebral body
uogeiaoid auoq qoos pazueo ue () pue "(smoie)
ventral to Tll (asterisk).
Degeneration
Articular process joint arthrosis and articular
process joint tropism
Osteoarthritis of the articular process joint develops
secondary to abnormal loading of the articular process
joints due to congenital malformations of the articular
processes (hypoplasia) or other underlying develop-
mental (osteochondrosis) or degenerative conditions.
aqsp on ual e si wsidon uof ssand remnr
bilateral articular process joint asymmetry and is most
shepherd dogs. The asymmetric joint conformation 
 promotes abnormal loading and osteoarthritis.
CT features
Articular process joint tropism (Figure 22.15A).
Narrowing of the process joints.
Hypertrophy and sclerosis of the articular process
(Figure 22.15B).
Osteophytosis,
sometimes
bridging,
 articular
process joints.
Subarticular erosions and/or subchondral cysts.
Intraspinal articular cysts
 -ues ul papiaipqns aq Aeu sisss remogre [eundsenu
 - uony Suste siss pue siss deaous 'siss uo
ments and intervertebral disks. Synovial cysts arise
lar tissue of the articular processes, while ganglion
 cysts arise from the periarticular connective tissue of
intervertebral joints. Both are thought to develop sec-
 ondary to degenerative joint disease. The differentia-
tion is done by histological examination as synovial
cysts are lined with synovium-like epithelial cells
whereas ganglion cysts are not.
CT features (Figure 22.16)
Soft tissue-dense cystic formation located immedi-
Dural mineralization
 Plaque-like dural mineralization commonly occurs in
Xiaaean u uaaa lupug [euaiou ue se uonelos
223 VERTEBRAL COLUMN AND SPINAL CORD
A
B
Figure 22.15 Two adult dogs with articular process joint arthrosis. (A) Transverse CT image shows asymmetry between the
articular process joints (arrows). (B) Transverse CT image shows severe hypertrophy of the left articular process joint (arrow).
'oiaios st aoq eapuouoqns aul pue 1einhaint Auats (speaumoie) pamoiiu are saoeds juot yog
·CT myelography: hard to see due to adjacent sub-
 arachnoid contrast.
Degenerative disk disease
Hansen type I disk disease is common in chondrodys-
trophic long-backed small breeds such as the
lI ase Sunox Kian e 1e Sueis uauo 'pumusuoea
 consists of a metaplasia of the gelatinous nucleus pul-
'eaieu pazienauu pue paerpuap our snsod
These changes per se do not cause clinical signs.
However, minimal stress on the hardened central disk
may then lead to complete rupture of the annulus
fibrosus and extrusion of disk material into the verte-
bral canal at the disk space and adjacent vertebrae,
leading to extradural spinal cord compression, extra-
Aiempauenu pue aseuiiouau lemnpenul io [emp
spinal cord swelling causing acute onset para- or
tetraparesis.
 Hansen type I disk disease can be seen in all dogs
 Figure 22.16 Adult dog with a ganglion cyst. Transverse
and in cats, usually at an advanced age. Mineralization
CT image shows a soft tissue-dense cystic formation (arrow)
of the nucleus pulposus is common but not always
 located immediately adjacent to an articular process.
present. There is only partial fiber rupture of the
annulus fibrosus with bulging of the disk into the ver-
young dogs. The etiology is unknown. It can also occur
tebral canal. This protrusion causes a more localized
and chronic form of spinal cord compression and
in association with neoplasia, but other features of
 disease are then present.
chronic onset of clinical signs often starting with pain.
Vacuum phenomenon, gas collections within the
CT features (Figure 22.17)
intervertebral space, is sometimes seen in degenera-
· Mineral-dense foci around the spinal cord.
tive disk disease. It is due to the liberation of gas,
224 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
 variable cord changes including hypodensity
(edema), contrast filling (myelomalacia)
 cord swelling.
Degenerative lumbosacral stenosis
 Degenerative lumbosacral stenosis is characterized by
 intervertebral disk degeneration, ligamentous hyper-
sauuo aaneaualap pue suogeiaoid auoq Xudon
of the dorsal articular facet joints, all of which can
contribute to compression of the cauda equina.
CT features (Figures 22.21, 22.22)
Dorsal protrusion of the lumbosacral disk.
 Dorsal displacement of the nerve roots and loss of
surrounding fat.
Bone proliferation on the vertebral bodies and
dorsal articular process joints.
●
 Foraminal stenosis is evidenced by a narrowing of
the intervertebral foramen and loss of foraminal
Figure 22.17 Transverse CT image of a dural mineraliza-
tion (arrow) at C1 in a neurologically normal dog.
fat.
Swelling of the nerve roots of the cauda equina
may be present.
Acquiring image series in flexion and extension
principally nitrogen, from surrounding tissues and
will allow assessment of a dynamic component of
accumulation within disk fissures. The vacuum sign
the cauda equina compression, with the compres-
pioo leunds nou inq uogeiauasap lesp sane
sion being more severe in extension unless a lum-
 osie anaaas) juasad si Aqeisu ienesoq
compression.
flexion).
CT protoco!
 Mineralized extruded material can be seen on non-
Degenerative myelopathy
 recommended for better delineation of the spinal cord
Degenerative  myelopathy  is  a  neurodegenerative
and identification of non-mineralized compressive
disease process. German shepherd dogs are most com-
disk material. Multiplanar reconstructions are very
monly affected, although it has been described in other
helpful in delineating the extent and site of a lesion.
breeds. CT is most useful in ruling out other causes of
 progressive neuropathy, but certain non-specific fea-
CT features (Figures 22.18-22.20)
tures have been associated with the disease in affected
 Disk degeneration is often present at multiple sites 
animals.
including that of the compression - stippled
CT features
mineral-dense material present at the disk space.
 Spinal cord small and deformed.
Linear or circular gas within the intervertebral
 Spinal stenosis.
space (vacuum phenomenon).
 Paraspinal muscle atrophy.
CT myelography
 compression and displacement of the spinal
Neoplasia
 compression of the epidural space
一
CT protocol
soft tissue-dense
material at the site of
compression.
-uosai st uoenndde umau jsenuos snouaaeu
Post-contrast (IV):
 mended in any case where neoplasia is suspected.
 hyperdense
material
(hemorrhage)
often
Contrast enhancement of the lesion will help in dif-
extending cranially or caudally from the site of
ferentiation neoplastic lesions from hyperplastic
compression
lesions of the paravertebral ligaments and spinal cord
225 VERTEBRAL COLUMN AND SPINAL CORD
B
Figure 22.18 Adult Dachshund with a discus hermia. (A) Transverse CT image shows severe lateralized extradural compres-
sion by an extruded mineralized disk (arrow). (B) Dorsally reconstructed CT image of the same dog, allowing accurate lesion
localization (arrow).
Figure 22.19  Adult dog with an in situ mineralized degen-
erative disk. Transverse CT image shows stippled mineral-
dense material at the disk center (arrows).
adnexa, although non-neoplastic mass lesions may
also contrast enhance. CT myelography is also helpful
in delineating the spinal cord from any adjacent soft 
Figure 22.20 Adult Dachshund with discus hernia.
tissue lesion, and in differentiation of extradural, intra-
Transverse CT images show a gas bubble (vacuum phenom-
dural and intramedullary lesions.
 enon) within intervertebral space (arrows).
226
VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Extradural
Extradural tumors are the most common category of
neoplasms affecting the spinal cord. Primary bone
tumors and metastatic neoplasia to bone can encroach
on the vertebral canal and result in cord compression,
 most commonly at the level of the thoracic spine. As
compression tends to be chronic, focal cord atrophy
 may result. Presentation can be of an acute or chronic
progressive neuropathy. The most common focal ver-
tebral tumors include osteosarcoma, chondrosarcoma,
fibrosarcoma and hemangiosarcoma, while diffuse
neoplasms include multiple myeloma and lymphosa-
rcoma (the most common spinal tumor in the cat).
Paravertebral  neoplasms  include  neuroendocrine
Figure 22.21  Adult dog with degenerative lumbosacral
 tumors and soft tissue sarcomata.
stenosis, compression of the cauda equina and right forami-
nal stenosis. Transverse CT image shows the intervertebral
CT features (Figure 22.23)
disk protruding dorsally, leaving only a thin sliver of epi-
-d on no (ed) os uo
dural fat in the vertebral canal (arrowhead). The hermiated
ostotic (secondary).
material contains a focal mineralization seen as a hyperdense
Usually very suble osteolysis with or without
dot. The disk protrusion is more severe on the right side,
pa ad s unn rei a a
 periosteal reaction.
 Occasionally osteosclerotic appearance.
(arrow). The nerve roots of the cauda equina are not visible
 Pathologic compression fracture common.
 separate from the hermiated disk material (compressed).
 Perivertebral soft tissue mass extension into thorax
possible.
Small circular lesions within the body.
Soft tissue- or mineral-dense mass within the ver-
tebral canal.
 Displacement of the spinal cord.
Post-contrast (IV): enhancement of the lesion.
Intradural extramedullary
Meningioma, neurofibrosarcoma, lymphosarcoma,
nerve root neoplasia and nephroblastoma can all
appear as intradural extramedullary lesions. Nerve
 root neoplasia, such as peripheral nerve sheath tumors,
 may have intramedullary and intradural components.
 Most affect older dogs and cats, but nephroblastomas
are typical in young dogs and occur specifically
between T10 and L2.
CT features (Figure 22.24)
A
B
 CT myelography is necessary to define location as
Figure 22.22 Sagittally reconstructed CT image of the lum-
intradural.
bosacral spine of a dog with mild dynamic cauda equina
Widened subarachnoid space
compression. (A) The lumbosacral junction is in flexion, the
 a 'golf tee' is apparent in the contrast column
intervertebral disk (asterisk) is flattened and the cauda
 on sagittal and dorsal reconstructions
equina is not compressed. (B) The patient is positioned with
the lumbosacral junction extended, the intervertebral disk
 the tumor may extend into the spinal cord and
(asterisk) protrudes much further dorsally, narrowing the
 can appear more intramedullary
vertebral canal and attenuating the epidural fat around the
with nerve root tumors there is often widening
cauda equina.
of the intervertebral foramen and presence of a
227 VERTEBRAL COLUMN AND SPINAL CORD
A
B
Figure 22.23 (A) Adult dog with metastatic osteosarcoma. Transverse CT myelogram shows marked spinal cord compres-
image shows decreased density on the right half of the vertebral body (asterisk).
contrast-enhanced tubular structure consistent
with nerve root enlargement.
Intramedullary
Glial cell tumors are the most common intramedullary
tumors in dogs, while lymphosarcoma is most common 
in cats. Intramedullary metastases are rare.
CT features
CT myelography: focal spinal cord swelling.
Vascular disorders
Fibrocartilaginous embolism
Figure 22.24  Young dog with a nephroblastoma. Sagittally
reconstructed CT myelogram shows an intradural extramed-
 Fibrocartilaginous embolism is acute infarction of the
ulary lesion (arrows) (image courtesy of N. Nelson, Ohio
spinal cord that results from vascular occlusion by
State University).
fibrocarilage from the nucleus pulposus. Large dogs
are most commonly affected, but spinal cord infarction
has also been described in the cat. A typical presenta-
tion is acute-onset asymmetric neuropathy that is non-
 painful and non-progressive after the first 24h. CT
diagnosis is by exclusion of other causes of spinal cord
disease.
228 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
terized by severe exostosis of the joints and vertebrae,
particularly the cervical vertebrae. This disorder may
lead to pain and rigidity and in severe cases it may
cause nerve root and spinal nerve compression.
Calcinosis circumscripta
Calcinosis circumscripta has been described as a rare
cause of compressive spinal cord dysfunction in young
 dogs, mostly between C1 and C2.
Disseminated skeletal hyperostosis
 Disseminated skeletal hyperostosis results in extensive
ventral vertebral new bone formation, including end-
plates and body, often spanning more than three
vertebrae.
Figure 22.25 Adult dog that was hit by a car and devel-
FURTHER READING
 oped myelomalacia at the site of a lumbar fracture. Transverse
CT myelogram shows swelling of the spinal cord that con-
tains multiple hyperdense areas (contrast medium) (arrows).
Axlund TW and Hudson JA (2003) Computed tomography
 of the normal lumbosacral intervertebral disc in 22 dogs.
Vet Radiol Lltrasound 44: 630-4.
Dennison SE, Drees R, Rylander H, Yandell BS, Milovancev
CT features
M, Pettigrew R and Schwarz T (2010) Evaluation of differ-
Post-contrast (IV): focal spinal cord swelling may
ent computed tomography techniques and myelography
be present.
for the diagnosis of acute canine myelopathy. Vet Radiol
LUltrasound 51: 254-8.
Drees R, Denmison SE, Keuler NS and Schwarz T (2009)
Myelomalacia
 Computed tomographic imaging protocol for the canine
cervical and lumbar spine. Vet Radiol Lltrasound 50: 74-9.
cord. It can occur secondary to any acute spinal cord
Gnirs K, Ruel Y, Blot S et al. (2003) Spinal subarachnoid cysts 
in 13 dogs. Vet Rad Ultrasound 44: 402-8.
injury and may be focal or extend cranially. Ascending
Jones JC and Inzana KD (2000) Subclinical CT abnormalities
myelomalacia is usually fatal.
in the lumbosacral spine of older large-breed dogs. Vet
CT features (Figure 22.25)
Radiol LIltrasound 41: 19-26.
Kinns J, Mai W, Seiler G et al. (2006) Radiographic sensitivity
1
 Most often seen in association with other lesions
and negative predictive value for acute canine spinal
(trauma, disk extrusion).
trauma. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 47: 563-70.
Hyperdense area within the spinal cord.
Ramirez III O and Thrall DE (1998) A review of imaging
CT-myelography
popuy ia auorpuss unba epnes auues ioy sanbuoal
contrast medium within the cord parenchyma
UIltrasound 39: 283-96.
 spinal cord swelling.
Schwarz T, Owen MR, Long S and Sullivan M (2000) Vacuum
disk and facet phenomenon in a dog with cauda equina
syndrome. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 15: 862-4.
ldiopathic/Nutritional
Sharp NJH, Cofone M, Robertson ID, DeCarlo A, Smith
u Aydeaouon pandu (s66) aa euI pue Y
Hypervitaminosis A
the evaluation of caudal cervical spondylomyelopathy
 Hypervitaminosis A is a nutritional disorder of cats
of the Doberman pinscher. Vet Radiol Uultrasound 36:
 due to excessive feeding with vitamin A. It is charac-
100-8.
CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE
Marc-Andre d'Anjou and Tobias Schwarz
IMAGING PROTOCOL (TABLE
cases, particularly if slice thickness is less than 3mm.
The pericardial cavity can be flled with hypodense fat,
23.1)
particularly in obese patients, in which case the fibrous
pericardium (smooth, 1-2mm thick) becomes distinct
 The advent of multislice CT has expanded the capacity
from the underlying myocardium. The cardiac apex is
 of CT to assess cardiovascular disorders. With single-
normally oriented to the left of the midline, although
slice CT, protocols must be adapted to favor the acqui-
sue aos un papis-iulin no lenuan aq Aew 1!
sition of high-resolution images along the Z-axis in the
shortest possible time. Once the region of interest is
identified after scanning the entire thorax, slice thick-
Great vessels (Figure 23.1)
ness may be further reduced to better highlight small
The pulmonic trunk and aortic root are similar in
structures. Test bolus injection should be used when-
width. The pulmonic and aortic valves can be identi-
 ever possible to determine the peak enhancement, and
fied with thin-slice acquisions, paricularly with
to select the best acquisition start time after contrast
MPR. Contrast-enhanced CT allows evaluation of the
medium injection start. This is essential for assessment
ventricular outflow tracts, the lumen of the aortic arch
of the more distant pools and lumens such as left ven-
 and its branches, and of the pulmonary arteries. The
tricle and aorta that suffer from contrast dilution with
pulmonic trunk and arteries fill rapidly and intensely
peripheral vein injection. In case of soft tissue masses;
with contrast medium after peripheral venous injec-
 a delayed acquisition should also be performed to
tion, while the aorta fills later (±10s post-injection)
assess tissue perfusion after the clearance of contrast
 after systemic hemodilution. Time and intensity of
medium from the great vessels. The complex anatomy
enhancement of the cranial and caudal vena cava
 of the heart and great vessels is best depicted with
depend on the site and rate of injection. Injection
multiplanar reformation (MPR), maximum intensity
through a large catheter via the cranial vena cava
projection (MIP), shaded surface display (SSD) or
allows rapid injection of large boluses but results in
volume rendering.
beam-hardening streak artifacts that can compromise
the visibility of nearby structures. Injecting into a
CT: ANATOMY
 peripheral vein results in more uniform contrast flling
and reduces the presence of artifacts. Reducing con-
Heart and pericardium (Figure 23.1)
-nrd 'diau osie Keu uoeuauon umau isen
larly with a central intravenous catheter. The use of a
The heart is a complex muscular structure composed
 pressure injector is advised.
of four chambers that can readily be distinguished
when filled with iodinated contrast medium. The atria
o Ae e das pnra ui e Aq pardas an
Anatomic and physiologic variants and
be well defined with CT, whereas the ventricles are
incidental findings
pue wmdas remouanau rai e Aq paneredas
Coronary artery branching (Figure 23.2)
outlined by walls that can be consistently recognized.
Atrioventricular valves are relatively perpendicular to
Five different anatomical pattern of the right and left
the transverse plane and can be recognized in most
 pauapi uaaq aaeu Suuq Aiae Krenon
saunes Auu 'ziemups sa q pauis fy pan 
@ 2011 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
229
230 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Table 23.1
CT imaging protocol for single-slice CT angiography
of heart and great vessels.
Series
Pre-contrast
 +/- Delayed post-contrast 
Angiography
Decubitus
Ventral
 Scan margins
 Caudal to cranial extent of lungs 
Voltage (kVp)
120
Current (mAs)
200
Tube rotation time (s)
0.5-1.0
 Slice width (mm)
3 (<10kg), 5 (>10kg)
3 (<10kg),
5 (>10kg)*
 Pitch
1.5
1.5-2.0
Helical image reconstruction interval
0.5 x slice width
 Ker nel frequency
Medium
Motion control
+/- ma nual ventilation 
 Contrast medium application site
N/A
 Caudal vena cava: cephalic or external jugular
 Cranial vena cava: saphenous vein
 Heart, aorta or pulmonary arteries: external jugular
 or cranial vena cava
 Contrast medium type
N/A
lodinated
 Contrast medium dose
N/A
 400-800 mg iodine/kg bw
 Contrast medium injection mode 
N/A
Automated
 Scan delay post start contrast injection
N/A
 Based on test bolus injection and peak
enhancement of the region(s) of interest 
Window level (HU)
40
200-400
100-600
dependent on
contrast medium
co ncentration
Window width (HU)
200-2000
Dependent on contrast medium concentration
 dogs. An anomalous origin of the left coronary artery
Cardiovascular gas emboli (Figure 23.4)
can lead to subvalvular pulmonic stenosis and has
Numerous gas bubbles can be seen in most dogs and
therapeutic consequences. Multislice helical CT angi-
 cats undergoing a CT examination in the veins of the
 ography offers a minimally invasive, quick and effi-
 thorax, shoulder and vertebral system without any
cient way of assessing the coronary artery branching
related clinical signs during or after the procedure.
for
diagnosis
pue
treatment
They are often present already before contrast medium
planning.
rensea jo uouauouaud qeuou e ae pue uogeidde
catheterization. Gas location depends on the venous
Adaptive cardiovascular changes (Figure 23.3)
catheter site and recumbency of the animal, as the gas
 accumulates in the highest location.
The size and shape of the heart and great vessels
 depend on the phase of the cardiac and respiratory
Aortic and cardiac mineralization
cycle and external pressure changes. To some degree
this is visible on CT exams and should be taken into
Mineralization of the aortic wall or other cardiac
account when assessing cardiovascular structures.
vessels can be recognized incidentally. It affects mainly
231 HEART AND VESSELS
RMIPa
Figure 23.1  Normal CT angiographic anatomy of the heart and
great vessels. Transverse images A--J represent successive,
but not contiguous, images from cranial to caudal. AoB = aortic bulb; AoT = aortic trunk; BCT = brachiocephalic trunk;
CaCV = caudal vena cava; CrCV = cranial vena cava; DAo = descending aorta; IVS = interventricular septum; LA = left
MPv = main pulmonary veins; PT = pulmonic trunk; RA = right atrium; RAz = right azygos vein; RCCv = right costocervical
 = A  Ad a  = A a Ad w  = e a Ad  = e 
ventricle; TV = tricuspid valve.
232 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Figure 23.2 Coronary CT angiogram of a normal dog using 64-slice CT technology. (A) Transverse CT angiogram showing
the aorta (A) and the following left coronary artery branches: the circumflex (black arrow), interventricular paraconal (white
-uap aauoadsiad tepnes uail e uo pamara jreay aul jo aheu patapuar-auunioa (a) (peaumoe) youenq teidas pue (matre
 onstrating the left circumflex coronary artery (images courtesy of Randi Drees).
B
Figure 23.3 (A) Transverse CT image of a dog with marked pneumothorax. (B) Due to the raised extravascular pressure,
the caudal vena cava (arrowhead) is partially collapsed whereas the left vertebral venous sinus (arrow) is enlarged as a means
of altermative venous returm. The size of the aorta (A) is not affected.
233 HEART AND VESSELS
 Figure 23.4  Transverse CT image of a cat with a small gas
Figure 23.5  Transverse CT image of a dog with incidental
cap in the cranial vena cava (arrow), ventral to trachea (T)
mineralization of the aortic bulb. An irregular, hyperdense
and esophagus (E). This is a normal phenomenon after vas-
partial rim involves the wall of the aorta (Ao).
cular catheterization, often already present before contrast
 medium administration.
older, large-breed dogs (particularly Rottweiler and
Vascular ring anomalies (Figure 23.6)
 Irish wolfhound) and is usually degenerative in origin.
 Persistence of the right aortic arch accounts for ±90% of
Mineralization of the descending aorta can also be
 associated with atherosclerosis, spirocercosis 
vascular ring anomalies in dogs and cats. The esopha-
gus is most commonly affected and its compression
 hyperadrenocorticism.
varies in site and severity according to the specific type
CT features (Figure 23.5)
of malformation. Characterization of these anomalies
Curvilinear or amorphous hyperattenuation of
is best performed with contrast-enhanced CT. Injection
 of air through a catheter placed in the esophagus may
mineral value involving the aortic wall, particu-
 help in confirming the site and level of compression.
larly in the bulb region, or other cardiac arteries
such as coronaries.
CT features (Figure 23.7)
Types 1-3: dextra position of the aorta, associated
DISEASE FEATURES
with leftward displacement of the trachea.
Type 1(most common): compression of the esopha-
Malformation/Developmental disorders
Suuua-uou e Aq aseq jeau au ie Adi sng
juaudonaaap reiay Sup redde Aeuu suoeurnoe
 left ligamentum arteriosum that extends dorsally
 and represent incidental findings, such as a left-sided
between the pulmonic trunk and a right-sided
cranial vena cava. Conversely, cardiac and vascular
aorta.
anomalies may become clinically significant. Contrast-
 Type 2 or 3: compression of the esophagus cranial
enhanced CT, especially with multislice units, can
 to the heart base in cases of aberrant left subclavian
 complement echocardiography in treatment planning
artery that crosses craniodorsally over the esopha-
 of such malformations, particularly embolization 
0r
-e nu jueiaqe ue jo anuasad auL (z ad) sng
 stenting. Because of its tomographic nature and higher
u saaad asn s u usoae 
 contrast resolution, CT angiography is performed with
site of compression at the heart base. If a left liga-
peripheral venous injection, i.e. non-selectively, and
mentum arteriosum is present, two sites of com-
 has replaced conventional angiography.
 pression may be found (type 3).
234 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Rigr
LS
LLA
PT
Normal
Type 1
Type 2
Type 3
Type 4
Figure 23.6 Schematization of normal and abnormal development of the aortic arch resulting in different levels of esopha-
geal compression (modified from Joly et al. 2008). Ao = Aorta; LLA = left ligamentum arteriosum; LS = left subclavian artery;
O = esophagus; PT = pulmonic trunk.
Type 4: double aortic arch joining to form a ring
pe Arae Arod e m ps e wg u Aa
 around the esophagus caudal to the heart base.
 clinical signs similar to a left-to-right patent ductus
Other vascular malformations such as anomalous
arteriosus can occur.
 subclavian artery may also result in esophageal
entrapment.
CT features
 Levo-phase angiogram demonstrating contrast
Patent ductus arteriosus
enhancement of multiple small aortic branches
converging into a single tortuous shunt vessel
Patency of the ductus arteriosus connecting the fetal
entering the right pulmonary artery and flow of
 e si eoe a wm Aiare Aromd u
contrast medium into the pulmonary arterial
 congenital malformation in dogs and, less frequently,
circulation.
10 ui-o-a e u moo un Suus puasisia sien
right-to-left direction of flow. Left-to-right shunts have
a distinctive machinery murmur that is lacking in
Cardiac valvular stenoses and insufficiencies
right-to-left shunts. CT can aid in the diagnosis of
(Figure 23.9)
 pue sases snionp puaied naron-iuo imoy anou
Although CT is currently not widely used for most
can be used for shunt size assessment for therapy
cardiac conditions in small animals, the potential of
planning.
 multislice CT examination of the heart is encouraging.
 The typical vascular and chamber enlargements seen
CT features (Figure 23.8)
 Distinct ductus diverticulum conmecting proximal
 in canine and feline valvular heart diseases, such as
descending aorta with the main pulmonary artery.
aortic and pulmonic stenosis, mitral and tricuspid
 insufficiencies can be recognized on CT.
silent.
 Distinct patterns of contrast enhancement in levo-
Vascular dissection, aneurysm and stenosis
 and dextro-phase CT angiography depending on
[Figure 23.10}
shunt type.
Aneurysms can affect veins such as the cranial vena
cava, but are more commonly seen in the thoracic aorta
Aberrant bronchoesophageal artery
in association with patent ductus arteriosus, aortic
In dogs and cats the bronchoesophageal artery arises
coarctation, aortic wall degeneration, Spirocerca lupi
from several thoracic aortic branches and supplies the
 infection or systemic hypertension. Aneurysms of
bronchi with systemic blood with venous drainage via
cardiac chambers have also been described and can be
the azygos system. As a rare anomaly in dogs, the
 congenital or traumatic. Aortic dissection can also be
235 HEART AND VESSELS
A
RSC
RSC
Jeft
right
BC
right
B
C
Figure 23.7 Five-month-old cat with an aberrant right subclavian artery. (A) Sagittally reconstructed CT image shows
sateuato ieul (moie) Aiaire ueiaeiqns juat jureiiaqe ue Aq uotssanduuos pue xeioul enueao aul u uoneiel (o) snseqdosa
directly from the aorta (Ao). (B) and (C) 3-D reconstructed CT images on which the anomaly can be clearly depicted from
cranial (B) and dorsal (C) views. BCT = brachiocephalic trunk; CrVC = cranial vena cava; LSC =left subclavian artery;
RSC = right subclavian artery (images courtesy of Franck Durieux).
encountered, with characteristic visualization of the
the dissection flap. These linear defects must also be
intimal flap on CT. Trauma may result in false aneu-
differentiated from streaks artifacts due to motion or
 rysm, ie. focal wall rupture with eccentric accumula-
 beam hardening.
tion of blood limited by the adventitial layer, or
complete rupture. Pulmonary artery stenosis has been
reported in a dog. The use of a pressure injector is
CT features (Figure 23.11)
 essential to adequately enhance the aortic lumen and
 Aneurysm: focal, smooth dilatation of the vessel or
to identify these anomalies, particularly in regard to
 chamber lumen.
236 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
[euaa (morre urnniaaip snsoare srnp saed quats Aesmo e ym op e go aseut i asiaasue () g'ee anb
to the descending aorta (Ao). (B) Volume-rendered view at the right heart of a different, clinically affected dog with a large 
 patent ductus arteriosus (d) joining the aorta (Ao). (C) Dextro-phase CT angiography demonstrates a contrast-enhanced cranial
-0T (a) (ov) eroe Suuassap pue () snsoare sronp suaied "(d) xun sruound (a v) reay uu (A) eas eaa
(d). The combination of these features confirms a right-to-left shunt direction (B to D images courtesy of Bjorn Ablad).
 Pseudoaneurysm: focal outpouching of contrast
enhancement. The false lumen tends to be larger
medium through a defect in the wall.
than the true lumen. The intimal flap may also be
 Dissection curvilinear contrast-filing defects
calcified on pre-contrast images.
indicating intimal flap, with higher enhancement
Stenosis: focal constriction of the lumen with post-
 of the true lumen during the peak phase of aortic
stenotic enlargement.
237  HEART AND VESSELS
Figure 23.9 (A) Transverse CT image of a cat with bulbous
dilatation of the aortic arch (Ao) in a cat with confirmed
aortic stenosis. (B) Transverse CT image of a dog with con
firmed pulmonary hypertension showing dilatation of the
 pulmonic trunk (PT).(C) Transverse CT image of a dog with
atrial (LA) dilatation and deviation of adjacent mediastinal
strctures.
小
Cardiac neoplasia
 Hemangiosarcomas usually involve the right atrium
or ventricle and may lead to pericardial effusion. Most
heart base tumors are chemodectomas, but thyroid car-
cinomas and invasive tumors involving the lung base
 or bronchial lymph nodes must also be considered.
Other neoplasia that can involve the heart of dogs and
cats include mesothelioma and lymphoma.
CT features (Figure 23.12)
 Mass of soft tissue attenuation showing variable
contrast enhancement, with borders that can be ill
defined or well defined, smooth or irregular, infil-
truding into a vascular lumen, into a cardiac
chamber (right atrium typically), or into the
pericardium.
 Pericardial effusion and thromboembolism may be
present.
Other disorders
 Pericardial effusions
 Pericardial effusion may be idiopathic, neoplastic, car-
diogenic, inflammatory, infectious or hemorrhagic in
 origin. Cardiac tamponade develops when the pericar-
 dial pressure is equal to or above the right heart-filling
pressure and characterized by a smaller right ventricle.
With marked effusion, heart swinging motion may
lead to motion artifacts.
CT features (Figure 23.13)
·Accumulation of fluid into the pericardium with
an HU value that depends on the presence of hem-
an n og ose  sio a a
pericardial sac.
 May be associated with the presence of a soft tissue
mass attached to the myocardium or pericardium
that can usually be better outlined after contrast
enhancement.
238 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
B
true
lumen
intimal
flap
lumen
C
D
Figure 23.10 Schematization of vascular wall anomalies. (A) Aneurysm, (B) pseudoaneurysm, (C) stenosis, (D) dissection.
Vena cava thrombosis
CT features (Figure 23.14)
 Well-defined, longitudinal filling defect that is
Thrombosis of the cranial or caudal vena cava may
 -uon 1o Aenred pue Suoqo 1o uriosny Aensn
be spontaneous or be secondary to vascular compres-
pletely surrounded with contrast medium.
 Long-standing thrombi may become mineralized.
nancy. The detection of thrombosis requires complete
and uniform filling of the venous lumen with contrast
medium. Injection through a cephalic or external
 Pulmonary thromboembolism
jugular vein is recommended for the caudal vena
 Pulmonary embolism represents a life-threatening
cava while the saphenous vein is recommended for
the cranial vena cava. Non-uniform mixing of con-
 condition that can result from a variety of causes. As
trast medium with blood or streaming of opacified
for the detection of vena cava thrombosis, technical
 loleu e sjuasaidan uosalun pidei Surmonoy pooq
 aspects in the delivery of contrast medium and timing
pitfall that can lead to a false positive diagnosis. By
 of CT acquisitions must be considered. Opacification
using a venous access where contrast medium homo-
of pulmonary arteries is usually more uniform regard-
ss Arenide e u poonq um saxru Aisnoauas
less of the site and rate of injection, which helps
(pulmonary or systemic) before entering the vessel of
 prevent misdiagnoses.
interest, this artifact can be minimized. Serial CT
acquisitions pre- and post-contrast are recommended
CT features (Figure 27.18)
to confirm the persistence of the filling defect con-
 Pulmonary arteries may be enlarged and tortuous on
sistent with venous thrombosis. The distinction
 pre- and post-contrast images, proximal to the site of
between soft tissue infltration of the vessel lumen
 embolism, with poor visibility of smaller peripheral
 and thrombosis may be difficult to achieve, particu-
arteries.
larly if the invasive process is poorly vascularized
and does not enhance on delayed acquisitions after
 Well-defined, longitudinal filling defect that may
 contrast medium injection.
be surrounded with contrast medium, or abrupt
239HEART AND VESSELS
srighf
Figure 23.11 (A) Cranial and (B) left lateral volume rendering views of an incidental pulmonic trunk aneurysm in a dog.
The lumen of the pulmonic trunk (PT) is markedly focally enlarged (An). Ao = aorta (images courtesy of Franck Durieux).
(C) Aneurysmal right atrium (RA) ventral to the cranial vena cava (CV) in the cranial mediastinum of a dog. (D) The sagittal
reconstruction shows the cranial extent of the aneurismal right atrium (images courtesy of Anu Lappalainen).
240
VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
241  HEART AND VESSELS
Figure 23.12 Transverse CT angiograms of canine cardiac neoplasia. (A-C) Heart base mass in a dog. (A) During the initial
pue (vd) Aialre Areuound juot aul (speaymoire) apeau oi uaas st (n) sseu anssn os aun 'aseud ienraire Areuournd
displace the left pulmonary artery (LPA) and trachea (T). Streak artifacts radiate from the contrast enhanced right ventricle 
(RV). There is focal lung atelectasis. (B) 10s later, the contrast bolus reaches the left heart. The mass (M) displaces the descend-
'pauyap Aiood sueuan inq juaasuqua Pu smous (au paidrian) sse aul pue unpau isenuos panp yim
CrVC = cranial vena cava; LAA = left atrial appendage; LCA = left coronary artery; PT = pulmonic trunk; PV = pulmonary
vein. (D) Incidentally diagnosed chemodectoma in a dog causing deviation of great vessels and other mediastinal structures
(E) Right atrial hemangiosarcoma, ruptured pericard and hemothorax in a dog. The non-enhancing nature of the mass prob-
ably relates to hematoma formation.
A
B
C
Figure 23.13 Transverse CT images of ectopic thyroid carcinoma in a dog. (A) Immediately and (B) 2min post-injection, a
large, lobulated mass (M) is visible at the cranial aspect of the heart, protruding into the pericardial sac (P) and is (C) associ-
ated with pericardialeffusion (asterisk). CrVC = cranial vena cava; Ao = aorta; PT = pulmonic trunk; LA = left atrium; LV = left 
ventricle.
interruption in the opacification of arteries in case
 Kirberger RM and Zambelli A (2007) Imaging diagnosis
of complete obstruction.
aortic thromboembolism associated with spirocercosis in
 Secondary pulmonary
hyperattenuation as the
a dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 48: 418-20.
result of hemorrhage, edema and/or necrosis,
MacGregor JM, Winter MD, Keating J, Tidwell AS and Brown
sometimes with pleural effusion.
DJ (2006) Peripheral pulmonary artery stenosis in a
4-month-old West Highland White Terrier. Vet Radiol
UIltrasound 47: 345-50.
FURTHER READING
Schwarz T, Sullivan M, Stork CK, Willis R, Harley R and
 Mellor DJ (2002) Aortic and cardiac mineralization in the 
dog. Vet Radiol Uultrasound 43: 419-27.
De Rycke LM, Gielen IM, Simoens PJ and van Bree H (2005)
Schwarz T, Willis R, Summerfield NJ and Doust R (2005)
 Computed tomography and cross-sectional anatomy of
 Aneurysmal dilatatin of the right auricle in two dogs.
the thorax in clinically normal dogs. Am J Vet Res 66:
I Am Vet Med Assoc 226: 1512-16.
512-24.
Salvolini L, Renda P, Fiore D, Scaglione M, Piccoli G and
Davidson BL, Rozanski E, Tidwell AS and Hoffman AM
Giovagnoni A (2008) Acute aortic syndromes: role of
(2006) Pulmonary thrombo-embolism in a heartworm-
multi-detector row CT. Eur J Radiol 65: 350-8.
positive cat. J Vet Intern Med 20: 1037-41.
Tidwell AS (2000) Uses of computed tomography in cardiop-
Joly H, d'Anjou MA and Huneault L (2008) Imaging
ulmonary disease. In: Bonagura JD (ed.) Kirk's current vet-
diagnosis-CT angiography of a rare vascular ring anomaly
erinary therapy XIl, pp 709-10. Philadelphia, PA: WB
in a dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 49: 42-6.
Saunders.
242 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
CrVC
CaVC
right
Figure 23.14 Transverse CT images of caval disorders. (A,B) Thrombosis of the caudal vena cava (CaVC; arrowed) in a dog
 caused by an adrenal tumor. (A) There is a marked flling defect in the dorsal caval lumen. (B) Streamlining resulting in
pseudothrombosis of the cranial vena cava (CrVC; arrowed). A filling defect is present due to incomplete mixing of contrast
medium and blood. (C) Cranial mediastinal mass (thymoma) in a cat causing cranial vena cava thrombosis.
CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR
TRACHEA
Tobias Schwarz and Jimmy Saunders
IMAGING PROTOCOL
the longus colli muscles, the cranial vena cava and
aortic arch in the thoracic part (Figure 24.1).
(TABLE 24.1)
 CT allows real-time evaluation of the trachea during
the respiratory cycle. Alterations in tracheal luminal
 The cervical trachea cannot be assessed properly with
 pressure are responsible for the degree of tension on
a tracheal tube in place. Options are to remove the tube
 the dorsal tracheal membrane and thus for the shape
immediately prior to scanning or to use intubation-free
 of the trachea. With increased intratracheal pressure
anesthetic or sedation protocols. Respiratory motion is
(cervical trachea in expiration, thoracic trachea in
 desirable for tracheal imaging and essential for assess-
inspiration), the trachea appears rounded. If the intrat-
ment of collapse. Using a very small helical reconstruc-
racheal pressure is lower than in its surroundings (cer-
tion interval minimizes the blurring artifact. To assess
vical trachea in inspiration, thoracic trachea in
 tracheal collapse, the patient should be sedated or
expiration) it can show a dorsal flattening or even a
better consciously restrained and a helical scan of the
slight concavity of the dorsal membrane into the tra-
entire trachea is acquired first. Then three series of
cheal lumen (Figure 24.2). The mean percentage 0f
dynamic CT for 30s periods are performed over the
change in tracheal cross-sectional area of healthy dogs
cervical and thoracic trachea and the mainstem bronchi.
In conscious patients, it might be best not to obtain
 expiration has been reported to be ±6%, with observed
scout radiographs, but to start with the helical CT and
Kiaso au Jo aa1ap s % 0n dn sae
quickly perform the dynamic CT series at locations
 resembles that in humans.
 determined on the first series.
A marked invagination of the dorsal tracheal muscle
into the tracheal lumen is commonly observed on CT
CT: ANATOMY AND NORMAL
at the level of the caudal cervical trachea, reducing the
height of the tracheal lumen. It is accompanied by a
VARIANTS
slight rotation of the tracheal height axis. This finding
corresponds to the misnamed ‘pseudocollapse'
The trachea is a semi-rigid tube that connects the larynx
described on radiography, which in fact is a true, albeit
to the bronchial system. It ends at the level of the fourth
partial, collapse but without contributable respiratory
signs (Figure 24.3). The tracheal dynamics are also
to fifth intercostal space with a crest, the carina. The
 trachea consists of C-shaped cartilages opened dor-
influenced by external conditions (pharyngeal, laryn-
sally and interconnecting tracheal ligaments and res-
geal, intrathoracic).
piratory mucosa. The dorsal opening of the cartilages
is connected by the tracheal muscle and conmective
DISEASE FEATURES
tissue. The trachea is slightly wider than it is high.
The esophagus is adjacent to the trachea dorsally in
Congenital/Malformation
the cranial cervical part, thenleft dorsolaterally towards
the thoracic inlet and then again dorsally at the carina.
Tracheal hypoplasia
Other adjacent structures include the thyroid glands,
Tracheal hypoplasia corresponds to a reduction >50%
the carotid sheath and its content in the cervical part,
of the cross-sectional lumen over all the tracheal length.
saunes Auu 'ziemups sa q pauis fy pan 
@ 2011 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
243
244 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Table 24.1
 Narrowing of the trachea in cross-sectional area.
CT imaging protocol (intravenous contrast study:
 Oslerus osleri: soft tissue-dense nodules in the
standard protocol; see Chapter 5).
trachea.
Series
 Pre- and post-contrast
CT examination may also be normal.
Decubitus
Ventral or lateral
 Scan margins
Larynx ←→ Carina 
Trauma
Voltage (kVp)
120
 Tracheal hemorrhage
Current (mAs)
60-150
 Tracheal hemorrhage can be secondary to an external
Tube rotation time (s)
0.5-1
or an internal trauma (intubation accident) or more
Slice width (mm)
2-3
 commonly due to generalized bleeding disorders
 Kernel frequency
 Medium
(rodenticide intoxication).
 Collimator pitch
2
 Helical image reconstruction 
CT features
0.5 x slice width
interval (mm)
 Tracheal wall thickening due to submucosal hem-
None, respiratory
orrhagic infiltration.
Motion control
 Other sites of hemorrhage are frequently found:
 motion is desirable
mediastinum, lungs.
Window level (HU)
-250
Window width (HU)
1500
Tracheal laceration and avulsion
Tracheal laceration and avulsion are mostly associated
with severe trauma such as road traffic accidents, bite
 injuries, post-surgery wound dehiscence or overzeal-
ous intubation (mainly in cats).
The disorder is more common in English bulldogs and
English mastiffs, although it has been described in
CT features
other breeds. The condition is rarely seen in cats. Dogs
Laceration in the tracheal wall.
and cats with mucopolysaccharidosis VII may show
Irregular
tracheal
wall/lumen,
misshapen
similar lesions.
trachea.
Absence of tracheal rings in case of complete
CT features (Figure 24.4)
rupture.
Reduced diameter of the trachea.
 A pneumomediastinum is commonly identified,
Tracheal wall thickening.
 localized or generalized.
Tracheal cartilages overlapping.
 Tracheal rings almost complete with negligible
dorsal muscle.
 Tracheal stenosis
1
Common concurrent 
t  congenital  abnormalities:
Segmental tracheal stenosis may be congenital or, more
 megaesophagus, pulmonic or aortic stenosis.
 commonly, acquired as a consequence of laceration/
 Mucopolysaccharidosis
VII:
reduced tracheal
avulsion. It may be asymptomatic despite a reduction
diameter with thickened, misshapen cartilages.
in diameter of 80% in lumen size.
 CT is very useful for planning, guidance and follow-
Inflammation/Infection
up of stent placement procedures in dogs with tracheal
stenosis. CT reconstructed images allows to determine
Tracheitis
accurately the extent and degree of stenosis allowing
Tracheitis may be due to an infectious agent (virus,
adequate selection of the size of tracheal stents.
bacteria, parasite - Oslerus osleri) or may have a non-
 infectious origin (prolonged barking, tracheal collapse,
CT features (Figure 24.6)
 chronic cardiac disease, irritation by gas or dust).
 Thickened tracheal wall.
Reduced tracheal diameter.
CT features (Figure 24.5)
 Dorsal and 3-D reconstructions allow exact loca-
 Tracheal wall thickening.
tion and extent of the stenosis to be determined.
245TR ACHEA
CV
CrVC
Figure 24.1 Transverse CT images of the trachea in the normal dog during the respiratory pause at the level of (A) C3, (B)
C6, (C) T1, (D) T3 and (E) T5. Note the positional change of the esophagus (arrows) and adjacent thyroid glands (T), carotid
sheath (arrowhead), longus colli muscle (LCM), cranial vena cava (CrVC) and aortic arch (Ao).
246 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
A
B
Figure 24.2 Transverse CT images of the canine mid-cervical trachea during (A) expiration with rounded distention and
(B) inspiration with invagination of the tracheal muscle (arrows). This is a normal range of luminal change.
Figure 24.3 1l-year-old mixed-breed dog without respiratory signs. (A) Tracheal close-up of a right lateral thoracic radio-
 graph shows a collapse of the caudal cervical trachea (arrows) and a gas-distended thoracic esophagus (Es). Superimposition
of the esophagus or longus coll muscle is often erroneously referred to as the reason for this appearance. (B) Transverse CT
image of the trachea at the level of C6 demonstrates the true partial collapse of the trachea (arrow) due to invagination of the
 dorsal tracheal muscle. Although the collapse is real, it is probably not severe enough to cause clinical signs.
Degenerative
where degenerative ring disorders have only been
described in mucopolysaccharidosis.
Tracheal collapse
 CT may be used for monitoring stent placement in
 Tracheal collapse is a progressive, degenerative disease
 dogs with tracheal collapse.
 of the tracheal rings, predominantly affecting middle-
aged to older small and toy-breed dogs. It may be
CT features (Figure 24.7)
inspiratory (cervical region), expiratory (thoracic
 Collapse of the tracheal lumen.
 region) or mixed.
 During collapse the tracheal cartilage is flattened
Cervical collapse may also be the consequence of
and the tracheal muscle appears stretched
nasopharyngeal or laryngeal obstruction via the nega-
('crescent-shape' trachea).
 tive intratracheal pressure created by an inspiratory
● Stent-check CT can differentiate stenotic granula-
effort. This should particularly be considered in cats
tion from fluid accumulation.
247TRACHEA
Figure 24.4 Adult dog with mucopolysaccharidosis VIl.
Transverse CT image of the cervical trachea shows marked
Figure 24.6 Sagittally reconstructed thoracic CT image of
hypoplasia and an abnormally overlapping tracheal carti-
a cat with a stenosis of the cranial thoracic trachea (arrow).
lage (arrow).
Neoplasia
Tracheal neoplasia
Tracheal neoplasia is rare in dogs and cats. Tumors
may affect primarily the trachea (osteochondroma,
 chondrosarcoma, carcinomas in dogs, lymphoma or 
 carcinomas in cats) or invade it extramurally (thyroid
carcinoma, lung neoplasia, aortic body tumor, esopha-
geal tumor).
CT features (Figure 24.8)
?
 Soft tissue-dense mass arising from the tracheal
wall.
 Post-contrast: moderate to severe enhancement.
1
FURTHER READING
Figure 24.5 Adult dog with tracheitis. Transverse CT
Kara ME, Turan E, Dabanoglu I and Ocal MK (2004)
image of the caudal cervical trachea shows a bilateral vent-
Computed tomographic assessment of the trachea in the
German shepherd dog. Ann Anat 186: 317-21.
rolateral proliferation of the tracheal mucosa (arrows).
 Leonard CD, Johnson LR, Bonadio CM and Pollard RE (2009)
 pue uoedsu luinp suonsuap teauoen u sasur
expiration in healthy dogs as detected via computed tom-
ography. Am J Vet Res 70: 986-91.
248 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Figure 24.7 Tracheal CT study of two different dogs with tracheal collapse. (A) Transverse CT image shows an almost
complete collapse of the caudal cervical trachea in a Papillon with severe attributable respiratory signs. The complete loss of
C-shape of the tracheal cartilage indicates chondromalacia. (B) Transverse CT image of a Yorkshire terrier with respiratory
distress several weeks after stent placement for tracheal collapse. The meniscus-shaped fluid-gas interface indicates intralu-
minal fhuid accumulation consistent with airway infection, ruling out stenotic granulation.
Figure 24.8 Adult cat with a lymphoma. Post-contrast transverse CT image of the cranial trachea shows a moderately
 contrast-enhancing mass arising from the dorsal tracheal wall (arrows).
CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE
MEDIASTINUM
Audrey Petite and Robert Kirberger
IMAGING PROTOCOL (TABLE
 astinum lies slightly to the right due to the extension
of the cranial left lung lobe across the midline. Caudally.
25.1)
the accessory lobe extends to the left across the midline,
locating the caudal mediastinum to the left.
Images are also viewed in lung and bone windows
 Mediastinal shift is an important radiographic inter-
allowing different aspects of a disease to be
pretative concept that can be applied to CT imaging.
evaluated.
It refers to a displacement of the mediastinum from its
Jonoued e oi anp Aiensn st 1I uoeson [eu1no
process inducing a change in volume of one hemitho-
CT: ANATOMY AND NORMAL
rax. An increased hemithoracic volume displaces the
VARIANTS
mediastinum away from the process, while a decreased
volume displaces the mediastinum towards the
The mediastinum is the thoracic midline space com-
process. Causes of mediastinal shift are numerous
prised between the left and right pleural cavities. The
(Box 25.2)
mediastinum is continuous with the soft tissues of the
neck cranially through the thoracic inlet. It is continu-
Esophagus
ous caudally with the retroperitoneum through the
aortic hiatus. In dogs and cats, the mediastinum con-
 The esophagus is a tubular structure that connects the
tains the thoracic trachea (see Chapter 24) and the
 oropharynx to the stomach at the level of the cardia. It
esophagus, lymph nodes, the thymus, the thoracic
is composed of four soft tissue layers: fibrous, muscu-
duct, several important nerves, the heart and the great
lar, submucous and mucous, which are not distin-
vessels (see Chapter 23). The mediastinum also con-
guishable on CT. The esophagus is divided into three
tains a variable amount of fat deposits. Although in
portions: cervical, thoracic and abdominal. In its cervi-
cats the width of the cranial mediastinum is fairly con-
cal portion, it runs dorsally and to the left of the trachea
sistent (Box 25.1), brachycephalic and/or obese dogs
to finish laterally and to its left at the level of the tho-
accumulate a large amount of mediastinal fat, which
racic inlet. In its thoracic portion, the esophagus crosses
is responsible for widening of the mediastinum (Figure
dorsally over the tracheal bifurcation with the aortic
25.1). On CT, the fat present in the cranial mediastinum
arch on its left. It then lies more or less midline, to the
provides a natural contrast with the other mediastinal
right of the descending aorta until it reaches the
structures and may help their visualization.
esophageal hiatus of the diaphragm. The abdominal
The mediastinum has three anatomic reflections:
 portion is very short and wedge-shaped, merging with
Tranioventral, caudoventral and the plica venae cavae
the cardia of the stomach.
(Figure 25.2A). For interpretation purposes, it is clas-
 In CT, the esophagus can be followed along its entire
sically divided into three sections: cranial, middle and
length. It adopts a rounded to ovoid shape of soft
caudal (Figure 25.2B and Table 25.2)
tissue density in the neck, cranial and middle medi-
 Although the mediastinum represents the midline
 astinum. In the caudal mediastinum, it often adopts a
space of the thoracic cavity, it runs obliquely cranio-
more triangular shape (Figure 25.2A). Its lumen may
caudally from right to leff. The ventral cranial medi-
be highlighted by a variable amount of air, particularly
saunes Auu 'ziemups sa q pauis fy pan 
@ 2011 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
249
250 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Table 25.1
CT imaging protocol (intravenous contrast study: standard protocol; see Chapter 5).
Series
 Pre- and post-contrast: mediastinal window
 Decubitus 
Ventral or dorsal
 Special positioning 
 Placement of orogastric tube or air insuffation of the esophagus when necessary
 Scan margins
 Thoracic inlet ←-→ Insertion of the diaphragm on L3
Voltage (kVp)
120
Current (mAs)
60-150
Tube rotation time (s)
1
 Slice width (mm)
3-5
Ker nel frequency
Medium smooth
Collimator pitch
1.75
 Helical image reconstruction interval
0.5 x slice width
 Motion control
Induced respiratory pause with manual hyperventilation
Window level (HU)
+40
Window width ( HU)
400
B
Figure 25.1 Post-contrast transverse CT image of the cranial mediastinum in (A) a greyhound and (B) an English bulldog.
 Both images are set with the same window (level 40HU, width 400HU). In addition to the difference in cranial mediastinal
width (between arrows), note the better contrast provided by the mediastinal fat in the buldog. T = trachea.
Box 25.1  Cranial mediastinal width
when animals are anesthetized. Occasionally, the
caudal esophagus contains some fluid due to regurgi-
Dog: should be less than twice the width of the
vertebral column
tation, and a distinct horizontal fluid line can be seen.
 Cat: should have a similar width to the vertebral
When visualization of the esophagus is hindered by
surounding structures or lesions, an orogastric tube
column
 can be placed. If an esophageal condition is suspected,
251
MEDIASTINUM
44
®
LIVER
A
B
Figure 25.2 CT anatomy of the mediastinmum. (A) Transverse CT image: caudoventral (small arrows) and plica venae cavae
(dashed arrow) mediastinum. Ao = aorta; CaVC = caudal vena cava; 
esophagus.
Table 25.2
The three mediastinal sections and their content.
Box 25.2 Common causes and direction of
 mediastinal shift
 Mediastinal
area
 Main structures present
Away from the process
 Unilateral pneumothorax
Cranial
Trachea, esophagus, thymus, thoracic 
 Unilateral pleural effusion
 arteries, veins and lymphatics,
Unilateral lobar overinflation
 brachiocephalic trunk and cranial vena
Large pulmonary mass(es)
cava
 Unilateral diaphragmatic hernia or rupture
Middle
Heart, aortic arch, ascending aorta, 
 esophagus, carina and bro nchial lymph 
Towards the process
nodes
Unilateral lung collapse (Figure 25.3)
 Pleural adhesions secondary to pleural disease
Caudal 
 Esophagus, caudal vena cava,
descending aorta, azygos vein, thoracic
duct and vagal nerves
 occludes the esophagus precluding the passage of the
endoscope, virtual endoscopy allows visualization of 
an additional endotracheal tube is passed into the
structures beyond the mass and/or retrograde viewing
esophagus to inflate the esophagus just prior to the
of the mass.
scan. The distended air-filled esophagus allows better
 delineation of the intraluminal component of any
Lymph nodes
mural mass. If the esophagus and stomach are dis-
 tended with air, virtual endoscopy allows generation
 In the mediastinum, three groups of lymph nodes are 
of images similar to a direct endoscopic examination
present: the sternal, the mediastinal and the bronchial
(Figure 25.4). It is important to distend the esophagus
lymph nodes.
adequately to avoid mistaking smaller nodules for
The sternal lymph nodes, also known as retrosternal
esophageal folds. In cases where the mass totally
Or presternal, are located at the level of the second
252VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
 sternebra. Although they are usually paired, a large
individual variation exists, the left one being more
consistently present than the right. They drain the lym-
phatics from the thoracic wall and the abdominal
cavity. Therefore, their enlargement should raise a sus-
picion of abdominal disease.
 The mediastinal lymph nodes consist of a chain of
nodes along the large vessels of the heart in the cranial
mediastinum. Their number and size vary.
The bronchial lymph nodes are divided into two
ydui reouoiqoauen al pue Aieuoumd auu'sdnon
nodes. The pulmonary ones are most frequently absent,
but when present are distributed along the main
bronchi. Three tracheobronchial lymph nodes are nor-
mally present and are located at the level of the carina.
The right and left tracheobronchial lymph nodes are
ovoid structures found on their respective side of the
base of the main bronchi. The middle or bifurcational
tracheobronchial lymph node is more V-shaped and
 lies caudal to the angle created by the bifurcation of
Figure 25.3  Transverse CT image of an adult cat with com-
the trachea. It is the largest of the three nodes.
plete right lung lobe collapse and a mediastinal shift (arrow)
 With CT, the normal lymph nodes are barely visible 
towards the lesion (completely deviated to the right). The
but a moderate enlargement can be demonstrated. CT
midline double arrow line represents the normal location of
the mediastinum. E =esophagus; T = trachea.
assessment of mediastinal lymphadenopathy repre-
A
F
H
Figure 25.4 Screenshot from a virtual endoscopy of an air-insufflated esophagus generated from CT images of a dog with
aoid srdossopua renra au yim sneudosa aul umop Soot st iapumata padeus-usid au 'ssu reaseudosa tepnes e
seen on the bottom right of the image. Small nodules can be seen on the left ventrolateral surface of the esophagus. The
viewfinder can be moved backwards and forwards to give a real-time endoscopic appearance.
253 MEDIASTINUM
Table 25.3
CT features associated with mediastinal lymphadenopathy.
 Group of lymph
nodes
CT features associated to lymphadenopathy
 Sternal
 One or two soft tissue densities dorsal to second sternebra
 Mediastinal 
 Soft tissue density associated with a widening of the cranial mediastinum, elevation of the
 thoracic trachea, if gross enlargement 
Tracheobronchial
 Soft tissue density in their respective location 
Right and left: caudal and ventral displacement of the ipsilateral main bronchus, associated to a
variable degree of compression
 Middle: widening of the angle created by the mainstem bronchi, which can be slightly deviated
ventrally
sents an important part of the routine oncologic staging
 is increased alternative lymphatic uptake in case of
and pre-surgical planning. Enlarged lymph nodes can
 reduced renal clearance of vascular contrast medium.
be identified as rounded homogeneous soft tissue den-
 CT lymphangiography allows a better detection of the
sities in their respective location. They are associated
 number and topography of the lymphatic ducts than
with a mass effect, which displaces or compresses the
radiography.
adjacent structures (Table 25.3).
Nerves
Thymus
 In normal circumstances, the nerves crossing the medi-
 The thymus is mainly a lymphoid structure located in
 astinum are not visible with CT.
the ranial mediastinum, which has a role in the
T-lymphocyte maturation. Its size varies with the ani-
DISEASE FEATURES
S i  ie ar  e e s
until sexual maturity; thereafter it progressively invo-
Congenital
lutes during the rest of the animal's life, the lymphoid
 Esophageal diverticulum
tissue being replaced by fatty tissue.
Esophageal diverticulum refers to a sacculation of the
Thoracic duct
esophageal wall, which can be congenital or acquired.
Ingesta accumulate in the diverticulum and can cause
The thoracic duct is formed by a single or multiple
significant esophagitis.
lymphatic ducts that coalesce in the cranial part of the
thorax. It originates from the cisterna chyli, which is
CT features
located ventrally to L4 and drains the pelvic and
Focal dilatation of the esophagus in the cranial
abdominal viscera as well as the pelvic limbs. It enters
mediastinum.
the thoracic cavity through the aortic hiatus and runs
 Presence of mixed attenuating content correspond-
 dorsally to the aorta and ventrally to the azygos vein.
 ing to filling with ingesta.
It crosses to the left of the aorta more or less at the level
 Possible signs of aspiration pneumonia.
of T6. It may join any major cranial vein, including the
left external jugular vein, the left subclavian vein, the
Megaesophagus
left brachiocephalic vein, the azygos vein or the cranial
 vena cava. On a plain CT, the lymphatic ducts are
Strictly speaking, a megaesophagus refers to the dila-
au ym aiau pue xeoul aul u alqsa jou Aensn
 tation of a part of or the entire esophagus. It can be
rest of the surrounding soft tissue structures. In the
 01 Aiepuosas pambse Xquouon arou '1o [euaguon
Cranial abdomen the cisterna chyli can sometimes be
neuromuscular or other diseases, esophageal obstruc-
seen as a hat-shaped structure draping dorsally over
tion or intoxication. General anesthesia induces in
the aorta. The lymphatic visualization is not improved
most dogs and cats a moderate esophageal distention,
with intravenous contrast administration unless there
which is incidental.
254 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
A
B
Figure 25.5
-eudosaered (v) oi Supeal Apoq uaiaroy iealeudosa tesraia Sueroiad e ym bop e jo saseurl I aslaasuein 
geal abscess delineated with a contrast enhancing thin wall (arrows) and (B) moderate pneumomediastinum and mediastinitis
(arrows). * =esophagus; T = trachea.
CT features
administered into the organ of concern. The CT scan
 Visualization of the esophageal walls over a vari-
should be repeated after enough time to allow contrast
able length.
extravasation (5-10min).
 Presence of non-attenuating gas within the esopha-
 geal lumen.
CT features (Figure 25.5)
Possible signs of aspiration pneumonia.
· Presence of non-attenuating gas tracking along the
mediastinal structures, resulting in enhancement
 of their visualization.
Trauma
 The full thickness of the trachea and esophagus are
 Pneumomediastinum
visible.
Visualization of individual vessels is enhanced.
Pneumomediastinum corresponds to the presence of
Non-attenuating gas is often simultaneously found
 free gas, usually air, in the mediastinum. It is most
along the fascial planes of the neck, subcutane-
 commonly the result of a traumatic event affecting any
ously and in the retroperitoneum.
cervical or thoracic structure in direct contact with air
 If a perforating foreign body is present, a focal area
(thoracic, tracheal, esophageal or cervical injury).
 of hypo- or hyperattenuation, depending on the
Spontaneous pneumomediastinum can occur follow-
 aq Aeu Xpoq uanoy al jo sanradoid uoenuae
ing severe respiratory disease. If all identifiable causes
ueio paeoad aul jo Araudad a u us
have been ruled out, idiopathic pneumomediastinum
 Extravasation of contrast medium may be seen in
is diagnosed. Although a pneumomediastinum can 
the fascial planes surrounding the perforation site.
lead to a pneumothorax, a pneumothorax is never the
cause of pneumomediastinum. CT is particularly
Esophageal stricture
useful to investigate the cause of pneumomediasti-
num. Both the neck and the chest should be scanned,
Esophageal stricture usually develops as a conse-
starting from the oropharynx. If esophageal or tra-
quence of a traumatic or inflammatory lesion of the
cheal perforation is suspected, 5-10ml of non-ionic
esophageal mucosa. The clinical signs vary greatly
water-soluble iodinated contrast medium can be
with the degree of stenosis.
255 MEDIASTINUM
CT features
单
 Under normal circumstances, the stricture is not
visible.
 Moderate esophageal gas distention proximal to
the stenotic portion.
 Insufflation of gas in the esophagus may enhance
visualization of the stricture.
Esophageal foreign body
Retained esophageal foreign bodies are common in
dogs. They are most frequently found at the thoracic
inlet, the heart base or the esophageal hiatus.
Occasionally, perforation can occur and cause
mediastinitis.
Figure 25.6 Post-contrast transverse CT image of an
 English bulldog with chronic vomiting and esophagitis. The
CT features
thoracic esophagus (arrows) is moderately distended and
 Direct visualization of the foreign body depends
partially fluid-filled (asterisk) due to esophageal reflux.
on its density.
Ao = aorta; black oval = caudal vena cava.
 Moderate esophageal gas distention proximal to
the foreign body.
Enhanced visualization achieved with gas insuffla-
tion in the esophagus.
Box 25.3  Causes of mediastinitis
Primary
Fungal: Histoplasma, Cryptococcus
Infection/Inflammation
Bacterial: Actinomyces, Nocardia
Esophagitis
Parasitic: Spirocerca lupi
Cats: mediastinal Feline Infectious Peritonitis
Inflammation or ulceration of the mucosal surface of
the esophagus is usually secondary to gastroesopha-
Secondary
 geal reflux, chronic vomiting or direct trauma to the
Esophageal perforation
mucosa. In extreme cases, perforation can cause
Tracheal perforation
mediastinitis.
Extension from pleural, pulmonary, pericardial
or cervical disease
CT features (Figure 25.6)
?
 No abnormalities are usually detected with CT.
 Occasionally, moderate focal esophageal dilatation
± presence of fluid/ingesta.
 Increased attenuation of the mediastinal content 
due to accumulation of exudate, chyle.
●
 Mediastinal lymph node enlargement may be
Mediastinitis
present depending on the cause.
 In case of mediastinits secondary to tracheal or
Mediastinitis is an inflammatory or infectious process
esophageal perforation, mediastinal air (pneumo-
 affecting the mediastinum. A large number of etiolo-
 mediastinum) may be present.
gies may be responsible for mediastinitis (Box 25.3).
oe jo se u tas aq  ain s 
 Mediastinitis can be generalized or focal, depending
inflammation and in the thickened mediastinal
on the cause.
pleura.
CT features (Figure 25.5)
Spirocercosis
 Moderate widening of the affected part of the
mediastinum, due to thickening of the mediastinal
Spirocerca lupi is a nematode that is a common cause of
pleura and variable amount of effusion.
mediastinal pathology in endemic areas. Following
 Irregular outline of the mediastinum.
 penetration of the gastric wall, the larvae migrate to
256VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
A
Figure 25.7 (A) Sagittally and (B) dorsally reconstructed CT images of a dog with three spirocercosis nodules (arrows) in
 an air-insuflated esophagus, two cranial luminal and a caudal mural nodule.
the aorta through the arteries, then to the esophageal
CT features
wall. There, they transform into their adult form. The
 Benign masses often have a more hypodense central
typical imaging appearance is that of a caudodorsal
region indicative of a fluid or necrotic component
mediastinal mass as a result of a terminal esophageal
with a soft tissue density periphery that will enhance
mural nodule or nodules, which bulge into the esopha-
with the CT angiogram. Benign nodules that have
 geal lumen (Figure 25.7). Depending on the mass size,
undergone neoplastic transformation to osteosarcoma
it may be readily seen on routine thoracic radiographs,
or fibrosarcoma have a more homogeneous soft
particularly dorsoventral/ventrodorsal (DV/VD) pro-
tissue density with patchy enhancement after CT
jections. Nodules may also occur in the hilar region,
angiography.
where they are more difficult to detect radiographically.
CTis the modality of choice to evaluate masses that are
located on the esophageal serosal surface which cannot
Neoplasia
be fully evaluated endoscopically or when pleural or
mediastinal fluid effaces structures on the radiograph.
Mediastinal neoplasia can have numerous origins, but
With time, the nodules may undergo neoplastic trans-
all result in the presence of a mediastinal mass. The
formation or may lead to other complications. The latter
location of the mass is the key point in the differential
 Ard a wo ood assod p
-pau aul sasodmd uogejaidiaut noy pue sisousep
route or aberrant migration are given in Table 25.4. CT
astinum can be divided into five areas: cranioventral,
is used for surgical planning and prognostication in
craniodorsal, perihilar, caudoventral and caudodorsal.
-od a e 'seae sapua u sued sisoanoids
Also, mediastinal masses can have a non-neoplastic
tial pathological processes must be assessed on a tho-
etiology Table 25.5 summarizes the differential diag-
racic CT, even if the dog has been presented for a
nosis of mediastinal masses according to their location
different problem, because of the sensitivity of CT in
 and the CT features potentially associated with the
 detecting even small, clinically insignificant masses. An
mass effect.
 additional endotracheal tube is passed into the esopha-
 The internal CT features of mediastinal neoplasia
 gus to inflate the esophagus just prior to the scan. The
largely depend on the origin of the tumor. Most
routine scan is usually followed by a CT angiogram to
commonly, the tumor has a homogeneous soft tissue
 assess mass perfusion and to detect aortic aneurysms
density with a variable contrast enhancement accord-
and thrombi (Figure 25.8). Images are viewed in medi-
ing to its degree of perfusion. Hypoattenuating areas
astinal, bone and lung windows, allowing evaluation
 may be present in the core of the lesion corresponding
of different aspects of the disease.
to a necrotizing center.
257 MEDIASTINUM
Table 25.4
Pathology that may be seen on a thoracic CT examination in cases with spirocercosis. Pathology is given in
Order of most to least likely.
 Possible forms and complications associated with spirocercosis 
 Primary pathology
Caudal esophageal mass or masses (Figure 25.7)
Large masses compress main stem bronchi and trachea depending on location
Neoplastic masses tend to be large, 0ccur in older dogs (6.4 ± 1.91 vs 4.93 ± 2.87 years in
 Hilar esophageal mass or masses 
 Gastric mass in cardia region 
 Pathology seco ndary
Spo ndylitis (Figure 25.9)
 to normal or aberrant
Aortic dystrophic mineralization (Figure 25.10)
 migration
 Aortic aneurysm
Abnormally located mass
Aortic rupture with periaortic streak-like hemorrhage or marked hemorrhage resulting in
hemomediastinum or more commonly acute death due to hemothorax
Focal thoracic hematoma, often associated with a blood vessel
Thoracolumbar extradural cord compression 
Thoracolumbar intramedullary spinal cord sweling 
Aortic thrombus formation (Figure 25.8)
Complications
 Hypertrophic osteopathy, primarily in malignant cases 
Esophageal perforation with mediastinitis and/or pyothorax
Pleuritis
 Pne umomediastinum 
 Aspiration pneumonia 
Pneumothorax
 Gastro-esophageal intussusception
 Figure 25.8 Sagittally reconstructed CT-angiogram of a
dog with spirocercosis. There is a multilobulated irregular
caudal esophageal mass (arrows) with mild aneurysmal dila-
 Figure 25.9 Transverse CT image in a dog with spondylitis
tation of the aorta at the origin of a ventrally located aortic
secondary to aberrant S. lupi larval migration. Small nodules
thrombus (arrowhead). The dog presented with iliac
are visible in the ventral esophagus (arrows). Ao = aorta.
thromboembolism.
258 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Granuloma/Abscess
An abscess or a granuloma can develop in the medi-
astinum secondary to an infectious or a traumatic
process.
CT features (Figure 25.11)
 Rounded mass lesion with variable mass effect on
surrounding structures (cf. Table 25.5).
Thick, irregular wall of soft tissue density.
Mixed soft tissue/fluid/gas density filling the
lesion.
Mild contrast enhancement of the wall.
Figure 25.10 Sagittlly reconstructed CT image of a dog
FURTHER READING
with spirocercosis. There is dystrophic aortic calcification of
the dorsal and ventral intima (arrow). E=air-filled
 Ballegeer EA, Adams WM, Dubielzig RR, Paoloni MC,
esophagus.
 Klauer JM and Keuler NS (2010) Computed tomography
characteristics of canine tracheobronchial lymph node
metastasis. Vet Radiol Lltrasound 51: 397-403.
Other masses
 Dvir E, Kirberger RM and Malleczek D (2001) Radiographic
and computed tomographic changes and clinical presenta-
Cysts
tion of spirocercosis in the dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 42:
119-29.
 Mediastinal cysts are usually benign, incidental find-
Esterline ML, Radlinsky MAG, Biller DS, Mason DE, Roush
ings that ocur in both dogs and cats. They can go
JK and Cash WC (2005) Comparison of radiographic and
unoticed until their size leads to compressive effects.
computed tomography lymphangiography for identifica-
 Occasionally they rupture and can cause mediastinitis.
tion of the canine thoracic duct. Vet Radiol Lltrasound 46:
They can have a pleural, branchial, thymic, lymphatic,
391-5.
bronchogenic or neoplastic origin. They are most
Paoloni MC, Adams WM, Dubielzig RR, Kurzman I, Vail DM
 commonly found in the cranioventral mediastinum,
and Hardie RJ (2006) Comparison of results of computed
but can occasionally be located in the caudal
 tomography and radiography with histopathologic find-
mediastinum.
primary lung tumors: 14 cases (1999-2002). J Am Vet Med
Assoc 228: 1718-22.
CT features (Figure 25.13)
Van der Merwe LL, Kirberger RM, Clift S, Williams M, Keller
Rounded mass lesion with variable mass effect on sur-
 N and Naidoo V (2008) Spirocerca lupi infection in the dog:
rounding structures (cf. Table 25.5).
a review. Vet J 176: 294-309.
Yoon J, Feeney DA, Cronk DE, Anderson KL and Ziegler LE
Thin wall of soft tissue density.
(2004) Computed tomographic evaluation of the canine
 Fluid density filling the lesion.
and feline mediastinal masses in 14 patients. Vet Radiol
 Mild contrast enhancement of the wall.
Lltrasound 45: 542-6.
259 MEDIASTINUM
Table 25.5
Differential diagnosis of mediastinal masses according to their location and associated CT features.
 Mediastinal area 
 Differential diagnosis
CT features
Cranioventral
Lymphoma 
· Soft tissue/mixed density mass
{Figure 25.11)
Thymic diseases (thymoma,
· Widening of the cranioventral mediastinum 
Iymphosarcoma, cysts, hematoma,
· Elevation ± compression of the trachea 
hyperplasia, amyloidosis)
· Caudal displacement of the heart and carina 
· Caudal displacement of the cranial lung lobes ± 
 pulmo nary atelectasis 
· Pooling of contrast in the veins of the neck and thoracic 
limbs
Craniodorsal
Esophageal diseases
· Soft tissue/mixed density mass, dorsal to the thoracic
(Figure 25.12)
Neural or neuroendocrine tumors
trachea
 Vertebral or paravertebral tumors
· Ventral depression ± compression of the trachea 
(Aortic aneurysm, chemodectoma 
· Ventral or lateral displacement of the esophagus if 
 or thymoma reported)
 extra- or intra-mural esophageal mass 
· Variable amount of esophageal dilatation proximal to
the lesion
 Perihilar
 Perihilar lymphadenopathy
· Soft tissue/mixed density mass 
Heart-based tumors
· Displacement ± compression/obstruction of the corre-
Esophageal diseases
sponding mainstem bronchus
 Bronchogenic cyst
· If mass is caudal to the carina, widening of the angle 
 Vascular or cardiac enlargement 
 created by the tracheal bifurcation ± possible compres-
sion of the carina 
 Caudoventral
 Diaphragmatic lesions 
· Soft tissue/mixed density mass
 Peritoneo-pericardial hernia
· Widening of the caudoventral mediastinum or plica
venae cavae
· Displacement of the caudal vena cava
· Displacement ± atelectasis of the accessory lung lobe
Ca udodorsal
 Esophageal diseases
· Soft tissue/mixed density mass
(Figure 25.13)
Neural tumors
· Widening of the ca udodorsal mediastinum 
Hiatal hernia 
· Ventral or lateral displacement of the esophagus if 
 Diaphragmatic mass 
 extra- or intra-mural esophageal mass
· Variable amount of esophageal dilation proximal to the 
lesion 
Any location
 Primary mediastinal tumors
· According to the location (cf. above)
(hemangiosarcoma, lipoma/
 sarcoma, histiocytic sarcoma)
Abscess/granuloma
Hematoma
260
VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Figure 25.11 Post-contrast transverse CT image of a dog
with a cranioventral mediastinal abscess. It is delineated
with a contrast-enhancing wall (arrows) and has a mixed
Figure 25.12 Post-contrast transverse CT image of a dog
fluid and gas content. * = esophagus; T = trachea.
with a craniodorsal mediastinal paravertebral leiomyosar-
coma (arrows). The trachea (T) is ventrally displaced and the
esophagus is displaced to the left (asterisk).
Figure 25.13 10-month-old dog with a paraesophageal cyst. Post-contrast transverse CT image shows a caudodorsal medi-
astinal mass delineated with a contrast-enhancing thin wall (arrows) and is fully fluid flled. It produces a significant mass
effect on the aorta (Ao), caudal vena cava (CaVC) and esophagus (arrowhead).
CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX
LUNGS AND BRONCHI
Tobias Schwarz and Victoria Johnson
IMAGING PROTOCOL
0.5. A bronchoarterial diameter ratio can be used to
assess overall bronchial size for bronchiectasis with a
normal range of 0.8 to 2. A bronchial diameter that
See Table 26.1.
 exceeds twice the diameter of the adjacent pulmonary
 artery indicates bronchiectasis.
CT: ANATOMY AND NORMAL
aq pmous vSD Kiajie Kieuoumd au sop u
between 0.4 and 0.6 of the external CSA of the adjacent
VARIANTS
bronchus. Both measurements should be obtained at
the level of the T8 vertebra.
The bronchi (Figures 26.1 and 26.2)
The bronchi are air-conducting tubes with bands of
The lung parenchyma (Figures 26.1 and
smooth muscle and flattened overlapping cartilage
26.3-26.6!
rings for support. The bronchial tree consists of a leff
and right principal bronchus, each of which subdi-
The lung parenchyma consists of a vast and thin-
vides into lobar bronchi and then further arborizes into
walled alveolar airspace, interstitium with feeding
segmental bronchi within each lobe. The segmental
bronchovascular and lymphatic structures.  Like
bronchi ventilate a small area of lung within a lobe and
humans, dogs and cats have a bronchoarterial lung
continue to branch into smaller and smaller tubes
a sae ae requ e um ui ad
 down to the respiratory bronchioles.
bronchus and pulmonary veins separate from the
 The bronchi are clearly visualized on high-frequency
bronchus at segmental level. Unlike humans (type II
lung), dogs and cats do not have distinctive septa
ad sm suaad m san are 
Kreuound auL (uml I ad) samqol Sum uaamjaq 
towards the periphery. The walls may be mineralized
'sis pue shop un juauond Araa jou si wmnnsra
-udad sou pue payeu sou s sui ssop ut Aenuan
 High-resolution CT seings with a lung window are
eral in chondrodystrophic breeds. In cats, normal
 best to visualize details of aerated lung anatomy. High-
bronchial walls should not be mineralized. Bronchioles
resolution CT is not a specific preset on most CT units,
are usually not visualized within 10mm of the periph-
but is achieved with a combination of optimized set-
eral surface of the lung. Virtual bronchoscopy of
normal bronchi reveals smooth-walled tubular struc-
frequency reconstruction algorithm, minimal slice
-ssoin u pumoi ane pue Aenpen iadei um sam
width, no or low pitch, high mAs settings, a smallfield
section. Smaller bronchioles cannot be assessed with
 xi a ae is a pe mai jo
this technique.
lung parenchyma should be reasonably homogeneous
 Normal bronchial wall thickness can be assessed by
with a tolerable noise level, with density levels in the
measuring the internal and external cross-sectional
 negative range. Mean density levels that are applicable
areas (CSA) of the bronchus, generating the bronchial
for all lobes and different CT settings have been estab-
wall CSA by subtraction of the intermal from the exter-
lished in dogs as -713HU in expiration and -846HU
nal CSA, and dividing the bronchial wall CSA by the
in inflated inspiratory CT. The soft tissue-dense pul-
external bronchial CSA. This ratio should not exceed
monary vessels can be followed to the fourth-degree
saunes Auu 'ziemups sa q pauis fy pan 
@ 2011 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
261
262 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Table 26.1
protocol; see Chapter 5).
Pre- and
post-
Series
contrast
High resolution lung 
Decubitus
Ventral
 Scan margins
Caudal extent of
lung →> Thoracic inlet 
Voltage (kVp)
120
Current (mAs)
160
200 to 300
Figure 26.2 Normal virtual bronchoscopy image with a
Tube rotation time (s)
0.5 to 1
view from the distal trachea into the right mainstem bron-
 Slice width (mm)
3-5
1
chus. Note the smooth, rounded appearance of the bronchus
 Kernel frequency
High
 and its divisions.
 Collimator pitch
1.5
0-1
Helical image 
1.5 to 2.5
rower window settings are helpful in this respect. The
reconstruction
branching of the bronchial tree is also helpful to deter-
interval (mm)
 mine the lung lobe anatomy, in particular for the right
Motion control
Required
middle lobe, which can easily be identified by its
Window level (HU)
-100
uique dorsoventral bronchial orientation. Finally the
Window width (HU)
2000
 lack of visible vasculature in the lung periphery can
aid the identification of lung borders.
 Heterotopic pulmonary bone formation (pulmonary
 osteoma) frequenly occurs in large breed dogs, par-
ticularly collie breeds, and manifests on CT images as
1-3mm dense nodules throughout the parenchyma
and subpleurally. Although these nodules consist of
bone, measured density values are frequently sill in
the negative HU range, due to volume averaging with
the air-dense lung.
 A degree of peripheral atelectasis (synonym collapse)
is ubiquitous in lung CT examinations of dogs and
cats. Only a fraction of the normal lung capacity is
 needed at rest and prolonged recumbency and general
anesthesia with oxygen instead of air lead to collapse
of lung space. Atelectasis (Box 26.1) occurs in the most
 dependent part of the lung and is most marked with
compression by other organs. There are many causes
of lung collapse that should be differentiated. Even if
Figure 26.1 Close-up of a transverse high-resolution CT
atelectasis is physiologic, it can mask pathologic lung
image of normal canine lung. The bronchi (B) have thin,
 lesions such as soft tissue nodules. It may be necessary
 dense walls. The pulmonary arteries (A) are directly adjacent
 to repeat the CT exam with the patient positioned with
to the bronchi, whereas the veins (V) travel in a distance.
 Smallung vessels are visible in the lung periphery but not
pue uogisod juapuadap-uou au ul Suml sgeioalaie a
 interlobar septa.
hyperventilated prior to scanning.
helpful to assess aerated lungs, but it is very useful for
branch as tubular soft tissue structures. Arteries and
 all soft tissue structures of the thorax, including non-
veins can be distinguished by their relationship to the
 aerated lung. Collapsed or consolidated lung and the
bronchus. The pleural lining of the lung is usually a
pleural lining show a strong contrast enhancement.
very faint hyperdense line, and consequently it can be
Therefore the contrast uptake is helpful to differentiate
difficult to define the exact lung lobe borders on CT.
pleural fluid from lung tissue, as well as vascularized
 Orthogonal reconstructions as well as lower and nar-
lung tissue from necrotic, infarcted, abscessed or cystic
263 LUNGS AND BRONCHI
Intermal CSA
Mean: -863.453 SDev: 209.042 Total: -268534
Area: 0.431 0
Min: -1099.000 Max: 91.000
Length: 2.338 cm
Extemal CSA
Area:0.629cm2
Mean: -686.150 SD
Min: -1099.000 Max: 317.000
Figure 26.3 Close-up transverse CT image of a normal left canine caudal lobar bronchus with regions of interest drawn to
 measure the external (red circle, 0.6cm²) and intermal (green circle, 0.4cm?) bronchial cross-sectional areas (CSA). The resulting
bronchial wall CSA is 0.2 cm? and the ratio between it and the external bronchial CSA is 0.33 (normal range ≤ 0.5).
B
Figure 26.4  Transverse CT images with features for canine lung lobe identification. Faintly hyperdense pleural lines are seen
between (A) the right middle and caudal lobe (arrowheads) and (B) around the accessory lobe (arrowheads). There is an absence
of pulmonary vessels in the periphery of the right middle lobe (asterisk) and there are mumerous small, dense pulmonary osteo-
 mas (arrows). (C) The right middle lobar bronchus (arrows) is the only bronchus with a dorsoventral orientation, helping to
identify this lobe.
lung. The contrast uptake in inflammatory or infiltra-
 tracheal collapse (see Chapter 24). The underlying
tive lung (consolidation) cannot be differentiated from
cause is a progressive degeneration of the bronchial
 atelectatic lung.
 cartilage leading to an unstable bronchial wall. The
 disease is often accompanied by other complicating
factors such as obesity and chronic bronchitis.
CT DISEASE FEATURES
Malformations/Developmental
CT features (Figure 26.7)
 Flattened or narrow bronchi (appreciated best in
Bronchial collapse
transverse section).
Bronchial collapse is commonly seen in small or toy
 Collapse occurs during expiration so best to acquire
Wm uooumluon u pumoy uao st pue shop paaq
images during this phase of respiratory cycle.
264 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
A
B
Figure 26.5
-isAud e st sui dop e u seare Suni resiop puapuadap u siseisalane pasunouond ym aheun I asiaasuein (v) 
ologic feature but can mask pathology. (B) Repeat CT scan with the dog in ventral recumbency post hyperventilation shows
the re-aerated dorsal lung and the beginming atelectasis ventrally.
Box 26.1  Forms of lung atelectasis
 Passive atelectasis
hypostatic lung collapse (physiologic)
 mild pneumothorax or pleural effusion 
small compressive mass lesion
 Compression atelectasis
tension pneumothorax
 marked pleural effusion
large compressive mass lesion
 Resorption atelectasis
oxygen supplementation (physiologic)
 airway obstruction
 Adhesive atelectasis
 congenital lack of surfactant
acute respiratory distress syndrome
Cicatrization atelectasis
lung fibrosis
Figure 26.6
Transverse CT image with normal contrast
 adhesive pleuritis
enhancement of a collapsed left cranial lung lobe (L).
Ao = aorta.
Trauma
 May see dynamic changes if a static CT series is
 Blunt external forces or internal trauma (barotrauma)
acquired while the patient breathes normally (see 
can lead to rupture of pulmonary capillaries, causing 
tracheal collapse).
● Possible additional pathology such as pneumonia
 swelling (contusion) and bronchial or airspace rupture,
pue
 right-sided
heart enlargement 
(cor
 leading to bulla formation, pneumomediastinum and
pulmonale).
 pneumothorax. A bronchial tear may occur secondar-
265 LUNGS AND BRONCHI
ily to iatrogenic barotrauma (positive pressure ventila-
Pneumomediastinum.
tion, bronchoscopy), lung lobe torsion or parasitic
Pneumothorax.
infestation. The rupture results in gas tracking into the
mediastinum, fascial planes and subcutis.
Infection/lnflammation
CT features (Figure 26.8)
Bronchitis
?
Swollen
soft
tissue-dense
lung
lobe
in
Chronic canine bronchitis typically affects middle-
consolidation.
 aged and older dogs with chronic airway inflamma-
+1
 Bulla formation.
tion, smooth muscle hypertrophy and mucous gland
 include infectious, inflammatory or allergic disease,
dynamic airway collapse and bronchiectasis.
Feline bronchial disease is a term used to include a
multitude of small airway diseases in the cat. The con-
dition results from airway inflammation, reversible
 obstructive disease, bronchial wall edema and hyper-
secretion of mucus. Respiratory tract parasites
(Aelurostrongylus, Capillaria, Paragonimus spp.) can also
create or contribute to the condition and should be
 excluded. Hyperinflation may result from air trapping
distal to the obstructed airways. Right middle lung
lobe collapse is a common sequel and on occasion
 chronic rib fractures may be seen.
CT features (Figure 26.9)
Figure 26.7 Transverse CT image of the tracheal bifurca-
tion in a Yorkshire terrier. The right stem bronchus (R) is par-
Thickened bronchial  walls  and peribronchial
cuffing.
tially collapsed and the left one (L) is completely collapsed.
 Intraluminal soft tissue-dense material.
B
 Figure 26.8 Transverse CT images in two different dogs. (A) Thorax trauma with marked subcutaneous emphysema,
pneumomediastinum, pneumothorax and right cranial and left cranial lung lobe consolidation, consistent with a contusion.
(B) Traumatic bullae formation in the left caudal lung lobe.
irregular thickening of the right caudal bronchial walls. (B) Feline bronchitis with increased wall thickening of peripheral
bronchi.
 Right middle lung lobe collapse in cats (mucus
plug).
Rib fractures (more commonly seen in cats)
 Hyperlucency and peripheral bronchiectasis with
air trapping in cats.
Co-existing features of pneumonia, bronchiectasis
 or bronchial collapse.
Bronchiectasis
 Bronchiectasis is characterized by irreversible bron-
chial dilatation. The changes may be focal or general-
ized, cylindrical or saccular shaped. The disease can
 a d  os n 
-japul Anojeidsal araaas 1o Supueis-Suol oi Aiepuosas
tions, due to airway obstruction or as a complication
of radiation treatment. Secondary  infections are
common and difficult to completely resolve. In fibrotic
lung diseases in dogs, traction bronchiectasis can
 occur. The distorted, fibrosed lung architecture pulls
 the bronchi into irregular dilated shapes.
Figure 26.10  Transverse CT image with severe bronchiecta-
sis with thick-walled, cylindrically and saccularly distended
CT features (Figure 26.10)
 peripheral bronchi in a dog with immotile cilia syndrome.
Cylindrical or saccular distentions of peripheral
bronchi.
Bronchial foreign body
 Lack of tapering of bronchial diameter towards
periphery, visible bronchi within 1cm of lung
Inhaled bronchial foreign bodies may cause obstruc-
margin.
tion, irritation, inflammation and laceration. The size
 Bronchoarterial ratio exceeds 2.0.
of the foreign body dictates the level at which it will
Co-existing features of pneumonia or fibrosis.
cease movement. The caudal lobes are more commonly
267 LUNGS AND BRONCHI
B
Figure 26.11  (A) Transverse CT image with round, soft tissue lesion in (asterisk) the center of the accessory lobe in a dog
(ssaqe) puauo Suuuanou ym puauauua ui smous ae iseu-isod aui (a) me sse huea e ym
(asterisk). (C) Occlusion and exudate formation in the bronchial tree of a dog that inhaled pine needles.
 affected. Chronic foreign bodies result in pneumonia
· Lobar atelectasis due to obstructive resorption
and even abscessation.
atelectasis.
 Hyperlucency and increased lobar volume if a
CT features (Figure 26.11)
check-valve effect is created by an incompletely
 Presence of foreign material within a bronchus (not
 obstructing foreign body.
always seen):
 high density (bone, stone, tooth, metal frag-
Lung infection and inflammation
ment, dental calculus etc.)
 soft tissue density (grass awn, toys, food frag-
Bacterial, viral, fungal and parasitic pneumonia and
ments, etc.)
 bronchopneumonia as well as allergic and idiopathic
m juauasuua Aue mous lm adi iaiau
inflammatory changes of the lung manifest with often
 intravenous contrast administration.
marked density changes and different distribution pat-
?
 Focal pneumonia or abscess formation. The abscess 
 terns of the alveolar space. The specific CT patterns of
 different inflammatory lung diseases have not been
non-enhancing fluid-dense core surrounding the 
 established yet in dogs and cats but some general rules
foreign material.
 can be applied.
CT features (Figure 26.12)
 Bands of dense lung tissue perpendicular to the
Propensity towards soft tissue opacification (similar
 pleural surface.
 to radiographic alveolar pattern).
 Peribronchial and subpleural soft tissue opacities.
Propensity towards ventral airspace filling in 
Mild traction bronchiectasis.
hematogeneous bacterial pneumonia.
 Peribronchial thickening in allergic and parasitic
Lung lobe torsion
airway conditions.
Perivascular thickening in parasitic  vascular
 Torsion of a lung lobe is a rare condition in dogs
infection.
 Jo uosnoo pe Suimi ym (sies un aren Aauanxa)
Associated
 perihilar  lymphadenopathy,
uaa Aiuond rqon 'snusuonq reqol reuad a
most
marked in fungal pneumonia.
 and later artery with progressive swelling. Resorption
 Nodule and mass formation (abscess, granuloma)
atelectasis and venous congestion lead to a soft tissue-
is less common.
dense, often enlarged, maloriented lung lobe, occa-
sionally with residual small pockets of air. Pleural
effusion is almost always present. In deep-chested
Granulomatous lung diseases and 
 dogs the right middle lobe, and in small breed dogs
abscess formation
with barrel-chest formation the left cranial lobe, are
 Pulmonary abscess formation can be a sequel to pneu-
most commonly affected. Multiplanar and paddle-
monia, inhaled, penetrated or migrating foreign body
infection, or severe pleural infection. Granuloma for-
 generated from thin-sliced images are helpful to follow
mation can be seen in fungal disease, canine eosi-
-is d rog a pe a rq a
 enhanced CT can assist differentiating vascularized
nophilic
C pneumonia, mycobacterial  disease 
pue
lymphomatoid granulomatosis.  Contrast-enhanced
collapsed lung from a necrotic torsed lung lobe.
CT is essential to differentiate these lesions from other
Equally, positional changes on a repeat CT examina-
inflammatory or neoplastic conditions, although there
tion should reveal reinflation of collapsed lung in a
non-dependent position but consistent atelectasis of a
remains some overlap.
torsed lobe. With pleural effusion aerated lung lobes
CT features (Figures 26.13 and 26.14)
 often float and become folded and this should not be
 Pulmonary soft tissue nodule or mass.
confused with torsion.
?
 Abscess characterized by non-enhancing material
CT features (Figure 26.16)
or gas and a regular contrast-enhancing wall.
 Collapsed or swollen lung lobe with lung apex
Abscess may contain opaque foreign body.
pointing in abnormal direction and maloriented
 Granulomas often have irregularly shaped large
bronchovascular structures.
mass formation, often with central necrosis and are
Accumulation of small air pockets (vesicular
usually not cavitated.
pattern).
1
Multifocal small nodular granulomas can be diffi-
Abruptly
y interrupted patency of a bronchus,
cult to differentiate from metastatic lung lesions.
 blunted appearance, fish-mouth like appearance in
 Granulomatous disease often has very marked
virtual bronchoscopy.
associated perihilar lymphadenopathy, more 
S0
 Lack of contrast enhancement with arterial occlu-
than with abscess and neoplasia.
sion and necrosis.
Lung fibrosis
Pulmonary edema
 Interstitial fibrosis can be the end stage of various
Cardiogenic pulmonary edema is a common sequel of
chronic pulmonary conditions. Idiopathic pulmonary
 heart disease in dogs and cats, less commonly seen is 
fibrosis is a chronic progressive condition of unknown
 non-cardiogenic permeability edema formation. CT
-saiond ym shop paanq raal rapro u uaas sonoa
should be an excellent imaging modality to assess
sive exercise intolerance and inspiratory crackles on
 edema formation, but it has not been extensively used
 auscultation. It has also been reported in cats.
 yet in veterinary cardiology.
CT features (Figure 26.15)
CT features (Figure 26.17)
?
 Diffuse ground-glass opacity (similar to radio-
 Patchy areas of soft tissue infiltrate in lungs.
 graphic interstitial pattern).
· Enlarged pulmonary veins in cardiogenic edema.
269LUNGSAND BRONCHI
Figure 26.12 Transverse CT image with canine bacterial pneumonia with ventral consolidation of (A) left cranial and (B)
 right middle lung lobe. (C) Septic peribronchial foci in right caudal and accessory lung lobe in a pyrexic dog. (D) Patchy areas
of ground-glass opacity in a histologically confirmed case of interstitial pneumonia. (E) Patchy alveolar infiltrate and vascular
(Auer uaspuy sren go Asans aseu) sisotuonsooure ym bop e u juauaseua
270VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
tion (cause unknown) and (B) miliary nodular changes and lung consolidation in tuberculosis in two cats. (C) Dorsally
reconstructed CT images with numerous soft tissue nodules, left lung consolidation and perihilar lymphadenopathy (cause
unknown) and (D) massive perihilar lymph node granuloma and nodules throughout the lungs (cause unknown) in two
dogs. (E) Large mass formation in the right caudal lung lobe in a dog with an eosinophilic granuloma.
271 LUNGS AND BRONCHI
Pulmonary vascular embolic events
 In pulmonary thromboembolism the bronchoarte-
and infarction
rial ratio can exceed 2.0 in the thrombosed vessel
segment and be diminished in the post-occluded vas-
Pulmonary arterial embolism can occur as a conse-
cular bed. Peripheral wedge-shaped areas of lung con-
quence of thromboembolic disease, iatrogenically dis-
solidation areconsistent with infarctedlung.Pulmonary
lodged intravascular material, fat and bone marrow
 CT angiography can reveal flling defects in throm-
Embolism due to trauma or bone-marrow compressive
bosed vessels.
surgery, septic, neoplastic or parasitic embolism.
 Diffuse metastatic neoplasia of the lungs (synonym
pulmonary carcinosis) has been documented in dogs
-des Sumi au u foqua roumi snoauasojeuau yim
laries, leading to obstruction of blood flow, ischemia
 and infarction.
CT features (Figure 26.18)
Areuoumnd ui [eaeu pasporsp Xiesnagonen
 artery.
 Enlarged thrombus containing arterial segment.
 Collapsed post-thrombotic arterial segment and
 pulmonary vein.
Pleural-based, wedge-shaped lung consolidation.
 Filling defect of pulmonary artery segment in CT
angiography.
 Wedge-shaped and froth-like bands of subpleural
u Aedo ssels-pumois jo seae pue sampou leus
 pulmonary carcinosis.
Neoplasia
Primary pulmonary and bronchial and
Figure 26.14 Transverse CT image with pneumonia in the
infiltrative tumors
right lung with abscess formation in the accessory lobe with
 Pulmonary, bronchial and bronchoalveolar carcinomas
a markedly contrast-enhancing rim and non-enhancing
aurs Sumon Aimons Aensn 'uouon Araaneai ane
content (asterisk).
A
Figure 26.15 Transverse CT image with generalized ground-glass opacity and parenchymal fibrous band in (A) a West
272 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
D
Figure 26.16 (A) Torsed consolidated right middle lung lobe of which the apex points dorsally, compressing the right caudal
lobe. Marked left pneumothorax. (B) Torsed consolidated left caudal lung lobe with a vesicular gas patterm and pleural effu-
sion in the dorsally dependent part. (C) Lack of uniform contrast enhancement of a torsed right cranial lobe and mild pleural
effusion in a pug. (A-C = transverse CT images.) (D) Virtual bronchoscopy image with a view into the torsed right middle
lobar bronchus with an ovoid fish-mouth appearance.
masses in dogs and cats that will eventually cavitate
airways immediately. Canine multicentric neoplasia
(gas or fluid flled) and seed metastases to the lungs
a a s i se sm
and other organs. CT is very valuable in assessment of
 lung infiltrate, whereas it only very rarely affects the
these lesions for possible surgical resection and the
-edou aun agu eso ao sien ui shum
presence of pulmonary, pleural or lymph node metas-
 sias such as histiocytic sarcoma and lymphomatoid
pareu ood aie m uasaid ssoeue
ates bronchial structures and thus remains clinically
areas of soft tissue infiltrate of the lungs and perihilar
silent longer than bronchial neoplasia that occludes
 lymph nodes. There are cystic lung tumors that can
273 LUNGS AND BRONCHI
A
Figure 26.17 (A) Transverse CT image with non-cardiogenic pulmonary edema in a dog with suspected paraquat intoxica-
 tion. There is marked diffuse alveolar airspace filling, particularly in caudoventral lung areas. (B) Marked edematous and
inflammatory infiltrate in ventral lung areas in a dog with acute respiratory distress syndrome.
mimic pulmonary and mediastinal abscessation and
 Metastatic lung neoplasia
cysts. Primary lung neoplasia has many features
The lungs are the most common site for distant metas-
similar to granulomatous lung disease and both should
tases in dogs and cats. Most metastases develop as
be considered in the differential diagnosis.
soft tissue nodules in the pulmonary interstitium.
Lymphangitic spread is less common and can lead to
diffuse or alveolar septal metastases. Hemangiosarcoma
CT features (Figures 26.18 and 26.19)
metastases are often hemorrhagic and have less well-
 Soft tissue mass, central mineralization more
 defined margins. In general, pulmonary metastases are
 common in cats than in dogs.
less well-defined in cats than in dogs. Local metastatic
 Gas and/or non-enhancing fluid content in larger
 spread can develop along bronchovascular structures.
masses.
 Both granulomatous disease and neoplasia can cause
Multilobulated
fluid-filled
cysts
in
cystic
nodules that may be difficult to differentiate without
adenocarcinoma.
further clinical information (see Box 26.2).
 Deviation and compression of bronchovascular
 structures with pulmonary neoplasia.
 Bronchial wall and lumen invasion with bronchial
neoplasia.
CT features (Figures 26.18 and 26.20)
 Usually show strong enhancement and central
 Soft tissue nodules within parenchyma.
 necrotic non-enhancing regions.
+
 Distinct from vessels, which are tubular and
 May have enlarged perihilar tracheobronchial
therefore
continuous
uIO
continuous
slice
lymph nodes.
images.
 May have evidence of pulmonary or pleural meta-
 May have feeding vessel.
static disease.
More indistinct margins in cats and with
·Feline bronchial neoplasia may be diffuse with
hemangiosarcoma.
areas of alveolar consolidation, bronchial thicken-
eiedoau riend p ym szis jo iar
ing, interstitial infiltrates and mineralization.
Very rarely mineralize.
274 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
+
D
Figure26.18
Aaans uo uoneoyedo Suni pasea-ienaid (rv) satare Aeund pasreua () um ale I asiaasi
CT and (B) luminal arterial fiing defects (Ar) in pulmonary angiography CT in canine pulmonary thromboembolism. (C)
Clinically silent dislodged catheter fragment (arrows) in the right cranial lung lobe artery of a dog (image courtesy of Tiziana
 Liuti). (D) Pulmonary carcinosis causing mumerous small tumor emboli and subpleural lung infarcts.
Figure 26.19 Transverse CT images of primary lung tumors. (A) Large cavitated soft tissue mass (M) involving bronchi and
lung tissue of the accessory lung lobe in feline bronchoalveolar carcinoma. (B) Right caudal lung lobe tumor (asterisk) in a
cat with typical central gas and mineralization. (C) A slow-growing pulmonary carcinoma (asterisk) causing bronchial devia-
tion (image courtesy of L. Jarrett). (D) Pulmonary adenocarcinoma in a dog (asterisk) with heterogeneous contrast enhance-
ment indicative of necrosis. (E) Cystic bilobed adenocarcinoma of the accessory lobe in a dog mimicking a mediastinal cyst
(asterisks). (F) Diffuse ground-glass opacity with canine lymphoma.
275 LUNGS AND BRONCHI
276 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Box 26.2 Ditzels
733-7.
This is a medical term to describe small lung
MS,
, Wisner ER, Johnson LR and Kass PH
nodules with unknown potential for malignancy
(2009)
）Computed
tomography  bronchial  lumen 
to
in humans. Due to the high sensitivity of CT,
 pulmonary
artery
diameter ratio in dogs without
very small nodules are also visible in dogs and
clinical pulmonary disease. Vet Radiot Uultrasound 50:
cats, and not all of them are neoplastic. The
622-4.
following rules can be applied.
Henninger W (2003) Use of computed tomography in the
diseased feline thorax. J Small Anim Pract 44: 56-64.
1-2mm in size, very dense lesions through-
Nemanic S, London C and Wisner ER (2006) Comparison of
thoracic radiographs and single breath-hold helical CT for 
 out the lungs in dogs are most likely inciden-
 detection of pulmonary nodules in dogs with metastatic
tal pulmonary osteomas. Due to partial
neoplasia. J Vet Intern Med 20: 508-15.
volume effect, densitometry is not reliable to
Johnson VS, Corcoran BM, Wotton PR, Schwarz T
 confirm mineralization.
and Sullivan M (2005)
Thoracic  high-resolution
·In areas of endemic fungal disease with
computed tomography findings in dogs with canine
known likelihood for nodule formation, such
idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. J Small Anim Pract 46:
as histoplasmosis, fungal origin should be
381-8.
 considered more likely.
Johnson VS, Ramsey IK, Thompson H et al. (2004)
Metastatic disease  is more likely to be
Thoracic high-resolution computed tomography in the 
present with an identified primary tumor
diagnosis of metastatic carcinosis. J Srmall Anim Pract 45:
134-43.
with high metastatic potential. The more
 Joly H, D'Anjou M, Alexander K and Beauchamp G
chronic the primary tumor is, the more likely
 (2009) Comparison of single-slice computed tomography
it is the patient would have advanced meta-
 protocols for detection of pulmonary nodules in dogs. Vet
static disease, with nodules of a range of
Radiol Lltrasound 50: 279-84.
sizes.
 Morandi F, Mattoon JS, Lakritz J, Turk JR and Wisner ER
 A follow-up CT scan in 4-6 weeks should be
(2003) Correlation of helical and incremental high-
considered.
resolution thin-section computed tomographic imaging
 with histomorphometric quantitative evaluation of lungs
in dogs. Am J Vet Res 64: 935-44.
Schultz RM, Peters J and Zwingenberger A (2009)
FURTHER READING
Radiography, computed tomography and virtual bron-
 choscopy in four dogs and two cats with lung lobe torsion.
J Small Anim Pract 50: 360-3.
Au JJ, Weisman DL, Stefanacci JD and Palmisano MP
Seiler G, Schwarz T, Vignoli M and Rodriguez D (2008)
(2006) Use of computed tomography for evaluation of
Computed tomographic features of lung lobe torsion. Vet
lung lesions associated with spontaneous pneumo-
Radiol UIltrasound 49: 504-8.
Figure 26.20 Transverse CT images of metastatic lung neoplasia. (A) Regularly shaped nodular metastases (arrows) in a
range of sizes in a dog with anal gland carcinoma. The faint opacity of the dorsal node is due to volume averaging with
aerated lung. Nodules can be differentiated from vessels that are tubulous and taper towards the lung periphery. (B) Direct
metastases along bronchial walls (arrow) in the left caudal lobe in a dog with left cranial lobar consolidation (arrowhead) due 
to perihilar bronchial carcinoma. (C) Irregularly marginated lung metastasis typically seen in cats. (D) Poorly marginated
lung metastases (arrows) in a canine anaplastic carcinoma. (E) Poorly marginated coalescing pulmonary metastases of a canine 
hemangiosarcoma due to hemorrhage and infarction.
CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN
PLEURA
Wilfried Mai
IMAGING PROTOCOL
is the case, then thickening of the pleura and primary
or reactive pleural disease should be suspected.
 The kermel frequency for pleural imaging should
See Table 27.1.
be in the medium range, and without additional
edge enhancement to avoid rebound artifacts that
CT: ANATOMY
 can mimic pneumothorax and pleural thickening (see
Figure 4.19D).
The pleural membrane is composed of a single layer
of mesothelial cells that overlie a cormective tissue
DISEASE FEATURES
layer containing blood vessels and lymphatics. There
is a parietal pleura that covers the inner surface of the
Pneumothorax
wall of the thorax (costal wall, diaphragm and medi-
astinum) and a visceral pleura that lines the lung
CT is usually not used to diagnose pneumothorax.
surface and forms the interlobar fissures. The two
However, it is frequently used in patients with spon-
layers of pleura (parietal and visceral) cannot be dis-
 taneous pneumothorax to rule out ruptured cavitary
tinguished normally on CT. Because they are thin and
pulmonary lesions such as blebs or bullae as a cause
oblique relative to the plane of the scan, the normal
of the pneumothorax (see Chapter 26).
major fissures are also not usually visible on CT. In
some patients though, just as on radiographs, normal
CT features
fissures perpendicularly aligned to the scanning plane
·Free pleural air is easily recognized using lung
can be seen as thin lines of soft tissue attenuation.
window/level settings as a non-attenuating space
 There is a thin space between the two pleural layers
between the parietal and visceral pleura accumu-
called the pleural cavity. This cavity is a potential space
lating in the highest (non-dependent) area of the
that contains 2-3ml of serous fluid, which acts a lubri-
pleural cavity (Figure 27.2).
 cant to minimize friction during respiration.
 Non-ruptured pulmonary blebs or bullae appear as
 In plarning for the CT, one must remember that the
[uouared Kreuound mol jo suoran papumon
 diaphragmatic pleura, the costodiaphragmatic and
 density, with focal changes to the vascular pattern
lumbodiaphragmatic  pleural  recesses  extend 
well
(disruption by pruning or distortion around the 
caudal to the lung bases and that scans caudal to the
low-density region).
 diaphragmatic dome must be obtained to evaluate
 Ruptured pulmonary bullae are very difficult to
an d a go sd a
identify as their appearance is non-specific (focal
 In normal patients, a 1-1.5mm thick opaque line is
area of alveolar consolidation).
Alenadsa Sumi au jo Aaudiad a e uaas Auouo
 Imaging should be performed after thoracic drains
ad ads sn sas qi juee raami
have been placed to drain the pneumothorax and
 represents the innermost intercostal muscle when
 imaging should be performed under mild positive
 present, combined with the two pleural layers and
 -[ae Areuoud quaaand on uonenuaa amssand
 some extrapleural fat (Figure 27.1).
ectasis. Even if a lesion has been localized previ-
 No significantly enhanced visibility of the pleura
ously and an assessment of the entire thorax is not
should be seen after contrast medium injection. If this
needed, the scanning area should always include
saunes Auu 'ziemups sa q pauis fy pan 
@ 2011 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
279
280 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Table 27.1
CT imaging protocol (intravenous contrast study: standard protocol; see Chapter 5).
Series
 Pre- and post-contrast
Decubitus
Ventral
 Special positioning 
 Thoracic limbs extended cranially to avoid inclusion in field of view
Scan margins
Last pair of ribs ←-→ Manubrium
Voltage (kVp)
120
Current (mAs)
 Small/medium thorax:160; large thorax: 200*
Tube rotation time (s)
 Slice width (mm)
 Small thorax: 2; medium thorax: 3; large thorax: 5
 Sequential slice interval (mm)
Small thorax: 4; medium thorax: 5; large thorax: 7
Kernel frequency
Medium
 Collimator pitch
 Small thorax: 2.0; medium thorax: 1.7; Large thorax: 1.4
 Helical image reconstruction 
 Small thorax: 2; medium size thorax: 3; Large thorax: 5
interval
 Motion control 
· Hyperventilate immediately prior to scan - apnea during scan
· Alternatively use paralytic agent - constant infusion of 3μg/kg/min of cisatricurium**
 Mechanical ventilation is required after CT scan for several minutes 
Window level (HU)
Mediastinal: +40; lung: +700
Window width (HU)
Mediastinal: 400; lung: 1500
*Thorax: small <15kg: medium 16-30 kg: large >30kg body weight.
**Nimbex, cisatracurium bensylate 2 mg/ml, Abbott Laboratories, North Chicago, IL.
Figure 27.1  Transverse CT image of the thorax in a normal
dog, high-resolution CT. A thin opaque line is seen at the 
periphery of the lung representing the summation of the
innermost intercostal muscle combined with the two pleural
Figure 27.2 Migrating foreign body (long arrow) and
layers and some extra-pleural fat (black arrow). The medias-
spontaneous pneumothorax (short arrow) in a dog with
 tinal pleura between the accessory and the left caudal lung
chronic cough (image courtesy Dr Schultz and Dr
lobe is also visible (white arrow).
Zwingenberger, University of Califormia, Davis).
281PLEURA
Figure 27.4 Post-contrast transverse CT in a dog with a
pyothorax. Elliptic and lenticular effusion with pleural
enhancement is seen (arrows) consistent with loculated
effusion.
Figure 27.3  Free pleural effusion appearing crescentic and
 Bop e ur yus Teuonenaei Sugensuouap 
the highest point of the pleural cavity to identify
Hemothorax
the magnitude of the pneumothorax.
 Hemothorax can result from trauma, or is the conse-
 Sensitivity of CT to identify ruptured bullae or
 quence of coagulation disorders or associated with an
small-sized intact bullae is relatively low.
intrathoracic neoplasm.
Pleural effusion
CT features
 Hemorrhagic effusion on CT is usually dense
General considerations
-adsa 'snoauasououu ieadde Aeu pue (NHOg<)
Pleural fluid can easily be recognized on thoracic CT,
cally with the dependent regions having CT
with most effusions having a density close to that of
 numbers higher than that of water.
water.
 In some cases a 'fluid-fluid' interface may be seen
CT numbers cannot be used to predict the nature
('hematocrit effect', due to the linear separation of
of pleural effusion with the exception of hemothorax
cellular and liquid components of blood).
(see below). In addition, the presence of pleural
thickening is suggestive of an exudate rather than a
transudate.
Chylothorax
 On cross-sectional images, effusions can be crescen-
Chylothorax is the accumulation of chyle within the
tic, elliptical or lenticular in shape:
pleural space, which leads to dyspnea. This manifests
 as a pleural disease, although it results from changes 
 Crescentic and dependent effusions are usually
associated with the thoracic duct or its tributaries
free fluid although in theory one should demon-
located within the mediastinum.
strate that the effusion moves with patient move-
ment to confirm this (unlikely to be done in practice)
CT features
(Figure 27.3).
CT lymphangiography can be performed after
· Elliptical and lenticular effusions are more likely to
 pre-surgical direct catheterization of a mesenteric
 represent loculated fluid (Figure 27.4).
lymphatic vessel or ultrasonographically guided
282VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
injection of a mesenteric lymph node, using iodi-
 Pockets of loculated effusion appear lenticular or
ue aq oi uaaond seu i wmipau isenon paneu
elliptical in shape.
efficient way to image the thoracic duct and
Presence of air in the effusion is usually the
its branches and identify leakage and/or
result of:
lymphangiectasia-type changes.
 recent thoracocentesis
 infection with gas-forming bacteria
 a bronchopleural fistula, which could for
Pyothorax (pleural empyema)
instance result from a migrating bronchial
Pyothorax or pleural empyema is a purulent septic
foreign body (see below).
 pleural effusion. CT can be useful in the management
of pyothorax to determine the extent and distribution
Pleural foreign bodies
of lesions and look for possible causes. CT is also
useful in patients refractory to traditional treatment
Pleural foreign bodies are not common and can result
from direct penetration from external thoracic wall
with thoracic drains to identify loculated or pocketed
 trauma or from chronic migration of an inhaled foreign
 areas of effusion.
us sapoq uianoy paeuu 'ume sse e se qons Apoq
 migrate along the bronchial tree and can end-up pen-
CT features
etrating the visceral pleura to enter the pleural space.
 Pyogenic effusions are commonly unilateral or
Lesions of pleuropneumonia and complications of
asymmetrical.
 pyothorax and/or pneumothorax can result from this
 Pleural thickening (especially parietal, less often
visceral) is commonly seen on post-contrast series
migration.
(Figure 27.5).
CT features
 A 'split-pleura’ sign can be observed, when the
CT allows better characterization and localization
thickened visceral and parietal pleural layers are
ublaoy Suelsu Areuoumd Aq pasnpu suoisal yo
split apart by and surround the empyema. This
body than radiographs.
can also be seen in the costodiaphragmatic recesses
 Common findings include:
of the pleural space due to fluid entrapment in
 focal interstitial to alveolar pulmonary opacities
the costophrenic reflection of the parietal pleura
most commonly seen in one caudal lung lobe or
(Figure 27.4).
the accessory lung lobe
Figure 27.5 Pre- (left) and post- (right) transverse contrast CT in a dog with a pyothorax showing severe left-sided effusion
causing mediastinal shift to the right as well as parietal pleural enhancement and thickening seen on the post-contrast image
(arrows).
283 PLEURA
Figure 27.7 Siamese cat with a history of infiltrative
thymoma that had been debulked surgically some months
prior to this CT. A pleural mass is seen in the right caudal
thorax appearing as a soft tissue-attenuating lesion that is
Figure 27.6 Post-contrast transverse CT in a poodle with a
broad-based towards the parietal pleura and displaces the
 migrating grass awn. An enhancing fistula tract (white
 lung ventrally. This was a pleural metastasis of the thymoma.
arrow) is seen in the left caudal lung lobe and there is focal
thickening of the pleural at that level (black arrow) (image
courtesy Dr Schultz and Dr Zwingenberger, University of
California, Davis).
 pleural effusion
CT features
focal  pleural  thickening and  enhancement
 CT is very useful in confirming the presence and
(Figure 27.6)
extent of pleural masses: irregular or nodular
pneumothorax (Figure 27.2)
thickening of the pleura is identified (Figure 27.7).
foreign body contrast enhancing tract (Figure
Post-contrast series are useful to distinguish
27.6)
the neoplastic tissue from associated fluid collec-
visualization of the foreign body itself (Figure
tions or strands of fibrin and hemorrhage
27.2).
(Figure 27.8).
 In cases of mesothelioma, pleural effusion might be
Pleural masses
the only recognizable finding. All portions of the
pleura can be affected, including mediastinal
 Pleural masses can be present as a manifestation of
pleural masses. Concurrent pericardial masses or
pleural spread of cancerous lesions (pleural carcino-
pericardial effusion is common.
sdo Ard jo osa e s no (siso
infiltrate, in particular mesothelioma. The differential
FURTHER READING
diagnosis will rely on the history (prior knowledge of
 a primary distant neoplasm) and/or on CT findings
(e.g. concomitant finding of pleural lesions and a mass 
Au J, Weisman DL, Stefanacci JD and Palmisano MP (2006)
lesion in the lung).
Use of computed tomography for evaluation of lung
doau aisse A e si eoaosa
lesions associated with spontaneous pneumothorax in
dogs: 12 cases (1999-2002). J Arm Vet Med Assoc 228:
pazaeieu si lI sisouond nood Aaaxa ue y
733-7.
m  d sso aq onr
 Burk RL (2009) Computed tomography of thoracic disease in
can be 'en plaque', nodular or create mass lesions.
dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 199: 617-21.
 The tumor usually spreads by local infiltration of the
De Rycke LM, Gielen IM, Simoens PJ and van Bree H.
pleural.
Computed tomography and cross-sectional anatomy of
284 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Figure 27.8 Pre- (left) and post- (right) contrast enhanced transverse CT image in a dog with a confirmed pleural mesothe-
lioma. Irregularly marginated and strongly enhancing pleural lesions (white arrows) are identified attached to the caudov-
entral mediastinal reflection (black arrow) and the diaphragmatic parietal pleura. A = aorta, C =caudal vena cava,
E =esophagus (image courtesy Dr Valdes-Martinez, Colorado State University).
the thorax in clinically normal dogs. Am J Vet Res 66:
Swinbourme F, Baines EA, Baines SJ and Halfacree ZJ (2011)
512-24.
Computed tomographic findings in canine pyothorax and
 Esterline ML, Radlinsky MG, Biller DS, Mason DE, Roush JK
and Cash WC (2005) Comparison of radiographic and
Small Anim Pract 5: 203-8.
computed tomography lymphangiography for identifica-
Zwingenberger A and Schultz RM (2008) Radiographic, com-
tion of the canine thoracic duct. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 46:
 puted tomographic, and ultrasonographic findings with
391-5.
Henninger W (2003) Use of computed tomography in the
Radiol Ultrasound 49: 249-55.
diseased feline thorax. J Small Anim Pract 44: 56-64.
CHAPTER TWENTY-EIGHT
THORACIC BOUNDARIES
Jimmy Saunders, Massimo Vignoli and Ingrid Gielen
IMAGING PROTOCOL
Feline anatomical specificities
Dogs have a curved sternum, which is square
 Similar to pleura; see Chapter 27.
in cross-section, while cats have a cylindrical
straight sternum with a flat xiphoid process.
CT: ANATOMY AND NORMAL
Malposition of xiphoid process in cats is usually
not traumatic. Vertebral body shape in cats is
VARIANTS
 more cylindrical than in dogs. Vertebral arrange-
ment is physiologically more flexible in cats
The boundaries of the thoracic cavity consist of the
(allowing bending of back).
thoracic skeleton (vertebral column, ribs, sternum), the
cranial and caudal thoracic apertures, and the covering
soft tissue structures (thoracic, pectoral, spinal and
other musculature, subcutaneous fat and skin).
The thoracic skeleton consists of 13 thoracic verte-
DISEASE FEATURES
 brae, which articulate cranially with a corresponding
Malformation/Developmental
rib pair and eight stermebrae. The first sternebra is
called the manubrium and the last one the xiphoid
Congenital abnormalities of the thoracic skeleton are
process (Figure 28.1). The first nine ribs articulate with
 relatively common, particularly in dogs, and are most 
the sternum through the costal carilages. The cranial
often incidental. Vertebral, costal and sternal abnor-
thoracic aperture, also called thoracic inlet (Figures
malities are often combined and should be assessed in
28.2 and 28.3), is a small passage for the trachea,
conjunction.
esophagus, muscles, vessels and nerves. The deep
fascia as well as pectoral, scalenius and longus colli
Spinal abnormalities
muscles enclose it. The diaphragm is a dome-shaped
musculotendinous organ that attaches to the costal
See Chapter 22.
 arch and covers the caudal thoracic aperture (Figure
28.4). It develops from six embryogenic segments into
Rib cage abnormalities: chondrodysplasias
two muscular masses, the crura diaphragmatica and a
central collagenous tendon. The normal adult dia-
Abnormal cartilage development may cause propor-
phragm has three openings: the dorsal aortic hiatus
tionate (all bones affected) or disproportionate dwarf-
(for the aorta, azygos vein and thoracic duct), the
(affecting primarily facial bones and/or
central esophageal hiatus (for the esophagus) and the
 appendicular skeleton). These features are often inher-
dextroventral caval foramen (for the caudal vena cava).
ited and selectively bred, such as disproportionate
The soft tissue mantle of the rib cage should normally
dwarfism in dachshunds and basset hounds (unusual
be thin and even.
'cottage loaf' thorax conformation).
saunes Auu 'ziemups sa q pauis fy pan 
@ 2011 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
285
286 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Congenital hypothyroidism is a disproportionate
dwarfism caused by arrested thyroid activity.
Mucopolysaccharidosis is a group of rare genetic
 connective tissue disorders in dogs and cats with gen-
 eralized skeletal deformities.
CT features
Chondrodystrophic breed  chest conformation:
inward deviation of ventral rib component (Figure
28.5A).
Congenital  hypothyroidism:  delayed  physeal
closure, shortened, often kyphotic vertebrae.
1
SPINE
AORTA
Figure 28.2 Transverse CT image at the thoracic inlet.
1 = infraspinatus m.; 2 = long m. of the neck; 3 = longissimus
TRACHEA
 LUNGS 
m.; 4 = multifidus m.; 5 = nuchal ligament; 6 = pectoralis m.;
7=rhomboid m.; 8=scalenus m.; 9=subscapular m.;
HEART
UVER
LUNGS
10 = supraspinatus m.; 11 = teres major m.; 12 = trapezius
m.,; 13 = triceps (long head) brachi m.; 14 = ventral serrate
STERNUN
m.; C6 = sixth cervical vertebra; O = esophagus; T = trachea.
 Figure 28.1  Sagittally reconstructed CT image shows the
main thoracic structures.
A
B
C
(fat); 2 = confluence of the axillary veins into the brachiocephalic veins; 3 = common carotid arteries; 4 = intermal thoracic vein
and artery; 5 = origin of the axillary arteries.
287 THORACIC BOUNDARIES
UVER
A
Figure 28.4 (A) Transverse CT image at the level of the caudal thorax (diaphragm - arrows). 1 = juxta-vertebral m.; 2 = latis-
simus dorsi m.; 3 = oblique m.; 4 = rectus abdominis m. O =esophagus; St = stomach. (B,C) Transverse CT image shows the
diaphragm (arrows).
· Mucopolysaccharidosis: oar-shaped ribs, endplate
 Sternal dysraphism: split sternum or xiphoid
sclerosis, widened and fused vertebrae, degenera-
process (Figure 28.6A).
tive joint disease and spondylosis, often Pectus
Pectus excavatum (Figure 28.6B):
excavatum (see below) (Figures 28.5B and 28.5C).
inward deviation of the sternum into the tho-
racic cavity
 decrease in thoracic dorsoventral diameter.
Sternal abnormalities
A variation in the size and number of sternebrae, and
in the shape of the manubrium and xiphoid process is
Diaphragmatic abnormalities
commonly seen and is usually incidental. Sternal dys-
Diaphragmatic hernia
raphism is the failure of the left and right cartilaginous
sternal precursors to fuse. It leads to a ventral defect
 Diaphragmatic hernias are congenital anomalies due
that is closed by the thoracic fascia and pleura only. In
 to agenesis of a portion of the diaphragm or lack of
the absence of diaphragmatic defects, sternal dysra-
fusion between the parts of the primitive diaphragm.
phism has no adverse respiratory or circulatory conse-
 They are usually found in young animals with no
quences. Pectus excavatum (funnel chest) isa congenital 
history of trauma. In contrast to diaphragmatic rup-
or developmental abnormality with variable decrease
tures, the prolapsed abdominal organs are contained
in the thoracic dorsoventral diameter due to inward
within a pleural (pleuroperitoneal hernia) or pericar-
deviation of the sternum. It can affect normal respira-
tory physiology in severe cases.
A hiatal hernia corresponds to herniation of any
abdominal organ through the esophageal hiatus. It is
CT features
most often congenital in origin, but can be acquired
 Abnormal number and shape of sternebrae is easily
following repair of chronic diaphragmatic rupture,
recognizable.
traumatic event, esophageal/upper respiratory tract
Ventrally deviated xiphoid process in cats.
 pathologies or neuromuscular disorders. Three main
288 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
B
Figure 28.5 Two dogs with rib cage abnormalities. (A) Transverse CT image of a normal basset hound shows inward rib
deviation (arrows). A lipoma is also visible (asterisks). (B,C) Transverse CT images of dogs with mucopolysaccharidosis show
deformation of the rib cage ('oar-shaped' ribs) and small degenerative changes (arrow).
types of hiatal hernia are recognized in animals: short-
thickened wall of the esophagus, mainly dorsal
esophagus hiatal hernia, sliding hiatal hernia and
gas may be present in the esophagus and sur-
 paraesophageal hiatal hernia. Chinese Shar-Pei dogs 
round the stomach.
 are predisposed for hiatal hernias.
Trauma
CT features
Spinal fractures
·Hiatal hernia (Figure 28.7):
 stomach visible within the thoracal esophagus
See Chapter 22.
289THORACIC BOUNDARIES
A
Figure 28.6 CT of congenital abnormalities. (A) Transverse CT image of a dog with spinal dysraphism shows a split xiphoid
process (arrow). Additional findings are a fluid-dilated esophagus, dorsal lung hypostasis and vertebral bone reaction. (B)
Volume rendering three-dimensionally reconstructed CT image viewed from the left side of a dog with pectus excavatum
showing inward deviation of the stermum into the thoracic cavity with a decreased dorsoventral thoracic diameter (arrows).
A
B
Figure 28.7 Adult dog with a hiatal hernia. (A) Transverse CT image shows the esophagus being slightly dilated by gas
(arrow). (B) Post-contrast transverse CT image shows the hyperdense stomach (S) within a dilated esophagus (arrows). The
wall of the esophagus is thickened (asterisks) and some gas is visible between the stomach and the dorsal wall of the esopha-
gus. Ao = aorta; CvC = caudal vena cava; H = heart.
290 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Rib fractures
Most rib fractures are traumatic in origin, although
pathologic or stress fractures are not uncommon.
Traumatic rib fractures may be transverse, oblique
 or segmental, and are often multiple and sequential.
They are currently associated with displaced frag-
ments that can cause lung trauma and penetrating
injuries, open or closed pneumothorax. Possible under-
lying diseases of pathologic or stress fractures are
osteopenic (chronic feline renal disease or other causes
of hyperparathyroidism), osteolytic (rib neoplasia) or
o sans paneadan Sunpu suouon Aronendsan
costal muscle attachments (feline asthma, chronic
canine bronchial disease or lobar emphysema). Due to
the anatomical orientation of the ribs, CT is not the
 most appropriate modality for demonstration of rib
fractures.
Figure 28.8
8 Transverse CT image of an adult dog with a
CT features (Figure 28.8)
(arrow). New bone formation associated with spondylosis
 Malalignment altered direction, abnormal spacing)
deformans is visible at the ventral aspect of the vertebral
of the fractured rib(s), usually obvious.
body.
 Bone fragments:
sharp fracture margins with recent trauma
-gopoued e isassns sunbieu aoeny dreusun
cal fracture.
CT features (Figure 29.9)
 Adjacent soft tissue swelling.
 Presence of a diaphragmatic defect.
 Associated lung lesions (pneumothorax, pulmo-
Discontinuity of the 
nary contusions) (see Chapter 26).
intrathoracic abdominal organs and/or peritoneal
fat - best seen on multiplanar reconstructions.
 Displacement of normal thoracic structures.
Sternal fracture and dislocation
·Pleural fluid.
Malalignment of sternebrae, with or without prior
 trauma, is frequently observed and is insignificant 
Infection
unless accompanied by intra- and extrathoracic soft
tissue swelling or clinical signs.
Spondylitis and discospondylitis
See Chapter 22.
CT features
 Usually obvious dislocation.
Ribs, thoracic wall, sternal osteomyelitis and
 Malposition of xiphoid process in cats is usually
abscessation
not traumatic.
 Infections of the thoracic wall result from foreign
bodies, lacerations, bite wounds or surgical wound
contamination. They are often very painful, even more
 Diaphragmatic rupture
so than neoplasia. Migrating foreign bodies such as
Diaphragmatic rupture is traumatic in origin (often
 plant material (grass awns) may penetrate via the skin,
st arau se enuay oneusendep parmbse, paueusnu
or wooden skewers via the gastrointestinal tract. They
no hernial sac). It may be caused by a sudden increase
 can cause inflammatory disease, abscess/granuloma,
in intra-abdominal pressure while the glottis 
1S
fistulous tract in the thoracic wall region or even lead
open. The side, size and shape of the rupture are vari-
to pleural effusion. Fungal or parasitic (hepatozoono-
able. The liver, stomach, small intestines and omentum
 sis) osteomyelitis and cellulitis may occur in endemic
'asdepoid Xuanbany isou je suesio au ane
areas.
291 THORACIC BOUNDARIES
Rib tumors
Primary rib tumors are uncommon, with osteosarcoma
and chondrosarcoma most frequently seen, whereas
fibrosarcoma, hemangiosarcoma and benign neo-
plasms (osteoma, chondroma, osteochondromatosis)
are only rarely seen. Pleural neoplasia (mesothelioma)
can metastasize by contiguity to the ribs locally and be
difficult to differentiate from other types of neoplasia.
 Multiple myeloma frequently affects ribs along with
vertebrae and other bones. Primary bone lymphoma
or bone involvement in multicentric lymphoma is rare
but may affect young animals.
CT features (Figures 28.10-28.12)
Osteolysis, mostly extended but can be subtle.
 Irregular to sunburst periosteal reaction and amor-
phous new bone.
 Soft tissue component may induce inwards dis-
 placement or involve pleural and pulmonary struc-
tures and involve the thoracic wall.
 Displacement or involvement of adjacent ribs.
Fractures with unsharp
margins (pathologic
fracture).
Figure 28.9  Adult dog with a chest wall abscessation sec-
 Primary rib tumors: monostotic, preferentially distal
ondary to a grass awn penetration. Post-contrast dorsally
third of rib, displaced adjacent ribs which are oth-
reconstructed CT image shows a left-sided mass (asterisk)
erwise normal, often very large intrathoracic
 displacing the ribs medially. The tenth rib is malaligned and
component.
the space between the tenth and eleventh ribs is increased.
Metastatic rib tumors: often polyostotic, but ran-
The mass comes in close contact with the liver and there is
domly oriented, preferentially middle and proxi-
loss of detail of the liver margin (arrowheads). GB = gall-
mal third of rib, often small at time of detection.
bladder; L = liver.
 Soft tissue tumor invading ribs: soft tissue mass with
 variable extermal component, osteolysis, periosteal
reaction, fractures at multiple adjacent ribs; any
 part of rib can be affected.
Chest wall abscessation is uncommon, but may be a
 Mesothelioma: abundant pleural effusion, no exter-
sequel to trauma (bites, penetrating foreign body) or a
 nal chest wall mass, periosteal reaction on several
complication of midline thoracotomy (sternotomy).
ribs possible.
 An intermittently discharging sinus may be present.
Multiple
myeloma.
 multiple punctate lucencies
without periosteal reaction or sclerosis.
CT features (Figure 28.9)
 Lymphoma irregular periosteal reaction and punc-
 Periosteal reaction around affected rib/sternebra.
tate or diffuse lysis, metaphyseal area in bone
 Osteolysis or sclerosis.
lymphoma.
 Soft tissue swelling - lucent gas tracts may be seen
 Osteochondromatosis (Figure 28.13); see Chapter
with a discharging sinus.
22.
 Pleural thickening and effusion.
Aneurysmal bone cyst: blow-out appearance,
?
Displacement, even invasion, of adjacent thoracic
 marked cortical thinning with minimal bone forma-
 or abdominal organs.
 tion. May affect the diaphysis or the metaphysis.
Neoplasia
Thoracic wall tumors
Spinal neoplasia
The most common soft tissue mass of the thoracic wall
See Chapter 22.
is fibrosarcoma, which is particularly common in cats.
292VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
B
Figure 28.10 Adult dog with first rib chondroma. (A) Transverse CT image shows a round, welldelineated calcified mass
(asterisk) in continuity with the first left rib (arrow). There is osteolysis of the first rib which is in close contact with the second
rib (arrow). (B) Post-contrast transverse CT image shows peripheral contrast enhancement of the mass (arrows) which invades
the thoracic cavity compressing and displacing the cranial mediastinal structures to the right side.
Figure 28.11 Adult dog with a primary rib tumor (osteoblastic chondrosarcoma). Transverse CT image shows an expansile
bone mass centered on the mid-diaphysis of a rib (arrows). In the middle of the mass the outline of the affected rib is still
visible, showing zones of lysis.
293THORACIC BOUNDARIES
A
Figure 28.12 Adult dog with chondrosarcoma. (A) Post-contrast transverse CT image shows a round soft tissue-density
mass, with central calcified tissue (arrows), centered on the rib cage. The mass extends into the thorax on one side and into
 the subcutaneous tissues on the other side. (B) Dorsally reconstructed CT image shows the calcified mass (arrows) involving
the thoracic wall musculature and extending into the thorax. The heart is displaced to the right. H = heart.
 Figure 28.13 Cartilaginous exostosis in a dog. Transverse CT image shows a slightly iregular lesion (arrows) originating
at the medial aspect of proximal diaphysis of the rib. This new bone formation has a density equivalent to the normal rib.
294VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
A
Figure 28.14 Injection site associated fibrosarcoma may show different levels of tissue invasion in the cat. (A) Post-contrast 
transverse CT image shows a subcutaneous poorly delineated mass, hyperdense compared to the surrounding muscles. In
addition a well-delineated oval cystic component with ring enhancement is visible (asterisk). (B) Post-contrast transverse CT
image shows a large inhomogeneous, moderately enhancing mass (arrows) involving the longissimus muscle. The mass
induces rib erosion and extends into the thorax. Within the vertebral canal (red ring) there is also a contrast-enhancing extra-
dural mass (extension of fibrosarcoma) compressing the spinal cord.
It can usually be distinguished from diffuse processes,
Lipoma (Figure 28.15):
such as cellulitis or hemorrhage, by its focal distribu-
 can be difficult to differentiate from obesity-
tion and its propensity to grow towards the thoracic
related fat deposition
cavity. It can be difficult to differentiate from primary
 no or mild enhancement on post-contrast
rib tumors.
Lipoma is common in the subcutaneous layers of the
(HU = -40 to -150), which distinguishes them
thoracic wall. It is characterized as soft moveable
 from soft tissue masses, capsule
masses that, occasionally, slowly grow to cause a mass
 infiltrative lipoma: locally aggressive, infltra-
tion of muscles and fibrous tissue, no
 -n pue -iaul a aenu oste uen euoniesodi pie
metastases
muscular layers of the thoracic wall.
 liposarcoma: infltrative, inhomogeneous may
 Peripheral nerve sheath tumors are slow-growing.
have fat and/or soft tissue density.
 locally invasive tumors that extend along the pathway
 Peripheral nerve sheath tumor (Figure 28.16):
 of nerve roots and rarely metastasize.
well-defined oval, spherical or fusiform mass
Metastatic tumors in the soft tissues are relatively
centered at the expected location of a nerve
common.
 periscapular muscle atrophy
displacement
ofadjacent
muscles
pue
CT features
vessels
 Fibrosarcoma (Figure 28.14):
 sometimesregional invasion into thoracic cavity
subcutaneous mass located at the lateral or
or dorsally into vertebral canal
dorsal aspect of the thoracic wall
 post-contrast: mild to severe, homogeneous or
aspect variable from single homogeneous, well-
heterogeneous, rim enhancement in about half 
 delineated mass to large inhomogeneous mass 
of the cases.
invading the surrounding soft tissues, mainly
Metastatic tumor in soft tissues (Figure 28.17):
muscles
mass  of 
variable
density,
mineralization
 post-contrast: enhanced mildly to moderately.
possible
ring enhancement common.
 post-contrast: marked contrast enhancement.
295
THORACIC BOUNDARIES
Figure 28.15 Three adult dogs with lipomatous masses. (A) Adult dog with simple lipoma. Transverse CT image shows a
well-delineated, homogeneous fat density mass (asterisk) in the thoracic wall. (B) Adult dog with infiltrative lipoma. Transverse
CT image (level thoracic vertebra) shows a mass located between the trachea, the vertebral column, the triceps brachialis
muscle and the ventral skin. The mass is partly homogeneous with a fat density (asterisk) and partly inhomogeneous (fat/
soft tissue density). The mass is locally aggressive and infiltrates the surrounding muscles (arrows). (C) Adult dog with
liposarcoma. Transverse CT image shows an inhomogeneous mass (asterisk) at the location of the juxtavertebral muscles.
296VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
 Sternal neoplasia
 sn s  g 1do as 
 and should be differentiated from osteomyelitis.
Radiographic findings
· Combination of osteolytic and irregular osteopro-
ductive lesions.
· May grow into the thorax and reach a large size.
FURTHER READING
Watine S, Hamaide A, Peeters D et al. (2003) Resolution of
 chylothorax after resection of rib chondroma in a dog. J
Small Anim Pract 44: 546-9.
Figure 28.16 Adult dog with malignant peripheral nerve
sheath tumor. Post-contrast transverse CT image shows a
round mass with mild rim enhancement (asterisk) located at
the thoracic inlet.
B
Figure 28.17 Adult dog with chest wall (muscles) metastases of a splenic hemangiosarcoma. (A) Post-contrast transverse
CT image at the level of the thoracic inlet shows a round mass with ring enhancement (arrow) in the teres major muscle. (B)
Post-contrast transverse CT image at the level of the T6 shows two heterogeneously enhancing hyperdense masses in the
muscle in the distal aspect of a swollen infraspinatus muscle (arrows). Pleural effusion is also present (asterisk)
CHAPTER TWENTY-NINE
LIVER,GALLBLADDER
AND SPLEEN
Federica Rossi, Federica Morandi and Tobias Schwarz
GENERAL IMAGING PROTOCOL
spleonoportography, as an altermative to dual-phase
CT angiography (DPCTA) for evaluation of the portal
See Table 29.1.
vasculature. This technique is not suitable for cats due
to their smaller and thinner spleen.
CONTRAST IMAGING
CT: ANATOMY AND NORMAL
PROTOCOLS
VARIANTS
Biliary contrast medium excretion
Liver
(Figure 29.1)
The liver is located in the cranial abdomen, cranially it
Specific biliary contrast media have not been applied
is in direct contact with the diaphragm and caudally
to veterinary patients in CT yet. However, all com-
with the stomach, pancreas, duodenum and right
mercially available iodine- and gadolinium-based con-
kidney. The diaphragm and the liver parenchyma are
trast media have a small biliary excretion fraction. This
seen as one continuous structure in CT, except with
is sufficient to see a late hepatic enhancement approxi-
late-phase post-contrast CT. Variable amounts of
-n  jo ne sso n 
hypodense peritoneal fat surround the ventral and
nated contrast medium. This late hepatic enhancement
caudal surfaces of the liver, helping to identify the
is useful to delineate the neighboring organs of equal
hepatic margins, lobes and hilar vessels.
 density from the liver, such as the diaphragm and the
Liver size can be subjectively evaluated by assessing
pancreas.
the distance between the diaphragm and the stomach,
 Approximately 30-60min post intravenous contrast
the portion of the liver covered by the costal arch,
and the caudal extension and shape of the hepatic
biliary ducts and gallbladder accumulate contrast-
margins. Moreover, quantitative CT can be used to
enhanced bile. This can be used to assess the patency
calculate liver size. In a study comparing dogs with
of the bile ducts in clinical cases and is promising for
portosystemic shunts and control dogs, normal liver
further clinical applications.
volume normalized to body weight has been reported
to be 24.5 ± 5.6cm²/kg
TRANSSPLENIC CT
The liver is divided into four main lobes (left, right,
quadrate and caudate lobes), four sublobes (medial
PORTOGRAPHY (TABLE 29.2)
and lateral left and right sublobes) and two processes
(caudate and papillary processes of caudate lobe). If
The injection of iodinated non-ionic contrast medium
two lobes are in direct contact, the interlobar fissures
into the splenic parenchyma has been described in
are not consistently identified in CT. Single lobes can
-0nd e 'sop ui (ISL) Audeiood I oruaidssun
cedure analogue to ultrasoumd-guided percutaneous
 toneal fat is present. However, the enhancement of
Veterinary Computed Tomography, First Edition. Edited by Tobias Schwarz, Jimmy Saunders.
@ 2011 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
297
298 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Table 29.1
Imaging protocol.
Series
 Pre-contrast
 Post-contrast
Decubitus
Ventral
 Scan margins
Liver and gallbladder: diaphragm to cranial pole of the right kidney
 Spleen: left lateral liver lobe to middle or ca udal abdomen 
Scan mirection
Dual-phase CT angiography
-Arterial phase: cranial to caudal
- Venous phase: ca udal to cranial
Voltage (kVp)
120-140
Current (mAs)
100-160
Tube rotation time (s)
0.5-1
Slice width (mm)
2-5
Kernel frequency
Low to medium
 Collimator pitch
1-2
 Helical image reconstruction interval 
% of the slice width
Motion control
Hyperventilation to achieve expiratory apnea 
Contrast medium application site 
N/A
Cephalic or jugular vein
 Contrast medium type
N/A
lodinated 
 Contrast medium dose
N/A
800 mg iodine/kg bw
 Contrast medium injection mode 
N/A
Automatic injection is preferred
Scan delay post start contrast injection
N/A
 Standard post-contrast
- No delay for the liver
- Delayed scan for splenic diseases.
Dual-phase CT angiography
 Arterial phase: 9-16s
Venous phase: 10-35s
Window level (HU)
+40
Window width (HU)
300
B
Figure 29.1  (A) Transverse CT image showing biliary excretion of gadolinium based contrast media 50min post MRI scan.
The hepatic parenchyma is enhanced, diferentiating it from the nonenhancing diaphragm (arrowheads), and contrast-
enhanced bile accumulates in the gall bladder and cystic duct. (B) Contrast-enhanced bile in the extrahepatic common bile
duct (arrow) and its duodenal papilla (arrowhead) in a dog 50min post intravenous administration of iodinated contrast 
medium.
299 LIVER, GALLBLADDER AND SPLEEN
Table 29.2
Transsplenic CT portography
Access site
 Spleen (preferentially under CT guidance)*
 Route of administration 
Non-selective injection in the splenic parenchyma
 Needle size
20 or 22 ga, 1%" length, attached to a preloaded extension set
Injection method 
Manual under CT guidance*
 Contrast agent 
lodinated (water-soluble)
Type
 Tri-iodinated, no n-ionic, low-osmolar 
 Generic name
 Omnipaque
 Co ncentration 
 175mg iodine/ml or lower to minimize high-density streak artifacts
Volume
 Ranging from 3ml for a small dog (Yorkshire terrier) to 15ml for a large dog (adult Golden 
retriever]
Rate of injection
 1-3ml as a bolus, followed by steady injection of the remaining volume at abo ut 0.4ml/s
 Duration of injection 
5-30s depending on animal size
 Scan trigger
Beginning of contrast injection 
 Side effects and risks
 Subcapsular (Figure 29.2) or intraperito neal leakage of contrast medium, if severe, can 
lead to non-diagnostic studies. Potentially splenic hemorrhage
Undesired effects
Streaks: because of the targeted delivery of contrast medium, vascular opacification is
usually higher and less homogeneous (incomplete mixing with blood) in TSCTP than in
DPCTA, resulting in streamlining and high-density streak artifacts (Figures 29.3 and 29.4).
This may limit the ability to identify shunts, particularly in the the right and central
 divisional branches of the portal vein (left hepatic contrast medium propensity) 
*To perform a transsplenic injection, the operator must stay in the room during image acquisition and needs to be protected from radiation
with a permanent shield, protective lead clothing or other means to comply with the relevant radiation protection legislation. An extension
 set, in addition to avoiding needle motion during injection, allows the operator to maintain a greater distance to the gantry, thereby minimiz-
ing exposure.
 The liver parenchyma shows a homogeneous density
NHS9-Z pue ssop uI NHOZ-09 1noqe Jo aue1 au u1
in cats, values depending on technical settings (kVp.
mA, slice width). After contrast medium administra-
 tion, the enhancement is intense and homogeneous.
 The intrahepatic vasculature includes an arterial
supply and a double venous system (hepatic and
 portal veins). In dual-phase CT angiography, arterial
and venous vessels can be identified. The hepatic
artery arises from the celiac artery, it runs cranially and
after giving off the gastroduodenal artery it enters the
Figure 29.2
2 Transverse 3mm helical image taken during
liver with a a variable number of branches ventral to
transsplenic CT portography. Notice the focal area of con-
the portal vein at the porta hepatis. Intrahepatic arter-
 trast medium accumulation (asterisk) in the parenchyma of
ies are seen in the arterial phase as small vessels
the spleen (Sp). There is also a small subcapsular accumula-
running in association with the portal vein wall (Figure
tion of contrast medium (arrows).
29.5E). The largest hepatic veins are often visible
tubular structures (Figure 29.5F); they become more
the liver parenchyma and of the vasculature in the
evident in the arterial phase as filling defects sur-
post-contrast scan and the presence of the gallbladder
rounded by enhancing hepatic parenchyma. During
 enable the recognition of different anatomical regions
the venous phase, they contrast enhance and are then
and structures (Tables 29.3-29.5, Figure 29.5).
easily recognizable (Figure 29.5G). The largest hepatic
300 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Figure 29.3
3 Transverse 2mm helical images taken during transsplenic CT-portography. Notice the streak artifact arising
Aup iuii =  (au at = YT (as) uaa saids pe (ds) uatds an rm ua ise Aisuap yy au u
Figure 29.4 Streamlining in two different dogs after transsplenic contrast medium injection, shown at different windows;
both images were acquired at 3mm collimation helically. Notice the peripheral distribution of contrast medium in the portal
vein (PV), predominantly ventral and left-sided, where the splenic vein enters the portal vein. L = liver; Sp = spleen;
SV = splenic vein; St = stomach.
veins are the branches draining the left medial and
Gallbladder and biliary system
lateral lobe; they can be followed entering the caudal
vena cava as a common vessel, the hepatic ampulla, in
 The gallbladder is easily recognized in CT because of
the cranial liver. The right medial and quadrate hepatic
its location between the right medial and quadrate
veins converge dorsally to the gallbladder. Smaller
hepatic lobes in the dog (between two parts of the right
hepatic veins drain from the caudate and right lateral
medial lobe in the cat), its pear shape and typical
lobe. Intrahepatic portal vasculature can be distin-
density. Depending on the amount of bile, the size and
guished in CT during the venous phase following the 
position of the galibladder can vary. When distended,
division of the main portal vein into the two main right
it extends more cranially making contact with the dia-
and left branches which supply the different liver 
 phragm. The gallbladder wall is not normally seen as
lobes. Maximum intensity projection and 3-D recon-
a separate structure. On post-contrast CT, some thin
structions are useful for better spatial representation of
enhancement along the wall is seen mainly where the
the hepatic vessels.
 gallbladder is adjacent to peritoneal fat. The bile is
301  LIVER, GALLBLADDER AND SPLEEN
Table 29.3
 CT region visible 
Location, shape, density
Relationship with surrounding structures 
 Liver parenchyma/
Liver parenchyma occupies the
 Diaphragm (dorsally and laterally), CvC (dorsally
lobes
entire cranioventral abdomen,
and to the right), esophagus (dorsally in the 
homogeneous pre- and post-contrast
mid-plane), falciform fat (ventrally), apex of the 
 gallbladder (ventrally and to the right) 
CVC
 Oval flattened, enhancing in the
Liver parenchyma (ventrally)
 post-contrast scan
 CVC = caudal vena cava.
Table 29.4
Anatomic details of the middle liver (Figure 29.5B and C) scan plane 2 and 3.
CT region
visible
Location, shape, density
 Relationship with surrounding structures
Liver
 Fissures between liver lobes sometimes visible
 Diaphragm (dorsally and laterally), cardia
 parenchyma/
ventrally, QL and RML separated by the GB.
and stomach fundus (dorsally to the left),
lobes
 Homogeneo us parenchyma divided by hepatic
falciform fat (ventrally), gallbladder
veins
(ventrally, to the right)
CVC and
 CVC: oval, located dorsally on the right. Hvs
Vessels are surrounded by
hepatic veins
co nfluence toward the CvC visible dorsally to the
homogeneo us hepatic parenchyma
 right, Hvs are hypodense to liver in pre-contrast
 study and in arterial phase, high density in venous 
phase 
Portal vein
 PV: round, located ventrally and slightly to the right
Vessels are surrounded by
and collaterals
of the CVC
homogeneo us hepatic parenchyma
 Portal veins visible running toward the periphery.
 low density in pre-contrast study and in arterial
phase, highly attenuating in venous phase
GB and CBD
GB: pear-shaped, hypodense structure, variable
GB: between RML and QL
size, located ventral and on the right, the wall is
partially enhancing in post-contrast scan. CBD
 sometimes seen ventral to PV running towards
duodenum
CBD = common bile duct; CVC = caudal vena cava; GB = gallbladder; HV = hepatic vein; PV = portal vein; QL = quadrate lobe; RML = right 
medial lobe.
hypodense to the hepatic parenchyma both in pre- and
Spleen
-puadap anqenrea are saniea nH rsaseu iseuos-isod
ing on the density of the biliary content. High-density
The long tongue-shaped spleen is a mobile organ
material is sometimes visible in CT, collecting in the
 located in the left hypogastric region. It is only fixed
dependent part of the gallbladder. On delayed post-
by its dorsal extremity to the stomach. If the stomach
 contrast studies biliary
/ accumulation of contrast
is empty, it can be in direct contact with the left lateral
 medium is a normal phenomenon. The biliary system
lobe of the liver, while in the case of gastric distention
 is not consistently identified in CT. Only part of the
its position is more caudal (Figure 29.6A). Since animals
 common bile duct can sometimes be recognized as a
are under general anesthesia for CT, splenomegaly is
round hypodense structure located ventral to the
a common finding. The abundant hypodense fat con-
portal vein. Intrahepatic ducts are not normally seen.
tained in the gastrolienal ligament at the splenic hilus 
302 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Table 29.5
Anatomic details of the caudal liver (Figure 29.5D) scan plane 4.
 CT region visible 
Location, shape, density
Relationship with surrounding structures
Liver parenchyma/
Caudal part of the LLL and RLL visible
LLL and RLL: laterally in contact with
lobes
ventrally. RLL visible dorsally and to the 
abdominal wall, medially with peritoneal fat
right, it covers the CP of the CDL extending
RLL: in contact dorsally with right
toward the right kidney. The PP is visible in
diaphragmatic crus, medially with PV and
the midplane, triangular shape
CVC, ventrally with CP. CP in contact
ventrally with duodenum, pancreas, colon,
caudally with right kidney
 PP: between aorta (dorsally), CVC and PV
(to the right), branches of hepatic arteries.
Variable co ntact with head of the spleen,
stomach, pancreas and colon. Surrounded 
by fat
Ao, CVC, PV
In the dorsal-mid abdomen (Ao), more
Ao surrounded by caudal attachments of
ventrally and slightly to the right (CVC and
diaphragmatic crura, CVC and PV by liver 
PV), round shape, of similar size
 parenchyma and peritoneal fat. Portal
lymph nodes sometimes visible to the left
and right of the PV
Ao = aorta; CDL = caudate lobe; CP = caudate process; CVC = caudal vena cava; LLL =left lateral lobe; PP = papillary process; PV = portal
vein; RLL = right lateral lobe; RML = right medial lobe.
is helpful to visualize the converging splenic vessels
sequences as non-enhancing foci or bands. Traumatic
and tributaries lymph nodes.
herniation of liver or spleen into the thorax can be
 In pre-contrast images, the spleen shows a homoge-
easily diagnosed with CT. The post-contrast study can
neous density. In the arterial phase, the enhancement
be useful to detect hypovascular areas due to direct
of the splenic parenchyma is very heterogeneous as a
trauma, torsion or stretching of vessels.
consequence of the irregular distribution of the con-
trast medium in the red and white pulp (Figure 29.6B
CT features (Figure 29.9)
 and C). This phenomenon should not be interpreted as
 Deformation of splenic or hepatic margins (sub-
     i  
 capsular hematoma).
Therefore, a complete evaluation of this organ requires
Abnormal position (herniation) of the liver or
a delayed CT scan in the venous phase.
spleen.
 Post-contrast: hypodense irregular areas (diffuse
hemorrhage) or more defined regions (hematomas,
DISEASE FEATURES
 parenchymal fractures, vascular infarcts).
Malformation/Developmenta!
Splenic and hepatic infarcts and torsion
CT enables the recognition of some anatomical vari-
 ants and malformation of the liver, biliary system and
Infarcts of the spleen and liver can be due to thrombosis
spleen (Table 29.6). These conditions are sometimes
 and embolism or can be secondary to torsion. CT find-
 discovered as an incidental finding.
ings of isolated splenic torsion have been described.
The post-contrast study enables evaluation of the entire
 vascular bed and parenchyma. The area supplied by
Trauma
the occluded vesselis visible as peripheral, low-density,
In trauma patients, CT can be used to establish the
 non-enhancing band with well-defined margins.
extent of a lesion and the involvement of abdominal
 pue uaalds au jo seuoieuay remsdesqns sues10
CT features (Figure 29.10)
liver are lenticular bloody collections adjacent to the
 Free peritoneal fluid.
organ's margins. Diffuse hemorrhage or fractures of
 Enlarged and abnormally positioned spleen/liver 
the parenchyma can be detected in the post-contrast
lobe.
303 LIVER, GALLBLADDER AND SPLEEN
RLL
Figure 29.5 Post-contrast CT images of a normal dog representing the anatomy of the liver and biliary system: (A) cranial,
(B,C) middle and (D) caudal aspect of the liver. (E) Hepatic arteries (arrows) are small tortuous vessels runming parallel with
the portal veins, (F) hepatic veins are hypodense in the pre-contrast study and, (G) enhancing structure in the venous phase 
of the contrast study. A= aorta; CP = caudate process; C = colon; Ca = cardia; CVC = caudal vena cava; D =duodenum;
E = esophagus; FF = falciform fat; GB = galbladder; LHV = left hepatic vein; L = liver; LLL = left lateral lobe; LML = left
medial lobe; PP = papillary process; PV = portal vein; RHV = right hepatic vein; RLL = right lateral lobe; RML = right medial
lobe; QL = quadrate lobe; St = stomach; Sp = spleen.
304 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Figure 29.5(Continued)
305 LIVER, GALLBLADDER AND SPLEEN
RK
LLL
Figure 29.6 Normal canine (A,B) and feline (C) spleen during the venous (A) and the arterial (B,C) phase. The dorsal extrem
ity of the spleen is located under the rib cage surrounded by the fat of the gastrolienal ligament. (B,C) In the arterial phase,
the parenchyma is heterogeneous because of the irregular distribution of the contrast medium in the red and white pulp. (A)
The same splen becomes more homogeneous in the venous phase. A = aorta; C = colon; CVC = caudal vena cava; D = duo-
denum; F = fat; LLL = left lateral liver lobe; PV = portal vein; RK = right kidney; RLL = right lateral liver lobe; Sp = spleen;
St=stomach.
306 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Table 29.6
Malformation of the liver, biliary system and spleen.
 Condition
 CT findings
Liver lobes or GB agenesis/hypoplasia (Figure 29.7)
Absence of red uced size of part of the liver, GB not visualized
Congenital diaphragmatic hernia
Liver lobes and/or GB localized in the thorax into the
 pericardium, diaphragm discontinuous
Bilobed GB or GB duplication (cats)
 GB separated in two parts by a septum or presence of two
separated GBs
 Vascular malformations of the liver
 Decreased liver volume, presence of abnormal vessels (see
Chapter 36)
Accessory spleen
pualds-ad aut ui pazeool ansst sjualds yidoioa to pueisl
area
Hepatic cysts (polycystic disease, cats) (Figure 29.8)
 Round, low-density, non-enhancing structures 
GB = gallbladder.
Corkscrew-like soft tissue mass at the splenic hilus
CT features
(pedicle) - splenic torsion.
 Focal hepatic and splenic lesions:
Post-contrast: lack of enhancement in the affected
 often seen as hypo- to hyperdense foci to the
areas.
normal surrounding parenchyma
 post-contrast: normally improved visualization.
 Alveolar echinoccocosis:
Diffuse non-neoplastic parenchymal
 multiple cystic or cavitary non-vascularized
diseases
lesions with mineralization.
Acute inflammation, congestion and storage diseases
Hepatic abscesses, hepatic necrosis secondary to
neoplasia or immune-mediated diseases:
 often produce hepatomegaly or splenomegaly. Wheras
m paeosse saueup Arsup I reuuuard
multiple non-enhancing lesions can be seen.
Splenic focal lesions:
diffuse liver diseases are well documented in humans,
 malignant lesions (hemangiosarcoma) show
 there is very little information available about animals.
lower attenuation values than benign condi-
Lower attenuation values of the liver have been
tions (hematomas and focal nodular neoplasia)
reported in cats and tortoises with hepatic lipidosis.
(Figure 29.11).
Calcification is seen in patients with metabolic condi-
tions such as Cushing's disease and in association with
chronic hepatitis.
Galibladder and biliary system -
CT features
non-neoplastic diseases
 Hepato-, splenomegaly: increased size and rounded 
CT features
margins.
 Biliary calculi in the gallbladder or common bile
Metabolic conditions, chronic hepatitis: calcified
:uaum ponp 
areas that appear as hyperdense foci of variable
 foci of mineral density are seen with calcium-
 size and location may be present.
containing concretions
 the dilated common bile duct can be recognized
Focal non-neoplastic parenchymal
ventral to the portal vein.
 Intrahepatic biliary ducts distention due to com-
diseases
 plete long-term biliary obstruction:
 Differential diagnosis includes many types of benign
tortuous tubular structure, non-enhancing and
 condition and focal neoplasia.
hypodense to the surrounding parenchyma.
307 LIVER, GALLBLADDER AND SPLEEN
Figure 29.7 Post-contrast images of the cranial (A), middle (B) and caudal (C) aspect of the liver in a dog with congenital
liver malformation. The liver extends only to the cranial right abdomen; the stomach and the spleen are in direct contact with
CVC = caudal vena cava; D = duodenum; L = liver; PV = portal vein; St = stomach; Sp = spleen.
308 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
 component is present with hepatic cystadenoma or
cystadenocarcinoma, frequently seen in the cat.
 Splenic and hepatic hemangiosarcomas: large non-
vascularized areas.
 Metastases: frequently
y seen as multiple round
hypodense nodules.
RL
 Advantages of pre-treatment CT in patients with
hepatic or splenic neoplasia
 Evaluation of the exact size and extension of a mass
-uaa (sasseu snq jo asen aui u Aew myasn)
CVC
 lesions from masses arising from adjacent organs
(sometimes difficult to assess with ultrasound)
(Figure 29.13).
 Assessment of the involvement of the main vascu-
lar structures such as caudal vena cava, aorta and
 portal vein (Figure 29.14).
Staging of diseases (evaluation of tributaries,
lymph nodes, detection of possible metastases in
the thorax or abdomen) (Figures 29.14C and D,
29.15).
Figure 29.8 Persian cat with a carcinoma of the right
caudal lung lobe and polycystic disease (incidental finding).
Post-contrast CT image shows an irregular cystic structure
FURTHER READING
(C) in the right middle and dorsal liver. This hypodense,
multilobulated cyst is divided by enhancing septa.
C =hepatic cyst; CvC = caudal vena cava; E =esophagus;
Echandi RL, Morandi F, Daniel WT, Paquette JL and Daniel
LL = left lung lobe; RL = right lung lobe.
GB (2007) Comparison of transplenic multidetector CT
portography to multidetecetor CT angiography in normal
dogs. Vet Radiol UIltrasound 48: 38-44.
 Emphysematous cholangitis (Figure 29.12):
Fife WD, Samii VF, Drost WT, Mattoon JS and Hoshaw-
 accumulation of gas in the gallbladder wall
Woodard S (2004) Comparison between malignant and
and/or lumen
nonmalignant splenic masses in dogs using contrast-
 presence of gas around the gallbladder and loss
enhanced computed tomography. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 45:
of continuity of the wall suggest gallbladder
289-97.
 Irausquin RA, Scavelli TD, Corti L et al. (2008) Comparative
rupture secondary to necrosis
 peritoneal effusion is normally present due to
evaluation of the liver in dogs with a splenic mass by using
ultrasonography and contrast-enhanced computed tom-
biliary peritonitis.
ography. Can Vet J 49: 46-52.
Nakamura M, Chen HM, Momoi Y and Iwasaki T (2005)
Clinical application of computed tomography for the diag-
Neoplasia
nosis of feline hepatic lipidosis. J Vet Med Sci 67: 1163-5.
 Primary or metastatic neoplasia can have variable size
Patsikas MN, Rallis T, Kladakis SE and Dessiris AK (2001)
E ur uorsio spualds palerost jo Audersouoi painduo 
and CT appearance. Dual-phase CT can be useful to
detect small liver lesions, because lesions may only
dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 42: 235-7.
 Stieger SM, Zwingenberger AL, Pollard RE, Kyles AE and
 enhance in the arterial phase or appear as low-density
Wisner R (2007) Hepatic volume estimation using quanti-
lesions in the venous phase.
 suashsotod ym shop u Arderoun randuo aae
shunts. Vet Radiol Lultrasound 48: 409-13.
CT features
Zwingenberger AL and Schwarz T (2004) Dual-phase CT
 Primary tumors tend to be large irregular masses
 angiography of the normal canine portal and hepatic vas-
associated with anarchic vascularization. Cystic
culature. Vet Radiol LIltrasound 45: 117-24.
309 LIVER, GALLBLADDER AND SPLEEN
RMIL
RLL
Figure 29.9 Thorax and cranial abdomen of an adult Border collie that was hit by a car and is suffering from diaphragmatic
rupture. (A,B) Post-contrast and (C,D) 2-D maximum intensity projection reconstructions. In the thorax, pleural effusion is 
visible. The quadrate and left lateral liver lobes are hermiated into the left caudal hemithorax between the caudal vena cava
and the cardiac apex. The two lobes are oriented cranially, the parenchyma shows extended hypoperfused areas due to vas-
cular stretching and torsion. The diaphragmatic tear is demonstrated by the maximum intensity projection reconstructions
(arrows). CVC = caudal vena cava; E =effusion; Es = esophagus; LLL = left lateral liver lobe; LML = left medial liver lobe;
PV = portal vein; QL = quadrate lobe; RLL = right lateral liver lobe; RML = right medial liver lobe; St = stomach.
310 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Figure 29.10  Adult Maltese dog with vasculitis due to Ehrlichia spp. infection. Post-contrast CT image shows the enlarged
left lateral liver lobe and two well-delineated, wedge-shaped, hypodense, non-enhancing areas (arrows). These lesions were 
not demonstrated by ultrasound. LLL = left lateral liver lobe; St = stomach.
Figure 29.11 Splenic focal lesions in two different dogs. (A) Adult dog with benign hyperplasia: post-contrast CT image
shows a 4cm round, slightly protruding nodule, with some iregular enhancement in the venous phase (arrows). (B) Adult
dog with hemangiosarcoma: post-contrast CT image shows a 6cm round mass with large irregular hypodense areas. LK = left
s=  =  =
311 LIVER, GALLBLADDER AND SPLEEN
 Figure 29.12 Emphysematous cholecystitis in two different dogs. (A) Post-contrast CT image shows multiple oval gas
bubbles in the lumen of the galbladder. The galbladder has a normal round shape. (B) Post-contrast CT image shows a loss
of the normal contour of the cranial aspect of the gallbladder. There are some small air bubbles in the lumen and a small
quantity of free fluid accumulated around its apex (arrow) and the duodenum. In this dog, rupture of the gallbladder and
biliary peritonitis was found in surgery. D = duodenum; FF = free fluid; GB = gallbladder; L = liver; St = stomach.
312 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
RLL
Figure 29.13 Adult dog with hepatoma. (A,B) Post-contrast and (C) 2-D reconstructed CT image show that the lesion is a
large pedunculated liver mass arising from the right medial lobe and extending caudally between the pancreas, the right
(sss =  (aqo ia eraieT al= TTT (moie) Passand Aiaras st eaes euaa Tepnis au ausaut Tes pue aup
P = pancreas; PV = portal vein; RK = right kidney; RLL = right lateral liver lobe; RML = right medial liver lobe; Sp = spleen;
St = stomach.
313 LIVER, GALLBLADDER AND SPLEEN
Figure 29.14 Adult dog with hepatic adenocarcinoma. (A,B) CT images of the abdomen show a hypodense liver mass
located dorsal and on the right, adjacent to the caudal vena cava. The lesion extends into the lumen of the vessel producing
a round filling defect (arrow). (C,D) CT images of the caudal lung show small round nodules in the caudal right lobe repre-
senting lung metastases (arrows). L = liver; M = mass; ST = stomach.
314 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
B
Figure 29.15 Adult dog with hepatic adenocarcinoma. (A) Post-contrast CT image shows the main mass which is a 10cm
diameter oval lesion, arising from the right lateral lobe, with heterogeneous density because of irregular mineralization, in
contact with the right caudal vena cava (CVC) wall (arrow). (B) Post-contrast CT image of the cranial liver shows three
hypodense round nodules. These lesions were detected only by CT and were demonstrated to be metastases. A= aorta;
CVC = caudal vena cava; C = colon; D = duodenum; L = liver; P = pancreas; PV = portal vein; Sp = spleen.
CHAPTER THIRTY
PANCREAS
Ana V. Caceres
IMAGING PROTOCOL
Feline anatomical specificities
The feline pancreas consists of two lobes; it is
See Tables 30.1, 30.2.
±12cm long and ±1-2cm wide. Unlike in dogs
there is an acute angle between the two lobes,
CT: ANATOMY AND NORMAL
probably because there is no pancreatic body.
In cats, the pancreas appears homogeneous
VARIANTS
during the venous phase. The mean HU of the
pre-contrast  pancreas  was  found   to  be 
 The pancreas is a U-shaped organ located caudal to the
 37.45 ± 7.19. The pancreas is hypodense to the
liver and stomach. It consists of three segments: the
liver and spleen and enhances immediately
body, the right lobe and the left lobe. There is no clear
after IV contrast administration, peaking imme-
demarcation between each segment but certain land-
diately and then gradually clearing but remain-
marks can been used. The body of the pancreas is dor-
ing hypodense compared to the spleen.
soventrally flattened and is located adjacent to the porta
 hepatica ventral to the portal vein, medial to the gas-
 troduodenal angle, between the pylorus and the trans-
verse colon. The right lobe is located adjacent to the
right abdominal wall, dorsal, dorsolateral or dorsome-
dial to the descending duodenum. The caudal exrem-
 ity of the right lobe terminates in an abrupt medial
Pancreatic angiography and contrast
angulation at the caudal duodenal flexure. The left pan-
enhancement
creatic lobe is adjacent to the body of the stomach and
extends caudally adjacent to the splenic vein, trans-
 The normal pancreatic angiography has been described
verse and descending colon (Figure 30.1). CT dimen-
in dogs. Vascular and pancreatic enhancements are
sions of the pancreas are shown in Table 30.3. The right
showm in Tables 30.4 and 30.5. On dual-phase there is
lobe follows the duodenum and the left lobe parallels
heterogeneous arterial and homogeneous venous pan-
the greater curvature of the stomach (Figure 30.2)
creatic enhancement.
Veterinary Computed Tomography, First Edition. Edited by Tobias Schwarz,Jimmy Saunders.
@ 2011 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
315
316 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Table 30.1
CT imaging protocol.
 Delayed
Series
Pre-contrast
Dynamic
 Dual phase
 post-contrast 
Decubitus
Ventral
 Scan margins
Diaphragm
 Pancreatic
Body
Arterial 
 Portal 
Diaphragm → L5
→ L5 
body → Area 
Rt lobe
Cd Body
 Diaphragm
 of interest 
Lt lobe 
→ Cr body
→ Cd pancreas
(no motion)
Cr pancreas 
Cd Rt
→ Cd Rt lobe
lobe → Diaphragm 
Cr pancreas
Cd Rt
→ Cd Lt lobe
lobe → Diaphragm 
Voltage (kvp)
120
 Current (mAs)
130
Tube rotation
1
time (s)
 Slice width
Dogs: <20kg 3mm; >20kg 5mm
(mm)
Kernel
 Soft tissue algorithm 
frequency
 Collimator 
Dogs: <20kg 1.7; >20kg 1.4
pitch
 Helical image 
2mm
recon interval
Motion
Hyperventilation or ventilator
 control
 Contrast 
None 
Cephalic/lohexol 240mg I/ml
None
medium
 application 
 site and type 
Contrast 
0.5ml/kg
2.2 ml/kg
No ne
medium dose
Contrast
Automatic - 5ml/s
None
 medium 
injection 
mode
 Scan delay
No delay
 Dependent on the Dynamic scan 
5-10min
post start 
Arterial = 7s
Portal ≈ 12.2s
contrast 
injection 
Window level
+350
(HU)
Window
50
width (HU)
Cd = caudal, Cr = cranial, Le = left, Rt = right.
317 PANCREAS
Table 30.2
CT protocols.
Condition
Pre-contrast
Dynamic
Dual-Phase 
 Post-contrast
Delay
 Pa ncreatitis
 Pancreatic cysts and pseudocyst 
Exocrine pancreatic tumor
 Endocrine pancreatic tumors
DISEASE FEATURES
Malformation/Developmental
thrombosis.
Pancreatic cyst, pseudobladder
CT features of chronic pancreatitis in dogs
Pancreatic cyst is a collection of fluid lined with cuboi-
and cats
 dal epithelium that lacks communication with the pan-
 Post-contrast: patchy and heterogeneous contrast
+
creatic duct. Pancreatic cysts and pseudobladder are
 enhancement.
believed to be congenital. In humans, pancreatic cysts
can be unilocular or multilocular and can be from
 Pancreatic pseudocyst
microscopic to several centimeters large. Pancreatic
 cysts have been described in cats, more commonly in
 Pancreatic pseudocysts are believed to represent dila-
the Persian or Persian crossbred with polycystic kidney
 tation of the pancreatic duct. Pancreatic pseudocysts
 and liver disease.
are a sequela of pancreatitis or pancreatic trauma, they
have been defined as a collection of pancreatic fluid
CT features
'anss uoemuen 1o snoiqu jo liem e Aq pasonoua
Cystic structure(s) with thin and smooth wall.
 Pseudocysts may regress spontaneously, or persist
 Post-contrast: no contrast enhancement of the cyst
with or without clinical implications, and can be of
or the wall (macrocystic pancreatic lesions).
various sizes. The pathogenesis for the formation
follows pancreatic inflammation, accumulation of
Infection/inflammation
enzyme-rich fluid, lack of absorption and pancreatic
 duct communication, therefore the pseudocyst is
Pancreatitis and pancreatic necrosis
usually rich in pancreatic enzymes and sterile.
Pancreatitis in small animals is divided into acute or
-ued pue shupug [eup jo siseq aul uo sadi snonp
CT features (Figure 30.4)
 ologic criteria. Acute pancreatitis is more common in
1
Round or oval fluid colection with a thin, ill-
 dogs and chronic pancreatitis affects mainly cats. CT
defined capsule or thick wall.
 can be useful for evaluation and diagnosis of pancre-
 Small mineralizations have also been reported in
atic necrosis, abscess and thrombosis. In human medi-
rare cases.
 Post-contrast: capsule /wall enhances after contrast
cine the diagnosis of pancreatic necrosis plays an
h oi anp 'sisouond Suaap ul anon puodu
administration.
higher mortality rate, especially with concurrent infec-
tion. Pancreatic necrosis is defined as focal or diffuse
 Pancreatic abscess
areas of non-viable pancreatic parenchyma involving
more than 30% of the gland.
 Pancreatic abscesses are mainly the result of acute pan-
creatitis and pancreatic necrosis can develop as a
CT features of acute pancreatitis (Figure 30.3)
complication from pancreatic pseudocyst. Although
 Pancreatic mass effect or enlargement.
 pancreatic abscesses are infrequently reported, mortal-
?
 Hypodense central or peripheral areas.
ity rates have been reported to range between 50 and
Peritoneal effusion.
86%. Most pancreatic abscesses in dogs yield negative
?
Post-contrast:
bacterial culture results and are thought to be sterile.
 - lack of contrast enhancement
Pancreatic abscesses seem to occur more frequently in
318 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
C
Figure 30.1 (A-D) CT images at the level of the pancreatic body (arrow) of a normal dog. (A) Pre-contrast phase: the pan-
creas is isodense to the liver and gastrointestinal tract. (B) Arterial phase: the gastroduodenal artery (arrowhead) is seen dorsal
to the pancreatic body and shows early inhomogeneous enhancement. (C) Portal phase: the gastroduodenal vein dorsal to
the body (arrowhead) and homogeneous contrast enhancement. (D) Delay phase: the pancreas is hypodense compared with
-ued aul jo uonensn (a 'g) "unnue yoeuois = is (unaponp supuassap = ( (iaa = T 'aueieaio iaisey ol anp iaa aul
creatic blood supply in dogs and cats (adapted from Caceres et al. 2006, with permission). (E) Arterial blood supply. Ao = aorta;
CdPDA = caudal pancreaticoduodenal artery; CeA = celiac artery; CrMA = cranial mesenteric artery; CrPDA = cranial pan-
creaticoduodenal artery; GDA = gastroduodenal artery; HA = hepatic artery; HBr = hepatic branches of the hepatic artery;
LGA = left gastric artery; LGEA = left gastroepiploic artery; RGA = right gastric artery; RGEA = right gastroepiploic artery;
SpA = splenic artery. (F) Venous drainage. CdMV =caudal mesenteric vein; CdPDV =caudal pancreaticoduodenal vein;
CrMV = cranial mesenteric vein; CrPDV = cranial pancreaticoduodenal vein; GDV = gastroduodenal vein; LGEV = left gas-
   = a  srdin  = A  rd = d  ss at = A aa sdian
SpV = splenic vein.
319 PANCREAS
RGA
RGEV
RGV
GDV
PV
LGV
GDA
CeA
Spv
SpA
CrPD
RGEA
LGEV
LGEA
GrPDA
CdMV
CdPDA
CrMA
CdPDV
CrMV
E
F
Figure 30.1(Continued)
Table 30.3
 Paraneoplastic alopecia and superficial necrolytic der-
 Pancreatic dimensions of nine beagle mix dogs.
matitis have been described in a cat with pancreatic 
carcinoma.
 Pancreatic
Median 
 Median 
Median
 Pancreatic hyperplasia may mimic neoplasia when
region 
height (cm)
width (cm)
length (cm)
it develops into a large mass, but the former is a benign
 Right lobe 
1.6 (1.2-2.1)
1.9 (1.4-2.4)
9.9 (8.3-12.0)
 pue -and res s Aidn p juaeua eo
Left lobe 
1.2 (0.8-1.9)
1.6 (0.7-2.8)
6.4 (3.6-6.7)
post-contrast density characteristics of the normal
Body
1.4 (0.8-2.5)
4.8 (3.5-7.7)
Not measured
gland (Figure 30.5).
CT features
 the right lobe, while pancreatitis and pancreatic necro-
+
 Hypodense pancreatic mass compared to the
sis seem to have no association to any lobe. In humans
 normal enhancing pancreas in all phases.
pancreatic abscess are thought to develop from trans-
 In pancreatic tumor there is a 'cuff' of soft tissue
location of bacterial from the adjacent inflamed colon.
 encasing the peripancreatic vessels, while in pan-
 Creatitis there are perivascular striations.
CT features
单
 Cystic structure with ill-defined or irregular thick
capsule.
Endocrine pancreatic tumor (insulinoma,
 Low dense material in the center with gas bubbles.
gastrinoma, glucagonoma, somatostatinoma)
Post-contrast:
 Insulinoma is the most common endocrine pancreatic
 absence of central contrast enhancement
neoplasm in dogs, ferrets and humans, but is rare in 
- variable peripheral enhancement.
cats. They are typically functional secreting tumors
that arise from the islet cells. More than 95% of insuli-
Neoplasia
 nomas in dogs are malignant and about 40-50% of the 
 tumor have visibly metastasized at the time of surgery.
 Exocrine pancreatic tumor (adenoma, carcinoma)
Large breed dogs are over represented.
 Exocrine pancreatic tumors are rare in dogs and cats.
Gastrinomas (Zollinger-Ellison syndrome) are rare
 There is no sex predilection but the Airedale terrier,
shoumi oeanued lan iasi g-uou 'unpoid-us
 boxer, Labrador retriever and cocker spaniels are at
 that result in gastric acid hypersecretion and gastroin-
 increased risk. Pancreatic neoplasia is very aggressive
testinal ulceration. The disease usually develops in
 and has often metastasized to the liver and local lymph
 middle-aged dogs and there in no breed predilection
nodes or less common lungs at the time of diagnosis.
reported.
320VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
B
Figure 30.2 Dorsally reconstructed CT image of the normal pancreas (A) in a dog and (B) in a cat. In the cat, the angle of
the pancreas is more acute than in the dog and the left pancreatic lobe extends to the caudal aspect of the left kidney. 1 = right
lobe; 2 = body; 3 = left lobe.
Table 30.4
Table 30.5
Vascular enhancement of nine beagle mix dogs at the
 Pancreatic parenchymal enhancement of
level of the porta hepatis.
nine beagle mix dogs.
 Abdominal 
Median TA*
 Median TPt
Pancreas mean
Liver mean
vessel
(s)
(s)
CT phase
density {HU)
density (HU)
Aorta 
6.3 (5.0-8.9)
10.5 (6.0-13.6)
 Pre-contrast 
61 (56-68)
65 (60-70)
Arterial 
130 (96-164)
94 (84-108)
Gastrod uodenal
7.0 (5.2-9.2)
12.0 (9.7-14.0)
Venous
129 (110-155)
151 (132-168)
artery
 Delayedt
91 (78-110)
110 (84-136)
 Gastrod uodenal
12.0 (10.9-16.0)
23.0 (17.0-27.0)
vein
+Performed in five dogs.
Portal vein
12.2 (10.7-15.1)
32.0 (24.9-42.4)
*Time of appearance: time at 15% of peak contrast enhancement
 post start contrast medium injection.
+Time to peak: time between start of contrast medium injection and 
 peak contrast enhancement.
Glucagonoma  (alpha cell) and somatostatinoma
 Iso- to hypodense on pre-contrast.
(delta islet cell) are rare pancreatic neoplasia.
Post-contrast:
 markedly contrast-enhancing (hyperdense) mass
CT features (Figure 30.6)
 in the arterial phase, less commonly isodense
1
 Dual-phase preferred.
iso- to hyperdense in the portal phase
 uojap jou Aeu no Keu jeu sseu sheaDued meun
 may see invasion to peripancreatic vasculature
the surface. In the diffuse form only increase in
 contrast-enhancing, normal to mildly enlarged
thickness may be seen.
regional lymph nodes.
321 PANCREAS
A
Figure 30.3 Adult dog with pancreatitis. (A) Pre-contrast CT image shows an enlarged, rounded pancreatic body (arrow)
with inhomogeneous density (hyperdense center and hypodense peripancreatic mesentery). The duodenum is seen dorsola
terally and contains a mild amount of gas. (B) Post-contrast CT image at the same location shows heterogeneous contrast
enhancement of the pancreas (arrow) with a less dense center, a mild enhancement of the peripancreatic mesentery, focal
effusion ventrolateral to the pancreas. There is also focal enhancement and increased thickness of the medial wall of the
 stomach adjacent to the left lobe of the pancreas.
FURTHER READING
computed tomography and radiolabeled leukocytes. Vet
Radiol UIltrasound 44: 420-8.
Iseri T, Yamada K, Chijiwa K et al. (2007) Dynamic computed
tomography of the pancreas in normal dogs and in a dog
Caceres AV, Zwingenberger AL, Hardam E, Lucena JM and
with pancreatic insulinoma. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 48:
 Schwarz T (2006) Helical computed tomographic angiog-
328-31.
raphy of the normal canine pancreas. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
Jaeger JQ, Mattoon JS, Bateman SW and Morandi F (2003)
47: 270-8.
Combined use of ultrasonography and contrast enhanced
Forman MA, Marks SL, De Cock HE et al. (2004) Evaluation
computed tomography to evaluate acute necrotizing pan-
of serum feline pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity and
creatitis in two dogs. Vet Radiol UIltrasound 44: 72-9.
helical computed tomography versus conventional testing
Robben JH, Pollak YW, Kirpensteijn J et al. (2005) Comparison 
for the diagnosis of feline pancreatitis. J Vet Intern Med 18:
of ultrasonography, computed tomography, and single-
807-15.
 photon emission computed tomography for the detection
Head LL, Daniel GB, Tobias K, Morandi F, DeNovo RC and
and localization of canine insulinoma. J Vet Intern Med 19:
 Donnell R (2003) Evaluation of the feline pancreas using
15-22.
322 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Figure 30.4 Adult cat with pancreatic pseudocyst (based on fluid analysis) in the cranial aspect of the pancreas. (A) Pre-
contrast CT image shows an oval, hypodense cystic structure within the pancreas (arrow). (B) Post-contrast CT image shows
the rim-enhancing cystic structure (arrow) and peripancreatic mesenteric inflammation. The cyst shows a slightly thickened
and irregular portion on the ventrolateral aspect of the wall, representing portion of the right pancreatic lobe. D = duodenum;
 PV = portal vein. (C) Dorsally reconstructed CT image shows the pancreatic pseudocyst (arrow) to the right of the portal vein
(PV). It is adjacent to the proximal aspect of the right pancreatic lobe (P). (D) Dorsally reconstructed CT image shows the
pseudocyst (arrow) and the left pancreatic lobe (arrowheads). The left lobe is small sized and irregularly marginated. (E)
Sagittally reconstructed CT image shows the relationship between the pseudocyst (arrow), duodenum (D) and transverse 
colon (C).
323PANCREAS
Figure 30.5Adult dog with pancreatic hyperplasia. CT images at the
body. (A) Pre-contrast phase
(B) arterial phase, (C) portal phase, (D) delay phase. There is a pedunculated slightly irregular, mildly hypodense mass extend-
ing ventrally from the body of the pancreas (arrow). There is no differential arterial enhancement from the rest of the pancreas
which is isodense in the portal and delay ph
duodenum;
B
 Figure 30.6 Adult dog with insulinoma. CT images at the level of the proximal aspect of the left pancreatic lobe. (A) A pre-
contrast image shows focal pancreatic enlargement (arrow). (B) A post-contrast arterial phase shows a well-demarcated,
markedly contrast enhancing mass deforming the shape of the pancreas (arrow). C = transverse colon; RK = right kidney;
Sp= spleen.
CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE
GASTROINTESTINAL IRACT
Massimo Vignoli and Jimmy Saunders
IMAGING PROTOCOL
 The size and shape of the stomach vary depending
of the size of the animal, the gastric content and the
degree of distention (Figure 31.1). For CT imaging of
See Table 31.1. CT gastroenterography allows optimal
visualization of the gastric and proximal intestinal
the stomach, adequate distention is essential (Figures
31.1B,C). If the stomach is not well distended, diseases
wall. Fluid (Table 31.2) can be put into the stomach via
 a gastric tube and manual injection of 30ml/kg bw.
may be overlooked or, conversely, the collapsed gastric
wall may mimic disease.
trast. Oral administration of water completed by intra-
venous injection of contrast medium is the most
Small intestine
appropriate combination for visualization of the
 stomach and proximal intestine.
The small intestine follows the stomach. It is a tube-
like structure of about 2.5 times the animal's total body
length and consists of three parts: duodenum, jejunum
and ileum. The duodenum is quite short and receives
CT: ANATOMY AND NORMAL
enzymes and other secretions from the pancreas and
VARIANTS
liver via the pancreatic and common bile ducts (Figure
31.2). The jejunum is the middle and longest portion
Stomach
(±90% of the length). It is rich in villi, which are small,
 The stomach is a hollow organ located caudal to the
finger-like sructures that protrude inwards into the
food contents and increase the absorption surface for
liver. From left to right, it is divided into a cardiac
the nutrients. Villi are not visible on CT. The short
sphincter, a fundus, a body, a pyloric antrum and a
ileum connects to the large intestine. On post-contrast
 pyloric sphincter. The stomach has a musculoglandu-
CT, the normal bowel wall shows marked contrast
lar wall designed to store large volumes of food and
enhancement allowing detection of hypoperfused
continue the digestive process. Its inner lining secretes
areas.
acids and enzymes to break down food. Additionally.
the gastric mucosa has folds that help grind and digest
food. Once the initial gastric phase of the digestive
Large intestine
 proces is completed, the partially digested food exits
the stomach through the pyloric sphincter into the
The large intestine connects the small intestine to the
 duodenum. Liquids are emptied in an exponential
anus. It has several distinct parts: the cecum (near the
patterm without evidence of a lag phase. In contrast to
junction with the small intestine, the colon (longest
this, solid food is emptied with a lag phase of varying
portion) and the rectum (final portion). The primary
length, depending on the composition and tempera-
function of the large intestine is to absorb water from
ture of the ingesta, and follows a more linear pattern
feces as needed, thus keeping the hydration level of
afterwards.
the body constant.
saunes Auu 'ziemups sa q pauis fy pan 
@ 2011 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
325
326 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Table 31.1
Feline anatomical specificities (Figure 31.3)
CT imaging protocol {intravenous contrast study: standard
The stomach is left-sided with the pylorus
 protocol; see Chapter 5).
mostly located at the level of the vertebral
 Pre- and post-contrast
column. The gastric folds are less numerous
 Series
 gastroe nterography
and thinner than those in the dog. On CT, an
Decubitus
Ventral
intramural lucent band and hypodense layer
corresponds to fat in the gastric submucosa.
 Scan margins 
 Cranial abdomen (-
This band is a normal anatomic feature. The
 Caudal pelvis 
normal small intestine contains less gas in cats
Voltage (kVp)
120-140
than in dogs. The feline cecum is very short.
Current (mAs)
 100 (cats and small dogs); 
250 (big dogs)
Tube rotation time (s)
0.8-1
 Slice width (mm)
1.25-5
DISEASE FEATURES
 Kernel frequency
 Low to medium
Gastrointestinal foreign body
 Collimator pitch 
1-2
 Helical image 
 % of the slice width
reconstruction
ones, to ingest objects other than food. Most of this
interval
foreign material, such as small pieces of bone, passes
 Motion control
 Hyperventilation to achieve
through the gastrointestinal tract without, or with
expiratory apnea
minimal, clinical incidence. Sometimes larger objects 
Window level (HU)
+40
become partially or completely lodged. Most common 
 obstructive foreign bodies are latex teat, plastic objects,
Window width (HU)
300-400
string/rope/fishing lines, stones or balls, but many
 others have been reported. In dogs, the jejunum is the
most common location of discrete foreign objects,
while in cats the distribution is more uniform. Linear
foreign bodies are most commonly anchored at the
 pylorus in dogs and around the tongue in cats. Foreign
bodies may cause bowel perforation.
Table 31.2
Contrast procedures for the gastrointestinal tract
 Study
Agent
Features
Gastroenterography
 Positive contrast
uo sowniopnasd pue 'suauo ysisen yim Awoun xiu pou op -
agents
be created
- may mask subtle lesions, particularly when combined with IV
contrast
- can complicate 3-D reco nstructions
- optimal distention of the small intestine (barium)
Water
inexpe nsive, well-tolerated
allows good visualization of the enhancing wall
improved visualization of the gastric wall 
better detection of subtle disease 
 does not interfere with 3-D reco nstructions 
- suboptimal distention of the small intestine (because of rapid transit)
 Positive contrast
- positive contrast material will fill the distal small bowel loops, and 
agent followed by
 the water will distend the stomach and proximal small bowel 
water
Intravenous
 used in addition of oral agents 
contrast
improved visualization of disease processes
327 GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT
A
C
Figure 31.1 Transverse CT images at the level of the stomach. (A) Stomach flled with solid food. (B,C) Normal stomach in
a medium-sized dog, (B) before and (C) after administration of water (30 ml/kg) in the stomach. CT gastrography using water
"(ssiaise) yseuois paiep aul u puasaid st ses jo punoue Teus v 'tem yoeuons aul jo uonezensta aul saaondu Aeano
L = liver; RK = right kidney; St = stomach.
CT features (Figure 31.4)
Gastrointestinal perforation
 Have not been reported.
 Anticipated features on CT:
Possible causes of gastrointestinal perforation include
foreign
material
may
show
different
ruptured ulceration following steroid and/or NSAID
densities
therapy, dehiscence after surgery, chronic non-
fluid surrounds the foreign bodies 
 neoplastic bowel disease, localized granuloma or neo-
 if secondary obsruction: intestinal wall thick-
plasia leading to necrosis, foreign body or, mainly for
 ening due to inflammation.
the large intestine, fractured bone fragments.
328 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Figure 31.2 Sagittally reconstructed CT image shows the
 a o  e o    'e o
biliary duct (arrows) originating in the gallbladder (GB) and
foreign bodies (peach stones) in the pyloric antrum (arrows)
entering the duodenum (D). L = liver; PV = portal vein.
"uaalds = dg Aaupr nuou = Y 'pin Aq papunoins
 Depending on the cause, a neoplastic or granulo-
 matous mass, foreign body or bone fragment may
be seen.
LIVEF
Gastrointestinal neoplasia
The most common gastrointestinal neoplasia is
malignant lymphoma in the cat, and adenocarcinoma
in the dog followed by smooth muscle tumors. A
sI shoum oinse noy uogisodspaid paanq Suons
Figure 31.3 Post-contrast transverse CT image shows
 present in rough collies, Staffordshire terriers and
hypodense layers (arrows) in the gastric wall of an adult cat
Belgian shepherd dogs.
corresponding to normal fat. Sp = spleen; St = stomach.
CT features (Figures 31.6-31.8)
Have not been reported.
CT features (Figure 31.5)
 Anticipated features on CT:
Small pockets of extraluminal gas.
 inhomogeneous, soft tissue mass of variable
Small amount of peritoneal free fluid.
size (mostly large at presentation) in the gastric/
 Intestinal wall thickening.
intestinal wall
Post-contrast (IV): enhancement of the surround-
 lymphoma: symmetric or asymmetric thicken-
 ing inflamed tissue.
 ing of the gastric/intestinal wall over a variable
 CT gastroenterography: contrast visible outside the
distance
 intestinal lumen.
contrast (IV) enhancement.
329 GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT
A
Figure 31.5 Miniature poodle with colonic laceration. It was in a car accident 6h prior to CT. (A) Transverse CT image
shows gas bubbles outside the colon (short arrows). Pelvic fractures are visible (long arrows) with sharply delineated fracture
ends. (B) Transverse CT image shows colonic laceration with gas bubbles exiting the colon (arrows). C = colon.
FURTHER READING
Fant P, Caldin M, Furlanello T et al. (2004) Primary gastric
histiocytic sarcoma in a dog-a case report. J Vet Med A
Physiol Pathol Clin Med 51: 358-62.
Hylands R(2005)Veterinary diagnostic imaging. Longitudinal
intestinal perforation at the level of the proximal duode-
mum near the pylorus resulting in a septic peritonitis. Can
Vet I 46: 748-50.
Terragni R, Rossi F, Laganga P et al. (2010) Evaluation of the
stomach wall by helical hydro-CT: normal technique and
clinical cases. Proc Axnual ESVONC Meeting, p. 45. Turin,
LIVFE
Italy.
Yamada K, Morimoto M, Kishimoto M and Wisner ER (2007)
Virtual endoscopy of dogs using multi-detector row CT.
Vet Radiol Ultrasound 48: 318-22.
CYST
Figure 31.6 Adult dog with gastric adenocarcinoma.
Transverse CT image (dog in dorsal decubitus) shows a soft 
issue density mass involving almost the complete stomach
wall (asterisks). The stomach is moderately filled with fluid
and also contains gas (G). A cyst is present in the liver.
Figure 31.7 Adult cat with intestinal lymphoma. (A) Post-contrast transverse CT image shows a transverse slice of the small
intestine filled with mucus and gas with a severely thickened and asymmetric wall (asterisks). A large circular mass (M),
-isod (a) 'sausaun Teus au uoeidsip uaopqe juau aul ut atqisia si Ksdonq iaye apou qdut Tenou e se pasouaei
contrast dorsally reconstructed CT image shows an asymmetric thickening of the small intestinal wall over a few centimeters 
(asterisks). The intestinal lumen is filled with mucus, a small gas bubble and a trace of contrast medium. The previously
described lymph node is visible (M). LK = left kidney; SP = spleen.
COLON
PELVIS
Figure 31.8 Adult dog with a leiomyoma of the large intestine. (A) Transverse CT image shows a circular isodense mass
(asterisk) located between the tail and the dorsal wall of the large intestine (C). (B) Sagittally reconstructed CT image shows
the mass (asterisk) extending from the level of the sacrum to at least the seventh coccygeal vertebra.
CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO
URINARY SYSTEM
Tobias Schwarz
IMAGING TECHNIQUE
UROLOGICAL ABNORMALITIES
Renal abnormalities
See Table 32.1.
Abnormal renal shape, size, density and contrast
CT: ANATOMY AND NORMAL
      
Glomerular filtration rate can be estimated with
VARIANTS (F1GURES 4.24C
applied software; however, this is still not widely
 available in veterinary practice. Secondary effects of
32.1-32.3)
renal insufficiency and failure can also be evident on
CT images, such as gastric wall mineralization,
The kidneys can be well visualized on CT and their
increased excretion via alternative pathways (biliary.
size, shape, density, location and number can be
intestinal mucosa) or increased lymphatic uptake and
assessed. Parenchymal-phase post-contrast images
bone demineralization.
show cortical and later medullary contrast medium
uptake which can be inhomogeneous. On excretory
CT features (Figures 32.4 and 32.5)
phase images there is a hyperlucent halo around the
contrast-enhanced renal pelvis, due to beam harden-
·Irregular
small
kidneys  with
 chronic renal
disease.
ing (see also Chapter 4, beam hardening).
 Non-enhancing
The ureters, urinary bladder and urethra should be
wedge-shaped
areas
with
 followed on the pre-contrast series first to rule out
infarcts.
 uweterolithiasis that would be obliterated on excretory
 Pelvis
distention
with
pyelonephritis
pue
phase images by contrast-enhanced urine. The distal
hydronephrosis.
 Mineralized concretions with urolithiasis.
ureters are closely located to the descending colon. A
 Irregular contrast-enhancing or non-enhancing
large fecal-filled colon can make the ureteral identifica-
tion more difficult.
masses with neoplasia.
 Gastric or aortic wall mineralization, osteopenia,
 Parenchymal phase images are helpful to visualize
the contrast-enhancing mucosa of the ureters, urinary
marked excretion of contrast medium into gall-
 bladder and intestinal lumen in case of renal insuf-
bladder and urethra.
 Excretory phase images should be performed with
ficiency and failure.
an elevated pelvis, so that the gravitationally depend-
ent contrast-enhanced urine pools in the cranioventral
Ureteral abnormalities
bladder, away from the clinically relevant trigone area
and vesicourethral junction.
Pre-contrast CT is a quick and efficient imaging modal-
The female urethra can be outlined with a retrograde
'sin pue shop ui sisonanan non uaanos on A
vaginogram study; however, urethral flling is not
Ureteral distention and lack of peristalsis can be
consistently achieved with this technique (see also
assessed on serial examinations or dynamic CT. The
Chapter 33, Vagina).
parenchymal and excretory phases can be helpful to
Veterinary Computed Tomography, First Edition. Edited by Tobias Schwarz,Jimmy Saunders.
@ 2011 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
331
332 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Table 32.1
CT imaging protocol.
Post-
Post-contrast
contrast
parenchymal
excretory
 Post-contrast excretory phase
Series
Pre-contrast
phase
phase
 ureterovesical junction dynamic CT
Decubitus
 Ventral with pelvis elevated
 Scan margins
 Cranial pole right kidney to anus 
 Stationary at caudal bladder neck
Voltage (kVp)
120
Current (mAs)
120-200
Tube rotation time (s)
1
 Slice width (mm)
3-5
using maximum number of image
channels 
(e.g. 4 x in 4-slice CT)
 Pitch/Temporal slice interval and 
1.5-2
 1s slice interval for 30s
duration
Helical image reconstruction interval
Half of slice width 
Equal to tube rotation time
 Kernel frequency 
Medium
Motion control
Not required
 Contrast medium application site 
N/A
Cephalic or external jugular vein
 Contrast medium type 
N/A
lodinated 
 Contrast medium dose 
N/A
400mg l/kg bw
 Contrast medium injection mode 
N/A
Manual
 Scan delay post start contrast
N/A
None
2-4min
 5-10 min
injection
Window level (HU)
100-200
300-500
Window width (HU)
300-500
1000-1600
assess luminal distention if a pre-contrast series was
performed.
CT is the modality of choice to assess the normo- or
ectopic ureteral ending, since it requires no colonic
enema preparation and is quick and easy to perform.
Due to the higher specific gravity, contrast-enhanced
urine sinks to the bottom of the urinary bladder. To
demonstrate the entrance point of a ureter, the jet of 
 contrast-enhanced urine drizzling through the non-
 enhanced higher urine layers needs to be visualized.
If the contrast-enhanced ureter continues caudal from
Figure 32.1 For a urologic CT examination the patient
this point, a partially ectopic ureter is present. If the
should be positioned in ventral recumbence with the pelvis 
ureter is completely ectopic and only connects to the
elevated on a wedge with a 5° to 10° angle.
urethra, the urethral lumen is contrast enhanced and
contrast-enhanced urine runs back to the urinary
 bladder. Ectopic ureters can also connect to the vagina.
 If the patient is not properly positioned in ventral
333URINARY SYSTEM
C
Figure 32.2 Normal CT features of a right canine kidney, transverse images. (A) On the pre-contrast image the renal paren-
chyma is homogeneously soft tissue dense. The renal pelvis lining is often slightly hyperdense and is surrounded by hilar
fat. The ureter can be identified. (B) In the parenchymal contrast enhancement phase, the renal cortex is most markedly con-
trast enhancing. (C) In the excretory phase, the renal pelvis and ureter are strongly contrast enhancing. Beam hardening creates
a dark halo around the renal pelvis.
4
B
Figure 32.3 Transverse CT images. (A) Normal mucosal enhancement of the pelvic urethra (arrow) in a male dog after
intravenous contrast medium application. (B) Normal location of both ureterovesical junctions (arrows) in a dog. A left urine 
jet (black arrow) drizzles through the non-enhanced urine towards the bottom of the urinary bladder.
334 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
B
C
D
Figure 32.4 Transverse CT images of the kidney. (A) Small, irregular feline kidney with a wedge-shaped non-enhancing
cortical area consistent with chronic nephritis and infarction. (B) Large nephrolith in a feline renal pelvis. (C) Distended,
contrast enhanced renal pelvis and wedge-shaped non-enhancing cortical area in a dog with pyelonephritis and renal infarc-
tion. (D) Non-contrast-enhancing renal carcinoma mass in a dog.
recumbency with an elevated pelvis it can be difficult
Ureteral distention cranial to concretion in case of
to reach a definitive diagnosis. If the ureter enters the
obstructive ureterolithiasis.
bladder from a very lateral angle (usually due to a fecal
Uniformly distended ureter with hydroureter
distended colon) it can be helpful to reposition the
(ectopic, infection).
patient in lateral recumbency (affected ureter up side)
 Contrast-enhanced ureter entering caudal bladder
with an elevated pelvis to demonstrate the ureteral jet
neck, urethra or vagina in case of ectopic ureter.
this way. It can be difficult to demonstrate both ure-
Contrast jet in too far caudal location.
teral jets in one imaging series due to the peristaltic
Thin-walled cystic ureteral entrance with contrast
medium accumulation in case of ureterocele.
CT over the bladder neck with the maximum number
of image channels is recommend to monitor both
Abnormalities of the urinary bladder and
ureters over time.
urethra (Figures 32.9, 32.10 and 33.11)
For other ureteral abnormalities such as a urete-
rocele or ureteritis it is important to scan during the
Although CT is not the modality of choice to investi-
parenchymal and excretory phases to be able to assess 
 gate these organs, it can be useful to assess them to
the mucosal lining and peristalsis.
provide a complete urologic work-up or in cases of
suspected secondary changes due to other diseases,
CT features (Figures 32.5-32.9)
such as urolithiasis and cysitis secondary to portosys-
Mineralized
 intraluminal
concretions
in
temic shunts. Wall thickening, mass formation and
ureterolithiasis.
urolithiasis can be documented using CT. An intrapel-
CVC
D
Figure 32.5 Transverse CT images showing secondary features of renal failure. (A,B) Chronic renal failure in a guinea pig
with (A) obstructive renolithiasis (white arrow) and (B) a mineralized gastric wall (black arrow) due to secondary uremic
abdominal lymph vessels (arrowhead) and the cisterna chyli (white arrow), located dorsolaterally to the aorta (Ao). (D)
Intestinal mucosal contrast medium excretion (black arrow). CVC = caudal vena cava. Ur = obstructive ureterolith.
B
C
Figure 32.6 Diagnosis of obstructive urolithiasis in a cat with the help of different CT techniques, transverse images. (A)
Mineral-dense concretion (arrow) in the right ureter on pre-contrast CT. (B) Parenchymal-phase contrast CT proximal to the
concretion demonstrates mucosal enhancement (arrowhead) and luminal distention. (C) Excretory CT at the same location
demonstrates ureteral wall thickening and luminal distention (arrowhead), indicative of obstruction.
Figure 32.7 Transverse CT images showing bilateral ectopic ureters in a bitch. (A,B) Both ureters (arrows) travel caudally
beyond the normal trigone area of the urinary bladder (UB). The right ureter is distended. (C) The smaller left ureter (arrow-
head) enters the urinary bladder lumen at the vesicourethral junction and creates a drizzling urine jet, proving its entrance.
(D) The distended right ureter joins further caudally the pelvic urethra and releases contrast-enhanced urine into it (arrow).
Figure 32.8 Dorsal plane image of an ureterocele (UC) in a cat forming a thin-walled cyst within the lumen of the urinary
bladder (UB).
337URINARY SYSTEM
C
 Figure 32.9 Transverse CT images of urinary bladder disorders. (A) Chronic cystitis in a dog with a portosystemic shunt
with a thickened urinary bladder wall and pronounced mucosal enhancement. Dorsal contrast medium pooling due to dorsal 
recumbency. (B) Cystic (arrow) and ureteral (arrowhead) urolithiasis in a cat. (C) The urinary bladder (UB) extends caudally
Jo suis ou ym sop are e st sn saamo oau hapea oiaden ue ym paisisuos 'sot dy aun jo iaat aul o
incontinence.
338 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
vic urinary bladder neck location can also be docu-
 mented with CT. The significance of this finding is
controversially discussed.
FURTHER READING
Alexander K, Dunn M, Carmel EN, Lavoie JP and DelCastillo
JRE (2010) Clinical application of Patlak plot CT-GFR in
Llltrasound 51: 421-7.
Barthez PY, Begon D and Delisle F (1998) Effect of contrast
medium dose and image acquisition timing on ureteral
opacification in the normal dog as assessed by computed
tomography. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 39: 524-7.
Ultrasound 44: 155-64.
Samii VF, McLoughlin MA, Mattoon JS et al. (2004) Digital
fluoroscopic excretory urography, digital fhuoroscopic ure-
thrography, helical computed tomography, and cystogra-
Figure 32.10 Transverse CT image showing obstructive
phy in 24 dogs with suspected ureteral ectopia. J Vet Int
urolithiasis (arrow) in the pelvic flexure in the urethra of a
Med 18: 271-81.
male dog.
CHAPTER THIRTY-THREE
GENITAL TRACT
Jimmy Saunders, Federica Rossi and Tobias Schwarz
IMAGING PROTOCOL
DISEASE FEATURES
Malformation/Intersexuality
See Table 33.1.
Intersexuality can be defined as the presence of both
male and female sexual characteristics in the same
CT: ANATOMY AND NORMAL
individual. There are multiple medical conditions that
VARIANTS
can lead to intersexuality (Table 33.2) and variations
within categories are common, leading sometimes to
The female genital tract
complex combinations.
The ovaries are found close to the caudal poles of the
kidneys and are generally ovoid in shape (Figure 33.1).
CT features (Figure 33.4)
They are continued by the uterine horns, cervix and
 Presence of male and female genital structures in
vagina. The appearance of the female tract varies
the same individual.
according to the different phases of the normal cyclus.
 The genital structures may be normal or abnormal
 Retrograde CT vaginography allows assessment of
(incomplete, aberrant, underdeveloped).
the cervix, vagina propria, vestibulovaginal junction,
vestibule and clitoral groove (Figure 33.2). Filling of
The gonads
the urethra is inconsistent with this method.
Retained testis and testis neoplasia
The male genital tract
Cryptorchidism has a prevalence of 0.8-10% in male
The testes are situated in the scrotum from the age of
 dogs and is due a sex-linked autosomal recessive trait
that affects most commonly small breeds. Retained
8-12 weeks. The prostate is a bilobed, ovoid-shaped
retroperitoneal gland encircling the neck of the urinary
testes are usually small and atrophied and are located
bladder and the proximal urethra (Figure 33.3). It
between the kidney and the inguinal ring. Castration
enlarges from birth to maturity and hyperplasia begins
is recommended because retained testes are 13 times
around middle age. The size of the gland varies
more likely to develop neoplasia, especially sertoli cell
between individuals and depends on the hormonal
tumors, than normal testes and are at increased risk for
status. Scottish terriers have a prostate gland up to
torsion. These tumors are functional and often metas-
 tasize to the regional lymph nodes, liver and lungs.
pue pazis Aneus iano jo azis an sa mog
aged dogs.
-auaoou siadde puels ajeisoid euou e 'L uo
CT features (Figure 33.5A)
ous. The capsule and parenchyma cannot be differenti-
Non-tumoral retained testis:
ated. The median septum becomes prominent on
presence of an oval, well-delineated soft
 post-contrast images. The normal prostate gland has a
tissue density mass along the expected course
density between 40 and 70HU on pre-contrast CT, and
of testicular descent (abdominal, inguinal,
between 90 and 150HU on post-contrast studies.
prescrotal).
saunes Auu 'ziemups sa q pauis fy pan 
@ 2011 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
339
340 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Table 33.1
CT imaging protocol (intravenous contrast study: standard protocol; see Chapter 5).
Retrograde CT vagino(urethro)graphy
 Series
Pre- and post-contrast 
(Figure 33.2)
Decubitus 
Ventral
Lateral or ventral
 Scan margins
Cranial abdomen ←→
[4 ←→Anus
Anus
Voltage (kVp)
120-140
Current (mAs)
100 (cats and small dogs); 250 (big dogs)
Tube rotation time (s)
0.8
 Slice width (mm)
1.25-5
Kernel frequency
Low to medium
 Collimator pitch
1- 2
Helical image reconstruction interval 
% of the slice width
Motion control
Hyperventilation to 
General anesthesia
 achieve expiratory apnea
 Contrast medium application site
N/A
Vagina (balloon tip catheter)
 Contrast medium type
N/A
lodinated 
Contrast medium dose
N/A
- Adequate distention on the scout pilot
- Guidelines: 10mg iodine/ml, 1ml/kg bw
or 20-120ml (spayed dogs < intact dogs)
 Contrast medium injection mode
N/A
Manual
Scan delay post start contrast injection
N/A
Immediately
Window level (HU)
+40
Window width (HU)
300-400
 Tumoral retained testis:
 Teratoma: large, irregular solid component con-
 large, sometimes heterogeneous, soft tissue
taining coarse calcifications.
density mass with moderate contrast enhance-
ment located in the central abdomen, mostly
The prostate gland
ventral
Prostate gland disorders include squamous metapla-
calcifications may be present
 pue eisedoau 'uogeuuregut 'eiseldiadky uuaq 'eis
liver,
lungs
or
lymph
 node
cysts. Concurrent disease conditions frequently co-
metastases.
exist in the same prostate gland of older dogs. The
 neoplastic gland frequently contains foci of benign
Ovarian neoplasia
hyperplasia, cystic glandular dilatation and significant
inflammation making imaging diagnosis challenging.
Ovarian neoplasia accounts for 1% of all tumors in
The CT features of prostatic disorders have not been
both the dog and cat. Tumor types are variable and
 reported. Anticipated CT features based on a limited
include epithelial cell tumors, germ cell tumors, sex
number of cases and ultrasonographic features are
cord stromal tumors and metastatic disease.
suggested.
CT features (Figure 33.5B)
Benign prostatic hyperplasia
soft tissue
density mass with moderate contrast enhancement
Benign prostatic hyperplasia is a diffuse disorder
located in the central abdomen, mostly ventral.
dependent on age-related alterations in testosterone
341 GENITAL TRACT
Sp
eao shl pue uiao hal aui () sop ateag ieuou e u joen ieiuan areay au jo saeunl I aslaasuei t'se anbi
bursa (arrow) are visible along the left abdominal wall. Sp = spleen. (B) The left ovarium during the estrus is visible at the same
location (arrow) and shows a hypodense center (fluid content). (C) The uterus is visible is the center of the abdomen (arrows).
and estrogen ratios. It initiates with sexual maturity
 Hyperdense foci: fibrosis or vascular changes, min-
and affects almost all intact male dogs older than 7
eralizations less likely.
 years of age. Glandular hyperplasia mostly seen in
Cystic hyperplasia (cysts of different size and
 young dogs (intra-alveolar increase in papillary prolif-
numbers).
 erations of prostatic secretory epithelium along with
Capsule intact.
an  increased  stromal  component)  is  believed  to
 No evidence of lymphadenopathy.
ssas) ssop 1aplo ul eiseqdiadAy xalduos oi ssaisoid
 -ad puis um sue spu pdone no/pue
 Prostatic neoplasia
landular chronic inflammation).
Prostatic neoplasia  is an  uncommon  disorder that
CT features
affects both sexually intact and castrated dogs equally.
 Symmetrical or asymmetrical prostatomegaly.
 Overall, these tumors are aggressive malignant
Heterogeneity of the parenchyma.
 epithelial neoplasms, mostly adenocarcinomas. At
342 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
C
Figure 33.2 CT retrograde vaginourethrogram in the normal bitch. (A) Transverse CT image shows the dilated vagina (V)
and ventral to it, the urethra (U). (B) Sagittally reconstructed CT image shows the cervix (black arrow), vagina propria (Va),
vestibulovaginal junction (white arrowhead), vestibule (Ve), urethra (black arrowhead) and clitoral fossa (white arrow), all
are well outlined. (C) Dorsally reconstructed CT image shows the vagina (Va), vestibule (Ve) and vestibulovaginal junction
(arrowhead).
presentation, 80% of the affected dogs have regional
·Mineralization may be present.
lymph node and/or lung metastases.
Post-contrast (IV): moderate (e.g. leiomyoma) to
marked  (e.g.
 adenocarcinoma)
heterogeneous
CT features (Figure 33.6)
enhancement.
Symmetrical or asymmetrical prostatomegaly.
Metastases:
lymph  nodes: enlarged,  sometimes  irregu-
areas.
 larly delineated and heterogeneous lymph
Cyst or cyst-like structures.
nodes
343  GENITAL TRACT
Table 33.2
Classification of the intersexual co nditions.
Intersexuality
Genotype
Gonadal sex 
 Phenotype
Hermaphrodism
XX > XY
Mixed
 Sex reversal
XX
Male 
Male
 XY (gene translocation)
Female
Female
 Pseudo-hermaphrodism
Male (XY)
Male
Female
Female (XX)
Female
Male 
testicular or epididymal disease. Regional lympha-
denopathy may be present. A prostatic abscess is
a complication of a prostatitis or an infection of
benign cyst.
CT features (Figure 33.7)
 Symmetrical or asymmetrical prostatomegaly.
 Focal or multifocal poorly defined hypodense 
areas.
Cyst or cyst-like structures.
 Small foci of mineralization are possible.
 Focal fluid accumulation in caudal abdomen.
 Regional lymphadenopathy, less severe than for
neoplasia.
 Abscess: one or more large cavities with irregular,
 thickened walls and hyperdense content.
 Post-contrast (IV): heterogeneous enhancement.
Figure 33.3 Transverse CT image of the prostate gland in
a normal male dog. The gland is divided into two lobes by
a median septum (arrow). C =colon; Le = left lobe (pros-
The caudal genital tract
tate); P = prostate; Rt = right lobe (prostate); U = urethra.
The caudal part of the genital tract includes the vagina
and vestibule in the bitch and the urethra and penis in 
 the male dog. Computed tomography can be used to
- bone: mainly proliferative: smooth, palisading
determine the extent of disease process of this part of
new bone, with possibly small osteolytic lesions
the genital tract in the female (Figures 33.8-33.10) or
 metastases in the lungs, abdominal organs,
 in the male (Figure 33.11) dog.
 brain, long bones and pelvic musculature are
not infrequent.
The cat
Prostatitis/Prostatic abscess
 Male genital tract disorders are extremely rare in the 
Prostatitis may be acute or chronic and is mainly the
cat. Female genital tract disorders are more frequent
result of a urinary tract infection or the extension of a
but do are not indications for CT.
344 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
JE
OF
A
B
Figure 33.4 Two-year-old (female) hermaphrodite dog. (A) Transverse CT image with two round uterine horms filled with
(dO) suad so (n) eain '(d) puela ateisoid "(an) iapperq Areuan aul smoys aseu I paornusuosan Aenaes (a) (n) pin
and testis (T).
FURTHER READING
with signs of feminization and a sertoli cell tumour. Reprod
Domt Anim 45: 447-52.
Wang KY, Sami VF, Chew DJ et al. (2006) Vestibular, vaginal
Ragetly GR, Bennett A, Chow EP and Naughton JF
[eunou joeju pue paeds u sdqsuoueian teruaan pue
(2009) What's your diagnosis? J Am Vet Med Assoc 234:
dogs. Theriogenology 66: 726-35.
1127-8.
Wang KY, Samii VF, Chew DJ et al. (2006) Vestibular,
 Smith J (2008) Canine prostatic disease: a review of anatomy,
 vaginal, and urethral relations in spayed dogs with and
pathology, diagnosis, and treatment. Theriogenology 70:
without lower urinary tract signs. J Vet Intern Med 20:
375-83.
1065-73.
Vegter AR, Kooistra HS, van Sluijs FJ et al. (2010) Persistent
 Mullerian duct syndrome in a miniature Schnauzer dog
345GENITAL TRACT
Figure 33.5 Adult dogs with gonadal tumors. (A) Post-contrast transverse CT image of a male dog with testicular neoplasia.
A large, round, softisue density mass (M) is present in the right ventral abdomen. This mass is slightly heterogeneous and
shows mild contrast enhancement. It displaces the small intestines dorsally and to the right. (B) Post-contrast transverse CT
image of an adult female dog with ovarian adenocarcinoma shows an irregularly delineated, heterogeneously enhanced large 
tes = ds aia pue Aes sausa a soends () ss
346
VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Figure 33.6 Adult dog with prostatic adenocarcinoma. (A) On the transverse CT image, the prostate gland (P) shows mul-
-oraiau paxreu smous aleul I astaasuen isenuosisod (a) (smoire) seare asuapodq auos pue iooy asuapiadu Teuus aidy
 geneous contrast enhancement. One large (asterisk) and multiple smaller hypodense areas are visible. (C) Transverse CT image
shows enlarged medial iliac lymph nodes (arrows).
347GENITAL TRACT
Figure 33.7 Adult dog with prostatic abscess. (A) Transverse CT image shows an enlarged, mildly heterogeneous prostate
gland. (B) Post-contrast transverse CT image shows peripheral enhancement and multiple large hypodense areas. C = colon;
P = prostate gland.
Figure 33.8 Adult dog with a fistula secondary to an ovarian stump abscess. Post-contrast transverse CT image shows
edematous swelling of the right abdominal body wal(arrows). Areas of mild contrast enhancement altermate with hypodense
zones.
348 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
A
B
Figure 33.9 CT studies of two patients with vaginal neoplasia. (A) Post-contrast transverse CT image of an adult bitch with
vaginal fibroma. A large, mildly contrast enhancing vaginal mass (asterisk) is visible within the pelvis. The colon is displaced
dorsally and to the left (long arrow) and the urethra ventrally and to the right (short arrow). (B) Transverse CT vaginogram
 of an adult bitch with neoplasia of the urethra extending into the vagina. The vagina shows two large fillng defects (asterisks).
C=colon.
(arrow). Va = vagina; Ve = vestibule.
349GENITAL TRACT
and (B) pelvic urethra (C) as well as in the thigh musculature.
CHAPTER THIRTY-FOUR
ADRENAL GLANDS
Federica Morandi
IMAGING PROTOCOL
Anticipated features on CT:
-on isou st usihnoouanpeodu asneaq
monly due to complete loss of adrenal gland
See Table 34.1.
cortical function, small, atrophic adrenal glands 
should be visible on CT.
CT: ANATOMY AND NORMAL
VARIANTS
Infection/Inflammation
The adrenal glands are located medial to the cranial
 Granulomatous infection/inflammation of the adrenal
aspect of the kidneys. The left adrenal is the largest,
anou pue iaeus st uol aul pue 'adeus inuead e um
glands have been occasionally reported in cases of sys-
temic mycoses (aspergillosis, blastomycosis, crypto-
rounded. The left adrenal gland lies ventrolateral to
coccosis,
coccidioidomycosis and histoplasmosis),
the aorta, between the origin of the cranial mesenteric
angiostrongylosis, neosporosis and peliosis hepatis.
and left renal arteries. The right adrenal gland is lateral
 There are no published data on the specific CT appear-
to, and in close association with, the caudal vena cava,
ance of these diseases.
cranial to the right renal artery and vein. Normal
adrenal glands have homogeneous density, approxi-
mately equal to that of the kidneys. On transverse CT
images, the shape and size of the adrenal glands can
Endocrine
vary due to slightly variable orientation of each gland
within the abdomen. There is no correlation between
Hyperadrenocorticism
a dog's body weight and adrenal measurements
Adrenal l
hyperplasia
äin
1  hyperadrenocorticism
(Table 34.2).
 -md Aieud e oi anp aq Aeu (auopus s,Buusn)
tary neoplasm (up to 85% of the cases) or primary
CT DISEASE FEATURES
adrenal neoplasm. Symmetric or asymmetric enlarge-
ment of the adrenal glands has been reported with
Malformation/Developmenta!
-ladAu quapuadap-Arenmd uim ssop jo %ez oi dn u
Congenital hypoadrenocorticism
adrenocorticism, the adrenal glands can be normal in
a[suis oi anp wstqiosouarpeody Arepaiay 'ssop ul
si aseasp au yum u shop u Ksonoudnou pue azis
U pauaumoop uaaq seu auas aaissanai leuosoine
due to a secreting adrenocortical tumor, the contralat-
standard poodles, Portuguese water dogs and Duck
 eral adrenal gland should become atrophied at long
Tolling retrievers. Other breeds with reported increased
term. CT may be particularly useful in the evaluation
risk of hypoadrenocorticism include Great Danes,
 of individual cases, such as large breed dogs (espe-
Rottweilers, West Highland White terriers, soft-coated
cially those with deep-chested conformation or obesity)
 Wheaten terriers, bearded collies and Leonbergers.
 in which the adrenal glands (particularly the right)
 may not be visible on ultrasound. In cases of marked
CT features
enlargement of the adrenal glands, CT may be useful
·Have not been reported.
 in ruling out vascular invasion (Figure 34.1).
saunes Auu 'ziemups sa q pauis fy pan 
@ 2011 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
351
352 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Table 34.1
Imaging protocol.
 Survey abdomen
Targeted 
Series
pre-contrast
 pre-contrast
Targeted angiogram phase
Decubitus
Ventral
 Scan margins
Diaphragm ←→ L7
T12-13 → Caudal aspect of the left kidney
Voltage (kVp)
120
130
Current (mAs)
150
175
Tube rotation time (s)
1
 Slice width (collimated or
5
2
binned, mm)
 Sequential slice interval (mm)
2
Kernel frequency
 Standard (medium)
Collimator pitch
1.25
1
 Contrast medium application 
N/A
 Peripheral vein (cephalic)
site
Contrast medium type
N/A
 lodinated, non-ionic
 Contrast medium dose
N/A
770mg /kg bw
 Contrast medium injection 
N/A
Manual or automatic (3ml/s)
mode
 Scan delay post start
N/A
 Targeted angiogram phase: simultaneous to
contrast injection 
injection 
 Targeted post-contrast: 5min
Window level (HU)
+40
 Between +35 and +50
Window width (HU)
350
Between 350 and 600
Table 34.2
 Increased adrenal volume has been documented in
Hounsfield units and mean volume of the adrenal glands
using multidetector CT.
cism compared with normal dogs:
1.60 ± 1.25 cm? in dogs with microadenoma
Rig ht
 2.88 ± 1.60 cm? in dogs with macroadenoma.
adrenal
Left adrenal
 Small mineralizations have also been reported in
Attenuation values (HU)
rare cases.
- pre-contrast 
34.3 ± 7.0
36.0 ± 5.3
 Hypodense, rounded or ovoid nodular lesions of 
- post-contrast
97.4 ± 12.4
101.5 ± 10.6
variable size.
Mean volume (cm)
0.55 ± 0.19
0.60 ± 0.17
 Post-contrast: minimal to no contrast enhancement
can be seen in affected adrenal glands.
Feline anatomical specificities
Neoplasia
In the cat, both adrenal glands have a similar,
ovoid shape. In older cats, adrenal glands can
Adrenal tumors can arise from the adrenal cortex
incidentally mineralize while retaining normal
(adenoma, carcinoma) or medulla (pheochromocyto-
morphology.
mas, ganglioneuroma), and they may be functional
(secreting excessive amounts of one or more hormones)
or non-functional.
Other 
 non-functional  adrenal
CT features
tumors incdlude
myelolipomas  
pue
teratomas.
No difference in adrenal attenuation values has
 Metastases to the adrenals have been reported in up to
juapuadap-Aemd um sop uaamiaq pumoua
20% of canine and 15% of feline neoplasias, with pul-
hyperadrenocorticism and normal dogs.
 monary, mammary, prostatic, gastric and pancreatic
353 ADRENAL GLANDS
RK
Sp
pareua Aipareut e s arau aeu  paeuat resop iseuosisod () pue uonalun senu iage uug (g) uoalun
slightly heterogeneously enhancing right adrenal gland (RA) containing a small speckle of mineralization (arrow) and deform-
ing, but not invading, the caudal vena cava. Only a small portion of the left adrenal gland (LA) is visible on Figure 34.1B and
is normal in size. Ao = aorta; CM = cranial mesenteric artery; CVC =caudal vena cava; LK = left kidney; RK = right kidney;
Sp = spleen.
carcinomas, and melanoma having the highest rates of
vessel) will show contrast enhancement similar to
 adrenal metastasis in dogs.
the adrenal mass, while a clot will not.
CT protoco!
CT features
 When evaluating adrenal masses with suspect vas-
 To date, no specific data correlating CT character-
cular invasion, an acquisition during the angi-
ogram phase (timed synchronously with contrast
 and feline patients, unlike in human medicine.
injection) can be very useful in confirming throm-
Evaluation of adrenal masses is limited to their
 bus formation (Figure 34.2); the thrombus appears
size, morphology, location and regional vascular
as a filling defect within the otherwise contrast-
invasion (Figures 34.3 and 34.4).
filled vessel.
 Fine needle aspirate or biopsy is needed for a con-
clusive diagnosis.
uad Supresan uouu sapond (uooa
 Adrenal tumors can have homogeneous or hetero-
of enhancement of the adrenal mass and thrombus:
geneous parenchyma.
a tumor thrombus (neoplastic tissue invading a
 Post-contrast: variable contrast enhancement.
354 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
C
Figure 34.2 Adult dog with persistent hypertension, presumably due to a pheochromocytoma. Transverse CT images taken
(A) before contrast injection, (B) during contrast injection and (C) dorsally reformatted CT image during contrast injection.
There is a large, lobulated left adrenal (LA) mass, which extends to silhouette with the caudal vena cava on the pre-contrast
image. Images obtained during contrast injection document a large tumor thrombus occupying the majority of the lumen on
the caudal vena cava. Ao = aorta; CVC = caudal vena cava; LA = left adrenal; LK = left kidney; RK = right kidney;Sp = spleen.
Aar spuela reaipe (i) hat pue () ui aun yoq Smos sop inpe ue jo ae I raasue () ete ani
enlarged. Both glands have heterogeneous density with the left adrenal containing mineral densities at the periphery. (B)
Post-contrast transverse CT image of the same dog showing attenuation of contrast flow within the cranial mesenteric artery
(CM) due to compression by the adjacent adrenal glands. Ao = aorta; CM = cranial mesenteric artery; CVC = caudal vena
cava; RK = right kidney; Sp = spleen.
355
ADRENAL GLANDS
RK
LK
Sp
RK
B
 Figure 34.4  Adult dog with adrenal myelolipoma and adenoma. (A) Post-contrast CT image showing a markedly enlarged,
smoothly marginated and heterogeneous left adrenal gland (LA). The gland shows a predominantly fat density and minimal,
 predominantly peripheral, contrast enhancement. (B) Post-contrast dorsaly reconstructed CT image of both glands, with the 
right adrenal (RA) showing homogeneous contrast enhancement. The right adrenal gland is only mildly enlarged and devi-
 ates the caudal vena cava to the left. Ao = aorta; CM = cranial mesenteric artery; CVC = caudal vena cava; LK = left kidney;
"ds = dg u uul = Y aa Td = Ad
●Mineralizations are most common with adrenocor-
Bertolini G, Furlanello T, Drigo M and Caldin M (2008)
tical tumors, but have also been reported with
Computed tomographic adrenal gland quantification in
pheochromocytomas.
canine adrenocorticotroph hormone-dependent hyper-
adrenocorticism. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 49: 449-53.
FURTHER READING
Caoili EM, Korobkin M, Francis IR et al. (2002) Adrenal
 masses: characterization with combined unenhanced and
delayed enhanced CT. Radiology 222: 629-33.
Bertolini G, Furlanello T, De Lorenzi D and Caldin M (2006)
 Morandi F, Mays JL, Newman SJ and Adams WH (2007)
Computed tomography of canine adrenal gland volume
 Imaging diagnosis - bilateral adrenal adenomas and mye-
and attenuation. Vet Radiol Uultrasound 47: 444-8.
lolipomas in a dog. Vet Radiol UIltrasound 48: 246-9.
CHAPTER THIRTY-FIVE
ABDOMINAL
. VASCULATURE
Tobias Schwarz
IMAGING TECHNIQUE
vascular conditions, injection speed and pressure. The
portal and caval phases last longer (25-60s) but their
Imaging protocol
 peak enhancement times also vary. A CT angiography
anp ueds au ious e um paedai Aisea aq jouen
See Table 35.1.
to the abundance of contrast-enhanced structures and
 patient safety considerations. Correct timing of vascu-
Imaging principles (Figure 35.1)
lar phase imaging is therefore essential and three dif-
ferent options are available:
CT allows identification of a wide range of attenuation
values permitting visualization of vascular contrast
 Educated guesing with the help of published
enhancement even after passage through and hemodi-
values (Frank et al. 2003). There is a moderate
lution in the pulmonary and systemic capillary bed
chance of missing the peak enhancement by
during the first vascular cycle. Helical CT allows scan-
guessing.
ning of long body parts in a short time span. Therefore
 Performing a test bolus dynamic CT scan at the
helical CT angiography enables visualization of
organ level of interest to determine the peak
contrast-enhanced abdominal vessels using only a
enhancement times of vascular phases.
 peripheral venous injection of iodinated contrast
 Use of automated bolus tracking software. This is
medium. Thus more invasive, costly, labor- and time-
a very convenient method; however,there are some
intensive selective angiographic procedures can be
serious drawbacks using this technology with cur-
replaced by CT. Multislice CT improves the image
rently available software options (see Chapter 6).
quality further and allows better timing of vascular
phases.
All methods of planning only assess the start and peak
 During an abdominal CT angiography, contrast
enhancement times, not the end times. The end of the
medium is injected into the cephalic or external jugular
vascular phases can be estimated by the duration of
vein as a bolus. Use of a power injector is essential for
the bolus injection and study of published values
most vascular studies and preferential for all. The
(Zwingenberger et al. 2004). In practice, however, this
bolus passes the heart and pulmonary circulation and
is usually not relevant. The limiting factor for pure
then enters the abdominal aorta and arterial system.
arterial phase imaging is the onset of the venous phase,
Very soon after this, the renal veins and the pre-renal
snouaa au snnoq isan Aq pamseau aq ues urum
 segment of the caudal vena cava contrast enhance with
 phase is usually long enough that if the scan started
streamlining of pre- and post-caval blood. Several
early on during this phase, it can be successfully
seconds later the portal vein tributaries, portal vein
imaged and even repeated, if restarted within 1min.
and branches as well as the post-renal cava and peri-
Suppression of respiratory motion artifacts in the
 toneal organs contrast enhance.
Tranial abdomen is essential for all abdominal vascular
A pure arterial vascular phase lasts only for 5-15s
studies, particularly because the study canmot easily be
in the canine and feline abdomen (shorter in smaller
repeated.  Rigorous  hyperventilation immediately
-on rn ose sn saaua yd a (shee
dsupaad uou sousuuss od
siderably (5-15s post start injection), depending on the
 atory bag holding or drug-induced apnea can also be
considered. Further details on motion artifact control
saunes Auu 'ziemups sa q pauis fy pan 
@ 2011 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
357
358 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Table 35.1
CT imaging protocol.
Series
Pre-contrast
Test bolus 
Arterial phase
Venous phase
Decubitus
Ventral
 Scan margins
Left atrium to hip 
 Stationary at porta
 Caudal abdomen to
 Thoracic inlet to
joint 
hepatis or organ of
 cranial liver margin 
hip joint 
interest
Voltage (kVp)
120
Current (mAs)
80-120
120-200
Tube rotation time (s)
1
2
0.5-1.0
 Slice width (mm)
5
2-5
 Pitch/Temporal slice interval 
Pitch of 2
 2s slice interval 
Pitch of 1-1.5
Helical image reconstruction 
Equal to slice 
 Equal to tube rotation
 Half of slice width
interval
width
time
 Kernel frequency
Medium
Motion control
 Required
Contrast application site
N/A
 Cephalic or external jugular vein
 Contrast medium type 
N/A
lodinated
 Contrast medium dose 
N/A
 200mg l/kg bw
 800mg /kg bw
 Contrast medium injection
N/A
Automated, 3-5ml/s, maximum pressure: 300psi (2000 kPa)
mode
Injection line needs to be screwed into catheter
 Scan delay post start
N/A
0-4
 Based on test bolus
contrast injection (s)
Window level (HU)
100-200
Window lidth (HU)
300-500
can be found in Chapter 4. The scanning direction
 identification of hepatic veins, which are best seen
should always be selected with the examination finish-
-s Aiaaau se ss asrd pae a S
ing in the caudal abdomen, furthest away from the
 trasted against the hepatic parenchyma
identification of tortuous enlarged hepatic arteries
starts breathing again. This means a caudal scan direc-
as a secondary sign of portosystemic shunts.
 tion for a single-phase scan and successive cranial and
 then caudal direction for a dual-phase scan technique,
VASCULAR ANATOMY AND
despite the fact that this is against the flow direction
NORMAL VARIATIONS
of the vascular phases.
-[enp e wnogad on Kiessanau Xpanlosqe jou sl 1
Abdominal aorta and branches (Figures
phase study for all abdominal vascular indications.
35.2-35.4)
Particularly with a limited X-ray tube heat capacity or
patients with poor respiration control it might be
The abdominal aorta runs in the left dorsal retroperi-
advisable to concentrate on the vascular system of
toneal space and gives off in caudal succession the
 primary interest. However, if there are no such restric-
celiac, right and left phrenicoabdominal, cranial
tions it is very helpful to assess both the arterial and
 mesenteric, right and left renal,right and left testicular/
:og uaopqe aul jo juamanueua jseon snouaa
ovarian, caudal mesenteric, right and left deep circum-
flex iliac, left and right external iliac arteries before
 confident identification of arteries and veins, par-
 dividing into right and left internal iliac arteries. These
ticularly in case of multiple extrahepatic shunts
branches are all visible on arterial-phased, low-pitched
identification of arteriovenous fistulae, venous
CT angiography studies.
thrombosis and other abnormalities of the non-
 Common incidental anatomic variations in dogs and
selected vascular system
cats indlude multiple left and right renal arteries, as
359 SYSTEMIC AND PORTAL ABDOMINAL VASCULATURE
Kovaik
Figure 35.1 The contrast bolus during a contrast medium injection can be seen as a train that runs in vessels instead of on
rails. The aim of a CT angiography is to catch the train in the abdomen and ride it along its jourmey. (A) Contrast medium is
injected as a tight bolus into the cephalic vein and travels through the cranial vena cava towards the heart. (B) The bolus train
 passes through the heart and pulmonary circulation and enters the abdominal aorta. For arterial phase imaging it is now time
it is best to wait for the next bolus train that will carry homogeneously contrast-enhanced pre- and post-renal caval blood.
(D) After passage through the systemic capillary system, two bolus trains run in parallel through the caval and portal venous
systems, leading to parenchymal hepatic and other abdominal organ enhancement. The CT angiography has now arrived at
its final destination.
well as different branching patterns of the hepatic
arteries.
Caudal vena cava and tributaries (Figures
35.3, 35.4 and 35.18!
The caudal vena cava (CVC) runs in the right dorsal
abdomen from the right dorsal aspect of the liver
towards the right ventral margin of the aorta in the
caudal abdomen. Further caudally the CVC moves
right and then dorsal to the aortic bifurcation. The
CVC is formed by the confluence of the common iliac
Figure 35.2  Volume rendering 3-D reconstruction image of
veins. In cranial succession the deep circumflex iliac,
the canine cranial abdominal aorta (Ao), viewed from the
right testicular/ovarian, left and right renal, left and
left, with celiac (C), cranial mesenteric (CrM), left phrenico-
 right phrenicoabdominal, and hepatic veins join the
abdominal (P), right (RR) and left renal (LR) artery branches.
The celiac artery trifurcates into left gastric (LG), hepatic (H)
 CVC. There are usually two right hepatic veins enter-
 and splenic (S) artery, whereas the cranial mesenteric artery
ing the CVC separately, and the majority of left hepatic
divides into ileocolic, caudal pancreaticoduodenal and many
veins form a large vessel; the hepatic ampulla
jejunal branches.
then joins the CVC from the left. These tributaries are
360 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
CVC
D
E
Figure 35.3 Canine caval and aortic anatomy. (A) The common iliac veins at the level of L7 (CIV) form the caudal vena
cava, whereas the intermal iliac arteries (arrows) form the aorta. The extermal iliac arteries (arrowheads) are the last branches
of the aorta. (B) Caudal vena cava (CVC) with tributary deep circumflex iliac vein (arrow) at the level of L6. The aorta (Ao)
receives the left extermal iliac artery (arrowhead). (C) The CVC receives the right ovarian vein (arrow) at the level of L5. (D)
Right (RRV) and left (LRV) renal veins join the CVC. Multiple extrahepatic shunt vessels ventrally. (E) Left hepatic veins (HV)
form the ampulla (HA) that joins the CVC just cranial to this level.
all visible on low-pitched CT angiography studies, the
hepatic tributaries best during the arterial phase where
CVC
they are negatively contrasted against the enhancing
hepatic parenchyma.
Common incidental anatomic variations in dogs and
cats include a split CVC (usually in the post-renal caval
a suaa ieuan u pue a adnmu pue (s
left testicular/ovarian vein normally drains into the
left renal vein, but can occasionally drain directly into
the CVC.
Portal vein, tributaries and branches
(Figures 35.4-35.6 and 35.9A)
Figure 35.4 Arterial phase image of a normal canine liver
 showing the moderately contrast-enhancing parenchyma,
The jejunal and ileal veins form the cranial mesenteric
enhanced hepatic arteries (arrows) that run parallel to non-
vein, which makes an S-shaped dorsal and then cranial
enhancing portal veins (PV). The hepatic veins (HV), ampulla
turn to receive the much smaller caudal mesenteric
(HA) and CVC stand out as non-enhanced vessels.
wy Aa jod ym je (iesnop woy Ansn) ua
361 SYSTEMIC AND PORTAL ABDOMINAL VASCULATURE
CVC
D
上
F
Figure 35.5 Normal canine portal vein anatomy. (A) The jejunal veins (arrow) in the mid-abdomen form the cranial
mesenteric vein. (B) The cranial mesenteric vein (arrows) makes an S-shaped turm towards dorsal and then cranial and receives
the caudal mesenteric vein (not pictured) to form the portal vein (PV). (C) The portal vein receives the large tributary splenic
vein (arrow) from the left side in the cranial abdomen and increases in diameter. (D) The last tributary of the portal vein is
the small gastroduodenal vein (arrow), which it receives just caudal to the porta hepatis, from right ventral. (E) Upon entrance
into the liver the portal vein immediately gives off its short right branch (arrow). (F) The remainder is the left portal branch
(arrow). CvC: caudal vena cava.
the portal vein. The portal vein then receives the large
splenic vein from the left and, just caudal to the porta
hepatis, the small gastroduodenal vein from right
 ventral. With each tributary the portal vein enlarges in
diameter Directly cranial to the gastroduodenal vein
emtrance the portal vein enters the liver and immedi-
ately gives off the short smaller right branch that sup-
plies the right lateral and caudate lobe, and continues
as the larger left branch supplying the remaining lobes
of the liver. The hepatic arteries run parallel to the
portal veins in the caudal aspect of the liver. The
hepatic veins run separately in the cranial aspect of
the liver.
 There is great variation in the feeding pattern of the
caudal mesenteric vein. In cats, the portal vein can
have a bulbous distention prior to the liver entrance.
 The hepatic portal branches can already be seen
during the arterial phase, where they run adjacent to
 the contrast enhancing arteries, as non-enhanced
Figure 35.6 Dorsal view of the portal vein in a cat with a
vessels.
bulbous distention at the porta hepatis without associated
clinical signs.
362 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
A
B
Figure 35.7 Normal renal vascular anatomy assessment in a renal donor cat. (A) Single right renal artery (arrow) giving off
two branches. (B) Single right renal vein (arrow) receiving two tributary branches. The length of the common stem of both
vessels is measured for surgical planming (images courtesy of Ana V. Caceres).
ASSESSMENT OF NORMAL
Arterioportal hepatic fistula
VASCULAR STRUCTURES
This is a are rare congenital abnormality in dogs in
(FIGURE 35.7)
uaa leod a o paa saare snedau an ym
with a single vessel or multiple (synonym arteriovenous
malformation) tortuous shunt vessels, resulting in portal
 CT can be used to identify individual anatomic pat-
hypertension, hepatic encephalopathy and ascites.
terns for specific surgical procedures such as determi-
 They are often combined with portosystemic shunts,
nation of stem length of renal arteries and veins for
complicating diagnosis.
patterns for interventional vascular procedures. A
dual-phase, low-pitched imaging protocol with good
CT features (Figure 35.8)
respiration control is essential for diagnosis. A test
 Almost always peritoneal effusion.
bolus is highly recommended, particularly in cats with 
Test bolus shows portal vein time-attenuation
very short arterial peak enhancement times.
 graph similar to aorta with minimal delay.
Single or multiple enlarged tortuous hepatic vessels 
VASCULAR DISEASES
arteries.
·May have abruptly decreasing aortic diameter
Aortic thrombosis
 caudal to celiac artery.
Thromboembolic disease of the abdominal aorta
 Distended portal vein branches.
results in the formation of a saddle thrombus at the
·Microhepatia.
aortic bifurcation. Abdominal ultrasound is usually
quick and efficient in diagnosing this condition;
however, CT angiography might be indicated if intra-
Portosystemic shunts (Figure 35.9)
vascular thrombolytic therapy is planned and com-
Portosystemic shunts (PSS) are abnormal communica-
 plete assessment of the thrombus extent is needed.
tions between the portal circulation and other venous
vascular systems causing hepatic encephalopathy.
CT features
raised bile acids and other abnormalities. Portosys-
● Filling defect in aorta and branching arteries on
temic shunts can be classified according to different
contrast-enhanced CT.
criteria.
363 SYSTEMIC AND PORTAL ABDOMINAL VASCULATURE
 right-divisional intrahepatic
 extrahepatic
 intra- and extrahepatic components.
 Number of shunt vessels:
一
 single
一
multiple
multiple entrances, single exit
 single entrance, multiple exits.
?
 Shunt fraction:
 incomplete shunting
 complete shunting with no remaining anatomic
一
 portal vein.
congenital
acquired.
The classification of PSS is an evolving process, as
 more and more shunt types and combinations accord-
ing to the different criteria are being identified with
 advanced imaging modalities. PSS are relatively
A
 common in dogs, and the most common shunt types
are single exrahepatic in small breed dogs and single
180-
 intrahepatic in large breeds. The left-divisional intra-
160-
sp jad e m snos sh ps sda
140-
venosus Aranti. PSS are rare in cats, the most common
120
type here is an extrahepatic portoazygos shunt.
100-
 Intrahepatic PSS are usually of assumed congenital
80-
origin, whereas extrahepatic shunts can be congenital
60
or secondary to some form of portal hypertension. The
20号
assumption that multiple exrahepatic shunts are
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
 always acquired is not correct.
B
SCAN TIME [sec]
 Microvascular portal vein dysplasia is a condition
Figure 35.8 (A) Arterial phase image of the cranial
where shunting only ocurs at microscopic level,
abdomen of a dog with an arterioportal fistula. There is
 requiring a liver biopsy for confirmation. CT is used to
marked peritoneal effusion, marked microhepatia and a
 rule out a macroscopic shunt. Dynamic CT has poten-
 large tortuous vessel that contrast enhances shortly after the
tial to aid in further diagnostic by calculation of the
aorta. (B) The time-density graph (time on X-axis, HU values 
(z aideu aas) xapu torsnad sgedau
on Y-axis) derived from density measurements of a dynamic
CT scan (test bolus). The aortic enhancement curve (A) is has
a sharp rise and decline, typical for arterial vessels. The
 portal curve (P) is only minimally delayed and similar. This 
CT features
is indicative of an arterioportal fistula (courtesy of Allison
Zwingenberger).
General features (Figure 35. 10)
Microhepatia.
+
Renomegaly (inconsistent).
·Connected vascular systems (each with further
Urolithiasis.
subtypes for exact branch):
Cachexia.
 porto-caval shunts
+
 Enlarged tortuous hepatic arteries.
 porto-azygos shunts
 Periportal edema (unknown significance).
 porto-internal-thoracic-vein shunts
 Gastric foreign bodies (allotriophagia).
 porto-esophageal varices.
 Reduced portal vein diameter cranial to shunting
+
·Relation to the liver:
portal tributary vein (extrahepatic shunt).
 left-divisional intrahepatic
Cessation or reduction of portal enhancement
- central-divisional intrahepatic
 distal to intrahepatic shunt origin.
364 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
A
CVC
RtM
PaPP
RtL
Cauc
GDV
LGV
CrMV
CdMV
SpV
JV
B
D
marcelKoralik
CVC
CVC
CVC
G
Az
E
F
GDV
CrMV
CdMV
CrMV
CdMV
CrM
CMV
SpV
JV
Figure 35.9 (A) Normal portal vein anatomy (light blue) with confluence of cranial (CrMV) and caudal (CdMV) mesenteric
 veins, splenic (SpV) and gastroduodenal (GDV) vein tributaries. The portal vein grows in diameter after each tributary. Upon
liver entrance the portal vein branches into a short right branch, supplying the caudate (Caud) and right lateral lobes (RtL).
The remaining left branch supplies the papillary process (Pap Pr), right medial (RtM), quadrate (Qu), left medial (LeM) and
left lateral (LeL) lobes of the liver. CVC = caudal vena cava. (B) Right-divisional intrahepatic shunt originating from the right
portal branch. (C) Short bulbous central-divisional intrahepatic shunt, originating from an early left portal branch. (D) Left-
divisional intrahepatic shunt (patent ductus venosus), originating from the left portal branch and conmecting to the hepatic
ampulla. (E) Extrahepatic shunt (S) originating from the left gastric vein (LGV) conmecting to the CVC directly cranial to the
liver. JV = jejunal veins; L = left branch; PV = portal vein; R = right branch. (F) Extrahepatic shunt originating from gastroduo-
connecting to the azygos vein (Az).
Single right-divisional intrahepatic portosystemic
Single left-divisional intrahepatic portosystemic
shunt (Figures 35.9B and 35.11)
shunt (Figures 35.9D and 35.13)
Wide tortuous intrahepatic shunt vessels in right
Wide tortuous intrahepatic shunt vessel in left liver
lateral lobe.
half.
 Originates from right portal branch directly at liver
 Originates from left portal branch, curves lateral,
entrance.
then dorsal, to connect to the hepatic ampulla.
 Connects to CVC from right with one or multiple
connections.
Common single extrahepatic shunt types(Figures
35.9E-G and 35.14)
 Originating from the left gastric vein, curving
Single central-divisional intrahepatic
along the minor curvature of the stomach, continu-
portosystemic shunt (Figures 35.9C and 35.12)
ing over the dorsal liver margin to connect to the
1
Short bulbous intrahepatic shunt vessel in central
 CVC between liver and diaphragm.
part of liver.
· Originating from the gastroduodenal and left
Connects left branch with CVC.
 gastric veins, merging to feed into the CVC from 
 Usually narrowed lumen at either shunt end.
the left, cranial to the kidneys.
365 SYSTEMIC AND PORTAL ABDOMINAL VASCULATURE
 Esophageal
vascular enlargement with varix
formation.
Portal vein thrombosis (Figure 35.16)
 Portal vein thrombosis is a rare consequence of sys-
d  so n s o  o
or secondary coagulopathies, resulting in portal hyper-
tension and ascites. CT is an excellent modality to
confirm or rule out a portal vein thrombosis by dem-
onstration of a filling defect in venous phase CT. It is
very important to inject contrast medium via the
cephalic or jugular vein and to scan not too early
during the venous phase. Preferentially two scans
should be performed during the venous phase to rule
 out any pseudothrombosis caused by streamlining of
native and contrast-enhanced blood.
Segmental caudal vena cava aplasia
(Figures 35.17 and 35.18)
 This is an increasingly frequently reported congenital 
juauas A [eua-and au uum u shop ut Areoue
between the kidneys and the liver has not been formed.
Post-renal caval blood is shunted to a right or anoma-
lousleft azygos vein. The condition can be incidental as
the cavo-azygos shunt is a functional conduit, but it is
associated with significant morbidity in about 25% of
cases, due to either thrombosis in the aneurismal cavo-
azygos shunt vessel or associated portosystemic
-on Aaadon un lod a ss aos un shu
 nects to the azygos vein, making it inoperable. CT angi-
 ography is therefore an excellent modality to assess the
need for and possibility of surgical intervention.
Vascular neoplasia and tumor invasion
(Figure35.19)
B
CT angiography is an excellent modality to assess
Figure 35.10 General features of canine portosystemic
tumor vascularity, vascular invasion and tumor throm-
shunts. (A) Microhepatia with enlarged tortuous hepatic
bosis of abdominal neoplasia. Most commonly, screen-
arteries. (B) Periportal hypodense halo consistent with portal
ing  of caval  invasion  of  adrenal  neoplasia  is
Wall edema, a non-specific sign of unknown significance.
performed.
REFERENCES
· Originating from the splenic vein and conmecting
 to the azygos vein.
Frank P, Mahaffey M, Egger C and Cormell KK (2003) Helical
computed tomography in 10 normal dogs and 10 dogs
Common multiple extrahepatic shunt types
with a portosystemic shunt. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 44:
(Figure 35.15)
392-400.
· Multiple small chaotic vessels between great
vessels and left kidney and around left kidney, less 
 angiography of the normal canine portal and hepatic vas-
commonly right kidney.
culature. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 45: 117-24.
366 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
FURTHER READING
Schwarz T, Rossi F, Wray JD et al. (2009) Computed tomo-
 graphic and magnetic resonance imaging features of
 canine segmental caudal vena cava aplasia. J Small Anim
Caceres AV, Zwingenberger AL, Aronson LR and Mai W
Pract 50: 341-9.
(2008) Characterization of normal feline renal vascular
Zwingenberger AL, McLear RC and Weisse C (2005)
anatomy with dual-phase CT angiography. Vet Radiol
 Diagnosis of arterioportal fistulae in four dogs using com-
LIltrasound 49: 350-6.
 puted tomographic angiography. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 46:
Caceres AV, Zwingenberger AL, Hardam E, Lucena J and
472-7.
Schwarz T (2006) Helical computed tomographic angiog-
Zwingenberger AL, Schwarz T and Saunders HM (2005)
raphy of the normal canine pancreas. Vet Radiot Ultrasound
Helical CT angiography of canine portosystemic shunts.
47: 270-8.
Vet Radiol Lltrasound 46: 27-37.
D'Anjou MA and Huneault L (2008) Imaging diagnosis -
 complex intrahepatic portosystemic shunt in a dog. Vet
Radiol Ultrasound 49: 51-5.
Figure 35.11 Single right-divisional intrahepatic portocaval shunt in a dog. (A) The large tortuous shunting vessel (S)
al oi apis  au uo sioa (a pue aqot iiaiet i au yno saen q uaa teod jui au ug sata
 caudal vena cava (CvC) close to its hepatic exit point.
CVC
 Figure 35.12 Single central-divisional intrahepatic portocaval shunt in a dog with a short bulbous shunting vessel (S) con-
necting the caudal part of the left portal vein branch (PV) through a small orifice from ventral to the caudal vena cava (CVC).
Ao = Aorta.
B
Figure 35.13 Single left-divisional intrahepatic portocaval shunt in a dog with (A) a large tortuous shunting vessel (S)
emanating from the lateral part of the left portal vein branch (PV) and (B) performing a leftward turm to connect to the hepatic
ampulla (HA) which flows into the caudal vena cava (CVC).
CVC
CVC
D
Figure 35.14  (A-C) Single extrahepatic shunt (S) in a dog (A) emanating from the left gastric vein, traveling along the minor
curvature of the stomach and (B) then dorsal to the left liver margin to (C) connect to the caudal vena cava (CVC) directly
cranial to its liver exit at which point the CVC also receives the hepatic ampulla (HA). (D,E) Single extrahepatic portoazygos
S Anua iy () um (z) uiaa soze un a aa uaas aq ues (s) tassaa prs an (a) aam op e u ss
enlarged. Ao = aorta; PV = portal vein.
368 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
D
Figure 35.15 (A,B) Multiple extrahepatic shunts in a dog. The chronically diseased liver (Liv) is abnormally small and
irregular causing marked ascites and multiple extrahepatic portocaval shunts (arrows). Ao = aorta; CVC = caudal vena cava;
() sassaa jus  ad () o e u xia osa  sus sedaxa an (') uaa od = A
emanating from the portal vein (PV) and conmecting to the CVC. (D) In the caudal thorax a distended shunt vessel (S) can be
seen in the esophageal wall, indicating a varix formation.
Figure 35.16 Portal vein thrombosis in a dog following an accidental steroid medication overdose. The portal vein (PV)
contains a hypodense filling defect, compared to the contrast enhancement in caudal vena cava (CVC) and aorta (Ao). The
liver lobes are separated by a hypodense rim, indicating ascites.
RK
CVC
 Figure 35.17 Segmental caudal vena cava aplasia in a dog. (A) The post-renal segment of the caudal vena cava (CVC) is
entering a large bulbous shunting vessel (S), located right and dorsal to the right kidney (RK) with mixed contrast medium
uptake,suggestive of turbulent flow. LK = lef kidney (B) The shunting vessel feeds via an isthmian conduit (arrow) into the
right azygos vein (Az). (C) Volume-rendered 3-D image of the abdomen, viewed from ventral (cranial on top), displaying the
cavo-azygos shunt vessel (arrow) and its relation to the kidneys and aorta (images courtesy of Fraser McConnel). Ao = aorta.
370 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Figure 35.18 Split caudal vena cava (CVC) in a dog that also has segmental caudal vena cava aplasia. A right and a left
CVC can be seen entering a large bulbous shunting vessel (S), which conmects to an anomalous left azygos vein. The portal
vein (PV) also feeds into the shunt vessel. Ao = aorta; LK = left kidney; RK = right kidney.
a s () ss o oy ahr e m o e  y oas () h' a
irregular portal vein (arrow). Ao = aorta, CVC = caudal vena cava. (B) Right adrenal adenocarcinoma (M) in a dog causing
invasion of the CVC. LK = left kidney; RK = right kidney.
CHAPTER THIRTY-SIX
ABDOMINAL LYMPH
NODES AND LYMPHATIC
COLLECTING SYSTEM
Federica Rossi, Michail Patsikas and Erik R. Wisner
IMAGING PROTOCOL
standard CT examination but the fat filled hilus
 appears as a low density region located eccentrically in
See Table 36.1.
the node.
CT: ANATOMY AND NORMAL
Collecting system - lymphatic vessels,
VARIANTS
cisterna chyli and thoracic duct
The peripheral system of lymphatic vessels and the
Abdominal Iymph nodes
lymph collecting ducts (cisterna chyli and thoracic
Several abdominal lymph nodes can be routinely iden-
 duct) are difficult to detect on CT unless contrast
tified in CT. In the authors' experience, left hepatic,
enhanced.
splenic, jejunal, medial iliac and superficial inguinal
 To perform a CT lymphography, two techniques are
lymph nodes are usually recognized in normal dogs.
possible.
Less consistently seen are the gastric, pancreatico-
duodenal, colic, hypogastric, sacral, aortic and renal
 Interstitial or indirect lymphography, for the visu-
lymph nodes, which are easily visualized if enlarged
alization of the lymphatic vessels and lymph nodes
(Figure 36.1).
directly draining from the injected area. The con-
In the cat, there are no significant differences in the
trast medium is injected into tissues within the
 presence and location of abdominal lymph nodes; the
lymphatic drainage volume.
 abundance of abdominal fat increases the conspicuity
 Direct lymphography, for the visualization of the
of these very small structures.
cisterna chyli and thoracic duct. The injection is
 In CT, normal lymph nodes appear as small,round to
a yd no lssa yd e o a a
elongated structures, with a density in the range of soft
(see Table 36.1).
tissues and surrounded by low attenuating fat. The
dimensions of the lymph nodes vary; in the authors'
Indirect lymphography
 experience, the ratio of the longitudinal to the trans-
verse diameter is normally ≥2. To identify the lymph
Normally,  contrast medium injected  interstitially
nodes, the best way is to follow the abdominal vessels
enters into the draining lymphatic vessels almost
 in the post-contrast study and look for smallenhancing
immediately following injection. The draining lym-
structures adjacent to the associated artery or vein. The
phatic vessels and the sentinel lymph node are often
long axis of lymph nodes is usually parallel to that of
well-visualized 1 minute after the injection. The senti-
adjacent vessels. Because lymph nodes are highly vas-
nel lymph node is the first lymph node that receives
cularized structures, normal nodes intensely enhance
 lymph flow from the injected area and appears as an
but to a lesser extent than adjacent vessels. No differen-
oval-shaped structure with a greater diameter than the
tiation between the cortex and medulla is possible in a
lymphatic vessels. Contrast medium is homogene-
aunes Au 'ziemups sa Aq pag uis yo pn ia
@ 2011 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
371
372 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Table 36.1
CT imaging protocol.
Pre-
Series
contrast
 Post-contrast
Indirect CT lymphography*
Direct CT lymphography*$
Decubitus
Ventral
Ventral or dorsal (injected area 
A. Ventral
 opposite to the table top)
B. Dorsal
 Scan Margins
 13th thoracic
 13th thoracic vertebra or more
Thoracic inlet > Popliteal 
vertebra > Sacral bo ne 
cranially if draining lymphatic 
lymph node
vessels enter in the 
 thorax > Sacral bone
Voltage (kVp)
120-140
Current (mAs)
100-160
Tube rotation time (s)
1 or 2
 Slice width (mm)
2-5**%
Kernel frequency
Medium
 Collimator pitch
1-2
Helical image
% of the slice width
reconstruction interval
 Motion control
 Hyperventilation to get expiratory apnea
Contrast medium
N/A
 Peripheral
Intratissue (subcutaneous,
A. Popliteal lymph node 
application site
vein
intraparenchymal, intralesio nal)
(25ga butterfly needle).
by mea ns of a 27-gauge needle
Gentle massage of the
Gentle massage of the
injected area
anatomic location
B. Mesenteric lymph 
node(s) 27-ga 1%"
needle
Contrast medium type
N/A
lodinated
lodinated, non-ionic, water-
lodinated, no n-ionic, 
soluble 300 to 370mg
water-soluble 300-370 mg
jodine/ml, absorbed by the
jodine/ml
initial lymphatic vessels 
Contrast medium dose 
N/A
800mg
0.5 to 1ml depending on the
A. 1ml/kg
 jodine/kg bw
size of the injected area
B. 1.5-2ml/lymph node 
Contrast medium
N/A
 Manual or
Manual, slow injection. The 
A. Manual, 2ml/min
injection mode
automated
total dose can be divided in 
 B. Manual in 90-120s 
(preferably)
ma ny sites.
 Scan delay post start
N/A
First scan:
First scan 1min after injection 
A. First scan: immediately
contrast injection 
immediately
Delayed scan: 5-10min 
Delayed scan: 5-10min
Delayed 
B. 5min
scan: 3-5min
Window level (HU)
+40
Window width (HU)
300
*To localize the draining lymphatic vessels and sentinel lymph node.
**To visualize the cisterna chyli and thoracic duct.
***In some patients, additional thinly collimated images may be required to fully characterize the thoracic duct and its branches, particularly
 near its convergence with the cranial vena cava.
 ously distributed into the normal lymph node and
 and the location of the sentinel lymph node(s) (Figure
lymphatic vessels, which are easily recognized by their
36.2).
high density. Five minutes after the injection, lym-
phatic vessels coursing from the sentinel lymph node
to more proximal nodes are usually visualized. The
Direct lymphography
3-D reconstructed post-contrast CT images provide a
 The topographic anatomy of the cisterna chyli and of
comprehensive anatomy of the lymphatic vasculature
the thoracic duct can be easily identified with percuta-
373
ABDOMINAL LYMPH NODES AND LYMPHATIC COLLECTING SYSTEM
St
D
E
Figure 36.1Adult dog with multicentric lymphoma. (A-F) Transver
se CT images show moderate enlargement and round-
ing of all abdominal lymphocenters increasing their visibility. The following lymph nodes are visible: gastric (A), pancreatico.
duodenal (B), left hepatic (C),right and middle colic (D),jejunal (E) and medialiliac (F) lymph nodes.C = colon; D = duodenum;
GL = gastric lymph nodes; L = liver; LHL = left hepatic lymph node; LMIL = left medial iliac lymph node; MCL = medial colic
lymph nodes; P = pancreas; PDL = pancreatico-duodenal lymph nodes; PV = portal vein; RCL = right colic lymph nodes;
su dn raf sa as au eis = is aads = d ia y si ta t = T au t = 
neous injection of contrast medium into the popliteal
 Experience, this injection techmique is much more suc-
lymph node. The proper dose and administration rate
cessful in dogs than in cats and the imaging study
of contrast medium are essential for successful visuali-
 may have to be aborted if contrast medium delivery
zation (Table 36.1).
is unsuccessful.
-punosenm Sumony Xudengotueudukl L
guided percutaneous injection of contrast medium
CT imaging findings
-ond Auanan uaaq sel sapou udu sajuasa ou
The efferent lymphatic vessels of the popliteal lymph
posed as a less invasive alternative to conventional
node, the lymph nodes of the iliosacral lymphocenter,
mesenteric lymphangiography which requires cannu-
the cisterma chyli and the thoracic duct are best visual-
lation of a surgically exposed mesenteric lymphatic
ized on CT images acquired immediately after the
vessel. Following the initial unenhanced CT scan, one
injection of the contrast medium. Normally, there is no
or two mesenteric lymph nodes are localized and
leakage of the contrast medium into the abdominal
injected. An echogenic ‘bloom' can sometimes be
and thoracic cavity. The cisterna chyli, a lymphatic
detected as contrast medium accumulates in the node
reservoir, is located ventral to the first four lumbar
and a slow delivery rate is important to maximize
vertebrae, it is bordered ventrally by the aorta and
retention of contrast medium within the node and
dorsally by the azygous vein and becomes the thoracic
associated afferent lymphatic vessels. In the authors'
duct as it passes cranially through the aortic hiatus. In
374 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
the dog, the thoracic duct crosses to the left, dorsal to
 azygos vein, the cranial vena cava or other veins. As
the aorta, at approximately the level of the sixth tho-
the thoracic duct arises from cistema chyli and travels
racic vertebra and enters the cranial mediastinum,
cranially, it gives a number of small diameter branches
where it may enter the left external jugular vein, the
that travel a short distance and re-anastomose with the
left subclavian vein, the left brachiocephalic vein, the
thoracic duct.
DISEASE FEATURES
Trauma
Chylothorax due to traumatic rupture of the thoracic
lesions of the cisterna chyli is quite rare. CT of the
thorax and abdomen is useful to exclude other possi-
ble underlying causes of chylous effusion (neoplasia,
caudal vena cava thrombosis, lung lobe torsion, peri-
cardial thickening, other pleural or peritoneal lesions).
 CT lymphangiography is of most value in defining
the anatomic location and character of the thoracic
duct in preparation for surgery (Figure 36.3). The
 abnormal appearance of the duct and its branches may
Figure 36.2 3-D reconstructed CT lymphogram 5min after
 explain the underlying cause of chylothorax. Overt,
injection of contrast medium into the parenchyma of the
 localized contrast medium leakage can indicate tho-
third mammary gland (G3) in a normal cat (dorsal decubitus)
shows mammary lymphatic vessels draining into the acces-
racic duct wall rupture (Figures 36.4, 36.5), whereas
sory inguinal lymph node (AILN). Efferent lymphatic vessels
distention  and  multiplication  of  small  terminal
 branches may suggest obstructive lymphangectasia
from AILN drain into the superficial inguinal lymph nodes
sapou qdufl sei Teipau aul ou araul uoy pue (Ns)
(Figure 36.6). Post-operative CT lymphangiography
(MILN).
should document successful ligation by complete
Figure 36.3 Dog with chylothorax. (A) Transverse CT image acquired at the level of the caudal thorax with the dog in dorsal
recumbency and following iodinated contrast medium administration into a mesenteric lymph node. At least three parallel
thoracic duct branches are identified in cross-section adjacent to the descending aorta (B) Sagittally oriented maximum inten-
sity projection (MIP) of the same dog documents the path of the redundant thoracic duct and its termination near the thoracic
inlet.
375 ABDOMINAL LYMPH NODES AND LYMPHATIC COLLECTING SYSTEM
D
 a () s sin m i i an e () r i a i sia ias a n e i
contrast medium are clearly visualized. The thoracic duct is localized on the left side of the aorta (C, arrow). Another small
collateral vessel lies on the right between the aorta and azygos vein. An anastomotic vessel is visible at the level of T12 (B).
In the cranial mediastimum, multiple dilated lymphatic vessels are visualized (D).
truncation of the thoracic duct contrast column and
CT features
its parallel branches, if any, cranial to the ligation
 Pleural and/or abdominal effusion.
site.
 Direct CT lymphography:
 In patients in whom the thoracic duct is ligated, CT
 loss of visualization or interruption of the tho-
racic duct or its branches
0 Aiaaeradonsod kaepauu pue sueld jems
extravasation of contrast medium into the
 -ied jo are sarpnis aaeiadoisod uogei ponp sya
 pleural space.
ticular importance in patients with multiple duct
 Associated lymphadenomegaly (with chronic effu-
branches coursing in parallel, since thoracic duct
sion or direct trauma).
duplication may make complete ligation more
challenging.
Lymphadenitis
Visceral lymph nodes can be enlarged if chronic
 cavitary effusion is present. Abdominal trauma can
Abdominal lymphadenitis due to inflammation or
produce lymphadenomegaly because of 
edema
infection of peritoneal organs is often recognized.
01 Aiepuonas 1o Amlu 1paip ol anp aseinourau 10
Reactive lymph nodes are enlarged and therefore
inflammation of the peritoneum or other abdominal
easily identified. They tend to be rounded and homo-
viscera.
U asueuo e sI aral saauos 'tanamou (snoauan
376 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Figure 36.6 Dog with chylothorax. Sagittally oriented
Figure 36.5 Dog with chylothorax. Transverse CT image
maximum intensity projection from a thoracic CT study fol-
acquired near the thoracic inlet with the dog in dorsal decu-
lowing iodinated contrast medium administration into a
bitus and following iodinated contrast medium administra-
 mesenteric lymph node. The thoracic duct courses cranially
tion into a mesenteric lymph node. Contrast medium
and terminates in a complex of markedly distended terminal
 surrounds the confluence of the two external jugular veins.
A similar patterm of uncontained contrast medium was also
obstructive lymphangectasia.
present further caudally. The imaging diagnosis was thoracic
duct rupture near its termination at the cranial vena cava
with resultant lymphatic fluid leakage.
 shape and density due to abscess or cyst formation
 acterize the anatomic distribution and morphological
within an affected node.
features of sentinel and more distant lymph nodes. In
 -sau sidonsonuu Suueuon sapou ydul 'teraua
CT features
 aidn wma jseiuon snoaaonaau aae sasi
Xlebauouapeqdu
-uos se Sueadde Aesidki sisodap sgeisejau uim
Acute cases:
trast filling defects. In patients with multicentric lym-
 often rounded lymph nodes with regular shape
phoma, several and more distant lymph centers may
and margins.
be involved (Figure 36.1). Typically, lymphomatous
Chronic cases:
 lymph nodes are more uniformly enlarged and have a
lymph nodes more irregular in shape and
heterogeneous
contrast medium administration. CT features can be
 hypodense areas with abscessation, necrosis or
 overlapping with inflammatory conditions.
cysts formation (Figure 36.7)
 hyperdense foci in case of calcification.
CT features
Neoplasia
Lymphadenomegaly.
 Often irregular shape.
Abdominal lymphadenomegaly is often seen in onco-
Post-contrast:
heterogeneous(
density
(Figure
 logic patients. Because of the exquisite anatomical
36.8) because of hyper- or hypodense foci due
detail provided by CT, it can be used to differentiate
to
hemorrhage,
 necrosis, cysts formation or
enlarged lymph nodes from masses arising from other
mineralization.
abdominal viscera. CT enables precise evaluation of all
 Indirect CT lymphography: often heterogeneous 
lymphocenters and identification of possible site of
 or lack of opacification in indirect CT lymphogra-
metastases in animals having primary neoplasia.
phy (Figure 36.9).
Following peritumoral contrast medium administra-
 Invasion of surrounding fat, vessels, other soft
 tion, indirect CT lymphography may be used to char-
tissue or bony structures (Figure 36.10)
377
ABDOMINAL LYMPH NODES AND LYMPHATIC COLLECTING SYSTEM
MILT
A
B
Figure 36.7 Adult dog with a peritoneal abscess originating from a mesenteric lymph node. Post-contrast transverse CT
images of the (A) mid- and (B) caudal abdomen show a severely enlarged mesenteric lymph node (MLN) that is also hetero-
geneous because of variable contrast medium uptake and multifocal mineralization. The abscessed lymph node is surrounded
by thickened peritoneum (P) and small intestinal loops (I). LK = left kidney.
RK
LHL
A
Figure 36.8 Adult dog with primary pancreatic neoplasia (gastrinoma). (A,B) Post-contrast 3-D volume rendering recon-
-au aq oi pauuos '(iHo pue THl) sapou yduai suedau uat pue at au uoai sny ouedau aul go saseu io paiorns
static, are increased in diameter with iregular shape and heterogeneous density. The pancreas (P) is enlarged, and a
high-density nodule is visible (B, arrow). CvC = caudal vena cava; D =duodenum; PV =portal vein; RK = right kidney; 
RLL = right lateral liver lobe; St = stomach;.
378 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Figure 36.9  Adult dog with neoplasia of the fourth left :
left and two normal right superficial inguinal lymph nodes (a
heterogeneous enhancement of the left-sided lymph nodes immediately after intravenous injection of the contrast medium
(C) Indirect CT lymphogram 1 min after injection of the contrast medium into the neoplastic and collateral normal mammary
glands failed to opacify left sided lymph nodes.
Figure 36.10 Metastatic hypogastric lymph nodes in an adult dog w
anal sac carcinoma.(A) Post-contrast CT
image shows infiltration of the sublumbar fat and musculature. T
l iliac arteries (arrows) and common iliac veins
(arrowheads) are visible. The veins on the right are ventrally displaced and compressed by the mass. (B) Post-contrast CT
image shows the right and left femoral veins are clearly identified (arrows). The left intermal iliac vein is visible (arrowhead),
while the right left intermal iliac vein and their branches enter the mass (circle). The rectum (R) is displaced ventrally and
towards the left.
379 ABDOMINAL LYMPH NODES AND LYMPHATIC COLLECTING SYSTEM
FURTHER READING
lymph node of dogs: experimental study and clinical
application. Vet Surg 35: 377-81.
Esterline ML, Radlinsky MG, Biller DS, Mason DE, Roush JK
Papadopoulou PL, Patsikas MN, Charitanti A et al. (2009)
and Cash WC (2005) Comparison of radiographic and
 The lymph drainage of the mammary glands in the cat: a
-ognuapt roy Aude.aotaueydual Ayderaouuon painduon
lymphographic and computerized tomography lympho-
tion of the canine thoracic duct. Vet Radiol Lltrasound 46:
graphic study.Anat Histol Embryot 38: 292-9.
391-5.
Patsikas MN, Papadopoulou PL, Charitanti A et al. (2010)
 Fossum TW, Mertens MM, Miller MW et al. (2004) Thoracic
Computed tomography and radiographic indirect lym-
 duct ligation and pericardectomy for treatement of idio-
phography for visualization of the mammary lymphatic
pathic chylothorax. J Vet Intern Med 18: 307-10.
vessels and the sentinel lymph node in normal cats. Vet
Johnson EG, Wisner ER, Kyles A, Koehler C and Marks SL
Radiol LIltrasound 51: 299-304.
(2009) Computed tomographic lymphography of the tho-
Suga K, Ogasawara N, Yuan Y, Okada M, Matsunaga N and
 racic duct by mesenteric lymph node injection. Vet Surg 38:
361-7.
-Brboudua Aqdeibouoi panduos joaruput ue ym sAem
Naganobu K, Ohigashi Y, Akiyoshi T, Hagio M, Miyamoto T
phy using a nonionic monomeric contrast medium
and Yamaguchi R (2006) Lymphography of the thoracic
Teadod aui ou foxauot go uooalu snoauiniad Aqiorp
CHAPTER THIRTY-SEVEN
LONG BONES
Ryan M. Schultz and Erik R. Wisner
CT: ANATOMY AND NORMAL
torsional or angular deformity of the bone can be accu-
rately and quantitatively characterized by CT.
VARIANTS
The CT appearance of long bones is similar to that seen
Panosteitis
on conventional radiographs. However, due to a lack
Panosteitis is a self-limiting disorder of unknown
 of anatomic superimposition, there may be better defi-
cause primarily affecting the appendicular skeleton of
nition of medullary bone architectural detail and better
immature large breed dogs with male and German
 delineation of endosteal cortical margins.
shepherd dogs overrepresented. Onset of the disorder
 Long bone physeal closure times are age dependent
istypically at 5 to 12 months of age, but panosteitis has
in dogs and cats and are well-documented in other
been reported to occur in dogs as young as 2 months
 sources. Physes appear as lucencies of variable width
 and as old as 7 years. Lesions in a particular location
 and definition depending on anatomic location and
 may resolve as others develop and imaging findings
patient age. The appearance of physes can be some-
do not always correlate with clinical signs. This pattern
what confusing when viewed in-plane and are often
leads to the typical history of shifting leg lameness.
better evaluated on images reformatted along the long
axis of the bone (Figure 37.1)
CT features (Figure 37.3)
Table 37.1 shows the anatomic differences between
?
 Lesions may be monostotic or polyostotic.
canine and feline long bones.
?
aq Ae saedo aoq Arpaui paap-i
surrounded by intramedullary fat or extend to the
DISEASE FEATURES
endosteal surface of the cortex.
 Regional periosteal or endosteal production may
Malformation/Developmental
be evident and the lesions often arise near a nutri-
 ent foramen. The lesions eventually resolve leaving
Angular limb deformities
a residual coarse to normal appearing trabecular
Angular limb deformities such as radius curvus, tibial
bone architecture.
torsion and femoral varus or torsion can result from
trauma or developmental orthopedic disease. These
Incomplete ossification of the humeral condyle
types of deformities in dogs have been associated with
a variety of clinical disorders including lameness, gait 
 Incomplete ossification of the humeral condyle most
alteration, joint incongruity, patellar instability,
 often occurs in Spaniel breeds and may lead to patho-
 Osgood-Schlatter-like syndrome and osteoarthrosis.
logic humeral condylar fractures folowing normal
Radiographs may cause a false appearance of tibial
physical activities. Two separate humeral condylar
torsion due to image distortion from beam angle and
-xodde ie edeoei redde srauan uoiso
 magnification artifacts whereas CT does not.
imately 22 days of age and fuse by 84 days. In dogs
with incomplete ossification, the two ossification
CT features (Figure 37.2)
centers remain separated by a thin fibrous fissure.
CT can be used in dogs with angular limb deformities
Pathologic fractures are often Y- or T- fractures of the
for preoperative corrective osteotomy planning as the
humeral condyle and epicondyle, but fractures limited
saunes Auu 'ziemups sa q pauis fy pan 
@ 2011 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
381
382 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
A
B
Figure 37.1 Six-month-old Labrador retriever with apparent open physes. (A) Transverse CT image shows the complex
anatomy of a portion of the distal femoral physis, the metaphysis and the epiphysis. (B) Frontally reformatted maximum
aenteaa ol raisea st sasAud aul jo Auoieue aul 'sasaud reqn reuixond pue ierouay teisip aul jo aseu uonsalond Aiisuau
 on images reformatted along the long axis of the bone. F = femur; T = tibia.
Table 37.1
Anatomic differences between canine and feline long
bones.
 Structure
Canine
 Feline
Supratrochlear
Present
 Abse nt
foramen of
humerus
Supracondylar
Abse nt
 Present - the 
foramen of
 brachial artery and
humerus
median nerve
traverse this
 structure
Coronoid fossa
Absent
Present
of the humerus
Clavicle
Remnant
Well developed
and ossified
Coracoid process
 Rudimentary
Well developed
of the scapula
Figure 37.2  Maximum intensity projection CT image cen-
Hamate and
Absent
 Present
tered on the left pelvic limb of a dog with an angular limb
suprahamate
deformity. There is an S-shaped deformity of the tibia, rota-
 processes of the
tional deviation of the tarsus relative to the tibia, and the
acromion of the
stifle and tarsal joints malalign. This study was performed
scapula
for preoperative planning to calculate osteotomy angles for
a corrective osteotomy of the tibia.
only to the lateral or medial aspects of the condyle also
CT features (Figure 37.4)
 Occur. This disorder is often bilateral and evaluation of
 Thin lucent vertical fissure centrally in the humeral
 the contralateral humerus is indicated in young dogs
condyle that may extend from the elbow joint to
 that are presented with spontaneous unilateralhumeral
the supratrochlear foramen. This fissure is usually
condylar fractures.
surrounded by sclerotic bone.
383LONG BONES
Figure 37.3 Young German shepherd dog with panosteitis and an ununited anconeal process. (A) Transverse CT image
shows an intramedullary bone density (250HU) in the proximal ulna (asterisk) associated with a mild surrounding periosteal
productive response (arrows). (B) Sagittally reformatted CT image again reveals the proximal intramedullary density (aster-
isk). A vertical linear fissure is also visible in this image documenting the presence of an ununited anconeal process (arrow).
 lage core, mucopolysaccharidosis, osteogenesis imper-
fecta, congenital hypothyroidism, and metaphyseal
pue pasouep Aneu are eiseidsap leasaudida pue
Audeoper Susn parouou Aianenbape
 Metaphyseal osteopathy (synonym: Hypertrophic
osteodystrophy!
 Initial findings are soft tissue swelling in the region of
the metaphysis of the distal radius and ulna, the tibia
and the metacarpal/metatarsal bones, and the occur-
rence of a radiolucent zone parallel to the physis within
the metaphysis. Later on periosteal bone proliferation
occurs and an extraperiosteal cuff of mineralization
Figure 37.4 Distal humeral condyle from a young Spaniel
-uai ssop amieu u sisAudejau aul Suore sdolaaap
with incomplete ossification of the humeral condyle.
nants of periosteal and extraperiosteal changes can be
Transverse CTimage shows a soft tissue dense vertical fissure
detected.
(arrow) with surrounding sclerosis (asterisks) in the middle of
the humeral condyle. There is no displacement or fracture.
Trauma (Figure 37.5)
·Periosteal reaction is frequently present on the
lateral aspect of the distal humeral metaphysis 
Currently CT is not routinely used for trauma or initial
which is likely secondary to chronic instability.
assessment of diaphyseal and metaphyseal long bone
fractures in dogs and cats. Articular fractures and
other complex fractures may be difficult to adequately
Mliscellaneous developmental disorders
characterize on radiographs and CT may be indicated
Other developmental disorders such as cartilaginous
for confirmation and preoperative planning for surgi-
 eXostosis, hypertrophic osteodystrophy, retained carti-
cal fixation.
384 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
osteomyelitis typically occurs in young large breed
sporting dogs located in specific geographic locations,
including the southwest (coccidioidomycosis) and the
southeast and Mississippi river valley regions (blasto-
mycosis). Aspergillus is a less common cause of
mycotic osteomyelitis, often as part of a multiorgan,
systemic infection. Young female German shepherd
dogs are predisposed. Bone infections cannot always
be distinguished from bone neoplasms based on
 imaging appearance only.
CT features (Figure 37.6)
·Bacterial osteomyelitis:
 variable depending on the initial cause and
Figure 37.5 Young dog with a chronic fracture of the left
femoral head. Transverse CT image shows a chronic fracture
chronicity of the lesion
 of the femoral head and a large amount of surrounding peri-
significant bone destruction and variable reac-
 tive periosteal production
articular and periosteal production.
 bone fragments of increased density
with
sharply delineated cortical margins may be seen
when devitalized (sequestered bone).
·Fungal osteomyelitis:
 pronounced productive unstructured periosteal
response with s
 significant underlying bone
destruction.
Aseptic necrosis of the femoral head
Aseptic necrosis of the femoral head, also termed
Legg-Calve-Perthes disease, typically
/occursin
growing toy and small breed dogs. Necrosis of the
subchondral bone of the femoral head results from a
 compromised blood supply and the disorder may be
bilateral.
Figure 37.6  Adult dog with coccidioidomycosis osteomy-
CT features
elitis. Transverse CT image of the left tibia shows focal
 Initially there is resorption of the subchondral bone
cortical destruction (asterisk) with a prominent adjacent
of the femoral head followed by femoral head
periosteal and endosteal productive response (white arrows).
remodeling with surrounding periosteal and peri-
This lesion surrounds the mutrient artery (black arrow) sug-
articular production during the chronic phase of
gesting a hematogeneous etiology.
the disease.
· Pathologic fracture of the femoral head may also
occur.
Infection/Inflammation
Osteomyelitis
Hypertrophic osteopathy (synonyms:
Hyperthrophic pulmonary osteopathy.
 Osteomyelitis typically occurs as the result of bacterial
Marie's disease)
or fungal infection. Bacterial osteomyelitis is usually
due to direct extension from a penetrating wound or
 Hypertrophic osteopathy is a specific periosteal reac-
adjacent soft tissue infection, surgical contamination
tion, usually described as pallisading or columnar, that
aul ol peaids snoauabojeuaq woy 'ssop SumoA ur '10
starts on the metacarpal and metatarsal bones and can
physis, metaphysis or epiphysis.
 progress proximally. The occurrence of this process is
usually secondary to a mass in the thorax or abdomen
 and is therefore usually polyostotic. In the US, mycotic
and there are several current theories for the patho-
385 LONG BONES
physiology, including vascular, neurogenic or endo-
determination of the size of a primary bone tumor is
crine disturbances. The joints usually are not involved.
generally only important if a limb-sparing procedure
Conventional radiography is currently adequate for
is to be considered as a therapeutic option.
accurate diagnosis of hypertrophic osteopathy.
 Metastatic tumors of the long bones occur most
 -md Kieuruu 'ln [euonisuen Areud won uao
monary and thyroid carcinomas. Metastatic lesions
Metabofic
pue sioumi auoq Kiud se yons seuosies uon
Secondary hyperparathyroidism
hemangiosarcomas also occur. Histiocytic sarcomas
 Secondary hyperparathyroidism can cause bone
arising from, or metastasizing to, bone have also been
resorption. Renal secondary hyperparathyroidsism
reported.
 primarily affects the mandible and skull In young
CT features (Figures 37.7-37.9 and 38.13)
u rs re  s
Cortical bone destruction.
roidism the long bones may be affected. Radiographs
Amorphous periosteal productive response.
are typically used to diagnose these diseases, although
 Long, ill-defined transition zone and a rapid rate
CT may be used to quantitatively assess bone density
of change.
CT features
 Thinning or double cortices.
Bone infarcts secondary to a primary
 Decreased bone density.
bone tumor
●Pathologic folding fractures.
Bone infarcts in the long bones are reported to occur
secondary to bone sarcomas and occur most frequently
Neoplasia
in smaller dogs, especially miniature schnauzers and
collie-type dogs. These infarcts have not been docu-
Primary and metastatic bone tumors
 mented to be caused by actual neoplastic tissue and
 Primary long bone tumors typically ocur at a single
 metaphyseal location. The more common sites include
the proximal humerus, distal radius, distal femur and
CT features (Figure 37.10)
proximal tibia. The age distribution in dogs is bimodal
 Focal regions of hyperdensity within the medul-
with peaks at 2 years of age and a much larger peak
lary cavity of the long bones.
in old age. The value of CT for accurate measurement
 Bone infarcts are most frequently distributed in the
 of tumor length is controversial. Regardless, accurate
radius, ulna, tibia and distal third of the femur
A
B
Figure 37.7 Adult dog with a femoral osteoma. (A) Transverse CT image of the proximal aspect of the left femur shows a
well-defined soft tissue mass (asterisk) with mild adjacent cortical thinning (arrows). No aggressive destruction or significant
production is identified. (B) Frontally reformatted CT image shows the length of the well-defined intramedullary soft tissue
mass (asterisk) with adjacent cortical thinning (arrows).
386 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
A
B
Figure 37.8 Frontally reformatted CT images from an adult dog with a femoral osteosarcoma. (A) There is a mixed produc-
aul jo Aies Aretiau au u (smoie) uoneiaoid ieaisoad ym (staise) sse asuap anssh hos aanonsap pe aa
proximal left femur. (B) Contrast enhancement of the soft tissue mass extends beyond the femur into the surrounding mus-
culature (asterisks).
Figure 37.10 Adult small-breed dog with a suspected
infarct secondary to a primary bone fibrosarcoma. Transverse
CT image (proximal humerus and fourth cervical vertebra)
shows intramedullary bone density in the right proximal
humerus.
Figure 37.9 Adult dog with a parosteal osteosarcoma.
Transverse CT image (right tarsus at the level of the distal
tibia (Ti), talus (Ta) and calcaneus (Ca)) shows a large
coma in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 220: 1171-6.
smoothly marginated mineralization (white asterisk) in the
Dudley RM, Kowaleski MP, Drost WT and Dyce J (2006)
soft tissues lateral to the calcaneus. In addition, there is irreg-
 Radiographic and computed tomographic determination
ular periosteal proliferation (black asterisk) surrounding the 
of femoral varus and torsion in the dog. Vet Radiol
calcaneus, which is connected to this mineralization in the
LUltrasound 47: 546-52.
 soft tissue.
Marcellin-Little DJ, De Young DF, Ferris KK and Berry CM
(1994) Incomplete ossification of the humeral condyle in
FURTHER READING
spaniels. Vet Surg 23: 475-87.
Schultz RM, Puchalski SM, Kent M and Moore PF (2007)
 Skeletal lesions of histiocytic sarcoma in nineteen dogs. Vet
Aper R, Kowaleski MP,Apelt D, Drost WT and Dyce J (2005)
RadiolLlltrasound 48:539-43.
Computed tomographic determination of tibial torsion in 
Schultz RM, Johnson EG, Wisner ER, Brown NA, Byrme BA
the dog. Vet Radiol LIltrasound 46:187-91.
and Sykes JE (2008) Clinicopathologic and diagnostic
 Davis GJ, Kapatkin AS, Craig LE et al. (2002) Comparison of
imaging characteristics of systemic aspergillosis in 30
radiography, computed tomography, and magnetic reso-
dogs. J Vet Intern Med 22: 851-9.
CHAPTER THIRTY-EIGHT
[OINTS
Valerie Samii (stifle), Ingrid Gielen (shoulder, elbow,
tarsus), Eberhard Ludewig (carpus), William M. Adams (hip),
Ingmar Kiefer (carpus), Henri van Bree (shoulder,
elbow, tarsus) and Jimmy Saunders
IMAGING PROTOCOLS
 sion of the joint capsule surrounds the tendon of origin
 of the biceps, and travels with it through the inter-
General imaging protocol (Table 38.1)
tubercular groove as the tendon's synovial sheath. A
Specific imaging protocols
thick band of ligamentous tissue, the transverse
humeral ligament, bridges the groove from greater to
The coxofemoral joint (Table 38.2)
lesser tubercle retaining the biceps tendon. The medial
and lateral glenohumeral ligaments are thickenings of
CT arthrography (Table 38.3)
the respective surfaces of the joint capsule and not real
ligaments. They are rather weak.
 The strength of the heavy musculature surrounding
Imaging tips
 the shoulder maintains its integrity. Because of this
 Use bone as well as soft tissue windows to
musculature, shoulder luxations/subluxations are
detect bone involvement.
rare.
Thin slice collimation, preferably sub-
 millimeter, is preferred for the assessment
 of intra-articular ligamentous structures both
Feline anatomical specificities
pre-contrast and post-arthrography.  Post
A clavicle is present in cats (a rudimentary clav-
intravenous contrast studies are typically
icle may be present in large dogs). The shape
performed only if neoplasia of the stifle joint
of the scapula and the trabecular bone structure
or surrounding tissues is suspected.
differs between dog and cat. The cat also has a
caudally oriented proliferation on the acromion.
CT: ANATOMY AND NORMAL
VARIANTS
The elbow joint (Figure 38.2, Table 38.5)
The shoulder joint (Figure 38.1,
The elbow is a hinge joint. Its main motion is flexion-
Table 38.4!
smal amount of rotation is also possible allowing
The shoulder is a ball-and-socket joint, which allows
supination and pronation of the paw.
movement in essentially every direction. However,
Three bones form the elbow: humerus, radius and
most of the motion takes place in a cranial-to-caudal
ulna. Three separate compartments are identified, each
plane, resulting in mainly joint extension and flexion.
of which plays an essential role in the normal function
 Bones contributing to the formation of the shoulder
of the joint. The humeroulnar joint is formed proxi-
are the scapula (by the glenoid cavity) and the humerus
a Kq Aiis pue eaon [eamy a Kq A
(by its head). The joint consists of a single cavity that
trochlear notch of the ulna. This compartment affords
extends between the scapula and humerus. A subdivi-
the main flexion-extension motion of the elbow. The
saunes Auu 'ziemups sa q pauis fy pan 
@ 2011 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
387
388 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Table 38.1
CT imaging protocol (intravenous contrast study: standard protocol; see Chapter 5).
Series
Pre-contrast
Bone
Decubitus
 carpus, digits in dorsal recumbency)
Special positioning 
 Front limb: full extension of the front limbs cranially, dog's head pulled back to the
lateral side
 Hind limb: full extension of the hind limbs caudally
 Scan margins
 Shoulder: from acromion (parallel to the humeroscapular joint space) distal part
humeral head 
Elbow: from top olecranon  ±3cm distal to radial head
Carpus/digits: from distal radius  top of digits
Stifle: from 1cm proximal to patella  2cm distal to tibial plateau
Tarsus: from top calcaneus proximal metatarsal bones 
Voltage (kVp)
100-140
Current (mAs)
100 (carpus)-240 (large hips)
Tube rotation time (s)
0.5-2
Slice width (mm)
0.5-2
 Sequential slice interval (mm)
 Equal to slice width
 Helical image reconstruction 
<1mm
interval
Ker nel freq uency
Medium (stifle: high)
High
Window level (HU)
+50-60
+200-500
Window width (HU)
360-400 (280-500)
2500-3000
'Tibial plateau parallel to long axis of CT couch from cranial to caudal.
Table 38.2
CT imaging protocol for the hip joint.
Hips
 Cancer suspicion
Post-trauma
Hip dysplasia
 Decubitus 
 Affected side up 
Dorsal 
Ventral
 Special positioning 
Hips/stifles
 Hips/stifles 
Hip/stifle flexed, abducted 
extended 
flexed 
 Foam wedge at pelvic inlet 
 Scan margins
 From L6 → caudal perineum 
Voltage (kVp)
100-140
Current (mAs)
140 (small hips)-240 (large hips)
Tube rotation time (s)
0.5-2
Slice width (mm)
5
1-3
Axial slice interval (mm)
5
1-3
Kernel frequency
 Medium
High 
Windowing bone (HU)
L: +250
W: 1500
Windowing post contrast
WL: +40
N/A
(HU)
WW: 350
MPR/3-D
ON/ON
Yes/Yes
ON/ON
389 JOINTS
Table 38.3
CT arthrography.
Access site
Standard site for joint centesis
 Route of administration
Intra-articular surgical preparation mandatory
Catheter size
22 ga
Injection method
Dudues pint lelaouas lot pue uoilisod aipaau wu o oi uio aieidss
 Manual injection
 Contrast agent
lodinated
 Contrast medium type
Non-ionic, dimeric 
 Generic name
Omnipaque
 Contrast medium
30 mg/ml* ( 1/10 dilution of Omnipaque 300mg with saline)
co ncentration
 Osmolality
336m0sm/kg H;0 (±232 m0sm/l)
Volume (ml/kg)
 To palpable distention
Rate of injection (ml/s)
0.5ml/s
 Scan delay
Immediately after 2 min of repeated flexion and extension of joint to insure adequate
contrast medium distribution within joint 
Side effects 
Mild synovitis
 Undesired effects 
 Extra-articular injection of co ntrast medium
latrogenic joint infection seco ndary to failure to perform surgical preparation prior to
joint centesis and arthrography
 *ln general the contrast medium concentration needs to be very low to avoid artifacts.
IV
HF
A
Figure 38.1  Reference transverse CT images of a normal right canine shoulder (shoulder joint musculature; see Figure 28.2).
(A) Scapula at the level of the glenoid cavity (Gl): the caudal aspect of the glenoid cavity is well delineated; the distal part of
the spine of the scapula (Sp) can be picked up at the lateral side. (B) Humerus at the level of the humeral head (HH): the
normal delineation and subchondral density of the humeral head are illustrated; a part of the glenoid cavity (Gl) is visible.
(C) Humerus at the level of intertubercular sulcus (arrows) of the biceps tendon: the sulcus is rounded and smoothly deline-
ated, it is surrounded by the major tubercle (TM) laterally and by the minor tubercle (Tm) medially.
390 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Table 38.4
 Shoulder joint muscles.
 Muscle name 
Function 
Insertion
Innervation
Biceps brachili
 Extensor
 Scapula: supraglenoid
 Ulna: medial coronoid 
Musculocutaneous n.
tubercle
process
 Radial tuberosity
CoracobrachialisA
Rotator (M)
 Scapula: coracoid process 
 Humerus: lesser tubercle 
 Musculocutaneous n.
Adductor
Deltoid 
Abd uctor
 Scapula: acromion and 
 Humerus: deltoid 
Axillary n.
Flexora
 spina
tuberosity
InfraspinatusA.D
Abductorc
 Scapula: infraspinous 
 Humerus: greater tubercle 
Suprascapular n.
fossa
 SubscapularisAE
Adductor
 Scapula: subscapularis 
 Humerus: lesser tubercle
Subscapular n.
fossa
 SupraspinatusA
Extensor
 Scapula: supraspinous 
 Humerus: greater tubercle 
Suprascapular n.
fossa
Teres major
Adductor
 Scapula: caudal border 
 Humerus: teres major
Axillary n.
Rotator (M)
tuberosity
Flexor
Teres minor
Abd uctorc
 Scapula: infraglenoid 
 Humerus: teres minor
Axillary n.
Flexor
tubercle
tuberosity
Triceps brachli
Flexor
 Scapula: caudal border
 UIna: olecranon
 Radial n.
(only long head)
^All stabilizers of the shoulder joint;
 Eflexor when acting together:
CTeres minor helps Infraspinatus;
 Plnfraspinatus functions as a lateral collateral ligament;
ESubscapularis functions as a medial collateral ligament.
a q nond pg si pol roa
  s    sn 
humeral capitulum and distally by the radial head.
minor ligament on the cranial (flexor) surface of the
 This compartment provides the major weight-bearing
joint. This ligament begins on the lateral side of the
function of the elbow. The articular circumference of
 humerus dorsal to the supratrochlear foramen, crosses
the radial head and the radial notch of the ulna form
obliquely and terminates on the medial side of the
the proximal radioulnar joint. This subjoint contributes
radius. Hypothetically, this ligament assists in preven-
to the rotary motion of the elbow. A single cavity com-
tion of hyperextension. The olecranon ligament is a
 prises the joint capsule serving all three compartments.
short band that extends between the lateral side of the
The medial and lateral collateral ligaments, located on
olecranon and the medial side of the lateral humeral
the respective sides of the joint, steady the joint against
condyle. This ligament assists in retaining the proxim-
 excessive transverse motion towards the opposite side
ity of the olecranon and the humerus.
of the limb. They steady the joint against excessive
transverse motion towards the opposite side of the
Feline anatomical specificities
limb. Both collateral ligaments attach proximally to the
The supratrochlear foramen is absent in cats,
humeral epicondyle and divide distally into two
which explains why condylar fractures are rare
branches, attaching separately to both the radius and
in this species. Instead, the feline humerus con-
the ulna. The annular ligament of the radius is a thin
tains a supracondylar foramen through which
ligamentous band that passes transversally around the
the brachial artery and median nerve pass. The
articular circumference of the radius (deep to the col-
cat has greater rotation of the elbow and supi-
lateral ligaments), essentially surrounding the bone
nation ability of the paw.
and maintaining its position against the ulna when the
391JOIN TS
Figure 38.2 Reference CT images of the normal right canine elbow. (A) Transverse CT image at the level of the joint space:
the normal aspect and density of the medial part of the humeral condyle (HCm) can be appreciated. HCl = lateral part of the
humeral condyle. U = ulna. (B) Transverse CT image at the proximal level of the radius shows the normal delineation and
subchondral density of the medial coronoid process (arrow). R = radius; U = ulna. (C) Transverse CT image at the level of the
joint space (soft tissue window). 1 = anconeus m.; 2 = brachial a.; 3 = brachialis m.; 4 = cephalic v.; 5 =extensor carpi radialis
m.,; 6 =extensor carpi ulnaris m.; 7 = extensor digitorm communis m.; 8 = flexor carpi radialis m.; 9 = flexor carpi ulnaris m.
(caput ulnare); 10 = flexor carpi ulnaris m. (caput humerale); 1l = flexor digitorum profundus m. (caput humerale); 12 = flexor
digitorum profundus m. (caput ulnare); 13 = flexor digitorum superficialis m.; 14 = lateral collateral ligament; 15 = median v.;
16 = pronator teres m.; 17 = radial n. (lateral superficial branch). R = radius; U = ulna. (D) Sagittally reformatted CT image
shows of a normal congruent elbow joint. The joint represent a parallel and narrow joint space (arrows) between humerus
(H), radius (R) and ulna (U).
392 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Table 38.5
Functional elbow musculature.
 Muscle name 
 Function 
Insertion 
Innervation
Anconeus
ExtensorA
 Humerus: lateral and medial 
 Ulna: clecranon
Radial n.
epico ndyles
Biceps brachii
Flexora
 Scapula: supraglenoid 
Ulna: medial coronoid 
 Musculocutaneous n.
tubercle
process
Radial tuberosity
Brachialis
Flexor
 Humerus: proximocaudal
Ulnar and radial
 Musculocutaneous n.
tuberosities
Triceps brachii
ExtensorA
Long head: infraglenoid 
 Ulna: olecranon
Radial rn.
tubercle - scapula
Lateral, medial, accessory 
head: shaft - humerus
Pronator teres
 Pronator forearm
Humerus: medial
 Radius: medial border
Median n.
epicondyle
Supinatorc
 Supinator forearm
Humerus: lateral epicondyle 
 Radius: proximal third,
Radial n.
dorso-lateral
^Anconeus helps the Triceps brachi;:
Brachialis helps the Biceps brachi:
cAn ossified sesamoid bone is present in the origin of the supinator muscle in large breed dogs and some cats.
The carpal joint and the digits (Figure
represent saddle joints. Due to narrow joint spaces in
38.3, Table 38.6)
some locations the bone interfaces cannot be visual-
ized on CT.
The seven bones of the carpus form a complex set of
 Ligamentous support consists of medial and lateral
joints. A sesamoid bone medial to the middle carpal
 collateral ligaments. In the carpus, additional intra-
joint accompanies the abductor pollicis longus muscle.
 articular ligaments hold the bones in place. The acces-
On the dorsal aspect of the second to the fifth digit, a
 sory carpal bone is stabilized by short ligaments to the
single sesamoid bone can be seen. Adjacent to each of
 ulnar carpal bone and by long ligaments to the base of
the metacarpophalangeal joints, paired sesamoid
 metacarpal bones IV and V.
bones located palmar within tendons of insertion of
The muscles and tendons of the flexor and extensor
the interosseous muscles are found in the second to the
muscles are located around the carpus and on the
fifth digit. A single bone can be seen palmar to the first
dorsal and palmar surfaces of the joints of the feet. A
 digit. These bony structures can be reliably identified
 number of these soft tissue structures can be differenti-
with CT.
ated in CT. However, due to the lack of fat, delineation
 The joints of the carpus and of the distal limb are
is often difficult. Soft tissue structures with small
diarthrodial joints. The carpus has three major joints:
 dimensions (tendon sheaths, bursae, fasciae, nerves)
the antebrachiocarpal joint, the middle carpal joint and
 hardly can be identified.
the carpometacarpal joint. These joints are responsible
for ±80%, ±15% and ±5% of carpal motion respectively.
Intercarpal joints (joints between bones within the
Feline anatomical specificities
rows) are of minor importance with respect to the
Dorsal elastic ligaments retract the claw. In the
range of motion. The joint capsule of the carpus is
retracted position, the distal phalanx is lateral
composed of two non-communicating compartments.
to the middle phalanx.
 The proximal part covers the antebrachiocarpal joint,
the distal radioulnar joint, and the joint of the acces-
sory carpal bone. The distal part covers the joints of
The hip joint, pelvic bones and proximal
the middle carpal, the carpometacarpal and the inter-
femur (Figure 38.4, Table 38.7)
metacarpal junctions.
 The metacarpophalangeal joints are modified hinge
Patient positioning for pelvic CT depends on the
joints. The proximal and distal interphalangeal joints
'juawssasse eumen ioy sI 1 JI Xpnis aui jo asodmd
393JOINTS
Figure 38.3 Reference transverse CT images of the normal right carpus at the level of (A,B) the carpal joint and (C,D) the
MCI= first metacarpal bone; MCI = second metacarpal bone; MCIII = third metacarpal bone; MCIV = fourth metacarpal
 bone; MCV = fifth metacarpal bone. 1 = abductor pollicis longus m.;2 = deep digital flexor tendon; 3 = extensor carpi radialis
m.; 4 = extensor carpi ulnaris m.; 5 = extensor digitalis communis m.; 6 =
 extensor digitalis longus m.; 7 = fifth digit muscles;
 8 = flexor carpi radialis m.; 9 = flexor retinaculum; 10 = palmar carpometacarpal fibrocartilage; 11 = palmar radiocarpal liga-
ment; 12 = superficial digital flexor tendon.
symmetry with minimal stress is sought. For radio-
three slices just cranial to the level of the obturator
therapy planning,the patient may be placed in a custom
foramen. In dogs with poor acetabular conformation,
mattress to assure continuity of specific positioning for
the dorsal rim of the acetabulum may be abbreviated,
 treatment planning In large dogs, image quality of the
resulting in a low acetabular angle (shallow acetabu-
hips will be compromised if the femurs are positioned
lum) (Figure 38.4D). In dogs with normal conforma-
 perpendicular to the pelvis (Figure 38.4A). This iseasily
tion, and those having had pubic symphysiodesis at a
rectified using a high kV technique and either flexing or
 young age, the dorsal acetabular rim will extend ven-
extending the hips (Figures 38.4B and 38.4C)-
trolaterally over the femoral head (deep acetabulum),
Assessment of the hips can be standardized by
 -qejase lesiop mol pue alsue ienqejane uaq e Suipiat
placing a wedge-shaped foam pad or rolled towel
ular rim angle (Figure 38.4E)
under the caudal abdomen with hips and stifles flexed,
 Proximal to the greater trochanter of the femur a
femurs abducted and tarsi extended, with the dog in
small nidus of bone is occasionally seen in the gluteal
si uosod s ym ie a uaquan deua
tendon; it is thought to be ossification of chronic avul-
 to measure the maximum acetabular depth for hip
sion injury to the tendons of insertion of the gluteal
dysplasia evaluation. This depth is found on one of the
muscles. Likewise, a small focus of bone may be
394 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Table 38.6
Functional carpal and digital musculature (small digital muscles are not included).
Muscle name
Function
Insertion
Innervation
Abductor pollicis
 Extensor carpus 
Humerus: lateral
 Metacarpus I: proximal part
 Radial n.
longus
Abd uctor (digit I)
epico ndyle
 Extensor digitorum
 Extensor digits
 Humerus: lateral
 Distal phalanges digits II-V:
 Radial rn.
communis
epico ndyle
processus extensorius
Flexor digitorum
Flexor digits
Humerus: medial 
Third phalanges digits I-v: flexor
Ulnar n.
profundus
epico ndyle
tubercle
 Extensor digitorum
Extensor digits
 Ulna: dorsolateral
 Metacarpi I: distal part common
 Radial n.
(l,11]
aspect
digital extensor
Extensor carpi radialis
 Extensor carpus 
Humerus: lateral
 Metacarpi Il and Ill: dorsal-proximal 
 Radial n.
epico ndyle
surface
 Extensor carpi ulnaris 
 Extensor carpus
Humerus: lateral
 Metacarpi V: proximo-lateral surface 
 Radial n.
epico ndyle
 Flexor carpi radialis 
Flexor carpus
Humerus: medial 
 Metacarpi Il and Ill: proximal part 
Median n.
epico ndyle
 Flexor carpi ulnaris
 Flexor carpus
Humerus: medial 
 Accessory carpal bo ne
Ulnar n.
epicondyle
Lateral digital 
Extensor digits
Humerus: lateral
First phalanges digits Ill-V: dorsal
Radial n.
extensor
 epico ndyle
aspect
 Superficial digital
 Flexor digits
Humerus: medial 
 Second phalanges digits Il-V
Ulnar n.
flexor
epico ndyle
 present just proximal to the lesser trochanter, at the site
 condyles both roll and slide along the articular surface
 of insertion of the iliopsoas muscle. These are usually
 of the tibial plateau, enabling some degree of cranial
 incidental findings.
 and caudal displacement, distraction and compres-
 It is common for the pubic symphysis to be unfused
 sion, and intermal and external rotation. The medial
 at 2 years of age and 15% of large breed dogs still have
and  lateral  femorotibial  and   femoropatellar  joint
an unfused pelvic symphysis at 7 years. It is this physis
 pouches all communicate. An infrapatellar fat pad is
that is intentionally fused in immature dogs (juvenile
 present caudal to the patellar tendon and cranial to the
pubic symphysiodesis) to improve hip conformation
intra-articular ligaments and fibrocartilage of the fem-
in those with excessive hip joint laxity. The iliac crest
orotibial joint.
is also inconsistently fused with the body of the ilium
 There are 15 intra- and extra-articular ligaments/
 Jo sieas z Aq pasny st iu Aueu ul yonou 'shop impe u
tendons associated with the stifle joint. The most 
-iesoiqg arel e jo dn apeu s juot seoies au ae
important are the cranial and caudal cruciate liga-
tilagenous synchondrosis, dorsocranial to a much
 ments, and the medial and lateral collateral ligaments.
smaller synovial portion of the joint. The ventral aspect
 The cranial cruciate ligament provides the primary
 of the sacroiliac joint may be fused in older dogs.
check against internal rotation of the tibia during
flexion. It originates from the caudomedial intercondy-
loid fossa of the femur and inserts on the cranial inter-
The stifle joint (Figure 38.5, Table 38.8)
condyloid area of the tibia. The caudal cruciate
The stifle joint is comprised of seven bones: femur,
ligament originates from the craniolateral aspect of the
tibia, fibula, patella, medial and lateral fabellae, and
 intercondyloid fossa of the femur. It crosses the cranial
 the popliteal sesamoid bone.
 cruciate ligament medially and inserts on the lateral
The stifle is a complex joint with three compart-
 edge of the popliteal notch of the tibia. The collateral
ments: the condyloid femorotibial, femoropatellar and
ligaments provide the primary check against external
 proximal tibiofibular. The movement of the joint is
rotation of the tibia during extension and flexion.
 primarily flexion and extension. However, the femoral
 The lateral and medial meniscofibrocartilage are
395
JOINTS
C
E
Figure 38.4 CT imaging of the hip joints. (A) Photon starvation artifact on a pelvic CT of an adult dog pelvis. (B) Scout 
au ranje (v) se uogeot reinqeiaoe eus () (v) aeu sueuos saias aui roy siay aul jo Suuoisod sumous aseu
legs were extended, revealing an occult dorsal acetabular fracture (arrow) in this same dog. (D) Positioning and appropriate
craniocaudal location for acetabular depth assessment by acetabular angle in a 16-week-old puppy with shallw acetabula.
(E) Positioning and appropriate craniocaudal location for acetabular depth assessment by dorsal acetabular rim angle in the
 same dog at 2 years. This dog had pubic symphysiodesis at 16 weeks of age. Note the ventrolateral growth of the dorsal
 acetabular rims.
Table 38.7
Functional pelvic musculature (adapted by J. Saunders).
 Muscle name
Function
Origin
Insertion
Innervation
Add uctors/Gracilis/
Adductors
Pelvis
 Medial femur, stifle,
 Obturator n.
 Pectineus/Sartorius
tibia
Biceps femoris
Extensor
Pelvis: ischial tuberosity
Tibia
 Sciatic n.
Gemelli/Obturator/Quadratus
Supinators
 Pelvis: ischium and 
 Femur: trochanteric
 Sciatic n.
pubis
fossa
 Gluteus group
Extensor
 Pelvis: iliac wing 
 Femur: greater
Gluteal n.
 trochanter
lliopsoas
Flexor
Lumbar vertebrae:
Femur: lesser trochanter
Lumbar spinal n.
L2-L7
 Quadriceps (rectus femoris) 
Flexor
Pelvis: ilium
 Tibial tuberosity
Femoral n.
 Semitendinosus
Extensors
Pelvis: ischial tuberosity
 Tibia and distal femur
 Sciatic n.
 Semimembranosus
396 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
LDET
CCCL
G
extended caudally. The white line designates the appropriate angle of transverse imaging through the joint (parallel to the
tibial condyle). (B) Transverse CT arthrogram (1 mm transverse) shows the cranial cruciate (CrCL) and caudal cruciate (CdCL)
ligaments and the long digital extensor tendon (LDET) at the level of the intercondyloid fossa of the femur. (C) Sagittally
reconstructed CT image shows the cranial cruciate ligament (arrows). (D) Sagittally reconstucted CT image of the caudal
cruciate ligament (arrows). (E) Sagittally reconstructed CT image of the medial meniscus (arrows). (F) Sagittally reconstructed
CT image of the lateral meniscus (black arrows), long digital extensor tendon (LDET) and popliteal tendon sheath (PT). (G)
of the meniscofemoral ligament (MFL).
397 JOINTS
Table 38.8
 Stifle joint musculature.
 Muscle name
Function stifle
Origin 
Insertion
Innervation
 Biceps femoris
Exte nsor/Flexor
 Pelvis: ischial tuberosity
 Tibia
 Sciatic n.
 Popliteus 
Flexor
Femur: popliteal fossa
Tibia: caudomedial
 Sciatic n.
Quadriceps femoris
Extensor
Vastus intermedius,
Tibial tuberosity via patella
 Femoral n.
medialis, lateralis: femur 
 Rectus femoris: ilium
 Tensor fasciae latae 
Extensor
 Pelvis: iliac crest 
Patella 
 Gluteal n.
semi-lunar shaped disks between the femoral and
(medially) and the calcaneus (laterally) surround the
tibial condyles. They increase stifle joint stability and
central tarsal bone in the proximal group. The tarsal
 congruency and serve as the shock absorbers of the
 bones I-I are relatively small in comparison with
stifle. The patellar tendon originates from the quadri-
 tarsal bone IV and are restricted to the medial half of
ceps femoris muscle and inserts on the tibial tuberos-
the tarsus.
ity. The patella, the largest of the sesamoid bones of the
 There are three main joints: the talocrural joint (pro-
stifle joint, is imbedded in the patellar tendon. The
viding the greatest range of motion), the intertarsal
tendon of origin of the long digital extensor is partially
joints with two compartments (proximal and distal
encased in an extension of the lateral femorotibial joint
intertarsal compartments) and the tarsometatarsal
 capsule. The medial and lateral fabellae are embedded
joints. The tarsal joint capsule envelops the entire area
in the tendons of the gastrocnemius muscles that origi-
 of these joints like a sheath. It has seven subdivisions,
nate on the supercondylar tuberosities of the caudodis-
four medial and three lateral. The largest component
tal femur. The tendon of origin of the popliteus muscle
surrounds the tarsocrural joint. The main ligaments
contains a sesamoid bone as well. It originates cau-
are the medial and lateral collateral ligaments, the
 dally to the extensor fossa and just cranial and deep to
extensor retinaculum, the flexor retinaculum, the
the lateral collateral ligament. The tendon of origin is
 plantar tarsal fibrocartilage and the special ligaments
 partially encased in an extension of the lateral femo-
 of which the long plantar ligament is the most clini-
rotibial joint capsule.
cally significant. Strain of this ligament is mostly asso-
 In CT, the osseous structures and infrapatellar fat pad
ciated with lameness.
are clearly identifiable. Intra-articular contrast medium
The stifle joint muscles are responsible for movement
is necessary to clearly see the intra-articular soft tissue
in the tarsus. Because the flexor surface for the tarsus
 structures. Reformation of the acquired transverse or
is positioned opposite to the flexor surface of the digits,
 frontal planar images is necessary to fully assess the
 the muscles that extend the tarsus flex the digits.
cruciate and meniscal structures (Figure 38.5).
 Feline anatomical specificities
Feline anatomical specificities
 The metatarsal bones are much longer than the
Cats have a more elongated patellar apex than
metacarpal bones.
dogs. Cats may also have meniscal ossicles as
 an incidental finding.
GENERAL JOINT DISEASE
The tarsal joint (Figure 38.6, Table 38.9)
FEATURES
 The tarsus is a hinge joint. Its main motion is flexion-
Developmental: osteochondrosis
extension, together with a small gliding component at
the proximal intertarsal joint.
Osteochondrosis is a common disorder in rapidly
Seven bones compose the tarsus: the talus, calcaneus,
 growing, large and giant breed dogs between 4 and
central tarsal bone and the tarsal bones I-IV. They
12 months of age. It is a disturbance in the process 
compose a proximal and a distal group. The talus
of endochondral ossification in a focal area of a
398 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
B
D
Figure 38.6 Reference CT images of the right normal canine tarsus. (A) Transverse CT image at the level of the proximal
surface of the talar ridges: the oval shape and homogeneous density of the ridges can be noticed. (B) Transverse CT image
(soft tissue window) at the level of the proximal surface of the talar ridges. 1 =extensor digitorum lateralis m.; 2 = extensor
digitorum longus m.; 3 = flexor digitorum lateralis m.; 4 = flexor digitorum superficialis m.; 5=peroneus (fibularis) longus m.;
6 = tibialis cranialis a.; 7 = tibialis cranialis m. (C) Two sagittally reconstructed CT images (1, 2) and one in the frontal plane
[aal z aeu 'aid teaes teiaiet an u aeds juot aul smous (asi reien teraiet iaaa) 1 asel 'pauasard are ( aas 'g)
medial talar ridge) shows the intact shape of the medial talar ridge. (D) Dorsal reconstructed CT image (white line 3 of B)
shows both talar ridges and the curved congruent joint space (arrows). C = calcaneus; F and Fi = fibula; m = medial malleolus;
n a go a t =   al go a Tat =   = 1  = 
developing articular surface centered at the osteochon-
bone becomes exposed to the synovial fluid (osteo-
dral junction. Local ischemia seems to be the key factor
uo uoisna 'souss susnen (suenassp sruou
leading to failure of joint cartilage to undergo
 pain and lameness.
 physiological calcification with consecutive cartilage
 The common sites of osteochondrosis in the dog are
necrosis, fragmentation and rupture. The subchondral
 reported in Table 38.10. Less common or controversial
399JOINTS
Table 38.9
Tarsal joint musculature.
Name
 Function 
Origin
Insertion 
Innervation 
Tibialis
Flexor tarsus
 Tibia: extensor sulcus
 Metatarsus I or tarsal bone I
 Deep fibular n.
cranialis
 and II
 Deep digital
Flexor digits
Tibia, fibula:
Third phalanges digits II-V:
Tibial n.
flexor
 proximolateral and 
plantar surface
ca udomedial
Gastrocnemius
Extensor tarsus
 Femur: lateral and medial 
Tuber calcanei
Tibial n.
 supraco ndylar tuberosities 
(with two sesamoid
bones)
Lateral digital
Extensor digits
 Lateral collateral ligament 
First phalanx digit V:
Peroneus n.
extensor
 dorsolateral aspect 
 Long digital
Extensor digits 
Femur: extensor fossa of
Third phalanx digits I-V:
 Peroneus n.
extensor
lateral condyle
extensor process
Peroneus
 Flexor tarsus
Tibia, fibula: distal part 
 Base metatarsal bo ne V
 Superficial fibular n.
brevis
 Pero neus
Flexor tarsus
Proximal fibula
 Plantar surface tarsal bone IV,
Deep fibular n.
longus
Tbia: lateral epico ndyle,
metatarsal bones I-IV 
Stifle: lateral collateral 
ligament
Superficial 
Extensor tarsus
 Femur: lateral
 Plantar surface proximal and
Tibial n.
digital flexor
Flexor digits 
supraco ndylar tuberosity
middle phalanges digits II-V
Table 38.10
 Common sites of osteochondrosis in the dog.
Joint
Location 
 Breeds predisposed
Vertebral
 Sacrum >> seventh Iumbar vertebra
 German shepherd dog > boxer, Rottweiler
Shoulder 
Caudal humeral head 
 Large and giant breeds (Great Dane, rottweiler, Labrador 
Elbow
 Medial aspect humeral condyle
retriever, golden retriever, Bernese mo untain dog. German
shepherd dog) >> medium breeds (border collie)
Stifle
Lateral femoral condyle (medial 
aspect) > medial femoral condyle 
Tarsus
 Talar ridge (medial > lateral) > medial
Rottweiler and Labrador retriever
malleolus
sites are the cervical vertebrae (see Chapter 22), scapu-
 Intra-articular osteochondral fragments may be
lar glenoid cavity, dorsal rim of the acetabulum, dorsal
 present.
 aspect lateral trochlear ridge and head of the head of
 Increased
soft tissue
density
within joint
 the femur, patella and distal metaphysis of the ulna. In
secondary
toe
rensdes junol 1o/pue uorsna
cats, osteochondrosis is rare and has been described at
thickening.
the humeral head, lateral femoral condyle and patella.
 Periarticular degenerative osseous changes often
present.
CT features (Figure 38.7)
 CT arthrogram may demonstrate loss of articular
 Flat to concave defect(s) (hypodense areas) in artic-
cartilage.
 ular surface surrounded by regional subchondral
 Tarsus: see Specific joint disease features, the tarsal
sclerosis.
joint.
400 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
D
Figure 38.7 Osteochondrosis (OC)/osteochondritis dissecans (OCD). (A) OCD of the shoulder. CT image shows multiple
hypodense focal areas (arrows) at the caudal head of the humerus (H). Sc = scapula. (B) OC of the elbow. CT image shows a
hypodense area surrounded by a sclerotic rim (arrow) in the medial condyle of the humerus. HCl = lateral part of the humeral
condyle; HCm = medial part of the humeral condyle; U = ulna. (C) Sagittally and (D) dorsally reconstructed CT images of
the stifle. The medial femoral condyle appears flatened on the sagittal image (arrows) and on the frontal image, a lucency
surrounded by a sclerotic rim is visible at the same location (arrows).
Trauma
· To detect fractures: the identification of fractures
in carpal or tarsal bones or detection
Articular fracture
of
small  (avulsed) fragments in all joints is
Articular (or intra-articular) fracture is a fracture
challenging.
within a joint or a fracture that involves the subchon-
·To describe the extent of bone involvement: size
 dral bone and articular cartilage.
and position of the fragments and the degree of
The aims of CT studies are:
involvement of articular surfaces.
401JOINTS
B
C
D
Figure 38.8 Intra-articular fractures. (A) Transverse CT image of the proximal humerus shows an epiphyseal fracture (black
arrow). The trochanter minor is fractured and multiple fragments are present (white arrows). Ep =normal epiphysis;
aul jo (suaae teis = H) aoey e smous aeu I paonsuoat Aeuonh (a) roeu sauroon = i snia = H
lateral column of the humerus (H) in a young dog (arrows). AP = anconeal process. (C) Transverse and (D) frontally recon-
stucted CT images show an intra-articular fracture of the lateral talar ridge (arrow) of the talus. C = calcaneus; Fi = fibula;
T = tibia; Ta = talus; Tmr = medial ridge of the talus.
 To map soft tissue changes: the location of the soft
of the development of degenerative changes.
tissue damage and the identification of avulsed
 Inadequate forces on the joint cartilage (e.g. due
Uaed Amju aeuanap oi dau ues suaue
to malpositioned fragments or limb deformities)
(Figure 38.8).
result in subsequent degenerative joint disease.
To identify and assess joint instability: functional
Despite artifacts due to metal implants (see
(stress) CT investigations allows to localize and
Chapter 4) the integrity of surfaces often can be
quantify a lack of ligamentous support.
answered reliably. CT can also aid the decision to
To control postoperative outcome: a complete
remove implants in cases of arthrodesis or
reconstruction of bony surfaces reduces the risk
osteosynthesis.
402 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
In immature animals, most fractures are periarticular
weight-bearing joints affecting ±20% of dogs. It may
Salter-Harris type I or II. Common articular fractures
 be primary, due to aging (idiopathic). However, more
in the immature animal are the avulsion fracture of the
frequently, it is the result of developmental (e.g. osteo-
supraglenoid tuberosity of the scapula, and for the
ga) paimnboe io (eiseldshp dru io moqla 'sisorpuoup
 elbow joint, Salter-Harris IV fractures of the humeral
trauma) disorders.
lateral condyle.
Early primary arthritis affects the carilage that
 In adult dogs, the supraglenoid tuberosity, the
becomes yellow and opaque with localized areas of
'(a < repuos -, < (eaien) sapuos (eamy
softening and surface roughening. As degeneration
acetabular fractures, femoral head fractures, avulsion
 progresses, the soft areas become cracked and worn,
 fractures of the cranial cruciate ligament and fractures
exposing bone under the cartilage. The bone then
of the small carpal and tarsal bones are common artic-
 begins to remodel and increases in density while any
ular fractures.
remaining cartilage begins to fray and osteophytes
covered by cartilage form at the edge of the joint (Table
CT features
38.11).
CT features of fractures depend on several factors
(e.g. age and location of the fracture, degree of
CT features (Figure 38.10)
movability, size of the patient).
 Joint capsular thickening and/or intracapsular
Apart from the fracture line a conspicuous sign of
effusion of varying degree.
 Periarticular bone proliferation of varying degree
 Jo asueieadde aul s aeis Aiiea au ut uogezue1o
 uo uo Suuadap
a resorptive zone, followed by progressive miner-
alization of the callus.
鲁
Subchondral bone sclerosis.
 Sagital and frontal reconstructions can be very
 Possible perichondral cyst-like lesions in advanced
useful in these cases.
cases.
Multiformat and  3-D
reconstructions may be
 CT arthrogram: abnormal cartilage thickness.
 helpful in surgical planning -these post-processing
methods require scan series using thin slices
Septic joint/Osteomyelitis
(<3mm) for a good result.
 Infectious arthritis is an uncommon condition in dogs
and cats. It is most often caused by bacterial contami-
Luxation/Subluxation
nation that may arise from direct penetration (surgical
 or raumatic), hematogenous dissemination or local
Joint luxation occurs most frequently as a result of
spread from adjacent tissues. Several different bacteria,
-uon juof 1ood ol Aiepuosas Xuouos ssal 'o eumen
mostly Staphylococcus intermedius, Staphylococcus aureus
joint luxation is associated with soft issue damage
(tendons, ligaments) and sometimes a small avulsion
CT features (Figure 38.11)
fracture at the attachment site of these soft tissues.
 Joint capsular thickening and/or intracapsular 
effusion of varying degree.
CT features (Figure 38.9)
 Periarticular proliferation and subchondral bone
Joint capsular thickening
and intracapsular
 lysis and sclerosis of varying degree depending on
effusion.
 Extracapsular swelling.
Possible sequestra formation if chronic.
 Small osseous bodies (avulsion fragments) may
Post-contrast (IV): enhancement of synovium may
be seen.
be seen.
Sagittal, frontal and 3-D reconstructions can be
very useful.
Stifle joint: cruciate +/- meniscal and collateral
Neoplasia
ligament tears probable.
Synovial cell sarcoma
Degenerative joint disease
Synovial cell sarcoma is a rare, slow-growing neo-
 plasm that arises from primitive mesenchymal precur-
 Degenerative joint disease (osteoarthrosis, osteoarthri-
sor cells of the synovial membrane of joints and bursae.
tis) is a non-infectious progressive disorder of the
The elbow and stifle joints of middle-aged medium to
403 JOINTS
A
B
C
Figure 38.9  Joint luxations in two patients. (A) Young dog with right femoral head (FH) dorsal luxation and left medial
acetabulum fracture (arrow). (B) Transverse and (C) 3-D reconstructed CT images of an adult cat showing a luxation (arrow)
between talus (Ta) and calcaneus (C).
Table 38.11
 Grading system for articular cartilage damage.
gression may occur by local invasion of surrounding
Grade
Description
bone and soff tissue, and metastasizes to regional
Normal cartilage
lymph nodes and to the lungs.
0
Histiocyic sarcoma, synovial myxomas and other
 Cartilage softening and swelling
 sarcomas are other less common joint tumors.
(cho ndromalacia)
Cartilage surface damage (fibrillation, wear
CT features (Figure 38.12)
lines, crack/fissure, fragmentation)
· Joint capsular thickening and/or intra-articular
 Deep cartilage damage (erosion) without bo ne
 mass effect and intracapsular effusion of varying
exposure
degree.
 -puadap uaas aq jou Aeu no Aeu sisAI lerpuouoqns 
IV
 Deep cartilage damage with bo ne exposure
Bone damage (eburnation)
lesion.
404VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
at the level of the caudal humeral head (arrows). H = humerus. (B) Elbow: transverse CT image of the distal humerus shows
new bone formation, multiple osteophytes (arrows) and subchondral cysts (arrowheads). H = humerus; U = ulna. (C,D) Stifle:
transverse CT images show cyst-like lesions (arrows) lateral to the (C) intercondyloid area of the femur (F) and in the (D)
subchondral bone of the cranial tibial (T) condyle. (E) Tarsus: transver
new bone formation and multiple
joint capsule (arrows).
A
Figure 38.11  Adult dog with septic arthritis. (A) Transverse and (B) frontally reconstructed CT images show a sequestrum
in the lateral femoral epicondyle (arrow). F = femur; P = patella; T = tibia.
405 JOINTS
+
E
Figure 38.12 Adult dogs with synovial cell sarcoma (SCS). (A) Shoulder: CT arthrogram shows multiple lytic lesions within
the humeral head (arrows). H = humerus. (B,C) Elbow: post-contrast transverse CT studies show (B) bone lysis (arrow) and
(C) thickening of the neoplastic synovial membrane which is better seen after enhancement of the neoplastic process (arrows).
R = radius; U = ulna. (D,E) Tarsus: transverse CT images show (D) bone destruction (arrows) of the fibula and dorsal aspect
of the distal tibia and (E) the extent of the neoplastic synovium (arrows). C = calcaneus; Fi = fibula; T = tibia.
Post-contrast (IV): enhancement of synovium and
· Proliferative periosteal response.
a mass may be seen.
· Joint capsular effusion may be an incidental finding.
 CT arthrogram: intra-articular filling defect created
by a mass.
SPECIFIC JOINT DISEASE
Primary or metastatic bone tumors
FEATURES
CT is used for staging surgical or radiotherapy plan-
 ning and accurate aspirates or biopsy in patients with
THE SHOULDER JOINT
bone tumors. Osteosarcoma, the most common bone
-qy on Arenon ‘ads pol a sapu Aiaen 'ro
Degenerative/Inflammatory
Incomplete ossification of the caudal glenoid rim
CT features (Figures 37.9 and 38.13)
 In immature dogs a separate ossification centre of the
·Osteolysis of the adjacent metaphysis with regional
caudal rim of the glenoid has been suggested, although
soft tissue sweling if cortical lysis or pathological
not proved. Some of these bone fragments are fused
fracture is present.
with the glenoid rim at maturity. If still present in the
406 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Figure 38.13 Primary bone tumor in two patients. (A) Adult dog with a primary bone tumor of the humeral head and
shoulder joint invasion. Transverse CT image shows a severe lysis centered on the trochanter minor (arrows). H = humerus.
(B) Adult dog with distal femoral osteosarcoma. Sagittally reformatted CT image shows cortical bone destruction, amorphous
periosteal reaction (arrows) and a long transition zone between the normal and diseased bone. The space between the distal
femur and the proximal aspect of the patella is increased. F = femur.
 mature dog, incomplete ossification of the caudal
glenoid rim is usually asymptomatic. However, it may
result in pain if the fragment is unstable, and this can
 be demonstrated at arthroscopy.
CT features (Figure 38.14)
 Fragments causing clinical signs are mostly irregu-
lar or elongated instead of nicely rounded.
 Mild to moderate regional muscle atrophy.
CT arthrogram: cartilage defect may be seen in
front of the fragment.
Biceps lesions: tendinitis/tenosynovitis, rupture
The inflammation of the biceps tendon (bicipital
tendinitis) and/or its tendon sheath (tenosynovitis)
affects mostly large mature dogs causing a chronic,
progressive lamenes. The cause of the disorder is
unclear, although a degenerative process and chronic
Figure 38.14 Young dog with a fragment in the caudal
'e pooaiso ue se yns 'en aada
aspect of the glenoid rim. Transverse CT image shows an
are suggested etiologies. A tendinitis/tenosynovitis 
elongated bony fragment (black arrow) in the caudal aspect
may result in tendon tear, partial or, rarely, complete
of the glenoid rim. Notice the new bone formation at the
tendon rupture and/or an avulsion fracture at the
cranial part of the scapula (white arrow).
 proximal insertion of the biceps. The disorder may be
bilateral.
407 JOINTS
B
C
Figure 38.15 Transverse CT images of three patients with biceps tendon lesions. (A) Adult dog with inflammation of the
 biceps tendon. New bone formation is visible in the intertubercular sulcus of the biceps tendon (arrows). These bony spikes
within the groove hinder the mechanical action and cause inflammation of the tendon. H = humerus. (B) Young dog with 
partial/complete rupture of the biceps tendon. CT arthrogram shows contrast material within the biceps tendon sheath
(arrows). The biceps tendon is thickened and the normal integrity is absent (arrowhead). (C) Adult dog with avulsion fracture 
of the proximal insertion of the biceps tendon. Avulsed fragments are visible (arrows).
Figure 38.16 Adult dog with bilateral osteochondomatosis of the shoulder joints. Transverse CT image shows multiple calci-
fied particles (arrows) within both joint cavities. H = humerus.
CT features (Figure 38.15)
Neoplasia
Fluid within the bicipital groove.
Synovial osteochondromatosis of the
calcification within it.
shoulder joint
单
 Bony spikes present within the groove, hindering
Shoulder synovial osteochondromatosis is a benign
the mechanical action of the tendon.
disorder in which the synovial lining of the joint or the
Mineralized fragments within the tendon sheath.
bicipital tendon bursa undergoes a nodular cartilagi-
 Supraglenoid process: areas of hypodensity due to
 nous, benign metaplasia producing multiple joint mice
demineralization, bone proliferation, avulsed
within the joint space causing chronic severe lameness.
fragment.
Synovial  osteochondromatosis  has rarely   been
CT arthrogram: in case of tear/rupture, contrast
单
described in the tarsal, stifle, elbow and carpal joints.
material within the biceps tendon sheath
(normal = biceps tendon identified as a well-
CT features (Figure 38.16)
 delineated filling defect surrounded by contrast
 Multiple calcified particles with different densities
medium).
 can be defined within the joint cavity.
408 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
 CT arthrogram: presence of filling defects within
 In the normal dog, the medial coronoid process is first
 the joint space.
cartilaginous and ossifies at around 20 weeks of age.
A disparate growth between radius and ulna or an
/paseaiu un imsan Aeu yoiou reauoon juaniuon
THE ELBOW JOINT
abnormal pressure on the medial coronoid process
Malformation/Developmenta!
causing fissuring or even fragmentation. The fragmen-
Au jen (s)juay anou o auo un nsan Aeu uonl
Elbow dysplasia
or may not be displaced.
 Kissing lesions are the result of erosion in articular
Elbow dysplasia can be separated into different pathol-
enaumu lepau aul jo auoq erpuouoqns pue aengren
 ogies, including fragmented medial coronoid process,
condyle by a fragmented medial coronoid process.
ununited anconeal process, osteochondritis dissecans
 They have the same aspect as an osteochondritis dis-
 and incongruity(ies) of the elbow joint.
secans lesion on radiography but a completely differ-
ent CT aspect.
Chondromalacia
 Chondromalacia refers to swelling, softening and
CT features (Figure 38.18)
 degeneration of the articular hyaline cartilage. It may
 One or multiple fragments.
 The structures have to be examined on an appro-
 be observed at the level of the medial coronoid process
cd moa m sop un e Auo a se
priate bone window to accurately evaluate the
Chondromalacia as observed in this case does not nec-
subchondral bony structures, especially to visual-
essarily evolve to more severe forms of cartilage
ize fissures, the appearance of which can be very
 degeneration.
discrete.
 Kissing lesions have a stripe-like form and are
CT features (Figure 38.17)
 associated with a lot of new bone formation.
 e o a ae s nan
diagnosis.
 A mixture of hypo- and hyperdense bone is present
Ununited anconeal process (UAP)
 at the medial coronoid process.
In large breed dogs, the anconeal process of the ulna
There is no fragmentation of the coronoid process.
 is a separate center of ossification that fuses at latest at
 20-22 weeks of age. If the physis remains radiographi-
cally visible beyond this time, it is considered unu-
Fragmented medial coronoid process (FCP)
 nited. CT gives essential information for the surgeon
Fragmented medial coronoid process is the most
to determine the surgical strategy. In cases of UAP, a
common clinical entity causing elbow osteoarthrosis.
check for an FCP is also indicated, as an association of
 both disorders is often present.
CT features (Figure 38.19)
· Irregular gap at the level of the humeral condyles
and anconeal process.
The position of the fragment in relation to the rest
 of the olecranon can best be evaluated on the sagit-
tal reconstructions.
Elbow incongruity
Elbow incongruity is defined as a poor alignment of
the joint surfaces of the elbow joint. Two features illus-
trate this disorder: an abnormal shape of the ulnar
 trochlear notch and a step between the radius and
Figure 38.17 Adult dog with chondromalacia. Transverse
 ulna. The radiographic evaluation of elbow incongru-
CT image shows a mixture of hypo- and hyperdense bone at
ity provides low sensitivity, especially in discrete cases.
the medial coronoid process (arrow). R = radius; U = ulna.
CT improves the sensitivity.
409JOINTS
B
D
Figure 38.18 Transverse CT images of medial coronoid proces fragmentation and associated disorder in four adult dogs.
(A)A separate bone fragment is visible (arrow).(B) The process is thickened and sclerotic (arrow).(C) Fragmentation is present
MaN 'alApuos Teraunu ieipau aul ie juasaid st (smoire aium) sadins asuapodAy pue -iadAy jo uraled paxiul v (a) (mo.ire)
bone formation (arrowheads) of all bone structures can be appreciated. These findings represent kissing lesions.
CT features (Figure 38.20)
·Widened and diverging joint space at the level of
8 + tl Aeydeoi passo readde Aa siauan
the trochlear notch and anconeus. Innormal elbows,
days after birth and fuse at 70 ± 14 days. An absence
Talered pue moiieu sieadde aneds juol siu
 of bony fusion is sometimes observed, resulting in
 On the sagittal and frontal reconstructions, a step
 a mechanically weak midline composed of a thin
 between the radius and ulna can be appreciated.
cartilaginous plate predisposing it to humeral
condylar fracture. This condition, also called intrac-
 ondylar fissure, is commonly seen in spaniel breeds,
Incomplete ossification of the humeral condyle
where a genetic basis with recessive mode of inherit-
The humeral condyle consists of two parts (capitulum
ance is suspected. However, other dog breeds can also
and trochlea) that develop as separate ossification
be affected.
410 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
A
B
Figure 38.19 Young dog with ununited anconeal process. (A) Frontally reconstructed CT image shows a gap (white arrow)
 at the anconeal process (AP). (B) Sagittally reconstructed CT image shows the displaced and rotated ununited anconeal process
(arrow). H = humerus; R = radius; U = ulna.
B
C
Figure 38.20 Young dog with elbow incongruency. (A) Transverse, (B) sagittally reconstructed and (C) frontally recon-
structed CT images show the widened and diverging joint space (arrowheads). There is a step present, between radius and
ulna (arrow). H = humerus; R = radius; U = ulna.
CT features (Figure 38.21)
· In dogs with a fractured humerus with underlying
 Saw-toothed intercondylar complete or incomplete
incomplete condylar ossification, a contralateral
hypodense defect  with adjacent hyperdense
humeral condyle fissure, sclerosis and degenera-
margins and sclerosis.
tive joint disease is seen in about 90% of the
·May be associated with degenerative changes or an
dogs.
atraumatic humeral condylar fracture, or even
fragmented medial coronoid process.
411 JOINTS
Degenerative/lnflammatory
 Avulsed fragments.
 Post-contrast: enhancement around these calcified
Mineralization of the insertion of the antebrachial
bodies.
flexor tendons
CT features (Figure 38.22)
 Calcifications within the soft tissues in the area of
THE CARPAL JOINT
 the medial humeral epicondyle.
Malformation/Developmental
 Diverging number of bones
Aplasia and supernumerary bones can be seen in dogs
and cats. Polydactyly is reported to be more common
in cats than in dogs. In ectrodactyly the distal front
 limb is split. A part of the phalanges, the metacarpal
and carpal bones are associated with the radius or the
HCn
ulna.
CT features (Figure 38.23)
Abnormal number of bones/phalanges.
Degenerative
Stenosing tenosynovitis of the abductor pollicis
longus muscle
Overuse of the carpal joint may cause chronic inflam-
 mation, with proliferation of connective tissue of the
Figure 38.21  Adult dog with incomplete ossification of the
synovial sheath, causing stenosis of the abductor pol-
humeral condyle. Transverse CT image shows a radiolucent
licis longus muscle.
 area (arrows) surrounded by a sclerotic rim representing an
intracondylar fissure. HCl = lateral part of the humeral
condyle; HCm =medial part of the humeral condyle;
U = ulna.
A
Figure 38.22 Young dog with avulsion at the origin of the antebrachial flexor tendons. (A) Transverse and (B) 3-D
reconstructed CT images show the avulsed fragments on the medial aspect of the ulna (arrows). H = humerus; R = radius;
U = ulna.
412 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
CT features
Acute cases: soft tissue swelling.
Advanced cases: proliferative bone reactions in
the region of the fibro-osseous canal of the muscle
(Figure 38.24).
Enthesiopathy of the short radial collateral
ligament
 In racing greyhounds, sprain of the short radial col-
lateral ligament is described, causing an incomplete
ligamentous tear and enthesiopathy at the site of the
attachment of the ligament on the medial aspect of the
distal radius.
CT features
 Soft tissue swelling.
 Periosteal reaction.
Dystrophic calcification.
Avulsion of parts of the origin of the ligament is
also reported.
SPECIFIC DISEASE FEATURES
OF THE DIGITS
Neoplasia/Infection/Inflammation
Figure 38.23 3D reconstructed CT image in an adult cat
  s a s   an  d 
Soft tissue swelling of one or more digits is a common
digits on each foot.
cause of presentation for dogs and cats. Differential
A
B
Figure 38.24 Adult dog with stenosing tenosynovitis of digital tendons. (A) CT image (just proximal to the antebrachiocar-
pal joint) shows barmacle-like proliferative bone reactions located in the craniomedial aspect of the radius (arrows). (B) 3-D
reconstructions show the reactions (arrows) belonging to bony canals for the extensor carpi radialis muscle (E) and the abduc-
tor pollicis longus muscle (A). R = radius; U = ulna.
413 JOINTS
A
B
Figure 38.25 Adult dog with chronic infectious process, probably secondary to a foreign body. Transverse CT images (distal
raw metacarpal bones) show (A) a dorsal and palmar soft tissue swelling adjacent to the third metacarpal bone (asterisks).
In the palmar region the changes are accompanied with loss of definition of normal soft tissue structures. The lesion contains
stippled mineralizations and (B) bony reaction on the dorsal aspect of the third and fourth metacarpal bone (arrows). The
 cortex of the third metacarpal bone is thickened and the medulla has an increased density.
diagnosis includes inflammation (paronychia - nail
Degree of bone destruction: mostly severe lytic
bed), neoplasia (subungual squamous cell carcinoma
 destruction of the involved bones, sometimes
or others), infection (osteomyelitis, septic arthritis/
mixed pattern lysis-proliferation. Dependent on
 pododermatitis, phlegmonia/abscess) and other rare
the stage/duration and the character (type of
disorders (synovial cyst).
bacteria/tumor type) of the disease.
 Infection is caused by hematogeneous or local (pen-
-aboraau snsiaa snoauasouou :(AI) isenuos-iso
etrating
wound/rauma)
spread
of
bacteria.
neous (central necrosis, foreign material).
Corynebacterium
pyogenes,
Clostridium
species,
 Phlegmon: inflammation is spread through tissue
 Streptococcus and Staphylococcus may be responsible for
 spaces over a large area and without definite
distinctive bony destruction and in the case of arthritis
margins.
 of severe cartilage damage.
 Mature abscess: exhibits a border.
A wide variety of tumor entities can affect the distal
limb (primary and metastatic bone tumor, soft tissue
-enbs remsunqns “(useldoau juo! Aieud 'sioum
THE COXOFEMORAL JOINT
mous cell carcinoma is the most common type of
digital tumor. Lung-digit syndrome is peculiar to the
Developmental
-d Ared jo sisisa len un nmsai nn pue i
Canine hip dysplasia
monary neoplasm.
Hip dysplasia is a complex inherited disease with a
CT features (Figure 38.25)
polygenic  and  multifactorial  etiology.  Almost  all,
Etiological differentiation of these disorders based on
breeds of dogs are affected, with predominance in
 soft tissue changes fails with CT. The growth behavior
large and giant breeds. The affected dog shows normal
of thelesion and the distribution of bony changes are
hips at birth but then develops joint laxity during ado-
more valuable diagnostic means. Nevertheless, a defin-
lescence and in most cases secondary osteoarthrosis.
itive diagnosis is mostly only possible with histology.
CT features (Figure 38.26)
·Soft tissue swelling.
 Acetabular angle low - dorsal acetabular rim angle
·Signs of a foreign body inoculation (detection of
high.
 foreign material, evidence of a tract).
 Fragmentation of the dorsal acetabular margin.
414 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Contrast
enhancement: rim, heterogeneous or
diffuse.
Evaluate
medial 
iliac
pue
sacral
lymph
nodes: enlarged may only be reactive, but if also
irregular or rim enhancing then metastases are
probable (Figure 33.6C).
Assess potential involvement of prostate, urethra
or rectum.
THE STIFLE JOINT
Figure 38.26 CT image of a dog with hip dysplasia shows
the increased distance between the femoral head and acetab-
ulum (subluxation).
Developmental
 Congenital patellar subluxation/luxation
Enthesophytes at the femoral joint capsule
 Congenital patellar luxation is likely due to develop-
attachment.
Periarticular osteophytes.
mental abnormalities of the pelvis resulting in mala-
Subchondral sclerosis and cystic degeneration.
lignment of the quadriceps complex (quadriceps
tendon, patella, patellar ligament). The disorder can be
seen as a medial luxation in small or toy-breed dogs
Trauma: luxation/subluxation
(Shi Tzu, Llhassa, mini poodle) or as a lateral luxation
  n oq  s s no n
in medium to large-breed dogs.
and the sacroiliac joint. If there is excessive hip laxity
secondary to trauma, an avulsion fracture fragment
CT features (Figure 38.29)
from the acetabulum may remain attached to the round
Patella laterally or medially displaced from troch-
ligament of the femur. If only one sacroiliac joint is
lear groove of femur.
luxated, look for a pelvic bone fracture.
Trochlear groove often shallow.
-nsse ano yn sh Kmlu anss os onaden
 Periarticular degenerative osseous changes often
rately assessed on CT than on radiographs, including
present.
sites and extent of hemorrhage, muscle tears and
muscle attachment avulsion. Iliopsoas muscle and
concomitant femoral nerve injuries have been reported,
Trauma
both with and without bone lesions. Muscle trauma is
Cruciate ligament and meniscal cartilage
best assessed from images made immediately after 
avulsions/tears
contrast injection.
The cranial cruciate ligament is by far the most com-
CT features (Figures 38.9A and 38.27)
monly injured part of the stifle. Lameness associated
Fracture/luxation:
with tearing or complete avulsion of the cranial cruci-
 if pelvic fracture with displacement is identi-
ate ligament is regularly seen in clinical practice. Other
fied, a second fracture or a sacroiliac luxation
or additional injuries may involve the caudal cruciate
must also be present.
 ligament and lateral or medial menisco-fibrocartilage.
 Intrapelvic soft-tissue injury:
 post-contrast (IV): hypodense regions indicat-
CT features (Figures 38.30-38.32)
ing inflammation and/or hemorrhage.
Sumed lenms ui pre Aeur suogonnsuonan (-
sion always seen.
 Periarticular degenerative osseous changes often
Neoplasia
present.
CT is used for staging, surgical or radiotherapy plan-
Small osseous bodies (osteochondromas or avul-
Asdorq 1o sajendse papms-LD pue Sunu
sion fragments) may be seen.
CT arthrogram:
CT features
 partial cruciate ligament tears: attenuation of
Lack of contrast enhancement: necrotic, cystic or
the ligament +/- dissection of contrast medium
lipoma (Figure 38.28).
within ligament
415 JOINTS
Figure 38.27 Pelvis fracture in two patients. (A) Right femoral neck fracture (arrow) in a l-year-old peekapoo. (B) Left Ilial
fracture (arrow), which mimicked acetabular fracture radiographically, and left pubic fractures in a dog. (C) Color 3-D refor-
matted pelvic CT of the same dog as (B), illustrating long oblique over-riding ilial fracture (arrows) and left pubic fracture 
(arrowhead). Right and left ilium wing fractures are also evident. Feces are in red.
 complete cruciate tears: inability to trace the
CT features (Figure 38.33)
ligament as a contiguous structure from the
 Joint capsular thickening and intracapsular
point of origin to the point of insertion
effusion.
meniscal fibrocartilage: dissection of contrast
 Avulsion fragment may be seen.
 medium within the meniscus.
 Sclerosis of the extensor fossa of the lateral femoral
 epicondyle may be seen.
CT arthrogram:
Long digital extensor tendonitis/tear/avulsion
 tendonitis: thickening of the tendon and atten-
Long digital extensor disorders occur mostly in imma-
uation of intra-articular contrast distribution
ture, large-breed dogs as a result of long-standing
 around the tendon
trauma. The owners may overlook the initial trauma
 partial tendon tears: attenuation of the liga-
and  the  dogs  are  mostly  presented  with  chronic
ment +/- dissection of intra-articular contrast 
lesions.
 medium within the ligament.
416VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Figure 38.28 Adult dog with a lipoma. (A) Soft tissue window image of a large caudal thigh infiltrative lipoma (L) invading
the pelvic canal and causing complete compression of the rectum. Advanced coxofemoral degenerative changes are evident
but not well windowed. (B) Same image as (A), with a fat-enhancing window (320)/level (-70), shows the capsule between
the lipoma (L) and perineal fat pad (P). F = femur.
Figure 38.29 (A) Transverse and (B) frontally reformatted CT images of a patellar subluxation in a dog. F = femur; P = patella.
417JOINTS
Figure 38.31 CT arthrogram of a mid-body, complete
Figure 38.30 Transverse CT arthrogram of a partial cranial
 cranial cruciate tear (arrow) in a dog.
cuciate tear (arrows) in a dog.
Figure 38.32 (A) Transverse CT arthrogram, (B) frontally reformatted arthrogram and (C) transverse CT image (same level
as A) show a bucket handle medial meniscal tear in an adult dog (arrows).
418 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
THE TARSAL JOINT
osteochondritis dissecans can be missed. The higher
percentage of missed cases in lateral ridge can be
Developmental
jo uosoduadns Arenuaadns a Aq paurendxan
the calcaneus. These percentages increase to 72% using
Osteochondritis dissecans
 -1op pue [erajelopau) suonnalond prepuejs omi Ajuo
 In the dog, osteochondritis dissecans of the tarsocrural
soplantar, both extended).
joint is a well-known but uncommon cause of lame-
Significant differences exist between lateral and
ness. The disorder can involve the medial or the lateral
medial tarsocrural lesions. The size of lateral tarsocru-
Kiqeisun ul shmsan pue snlen a jo ahpi reaoon
ral lesions is significantly larger than those of medial
pain, lameness and degenerative joint disease.
 lesions. With bilateral lesions, the lameness is present
 Using an extended protocol including six
 radio-
in the joint with the largest defects in 30% of cases. The
 graphic projections, 27% of cases of lateral osteochon-
 non-clinical tarsocrural lesions are significantly smaller
dritis dissecans and 10% of cases of medial
 than the clinical ones. The prognosis after surgical or
arthroscopic removal depends on the size of the defect.
CT features
·Osteochondritis dissecans medial talar ridge
(Figure 38.34):
 On the transverse images, radiolucent defects
surrounded with sclerosis can be seen. Most of
the time several fragments associated with these
defects can be observed.
 Most defects are located in the proximal and
 dorsal part of the ridge. The number and loca-
tion of fragments is essential information for the
surgeon.
 Frontal and sagittal reconstructions  allow
inspection of the entire joint.
 Osteochondritis dissecanslateral talar ridge (Figure
38.35):
Most of the time, large fragments in the proxi-
mal part of the lateral talar ridge are observed.
 Rarely fragments are seen in the distal part of
Figure 38.33  Adult dog with long digital extensor tendo-
the lateral ridge, which demands a different
 nitis in a dog. Transverse CT arthrogram shows an enlarged
surgical approach.
tendon that is increased in density (arrows).
C
Figure 38.34 Young dog with medial osteochondritis dissecans. (A) Transverse, (B) sagittally reconstructed and (C) frontally
reconstructed CT images show multiple detached fragments (white arrows). C = calcaneus; Fi = fibula; T = tibia; Ta = talus.
419 JOINTS
A
Figure 38.35 Young dog with lateral tarsocrural osteochondritis dissecans. (A) Transverse, (B) sagittally reconstructed and
(C) frontally reconstructed CT images show a large detached fragment (white arrows). C = calcaneus; Fi = fibula; T = tibia;
Ta = talus; Tmr = medial tarsal ridge.
FURTHER READING
Gielen I, Van Ryssen B and van Bree H (2005) Computerized
tomography compared with radiography in the diagnosis
 of lateral trochlear ridge talar osteochondritis dissecans in
dogs. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 18: 77-81.
Cavanaugh RP, Carey K, Fischetti AJ and Sami VF (2007)
Grundmann S and Montavon PM (2001) Stenosing tenosyno-
What is your diagnosis? J Am Vet Med Assoc 230:
la soop u alosn snsuot siod sononpqe aul jo sa
1809-10.
Comp Orthop Traumatol 14: 95-100.
Crawford JT, Manley PA and Adams WM (2003) Comparison
Holsworth IG, Wisner ER, Scherrer WE et al. (2005) Accuracy
 of computed tomography, tangential view radiography
of computerized tomographic evaluation of canine radio-
and conventional radiography in evaluation of canine
ulnar incongruence in vitro. Vet Surg 34: 108-13.
pelvic trauma. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 44: 619-28.
Kramer A, Holsworth IG, Wisner ER et al. (2006) Computed
De Rycke LM, Gielen IM, van Bree H et al. (2002) Computed
 tomographic evaluation of canine radioulnar incongru-
 tomography of the elbow joint in clinically normal dogs.
ence in vivo. Vet Surg 35: 24-9.
Art J Vet Res 63: 1400-7.
Mahoney PN and Lamb CR (1996) Articular, periarticular
Dueland RT, Adams WM, Fialkowski JP, Patricelli AJ,
and juxtaarticular calcified bodies in the dog and cat: A
Mathews KG and Nordheim EV (2001) Effects of pubic
radiologic review. Vet Radiol Uultrasound 37: 3-15.
symphysiodesis in dysplastic puppies. Vet Surg 30:
Reichle JK, Park RD and Bahr AM (2000) Computed tomo-
201-17.
 graphic findings of dogs with cubital joint lameness. Vet 
Fitch RB, Wilson ER, Hathcock JT and Montgomery RD
Radiol Ultrasound 41: 125-30.
(1997) Radiographic, computed tomographic and mag-
 Sami VF and Dyce J (2004) Computed tomographic arthrog-
 netic resonance imaging evaluation of a chronic long
raphy of the normal canine stifle. Vet Radiot Ultrasound 45:
digital extensor tendon avulsion in a dog. Vet Radiol
402-6.
Ultrasound 38: 177-81.
Sami VF, Dyce J, Pozzi Aet al. (2009) Computed tomographic
Gemmill T (2004) Completing the picture: use of CT to inves-
arthrography of the stifle for detection of cranial and
tigate elbow dysplasia. J Small Anim Pract 45: 429-30.
 caudal cruciate and meniscal tears in dogs. Vet Radiol
Gemmill TJ, Hammond G, Mellor D et al. (2006) Use of
LUltrasound 50: 144-50.
reconstructed computed tomography for the assessment
 Smallwood JE and George TF (1993) Anatomic atlas for com-
of joint spaces in the canine elbow. J Small Anim Pract 47:
puted tomography in the mesaticephalic dog: caudal
66-74.
 abdomen and pelvis. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 34: 143-67.
Gielen I, De Rycke L, van Bree H and Simoens P (2001)
Tivers MS, Mahoney P and Corr SA (2008) Canine stifle posi-
Computed tomography of the tarsal joint in clinically
tive contrast computed tomography
arthrography for
normal dogs. Am J Vet Res 62: 1911-15.
assessment of caudal horm meniscal injury: a cadaver
Gielen I, van Bree H, Van Ryssen B, De Clercq T and de
study. Vet Surg 37: 269-77.
Rooster H (2002) Radiographic, computed tomographic
van Bree H, Gielen I, Van Ryssen B et al. (2002) Comparative
 and arthroscopic findings in 23 dogs with osteochondrosis
joint imaging in small animals. Eur J Comp Anim Pract 12:
of the tarsocrural joint. Vet Rec 150: 442-7.
25-36.
CHAPTER THIRTY-NINE
PARTICULARITIES
S OF
EQUINE
Jimmy Saunders, Alastair Nelson and Katrien Vanderperren
SCANNING TECHNIQUE
Specific CT equipment for horses (Figure 39.2)
(INCLUDING FACILITIES
 Instead of the standard table designed for humans, a
 custom-built horse table has to be installed specifically
AND EQUIPMENT)
aeuxodde oi dn sinalqns jo Sueur au Sumoe
CT on the anesthetized horse
 2000-2500lb. The CT table should preferably be linked
to the table drive, allowing helical scanning. Such a
Recovery box and transport to the CT room
table can be made by the manufacturer or can be self-
The sedation and anesthesia of the horse is ideally
made. If the table proves unlinkable, it can be advanced
done in a recovery box located as close as possible to
manually by means of a hand crank, but this prevents
the CT machine and equipped with a hoist to allow the
the use of helical scanning. An alternative is the use of
horse to be positioned on the CT table.
a stationary table and a CT gantry that advances on
the table. Any table should be adjustable. Thick cush-
 If such an infrastructure is unavailable, the induc-
tion can be done in a recovery box located elsewhere,
ions, ropes and other containment and positioning
and the horse can be transported to the CT machine by
materials, as well as a power injector for contrast
means of the CT table itself, a forklift or another
studies, are mandatory for most studies of the brain
moving table. If another table is used, then hoists
and limbs.
should be available inside the CT room.
CT on the standing horse
The CT room
A system has been developed at the Rainbow Equine
The optimal size for the CT room is 8m in length, 8 m
Clinic in North Yorkshire in the UK, to carry out CT
 in width and 5m in height (including workstation and 
scanming of the horse's head and cranial neck.
 anesthetic material). These measurements alow easy
The main adaptation has been that the head/neck
positioning of the horse in dorsal (Figure 39.1A) as
 can be positioned within the scanner while the horse
well as in lateral (Figure 39.1B) recumbency.
remains standing in a pit (Figure 39.3)
Another adaptation is that the CT gantry is reversed,
 so that the horse is being presented to that side of the
The CT machine
 gantry which is normally next to the patient table. The
In adult horses, CT is limited to the head, neck and
reason for this is that most scanners are desigmed with
spuadap paess aq ues Xpoq au jo yonw moH ssa[
 one side of the scanner having a shorter distance to the
-d wg wo sn m a  a 
scan plane than the other.
 able system) to 90cm (large-bore). Using a large-bore
The patient table is used to move the area to be
CT, the neck can be scanned up to C4 or C6 depending
scanned during helical scanning. When scanning the
on the size of the horse, the forelimbs up to the elbow
head and neck the table is linked to the platform the
 joint and the hindlimbs up to the stifle joint.
horse is standing on. This platform is mounted on air
aunes Au 'ziemups sa Aq pag uis yo pn ia
@ 2011 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
421
Figure 39.1 A CT room must be large enough to allow scanning of horses in (A,B) dorsal/dorsolateral decubitus (head and
neck, stifle) as well as (C) in lateral decubitus (lower limbs) (images courtesy of H.E. Bergman, Lingehoeve, Netherlands).
Figure 39.2CT table specifically
designed for horses(image
courtesyof H.E.Bergman,
Lingehoeve, Netherlands).
423 PARTICULARITIES OF EQUINE CT
B
D
Figure 39.3 CT examination of the head and neck can be performed with a fixed CT on the standing horse. (A) A pit 
an jo uonisod (a') suruess Suinp id au u supuis asnoH (a) aess I Anu aul jo juoy u nuaiu inq uaaq s
'aua osoera saunbg saipsso 'amod t's jo Asainos sasei Suuss Sup Auea au u asio au jo peay
Suffolk, UK).
skates, which allow frictionless movement of the plat-
 A handler is present during scanning. The handler
form and horse. The disadvantages of the system
scanning behind a lead screen directly adjacent to
include the following:
the gantry, which acts as a radiation shield, reduces 
the radiation dose to a minimum.
?
 Horses tolerate helical scanning of the head well,
 but the movement of the patient table during scout
acquisition is too rapid and so the acquisition
A peripheral  quantitative  computed tomography
cannot be carried out.
(pQCT) scanmer, was designed to image the limbs of
 Movement blur may necessitate repeating a scan of
the horse, both in standing or recumbent position in
the area affected by movement, mainly only a small
the Equine Clinic Desbrosses (Figure 39.4). These
section of the area. Movement blur may degrade
systems have a reduced image quality compared with
the quality of MPR and 3-D reconstructions.
 conventional CT machines.
424VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
A
B
Figure 39.4 Peripheral quantitative computed tomography scanmer designed to image the limbs of the horse, both in stand-
ing (A) and recumbent (B) position (image courtesy of Clinique Desbrosses, France).
Table 39.1
 CT imaging protocol for the head and neck.
 Pre- and 
IMAGING PROTOCOLS
 Series
post-contrast
Bone
 Decubitus 
Dorsal
Imaging  protocols  for  vascular  contrast  CT  are
 Scan margins
Head/Brain: Rostral orbit → C1
 described in Chapter 5.
 Neck: Occiput → as caudal as
possible
 Sinonasal and dental:
Axial skeleton (including brain)
Foal: Nostrils ←-→>
ca udal aspect
Standard CT (Table 39.1)
of bony orbit
Adult: Nostrils 
 temporo-
Anesthetized horses are positioned in dorsal recum-
mandibular joint 
 bency during examination of the head, which may
Voltage (kVp)
120
result in an artifactual edema of the nasal turbinates.
Current (mAs)
280
 Tube rotation time
1
CT myelography (Table 39.2)
[s]
Slice width (mm)
5
2.5
Joints
 Ker nel frequency
 Medium 
yb!H
Native joints (Table 39.3)
 Collimator pitch
1-1.5
1
Helical image 
CT arthrography (Table 39.4)
2.5
1.25
reconstruction
interval
Window level (HU)
+50
+400
Dental: +2000
 sino nasal
Window width (HU)
150
2000
Dental: 5000
425 PARTICULARITIES OF EQUINE CT
Table 39.2
CT imaging protocol for myelographic studies.
Series
 CT myelography
Access site
 Cervical (cisternal): atlanto-occipal joint
Scan margin
Following conventional myelography include two vertebral bodies cranial
If possible (foals), complete spine up to T1
 Contrast medium application 
 Preferably ultraso und-guided cervical injection 
Contrast medium type
No n-ionic, monomeric, iodinated contrast medium only 
Contrast medium dose 
 30mg iodine/kg bw (0.1ml/kg of 300mg I/ml)
 Contrast medium injection mode
 Manual
 Scan delay post start contrast injection
As soon as possible 
 Side effects 
 Post-myelogram seizures 
latrogenic brainstem injury
 Undesired effect 
 Accidental epi- or subdural injection (red uced risk if ultrasound-guided) 
 Additional comment
CSF samples should be collected prior to contrast medium injection, as the
contrast medium alters the differential cell count within 24h and can affect 
the growth of bacteria in culture
Table 39.3
CT protocol for joint studies.
Series
 Pre- and post-contrast 
Bone
Decubitus 
 Lateral - limb of interest down 
 Special positioning
 Distal extremity, carpus, tarsus: limb of interest down with horse in lateral decubitus.
Contralateral limb out of gantry whenever possible 
 Stifle: limb of interest down in full extension with horse in lateral/dorsolateral decubitus.
 Contralateral limb flexed out of gantry (Figure 39.1A,B)
Scan margins
 Stifle: scan as proximal as possible (adult horse = complete femoro-tibial joints and 
 distal part femoro-tibial joint (→> 5cm distal to tibial crest)
Tarsus: distal tibia → proximal metacarpus (attachment suspensory ligament included)
 Carpus: distal radius → proximal metacarpus (attachment suspensory ligament included)
 Fetlock: distal extremity (metacarpus/metatarsus) - distal hoof wall
 Foot: fetlock joint → distal phalanx including laminae
 ROI* or proximal border DSB → distal end of ROl or distal insertion DDFT
Voltage (kVp)
120
Current (mAs)
120-350
Tube rotation time (s)
0.85-1
 Slice width (mm)
2
1 or 2 (fetlock)
Intra-articular 
0.6 mm
 Sequential slice interval
2
(mm)
 Collimator pitch 
0.85-1
Kernel frequency
Medium
High
 Motion control
 Breath hold - hyperventilate to produce transient apnea
Window level (HU)
+40-80 (120)
+750 (700)
Window width (HU)
200-400
2000 (3200)
426 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Table 39.4
CT imaging protocol for arthrographic studies.
Access site
 Standard site for joint centesis
Ro ute of administration 
Intra-articular (surgical preparation mandatory)
 Catheter size
22ga (tarsus 18ga)
Injection method
 Blind (aspirate to co nfirm needle position and for synovial fluid sampling) or ultrasound-
 guided manual injection 
 Contrast agent 
lodinated 
 Contrast medium type 
Non-ionic, dimeric
Generic name
 Omnipaque
 Contrast medium
(aues ylm bwmog anbeduwo to uonp 0t/l) qw/upo bu 0t-0g
 co ncentration
Volume
 Until distention is reached
Guidelines
Carpal region: radiocarpal 15-25 ml; intercarpal with carpometacarpal 15-25ml; carpal
sheath: 50-80 ml
 Coffin joint: 20-30ml
Fetlock joint: 20 (front)-30 ml (hind)
 Stifle joint: femoropatellar 80 ml, others 60 ml each 
Tarsal joint: 60ml (tarso-crural), 3ml others 
Tendon sheath: 50-80 ml
 Rate of injection 
0.5 ml/s
 Scan delay
 After several joint flexio ns and extensions 
 Side effects
 Mild synovitis 
 Undesired effects
 Extra-articular injection of contrast medium (reduced risk with ultraso und-guided
injection)
latrogenic joint infection secondary to failure to perform surgical preparation prior to
joint centesis and arthrography
CHAPTER FORTY
EQUINE SINONASAL
AND DENTAL
Jimmy Saunders and Zoe Windley
DENTAL AND PERIODONTAL
-eul pauua omi aael yaal yau Arexeur au
CT: ANATOMY AND NORMAL
nations, called infundibula, that penetrate the
occlusal surface. These correspond to remnants of
VARIANTS
vascular channels and are filled by cementum,
often incompletely (Figure 40.2A).
The horse has 24 deciduous teeth (2 x Di 3/3, Dc 0/0,
 Infundibular changes are observed with age. Some
Dpm 3/3) and 36 to 44 permanent teeth (2 x I 3/3, C
of these changes have no clinical relevance.
1/1 or 0/0, PM 3/3 or 4/4, M 3/3) that are mostly
However, the differentiation between normal vari-
named using the Triadan system (Figure 40.1).
 ations and clinically relevant/pathological changes
 As in most mammals, the equine tooth is composed
has still to be defined (Figure 40.4).
of enamel, cementum, dentine and dental pulp and is
Enamel and cementum in horses can be peripheral
supported by the periodontium (periodontal ligament,
(primary) or infundibular (secondary). The dentine
alveolar bone and gum) (Figure 40.2). Each of these
forming the skeleton of the tooth is called primary.
 structures has a specific density on CT that is not age-
while the dentine that is laid dowm at the occlusal
related (Table 40.1).
surface is termed secondary.
as n ar oe yan aua rams
 As a consequence of the continuous eruption, the
determined by evolution.
detailed morphology of equine teeth continuously
posse st ae ul asa uy ag iao saue
uposdy aie sasiou un yaa juauead iv ·
with a decrease in pulp volume, in the number of
which means that tooth eruption continues
communications between pulp horns, in the dis-
throughout life (at a rate of 23mm/year). This
tance the pulp extend apically within individual
process compensates for wear at the tooth's occlu-
roots and in the length of the reserve crown, and
sal surface due to the prolonged mastication (up to
with an increase in the number of apical foramina
20h/day) of abrasive forage (Figure 40.3).
per root.
· Due to the permanent abrasion, the horse's teeth
Vessels in the apical pulp afford nutrition to the
need to continuously lay down secondary dentine
developing tooth via wide apical foramina. In the
to prevent occlusal pulp exposure. The permanent 
maxillary teeth additional vessels descend from
au pue juaweh reuopoad a saioy uondnne
the coronal surface into the infundibula. This
alveolar bone to be very flexible. For this reason,
strong vascular supply gives an optimal protection
an area of spongy and porous bone is present
against infection. In the adult tooth, the apical
between the lamina dura (thin layer of compact
foramina progressively become smaller, as does the
bone attached to the periodontal ligament) and the
pulp cavity, and the vascular supply from the
mandibular and maxillary trabeculae.
infundibula dramatically reduces or may disap
The cheek teeth have between five and eight pulp
 pear completely, thereby decreasing the regenerat-
horns (Figure 40.2B)
ing capabilities of the adult tooth.
saunes Auu 'ziemups sa q pauis fy pan 
@ 2011 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
427
428 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Peripheral cemental hypoplasia varies in severity. When
large areas of the tooth are affected, the vascular supply
of the cementum and even the stability of the tooth
may be affected. Significant peripheral cemental hypo-
]
plasia may be associated with the presence of perio-
dontal disease.
105
 Enamel hypoplasia may induce both infundibular and
 peripheral cemental hypoplasia, as any defect in the
106
enamel is directly transferred to the surrounding
107
tissues (dentine and cementum).
108
109
CT features
110
● Infundibular cemental hypoplasia (Figure 40.5):
111
一
 hypodense area
within the infundibulum
411
(rostral > caudal)
consequent deposit/presence of organic mate-
410
 rial within the infundibulum.
409
 Peripheral cemental hypoplasia
408
defect in the normal cemental outline (between
407
the hyperdense peripheral enamel and the thin
406
hypodense periodontal ligament).
·Enamel hypoplasia (Figure 40.6):
defect in the normal/hyperdense enamel
outline, mostly multifocal. Three-dimensional
404
reconstructions greatly facilitate  a global
evaluation.
0t
402
401
Dental fracture
Figure 40.1  Triadan (left on the image) and traditional ana-
Horses can acquire fractures through external trauma
tomic chart (right on the image) of the equine dental nomen-
(mandibular > maxillary) or iatrogenic trauma during
clature of the permanent teeth.
dental treatment. However, in half the cases there is no
evidence of trauma and the fracture is described as
idiopathic. Most idiopathic cheek teeth fractures
DENTAL AND PERIODONTAL
(+80%) are lateral slab fractures involving the pulp
horns. Idiopathic lateral slab fractures are most
DISORDERS
common in the maxillary cheek teeth, with the Tridan
Dental developmental disorders:
 09 teeth being most commonly affected. Although it is
commonly accepted that these fractures appear at loca-
cemental and enamel hypoplasia
tions of anatomical weakness ('thin' calcified tissue),
Hypoplasia of the dental tissues is mostly benign.
which are subjected to enormous masticatory forces,
However, it may also be a predisposing factor for
the precise reason for weakness is not fully under-
infectious dental and periodontal disease.
 stood. The remaining idiopathic fractures (±20%) are
Infundibular cemental hypoplasia is present to some
 midline sagittal infundibular fractures caused by the
 degree in all maxillary check teeth and affects more
 presence of infundibular cemental hypoplasia. This
 frequently the rostral infundibulum. This inadequate
results in food entrapment, infundibular caries and 
 cementum deposition may be due to premature erup-
 finally a weakened tooth that is unable to support the
tion, premature removal of protective deciduous teeth
force of mastication.
(caps) or compromised infundibular blood supply in 
the young horse. The latter may be due to an excessive
CT features (Figure 40.7)
deposition of infundibular cementum near the occlusal
Presence of one or more hypodense (fracture)
surface constricting the blood supply to cementocytes
line(s) visible on at least two contiguous sections
 deeper within the infundibulum.
without continuation into adjacent tissue.
429 EQUINE SINONASAL AND DENTAL
A
B
Figure 40.2
(s) dnd a smos a  a () s Z g ae a 1 m yon (ot) 1 To
 The infundibula are normal and no defects within the infundibular cementum are visible. (B) Dorsally reconstructed CT image
shows the pulp horns (1-5). The palatal pulp horms (34) are of greater diameter than the buccal ones (1,2). The pulp horms
have an elongated appearance in young and adult horses and become more rounded with increasing age. B = buccal;
P = palatal.
Table 40.1
CT density of main dental structures.
fication, which is based on the severity and the involve-
Anatomical area
Hounsfield units
ment of different dental structures at the occlusal
Enamel
+2000 to +3700
surface. The process starts with defects in the cemen-
Cementum
+500 to +2400
tum (degree 1) allowing debris, microorganisms and
peripheral
+1780 to +2420
food to track down the central channel. This material
infundibular
+1545 to +2376
 is packed in anaerobic conditions at the apical aspect
Dentin
+950 to +3000
 resulting in fermentation, acid production and decal-
 primary
+1852 to +2686
 cification of the infundibular cementum. Further pro-
 secondary
+1332 to +1977
 gression of the process through the enamel (degree 2)
Dental pulp
-1024 to +700
 then dentine (degree 3) may result in an apical absces-
sation or tooth fracture (degree 4)
Associated soft tissue lesions.
CT features (Figures 40.8 and 40.9)
Chronic dental fracture may be associated with
dystrophic  calcification(s)  invading
the nasal
 Degree 1:
 complete or incomplete, hypodense line along
cavities.
 the infundibulum
Infection/inflammation:
 large hypodense areas or expansion, forming a
 radiolucent bulbous shape at the apical exten-
infundibular caries
sion of the infundibulum.
 Infundibular caries is classified in five categories (with
 Degree 2-4: cemental, enamel, dentin defects,
degree 0 = normal) using the modified Honma classi-
 apical abscessation, tooth fracture.
430VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
A
B
Figure 40.3 Dentition in (A) a 4-year-old horse and (B) a 20-year-old horse. In horses, the teeth continuously erupt through-
 out life. With time, the length of the reserve crown shortens and the roots develop. In old horses, only a small amount of 
tooth is left.
Figure 40.4 Infundibular changes found incidentally during CT.
examination of two patients. (A) Dorsally reconstructed CT
image of the maxilla shows infundibular lesions (arrows) of the rostral infundibula of Triadan 109, 110, 206, 209 and 210. (B)
 Infundibular caries (IC) were seen in another horse, illustrated on this sagittally reconstructed CT image.
Degenerative/Acquired: pulpar
Infectious/lnflammatory: apical
exposure/pulpitis
abscess/alveolitis
Excessive attrition or reduction in secondary dentine
There are numerous potential etiologies for equine
 deposition may cause pulpar exposure. Reduced sec-
apical abscesses. An apical abscess may be primary
ondary dentine deposition may be due to trauma or
(unknown etiology) or secondary. This latter further
thermal damage during dental treatment (direct), or to
classifies as developmental or acquired. Secondary
a decrease or loss of vascular supply (indirect). Pulpitis
developmental abscesses may arise from polydontia,
secondary to infection after tooth fracture or cemental
dental displacement or rotation, dental dysplasia or
 necrosis is mostly severe.
abscesses arise due to post-traumatic or idiopathic
CT features (Figure 40.10)
fractures (tooth, bone, both), caries, wear disorders,
Heterogeneous density of the pulp due to the pres-
 anachoretic pulpitis or periodontal disease. Apical
ence of areas of gas.
 infection caused by deep periodontal disease is uncom-
 Increased volume and irregular margin of the pulp
 mon in young teeth that may have a reserve crown in
horns.
excess of 80mm.
431
. EQUINE SINONASAL AND DENTAL
A
B
Figure 40.5 Five-year-old horse with infundibular cemental hypoplasia. (A) Dorsal anatomical section and (B) dorsal CT
ea) unaunu iepnis aui i uo asuapoday pue (smoire am) pasreua Aiuons st unapuru ienson aul aseu
arrow) shows an enlarged central lucent area indicative of infundibular cemental hypoplasia.
CT features (Figure 40.11)
CT features (Figure 40.13)
 Destruction of the dentine between infundibula.
 Loss of alveolar bone.
Tooth roots damaged:(
destroyed,
distorted,
 Dental loss, displacement, malocclusion.
increased density, clubbed.
Diastemata presence, location, configuration.
 Hypodense area around the apex.
CT signs the primary disorder (mass, fracture).
 Fragmentation of tooth, masses of cement.
 Deposits of cement, fragments of unstructured
mineralized tissue (cement pearls) adjacent to the
Dental tumors
infected tooth
Kaul yonoue 'e1auas u arei are sioum sjuasojuopo
Loss of lamina dura.
 Iao ul ueu sasioy u juanbaij anow aq ol waas
 Midline sagittal fractures (tooth fracture).
 Alveolar bone sclerosis, proliferations (osteitis).
 species.
 Ameloblastoma, cementoma, odontoma (complex or
 Sinusitis.
compoumd),
 ameloblastic
odontoma
a and cysts/
hamartoma should be differentiated from tumor-like
Periodontal disorders
processes such as aneurismal bone cysts, fibrous dys-
 Primary periodontal disease is uncommon in the horse.
plasia, lymphosarcoma or bone tumors (osteoma,
 Secondary periodontal disorders are quite common
osteosarcoma).
 and can be grouped in four categories: inflammation,
dystrophy,
neoplastic
pue
other
 anomalies.
CT features (Figure 40.14)
 Inflammation is the most frequently reported and can
 Ameloblastoma
(mandibula > maxilla): locally
lead to a 'domino cycle' (Figure 40.12).
Periodontal disorders are quite frequent in the
and expansile process.
 young horse due to the physiological process of tooth
Cementoma: hyperdense (sheets of cementum-
eruption and may resolve once normal occlusion is
like material) alteration crown structure, alveolar
achieved. In older animals, apical infections usually
 infection or proliferation.
 cause infection of the supporting bones and depending
 Odontoma: multiple
small-lobulated foci of
on the tooth involved, cause facial swellings, fistulae
 enamel within a well-defined cyst-like structure at
or sinusitis.
the root of a maxillary tooth.
432VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
C
and (C,D) 3-D reconstructed CT images show multifocal defects in the enamel outline (arrows). B = buccal; P = palatal.
SINONASAL: CT ANATOMY
nally into a dorsal, a middle and a large ventral meatus.
AND NORMAL VARIANTS
These conchae consist of single scrolls in a simple
(F1GURE 40.15)
the caudal aspect of the nasal cavity, six endoturbinates
(ethmoturbinates) and 25 delicate ectoturbinates with
The nasal septum divides the nasal cavities into a left
secondary lamellae form the ethmoid labyrinth that
and right part. The rosral aspect of the equine nasal
extendsrostrally from the cribiformplateof theethmoid.
cavity is composed of strongly developed dorsal and
The frontal and maxillary sinuses are air-filled spaces
ventral conchae that divide the nasal cavity longitudi-
 formed by the evagination of the frontal and maxillary
433 EQUINE SINONASAL AND DENTAL
Figure 40.7 Dental fractures in three patients. (A) Dorsally reconstructed CT image shows fracture of Triadan 109 and 209
(white arrows). A supermumerary tooth is present in the right maxilla (black arrow) and soft tissue density is present bilater
ally in the maxillary sinuses, indicating secondary sinusitis (asterisks). (B) Transverse CT image shows a fracture of Triadan
106 with two fragments and food trapped between them. Bone reaction is present at the dorsal aspect of the medial fragment
and a calcified mass is present in the nasal cavities (arrows). These findings suggest a chronic fracture with secondary infec-
tion and dystrophic calicification. (C) Transverse CT image in a horse with bilateral dental fracture secondary to infundibular
caries. Triadan 109 is fragmented in two pieces, with food trapped in between. Triadan 209 is broken into several fragments.
Both pulpar cavities are enlarged, extend till the infraorbital canal and contain mineral densities.
bones. These sinuses communicate with each other via
in a few cases the nasal cavities. Sinus cysts are nearly
a large oval opening and directly with the nasal cavity.
always unilateral and can completely fil the involved
The maxillary sinuses are divided into a rostral and a
sinus. Their exact etiology has not been elucitated.
[pau e oul pue umidas Auoq u e Xq jed jepne
and a lateral compartment by the infraorbital canal. In
CT features
 young horses, reserve crowns largely obliterate the
 Simple or complex, fluid-filled cavity.
maxillary sinuses but when the teeth erupt, the air
 Maxillary and frontal bones: mostly deformation
space within the sinuses gradually increases. The
 and thinning (osseous pressure atrophy), less com-
monly thickening.
rostral maxillary sinus usually overlies the apices of
 Nasal septum deviation.
Triadan 08 and 09 and the caudal maxillary sinus the
apices of Triadan 10 and 11. The conchal sinuses are
 Dental distortion, displacement.
the spaces within the caudal aspect of the conchae that
Submandibular lymphadenopathy.
communicate with the frontal sinus and opens within
 Orbital extension with exophthalmos is uncommon.
the caudal maxillary sinus (dorsal conchae) or with the
rostral maxillary sinus (ventral conchae). The relation-
Infection/Inflammation
ship between the various air cavities can be easily visu-
 alized on transverse CT images.
Primary sinusitis
 The sinusal mucosa produces daily a large quantity of
mucus that is evacuated into the nasal cavity via active
SINONASAL DISORDERS
ciliary movement. Primary infectious sinusitis occurs
Malformation/Developmental:
when this active evacuation mechanism is inhibited
 because of an extension of a viral or bacterial upper
sinus cysts
respiratory tract infection into the paranasal sinuses.
Sinus cysts, also called maxillary follicular cysts, are
Mucus then accumulates in the sinus, which favors
expansile,non-neoplastic, simple or complex,epithelial-
a s ea do aq ua
lined, fluid-filled cavities that develop in the maxillary
 and zocepidemicus). Without successful therapy, pus
sinus and can extend into the (concho)frontal sinus and
434 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
部
E
Figure 40.8 Adult horse with severe infundibular caries (IC) of a Triadan tooth 209 with an eruption age of 3 years. (A)
Transverse anatomical section, (B) corresponding transverse reconstructed CT image, (C) dorsal CT image, (D) 3-D recon-
structed CT image of the enamel, pulp (red) and infundibula (blue), (E) 3-D reconstructed CT image of the infundibula (blue).
 Both infundibula appear hypodense (A,B,C). They show bulbous enlargements (black arrows) at the apical extent of the
infundibula (D,E). The pulp is illustrated with a white arrow in A and B.
 necrosis and chronic empyema. The disorder is usually
Secondary sinusitis
unilateral involving one or more sinuses.
Tooth disorders (M1>P4>P3 or a combination of these)
CT features (Figure 40.16)
are by far the main causes of secondary sinusitis. Other
 Thickening of the sinusal mucosa.
causes are open post-traumatic wounds in the region
Fluid density filling the affected sinus.
or destructive processes in the sinuses such as cysts,
 Chronic empyema may induce bone reactions.
tumors and mycosis.
435 EQUINE SINONASAL AND DENTAL
B
C
Figure 40.9 Adult horse with severe infundibular caries of a Triadan tooth 109 with an eruption age of 19 years.
3D-reconstructed CT images show (A) the enamel (green), pulp (red) and infundibula (blue) combined, (B) the pulp (red) and
their entire length and a spherical lesion (asterisk) of the caudal infundibulum is visible.
A
B
Figure 40.10 Adult horse with pulpitis. (A) Transverse and (B) dorsally reconstructed CT images show multiple hypodense
areas in the pulpar cavity (P) with consequent heterogeneous density. The margins of the pulpar cavity appear irregular
(arrows).
CT features (Figure 40.17)
· Facial deformation (maxillary swelling, fistulae) is
·Affected sinus fluid filled, possible infiltration with
more frequent than with primary sinusitis but less
gas.
frequent than with sinus cysts or neoplasia.
 Signs of tooth disorder.
 Submandibular lymphadenopathy
436 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Sinonasal mycosis
Fungal infection caused by Asp. fumigatus is the most
frequent sinonasal mycosis in Europe and is usually
cavities and can invade the sinuses (frontal > maxil-
lary), the meninges or the brain. In warm humide cli-
mates, such as the Southern United States and
Australia, other fungal organisms such as Cryptococcus
neoformans or Coccidiodes immitis may cause mycotic
granulomas.
CT features (Figure 40.18)
· Sinonasal aspergillosis:
 turbinate (and conchae) destruction
- bone reactions.
Figure 40.11  Adult horse with pyogranulomatous tooth
 inflammation
 plaque build-up
hyperemia
inflammation and associated calcification. Transverse CT
steal proliferation of the outer surface of the maxilla (aster-
isk). A calcified mass (arrows) is seen in contact and dorsal
loss of tooth
to the Triadan 208. The mass invades the ventral concha.
bone loss
loss of support tissue
edema
Figure 40.12 The 'domino cycle' in horses with secondary
periodontal disease of inflammatory origin.
Figure 40.13 Transverse CT images of a 5-year-old mare with pulpitis and alveolitis of Triadan 207 and associated maxillary
aul jo aoenans ianno aun jo uoneiaoid ieaisoad paureu Aoous pue Sunams anssn os st arai (v) 'suanaiso
maxilla (asterisk) overlying the left Triadan (207). The pulp chamber is increased in size and contains gas lucencies. A tract
starts from the pulp and leads to a defect in the maxilla (arrows). Irregular bone margination is present at the buccal aspect
of the tooth (arrowheads). (B) The density of the maxillary bone is increased (asterisk). The previously described soft tissue
swelling and periosteal bone is visible.
437 EQUINE SINONASAL AND DENTAL
A
Figure 40.14 Two-year-old Welsh horse with dental ameloblastoma. (A) Transverse CT image shows an extensive, large,
lobular, low-density (20HU) soft tissue mass (asterisk) involving the left maxilla. The mass appears to arise from the germinal
issue of the Triadan 208 (arrows). The mass causes marked distortion of the inner surface of the maxilla and causes rightward
oy bupuaixa (isaise) sseu aul smous aheu I paiornsuosar Aesioa (a) suau aul ol udas ieseu aul jo uonenaap
Triadan 206 rostral to caudal to Triadan 211. The mass causes marked distortion of the inmer surface of the maxilla (arrows)
and causes rightwards deviation of the nasal septum. The medial aspect of the mass consists of a small/thin bone mineralized
layer. There is gas present within the infundibula of Triadan 210.
Tropical mycosis:
CT features (Figure 40.19)
well-demarcated soft tissue density in the nasal
Mass of soft tissue density (homogeneous, compact)
passages and sinuses (mycotic granuloma).
into the nasal conchae, sinuses with possible oblit-
●Submandibular lymphadenopathy.
eration of one or both nasal cavities.
 Bone thinning or even bone lysis are common with
 consequent exposed infraorbital nerve, loose teeth,
Sinonasal neoplasia
lesions to large arteries, extension to the soft palate,
 even the central nervous system giving rise to neu-
Sinonasal tumors are rare in the horse. Most of them
rological symptoms and blindness.
are malignant and have a bad prognosis. Squamous
 Metastases are uncommon. Secondary infection is
cell carcinoma is the most common tumor type. Clinical
mostly associated with aggressive tumors and
signs are similar to those of other sinonasal disorders
increased tissue destruction.
but in a more aggressive way. Extensive tissue infltra-
 tion and destruction is frequent. Other tumor types to
 Post-contrast IV: marked enhancement.
 be considered are juvenile ossifying fibroma (young
horse), sarcoid, melanoma, tumors of fibro-osseous
Trauma
 origin, oral papilloma, epulis, salivary adenocarci-
 Sinonasal trauma is quite frequent in horses and affects
noma, myxoma/sarcoma and congenital tumors.
 mostly young stallions. Common reasons for trauma
Tumors of dental tissue origin may involve the nasal
are a kick from another horse or collision with a
cavities and maxillary sinuses.
fixed object, resulting in a closed or open wound and
438 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
4
C
Figure 40.15 Transverse CT images of the nasal cavities and paranasal sinuses of a normal adult horse at the level of (A)
Triadan 08, (B) Triadan 09 and (C) orbit. 1 = caudal maxillary sinus; 2 =common nasal meatus; 3 = conchofrontal sinus;
4 = dorsal nasal concha bulla; 5 = dorsal nasal concha; 6 =dorsal nasal meatus; 7 =ethmoid labyrinth; 8 = facial crest;
9 = frontal bone; 10 = globe; 11 =infraorbital canal; 12 =maxillary bone; 13 = middle nasal meatus; 14 =nasal bone;
15 = nasopharynx; 16 = nasal septum; 17 = palatine bone; 18 palatine process of maxillary bone; 19 = rostral maxillary sinus;
20 = superior labi elevator muscle; 21 = Triadan 208; 22 = Triadan 209; 23 = ventral nasal concha; 24 = ventral nasal concha
bulla; 25 = ventral nasal meatus; 26 = vomer bone.
 sometimes in facial deformation (with or without frac-
Associated regions of hyperdensity due  to
ture), ocular lesions or even central nervous system
hemorrhage.
disorders.
Fluid in involved sinus.
Impacted fractures, particularly in the region of
Young horses:
the frontonasal suture, are a common fracture type,
 periosteal proliferation/reaction in the region
 not always diagnosed by the owner. Sinusal bleeding
of the frontonasal suture
can induce  epistaxis
and
secondary sinusitis,
fluid in the maxillary sinus.
 particularly if a bone sequestrum (nasal fistulation) is
present.
Ethmoid hematoma
CT features (Figure 40.20)
 Progressive ethmoid hematoma is a non-neoplastic,
 Discontinuity of bone margins.
 locally destructive process that develops because of
 Displacement of bone fragments.
repeated  submucosal  bleedings.  Most  hematomas
439 EQUINE SINONASAL AND DENTAL
 Figure 40.16 Twenty-year-old mare with primary sinusitis 
Figure 40.18 Adult horse with sinonasal mycosis.
(inspissated pus was present within the ventral nasal concha
 Transverse CT image shows soft tissue density (asterisk) in
the conchofrontal sinus along the orbit extending to the
the right ventral nasal concha (asterisk) by soft tissue density
ethmoid labyrinth and infraorbital canal. There is lysis of the
(image courtesy of Justin Perkins, Royal Veterinary Colege,
frontal bone at the medial aspect of the orbit (arrows).
UK).
DPN
 Figure 40.17  Transverse CT image in an adult horse with
 Figure 40.19 Transverse CT image (level Triadan 208) of a
sinusitis secondary to dental disorders (postoperative CT
young horse with ossifying fibroma shows an expansile soft
study). There is bone remodeling (arrowheads) associated
tissue mass density (asterisk) that displaces the surrounding
  Sua eur u a ut sur Aso ai m
bone structures. The ventral nasal concha is displaced and
maxillary sinus (healing osteotomy). The mucosa of the
 misshapen. The nasal septum is slightly deviated to the left.
caudal maxillary sinus is thickened. Porous-appearing dental
The outer wall and the palatine process of the maxilla are 
packing material (DPM) is present within the socket of
thinned (arrows), while the nasal aspect of the maxilla
Triadan l10. A dental fragment (arrow) is seen on the buccal
 appears thickened (arrowheads).
side of the dental packing material (may serve as a nidus for
infection). Bone proliferationis present dorsal from this frag-
ment. The ventral conchal sinus is fall of soft tissue/fluid
material (asterisk).
440VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
B
Figure 40.20 Nine-year-old Warmblood mare with a head trauma and surgery for a fractured left maxilla 1 month ago. (A)
Transverse CT image shows bone resorption associated with the most dorsal portion of the nasal bone (arrowheads) and
mucosal thickening (arrows). Mucosal thickening in addition to soft tissue accumulation is present in the right rostral maxil-
lary sinus. (B) Transverse CT image shows soft tissue swelling on the right side associated with bone resorption (arrowheads)
and a probable sequestrum (arrow). The fracture margins are irregular with proliferation altermating with areas of resorption.
arapou no (staise) uoeinnn pin st araui 'seh rea yiim ienaie asuap-anssh hos si aiaun uonan sn oi daa
mucosal thickening within both rostral maxillary sinuses.
appear in or around the ethmoid bone, while the less
Nasal polyps
frequent small ones develop from the maxillary
 Nasal polyps are the result of mucosal hypertrophy or
sinuses. They can cause destruction of the cribriform
a proliferation of fibrous connective tissue secondary
plate and involve the brain, which is a contraindication
for intra-lesional formalin injection. The exact cause of
to a chronic inflammation originating from the nasal
ethmoid hematoma is still unknown.
mucosa (septum >> conchae or tooth alveolus). Their
exact etiology is unknown.
CT features (Figure 40.21)
 Sinus-associated
mass
of
mixed
density
CT features (Figure 40.22)
(unilateral >> bilateral).
 -xeu aigua au Adnso Aeu euoeuaq aie Aia
 Smooth, well-delineated, single soft tissue density
lary sinus and the nasal cavities on one side.
mass originating from a mucosal surface. Multiple
Facial deformation caused by necrotic pressure due
masses are rare.
 Its size can vary greatly from a few centimeters to
to a large mass.
 Possible extension though cribriform plate.
complete filling of the nasal cavity.
Post-contrast (IV):
Displacement and/or deformation of normal nasal
hematoma: marked enhancement
structures is possible.
 brain: marked enhancement when involved.
 Mostly unilateral, may be bilateral.
 Dorsal and sagittal reconstructions help to define
the origin and extension of the process and, the
integrity the cribriform plate.
ldiopathic
 Small ethmoid hematomas may be present on the
contralateral side.
Figure 40.23 illustrates an unusual sinonasal disorder.
Figure 40.21 Adult horse with ethmoid hematoma. (A) Transverse CT image shows a slightly heterogeneous soft tissue
density mass (asterisk) arising from the ventromedial aspect of the left ethmoturbinates. (B) Dorsally reconstructed CT image
shows the mass extending rostrally in the caudal nasal passage (asterisk). (C) Sagittally reconstructed CT image shows the
mass (asterisk) originating from the ethmoid turbinates (arrows). Et =ethmoid turbinates; NS = nasal septum.
Figure 40.22 Adult horse with nasal polyp. Transverse CT images show (A) a sessile ovale mass (asterisk) originating from
the ventral nasal concha (VNC) that contacts the nasal septum (NS). The dorsal nasal concha (DNC) is atrophied and (B) has
a thickened mucosa.
442 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
FURTHER READING
Morrow KL, Park RD, Spurgeon TL et al. (2000) Computed
tomographic imaging of the equine head. Vet Radiol
Ultrasound 41: 491-7.
Windley Z, Weller R, Treamine WH and Perkins JD (2009)
Two- and  three-dimensional  computed  tomographic
anatomy of the enamel, infundibulae and pulp of 126
 equine cheek teeth. Part 1: Findings in teeth without mac-
roscopic occlusal or computed tomographic lesions. Eq Vet
I 41: 433-40.
Windley Z, Weller R, Treamine WH and Perkins JD (2009)
Two- and  three-dimensional  computed tomographic
 anatomy of the enamel, infundibulae and pulp of 126
scopic occlusal or computed tomographic lesions. Eq Vet J
41: 441-7.
Figure 40.23
3 Transverse CT image of a 4-year-old mare
with idiopathic tooth sinonasal disorder. There is a large
'dental mass filling the ventral two-thirds of the left nasal
cavity. The maxillary sinus is involved and the maxillary
bone is displaced laterally.
CHAPTER FORTY-ONE
EQUINE CALVARIUM, BRAIN
AND PITUITARY GLAND
Jennifer Kinns and Russ Tucker
ARTIFACTS ASSOCIATED WITH
Temporomandibular joint (Figure 41.3)
IMAGING OF THE EQUINE
The temporomandibular joint is a synovial condylar
HEAD (F1GURE 41.1)
articulation. It is formed from the expanded, flat facet
of the mandibular condyle and the articular surface of
the temporal bone, which has a rostral condyle and
The equine caudal fossa presents a specific problem in
 caudal glenoid cavity. It has two non-communicating
CT imaging. The beam hardening artifact from the
ventral and dorsal synovial pouches, an articular disk,
surrounding dense bone results in hypodense bands
across the brainstem, which confound interpretation.
joint capsule, and rostral and caudal ligaments. On CT
[esoi shl ie Aienaiel ramy spuaxa juf au saseu
 Thick-slice reformatting of sequential images acquired
 aspect where the mandibular condyle is wide and flat.
 as thin slices can reduce this problem. Volume averag-
Caudally the articulation is narrower and more axial
ing can also be detrimental. The size of the equine
in location. The thick intra-articular disk can be seen
calvarium necessitates thicker slice acquisition on
with difficulty on CT, but the associated fibrous lateral
many systems; this can result in multiple densities,
 and elastic caudal ligaments cannot.
such as those of bone and brain, averagedin one image
voxel. Acquisition of thin slices in regions of concern
can reduce the problem.
Brain (Figure 41.4)
 Due to the large size and associated artifacts, particu-
CT: ANATOMY AND NORMAL
larly in the caudal fossa, CT of the equine brain pro-
vides a poor contrast image compared to that of small
VARIANTS
animals. Gray/white matter differentiation is not
good, and subtle lesions can be missed. The forebrain
Calvarium (Figure 41.2)
and midbrain are more readily examinable than the
Compared to other species, the calvarium, or roof of
cerebellum and brainstem, but caution should be exer-
the skull, is relatively small. It is formed by the paired
cised in the interpretation of subtle changes in density.
frontal, parietal and temporal bones, and the occipital
bone. The occipital bone has a large paracondylar
DISEASE FEATURES
process rostral to the occipital condyle. There are large
[euei au rauoq edioso au jo apis ya uo suruado
Malformation/Developmenta!
opening (foramen lacerum) combines the oval and
Dentigerous cyst
carotid foramina while the caudal opening represents
the jugular foramen. Both the styloid and muscular
A dentigerous cyst is a congenital defect that arises due
processes of the temporal bone are prominent; the
to incomplete closure of the first branchial cleft. It
former forms the temporohyoid articulation with the
'o1 e jo umono au Supunoims isho e se sieadde
large stylohyoid bone.
which is commonly fixed to the temporal bone. The
saunes Auu 'ziemups sa q pauis fy pan 
@ 2011 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
443
444 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Figure 41.1
Ul (uotoai essoy Tepnes) aseu I asiaasuei 
 a horse. The dark band (asterisk) extending across the region 
Figure 41.3 Transverse CT image (temporomandibular
is a beam-hardening artifact.
joint) of a normal horse.
Figure 41.2 Sagittally reconstructed image of a CT study
 Figure 41.4 Transverse CT image (midbrain) of a normal
of the normal equine calvarium, viewed with a bone window.
horse. The mesencephalic aqueduct is clearly visible. Gray/
1 = frontal bone; 2 = cribriform plate; 3 = extermal occipital
white matter differentiation is poor.
protuberance; 4 =region of attachment of rectus capitis on
the base of the skull.
clinical presentation is usually of a firm swelling and
Cerebellar abiotrophy
often intermittent seromucoid or seropurulent dis-
charge from the region. Although the tooth structure
Cerebellar abiotrophy is an inherited degenerative
disease of the cerebellum that occurs in Arabians and
is normally visible radiographically, it can be difficult
part-Arabians. Most affected animals appear normal at
to identify without multiple oblique projections, and
birth with clinical signs typically appearing in the first
CT improves delineation of the lesion.
as e i s ia a o eeo es
CT features (Figure 41.5)
reported syndrome in horses that may occur in asso-
 Hyperdense tooth-like structure in an aberrant
ciation with cystic dilation of the fourth ventricle
location, often adjacent to the calvarium.
(Dandy-Walker syndrome).
Tooth is most often single but can be multiple.
 Often surrounded by a hypodense rim.
CT features
 Rarely occur within the paranasal sinuses.
 Small cerebellum.
445 EQUINE CALVARIUM, BRAIN AND PITUITARY GLAND
can be difficult to interpret due to superimposition, CT
permits accurate evaluation of the calvarium and
basilar region. Sagittal and dorsal plane reconstruc-
tions are recommended. Fractures of the base of the
skull (basisphenoid and basioccipital) may occur if the
horse rears and falls over backwards; this is due to
 avulsion of the insertion of the rectus capitis ventralis
muscle. This type of fracture is usually associated with
common and are associated with direct trauma, such
as kick wounds; they may involve the frontal and lac-
rimal bones and the zygomatic process of the frontal
and temporal bones.
CT features
?
 Discontinuity of bone margins.
?
 Displacement of bone fragments.
 Associated  regions of hyperdensity
due to
Figure 41.5
5 Transverse CT image (caudal occipital bone)
hemorrhage.
of a dentigerous cyst (arrows) in a 4-year-old horse.
 Intracranial free gas may occur secondary to open
fractures or those that involve the sinuses or
Hydrocephalus
nasopharynx.
 Orbital fractures are often of a depression type.
Hydrocephalus is an uncommon condition of equine
neonates. Horses borm with congenital hydrocephalus
have severe neurological deficits. Ventricular dilata-
Brain trauma
tion may be confined to the lateral ventricles or involve
the whole ventricular system. The accumulation of cer-
 ence of skull fractures. Clinical signs will depend on
ebrospinal fluid (CSF) is most often due to obstruction
the site and extent of the injury.
 of CSF drainage, though the cause of obstruction is not
usually identified ante-mortem.
CT features
CT features
+
 Initial appearance is of areas of low density (edema)
mixed with high density (hemorrhage).
·Marked ventricular dilatation with fluid dense
 lano aseau Aeu aseqouau pue euapa yog
content.
 several days.
+1
 Thin rim of cortex.
 Possible mass effect, especially if a large hematoma
forms.
Trauma
Imaging protocol for head trauma
Epidural and subdural hematoma
Epidural hematoma usually results from vascular
sary in acute trauma cases. Regions of hemorrhage will
 injury, and most often occurs in association with frac-
 appear hyperdense on non-contrast images. Contrast
medium may allow identification of active bleeding if
ture. Clinically hematomas are often associated with
deterioration of clinical signs after trauma. Subdural
the timing of the scan is appropriate to capture a vascu-
lar phase. Thin-slice acquisition through the basilar
hematomas are not confined between the dura and
bone, and are often associated with parenchymal
region can be helpful where basilar trauma is suspected,
and reconstruction of this region in multiple planes is
contusion.
recommended.
CT features (Figure 41.6)
 Epidural hematoma appears as localized regions of
Skull fracture
high density (around 7OHU, but depends on the
CT is the modality of choice for evaluating bone dis-
age of the lesion) outside the brain with convex
sudeorpei peau aluM sases eumen peau ul uogdni
 margins or a lentiform shape.
446 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Figure 41.6 Fifteen-year-old Morgan stallion that fell while lunging and had altered mentation. (A) Transverse CT image
of the brain shows a hyperdense broad-based subdural hematoma (arrowheads) that was confirmed at post-mortem. Gas is
also present within the brain parenchyma. (B) Further transverse CT image of the same horse (gutthural pouch) shows a large
hematoma (arrowhead) within the medial compartment (images courtesy of Nathan Nelson, The Ohio State University).
 Subdural hematomas appear wider and do not
West Nile virus, rabies virus or herpes virus (EHV-1)
have a convex margin,
The incidence of most is geographically dependent,
-au eozoond aumbg snobiqn si I-AH uono
Infection/Inflammation
loencephalitis (EPM) is the most common form of
encephalitis in North America, and is caused by coc-
Abscess
cidian parasites. Verminous encephalitis is rare and
 There are several stages of abscess formation. Initially
 may occur due to aberrant migration of nematodes.
an acute cerebritis is present with surrounding edema.
This progresses to confluent areas of necrosis with a
CT features
capsule finally developing around the necrotic core.
·CT may be normal.
The early stages of abscess formation may not be
 The CT appearance of the different forms of
apparent on CT.
encephalitis is non-specific.
-wau) Aisuapady (euapa) Asuapodu yo sear
CT features
 juasand aq Aeu juaauua Auied no (aeu
Mass effect.
Lesions are usually bilateral but asymmetric.
 The center of the lesion is hypodense to the adja-
 Mass lesions with a hypodense center may be
cent brain parenchyma and the rim may be
 present with EPM cysts.
hyperdense.
 An area of hypodense edema may surround the
Fistulous tract
lesion.
Post-contrast (IV): typically rim enhancement.
Sinus tracts most often develop in association with a
foreign body. The purpose of CT is to determine the
extent of the tract and the presence and location of any
Encephalitis
foreign material. Often the material is not directly visu-
Viral encephalitis in horses may be caused by Eastern,
alizedbut the delineation of the tract facilitates appro-
Western or Venezuelan equine enchaphalitis viruses,
 priate surgical intervention. Fistulous tracts may also
447 EQUINE CALVARIUM, BRAIN AND PITUITARY GLAND
be associated with temporomandibular joint (TMJ)
sepsis (see below).
CT protoco!
 Intravenous contrast medium application is most
useful for delineating the extent of inflammation asso-
ciated with the draining tract. A CT fistulogram can
also be used to highlight the tract, and may demon-
 strate a foreign body as a flling defect. If a fistulogram
is performed a Foley catheter will prevent backflow of
 contrast. The head should be positioned such that
 gravity assists flow of contrast in to the lesion and the
CT scan should be commenced immediately after con-
trast has been injected to the point of back pressure.
CT features (Figure 41.7)
单
 Gas or hypodense fluid within a tract communicat-
ing with the skin surface.
Contrast enhancement of the walls of the tract and
adjacent tissue.
Foreign body
density
+1
depends on material
Figure 41.7 Adult Tennessee Walker gelding with a 48-
(wood = hypodense).
hour history of a draining wound over the lefteye. Transverse
CT image shows a linear hypodense wood foreign body
Osteitis
(black arrowhead) medial to the caudal orbit with adjacent
pockets of gas (white arrowheads) (image courtesy of Nathan
Infection and inflammation of the bones of the calvar-
Nelson, The Ohio State University).
ium may occur secondary to penetrating trauma.
 Sequestration of bone fragments associated with cal-
varial trauma is also possible.
CT features
 Lysis and irregularity of bone margins.
?
 Periosteal proliferation is irregular, but is not
always present.
单
 Sequestered bone fragments of increased density
with   a  surrounding  region  of  hypodensity
(involucrum).
Temporomandibular joint sepsis
aq Ae pe aiei st sisdas juof remqipuemoodan
associated with a fistulous tract on presentation. The
cause is often unknown.
CT features (Figure 41.8)
Areas of lysis of the mandibular condyle, temporal
tubercle or both.
Gas may be present within the joint.
+1
 Communication with fistulous tract, if present.
Figure 41.8 Adult Appaloosa gelding with septic tempo-
romandibular joint. Transverse CT image shows gas within
Temporohyoid osteoarthropathy
the joint (arrow) and an irregular margin to the mandibular
condyle. Stylohyoid osteomyelitis was also present (not
Temporohyoid osteopathy is a specific condition in
visible on this image) (image courtesy of Nathan Nelson, The
horses. The etiology is poorly understood but it may
Ohio State University).
448 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
CT features
 Smoothly marginated bone dense mass.
 May cause thinning of adjacent bone by pressure
necrosis.
Malignant bone neoplasia
Osteosarcoma and metastatic carcinoma can both
occur in the equine calvarium, though they are rare.
The clinical presentation may be similar to that of
benign and soft tissue neoplasia, and CT aids the dif-
 ferentiation of benign and aggressive lesions.
CT features
 Localized bone disruption and lysis.
Variable irregular periosteal proliferation.
Variable associated mass.
 Bone-dense
material
withinthemass if
osteosarcoma,
Intra-axial brain neoplasia
Figure 41.9 Adult Quarterhorse with left sided facial
Oodual jo aouapiaa smous abeu I asiaasUueil 'sisAiered
hyoid osteoarthropathy with a stylohyoid fracture and pro-
liferation (image courtesy of Nathan Nelson, The Ohio State
are usually progressive.
University).
CT features (Figure 41.10)
 Mass lesion that may cause a midline shift.
 occur as a sequela to otitis media, upper respiratory
Variable contrast enhancement.
Variable surrounding hypodensity (edema).
 infection, or as a primary degenerative disease. It is
typified by progressive osseous proliferation of the
stylohyoid and can lead to fusion of the temporohyoid
Pituitary adenoma
-s jo je edi si uoasad jeun a u
 Pituitary pars intermedia dysfunction is also known as
tibular signs and facial nerve dysfunction.
equine Cushing's disease. It is caused by adenomatous
md al j aq a  jo d
CT features (Figure 41.9)
 Bony proliferation of the stylohyoid bone and tem-
gland. Diagnosis is by the typical clinical picture (hir-
sutism predominantly and often chronic laminitis,
porohyoid articulation.
bulging fat pads, polydipsia and polyuria) and endo-
Thickening of the ceratohyoid bone and prolifera-
crinological testing.
 tion of the styloceratohyoid ariculation may also
be present.
m sasnou u I uo uoon saun [enan
CT features (Figure 41.11)
 Enlarged pituitary width and height (normal is
 unilateral clinical signs.
approximately
2 × 2 × 0.5cmlength × width x
 Fluid within the tympanic bulla in some cases.
height), though adenomatous glands may measure
within normal limits.
Neoplasia
Benign bone neoplasia
Cholesterinic granulomas
Primary bone neoplasia is rare in horses. Benign
 Cholesterinic granulomas are benign growths of the
lesions, including osteomas and ossifying fibromas,
choroid plexus. They are common, occurring in 15-
 can ocur. The clinical presentation is typically one of
20% of older horses. The lesions occur in the lateral
 progressive swelling.
and fourth ventricles and can cause neurological signs
449 EQUINE CALVARIUM, BRAIN AND PITUITARY GLAND
Figure 41.10  Four-year-old Quarterhorse mare with an oli-
godendroglioma arising from the olfactory lobe. Transverse
al aui ou Sumoia (xstaise) sseu e smous aeu I
Figure 41.12 Transverse CT image of an adult Warmblood
lateral ventricle causing dilation of the ventricle and a gen-
with bilateral cholesterinic granulomas in the lateral ventri-
eralized mass effect. Focal hyperdensity on the axial margin
represents dystrophic mineralization (image courtesy of
cles. The regions of hyperdensity (arrows) represent dys-
 Nathan Nelson, The Ohio State University).
trophic mineralization (image courtesy of Nathan Nelson,
The Ohio State University).
 Hyperdense foci may be present pre-contrast due
to dystrophic mineralization.
 Contrast enhancement varies from mild patchy to
marked diffuse.
FURTHER READING
Hilton H, Puchalski SM and Aleman M (2009) The computed
tomographic appearance of equine temporohyoid osteoar-
thropathy. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 50: 151-6.
McKlveen TL, Jones JC, Sponenberg DP, Scarratt K, Ward D
and Aardema BS (2003) Assessment of the accuracy of
Figure 41.11  Adult Thoroughbred gelding with signs of
computed tomography for measurement of normal equine
Cushing's type disease. Transverse post-contrast CT image
pituitary glands. Am J Vet Res 64: 1387-94.
shows the enlarged and uniformly enhancing pituitary gland
Rodriguez MJ, Latorre R, Lopez-Albors O et al. (2008)
(asterisk).
Computed tomographic anatomy of the temporomandib-
ular joint in the young horse. Eq Vet J 40: 566-71.
Porat-Mosenco Y, Schwarz T and Kass PH (2002) Thick-
due to an associated obstructive hydrocephalus or
 direct brain compression. CT-guided biopsy can allow
section reformatting of thinly collimated computed tom-
ography for reduction of skullbase-related artifacts in
differentiation from less common tumor types.
dogs and horses. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 45: 131-5.
Vink-Nooteboom M, Junker K, Van den Ingh TS and Dik KJ
CT features (Figure 41.12)
(1998) Computed tomography of cholesterinic granulomas
 Often bilateral.
in the choroid plexus of horses. Vet Radiol Lultrasound 39:
Variable density.
512-16.
CHAPTER FORTY-TWO
EQUINE NECK AND SPINE
Jimmy Saunders and Hendrik-Jan Bergman
CT: ANATOMY AND NORMAL
 Hypoplasia of atlas and/or the dens of the axis. An
elongatation of the dens has rarely been described.
VARIANTS
 Additional free axis.
The horse's neck comprises seven vertebrae. C3-C7 are
Cervical vertebral malformation (cervical
conmected with each other by paired joints on the left
vertebral stenotic myelopathy)
and right sides (the facet joints), by elastic fibrocarti-
Cervical vertebral malformation (Table 42.1) is one
lages (the intervertebral disks) and by several liga-
 clinical entity in the group of equine developmental
ments. The spinal cord passes through each vertebra
orthopedic diseases and also one of the most common
and nerve roots emerge between each vertebra.
 The nuchal ligament is very developed in equines.
 causes of wobbler syndrome. It includes not only mal-
formation but also malarticulation and degenerative
Two parts, funiculus and laminae, insert at the external
changes   of 
the joints, causing
occipital protuberance of the occipital bone and run to
spinalcord
the withers, supporting and holding the horse's head
compression.
 The disorder is a main indication for CT myelogra-
and neck in position (Figure 42.1A and B). The semi-
phy in horses suspected to have lateral compressive
spinalis capitis muscle originates on the cervical verte-
brae and the first six to seven thoracic vertebrae and
lesions. Minimum median diameter values can be
 measured on CT and correlate well with macroscopic
inserts with two symmetrical tendons on the occipital
bone, on both sides of the nuchal ligament (Figure
necropsy measurements.
42.1A and C). Incidental bone proliferation is fre-
 quently seen at the insertion of these two structures on
 the occipital bone (see below, Nuchal entheseopathy.
Table 42.1
 Cervical vertebral malformation (CVM) types in horses.
Figure 42.4C).
Type I CVM
Type IIl CVM 
DISEASE PROCESSES
Young (<2 years) rapidly
 Older horse (young
growing horse
possible)
Congenital/Developmental
 Male and Thoroughbreds 
 Affects all horses
Occipitoatlantoaxial malformation
at risk 
 Midcervical vertebral
Occipitoatlantoaxial malformation is an uncommon
Caudal neck (C5-C6,
column
C6-C7)*
disorder described in Arabian and Friesian foals.
 Dynamic stenotic 
 More static compression:
compression when the
osteoarthritis of the
CT features
 neck is flexed
articular processes 
 Fusion of two or more vertebrae (occipito-atlanto-
axial).
*Not accessible with current CTs in living animals.
Veterinary Computed Tomography, First Edition. Edited by Tobias Schwarz, Jimmy Saunders.
@ 2011 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
451
452 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
B
Figure 42.1 Normal aspect of the attachment of the nuchal ligament and semispinalis capitis tendons. (A) Transverse CT
image shows the muchal ligament (NL) and semispinalis tendons (arrows). (B) Dorsally reconstructed CT image shows the
cranial attachment of the nuchal ligament (arrows) on the nuchal crest (NC) of the occipital bone. (C) Dorsally reconstructed
CT image a few mm dorsal to (B) shows the attachment of the semispinalis tendons (arrows) on the muchal plane (NP).
C1 = atlas; Oc = occipital condyle; SC = spinal cord.
453 EQUINE NECK AND SPINE
CT features (only Type I)
DDBB
 Have not been reported.
Anticipated CT features:
 absolute or dynamic stenosis of the vertebral
canal (vertebral malalignment)
 malformation (including osteochondrosis)  or
 osteoarthritis to the articular processes
 angular deviations of the vertebrae, associated
with physeal lesions (dorsal flare caudal epi-
physes, enlargement)
 soft tissue pathology associated with spinal
 -iaday umae umuauesi uoissaiduos pion
trophy, joint capsule swelling and hypertrophy.
synovial cysts
 CT myelography: spinal cord compression as
 circumferential loss of contrast agent due to
stenosis of the vertebral canal or lateral impinge-
Figure 42.2 Six-month-old stallion with kyphosis of the
ment of the dural sac by a malformed articular
thoracolumbar region secondary to trauma (two months
 facet; proximal intervertebral foramen impinge-
malalignment (arrows). The cranial vertebral physes are
ment: compression of the nerve root by a mal-
 closed while the caudal physes are not suggesting discrep-
formed articular facet.
 ancy in their closure time.
Fractures, luxations
nuchal ligament/semispinalis capitis tendon
Cervical fractures are common in foals and often
snoauasoiajay 1o/pue oinause 'pasrequa
 involve epiphyseal separation, particularly of the dens
with irregular margins
 of the axis. In adult horses, fractures occur more com-
 a uo ud aq i m
pue shuapise aoer 1o yopped paads-ubu ul Aquou
occipital bone.
affect mostly the midcervical and caudal cervical ver-
tebrae. Associated tearing of joint capsule
pue
 dislocation/fracture of the dorsal articular processes is
Degenerative
not rare, allowing vertebral subluxation and spinal
Nuchal enthesopathy
cord contusion. Subtle fractures or the complexity of
comminuted fractures are better demonstrated using
 Bone proliferation is frequently present at the cranial
CT compared to radiography.
attachment of the nuchal ligament or of the semispina-
A specific type of fracture in the adult horse is the
 lis tendon, especially in dressage and jumping horses.
 avulsion fracture at the insertion of the nuchal liga-
Most of these horses do not show pain or diminution
ment and/or semispinalis capitis tendons, which has
 of performance. However, in some, unwillingness,
 to be differentiated from a nuchal enthesopathy
head shaking or stiffness may emerge.
CT features (Figure 42.5)
CT features
 Bone proliferation at the attachment on the nuchal
?
Fracture/Luxation of the vertebral column (Figures
crest or nuchal plane.
42.2 and 42.3):
 Separate fragments may be present bone nodules,
 multiple bone fragments
mineralization inside the ligament.
 best visible on the dorsally reformatted images
 Nuchal ligament/semispinalis capitis tendons ill-
 spinal cord displacement.
 defined, thickened, irregularly marginated, hetero-
Avulsion fracture of the 
 nuchal ligament/
 geneous or, for the muscle, asymmetric.
semispinalis capitis tendon (Figure 42.4):
 bone fragment close to the external occipital
Neoplasia
 protuberance of the occipital bone
 a nidus in the ventral aspect of the nuchal crest
 Neoplasms affecting the vertebral canal are a rare
is sometimes visible
 occurrence in the horse. They are mostly metastases of
454 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
C
B
Figure 42.3 Adult horse with fracture of the atlas and subluxation of its atlanto-occipital joint. (A) Transverse CT image
shows multiple, sharply margined, bone fragments (arrows) associated with the left pedicle of the atlas. The fragments are
just axial to the left occipital condyle (Oc) within the spinal canal. (B) Dorsally reconstructed CT image shows a subluxation
of the atlanto-occipital joint (arrowheads). The dura is clearly demarcated and a compression of the left subarachnoid space
is visible (arrow). The spinal cord is visible and appears displaced to the left. (C) Sagittally reconstructed CT image shows
the previously described fragments at the bottom of the vertebral canal (arrow). Bone reactions are visible on the caudal aspect
of the occipital bone (arrowheads). C1 = atlas; C2 = axis; Oc = occipital condyle; SC = spinal cord.
non-neural origin causing extradural compression of 
·Possible involvement of the paravertebral
the spinal cord with other primary foci in the body.
musculature.
Melanoma in the spinal canalin mature gray horses has
been described. Other reported neoplasms include
squamous cell carcinoma, hemangiosarcoma, osteosar-
coma, intestinal adenocarcinoma,plasma cell myeloma,
FURTHER READING
fibrosarcoma, pheochromocytoma and lymphoma.
Guided biopsy is necessary for final diagnosis.
Mayhew GJ (1999) The diseased spinal cord. Proc Am Assoc
Eq Pract 45: 67-84.
CT features (Figure 42.6)
Moore BR, Holbrook TC, Stefanacci JD, Reed SM, Tate LP
1
Lytic bone lesion.
and Menard MC (1992) Contrast-enhanced computed
 Extradural soft tissue mass causing spinal cord
compression.
stenotic myelopathy. Eq Vet J 24: 197-202.
OB
 Figure 42.4 Four-year-old Anglo-Arab mare with long history of sudden resistance to riding in frame and a final diagnosis
 of chronic avulsion fracture at the insertion of the right side of the semispinalis capitis tendon. (A) Sagittally reconstructed
CT image shows a rounded bone fragment (arrow) just ventral and caudal to the extermal occipital protuberance of the occipital
bone. The semispinalis capitis tendon is visible (arrowheads). (B) Sagittally reconstructed CT image shows the normal left
semispinalis capitis tendon entheses (arrows) and its attachment to the occipital bone. (C) Sagittally reconstructed CT image
Aieinbaint pue snoauasoraiay sreadde uopual steurdstuas aul (moire) sasauua uopual suides seuidstuuas suaul aul smous
delineated at its insertion. The previously described fragment is still visible (arrowhead). The tendon at the level of its entheses
appears enlarged. C1 = atlas; OB = occipital bone.
456 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
C1
Figure 42.5 (A) Sagittal reference CT image of the occipital bone in a normal horse. (B) Seven-year-old horse with intermit-
tent headshaking and a diagnosis of muchal entheseopathy. On a sagittally reconstructed CT image, the ventral aspect of the
 Nine-year-old horse without clinical signs. Sagittll reconstructed CT image shows severe chronic bone proliferation at the
attachment site of the muchal ligament (arrows). C1 = atlas; OB = occipital bone.
B
Figure 42.6 Eleven-year-old horse with vertebral hemangiosarcoma (metastases were found in the kidneys,liver and lungs).
(A) Transverse CT myelogram at the level of C3 shows severe osteolysis of the vertebral body (arrowheads). The spinal cord
is dorsally displaced and is misshapen. The dorsal contrast column is thinmed dorsally (arrows). (B) Transverse reference CT
myelogram of the normal contrast column at the level of C3. SC = spinal cord.
CHAPTER FORTY-THREE
EQUINE FRACTURES
Hendrik-Jan Bergman and Jimmy Saunders
INTRODUCTION
Stress fractures are overuse injuries most commonly
recognized in equine athletes undergoing continual
As CT provides an excellent bone detail, it can be of
usually seen in the third metacarpal/metatarsal bone,
great value to demonstrate the precise nature of frac-
 tures when other imaging modalities remain inconclu-
particularly the dorsolateral aspect, as a severe form of
bucked shins. Stress fractures have also been describe
sive. CT is very useful for diagnosis of subtle bone
u pue (emdess pue eq 'snaumu) qu addn au u
lesions such as fissures, stress fractures or subchondral
the axial skeleton (pelvis and vertebrae).
bone fractures, for diagnosis of fractures in complex
Subchondral bone  fractures  involve traumatic
joints (joints comprising many bones) or for better
 damage to the cartilage and subchondral bone caused
uderstanding of comminuted fractures.
by contusion, excesive shearing and/or rotational
CT angiography can be used to evaluate vascular
forces. They may be associated with the formation of
integrity in horses with trauma to the distal extremities
with regard to their prognosis.
loose intra-articular osteochondral fragments.
CT features
FISSURES, STRESS FRACTURES
AND SUBTLE SUBCHONDRAL
Fissure (Figures 43.1 and 43.2).
· Prior to contrast medium administration:
BONE FRACTURES
 small lucent/hypodense line in bone, mostly
regular
Fissures and stress fractures are two types of incom-
 the fissure line may be surrounded by a lucent
 plete fractures. Their diagnosis can be difficult but is
 defect in the subchondral bone or subchondral
critical to prevent progression to a catastrophic com-
bone sclerosis
plete fracture. Even several weeks after the clinical and
 optimal visualization may require the use of
scintigraphic confirmation, the estimated frequency of
MPR reconstructions.
yons uI (%0s-oz st Audeigorpe1 aaesau panuuon
After
 intra-articular
contrast
 medium
cases, other advanced imaging modalities are required
 administration
for diagnosis directly improving management and
 contrast medium can be present in the fissure.
prognosis.
A fissure is a crack extending from a surface into,
Stress fracture
but not through, a bone. Fissures are quite common in
Lucent fracture line(s).
horses and are mostly the result of a kick from another
+
 Asymmetrical subchondral bone formation.
jso na eunol umn samssy iso asiou
 Callus formation: (benign) periosteal reactions and
common locations are the proximal, typically the
 cortical thickening.
 dorsal sagittal groove in the proximal articular surface,
middle and distal phalanx. This condition is also com-
Subchondral bone fracture (Figure 43.3)
monly seen in the metacarpal/metatarsal condyles
 Disruption/irregularity in cortical bone.
(lateral > medial).
 Partial or complete fragment separation.
saunes Auu 'ziemups sa q pauis fy pan 
@ 2011 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
457
458 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Figure 43.1 (A) Transverse CT image showing a fissure line (arrow) surrounded by sclerosis (asterisks) on the midline in
the dorsal portion of the proximal phalanx of a left forelimb. There is irregularly margined periosteal proliferation over the
-usan Aenes (a) (peaumoie) aur arnssy aul jo ianal aul ie pasunouond anu xuteud ieuxond aul jo aeans iesio
structed CT image showing subchondral lucency (asterisk). There is iregularly margined periosteal proliferation over the
dorsal surfaces of the proximal phalanx extending distally to the proximal diaphyseal region (arrows).
· Fragment(s) may be non-displaced or displaced,
 and possibly become intra-articular, free floating.
SALTER-HARRIS FRACTURES
The Salter-Harris classification of growth plate injuries
(I-VI) can be applied to all domestic animals. Type II
fractures are the most common type of physeal injury.
CT can help to diagnose the fracture, define a possible
intra-articular component and give additional infor-
mation for surgical plarming. The CT features depend
of the type of fracture (Figure 43.4).
COMMINUTED FRACTURES
In case of a comminuted fracture, the bone is broken,
 splintered or crushed into three or more pieces. The
Figure 43.2 Transverse CT image of a left carpus showing
 radiological examination of the geometric pattern of
the second (Il), third (Il) and fourth (IV) carpal bones. There
 multiple fractures can be challenging, considering the
is an incomplete palmar cortical fracture in the medial aspect
complex superimposition of the 3-D anatomy of a
of the third carpal bone (arrows) surrounded by regional
 region onto a 2-D image. CT is highly superior to radi-
sclerosis (asterisks).
ography for evaluating the spatial configuration and
completeness of the fracture as well as the relationship
between the fracture and adjacent lesions (such as
osseous cyst-like lesion, secondary degenerative joint
disease) or joints (Figure 43.5). CT is essential to select
459 EQUINE FRACTURES
A
B
Figure 43.3 (A) Transverse CT image of a left metacarpophalangeal joint showing an ovoid fracture at the distodorsal aspect 
 of the sagittal ridge of the third metacarpal bone, which is associated with an incompletely separated osseous fragment
(arrow). (B) Sagittally reconstructed CT image showing a radiolucent region (arrow) adjacent to this lesion. There is a large,
 ill-defined region of sclerosis (asterisk) involving the distodorsal aspect of the sagittal ridge.
RADIUS
Figure 43.4 (A) Transverse CT image showing extensive new bone formation (arrows) along the dorsomedial, medial and
palmaromedial aspects of the distal physis of the radius. Severe bone sclerosis (asterisk) can be seen, indicating chronic disease.
(B) Frontally reconstructed image showing the distal growth plate of the radius. The medial aspect of the distal physis is
elongated (arrows) and an extensive sclerosis is present at the medial aspect of the metaphysis (asterisk). The medial aspect 
of the distal epiphysis of the radius is shorter than the lateral epiphysis. These changes were consecutive to a Salter-Harris
fracture.
460 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
上
Figure 43.5  Transverse CT images of a comminuted fracture of the proximal phalanx at the level of (A) the distal metaphysis,
 Suensn uoyrusuosat (-e e (h) pue 'saseun ieaes (a) pue iejuoiy (a) sisAydeiau ieuxoid () pue sisAqdeip-piu (g)
the intra-articular component and the complexity of the fracture.
the most appropriate treatment option (conservative
 important information gained from CT can give a
 versus surgical) and for optimal surgical planning.
 more accurate diagnosis and can be used in selecting
Most common comminuted fractures are fractures
 the most appropiate treatment and in determining the
 involving the proximal and middle phalanx, and the 
prognosis.
carpal bones.
 Specific fractures that are involved are chip and slab
-je qs pue (9'th ama) so! iedes a jo same
tures of the tarsal bones (third tarsal bone > central
COMPLEX JOINTS (CARPUS,
tarsal bone > second and fourth tarsal bones) (Figures
TARSUS)
43.7 and 43.8).
The detection of fractures in complex joints is some-
FURTHER READING
times difficult by radiography because of the superim-
position of the different bone sructures. In these cases
CT can be used for fracture detection or for defining
Collins JN, Galuppo LD, Thomas HL, Wisner ER and
the exact fracture location and configuration. This
Aqdeiouon Panduo Jo asn (ooz) IM JouioH
461 EQUINE FRACTURES
angiography to evaluate the vacular anatomy of the distal
process of the distal phalanx in a horse using computed
portion of the forelimb of horses. Am J Vet Res 65:
tomography. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 40: 346-9.
1409-20.
 Rose PL, Seeherman H and O'Callaghan M (1997) Computed
Martens P, Ihler CF and Rennesund J (1999) Detection of a
tomographic evaluation of comminuted middle phalangeal
radiographically occult fracture of the lateral palmar
fractures in the horse. Vet Radiol UIltrasound 38: 424-9.
B
 Figure 43.6 Transverse CT images illustrating fractures of a carpus in three different horses. (A) A small fracture fragment
(arrow) is visible at the medial aspect of the right ulnar carpal bone (U). (B) Fracture of the palmar aspect of the intermediate 
carpal bone (I) of a left carpus (arrow). (C) Comminuted fracture of the second carpal bone (Il) of a right carpus. Three small
bone fragments (arrow) are visible at the dorsomedial aspect of the third carpal bone (Ill). IV = fourth carpal bone; A = acces-
 sory carpal bone; R = radial carpal bone.
CTB
B
C
Figure 43.7 (A) Transverse CT image illustrating a complete fracture of central tarsal bone (CTB) (arrows) surrounded by
sclerosis (asterisks). (B) Frontally reconstructed CT image showing a longitudinal fracture (circle) in the mid-portion of the
central tarsal bone. Sclerosis is visible (asterisk). (C) On a sagittally reconstructed CT image, the previously described fracture
(circle) is seen at the plantar aspect of the central tarsal bone. A marked sclerosis of the central tarsal bone is visible on the
three images (asterisks). II = second tarsal bone; Ill = third tarsal bone; IV = fourth tarsal bone; C = calcaneus; T = talus.
462VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Figure 43.8 (A) Transverse CT image showing a bone fragment (arrow) at the plantomedial aspect of the sustentaculum
tali. Smooth periosteal reaction is present along the medial border of the sustentaculum tali. (B) Frontally reconstructed CT
bone defect. C = calcaneus; T = talus.
CHAPTER FORTY-FOUR
EQUINE FOOT
Sarah Puchalski
CT: ANATOMY AND NORMAL
midline, rurning between the tendon lobes. One small
vessel extends across the dorsal aspect of the DDFT
VARIANTS
connecting to the midline vessel at the level of the col-
lateral sesamoidean ligament (CSL) (Figure 44.4). The
The equine hoof capsule houses all components of the
NHool pumoie Xlleauas pue snoauasouoq sI LHQa
musculoskeletal system in addition to laminae, vascu-
In the distal pasterm and heel bulb region, the digital
lature and neural tissue. Anatomic structures of clini-
aul punoie ul asuapoday unul e se sieadde yeaus
cal importance that lie within the hoof capsule include
DDFT (Figure 44.2).
the middle and distal phalanges, comprising the distal
interphalangeal (DIP) joint along with the collateral
Distal interphalangeal collateral
ligaments (CLs) of this joint.
The podotrochlear apparatus includes the deep
ligaments
digital flexor tendon (DDFT), the podotrochlear bursa
 The CLs of the DIP are paired, symmetric soft tissue
(from now called navicular bursa), distal sesamoid
structures that are housed almost completely below
bone (following called navicular bone), distal sesamoi-
the coronary band. Proximally, the ligaments arise
 dean impar ligament and the collateral sesamoidean
from the epicondylar fossae of the middle phalanx,
-naeu aul jo juawe Aiosuadsns 1o (is) juawes
abaxial and slightly dorsal. Near their proximal attach-
lar bone. The distal portion of the digital sheath and
- asaul rmsueioai on proao si adeus na jua
distal digital annular ligament are also housed within
ments change in shape to become flatter in a medial to
the hoof capsule.
lateral direction and longer in a dorsal to palmar direc-
tion as they course distally. This change in shape
appears as 'fanning' out on gross specimens. The CLs
Deep digital flexor tendon
are homogeneous but their margins can be difficult to
The distal portion of this DDFT is housed within the
clearly delineate, particularly near their distal attach-
hoof. Distal to the fetlock joint, the DDFT has two sym-
ment to the distal phalanx. The CLs are slightly less
metric lobes (Figure 44.1). In the pastern region, the
dense than the DDFT at ± 80HU.
tendon lobes are round but become ovoid to fusiform
until the level of the proximal border of the navicular
Collateral sesamoidean ligament
bone. At this level, the tendon maintains a slightly
bilobed appearance but the lobes become flattened in
The CSL is also known as the suspensory ligament of
a dorsal to palmar direction (Figure 44.2). Over the
 the navicular bone or, occasionally, the proximal liga-
flexor cortex of the navicular bone, the tendon flattens
ment of the navicular bone. The ligamentous tissue is
and widens as it approaches its insertion onto the
 present as a tough band of soft tissue that crosses the
palmar flexoria fasciae of the distal phalanx. Distal to
entire proximal border of the navicular bone. At the
the navicular bone, the DDFT is thin and difficult to
proximal exremities of the bone, the ligament sends
differentiate from the distal digital annular ligament
Alerael pue Aepau 'sjuausee leurxoid aul yo
(Figure 44.3). The fibers of the tendon run in a slightly
The proximal porions of both medial and lateral
diverging pattern to their insertion. On angiographic
ligament extend proximally and dorsally to attach to
studies, a small blood vessel is consistently present on
the distal, dorsal aspect of the proximal phalanx.
saunes Auu 'ziemups sa q pauis fy pan 
@ 2011 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
463
464 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Figure 44.1 Normal transverse CT images (A) without contrast and (B) with intra-arterial contrast made at the level of the
distal aspect of the proximal phalanx. The DDFT has a bilobed, symmetric shape and is surrounded by the digital sheath
(arrow).
Figure 44.2 Normal (A) pre- and (B) post-intra-arterial transverse CT images (level of the middle phalanx and navicular
bursa). (A) The DDFT is flattened in a dorsal to palmar direction. There is a small amount of hypodense fluid within the
navicular bursa (white arrow). The dorsal border of the navicular bursa is bound to the CSL (white arrowheads). The collateral
 or ungual cartilages are intermediate attenuation to hoof wall and soft tissues (large white arrows). (B) A small blood vessel
Crosses the entire dorsal aspect of the navicular bursa and a branch extends into the DDFT on mid-line (arrowhead).
465EQUINEFOOT
Figure 44.3 Normal sagittally reconstructed CT images in (A) a bone window, (B) a soft tissue window without contrast
medium and (C) with intra-arterial contrast medium application.
Figure 44.4 Normal (A) pre- and (B) post-intra-arterial-contrast transverse CT images (level of the middle phalanx, navicular
bursa and distal interphalangeal joint (+) show a small amount of fluid in the navicular bursa (arrow). The collateral sesam-
oidean ligament is symmetric (asterisk). There is partial ossification of one collateral cartilage (arrowhead).
466 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Proximally, the CSL is difficult to identify on CT
the CSL. Normally, the peri-articular and subchondral
images. The portion of the CSL that crosses the proxi-
bone surfaces are smooth and well delineated. The
 mal border of the navicular bone separates the three
dorsal, proximal reflection of the joint can be identified
synovial compartments of the foot. The palmar reflec-
dorsal to the distal condyle of the middle phalanx. This
tion of the DIP joint is dorsal to the CSL, the navicular
reflection often has a motled, intermediate density
bursa is palmar and the digital sheath is proximal and
slightly palmar.
vial fluid. Normally, this reflection has a flattened
dorsal to palmar appearance. The carilage of this joint
Navicular impar ligament
is relatively thick but not identified on CT unless a CT
arthrogram is performed. On arthrography, the carti-
This small structure attaches the distal, flexor cortex of
anssh asuapody jo raAel xi e se readde iim asel
the navicular bone to the palmar surface of the distal
 between the subchondral bone shelf and the contrast-
n s    s
 laden synovial fluid. It should appear symmetric and
-jou asuapody se readde ues jeu quaue aul ou
homogeneous with contrast limited to the synovial
tling. This ligament is best seen on sagittal plane refor-
fluid.
matted images made from thin (1mm) transverse or
helical images.
Distal phalanx
Navicular bursa
There are several anatomic features of interest with
 respect to foot lameness. An exhaustive description of
 Locating the structures that provide its boundaries
the distal phalanx anatomy will be reserved for other
best identifies this synovial structure. The dorsal
border of the DDFT always defines its palmar or
sources. The fascia flexoria of the distal phalanx should
 plantar border. Distally, the palmar border of the impar
 be smoothly margined with a clear line of demarcation
between the dense bone of the soft tissue attachments
ligament defines its dorsal border. The flexor cortex
and the trabecular bone of the marrow cavity. The
and fibrocartilage of the flexor cortex of the navicular
distal attachments of the CL of the DIP joint are rela-
bone define its dorsal border at this level. Proximal to
tively shallow, narrow fossae that are located on the
the navicular bone, the proximal portion of the CSL
dorsolateral and dorsomedial aspects of the distal
defines its dorsal border. The synovial fluid of the
phalanx. The dorsal surface of the distal phalanx
bursa is hypodense and in the normal horse may pro-
should be smoothly demarcated. The crena appears as
trude very slightly beyond the abaxial margins of the
 DDFT proximal to the navicular bone. The proximal
a smoothly margined semi-circular indent in the dorsal
 border of the distal phalanx and is present in some
reflection of the bursa can extend proximally to about
 horses. It will extend a variable distance proximally
the mid-level of the middle phalanx but on sagittal
reformatted images maintains a flattened appearance.
depending on the size of the crena. In general, there
will be a clearly demarcated corticomedullary junction
The proximal extension of the bursa will change dra-
deep to the crena and this should help to distinguish
matically in navicular bursitis. The synovium of the
 navicular bursa is minimally contrast enhancing on
it from an area of geographic bone lysis as seen in
septic osteitis. The solar margin can appear irregularly
 contrast-enhanced studies.
margined with variably sized and orientated vascular
canals. There is a vascular canal in the palmar proc-
Collateral or ungual cartilage
esses that enters and exits at the periphery of the distal
These structures have density characteristics that are
phalanx that can cause the false appearance of a solar
intermediate to the DDFT and the hoof capsule. These
margin fracture.
also have a robust system of vascular channels that are
illuminated on contrast studies. They are well visual-
Middle phalanx
ized from the distal and abaxial surface of the distal
 phalanx as they extend proximally to terminate proxi-
The dorsal surface of the middle phalanx is smoothly
mal to the coronary band.
margined deep to the dorsal, proximal reflection of the
 DIP joint. The dorsal aspect of the epicondylar fossae
Distal interphalangeal joint
at the proximal attachment of the CLs should be
smooth and symmetric. The scutum of the palmar
This joint is comprised of the middle and distal
 proximal aspect of the middle phalanx is the attach-
phalanges, the navicular bone, the impar ligament and
ment of multiple soft tissues.
467 EQUINE FOOT
B
Figure 44.5 (A) Pre- and (B) post-intra-arterial-contrast transverse (level of the middle phalanx) CT images of a horse with
a peripherally enhancing DDFT lesion in one lobe (black arrow). Note the concurrent navicular bursa effusion (white arrow)
with enhancement of the synovium.
DISEASE FEATURES
CT features (Figures 44.5 and 44.6)
 Prior to contrast administration:
Computed tomographic examination of the equine
 enlarged injured tendon lobe resulting in shape
foot can be performed with or without contrast media.
change
Evaluation of the bone column is adequately assessed
poorly
defined
and
 irregular
tendon
in the absence of contrast medium; however, evalua-
 margins
tion of the major soft tissue structures implicated in
 decreased tendon density, with the exception of
lameness arising from the foot is greatly improved by
uoeeauu anssh os uam Amun sruon
the addition of intra-arterial contrast media. Protocols
may occur
allow for high quality, standardized image acquisition.
 insertion site onto the distal phalanx: enthesop-
-0nd 'suogeulreu remgainl se Suneadde Aue
tory answer for the clinical question at hand, the
liferation or lysis.
imaging clinician should consider other contrast-
 During regional intra-arterial infusion of contrast
ameliorated procedures such as arthrography or bur-
material:
m m a r jo si s s
一
 the vast majority of DDFT injuries have a
 consider that most diagnostic anesthesia techniques
component of contrast enhancement through
are relatively non-specific.
extravasation of contrast media or neovessel
formation.
Deep digital flexor tendinopathy
 Deep digital flexor tendon injury can occur anywhere
Distal interphalangeal collatera!
in the distal limb, and occasionally, multiple non-
desmopathy
contiguous lesions will be identified. Lesions result in
alterations in classic roentgenologic findings and often
 The anatomic location and orientation of the DIP col-
 DDFT lesions will involve only one lobe thereby pro-
lateral ligaments make them a difficult anatomic struc-
viding an internal control for comparison.
ture to evaluate with any imaging modality.
468 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
B
Figure 44.6 Adult horse with deep digital flexor tendinopathy. Transverse CT images made (level of the middle phalanx)
(A) without contrast and (B) with intra-arterial contrast show bi-axial dorsal border erosions (white arrows) and a core to
dorsal border lesion in one lobe (black arrow). Note that the entire dorsal border of the tendon is abnormally enhancing and
mew vessel formation is present in association with the core lesion. There is also synovial proliferation and enhancement in
the dorsal reflection of the distal interphalangeal joint (asterisk).
CT features (Figure 44.7)
deep digital flexor tendonopathy, navicular bursitis
 Prior to contrast medium administration:
and distal interphalangeal synovitis.
 CLs regionally or focally hypodense
 enlargement can be difficult to detect because
CT features
of their confined anatomic location
 Prior to contrast administration:
 the proximal and distal attachment sites should
juauei aul jo asueuo adeus pue juauasieua
be carefully evaluated for bone proliferation or
as it crosses the proximal border of the navicu-
lysis.
lar bone. It is often best evaluated on reformat-
 During regional intra-arterial infusion of contrast
ted sagittal plane images.
medium:
 Frequently, this structure, when injured cannot 
 in general, the hypodense regions are expected
 be separated from the dorsal aspect of the deep
to contrast enhance
 digital flexor tendon.
 infrequently, particularly with acute ligament
 The proximal portions of the ligament are
injury, swelling within the hoof capsule will
difficult to identify on CT images.
 cause a regional perfusion deficit limited to the
 During regional intra-arterial infusion of contrast
region of the CL.
medium:
 After intra-articular contrast medium administration:
suo Kraerapou Aisnoauaoiaau uano si l
- contrast-laden synovial fluid will occasionally
enhancing.
extend into defects in the CLs.
Navicular impar desmitis
Collateral sesamoidean desmitis
This diminutive ligament is difficult to evaluate on
Collateral sesamoidean  desmitis commonly  occurs
transverse images unless they are made perpendicular
se yons sonoued snieiedde reauoonopod iao um
to its long axis. It is best evaluated on reformatted
469 EQUINE FOOT
C
D
Figure 44.7 Adult horse with a severe desmopathy and enthesopathy of the lateral collateral ligament (LCL) of the distal
interphalangeal joint. Pre-contrast (A) transverse and (B) frontally reconstucted CT images, and intra-arterial contrast (C)
transverse and (D) frontally reconstructed CT images are shown. The LCL is enlarged and heterogeneous (large black arrow)
Teistp aul ie xueteud ieistp aui jo uondrosar snoasso pauareu Aieinaint st aiaui "suauean tepau aui yiim pareduos uaum
attachment site (small black arrows). There is amorphous contrast enhancement of the distal aspect of the LCL.
 images made either in a sagittal plane or transverse to
and palmar navicular bone should be closely scruti-
its long axis. Depending on the orientation of the distal
nized for lesions.
 limb during scanning, this can require reformatting
from volume data.
CT features (Figure 44.9)
 Prior to contrast medium administration:
distention of the bursa with low-density fluid
CT features (Figure 44.8)
within the expected anatomic limits of the
· Prior to contrast medium administration:
structure
 enlargement of the ligament, loss of the nor-
 the fluid accumulation can cause dorsal dis-
 mally mottled architecture.
 placement of the soft tissues dividing the palmar
· During regional intra-arterial infusion of contrast 
aspect of the DIP joint and the dorsal aspect of
medium:
the navicular bursa 
 contrast enhancement distal to the navicular
subacute and chronic bursal distention will
bone.
cause extension of the synovial space abaxially
and proximally.
juon jo uonsnn rae-e leuoan hu
Navicular bursitis
medium:
The hallmark feature of bursitis is synovial effusion. It
 the synovial ining is variably contrast enhanc-
is important to consider the underlying cause of bur-
 ing but generally moderate to markedly enhanc-
sitis, and the deep digital flexor tendon dorsal border
ing with active synovitis.
B
Figure 44.8 Adult horse with navicular impar ligament desmitis. Intra-arterial (A) transverse (level of the distal phalanx)
CT image shows enlargement and enhancement of the distal DDFT (white arrowhead) and the impar ligament (white arrow).
aq ianuot ou ues Lhaa aul pue quaueat redu aul araum aheu Io paorinsuosat Aeaes aul uo Tam smous sul (a)
identified as separate structures (white arrows).
口
Figure 44.9 Adult horse with synovitis of the distal interphalangeal (DIP) joint and navicular bursitis. Transverse CT images
(A) without contrast and (B) with intra-arterial contrast (level of the middle phalanx, navicular bursa and DIP joint) show a
severe effusion of the navicular bursa (white arrow) and DIP joint (+). The dorsal reflection of the DIP joint has synovial prolif-
eration and marked synovial enhancement (white arrowheads). The collateral sesamoidean ligament is asymmetric (asterisk).
471 EQUINE FOOT
Ossification of the collateral cartilages
in the overall quantity of enhancement. Vessel
ingrowth will also occur with more clearly defined
Mineralization of the collateral cartilages is readily
 blood vessels margins.
identified on CT. Its significance must be evaluated
in light of the clinical signs and presence of other
pathology.
FURTHER READING
Contrast enhancement and
Puchalski SM, Galuppo LD, Hormof WJ and Wisner ER
tendon healing
(2007) Intraarterial contrast-enhanced computed tomogra-
The pattern of contrast enhancement in tendon injuries
 phy of the equine distal extremity. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 48:
changes over time. Two common patterns are most
21-9.
frequently seen.
 Puchalski SM, Galuppo LD, Drew CP and Wisner ER (2009)
 Use of contrast-enhanced computed tomography to assess
angiogenesis in deep digital flexor tendonopathy in a
● Lesions that are seen to have a peripheral rim of
horse. Vet Radiol Lltrasound 44: 292-7.
contrast enhancement with a central avascular
 Puchalski SM, Snyder JR, Hornof WJ, Macdonald MH and
 portion will fill in with vascularized tissue.
 Galuppo LD (2005) Contrast enhanced computed tomog-
 Lesions that have amorphous enhancement will
raphy of the equine distal extremity. In: 51 Anmual
become more organized, frequently with a decrease
Convention of the AAEP, ivis.org, Seattle, WA, USA.
CHAPTER FORTY-FIVE
EQUINE FETLOCK
Katrien Vanderperren and Hendrik-Jan Bergman
CT: ANATOMY AND NORMAL
ligaments. The sraight, oblique, cruciate and short
Aiosuadsns aul jo jred e aie sjuauesi ueapiouesas
VARIANTS (F1GURES 45.1
apparatus, preventing hyperextension of the fetlock
AND 45.2)
joint. All distal sesamoidean ligaments originate from
the base of the proximal sesamoid bones and the
The equine fetlock joint is a high motion joint com-
 palmar ligament. The straight sesamoidean ligament
inserts on the proximal aspect of the middle phalanx,
posed of the third metacarpal/metatarsal bone, the
 proximal phalanx and two proximal sesamoid bones.
whereas the other distal sesamoidean ligaments insert
The bony components of the joint can be seen in
on the proximal phalanx.
great detail with CT. There is some shape variation
The articular cartilage in the fetlock joint is 1mm
between the proximal sesamoid bones with the medial
saaq pue jof a jo poadse exod a ie y
thinner distally (0.4-0.5mm); it can be identified after
proximal sesamoid bone being more cuboidal than
the administration of intra-articular contrast medium.
the lateral one and with the proximal sesamoid bones
of the forelimbs being more elongated and triangular
than the ones of the hindlimb.
DISEASE FEATURES
 Anatomic variation in thickness and bone density of
the subchondral bone exists between different regions
Osteoarthrosis
of the distal condyles of the third metacarpal/
The fetlock joint is frequently affected by osteoarthritic
metatarsal bones. This variation is dependent on train-
A ras no Aed aq n um 'sae
 ing and is generally more marked in horses undergo-
osteoarthrosis refers to an age-related disease of the
ing intense training. A zone of increased density runs
joint, whereas secondary osteoarthrosis is associated
obliquely from the palmar/plantar apical region of the
with previous damage to the joint. Chronic mechanical
third metacarpal/metatarsal bone to the dorsal proxi-
overload leads to a common fetlock osteoarthrosis
mal aspect of the distal epiphysis. The subchondral
in the palmar/plantar aspect of the metacarpal/
bone of the palmar/plantar distal aspect of the con-
metatarsal condyles of racehorses, also called palmar /
dyles is more dense compared to the bone deep to the
plantar osteochondral disease.
sagittal ridge on the palmar/plantar aspects. The
 lateral condyle usually appears more dense than the
CT features (Figures 45.1 and 45.3-45.5)
medial.
Prior to contrast medium administration:
 Most soft tissue components of the fetlock region
 joint distention due to effusion and swelling
 can be wellidentified by using the soft tissue setings.
resorptive subchondral bone lesions
However, the distinction of structures with the same
changes in subchondral density
density remains difficult (i.e. superficial and deep
 subchondral bone sclerosis
parts of the collateral ligaments, distal sesamoidean
 osteophytes at joint margins and/or enthesio-
ligaments (short and oblique; cruciate and straight),
 phytes at sites of capsular/ligaments insertions
narrowing of joint space
of the collateral ligaments). Regional intra-arterial con-
 palmar/plantar osteochondral disease: resorp-
trast infusion can be used for the evaluation of these
tive subchondral bone lesions in the palmar/
soft tissue structures. The main indication of CT in the
plantar aspect of the metacarpal/metatarsal
fetlock region is desmitis of the distal sesamoidean
condyles.
saunes Auu 'ziemups sa q pauis fy pan 
@ 2011 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
473
474 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
+
D
Figure 45.1 (A,B) Transverse and (C,D) sagittal reconstructed CT images of a right fetlock joint of thoroughbred race horse
in training. (A) The lateral aspect of the condyle shows mild sclerosis and (B) the medial aspect shows moderate sclerosis of
the palmar aspect of the metacarpal condyle. 1 = mild degree of sclerosis; 2 = moderate increase of subchondral bone sclerosis.
White lines in (A) and (B) denote scan plane for (C) and (D) respectively (images courtesy of Sarah Puchalski, University of
Davis, Califormia).
·After intra-articular contrast medium admini-
 plantar aspect of the metacarpal/metatarsal
stration:
condyles.
cartilage defects: partial to full penetration of
contrast medium in the articular cartilage
Subchondral bone cysts
cartilage fragment can also be present
cartilage
 thickening/thinning:
：increased/
Subchondral bone cysts or ‘osseous cyst like lesions'
decreased space between the subchondral bone
are usually seen in young horses. Trauma to the carti-
and contrast medium
lage or subchondral bone, infiltration of synovial fluid
palmar/plantar osteochondral disease: minimal
through an articular defect, chronic osteoarthritis, frac-
to severe disruption of articular cartilage, col-
 ture, ischemia and inflammation have been proposed
lapse of the articular surface in the palmar/
 as potential causes. Subchondral cystic lesions may
475 EQUINE FETLOCK
B
 Figure 45.2 (A) Transverse and (B) sagittally reconstructed CT images obtained after intra-articular administration of con-
trast medium in a left fetlock joint of a normal horse demonstrating the cartilage. 1 = contrast medium in the dorsal synovial
recess; 2 = cartilage of the dorsal aspect of the condyle of the third metacarpal bone; 3 = cartilage of the palmar aspect of the
-sas ieuxod au jo ar = g issaat eous reed au u upau isus =  iauoq iediau pr au jo apuo
moid bone; 6 = cartilage of the proximal phalanx.
B
periarticular new bone formation on the dorsomedial and dorsolateral aspect of the proximal phalanx is present; 2 = new
bone formation at the articular margins.
occur in the condyles (medial > lateral) of the distal
 communication with the adjacent joint is often
third metacarpal, iess frequenly metatarsal bone, the
identifiable. Most subchondral cystic lesions of
 proximal sesamoid bones and the proximal phalanx.
 the condyles open to the joint just dorsal to the 
transverse ridge.
CT features (Figure 45.6)
 During regional intra-arterial infusion of contrast 
· Prior to contrast medium administration:
medium:
- hypodense focus (lucent defect), varying in size
 enhancement of the soft tissue within the
and shape, surrounded by a sclerotic border
defect.
(rim)
476 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
 During regional intra-arterial infusion of contrast
medium:
 disruption/reduction/thickening of the palmar
ligament
 contrast enhancing palmar ligament 
new vessel formation.
 After  intra-articular contrast  medium  admini-
stration:
 detection of possible communication of the joint
 space with the lytic lesions.
Osteochondral fragments
Fragments in the fetlock joint occur at different sites
In the dorsal part of the joint, fragments can be seen at
the sagittal ridge or the condyles of the third metacar-
 pal/metatarsal bone, in the synovial pad and at the
at the palmar (plantar) aspect of the fetlock joint
include fragments originating from the palmar /plantar
aspect of the proximal phalanx immediately medial or
lateral to the sagittal groove, fragments arising from
 the palmar /plantar eminence of the proximal phalanx,
 fragments deriving from the base of the proximal sesa-
Figure 45.4 Transverse CT image obtained after intra-
 moid bone and fragments originating from the palmar /
articular administration of contrast medium in a right fetlock
plantar condyles.
joint with a small fall-thickness cartilage lesion in the medial 
palmar condyle. A small defect in the cartilage is filled with
CT features (Figure 45.9)
contrast material (circle).
1
Separate osseous fragments with a low density or
density similar to the cortical bone.
Adjacent indentation (not always present).
After intra-articular contrast administration:
contrast medium can enter (fill) the defect con-
Fractures
firming a communication with the joint space.
Fractures of the fetlock joint are discussed in
Chapter 43.
Osteomyelitis of the proxima!
sesamoid bones
Soft tissue injuries
The entire proximal sesamoid bone can be affected.
Desmitis of the sesamoidean ligaments
 However, an unusual sesamoidean infection involving
 Injuries of the oblique and straight sesamoidean liga-
most of the axial borders of the proximal sesamoids
ments are common. Injuries of the cruciate sesamoi-
has been described, where either one or both proximal
dean ligaments have been described, whereas desmitis
 sesamoid bones can be affected. This disorder is typi-
of the short sesamoidean ligaments has not been
cally associated with inflammation of the palmar
reported.
(intersesamoidean) ligament.
CT features (Figures 45.10 and 45.11)
CT features (Figures 45.7 and 45.8)
· Prior to contrast medium administration:
 Prior to contrast medium administration:
 enlargement of the ligament
cavitary lesions within cancellous bone
 aul jo anuereadde asuapodky 'snoauagorajau 
axial border bone destruction (primarily at the
ligament
mid-body and apical region of the axial borders,
hypodense defects at the attachments of the
although the whole proximal sesamoid bone
ligaments
can be involved).
 small bony fragments at the attachment sites.
477 EQUINE FETLOCK
B
Figure 45.5 (A,C) Transverse and (B,D) sagittally reconstructed CT images of the left front fetlock joint before and after
 administration of intra-articular contrast medium in a horse with palmar osteochondral disease. 1 = bone defect in the pal-
marodistal aspect of the medial metacarpal condyle surrounded by sclerosis; 2 = loss of articular cartilage and subchondral
 bone; 3 = small air bubbles due to intra-articular injection of contrast medium; 4 = small osteochondral fragment at the palmar
aspect of the lateral condyle. White lines in (A) and (C) denote scan plane for (B) and (D) respectively (images courtesy of
Sarah Puchalski, University of Davis, California).
●During regional intra-arterial infusion of contrast
tion of subchondral osseous lesions in seven horses with
medium:
chronic synovitis. Eq Vet J 28: 480-8.
 mild to severe, focal to diffuse enhancement of
Riggs CM, Whitehouse GH and Boyde A (1999) Structural
the ligament
variation of the distal condyles of the third metacarpal
 f ia ba 'asio au u saoq iesiia p pu
- new vessel formation.
130-9.
Rijkenhuizen ABM, van den Top GB and van den Belt
AJ (2005) The role of computer tomography in the
 surgical management of cystic lesions. Pferdeheikunde 21:
FURTHER READING
317-21.
Vanderperren K, Ghaye B, Snaps F and Saunders JH (2008)
Firth EC, Rogers CW, Doube M and Jopson NB (2005)
Evaluation of computed tomographic anatomy of the
Musculoskeletal responses of 2-year old Thoroughbred
equine metacarpophalangeal joint. Am J Vet Res 69:
631-8.
metacarpal and third metatarsal bones. NZ Vet J 53:
Young BD, Samii VF, Mattoon JS, Weisbrode SE and Bertone
101-12.
 AL (2007) Subchondral bone density and cartilage degen-
Hanson JA, Seeherman HJ, Kirker-Head CA and O'Callaghan
eration patterms in osteoarthritic metacarpal condyles of
MW (1996) The role of computed tomography in evalua-
horses. Arr J Vet Res 68: 841-9.
478 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Figure 45.6 (A,C) Transverse and (B,D) frontally reconstructed CT images obtained before and after intra-articular admin-
istration of contrast medium of a horse with an incomplete fracture of the distal third metacarpal condyle with osseous cyst
like lesion formation (right fetlock joint). There is a lucent fissure (1) extending from the palmar aspect of the distal third
metacarpal condyle. As it extends dorsally, it enlarges into a cystic lucency (2) with a surrounding rim of sclerosis (3). After
the arthrogram, contrast medium is suspected to be within the lucent lesion (4).
479EQUINE FETLOCK
Figure 45.7 Transverse CT images of the right metatarsophalangeal joint prior to (A) and after (B) administration of intra-
articular contrast medium. 1 = osteolysis of the axial aspects of both proximal sesamoid bones. After administration of contrast
medium (2) into the metatarsophalangeal joint, the plantar aspect of the joint margin is maintained. No direct communication 
of the joint space and the lytic lesions is identified.
480 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
D
Figure 45.8 (A) Transverse and (B) sagittally reconstructed CT images prior to and (C) transverse and (D) frontally recon-
structed CT images after regional intra-arterial administration of contrast medium of a hindlimb with osteomyelitis of the
fetlock joint. 1 =marked, irregularly margined osteolysis of the entire medial proximal sesamoid bone, most pronounced at
the abaxial border;2 = enlarged, hypodense, irregularly margined medial branch of the suspensory ligament; 3 = the ligament
is markedly contrast enhancing. Note also the marked soft tissue swelling surrounding the medial suspensory branch;
4 = moderate metatarsophalangeal joint effusion.
1 = small low-density fragment dorsal to the sagittal ridge; 2 = smaller low-density fragment just dorsal to the medial condyle.
A
B
Figure 45.10 (A) Transverse pre-contrast and (B) post-contrast CT images of a horse with an incomplete fracture of the first
phalanx and lateral oblique sesamoidean ligament injury (left fetlock). This horse was lame for 6 weeks and radiographs and
ultrasound were negative. 1 = clearly demarcated cleft in the proximal subchondral bone plate of the proximal first phalanx;
2 = iregular periosteal proliferation at the dorsal margin of the proximal phalanx; 3 = lateral oblique sesamoidean ligament 
with marked contrast enhancement. These two conditions are sometimes seen together.
482VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
A
B
C
Figure 45.11 (A) Transverse pre-contrast, (B) transverse and (C) sagittal post-contrast CT images of a horse with a proximal
straight sesamoidean ligament desmopathy and mild bi-axial oblique sesamoidean desmitis (left fetlock). 1 = the straight
-est ueapiouresas anbrqo aul =7 iasuereadde asuapodAy pue snoauasaraay e sey pue pasieua st juauesi ueaprouesas
ments are mildly hypodense; 3 = diffuse contrast enhancement of the straight sesamoidean ligament; 4 = the oblique sesam-
oidean ligaments show mild contrast enhancement.
CHAPTER FORTY-SIX
EQUINE UPPER
LIMBS
CARPUS, TARSUS, STIFLE
Hendrik-Jan Bergman and Jimmy Saunders
The disorders discussed in this chapter will be
juasaid st auoq ledies uy 1o/pue sg e Xieuoisesno
restricted to those for which CT represents a clear diag-
 It contains three carpal joints: radiocarpal, intercarpal
nostic surplus value compared with other imaging
uof ald e si sol re s ledriadins pe
modalities.
with minimal movement. The carpal synovial sheath
encloses the digital flexor tendons of the forelimb start-
 ing from a level of ±10 cm proximal to the radiocarpal
CT: ANATOMY AND NORMAL
joint to near the middle of the third metacarpus. The
palmar carpal ligament is thick and dense, is closely
VARIANTS (TABLE 46.1)
attached to the carpal bones and forms the dorsal wall
 of the carpal canal. The accessory carpal bone and its
A detailed CT anatomy description of the carpal, tarsal
 corresponding ligaments form the lateral wal of this
 and stifle joints already exists. The CT anatomy will
canal, whereas the mediopalmar wall is formed by the
focus on the features relevant for the clinical disorders
carpal flexor retinaculum. The interosseus medius
that are discussed in this chapter.
 muscle (suspensory ligament) arises at the level of the
distal row of the carpal bones and the proximal part of
the third metacarpal bone.
The carpal region
CT is particularly useful for diagnosis of injuries affect-
The tarsal joint
ing the carpal bones (sclerosis, fracture), the wall and
contents of the carpal sheath (deep digital flexor
Native CT of the tarsus is sufficient for evaluation of
tendon, superficial digital flexor tendon, accessory
the bone and soft tissue structures. CT arthrography of
ligament of the superficial digital flexor tendon, flexor
the tarsus may be useful for the detection of cartilage
retinaculum, palmar carpal ligament), and the proxi-
lesions, while intra-arterial contrast administration is
mal attachment of the suspensory ligament. The use of
 indicated for evaluation of the proximal suspensory
regional intra-arterial contrast infusion is mandatory
ligament.
for evaluation of these soft tissue structures. CT
The equine tarsus is an anatomically complex region
arthrography is an interesting option for cartilage
with many joints, ligaments and tendons. This joint
disorders of the radiocarpal, intercarpal or carpometa-
consists of two large (talus, calcaneus) and four small
carpal joint, or disorders of the small interosseus/
(central, fused first and second, third and fourth tarsal
carpal ligaments. A separate evaluation of these short
snoauu Aq raaon ida are um 'saoq (saoq
ligaments is not possible on native CT.
ligaments. Only the ligaments relevant for this chapter
The carpus includes the distal radius, the radial,
will be discussed. The interosseus talocalcaneal liga-
 -xond au ui sauoq Aiossanoe pue reun 'aepauau
ment fills the tarsal sinus, connecting the talus and
mal row, the second, third and fourth bones in the
calcaneus. The tarsal foramina at the talocalcaneal-
distal row, and the proximal metacarpi and the
centroquartal, talocentrodistal and tarsometatarsal
structures adjacent to these osseous components.
 joints are filled with interosseus ligaments connecting
Veterinary Computed Tomography, First Edition. Edited by Tobias Schwarz, Jimmy Saunders.
@ 2011 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
483
484 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Table 46.1
DISEASE FEATURES
 Procedures included in a routine CT examination of
the upper joints.
General disorders
Carpus
Tarsus
Stifle
Fractures, luxations
Native CT
yes
yes
ves
Fractures of these complex joints, a main indication for
CT arthrogram
yes
yes
yes
CT, will be discussed in Chapter 43.
Intra-arterial CT
yes
yes
no
Subchondral bone cysts
the distal talus with the proximal central tarsal bone,
Subchondral bone cysts or ‘osseous cyst-like lesions'
the distal central tarsal bone with the proximal third
are usually seen in young horses. Trauma to the carti-
tarsal bone and the distal third tarsal bone with the
lage or subchondral bone, infiltration of synovial fluid
proximal canon bone. The distal plantar ligament 
through an articular defect, chronic osteoarthritis, frac-
attaches at the distal aspect of the sustentaculum tali.
 ture, ischemia and inflammation have been proposed
Having a fibrocartilagenous structure it contributes to
as potential causes.
the delineation of the dorsal wall of the tarsal sheath.
The distal plantar ligament covers the suspensory
CT features (Figures 46. 1-46.3)
ligament, continuing distally as the distai check
●Prior to contrast medium administration:
ligament.
solitary or multiple circumscribed hypodense
focus (lucent defect), varying in size and shape,
often surrounded by a sclerotic border (rim)
The stifle joint
 communication with the adjacent joint is often
CT is particularly useful to diagnose injuries affecting
identifiable.
the femorotibial joints (mainly menisci and cranial
 During regional intra-arterial infusion of contrast
meniscotibial ligaments) and the cruciate ligaments.
medium:
Disorders affecting these structures are difficult, or
 enhancement of the soft tissue within the pos-
even impossible to diagnose using other imaging
sible defect.
 modalities. The use of CT arthrography is mandatory
 After intra-articular contrast medium administration:
for accurate visualization. CT arthrography requires
contrast medium can enter (fill) the defect con-
the injection of contrast medium in the three compart-
firming a communication with the joint space.
ments of the joint performed individually as the com-
munication between them is far less frequent than
Cartilage lesions
reported. Ultrasound guidance facilitates the injection
of contrast medium.
Cartilage lesions may be associated with developmen-
 The stifle joint has three compartments: femoropa-
tal (e.g. osteochondrosis) or acquired (e.g. trauma,
 tellar, femorotibial medial and lateral. Two menisci are
 osteoarthrosis) disorders. The cartilage may appear
present between the articular cartilage surfaces of the
thicker, thinner or may show a fissure /fracture depend-
femur and tibia condyles of the later joint. They are
 ing on the disease process. Cartilaginous abnormalities
attached to the tibia by the cranial and caudal menis-
without other joint lesions are not always associated
 cotibial ligaments. Their semi-lunar (proximal concave)
with clinical signs in horses.
distal convex) shape compensates for the incongru-
ence of the femorotibial articular surfaces. The femur
CT features (Figures 46.4 and 46.5)
and tibia are joined by two extra-articular cruciate liga-
 After intra-articular contrast medium administration:
ments, which support and stabilize the joint. The
 cartilage thickening: increased space between
cranial cruciate ligament runs in a craniodistal direc-
the subchondral bone and contrast medium
tion, originating from the caudal lateral surface of the
cartilage thinning: decreased space between the
 intercondylar region of the femur and inserting crani-
subchondral bone and contrast medium
ally and medially on the medial eminence of the tibia,
cartilage defect partial or full:
whereas the caudal cruciate ligament is oriented in a
 direct contact between the contrast medium
caudodistal direction, starting at the cranial medial
(layer) and the adjacent subchondral bone
aspect of the intercondylar fossa of the femur and
 partial to full penetration of contrast medium
inserts on the popliteal notch of the tibia.
in the articular cartilage.
485 EQUINE UPPER LIMBS (CARPUS, TARSUS, STIFLE)
A
B
Figure 46.1 Nine-year-old Warmblood gelding with a subchondral bone cyst of the stifle joint. (A) Pre-contrast frontally
reconstructed CT image shows a large rounded lucency in the distal portion of the medial femoral condyle (asterisk) with an
apparent communication with the articular surface (arrow). (B) CT arthrogram (of the three joints) shows contrast medium
extending into the cyst confirming communication with the joint.
B
C
Figure 46.2 Ten-year-old Warmblood mare with diagnosis of subchondral cyst-like lesion of the third tarsal bone. (A)
Sagittally reconstructed, (B) transverse and (C) frontally reconstructed CT images show an iregularly margined, lobular lucent
lesion in the mid-portion of the third tarsal bone (arrowhead). There is also a small osseous fragment at the dorsal, proximal
aspect of the central tarsal bone at the proximal intertarsal joint (arrow).
Specific disorders of the carpal, tarsal
 bone architecture. This increased stiffness is detrimen-
and stifle joint
tal to bone compliance and results in vulnerability
to mechanical damage. The end stage of third carpal
The carpal joint
bone disease is thought to be slab fractures; the prog-
nosis for return to athletic function is guarded.
 Sclerosis of the carpal bones
However, it is not known at what point increases
Sclerosis of the third carpal bone is common in race-
 in sclerosis indicate the onset of disease or increased
horses. The third carpal bone shows a rapid response 
 risk of third carpal bone fracture. Subchondral lucency
by increasing bone mineral density and altering 
 facet of third carpal bone may involve the same
486 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
B
Figure 46.3 Subchondral bone cyst in the carpus of two different patients. (A) Fifteen-year-old Warmblood mare. Transverse
CT image shows a lucent lesion in the palmaromedial aspect of the ulnar carpal bone (arrow). (B) Eleven-year-old Warmblood
 gelding. Transverse CT image obtained during intra-arterial infusion shows a round subchondral lucency at the palmar aspect
of the intermediate carpal bone (arrow).
B
performed with contrast material in the medial and lateral femorotibial joints. (A) Frontally and (B) sagittally reconstructed
CT image of a full-thickness cartilage lesion shows contrast medium that abuts the subchondral bone of the femoral condyle
(arrowhead).
qers apanand sdeuad pue ssanond lesnonorssudoedg
Tear/Desmitis/Avulsion of the intercarpal
fractures.
ligaments
CT features (Figure 46.6)
Tearing of the intercarpal ligaments has been recog-
 Increased density (sclerosis) of the third carpal
nized as a cause of effusion and occasionally lameness
bone (radial facet).
 eda rd ea  sasonnn 
Commonly  in combination  with subchondral
 is more commonly affected than lateral one. In contrast
lucency(ies).
to racehorses, these lesions can be identified in non-
 Degenerative bone damages with active sclerosis.
racehorses  without associated osteochondral abnor-
487 EQUINE UPPER LIMBS (CARPUS, TARSUS, STIFLE)
A
B
Figure 46.5 Adult horse with cartilage injury of the left tarsal joint. (A) Sagittally reconstructed and (B) transverse CT
arthrogram show focal fall-thickness cartilage defect (contrast medium in contact with subchondral bone) at the proximal
 part of the medial aspect of the lateral talar ridge (arrows).
malities. Injuries of other intercarpal ligaments, such
carpal ligament), exostosis distal radius or carpal bone
as between the second and third carpal bones can also
Xmlun nonsuaxalady oi anp are asaull jo jso satmlun
be observed.
CT features (Figures 46.8 and 46.9)
CT features (Figure 46.7)
 Prior to contrast medium administration:
· Prior to contrast medium administration:
 enlargement of the involved structures result-
 subchondral  bone
 damage/osteochondral
 ing in shape change (tendon injury)
fragmentation
 decrease in tendon density (hypodense)
 associated bone lesions with avulsion of the
carpal sheath distention with or without syno-
 lateral palmar intercarpal ligament:
:lucent
vial proliferation
 zones in the ulnar carpal bone, avulsion frag-
associated bone/carpal sheath wall (palmar
ments originating from the medial palmar
carpal ligament) lesions.
 aspect of the ulnar carpal bone.
 During regional intra-arterial infusion of contrast
· During regional intra-arterial infusion of contrast
medium:
medium:
moderate to marked contrast enhancement of
 contrast enhancement within the affected inter-
the involved structure
carpal ligaments
 new vessel formation(s)
possible
 enlargement
of
the
intercarpal
 arterial displacement/compression.
ligament
new vessel formation.
Common palmar carpal ligament
After intra-articular contrast medium administration:
 desmitis/enthesopathy
possible
cartilage erosion (partial
or full
thickness).
A particular disorder of the carpal sheath is palmar
carpal ligament desmitis and enthesopathy.
Carpal canal (tunnel) syndrome
CT features (Figures 46.10 and 46.11)
Carpal canal syndrome (carpal sheath effusion) is rec-
 Prior to contrast medium administration:
ognized in horses mainly due to distal radial osteo-
local thickening and heterogeneous density of
chondromas, injuries of carpal sheath contents (flexor
 the common palmar carpal ligament, affecting 
[ lans a jo pua rnossase 'suoual
mostly the lateral part; diffuse thickening is less
flexor tendon), injuries of carpal sheath wall (palmar
488 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
+
Figure 46.6 Adult horse with third carpal bone sclerosis on the right front leg. (A) Transverse CT image shows increased
density at the dorsal aspect of the radial carpal bone (asterisk) and the dorsomedial aspect of the intermediate carpal bone
(asterisk). Smooth periosteal reactions are visible at the dorsal aspect of the intermediate carpal bone (arrows). (B) Transverse
CT image shows increased density at the dorsal aspect of the radial facet of the third carpal bone (asterisk). (C) Sagittally
reconstructed CT image (as shown by white line in B) shows increased density at the dorsal aspect of the intermediate and
third carpal bones (asterisks).
Proximal suspensory desmitis (enthesopathy)
ligament
Proximal suspensory desmitis is a primary, multifacto-
 carpal canal effusion often associated
rial degenerative condition that may affect both fore-
palmar aspect of the distal radial physeal scar
and hindlimbs, uni- or bilaterally. Conformational
irregular at the proximal attachment of the
abnormalities and high-level performance training
common palmar carpal ligament.
 have been suggested as predisposing factors
 During regional intra-arterial infusion of contrast 
medium:
CT features (Figures 46.12 and 46.13)
- local or diffuse, irregularly marginated, hetero-
·Prior to contrast medium administration:
 geneous contrast enhancement
Thickening of one (asymmetry of the heads) or
- new vessel formation due to inflammation.
 both heads of the suspensory ligament with
489 EQUINE UPPER LIMBS (CARPUS, TARSUS, STIFLE)
B
Figure 46.7 Seven-year-old Warmblood mare with intercarpal ligament injury of the left carpus. (A) Pre-contrast transverse
CT image appears normal. (B) Transverse CT image during regional intra-arterial infusion of contrast medium shows irregular
enhancement and new vessel formation within the intercarpal ligament between the radial and intermediate carpal bones
(arrow).
Figure 46.8 Nine-year-old, Arab gelding with a tear in the distal part of the superior check ligament. (A) Pre-contrast trans-
verse CT image shows a hypodense lesion (arrowhead) within the superior check ligament. (B) CT image obtained during
regional intra-arterial infusion of contrast medium shows an irregularly shaped hypodense region in the distal portion of the
superior check ligament with peripheral contrast enhancement (arrowheads).
490 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
A
B
Figure 46.9 Adult Warmblood gelding with superficial digital flexor tendinopathy with associated carpal canal synovitis
on the left carpus. (A) Pre-contrast transverse CT image shows an enlarged superficial digital flexor tendon containing a
hypodense area (arrows) just distal to its musculotendinous junction within the carpal canal. There is moderate carpal canal
effusion. (B) Transverse CT image obtained during regional intra-arterial infusion of contrast medium (same level as A) shows
marked contrast enhancement with marked neovascular formation of the previously mentioned superficial digital flexor
tendon lesion (arrows).
 consequent palmar displacement of the inferior
The tarsal joint
check ligament and flexor tendon bundle.
Distal plantar ligament desmitis/desmopathy
 Affected ligaments may present a mottled
appearance with hypodense areas and
a
CT features (Figure 46.15)
 decreased definition of the margins.
Prior to contrast medium administration:
Soft tissue mineralization.
 dystrophic mineralization within the ligament
Osseous proliferations (exostosis) at the proxi-
 associated bone changes.
 mal palmar/plantar aspect of the MCI1/MTIII
 During regional intra-arterial infusion of contrast 
may extend around the abaxial margins of both
medium:
heads or between the heads of the ligament.
 moderate to marked contrast enhancement due
 Osseous resorption is rarely observed.
to extravasation (inflammation) and new vessel
 Endosteal sclerosis may be observed deep to the
formation.
ligament attachment.
Syndesmopathies of the second and third meta-
tarsal bones - third and fourth metacarpal bones
 Desmitis interosseous tarsal ligaments
(Figure 46.14).
 During regional intra-arterial infusion of contrast
 Lesions in the small interosseous ligaments are some-
medium:
 Contrast enhancement may be absent, minimal,
horses with tarsal pain.
moderate or severe, diffuse or local, bilateral or
unilateral, heterogeneous or homogeneous.
CT features (Figure 46.15)
Hypodense
ligament
with
 peripheral
Prior to contrast medium administration:
enhancement.
 osseous proliferations at the attachment sites of
 Contrast medium extravasation and new vessel
the affected ligament.
formation.
491 EQUINE UPPER LIMBS (CARPUS, TARSUS, STIFLE)
Figure 46.10 Friesian mare with regionally extensive palmar carpal ligament injury. (A) On a pre-contrast transverse CT
 image the palmar carpal ligament is thickened at the origin of the lateral aspect (arrowheads). The abnormality is accompanied
[eajre-enu Sunnp paureiqo aseu Io asraasuein (a) 'snipen ieisip aul jo ioadse iepnes aul Suote Suapouar soaso Aq
infusion of contrast medium (same level as A) shows marked contrast enhancement of the lesion described in (A) (arrow-
heads). (C) Reference transverse CT image of a different horse obtained during intra-arterial infusion of contrast medium at
shows marked palmar carpal ligament enhancement (arrowheads) extending distally up to the level of the accessory carpal
bone. (E) Reference sagittally reconstructed CT image of a different horse obtained after intra-arterial contrast administration
at the same level as D.
492 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Meniscotibial ligament
desmopathy/enthesopathy (Figures
46.16-46.19)
 The cranial and caudal meniscotibial ligaments are
these ligaments are frequently seen.
CT features
· Prior to contrast medium administration:
 Osseous changes at the attachment site on the
tibia of the cranial medial
meniscotibial
ligament (cranial >>> caudal). Resorption is
<< 1embain) uogeaoid ueui juanbay aiou
smooth).
 Disruption of the meniscotibial ligament can be 
 observed in severe cases.
After intra-articular contrast medium admini-
stration:
Contrast medium within the cranial medial or
caudal medial meniscotibialligament. The outline
of contrast is mostly irregular and is more or less
Figure 46.11 Adult horse with palmar carpal ligament
extended depending on the gravity of the lesion.
 Contrast medium may extend in the adjacent
infusion of contrast material shows moderate carpal sheath
bone (tibia) or between the ligament and the
effusion, iregular bone proliferation along the caudo-lateral
 Cranial hom of the meniscus.
aspect of the distal radius (arrowheads) and moderate
 palmar carpal ligament contrast enhancement (arrow).
 The same changes rarely affect the craniallateral
meniscotibial ligament.
Meniscal injuries (Figures 46.18 and 46.19)
 During regional intra-arterial infusion of contrast
medium:
Meniscal tears are frequently seen in the cranial aspect
 irregular contrast enhancement  within the
of the femorotibial joint, although lesions are occasion-
affected ligament
ally encountered caudally, especially in the medial
new vessel formation.
compartment. Concurrent disorders, mainly articular
cartilage disease but also cruciate ligament lesions, are
 frequently present in horses with meniscal injuries.
Proximal suspensory desmitis (desmopathy)
See Carpus.
CT features
·Prior to contrast medium administration:
abnormal shape of the cranial horn of the medial
The stifle joint
meniscus
The majority of disorders affecting the equine stifle
 meniscal extrusion or protrusion can be seen on
joint are traumatic or degenerative in origin.
frontally reformatted images.
Figure 46.12 Seven-year-old Warmblood gelding with bilateral suspensory desmitis. (A) Pre-contrast transverse CT image
of the left proximal metacarpus shows the proximal suspensory ligament (arrows) and thickening of the palmar cortex of the
third metacarpus (asterisk). (B) On a transverse CT image obtained during regional intra-arterial administration of contrast
medium (same level as A) the proximal suspensory ligament is heterogeneous with contrast enhancement within both the
medial and lateral lobes. Within the lateral lobe, the enhancement is irregular and central (arrow). (C) Pre-contrast transverse
CT image of the right proximal metacarpus shows the body of the suspensory ligament severely enlarged and heterogeneous
(asterisk). (D) On a transverse CT image obtained during regional intra-arterial administration of contrast medium (same
level as C), the body of the suspensory ligament is severely enlarged and markedly contrast enhancing. Within its body,
several peripherally enhancing regions without central enhancement are identified.
493 EQUINE UPPER LIMBS (CARPUS, TARSUS, STIFLE)
494 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
A
B
Figure 46.13  Four-year-old Warmblood gelding with medial proximal suspensory ligament injury and associated enthesop-
athy. (A) Pre-contrast transverse CT image shows regions of irregular bone reaction at the palmar aspect of the third meta-
carpal bone (arrows) in association with the medial head of the suspensory ligament origin (asterisk). There is bone reaction
at the palmaromedial aspect of MCll (arrowhead). (B) Transverse CT image obtained during regional intra-arterial infusion
of contrast shows marked neovascularization of the medial head of the proximal suspensory ligament (arrows).
After intra-articular contrast medium admini-
 in severe cases, a rim of osteophytes on the
stration:
 caudal and medial aspect of the medial tibial
 contrast medium within the meniscus, mostly
condyle (cruciate ligament enthesopathy).
in the cranial horn or at the junction with the
After intra-articular contrast medium admini-
meniscotibial ligament
stration:
 contrast medium dissects between the attach-
 Contrast medium extension within the cruciate
ments of the meniscotibial ligaments to the
ligament, mostly in the mid- or distal portion of
meniscus.
the ligament. Both cranial and caudal ligaments
are affected with the same frequency. These
changes are compatible with a parial cruciate
 Cruciate ligaments injuries (Figures 46.20
ligament tear.
and 46.21)
The cruciate ligaments can be visualized completely
using CT arthrography.
FURTHER READING
CT features
 Prior to contrast medium administration:
Bergman EHJ, Puchalski SM, van der Veen H and Wiemer P
(2007)Computed tomography and computed tomography
enlargement (thickening) and irregular margins
of the ligament
arthrography of the equine stifle: technique and prelimi-
nary results in 16 clinical cases. Proc Am Assoc Eq Pract 53:
mineralization (smooth, osseous fragments) is
46-55.
sometimes present in the cruciate ligament
Kaser-Hotz B, Sartoretti-Schefer S and Weiss R (1994)
 evidence of bone resorption or bone prolifera-
 Computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging
tion at an attachment site of the cruciate
of the normal equine carpus. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 35:
ligament
457-61.
495 EQUINE UPPER LIMBS (CARPUS, TARSUS, STIFLE)
B
shows bone reactions between the second and third metacarpal bones (arrowheads) and a bone fragmentation/mineralization 
at the medial aspect of the second metacarpal bone (arrow). (B) Transverse CT image (same level as A) obtained during
regional intra-arterial infusion of contrast medium shows marked moderate neovascularization of the medial branch of the
suspensory ligament (arrows).
B
Figure 46.15 Adult horse with degenerative changes into the distal plantar ligament. (A) Sagittally reconstructed CT image
 shows dystrophic mineralizations in the proximal aspect of the distal plantar ligament (arrowheads). (B) Transverse CT image,
obtained at the level as shown with the line in A, shows bone reactions (enthesiophytosis) at the insertion sites of the interos-
seus talocalcaneal ligament (arrowhead).
496 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Figure 46.16 Fifteen-year-old Appaloosa gelding with hind lateral meniscotibial ligament tearing. (A) Transverse and (C)
frontally reconstructed CT-arthrogram shows extensive, iregularly margined contrast uptake within the lateral meniscotibial
ligament (arrows). (B,D) Reference images of a normal joint at the same level.
 Mayrhofer W, Stanek C, Lutz H and Heidbrink U (2006) The
Tomlinson, JE, Redding WR, Berry C and Smallwood JE
(2003) Computed tomographic anatomy of the equine
cal examination in the diagnosis of carpal joint diseases in
tarsus. Vet Radiol UIltrasound 44: 174-8.
the horse. Pferdeheilkunde 22: 773-84.
Van der Vekens E, Bergman EHJ, Vanderperren K, Raes EV,
Raes E, Bergman EHJ, Vanderperren K, Van der Vekens E
Puchalski SM, van Bree HJ and Saunders JH (2011)
 and Saunders JH (2011) Cross-sectional anatomy and com-
Computed tomographic anatomy of the equine stifle joint.
 parative computed tomography of the equine tarsus. Am
Amm J Vet Res 72: 512-21.
I Vet Res (in press).
497 EQUINE UPPER LIMBS (CARPUS, TARSUS, STIFLE)
C
Figure 46.17 Nine-year-old Warmblood gelding jumper with hind medial meniscal and cranial meniscotibial ligament
injuries. (A) Pre-contrast transverse CT image shows bone resorption and irregular proliferation at the insertion site of the
cranial medial meniscotibial ligament (arrow) indicative of enthesopathy of this ligament. There is a large, iregularly shaped
hucent lesion with a sclerotic rim in the subchondral bone of the proximal tibia near the insertion of the cranial medial menis-
cotibial ligament (asterisk). (B) Transverse CT arthrogram (same level as A) shows that the contrast material does not com-
municate with the previously described osseous lesion in the proximal tibia. Contrast medium is seen dissecting through the
cranial medial meniscotibial ligament (arrow). Multiple radial tears are present in the medial meniscus (arrowheads). (C)
Reference image of a normal stifle joint at the same level.
498 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
4
Figure 46.18 Seven-year-old gelding with right medial meniscus and meniscotibial ligament tearing. (A) Transverse CT
 arthrogram (medial femorotibial joint) shows contrast medium that linearly dissects within the caudal medial meniscotibial
ligament (arrow). Contrast medium surrounds the meniscus. (B) Reference image of a normal stifle joint at the same level.
499 EQUINE UPPER LIMBS (CARPUS, TARSUS, STIFLE)
Figure 46.19  Ten-year-old Friesian mare with medial meniscal and medial meniscotibial ligament tearing and severe oste-
oarthrosis. (A) Frontally reconstructed, (B) transverse and (C) sagittally reconstructed CT arthrogram (medial and lateral
femorotibial joints) show a complex patterm of contrast uptake into the cranial horm of the medial meniscus and in its cranial
au u rnay reis aul jo poadse ienpau au Suore uoonpoid auoq mau aaisuaixa st araui (smoie) puain ienanossa
is subtle subchondral sclerosis of the medial plateau of the tibia and the medial condyle of the femur (asterisk). (D,E,F)
 Reference images of a normal stifle joint at the same level.
Figure 46.20 Adult Warmblood gelding with caudal cruciate ligament tear. (A) Frontally reconstructed, (B) transverse and
(C) sagittally reconstructed CT arthrogram (medial and lateral femorotibial joints) show iregularly shaped contrast medium
501 EQUINE UPPER LIMBS (CARPUS, TARSUS, STIFLE)
D
ment (arrow). (C,D) Reference images of a normal stifle joint at the same level.
CHAPTER FORTY-SEVEN
RUMINANT AND PORCINE
Fintan McEvoy and Stefanie Ohlerth
RUMINANT CT
with the upper digestive apparatus.
Imaging protoco!
 Upper airway diseases are excellent to work up with
CT and the most common problems in ruminants
-mi u panojad Xuouon jou st L ‘enauan u
include rhinitis, sinusitis, cysts in young animals
nants because of the high cost and anesthesia. However,
(Figure 47.2) and trauma. Space-occupying lesions
 in very valuable animals, rare breeds, pet animals,
 such as granulomas (e.g. with actinomycosis), abscesses
exotic ruminants and camelides, or occasionally with
or tumor-like adenocarcinoma are occasionally seen.
livestock problems, CT may represent a highly useful
tool for the work-up of skeletal, central nervous, upper
Sinusitis may develop secondary to dehorning, trauma,
cysts or parasites. In cows with poor healing of sinusi-
digestive and airway tract as well as other thoracic
tis, CT may be indicated for the detection of a seques-
diseases.
 For CT studies in large and small ruminants, posi-
 trum that has developed secondary to the sinusitis.
 tioning and scan parameters may be chosen according
Dental diseases may be diagnosed in camelides
where a tooth root abscess, subsequent osteomyelitis
to the scan protocols for horses or small animals. For
and sequestrum formation may be seen (Figure 47.3).
's s n  s n  as
 There is a high prevalence of lower airway diseases in
the withdrawal time has to be taken into account.
ruminants due to viral, bacterial, parasitic or non-
infectious causes. CT lung patterns in small ruminants
CT disease features
 or young animals are very similar to those described
in dogs. However, CT is not the method of choice in
There is a whole variety of infectious/parasitic and
 metabolic diseases of the central nervous system in
ruminants for their diagnosis.
ruminants, which may be associated with meningitis,
encephalitis, myelitis, encephalomalacia or cerebellar
hypoplasia. Single or multiple abscesses in the brain
PORCINE CT
and spinal cord may be seen in ruminants due to
Imaging protoco!
hematogeneous infection or direct spread from head
Aew sassansqe uieig Xmlu leaguieudoseu no emen
L uo pauues aq ues Soog Aaeuxoidde oi dn si 
also represent a sequel to dehorning, placement of a
tables designed for use with humans. For whole-body
nose ring, rhinitis or otitis media.
scanming ventral recumbency is best tolerated, the tho-
Fractures and infectious bone lesions such as osteo-
racic and pelvic limbs should be drawn cranially and
myelitis occur rather frequently in ruminants. In the
caudally respectively. Sedation using Azaperone
spine, traumatic lesions and spondylitis may be found
1-2 mg/kg (Stresnil, Mallinckrodt, USA) provides ade-
(Figure 47.1).
quate restraint. Fasting 12-16h prior to scanning will
Congenital or neoplastic diseases of the central
reduce artifacts due to intestinal content. For whole-
nervous system, other than leucosis, are rather uncom-
 body scanming (shoulders to pelvis) a slice thickness of
mon as they are in general in ruminants.
0.5cm, 110kVp, 140mAs will permit scan completion
CT may be very helpful to identify abscesses, neo-
e Sursn Sxool o1 dn shid uI so8 Alajeurxoidde u
plastic lesions (e.g. leucosis, adenocarcinoma or sarco-
single-slice helical scanmer. Body composition studies
saunes Auu 'ziemups sa q pauis fy pan 
@ 2011 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
503
504 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
brae. The shape of the spinous process of the scapula
is considered important for the predisposition to
shoulder abscesses, a common problem in housed
 breeding sows. Intestinal volume is not as great as in
small ruminants.
CT disease features
For economic reasons, CT is rarely performed as an aid
to diagnosis in individual pigs. Accounts of its use in
clinical veterinary medicine are few. Osteochondrosis
and osteomyelitis are known problems in production
 pigs and these conditions lend themselves to CT diag-
nosis (Figure 47.4).
CT in porcine animal models
There is considerable use of pigs as animal models of
human disease. CT has been used in models of experi-
mentally induced pyelonephritis, cryoablation of liver
tumors and ocular foreign bodies.
CT in production pigs
The principal application of CT in pigs relates to the
examination of body composition. The proportion by
weight or volume of adipose to lean tissue must be
optimized for optimal feed conversion, reproductive
performance and slaughter characterized to meet
market demand. CT can be used as a non-invasive tool
 in the selection of breeding stock and in the validation
of other methods, e.g. measurement using ultrasound
of tissue thicknes, that can be applied under farm
 conditions. Industrial CT is an advanced topic in itself
Figure 47.1  Two-month-old calf withinfectious spondylitis
and there is current research into the use and feasibility
/discospondylitis. (A) Transverse CT image shows a marked
Suno paieuoine apm8 pue sasseoies apeis oi LD Jo
au ul (saise) se aa yiim (smoie) uis al jo sis
adjacent soft tissue. (B) Sagittally reconstructed CT image
systems in abattoirs.
confirms lysis of the caudal endplate of L6 and of the sacrum
At its simplest, body composition estimates require
(arrows) and shows free gas (asterisk) in the vertebral canal.
that image slices are segmented into relevant groups,
lean, fat and bone. Since the three tissues have very
different HU, this is readily achieved (Figure 47.5A).
 Estimates can be based on data from whole-body or
require a kernel optimized for soft tissue contrast,
selected transverse scans by calculating the proportion
while skeletal studies should include images proc-
of voxels in the HU range for the various tissue types.
essed with a kernel optimized for spatial resolution. If
Three important issues have to be addressed in these
densitometry is to be performed, the kernel should be
studies. The first is a particular problem in live pigs as
standardized as it will influence the recorded tissue CT
opposed to carcasses, where due to slice thickness artl-
numbers.
fact a voxel at the junction, for example between intes-
tinal gas and intestinal wall, may be mistakenly
CT anatomy and normal variants
 interpreted as a fat-containing voxel. There are various
strategies, for example by examining neighboring
'uoemdod uonm Aiauanxa ue are shid uosnpon
voxels, to minimize the effect of these ‘mixed voxels'
 Slight variation exists in the number of lumbar verte-
The second issue when segmenting tissue by HU is the
505
RUMINANT AND PORCINE
A
B
 Figure 47.2 Young cow with nasal cysts and sinusitis. (A) Transverse CT image shows multiple cysts of different size in the
nasal cavities (arrows) and maxillary sinusitis (asterisks) bilaterally. There is mild deformation of the skull. (B) Dorsally
reconstructed CT image shows the cysts (arrows) and sinusitis (asterisks). There is moderate deviation of the nasal septum
 to the right. The CT study was performed in dorsal recumbency.
Figure 47.3 Adult cow with chronic fistulous tract forma-
tion along the mandibula (old partially healed fracture).
Sagittally reconstructed CT image shows soft tissue swelling,
  sio  aq m s i
right mandibula and a sequestrum (arrow). The CT study
Figure 47.4  Adult pig with an osteomyelitis of the scapula
 was performed in dorsal recumbency.
 associated with an abscess in the shoulder region. Transverse
CT image shows thickening of the spine and body of the
scapula and an irregular outline of the spine of the scapula
(arrows). There is an overlying soft tissue swelling.
Mathematical models are currently being explored to
describe the shape of the scapula and test if certain shapes 
predispose to this problem. (Courtesy Jorgen Kongsro,
Norsvin, Norway.)
506 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
C
Figure 47.5 Transverse CT images (abdomen) of a pig undergoing tests for body composition. (A) The color look-up table
separates adipose from other tissues (blue is assigned a -50 to -200 HU). (B) Grayscale image. (C) Automatic detection of the
junction between subcutaneous adipose tissue and underlying muscle and deletion of the area inside this junction. This pro-
cedure allows separating descriptions of subcutaneous and visceral adipose tissue.
-d e o ie o a  g ar an jo a
100 or more slices and the number of scans required
ticular tissue on final estimates. Various tables are
can be high to achieve statistical power or if the method
available showing typical HU for different tissues.
 is used as a selection procedure for breeding stock. For 
These can be taken as guides only as it has been shown
eassa st sisheue aseu paiewoine tosean s
in pigs that the HU for a particular tissue type varies
Adipose tissue is metabolically active and differs in
 from individual to individual and within individuals
function and chemical composition from location to
location throughout the body. Excessive visceral
that a CT range be determined for the particular indi-
 adipose deposits, for example, are associated with
vidual at a particular time point. Finally, data sets can
 obesity-related diseases to a greater extent than subcu-
be very large given that a whole-body scan will contain
 taneous. The subcutaneous adipose layer in the pig is
507 RUMINANT AND PORCINE
itself composed of three layers (detectable by ultra-
ences in chemical  and  physical  adipose tissue
sound but not CT) that differ in their rate of develop-
composition.
ment, heritability and correlation with other body
The application of CT in production pigs is different
characteristics such as the size of intramuscular fat
 to that seen in companion or sport animal species. The
depots. Pigs have been used to investigate differences
 pig industry invests large sums of money into genetic
between these various adipose depots, an analysis that
 improvement programs using CT. Some testing centers
 requires that image segmentation strategies are capable
 are performing in excess of 3000 CT examinations
of separating one fat depot from another. This is a more
annually. This application of CT is relevant in its
challenging task than the simple segmenting adipose
 own right for the veterinarian and also as a source of
tissue from other tissues such as muscle or bone that
 data that can give insights into the general topic
-uosaiameayaeu snoeA nHuaia Aiaa aae
 of obesity or other diseases where the pig can be used
tion techniques can be used to isolate these depots.
as a model.
Subcutaneous adipose tissue, for example, can be iso-
lated because it is bounded by skin and muscle, both
of which have HU greater than zero (Figures 47.5B and
FURTHER READING
47.5C). A software algorithm that can recognize this
transition zone can be used to select this tissue from
Kolstad K, Brenoe UT and Vangen O (2002) Genetic differ-
each image slice. Such software is available commer-
ences in energy partitioning in growing pigs. Acta
cially or can be written on site. Volume or HU analysis
Agriculturae Scandinavica, Section A —Animal Science 52:
can thus be performed in the isolated tissue. Work in
213-20.
this area has shown that the HU of adipose tissue in
Vester-Christensena M, Erbou SGH, Hansen MF et al. (2009)
 pigs varies with distance from the skin surface and
Virtual dissection of pig carcasses. Ment Science 81:
with age possibly reflecting location dependent differ-
699-704.
CHAPTER FORTY-EIGHT
RABBITS AND RODENTS
Randi Drees
IMAGING PROTOCOL
Tranial abdomen. The duodenum in rabbits has a
slight enlargement at the level of the termination of
the bile duct. The small intestines are commonly
See Table 48.1.
located in the right cranial abdomen in rabbits and
rodents. The ileum has a thick-walled expansion (sac-
CT: ANATOMY AND NORMAL
culus rotundus), most prominent in rabbits. The
 C-shaped large cecum is located in the mid and ventral
VARIANTS
portion of the peritoneal cavity and is normally filled
Head (Figure 48.1, Table 48.2)
with gas and ingesta in rabbits and rodents. The
ascending colon in the rabbit is subdivided in four
Rabbits and rodents have aradicular hypsodont teeth
regions, of which the first are distinguishable by their
that grow throughout life. In hamsters and rats only
teniae and haustra. The major portion of the liver is
the incisors are aradicular hypsodont, the cheek teeth
located in the right cranial abdomen. The spleen is
 are anelodont brachydont. In guinea pigs the apex of
usually small. In rabbits, the right lobe of the pancreas
the incisors extends lingual to the level of the second
shaup auL “umuaponposau a u asnp aq uen
cheek tooth. Only in rabbits is deciduous dentition
and bladder are comparable in shape and location to
 present at birth. The occlusal surface of the cheek teeth
those of other mammals; mineral-dense sediment in
aul raueld anbuqo ue u pauano si ssid eaumg u
the urinary bladder of the rabbit can be seen as a
mandibular teeth are curved lingually and the maxil-
normal variant. In guinea pigs the ischiopubic sym-
lary cheek teeth are curved buccally. In chinchillas and
 physis dilates to allow passage of the large fetal head.
rabbits the occlusal surface is almost horizontally ori-
It fuses at 7-8 months if no breeding has occurred up
 ented. CT allows accurate evaluation of the teeth, peri-
to this point and then may contribute to dystocia in
odontium and alveolar bone as well as the oral soft
later pregnancies.
tissues and bony structures of the skull.
 In the normal guinea pig the ventral auricular carti-
lages are commonly mineralized. The tympanic bullae
Musculoskeletal
of chinchillas are large, thin-walled and septated; in
other rodents and rabbits they are comparably small.
Periarticular mineralized bodies and linear dystrophic
mineralization of entheses and muscles is commonly
seen in rabbits and rodents and is usually of minor
Thorax
clinical significance.
a go tod a Aaan e dn san pau a
thoracic cavity in rabbits and rodents. Thymic rem-
Metabolic
nants may be seen in the ventral cranial mediastinum
of the adult rabbit and rodent. Otherwise thoracic
Normal serum calcium concentration in rabbits is
structures are similar to those of mammals.
30-50% higher than in other mammals. Resorption
of calcium via the intestinal tract is achieved by
passive diffusion and active transport; excretion of
Abdomen
calcium into the gastrointestinal tract is independent
The stomach of rabbits and rodents is comparably
 of serum calcium levels. Renal calcium excretion or
small and hook-shaped and mostly located in the right
conservation according to metabolic needs is control-
saunes Auu 'ziemups sa q pauis fy pan 
@ 2011 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
509
510 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Table 48.1
 CT imaging protocol for rabbits and rodents.
Decubitus
· Head, thorax: ventral
· Abdomen: dorsal or ventral*
· Spine and myelo-CT: dorsal
· Other: ventral, dorsal, lateral depending on area of interest 
 Special positioning 
· Head:
· Transverse plane: hard palate perpendicular to gantry (head on
 foam pad or similar)
· Direct dorsal plane: hard palate parallel to gantry (animal on foam
pad)
· Myelo-CT: scan plane aligned with intervertebral disk space in region
of interest
· Accurate straight positioning in trough
 Scan margins
· Head: tip of the nose → cranial neck
· Thorax: thoracic inlet → ca udal margin of diaphragm 
· Abdomen: cranial end of diaphragmatic cupola (→ anus 
· Spine and myelo-CT: cranial (→ caudal margin of neurolocalized
 segment or region of interest 
· Others: cranial ←→> caudal margin of region of interest 
Voltage (kVp)
120
Current (mAs)
100
Tube rotation time (s)
≤1
Slice width (mm)
· Head: 1mm
· Thorax, abdomen: 2-3mm 
· Spine and myelo-CT: 1mm
· Other: 1-3mm depending on region of interest 
 Sequential slice interval (mm)
·Head: 1mm
· Spine and myelo-CT: 1mm
· Other: 1-3mm depending on region of interest 
 Helical image reconstruction interval
· Thorax, abdomen: 2-3mm
 Pitch
· Thorax, abdomen: 1.4
Kernel frequency 
· Pre- and post-contrast: medium
· Bone: high
· Myelo-CT: medium and high frequency
 Contrast medium application site
· Intra-venous: cephalic or saphenous catheter
· Myelo-CT: subarachnoid puncture
 Contrast medium type
· Intra-venous: ionic or non-ionic iodinated contrast medium 
· Myelo-CT: non-ionic iodinated contrast medium
 Contrast medium dose
· Intra-venous: 700-800 mg l/kg 
· Myelo-CT: 0.33ml/kg or until sufficient opacification verified under
image guidance
 Contrast medium injection mode 
Manual
 Scan delay post start contrast injection
Intra-venous: 1min 
Window level (HU)
· Pre- and post-contrast, myelo-CT: +250
· Bone: +500
Window width (HU)
· Pre- and post-contrast, myelo-CT: +50
· Bone: +3500
*Respiratory motion is less in dorsal recumbency, however ventral recumbency is often better tolerated by the patient.
511RABBITS AND RODENTS
+
Figure 48.1 Positioning for head CT for rabbit and rodent patients. (A) Alignment of the gantry (white line) perpendicular
to the hard palate for transverse plane (B) acquisition. (C) Parallel alignment of the gantry to the hard palate for direct dorsal
plane (D) acquisition can be helpfal for evaluation of dental and periodontal structures.
512 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Table 48.2
 Dental formula in rabbits and rodents.
 Dental 
Guinea pig,
formula
Rabbit
chinchilla 
Hamster, rat
 Deciduo us
2030
N/A
N/A
16
1020
Permanent
2033
1013
10 03(2H)
28
20
:14-16
1023
1013
1003(2H)
led by pituitary-dependent hormone and vitamin D;
Fractures and soft tissue trauma
n   d s s   mo
 Fractures of the skull or other skeletal structures can
mammals. Renal failure therefore sequentially leads to
 be seen in rodents and rabbits, usually due to bite or
failure of serum calcium regulation.
 Lameness and lethargy in adult guinea pigs are
step injuries.
commonly attributed to vitamin C deficiency, as they
CT features
depend on nutritional supply. Young animals are
more susceptible to develop signs of hypovitaminosis
 Severed soft tissue-dense structures.
Sharp-margined fracture lines or fragments and
C (scurvy), such as ceasing skeletal maturation,
epiphyseal dysplasia and progressive osteopenia.
malaligned skeletal structures.
Alternatively, osteodystrophy due to secondary nutri-
tional or renal hyperparathyroidism should be con-
Infection/Inflammation
sidered as a cause of lameness or can be found
incidentally. Specifically, osteodystrophia fibrosa has
Dental and periodontal disease
 -ou paseaou ue um 'shid eaums ul paqliosap uaaq
 The progressive syndrome of acquired dental disease
 edonsspoaiso shid eaums paanq uges u anuap
is commonly seen in rabbits and rodents, leading to
fibrosa presents with decreased bone opacity (osto-
deterioration of tooth quality, acquired malocclusion,
penia, double cortical line), patchy osteosclerois,
elongation of tooth roots and periapical disease.
coarse bone trabeculation, arthropathies and patho-
 Secondary osteomyelitis and abscesses in or adjacent
logic fractures.
to the maxilla, mandible or retrobulbar space are seen
 in advanced disease. Predisposing factors are weak-
 ened alveolar support of the tooth due to underlying
CT DISEASE FEATURES
metabolic bone disease, dietary texture and composi-
Trauma
 tion, and genetic predisposion. Direct dorsal plane
CT acquisition is benefial for evaluation of tooth
Spinal trauma
alignment and periodontal disease.
Rabbits are prone to spinal fractures and (sub)luxa-
tions, commonly associated with restraint-induced self
CT features (Figures 48.2 and 48.3)
 trauma. CT examination can additionally be performed
 Curvature and elongation of the teeth with hook
 after subarachnoid contrast injection (myelogram).
formation in the oral cavity: usually oral curvature
 of the maxillary incisors and rostral curvature of
CT features
the mandibular incisors, lingual hooks on man-
 Sharp-margined fracture lines or fragments in
dibular cheek teeth, buccal hooks on maxillary
acute cases.
cheek teeth. Elongation of tooth roots with possible
 Malalignment of vertebrae.
 periosteal penetration. Distortion of teeth align-
Myelo-CT: deviation or obliteration of the contrast
 ment, loss of occlusal line.
 columns indicating compression of the spinal cord,
Dental decay: loss of vertical enamel lining,
contrast medium in the spinal cord (myelomala-
hypodense tooth center, tooth fragmentation.
cia), leakage of contrast medium out of the sub-
-uopoad ym aeds reuoad aui jo Suai
arachnoid space (dural laceration).
tal disease.
513 RABBITS AND RODENTS
1
 Loss of normal root structure, definition of lamina
dura and alveolar bone; in advanced cases tooth
root abscesses with lysis of the surrounding alveo-
lus and possibly extensive osteomyelitis of the
 adjacent bone.
 Dystrophic mineralization of the alveolus with
chronic alveolitis.
 Thinned ventral mandibular and incisive cortex.
 All over loss of bone opacity in the skull.
 Lingual and/or buccal soff tissue swelling in
regions of trauma due to dental hooks 
0r
overgrowth.
 Abscess: fluid or soft tissue-dense mass possibly
series.
Upper and lower airway disease
Figure 48.2 Adult chinchilla with dental and periodontal
disease. Transverse CT image shows an overgrowth and cur-
-ja Aemine ramol leguanbasuon anqissod pue iaddn
vature of mandibular and maxillary cheek teeth with buccal
tion  with  Pasteurella  spp..
Bordetella
pue ·dds
(1) and lingual (2) hook formation. There is also widening of
 Staphylococcus spp. are common causes for sneezing.
the periodontal spaces (3) and irregular lysis of the alveolar
nasal discharge and possible pneumonitis or bron-
bone (4).
chopneumonia in rabbits and rodents. CT enables
 evaluation of the extent of upper airway disease and
differentiation from nasal discharge related to tooth
root abscess formation. A small amount of recumbency-
 dependent atelectasis is commonly seen as a normal
variant and has tobe differentiated from
consolidation.
CT features (Figure 48.4)
 Rhinitis: soft tissue dense material in the nasal
cavity, commonly bilaterally. Possible destruction
of the turbinates and the bony nasal septum with
chronic rhinitis.
Bronchitis: bronchial
thickening.
 peribronchial
 infiltrates, bronchial plugs.
 Pneumonia: diffuse
interstitial
 pattern and/or
consolidation.
Otitis
 Lop-eared rabbits are prone to develop otitis externa.
 Otitis media in rabbits commonly occurs in conjunc-
Figure 48.3  Adult Dutch rabbit with bilateral retrobulbar
tion with upper airway infections (Pasteurella spp.)
abscesses. Transverse post-contrast CT image shows
 and patients can present with severe head tilt. Ruling
 abscesses with a fluid-dense, non-enhancing center (1) and a
out otitis is important if Encephalitozoon cuniculi
soft tissue-dense, contrast-enhancing rim (2). The left globe
infection is suspected in rabbits. In guinea pigs
(G) is displaced dorsolaterally and deformed.
 otitis media is usually due to infection with Strepto-
coccus pneumoniae; this infection has an increased
likelihood  with prolonged subclinical  vitamin C
deficiency.
514 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
A
B
Figure 48.4 Transverse CT images of an adult Dutch rabbit with a rhinitis due to infection with Pasteurella spp. (A) The
nasal cavities are partially obliterated with fluid- (1) and soft tissue-dense material (2). (B) The nasal turbinates are partially
destroyed (3).
CT features (Figure 48.5)
 Otitis externa: increased enhancement and thick-
ness of the ear canal lining. Overall subjective nar-
rowing of the external ear canal. Increased amount
 of non-enhancing soft tissue-dense material in the
external ear canal and possible mineralization of
auricular cartilages (chronic).
 Otitis media: fluid or inspissated soft tissue to
 possible contrast enhancement of the lining of the 
tympanic bulla, sclerosis and thickening of the
tympanic bulla, and possible lysis of the bulla in
severe and chronic cases.
 Otitis interna: none, or alteration of the small bony
Figure 48.5
 Adult Mini lop breed rabbit with otitis media
structures of the inner ear.
and exterma. Transverse CT image shows soft tissue-dense
material filling the extermal ear canal (1) and tympanic
Gastrointestinal disease
 bulla (2). There is no evidence of thickening of the tympanic
bulla.
Rabbits commonly have a moderate amount of hair in
the stomach. Formation of trichobezoars usually
results in and is not a cause of gastrointestinal dysfunc-
 testinal system. Mildly increased gas accumulation in
tion. Intestinal obstruction often occurs with ingestion
 the gastrointestinal tract can be related to anesthetic
of foreign material. The etiology of cecal impaction is
 procedures.
incompletely understood but thought to be related to
-edoraua pnoon inouod enuanbas pue ssas
CT features
thy is mostly seen in adult pet rabbits, often after
 Possible soft tissue-dense trichobezoar visible in
 stressful incidents. Almost all gastrointestinal disor-
the stomach.
 ders lead to additional gas collection in the gastroin-
· Gas-distended gastrointestinal tract.
515
 RABBITS AND RODENTS
 Enlarged mesenteric lymph nodes:
 reactive
CT features
lymphadenopathy.
 Osteolytic lesions in affected bones, possibly asso-
Cecal impaction: cecal dilatation with gas and
ciated with severed soft tissuesif related to wounds.
impacted ingesta.
 Mucoid enteropathy: large amount of fluid to soft 
Neoplasia
tissue-dense mucus in the colon, often with cecal
impaction. Stomach and small intestines can be
Most commonly observed neoplasia in rabbits and
 distended with fluid and gas.
rodents are lymphoma, thymoma, mammary neopla-
SI eisdoau Aneuod eisedoau auian pue eis
common in rodents >3 years. Other neoplasms seen in
Urinary system
 small animals can also affect the rabbit and rodent
In rabbits, mineral urinary sediment is a normal
patient.
 variant. Renal, ureteral, cystic and urethral urolithiasis
is caused by increased urine concentration of stone-
Lymphoma and thymoma
forming ions and can lead to mechanical obstruction
and irritation in rabbits and rodents. Cystitis is often
Intrathoracic lymph node enlargement or cranial
present with cystic urolithiasis. Guinea pigs often
mediastinal masses are commonly observed in rabbits
present with urethral urolithiasis. Renal failure leads
and guinea pigs with lymphoma. However, all other
to
alterations in calcium metabolism in rabbits.
 forms of lymphoma can occur in the rabbit and rodent.
Granulomatous lesions of the kidney associated with
 Differentiating between thymoma and lymphoma may
Encephalitozoon cuniculi infection in rabbits are seen on
 depend on cytologic analysis.
 necropsy or histologic samples. Abyssinian breed
 guinea pigs are prone to develop non-insulin-depend-
CT features (Figure 48.6)
ent diabetes mellitus. Secondary cystitis can lead to
 Lymphoma: cranial mediastinal, sternal and tra-
urinary bladder wall hypertrophy and voiding
-adad uaueua apou ydui euoqoa
dysfunction.
 erallymph node enlargement;hepatosplenomegaly;
 gastrointestinal masses. Less commonly pulmo-
CT features
nary infiltrates.
 Gravity-dependent mineral sediment in the urinary
 Thymoma: ventral
 cranial
 mediastinal
mass,
bladder (normal variant in rabbits).
often
cystic
components and poor
contrast
Gravity-dependent mineral (less commonly soft
enhancement.
tissue-dense) stones in the urinary system.
 Renal failure in rabbits: renomegaly, urolithiasis,
Genital neoplasia and cystic disorders
increased bone opacity (osteosclerosis), metastatic
soft tissue mineralization,
 Mammary neoplasia is seen in middle-aged to older
 rabbits and rodents and can be benign or malignant.
urinary bladder and subjectively thickened wall.
Malignant mammary neoplasia can metastasize to the
 sternal lymph nodes and lung. Uterine, uterine stump
 Genital system
jasand uao shid eam pazia aq un pe
Pyometra or other inflammatory conditions of the
with cystic ovarian disease with or without associated
uterus are seen in female rabbits and rodents. Mastitis
 hormonal imbalances; endometrial hyperplasia or lei-
 and mammary neoplasia is usually identified on clini-
 omyoma occur sequentially.
 cal examination; thoracic CT for metastasis check may
be indicated.
CT features (Figure 48.7)
1
 Soft tissue-dense mammary masses with variable
CT features
contrast enhancement and possible mineralization,
 Enlarged uterus filled with fluid-dense material.
sternal lymphadenopathy, lung nodules.
 Uterine or cervical masses with/without mineral
Osteomyelitis
content.
Ovarian cysts: fluid-dense cystic structures arising
 Osteomyelitis is seen with similar etiology as in small
from the ovaries, caudodorsal to the kidneys, com-
animals but rarely occurs in rabbits and rodents.
monly bilaterally.
516 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
B
Figure 48.6 Adult Dutch rabbit with a thymoma. (A) Transverse CT image shows the heart (1) displaced laterally by a large
 soft tissue-dense mediastinal mass (2). (B) On post-intravenous transverse contrast CT, the mass (2) moderately enhances.
B
Figure 48.7 Adult Angora rabbit with uterine stump adenocarcinoma. (A) Transverse CT image of the caudal abdomen at
the level of the coxofemoral joints. The mixed soft tissue- and fluid-dense mass (1) is heterogeneously enhancing following
intravenous contrast injection. It is located dorsally to the urinary bladder (2) and displaces the colon (3) dorsally and to the
right. (B) Transverse CT image shows soft tissue nodules (4) in the lung parenchyma, consistent with metastatic disease.
FURTHER READING
Harcourt-Brown F (2007) Radiographic signs of renal disease
in rabbits. Vet Rec 160: 787-94.
Legendre LF (2002) Malocclusions in guinea pigs, chinchillas
 Beregi A, Zorm S and Felkai F (1999) Ultrasonic diagnosis of
and rabbits. Carn Vet J 43: 385-90.
 ovarian cysts in ten guinea pigs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 40:
Reiter AM (2008) Pathophysiology of dental disease in the
74-6.
rabbit, guinea pig and chinchilla. J Exotic Pet Med 17:
Capello V and Cauduro A (2008) Clinical technique: applica-
70-7.
tion of computed tomography for diagnosis of dental
disease in the rabbit, guinea pig, and chinchilla. J Exotic
Pet Med 17: 93-101.
CHAPTER FORTY-NINE
AVIAN
Michaela Gumpenberger
IMAGING PROTOCOL
erigars). Prior to the removal of the patient from the
table for contrast medium application it is recom-
See Tables 49.1 and 49.2.
mended to sketch the bird's silhouette with a marker
on paper towels. Repositioning after contrast medium
IMAGING TECHNIQUE
dislocation. Administration of contrast medium into
the basilic vein can be managed in dorsal recumbency
Routine CT in birds is performed under general
without major displacement of the bird.
anesthesia, mostly with isoflurane and a head chamber.
weight of 5-10%) can be administered with a crop tube
Exceptionally, some regions (coelomic cavity, lung) of
larger, weak individuals may be scanned in conscious
60-90min prior to the CT examination. The barium
will enable better differentiation of the gastrointestinal
animals (Figure 49.1). They can be strapped to the table
umau isenuon snouaaenui ou j Aioadsa ‘jnen
or may be positioned in a box. However, diagnoses in
delicate regions such as the spine or head should
will be used.
 Analysis of coelomic disorders may be easier in sag-
always be done in anesthetized birds.
ittal scans/reconstructions that resemble the more
 The positioning for head scans depends on the shape
 familiar lateral radiograph.
of the beak, head and neck. Birds with spherical heads,
 smaller beaks and shorter necks (e.g. birds of prey.
most parrots) will be easier scanmed in dorsal recum-
bency or sometimes even lateral recumbency. Avian
CT ANATOMY AND NORMAL
species with elongated heads, beaks and necks (e.g.
VARIANTS (F1GURE 49.2,
-an ais  paosod rasa are (imog am
TABLE 49.3)
bency. Therefore heads will be scanned in dorsal or
laded 'saioads a uo Supuadap aueid lesiaasuen
tissues, foam wedges or cardboard boxes can be used
Today more than 9700 different avian species are
 as additional devices for correct positioning.
known. Although the basic anatomy is similar, each
 Smaller avian species can be positioned crosswise to
 species has its own characteristics. Radiographs still
the longitudinal axis of the patient table. The resulting
sagittal scan is performed much quicker than the axial
 patient. Rare species (e.g. dead individuals of a zoo-
 l u isann rads jo aq Ae s auo
logical garden or museum) should be radiographed
 patients or in slower, single-slice CT machines.
and scanmed whenever available to build up an archive
 Slice thickness and distance may vary from 0.5mm
 of reference images.
in tiny birds to 5mm when scanning the coelomic
cavity in larger species (e.g. swans). Diagnoses of the
 spine or head should always be done with small slices.
DISEASE FEATURES: GENERAL
Sagittal scans result in more artifacts than transverse
REMARKS
scans caused by grit in the intestines and metallic
footrings.
 Intravenous contrast medium is administered man-
Most skeletal disorders like fractures or hyperostosis
 ually into the jugular vein in small species (e.g. budg-
as well as lead intoxication can usually be confirmed
saunes Auu 'ziemups sa q pauis fy pan 
@ 2011 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
517
Table 49.1
CT Imaging protocol of the coelomic cavity of avians.
Series
 Pre- and post-contrast bone 
 Additional remarks 
 Positioning, routine
Dorsal
Wings should be flexed and attached to the body
while the legs should be extended caudally to
 minimize artifacts
 Positioning of weak animal,
Sternal
In emaciated patients the sharp-edged carina may
critical care
 compromise symmetric positioning 
Scan margins
 Shoulder ←→ Cloaca 
Voltage (kVp)
100 to 120
 Depending on the size of bird
Current (mAs)
100 to 130
 Depending on the size of bird 
Tube rotation time (s)
1or 2
 Slice width (mm)
1-3
Budgerigar to swan
 Sequential slice interval (mm)
1-3
 Budgerigar to swan
Kernel frequency
 Pre-contrast: soft tissue/medium
Bone: bone
Window level (HU)
 Pre-contrast: +40
Modified soft tissue window: 50-160
Bone: +350
Window width (HU)
 Pre-contrast: 400
Modified soft tissue window: 500-640
Bone: 3200
Table 49.2
 Intravenous contrast protocol.
Contrast medium
Jugular vein (small birds)
application site
or basilic vein
 Contrast medium type
lodinated
Contrast medium dose
 150-300 mg I/kg bw
Contrast medium
Manual
injection mode
Scan delay post start
 1 min, repetition after 
contrast injection
3-5min
 Kernel frequency
Soft tissue/standard
Window level (HU)
+40
Window width (HU)
350
Figure 49.1 Conscious, but weak mute swan (Cygnus olor)
 positioned within the gantry.
Figure 49.2 (A) Scout for sagittal scans in figure 49.2B to demonstrate the normal anatomy of the coelomic organs of
a domestic pigeon (Columba lioia f. domestica). B = bowel loops; Lu = lung; H = heart; Li = liver; V = ventriculus. 1: right lateral
scan; 2: right sagittal; 3: left sagittal; 4: left lateral scan. (B) Anatomy of a domestic pigeon, sagittal slices (frozen) and
scans (soft tissue and lung window): (B) to (D) right lateral scan, (E) to (G) right paramedian, (H) to (J) leftsagittal,(K) to (M)
left lateral scan. B = bowel loops; Bm = breast muscle; H = heart; K = kidneys; L= lung; Li = liver; P =proventriculus;
V = ventriculus.
520 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Table 49.3
Organ
Anatomical details 
Head
Head
Infraorbital sinus (better: paranasal sinus with infraorbital, preorbital
 and postorbital part) co nnected to nasal cavity 
Eyes
 Septum interorbitale between large bulbi
 Scleral bones support lens attachment 
 Pecten oculi: carnot be differentiated within vitreous in plain CT
Skeleton 
Cervical spine 
 Single co ndylus occipitalis articulates with atlas and allows rotation
of head and neck 1809
Number of cervicic vertebrae varies with species
Thoracic spine
 Most cranial thoracic vertebrae are fused and form the notarium (os
 dorsale) in galliformes and pigeons 
 Single mobile thoracic vertebra co nnects notarium with synsacrum
Lumbar spine
Last thoracic, all lumbar and sacral vertebrae as well as first caudal
vertebrae are fused to form the synsacrum (os lumbosacrale)
 Caudal spine 
 Pygostyle - fusion of last caudal vertebrae
Ribs
Floating ribs arise from the last cervical vertebrae
 5-6 pairs connect sternum to thoracic spine
Uncinate processes are directed caudally and are co nnected with the
following rib
Ster n um
 Not segme nted 
 Carina or keel supports attachment of massive flight muscles 
Forelimbs
Clavicles unite and form the furcula
 Ulna larger than radius 
 Only two carpal bones (os carpi radiale and ulnare)
 Carpometacarpus consists of fused carpal and metacarpal bo nes (os
metacarpale majus and minus)
Digits II,Ill and IV
Pelvis and hindlimbs
 Pelvis firmly connected to synsacrum, but open ventrally
Tibiotarsus: fusion of tibia and part of tarsus, longer than femur 
 Fibula only rudimental
Tarsometatarsus: fused distal tarsal bones and metatarsal bo nes (ll
to IV)
 Os metatarsale I: builds first toe 
 Digit I-IV have two, three, four and five phalanges 
 Bones in general
 Pneumatized and have thin cortices
Hyperostosis: especially long bo nes may show increased density 
with loss of medullary space under hormone influence (estrogen):
 egg development as well as ovarial cysts or neoplasias
 Musculoskeletal system
Tendons of limbs, sometimes of the TMJ and some dorsal muscles 
tend to ossify
521
AVIAN
Table 49.3
(Continued)
Organ
Anatomical details 
Coelomic organs 
Diaphragm
Does not exist
Heart
Very close to liver, cannot usually be differentiated in plain CT
Liver
Right (larger, perforated by caudal vena cava) and left (dorsal and 
ventral) lobe, additional processus vary with species 
Homogeneo us, mean density in domestic pigeons 55-65HU, nearly
impossible to differentiate form the heart in plain CT
Gallbladder
At visceral surface of right liver lobe 
 Not present in most pigeons and parrots 
 Spleen 
Right sagittally positioned, medial to proventriculus, in most cage 
birds small and round (budgerigar = 1mm, Amazon parrot = 6mm) 
Pancreas
Lies between the limbs of the duodenum, trilobated, usually not 
differentiable in CT
Esophagus
 First dorsal to trachea, then at the right side of the neck
Crop
 Extension of esophagus at the level of the thoracic inlet 
 Expansile to ventral and laterocaudal, depending on filling degree 
 Stomach
Consists of proventriculus and ventriculus (gizzard): especially in 
herbivore and granivore species
Gizzard is thick walled, mean density in domestic pigeo ns 60-70 HU,
mostly grit in lumen ( responsible for artifacts)
Single, very expansile stomach in seagulls and storks 
 Small stomach in fruit eaters or nectar-feeding birds 
 Usually does not contain gas 
Small intestines
Duodenum at the right, forms a tight U-shaped loop
Duodenojejunal junction close to stomach
 Jejunum forms some loops, not differentiable from ileum
 Usually does not contain gas
Large intestines
 Paired ceca in hens, small ceca in pigeons, not present in parrots 
and carnivore species
Short rectum co ntinues to cloaca 
 Usually co ntains gas 
Kidneys
 Trilobated, positioned ventral to synsacrum
 Mean density in domestic pigeons 35-60 HU
Ureters
 Only visible with contrast media 
Urinary bladder
Does not exist
Gonads
 Males: two testicles cranioventral to cranial pole of kidneys, enlarge
during mating season (do not misinterpret as renomegaly)
Females: only left ovary developed; follicles appear as round
 structures of various sizes
Lung
 Not lobated
 Tertiary bronchia responsible for honeycombed lung pattern
 Does not expand during breathing 
Density reported in various parrots: -600 to -650 HU
Air sac system
 Unpaired: clavicular air sac 
and abdominal air sacs 
522 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
radiographically in a straightforward way Hence the
DISEASE FEATURES: COELOMIC
following tables will focus on selected disorders that
ORGANS (TABLE 49.5)
are diagnosed more precisely with CT. Besides some
case reports only very few papers of advanced CT
studies in avian species exist. Therefore the given
Additionally, CT is used in chickens to predict values
examples mostly reflect the experiences of the author.
for the amount of abdominal fat or breast cut for com-
mercial reasons.
DISEASE FEATURES: SKELETON
AND HEAD (TABLE 49.4)
Table 49.4
 Disease features: skeleton and head.
 Organ
 system
 Pathological changes 
Manifestation
CT characteristics
 Figure
Head
Malformation,
 Meningo-encephalocele
 Variable bone formations and skull
developmental
 and cranial malformatio ns 
 defects, protrusion of mostly fatty
in domestic ducks with
tissue
feather crests
Trauma, dislocation
 Mostly collisions with
 Similar to mammals; eye: fractures 
49.3
cars or windows, cause
 of scleral bones; sub-/luxation of 
fractures and intracranial 
lens
hemorrhage
Infection, inflammation,
 Sinusitis, sometimes otitis 
 Obstruction of usually aerated 
degeneration
 sinuidal system
Infection, inflammation,
 Cataract or lyses of lens
49.3
degeneration (eye)
Neoplasia
Single case reports of
Space-occupying masses, similar
49.4
 pituitary adenomas,
 to mammals
49.5
retrobulbar and
intracranial masses
Vertebral
Trauma, dislocation 
 Fractures, luxations 
Hemorrhage, loss of pneumatized
49.6
 column
chambers within bony structures;
sagittal reconstruction helpful
Infection, inflammation,
Mostly systemic
Increased density, loss of detail;
49.7
degeneration
aspergillosis or bacterial
very rarely involvement of
infection
intervertebral meniscus: thickening
and hyperdensity, mild protrusion,
sclerosis of neighboring vertebral 
endplates
Extremities
 Trauma, dislocation
 Delicate fractures and
 Additional to fracture/fissure lines 
49.8
luxation of especially
increased densities within 
49.9
coxofemoral joint and
pneumatized bones (resembling
furcula/sho ulder
hemorrhage), often peripheral
emphysema and soft tissue 
swelling: frontal/sagittal 
reconstruction helpful
Infection, inflammation,
Arthritis
Periosteal reactions (less than in
degeneration
mammals), soft tissue swelling;
 massive osteolytic reactions may
indicate septic arthritis
523AVIAN
Table 49.5
Disease features: coelomic organs.
 Pathological
Organ system
changes
Pathogenesis
CT characteristics 
Figure
Liver
Hepatomegaly
Infection, degenerative/metabolic
Liver extends caudal to the
49.10
(lipidosis; hemochromatosis - mostly
sternum, stomach displaced to
in mynah birds), neoplasia 
dorsal (and caudal), loss of
hourglass-shaped waist on
dorsal reconstructions,
compression of air sacs; in fatty
liver disease density lower than
20-30 HU
Spleen
Splenomegaly
 Chronic infection (chlamydia,
 Enlarged round structure dorsal 
49.11
mycobacteria), leucosis, neoplasia;
to stomach, ventral to cranial 
sometimes metabolic (lipidosis);:
 and medial division of kidneys;
psittacosis often accompanied with
stomach may be displaced
inflammation of lung and air sacs 
cranioventrally and to the left 
Gastrointestinal
 Dilatation of
 Proventricular dilatation due to
Abnormal shape, often thin-
49.12
tract
stomach
 neurogene proventricular dilatation
walled, often gas-filled 
disease, going-light-syndrome of 
budgerigars (megabacteria), parasites
 or mycoses, rarely ileus
 Dilatation of
 Severe inflammation, foreign bodies,
Gas and fluid accumulation
bowel loops
 parasites (similar to mammals)
 Dilatation of
Spinal trauma or neoplasia involving 
May protrude caudally, may
cloaca
sacral nerves (e.g. renal neoplasia);
 displace small bowel loops 
rare idiopathic dilatation
cranially
Kidney
 Renomegaly
Mostly neplasias (adenocarcinoma,
Bowel loops displaced ventrally,
49.13
fibrosarcoma), also infection
 sometimes ca udoventrally
49.14
(chlamydia) /inflammation/
(enlargement of cranial division 
degeneration (gout, lipidosis, cystic 
 or gonads), cranioventrally
degeneration)
(enlargement of caudal division 
of go nads); compression of 
abdominal air sacs makes 
 differentiation of severely
 enlarged kidneys on plain CT
nearly impossible 
Increased
Kidney gout with calcinosis, 
More than 70 HU (in domestic
density
nephrosis, severe dehydration 
 pigeo ns and parrots), may be
enlarged and heterogeneous 
Female genital 
Dystocia,
Usually incomplete or soft shell,
Loss of detail, compression of 
49.15
tract 
egg-related
 impacted yolk or follicles 
air sacs, ventral displacement 
 peritonitis
 of gastrointestinal tract
Male genital
Enlargement 
Mostly caused by neoplasia (often in 
Compression of air sacs,
49.16
tract
of testis
budgerigars): moderate enlargement
displacement of gastrointestinal
 normal during breeding season 
tract to (caudo-) ventral,
stomach in severe enlargement 
 displaced cranially; functional
sertoli cell tumors may cause
hyperostosis
(Continued)
524 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Table 49.5
(Continved)
Pathological
Organ system
changes
 Pathogenesis
CT characteristics
 Figure
Lung
Opacification
Aspergillosis, tuberculosis, broncho-f
 Patches of increased density
49.17
 pneumonia (foreign body aspiration,
within the Iung, peribro nchial
bacterial, hypovitaminosis A), rarely
infiltrates, thickened walls of
fibrosis
bronchi and the air sacs
(aerosacculitis); granulomas 
(which tend to ossify) and 
abscesses possible; loss of 
 definition of vessels and 
bronchi
Bronchiectasis
 Described in pneumonia and fibrosis 
Increased diameter of bronchi
Air sacs
Thickening/
Inflammation/infection, often 
Thickening of walls, fluid or
opacification 
 accompanied by pneumonia 
 substrate in lumina 
 Dilatation
Mainly abdominal air sacs = 'air-
 Caused by stenosis of upper 
trapping'
respiratory tract and lung, often 
mycosis
 Coelomic cavity
 Ascites
Mostly accompany heart failure and
 Loss of detail, compression or
49.18
hepatic disease (such as 
filling of air sacs 
hemochromatosis)
A
B
Figure 49.3 (A) Dorsal CT image (head) of a normal common buzzard (Buteo buteo). Note the globular shape of the bulbus
that is typical for diurmal birds. The huge bulbi are only separated by the interorbital septum. (B) Dorsal CT image (head) of
an eagle owl (Bubo bubo). The lenses are fattened and mildly hypodense. No nuclei are present. The bird suffered from a
bilateral severe cataract. Note the tubular shape of the bulbus of nocturmal birds. (C) Dorsal CT image (head) of a long eared
owl (Asio otus). The left lens is subluxated to anterior medially. Cormea (arrow); AEC = anterior eye chamber; L = lens;
N = nucleus lentis; PW = posterior wall; SR = bony scleral ring; V = vitreous.
525
AVIAN
Figure 49.4 Dorsal CT image (head) of a cockatiel (Nymphicus hollandicus) with pituitary adenoma. A rounded mildly hyper-
dense structure (arrows) is visible.
Figure 49.5 (A) 3D reconstruction (head) of a Scarlet macaw (Ara Macao). There is a bilobated bullous emphysema (arrows),
 originating from the choana. (B) Transverse CT image shows the origin (asterisk) of the bulla obstructing the upper respira-
tory tract.
526 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Figure 49.6 Vertebral column of a bearded vulture (Gypaetus barbatus). (A) Transverse CT image of a normal vertebra. (B)
A
B
Figure 49.7 Mute swan (Cygrus olor) with suspicion of discospondylitis. (A) Transverse CT image (vertebral column) shows
areas of sclerosis and lysis in a vertebral body. (B) Sagittally reconstructed CT image shows thickening, sclerosis and hyper-
density of the intervertebral disk and vertebral endplates. Additionally there is narrowing of the intervertebral foramina due
to moderate protrusion. Note the motion artifact in the sagittal reconstruction.
527AVIAN
B
B si araui () saoeng yiim (ono snu) suems atn jo (siaiad pue aipna iapinous) sase I asiaasui 8'ht an
fractured furcula (arrow) with subcutaneous emphysema. (B) There is a luxated left femoral head and some small avulsion 
fractures (arrow), typical hemorrhage (arrowhead) within pelvic bone and surrounding emphysema.
Figure 49.9 3D reconstruction of both legs of a saker falcon (Falco cherrug) with an old fracture of the left distal tibiotarsus.
While the particular position of the condyle was not understood on transversal images, the 3D model helps to diagnose the
angulation of the distal epiphyses.
B
Figure 49.10 (A) Transverse CT image of a domestic pigeon with fatty liver disease. The liver (L) measured -10HU and the
coelomic fat -160HU. Vessels can be differentiated within the liver parenchyma. Artifacts caused by grit in the ventriculus
are visible. B = bowel loops; Bm = breast muscle; V = ventriculus. (B) Right sagittal CT image of a galah (Eolophus roseicapillus)
with fatty liver (Li) disease (-5HU) with protruding xanthoma (X) of the liver. The heart (H) measured mean 62HU.
K=kidneys.
Figure 49.11  Mealy parrot (Amazono farinoso) with leucosis. Right sagittal CT image shows a markedly enlarged spleen (S).
B = bowel loops; H/Li = heart and liver; K = kidney.
C
Figure 49.12 (A) Sagittaly reconstructed CT image of a normal Egyptian vulture (Neophror percnopterus) showing the large
proventriculus (P) and gizzard (G) after feeding. (B) Sagittal CT image of a yellow-fronted Amazon parrot (Amazona ochro-
cephala) with proventricular dilatation disease. The proventriculus is severely enlarged, has an abnormal shape and contimues
to an abnormally thin-walled gizzard. (C) Sagittal CT image of a budgerigar (Melopsittacus undulatus) with going-light-syn-
drome showing a gas distended proventriculus, normal wall and shape of gizzard. Cr = crop; H = heart; L = lung; Li = liver.
enlargement with compression of abdominal air sacs. Nevertheless the origin of the mass is clearly visible from the cranial
(K1) and middle division (K2) of the kidney (compare Figure 49.14). The small bowel loops (B) are displaced ventrally.
530 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Figure 49.14 Budgerigar (Melopsittacus undulatus) with renal adenocarcinoma. (A) Transverse CT image shows a soft tissue
mass originating from the kidney region. (B) Post-intravenous transverse contrast CT image and (C) Sagittally reconstructed
 CT image. The thickened ureter (arrow) is displaced ventrally, the kidneys (K) appear as a heterogeneous, partially non-
enhancing and severely enlarged mass. Li = liver.
Figure 49.15 Domestic pigeon with multiple adhered follicles and peritonitis. Sagittal CT image shows poor coelomic detail.
A soft tissue mass, consisting of multiple round, peripherally mildly hyperdense structures displaces the contrast medium
filled gastrointestinal tract ventrally.
531AVIAN
Figure 49.18 Cockatiel (Nymphicus hollandicus) with ascites
caused by cardiac insufficiency. Sagittal CT image shows loss
of coelomic differentiation. The heart (H) is visible due to the
 decreased density of the neighboring liver. Part of the gizzard
(G) and some bowel loops (B) with remnants of contrast
medium are in normal position.
B
Figure 49.16 Cockatiel (Nymphicus hollandicus) with a
 gonadal tumor (seminoma).(A) Sagittal CT image shows the
contrast filled bowel loops (B) displaced ventrally by a soft
 tissue mass originating from kidney region. (B) On the post-
intravenous contrast sagittal CT image, the ureter (arrows)
defines the ventral border of normal sized kidneys (K).
H = heart; Li = liver.
A
B
Figure 49.17 (A) Transverse CT image of a domestic duck showing thin-walled normal air sacs. (B) Transverse CT image
infltration and mild focal thickening of air sac wall(arrows). K = kidneys; T = testicles.
532 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
Gumpenberger M and Henminger W (2001) The use of com-
 puted tomography in avian and reptile medicine. Semirn
Avian Exotic Pet Med 10: 174-80.
The author would like to thank Dr Alexandra Scope,
pue oqde.ouosenin (gooz) 5 uoy pue N 1abraquaduny
Clinic for Avian, Reptile and Fish Medicine and the
computed tomographic examinations of the avian eye:
Institute  of  Pathology  and  Forensic 
Veterinary
 physiologic appearance, pathologic findings, and com-
Medicine, both University of Veterinary Medicine,
 parative biometric measurement. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 47:
Vienna, for the cooperation in avian patients.
492-502.
Krautwald-Junghanns ME (1998) CT-assisted versus silicone
 rubber cast morphometry of the lower respiratory tract in
FURTHER READING
healthy amazons (genus Amazona) and grey parrots
(genus Psittacus). Res Vet Science 65: 17-22.
Krautwald-Junghanns M-E, Kostka VM and Dorsch B (1998)
Comparative studies on the diagnostic value of conven-
Amann O, Kik MJL, Passon-Vastenburg MH, Westerhof I,
tional radiography and computed tomography in evaluat-
Lumeij JT and Schoemaker NJ (2007) Chronic pulmonary
ing the heads of psittacine and raptorial birds. J Aoian Med
interstitial fibrosis in a blue-fronted Amazon parrot
Surg 12: 149-57.
(Amazona aestioa aestioa). Avian Dis 51: 150-3.
Artmann A and Henninger W (2001) Psittacine paranasal
 sinus - a new definition of compartments. J Zoo Wildl Med
32: 447-58.
CHAPTER FIFTY
CHELONIANS
Michaela Gumpenberger
Chelonians are enclosed in their, usually, bony shell.
repositioning of the patient is guaranteed when using
Therefore physical examination differs and is limited
the various scales of the shell for orientation. The
in comparison with lizards or snakes. Diagnostic
center of the scan should be the middle of the neural
imaging is often essential to gain a diagnosis. This
shields. Repositioning after contrast medium adminis-
chapter focuses on chelonians as representatives of
tration will then be possible with no or only minimal
reptiles.
dislocation. Repiles are poikilothermal animals.
[do ue oi dn pam aq on pau Aaui anoganau
body temperature (mostly 28-30°C) to ensure metabo-
IMAGING PROTOCOL
lization of the similarly warmed contrast media.
 Analysis of coelomic disorders may be easier in sag-
See Tables 50.1 and 50.2.
ittal scans or reconstructions, which resemble the more
familiar lateral radiograph. Interpretation of the most
Mooy [erauag un pmous suns Apoq-anoum, uowo
 a strict hierarchy, for example: heart/liver, gastrointes-
IMAGING TECHNIQUES
tinal tract, urogenital tract, respiratory tract, skeletal
system, other structures. Dorsal reconstructions should
Routine CT of the coelomic cavity can be performed
be orientated parallel to the plastron.
without anesthesia in most chelonians, except for
head scans. The legs are taped into the shell in phy-
siological position while the head and tail are able to
CT: ANATOMY AND NORMAL
move. The animals have to be placed on a cardboard
VARIANTS
box or block of styrofoam or plastic. Otherwise they
m uonisod radond jo jno saanasuaun mue Aeu 
the tail. Calm animals can sometimes rest in a box
The clade of tortoises and turtles is represented by
without further restraint. Larger species like African
hundreds of different subspecies  with different
 spurred tortoises (Geochelone sulcata) can be strapped
 anatomy. Therefore Table 50.3 focuses on the general
on a first-aid stretcher or anesthetized. Soft-shelled
anatomy of Mediterranean tortoises.
-saue aq 1o xoq papeqs ralleus e u jsa1 Kew sa[im
The general schematic anatomy of tortoises is dem-
thetized, too.
 onstrated in Figure 50.1.
 Smaller individuals can be positioned crosswise to
the longitudinal axis of the patient table. The resulting
sagittal scan is performed much quicker than the axial
DISEASE FEATURES: SKELETON
 one. Movement artifacts may arise from head move-
ment but usually do not hinder diagnosis. Existing
AND HEAD
 protocols for head scans for dogs and horses may be
 used and adapted for chelonians in general.
Table 50.4 provides an overview of the most likely
 Intravenous contrast medium is administered man
findings in chelonians. CT characteristics are described
ually into the jugular or coccygeal vein. The correct
 in more detail when they differ significantly from dogs
saunes Auu 'ziemups sa q pauis fy pan 
@ 2011 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
533
534 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Table 50.1
Imaging protocol of the coelomic cavity of chelonians.
 Series
Pre- and post-contrast bone 
Additional remarks
 Positioning
 Sternal 
Legs taped into the shell in physiological position
(see further remarks in text)
 Scan margins
Axial scan: cranial rim of shell → caudal rim of shell 
 Sagittal scan from right to left: right shell bridge → neural shields →> left shell bridge
Voltage (kVp)
100-130
Depending on the size
Current (mAs)
100-200
Depending on the size
Tube rotation time (s)
1-2
Slice width (mm)
1-5
 Small to giant species 
 Sequential slice interval (mm)
1-4
 Small to giant species
Kernel frequency 
 Pre-contrast: soft tissue/medium 
Bone: bone
Window level (HU)
 Pre-contrast: +50 to +100
Lungs: -200 to -400
Bo ne: +350 to +500
Window width (HU)
 Pre-contrast: 350-450
Lungs: 1600-2000
Bo ne: 2500
Table 50.2
Intravenous contrast protocol.
 Contrast medium
 Jugular vein or
 application site
coccygeal vein
 Contrast medium type
lodine based, ionic or
non-ionic - warmed 
Contrast medium dose
 600 mg I/kg body weight
Contrast injection mode
Manual
 Scan delay post start
 1 min, repetition after
contrast injection
3-10min
 Kernel frequency
 Soft tissue/medium
Figure 50.1 Schematic basic anatomy of the coelomic
+100
 organs of a Mediterranean tortoise. G = gonads; GIT = gas-
Window level (HU)
trointestinal tract; H = liver; K = kidneys; L = lung; M = mar-
Window width (HU)
350
ginal shield; N = neural shield; UB = urinary bladder.
FURTHER READING
Gumpenberger M (2007) Diagnostic imaging of dyspnoic
chelonians. In: Seybold J and Mutschmann F (eds)
and cats. Otherwise the author would kindly refer the
reader to the particular chapter of the present book.
Medicine in Reptiles and Amphibians (Berlin 2004). Chimaira,
pp. 217-22.
-Bouot panduo (ooz) yI dH pue W iaiaquadun
DISEASE FEATURES: COELOMIC
 phy and use of intravenous contrast media in imaging
ORGANS
chelonian kidneys. Proceedings 14th Anrual Meeting of
ARAV, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA, p. 5.
Gumpenberger M and Henninger W (2001) The use of com-
Table 50.5 provides an overview of the most likely
puted tomography in avian and reptile medicine. Semin
findings in chelonians.
Avian Exotic Pet Med 10: 174-80.
Table 50.3
Anatomy - most important variations to mammals.
 Organ
Anatomical details 
Figures
Head 
Head
Differs in each species - check special literature
Eyes
Scleral ossicles support the globe
Skeleton in
Shell
Consists of carapace (dorsal part), plastron (ventral part) and bridge.
50.2
 chelonians
 Each built by numerous bony plates that are derived from dermal
ossification, ribs, vertebrae and clavicles 
Hinges present in some species 
Compacta = 1200-1400 HU, medullary space = 700-750HU in
Mediterranean tortoises 
 Cervical spine
 Eight vertebrae, movable
Thoracal and
Nine vertebrae, not movable, fused with carapace
lumbar spine
 Caudal spine 
Movable, various number depending on length of tail
Shoulder and
 Enclosed in shell
pelvic girdle
 Extremities usually have five toes 
Coelomic
 Diaphragm
Lacking
organs
 Heart and main 
 Three-chambered, complete atrial septum 
50.4
vessels
 Flanked by liver lobes
50.5
 Paired carotid arteries and jugular veins 
 Paired ventral abdominal vein and renal portal system present 
Thyroid gland
Anterior to the heart, mean density in Herman's tortoises 40-50 HU,
50.5
in juvenile animals maybe more (to 70 HU)
50.27
Liver
Hal aui ueui abiel auo sublu aui (sagol jote ol
50.3
Homogeneous, mean density in Herman's tortoises 50-70 HU
Gallbladder
Located at right liver lobe
Spleen 
 Oval, dorsomedial to stomach, right sagittal
50.3
Mean density in Herman's tortoises 40-50HU, may be denser in
juvenile animals (to 75HU)
Pancreas
 Close to stomach and duodenum, caudal to gall bladder
Esophagus
 Dorsal to trachea
 Longitudinal folds for great distensibility
Stomach
 Positioned in the left cranial half of the shell, across the caudal face
 of the liver, pylorus positioned right sagittal or central
 Small intestines 
Many loops
50.4
 Large intestines 
 Cecum in the right caudal quarter of the coelomen
50.3
 Prominent colon in herbivorous tortoises 
50.5
Kidneys
No pelvis, macroscopically no medulla or cortex 
 Positioned at level of or dorsocranial to hip joints
Normal density 25-40 HU (in Herman's tortoises)
Urinary bladder
Single sac or central structure with bilateral accessory bladders
Go nads
 Cranioventral to cranial pole of kidneys
50.3
 Females: follicles appear as round structures of various sizes, may
50.4
suejuojauo ul Alla sjolaoo aloym Alleau Adnsg 
50.5
Medium-sized to large follicles in Herman's tortoises measure 
60-75 HU
Adrenals
Associated with kidneys
Trachea
Two main bronchi branch off in the first half of the neck
bun7
 Paired; typical reticular or honeycomb pattern 
50.2
50.4
Lymph nodes
ulm waisas slieydual aaey op ing ((aluni bu iddeus idaoxa) bu lyoe7
perivascular lymph channels
536 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Table 50.4
Disease features: skeleton and head.
 Pathological
 Organ system
changes
Manifestation
CT characteristics
Figures
Head
Infection, 
 Otitis media 
 Protrusion of tympanic scale, obstruction of
inflammation,
middle ear, variably affects bony structures
degeneration
(osteolyses)
Infection,
 Mandibular and 
Lytic process, hardly any periosteal new
inflammation,
maxillary
bo ne production
degeneration 
 osteomyelitis
Shell
Trauma,
 Fractures, mostly
 Check position of fractures (often impression
50.6
dislocation
caused by dog bites,
fracture), Iung hemorrhage/co nsolidation,
dropping and car
spinal lesions 
accidents
Infection,
(Mostly nutritional)
 Pyramidal shape of neural bone plates,
50.7
inflammation,
secondary
 flattening of carapace, heterogeneous,
50.8
 degeneration 
 hyperparathyreoidism
 honeycomb or moth-eaten-like pattern of
50.9
with demineralization
 bony plates, loss of compacta (especially
(often accompa nied 
plastron, visceral surface), decreased
by kidney disease)
 density; in very severe cases most of the 
 shell consists of fatty tissue, bo ne may not 
be visible in bo ny window
Infection,
 Shell necrosis
Lytic areas within bony plates while the 
50.10
inflammation, 
 superficial horny shield may be healed, may
degeneration
 be accompanied by intracoelomic
abscessation
Infection,
 Sequestration (after
Isolated part of bony plates, hypodense halo,
50.11
inflammation,
trauma or
plastron more often affected 
degeneration 
coeliotomy)
Vertebral spine
Trauma,
 Fractures of proximal
 Similar to mammals; greenstick fracture:
and extremities
dislocation
extremities rare due 
 note thinned compacta; healing: fibrous
to protection of shell;:
 fracture stabilization may be more prominent
may be assisted by
 than osteous callus formation (complete 
abscesses
healing may least 6-18 months)
Trauma,
 Luxation of sho ulder 
 Similar to mammals 
50.9
dislocation
or hip joint, rare
Infection,
Arthrosis and
 Shellike bony tissue around (shoulder, hip 
50.12
inflammation,
 pse udogout (calcium
and knee) joints
degeneration 
deposits)
Infection,
Arthritis
 Soft tissue swelling and widened joint space,
inflammation,
sometimes lytic bone, less periosteal
degeneration 
reactions 
Infection,
 Abscessation (may be 
 Mostly well defined (reptiles usually have
50.13
inflammation,
caused by bites of,
 caseous and often encapsulated pus), may 
degeneration
 for example, mating
calcify; sometimes necrotic process with 
partners or prey as
bone involvement (progressively lytic 
well as by injections)
process)
 Neoplasia
 Primary as well as
 Seems to be more often lytic, may be
metastasis, rare
 followed by fractures 
537 CHELONIANS
Table 50.5
Disease features: coelomic organs.
Pathological
Organ system
changes 
Pathogenesis
 CT characteristics
Figures
Cardiovascular
Calcification
 Excessive vitamin D3
Increased densities/mineralization of
50.14
system
and calcium, often 
heart, more linear in vessels 
accompanied by renal 
disease
 Pericardial
 Small amounts may be normal; large 
50.14
effusion 
 amo unts cause displacement of coelomic 
 organs, especially liver
Liver
Hepatomegaly
 Mostly lipidosis 
 Liver extends to the inguinal window of
50.16
the shell, in fatty liver disease density
50.17
lower than 20HU
Gastrointestinal
 Dilatation of
Stenosis
 Enlarged stomach, displacing liver
50.15
tract
stomach
cranially, gravel signs may be present
Dilatation of
 Stenosis, severe
Gas and fluid accumulation; small bowel
bowel loops
inflammation or
loop diameter one third or more of height
 parasitosis, sometimes 
of shell 
foreign body (especially
sea turtles) or
abscessation
 Foreign bodies
Similar to mammals
Kidney
Renomegaly
 Degeneration: gout,
 Normal density does not notably increase 
50.16
nephrocalcinosis; also
with gout (uric acid deposits are not
50.17
infection, inflammation,
 radiodense) but with calcinosis, shape 
rarely neoplasia
more blunted and rounded, can cause
lung compression
Increased
Kidney gout with
Increased density, marble-like appearance;
50.14
density
calcinosis, nephrosis
check for further mineralization at heart, 
large vessels and larger joints (knee)
 Urinary bladder
Abnormal
 Cystic calculi
Usually large (and singular), often layered 
50.18
contents
Enlarged
 Urinary retention
 Severely enlarged urinary bladder; liver 
50.19
dislocated to cranial, bowel loops to 
50.20
 dorsal, lung compression 
 Female genital 
Preovulatory
Atretic follicles, heterogeneous with
50.21
tract
dystocia or
hypodense areas, horizontal levelling of
follicular stasis
liquid co ntents - appearance does not
improve on follow-up examinations 
 Dystocia or egg
Enlarged, broken, incomplete or thickened 
50.22
binding
shells; loss of ovoidal shape of yolk,
50.23
builds horizontal fluid line, may have gas 
 cap; displacement: ova may be found in 
urinary bladder (suspected on radiographs
but proved with CT)
Egg-related or
 Poor differentiation, loss of round shape 
50.24
egg-yolk
 of follicles, atretic follicles (see above)
coelomitis 
(Continued)
538 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Table 50.5
(Continved)
 Pathological
 Organ system
 changes
 Pathogenesis
CT characteristics
 Figures
Lung
 Opacification of
 Mostly pneumo nia 
Loss of air chambers, mostly horizontal
50.25
Iumina 
fluid line
Thickening (and
Pneumonia,
Thickened septa, sometimes some fluid in 
50.26
 opacification)
hemorrhage, edema,
air chambers or increased density of 
of septa
contusion
septa
Abscessation
 Pneumonia
Consolidation of lung, multiple roundish, 
50.27
mostly mild hyperdense structures
replace normal lung tissue 
 Emphysema
May accompany
Loss of normal air chamber architecture,
50.28
 One-sided pneumonia 
loss/rupture and thinning of septa 
Coelomic cavity
Ascites
Rare event
 Similar to mammals; liver elevated from 
 generally
plastron 
Adiposity
 Often accompanied by
 Fatty tissue at the inner surface of the
lipidosis
shell and around shoulder and pelvic 
girdle
aas aui 'tiaus aul go uoezieiauu poaad smous astoot aua-nds reou e jo aeu  ieaes hat zos auni
bony plates are clearly differentiable, including compacta and spongiosa. Note the tortoise rests on a wooden block. L = lung;
T = trachea; V = vessel in lung.
539 CHELONIANS
Figure 50.4 Sagittal CT image of a normal Herman's tor-
toise. The poor coelomic detail is normal in chelonians. The
testes (Ts) are located immediately cranial to the kidneys (K).
B = bowel loops; H = heart; L = lung.
Figure 50.5 Sagittal CT image of a normal Herman's tor-
C
toise. The head is retracted. Consequently, the neck superim-
Figure 50.3  Right sagittal CT images (coelomic cavity) of
poses and compresses the lung (L). Asterisk = thyroid gland;
a normal Herman's tortoise. (A) Pre-contrast CT image. The 
 B = bowel loops with feces; F = normal homogeneous hyper-
liver (Li) is small and homogeneous, some folicles (F) are
dense follicle; H = heart.
present. The spleen (Sp) presents caudal to the liver and
dorsomedial to the stomach. The kidneys (K) are poorly dif-
ferentiable. Gas and feces are present in cecum/colon (C).
(B) Early and (C) late post-contrast images. The large vessels
within the liver parenchyma and the kidneys show early,
 strong enhancement. The ureter is visible as an undulating
stucture at the caudal end of the kidney on the early
ienuos anet smous (ds) uaaids aui ase isenuos-isod
enhancement.
540 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Figure 50.6 Herman's tortoise after dog bite. Transverse
CT image at the level of the hip joints shows a fracture of the 
carapace (arrow), fracture of the pelvis (asterisks) and hem-
orrhage in the most caudal lung fields.
Figure 50.9
3-D reconstruction (dorsal view, carapace par-
 tially removed) of a Herman's tortoise with renal hyperpara-
Taus aui go ison 4nos AaupyY aiaas Aq pasnes usiproiiu
 lacks sufficient mineralization, huge lytic areas represent
fatty tissue. There is caudal luxation of both femoral heads
(arrows).
Figure 50.7 Right sagittal CT image (coelomic cavity) of a
red-eared slider turtle. There is a severe malformation and
demineralization of the shell causing lung (L) compression.
Some calcification is visible in the gall bladder wall (GB).
F = follicles.
Figure 50.10 Sagittal CT image of a musk turtle. There is
kidney abscessation (K) secondary to shell necrosis (arrow).
hyperparathyroidism. Left sagittal scan shows a barely min-
(normal range: 700-750 HU). The soft tissues of the coelomic
organs occupy one third of the height of the shell - lean
tortoise. Asterisk = main bronchi with accompanying vessel;
K = kidney; L = lung.
A
Figure 50.11 (A) Herman's tortoise that underwent a coeliotomy some months ago. Sagittal CT image shows a huge seque-
 strum in the abdominal bony plate. A new bony plate is growing while the surgically created flap is isolated. Some air invades
the space between sequestrum and new bone. (B) Dorsally reconstructed CT image of the plastron of another Herman's tor-
toise. While it was hardly differentiable on single sagittal images, a huge sequestrum (arrows) is visible in the abdominal
bony plate. Suspected origin was dropping on a stone floor.
Figure 50.13 Left sagittal image of one hindlimb of a
Herman's tortoise. A well-demarcated (arrows) abscess with
Figure 50.12  Herman's tortoise with pseudogout. Sagittal
 central calcification (C) causes massive soft tissue swelling
CT image shows moderate demineralization and ring like
 cranial to the leftibia and fibula. These bones are notinvolved.
calcifications around the shoulder joint (arrow). Urate (U)
accumulation is visible within the urinary bladder.
Figure 50.14 Long-necked turtle with nephritis and nephrocalcinosis accompanied by heart disease. Right sagittal scan
shows severe calcification of the heart (H) and main vessels (arrow). Additionally, severe pericardial effusion (PE) is present.
The liver (Li) is displaced caudodorsally by the enlarged heart. The kidneys (K) show similar calcifications and mild enlarge-
ment. The lung is compressed.
542 VETERINARY COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Figure 50.15 Right sagittal CT image of a Mediterranean
tortoise. The pylorus (P) is dilated with gravel sign (arrow)
 Figure 50.18  Right sagittal CT image of an African spurred
ventrally, functional stenosis and hemorrhage of unknown 
tortoise (Geochelone sulcata). A huge onion shell-like urinary
origin. The shell is demineralized and deformed. Li = liver.
bladder stone is accompanied by lots of fragments. On con-
ventional radiographs only the main stone was visible, mim-
icking dystocia.
Figure 50.16 Herman's tortoise with lipidosis and kidney
(nHz-) asuaody e smous ase I tees uor "inog
lver (Li) and a severely enlarged kidney (K). There is severe
lung (L) compression due to hepatomegaly and renomegaly.
H =heart.
Figure 50.19 (A) Right sagittal CT image of a Herman's
 tortoise. The urinary bladder (UB) is severely distended with
some urates (arrow) and displaces the bowel loops dorsally
-rauuap araaas st arau ussanduos Sn aiaaas Susnes
alization of the shell giving a bumpy appearance to the
surface of the carapace. (B) Aerated unfold aspect of the lung
Figure 50.17 Russian tortoise (Testudo horsfeldin) with renal
after punctation of the urinary bladder in the same animal.
adenocarcinoma and liver lipidosis (Li). Sagittal CT image
 shows an enlarged, rounded kidney (K) that contains some
bright spots. There is severe demineralization and flattening
of the carapace (arrows).
543 CHELONIANS
Figure 50.20 Herman's tortoise with a huge intra-coelomic
abscess originating from a fissure in the carapace. Right
sagittal CT image shows the abscess (A) with an irregular
wall (arrow) causing severe lung (L) compression. Such an
abscess should be differentiated from a dilated urinary
bladder.
Figure 50.23 Herman's tortoise with chronic dystocia.
 Dorsally reconstructed CT image of the ventral half of the 
body (level shoulder and hip joints) shows some broken
shells (1) within the oviduct and three thickened shells (2)
within the urinary bladder (UB). Displacement of eggs into 
juauea iadodun Aq pasne aq Aeu iappenq Areuan aul
or obstruction of the cloaca during deposition of a clutch.
Figure 50.21  Right lateral sagittal CT image of a Herman's
tortoise showing atretic follicles (F) with abnormal horizon-
tal levelling of their contents and abnormal density. The
oviduct (O) is typically hyperdense and curled. There is also
focal mineralization of the liver (Li).
Figure 50.22 Red-eared slider turtle with dystocia. Right
Figure 50.24 Herman's tortoise with peritonitis caused by
yolk. Sagittal CT image shows very poor detail in the caudal
sagittal CT image shows two calcified egg shells (1) that
Pue () oA panaaal Aequzou Tenoqe ue uuo
half of the coelomic cavity. Some rounded structures seem to
albumen (A) in addition to a small gas bubble (asterisk). Two
be visible.
other poorly mineralized ova (2) have a normal centered
oval-shaped yolk with a peripheral ring of albumen. The
hepatic tissue (Li) is hypodense (lipidosis).
B
Figure 50.25 Spur-thighed tortoise with severe unilateral pneumonia. (A) Transverse CT image shows mild thickening of
the reticular patterns in the right lung. The left lung is not differentiable and is fluid-filled. (B) Transverse CT image of the
 same animal after 20 days' therapy. Both lungs are normal.
Figure 50.28 Redeared slider turtle with severe lung
emphysema. Right sagittal CT image shows loss of normal
reticular lung (L) patterm and merged air chambers. Severe 
emphysema of one lung usually takes place in pneumonia
 or obstruction of the contralateral lung.
pneumonia. Sagittal CT image shows thickened and hyper-
 dense reticular patterms. The animal was scanned in a wicker
basket.
Figure 50.27  Red-eared slider turtle with lung abscessation. Median sagittal CT image shows that the cranial half of the
lung contains multiple rounded abscesses. More abscesses (arrows) were found in the coelomic cavity. The thyroid gland (T)
is enlarged. This animal was kept like a Herman's tortoise for several years.
INDEX
Page mumbers in italics indicate
imaging protocol, 352
blooming, 44, 48, 51, 58
figures; those in bold indicate tables.
infection, 351
cone beam effect, 41, 42
neoplasia,352,354,355
edge enhancement, 23, 44, 47, 49
afterglow, 47
edge gradient streaks, 54,54
A
 air-contrast interface artifact, 54, 54
energy spectrum effects, 50
air sac (avian), 524
faulty detector, 46, 50
aorta and branches, 358, 359, 360
airway disease (rabbits and rodents),
faulty output, 46
abdominal CT, 24,32,33, 34,46
513
flipped gantry, 44, 46
 abdominal CT angiography, 357,
algorithm distortions, 44
geometrical errors, 35
359
aliasing, 35, 36
head (equine) imaging, 443, 444
lymph nodes, 371, 373
remedies, 37, 37, 38
helical multislice CT, 41
 inaging protocol, 372
 anesthetic set up, 24, 24
high-density streaks, 12, 48, 51
neoplasia, 376,373, 377, 378
 anesthetized horse, 421
remedies, 12, 13, 48
rabbits and rodents, 509
aneurysm, 234, 238, 257
high pitch blurring, 18, 40, 40
vasculature, 73, 357
angiographic studies, 71, 71, 233
metal, 12, 48, 51
imaging protocol, 358
Angiostrongylus vasorum infection, 67
motion, 19, 38, 39
abducens CN VI, 206, 208
 angular limb deformities, 381, 382
remedies, 38
 abductor pollicis longus muscle,
anode, 1
 non-linear partial volume effect, 14,
 stenosing tenosynovitis, 411,
anophthalmos, 138
53, 53
412
aortic thrombosis, 362
out-of-field, 10, 42, 43, 46
abscess
apical abscess/alveolitis (equine), 430,
partial volume, 13, 14, 14, 17, 19,
brain (equine), 446
436
41, 42, 43, 45
hindlimb (chelonians), 541
apical cyst, 120
remedies, 41
lung, 268, 271
application entity, 75
peripheral, 10,42, 43,46
masticatory muscles, 116, 130, 135
 arterioportal hepatic fistula, 362, 363
 photon starvation, 48, 51
mediastinum, 258, 260
arthrographic studies (equine),
point spread effect, 44, 47, 48, 51
oral cavity, 115, 116
 imaging protocol, 426
qualitative errors, 35
orbita, 138, 141
articular cartilage damage, grading
quantitative errors, 35
ovary, stump, 347
system, 403
6‘punoqat
pancreas, 317
articular (facet) joint arthrosis, 222,
ring, 47, 50
 paraesophageal, 254
223
scatter, 47
prostate gland, 343, 347
artifacts, 35
stair step, 41, 43
tooth apex (equine), 430, 436
 air-contrast interface, 54, 54
starburst, 12, 48, 51
accessory CN XI, 206
algorithm distortions, 44
tuncated view, 10, 42, 43, 46
adaptive cardiovascular changes, 230,
aliasing, 35, 36
view aliasing, 9, 36, 37
232
remedies, 37, 37, 38
windmill, 41, 41
 adenohypophysis, 197
attenuation measurement-induced,
zebra, 41, 43
adrenal glands, 351
45
 aseptic necrosis of the femoral head,
feline, 352
beam hardening, 50, 52
384
Hounsfield units, 352
remedies, 51, 53
aspergillosis (avian), 531
Veterinary Computed Tomography, First Edition. Edited by Tobias Schwarz, Jimmy Saunders.
@ 2011 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
545
546 INDEX
Aspergillus fumigatus,97,99,100
biceps lesions, 406, 407
hyperostosis, 165
asymmetric scanming, 43
biliary contrast medium excretion,
imaging protocol, 162
atelectasis, 262, 264, 264
297, 298
neoplasia, 166, 167-170
peripheral, 262
binning, 5, 15
osteomyelitis, 164, 166
atlantoaxial subluxation, 213, 216
biopsies, CT-assisted, 81, 82-84
sequestra,164, 166
 atracurium, 40
Ur suogestdde aremgos apou Asdom
canine distemper virus encephalitis,
 attenuation measurement-induced
CT, 81
191
artifacts, 45
bite block immobilization, 78
 cardiac insufficiency (avian), 531
auditory tube, 175, 178
blood flow, quantification, 62
cardiac neoplasia, 237, 241
aural cholesteatoma, 159
blooming,44, 48, 51, 58
 cardiac valvular insufficiencies, 234,
automated bolus tracking, 68
blurring, 38, 41, 45
237
limitations, 69
body composition (porcine), 504, 506
cardiac valvular stenoses, 234, 237
 principle, 68
body part selection, 9
cardiovascular gas emboli, 230, 233
 recommendations for use, 69
bone
 cardiovascular system (chelonians),
 automatic tuabe current modulation,
 infarcts secondary to primary bone
537, 541
50
tumor, 385, 386
caries, 120, 122, 123
avian
mineral density, 67
carmassial teeth, 114, 125
air sac, 524
neoplasia, 385, 385, 386,405,406
carpus
anatomy and normal variants, 517,
bow-tie filters, 51, 53
 bone fractures (equine), 460, 461
518, 519, 520, 521
brain, 22, 50, 52, 185, 187
bones, 61
aspergillosis, 531
abscess (equine), 446
canal syndrome (equine), 487, 489,
cardiac insufficiency, 531
acute trauma, 190
490
cataract, 524
anatomy, 186
intercarpal ligaments, tear/
coelomic organs
chronic trauma, 190, 191
desmitis /avulsion (equine),
 anatomy, 521
contusions, 163
486, 489
disease features, 522, 523, 524,
degenerative disease, 194
joint, 392, 393, 411
528-531
disease, general, 185
 diverging number of bones, 411,
imaging protocol, 518
equine,443,444
412
discospondylitis, 526
hermiation, 187
musculature, 394
disease features, 517
imaging protocol, 186
region (equine), 483
extremities, 522, 527
mass effect, 186, 187
sclerosis (equine), 485, 488
female genital tract, 523, 530
metabolic, nutritional, toxic disease,
sheath effusion (equine), 487, 489,
fractures, 527
193,193
490
gastrointestinal tract, 523, 529
metastases, 195
tunmel syndrome (equine), 487, 489,
head
neoplasia, 194, 194, 195
490
anatomy, 520
trauma (equine), 445
cartilage lesion (equine), 484, 486, 487
disease features, 522, 524, 525
bronchi, 261,262
cartilage lesion, medial palmar
imaging technique, 517, 518
collapse, 263, 265
condyle (equine), 476
 intravenous contrast protocol, 518
foreign body, 266, 267
case load considerations, 89, 90
kidney, 523, 529, 530
lymph nodes, 252
cataract (avian), 524
lenucosis, 528
bronchiectasis, 266, 266
cathode, 1
liver, 523, 528
bronchitis, 265, 266
cauda equina, 213, 214
lung, 524, 531
bronchitis (rabbits and rodents), 513
caudal, 29
male genital tract, 523, 531
bronchoarterial diameter ratio, 261
caudal glenoid rim, incomplete 
pituitary adenoma, 525
bronchoesophageal artery, aberrant, 
ossification, 405, 406
seminoma, 531
234
 caudal vena cava and tributaries, 359,
skeleton
imaging protocol, 262
360, 370
anatomy, 520
brute force approach, 2
cavitary disease,213,216
disease features, 522, 526, 527
bursitis, navicular bursa (equine), 469,
cellulitis, 173
spleen,523,528
470
cemental hypoplasia (equine), 428,
vertebral spine, 522, 526
business plan, 89, 90
431
axial scanning, 6, 16
 peripheral, 428
C
cementifying fibroma, 123
B
 calcinosis circumscripta, 228
 central nervous system-associated
 bacterial meningoencephalitis, 191
calvarium, 161
tumors, 195
bag-holding with lungs inflated, 40
equine,443,444
cerebellar abiotrophy (equine), 444
beam hardening, 50, 52
neoplasia, 448
cerebellar hypoplasia, 190
benign prostatic hyperplasia, 340
osteitis, 447
cerebral blood flow map (canine), 70
547 INDEX
cerebral necrosis, 189
imaging protocol, 518
individual cranial nerves 
cerebrovascular diseases, 192
coelomic organs (chelonians), 535,
abducens CN VI, 206, 208
cervical lymph nodes, superficial and
539,544, 538
accessory CN XI, 206
deep, 171, 173
inmaging protocol, 534
facial CN VII, 206, 208
cervical spine, 10 ,20,43
collapse, 262
glossopharyngeal CN IX, 206
cervical spondylomyelopathy, 213,
 collateral sesamoidean desmitis
hypoglossal CN XI1, 206
217
(equine), 468
oculomotor CN IIl, 206, 208
cervical vertebral malformation
 collateral sesamoidean ligament
olfactory CN I, 206
(equine), 451
(equine), 463, 465
optic CN II, 137,139, 140, 140,
cervical vertebral stenotic myelopathy
collateral cartilage (equine), 466
206, 208
(equine), 451
collective system, 371
trigeminal CN V, 206
chelonians, 533
imaging protocol, 372
mandibular branch, 206, 207
abscess hindlimb, 541
collimator pitch, 18
maxillary branch, 206, 207
anatomy and normal variants, 533,
collimators, 3, 3, 5, 16
ophthalmic branch, 206, 208
534, 535, 538, 539, 544
comminuted fractures (equine), 458,
trochlear CN IV, 206, 208
cardiovascular system, 537, 541
460
vagal CN X, 206
coeliotomy, 541
computed tomography (CT), 1
vestibulocochlear CN VIll, 206,
coelomic organs, 535, 539, 544,
cone beam effect, 41, 42
207
538
 congenital hydrocephalus, 161, 162,
neoplasia, 206
disease features, 534, 537, 538,
189, 188
craniomandibular osteopathy, 165,
541-544
 congenital hypoadrenocorticism, 351
166
 imaging protocol, 534
 congenital imperforate nasolacrimal
craniopharyngiomas, 201, 203
dystocia, 543
duct, 149
cross-sectional areas (CSA), 261
extremities, 536, 540, 541
 congenital patellar subluxation/
crown defect, 122
female genital tract, 537, 543
luxation, 414, 416
cruciate ligament trauma, 414, 417
fractures, 540
 congenital vertebral malformations,
cruciate ligaments injury (equine),
gastrointestinal tract, 537, 542
215,218
494, 500, 501
head, 535
 contrast agents, 57
cryoablation of tumors, 84, 87
disease features, 533, 536
 administration method, 64
Cryptococcosis, 98, 101
hyperparathyroidism, secondary,
commercially available, 58
CSA (cross-sectional areas), 261
540
injection, 69, 359
CT (computed tomography), 1
imaging techniques, 533
gadolinium, 58
acquisition principles, 9
intravenous contrast protocol, 534
intravenous, 57,58
arthrography, 389
kidney, 537, 541, 542
iodinated, 27
contrast media, 57
liver, 537, 542
ionic, 57
descriptive terminology, 29
lung, 538, 544
non-ionic, 57
 image interpretation, 29
IS 4nosopnasd
reactions, 57
imaging protocol
shell, 536, 538, 540, 541
undesired effects, 58
 abdominal lymph nodes and
skeleton, 535, 538
 contrast-enhanced vascular strctures,
collective system, 372
disease features, 533, 536, 540,
73,73
adrenal glands, 352
541
contrast latitude, narrow, 31
arthrographic studies (equine),
urinary bladder, 537, 542, 543
contrast procedures, 64
426
vertebral column, 536
cool-down time, 2
brain, 186
Chiari-like malformation, 161, 190
coronary artery branching, 229,
calvarium and zygomatic arch,
 cholangitis, emphysematous, 308,
232
162
311
costs
coelomic cavity (avians), 518
 cholesterinic granulomas (equine),
calculations worksheet, 91
 coelomic cavity (chelonians), 534
448, 449
fixed and variable, 90
cranial nerves and associated
chondrodystrophic malformation,
fixed costs per month,91
skull foramina, 206
TMJ joint, 127
non-fixed costs per month, 91
extermal, middle and inner ear,
chondrosarcoma, 117, 168, 169, 293
 per case worksheet, 91
154
chyloabdomen, 374
cranial, 29
gastrointestinal tract, 326
chylothorax, 281, 374, 374, 375, 376
cranial mediastinal width, 250, 251
genital tract, 340
cisterma chili, 371
cranial nerves, 205
head and neck (equine), 424
clinical tumor volume (CTV), 78
corresponding skull foramina in the
heart and vessels, 230
coeliotomy (chelonians), 541
90z 8op
joints, 388
coeloma (sea bass), 65
feline, 205
joint studies (equine), 425
coelomic cavity (avian), 524, 531
imaging protocol, 206
liver, gallbladder and spleen, 298
548 INDEX
CT (computed tomography) (Cont.)
Rathke's cleft, 199
nomenclature
lungs and bronchi, 262
salivary gland, 142
 canine and feline, 114
lymph nodes of head and neck,
sinus (equine), 433
equine, 428
172
subarachnoid, 218, 220
rabbits and rodents, 512
mediastinum, 250
subchondral bone, 129
odontogenic neoplasia, 121, 123,
myelographic studies (equine),
thyroid gland, 176, 181
124
425
tooth apex, 120
odontoma, 123
 nasal cavities and frontal simuses,
 cystic disorder (rabbits and rodents),
 periodontium
94
515
anatomy (equine), 427
 oral cavity, mandible, maxilla 
disease (rabbits and rodents),
and dental apparatus, 112
D
512, 513
 orbita, salivary glands and
3DCRT (three-dimensional conformal
disorders (equine), 431, 436
lacrimal system, 138
radiotherapy), 77
neoplasia, 121,123
pancreas, 316, 317
dacryocystitis, chronic, 149, 150
periodontitis,120, 122, 123
 pharynx, larynx and thyroid
dacryocystography, 148,149, 150, 151
pulpal gas, 123
gland, 176
dacryops, 150, 150
pulpar exposure (equine), 430, 435
pleura, 280
Dandy-Walker malformation, 190
pulpitis, 120, 122, 123
pituitary gland, 198
 DDFT (deep digital flexor tendon)
equine,430,435
rabbits and rodents, 510
(equine), 463,464
suctures (equine), CT density,
 systemic and portal abdominal
 DECT (dual-energy CT), 6, 67
429
vasculature, 358
deep digital flexor tendon (DDFT)
 tooth mumber and position,
 temporomandibular joint and
(equine), 463, 464
 abnormal, 118
masticatory apparatus, 112
pathology,467,467, 468
tooth root infection, 120, 122, 123
thoracic boundaries, 280
degenerative disk disease, 223, 225
 Triadan dental mumbering system,
trachea, 244
 degenerative lumbosacral stenosis,
113, 114
urinary system, 332
224, 226
equine, 428
vertebral column and spinal
degenerative myelopathy, 224
dermoid cyst, 94, 96
cord, 209
 densities, wide range, 31
 desmitis, palmar carpal ligament,
myelography, 210, 225
densitometry, 67
(equine), 487,491, 492
mumbers, 30
density values vertebral canal, 211
desmopathy
 perfusion imaging, 69
dental apparatus, 113
 menisco-tibial ligament (equine),
limitations, 70
anatomy, 114
492, 496-499
principle, 69
equine,427,428,429,430
 suspensory ligament (equine), 480
recommendations for use, 69, 70
apical abscess/alveolitis (equine),
detector pitch, 18
physics, 1
430, 436
detector systems, 3
unit anatomy, 1
caries, 120, 122, 123
DEXA (dual energy X-ray
values, 30
carnassial teeth, 114, 125
 absorptiometry), 67
CTV (clinical tumor volume), 78
cemental hypoplasia (equine)
diaphragm
cupping, 50, 52
infundibular, 428, 431
hermia, 287,289
current, 9, 10
peripheral, 428
rupture,290, 309
 curvilinear reconstruction, 71, 72
cementifying filbroma, 123
DICOM (digital imaging and 
limitations, 72
cystic lesions, 118, 120
 communication in medicine),
 principle, 71
equine,443,445
72,75
recommendation for use, 71
disease (rabbits and rodents), 512,
diencephalon, 185
cyst
513
digital environment, 75
 dental apparatus, 118, 120
enamel hypoplasia (equine), 428,
digital image display, 31
equine, 443, 445
432
digital imaging and communication
dermoid, 94,96
endodontic treatment, 118
in medicine (DICOM), 72,
intracranial intra-arachnoid, 189,
epulides, 121, 123, 124
75
190
extractions, 118
digits,392,412
intraspinal articulation, 222, 223
fractures, 118, 121
feline, 392
mediastinum, 258, 260
equine,428,433
 infection/inflammation, 412, 413
orbita, 140
 imaging protocol, 112
musculature, 394
osseus like lesions (equine), 484,
impaction, 102
 neoplasia, 412
485, 486
 infundibular caries (equine), 429,
direct lymphography, 372, 373
pancreas, 317
434, 435
discospondylitis, 220, 222
pseudocyst, 317, 322
infundibular, 428, 431
avian, 526
polycystic disease, 308
neoplasia (equine), 431, 437
disk disease, degenerative, 223, 225
549 INDEX
display field of view (DPOV), 11, 11
elbow, 13, 14,17,32, 33,52, 387,391,
extraocular muscles, 137, 139, 139,
 disseminated skeletal hyperostosis,
408
140
228
chondromalacia, 408,408
feline, 137
distal, 29
dysplasia, 408
extraocular polymyositis, 139, 141
 distal interphalangeal collateral
feline, 390
extremities, 24
desmopathy, 467, 469
incongruity, 408, 410
avian, 522, 527
 distal interphalangeal collateral
musculature,392
chelonians, 536, 540, 541
ligaments (equine), 463
embolization techniques (CT-assisted),
eye, 137
distal interphalangeal joint (equine),
84, 86
 anophthalmos, 138
466
emphysematous cholangitis, 308, 311
cataract (avian), 524
distal phalanx (equine) 466
empty sella in dogs, 199, 201
dacryocystitis, chronic, 149, 150
distal plantar ligament desmitis /
enamel hypoplasia (equine), 428, 432
dacryocystography, 148, 149, 150,
desmopathy (equine), 490,
encephalitis, 191
151
495
equine, 446
dacryops, 150, 150
distemper virus encephaltis (canine),
encephalocoele, 189
endophthalmitis, 138
191
endocrine pancreatic tumor, 319
enophthalmos, 139
ditzels, 276
endodontic treatment, 118
exophthalmos, 139, 139, 140, 141,
dorsal, 29, 31
endophthalmitis, 138
145, 146
plane,29,30,33
energy spectrum effects, 50
extraocular muscles, 137, 139, 139,
reconstruction, 40
enophthalmos, 139
140
DPOV (display field of view), 11, 11
enthesopathy
feline, 137
drug-induced apnea, 40
 menisco-tibial ligament (equine),
extraocular polymyositis, 139, 141
dual-energy CT (DECT), 6, 67
492, 496-499
feline restrictive orbital
dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry
palmar carpal ligament, (equine),
myofibroblastic sarcoma,
(DEXA), 67
487,491, 492
142, 144
dual-phase CT angiography, 6, 297
short radial collateral ligament, 412
imaging protocol, 138
dual reconstruction, 15
epidural hematoma (equine), 445
lacrimal gland, 140 
dual-source CT, 2
epidural hemorrhage/hematoma, 163
lacrimal system, 148
dural mineralization, 222, 224
epidural space, 209, 212
feline, 148
dural tear, 218, 220
epulides, 121, 123, 124
microphthalmos, 138
dynamic focal spot, 38, 38
equal-detector width design, 15, 16
neoplasia, 142
dynamic scanning, 6
equine CT, 421
optic CN I1, 137,139, 140, 140, 206,
dystocia (chelonians), 543
machine, 421
208
room, 421, 422
optic neuritis, 140
E
 specific equipment, 421, 422
orbita, 137
ear
 eroneous attenuation measurements,
abscessation, 138, 141
aural cholesteatoma, 159
41
cellulitis, 138, 139
extermal ear, 153, 156
esophagus,249,251
cyst, 140
canal atresia, 154, 156
diverticulum, 253
fat, 137,139, 139, 140, 141
feline, 154
esophagitis, 255, 255
feline, 137
imaging protocol, 154 
foreign body, 255
foreign body, 139, 141
inner ear, 153, 156
stricture, 254
fractures, 141, 143
middle ear, 153, 156
ethmoid hematoma (equine), 438,
neoplasia, 142, 145, 146
neoplasia, 158,160
441
panophthalmitis, 138, 140
otitis exterma, 156
Eustachian tabe, 175, 178
proptosis, 140, 142
otitis intema, 158
 exocrine pancreatic tumor, 319
retinal detachment, 138, 140, 142
otitis media, 157,157, 158, 159
exophthalmos,139, 139, 140, 141, 145,
otitis (rabbits and rodents), 513,
146
514
exostoses, multiple cartilaginous, 217,
facet joint tropism, 222
otolithiasis, 157, 158
219, 293, 407
facial CN VI1, 206, 208
 polyps, inflammatory, 158, 158
extended CT scale technique, 48
false temporomandibular joint 
trauma, 154
extermal beam radiotherapy, 77
ankylosis, 130, 116, 134, 135,
ectopic thyroid neoplasia, 118, 241
extermal ear, 153, 156
141, 147
ectopic ureters, 332, 336
canal atresia, 154, 156
fault
edge enhancement, 23, 44, 47, 49
feline, 154
in detector, 46, 50
edge gradient effect, 54, 54
imaging protocol, 154
in output, 46 
edge gradient streaks, 54, 54
exractions, 118
feline infectious peritonitis virus
egg retention (koi carp), 65
extradural neoplasia, 226, 227
encephalitis, 191
550 INDEX
feline restrictive orbital
stermum, 290
great vessels, 229, 231
myofibroblastic sarcoma,
stress (equine), 457
 imaging protocol, 230
142, 144
subchondral bone (equine), 457, 459
gross tumor volume (GTV), 78
female genital tract
tarsal bone (equine), 460, 461, 462
avian, 523,530
temporomandibular joint, 116, 125,
H
chelonians, 537, 543
126, 127
half-width-height-maximum, 15
femoral head, aseptic necrosis ,384
vertebral column, 219, 221
hard and software combinations, 23,
femur, proximal, 392
avian, 526
24
fetlock joint, 473, 474, 475
equine,453,453,454
head, 32, 33, 34,43, 53
intra-articular administration of
 fragmented medial coronoid process 
avian, 520, 522, 524, 525
contrast medium, 475
(FCP), 408, 409
chelonians, 535, 536
osteoarthrosis, 473, 475-477
frontal plane, 29,30,31, 33
CT, 24
 osteochondral fragments, 476, 477,
frontal sinuses, 93
equine, 46
481
imaging protocol, 94
imaging artifacts, 443, 444
fibrocartilaginous embolism, 227
fungal meningoencephalitis, 191, 192
imaging protocol, 424
fibrosarcoma, 117, 117, 294
funmel chest, 287, 289
rabbits and rodents, 509, 511
filter, 3, 21, 22, 23, 49
trauma, 115, 163, 164, 165
financial viability, 90
G
equine, 445
fine needle aspirates (CT-assisted), 82,
gadolinium contrast agents, 58
heart, 229, 231
85
galbladder and biliary system, 300,
 cardiac insufficiency (avian), 531
fissures (equine), 457, 458
303,304,328
cardiac neoplasia, 237, 241
fistulous tract
 imaging protocol, 298
cardiac valvular insufficiencies, 234,
bovine, 505
malformation, 302, 306
237
equine,446,447
non-neoplastic diseases, 306, 311
cardiac valvular stenoses, 234, 237
fixed and variable costs, 90
gantry, 1, 10
 imaging protocol, 230
fixed costs per month, 91
tilt, 11, 12, 13
heat capacity, 9
flat-panel technology, 4
 gastrointestinal contrast study, 51
helical CT,5, 6, 13, 16, 18, 18
flipped gantry artifact, 44, 46
gastrointestinal tract, 325
helical image reconstruction interval
focal spots, 2
avian, 523, 529
(HIRI), 19, 21
focal spot wobble, 38, 38
chelonians, 537, 542
helical multislice CT artifacts, 41
foot (equine), 463
 contrast methods, 326
helical tomotherapy (HT), 78, 79
foramen magmum, 162
disease (rabbits and rodents), 514
hemorrhagic stroke, 193, 193
forebrain, 185
feline, 326, 328
hemothorax, 281
Fourier transformation, 22, 36
foreign body, 326, 328
hepatic caudal vena cava, 51
four-slice CT, 15, 16, 19
imaging protocol, 326
hepatic perfusion index, 69, 70
fourth-generation CT, 4
neoplasia, 328, 329, 330
 heterotopic pulmonary bone
fractures
perforation, 327, 329
formation, 262, 263
avian, 527
 general anesthesia, 25
high-density edge gradient streak, 54,
carpal bone (equine), 460, 461
genital tract, 339
54
chelonians, 540
caudal, 343, 342, 348, 349
high-density streaks, 12, 48, 51
comminuted (equine), 458, 460
female, 339, 341, 342, 348
remedies, 12, 13, 48
dental apparatus, 118, 121
imaging protocol, 340
high pitch blurring, 18, 40, 40
equine,428,433
male, 339, 343, 346, 347, 349
high spatial frequency algorithms, 23
fissures (equine), 457
malformation, 339
hindbrain, 185
hyoid bone, 179, 183
rabbits and rodents, 515
hindlimb abscess (chelonians), 541
joints, 400,401
neoplasia, 515, 516
hip joint, 392, 395, 413
mandible, 114, 115
geometrical errors, 35
dysplasia (canine), 413, 414
maxilla, 114, 115
ghost images, 39
imaging protocol, 388
nuchal ligament (equine), avulsion,
ghosting, 38
luxation/subluxation, 414, 403, 415
453
Gigabit Ethermet, 76
neoplasia, 414, 416
orbita, 141, 143
glial tumors, 194, 194
HIRI (helical image reconstruction
pelvic bones, 73
glossopharyngeal CN IX, 206
 interval), 19, 21
rabbits and rodents, 512
gonads, 339
HIS (hospital information system), 75,
rib, 290, 290
granulomatous lung diseases, 268,
76
Salter-Harris (equine), 458, 459
270
histiocytoma, 170
 semispinalis capitis tendon
Honma classification (equine), 429
(equine), avulsion, 453, 455
192
hospital information system (HIS), 75,
skull (equine), 445
Gray (Gy), 77
76
551INDEX
Hounsfield bar, 50, 52
 intercarpal ligaments, tear/desmitis/
K
Hounsfield units (HU), 30, 504 
avulsion (equine), 486, 489
kermel, 21,22, 23, 49
HT (helical tomotherapy), 78, 79
interleaved reconstruction, 19, 21, 39
keyhole malformation, 161, 162
HU (Hounsfield units), 30, 504
interosseous ligament (equine), 60
kidney, 331, 333
humeral condyle, incomplete 
interosseous tarsal ligament desmitis
avian, 523, 529, 530
ossification, 381, 383, 409, 411
(equine), 490, 495
chelonians, 537, 541, 542
hydranencephaly, 189
interpetrosal lucency, 50, 52
nephritis, 334
hydrocephalus, 187, 188, 188
intersexuality,339, 343, 344
 nephrogenic systemic fibrosis, 58
congenital, 161, 162, 189,188
interventional CT, 81
renal abnormalities, 331, 334, 335
equine, 445
 in equines, 87
kilovoltage, 9, 10
hyoid apparatus, 175, 179, 183
 interventricular hemorrhage/
hyoid bone 
hematoma, acute, 163
L
fractures, 179,183
inter-view aliasing, 36, 37
lacrimal gland, 140
luxations, 179,183
intra-arterial contrast (equine)
lacrimal system, 148
 malformations, 176
administration, 59, 60, 61, 62, 62, 62,
feline, 148
hyperadrenocorticism, 351, 353
63
imaging protocol, 138
hyperparathyroidism, secondary, 385
anatomical considerations, 59
laminitis (chronic), 63
 chelonians, 540
catheter placement complications,
large intestine, 325
hypersialosis, 145
61, 62
larynx, 175, 179
hypertrophic osteodystrophy, 383
 catheter placement procedure, 60
feline, 175
hypertrophic osteopathy, 384
forelimb, 59, 60, 61
 imaging protocol, 176
 hypertrophic pulmonary osteopathy,
hindlimb, 60, 62
neoplasia, 180, 184
384
 interpretation, 63
wall lesions, 179
hypervitaminosis A, 228
introduction, 59
lateral, 29
hypoadrenocorticism, congenital, 351
undesired effects, 63
Legg-Calve-Perthes, 384
hypoglossal CN XI1, 206
 intra-axial brain neoplasia (equine),
leiomyoma, 330
hypothyroidism, 177
448, 449
leucosis (avian), 528
hysteresis, 47
intracranial hemorrhage, 188, 188, 189
ligamentum arteriosum, 233, 234
intracranial intra-arachnoid cysts, 189,
lingual neoplasia, 118, 119
1
190
lipoma, 295,416
idiopathic neuritis, 206
intradural extramedullary neoplasia,
liver, 297, 303, 304, 360
idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, 268
226, 227
anatomy
image
intrahepatic shunt, 86
caudal liver, 302, 303
labels, 30
intrahepatic vasculature, 299
cranial liver, 301, 303
orientation, 30, 31, 32-34
intramedullary neoplasia, 227
middle liver, 301, 303
 parameter selection, 9
intraspinal articular cysts, 222, 223
avian, 523,528
reconstruction algorithm, 21, 22, 23,
intravenous contrast medium
chelonians, 537, 542
49
administration, 57, 58
diffuse non-neoplastic parenchymal
resolution, 11
iodinated contrast, 27
diseases, 306
immobilization devices, 77
agents, 57
 focal non-neoplastic parenchymal
 IMRT (intensity-modulated
ionic agents, 57
diseases, 306
radiotherapy), 77
ionization chambers, 4
hepatic caudal vena cava, 51
incomplete ossification
IP address, 75
hepatic perfusion index, 69, 70
caudal glenoid rim, 405, 406
ischemic stroke, 193
 imaging protocol, 298
humeral condyle, 381, 383, 409,
isotropic image resolution, 13
infarcts and torsion, 302, 310
411
malformation, 302, 306, 307
indirect lymphography, 371, 374
neoplasia, 86, 308, 312, 313, 314
infundibular caries (equine), 429, 434,
jaw drop, 129, 132, 206
size, 297
435
joints, 387
trauma, 302,309
 infundibular cemental hypoplasia
degenerative disease, 402, 404
 localizer radiograph, 6
(equine), 428, 431
fractures, 400, 401
logarithm of the sum, 54
inner ear, 153, 156
imaging protocol, 388
long bones, 381, 382
feline, 154
 imaging tips, 387
anatomic differences (canine and
 imaging protocol, 154
luxation, 402, 403
feline), 382
instrumentation, 1
neoplasia, 402,405
developmental disorders, 383
insulinoma, 320, 324
septic, 402,404
trauma, 383, 384
 intensity-modulated radiotherapy
studies (equine), 425
long digital extensor tendonitis/tear/
(IMRT), 77
subluxation, 402
avulsion, 415,418
552 INDEX
lumbar spine, 49
mAs product, 9, 10
 MIP (maximum intensity projection),
lumbosacral disk space, 82
material approach, 2
72, 229
lumbosacral stenosis, degenerative,
 material-selective scanning, 6, 67
motion artifacts, 19, 38, 39
224, 226
maxilla, 113, 118
remedies, 38
lung, 40, 261, 262
fractures, 114, 115
moving gantries, 5
abscess formation, 268, 271
 imaging protocol, 112
 MPNST (malignant peripheral nerve
atelectasis, 262, 264, 264
neoplasia, 116, 117, 118, 136
sheath tumor), 207
avian, 524, 531
 maxillary sinus (equine), 48
 MPR (multiplanar reconstruction), 70,
chelonians, 538, 544
maximal injection rate, 64
229
CT image, 26, 49
maximum intensity projection (MIP),
MPS (mucopolysaccharidosis), 114,
collapse, 252, 264
72, 229
244, 247, 288
fibrosis, 268, 271
mechanical design, 1
mucopolysaccharidosis (MPS), 114,
 granulomatous diseases, 268, 270
medial, 29
244, 247, 288
imaging protocol, 262
mediastinum, 40, 249, 250, 251
multileaf collimators, 77
infection and inflammation, 267,
cysts, 258, 260
 multilobular osteochondrosarcoma,
269
granuloma/abscess, 258, 260
117, 132, 136
lobe torsion, 268, 272
imaging protocol, 250
multilobular tumor of bone, 166, 167
metastasis screening, 14
lymphadenopathy, 253
multiplanar reconstruction (MPR), 70, 
neoplasia, 271
lymph nodes, 252
229
metastatic, 273, 277
mediastinitis, 254, 255
limitations, 71
primary pulmonary and
neoplasia, 85, 256, 259,260
 principle, 70
bronchial and infiltrative 
sections, 251
recommendation for use, 70, 71
tumors,271, 274, 275, 308
shift, 249, 251, 252, 282
multiple cartilaginous exostoses, 217,
parenchyma, 261, 262-264
megaesophagus, 253
219, 293, 407
trauma, 264, 265
melanoma, malignant, 117, 118
multislice collimator pitch, 19
lymphadenitis, 375, 377
 meningeal tumors, 194, 187
multislice CT,5, 15, 16, 18
lymphadenomegaly, 375, 376
meningiocele, 94, 96
multislice detector pitch, 19
lymphatic vessels, 371
meningitis, 191, 191
muscles of mastication, 127
lymph nodes
meningoencephalitis
musculoskeletal system (rabbits and
CT features, 174
bacterial, 191
rodents), 509
 of head and neck, 171
 granulomatous ,192
myelencephalon, 185
imaging protocol, 172
necrotizing, 192, 192
myelographic studies (equine),
lymphography, direct, 372, 372
 meningoencephalocele, 189
imaging protocol, 425
lymphography, indirect, 371, 374
meningomyelitis, 221
myelomalacia, 228, 228
lymphoma, 118, 119, 174, 248, 330
meniscal cartilage trauma, 414,
myelopathy, degenerative, 224
rabbits and rodents, 515
417
 menisco-tibial ligament, desmopathy/
N
M
enthesopathy (equine), 492,
nasal cavities, 93, 94, 95
Mach effect, 45
496-499
feline, 94
magnitude
meniscus injuries (equine), 492, 497,
b6 'f0sojo1d Sungeu.
of image noise, 13
498, 499
nasal polyps, 95, 97
 of volume averaging, 13
 mesencephalon (midbrain), 185
equine,440,441
male genital tract (avian), 523, 531
metabolic system (rabbits and
nasal tumor, 78
malignant melanoma, 117, 118
rodents), 509
nasolacrimal duct
 malignant peripheral nerve sheath
metal artifact, 12, 48, 51
congenital imperforate, 149
tumor (MPNST), 207, 296
metallic foreign material, 11
obstruction, brachycephalic, 148
mandible, 111, 117, 120
 metaphyseal osteopathy, 383
nasopharynx, 119, 177
fractures, 114, 115
metencephalon, 185
polyps, 176, 182
imaging protocol, 112
microphthalmos, 138
stenosis, 175, 181
lymph nodes, 171, 172, 173
midbrain, 185
navicular bursa (equine), 464, 465, 466
neoplasia, 116, 117, 118, 136
middle ear, 153, 155
bursitis, 469, 470
symphysis, 113, 125
feline, 154
navicular impar ligament (equine),
Marie's disease, 384
 imaging protocol, 154
466
masticatory muscles, 125, 127
 middle phalanx (equine), 466
desmitis, 468, 470
 imaging protocol, 112
 mineralization
neck, imaging protocol, 424
infection and abscessation, 116, 130,
aortic and cardiac, 230, 233
neck (equine), 451, 452
135
insertion of antebrachial flexor
 necrotizing meningoencephalitis, 192,
myositis (canine), 131, 132, 135, 139
tendons, 411, 411
192
553 INDEX
neoplasia
vertebral column, 225
occipitoatlantoaxial malformation
 abdominal lymph nodes, 376, 373,
equine,453,456
(equine), 451
377, 378
nephritis, 334
ocular neoplasia, 142, 144
adrenal glands, 352, 354, 355
nephrogenic systemic fibrosis, 58
oculomotor CN IIl, 206, 208
bone,385,385, 386, 405,406
nerve roots, 212, 212
odontogenic neoplasia, 121, 123, 124
brain, 194, 194, 195
neuritis, idiopathic, 206
odontoma, 123
calvarium, 166, 167-170
neurohypophysis, 197
olfactory CN I, 206
equine, 448
enhancement, 199, 200
open jaw lock, 127, 132
central nervous system, 195
nictitating membrane gland, 140
 operator console, 1
cranial nerves, 206
noise-induced streaks, 48, 51
optic CN I1, 137, 139, 140, 140, 206,
dental apparatus, 121, 123, 124
non-fixed costs per month, 91
208
equine, 431,437
non-ionic agents, 57
optic neuritis, 140
digits, 412
non-linear partial volume effect, 14,
oral cavity, 111, 112
ear, 158
53,53
abscesses, 115, 116
ectopic thyroid, 118, 241
non-proprietary workstations, 76
 imaging protocol, 112
eye,142,144
non-specific rhinitis, 95, 98
oral and rectal applications of
extradural, 226, 227
nose, 17
 contrast medium (fish), 64,
gastrointestinal tract, 328, 329, 330
dermoid cyst, 94, 96
65
genital tract (rabbits and rodents),
ethmoid hematoma (equine), 438,
orbita, 137
515,516
441
 abscessation, 138, 141
heart, 237, 240, 241
meningiocele, 94, 96
cellulitis, 138, 139
hip joint, 414, 416
nasal cavities, 93, 94, 95
cyst, 140
 intra-axial brain (equine), 448, 449
feline, 94
fat, 137,139,139,140,141
intradural extramedullary, 226,
 imaging protocol, 94
feline, 137
227
nasal polyps, 95, 97
foreign body, 139, 141
 intramedullary, 227
equine, 440,441
fractures, 141, 143
joints, 402, 405
nasal tumor, 78
imaging protocol, 138
larynx, 180, 184
rhinitis
neoplasia, 142, 145, 146
liver, 86, 308, 312, 313, 314
bacterial, 17, 100
organs at risk (OAR), 78
lung, 271,273, 274, 275, 277, 308
dental, 100, 102
oropharynx (canine), 112
mandible, 116, 117, 118, 136
foreign body, 100, 102
 orthogonal image reconstruction, 13
maxilla, 116, 117, 118, 136
fungal, 97, 99, 100, 101
Oslerus osleri, 244
mediastinum, 85, 256, 259, 260
idiopathic chronic, 103, 109
osseous cyst like lesions (equine), 484,
nose and sinus (equine), 437, 439
non-specific, 95, 98
485, 486
orbita,142,145,146
parasitic, 100
ossification
ovary, 340, 345
rabbits and rodents, 513, 514
caudal glenoid rim (incomplete),
palate, 118, 119
traumatic, 101, 102, 103
405, 406
pancreas,319,323, 324
 sinonasal anatomy (equine), 432,
collateral cartilages (equine), 471
periodontium, 121, 123
438
humeral condyle (incomplete), 381,
pharynx, 180
 sinonasal disorder idiopathic
383, 409, 411
pituitary gland,200, 202, 203
(equine), 40, 442
osteitis, calvarium (equine), 447
pleura, 283, 283, 284
sinonasal mycosis (equine), 436, 439
osteoarthrosis, fetlock joint, 473,
prostate, 341, 346
sinonasal neoplasia (equine), 437,
474477
rabbits and rodents, 515
439
osteochondral fragments, fetlock joint
rib, 291, 292, 293
sinonasal neoplasms, 102, 104-108
(equine), 476, 477, 481
salivary gland, 148, 150
sinonasal trauma (equine), 437, 440
osteochondritis dissecans
spinal cord, 225
nuchal ligament (equine), 451, 452
head, 22
spleen, 308
avulsion fracture, 453
sacrum, 218,219
stermum, 296
enthesopathy, 453, 456
shoulder, 400
testes, 339, 345
Nyquist theorem, 37
tarsal joint, 418, 418, 419
temporomandibular joint, 116, 125,
osteochondromatosis, 217
126, 127
0
dorsal arch, 219
thoracic wall, 291, 294-296
OAR (organs at risk), 78
rib, 293
thyroid gland, 180, 184
object contrast, 14
shoulder, 407
tongue, 118, 119
oblique plane orientation, 70
osteochondrosis, 397, 399
tonsilla, 118, 119
occipital bone
elbow, 400
trachea, 247,248
dysplasia, 161, 162
shoulder, 400
vasculature, 365, 370
malformation, 161
temporomandibular joint, 125, 129,
554 INDEX
osteolysis, proximal sesamoid bones
paradigm shift, 2
picture archive and communication
(equine), 479
 paraesophageal abscess, 254
systems (PACS), 75
osteoma
paranasal sinuses, 93, 94, 95
pigs,503
femur, 385
feline, 94
animal models, 504
skull, 168
 parasitic meningoencephalitis, 191
CT, 503
 osteomyelitis
 paraspinal bullet, 12
 anatomy and normal variants,
calvarium/zygomatic arch, 164,
 parotid lymph node, 171, 174
504
166
partial scan, 38
disease features, 504, 505
joints, 402
 partial volume artifact, 13, 14, 14, 17,
imaging protocol, 503
long bones, 384, 384
19, 41, 42, 43, 45
skull, 24
maxilla or mandibula, 116
 partial volume averaging, 13, 14, 14,
pitch, 5, 18, 18
porcine, 505
17, 19, 41, 42, 43, 45
selections, 18, 20
proximal sesamoid bones (equine),
 partial volume effect, 13, 14, 14, 17,
 pituitary apoplexy-like disease
476, 479, 480
19, 41, 42, 43, 45
(canine), 200
rabbits and rodents, 515
 patellar subluxation/luxation,
pitaitary gland, 197, 199, 200
skull, 205
congenital, 414, 416
osteosarcoma, 87
 patent ductus arteriosus, 234, 236
avian, 525
femur, 386
patient
equine, 448,449
mandible/maxilla, 117, 136
 direction and recumbency, 23, 24
equine, 443
skull, 168, 168
positioning, 24
fhush, 199, 200
otitis exterma, 156
restraint, 25
height-to-brain ratio (P:B ratio),
otitis interma, 158
table, 1
199
otitis media, 156, 157, 158
P:B ratio, 199
 imaging protocol, 198
otitis (rabbits and rodents), 513, 514
pectus excavatum, 287, 289
macrotumors,200, 202
otolithiasis, 157, 158
 pelvic bones, 392
microtumors, 200, 203
out-of-field artifact, 10, 42, 43, 46
fracture, 73
pseudo pituitary masses (feline),
ovary,339, 341
pelvic musculature, 395
199, 201
neoplasia, 340, 345
performance characteristics, 6
 planning tumor volume (PTV), 78
 stump abscess, 347
perfusion densitometry, 68
plantar, 29
overlapping reconstruction, 19, 21,
 periapical osteolucent abscess, 123
pleura,279, 280
39
pericardium, 229
effusion, 86, 281, 281, 296
overscanming, 38
effusions, 237, 241
ermpyema, 281,282,282
 periodontium
foreign bodies, 280, 282, 283
P
Z (anba) Auoeue
imaging protocol, 280
PACS (picture archive and
disease (rabbits and rodents), 512,
neoplasia, 283,283, 284
communication system), 75
513
pneumocephalus, 163, 165, 167
paddle wheel reconstruction, 72, 72
disorders (equine), 431, 436
pneumomediastinum, 254, 254
palatal neoplasia, 118, 119
neoplasia, 121, 123
 pneumonia (rabbits and rodents),
palmar, 29
periodontitis, 120, 122, 123
513
palmar carpal ligament desmitis and
 peripheral artifact, 10, 42, 43, 46
pneumothorax, 232, 254,279,281
enthesopathy (equine), 487,
 peripheral atelectasis, 262
point spread effect, 44, 47, 48, 51
491, 492
 peripheral cemental hypoplasia
 polycystic disease, 308
pancreas, 44, 315, 318-320
(equine), 428
polyps ear, inflammatory, 158, 158
abscess, 317
 peripheral nerve sheath tumor,
porencephaly, 189
 angiography and contrast
malignant (MPNST), 207,
 porta hepatis, vascular enhancement,
 enhancement, 315
296
320
cyst,317
 peripheral quantitative computed
 portal vein
dimensions, 319
tomography (pQCT) scanner,
thrombosis, 365,369
feline, 315
423, 424
tributaries and branches, 21, 360,
hyperplasia, 319, 323
phalanx, 62
360,361, 364
imaging protocol, 316, 317
 pharynx, 175
port number, 75
necrosis, 317
feline, 175
portosystemic shunts, 362, 364, 365
neoplasia, 319, 323, 324
foreign body, 178, 183
common multiple extrahepatic, 365,
pancreatitis, 317,321
imaging protocol, 176
368
 parenchymal enhancement, 320
neoplasia, 180
common single extrahepatic, 364,
pseudocyst, 317, 322
 photon flux, 42
364, 367
 panophthalmitis, 138, 140
 photon starvation, 48, 51
single central-divisional
panosteitis, 381, 383
physis, 381, 382
intrahepatic, 364, 364, 366
555 INDEX
single left-divisional intrahepatic,
R
rabbits and rodents, 513, 514
364,364, 367
rabbits and rodents, 509
foreign body, 100, 102
single right-divisional intrahepatic,
abdomen, 509
fungal, 97,99, 100, 101
364, 364, 366
airway disease ,513
idiopathic chronic, 103, 109
 power injection, 64, 69
bronchitis, 513
traumatic, 101, 102, 103
 prescapular lymph nodes, 171
cystic disorder, 515
rhombencephalon, 185
production pigs, 504, 506
dental apparatus
rib
 prognathism, 114
disease, 512, 513
 abnormalities: chondrodysplasias,
projection, 35
nomenclature, 512
285, 288
 projection aliasing, 36, 37
fracthures, 512
fractures, 290, 290
 proprietary CT terminology, 7, 8
 gastrointestinal tract, 514
infections, 290
proptosis, 140, 142
 genital tract, 515
neoplasia, 291, 292, 293
prosencephalon, 185
neoplasia, 515, 516
ring artifact, 47, 50
prostate gland, 339, 340, 343
head, 509,511
rigorous hyperventilation, 40
abscess, 343, 347
imaging protocol, 510
 RIS (radiology information system),
hyperplasia, benign, 340
lymphoma, 515
75,76
neoplasia, 341, 346
 metabolic system, 509
rodents, 509
prostatitis, 343
musculoskeletal system, 509
 imaging protocol, 510
protozoal meningoencephalitis,
neoplasia, 515
 ROI (region of interest), 68
192
csteomyelitis, 515
rostral, 29
proximal, 29
otitis, 513, 514
rotating envelope tube, 2
 pue surusap Aiosuadsns teurxond
periodontium, 512, 513
rotating X-ray tube, 10
enthesopathy (equine), 488,
pneumonia, 513
rotation speed, 2
493, 494, 495
rhinitis, 513, 514
rminant, 503
pseudoaneurysm, 236, 238
soft tissue lesions, 512
CT disease features, 503, 504, 505
pseudobladder, 317
spine, trauma, 512
 imaging protocol, 503
pseudogout (chelonians), 541
thorax, 509
pseudolesions, 41, 44
thymoma,515, 516
S
pseudo pituitary masses in cats, 199,
urinary system, 515
sacroiliac joint, 51
201
radiography, 2
luxation, 219, 221
 pterygoid muscle, 82
radiology information system (RIS),
sagittal plane, 29, 30, 31, 34
PTV (planning tumor volume),
75,76
saline flush, 64
78
radiotherapy, 77
salivary gland, 143, 147
pulmonary carcinosis, 271
reducing set-up errors, 78
cyst, 142
pulmonary densitometry, 67, 68
 treatment planning, 77, 78
enlargement in limbic epilepsy, 145
pulmonary edema, 268, 273
ranula, 142, 147
feline, 137
pulmonary fibrosis, idiopathic,
Rathke's cleft cyst, 199
imaging protocol, 138
268
ray, 35
neoplasia, 148, 150
pulmonary osteoma, 262, 263
ray aliasing, 36, 37
 Salter-Harris fractures (equine), 458,
 pulmonary parenchyma, 68
rebound artifact, 49
459
pulmonary thromboembolism, 238,
rebound effect, 23, 44, 47, 49
scan field of view (SPOV), 10, 10, 42
271, 274
reduced point spread effect, 47
scanning modes, 6
pulpal gas, 123
region of interest (ROI), 68
 scanming planes, 29
pulpar exposure (equine), 430,
renal pelvis, 52, 333
scanogram, 6
435
respiratory and cardiac gating, 39
scan power, 2
pulpitis, 120, 122, 123
restrained devices, 25
scatter, 47
equine,430, 435
restraining options, alternative , 25, 25
 scintillation detectors, 4
purchase considerations, 89
retained testis, 339
sclerosis, carpal bones (equine), 485,
 pyelonephritis, 334
retinal detachment, 138, 140, 142
488
pyloric antrum, 54
retropharyngeal lymphadenopathy,
scout radiograph, 6
pyothorax, 281,282,282
101
scout view, 6
 retropharyngeal lymph nodes, medial
 segmental caudal vena cava aplasia,
Q
and lateral, 171, 172, 174
365,369,370
qualitative errors, 35
rhinitis
selective angiogram, 62
 quantitative errors, 35
bacterial, 17, 100
 seminoma (avian), 531
quarter detector offset, 37, 37
dental, 100, 102
semispinalis capitis tendon (equine),
quarter detector shift, 37, 37
non-specific, 95, 98
451, 452
quarter ray offset, 37, 37
 parasitic, 100
avulsion fracture, 453, 455
556 INDEX
sequential scanning, 6, 16
software applications, 67
subarachnoid
 serial scanning, 6
spatial frequency, 36
cyst, 218, 220
seruminal gland carcinoma, 174
 algorithms, low or medium, 22
hemorrhage, 163
service contract, 89, 90
spinal cord, 209, 212, 212
space,211,212
 sesamoidean ligaments (equine), 473
 imaging protocol, 209
subchondral bone cyst, 129
desmitis, 476, 481, 482
neoplasia, 225
equine, 484,485, 486
shaded surface display (SSD), 229
trauma, 219, 221
fetlock joint, 474, 478
shell (chelonians), 536, 538, 540, 541
spine, 24,32, 34,71,72
stifle joint, 484, 485, 486
malformation, 540
disorders, 215
subchondral bone fractures (equine),
necrosis, 540
equine, 451
457, 459
shoulder joint, 41, 387, 389, 405, 407
trauma (rabbits and rodents), 512
subdural space, 211
feline, 387
spirocercosis, 255, 256, 257,257,258
hematoma (equine), 445, 446
musculature, 390
skull foramina (feline), 205
hemorrhage/hematoma, 163
 synovial osteochondromatosis, 407,
spleen, 301, 305
sum of the logarithms, 54
407
avian, 523,528
 suprasellar germ cell tumors, 201
shunt vessel, 21
 diffuse non-neoplastic parenchymal
survey radiograph, 6
sialoadenitis, 147, 149
diseases, 306
suspensory ligament (equine), 60
sialocele, 147
focal non-neoplastic parenchymal
synovial cell sarcoma, 402, 405
sialolithiasis, 147
diseases, 306, 310
syringomyelia, 190
single-slice collimator pitch, 19
imaging protocol, 298
single-slice CT, 3, 5, 15, 15, 18, 19
infarcts and torsion, 302
 single-slice scan, 6, 16
malformation, 302, 306
table design, 6
sinonasal anatomy (equine), 432, 438
neoplasia, 308
tarsal bone fractures (equine), 460,
 sinonasal disorder idiopathic
trauma, 302
461, 462
(equine), 440, 442
spondylitis, 257, 504
tarsal joint, 397, 398, 418
 sinonasal mycosis (equine), 436, 439
squamous cell carcinoma
equine, 32,483
 sinonasal neoplasia (equine), 437,
calvarium, 136
feline, 397
439
ear, 159, 160
musculature, 399
sinonasal neoplasms, 102, 104-108
larynx, 184
tarsus, 34, 62
 sinonasal trauma (equine), 437, 440
lingual, 118
teeth, 113, 114
sinus cysts (equine), 433
mandible/maxilla, 116, 117
telencephalon, 185
simusitis
tonsilla, 119
temporal muscle, 82
bovine, 505
zygomatic arch, 168
temporohyoid osteoarthropathy
equine
SSD (shaded surface display), 229
(equine), 447, 448
primary,433, 439
stair step artifact, 41, 43
temporomandibular joint (TMJ), 116,
secondary, 434, 439
standing horse CT, 421, 423
125, 126, 127
skeleton
starburst artifact, 12, 48, 51
ankylosis, 130, 128, 133
avian, 520
stenosing tenosynovitis, abductor
false, 130, 116, 134, 135, 141,
chelonians, 535, 538
 pollicis longus muscle, 411,
147
skull, 45, 94, 115
412
chondrodystrophic malformation,
foramina, 205, 207
stents and other devices, 84, 86, 265
127
adjacent infectious diseases,
stermum
degenerative disease, 125, 129
205
abnormalities, 287, 289
dislocation, 126, 128, 130
fracture (equine), 445
fracture and dislocation, 290
dysplasia
trauma, 205
lymph nodes, 251
canine, 125,127, 128
slice
neoplasia, 296
 luxating form, 127
increment, 15, 17
 osteomyelitis, 290
equine,443,444
interval, 15, 17
stifle joint, 394, 396, 414
fractures, 130, 133
mismatch, 38
equine, 484
imaging protocol, 112
 sensitivity profile, 15
feline, 397
neoplasia, 132,136
thickness, 13, 14, 15, 17
musculature, 397
sepsis (equine), 447, 447
width, 13, 14, 15, 17
stomach,325,327,328
tendinitis, biceps, 406, 407
 sliding gantries, 5
Straton tube, 2
tendon healing, contrast enhancement
slip-ring technology, 4
streak cancellation, 37
(equine), 471
 small intestine, 325, 328
streaks, 38,41, 42, 46, 58, 59
tenosynovitis, biceps, 406, 407
 soft tissue lesions, 62
streaming, 48, 59, 59
terminology
 trauma (rabbits and rodents),
streamlining, 48, 59, 59
of direction, 29
512
stress fractures (equine), 457
of location, 29, 30
557 INDEX
testes, 339
transfer speed, 76
V
neoplasia, 339, 345
 transsplenic CT portography (TSCTP),
vagal CN X, 206
thick-section reformatting, 54
297,299, 299, 300
vascular dissection, 234, 238
third-generation CT, 4
transverse CT image, 68
vascular neoplasia and tumor
thoracic biopsy procedures, 83, 85
transverse plane, 29, 30, 31, 32
invasion, 365, 370
thoracic boundaries, 285, 286, 287
 treatment position, 78
vascular ring anomalies, 233, 234,
feline, 285
Triadan dental numbering system,
235
 imaging protocol, 280
113, 114
vascular stenosis, 234, 238
thoracic duct, 253,371,374, 375, 376
equine, 428
vascular structures assessment, 362,
rupture, 374, 376
 trigeminal CN V, 206
362
thoracic inlet, 285, 286
mandibular branch, 206, 207
vasogenic edema, 186, 187
thoracic skeleton abnormalities, 285
maxillary branch, 206, 207
vena cava
thoracic wall infections, 290, 291
ophthalmic branch, 206, 208
caudal and tributaries, 359, 360,
thoracic wall neoplasia, 291, 294-296
trochlear CN IV, 206, 208
370
thorax, 11, 24, 32, 33, 71, 72
tuncated projections, 10, 42,43, 46
thrombosis, 238, 242
thorax (rabbits and rodents), 509
truncated view artifact, 10, 42, 43, 46
ventral, 29
three-dimensional conformal
TSCTP (transsplenic CT portography),
ventricular tumors, 194, 194
radiotherapy (3DCRT), 77
297,299, 299, 300
vertebral canal, density values, 211
three-dimensional reconstruction, 72
tube,3
vertebral column, 209, 211
limitations, 73
arcing, 46
avian,522,526
principle, 72
heat capacity, 14
fracture, 526
recommendation for use, 73, 73
 rotation time, 9
chelonians, 536
thymoma (rabbits and rodents), 515,
spit, 46
fractures, 219, 221
516
tungsten filament, 1
equine,453,453, 454
thymus, 253
imaging protocol, 209
thyroid gland, 175, 179, 180
U
lesion, 84
anatomy, 179
UAP (ununited anconeal process),
 malfrmations, congenital, 215, 218
carcinoma, 184
408,410
neoplasia, 225
cysts, 176, 181
Uberschwinger effect, 23, 44, 47,
equine, 453, 456
goiter, 176
49
vessels, 229
imaging protocol, 176
ultra-fast ceramic, 4
vestibulocochlear CN VII1, 206, 207
neoplasia, 180, 184
ultrasound guidance, 60
VetMouseTrap, 25, 26
ectopic, 118, 241
underscanning, 38
view,35
tibia, 62
unequal-detector-width design, 15,
view aliasing artifact, 9, 36, 37
TMJ (temporomandibular joint), 116,
16
virtual endoscopy, 251, 252
125, 126, 127
ungual cartilage (equine), 466
virtual local area network (VLAN), 76
 tomographic reconstruction, 30
umunited anconeal process (UAP),
volume averaging, 13, 14, 14, 17, 19,
tongue, 119
408,410
41, 42, 43, 45
base, 112, 116
upper joints CT procedures (equine),
volume rendering, 229
neoplasia, 118, 119
484
tonsilla, 119
upper imbs (equine), 483
M
neoplasia, 118, 119
ureter, 331, 333
windmill artifact, 41, 41
tonsillitis, 116
abnormalities, 331, 335-337
windowing techniques, 22-24, 31
topogram, 6
ectopic,332,336
 preparation and selection, 25
lreterocele (UC), 336
X
trachea, 243, 245, 246
urethra, 331, 333
X-ray tube, 1
collapse, 246, 246, 248
abnormalities, 334, 338
hemorrhage, 244
urinary bladder, 52, 331, 333
Z
hypoplasia, 243, 247
abnormalities, 334, 337
zebra artifact, 41, 43
imaging protocol, 244
chelonians, 537, 542, 543
 zygomatic arch, 161
laceration and avulsion, 244
urinary system,33,33,333
 imaging protocol, 162
neoplasia, 247,248
imaging protocol, 332
sequestra, 164, 166
stenosis, 244, 247
rabbits and rodents, 515
zygomatic gland, 137,140,141, 143,
tracheitis, 244, 247
urolithiasis, 331, 335, 337, 338
147, 148
tube, 37
naternus, 339,341
sialoadenitis, 141, 147