Veterinary
Euthanasia
Techniques
A Practical Guide
Kathleen A. Cooney.
Jolynn R. Chappell,
Robert J. Callan, and
Bruce A. Connally
WWILEY-BLACKWELL
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.co m
Veterinary
Euthanasia
Techniques
A Practical Guide
Veterinary
Euthanasia
Techniques
A Practical Guide
Kathleen A. Cooney, DVM, MS
Jolynn R. Chappell, DVM
Robert J. Callan, DVM, MS
Bruce A. Connally, DVM, MS
WWILEY-BLACKWELL
A John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, Publicatior
This edition first published 2012 O 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
global Scientific, Technical and Medical business with Blackwell Publishing.
Editoriaf offices: 2121 State Avenue, Ames, lowa 50014-8300, USA
The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8sQ, UK
9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, UK
about how to apply for permission to reuse the copyright material in this book please
see our website at ww w.wiley.com/ wiley-blackwell.
Authorization to photocopy items for internal or personal use, or the internal or
personal use of specific clients, is granted by Blackwell Publishing, provided that the
Danvers, MA 01923. For those organizations that have been granted a photocopy
license by CcC, a separate system of payments has been arranged. The fee codes for
users of the Transactional Reporting Service are ISBN-13: 978-0-4709-5918-3/2012.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often clairmed as
trademarks. All brand names and product names used in this book are trade names,
service marks, trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective owners. The
siul 'yoog slui ul pauouaw jopuaa jo ponpoid Aue ylm paieiosse jou s! jauslgnd
publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to
the subject matter covered. It is sold on the understanding that the publisher is not
assistance is required, the services of a competent professional should be sought.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Pubfication Data
Veterinary euthanasia techniques : a practical guide / Robert Callan ... [et al.].
p. ; cm.
ISBN 978-0-470-95918-3 (pbk. : alk. paper)
1. Euthanasia of animals-Technique-Handbooks, manuals, etc. 2. Veterinary
anesthesia-Handbooks, manuals, etc. I. Callan, Robert J.
[DNLM: 1. Euthanasia, Animal-methods. 2. Animals, Domestic. SF 756.394]
SF756.394.V48 2012
636.089796-dc23
2011052835
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that
appears in print may not be available in electronic books.
Set in 9/12.5 pt Interstate Light by Aptara@ Inc., New Delhi, India
Disclaimer
The publisher and the author make no representations or warranties with respect to
the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this work and specifically disclaim all
warranties, including without limitation warranties of fitness for a particular purpose.
No warranty may be created or extended by sales or promotional materials. The advice
and strategies contained herein may not be suitable for every situation. This work is
sold with the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering legal
accounting, or other professional services. If professional assistance is required, the
services of a competent professional person should be sought. Neither the publisher
nor the author shall be liable for damages arising herefrom. The fact that an
organization or Website is referred to in this work as a citation and/or a potential
the information the organization or Website may provide or recommendations it may
make. Further, readers should be aware that Internet Websites listed in this work may
12012
About the Authors
vii
Acknowledgments
ix
Introduction
xi
Client Considerations
1
Companion animals
3
Species-specific considerations
6
2
 Equipment
19
Technique-specific equipment
19
Euthanasia area equipment
29
Drugs
30
 Species-specific considerations
35
Positioning and Restraint
43
Positioning
43
Restraint
45
Species-specific considerations
45
4
 Pre-euthanasia Sedation and Anesthesia
51
Anesthesia
52
Sedation
53
Drugs and routes of administration
55
Assessing unconsciousness and sedation
56
Specific-species considerations
57
Euthanasia Techniques
73
How death is achieved
73
Choosing an appropriate method
75
Inhalant methods
78
Injectable methods
79
Physical methods
79
Species-specific techniques
79
Unacceptable methods for domestic animals
164
Deathand associated signs
165
T
Vi
Contents
Body Aftercare
169
Burial
170
Composting
172
Cremation/incineration
173
Rendering
174
Species-specific considerations
174
Conclusion
183
Bibliography
185
Index
191 
About the Authors
Dr. Kathleen A. Cooney is the founder and owner of Home to Heaven, PC,
          
Cooneyhas helped thousands ofpetspasspeacefullyin the comfortof their
homes. Dr. Cooney graduated from Colorado State University's (CSU) DvM
program in 2004. She is a strong advocate for education and teaches in-home
euthanasia techniques, along with client communication, to junior veterinary
merous webinars and continuing-education opportunities for veterinarians
regarding the many facets of companion-animal euthanasia and hospice care.
nation's first peteuthanasia centerin Loveland, Co. Her first book, In-home Pef
Eufhanasia Techniques, was completed in 2ol1 and can be found as an eBook.
Dr. Cooney is an active member of the International Association for Animal
Hospice and Palliative Care (lAAHPC) presenting talks on end-of-life care. She
was also a member of the companion animal working group for the 2ol1 Amer
nary Medical Association later that year.
to maintain the highest level of care. For years, Dr. Chappell taught avian
husbandry to CsU students; she is certified in medical acupuncture with an
em phasis in avian medicine, and is an active memberof numerous exotic-based
professional interests include anything pertaining to exotic medicine as well
as wildlife work with the Colorado Division of wildlife.
Dr. Robert J. Callan is a professor at Colorado State University in the De-
partment of Clinical Sciences and service head of the Livestock Medicine and
obtained his DVM degree at Oregon State University in 1986 and then obtained
an MS in reproductive physiology at Utah State University in 1988. Dr. Callan
vii
vii About the Authors
been a faculty member at CSU since 1996 and provides clinical care for rumi-
of Veterinary Internal Medicine. His research interests focus on infectious
diseases and immunity in livestock.
Dr. Bruce A. Connally graduated from Colorado State University College of
these practices and become a technical services veterinarian for SmithKline
Beecham in 1989. A year later, he became a field service veterinarian for
Michigan State University where he treated horses and camelids. He also
service at Colorado State University. Up until the summer of 2011, Dr. Connally
Acknowledgments
MMe the authors would like to thank all those within the veterinary and
 scientific community who have helped to pioneer the techniques dis-
cussed in this book. It is through their dedication to medicine and the better-
ment of animal care that techniques like these exist today. We recognize the
hours of work, years of study, and ever-present compassion that has gone into
this body of knowledge. Our hope is that everyone reading will approve of our
collaborative effort here. Writing this book gave us the opportunity to reflect
on our own perceptions ofeuthanasia and our commitment to a "good death."
No project such as this book is accomplished without mentoring, guidance,
help, and support from others. A special thank you to those people in our im-
Guerrero, Sheila McGuirk, Sue Semrad, Paul Lunn, Benjamin Darien, Maryann
McCrackin, Gene Komer, John MacNeil, Jessica Pierce, Heather Craig, Lesya
Ukrainchuk, Tim Holt, Stacey Byers, Dave Van Metre, Frank Garry, and Page
such beautiful technique illustrations, and to those who helped to photograph
our work. To all of the library staff and providers of literary resources, a big
thank you for digging deep.
To our families, both human and animal, we thank you for providing us
time away from home and play to complete this book. You have all helped
tokeepus focused onthegoal ofcompletionandwereeverpatientwith
the process. Lastly. we would like to thank the panel members of the 2011
AVMA Euthanasia Guidelines for laying the foundation for the improvement
ofeuthanasiatechniquesas awhole.
Sincerely
Kathleen A. Cooney
Jolynn R. Chappell
Robert J. Callan
Bruce A. Connally
ix
introduction
hisbookis writtentobe apracticalguideforveterinarians,veterinary
students, and technicians performing or assisting euthanasia, especially
for the timesthey find themselvesinunfamiliarsituations.Hundreds of articles
have been written on euthanasia over the century. but none of it has been
collected in technical detail until now. When the first American Veterinary
number of published articles, presentations, and books utilized had grown to
utilizing the expertise of more than 7o individuals. All of this work, including
that undertaken by the authors here, is done to ultimately prevent animal
suffering,partof theveterinarian'soath,andwhenappropriate,offersupport
to the family/owner.
The use of the term euthanasia can reflect the veterinarian's desire to do what
the animal (AvMA euthanasia guidelines draft review 2o11). Another use is as
a matter of humane technique only and not directly tied to the reason behind
it, such as the euthanasia of laboratory animals.
Human caring for animals dates back to our earliest symbiotic partnering.
For most of us, respect for life is instinctually understood and over the cen-
turies,we have come to appreciate the anatomy and science of animals so
much more. Pain mechanisms, animal behavior, and disease processes have
been studied extensively, helping us to appreciate the level at which an animal
might suffer.Philosophically speaking,we have come to some understanding
of what an animal wants from life, its quality of life, and how it might view
deathitself.
sideration must be given to the manner of death in every circumstance.
Itmust beaddressed that the species being euthanized and thereasons
for doing so can be vastly different. If the animal in question is being eu-
thanized because of a terminal illness and suffering is imminent, the rear
ing euthanized for the use of its body, the reason why can become more
Xi
xi    Introduction
for production use. Whatever the reason foreuthanasia, the procedure should
be approached with respect to the animal and everyone involved.
In today's world, thanks in large part to the medical professionals who con
ducted studies over the last 10o years, we know ways to achieve as painless
and anxiety-free a death as possible. With dedication to this line of work, these
authors are certain that new techniques will emerge to make the euthanasia
of animals even smoother, harboring fewer complications, and ultimately min-
imizing animal suffering and the ever-present concern of compassion fatigue.
If life is to be taken, it should be done with the utmost respect for the ani-
mal. Euthanasiais performed for a variety of reasons: an incurable disease, the
conclusion of a terminal study, depopulation, and so on. Our responsibility is
to make sure that the life is taken carefully and with great skill. For this reason,
euthanasia must be performed by a veterinarian or, within the world of shelter
and laboratory medicine, specially trained euthanasia technicians. We, the au-
The chapters hold information on client considerations, sedation protocols,
euthanasia techniques, aftercare options, and more. Each chapter includes
species-specific teachings for easier reading and referencing. The euthanasia
techniques themselves are divided into the various methods: inhalants, non-
to the AvMA's euthanasia guidelines for the expressed purpose of being easy
to follow.
The methods listed within cause death by three basic mechanisms:
cal agents.
guination.
What method is chosen depends on the criteria listed below. The euthanasia
techniques included in this book are evaluated using the following criteria
(taken from the 2ol1 AVMA euthanasia guideline review):
● Ability to induce loss of consciousness and death without pain or anxiety.
· Time required to induce loss of consciousness.
· Reliability.
· Safety of personnel.
· Irreversibility.
· Compatibility with requirement and purpose
· Compatibility with use of tissue, examination.
eiuaiod asnge uewnu pue Aigeieae bnia o
· Compatibility with species and health status
· Ability to maintain equipment in working order.
Introduction xii
· Legal requirements
· Environmental impacts of the method or carcass disposition.
Mosteuthanasiatechniquepublications around theworlduse these cri-
teria as their basis for acceptable methods.If a particular technique does
not meet one or more criteria, the technique becomes conditionally accept
an intracardiac injection of a barbiturate must be preceded by the admin-
mal. Another example is the gunshot technique of a client-owned horse. This
may have a great emotional effect for the observers, but when the safety of
predators scavenging the body is considered, it may be necessary to do. The
and make the best judgment on how to proceed.
Because this book is meant to train veterinarians on euthanasia in the field
those used routinely. The species covered include: dogs, cats, birds, pocket
pets, common household reptiles and amphibians, horses, and livestock such
as cattle, small ruminants, swine, and camelids. Therefore, we will not go into
and mass depopulation situations. For example, the use of inhalants is much
broader within shelter and laboratory medicine and is, therefore, mentioned
within on a much more focused level. Wonderful material has already been
it beyond the scope of this book to discuss the human-animal bond in great
detail.Anyone reading thisbook will undoubtedly understand the reasoning
behind why we choose the techniques we do giventhe circumstances.When
clients/owners are present, our goal is to support them, offering empathy
nored. Again, wonderful books have been written on these subjects and we
recommend you explore the teachings within.
Wehopeyoufind this cohesivebodyofworkhighlyinformative and eye
ue 'shouine aui 'sn aa pasn 'ann pue pal aie sanbiuuoal asaul buiuado
you should be able to perform these techniques with confidence. As with
aa-uied pue -ssaiis e aunsua ol painbau poddns ssol pad pue sanbiuuoal
a lot on the school attended, personal background, and continuing education.
Technique manuals like this,bereavement training books,animal husbandry
xiv Introduction
is important for veterinarians to recognize that advances are being made to
are being developed, new safer and faster techniques are being applied, and
pet loss support is broadening.
Over the next 10 years, veterinary schools will undoubtedly be incorporat-
euthanasia methods. May we exceed their expectations to the fullest.
Chapter 1
Client Considerations
M aking the decision to end an animal's life can be extremely difficult for a
V client. Understanding the full scope of the reasons behind euthanasia
important. Veterinarians can help clients determine if euthanasia is the best
option for everyone. Veterinary training should provide the necessary tools to
assess the animal and determine what physical changes the animal will endure
as the end of life approaches. Age, disease, species, financial reserves, beliefs,
etc., can all play a role in the decision to euthanize. The client may be consid-
ering euthanasia as the only possible option and it is the veterinarian's role
to identify suffering and make sure all options are explored. Clients typically
their contributions to the conversation are crucial. The trick is not to let fear
education as the prevailing rational.
Thebestwayto approachend-of-life careis tosetupthe typeofrelation-
ship with a client that has the best interests of the animal in view as the goal
of treatment (Rollin 2006). This can be done early on in the veterinarian's
Professionalism andrespect for the situation go along way in demonstrat-
ing compassion. when death becomes imminent, except maybe in pure crisis
situations, preparations and mutual understanding should already have been
established. Suffering by the animal and client can hopefully be better avoided.
With respect to this final decision, euthanasia is the treatment to end suffering
(McMillan 2001).
Sufferingisaverysubjectiveterm anddifficult todefinefor anyonesitua
tion. We must take all factors into consideration to help determine if suffering
Jolynn R. Chappell, Robert J. Callan and Bruce A. Connally.
 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
2Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
a quality-of-life issue, regardless of the species.
Whether the animal in question is client owned or is kept for production
based purposes, the client will need to consider the following factors regarding
disease before deciding to proceed forward with euthanasia:
· Is the animal free of pain?
· Can pain be controlled enough to make the animal comfortable and maintain
a reasonable quality of life?
· Is the client willing to care for the animal in its current state of health?
· Is the client able/willing to finance procedures that would heal or at least
improve the animal's condition?
Opening up dialog early in the end-of-life discussion is important so that ev
to avoid sadness by the caretakers. When euthanasia enters the discussion,
will understand their needs. In addition, it needs to be introduced delicately so
and Sawyer 1991). Ultimately. it is the disease or extenuating circumstance
that is taking the pet's life. Veterinarians facilitate death when it is necessary
and no other reasonable options are available. Once the decision to euthanize
They may have very specific questions regarding the euthanasia that need to
be addressed:
· What should I know about euthanasia?
· Can or should other animals be present?
· Where can euthanasia be done? (At the clinic, farm, in the home, etc.)
· Is euthanasia painful?
· Do I have to be present?
· How do we handle the body afterward?
The method of euthanasia should be discussed with the client before it is
attempted. Many people understand the varying techniques that may be per-
the technique of choice given the circumstances and still allow the client to
voice any concerns they may have. It is important to reassure those present
that the goal of euthanasia is to provide a stress-free and painless death.
Cient Considerations   3
that unexpected situations are minimized. Financial concerns, quality of life,
and matters of personal importance should be considered.
Companion animals
An animal may be kept for companionship and a person's enjoyment, as op-
posed to livestock or working animals that are kept for economic or productive
reasons. Pets, as they are commonly referred to, are euthanized everyday by
risks, behavior issues, and so on. In practice, we hope to avoid "convenience
euthanasia" as much as possible, and maintain this ultimate act of kindness
for thesick and suffering.
Morally,veterinariansmustexamine allpossible optionsbefore euthanasia
is chosen. On a personal level, are we as members of the veterinarian field
comfortable withthedecision?Wasthedecision-makingprocess thoroughand
were we motivated by proper reasoning? Professionally, did we offer every
viable treatment or re-homing option? Are we acting in accordance with the
law and feel certain that public opinion would show favorably on the decision
not been well thought out. One may need to ask themselves if their reason
played out in the best interest of the animal and family.
Because of client/family dynamics,current medical options,public opinion,
ethics, etc, veterinarians are encouraged to reach outside themselves for an-
families can be consulted and viewpoints heard before euthanasia is chosen.
Staff members can be brought into conversations so that life-maintaining op-
tions are not overlooked. Hasty decision-making can fuel compassion fatigue
and'burnout', leaving veterinary staff feeling troubled and upset.
When veterinarians and caregivers examine best and worst case scenarios,
the goal is to arrive at euthanasia when it is most appropriate and justified.
as the worst-case scenario. They choose palliative and hospice care to provide
taker for as long as possible in the face of life-limiting disease. When managed
sia willbechosenwhensufferingisrecognizedregardlessofstrongpalliative
efits, this family will view euthanasia as the worst-case scenario and endeavor
4Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
numerous reasons. They do not have the time, physical ability, or financial re
to provide love and support for their pet during death. Therefore, they will
endeavor towards euthanasia by acting on it sooner rather than later. To fully
that may be present. It is also very important to recognize that the emotional
implications of their decisions may remain with them forever, especially when
guilt is involved.
In terms of a pet's disease, it is important to consider the pet's suffering as
outside for potty breaks? Are they emotionally strong enough to watch their
horse worsen from lymphoma when it is the same cancer a human loved one
died from? Can they financially handle the extreme cost of treatment for one
cow and still provide for the rest of the herd and their client?
Also to consider is how much does the client understand about euthanasia.
When euthanasia enters the conversation, the client may have a completely
different scenario in mind than what will be done. Veterinarians or support
staff can describe the procedure and address concerns of the client. If pain
for the pet is the biggest concern, the client may be comforted to know that a
sedative will be given first. If they are envisioning a gas chamber or something
similar, they might be comforted to learn that it will be an injection, and so
present, they might want to know standard protocol.
Educating clients about their options and how best to proceed is important
doing so for the right reasons. This will ultimately lessen the guilt and help
them achieve healthier mourning (Wolfelt 2004).
Common questions by a client include the following:
· How do I know my pet is suffering?
· What does suffering look like?
· Does he have a good quality of life?
· Is it what my pet really wants?
· Is euthanasia the only option?
· What should I know about euthanasia?
· Where can euthanasia be done? In the clinic, home, or special center?
· Is euthanasia painful?
· Do I have to be present?
· How do I handle the body afterward?
· Will I be able to have a ceremony?
Cient Considerations   5
The answers to these questions depend on many variables: beliefs, prior
mental fortitude, community offerings, etc. With regard to suffering, a quality
that they are seeing in their pet. Factors such as hygiene, mobility, mentation,
appetite, etc., are considered collectively to help a client determine how com
fortable a dog or cat is in its body and surroundings (Villalobos and Kaplan
2007). If children will be present, they should be gently instructed on how eu-
thanasia will occur and why. Children do remarkably well when introduced to
euthanasia in a positive and safe manner (Cooney 2011). The presence of other
pets may also be allowed if the client and veterinarian deem it appropriate.
Thelocationof theprocedure dependsonhow thepracticeis designedand by
ahead of time. A memorial garden or comfort room may be perfect too.
A big concern for some clients is whether or not to be present when saying
goodbyetoabelovedpet.Manyindividuals findtheactofeuthanasia too
emotional and thus feel they cannot be there. Like many of these questions,
the answer is up to them. However, if they are leaving because they have
a negativeperception ofthe euthanasiaprocedure,veterinarians andstaff
unknown can make the last moments with their pet more memorable and
maintain the human-animal bond at its most critical time.
Once the decision has been made to proceed with euthanasia, there are
numerous questions that need to be addressed by the tending veterinarian:
· What does the client need to know about euthanasia?
· Where should it take place?
· Who should be present?
· Has the body aftercare been decided?
· Is the person making the decision authorized to do so?
· Should a necropsy be chosen?
· Do we have any financial concerns or beliefs that need to be discussed?
tinue throughout to make sure that things proceed smoothly. The goal of those
that will make theirexperience less stressful. It is comforting for them to know
Before gathering with the client and pet, everything should be ready to
proceed. In the clinic setting, all drugs and equipment should be readied, the
lights should be set to a comfortable level, and the staff alerted to the time
and location of the euthanasia. There are usually many people involved with
euthanasia in the hospital setting: receptionist, technician, doctor, and vet
6Veterinary EuthanasiaTechniques
those gathered may simply be the veterinarian and client, as is often the case
pue papoau sbnp umeap ag pinous sadns pue shnp llv 'slleo asnoy uo
as candles, music, etc., everything should be in place. Clients may want to
lay on the ground with smaller animals, so providing blankets, etc., can be a
to the procedure, by verbal communication, a marker outside the door or
distractions.
To allow the client more privacy. appointments can be scheduled during
and accepting payment over the phone, so it does not need to be discussed
during the appointment. If practice policy is to have aftercare arrangements
afterward, this can all be done before euthanasia. It is important to be flexible,
understanding, and compassionate to the client's wishes and emotions.
If the client chooses euthanasia outside of the clinic, for example, at their
home, unique preparations need to be made. The attending veterinarian must
carry all supplies with them to the pet being helped. Being prepared for every
situation will help ensure a smooth procedure. Mobile veterinarians should
have a good navigation system in place to ensure they arrive at the home on
time. It is also helpful for clients to prepare themselves when you arrive by
pet before, each time is unique and reflects directly upon the relationship they
rately discuss grief, offer guidance, and be informed on what the community
Species-specific considerations
Dogs and cats
According to the American Society for the Prevention and Cruelty to Animals
(ASPcA), there were an estimated 75 million dogs and 85 million cats liv-
consider these animals to be the members of their family. Many are treated
like surrogate children, and the pending loss of life can be overwhelming for
those who have devoted so much love and time toward their care. with dogs
and cats living close to home, usually in the home or within the confines of the
property, the connection these two species have with their "people" could be
considered unparallel to other species in today's society (Figure 1.1). Dogs and
Client Considerations 7
Figure 1.1 A feline enjoying the comfort of its owner.
great anatomical differences, but rather because of the kinds of requests and
wants that come from their human caretakers.
Because dogs and cats are so commonly intertwined with our daily life,
clients commonlyrequest unique locationsforeuthanasia.In the typical clinic
s    a  oo      
as "on the master bed" or "under the favorite tree in the backyard" are
be accommodated withinreason as long as the euthanasia can be conducted
safely and state regulations allow it.
Our pets develop lasting human relationships within the family and beyond,
and cats, this may include pet sitters, groomers, breeders, kennel attendants,
people who may have a particularly difficult time with the loss, pet loss support
personnel may also be present.
client will need to decide if other pets are to be allowed to remain during
the euthanasia procedure. The decision to allow another pet to remain in
the area will depend on client beliefs,the temperament of both animals,the
veterinarian's recommendations, etc. Ultimately, this is up to the client, unless
other pets are disruptive to the procedure, wherein the veterinarian may
How the euthanasia procedure itself is conducted can also be affected
by dog and cat clients, commonly called pet parents. They may request
8Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
lap, in their arms, etc., keeping the human-animal bond strong up until the end.
These are matters that can be talked about before euthanasia is attempted.
Actual euthanasia techniques will be described in Chapter 5.
their dog or cat's body will undergo. They should be prepared for urination and
defection, possible agonal breathing, muscle fasciculation, etc., all of which
completely involuntary.
Whenever possible, aftercare arrangements, such as cremation or burial,
ported to a cremation facility of pet cemetery for internment or even buried
on the client's property if local law permits. Large dogs can be moved using
boxes, etc. As mentioned previously, dogs and cats commonly fill the role of
surrogate children and clients may expect their bodies to be treated with the
same level of respect as a human loved one. Veterinarians should strive to
meet the level of care expected by the client.
Exotics
Working with exotic companion animals has many rewards as well as many
challenges. Their families often view these animals in different ways. They can
want to be sure the animal is not suffering. So many times, veterinarians are
faced with the option of euthanasia simply due to the client's finances, even
pets such as hamsters, gerbils, and mice. These have a relatively short lifespan.
Clients with fish of any species often value them as companion animals and
share a human-animal bond similar to that seen between clients and other
pets, such as dogs and cats (AVMA euthanasia guidelines draft review 2011).
Reptiles can survive a very poor state of health for extraordinarily long
periods of time, so when they do arrive at the hospital, sometimes the only
option is euthanasia. When medical care is a viable option, sometimes the
amount of care they need or the home care required from the client is too
much for the clients to take on and they decide on euthanasia.
private practice. Birds are usually beloved pets and possibly have been part
of the family for years, if not decades. This includes ducks and chickens, as
these birds can become very special pets. The decision to euthanize can be
Client Considerations   9
Figure 1.2 Young boy bonding with his rabbit.
species should be followed such as quality of life, degree of pain or discomfort
present, the ability of the client to care for the bird in its particular condition,
and sometimes client financial concerns. Regardless of the reason, once the
decision is made to end the life of the bird, the decision of whether the clients
want to be present during the procedure and what form of body care is desired
should all be made prior to the procedure. The clinician should offer a footprint
clients wish to be present during the euthanasia procedure, the steps involved
should be explained prior to the procedure.
Another challenge is handling exotics and minimizing their stress in front of
clients for the euthanasia procedure. Unfortunately, many exotic companion
animalsdiebefore the clientgets them into thehospital,either onthe trip in
may come to the conclusion that the trip into the veterinary hospital was just
their exotic pet is in need of medical care after it has been sick for quite some
time. This can be due to the ability of the exotic pet to hide their symptoms for
quite a long time, as a mode for survival. Other times, the client either is not
10 Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
aware that thereis veterinary care available for these types of pets or they are
unwilling to spend money on them and then decide too late that they better get
care in the hands of a child too young to make the decision on the pet's state
  s s an   a    a u 
hamsters and guinea pigs die before or just after their arrival to the hospital.
If the ability of the exotic pet to reach the hospital setting for euthanasia is in
question, then home visits may be more appropriate.
For those clients that do reach the clinic for euthanasia, minimizing stress
is of the utmost importance. Whenever possible, exotics should be kept in
for everyone. If physical contact is necessary, especially with regard to exotics
that have had little human contact, a quiet environment setting and a rapidly
performed euthanasia must be achieved.
There are varying thoughts on allowing other exotics to be present for
the death of a companion. Opinions differ mostly because of the types of
bird be present during euthanasia. Birds are very sensitive and intelligent and
can get quite stressed watching their companion die. when this is the concern,
it may be prudent to recommend that the living bird view the body after
euthanasia, but not be there for the actual process of euthanasia. Ultimately,
exotic pet, the rabbit, is also considered to be closely bonded to housemates.
time with the body afterward. Families have been known to borrow the body
back to the clinic the next day for aftercare such as cremation. Some members
in the House Rabbit Society think that it helps the bonded mate get over the
loss of their companion, so they recommend it.
It is not uncommon for some exotics to vocalize during a euthanasia proce
suddenly and sometimes quite loudly. Two examples of this come from a
with minimal vocalizations during life. If stressed during the euthanasia proce-
pue buweans puo bunoa e on selwis punos e ayew ueo bouabpay aui 'anp
the rabbit may give a piercing cry out. Generally though, if they are handled
quietly and calmly, they will not get stressed. It is helpful to warn the client of
this possible occurrence ahead of time. Again, pre-euthanasia sedation may
helptolessenstress andsubsequentvocalization.
Also, as with other types of companion animals, the exotic pet can continue
with body movements long after the heart has stopped. In most of the species,
preparations for this may be made ahead of time. With birds, the eyes may
close and the crop fluid will flow out of the mouth, especially if it was full prior
Cient Considerations   11
physical changes and verify when death has occurred.
Horses
whose economic value may be eclipsed by its personal value. It is essential
that we know what relationship the clienthas with a horsebefore any other
discussions take place. Veterinarians are commonly called to cattle ranches
when the horse has died.
sons. Advanced age, severe illness or lameness, and even economic conditions
be the first time they have had personal experience with death. For others, this
the client for decades. If it is an emergency situation, the client, and possibly
others in the vicinity, often have to make a decision quickly. Veterinary advice
in thesesituations maybeinvaluableforthe clienttochoose themosthumane
treatment for their animal (Lenz2004).Actual euthanasia techniqueswill be
discussed in Chapter 5.
The client may be considering euthanasia as only one possible option, when
really several options may exist. One consideration is selling the animal for
slaughter, which may ameliorate the financial loss incurred when a working
is very low,due in part to legislation in 2007,whichhas forced closure of
all equine slaughter plants in the United States (Heleski 2008). Horses sold
the present system. This is not optimum for two reasons. First, the horses
procedures utilized in these plants (Cordes 2008). As this book is being written,
several states are pursuing legislation that would legalize horse slaughter.
thebasevalue of horses andgiveclients aviablemeansofrecovering some
of the investment they have made in their working animal(Heleski 2008).An
equine carcass disposal in the United States.
Another consideration is the well-trained horse that has become physically
unable to perform his work. This horse might be sold to another person who
requires a much lower level of performance. It is also possible to find orga
dependable horse that cannot otherwise perform as a higher level athlete.
12Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
client as well. Of overwhelming concern in these situations is the horse's
comfort. A seriously injured horse may not be able to be used humanely, even
at the lowest levels of performance.
Clients may choose to breed a very valuable animal, which has been in-
to be looked at carefully to ascertain if this is a humane use of this animal
or if immediate euthanasia is a better option for the horse. New enhanced
reproductive techniques may now allow harvesting of eggs or sperm immedi-
ately after euthanasia in certain situations.
Once the decision is made, it is time to talk to the client about the process.
The client may have a very strong preference for the method of euthanasia
used, and the veterinarian will need to work to accommodate their wishes
within the bounds of humane euthanasia. For example, some owners may
request a physical method of euthanasia rather than an injection so the horse
may be allowed to biodegrade naturally: give the body back to nature if you
willwithout risking secondary wildlife death from barbiturate ingestion. They
to euthanize close to an area with vehicle access. Moving a deceased horse
equine aftercare specifics will be discussed in Chapter 6.
Some clients may ask if euthanasia will be painful for the horse or if
the goal is to make the procedure as quiet and painless as possible for the
horse and for the client. Each step of the procedure can be discussed so there
are no surprises that may be upsetting to the client and those present.
Some clients will choose to be absent when the euthanasia is performed.
This is a legitimate choice, which may actually make the process easier for the
veterinarian and the horse. A very emotional client can transfer their anxiety
to the horse. If they do choose to observe the euthanasia, it is important to
talk about what they will see.
Almost all horses will be standing when euthanized. They will generally not
just lie down and shut their eyes, but will lose consciousness and fall to the
ground. This abrupt crash to the ground can be the most troubling part of
equine euthanasia. In some hospital situations, an anesthesia induction stall
may be used to mitigate the fall. This appears more acceptable to the horse
client but may not be better for the horse. Many horses will become anxious
in this very confining space. It is important for the client to understand that
when the horse falls it is unconscious and, therefore, will not feel anything or
until all signs of life are gone.
horse clients are startled and troubled when the horse dies with eyes
wide open.Veterinarians often forget that open eyes are equated with
Client Considerations13
Figure 1.3 Woman and her horse. This close proximity during euthanasia is
not safe and should be avoided. Time for bonding should be allowed before the
procedure begins.
tant to take the time to explain this to the client and reassure them the horse
isnotaware.
Becauseit is unnatural fora horse to fall down, this may startle other horses
by nuzzling or pawing at it. Other horses will completely ignore the deceased
horse. Most horses come investigate for a short time and then go on as if
to watch as long as they can do so safely.
Companion Livestock
Some commercial livestockhavevalue to the client that goesbeyond simple
commercial dollar value. This may be true for special seed stock animals, show
or 4H animals, or pet livestock. In these cases, treatment and euthanasia deci-
sions can become very complex. Appreciating the emotional ties a client may
(Figure 1.4). Clients may request treatment and care that is beyond the ordi-
nary. There are also clients of pet livestock that do not feel comfortable with
comfort to the animal as possible until it passes away naturally. These re
quests often challenge the livestock veterinarian and, in some cases, test our
beliefs in the client's ability to minimize animal suffering and provide anima
welfare, including a humane death.
14  Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
Figure 1.4 Two boys presenting their livestock.
Production animals
An important aspect of livestock production and veterinary medicine is rec-
e siewue jo al o pua auewnu e buiaod pue buans lewiue buiziuo
have serious or terminal disease.Livestock including cattle,sheep,goats,pigs,
uo snoot lm uooas siui 'obaie sui oui leh lle aow pue 'sesedie sewel
the specific considerations and methods of euthanasia for livestock species
and is meant to augment theinformation provided in the American Veterinary
Medical Association(AVMA) Guidelines on Euthanasia.
          
should be euthanized. In the livestock production setting, this will include
the type and severity of disease, the likelihood of recovery from disease, the
are also faced with the evaluation of the economics of treatment relative to
the predicted return to production.
A simple but effective method of economic decision-making is to evaluate
the replacement value of the animal relative to the prognosis for return to
productivity and the cost of treatment. On strictly economic terms, further
treatment of an animal is economically justified if:
[Replacement Value] x[Prognosis] > [Cost of Treatment]
For commercial livestock operations, it is evident that more complicated
Client Considerations 15
treatment resulting in less incentive to treat the animal. In these cases, culling
or, if necessary, euthanizing the animal should be considered. In some cir-
meat-withholding periods and the animal cannot be immediately salvaged
of further treatment, prolonged drug withdrawal times, or continued suffer-
ing of the animal if treatment is withdrawn to allow for elimination of drug
residues. In some cases, further treatment is not warranted and salvage for
slaughter is not an option due to the animal being recumbent, having drug
residues, or having a disease that would not be acceptable for slaughter.
In such cases, the decision for euthanasia is often the most humane choice
(Figure 1.5).
 Ill or injured animal
Is the condition likely to be
progressive or terminal
even with treatment?
Treat if
Does the prognosis and
Is the animal
indicated and
estimated treatment cost
suffering?
periodically
supporta decision to treat?
reevaluate
Ye：
No
Can the animal be
slaughtered for meat?
Is the owner
Does the owner
willing to treat?
want to treat?
Salvage for
Euthanize
Treat
slaughter
Was the
No further
treatment
action
successful?
Figure 1.5  Determining factors for the euthanization of livestock. (Robert
Callan, author.)
16  Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
Some indications for euthanasia include the following:
· Severe trauma
tonitis, mastitis, metritis, enteritis, etc.).
● Inability to stand or walk.
· Zoonotic disease with significant public health implications (i.e., rabies).
· Unresponsive metabolic disease resulting in debilitation.
· Progressive organ failure (heart, liver, kidney).
· Persistent pain or discomfort (suffering) that is not responsive to medical
treatment.
The question of whether or not an animal is suitable for market and slaugh-
ter is sometimes difficult. Beef quality assurance guidelines recommend that
animals should not be marketed for meat unless they:
· do not pose a known public health threat;
as severe infectious disease, advanced neoplasia, or unresponsive metabolic
disease;
· are able to ambulate and are able to remain standing for transportation;
· are not severely emaciated (body condition score >2.5/9 for beef cattle or
>1/5 for dairy cattle);
· do not have a uterine or vaginal prolapse with visible fetal membranes;
mous cell carcinoma);
·do nothave advanced lumpy jaw.
Most livestock producers are very familiar with terminal disease in their an
imals and the decisions leading up to euthanasia. As some producers put it, "lf
are routinely very knowledgeable about basic medical conditions in their ani-
mals, fundamental care, and treatment. In addition, most livestock producers
generally demonstrate a strong sense of animal welfare and are conscientious
at minimizing animal suffering in the face of illness or injury.
appropriate decision. Once the decision for euthanasia is made, it is important
to discuss the method of euthanasia and what the client should expect from the
pet livestock, this is a very important discussion. There are two basic options
solution, or euthanasia by rendering the animal unconscious with penetrating
Client Considerations17
secondary means to cause cardiac or respiratory arrest. Both methods have
Euthanasia by injection of a pentobarbital solution often is considered a
bolt. However, the cost of the procedure may be considerably more due to
the cost of the euthanasia drugs,particularlyinlargerlivestock such as cat-
of pentobarbital is selected, then the carcass remains must be disposed of in
a way that prevents scavenger animals (dogs, coyotes, wolves, bears, eagles,
etc.) from consuming any of the tissues. This means that the carcass must
toxicity and possible death in scavenger animals.
Euthanasia by gunshot or captive bolt may have negative aesthetic conno
tations with some people,particularly pet livestock clients,or when used on
neonates and young stock. while this may be difficult to explain in rational
discussed, proper euthanasia by gunshot or captive bolt renders the animal
immediately unconscious with less physical or psychological effects caused
travenous administration of pentobarbital solution.
It is always good to ensure that the client understands the fundamental
mal unconscious in a humane way with minimal physical pain or psychological
stress. This is followed by cardiac and respiratory arrest. For inexperienced
clients,it may be useful to describe the procedureindetail prior to performing
paedaid ag osie Aew pue padxa oi peum mouy aaul peul os eiseueuina aul
for any adverse responses. For example, if euthanizing an animal by pento-
barbital injection, the client should be informed that the animal will become
cardiac arrest but this can take up to 5 minutes. During that time, the animal
may demonstrate several deep breaths. In ruminants and camelids, the loss
sive regurgitation following death. Spontaneousurination and defecation may
alsooccur.
unconscious and will become immediately recumbent. This is more dramatic
ticularly if they are observing or assisting with the restraint of the animal.
ondary methods (pithing, exsanguination, intravenous potassium chloride, and
18Veterinary EuthanasiaTechniques
pneumothorax) are often used to ensure rapid death. During this time, the ani-
This is often more pronounced compared with euthanasia by pentobarbital
because the penetrating concussion to the brain, while rendering the animal
unconscious, does not prevent involuntary motor activity of the extremities.
Further, the penetrating concussion disrupts the motor inhibitory centers of
exaggerated.
The physical location of the euthanasia may also be a consideration for the
transported, a farm euthanasia may be preferred. The client may request
an on-farm euthanasia for pure convenience. This must be balanced with
 a   n   e a    a
considered. In the cases of acute skeletal trauma or fracture, the client may
request on-site slaughter. Alternatively. the animal may be picked up by the
for necropsy. If the client would like a necropsy, this can be performed on
the farm following the euthanasia. If the client requests that a necropsy be
performed at a veterinary diagnostic laboratory. it may be easier to load the
animal onto a trailer alive and then transport to the diagnostic laboratory for
evaluation,euthanasia,and necropsy.
Chapter 2
Eguipment
 hen preparing to perform euthanasia, it is imperative that all the neces-
 sary equipment, drugs, and miscellaneous supplies are ready to help en-
sure that things proceed smoothly. Whether in the clinic or out in the field, hav-
ing a variety of equipment close at hand will allow you to perform whichever
euthanasia technique is most appropriate given the patient and setting. The
types of drugs and supplies to keep will depend on the veterinarian's preferred
method of euthanasia, the type of animal, the presence of onlookers, the loca-
tion, etc. For example, most veterinarians choose to euthanize dogs and cats
via an intravenous (Iv) injection of a noninhalant pharmaceutical agent, and
therefore, needles, catheters, and syringes are needed. within the shelter set-
ting, other techniques may be utilized, such as the inhalation of gas mixtures,
and specialized equipment must be maintained to ensure the safety of animal
for this method are very specific to inhalant agents and will not be commonly
found in veterinary clinics. Whatever the method, all supplies need to be on
proficient euthanasia. The majority of explanation behind the use of all types
of equipment can be found in Chapter 5.
described in the pertinent sections within this chapter.
Technique-specific equipment
Inhalant techniques
Equipment List
Facemask
Rope gauze or string
Gas chamber
Inhalant drugs
Flow meters
Cotton balls
Gas filtration system
Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques: A Practical Guide, First Edition. Kathleen A. Cooney.
Jolynn R. Chappell, Robert J. Callan and Bruce A. Connally.
 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
19
20Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
Figure 2.1Example of a simple gas chamber for small animals.
are considered acceptable and conditionally acceptable for small dogs, cats,
cal Association (AVMA euthanasia guidelines draft review 2011). If the pet can
be safely held close to the owner while receiving an inhalant such as isoflurane,
this should be allowed. Facemasks of various sizes should be kept to accom-
modate different head sizes. A preattached strap or added rope is needed
to secure the mask over the animal's nose. Cotton balls soaked in anesthetic
liquids may be placed within masks or chambers to facilitate inhalation by the
animal.
Gas chambers must be of high quality and free of defects (Figure 2.2).
Defects are a danger to personnel and will increase the time to achieve eu-
captured in a scavenging unit, keeping in mind that some gases should only
be infused once the animal is already inside the chamber. They should allow
for separation of animals if more than one will be euthanized at a time. They
must be in a ventilated area, preferably even outside where permitted, and
well lit for animal observation. when indoors, hazardous gas monitors should
be present and maintained to alert staff to possible gas leaks into the air.
The use of flow meters will help ensure that gases are delivered at optimal
may experience distress. Carbon monoxide (Co) is flammable, and therefore,
(AVMAeuthanasia guidelines draftreview 2011).
Equipment21
Figure 2.2 Example of a simple gas chamber for small animals
Noninhalant pharmaceutical agent injections
Equipment List
Catheters
Syringes
Needles
Male adaptors
Extension sets
Tape
4x4 gauze
Saline
Hydrogen peroxide
Tourniquet
Drugs
 Sharps container
Clippers
These items are commonly used for the administration of injectable euthana
directly in the vein, within the abdomen, or within organs that will rapidly move
the drug toward the site of action. How these items are used depends on the
veterinarian's method of choice and the animal being euthanized.
Depending on the species, IV administration can be accomplished using di-
is performed in the leg or arm of the animal, a tourniquet may be used to oc
clude blood flow and increase the size of the vein. Clippers may be used to
istered, the luer-locking tip is recommended to avoid leakage. IV extension sets
and male adaptors may be used to stop the backflow of blood from catheters.
Gauze and hydrogen peroxide can be used to clean the injection site before
and after euthanasia. A sharps container is required for proper disposal of
needles, catheter stylets, etc. The size of needles, syringes, and catheters is
directly related to the size of the animal.
22Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
Physical methods
Gunshot
Equipment List
Appropriate firearm
Cartridge of appropriate type for species
Halter or other method of head restraint
Ear and eye protection
Handguns, rifles, or shotguns can all be used for euthanasia of livestock,
including horses. Handguns have the advantage of being compact and easy
Rifles and shotguns may also be used at close range or at much longer ranges
in special circumstances. Rifles provide acceptable accuracy and effective
euthanasia at longer distances, especially when fitted with a telescopic scope.
The AVMA guide discourages euthanasia via gunshot to the chest, as death
is not instantaneous. This method may still be utilized in wild animals where
approach is impossible. A competent marksman can shoot an animal in the
head at considerable distance but this requires much practice.
The caliber, type of bullet, and muzzle velocity all affect the suitability of
when euthanizing an animal with a firearm. Larger, more powerful firearms
will cause more tissue damage and thus may allow for minor placementerrors.
placement.
Some veterinarians have extensive experience euthanizing animals with
firearms, but others will not and are encouraged to get advice from an expe
rienced firearm professional before purchasing a gun for use in euthanasia.
There are literally hundreds of choices of pistols, rifles, and shotguns on the
market, which could be employed for euthanasia. Some will be better than
others. Multiply this by the hundreds of bullet choices used in these weapons
and safety concerns. Depending upon local regulations, the veterinarian may
limits. while the upfront cost for a firearm is less than a captive bolt gun, a
firearm is associated with greater liability. Firearm safety training is highly
recommended before using a firearm for euthanasia. In addition, there is a
greater concern of theft with firearms versus captive bolt guns.
Choosing the appropriate caliber and bullet type is important for effective
Equipment  23
Figure 2.3 Various types of bullets.
firearm caliber and bullet type that has a lower effective energy may result in
respiratory arrest, and death. In such cases, secondary methods of causing
cardiac and respiratory arrest such as pithing, exsanguination, IV potassium
chloride (Kcl), or pneumothorax (livestock) should be performed once the
animal is unconscious.
imals such as horses and livestock. when using a shotgun with birdshot, the
damage from multiple projectiles is often more severe than that induced by a
single bullet from a pistol or rifle. All firearms are loud and can cause hearing
protection should always be worn when using firearms for euthanasia.
Captive bolt
Equipment List
Captive bolt gun, bolt, and cartridge
Secondary equipment:
Pithing instrument
Sharp necropsy knife, at least 6 in. long
Scalpel blade and handle
Noninhalant injectable agents and supplies
Halter or other method of head restraint
24
Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
Table 2.1F
Recommended firearm and cartridge for euthanasia of livestock.
Firearm
Animal type
Caliber
Bullet
Handgun
Calves, sheep, goats
.22
Soft or hollow point
or rifle
5.5 mm
Pigs <100 kg
.22
Round nose
5.5 mm
Adult cattle (>24
.22 magnum
Round nose
months)
.357
Soft or hollow point
ww6
Softorhollowpoint
Horses
.357
Soft or hollow point
ww6
Soft or hollow point
Adult bulls, pigs >
.357
Round nose
100kg
ww6
Round nose
Shotgun
Calves, sheep, goats
20,16, or 12
#4,5, or 6 birdshot
a6ne6
Pigs <100 kg
20,16, or 12
#4,5, or 6 birdshot
gauge
Adult cattle
16 or12 gauge
Slug or #4 or 5
birdshot
Horses
16 or 12 gauge
Slug or #4 or 5
birdshot
Adult bulls, pigs >
12 gauge
Slug or #4 or 5
100 kg
birdshot
Safety Authority AHAW/O4-027. Scientific report of the Scientific Panel for Animal Health and Welfare
on a request from the commission related to welfare aspects of animal stunning and killing methods.
erinarians choosing to use a firearm or captive bolt gun for euthanasia. A
fundamental criterion for the humane euthanasia of animals by gunshot or
captive bolt stunner is to render the animal immediately unconscious (<1 sec-
ond) followed by cardiac and respiratory arrest. when the captive bolt does
not accomplish euthanasia by itself, a secondary method must be applied.
makes it easier for the bolt to penetrate the skull and enter the calvarium. The
mass, diameter, length, and velocity of the bolt upon firing. These character-
istics vary between captive bolt stunners and thus determine their suitability
for different size and species of animal (Table 2.1). The length of the bolt varies
from 57 to 136 mm, with diameters from 12 to 14 mm. Bolt velocity is about
60 m/s (200 ft/s) with a kinetic energy of around 295 ft Ib (400 J).
Both trigger-operated and contact-firing captive bolt stunners are available
(Figure 2.4). Both pistol and cylindrical models are available. The trigger-
operated captive bolt guns seem to allow for more control of placement over
the target.
Equipment   25
Figure 2.4 Example of a trigger-operated penetrating captive bolt stunner.
This model is the Cash Special manufactured by Accles & Shelvoke.
For field use,captive bolt stunners arepowered by a blank cartridge,gen
that theboltmoves freelyand has adequatevelocity.The bolt must be fully
retracted into the barrel after each shot. The rubber buffer rings contained
in the cylinder regulate the penetration depth and also retract the bolt out of
pabewep jo juag s! ll l paoeidal pue Ajueinbau paioadsul ag osle pinous llog
(Figure 2.5).
multiple models including the Cash Special, Blitz-Kerner, Magnum 25, and the
and cylindrical designs. The two different designs have different ergonomics
such that the cylindrical design is easier to use in standard slaughter kill boxes
Figure 2.5 The Accles & Shelvoke Cash Special disassembled for cleaning
and inspection of the penetrating bolt and the buffer rings.
26VeterinaryEuthanasiaTechniques
from above the animal. In the field, cylindrical models can be comfortably used
from the side of the animal, but are more awkward from directly in front of
the animal. The pistol design is easiest to use from in front of the animal or to
the side.
o  an l sas       a
investment as the cost of these devices currently ranges from $350 to $3350
(2011 prices). However, shells for these stunners cost less than $0.20 each,
and it is estimated that the cost over the life of the equipment is less than
firearms are that captive bolt stunners are generally safer for the operator and
bystanders, do not require special licensing, and can be used within city limits.
When properly used on various species, the captive bolt stunner will effec-
tively render the animal immediately unconscious, but may not cause suffi-
arrest, and death. It is important that ancillary equipment be on site to com-
plete euthanasia via a secondary method by inducing cardiac and respiratory
arrest. Typical methods used in animals include pithing, exsanguination, IV or
intracardiac injection of saturated KCl solution, or pneumothorax. The pithing
screwdriver, Buhner needle, or even a long nail. Disposable pithing rods are
also available (www.pithingrods.com). These are flexible plastic rods approxi-
mately 1 m in length.
least 6 in. in length. Some practitioners will alternatively cut the abdominal
aorta and vena cava via rectal palpation using a scalpel. Cardiac arrest,
followed by respiratory arrest, can be achieved by injection of a lethal amount
of KcI as well.
Terminal hypoxiacan be achieved by inducing a pneumothorax in the uncon
scious animal, typically livestock. This is accomplished by performing a deep
intercostal incision into the thorax over at least two-thirds of the intercostal
space with a knife or scalpel blade.
Decapitation
Equipment List
Anesthetic agent
Cutting shears
Guillotine
Sharp knife
Secondary equipment:
Pithing rod
Equipment  27
Decapitation is a conditionally acceptable method of euthanasia in small ro-
dents and birds when they are anesthetized and an adjunctive method in other
species. Decapitation using a heavy shears or guillotine is effective for some
species. Because the central nervous system of reptiles and amphibians is
tolerant to hypoxic and hypotensive conditions (Cooper 1989), decapitation
must be followed by pithing or another method of destroying brain tissue
pithing).
Cervical dislocation
Equipment List
Anesthetic agent
Thin cylindrical/rod-shaped device
Cervical dislocation is a conditionally acceptable method of euthanasia by the
AVMA for unconscious small mammals,birds,and reptiles,and is acceptable
in turkeys. In this method, a small board, dowel, or pencil (depending on the
size of animal) is placed at the base of the animal's skull. Exact description of
this technique will be in Chapter 5.
Rapid Freezing
Equipment List
Anesthetic agent
Liquid nitrogen
Tongs
Reptiles,amphibians,companion arthropods,and baby mice can be eutha-
ing must be <4 kg (Close 1997) and be unconscious or presumed dead al-
ready. The AVMA views it as an adjunctive method. Most private practice
facilities do not house liquid nitrogen, so this is not considered a common
those who dokeep it on site;that is,reproduction laboratories,dermatology
centers, etc.
28Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
Miscellaneous
Equipment List
Bandage scissors
Hemostats
Rubber gloves
Towels/blankets
Stethoscope
Stretcher
Flashlight
Drug box and key
 Trash container
Sharps container
 Skin adhesive
Supply bag
Clay paw prints
Pet loss literature
Kleenex
Calculator
Body bags/boxes
Restraint devices
These miscellaneous supplies aid in the euthanasia appointment itself (Figure
2.6). A stethoscope to auscult the heart and cardiac arrest is still considered
may be present. Some practices/shelters may use long needles and syringes
for the cardiac-puncture test to check for cardiac standstill (Rhoades 2o02).
Rubber gloves can be worn to protect hands from bodily fluids and infectious
diseases. Towels and blankets soften the area for small animals and, when
tucked under the body,can catch urine and feces following death.They can
skin adhesives can be used to secure catheters to the skin in large animals
and close the eyelids of the deceased.
Restraint equipment should always be carried in case the animal being
euthanized requires more handling than expected. This equipment is meant
to aid the administrator by keeping the animal in a stable position allowing for
a safer euthanasia procedure. Such equipment could be muzzles, halters, cat
bags, squeeze shoots, etc. Even sedation/anesthetic drugs can be considered
restrained, and the risk to animal or handler is too great, euthanasia may
need to be postponed until circumstances are improved.
m buole juawdinba pioy oi aessaau si beg Aiddns e 'buinas pla aui ul
a midsized animal and body bags or boxes used to transport the animal home
so that medical waste is not left behind.
Family support is also important. Kleenex should be kept in the area for
helpful to the client should be kept close and ready to use.
Equipment29
Figure 2.6 House call bag with supplies for injectable agents and client
support.
Euthanasia area equipment
Reliability, re peatability, and safety are vital with euthanasia procedures. Per-
good lighting for the veterinarian to accurately perform the desired technique.
Euthanasia equipment and supplies should be housed in a safe place and kept
free of defects. When wear and tear is becoming evident, such as a tourni-
quet that loses its tightening capabilities or a facemask that leaks, items like
these should be replaced. In fact, two of every item should be kept in case its
immediate use is needed.
An eye-wash station should be close by in the case of accidental eye contact
Adequate space to work should be sought out and used needles and syringes
should be properly disposed of in sharps containers.
When practical, a euthanasia room or area should be established to limit
contact with other animals and people. Many small animal clinics today have
30   Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
Figure 2.7Comfort room.
"comfort rooms" to allow clients to gather with their pets (Figure 2.7). while
these rooms are designed to be pleasant for families, they should still provide
safe surface to work on, such as a floor or table. It should hold a first-aid
kit, cleaning supplies, and animal-restraint devices such as muzzles, collars,
and leashes, or feline-restraint bags tucked out of site and ready for use.
Restraining devices are not ideal to use when the family is present, but having
them close by eliminates stressful waiting while staff retrieves what they
need from another room.
Due to the desired outcome of death, sterility for the patient is not a con-
area or be treated with the same equipment for other procedures. When eu-
thanasia is conducted in a general clinic treatment area, all surfaces should be
disinfected following the procedure. The same holds true for comfort rooms
that are used for routine appointments as well. Even euthanasia-only rooms
tious disease by family members returning home to other pets. This includes
wiping down surfaces with disinfectants and vacuuming as needed. As with
most procedures, equipment should be cleaned after use. If syringes are to be
Drugs
The euthanasia drugs we use in everyday practice, whether in the clinic or
in the field, are chosen based on (1) availability. (2) cost, (3) reliability and
Equipment    31
irreversibility.(4) human abuse potential,(5) subsequent use of tissue,(6)
lines draftreview2o11).They consist ofinhalantgases andnoninhalant
tion/anesthesia is required, common sedatives and anesthetics are used.
the public, and an accurate drug log maintained. Clinic drug safes or field
and eliminate the likelihood of theft. All euthanasia drugs and many pre
established. The veterinarian ordering these drugs is required to hold an active
veterinary license, a Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) license, and in
some states, hold a Controlled Substance license. However, a DEA license is not
required by the attending veterinarian, or "certified euthanasia technicians'
typically found in shelters, to perform euthanasia or carry the necessary drugs.
Whenever possible,drugs should bekept locked up until theprecise time they
are needed. Expired and wasted drugs need to be reported to the DEA. Any
prepared topresentdocumentationtoDEAenforcementofficialsinthefield
if requested. Documentation should include the following:
· The client name
· The patient name or ID
· The species and weight of the animal
· The amount of drug used
· The total amount of the drug left
· The name of the person that administered the drug
Inhalant agents
Equipment List
flurane
Gases: carbon dioxide (cO2), carbon monoxide (co), nitrogen, and argon
The following must be considered when choosing an inhaled agent for eu-
· Time to unconsciousness depends on many factors.
al pue lapio buyom pooe ui ag psnu pasn puawdinba aul o
· Most inhaled agents are hazardous to workers.
32Veterinary EuthanasiaTechniques
· Neonatal animals and certain species appear to be resistant to hypoxia.
uoislaae puanbasgns pue asiou aonpoid aew mo seb pidea 
· Agents are best delivered in a safe environment for the animal.
· Some inhaled agents may be lighter or heavier than air.
· Agents that induce convulsions prior to loss of consciousness are unaccept
able.
·Death must be verified before agent exposureis done.
(O2) must be provided to prevent hypoxia before unconsciousness (AvMA
euthanasia guidelines draft review 2011).
The AvMA's 2o11 guidelines review lists anesthetic gases in order of pre
ferred use as: isoflurane, halothane, sevoflurane, and desflurane. They should
be nonirritating to mucous membranes and contain little to no odor. Inhalant
of most anesthetics is irritating to tissues and should not contact the animal
directly. Inhaled anesthetics can be useful as the sole euthanasia agent or
as part of a two-step process, where animals are first rendered unconscious
through exposure to inhaled anesthetic agents and subsequently euthanized
using a secondary method such as intracardiac injection with a pharmaceutical
agent, decapitation, etc.
Overdoses of inhalant anesthetics (e.g., ether, halothane, methoxyflu-
rane, isoflurane, sevoflurane, desflurane, enflurane, and nitrous oxide) have
Halothane induces anesthesia rapidly and is an effective inhalant agent for eu-
eisauisaue saonpun lt pue 'aueuioey ueul aignos ssal sl auenosl eiseueul
more rapidly. However, it has a pungent odor and onset of unconsciousness
pressure. Anesthetic concentrations can be achieved and maintained rapidly
but more drug will be required to kill the animal. Although sevoflurane is re-
ported to possess less of an objectionable odor than isoflurane, some species
may struggle violently and experience apnea when sevoflurane is administered
by facemask or induction chamber (Flecknell et al. 1999). Sevoflurane induces
is so volatile that it could displace O2 and induce hypoxemia during induction if
supplemental O2 is not provided. Halothane, isoflurane, sevoflurane, and des
flurane are nonflammable and nonexplosive under usual clinical conditions.
Precautions should still be taken to limit risk to personnel and animal.
Other inhalant agents include Co, COz, nitrogen, and argon. They are all
considered conditionally acceptable or as adjunctive methods when used with
appropriate species. None of them are listed as acceptable methods alone
Equipment33
as too many extenuating factors are present. Each gas should be closely un-
from licensed manufacturers to ensure their purity, concentration, temper-
ature，and delivery rate.Any outside source,including "home creation"is
example of this would be the use of antacids or dry ice to create Coz for use
in small animals. It is recognized that some gases can be created using alter
nate sources, but must be delivered at ambient temperatures and purified to
revlew2011)
Noninhalant pharmaceutical agents
As of 2012,within the United States, there are two types of acceptable
euthanasia-specific injectable agents: barbiturates and barbiturate combina-
tions (Table 2.2)(AVMA euthanasia guidelines draft review 2011). These agents
be administered in various ways, and have a high percentage of reliability
and irreversibility when given properly (Lumb 1974). Pure barbiturates are
those containing pentobarbital with no additives and are class ll controlled
combination drugs include those with phenytoin sodium or lidocaine and are
class Ill controlled drugs due to their lower abusepotential.Powder barbi-
turates can also be administered orally. Barbiturates are to be kept at room
temperature, but remain fairly stable under warmer or colder temperatures.
Otherinjectableagents,conditionallyallowedforusebytheWorldSociety
for the Protection of Animals (WSPA) and the AVMA include KCl, Tributame?,
T-61@(not produced in the United States),and propofol. Others that may
beknown arenotlisted here as they are not available within theUnited
States. These four drugs are only acceptable under general anesthesia due to
their often unpredictable nature and the risk of distress upon death. They are
generally consideredunnecessary touse in most animals due to the availability
of barbiturates. Some common sedatives such asα2-agonists and dissociatives
like ketamine do have lethal doses that can be administered intramuscular (lM)
in small animals, but limited study has been conducted on the efficacy of their
are available. The AVMA guidelines do list two studies conducted in mice only.
KClis anadjunctive methodin many species.A saturated solutionof KCl can
be prepared by mixing 560 g KCl in a liter of warm water and stirring. If there
is some solid KCl at the bottom of the solution,then the solution is saturated
other dye can be added to the solution to help with proper identification.
Other pharmaceutical agents that can be used for euthanasia include many
222), benzocaine hydrochloride,eugenol (clove oil), 2-phenoxyethanol, quinal-
dine, and metomidate. These agents will be described in more depth within the
34    Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
Table 2.2Injectable euthanasia agents.The IV doses listed are the minimum
acceptable amounts for most domestic species. Labels should be consulted to
determine appropriate usage in various species.
Pentobarbital sodium
Class Il
Name
Concentration
IV dose
Fatal Plus@
390 mg/mL
1 mL per 10 Ibs
@bg-qwnaos
Same as above
Somlethol
Same as above
Sleepaway?
260 mg/mL
Pentobarbital sodium with
Class III
Phenytoin sodium
Name
Concentration
Dose
Beuthanasia-D
390 mg/mL (pentobarb)
1 mL per10 Ibs
50 mg/mL (phenytoin)
Euthasol?
Same as above
Euthanasia-
Same as above
Pentobarbital sodium with
Class IIlI
lidocaine
Name
Concentration
Dose
390 mg/mL (pentobarb)
1 mL per 10 Ibs
20 mg/mL (lidocaine)
Secobarbitol sodium with
Class III
dibucaine
Name
Concentration
Dose
Repose@a
400 mg/mL (secobarbitol)
0.22 mL/kg
25 mg/mL (dibucaine)
Embutramide
Class III
Name
Concentration
Dose
T-61a
200 mg/mL (embutramide)
0.14 mL/lb
50 mg/mL (mebozonium iodide)
5 mg/mL (tetracaine HCI)
Tributamed
135 mg/mL (embutramide)
1 mL per 5 Ib
35 mg/mL (chloroquine
phosphate)
1.9 mg/mL (lidocaine)
Potassium chloride (KCl)
Name
Concentration
Dose
KCI
Varies
1-2 mmol/kg
aThese products are currently not marketed in the United States.
Equipment 
35
Table 2.3 Common pre-euthanasia drugs.
Dissociatives
Class
Common names
Tiletamine/zolazepam
Telazol@
Ketamine
Ketaset,Ketaved?
α2-agonists
Xylazine
Rompun@, Ketased@
Anased@
Medetomidine
Domitor@
Dexmedetomidine
Dexdomitor?
Opiates
Butorphanol
IV
Torbugesic@
Dolorex@
Buprenorphine
Buprenex@
Morphine
none
Nalbuphine
none
Fentanyl
Fentanyl@
Phenothiazines
Acepromazine
PromAce@
Benzodiazepines
Diazepam
IV
Valium?
Midazelam
IV
Midazelam
exotic's technique section in Chapter 5. Agents, such as formaldehyde, that
are rarely used in private practice will not be discussed in any great detail.
Pre-euthanasia drugs
When sedation is needed, such as with a fractious animal or when the clinic's
 policy is pre-euthanasia sedation/anesthesia for every pet, a variety of pre-
euthanasia sedatives and anesthetics need to be kept on location along with
the euthanasia drug of choice(Table 2.3).Each drug's method of action,
metabolism, etc., needs to be fully understood before use. Most may be given
IV, IM, or subcutaneous (SQ), and some may be given orally to induce sedation.
When given orally, some can be squirted directly into the mouth or canned
food must be kept on site to mix with. More on all of these drugs and their role
in euthanasia will be discussed in Chapter 4.
Species-specific considerations
Dogs and cats
The euthanasia of dogs and cats is usually accomplished by the IV adminis-
tration of noninhalant pharmaceutical agents such as pentobarbital. Restraint
the animal prior to euthanasia. Because the cats and dogs that veterinarians
encounter, particularly dogs, come in a variety of sizes, needles and syringes
36Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
Figure 2.8 Example of shielding an intracardiac injection from view.
of various sizes should be on hand. For most dogs and cats, syringes ranging
from 25 to 18 gauge with a typical length of 0.5-1 in.
When families are present or when the pet is not sedated, ideal circum
guidelines draft review 2011). Catheters used typically range from 25 to 20
-ueg 'aessaoau uauu bal aui oi dnas aul lououe oi pasn ag ues adei 'abneb
dage scissors and hemostats may be needed to remove firmly placed catheter
setups from the leg.
When venous access is not possible, longer needles up to 3 in. in length may
technique like this is difficult for the client, a small cloth drape can be used
to shield the injection from view (Figure 2.8). Longer needles may also be
required to reach the liver in large dogs
for use on dogs and cats (AVMA euthanasia guidelines draft review 2oil).
no larger than a .22 handgun or rifle. If the distance is greater, such as within
5-15 yards, a shotgun of 12, 16, or 20 gauge, with #6 to #2 shot may be used
Equipment    37
(Awlc 2o02). The use of gunshot is not allowed for routine use and should
only be attempted when no other humane method is available and the animal
is suffering.
multiple factors must be met for their use. Anesthetic gases may be delivered
via intubation tubes during surgery or via gas mask. Co and Coz may be
delivered via closely monitored chambers. Nitrogen and Argon are utilized
is already rendered unconscious.
Exotics
Equipment necessary for most small companion exotics and birds that a vet
agents,anassortment of small needles ranging from 27 to 20 gauge should be
to dogs and cats.
For inhalant gas use, a closed container must be used, such as an anesthetic
terfowl and wading birds to fit their long beaks. A latex glove can be placed
gas anesthetic induction or euthanasia, and the smallest possible container
will help the process go faster.
When using immersion solutions to achieve euthanasia in amphibians and
Gloves should be worn to prevent uptake through the administrator's skin and
Physical methods,such as decapitation of small rodents,birds, reptiles,
from the neck. Pre-euthanasia anesthesia will be required unless the animal
is alreadyunconscious.Rapid freezingwith liquid nitrogen is conditionally
acceptable for those <4 kg.
For assistance in handling the patients, a variety of towels should be avail-
able for use. Sacks such as pillowcases work well for containing snakes prior to
handling and thick leather gloves are helpful for handling raptors and sharp-
scaled animals such as iguanas.
captive bolt or gunshot (free bullet) delivered to the brain (Made 1996). De-
blade or shears.
A doplar unit and small stethoscope accurate enough to auscult small pa-
and 2.10).
38Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
Grafco
Figure 2.9 Common doplar unit.
Sofluir
Figure 2.10 Masks modified for very small animals.
Equipment  39
Horses
agents and physical methods. Due to their size, the use of inhalant euthanasia
agents is almost never attempted. None of the drugs or instruments used for
they can be utilized.
Veterinariansshouldusetheirbestjudgmentastothebestequipmenttouse
with horses. If restraint is needed, a halter and lead rope is usually sufficient
for nonfractious horses.Towels canbe used to cover the eyes tohelp quiet
an anxious horse. If necessary, a squeeze chute can be used to hold the horse
themfrom the area.A rodeo roughstock chute could be acceptable as could
a livestock alley.It should benoted that squeeze chutes canbe extremely
dangerous for horses and for the people working around them. The chute
engenders claustrophobic panic and extreme attempts to escape.
IVbarbituratesareprobablythemostwidelyusedmethodofequineeu-
thanasia in the United States, followed by gunshot and penetrating captive
the lateral side of the neck. Due to the large size of the horse, a high volume of
aiissod se aoinb se os auop pue palaisiuiwpe ag isnu uoiinios eiseueuina
direct venipuncture into the jugular vein. lf venous pressures are very poor and
the veins are difficult to feel, such as with a sick foal, an intracardiac injection
a minimum of a 16-gauge size is recommended with attached 3-mL extension
Syringe size is also important. Larger syringes hold more solution and should
to used to administer as fast as possible.
pistols such as the .22 LR caliber or .380 caliber can be used on small horses
 l  a e   i     
damage and decrease the possibility of ricochet.
If the horse cannotbe manuallyrestrained,a gunshot must be attempted
from a distance. A rifle or shotgun may be used, but the excessive power
may increase the risk of the bullet passing through the horse and into the
environment. Great care must be taken when this is attempted.
The captive bolt technique uses the same types of bolt guns as used with
other species. When required to use a physical method in an urban setting,
aapisuo sl ll 'uoiiunwwe pue unb jo asn aul aoeidau pinous unb log au
safer than gunshot.
aforementioned equipment. In young foals, a blow to the head may be effec
tive, but it must penetrate the skull and disrupt the brain to effect immediate
40Veterinary EuthanasiaTechniques
fireman's pick axe could be used with effect similar to captive bolt, but will
difficult to perform on an adult horse. The combination of stunning the anima
with a blow to the head followed by exsanguination is effective, but also tech-
nically difficult. Exsanguination may be carried out using a 6-in. blade across
the throatlatch or per rectum to transect the aorta using any blade equal to
or larger than a scalpel blade.
Livestock
Livestock veterinarians should be prepared for the possible need to perform
euthanasia onany farm call. In some cases, the potential for euthanasia is clear
the presenting complaint for the visit. However, it is possible that the infor-
mation received prior to the appointment may not indicate that euthanasia
may be necessary. For routine farm calls, there is always the possibility for
animal. For example, one does not expect to have to euthanize an animal while
could result in fractures, back or spinal injury. head trauma, neck injury, or
other complications that are not readily treatable and may result in euthanasia
be considered part of the standard equipment available for all farm calls.
Even though many different species are considered livestock, most of the
same supplies can be used among them. As with the other domesticated
on the size of the animal being helped. As with all species, the bigger the animal,
the bigger the syringe needed. Needle sizes range from 20 to 18 gauge ×
1.5 in. for small ruminants or camelids to 14 gauge x 2 in. for adult cattle.
If an IV catheter must be placed, 18-16 gauge up to 3 in. is ideal for small
catheters.
A .22-caliber firearm, when used appropriately will reliably render most
Soft or hollow point .22-caliber bullets may be used in calves, sheep, or goats
recommended. A .22-caliber long rifle solid point (round nose) bullet is better
large cows, bulls, or boars.
Equipment41
firearm. It must be noted that in some cases, standard .22 or .22 magnum
caliber firearms may not result in sufficient cerebral trauma to cause cardiac or
methods of inducing cardiac and respiratory arrest should be available such
as pithing, exsanguination, IV Kcl, or pneumothorax.
Somestatesmaysetspecificstandardsforlivestockeuthanasiaby
small livestock and immature cattle or swine, and a minimum .22 magnum
hollow point for mature cattle and swine (ohio Livestock Care Standards
Board, http://ohiolivestockcarestandardsboard.gov/content/news/effective_
standards.aspx).
ommended. If you are relying on the firearm to render the animal both uncon-
scious and inflict enough central nervous system (CNS)damage to result in
cardiac and respiratory arrest, then a .44 magnum should be used. Hollow or
therisk of the projectile exiting the animal and possibly causing human injury
firearmforsmallruminants or calves.A12-gaugeshotgunisrecommended
for larger livestock such as bulls or boars.
There is no single firearm and bullet that is optimum for all classes of
livestock(Table 2.1).Both.22-caliber pistols and rifles are satisfactory for
A hunting rifle with a telescopic scope may be the best alternative in situa-
preference.
Both penetrating and nonpenetrating captive bolt stunners are available
mushroom head and stuns the animal solely by concussive force. In gen-
method for field euthanasia of livestock. Along with the concussive impact
physical trauma to the brain, including portions of the cerebrum, midbrain,
pons, cerebellum, and medulla oblongata depending on method. Penetration
and physical trauma to the brain will cause irreversible loss of conscious
(Tables 2.4 and 2.5).
42  Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
Table 2.4 Trigger fire captive bolt stunners (models available in 2011).
Recommended
Model
Caliber
Bolt length
species
Cash Special
.22 and .25
121 mm
Sheep, swine, cattle
Accles & Shelvoke
(4 3/4 inch)
Cash Magnum
.22 and .25
121 mm
Cattle
Accles & Shelvoke
(4 3/4 inch)
Cash Special Heavy
.25
121 mm
Cattle
Duty
(4 3/4 inch)
Accles & Shelvoke
Cash Special HD
.25
136mm
Large cattle
Extended Bolt
(5 3/8 inch)
Accles & Shelvoke
Cash Dispatch Kit
.25
Variable
Poultry, swine, sheep,
Accles & Shelvoke
horses, neonates,
Hinpe pue
Blitz-Kerner Captive
wW6
57 mm
Growing swine, gilts,
Bolt Stunner
(2 1/4 inch)
sheep, calves, light 
cattle
Schermer KR
NA
82mm
Sheep, swine, cattle
Stunner
(3 1/4 inch)
Schermer KC
NA
82mm
Sheep, swine, cattle
Non-Penetrating
(3 1/4 inch)
Stunner
Schermer KS
NA
82mm
Sheep, swine, cattle
Self-Retracting
(3 1/4 inch)
Stunner
Schermer KL Stunner
NA
133 mm
Cattle
Elongated Bolt
(5 1/4 inch)
Table 2.5
CaptiveBoltStunnermanufacturers and USdistributors.
Manufacturers
Website
Accles & Shelvoke, West Midlands,
www.acclesandshelvoke.co.uk/index.htm
England
Karl Schermer Gmbh & Co.,
www.karl-schermer.de
Ettlingen, Germany
US Distributors
Bunzl Processor Division (Koch
www.bunzlprocessor.com
Supplies), North Kansas City, MO
Cotran Corporation, Portsmout, Rl
www.cotrancorp.com
Hantover, Kansas City, MO
www.hantover.com
Hog Slat Inc., Newton Grove, NC
http://hogslat.biz/Blitz_Captive_Bolt_Stunner.
asp
QC Supply, Schuyler, NE
www.qcsupply.com/farm-livestock/handling/
bolt-stunners.html
AGRlsales Inc., Ceresco, NE
http://www.agrisales-inc.com
Chapter 3
Positioning and Restraint
t is well agreed upon by the veterinary and animal professional community
thatthe more comfortable andrelaxed the animal,thesmoother the eu-
thanasia process. As we have been discussing so far, the key to euthanasia
is to provide a pain-free, anxiety-free death for each animal. It is difficult to
know exactly what an animal understands about the position it is placed in,
but we do know that keeping it in familiar surroundings will lessen stress. An
ideal euthanasia setting for a client-owned dog or cat might include loved ones
gathered around, remaining at home on its bed, or within a safe setting at the
hospital, while an ideal setting for a fractious stray might be minimal human
safely handled before, and so on. Regardless of the temperament, all animals
should be treated with love and compassion before and after euthanasia.
All personnel performing euthanasia must be well educated in animal be-
slewiue aun peun bunsse oi iunoweed si uonpi sapuegsnu pue joiaeu
body language is understood. For example, if the handler witnesses a display
of fear, the animal cannot be guaranteed a distress-free death. It is also im-
portant for euthanasia personnel to understand the normal anatomy for the
animal, the limitations of the physical body, for example, range of limb motion,
head extension, and so on. Excessive restraint can make the situation worse.
Salivation, vocalization, urination, defecation, evacuation of anal sacs, pupil-
lary dilatation, tachycardia, sweating, and reflex skeletal muscle contractions
causing shivering, tremors, or other muscular spasms may occur in uncon-
scious as well as conscious animals (AVMA euthanasia guidelines draft review
2011). Readers are encouraged to increase their understanding of animal be-
havior for the benefit of the animal and their own safety.
Positioning
use of pre-euthanasia sedatives, and the species being aided. As will be
Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques: A Practical Guide, First Edition. Kathleen A. Cooney.
Jolynn R. Chappell, Robert J. Callan and Bruce A. Connally.
 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
43
44Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
Figure 3.1  Gentle restraint for cephalic injection in a cat.
floor, on the client's lap, and so on. Larger animals may be euthanized in stalls,
in stocks, out in pasture, and so on. when family is involved, small animals may
be held as long as the person holding is protected from scratching and biting.
Positioning and necessary restraint will depend a lot on the temperament of
the animal. Proper restraining techniques will minimize distress for all animals,
regardless of their exposure and comfort with humans. In the case of compan-
ion animals, those that are familiar with human love and protection do well with
gentle touches, soff voices, and support from their family. If the pet is fear-
ful of people, such as in the case of abused or feral animals, or is extremely
painful, minimal contact is preferred. Those present will need to determine
Regardless of the method of euthanasia, the animal must be clearly visible
and safe to handle. For example, proper lighting is important so that the
injection site can be easily seen. In situations where light is minimized, such as
outdoor evening appointments or clinic power outages, flashlights should be
Positioning and Restraint    45
and access to the anatomical area of interest
Restraint
Restraint can be physical, chemical, or both. The level of restraint needed is
animal, and experience of the handler, and is used to keep the pet in proper
position. The use of restraint does not imply that the animal is fractious
Gentle restraint is typically done with even the calmest animal to ensure that
they do not move during an injection, etc. However, if an unsedated animal
moves during the euthanasia procedure, it may experience pain and distress.
For this reason, many veterinarians are moving toward using pre-euthanasia
sedation/anesthesia for all euthanasia procedures. This is considered chemica
restraint and can aid the veterinarian in many ways. More on this will be
discussed in Chapter 4.
 a sa    s   s  a
description of restraint techniques for small animals can be found in The HsUS
nice detail regarding cat and dog restraint in particular. The best method is
one that feels natural to the animal. It is always important to remember that
as comfortable as the restraint hold might be to the animal, it may move very
accordingly to keep everyone safe.
Restraint devices should be kept anywhere animals will be euthanized.
Something as simple as a towel can be utilized to gently restrain a dog, cat, or
an exotic or can be used to cover the eyes of livestock, etc. Other devices such
contact. More on restraint will be included below.
In general, regardless of the technique being performed or the tempera
ment of the animal, positioning and the amount of restraint used should be
Species-specific considerations
Dogs and cats
by where the euthanasia is conducted. In the typical examination room, dogs
and cats are commonly placed on the examination table, either directly on its
46Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
Figure 3.2 Calm cat free of environmental stressors.
surface or on top of a towel/blanket. Providing a nonslip surface may help the
pet feel more secure. A larger dog may be euthanized on the floor to avoid
lifting. Many clinics provide floor mats for improved comfort. when hospital
space allows, a "comfort" room should be established for easier work with
postsurgery suffering is imminent. When this occurs, the pet may remain in
given the pet's condition.
In the home setting, there are usually more factors affecting the pet's posi-
tioning: confinement in a small space, on the master bed, outside on a hillside,
and so on. Families choosing home euthanasia appreciate the attending veteri-
should be made to keep the pet comfortable while still performing a technically
proficient euthanasia.
If restraint is needed beyond simple holding, a more fractious pet can be
immobilized using large blankets, squeeze cages, and so on. Muzzles and cat
can be offered to calm the dog or cat and keep the handler safe. lf none are
Exotics
Handlers will need to be well versed in exotic handling techniques before
attempting euthanasia. For example, some exotics like ferrets are difficult to
Positioning and Restraint   47
Handling rabbits properly will decrease their stress level and keep them safer.
Protecting their back from injury is essential. Rabbits have powerful hind legs
that can kick out and cause injury to themselves or the handler. To prevent
this, it is helpful to wrap their body firmly with a towel, and then pick them up,
supporting their hind end and cradling their body against the handler's body.
Unless the rabbit is quite debilitated, some form of sedation is preferred prior
also be hooded to prevent stress.
For guinea pigs, chinchillas, rats, and other pocket pets, they generally do
not respond well to handling. Quite commonly, they are very debilitated upon
presentation, and when handled, can become quite agitated. The handler can
scruff the rodents by placing a hand over the dorsal aspect of the neck and
picking up a large handful of skin. Hamsters' eyes tend to become exopthalmic
when too much force is applied to their bodies and can even dislodge from the
the subject.
Horses
The actual process of euthanizing a horse, donkey,or mule needs to be or-
as the top two priorities. If this is an emergency euthanasia in a public setting.
and traffic control to keep people safe.
The equine patient needs to be moved away from other animals, as they
may present a distraction.Distractions often translate into safety issues. The
ians, including this author, discourage this. The client is often dealing with
technician restrain the animal for practical reasons and for the legal liability
as a veterinarian.
experienced horse handler at risk. In some cases, especially when using a
risk for those involved.
Physical restraints such as stocks are rarely used due to the difficulty of
extricating the body afterward. Any confined space, including stalls or horse
trailers, increases the risk for the people involved because the avenues for
48VeterinaryEuthanasiaTechniques
   a  o  s l  a
Livestock
in both standing and recumbent animals. For large livestock, one should also
consider the location of the animal at the time of euthanasia and how that
a way of opening the side to remove the carcass.
Adequate restraint is essential for a safe and efficient euthanasia in live
stock. This may come in the form of chemical restraint, physical restraint, or
straint to minimize stress, discomfort, or pain associated with the procedure.
In practical terms, this implies sufficient restraint to either perform a compe
or captive bolt stun. The safety of the operator, handlers, and bystanders is
also a concern and is optimized with proper restraint of the patient.
Except for very docile or obtunded animals, some degree of physical re
straint is helpful and often required to stabilize the head and neck and provide
safety. For manageable adult cattle and calves, a halter may be all that is
secured to a stable post or other sturdy object, or in some instances held by
an assistant. when an assistant holds the halter, they should be positioned to
to minimize risk of injury from the projectile or the animal. Sometimes, using
and improve accuracy of the shot. In recumbent cattle, a single halter can be
placed, pulling the head to the side and securing the lead around the rear leg
and tied at the level of the stifle to provide stabilization of the head and neck.
This will provide good restraint allowing for either direct venipuncture and
-   o  a u    a a i
ticularly beef cattle. These animals may need to be restrained in an alleyway
If euthanizing an animal in a head chute, one must first consider how the
animal will be removed from the chute. This generally requires a chute that
has the ability to open or remove at least one side of the chute. In this case,
Otherwise, when the animal becomes recumbent, it can put so much pressure
on the sides of the chute that the chute side cannot be released and opened
(Figure3.3).
Positioning and Restraint  49
Figure 3.3 A chute with the side open prior to euthanasia. The head is
restrained with a halter and would allow for safe euthanasia by intravenous
injection, gunshot, or captive bolt stunning. The head is pulled slightly to the
animal's left so that the animal will fall to the right side.
as in cattle except that the animals are smaller and more easily restrained.
As with cattle, the goal is to position the animal so that the head and neck
are accessible for either intravenous (IV) injection or euthanasia by physical
active animals, gentle physical restraint is often sufficient. A halter can also be
euthanasia. Access to the jugular veins for IV injection can be obtained with
from the side of the injection.Alternatively,the animal can be positioned in
lateral recumbency.
due to the difficulty of proper restraint and positioning. In general, pigs do
not accept physical restraint. In severely debilitated or obtunded animals, this
may not be an issue. However, many times, the pigs are sufficiently active
aoe molle aew sui bus e ui papuadsns bid aui uieisau ol si sbid sallews
to the cephalic vein for IV injection. However, because of the challenges with
may be best performed following heavy sedation or anesthesia to allow for
50Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
a calm venipuncture or intracardiac injection. Otherwise, gunshot or captive
bolt methods should be utilized
Like the other livestock species, euthanasia of llamas and alpacas requires
adequate restraint that allows access to the head and jugular vein. Many llamas
and lead rope. Unmanageable animals may need further restraint with either
Sometimes, just catching the llama or alpaca can be a challenge, particularly
to be haltered. As with the other species, many of the animals that require
euthanasia are debilitated and may not have the strength to object to basic
physical restraint.
Sedation may be appropriate in some cases, particularly when simple phys-
ical restraint is not sufficient, or if the owner specifically requests it. The
shot or captive bolt stun. The same sedatives that are used in ruminants can
sasop laubly auinbal ol pual Aaul ybnoulle 'seoedje pue sewell ui pasn ag ose
Chapter 4
Pre-euthanasia Sedation
and Anesthesia
M hen we think about assisting an animal with euthanasia, the terms "peace-
 ful" and "painfree" hopefully come to mind. There are many factors to
quick? The whole premise behind euthanasia is to help the animal die in as
comfortable a manner as possible, and pre-euthanasia sedation or anesthesia
is a great way to facilitate that. This being said, it must still be recognized that
euthanasia guidelines draft review 2011).
There is a distinct difference between simple sedation and anesthesia; how-
sciousness is required for some conditionally acceptable or adjunctive meth-
agent to induce unconsciousness and prevent pain perception. Sedation, on
the other hand, indicates that while the animal may be relaxed and free of mild
to moderate pain, it is revivable and may become distressed if enough painful
stimuli is applied.
 n  s   an       
to the attending veterinarian to modify the protocol as needed. Understanding
the drug's mode of action, common side effects, etc., will help ensure that the
animal remains comfortable and stable throughout the procedure.
There will be times when administering an anesthetic agent to a pet is more
an intraperitoneal (IP) injection of a barbiturate would be just as effective. The
use for and against pre-euthanasia sedation/anesthesia must be based on the
Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques: A Practical Guide, First Edition. Kathleen A. Cooney.
Jolynn R. Chappell, Robert J. Callan and Bruce A. Connally.
 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
51
52Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
Box 4.1 Reasons for and against pre-euthanasia
sedation or anesthesia in domestic animals
Pros
Minimizes distress for the animal
Eliminates pre-death pain from the animal's disease
Lessens danger to the handlers
Increases technique options
Eliminates need for restraint during euthanasia
Eliminates need for second person to assist
May lessen perimortem side effects, for example, agonal breathing
Cons
More expensive
Unpredictable transition into sedation with critical patients
Potential for side effects, for example, vomiting, dyspnea
pet being euthanized, the skill of the handler,and the method of euthanasia
itself.
Anesthesia
There are varying levels of anesthesia, but the AVMA is generally referring
to surgical-depth anesthesia. The guidelines are written this way in direct
response to scientific study indicating that pain will be felt by a particular
method unless unconsciousness is achieved. General anesthesia will be re-
quired for those conditionally acceptable methods where pain and distress are
a probability in a conscious animal, such as intracardiac (IC) injections with a
administration.
Following are the four stages of anesthesia (Rhoades 2o02):
(2) Involuntary excifemenf: This is considered an unpredictable time. If held
too long in this stage, the pet may be disorientated, vocalize, bite, leg
paddle, and move sporadically.
unconscious, and in its deepest phase, and has no response to internal or
external stimuli. Vital functions remain intact and are considered easily
reversible.
Pre-euthanasia Sedation and Anesthesia53
Respiratory and cardiac arrest are the end results of fatal medullary
paralysis.1
The administrationofanestheticagents shouldmovethe animalgently
through the first three stages. Many can be given orally. by injection, or
throughinhalation and canbe donein a one-ortwo-stepprotocol.when
the method of euthanasia is injection through an intravenous (lV) catheter
with an agent like pentobarbital, some veterinarians will perform a one-step
tal injection. This is similar to an anesthetic inhalant being offered before
euthanasia. Some veterinarians will administer a pre-euthanasia sedative to
effect, and then follow it with a true anesthetic agent just before proceed-
ing with euthanasia. This is considered a two-step pre-euthanasia anesthesia
protocol. This protocol helps ensure that the animal will not experience any
physical change between sedation and death.
agent, the animal should move smoothly through all four stages of anesthesia
They can be,and were commonly used before,as anesthetic drugs them-
selves. Other anesthetic injectable agents such as propofol can also be used
tofacilitateeuthanasiabywayofanestheticoverdose.
Sedation
Sedation is a term used to describe a light state of anesthesia wherein the
stimulation (Tranquili and Thurmon 2007). This means that the pet's ability
to react normally to its environment is altered, but it generally does not go
to the point of unconsciousness with absolutely zero ability to respond to
stimuli such as pain,noise,or light.Sedation can be achieved by administering
sedative drugs at therapeutic doses or by administering true anesthetic drugs
below levels required for surgical anesthesia.
Thedecisionofwhether ornottosedate ananimalprior toeuthanasia is
a very personal choice and is reflected by an individual's previous training,
experience, and the circumstances of the specific euthanasia. Sedation of the
animal may be requested by the client or the person performing the euthana
sia maydeterminethatsedationoftheanimalwouldmaketheprocedure
less aversive to onlookers (Figure 4.1).Some individuals feel that sedation
decreases the risk of excitatory or violent responses by the animal during on
Some literature create a Stage 5 for cardiac death.
54   Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
Figure 4.1 Drawing sedative from a bottle.
following euthanasia such as vocalization or seizures. Alternatively, sedation
or provide sufficient restraint for an accurate gunshot or captive bolt stun.
Sedation may also make the procedure safer for the operator, handlers, or
bystanders.
argument is that sedation may decrease cardiac output and thus lengthen
the time for adequate distribution of the drug. This may result in a period of
adequate by themselves for relieving stress and anxiety and many have anal-
gesic properties as well. It is only in cases where the technique requires true
Pre-euthanasia Sedation and Anesthesia55
anesthesia or the pet refuses to relax with a simple sedative, for example, an
α2-agonist, will a stronger drug be needed.
euthanasia sedation and anesthesia are helpful on many levels. More and
cat they euthanize even when the method of euthanasia is acceptable without
pets are hurting and anesthesia takes that hurt away. It is their time to be as
relaxed as possible.
Second, they provide the family some time for physical contact. when an
to be held and now, when the pet is sleeping, they can do it without resistance.
restrain the pet for catheter placement, etc. In the instances where physi-
cal methods of euthanasia are used, for example, gunshot, the incidence of
straint, makes for easier body positioning, and negates the use of more thar
one person to be present.
Drugs and routes of administration
Common sedatives administered include α2-agonists, phenothiazines, benzo
ditive effects such as sedation plus analgesia. Dissociative anesthetics such
as ketamine and the combination product Telazol? can be used as sedatives,
butwilllead to completeunconsciousnesswhengiven atsurgical anesthetic
species considerations; see Box 4.2 for a comprehensive list of options.
As mentioned before, many of the pre-euthanasia anesthetic drugs can be
combined together for their calming additive effects. The volume administered
is based on theindividual drug's dosing properties and the weight of the animal
and injected intramuscularly (IM) or subcutaneously (SQ). Even those drugs
that are labeled for only IM use can be given more gently via the SQ route to
the same ultimate effect (Cooney 2011). Sedatives and anesthetics can also be
Inhalants are also used to induce unconsciousness in smaller animals. If they
the use of themwas not originallyintended forpre-euthanasia anesthesia,but
of pre-euthanasia anesthesia to be more stressing than the euthanasia itself.
56Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
Assessing unconsciousness and sedation
How deeply the animal goes into sedation or general anesthesia depends on
the type and volume of drugs used.
When the euthanasia method requires unconsciousness, a true anesthetic
Aue ui puodsau jou saop lewiue aul aaiuenene oi palaisiuiwpe ag isnw juabe
way. Unconsciousness is a state of unawareness or insensibility where the
individual is unable to consciously perceive and respond to normal stimuli,
including pain.
The unconscious animal is unable to stand and lies recumbent, lacking the
ocular reflexes including the pupillary light reflex. The lack of normal ocular
reflexes indicates disruption of brainstem function and also suggests loss of
cerebral cortical function. The animal will lack conscious sensation to pain and
thus will not demonstrate a response to painful stimuli such as a needle prick
or pinching the ear or extremities. This must be differentiated from simple
peripheral reflexes that may still be intact. All of these signs can be quickly
assessed during the euthanasia procedure.
Drugs are not required to achieve unconsciousness, but they are used to fa
cilitate it in most instances regarding the euthanasia of client-owned animals.
Effective and humane physical methods of inducing unconsciousness, such
as penetrating and nonpenetrating captive bolts and electrical stunners often
Box 4.2
Signs of unconsciousness
· Recumbency with a lack of a righting reflex
·Absence of a corneal reflex
· Absence of a palpebral reflex
· Loss of spontaneous eye blink
· Absence of eye movement tracking an object
· Fixed and dilated pupils
· Absence of normal rhythmic breathing
· Absence of a pain response
Signs of Regaining Consciousness
·Return of coordinated breathing
· Return of corneal or palpebral reflex
● Constricted pupils or return of a pupillary light reflex
· Attempt to raise the head
· Return of a righting reflex
·Return of ocular movement and a blink
·Vocalization
●Response to painful stimulation such as a needle stick
Pre-euthanasia Sedation and Anesthesia57
used with livestock and some laboratory animals, render the animal rapidly
a secondary method such as pithing, administration of KCl, exsanguination,
and so on.
Ifsedation is all that is desired before proceeding with a particularmethod,
erinarian to proceed. Small animals should be calmly lying down with minimal
their surroundings.when little to noresponse is observed,the veterinarian
should feel comfortable proceeding.
Specific-species considerations
Dogs and cats
tive and analgesic effects. They can be given SQ, IM, or Iv. SQ injections are
commonlygivenbetweentheshoulderblades or undertheskininthelower
back or rump area. IM injections are typically given in the epaxial muscles
c2-agonists,whilephenothiazines suchas acepromazinemaylower cardiac
and pharmacodynamics of their drugs of choice. Note: Common drug doses
for dogs and cats can be found in the author's book In-home Pet Euthanasia
Techniques (Cooney 2011) or on bottle labels.
Common injectable anesthetics for dogs and cats include propofol and
dissociative anesthetics like ketamine, or the combination product Telazol?.
followedshortlyafterwithaninjectable euthanasiasolutionsuch aspento-
barbital. As mentioned before, this is often part of a two-step pre-euthanasia
protocol, but may be used alone without a sedative first. Ketamine and
Telazol? can be administered SQ, IM, or IV, usually in conjunction with
another sedative drug, and should produce reliable anesthesia within 5-10
effectively in dogs and cats via this route for the purpose of pre-euthanasia
     u    t  
Sedatives andanesthetics shouldbe administered slowly withsmallgauge
needles to minimize pain on injection.
58   Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
Figure 4.2Subcutaneous injection of an anesthetic in a small dog.
Common inhalant anesthetics, like isoflurane, halothane, and sevoflurane,
can be administered to small dogs, cats, and newborn puppies and kittens.
They may be placed within chambers or made to breathe in using facemasks.
Running fingers and hands gently along the pet's body can easily assess
the depth of sedation and anesthesia. Other methods include toe pinching,
tickling in between the toe pads, or touching the caudal thigh to check for tail
is touched during sedation, but they should remain unresponsive in deep
anesthesia. Some will urinate and defecate in direct response to the level of
relaxation and the drugs used.
Exotics
Ferrets
If the ferret is too active and alert for gas anesthesia, an injectable sedative
and usually does not sting. For an IM injection, the ferret can be scruffed
by gently gripping a fold of skin over the dorsal neck, which will normally
cause the ferret to relax like a cat. The most accessible muscle to use is the
thigh muscle. The leg can be firmly held while the needle is inserted. This
must be done quickly in order to minimize stress for the ferret and prevent
injury to the handler, as the ferret may try to bite. The aforementioned drug
Pre-euthanasia Sedation and Anesthesia   59
combination may be used SQ though it can take up to 20-25 minutes to take
affect. SQ injections may be easier to administer,although the volume of
drug needs to be much higher for dexmedetomidine to take effect. Whatever
route is chosen, being quick with the injection and confident with the handling
of the ferret is important.
by volume mix given IM at a dose of 0.13 mL per1100-g ferret (Rhoades 2002)
or Telazol@ 0.15 mL combined with acepromazine 0.05 mL given SQ. These
drugs may sting when given IM or SQ causing a reaction in front of the owner.
drugs are generally more rapid to affect given SQ than the dexmedetomidine,
usually reaching full sedation within 5-10 minutes.
Rabbits
Rabbits tend to take longer than otherexotics to relax into unconsciousness on
heavy sedation. Sedative drugs can be administered IM using the lumbar mus
cles or quadriceps muscles, or SQ within the shoulder blade region. Injectable
sedation drugs include dexmedetomidine and butorphanol at 0.1 mL of each
given IM. This produces sedation within 5-10 minutes. Telazol@ 0.3-0.4 mL
combined with acepromazine 0.1 mL given SQ produces full anesthesia within
5 minutes. Once the rabbit is fully unconscious, the barbiturate solution can
be administered IV, IP, IC, or intraorgan.
Guinea pigs, chinchillas, rats, hamsters, gerbils, mice,
and sugar gliders
In many cases, a cotton ball soaked with a liquid gas anesthestic placed in a
chamber or anesthesia mask is the quickest, fastest, and least stressful way
to anesthetize some of these very small animals. This can then be followed up
be stressful and challenging, especially in the sugar gliders and mice. This
sedation would then be followed with an IP or intrahepatic injection of the
euthanasiadrug.
Reptiles
If the reptile is very cold, due to its slow metabolism, it should be warmed
drug. This can be done using a heating pad on the lowest setting and wrapping
the animal with the heating pad and a towel to secure it. Warming can also
the animal. A snake can be placed in a plastic tube and have a warm towel
or heating pad placed around the tube to warm it. It may take up to 2o-45
minutes to warm the animal to at least room temperature,depending on
how debilitated it is. During this time, it is helpful to place a doplar unit in
60Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
Figure 4.3  Intramuscular (IM) injection into the lumbar muscle of an iguana.
(Mader 1996). A reminder here that reptiles do not accept inhalant agents
to handle, or potentially dangerous reptiles, and for IC injections. These drugs
include Telazol? at 25 mg/kg IM and ketamine at 100-200 mg/kg IM. Anes
anesthesia is generally not recommended.
limb using the biceps or triceps muscles (Figures 4.7).
Birds
bined with nalbuphine, butorphanol, or ketamine. Any of these drugs will give
given either IV, IC, or directly into the liver; see Table 4.1 for doses.
Medetomidine: Dose varies between species of birds, 200-300 mg/kg, with
ketamine at dose of 5-10 mg/kg IM or Iv.
Ketamine: Dose range depends on species of birds, between 10 and 75 mg/kg
IM or IV, with diazepam at 0.5-2.5 mg/kg.
Pre-euthanasia Sedation and Anesthesia    61
Figure 4.4 Biceps muscle injection.
Figure 4.5 Intramuscular (IM) injection into the thigh muscle group.
62Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
Figure 4.6  Intramuscular (IM) injection into the epaxial muscle.
Figure 4.7 Intramuscular (IM) injection into the muscle of the forelimb of a
tortoise.
Table 4.1
 Reasons for and against pre-euthanasia sedation or anesthesia in domestic animals (generalized).
Method of anesthesia/
Rodents!
euthanasia
Ferrets
Rabbits
guinea pigs
Reptiles
Amphibian
Avian <150 gAvian >150 g Fish
Inhalant anesthesia: CO2
Flow rate:
Flow rate:
To effect
20%
20%
vol/min
vol/min
Inhalant anesthesia: soaked
To effect
To effect
To effect
Not
To effect
To effect
 For sedation
cotton ball
effective
Butorphenol/
0.1 mL/0.1
0.3-0.4 mL
0.1-0.2 mL
dexmetomadine
mL, IM
of each, IM
of each, IM
Ketamine/dexmetomadine
5-10 mg/kg,
200-300
mg/kg, IV, IM
Telazol
25 mg/kg,
0.11 mL/kg,
0.11 mL/kg,
IM
IM
IM
 Telazol/acepromazine
0.15
0.3-0.4
mL/0.05
mL/0.1 mL,
mL, SQ
SQ
Ketamine
100-200
0.2-0.4 mL
0.3 mg/g,IM
mg/kg, IM 
(20-40 mg),
IM
Xylazine (20 mg/mL)/
0.13
0.5 mL/10#,
0.5 mL/10#,
0.11 mL/kg,
0.11 mL/kg,
ketamine (100 mg/mL), 1:5
mL/1100 g
IM
IM 
IM
IM
mixture
ferret, IM 
Barbiturate overdose (3x
120 mg/kg,
100 mg/kg,
150 mg/kg,
100 or >100
100 or >100
0.22 mL/kg,
0.22 mL/kg,
100
anesthetic dose)
IV, IP
IV; 150
IV, IP
mg/kg, IV,
mg/kg, IV,
IV, IP
IV, IP
mg/kg,
mg/kg, IP
IP
ICo
IP, IV
(continued)
Table 4.1  (continued)
Method of anesthesia/
Rodents/
euthanasia
Ferrets
Rabbits
guinea pigs
Reptiles
Amphibian
Avian <150 g Avian >150 g Fish
Commercial euthanasia
0.22 mL/kg,
0.22 mL/kg,
0.22 mL/kg,
200 mg/kg,
0.22 mL/kg,
0.22 mL/kg,
0.22 mL/kg,
100
solution
IV, IP
IV, IP
IV, IP
IV, IP
IV, ICo, IC
IV, IP
IV, IP
mg/kg,
IP, IV
Benzocain hydrochloride,
Soak to
 250 mg/l water bath
effect
Tricane methane
Soak to
sulphonate MS-222@, 3 g/L
effect
KCI, Iv or IC, in
75-150
75-150
 anesthetized animal
mg/kg KCl
mg/kg
KCI
Unacceptable methods
Stunning in an awake
animal
Electrocution in an awake
animal
Drowning in an awake
animal
Freezing in an awake
animal
Kitchen microwave oven
Cervical dislocation,
decapitation >500 g
animal
Exsanguination in an
awake animal
CO2 using dry ice: need
CO2 chamber
IM, intramuscular; IP, intraperitoneal; IV, intravenous; SQ, subcutaneous; ICo, Intracoelomic.
Pre-euthanasia Sedation and Anesthesia65
Length of time for induction of sedation and anesthesia varies with route of
administration, drugs used, and the species being sedated. In some birds, the
injectable sedatives will be enough to cause death, especially if the doses
quate unconsciousness has been achieved, the barbiturate drug can then be
administered. This can be given IV or intrahepatic.
are quite easy for the clinician less skilled in IV administration. IM injections
are given into the pectoral muscles that cover the keel bone. These muscles
load aue pue amo e ui paddeim sl phig aui pasn ag ueo saisnu ybiun
either side. Be sure to locate the soft crop area proximal to the point of the
keel bone and be sure not to inject in that region for the absorption of drug
will be much slower. Once the pectoral muscle is located, a 0.5-1-in., 27-22-
gauge needle (depending on the size of the bird) is inserted perpendiculan
to the skin. The needle can be inserted to the hub, if it is inserted too deep,
bonewillbeencountered andtheneedleshouldbewithdrawnslightlybefore
injecting. For the larger birds that are much more stressed when picked up,
the pectoral muscles can be located with the bird standing, taking care that
Figure 4.8  The pectoral muscles can be located on either side of the keel
bone.
66Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
these large birds and much safer for personnel.
Horses
A local anesthetic or mild sedative may facilitate the placing of an IV catheter
or allow for easier direct venipuncture. Sedation may be used to lower the
useful for restraint during euthanasia, but veterinarians must acknowledge
that there may be adepressanteffect from sedation on the circulatory system,
which may increase the time required for the animal to lose consciousness.
It is good to warn the client that there may also be an increased amount
of muscular activity and agonal gasping when euthanizing a sedated horse.
severe pain as from colic.
practically administered to wild or untrained horses in many cases. The in-
for some owners. Also, many believe that euthanasia is delayed by the cardio-
vascular depression of most sedatives.
If sedation is chosen, the α2-agonist group of sedatives is most commonly
Auw ul 'Al by/w tl oi by/w t'o wo abues Aew asop au1 'spinba isow
cases, the doses in the lower end of the spectrum will effect adequate seda-
tion without the ataxia often seen with the higher doses. Detomidine is a much
more profound sedative, but is significantly more expensive. Label dosage is
20 or 40 mcg/kg IV. As with xylazine, the higher doses may produce ataxia.
impossible (Figure 4.9). with IM administration, sedation is more variable and
the onset will be delayed. Other less commonly used sedatives such as ace-
promazine or romifidine may be used at labeled dosages. Sedation in donkeys
and mules does not last as long as horses, so larger doses may be required.
Livestock
and improve safety for the veterinarian, owner, and other bystanders. In some
cases of pet livestock, the owner may request sedation prior to euthanasia. In
many cases, only mild sedation is needed to allow for successful venipuncture.
recumbent for the procedure in order to provide adequate restraint and safety.
α2-agonists, such as xylazine, are probably the most common sedative used
low doses in ruminants and camelids. Acepromazine can also be used but
Pre-euthanasia Sedation and Anesthesia  67
Figure 4.9  Intramuscular injection of a sedative in the neck of a horse.
au pue uoiielposea ul lnsau llm pue eisableue jeuolppe apiaoid pou lm
potension. Benzodiazepines such as diazepam or midazolam are also effective
sedatives in ruminant and camelid species.Opioids such as morphine or butor-
dation of swine is probably the most unpredictable and may require high doses
to obtain the desired effect. Combinations of sedatives are often used to pro
In rare circumstances, general anesthesia may be preferred to sedation
prior to euthanasia of livestock. In some cases, this is simply because the
beobtained with sedation alone.Injectable anestheticssuch asketamine and
Telazol are effective and commonly used in ruminants, camelids, and swine.
Inhalation anesthetics such as isoflurane are effective in livestock as well.
tions. Clients should be forewarned of this when using these drugs.
Cattle
In many instances, it may not be possible to safely restrain the animal sim
is not available. In these cases, immobilization with sedation is required. A
variety of drugs and drug combinations can be used for this, some of which
68Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
Table 4.2
Some suggested drugs and drug combinations for providing standing or
recumbent sedation prior to euthanasia in cattle.
Drug or drug
combination
Dosage and route
Comments
Xylazine
0.01-0.05 mg/kg, IV
Standing sedation. Dosage
0.01-0.1 mg/kg, IM
dependent on the excitability
of the animal.
0.1-0.2 mg/kg, IV or IM
Results in recumbency in most
cattle. Higher doses can be
used in anxious animals to
assure recumbency prior to
euthanasia.
Detomidine
0.002-0.02 mg/kg, IV
 Standing sedation. Dosage
or IM
dependent on the excitability
of the animal.
Acepromazine
0.05-0.1 mg/kg,
Will provide sedation but no
IV or IM
analgesia. Marked hypotension
may prolong euthanasia by
injectable barbiturates.
Standing
Combine for SQ or IM
Provides effective standing
Ket-Stun
injection (1:2:4 ratio)
sedation and chemical
Butorphanol
0.01-0.025 mg/kg
restraint for most cattle.
Xylazine
0.02-0.05 mg/kg
Anxious cattle may need a
Ketamine
0.04-0.10 mg/kg
higher dose.Increasing
xylazine increases the
likelihood of recumbency.
Recumbent
Combine for SQ or IM
Routinely provides sedation and
Ket-Stun
injection.
recumbency in most cattle.
Butorphanol
0.025 mg/kg
Onset in 3-10 min.
Xylazine
0.05 mg/kg
Ketamine
0.1 mg/kg
Xylazine-ketamine
Xylazine 0.05 mg/kg, IV
Produces rapid anesthesia that
combination
Ketamine 4.5 mg/kg, IV
will last for 15-20 min.
TKX-ruminant
Reconstitute a 500 mg
Recumbency in 5-10 min. The
Telazol
vial of Telazol with
low volume makes this
Ketamine
250 mg (2.5 mL)
combination ideal for
Xylazine
ketamine and 100 mg
immobilizing intractable
(1 mL) xylazine.
ruminants. It may be
Administer at 1-1.5
administered by syringe, with
mL/110 kg, IM
a pole syringe, or dart gun if
needed. Relatively expensive.
IM, intramuscular; IV, intravenous; SQ, subcutaneous.
Pre-euthanasia Sedation and Anesthesia69
α2-adrenergic agonist sedative that could be used for sedation and restraint.
However, detomidine is more expensive and results in greater cardiorespira
tory depression thatmay result in prolonged response to lethal injection with
barbiturates. Acepromazine is also an effective sedative in cattle but does
not provide any significant analgesia. In addition, the hypotension resulting
from inhibition of catecholamine-mediated vascular tone may result in pro-
and ketamine (Ket-Stun protocols) and Telazo|@, ketamine, and xylazine (TKX
Such combinations can provide profound sedation and analgesia.
In some instances, the animal may not be safely approached in order to
administer sedation directly. Examples would be some range beef cattle, rodeo
cattle, and bison. In these situations, the animals are generally very excitable
and may override simple sedation with just xylazine. A pole syringe or dart
animals. Otherwise, euthanasia by gunshot at longer range with a hunting rifle
might be most appropriate.
Sheep and goats
Sedation is rarely necessary in euthanasia of sheep and goats except in the
most excitable animals such as wild sheep and goats. Similar sedatives as used
in cattle can be used in sheep and goats with similar considerations. A list of
Pigs
tions of sedatives and anesthetics seem to provide more consistent results.
Common injectable sedatives and anesthetics used in swine are presented in
Table 4.4. IV injection can be challenging in pigs.Common sites include the
ear vein, the anterior vena cava, brachiocephalic vein, jugular vein, coccygeal
vein, cephalic vein, or lateral saphenous vein.
poorly visible ear veins for venipuncture. In addition, the family may want to be
present and will expect the procedure to be performed with minimal distress
induce general anesthesia followed by venipuncture or IC injection of pento
barbital euthanasia solution or a saturated KCl solution. General anesthesia
70Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
Table 4.3 Some suggested drugs and drug combinations for providing standing or
recumbent sedation prior to euthanasia in small ruminants.
Drug or drug
combination
Dosage and route
Comments
Xylazine
0.01-0.05 mg/kg, IV
Standing sedation. Dosage
0.01-0.1 mg/kg, IM
dependent on the excitability
of the animal.
0.1-0.2 mg/kg, IV or IM
Results in recumbency in most
cattle. Higher doses can be
used in anxious animals to
assure recumbency prior to
euthanasia.
Detomidine
0.002-0.02 mg/kg, IV
Standing sedation. Dosage
or IM
dependent on the excitability
of the animal.
Acepromazine
0.05-0.1 mg/kg,
Will provide sedation but no
IV or IM
analgesia. Marked hypotension
may prolong euthanasia by
injectable barbiturates.
Diazepam or
0.2-0.4 mg/kg, IV
Provides moderate sedation in
midazolam
0.3-0.5 mg/kg, IM
most sheep and goats.
Sheep
Combine for SQ or IM
Provides conscious sedation
Ket-Stun
injection
while significantly limiting
Butorphanol
0.025 mg/kg
movement in the animal. The
Xylazine
0.05 mg/kg
animal will often become
Ketamine
1.0 mg/kg
recumbent.
Small-ruminant
Combine ketamine (100
Provides recumbency and good
cocktail
mg/mL), xylazine
anesthesia in 5-10 min in most
(100 mg/mL), and
sheep and goats.
butorphanol (10 mg/
mL) at a 10:1:1 ratio.
Administer at 1
mL/80-1001b BW IM.
If giving IV, start with
2/3 dose.
Xylazine-ketamine
Xylazine 0.05 mg/kg, IV
Produces rapid anesthesia that
combination
Ketamine 4.5 mg/kg, IV
will last for 15-20 min.
TKX-ruminant
Reconstitute a500 mg
Recumbency in 5-10 min. The
Telazol
vial of Telazol with
low volume makes this
Ketamine
250 mg (2.5 mL)
combination ideal for
Xylazine
ketamine and 100 mg
immobilizing intractable
(1 mL) xylazine.
ruminants. It may be
Administer at 1-1.5
administered by syringe, with
mL/110 kg, IM
a pole syringe, or dart gun if
needed. Relatively expensive.
IM, intrarmuscular; IV, intravenous; SQ, subcutaneous; BW, body weight.
Pre-euthanasia Sedation and Anesthesia
71
Table 4.4 Some suggested drugs and drug combinations for providing sedation or
anesthesia prior toeuthanasia in pigs.
Drug or drug
combination
Dosage and route
Comments
Acepromazine
0.5-5 mg/kg, IM
Will provide sedation but no
analgesia. Marked
hypotension may prolong
euthanasia by injectable
barbiturates.
Diazepam or
0.2-1 mg/kg, IM
Provides moderate sedation
midazolam
and muscle relaxation in
most pigs.
Xylazine
0.5-3.0 mg/kg, IM
Sedation, but unreliable when
used alone.
Diazepam/midazolam
0.2-0.5 mg/kg, IM
This IM combination will
plus butorphe-
0.2-0.5 mg/kg, IM
generally provide smooth
nol/morphine
sedation. Good prior to
masking with isoflurane.
Detomidine
20-60 μg/kg, IM
This drug combination
Midazolam
0.3 mg/kg, IM
provides deep sedation.
Butorphanol
0.3 mg/kg, IM
Swine Telazol cocktail
Suspenda500mg vial
Smooth anesthesia.Apnea
of Telazol with 2.5
may occur.
mL ketamine (100
mg/mL) and 2.5 mL
xylazine (100
mg/mL).
Administer at 1 mL/35
kg, IM
Midazolam
5 mg/kg, IM
This combination induces
Telazol
4 mg/kg, IM
anesthesia in most pigs.
IM, intrarmuscular.
ear in the neck. Alternatively, many pigs accept being masked with isoflurane.
This may be done with or without sedation administered by IM injection. Intra
muscular or subcutaneous injections are most commonly administered in the
neck just caudal to the ear in pigs.
Llamas and alpacas
Because the jugular vein can be difficult to hit in llamas and alpacas, and
because the carotid artery is positioned very close to the jugular vein, initial
sedatives will result in rapid excitement and possibly seizure activity. If giving
72
VeterinaryEuthanasiaTechniques
Table 4.5 Some suggested drugs and drug combinations for providing standing or
recumbent sedation prior to euthanasia in llamas and alpacas.
Drug or drug
combination
Dosage and route
Comments
Xylazine
0.05-0.1 mg/kg, IV
Standing or recumbent sedation.
0.1-0.4 mg/kg, IM or
Dosage dependent on the
SQ
excitability of the animal.
Butorphanol
0.05-0.2 mg/kg, IV or
Produces sedation, and at the
IM or SQ
higher doses may produce
recumbency.
Diazepam or
0.2-0.4 mg/kg, IV
Provides moderate sedation in
midazolam
0.3-0.5 mg/kg, IM or
most sheep and goats.
SQ
Camelid
Combine for SQ or IM
Provides conscious sedation.
Ket-Stun
injection (1:2:4 ratio)
Animal may stay standing or
Butorphanol
0.05-0.1 mg/kg
become recumbent.
Xylazine
0.1-0.2 mg/kg
Ketamine
0.2-0.4 mg/kg
Small-ruminant
Combine ketamine
This same mixture that is used in
cocktail
(100 mg/mL),
small ruminants is very
xylazine (100
effective in llamas and alpacas
mg/mL),and
as well, just at a higher dosage.
butorphanol (10
Provides recumbency and
mg/mL) at a 10:1:1
good anesthesia in 5-10 min in
ratio.
most llamas and alpacas.
Administer at 1 mL/50
Ib Bw in llamas and 1
mL/40 Ib BW in
alpacas IM. If giving
IV, start with 2/3
dose.
Diazepam-ketamine
Diazepam 0.1-0.2
Produces rapid anesthesia that
combination
mg/kg, IV
will last for 15-20 min.
Ketamine 3 mg/kg, IV
IM, intrarmuscular; IV, intravenous; SQ, subcutaneous; BW, body weight.
the initial sedation intravenously by the jugular vein, it is recommended to
initially give small portions of the dose slowly to check for an adverse response
before the bulk of the drug is administered. Sites for IM injections are the
triceps and the semimembranosus and semitendinosus muscles. SQ injections
can be given in the neck, just in front of the shoulder, over the triceps, or over
the caudal thigh (see Table 4.5).
Chapter 5
Euthanasia Techniques
eterinarians and staff are encouraged to have standard protocols in place
that clearly outline the methods used and reasons for them. All methods
of euthanasia have the potential to be poorly performed if personnel have
for proficiency and emotional fortitude and encouraged to gain further skills
through advanced training for the benefit of the animal and client. As previ-
ously mentioned in Chapter 3, understanding animal behavior and restraint
techniques will help facilitate a smoother procedure.
The following techniques are segmented into euthanasia by inhalant agents,
noninhalant pharmaceutical agents, and physical methods. Because owners
are commonly present during euthanasia (Adams et al. 2ooo), the manner of
these techniques, those administering the technique should take their time and
 be consistent. If one technique proves challenging, another can be attempted
idealmanner ofprotocol.Because it is impossible to guarantee that every
attempt will be perfect, there is a section on technical challenges following
eachmethod.This willprovideinsight onhow best to move forwardwith
euthanasia in difficult situations.
How death is achieved
Thereason thatthese techniques arelisted as methodsofeuthanasia is that
life, (2) hypoxia, and (3) physical disruption of brain activity. To be considered
euthanasia, as mentioned before, the animal must be allowed to die in the
most pain-free and stress-free manner possible. Circumstances will dictate
Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques: A Practical Guide, First Edition. Kathleen A. Cooney.
Jolynn R. Chappell, Robert J. Callan and Bruce A. Connally.
 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
73
74Veterinary EuthanasiaTechniques
Direct depression of neurons necessary for life
·Injectable agents: barbiturates, T-61?, Tributame@
methanesulfonate (MS-222)
● Anesthetic agents: both inhalants (e.g., halothane) and injectable agents
(e.g.,propofol)
of the cerebral cortex. A state of general anesthesia and unconsciousness can
be assessed by the lack of a corneal and palpebral reflex. The progression
from consciousness, to recumbency, to unconsciousness is generally smooth
and progressive with current euthanasia solutions when administered appro-
priately. Early stages of anesthesia may lead to an excitatory phase producing
dysphoria, mild to severe muscle movement, and vocalization. Respiration
tern along with an identifiable heartbeat. As death ensues, a few final deep
respiratory gasps may be observed in many species. Generally, respiratory
these agents. Because of the potential for recovery, care must be taken to
Hypoxia
· nerf gases: carbon dioxide (COz), nitrogen (N), argon (Ar), and carbon
monoxide (Co)
· Physical methods: exsanguination, decapitation, and potassium chloride
(KCI)
Mechanisms of action: Inhalant gases such as COz, N, and Ar displace oxygen
within the chamber or mask leading to direct hypoxia. Co works differently by
binding to red blood cells to form carboxyhemoglobin, thus blocking oxygen
cardiac muscle leading to death. KCl causes direct cardiac arrest, ultimately
ceasing blood flow.
Physical disruption ofbrain activity
· Concussive sfunning: blow to the head and electrical stunning
· Direct desfrucfion: gunshot, captive bolt, pithing, and freezing
· Depolarizafion of neurons: electrocution (not included in this book)
Mechanisms of action: Direct destruction of brain tissue leads to imme
diate death as long as the medullary centers within the brainstem are also
destroyed. Concussive stunning renders the animal unconscious when done
Euthanasia Techniques  75
properly. These methods must be followed by a secondary method ofeuthana
is a conditionally acceptable method in some animals, but will not be discussed
here due to its limited use in general practice.
Choosing an appropriate method
Themethodofeuthanasiachosenbytheveterinarianwilldependonmany
things such as the following:
· Comfort with the technique
· Supplies
· The presence of onlookers
aigeeae bnup eiseueuina jo punowe pue adai aul o
· The signalment and physical condition of the animal
· The need for a postmortem examination
Comfortwith the technique
When a veterinarian has experience with a particular technique, they know
pens. All veterinarians should know at least two other methods in case circum
stances indicate another technique is needed. Experience is gained with every
and staff should be educated on how to proceed in the animal's best interest.
ian, along with some client input if acceptable, must decide which technique
stand if another technique must be used instead, given the circumstances
Supplies
procedure as well as emergency equipment. For injectable methods, various
needle sizes, syringes, catheters, cleaning gauze, etc., need to be accessible at
all times. For physical methods, the equipment must be cleaned and ready for
bullets in stock to avoid the inability to carry out the procedure.
The presence of onlookers
Veterinarians know that as long as an animal is sedated or unconscious, most
free as possible, and timely. any of the approved methods are acceptable.
76VeterinaryEuthanasia Techniques
However, when family members and clients are watching, the least aversive
technique available should be chosen for that particular species. As long as it is
explained to the client how the procedure will take place and the approximate
time frame involved, most clients will be acceptable to the method chosen.
will help to decrease their stress. Sometimes, the clinician needs to prompt
these questions due to the client's state of mind, as they may not think of
injection, onlookers should be prepared that death may take a few minutes.
When venous access is impossible, due to poor pressures, overlying masses,
small size of the animal, etc., intracardiac (Ic) injections are commonly done.
In the case of large animals, gunshot is often the most practical method,
but the reaction of onlookers must be considered. Clients/family members
typically handle the technique very well when they understand why it is done
is important to lessen fears of the unknown.
The type and amount of euthanasia solution available
Domesticated animal euthanasia is most commonly carried out using barbitu-
rates or barbiturate-combination drugs. It is considered the most acceptable
method,except for thoseintended forfood use.All euthanasia solutionlabels
sia, barbiturates are approved for all injectable methods: IV, IC, IP, and in-
traorgan injections. If pre-euthanasia sedation or anesthesia is not available,
goes unconscious, thus leading to distress. Kcl must be given IV or IC un-
der complete anesthesia. Factors such as these should be understood before
euthanasia is performed in any situation.
The amount of solution available is also important. Euthanasia should never
be attempted without adequate amounts of solution ready for use. Each drug
has a standard dosing protocol for each technique that needs to be strictly
the animal, family, veterinary staff, and aftercare facility operators. Instances
If only a small amount ofeuthanasia solution is available, a technique should
be chosen that requires the smallest volume possible, such as an Iv injection.
IC injections can be tricky, especially if it is difficult to locate the heart and the
'uonlos ybnoua jou si aaul ll 'aoeds genaid so sbunl aui ui dn spua uoinos
Euthanasia Techniques    77
The signalment and physical condition of the animal
s a   e so a    
disease, species, and even breed, all contribute to how well a particular tech-
nique can be expected to work. Following are a few examples of differences
that veterinarians will encounter:
· Weighf: Obesity makes veins harder to see and feel, makes the chest wall
thicker, creates large amounts of intra-abdominal fat, and may lead to in-
creased dyspnea during sedation/anesthesia. If the patient is an overweight
aul 'linoitp ag ueo Aaupiy e buneiosl pue buipu asneag snoabeiueae
s e          
almost impossible and methods must be modified to protect staff and the
animal itself
smaller, more delicate veins than larger birds, and so on. For obvious rea-
sons, IC injections are rarely, if ever, attempted on large animals. Size will
anized with a .22 pistol versus a larger gun, etc.
· Age: Age can affect technique. Young neonates are difficult, if not impossi-
might be more commonly used in young animals. Young livestock may be
easier to euthanize with a physical method due to their softer craniums. An
etc., can affect blood pressure, circulation, perfusion, and drug uptake. If the
animal has extremely ow blood pressure, the veins might be inaccessible.
veins may be virtually impossible to find making it necessary to abandon an
IV injection altogether. If a small animal has ascites or hemoabdomen, an IP
injectionwillbedilutedintotheabdominalfluidlikelyleadingtoaprolonged
time of death,and so on.
euthanasia sedation or anesthesia. If the animal in question is having a
to breathe while waiting for an IP injection to stop the heart. The same is true
before using them.
78VeterinaryEuthanasiaTechniques
· Species: In most cases, dogs and cats are euthanized easily by IV, IC, or
perform in cats due to their freely movable left kidney resting outside the
retroperitoneal space (Cooney 2011). Swine can be difficult to control negat-
not recommended for use with reptiles and amphibians, and so on.
· Breeds: Different breeds vary in their physical and physiological attributes;
leg length, head shape, hair coat, predisposition to disease, etc., all play
For example, brachycephalic dogs and cats have a tendency to become
when outdoors or lying in front of the fire. It can be nearly impossible for
required, and so on.
The need for a postmortem examination
It is important to know whether or not an animal will be studied following
euthanasia. If so, techniques should be chosen that minimize organ and tis
m i! 'jeiiguegoiuad se yons uoiinios eiseueuina e buisn uaum 'abewep ans
enrolled in a renal study. an intrarenal injection should not be performed. If
a rabies test needs to be conducted, a physical method such as gunshot to
the head should be avoided and so on. Laboratory researchers have a vari-
ety of euthanasia techniques that general practitioners do not use in private
practice because of their need to preserve tissues. when possible, veterinar-
euthanasia is most appropriate.
Inhalant methods
Pros
Cons
· Cotton ball or gas machine
● Not ideal in the field
· Can induce death by itself
· Liquid form is corrosive
· No need for a needle injection
· Some gases are aversive
· Pre-euthanasia anesthesia too
· Risk of worker/onlooker inhalation
· Poor uptake with respiratory
disease
· Some species are resistant
· Gas cost and storage
· Chambers create a physical barrier
Euthanasia Techniques
79
Injectable methods
Pros
Cons
· Fast and effective
·Venous access typically necessary
· Standard dosing
· Blood pressure concerns
· +/- Sedation/anesthesia
· Requires mild to advanced skill
· Minimal side effects
· Most are controlled substances
· Unconsciousness required in some
techniques
· Tissue residues
Physical methods
Pros
Cons
· No tissue residue
· Requires specialized equipment
· Fast and effective
· Requires advanced training
·Relatively inexpensive to
· External bleeding is typical
perform
· Secondary methods often needed
· Greater risk to personnel
· Increased risk of compassion
fatigue
Species-specific techniques
Dogs and cats
      i a    
owned, live within shelters, or in laboratories, is by injection of a barbiturate
or barbiturate-combination solution. Typical inhalants are CO2, CO, and anes-
thetics such as halothane and isoflurane. N and Ar are other inhalants that are
more extreme situations, other methods will be called upon that may be con-
sidered normal for other species. Examples of this include gunshot, injected
anesthetics, or KCl injection.
Inhalant agents
euthanasia. They are more commonly used in the shelter settings or for mass
euthanasia. Whatever the situation, an ideal inhalant will be free of odor,
nonirritating, and lead to rapid unconsciousness regardless of the size of the
pet. The method in which it is delivered is also important. A device should be
Any gas that is inhaled must reach a certain concentration in the alveoli be
fore it can be effective (AVMA euthanasia guideline review 2011). Respiratory
80Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
cat may increase the time to unconsciousness and should be considered when
other methods such as barbiturate injection, inhalant agents are generally re
depopulation such as in shelters.
Ifan inhalant agent must be used, the delivery method should be appropriate
to the size and behavior of the animal. Dogs and cats less than 7 kg may
be masked or placed in a chamber to receive the agent. Any dogs or cats
larger than this would be unacceptable, according to the American Veterinary
is fractious, a chamber is preferred to avoid more handling than necessary.
should be euthanized individually whenever possible, unless the veterinarian
deems it appropriate to have two or more companions together for comfort.
When unconsciousness is achieved, the gas may be used to complete death or
another method may be performed.
Noninhalant pharmaceutical agents
Intravenous injection
In order to perform an IV euthanasia, the veterinarian or staff member will
need to find a vein that can be injected with euthanasia solution. The acces
saphenous veins in the back leg are generally easy to see and feel. Each has its
pros and cons. The administrator should pick the one that is most appropriate
under the circumstances (see Table 5.1).
of or in the grooves between neighboring muscles, tendons, and ligaments
Depending on the dog or cat, it may be necessary to first shave the intended
area of injection. Shaving close to the skin provides a better view of the vein,
thus minimizing multiple injection attempts (Rhoades 2002). If an awake pet
does not like the sound of clippers, their use should be avoided or a pre-
euthanasia sedative given to essen distress.
The vein will need to be occluded by either a tourniquet or an assistant
"holding off" the vein to build pressure distally. Occlusion of the vein should
be done proximal to the injection site and with enough pressure that the vein
enough to avoid added stress. A socialized pet responds well to soft touches
and supportive talking. If the vein cannot be easily seen or palpated, occlude
again, gently squeezing the leg to increase venous blood return.
The lower on the limb the vein is, the more"roly-poly" it becomes. In general,
the more proximal to the body, the more stable the vein becomes. This is due
to the surrounding muscle bodies, fascia, etc. when choosing your injection
site, consider skin diseases, masses, etc., that will make placement difficult.
When preparing to inject, either via direct venipuncture with a needle or
with catheter use, hold the vein in place to minimize lateral movement. The
Euthanasia Techniques    81
Table 5.1Common venous injection sites in dogs and cats.
Lateral saphenous vein
· Easy to locate
· Long length
· Away from the head where families like to gather
· Perfectly positioned when a pet is lying on its side
Cons
● Short legs make placement more difficult
● Poorer pressure due to distance from heart
· Loose skin, minimal fascia to hold the vein in place
· Vein can split into smaller veins
Medial saphenous vein
· Easy to locate
· Medium length
· Away from the head
● Body position builds blood volume in the vein
Cons
● Upper leg has to be moved out of the way
● Tourniquet placement more difficult
·Works better on cats than dogs
Cephalic vein
· Easy to locate
· Usually good diameter
· Long length
· Good pressures due to proximity to heart
● Consistent vein pattern
Cons
· Harder to place in lateral recumbency
· Near the head where families like to gather
the saphenous vein, which tends to be very movable, the administrator can
secure the vein distal to the injection site using their thumb. Actually placing
the thumb over the vein and applying a little tension distally will straighten out
any kinks in the vein and tighten the skin. This essentially traps blood between
overtheinjection sitewill alsohelp anchor thevein and makeinjection easier.
should draw back and check for blood. To be safe, the administrator should do
this at least once during venous administration to make sure that the needle
is still placed correctly (see Figures 5.1-5.7).
82Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
Figure 5.1Cephalic catheter placement in a dog.
Euthanasia Techniques 83
Figure 5.2 Example of a highly visible cephalic vein in a cat after shaving.
More and more veterinary teaching institutions are recommending catheter
placement for all IV euthanasia procedures. It is considered the gold standard
Figure 5.3  Unshaved inner thigh hiding the medial saphenous vein in a cat.
Note how hard it is to see the vein.
84Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
Figure 5.4 Shaved inner thigh exposing medial saphenous vein in a cat.
the family some privacy before proceeding with the euthanasia (Cooney 2011).
Figure 5.5 Preparing to place a catheter in the left lateral saphenous vein in
adog.
Euthanasia Techniques
口835
Figure 5.6 Extension set with catheter in a dog.
Figure 5.7 Demonstration of extension set allowing the veterinarian to sit
back and allow room for the client to gather close.
86VeterinaryEuthanasiaTechniques
from the pet, giving more room for loved ones to gather close. Luer-locking
mechanisms on either is recommended to help prevent leaking or dislodging
with euthanasia solution may be directly connected to the catheter for more
rapid administration.
If a good vein should "blow" at anytime during the initial catheter placement,
especially if the vein is highly visible there and moving to another leg will prove
difficult. This location is not standard practice for a pet expected to survive,
but when euthanasia is the objective, it is acceptable. Saline should be admin-
there is at the original extravasation site. If there is little to none, which is
usually the case, the euthanasia solution can be given while applying gentle
pressure to the area. Onty affempf fhis if fhe pef is deeply sedafed or com-
pletely anesthefized, due fo the risk of pain from even slighf euthanasia
sorufion exfravasafion. Veterinarians should also inject more euthanasia so-
lution than necessary due to this mild extravasation.
When families are present, the injection preparation can be a difficult time.
If venous access is proving difficult, let those present know that everything is
under control and their pet is doing fine. In this author's experience, families
do not want to know technical details more than necessary. To avoid the
technical portion, many clinics remove the pet back to the treatment area for
catheter placement; however, this may disconnect the family and their pet
at a very critical time. When possible, a technically skilled staff member or
the veterinarian themselves should prepare the injection site in the room with
family present. If they are interested in talking, ask them to tell a story about
continue in silence. In the case of a fractious pet that is reluctant to hold still
for the injection, giving a pre-euthanasia sedative will make the process easier
oneveryone.
The standard barbiturate injection amount is1 mL per 10 Ib body weight for
both dogs and cats. If the exact weight of the pet is unknown, make the best
educated guess possible and give at least 2 mL more than the required amount
in the syringe in, case the drug leaks from a catheter set up, such as when
a luer-lock is not securely fastened. If the euthanasia solution is extremely
and/orcatheter.
Once the needle is inserted directly into the vein or a catheter is placed,
all of the solution has been properly injected, the needle or catheter may be
Euthanasia Techniques87
should be checked to make sure there is no bleeding before allowing anyone
to hold the body.
When performing an IV injection, death occurs very quickly. The onset of
2008).KCl is also quick.As of 2011, overdoses of propofol or xylazine for
to death is unknown. Anyone present for the euthanasia should be told what
to expect and how fast the death will occur. If the pet is sitting, it should be
gently guided down toward the table or floor to avoid a rapid drop. In this
author's experience,it is the sudden collapse that is most surprising to loved
oneswatching.
Technicalchalfenges
During the injection, there are a few scenarios that can occur leading to a
the vein that cannot be found. Veins can be difficult to find for a variety of
reasons: poor venous pressures,thickened orloose skin,improper tourniquet
being attempted by one person without assistance, pre-euthanasia sedation
is strongly recommended, especially for fractious animals.
If a leg vein cannot be found, and IV euthanasia is the only acceptable
method given the circumstances, a tongue vein or the jugular vein can be
used.The tongue has multiple veins along the ventral surface,but one vein
willlikely be more prominent than the others.They can be occluded and
stabilized similar tolegveins.Tongueveins should onlybe used in extreme
working in the pet's mouth. Because of the difficult location, all animals should
Jugular veins may also be used. Shaving the neck is encouraged to improve
visibility.Depending on the dog or cat's neck structure,veins can be deep
and difficult topalpate.Assistance isrecommendedwhenattempting to inject
thoracic inlet to improve vein size.
Anotherpoor scenario is extravasation of the solution.If a blebisseen
animal will feel pain upon extravasation of the euthanasia solution. This is due
to increased pressure within the subcutaneous (SQ) space and/or the chemical
injection site. A second injection attempt should be tried higher up the leg.
88Veterinary EuthanasiaTechniques
view of the original vein and may force the use of another one. Proceeding
quickly helps keep the family comfortable and limits the time available for
the misplaced injected solution to absorb and lower blood pressures. In the
or intra-abdominal injection.
Another difficult situation is when a catheter is placed within the vein, but
the solution will not flow. Causes for this are a kinked catheter, a plug within
the tip (either tissue or blood clot), or the tip pressed up against a venous
proximally and the procedure started over.
If there is leakage around a properly placed catheter, the adaptor or exten-
sion has not been securely fastened together and solution is able to leak out.
If this occurs,the setup should be examined and the problem corrected before
out and euthanasia cannot be achieved with the remaining amount.
these conditions, the administrator should use the leg that has the biggest
vein or they feel most comfortable with. If someone is willing to help, they
Intra-abdominal absorption can take a long time and the pet will continue to
seizure in the meantime.
Not having enough euthanasia solution may be the biggest technical chal-
is not passing normally and all remaining solution has been given, or inade-
quate volume of solution was available. Whatever the situation, it is important
to find the next logical course of action to prevent suffering. If the inade
quate amount is found before euthanasia is attempted, more solution should
be acquired before proceeding. If the euthanasia procedure is in progress, an
overdose of sedatives/anesthetics on hand, such as propofol, xylazine, or an
inhalant gas such as isoflurane, can be administered. However, at this time,
there are no scientific reports on the appropriate dosing of propofol, xylazine,
or any other injectable anesthetic for euthanasia in dogs. One manufacturer
of propofol gave an LDso of 30 mg/kg and suggested that 100 mg per 10 Ib
the direst of circumstances due to the availability of superior, more reliable,
andinexpensivemethods.
a physical method will need to be attempted under anesthesia. If the euthanar
sia drug used was a barbiturate such as the common pentobarbital, a dose of
Euthanasia Techniques89
25-30mg/kgIV mayhave alreadybeengiven and is sufficient foranesthesia
of dogs and cats (Plumb 2005). An example of this dose would be 1.5-2 mL of
attempted including gunshot, exsanguination, etc. Anyone present should be
and stressors.
Intracardiac injection
Veterinary practitioners have performed IC injections for a very long time.
Veterinarians choose cardiac sticks for a variety of reasons, most often when
veins are not accessible or when an immediate death with little to no prepa
ration is desirable, such as with a seizuring dog. However, no studies have
and when the family is present, perform it perfectly on the first attempt.
ThesimplestwaytogiveanICinjectionis tohave thepet lying in lat-
 i     i l     o  
the left ventricle is usually the easiest chamber to locate due to its size. The
left side of the chest also has fewer lung lobes, but the right side does have
the cardiac notch where no lung tissue resides.Heart and lung disease can
complicate things; thickened myocardium,tumors, displacement,pulmonary
injection difficult. In terms of death, there is little difference between using the
right or left side of the heart. When injecting the right side, the right ventric-
ular chamber is usually smaller than the left making injection more difficult.
Once located however,time to cardiac arrest is essentially the same,even
though solution from the right ventricle must pass through the lungs before
making its way up to the brain.
A normal dog or cat will contain the following anatomical features that must
be penetrated for a successful IC injection (from outside, moving in):
(1) Skin
(2) Body wall with costal musculature
(3) Costal pleura
(4) Pleural cavity
(5) Pericardial pleura-part of the mediastinal pleura
(6) Fibrous pericardium
(7) Serous pericardium
(8) Pericardial cavity
(9) Epicardium
(10) Myocardium
(11) Endocardium
(12) Ventricular chamber
90Veterinary EuthanasiaTechniques
If the lung is penetrated, the needle must pass through the pulmonary pleura
and lung tissue itself.
The heart in most dogs and cats will reside from the 2nd or 3rd intercostal
space (lcS) to the 5th or 6th IcS, and from the sternum to about two-thirds
of the way up the thorax (Pasquini and Spurgeon 1992). In this author's ex-
of maximum intensity. On the left side of the chest, this will likely be the
point of the aortic valve located in the 4th IcS at the level of the shoulder.
On the right side, the right AV valve will generally be the loudest and is also
in the 4th IcS at the level of the olecranon/elbow. The olecranon is located
near the 5th IcS, so there will be little heart caudal to this point in a normal
or cat were standing. A good place to insert the needle is usually just a bit
cranial to the point of the elbow. Combining the location of the PMl with this
landmark should help locate the heart (Figures 5.8-5.10).
Before attempting an IC injection, all supplies should be ready to go before
and should not react in any way to the injection. when performing an IC
injection in large dogs, a long needle will be required to reach the heart. Long
needles, such as 1.5-2-in. needles can be used. Smaller dogs and cats will allow
for shorter1-in. needles. As the administrator prepares to enter the chest wall,
will increase the distance needed to travel before locating the heart. If a rib is
bumped during penetration of the chest wall, the administrator should either
start over or gently walk the needle tip off the rib edge and keep going
When the administrator believes the heart has been located, the syringe
rapid gush of blood. If only a small amount is found in the needle hub, the
needle is within myocardium or small capillary. If negative pressure occurs
myocardium, a tumor, a pleural lining, etc.). The needle should be advanced
-pe aui 'unoy ou ls s! pooig fl 'uiebe paidwane uoeidse pue jauin
ministrator can gently redirect without removing the needle completely from
the chest.
A large syringe, with extra room for aspiration, should be used to hold the
to make sure they are within a chamber, and therefore, a little extra room in
the syringe is necessary. If giving 6 mL of solution, this author recommends
air can be aspirated into the syringe. Once obvious blood is in the syringe,
the administrator is free to inject the euthanasia solution. It is always good
practice to draw back again halfway through the injection to check for proper
Euthanasia Techniques   91
Figure 5.8 Proper placement of intracardiac injection in the left side of a dog.
placement. When all of the solution has entered the heart, death should occur
quickly.
Administering more solution than required is good practice with IC injections
(Cooney 2011). If the pet weighs 40 Ib, and the solution dose is 1 mL per 10 Ib,
administering at least 6 mL will help ensure that death takes place. There is no
limit to how much solution can be given with any technique. A higher volume
allows for minor accidental injection outside of the heart, which is never ideal,
but does commonly occur.
When the administrator is holding the syringe in the heart, it may move
along with the contractions. This is disturbing for any loved ones present
to see, so the syringe should never be let go. A free hand can be used to
shield the syringe from view if necessary. when properly performed, the IC
injection is no more invasive than any other technique; however, those present
should be prepared for what they will witness. If anyone expresses concern,
the veterinarian's hand or a drape of some sort can be placed to limit visibility
(Figure 5.11).
92  Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
Figure 5.9Anatomical landmarks for left-sided cardiac injection in dogs.
Before performing an IC injection, the administrator may need to share
with the family why this method is best for their pet. In this author's expe-
rience, some families have found it difficult to watch and accept, especially
technique remains one of the most efficient methods used today.
Figure 5.10 Anatomical landmarks for right-sided cardiac injection in dogs.
Euthanasia Techniques93
Figure 5.11 Veterinarian's hand shielding visibility of the intracardiac
injection.
Technicalchalfenges
cal challenges present. The administrator cannot see the heart itself, so the
injection site is based solely on anatomical landmarks and auscultation. What
started. Ultrasound or radiography might be used to increase visibility.
before blood. Having extra room in the syringe will allow the administrator
euthanasia solution. The same holds true for air aspirated from lung tissue,
airways,etc.
When the heart is difficult to locate, and the syringe is full of fluid (both
solution and pulmonary fluid) or air, the syringe can be gently expressed in
the chest. If this does not seem like a viable option, the administrator can
express the contaminated syringe contents into a towel or trash container
and redraw fresh solution to start again. Injecting a small to moderate amount
of euthanasia solution into the chest of an unconscious animal should not have
(Cooney 2o11). All wasted drug will need to be recorded.
There will be times when the heart is impossible to find; the chest is too deep.
the needle length is inadequate, the heart is not in the standard position due
to disease, etc. When the heart cannot be located, it will become necessary to
attempt another technique altogether. When loved ones are present, multiple
94Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
IC needle insertions are not advised. Another technique should be attempted
as soon as it becomes evident that the heart cannot be found
injected successfully. but the pet is not passing, the solution has been third-
or some other blood-filled space and cannot make its way to the brainstem.
At this point, the administrator should attempt another cardiac injection or
move to another location such as the liver.
Sometimes, pushing down on the needle during injection will move it out of
the ventricular chamber. A steady hand is needed throughout the injection.
If the needle moves out of the chamber during injection, the needle should
first be redirected to locate it again. If blood cannot be found, the contents of
the syringe can be expressed within the chest and the procedure immediately
started again.
Intraperitonea!injection
An IP injection is generally considered easier to perform than most other
methods. It is a nice alternative to IV injections when poor venous pressures
are observed. The euthanasia solution is given into the peritoneal space, that
is, the abdomen. Therefore, the solution must miss neighboring organs or the
si eiseueuina leiag saiddnd pue suaily bunoa buipniui 'sbop pue sieo paies
also commonly achieved via this method following the removal of the uterus
from the bitch or queen.
Shelters in particular use this technique on a daily basis due to the low
level of skill required to perform them and that no sedation is required for
pure sodium pentobarbital administration. According to the 2012 AMVA eu-
awake animals. Barbiturate-combination drugs, such as Beuthanasia-D@ from
added component phenytoin sodium. Should phenytoin sodium be absorbed
first, leading to premature cardiac arrest before pentobarbital-induced un-
reference sheet for all approved solution administration sites.
There are two approved sites of IP injection: (1) ventral midline caudal to
locations prove most reliable for avoiding abdominal organs. Smaller needle
wall is abnormally thickened, a longer needle should be used. To minimize pain,
the needle bore size should be appropriate to the size of the animal and the
solution given at a rate of 1 mL/s. Newborns handle 25-gauge, 5/8-in. needles
2008).
The needle should be inserted at an angle slightly toward the head and the
syringe plunger pulled to check for fluid. If no blood or fluid is seen in the
syringe, the administrator may inject the solution. Because the euthanasia
Euthanasia Techniques  95
Figure 5.12Cat receiving an intraperitoneal injection.
solution is moving into the blood stream through absorption across abdominal
with another5-10 minutes before cardiac arrest (Rhoades 2002).It may take
sanssaud pooig pasamol oi anp aip on iad paiepas e sol habuol lo buol siue
When necessary.the abdomen canbe gently massaged tohelpthe solution
absorb.
cages, etc., free of distraction. This will allow a smoother transition into un-
vocalize a bit as the drug starts to take effect. These movements correlate to
Stages1and 2 of anesthesia(Fakkema 2008).If the owneris present,they can
hold the pet offering comfort, but due to the unpredictable nature of Stage 1
sedation/anesthesia might be warranted when owners are present. In this au-
thor'sexperience,sedationdoesnotappeartogreatlyincreasetimetocardiac
arrest.
IPinjectionsrequiretheadministrationofmorebarbituratesolutionthan
the standard 1 mL per 10 Ib. The recommended dose is 3 mL per 10 Ib. If
updated on why more is being given. Because waiting for a pet to die can be
difficultforsome,injectinganareaofhighperfusionsuchastheliverorkidney
under anesthesia is recommended over the standard IP injection. Death must
beverified closelyto make sure deep unconsciousness is not confusedwith
death and the pet subsequently recovers.
Technicalchalfenges
There has been discussion on the validity of this technique without pre
euthanasia sedation/anesthesia due to the possibility of abdominal irritation
96VeterinaryEuthanasiaTechniques
from barbiturate injection. Specifically, a study looking at abdominal irritation
1997). If subsequent studies demonstrate consistent findings, pre-euthanasia
-ngueg aund buisn suooarui dl le jol pauinbal ag Aew eisauisaueuoepas
new barbiturate-combination drug (FP-3@) containing lidocaine. This solution
works by eliminating pain at the injection and absorption site. If effective,
FP-3 may be an ideal IP injection solution for awake or sedated pets. Until a
combination product like this is marketed, local anesthetics may also be given
to lessen pain at the injection site.
Based on the speed of abdominal absorption, it is possible for this technique
to take up to an hour or more before death is achieved. Abdominal fluid, weak
may not be the best technique to use.
combination drug. Anesthetic overdoses with propofol, xylazine, etc., are not
appropriate for IP injections. Pure barbiturates are the only drug allowed for
this technique. More solution must be administered to avoid deep unconscious
ness without cardiac arrest.
If an organ is injected in an awake pet, the pet will likely squirm and try to
e uiulm paip jou sey jad aul pue 'uaaib uaag sey uoinjos algelleae aul le ll
reasonable amount of time, more solution should be quickly acquired before
the pet regains consciousness or a physical method of euthanasia should be
performed.
Intrahepatic injection
The liver is large, highly vascular, and is usually easy to palpate. Veterinari-
the improved uptake of the euthanasia solution, especially when clients are
present. This organ resides right up against the diaphragm and for the most
part, takes up to half of the caudal rib cage space. Seated within its curva
ture will be the stomach, gall bladder, and proximal small intestine. When an
IV injection is not viable, an intrahepatic injection can be a great alternative
(Cooney 2011).
Like IC injections, intrahepatic injections need to be done in unconscious
ue bulams ewayouaed ol anp pad ayeme ue ui uied asneo aew aayl 'siad
possible irritation from the euthanasia solution. Before injecting the liver,
inject. Because the pet is unconscious, it will likely be laterally recumbent
making hepatic injection easier.
1-in. needle should be adequate, but in larger pets, a 1.5- or 2-in. needle may
Euthanasia Techniques
■97
Figure 5.13 Anatomical landmarks for intrahepatic injections in dogs and
cats.
be necessary. To inject the liver, the needle will have to be placed in the notch
    l       aa 
palpated (Figure 5.13). The liver is best reached by aiming cranially, up under
the last rib of the laterally recumbent pet. Inward pressure with the syringe or
withthe administrator's free hand will allow the needle to move deeper.As-
pirating and detecting blood usually indicates the needle is correctly placed;
however, absence of blood does not mean the placement is wrong. Intra-
hepatic injections are effective from either the left or right side of the body
(Figure5.14)
Figure 5.14 Injection in the left side of the liver in a dog. Note this dog's liver
could be palpated easily in this region.
98Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
tion than the standard 1 mL per 10 Ib. The recommended dose is 2 mL per 10 Ib
they can be updated on why more is being given. Death should occur within
Schaffer 1990; Cooney 201l). Cessation of breathing should be almost immedi-
ate. In case the injection does not entirely penetrate the liver, anyone present
Technica!challenges
If the administrator feels the liver was not injected properly. death may not
occur in a reasonable amount of time and more solution should be given,
especially when loved ones are present. A second full dose of solution may be
as a kidney. If the second injection is given and the pet continues to breathe,
the administrator may gently massage the region to increase blood flow and
absorption time. When cardiac death takes longer than 10 minutes, either an
IP injection was performed or the area of liver injected was not well perfused.
reasonable amount of time, more solution should be quickly acquired before
the pet regains consciousness or a physical method of euthanasia performed
Good planning will help to prevent this.
Intrarenafinjections
Intrarenal injections are a viable option for cats and small mammals. This
method is a great choice if venous access is difficult or when preparing a
catheter site is too obtrusive. This technique is noninvasive and works well
the human-animal bond strong. As with intrahepatic injections, renal tissue will
improve the rate of absorption over standard IP injections. Complete uncon-
here, this technique will be demonstrated in cats.
Feline kidneys and kidneys of small mammals are usually easy to palpate,
neys are a paired structure lying adjacent to the sublumbar muscles alongside
the vertebral column. Increased abdominal fat decreases the administrator's
istrator will be able to choose the most appropriate one to inject.
usually located just under the last two ribs along the dorsum. The left kidney
in contrast is more caudal and free of the overlying ribs. In cats, the left
kidney rests outside the retroperitoneal space making it easier to isolate than
theright.
the left kidney. If a cat is in renal failure, the kidneys may be smaller, have a
nodular feeling, or even be impossible to locate. Abdominal masses or fecal
Euthanasia Techniques  99
Figure 5.15 Cupping the kidney in a cat (shaved for added visualization only).
balls in the colon are sometimes confused with kidneys. Should one kidney be
assessed as unusable, the other may be tried.
Once the feline patient is completely anesthetized,it should be laid in a
lateral recumbent positioneitheron a table, owner's lap, etc. The administrator
will move their hands along the abdomen to find the kidney and feel for
any abdominal muscle tensing. If the cat tenses, it is not yet in a surgical
plane of anesthesia and ready for injection. lf necessary, more pre-euthanasia
right kidney will shift by only a centimeter or two.
Whenreadyforeuthanasia,theadministratormaylikelyneedtouseboth
handsto gentlyisolate the kidneybefore switching to one hand to hold it in
for easier grasping. Once within reach, the administrator's less dominant hand
(Figure 5.15)
held in place throughout the entire injection.Whenloved ones are present,
any manipulation of the abdomen should be subtle.
should be sufficient to easily penetrate the kidney. Diseased kidneys can fee
granular, cystic, etc., making needle insertion more difficult. The syringe can
very effective way to hide the injection from onlookers. If the kidney is located
100Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
Figure 5.16 Demonstration of intrarenal injection in a cat.
deep in the abdomen, the syringe will have to be held more perpendicular to
the body.
the renal pelvis (Figure 5.17). Injecting the pelvis may move the euthanasia
solution into the ureter, limiting absorption. The kidney is a highly perfused
organ, as one might expect based on its function, making it an ideal organ for
rapid uptake of solution.
As this technique is considered relatively new, there remains no standard-
of drug used. Private practitioner reports indicate that anywhere from 2 mL
per 10 Ib up to 6 mL total per cat is effective with a properly executed injection.
This author administers 6 mL per cat with excellent results. whatever the vol-
ume, the kidney may swell due to increased pressure within the renal capsule.
This is a good indication that the needle is positioned properly within the renal
crease the odds that death will occur faster (Cooney 2011). A proper injection
within a viable kidney should produce respiratory and cardiac arrest within 30
seconds or so. Depending on the volume of solution given, the cat may pass
before completing the injection. As with intrahepatic injections, loved ones
present should be informed their pet may pass immediately or within just a
fewminutes.
Technicalchalfenges
A common technical challenge with intrarenal injections is losing hold of the
Euthanasia Techniques   101
Figure 5.17 Anatomical landmarks for intrarenal injections in cats.
and it cannot be quickly isolated again,the needle canbe gently advanced
majority of the solution was administered before the kidney was lost. However,
giving the remaining solution into an area of high perfusion helps to guarantee
a more rapid death.
Another challenge is the absence of the administrator's preferred kidney.
side making injection more difficult, especially when moving the pet is not an
option with loved ones present. It can be awkward to roll a pet over onto its
other side when an owner is holding it close. An example of this is the left
kidney missing from a cat lying on its right side. The right kidney must now
be used. If the right kidney cannot be fully grasped while the cat is lying on
its right side, it can be isolated using the index and middle finger from the
administrator's nondominant hand. These two fingers will essentially "trap'
the kidney in place for injection.
Some well-placed intrarenal injections will result in prolonged time to car-
diac death. Reasons for this prolonged time may include poor venous pres-
sures, injection of a diseased kidney, or injection into an area of minimal
vasculature such as the renal pelvis. These reasons are pure speculations as
no scientific studies have been conducted to date. Whatever the reason be
hind the prolonged time, there are ways to compensate. If the administraton
102Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
uooafui peadal e 'buuieaig ls sl iad aul pue 'asop lny aul paioarui seu
           
injection can be explained as "giving the rest." In general, when administering
any type of euthanasia solution with any method other than IV injection, loved
ones present can be prepared for up to two injections. when one injection is
not achieving death in a timely manner, a second can always be given. In the
dose whenever breathing continues following the first injection. The second
splenic injection may lead to slower uptake (Grier and Schaffer 1990). Based
to cardiac death within 2 minutes.
Oraladministration
in the United States. when necessary, as in the case of feral or aggressive
to limit injury. Oral administration may be used if needles or pre-euthanasia
sedatives/anesthetics are unavailable. If unconsciousness can be achieved
through oral dosing, a secondary method of euthanasia may be employed
that is more reliable.
If liquid solution is given orally, three times the normal IV dose must be
death. A10-lb cat will need 3 mL for death. Based on the dosage of 25-30 mg/kg
for barbiturate-induced anesthesia, a 50-lb dog will need to receive 1.5-2 mL
hard to determine. If liquid is to be given orally. the pet may need to have its
a hissing cat, etc.
Powdered forms of barbiturates are also available in the market and appear
to be more reliable for effective dosing (Fakkema 2008). Fatal Plus? powder
from Vortech is the only barbiturate powder approved for oral administra-
tion. The powder must be placed within food or within gelatin capsules for
consumption. The correct dosing can be found in Table 5.2.
Guide, an animal receiving adequate oral dosing of a barbiturate should be
in Stage 3 of anesthesia within 40 minutes of ingestion and dead within 2
absorption, environmental stimulation, and so on. whenever possible, the an
imal should be kept in a quiet, dark space to encourage relaxation and limit
Table 5.2 Oral dosage chart.
abesop lejo
Weight
Amount of powder
Presentation
Species
Liquid
Ib
kg
Example
正
Grains
mg
g
5 grain/capsule
Teaspoon
Tablespoon
1.5
0.68
Kitten (6 week)
1.0
6
390
0.39
1
1/10
2
0.9
Kitten (8 week)
1.0
6
390
0.39
1
1/10
1.4
Kitten (12 week)
1.0
6
390
0.39
1
1/10
B
3.6
Cat
3.0
18
1,170
1.17
4
1/4
10
4.5
Puppy (8 week)
3.0
18
1,170
1.17
4
1/4
15
6.8
Cairn Terrier
4.5
27
1.755
1.76
5
1/2
20
9.1
Fox Terrier
6.0
36
2.340
2.34
7
1/2
25
11.4
Beagle
7.5
45
2.925
2.93
6
3/4
1/4
30
13.6
Cocker Spaniel
9.0
54
3,510
3.51
11
3/4
1/4
40
18.2
Springer Spaniel
12.0
72
4,680
4.68
14
1
1/3
50
22.7
Irish Setter
15.0
06
5,850
5.85
18
11/2
1/2
60
27.3
Labrador
18.0
108
7,020
7.02
22
11/2
1/2
70
31.8
Airedale
21.0
126
8,190
8.19
25
2
3/4
80
36.4
German Shepherd
24.0
144
9,360
9.36
29
2
3/4
06
40.9
Rottweiler
27.0
162
10,530
10.53
32
21/2
3/4
100
45.4
Great Dane
30.0
180
11,700
11.70
36
23/4
1
150
68.2
Mastiff
45.0
270
17,550
17.55
54
31/2
11/2
200
6'06
St. Bernard
60.0
360
23,400
23.40
72
5
2
Source: Vortech Pharrmnaceuticals Ltd. 7/95
Weight:1 kg equals 2.2 Ib.
Solution: liquid dosage is calculated on 390 mg /ml or 6 grains/ml.
Record keeping: subtract the arount of powder rermoved in grarms.
Presentation: number of capsules, based on 5 grains per capsule.
"uoodsaiget jad b el Alatewixoudde uo paseg si uoodsalget yad junowy uoodseal jad b s't Alapewixoudde uo paseg si uoodseal yad junous
104Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
sia and exhibit unpredictable behaviors. Animals should remain undisturbed
during this time until full unconsciousness is observed, that is, no response to
Verification of death must be done before disposing of the body.
Technicalchallenges
contact, stepping away from the area may make the pet feel safer and facilitate
ingestion. Lightly heating the food may increase the release of aromas and
stimulate appetite.
portant. If the solution misses the mouth and is wasted, another attempt can
be tried or a different method may need to be done. Barbiturates such as
pentobarbital are very alkalinic and foul tasting, which even the gentlest of
pets will dislike. Unfortunately, the easiest way to squirt drug into a fractious
pet's mouth is when it is hissing or barking at the administrator. This indicates
that the pet is angry or in distress, which is not an ideal euthanasia situation,
Physical methods
ods of euthanasia available for dogs and cats. These methods, considered
cannot be used for whatever reason. They will only be briefly addressed due to
present unless pronounced suffering necessitates their use.
cats in the 2012 AVMA guidelines. There are other, more reliable methods
of euthanasia and these should always be considered first before resorting
to gunshot use. If attempted, the pet should be quieted as much as possible.
Due to the requirement for preciseness of the shot, fractious pets should be
them immobilized. This will not only keep the handler safe, but help guarantee
or anesthetized to calm them and minimize movements, especially for cats and
their smaller forehead size (Longair et al. 1991). If the pet is out of reach, and
cannot be sedated using oral sedatives in food, highly skilled personnel will be
required to perform the shot at a distance.
Euthanasia Techniques105
Figure 5.18 Anatomical landmarks for gunshot or captive bolt use in dogs
andcats.
 a          
the approach is made within 3 ft of the pet, handguns or small caliber rifles
rifle or handgun or .410-gauge shotgun with slugs or pellets within 1-2 in. of
the skull (Longair et al. 1991). Longer range attempts up to 2 m or so can
distance from the dog or cat, the greater the risk of improper placement. This
will endanger not only the pet, but also those gathered nearby.
Whether the pet is standing or lying down, the gun will be aimed directly
toward the rostral forehead, as seen in Figure 5.18. The bullet should travel
directly through the forehead into the brain with continuation down into the
neck whenever possible. This prevents the bullet from leaving the body, putting
others in harm's way. and directs it through the region of the brainstem
causing instant unconsciousness and death. This method is standard for all
domestic animals, except those with horns.
In dogs, the firearm is aimed at the point midway between the level of the
eyes and ears. Some literature suggests aiming slightly off to one side to
miss the thick midline bony ridge. With respect to the ears, the lines should
be drawn to the dorsal medial edge closest to the medial plane. Because
dogs have many different ear types, the shooter will have to use their best
106Veterinary EuthanasiaTechniques
canthus of the opposite eye. Again, the angle should be such that the bullet
and keep it relatively still, food may be placed in front on something elevated.
should be aimed the same.
For cats, the gunshot technique should only be used in the most extreme of
circumstances. Pre-euthanasia sedation is highly recommended to limit free
hold still, but they may need to be restrained. Restricting movement for any
animal being euthanized is not ideal as this will cause stress and anxiety, but
The firearm should be aimed at the center of the cat's head slightly below a
line drawn connecting thebase of theears.
Instant unconsciousness and death is the goal with this physical method.
Even with properly executed shots, the pet's body may spasm for a short while
and bleeding will occur (Longair et al. 1991). Any one watching should be pre
pared for these physical signs and reassured that they are purely involuntary
and that death was accomplished.
Technica!challenges
The reason this method is deemed conditionally acceptable and only to be
used in the most specific of circumstances owes to the technical challenges it
presents. The pet must be perfectly positioned or the bullet will miss the brain-
stem and put the pet at risk for pain and distress. Bullets can do remarkable
nique disturbing to watch. If the bullet misses the brainstem, the administrator
will need to fire another better placed shot. If only one bullet was available, and
the pet is now suffering, blunt force trauma or some other physical method
loud and may cause stress to other animals gathered around.
Penetrating captive boft
The frequency of the usage of this technique is not known and it is only
death, such as in tissue sampling for laboratory medicine, this technique may
be applied. The penetrating captive bolt technique may be used by itself to
accomplish death. No other technique will need to be used secondarily un-
method needs to be used.
uw ui buidaay 'uoiiisod Aue ul sbop uo pasn aq ueo suno log aalide
cumbency eliminate this falling motion. The dog should be calmed naturally
with soothing talk, offered food, or pre-sedated to minimize movement of the
head. The bolt gun is placed centered in the forehead exactly like the gunshot
Euthanasia Techniques    107
location. Typical bolt guns fire a .22 caliber blank to mobilize the rod out of
the barrel to penetrate the forehead. For best penetration, the end of the bar
rel should rest against the skin, be aimed toward the medulla oblongata, and
disruption,including themedulla oblongata,is needed to achieveimmediate
unconsciousness and death.
Upon successful captive bolt usage, the dog will have immediate cerebral
utes (Dennis and Dong 1988). Some objectionable side effects such as extensor
nique difficult to watch, but based on study results, all movements appear to
be involuntary. The bolt will carry skin, debris, and bone into the head,so brain
tissue sampling is not recommended with this method. The procedure is safer
than the gunshot technique when observers are present. There is no bullet
that could ricochet and cause injury.
Technicalchalfenges
Captiveboltguns have a tendency to failwhennot properlymaintained
(Grandin 1998). The bolt will become covered in blood and tissue following
use, and therefore, must be thoroughly cleaned after each euthanasia. Cap-
tive bolt guns are also loud and may cause distress to other animals in the area.
Should theplacementofthegunbeincorrect,theboltwillnotpenetratethe
brainstem. This may lead to pain and distress if unconsciousness has not been
achieved. Another firing will have to be done. If the bolt is not long enough
to penetrate the brainstem, a pithing rod will be needed to disrupt the tissue.
Thisis considered extremely unpleasant to do and should be avoided if at all
possible by having a bolt long enough to complete death.
Exsanguination
its use.
Exsanguination should be done using a very sharp knife, with at least a
6-in. rigid blade. These specifications come from what this author knows of
goat exsanguination protocols for military personnel survival training. The
knife is thrust into the neck just below the head, ventral to the vertebrae
and drawn downward to sever the jugular veins, carotid arteries, and trachea.
sanitary reasons, it should be completely cleaned up before other animals
are allowed in the area. When a client must be present, it may be advisable
to attempt an internal cut of the myocardium to allow blood to flow into the
chest cavity rather than out on the ground. To date, there is no scientific data
to demonstrate this technique or support its reliability.
108Veterinary EuthanasiaTechniques
of superior methods and is only mentioned here to offer yet another possibility
for use in dire situations. It is technically challenging in and of itself to safely
penetrate the neck with a knife and sever it across laterally. Muscle, ligaments,
nerves, and the trachea make a smooth sweeping motion almost impossible.
More often than not, as demonstrated with goat slaughter training videos,
while cutting is reduced and it will contaminate everything around the body.
There must be a cleanup plan to remove all blood.
Bfuntforce trauma
This physical action is rarely effective in causing death by itself and is consid-
stunning and unconsciousness and is then followed by a secondary method
of euthanasia. Mature craniums are designed to withstand head injuries, and
therefore, very strong force is needed to disrupt the central nervous system
(AVMA euthanasia guideline review 2011). It is most appropriate for neonatal
animals with thin skull bones. This method can produce acceptable euthanasia
when the blow provides sufficient force to cause a depressed fracture of the
not flexible, and should be large enough to cover a large portion of the skull re-
gion. The smaller theinstrument, the smaller the surface area to be impacted
used in the most extreme of circumstances and when owners are not present.
Electrocution
Electrocution is currently classified as an adjunctive method of euthanasia in
this technique objectionable is the violent physical activity demonstrated by
the dog that the observer must bear witness to. Because other techniques are
far superior, its training will not be listed here.
Special circumstances
Scientific study shows that embryos and fetuses cannot experience pain and
ter the death of the dam, whatever the cause" (Mellor 2010). Once their first
urally from anesthetic overdose or hypoxia soon afterward. This may take
up to 15-20 minutes after the mother is confirmed dead (AVMA euthanasia
guideline review 2oll). IP injections of pentobarbital should be avoided dur-
and thus unable to be rapidly absorbed. However, IP injections are perfectly
Euthanasia Techniques 109
acceptable for the newborns as venous access can be very difficult. It may be
the uterine blood vessels, thus allowing the fetuses to die by hypoxia.
These methods, such as blunt force trauma, can be very difficult to watch, let
alone perform. It is recognized that technical challenges may arise during more
preferred techniques and physical methods must then be used. Onlookers
Exotics
Inhalant agents
Ferrets
Often, ferrets are presented in poor body condition, being emaciated and
of the handler, the condition of the animal, and the ability to discuss these
issues with the owner. A very moribund ferret with marked dehydration, but
normal respirations, can easily be sedated using a cotton ball soaked with
isoflurane anesthesialiquid.Other gas anesthesialiquids thatcanbeused
for the anesthesia machine or a plastic bag. Due to the corrosive nature of
recommended. It is important not to allow direct contact of the soaked cotton
ball with the animal or the owner. The animal's head is placed in the mask or
state (no response to toe pinch and loss of palpebral reflex).
If the ferret is severely debilitated, this form of sedation will often cause
respiratory arrest within less than a minute, and cardiac arrest usually occurs
within approximately 1-3 minutes. It is recommended to inform the owner that
further assistance may be needed such as an injectable euthanasia solution if
the heart continues to beat.
Inhalation of an anesthetic gas is a very rapid and calm method for sedat-
ing and/or euthanizing a ferret. The owner is usually much calmer with this
procedure because their pet does not have to be injected with a needle. Any
two breaths animmediate calming and anesthesia is achieved.The struggle
is usually very minor, especially if the ferret is in a very poor state of health.
There may be a period of brief panic if the ferret is active, alert, and in rela
method rather than an injection.
1H0Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
Figure 5.19 A ferret in a face mask sealed at the end with an
isoflurane-soaked cotton ball in the end of mask.
Rabbits
The same method of an isoflurane-soaked cotton ball works well in very small,
disease, this method may take longer to be effective due to the decreased
function of the respiratory tract. This method will sedate a small or debilitated
IV, IP, or intraorgan injection.
Guinea pigs, chinchillas, rats, hamsters, gerbils, mice,
and sugar gliders
These animals generally do not tolerate handling without a tremendous
amount of stress; therefore, any discomfort experienced from the odor of
the gas anesthetic is much less than the stress experienced from handling.
Therefore, the most humane and calm method for euthanizing these animals
due to the animal's discontent of being confined and then they usually relax.
shortly thereafter, generally within another 5-20 seconds. If the owner wants
to hold the animal, they can do so once the animal is anesthetized in the large
Euthanasia Techniques   111
Figure 5.zo A sugar glider in a large facemask.
facemask and then the large facemask can be immediately replaced with a
be euthanized before the small facemask is placed. Another option is to have
the animal on a towel on the owner's lap with the large facemask over the
entire animal forthe whole procedure.Again,the client should be protected
fromtouching or inhaling theisoflurane liquidbykeepingthesetupsealed
small animals can have a latex glove taped over the large opening instead of
the typical black rubber end. A smaller opening can be cut into the latex glove
to keep the mask more airtight (Figure 5.21).
animals, but in cases where it only anesthetizes the larger ones such as the
guinea pigs, rabbits, or chinchillas, a euthanasia injectable agent can be ad-
used, cardiac arrest should occur within 3-4 minutes. If it has not occurred
within this time frame, then the euthanasia solution should be administered.
The smaller and more sealed the container that the animal is placed in with
nized at the same time such as two guinea pigs and they have been placed in a
cotton ball method worked quite well.Both animals were calm and died very
1H2Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
Figure 5.21 A rat in a smaller facemask that is sealed with an
isoflurane-soaked cotton ball at the end.
quietly. For highly fractious animals that are more dangerous to handle such
as prairie dogs, skunks, squirrels, raccoons, or even the occasional ferret, a
cage, or small carrier and the gas anesthetic can be administered with sev-
eral soaked isoflurane cotton balls or if available the gas anesthetic machine,
though this method can take much longer.
CO2 delivered by a CO2 chamber (not dry ice) must be slowly delivered at
cage (University of Minnesota, guidelines for euthanasia).
Reptiles
Given the reptilian's slow metabolism and ability to hold their breath for long
periods of time, euthanasia or anesthesia using inhalant gases is conditionally
amphibians are capable of breath holding and shunting of their blood, which
permits conversion to anaerobic metabolism for survival during prolonged
review 2o1). Because of this, induction of anesthesia and time to loss of
than lizards and snakes, which lends them to being the least affected by gas
anesthesla.
Euthanasia Techniques    113
Figure 5.22 Cockatiel in an enclosed facemask with a latex glove at the open
end and an isofluorane-soaked cotton ball in the mask.
Amphibians
Because amphibians can hold their breath similar to that of reptiles, inhalant
anesthetics are not recommended for euthanasia. Co2 is also an unaccept-
extended periods in a low oxygen environment (Brown 2o03).
Birds
Most birds weighing less than 5oo g are easily and quickly euthanized using
an anesthetic-soaked cotton ball. The choice of gas anesthesia used on the
cotton ball can be one of several such as isoflurane, halothane, enflurane, and
unoie l! leas diay oi pua uado aui uo aaoie xaiel e uim ase abuuas e jo pua
the face (Figure 5.22). It can also be placed in the end of a small plastic bag
that is rolled up enough to just cover the face, which works well when doing
the procedure with the client present.
Any of these can be attempted with the client present. with some birds,
there may be a brief moment of struggle as they inhale the anesthetic, but
this quickly passes within just 1-3 breaths. Respiratory arrest occurs generally
within 20-60 seconds depending on the size of the bird. Cardiac arrest gen-
monitored closely to determine time of death. The bird should be kept within
the gas chamber setup during the confirmation of death as they may recover
quickly if death has not been achieved.
114Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
For larger birds, the anesthetic-soaked cotton ball can be used to anes
that there may be a brief excitement stage of a few seconds, which can be
      sa    e s a a
injectable sedation or anesthetic drugs for these large birds for the handler's
safety and the bird's comfort.
Fish
Inhalant drugs such as isoflurane and halothane can be distributed into the
water bath for inhalation across the gills. This is often done with oxygen,
but the levels are unreliable due to the insoluble nature of the drugs. For
fish too large for immersion, the anesthetic water can be poured over the
gills directly. CO2 and Co have been frequently used as euthanasia agents.
but again it is difficult to maintain an accurate level of concentration in the
water and a high level of oxygen must be administered as well. (Neiffer and
Stamper 2009). Since C02 is the only chemical without tissue residues, the
fish may become part of the food chain such as fishmeal or food for human
consumption (University of Florida IFAS Extension)
Technica!challenges
working with inhalant gases. The first is the inherent risk of gas leaking from
need to notify the veterinarian and staff immediately. Leaking gas also slows
for the pet to inhale.
Anesthetic gases all have odors associated with them, which may make
for brief struggling as described. Each animal must be properly restrained to
avoid injury to themselves and the handler. If this is deemed too difficult, an
back into its home cage to prevent added stress. The animal can then relax
in its own space and be removed for euthanasia when ready. If the animal
refuses to breathe due to the odor, there is little that can be done to stimulate
inhalation, especially with regard to reptiles and amphibians
In the presence of respiratory disease, the animal may be unable to rapidly
longer than normal. If deemed necessary, a second method should be utilized.
Euthanasia Techniques  15
ASPEN WING ANIMAL HOS
Figure 5.23 Radiograph of a ferret showing the heart location.
Noninhalant pharmaceutical agents
Injectable methods
Most exotics can be euthanized via a variety of injectable methods using barbi-
ofinjectable anesthetics similar to dogs and cats.The following represents
those injectable techniques that are easily accomplished in private practice
with or without owners present.
Ferret
If venous access is possible, cephalic or lateral saphenous veins can be used.
qwll puiy aul uo Aelaiel paieool sl uiar snouaydes elaiel aul pue 'bop aul
above the hock joint. If the euthanasia solution being used is thick, diluting
the solution 50/50 with saline, so it will flow more easily through a 25-gauge
needle, works well. Generally. it is advisable to be generous with the solu
uncommon.
If venous access is impossible, an IC injection can be performed on an
anesthetized animal using a 22-gauge 1-in. needle. Note that the ferret's heart
is located more caudally than other domesticpets,between the7th and10th
similar to that done in cats and dogs.
solution. This method may take up to 10-15 minutes due to the rate of natu-
ral absorption across membranes. Other routes of administering euthanasia
intrarenal;however,thiscanbe difficult in anoverweightferret oronewith a
large amount of ascites. Also, one must consider the large amount of perire
nal fat normally present in ferrets. Again, these methods of injections must be
done in an anesthetized animal.
116Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
Figure 5.24 Accessing the medial, saphenous vein in a rabbit.
Rabbits
The venous sights include cephalic, lateral saphenous, marginal ear veins, and
The marginal ear veins are preferred in an awake rabbit due to the low stress
involved for handling the rabbit for this venous access.
If the rabbit is hydrated, all veins are usually large enough to pass a 25-
gauge needle into. Following the ear vein, the medial, saphenous vein is the
5.24). Shaving the fur is not necessary and can be stressful to the rabbit. In
the awake rabbit, it should be held snuggly in a towel and slightly tilted on
its side. This vein can easily be located using a small amount of alcohol on
a cotton ball to part the hair to visualize the vein. Rabbits do not tolerate a
lateral position well, so keeping them just slightly tilted decreases anxiety. The
handler can hold the hind leg firmly. gripping the proximal one-third of the leg
so the vein is held off.
The cephalic vein can also be used. It is preferred for use in an anesthetized
handled. In general, if the euthanasia fluid is to be administered by the IV
route, it may be preferred that the rabbit be sedated prior to the IV injection
as was described for the ferret, and given slowly.
Nondebilitated rabbits tend to have a large amount of abdominal fat, and
Euthanasia Techniques  117
Figure 5.25 Radiograph of a rabbit showing the heart location.
traorgan injection. Kidneys can be difficult to access whether the rabbit is
debilitated or in good flesh due to the normally large amount of abdomina
and perirenal fat present in most rabbits. For IC injections, note that the heart
in rabbits is located more cranial between the 1st and 5th IcS (Figure 5.25).
Guinea pigs, chinchillas, rats, hamsters, gerbils, mice, and
sugargliders
veterinarians, especially when owners are present. The time and effort to find
administration are preferred. IC administration in the small pocket pets may be
Reptiles
Reasons to euthanize reptiles are similar to that of other species of animals
eweud jueeyuiuou e jo uooarul lauuew auewny e ul auop ag pinous pue
ceutical agent such as a barbiturate or barbiturate-combination drug is the
most common technique used in reptiles in private practice. They do not read-
ily accept inhalant gases and the physical methods commonly used in other
species do not work well with their unique anatomy: however, these other
methods may be used in certain circumstances when injectable agents are
unavailable. The method of euthanasia is important to consider if a necropsy
or histopathology will be desired.
As discussed in a previous section, reptiles may be given pre-euthanasia
na buiunp uied ssal pue buiuey sajes aieoey ol eisauisaue/uoepas
1H8Veterinary EuthanasiaTechniques
Figure 5.26 Radiograph of a snake with the head to the left and the opacity
thehead.
antee a smooth euthanasia, especially for those unfamiliar with the species.
It can be very difficult to assess if a reptile patient is dead or alive especially,
therefore, slowing the process down significantly. It is absolutely necessary
to assure that the animal is truly dead and keeping the body 24 hours prior
where the euthanized reptile was found walking around in the plastic bag the
next day. Additionally, those animals whose bodies will be taken home with
the client, should be given at least three times the recommended volume of
euthanasia drug (Mader 1996).
Assessing the heartbeat inreptiles
the heart so it will be easier to find once the animal is sedated or anesthetized.
used to locate the heart. The general location of the heart in the snake is
Lizards
Lizards are commonly euthanized byinjecting either the ventral tail vein or the
ventral abdominal vein. For ventral tail injections, the lizard can be restrained
by wrapping it firmly in a towel in dorsal or sternal recumbency leaving the
with in a sedated lizard, while the sternal position is less stressful for an awake
between the scales, midline, and approximately 1/3-1/2 distal distance from
the cloaca to the tip of the tail. The needle must reach the vertebral column
so it is helpful to measure the thickness of the tail at the location where the
needle will be inserted. The needle is inserted perpendicular to the tail until the
pressure on the syringe while carefully and slowly withdrawing the needle until
blood flow is achieved. The euthanasia solution is then administered. In the
sternal position, the lizard can be supported by a table and the tail draped over
Euthanasia Techniques  119
Figure5.27Doplarlocation in a lizard.
the edge, making sure the tail is held firmly to prevent injury to the handler
and the lizard (Figure 5.30).
For access to the ventral abdominal vein, the lizard should be sedated or
anesthetized to render it motionless. In this author's experience, this vein is
recumbency. Using a 22-25-gauge needle, the vein, located just under the
and the cloaca (Figure 5.31).
For performing IC injections, the heart can be found in the cranial coelomic
cavity and is accessed through the thoracic inlet. Veterinarians will need to
insert a 0.5-2-in., 22-25-gauge needle into the thoracic inlet just above the
Figure 5.28 Doplar setup for a tortoise.
120  Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
Figure 5.29 Doplar location for a tortoise.
advancing until blood enters thesyringe.
Snakes
Snakes differ from lizards in that the ventral abdominal vein is rarely ever
used. The ventral caudal tail vein is preferred and is accessed using a 25-22
scales, approximately one-third the distance caudal to the cloaca between the
negative pressure in the syringe once the needle is through the skin until the
Figure 5.3o  Intravenous (Iv) injection into the ventral caudal tail vein of an
iguana.
Euthanasia Techniques121
Figure5.31Ventralabdominalvein access inaleopard gecko.
vessel is located (Figure 5.33). It is close to the level of the vertebrae as in the
lizard.
Theheartlocationisvariablewiththespeciesofsnake,whichcanmake
IC injections more challenging, especially for those veterinarians unfamiliar
and by watching for movement of the scutes, the large scales on the ventral
surface. It can be stabilized using a thumb and finger at the heart's cranial
Figure 5.32 Radiograph of a bearded dragon. Note the location of the heart
is in the cranial aspect of the coelomic cavity.
122 Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
Figure 5.33 Ventral caudal tail vein insertion; note the cloaca at thumb.
and caudal position. A 0.5-2-in., 21-25-gauge needle can then be advanced
perpendicularly into the heart to the suspected depth.
Chelonians
Because of the thickness of their scales and the short length of their legs and
tail, IV injections are rarely attempted in turtles and tortoises. In small cheloni-
is inserted into the thoracic inlet area and using gentle negative pressure, the
needle is advanced until blood enters the syringe (Figure 5.34). The heart is
injected while unconscious, similar to other species.
Figure 5.34  Intracardiac (IC) injection in a chelonian; note the doplar on the
right side of the thoracic inlet monitoring the heart while injecting.
Euthanasia Techniques 123
Amphibians
        
intracoelomic(ICo).MS-222is another drug thatcanbeinjectedICo at a dose
of200 mg/kg(Brown2003).
Birds
For IV administration, the vein that would be most accessible is the leg vein,
to the scaled portion of the foot. This is a common and easily accessible vein
to obtain in large birds such as the ducks, chickens, game birds, and raptors.
the handler stabilizes the leg at the stifle. The veterinarian then holds the foot
firmly toinject the euthanasia solution(Figures 5.35 and 5.36).The smallest
a towel and the wing is gently pulled out away from the body (Figure 5.37). It is
helpfulto dampenthefeathers at themedialsurfaceof theelbowtovisualize
the vein.
Thejugularveinis anothervenous access point,which is locatedon the
either side, but the right jugular vein is larger, and therefore, easier to inject.
The jugular vein is more difficult to access in columbiformes, such as pigeons
and doves, as there is no lateral cervical apterium (featherless tract). These
birds also have a diffuse venous plexus rather than a single jugular vein.
ais pubu aui pue lamoi e ui paddeim si puig aul 'uiaa seinonf aul ssaooe ol
of the neck is exposed by gently stretching the neck.The handler must hold
124Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
Figure 5.36 The bird is wrapped in a towel and the handler is stabilizing the
leg while the clinician is holding the foot firmly and injecting into the medial
metatarsal vein.
left hand, taking care not to apply pressure over the keel bone (breast bone).
Birds do not have diaphragms. They control their breathing by moving their
and hypoxia (Figure 5.38).
Figure 5.37  This is demonstrating the position of the bird without the towel
to utilize the ulnar or wing vein.
Euthanasia Techniques  125
side of the neck in the featherless tract. The position of the bird and head are
shownhere.
Whenvenous access is impossible,anintrahepatic,IC,orICoinjection can
be given with the bird in a state of unconsciousness. The intrahepatic injection
will only be possible if there is hepatomegaly due to the presence of the long
breastbone impeding the injection site. ICo injections can be done easily, but
may take a longer period of time to be absorbed. IC injections can be performed
using a 1.5-2-in., 22-gauge needle and angling the needle down caudally into
the thoracic inlet.Once there,the veterinarian must aspirate with the syringe
deep enough, and when the heart is penetrated, visualize blood flow before
injecting the solution (Figures 5.39 and 5.40).
Fish
Sodium pentobarbital may be injected at a dose of 100 mg/kg given IV or ICo,
or given at 0.22 mL/kg IV or ICo (UMN 2009). Some injectables are accept-
Figure 5.39  Intracardiac (IC) injection with the needle facing caudally down
into the thoracic inlet.
126Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
Figure 5.40 Intrahepatic injection with the needle under the distal point of
the keel bone facing cranially.
muscle spasms during induction, so the client should be aware of this. Anes
thesia followed by IV KCl at 1-2 meq/kg is an acceptable method. (University
of Minnesota guidelines)
Immersion and topical methods
Amphibians
Amphibians have a unique characteristic to their anatomy that allows for
skin that can be harmful or even quite toxic to our skin; therefore, it is always
talc powder (Mader 1996).
The amphibian is placed in a shallow bath of only a few millimeters of
the liquid drug and the drug will be absorbed through the ventral surface of
the skin (Figure 5.41). As with any procedure, care must be taken to ensure
that the animal is dead, using a stethoscope to monitor heart rate as well as
animal is completely anesthetized or administering an injection of commercia
euthanasia drug at 0.22 mL/kg or an overdose of barbiturate at 100-200
mg/kg ICo or IC.
The following drugs for the bath can be used:
●Efhyf alcohof bath: The animal is placed in a 5% solution until anesthetized,
utilized for more rapid results.
● MS-222: A 0.3% (3 g/L) solution is effective in most species of amphibians
Euthanasia Techniques127
Figure 5.41 Frog in shallow bath of MS-222.
method alone may take up to 5 hours. An injection of euthanasia solution
may be needed to assist the time of death. MS-222 is acidic at >500 mg/L
and must be buffered to a pH of 7.0-7.5. This can be done using sodium
bicarbonate at 2 g per g of Ms-222.
· Benzocaine HCl-Oraje@: The effects of this chemical are similar to MS-222
sodium bicarbonate. Benzocaine HCl is also available over the counter in
forms such as Orajel of which the 7.5% and 20% are both effective. The
chemical is easy to obtain and effective to use.
One reference describes the Orajel being placed directly on the ventral
abdomen of the amphibian and the animal is then placed in a plastic bag.
This method is very rapid,usually taking effect inless than a minute and
ventral abdomen will result in rapid death of a dwarf salamander (Brown
2003;Torreilles et al.2009)
ommended; benzocaine HCl must be used to be effective.
Fish
method of choice for fish. The use of MS-222 using a solution of 2 g/L of water
unconsciousness is obtained. The pH must be adjusted to 7 using sodium bicar
bonate. Another immersion solution is benzocaine HCl (Orajel) at 250 mg/L
of water. Magnesium sulfate/magnesium chloride may also beused in a water
       o a u al  io  
cessation of opercular movement (AVMA euthanasia guideline review 2011).
128VeterinaryEuthanasiaTechniques
Technicalchallenges
lenges simply due to their unique anatomy. IV injections are considered more
difficult in most exotics due to small vein size, the presence of scales and
mal is considered too great, IPinjections with a barbiturate may be performed
in small mammals.
involved compared with the time it takes to complete euthanasia via the IV
or IC route in an anesthetized animal. Additionally, injecting chloroform is no
longer recommended due to the pain this drug causes (McCarthur et al. 2o04,
Mader 1996).
Physical methods
Cervica! dislocation
Mice, rats, small rabbits and birds, reptiles Cervical dislocation may be nec
means of assuring death after injectable euthanasia and should only be done
y s'o ueui ssal slewue ul auop ag aluo pinus siul lauuosiad pauiei ag
and the animal should be sedated or unconscious. The AvMA lists turkeys as
ily sedated or anesthetized whenever possible, especially if the veterinarian
is new to the technique. A small board, dowel, or pencil (depending on the
down firmly against the board to separate the first cervical from the skull.
The board placed at the base of the skull helps stabilize the head. Veterinari-
ans and others attempting this with their fingers will tend to hesitate as they
feel a definite crunching of bones. Using a board or rod minimizes the risk of
incomplete dislocation of the cervical vertebrae (Figure 5.42)
fication that respiratory and cardiac arrest has occurred is crucial. Because
this technique is technically difficult, proper training, including practicing on
tionally acceptable on small pocket pets and turkeys. A fair amount of force
on mammals larger than rats is needed, and therefore, it is not recommended
when other techniques are available. For obvious reasons, this method should
not be done in front of a client.
Birds
Cervical dislocation is accomplished using a board or small dowel and is done
using the same technique as in the mammals and reptiles. Firm downward
head of the smaller birds is often popped off with this method due to the
Euthanasia Techniques129
Figure 5.42 Cervical dislocation of a rat.
ueseaud pue asaae se yons spuig awee pue imol laiem sabiel aun uo pasn ag
oau aul jo aseg aui pue pueu auo um peau aul jo aseg aun buidseie aa
with the other and pulling rapidly and firmly in opposite directions with a
an anesthetized bird.
Technicalchaffenges
There will be times when it is physically impossible for the veterinarian to
achieve proper cervical dislocation. Whether the neck is too thick or the vet-
Figure 5.43 Locating the caudal portion of the skull.
130Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
Figure 5.44  Using a small board just caudal to the skull and a hand is placed
on the body for cervical dislocation.
rapidly employed. This is never ideal and can cause stress to the veterinarian
and observers. If a rod or board is not available, anything can be used to hold
the head in place such as the edge of a book, stapler, etc. The more awkward
the object to hold, the greater the risk of improper technique.
Gunshot and captive bolt
Pet crocodilians and other large reptiles can be euthanized by a penetrating
aimed at the brain, which would be along the midsagittal plane and just caudal
to the eyes (Mader 1996).
Decapitation
Small mammais, reptiles, amphibians, birds, fish Decapitation can be used
as a sole method of euthanasia or as an adjunctive method to guarantee
death following another method. It is an option in smaller reptiles and should
be done in an anesthetized animal. The force and positioning of the strike to
the skull has to be strong enough and very accurate to cause rapid death. A
sharp instrument such as a guillotine blade or other sharp blade such as an
osteotome would suffice, taking care to avoid personnel injury. This is a rapid
way to kill a reptile but the brain must be destroyed for it to be a humane
method, as the brain in reptiles can stay viable for up to an hour (Cooper
et al. 1984; Kaplans 1994).
Decapitation can be done on amphibians and then should be followed with
and include decapitation and cervical dislocation. Decapitation can be done
Euthanasia Techniques131
Figure 5.45 Pithing the brain through the roof of the mouth in a turtle.
Freezing
There have been various methods of euthanasia used in the past that would
not be considered humane with current standards. One such method is placing
the animal in a freezer to lower the body temperature enough to cause death.
Thismethodis verypainful in that thefreezing causesice crystalsto form in
the tissues. If such a method is used, it should be in an anesthetized animal
Pithing
Pithing the brain and spinal cord or crushing the skull over or just caudal to
Pithing the brain can be done with a sharp dental probe inserted through the
foramen magnum with the spike rotated to destroy the brain tissue. Another
method of pithing can be done by inserting the dental probe through the roof
of themouth into the cranialvault.The spikeisthenrotated to destroy the
brain tissue (Figures 5.45 and 5.46). The latter method may be preferred
for animals being sent home after euthanasia (McCarthur 2004). For obvious
reasons, these methods should not be done in front of the client. Pithing and
decapitation would be the methods used to be sure death has occurred.
Special circumstances
may be destroyed by prolonged exposure (20 minutes) to C02,cooling (4 hours
132Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
probe.
   
also be used (Orosz 2006).
Little information is available on the sensory capacity of amphibians and
since little is known about the physiology of life inside.
be treated as adults. In utero, like many other species, the fetuses are not
believed to experience pain and breathlessness due to the death of the dam
(Mellor et al. 2o05). Fetuses may be euthanized in the same manner as adults,
 but as described before, young animals tend to be more resistant to hypoxia,
minutes to die from CO2 exposure (Pritchett 2005). A secondary method
fetuses/neonates, as a conditionally acceptable technique provided the an-
imals do not directly contact ice (wet or dry) or precooled surfaces. This is
not recommended after 7 days of age. Fetuses/neonates can be efficiently
killed by rapidly freezing in liquid nitrogen, but they should be rendered un-
conscious first to be safe. Decapitation is also conditionally acceptable for
Fish can undergo blunt force trauma, decapitation,freezing,and pithing like
other species as long as unconsciousness and death are immediate.
Euthanasia Techniques   133
Horses
Distractions often translate into safety issues. The owner may request to hold
the horse,butprofound grief may make themless effective at restraint and
less responsive in keeping themselves safe. It is preferable to have a trained
technician restrain the animal. In some cases, especially when using a firearm,
the procedure may be performed without any assistance to minimize risk for
those involved. Restraints such as stocks are rarely used due to the diffi-
culty of extricating the body afterward. Any confined space including stalls or
for escape are limited. It is important to emphasize to all involved that the
be unpredictable. They may sink quietly to the ground but may also fall over
backwardor lungeforwardputtingevenanexperienced horsehandleratrisk.
When euthanizing a horse that is to be buried, it is often expedient to have the
horse as close to the burial site as possible. This does add one more danger to
the procedure. If the horse bolts or falls unexpectedly, the veterinarian may
be pushed into the hole. It is even possible the horse could fall on top of the
person. If the horse does fall directly into the hole, the attending veterinarian
will have to climb in to verify death. Public events or horses requiring euthana
sia in public settings add several complications. Often, the pu blic wants to help
the poor horse and while this is noble,it is misguided. Too many people in the
area greatly increase the risk of someone getting hurt. An equine public event
to get the horse out of the public view if humanely possible. A mechanism to
Inhalant agents
The use of inhalant drugs to euthanize horses is rarely, if ever, attempted due
to the availability of superior methods.
Noninhalant pharmaceutical agents
Intravenous injections
The jugular vein is the most common site for IV injection of a euthanasia
agent like pentobarbital. A catheter may be placed within the vein or direct
venipuncture may be attempted. A local anesthetic or mild sedation may
facilitate this process. Sedation can be useful for restraint during euthanasia,
but the depressant effect on circulation may increase the time to loss of
good to warn the client that there may also be increased muscular activity
and agonal gasping when euthanizing a sedated horse. Sedation should still be
134Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
Figure 5.47  Jugular injection in a horse using a small extension set.
 Once the injection site has been identified and prepared, the euthanasia
procedure may be performed (Figures 5.47 and 5.48). The client should be
should survey the area one last time to be sure everyone is in safe posi-
tions. This means that onlookers and other animals are at least 2o ft away if
possible.
to change syringes in the middle of the procedure. A second (and possibly
third) syringe full of barbiturate should be readily available in a pocket or
an experienced assistant may hand it to over when needed. The barbiturate
Figure 5.48 Jugular injection in a horse via direct venipuncture.
Euthanasia Techniques 135
Figure 5.49 A confirmed dead horse following barbiturate injection. Note the
openeyes.
drop before the first syringe of barbiturate is given. Others will still stand
for several seconds after the full dose has been administered. Many horses
administered too slowly.the horse may stumble a bit and appear anxious.This
from the injection site once the needle or catheter is removed.
Many veterinarians and assistants will be tempted to try and influence the
way the animal falls to make it more esthetically acceptable to the owner.
Pressure on the halter rope may prevent the head from hitting the ground,
butcanbe difficult andpossibly dangerous tothose around.Understanding
The horse must be monitored for several minutes after it is down. Brain
function will beinhibited by barbiturate anesthesia,but cardiacfunctionmay
continue for several minutes. Additional doses of barbiturate may be needed
of veterinarians that euthanized a horse with inadequate dose of drug and
verified using the corneal reflex, respiratory rate, and cardiac rate until all
signs of life are absent (Figure 5.49).
Technical challenges
Horses may have unpredictable reactions to barbiturate-induced euthanasia.
They may stand for longer than expected, flip over backward, fall various
directions, etc. If the horse has not become recumbent within a couple of
136Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
minutes of barbiturate injection, more drug should be administered. Fifty to
hundred percent of the first dose is usually an effective second dose.
Even in the most extreme of circumstances, a veterinarian should not allow
themselves to run out of solution. If it did happen, due to poor planning or
to another method. Kcl administration would be appropriate if the horse is
already unconscious, perhaps a physical method such as exsanguination or
even gunshot would be appropriate.
disaster or getting injured.
If venous pressures are poor and the veins are difficult to feel, such as with
a sick foal, an IC injection can be performed on unconscious animals using a
large bore 4-6-in. needle.
Physical methods
Gunshot
When euthanasia is to be performed using a gunshot, safety must become the
safety course. All unnecessary personnel and other animals need to be away
should be made aware that there will be bleeding from the bullet entry wound
and from the nostrils
euthanasia. Clients that have attempted to euthanize their own horse using
They often find that after two to three firings, their horse is still standing.
gunshots will be very stressing for everyone and obviously painful for the
patient.
When the horse is in hand and a pistol is used, drawing the imaginary
"X" on the forehead gives the best target. Attention to several details can
auo aul ui loisid aul pue puey auo ui adoi peal aul pioy aew ueeuaiaa
dangerous position. It is also much safer than tying the horse to something
to, which could injure onlookers. When positioning the gun, the barrel should
is fired, potentially disrupting the penetration point. The barrel of the pistol
Euthanasia Techniques137
Figure 5.5o Frontal brain target in horses.
should be within 1-2 in.of the skin on the forehead.When the animal is facing
the shooter, the target is the intersection of lines drawn from the base of the
CDFA2010).
Another critically important point is to allow time for the horse to lower its
head.If the shot is taken with the head elevated, the barrel of the gun will be
brain and exit the back of the skull. The barrel of the gun must be aligned with
the horse's neck as shown in the picture (Figure 5.52)
diate unconsciousness and death. The bullet will remain in the neck decreasing
 the head, but patience is all that is usually required to achieve this positioning.
The veterinarian should wait until the horse lowers its head so the bullet will
travel into the neck instead of exiting the back of the head. When veterinarians
leave the gun elevated and reassure the horse. Almost all horses will bring
barrel and neck.
or frightened horse, a rifle can be used to place a bullet at the base of the ear
from a lateral viewpoint (Figure 5.53).
138Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
Figure 5.51  Improperly placed frontal gunshot in a horse.
This will effectively disrupt brain and brainstem, but the bullet may exit
the other side of the head. Obviously for safety reasons, this technique may
only be used in limited circumstances. Shooting a horse in the neck or chest
does not cause immediate loss of consciousness and is thus not acceptable by
AVMAGuidelinesonEuthanasia.
Figure 5.52 Correct frontal gunshot placement in a horse.
Euthanasia Techniques  139
Figure 5.53 ldeal placement of a lateral gunshot to a horse's head.
Technicafchalfenges
Physical methods such as the use of gunshot create physical changes to the
client request it,especially when other horses will be inthe area soon after.
If the bullet exits the horse, it should be mentioned to the client that they
may find it later. Waiting until the horse lowers its head will prevent this
from happening. If the horse refuses to do so, it should be sedated before
with a large horse or is small in stature himself.
A properly executed gunshot will cause the horse to drop straight to the
ground. Those in the area should be prepared for this. If the bullet does not
penetrate the brainstem correctly, the horse may exhibit erratic movements,
and therefore,another shot should be immediately taken.If thebullet does
exit theback of the head,there will be twobleedingholes and likely tobe more
external bleeding.
Captiveboft
Euthanasia with the penetrating captive bolt has many things in common with
either gunpowder or compressed air and will extend the bolt 3 in. in toward
the brain. The bolt must penetrate the skull of the horse and cause trauma to
the brain, just like in any other species. The instrument is placed against the
forehead of the horse using the imaginary "X." It may be advisable to sedate
140Veterinary EuthanasiaTechniques
the horse as the captive bolt gun must be held perpendicular to the skull and
touching the forehead for maximum penetration of the bolt. As with gunshot
there will be a loud report and the horse will drop abruptly. The operator of the
Expected blood loss can be up to 5oo mL. Extreme fracturing of the skull is
very rare and should not be expected.
Technicalchallenges
If the bolt gun is held at an angle to the skull, the bolt may glance off the bone
and not penetrate. This is painful and not debilitating, so the horse does what
on the level of damage that has been done.
never ideal for the horse or client.
For veterinarians who have never attempted this technique before, pre
be repeated, or in extreme situations, a pithing rod may be used to achieve
death.
Exsanguination
terminal aorta. This allows the animal to bleed into the abdominal cavity. It
would be viewed as inhumane. Death by exsanguination causes great agita-
tion and fear for the few minutes when the brain is not receiving adequate
great distress.
External exsanguination is usually accomplished by transaction of the jugu
lar veins and the carotid arteries in the neck, similar to that in livestock. It
adequate because the blade is too small and requires repeated cuts to be
effective. The thick neck musculature and tissue also make it is easy to break
a scalpel blade. External exsanguination is equally as stressful as the internal
as adjunctive methods by the AVMA
for those performing it and any onlookers. Veterinarians are encouraged to
practice this technique on deceased animals before attempting it with a client
present.
Euthanasia Techniques 141
Specia!circumstances
ever, their youth may make it more difficult to quiet them and keep them
erations for fetuses remain the same for horses as other mammalian species.
When injurynecessitates euthanasia atapublic event,heavy sedation or
anesthesia may be used to quiet the horse until it can be removed and eu
handlers and onlookers remain safe. There may be instances when a physical
method is required and the public should be informed as to why such means
were necessary to prevent further suffering. Removal of the horse should be
done as delicately as possible.
Livestock
The method of euthanasia chosen for any individual case must be tailored to
the client,animal,physicalenvironment,and availableresources.This section
l  l  s  so a  a o s
injection by barbiturate overdose, (2) gunshot, and (3) captive bolt stunning.
Where appropriate, other alternatives that may be indicated in certain circum-
stances will be presented for individual species.
Inhalant agents
Inhalant agents for euthanasia of livestock is very rare, except in those cir-
cumstances where the animal is already exposed to anesthetic gases such as
Noninhalant pharmaceutical agents
Intravenous injections
Cattle
and is often considered the least aversive method of euthanasia for livestock.
Thereseemstobecommonconcernover difficulteuthanasiawhereexcitabil-
the drug administered perivascularly, or severely compromised animals with
or not to sedate an animal and whether or not to use a direct venipuncture
euthanasia by IV injection of pentobarbital is rapid and complete injection of
or catheters (3-5 in., 16-12 gauge) will aid in proper IV delivery.
erally effective, although some individuals routinely increase this dose. For
142  Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
7021
Figure 5.54 Euthanasia of a calf by jugular intravenous (IV) injection. A
14-gauge 2-in. needle was used for the IV injection along with an extension set.
The extension set is not necessary but does allow some freedom if the animal
moves its head and neck while giving the injection. Note that when the animal
becomes recumbent, it lays down to the side opposite the direction the head is
turned.
sodium-pentobarbital-based euthanasia solutions, the labeled dose is 100
mg/kg. Most current pentobarbital-based euthanasia solutions contain 390
mg/ml sodium pentobarbital and the standard dose is approximately1 mL per
4.5 kg (10 Ib) body weight.
euthanasia solution. Direct venipuncture or a jugular catheter may be used. It
is recommended to use the largest gauge needle or catheter that is reasonable
for the size of animal (18-14 gauge for calves, and 16-12 gauge for adult cattle).
While the ear veins are an alternative, their size does not allow for as large a
The animal should be restrained so that the jugular furrow is accessible for
venipuncture or catheter placement (Figure 5.55). In both cases, the venipunc-
ture is directed down the jugular vein with the flow of the blood. An extension
ministration of the euthanasia solution. It is appropriate to draw back on
that the needle is still in the vein. If not, the needle should be redirected or
venipuncture should be attempted at another site. It is critical that the entire
dose of euthanasia solution is administered intravenously and rapidly in order
Euthanasia Techniques143
Figure 5.55 Ahead catch system with a solid wall and a swinging gate that
can be used for physical restraint of cattle for euthanasia. Note how the head is
restrained to the left of the animal. This will result in the animal most likely
falling in right lateral recumbency upon euthanasia. This is important as it
keeps the limbs toward the solid wall and allows safer access to the neck and
jugular veins from the back or dorsum of the animal.
to have a smooth euthanasia with minimal complications. Many euthanasia
procedures that result in adverse behavior or reactions in the animal are due
To perform an IC injection, the location of the heart is identified either by
auscultation or by palpation of the chest. The appropriate site for IC injection
is generally in the 5th ICS at the level of the elbow or just above the elbow. A
Following completion of the injection, the animal will become laterally re-
several seconds. Some paddling of the limbs may be observed. Once recum-
toward the backside of the animal to minimize the risk of being struck by the
limbs. During this time, signs of unconsciousness can be assessed (Box 4.2).
After respiration has stopped, the heart is ausculted to verify cardiac arrest.
in a conscious animal. Once the animal is rendered unconscious by gunshot
or captive bolt, a saturated solution of KCl is administered intravenously. The
specifics of preparing saturated KCl were presented in Chapter 2. However,
if some solid particles of salt are observed in the solution, then the solution
144Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
sufficient to induce cardiac arrest. The solution can be administered IV in the
jugular vein. If the jugular vein is not accessible, then the KCl solution can be
administered as an IC injection in unconscious animals.
Consideration of the disposal of the carcass is critical following euthanasia
enging animals and the carcass must be disposed of properly. More details
regarding this can be found in Chapter 6.
Sheepandgoats
containing euthanasia solutions. The standard dosage of 1 mL per 10 Ib body
weight is recommended. As with other species, it is critical that the euthana-
sia solution is injected rapidly and that it all enters the vascular space. Thus,
performing a competent venipuncture or placing an IV catheter is critical for a
smooth euthanasia. Clipping the animal's neck will aid in venipuncture (Figures
5.56-5.58). Most problems with rough euthanasia are due to either perivascu-
lar administration of some or all of the euthanasia solution or cardiovascular
condition and the sedative.
calmly collapse into sternal, then lateral recumbency. The eyes generally re-
ae saxaau egaded pue eauo 'sldnd paiep uim paxi pue uado uie
rest. Once respiratory arrest has occurred, the animal should be assessed for
cardiac arrest by auscultation of the heart.
Swine
forming a successful venipuncture or IC injection. These procedures generally
require suitable restraint. In debilitated or obtunded domestic pigs, successful
venipuncture of an ear vein may allow for administration of euthanasia so-
lution. Alternatively, venipuncture of the anterior vena cava, brachiocephalic
vein, or jugular vein may be attempted in the neck. Because pigs generally
resist physical restraint, this procedure will benefit from injectable sedation
or anesthesia. Many pigs also tolerate being masked and anesthetized with
isoflurane (Figure 5.59). Once the pig is sedated or anesthetized, venipunc-
ture or IC injection can be done more successfully and with little distress to
thepig.
or captive bolt stun. In these cases, the owners often expect us to perform
this in a way that will cause minimal distress in their pet during the procedure.
injectable anesthetic combination or masking the pig with isoflurane either
Euthanasia Techniques145
Figure 5.56 Good visualization of the jugular vein in sheep. Shaving the neck
is recommended for improved euthanasia by injection in sheep.
with or without sedation depending on the demeanor of the pig. Once the
pig is anesthetized, a lethal injection of a pentobarbital-containing euthanasia
solution (1 mL per 10 Ib body weight) can be administered. IC injection is often
easier than venipuncture. This method is well received by most pet pig owners.
Figure 5.57 Injecting the jugular vein in a sheep. Notice the gentle restraint
and proper positioning used.
146Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
Figure 5.58Placing an intravenous catheter in the ear vein of a sheep.
intracardiac injection of a euthanasia agent.
If this is a large domestic pig and cost is a concern, then a saturated solution
of KCl could be used instead of the pentobarbital euthanasia solution since
thepigis already anesthetized atthe timeofeuthanasia.
Liamasandaipacas
Euthanasia by lethal injection is probably the most common method used for
llamas and alpacas. This method is less aversive to most owners and often
provides a very peaceful death. The animal should be restrained physically.
with or without sedation, or anesthetized. Some owners may request or pre
fer sedation prior to the euthanasia. Sedation should definitely be used if
Euthanasia Techniques147
alpaca. Note the obvious flow of blood. This should be minimized and contained
wheneverpossible.
physical restraint is not adequate to allow for a proficient jugular venipunc
ture.However,sedation and anesthesia may prolong the time from admin-
istration of the euthanasia solution to cardiac and respiratory arrest. This
aware.
Jugular venipuncture can be challenging in llamas and alpacas, particularly
in intact males.Male camelids have thickerskinoverlying the jugularfurrow
making it more difficult to identify the jugular vein and to insert a needle.
Clipping the neck will aid in identification of the jugular vein. Initially clipping
both left and right jugular furrows often makes it easier to appreciate the
anatomy and gives more options should problems occur with the first attempt
on one side. Jugular venipuncture can be performed standing, recumbent
in the cushed position (sternal recumbency),orin lateral recumbency (Fig-
relaxed and level with the head slightly turned away from the side used for
the venipuncture (i.e.,if performing venipuncture in the right jugular, turn the
head slightly to the left).Jugularvenipuncture canalso beperformed with
the animal in lateral recumbency if they will allow physical restraint in that
jugular vein, it is often easier to see the jugular vein recede when you stop
used for both sedation and the euthanasia procedure.
If the animal is to be euthanized in a chute, then one must plan for extraction
148Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
alpaca.
catch should be released to prevent these from jamming with the weight of
the recumbent animal pressed against them.
The dosage of currently available pentobarbital euthanasia solutions is 1 mL
possible. This dosage is typically sufficient in most animals; however, there are
IV injection by the jugular vein is preferred. This can be done either directly
with a needle or from a catheter. The medial saphenous vein is an alternative
site but requires that the animal is heavily sedated or anesthetized and is in
saphenous veins are accessible or suitable for IV injection, an IC injection can
be performed. IC injection is most easily performed from the left side at the
5th ICS just behind the elbow.
to lateral recumbency. The eyes will remain open and fixed, with dilated pupils
The corneal and palpebral reflex will be absent. Respiratory arrest followed
by cardiac arrest generally occurs within 2-5 minutes. Some regurgitation,
defecation, or urination may be observed.
Technica! challenges (Cattfe, sheep, goats, swine, and camelids)
IV injections in these species have challenges similar to those in others. Vein
thick layers of wool or hair. In swine, veins can be difficult to access due to
their thick skin and fat content. when shears or clippers are unavailable and
Euthanasia Techniques 149
Physical methods
Gunshot
Performed appropriately, euthanasia by gunshot renders the animal immedi-
sia by gunshot, the shot is made from a very close distance. This puts the
addition,thereis the risk of misfiring the gun,either by accident or as aresult
of impact from a poorly restrained animal. There is the potential for ricochet
off of the skull of the animal or from other solid objects if the bullet misses
or fully penetrates the target. This increases the risk for personal injury or
age (see Chapter2).
· Be familiar with the firearm that is being used.
· Assure adequate physical or chemical restraint of the animal. Even a de
bilitatedorsedatedanimal cansuddenlylungeforwardortothesideand
misfire.
· Be familiar with the surroundings and consider what is behind and to the
sides of the target.
· Any handlers assisting with animal restraint should remain behind the muz
zle of the firearm.
While gunshot is more likely than captive bolt stunning to directly result in
death, a secondary means of assuring death such as pithing, exsanguination,
IV KCl, and pneumothorax should always be available if needed.
Caftle
The animal must be sufficiently restrained in order to perform an accurate
shot and maximize safety. The type of restraint is dependent on both physical
facilities and the size and temperament of the animal. Physical restraint is
generally sufficient for dairy cattle, docile beef cattle, or markedly compro
mised cattle. In these cases, a halter tied to a post may be sufficient. If the
animal is recumbent, a halter may be used to tie the head back to the rear leg.
paziubooal ag pinous li ing jueisisse ue ag Alaall piay ag ues peal jalley aui
that this increases the potential risk to the handler from either the animal or
the gunshot.
150Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
Figure 5.62 The point of penetration for gunshot or captive bolt in cattle is
at the intersection of imaginary lines drawn from the lateral canthus to the
horns, or point on the head where horns would emerge. The angle should be
brainstem and foramen magnum. (Image courtesy of Dr. J.K. Shearer,
Procedures for Humane Euthanasia, lowa State University Extension.)
In more excitable animals, a chute or head catch may be required for safe
bullet that misses or fully penetrates the target. Chutes or head catches must
have the ability to open on at least one side to allow for removal of the carcass
following euthanasia. when using such a chute, it is very important to release
dismembering the carcass to remove it from the chute.
The choice of firearm and bullet was discussed in Chapter 2. For calves
u    i     s t e   
point (young calves) or round nose bullets (juvenile and older cattle) are
slugs or No. 4, 5, or 6 birdshot will also work.
the animal. The barrel of the gun should be within 2-12 in. of the impact site
for pistols and rifles and within 1-2 m for the shotgun. The most common
location for gunshot in cattle is at the intersection of two lines extending from
the outside (lateral canthus) of the eyes to the base of the opposite horn or
either perpendicular to the skull or angled slightly up to direct penetration
of the bullet toward the foramen magnum. A perpendicular shot has less risk
of ricochet off of the skull but may only penetrate the rostral aspect of the
the eyes to the ears. A common error made by veterinarians with euthanasia
Euthanasia Techniques  151
Figure 5.63 The bovine skull showing the point of penetration for euthanasia
by gunshot or captive bolt. In the lateral view, the difference in penetration of a
seen. The angled shot has an increased risk or ricochet, but it will also cause
more damage to the brainstem and vital control of cardiac and respiratory
the cerebral cortex resulting in ineffective euthanasia.(Frontal skull image
courtesy of Dr. J.K. Shearer, Procedures for Humane Euthanasia, lowa State
University Extension.)
consciousness over time.
be considered when the positioning of the animaldoes not allow foreasy
shot is located from behind the head and the shot is directed from just caudal
to the pole of the head aiming at the muzzle. Both of these alternatives have
a higher risk of complete penetration of the bullet and ricochet and may be
the location of the temporal shot as described previously, the middle of the
Once the animal has fallen and it is safe, the animal should be approached fon
a head shot as previously described.
Followingthe gunshot,the animal shouldbe assessedforunconsciousness
diately become laterally recumbent and lack a righting reflex. The eyes will
152Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
function.
Gunshot has a greater likelihood of resulting in cardiac and respiratory
will continue to penetrate until it stops. However, a gunshot may not always
cause direct trauma to the brainstem. Thus, it is recommended that a gunshot
is still followed by a secondary method of causing cardiac and respiratory
Captive bolt
Cattle
Euthanasia with a captive bolt is similar to gunshot but has several advantages.
to property from a free projectile, and fewer regulatory considerations. The
main disadvantage is the high upfront cost.
The choice of the type of captive bolt stunner was already discussed in
Chapter 2. Some captive bolt stunners have different strength charges and
the appropriate charge should be selected for the animal species and size
the same as for gunshot. The frontal site is generally recommended in most
field and veterinary situations. However, in some cases, due to positioning and
facilities, it may be safer and easier to obtain accurate placement from above
and behind the animal aiming just behind the pole and toward the muzzle of
the animal. The barrel of the captive bolt stunner should be held either directly
allows for a greater velocity of the bolt upon impact with the skull. In some
models of captive bolt stunners, the bolt is actually recessed slightly into the
chamber to provide an automatic gap and increase bolt velocity and higher
thick bone structure to the skull such as adult bulls and boars (Figure 5.64).
to always result in cardiac and respiratory arrest and death. For this reason,
should always be employed such as exsanguination, pithing, IV injection of
Gunshot or captive bolt
Sheep and goats
Euthanasia by gunshot or captive bolt is an acceptable method of euthanasia
in small ruminants. The equipment is essentially the same with appropriate
choices for caliber of firearm and specific power cartridge used for the captive
Euthanasia Techniques 153
cow. Note the light restraint with a halter and that the head is turned slightly to
the animal's left so that it will fall in right lateral recumbency, allowing safe
access from the backside of the animal. The captive bolt stunner is placed
directly against the animal for firing. Note in this case that the stunner is
angled slightly from perpendicular so that the penetrating bolt is directed more
toward the foramen magnum and the brainstem.
bolt stunner. A .22 caliber pistol or rifle is adequate for small ruminants. A
hollow or soft point bullet is suitable for young animals and most adult small
way through the animal and thus has a decreased risk of human injury or
bucks with thick skull bone structure, a solid point round nose long rifle shell
ismore suitable.Almost all commercial penetrating captivebolt stunners are
acceptable for euthanasia of small ruminants.
Three sites are described for euthanasia of small ruminants, (1) the crown
site, (2) the poll site, and (3) the frontal site. The crown position is the rec-
ommended method for polled sheep and goats (Figure 5.65). The location of
this site is on midline at the highest point of the head between the ears, point-
sheep or goats, the bone structure at the top of the skull may be too dense for
optimum penetration. Also, this dense bone may increase the risk of ricochet
goats is the poll position. The poll position is on midline just behind the bony
ridge at the top of the head and aiming toward the muzzle or chin in goats
It should be noted, however, that the poll site in sheep may result in reduced
respiratory arrest is recommended.
154Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
Figure 5.65 Diagram showing both the frontal and poll sites for euthanasia
by gunshot or captive bolt. The frontal site is suitable for polled animals but is
less desirable in horned sheep and goats due to the high bone density in the
front of the skull. (lmage courtesy of Dr. J.K. Shearer, Procedures for Humane
Euthanasia, lowa State University Extension.)
The frontal position is described but is only recommended for polled sheep.
This site is located on midline just above the eyes with the shot directed in
sun re sous jadoid e jot papaau albue aul (ot's aunbi) yoau aun yim aull
site increases the risk of ricochet with gunshot, particularly in horned animals
(Figure 5.71). In goats, the brain is located more caudally, making this site less
acceptablefor goatsthaninsheep.
Following gunshot or captive bolt stun, the animal should become immedi-
ately recumbent and unconscious. Tonic seizure may be observed and may
progress to paddling of the limbs. The eyes remain open and fixed, generally
erratic.
arrest should always be performed following gunshot or captive bolt stun.
these procedures are the same as in cattle.
Swine
Of all the livestock species, pigs are probably the most challenging animal to
anatomy and also the difficulty to get sufficient restraint to allow for accurate
Euthanasia Techniques  155
Figure 5.66 Euthanasia of a goat using a captive bolt gun in the crown
position.
thick frontal bones and thick sinuses covering the brain. In addition, the target
area is very small.
As with all species, proper selection of firearm or captive bolt stunner is
critical. while a .22 caliber pistol or rifle may be adequate for young or juvenile
pigs, larger caliber firearms are necessary for adult pigs, particularly boars. A
minimum of a .22 magnum should be used on adult sows and a minimum of
a .357 should be used on adult boars. Because of the heavy bone structure
and sloped anatomy of the skull, solid point round nose bullets should be
used to maximize penetration and minimize ricochet. An appropriate captive
through the frontal sinuses to the brain in adult swine.
Pigs, in general, are a difficult species to approach closely without confine
ment or restraint. This is necessary to allow for accurate placement of the
firearm or captive bolt stunner. A nose snare may be used if necessary but will
increase the distress in the animal.However,it may provide the opportunity
for a more accurate shot and thus minimize the potential for pain and further
distress in the animal. If a snare is used, the holder should stand behind the
operator of the firearm or captive bolt. Alternatively, the animal may first be
sedated to reduce movement and allow for a more accurate shot with less
distress in the animal.
Thefrontalsiteisrecommendedforgunshotorcaptiveboltstunninginpigs.
above eye level (3-4 cm in larger sows and boars) aiming toward the foramen
magnum and spinal canal (Figure 5.72). A transverse temporal shot (Figure
5.72) or an oblique shot (Figure 5.73) from behind the ear directed toward the
156Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
Figure 5.67 Euthanasia of a sheep using a captive bolt gun in the crown
position.
Figure 5.68 The poll site for gunshot or captive bolt stunning used in polled
or horned sheep and goats. The point of entry is just behind the ridge line of the
poll and thus slightly behind the crown site. In sheep, the aiming point is toward
the throat. In goats, the aiming point is either toward the throat,like sheep, or
the muzzle of the animal muzzle of the the animal. (lmage courtesy of Dr. J.K.
Shearer, Procedures for Humane Euthanasia, lowa State University Extension.)
Euthanasia Techniques   157
Figure5.69
 Euthanasia of a sheep using a captive bolt gun in the poll
position.
Figure5.7o
Euthanasia of a sheep using a captive bolt gun in the frontal
position.
158Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
Figure 5.71 Diagram showing the crown site for euthanasia with gunshot or
captive bolt in sheep or goats. This site is acceptable for sheep and goats
without horns but is considered less reliable in horned sheep and goats due to
the more dense bone structure. (Image courtesy of Dr. J.K. Shearer,
Procedures for Humane Euthanasia, lowa State University Extension.)
bolt.
Following an appropriately placed shot, the pig will immediately collapse.
seizure activity. If an animal does not demonstrate intense tonic spasm and
instead has milder paddling or kicking movements, then it is likely that the
Figure 5.72 Diagram of the sites for a frontal shot (acceptable for both
gunshot and captive bolt) and the temporal shot (acceptable for gunshot only)
in swine. (lmage courtesy of Dr. J.K. Shearer, Procedures for Humane
Euthanasia, lowa State University Extension.)
Euthanasia Techniques  159
Figure 5.73 Diagram showing the point of aim and direction for an oblique
shot that can be used with a firearm for euthanasia of swine. (lmage courtesy
of Dr. J.K. Shearer, Procedures for Humane Euthanasia, lowa State University
Extension.)
stunning was ineffective and it should be repeated immediately. During this
time, the animal should have open, fixed eyes with dilated pupils. The corneal
reflex should be absent.
inordertosever thecommon carotid arteries and othermajorbloodvessels
near the heart.
Liamas and aipacas
Gunshot or captive bolt stun is most easily performed with the animal standing
or cushed. This allows the best access to the poll of the head and an accurate
shot. If necessary. the head can be restrained with a halter and lead, or a rope
can be used to hold the head steady to the left and the right. The leads should
be tied off to a post or other sturdy object.Alternatively,the handlers holding
the euthanasia to minimize risk of injury from a ricochet.
although not as commonly elected by owners. For gunshot, a .22 caliber hollow
or soft point long rifle shell is adequate for alpacas and young llamas and a
.22 caliber round nose long rifle shell is best for adult llamas. Most penetrating
160Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
Figure 5.74 Sites for gunshot or captive bolt stunning in llamas and alpacas.
The crown site (left) is located at the top of the head on midline directly
between the ears and directed toward the throat. The frontal site is just above
the intersection of two lines drawn from the eyes to the opposite ear and
directed toward the foremen magnum.
captive bolt stunners are adequate for both llamas and alpacas. If the captive
bolt stunner has different size blanks, the same charge recommended for
sheep should be suitable for llamas and alpacas.
mended in llamas and alpacas (Figure 5.74). The crown site is located at the
top point of the head directly between the ears on midline and aimed down-
ward toward the throat. This is similar to that described for hornless sheep.
The frontal site is located on the forehead at a point just above the intersec-
tion of a two imaginary lines drawn from the eyes to the opposite ears. The
shot is directed toward the foramen magnum. Even though the illustration
does not show it, a bullet from the gunshot method would ideally stay within
the neck and not exit the body. Whenever possible, the animal should be given
time to lower its head and provide the veterinarian with a perfectly positioned
shot.
to lateral recumbency. The eyes will remain open but become fixed with di-
lated pupils. The corneal and palpebral reflex will be absent. In all cases, a sec-
urated KCl solution. The methods for this are identical to those described for
cattle.
Technical challenges (Cattle, sheep, goats, swine, and camelids)
Physical methods such as the use of gunshot and captive bolt create physical
changes to the body similar to that of horses and other species. Because of
Euthanasia Techniques  161
Figure 5.75 Diagram showing the method for exsanguination by severing the
blood vessels of the neck.A rigid knife at least 6 in.inlength is inserted behind
the jaw and just below the vertebrae. The cut is extended outward in order to
J.K.Shearer,Procedures for Humane Euthanasia,lowa State University
Extension.)
the thickened craniums typical to these species, especially those with horns,
penetration by both the bullet and the bolt. An immediate second firing may
be required to avoid pain and distress in the animal. As mentioned previ-
ously, a secondary adjunctive method may be required and should be readily
available.
Exsanguination
Catfle, sheep, goats, swine, and camelids Exsanguination, considered an
adjunctive method by the AVMA, is performed by severing the major blood
vessels of the neck. Once the animal has been rendered unconscious, a sturdy
knife at least 6 in. in length is inserted behind the jaw and just below the ver-
younger livestock is to sever the brachial vasculature. This is performed by
lifting the forelimb and making a deep cut beneath the elbow to the shoul-
der (Figure 5.76). Again, this is considered an adjunctive acceptable method
aware of the procedure,this would be considered a slaughter procedure,not
euthanasia.
If the neck is not easily cut, more force will need to be applied to the blade
and deeper cutting movements performed. This can be emotionally troubling
162 Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
Figure 5.76 Method for exsanguination by severing the brachial blood
vessels. A deep cut is made in the axilla extending up to the shoulder. (lmage
courtesy of Dr. J.K. Shearer, Procedures for Humane Euthanasia, lowa State
University Extension.)
for those performing it and any onlookers. Veterinarians are encouraged to
present.
Pithing
Cattle, sheep, goats, swine, camelids Pithing is another adjunctive method
anss uieag aoisap oi pasn sl ll 'siewiue snoiosuooun ui pasn ag ueo peui
and cause death following techniques that may only render the animal uncon-
The rod is then moved in a vertical, horizontal, or circular motion to cause
contribute to the dissemination of brain particles to other tissues. Because
of this and the risk of contaminating edible tissue with prions in BSE-infected
animals, pithing is currently banned for slaughter animals in Europe.
Special circumstances
fetus. Current research suggests that the fetus is not sentient until after it has
taken a breath (Mellor et al. 2005; Mellor and Diesch 2006; Mellor 2010). While
the fetus will show reflex responses to stimuli in utero, there is no conscious
perception of pain or discomfort. This has implications regarding euthanasia.
First, in circumstances where a pregnant dam is euthanized, the fetus does
not have recognition of pain or distress as long as it stays within the uterus
Euthanasia Techniques163
is to be prepared for custom slaughter,thefetus should remain within the
uterus for a period of 15-20 minutes, or until dead.
These concepts also pertain to the ethical and moral considerations in dys
tocias where the fetus is alive but cannot be delivered vaginally and a cesarean
a breath. If this alternative is selected, the first cut should be made rapidly
and result in severing major blood vessels (i.e., removal of the head for an-
terior presentation or a hind limb at the pelvis for a posterior presentation)
while not a pleasant choice to have to make, should at least be considered
physiologically humane based on current research.
Masseuthanasiainsituationsofexoticcontagiousdiseaseoutbreaks also
poses unique considerations for livestock (Baker and Scrimgeour 1995). Hu-
foot and mouth disease (FMD) may be limited. Also, the logistics of depopulat-
facilities must be considered (de Klerk 2002, Scudamore et al. 2002). Fur-
ther consideration must be made for how the remains of the animals will be
collected and disposed of. Euthanasia in situations of mass eradication of a
If large numbers of animals must be euthanized expediently on the original
premise, the most likely method will be gunshot. It should be noted that in the
the animal where adjunct methods are required.Firearms witha muzzle veloc-
ity of at least 300 ft lb are recommended for livestock less than 4o0 Ib body
weight. Firearms with a muzzle velocity of at least1ooo ft Ib are recommended
for animals greater than 4o0 Ib body weight (US Department of Agriculture
2004, (AVMA euthanasia guideline review 2011)).
primary methods of euthanasia in livestock that are accepted by the AVMA: (1)
tion,(2) gunshot,and (3) captive bolt stunning.It must be acknowledged that
of thesemethodsofeuthanasiaisnotimmediatelyavailable.Suchsituations
moral responsibility to relieve suffering. Morally, we face the consideration of
withthepotentialofadditionalacutepainand distress.
sible to emulate the principles of euthanasia by rapidly rendering the anima
164Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
cardiac and respiratory arrest. Small livestock (lambs, kid goats, crias, and per-
is forcefully propelled into the frontal area of the skull resulting in skull frac
ture and both concussive and physical damage to the brain. This procedure
when inappropriately applied. It must be followed by an adjunct method of in-
ducing cardiac and respiratory arrest such as exsanguination, pneumothorax,
heavy doses of xylazine do not render the animal unconscious prior to induc
justifiable in the uncommon situations where prolonged suffering and natural
death by the animal was considered less humane than these alternatives.
Unacceptable methods for domestic animals
There are numerous unacceptable methods of euthanasia, many of which
otherwise. It was decided that these methods could not reliably and consis-
tently demonstrate the necessary criteria of today's euthanasia model, listed
previously in the Introduction. Anexample of this is the once acceptable use of
and unacceptable in others. For a complete listing of these techniques, see
In general, the AvMA does not condone the use of injectable agents via the
SQ,intramuscular, intrapulmonary, and intrathecal routes, with the exception
of some injectable anesthetic agents such as ketamine or xylazine (only to
be used in rodents with published studies on efficacy). The IP route should
not be used in pregnant animals. Household chemicals, disinfectants, cleaning
agents under any circumstance. Other unacceptable approaches to euthana-
animal that requires unconsciousness before proceeding. Paralytic immobiliz-
ing agents such as curare, succinylcholine, and strychnine are condemned as
'ue snosuooun ue ui pasn ag Auo aeu aaul eiseueuina jo siuabe alo
but due to the availability of other agents, their use in general should rarely
beneeded.
When the attending veterinarian feels that euthanasia must occur for what-
ever the reason, any method of euthanasia is conditionally acceptable as long
Euthanasia Techniques   165
it is a client-owned animal, the client must agree to the termsof death and be
informed of all possible outcomes.
Death and associated signs
Signs of death are generally considered to be similar between all species. Body
movements, reflexive breathing, urination or defecation, etc., commonly occur
as the body and mind cease to function. It is important to recognize all signs
●Body stretching
● Pupil dilation
· Urination
· Defecation
· Eye glazing
· Third eyelid extension
· Small spasms, that is, whisker movement, toe flexing
· Agonal breathing
· Borborygmi
· Thoracic air release, that is, airway sounds when the body is moved
· Opisthotonus
· Nasal fluid discharge
 Fly strike
Verification of death can be done by the following:
●Lack of pulse
· Absence of audible heart beat
· Graying of the mucous membranes
· Apnea
·Lack of reflexes, that is, corneal reflex
· Cardiac puncture; no movement
· Rigor mortis
imal should be evaluated for absence of respiration for a period of at least
5 minutes. If the respiration is very shallow, it can be difficult to evaluate.
An alternativeis to hold amirror near thenares and see if there is any con-
densation on the mirror indicating a breath. This works particularly well with
livestock. Identifying a peripheral pulse can be difficult in large animals, so
thoracic auscultation should beperformed to confirm cardiac arrest.Alter-
natively, this could be assessed by electrocardiogram (EcG) or a doplar unit.
Following death, the pupils will remain dilated and the eyes develop a glazed
166Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
Figure 5.77 Deceased dog with rigor mortis.
to several hours (Figure 5.77). It is critical that death is accurately confirmed
following euthanasia. This remains especially important for those species that
can dramatically slow their metabolism, such as reptiles and amphibians.
Of all of these signs, only rigor mortis indicates that irreversible death has
occurred. Other signs can be seen during various stages of life, anesthesia, and
near-death events with possible revival. A cardiac puncture test is commonly
performed in shelter settings as another verification of death in small animals
(Fakkema 2008). A needle and syringe are inserted within the heart to check
for movement by cardiac muscle contractions. If blood is aspirated, and the
syringe remains still, death is confirmed.
Urination and defecation should be expected with death in most animals.
is on a loved one's lap, within a family's home, or on any surface that will be
difficult to clean. Urine can quickly saturate a towel, so another one should
be within reach if needed. If heart or upper respiratory disease was present,
something should be placed under the head to absorb nasal discharge such as
blood and mucus.
of euthanasia. The use ofinhalants, injectable pharmaceutical agents,or phys
ical methods all demonstrate fairly consistent physical changes depending on
thesia prior to euthanasia with a barbiturate exhibit less agonal breathing or
body stretching (Cooney 2oll). Animals given simple sedation prior to barbi-
turate euthanasia may move slower through all four stages of anesthesia and
exhibit more involuntary signs.
Euthanasia Techniques 167
Figure 5.78 Cow with fixed pupils.
Gunshot or captive bolt gun usage generally sets the animal up for a period
of tetanic spasm that lasts for several seconds. The limbs initially flex and then
in frequency. In some cases, these may increase in force as well and can
are in part due to simple motor reflex responses of the extremities and are
Figure 5.79 Assessing death in a dairy cow.
168Veterinary EuthanasiaTechniques
be aware that exaggerated limb paddling may occur and explain to the client
following gunshot or stunning, the corneal reflex will be absent and the pupil
should become dilated with an absent pupillary light reflex (Figure 5.78). The
respiration pattern will be slow and become erratic.
Depending on the effectiveness of the gunshot or the stun, respiration may
diac arrest is in part determined by the amount of damage to the brain and
brain stem, particularly the medulla oblongata. Because of the free penetra-
captive bolt stunning. However, the possibility of prolonged unconsciousness
without respiratory and cardiac arrest, or regaining consciousness is possible
with both methods. For this reason, applying a secondary method to ensure
death immediately after the animal is unconscious is recommended for eu-
thanasia with gunshot or captive bolt.
The species of animal being euthanized may also demonstrate particular
death signs. Dogs, especially large breeds, may exhibit signs that are very ob-
vious to onlookers. A good example of this is a large agonal breath with mouth
sanigaeg uim paziueuina sieo punos buidsee pnol e pue apim pauado
and reptiles tend to die with their eyes closed. Familiarity with the species
(F1gure 5.79).
Chapter 6
Body Aftercare
Rody care options following the death of animals continues to grow in the
United States. Depending a bit on geography, most owners have the choice
of burial, cremation, rendering, or based on where they reside, body donation
looking in death the way it looked in life. The cost and options available are
often determined by size and species of animal.
hospital or external setting, preparations need to be made to ensure that
the animal is handled according to the client's wishes. Whenever possible,
details should be discussed prior to the procedure when client emotions are
not as fragile and to expedite further steps. If they choose to keep a physical
reminder of their animal, such as a clipping of hair, feather collection, or a clay
permanent change such as cremation.
Bodies should always be treated with the utmost respect, whether the client
 se aem e yons ui paaow ag pinous saipog (aooz dooy pue Aaibii) anbiiet
it is one example (Figure 6.1).
If the animal's body will be moved to an aftercare facility, it will first need
to be prepared by the veterinary staff. Following confirmation of death and
privacy for the family (if requested), the body should be placed in a contain-
from bodily fluids, etc. Ice and other cooling systems can be used to keep small
bodies cold until the client is ready for final aftercare.As of 2012 most veteri-
nary services still use plastic bags of varying thickness to transport remains of
small animals. A growing trend in the companion animal death-care industry is
theuse ofpetcaskets for transporting small animal remains to the aftercare
facility.but this may not be financially feasible or requested for most pets
Jolynn R. Chappell, Robert J. Callan and Bruce A. Connally.
 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
169
170   Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
Figure 6.1 Carrying a large dog down the stairs on a rigid stretcher.
today. Larger animals will require blankets or tarps to wrap or cover the body
When ready, aftercare facility staff will generally arrive to pick up deceased
animals and transport them for burial or cremation. Most clients are not
to have the animal picked up and taken immediately to the crematory on
 a sa  a i a s se n  a
the client's wishes are carried out as quickly as possible. Some veterinary
hospitals, or even the family, will bring the companion animal's body to the
crematory or cemetery themselves to make sure it arrives in a timely fashion.
Burial
Burial options include home burial, pet cemetery burial, or landfill internment.
Animals of various sizes can be buried in boxes of various materials, in blan-
kets, bags, or laid naturally underground with no wrapping at all. Pet ceme
teries will have specific regulations for burials on their grounds. Landfill use is
especially for larger livestock. Disposal at landfills is more common for shel-
number of animals in their rendering facilities
regardless of their size. If the pet's eyes remain open following death, which
Body Aftercare171
Figure 6.2 Gluing a dog's eyes shut prior to burial.
is usually the case with mammals,they may be permanently closed using a
eyelids from opening and eliminate the risk of dirt/debris getting in the eyes
during burial (Figure 6.2).
moved to return the animal to a natural state. Pets can be wrapped in specia
blankets or anything the family feels appropriate, including placing memo-
rable articles such as toys, photos, feeding dishes, and collars/leashes/halters
along with the body. When possible, the animal's body should be tucked into a
Ifa clientis considering burying their animal ontheir property.they must
first contact local authorities to learn the rules and regulations of doing so. In
general,everystate,evencounty,will have specific guidelines thatneedtobe
followed to protect the environment and public at large. It can be difficult to get
a concise,uniform answer as to how a burial should be done.All veterinarians
should be educated on regulations within their state of practice to protect
root systems and be cognizant of utility lines that may be underground. Buria
digging a hole in the frozen ground.
172VeterinaryEuthanasiaTechniques
poses a serious health risk, including death, for predators. Even smaller car-
casses from dogs, cats, and exotics can pose a risk. A famous case of wildlife
ing pentobarbital-infused tissues from two mule carcasses. The rancher and
sonings of bald and golden eagles as well as other species have been reported
(O'Rourke 2002; Krueger 2010). Several federal statutes including Migratory
Bird Treaty Act and the Bald and Golden Eagle Protection Act may apply to
protect these species.
Unfortunately. this is not an uncommon situation. If a veterinarian is found
responsible for the accidental death of endangered species, such as one pro-
tected bythe Endangered Species Actorthe Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA), the US government can issue fines up to as high as $250,0o0 per in-
dividual and $5oo,ooo per organization, as well as imprisonment for up to
2 years. Because of this, it is imperative that veterinarians educate on proper
burial guidelines, even having clients sign a legal document stating they un-
derstand the laws and regulations.
The Raptor Education Foundation based in Denver, Colorado, has created
awareness. with registration, they provide aform to give to clients and keep on
wildlife death occurs. The goal is to protect all wildlife, regardless of the
level of governmental protection. If incidents of wildlife death continue to be
reported, it is possible that burial may not be allowed at all following the use
of barbiturates.
Following are common animal burial guidelines often recommended
throughout the United States:
●Maintain a 150-ft separation from wells and waterways.
ration above the ground water table.
Composting
Composting is considered to be an effective means of recycling organic waste.
It is a simple and easy procedure for the backyard gardener, but is much more
carcasses. Approximately 6 months is required to completely compost an
equine carcass (Brown 2oo7). The actual compost pile must be constructed
the environment. A recently recognized problem with this means of carcass
disposal is that pentobarbital used to euthanize animals may not be completely
Body Aftercare173
Figure 6.3  Inside a crematory oven.
Cremation/incineration
pue yse ol suewa lewue saonpau jeui ssaooud buneay aul s! uoewan
minute, unidentifiable dimensions (PLPA 2009). According to the Pet Loss
Professionals Alliance (PLPA), founded in 2009, there are three types of cre
animal crematory oven, but how the remains are handled is determined by the
(1) Privafe cremafion: A cremation procedure during which only one animal's
body is present in the cremation unit during the cremation process.
one pet's body is present in the cremation unit and the cremated remains
cremated together without any form of separation. These commingled
remains are not returned to the owner.
As of 2011, there are no statistics indicating how many animals are cremated
businesses started annually, it is evident that clients are opting more and more
and offers more options such as scattering the remains, carrying portions
174   Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
the client themselves. Cremation also ensures that any diseases or euthanasia
solution within the deceased pet's body will not contaminate soil or another
living being
Legally. it is important that veterinarians learn about the crematory
try. Many practices today have an agency-type relationship with the local pet
crematory. This means that an agreement is made with a particular crema-
treatment for staff-owned pets, etc. If fraud should be discovered by a client,
ing to exercise due care when referring clients (Hofmann and wilson 2oo0).
Veterinarians are encouraged to visit facilities, meet with staff members, and
ask pertinent questions to gain a full appreciation of operations (Box 6.1)
We should mention that a new form of flame-less cremation, sometimes
This process uses water and potassium hydroxide, or a similar combination
bone fragments. It is also commonly called alkaline hydrolysis. This flame-less
Rendering
Rendering companies are another option for body disposition in some areas.
As of 2011, there are 205 rendering plants in the United States and Canada
(NRA 2011). This option is relatively inexpensive, but is not an acceptable 0p
tion for some clients. Veterinarians need to tell rendering truck operators
if the animal was euthanized with drugs like barbiturates that are not inac-
with pentobarbital for this reason.
Species-specific considerations
Dogs and cats
due to the increasingly important part they have in family life, the aftercare
options continue to become more personalized.
Pet funerals, casket use, and elaborate spreading of ashes are on the rise
in the United States. Pet owners are treating beloved companions similar to
Body Aftercare175
Box 6.1 Taken from small business concerns: what
veterinarians should know about pet cemeteries
and crematoriums (Source: Used with permission
from the AVMA)
· What kind of records does the facility keep?
·How long are the records retained?
● What type of system does the facility use to identify the body bags
animals are received in?
● How will the facility handle multiple transfers from veterinary clinics
to prevent loss of anindividual body's identificationtag?
·Are the bodies provided with toe tags or identification collars so that
they can be identified even if they become displaced from the bags
in which they are transported?
· where and how are the bodies stored after receipt by the facility
and before disposal?
· Does the facility have refrigeration and freezer capacity to
accommodate the volume?
· What method is used to identify, store, and transport patient's
individual ashes after cremation?
· If the facility provides for burials, what size plot is allocated for each
animal?
·How many animals canbe buried ina plot or grave?
■
What is the daily capacity of crematorium furnaces?
·What is the breakdown between the number of communal
cremations versus private cremations?
pets are only those of the pet being cremated?
What is the largest sized body that can be cremated on site?
· Can the facility handle large breed dogs or small farm animals?
· If communal cremations are provided, how many animals are
cremated at one time?
·Are owners or veterinarians permitted to observe the cremation or
burial?
·What is the standard turnaround time for receipt of a body from the
veterinary practice to return of the ashes to the family?
the containers and view the ashes?
· What type of fuel is used in the cremation?
· Do ashes contain chunks of bone or teeth, or are they sifted to
remove those fragments before they are returned to the owners?
· Has the facility been inspected by the state, and if so, when was the
last inspection?
·Are there any fenced-off portions of land in the cemetery area?
 What is the number of pets handled annually?
● Can the facility sustain its growth over the next 5-20 years?
For instance, does it burn medical waste?
· Do the furnaces meet the EPA requirements for the location?
176Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
GYPSY
1976
796
Figure 6.4An example of a pet cemetery grave marker.
human loved ones (Figure 6.4). Veterinarians are integral in the preparation
for aftercare wishes and, by becoming educated themselves on all of the avail-
able options, can make the entire process easier for families. within the rapidly
growing specialty field of pet hospice, veterinarians and pet care professionals
have an opportunity to partner earlier with families preparing for a loss.
ag pinous Aaun 'eiseueuina buimolol aiis uo uiewau isnw jeo pue bop e tl
wrapped in a towel, box, or bag to prevent fluid-release contamination, fly
strike, etc. As discussed in Chapter 5, death changes the body very quickly
bodies are placed in freezers kept on site at the hospital, shelter, crematory.
etc. Cooling bodies is important to slow decomposition and maintain sanitary
conditions at both the hospital and aftercare facility. Human mortuaries use
refrigerated units rather than freezers to hold bodies, which may become the
norm for pets. As mentioned before, physical mementoes may be offered to
the family before body disposition occurs.
Exotics
Exotic pets should be handled with the same reverence as other companion
animals. For those clients wishing a private cremation, the ashes are returned
in very small urns or decorative boxes. The client may have requested a paw
print, a small group of hair or feathers, or the leg band.
Some species hold unique characteristics to consider when processing. A
Body Aftercare177
the rest of the bones. Snail shells will cremate similar to bone. The smaller the
body, the smaller the amount of ash will remain.
Horses
after euthanasia (Haskell and Ormond 2003). The equipment necessary to
 s   e  ai o  l  s  
between euthanasia and body disposal. Even a short time between euthanasia
and disposition of the body may provide an opportunity for scavengers. A little
time spent makingthese preparations cansavemuch stress wheneuthanizing
a horse. This becomes more difficult with an emergency euthanasia. Having a
appreciated service for the horse owner.
In most cases, some form of equipment will be necessary to move the body.
A tractor with a loader is most commonly used to lift the body. It is difficult
to get large horses into some tractor loader buckets. Forklift teeth may be
used to slideunder thehorseorchainsmaybewrapped around thelegs and
attached to the loader bucket. This is effective for moving the horse to a
burial site or for loading on to a flatbed trailer or open truck. Tow trucks that
have sliding beds for transporting disabled cars are also a good choice if the
operators are amenable to this task.
Often,thehorse owner will chooseto load the horseinto theirhorse trailer
for transport. The tractor loader does not work well with a covered trailer,so
a handwinch or manyneighbors maybeneeded to slidethebodyinto the
trailer. It is possible to perform the euthanasia in the trailer, but the risk of
into the truck to load the body. lf the body needs to be transported on an open
trailer, some form of cover will make the trip more esthetically acceptable.
Disposal of the body remains a significant problem for the equine owner
(Meeker 2008; CDA 2010). In the United States, at least 200,000 equine
carcasses must be disposed of each year (Messer 2oo8). If we assume the
in the United States.As this book is being written, some horses are still sent to
Canada or Mexico to be processed for human consumption, but the vast ma
of in landfills, or rendered (Meeker 2008).
Burying the horse would seem to be an easy option. while it is widely used
in rural areas, burial has the potential to result in the greatest risk to human
178Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
tion (Meeker 2008). Adding a layer of lime above and below the carcass may
demonstrated when several dogs were poisoned after exposure to a horse
(Kaiser et al. 2010).
Because barbiturates are so persistent in the environment, most localities
will not allow burial of horses euthanized with barbiturates in any area that
might result in contamination of surface or ground water (CDA 2010). Burial in
local landfills where procedures are in place to prevent water contamination
to cause ground water contamination, it is advisable to use a utility locating
There are certain situations, such as on large ranches, where the owner
may choose to leave the body to natural disposition by scavengers. Poten-
scavengers and flies as well as the odor produced are also important factors.
In this case, drugs must not be used to euthanize the horse as these drugs
Options used for small animals such as cremation may be prohibitively ex-
        a   
Some crematoriums may offer a head, heart, and hooves package as a sym-
bolic cremation, which decreases the expense but does not address disposal
of the carcass. Many cremation facilities are now equipped to cremate the
entire horse, but the size necessitates it be quartered down first into a more
manageable size.
Livestock
Because of the variety of species and animal sizes, aftercare considerations
horses. It is always important to discuss aftercare of the carcass remains with
the client prior to euthanasia, as that may affect the choice of euthanasia
method and location. Specifically, one must consider the location of euthana-
sia for large livestock to facilitate movement of the remains if needed. This
a site for burial, or to move to a site for composting. As already mentioned,
consideration must also be made to ensure protection of scavengers from con-
suming contaminated tissue if the animal was euthanized with a barbiturate-
containing euthanasia solution. Lastly, the clients should be informed that
there are fees for most of the methods of body disposal.
Body Aftercare 179
blankets if needed for transport in a car or pickup. Larger livestock including
Movement of these animals generallyrequires mechanical assistance as with
horses.
All of the disposal options previously discussed can be used for livestock.
Cremation may be considered for pet livestock or livestock with other sen-
timentalvalue.The chargesfor cremation are oftenbased on theweight of
the remains. Large-livestock owners may elect to have a partial cremation of
specific body parts, often including the head and heart. Including additional
bone dense tissues such as the limbs will increase the amount of ash returned
to the owner.
Rendering is a common method of livestock carcass disposal, but over the
last decade, this has become more expensive and is less available due to
renderingis that the remains can be removed from the premises quickly and no
further equipment or labor is required. The cost for rendering livestock varies
animal. It is important to be aware of local rendering restrictions for livestock
euthanasia solutions. If a necropsy is performed on the animal prior to pick-up
by the renderer,it isimportantto replace the viscera back into the carcass
and suture the carcass closed with string or twine.
Many landfills will accept the remains of livestock. It is best to contact the
local landfill to determine if there are any specific restrictions and what fees
may be charged. Using the landfill generally has the benefit of a low-cost
alternative if available but does require extra time, labor,and a means to
transport the carcass.
In some cases, euthanized livestock are left in the open to be consumed by
as it has thehighest riskfor the spread ofdisease and contamination ofthe
odor as well as increased flies in the local area of the carcass. If this method
is used, it is critical to determine this prior to performing the euthanasia so
thatanappropriatemethod ofeuthanasia suchas gunshotor captivebolt
solution would be inappropriate in these cases due to the risk of toxicity to
scavenging animals.
Burial is another option for disposal of livestock. It would be rare for livestock
livestock. Burial on the premises is more common. Specific considerations
Owners may have the machinery to do this, or they may contract with a local
excavator. While this is safer than leaving carcasses for surface scavengers
and decomposition, there are still biosecurity and environmental risks. Loca
ordinances must be followed to protect against contamination of streams.
180Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
Figure 6.5 Composting pile for livestock.
lakes, ponds, or ground water and wells. Specific information can often be
obtained from local or regional public health department offices, the county
commissioner's office, or the state department of agriculture, depending on
the office jurisdiction in a given state.
   s  ae  )  o  
fits that it can decrease the pathogen load of the carcass, decrease odors
associated with decay, can be performed any time of the year, is relatively
inexpensive, and requires only a small amount of labor.
seo so molle oi pansund si uawnu aui pue pag siun uo paeid uaui si ssese
some semisolid manure will improve carcass degradation. There should be
the bottom, sides, and top of the carcass. The composting pile is allowed to
sit for 4-6 months. During this time, it is advised to periodically check the
between 104 and 140*F. For optimum pathogen control, the temperature of
the pile should be at least 135°F for at least 3 consecutive days
After 4-6 months, the pile is checked to see if the carcass if fully degraded
If not, the time period can be extended or the pile can be turned to improve
Body Aftercare181
A common problem with carcass composting is not using organic material
problems can result in delayed composting, low pile temperatures, increased
cient and effective method of carcass disposal but does require some labor,
resources, and a commitment to do it right.
Conclusion
uthanasia work,consideredby most tobe aless glamorous facet ofvet-
erinary medicine, needs further research within the techniques themselves
to improve our understanding of methods. Scientific studies to fully appreciate
After all, it is they who are expecting a good death.
Whilethetechniquesandinformationwithinthisbookarebroadandopen
forinterpretation,itis the veterinarian working on behalf of the client and
animal that will ultimately decide the best course of action. The decision to
euthanize must be a collaborative effort, examining all logical possibilities and
outcomes, for the benefit of the animal in question. We, the authors, recognize
that not all decisions for euthanasia will be to alleviate suffering and hope that
the veterinarian themselves and the client faced with the decision to end
life. Strong client communication skills will also go a long way to build trust
encouraged to seek continuing education opportunities in the realm of client
communication.
In the world of companion animals, a new emerging field of animal hospice is
taking shape. The broad mission of animal hospice is to provide palliative care
for the animal as it approaches death, either through euthanasia or the natural
has its place and is deemed acceptable when the suffering of any species is
eminent. For more information on animal hospice, contact the International
Association of Animal Hospice and Palliative Care, www.iaahpc.org.
ulation techniques for animals. This is the rapid destruction of large numbers
of animals in response to emergencies, such as the control of catastrophic
infectious diseases or exigent situations caused by natural disasters (AVMA
euthanasia guidelines draft review 2011). To address this area, the AVMA plans
to release a new document, AvMA Guidelines for fhe Mass Depopulafion of
Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques: A Practicar Guide, First Edition. Kathleen A. Cooney,
Jolynn R. Chappell, Robert J. Callan and Bruce A. Connally.
 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
183
184Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques
Animals. Also soon to come are the recommendations on slaughter, the A vMA
Guidelines for Humane Siaughfer. Both of these documents will include many
common themes in euthanasia work, but not all depopulation and slaughter
methods meet the criteria for euthanasia and are therefore too broad for
this book.
For those providing euthanasia, mass depopulation, or slaughter, compas
sion fatigue is a daily threat. Compassion fatigue is defined as exhaustion
due to compassion stress, the demands of being empathetic and helpful to
those who are suffering (Figley and Roop 2006). It can be theorized then that
tigue. Another common term is the caring-killing paradox, used to describe the
to provide care for animals, a study conducted in 2004 by the Humane Society
   )       o 
of caregivers to provide ongoing professional training on the latest methods
Bibliog
Adams CL, Bonnett BN, and Meek AH. 2Ooo. Predictions of owner response to
companion animal death in 177 clients from 14 practices in Ontario. JAVMA
217(9): 1303-1309.
American Association of Equine Practitioners. 2Oo7. Euthanasia Guidelines.
AVMA. 2Oll. Euthanasia Guidefine Review.
Baier J. (2006). Reptiles. In: C.K. Baer (Editor), Guidelines for Euthanasia of Non-
domestic Animals, American Association of Zoo Veterinarians: Lawrence, USA,
p. 42-45.1SBN: 0-689-70726-6.
Baker HJ and Scrimgeour HJ.1995. Evaluation of methods for the euthanasia of
cattle in a foreign animal disease outbreak. Can Vet J36(3): 160-165.
Booth NH. 1988. Drug and chemical residues in the edible tissues of animals. In:
Booth NH and McDonald LE, eds. Veterinary Pharmacology and Therapeutics,
6th edn, pp. 1149-1205. Ames: lowa State University Press.
Brown LC. 2oo7. The effects of various co-composting materials on the decompo
sition of equine carcasses. Masters Thesis. West Texas A&M University, Canyon,
TX.
Burns R. 1995. Considerations in the euthanasia of reptiles, amphibians, and fish.
narians, Wildlife Disease Association, and American Association of Wildlife Vet-
erinarians, August 12-17 (1995), East Lansing, Michigan, American Association of
Zoo Veterinarians: p.243-249.
Close B,Banister K,Baumans V, Bernoth EM,Bromage N, Bunyan J, Erhardt W,
Flecknell P, Gregory N, Hackbarth H, Morton D, and Warwick C. 1997. Recommen-
dations for euthanasia of experimental animals: part 2. DGXl of the European
Commission. Lab Anim 3l: 1-32.
Cohen S and Sawyer D.1991. Suffering and euthanasia. Probf Vet Med 3(1): 101-109.
Heiping Families and Their Pets Say Goodbye in the Comfort of Home. Ebook.
pp.1-150.
Reptiles. Universities Federation for Animaf Weffare, Potters Bar: England.
Cooper JE, Ewebank R, and Platt E.1984. Euthanasia of tortoises. Vet Rec 1l4: 635.
Cordes T. 2oo8. Commercial transportation of horses to slaughter in the United
States: knowns and unknowns. The Unwanted Horse Issue: What Now? Forum.
Washington, DC: USDA.
Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques: A Practical Guide, First Edition. Kathleen A. Cooney.
Jolynn R. Chappell, Robert J. Callan and Bruce A. Connally.
 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
185
186Bibliography
Cottle LM, Baker LA, Pipkin JL, Parker DB, DeOtte Jr, RE, and Auvermann BS. 2O10
euine jo sassesies buiuiejuos salld psodwos ul sanpisal lelgiegouad wnipos
nized equines. International Symposium on Air Quality & Manure Management
for Agricufture (September 13-16). St. Joseph, Ml. CD-Rom Proceedings. ASABE.
ASAE Pub #711PO510cd.
Daly CC and whittington PE.1986. Concussive methods of pre-slaughter stunning
uoliouny uieig uo uoilsod lod aul ui buiuunis log aalideo jo sioaja :daaus u!
Res Vet Sci 41(3): 353-355.
Daly CC, Gregory NG, Wotton SB, and Whittington PE. 1986. Concussive methods
of pre-slaughter stunning in sheep: assessment of brain function using cortical
evoked responses. Res Vet Sci 41(3): 349-352.
de Klerk PF. 2oo2. Carcass disposal: lessons from The Netherlands after the foot
and mouth disease outbreak of 2001. Rev Sci Tech 21(3): 789-796.
Dennis MB and Dong WK.1988. Use of captive bolt as a method of euthanasia in
larger laboratory species. Lab Anim Sci 38(4): 459-462.
stunning and killing the main commercial species of animals. The EFSA Journa!
24: 1-29.
Fakkema D. 2008. Euthanasia by injection-Training guide. American Humane As-
sociation, p. 29.
Figley CR and Roop RG.2oO6. Compassion Fatigue in the Animal Care Community.
p. 11. Washington, DC: Humane Society Press.
sevoflurane and isoflurane in the rabbit. Lab Anim Sci 33(1): 41-46.
Grandin T. 1998. Objective scoring of animal handling and stunning practices in
slaughter plants. JA VMA 212: 36-39.
Grier RL and Schaffer CB. 199o. Evaluation of intraperitoneal and intrahepatic
administration of a euthanasia agent in animal shelter cats. JAVMA 197(12):
1611-1615.
Haskell SRR and Ormond CJ. 2OO3. Waste management: equine carcass disposal.
JAVMA 223(1): 48-49
Heleski CR. 2oo8. Ethical perspectives on the unwanted horse issue & the US Ban
DC: USDA.
Hofmann M and Wilson J. 2ooo. Small business concerns: What veterinarians
should know about pet cemeteries and crematoriums. JAVMA 216(6): 844-
847.
Kaiser AM, McFarland W, Siemion RS, and Raisbeck MF. 2O10. Secondary pentobar
bital poisoning in two dogs: a cautionary tale. JVDt 22(4): 632-634.
Lagoni L and Butler C.1994. Facilitating companion animal death. Comp Cont Educ
Pract 88: 35-41.
Lagoni L, Butler C, and Hetts S.1994. The Human-Animaf Bond and Grief. p. 194.
Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
Lenz TR. 2oo4. An overview of acceptable euthanasia procedures, carcass
disposal options, and equine slaughter legislation. AAEP Proceedings 191-
195.
Longair JA, Finley GG, Laniel MA, et al. 1991. Guidelines for euthanasia of domestic
animals by firearms. Can Vet J32(12): 724-726.
Lumb W. 1974. Euthanasia by noninhalant pharmaceutical agents. JAVMA 165:
851-852.
Mader DR. (ed.). 1996. Reptile Medicine & Surgery. p. 278. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders.
Bibliography   187
Mader,Douglas R. (ed.). 1996. Reptile Medicine & Surgery, Mader, Douglas R., p.
278. Philadelphia: WB Saunders Co.
Martin F and Ruby K. 2oo4. Factors associated with client, staff, and student satis
faction regarding small animal euthanasia procedures at a veterinary teaching
hospital. JA VMA 224(11): 1774-1779.
McCarthur S, Wilkinson R, and Meyer J. 2oO4. Medicine and Surgery of Tortoises
and Turtles, p. 400. Ames: Blackwell Publishing.
McMillan F. 2oo1. Rethinking euthanasia: death as an unintentional outcome.
JA VMA 219(9): 1204-1206.
Meeker DL. 2oo8. Panel: Unwanted horse issues; carcass disposal options. The
Unwanted Horse Issue: What Now? Forum. Washington, DC: USDA.
Mellor DJ. 2010. Galloping colts, fetal feelings, and reassuring regulations: putting
animal-welfare science into practice. J Vet Med Educ 37(1): 94-100.
Mellor DJ and Diesch TJ. 2oo6. Onset of sentience: the potential for suffering in
fetal and newborn farm animals. Appf Anim Behav Sci10o: 48-57.
for understanding fetal pain. Brain Res Rev 49(3): 455-471.
Messer NT. 2oo8. The historical perspectives of the unwanted horse. The Unwanted
Horse Issue: What Now? Forum. Washington, DC: USDA.
thanasia: considerations, methods & types of drugs. fLAR Journaf, Nationaf
Academy of Sciences 50(4): 357 (portions of this manuscript were published
in Neiffer (2007),& Stamper (2007))
Pasquini C, Spurgeon T. 1992. Anatomy of Domestic Animais, 5th edn. Pilot Point:
Sudz Publishing.
Plumb DC.2005.Plumb's Veterinary Drug Handbook,5th edn.Ames: Blackwell
Publishing.
Pritchett K, Corrow D, Stockwell J, and Smith A. 2o05. Euthanasia of neonatal mice
with carbon dioxide. Comp Med 55(3): 275-281.
Ramsey EC and Wetzel Rw.1998. Comparison of five regimens for oral administra
tion of medication to induce sedation in dogs prior to euthanasia. JAVMA 213:
240-242.
Reeve CL, Rogelberg SG, Spitzmuller C, and Digiacomo N. 2OO5. The caring-killing
Psycho/ 35: 119-143.
Rhoades RH. 20O2. Euthanasia Training Manuaf, pp.1-151. Washington, DC: Humane
Society of the United States.
Rogelberg SG, Reeve CL, Spitzmiller C, Clark O, Natalie DiGiacomo N, Schultz L,
Walker A, Gill P, and Carter, N. 2007. Animal Shelter Worker Turnover: The Im
Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association 23o: 713-719.
Rollin B.2006. Euthanasia and quality of life. Commentary. JAVMA 228(7):
1014-1016.
Scudamore JM, Trevelyan GM, Tas MV, Varley EM, and Hickman GA. 20O2. Car-
aseasip yinow pue poo ayl buimooy uieig peaiy woiy suossal lesodsip sses
outbreaks of 2001. Rev Sci Tech 21(3): 775-787.
Torreilles SL, McClure DE, and Green SL. 2OO9. Evaluation and refinement of
euthanasia methods for Xenopus laevis. J Am Assoc Lab Anim Sci 48(6): 708.
Tranquilli W and Thurmon J. 2oo7. Lumb and Jones Veterinary Anesthesia and
Anaigesia, 4th edn, pp. 274-281. Ames: Blackwell Publishing.
Villalobos A and Kaplan L. 2Oo7. Canine and Feline Geriatric Oncology: Honoring
the Human-animal Bond,pp.1-32O. Ames: Blackwell Publishing.
188
Bibliography
Voss LJ, Sleigh JW, Barnard JP, et al. 2Oo8. The howling cortex: seizures and
general anesthetic drugs. Anesth Analg 107(5): 1689-1703.
Wadham JB. 1997. Intraperitoneal injection of sodium pentobarbitone as a method
of euthanasia for rodents. ANZCCART News 1O(4): 8.
Wolfelt A.2004. When Your Pet Dies: A Guide to Mourning. Remembering. and
Healing, pp. 1-76. Bishop: Companion Press.
Wright KM. 2OO1. Restraint techniques and euthanasia. In: Wright KM, Whitaker BR,
(eds) Amphibian Medicine and Captive Husbandry. Krieger: Malabar FL.
Web References
www.aasv.org/aasv/documents/SwineEuthanasia.pdf
- on-farm euthanasia of
swine: recommendations for the producer.
www.AEMv.org - pain management in rabbits and rodents.
www.ahc.umn.edu/rar/euthanasia.html - University of Minnesota (UMN) 2oo9. Re-
search Animal Resources, Board of Regents.
herp care collection.
www.avma.org/onlnews/javma/jan02/sO11502d.asp - O'Rourke 2002. Euthanized
animals poisoning wildlife. Accessed November 2010
www.nwnyteam.org/Dairy/Natural9o2oRenderingFS.pdf
- Natural Rendering:
Composting Livestock Mortality and Butcher Waste.
www.colorado.gov/cs/Satellite?blobcol=urldata&blobheader =application%2Fpdf
&blobkey=id&blobtable=MungoBlobs&blobwhere=1251663391356&ssbinary=
true - Livestock carcass disposal. Colorado Department of Food and Agriculture
(CDFA), Animal Industry Division, e-News, Fall 2010. Accessed November 1, 2010.
tory animals.
www.creighton.edu/fileadmin/user/ResearchCompliance/lAcuc/forms/
Euthanasia_Guidelines.htm - exotic euthanasia.
www.dem.ri.gov/topics/erp/nahems_euthanasia.pdf - US Department of Agricul-
ture 2oo4. Governmental resource for euthanasia in livestock. National ani-
mal health emergency management system guidelines, operational guidelines,
euthanasia.
www.efsa.europa.eu/en/scdocs/doc/45ax1.pdf - welfare aspects of animal stun-
ning and killing methods.
www.fda.gov/AnimalVeterinary/NewsEvents/FDAVeterinarianNewsletter/
ucmO93929.htm - Myers M. CVM Scientists develop PCR test to deter-
mine source of animal products in feed, pet food. FDA veterinarian newsletter
2004. Accessed February 2011.
www.fws.gov/southeast/news/2002/12-03sec poisoning fact sheet.pdf - Krueger
BW and Krueger KA. Secondary pentobarbital poisoning of wildlife. US FWS fact
sheet. Accessed November 2010.
www.icam-coalition.org/downloads/Methods%20for%20the%20euthanasia%20
of20dogs%20and%20cats-%20English.pdf - world society for the protection
of animals euthanasia document.
www.iccfa.com/groups/pet-loss-professionals-alliance - PLPA 2oo9. Definitions
for cremation.
Bibliography  189
www.justice.gov/dea/index.htm - information on holding and dispensing controlled
substances.
www.link.vet.ed.ac.uk/anima lpainy - animal pain.
www.nal.usda.gov/awic/newsletters/vlln3/lln3hany.htm - AWiC 2002. Guidelines
for police officers when responding to emergency animal incidents.
www.ocw.tufts.edu/Content/60/lecturenotes/799308 - exotic euthanasia.
Wright B, Rietveld G, and Kenney D. May 2Oo9. Euthanasia of horses. Ontario
Ministry of Agriculture and Food INFO Sheet. Accessed February 2011.
www.pork.org/filelibrary/Factsheets/Well-Being/CaptiveBolt.pdf - captive bolt eu-
thanasia in pigs.
www.research.cornelledu/care/documents/ACUPs/ACUP3O6.pdf - fish and am-
phibian euthanasia. Cornell University, Institutional Animal Care and Use Com
mittee, ACUP 306.02. Original author/date: Brown C., April 17, 2003.
www.research.fiu.edu/compliance/animalCareFacility/sop/SO P%620302.01.pdf
exotic euthanasia.
www.research.uiowa.edu/animal/?get=euthanasia#general anesthesia - exotic
euthanasia.
www.rwjms.umdnj.edu/research/orsp/ra/documents/04_Euthanasia_Policy_
2006-1.pdf-exoticeuthanasia.
www.theodora.com/rodent_laboratory/guideline_O1_1.html
www.utexas.edu/research/rsc/iacuc/forms/guidelineO2.pdf - exotic euthanasia.
www.vdpam.iastate.edu/HumaneEuthanasia/pref.htm - euthanasia of livestock.
www.vet.ucr.edu/Primer/Biomethodology/Euthanasia.htm - exotic euthanasia.
www.vetmed.iastate.edu/Humane Euthanasia - humane euthanasia.
www.vetmed.iastate.edu/sites/default/files/vdpam/Extension/Dairy/Programs/
Humane%2OEuthanasia/Download%2OFiles/EuthanasiaBrochure.pdf - euthan-
asia of livestock.
www.vetmed.ucdavis.edu/vetext/inf-an/inf-an_emergeuth-horses.html
-emer
gency euthanasia of horses.
Abdominal vein, 121f
Avian species,9,63t-64t
Aftercare arrangements
AVMA.See American Veterinary Medical
body handling, 169
Association
for cats, 174
considerations for,169
Bandage scissors, 27
for dogs, 174
Barbiturates
for exotics, 176
death from, 135f
for horses, 12, 177-78
doses of,86
for livestock,178-81, 180f
IV,38
removal, 169-70
methods, 76
types of, 8
Bearded dragon, 121f
Age.77
Benzocaine HCL-Orajel?,127
Alpacas
Benzodiazepines, 35t
captive bolts in, 159-60, 160f
Biceps muscle injection, 61f
intravenous injections in, 147f-148f
Birds, 10
pre-euthanasia drug combinations in,
cervical dislocation of, 129f-130f
71t
inhalants in, 113-14, 113f
sedation of,72
intracardiac injections in, 126f
American Society for the Prevention and
jugular vein in, 125f
Cruelty to Animals (ASPCA),
noninhalants in, 123f 
6-7
as scavengers, 171-72
American Veterinary Medical Association
sedation of, 60, 65-66, 65f
(AVMA)
Blunt force trauma, 108
euthanasia guidelines by, 14
Body handling,169
 slaughter guidelines by. 184
Brachial vessels, 162f
Amphibians, 63t-64t, 113
Brain activity, 74-75
immersion of, 124, 127f
Breeds,78
Anesthesia, 26, 31
Bullets, 23f
in cats, 57
Burial
in dogs, 57
gluing eyes shut for, 171f
drugs for, 55
of horses, 177-78
for exotics,58-66
of livestock, 178-79
for ferrets,58-59,63t-64t
options for,170-72
four stages of, 52-53
in horses,66
Camelids,148
levels of, 52
Captive bolts
types of, 63t
in alpacas, 159-60, 160f
ASPCA.See American Society for the
anatomical landmarks for, 105f
Prevention and Cruelty to
in cat euthanasia, 106-7
Animals
distributors of, 42t
Veterinary Euthanasia Techniques: A Practical Guide, First Edition. Kathleen A. Cooney.
Jolynn R. Chappell, Robert J. Callan and Bruce A. Connally.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
191
192 Index
Captive bolts (Continued)
Cervical dislocation
in dog euthanasia, 106-7
in birds, 129f-130f
equipment for,23-26,25f
equipment for,27
frontal position for, 157f-158f
in exotics, 128-30,129f-130f
in goats, 152-55, 154f-155f
in rats, 129f
in horse euthanasia,12,39, 139-40
Chelonian, 122f
in livestock euthanasia,17, 40, 152,153f
Children, 5
penetrating type of, 106-7
Chinchillas
in sheep euthanasia, 152-54, 154f,
inhalants in, 110-12
156f-158f
 noninhalants in, 117
technical challenges of, 107
sedation of,59
 trigger fire stunners, 41t
Chutes, 49f
Cardiac death, 73-74
Client considerations
Caring-killing paradox, 184
for cats, 6-8
Cartridge, 22
for dogs, 6-8
Catheters, 8, 21
for horses, 11-12
Cats
for mortality, 4f
aftercare arrangements for, 174
for privacy, 6
anesthesia in, 57
for veterinary euthanasia, 1-3, 183
captive bolts used in, 106-7
Client relationships, 1-2
cephalic injection in, 44f
Clippers, 21
client considerations for, 6-8
Cockatiels, 113f
comforts of, 7f
Comfort room,29,30f
electrocution of, 108
Commercial operations, 15
euthanasia equipment used with,
Companion animals
34-36
euthanasia considerations with, 3-6,
euthanasia techniques in
3f-4f
for inhalant agents, 79-80
unacceptable euthanasia methods for,
for noninhalant agents, 80-89, 81t,
164-65
82f-85f
Compassion fatigue, 184
exsanguination of,107-8
Composting
gunshots used in, 104-6, 105f
procedures for,180-81, 180f
intracardiac injections in, 89-94.
use of,172
91f-93f
Cotton balls, 19
 intrahepatic injections in, 96-98, 97f
Cremation/incineration, 173-74, 175b
intraperitoneal injections in, 95f
Crematory oven, 173f
intrarenal injections in, 98-102,
Cutting shears, 26
99f-101f
physical euthanasia of, 104
Death
restraint equipment for, 45-46, 46f
actual signs of, 165-68, 166f-167f
sedation of, 57-58
from barbiturates, 135f
Cattle
cardiac,73-74
death signs in, 167f
dogs eyes glued after, 171f
gunshots in, 149-52, 151f
horse eyes in, 13
intravenous injections in, 141-44, 142f
physical condition and, 77-78
 pre-euthanasia drug combinations in.
Decapitation
68t
equipment for, 26-27
restraints for
in exotics, 130-31, 131f
for euthanasia, 68, 70,143f, 153f
Dental probe, 132f
for sedation, 68, 70
Direct venipuncture, 134f
Caudal tail vein, 120f, 122f
Disease, 77
Cemetery. 176f
Dissociatives, 35t
Cephalic catheter, 82f
Documentation, 30-31
Cephalic injections
Dogs
in cats, 44f
aftercare arrangements for, 174
sites of, 81t
anesthesia in, 57
Cephalic vein, 81t, 83f
burial of, 171f
Index  193
captive bolt in,106-7
for noninhalant injectable agents, 23
cardiac injections in,92f
for noninhalant pharmaceutical
client considerations for, 6-8
agents,21-22
death signs in, 166f
for pithing, 23, 26,132f
electrocution of, 108
for rapid freezing, 27
euthanasia equipment used in, 34-36
for restraint, 45-46, 46f
euthanasia techniques in
species-specific considerations for,
for inhalants, 79-80
34-42
for noninhalants, 80-89, 81t,
types of, 19-29
82f-85f
Ethyl alcohol baths, 126
exsanguination of,107-8
Euthanasia techniques
gluing eyes of, after death, 171f
for cats, 79-89, 81t, 82f-85f
gunshots in, 104-6, 105f
choosing of, 75-79
intracardiac injections in, 89-94.
comfort with,75
91f-93f
for dogs, 79-89, 8t, 82f-85f
intrahepatic injections in, 96-98, 97f
for gunshots, 22-23, 23f
physical euthanasia of, 104
for inhalant agents, 19-20, 21f
restraint equipment for, 45-46
for onlookers, 75-76
sedation of, 57-58,58f
protocols for,73
Doplar location, 119f
supplies for, 75
Doplar setup, 119f
technique-specific equipment, 19-29
Doplar unit, 37f
Exotics
Doses
aftercare arrangements for, 176
of barbiturates, 86
anesthesia for, 58-66
injectable, 33t
cervical dislocation in, 128-30,
oral,103t
129f-130f
over-, 31
decapitation in, 130-31, 131f
Drugs. See aiso Specific type i.e.
euthanasia equipment used with,
Benzodiazepines
36-37
administration routes of, 55
gunshots in, 130
for anesthesia, 55
inhalant agents in, 109-14, 110f-113f
documentation of, 30-31
noninhalant injectable agents in,
for pre-euthanasia, 34, 35t, 55
115-24, 115f-124f
 in alpacas, 71t
physical euthanasia of, 22-27
in cattle, 68t
restraint of, 46-47
considerations for, 52
sedation of, 58-66
in llamas, 71t
stress level of, 10
in pigs, 70t
technical challenges with, 128
reasons for,63t
veterinary euthanasia of, 8-11, 9f
in small ruminants, 69t
Exsanguination
types of, 63t
in cats, 107-8
solutions for,76-77,102
in dogs, 107-8
for veterinary euthanasia, 29-31
in horses,140
in livestock, 161-62,162f
Ear protection, 22
Extension sets
Electrocution, 108
examples of, 85f,134f
Emergency euthanasia, 39
types of, 21
Epaxial muscle, 62f
Eye protection, 22
Equipment
Eyewash station, 29
areas for, 29
for captive bolt, 23-26, 25f
Facemask,19,38f
for cervical dislocation, 27
Family support, 28-29
for decapitation, 26-27
Ferrets
for families, 28-29
anesthesia in, 58-59, 63t-64t
for horses, 38-39
inhalants in, 109, 110f
for inhalant drugs, 19
noninhalants in, 115, 115f
miscellaneous, 27-29
radiograph in, 115f
194
 Index
Firearms, 22, 24t
location of,90
Fish
radiographs of, 115f, 117f-118f
immersion of, 127
Hemostat, 27
inhalants in, 114
Horses
noninhalants in, 124
aftercare arrangements for, 12, 177-78
sedation of, 63t-64t
anesthesia in, 66
Fixed pupils, 167f
burial of, 177-78
Flashlight, 27
captive bolt use on, 12,39, 139-40
Flow meters, 19
client considerations for, 11-12
Foals, 141
comforts of,13f
Freezing, 131
confirmed dead, 135f
Frogs,127f
decomposition of, 172
Frontal brain target, 137f
emergency euthanasia of, 39
equipment used with,38-39
Gas chambers, 19-20, 20f
euthanasia procedures for, 133
Gas filtration systems, 19
exsanguination in,140
Gerbils
eyes of, in death, 13
inhalant agents in, 110-11
foal euthanasia, 141
injections in, 59
frontal brain target in, 137f
noninhalant agents for, 117
gunshot euthanasia for,12,39,136-39,
Goats
137f
captive bolts in, 152-55,154f-155f
inhalant agents for, 133
intravenous injections in, 144
 injections in, 12
sedation of, 71-72
intramuscular injection in, 67f
Grave markers, 176f
intravenous injections in, 133-36,
Guillotines,26
134f-135f
Guinea pigs
restraint of, 47
inhalants in, 110-12
sedation of, 66
noninhalants in, 117
slaughter plants for, 11
sedation of, 59, 63t-64t
in society,.11
Gunshots
technical challenges with, 135-36
 anatomical landmarks for, 105f,
trauma in, 12
137f-138f, 150f-151f
Hospice, 183
in cats, 104-6, 105f
House call bag, 28f
in cattle, 149-52, 151f
House Rabbit Society. 10
in dogs, 104-6,105f
Hydrogen peroxide, 21
euthanasia techniques for, 22-23,
Hypoxia,74
23f
 in exotics, 130
lguanas, 60f, 61f
firearm recommendations for, 24t
Immersion
frontal position for, 157f-158f
of amphibians, 124, 127f
in horses,12, 39, 136-39, 137f
of fish, 127
lateral, 139f
procedures for,124-27
in livestock,17,40,149-52,150f
Inhalant agents
in llamas, 159-60, 161f
in birds, 113-14, 113f
oblique, 159f
in cats,79-80
protection for,22
in chinchillas, 110-12
in swine, 154-59, 158f-159f
in dogs.79-80
technical challenges of, 106
equipment for, 19
in exotics,109-14,110f-113f
Hamsters, 59, 110-11
in ferrets, 109, 110f
 noninhalants in, 117
in gerbils, 110-11
Head catch system, 143f
in guinea pigs, 110-12
Head restraint, 22
in horses, 133
Heart
in livestock, 141
beat, 118
in mice, 110-11
injections in, 90-94
overdoses from, 31
Index  195
pros and cons of,78
exsanguination in, 161-62, 162f
in rabbits, 110
factors for, 16f
in rats, 110-11, 112f
gunshot euthanasia for, 17, 40,149-52,
in reptiles, 112
150f
in sugar gliders, 110, 111f
inhalant agents used in, 141
technical challenges of, 114
injections in, 17
techniques for, 19-20, 21f
noninhalant agents used in, 141-49,
types of, 31-32
142f-148f
Intracardiac injections
pentobarbital euthanasia for, 18
in birds, 126f
pithing in, 162
in cats, 89-94, 91f-93f
positioning for, 48, 49f
in dogs, 89-94, 91f-93f
restraint of, 48-50,49f
shielding visibility of, 36f, 93f
sedation of,66
in swine,146f
special circumstances used in, 163-64
Intracoelomic injections, 65
technical challenges with, 148-49,
Intrahepatic injections
160-61
in cats, 96-98, 97f
veterinary euthanasia of, 13-14, 14f
in dogs, 96-98, 97f
Lizards
needles used in, 96-97
doplar location in, 119f 
Intramuscular injections
noninhalants in, 118
 in epaxial muscle, 62f
Llamas
in horses, 67f
gunshots in, 159-60, 161f
in iguanas, 60f, 61f
 pre-euthanasia drug combinations in,
in tortoises, 62f
71t
Intraperitoneal injections
sedation of,72
in cats, 95f
sites of, 94
Male adaptors, 21
technical challenges of, 95-96
Masks
Intrarenal injections
face,19, 38f
examples of, 99f-101f
for small animals, 38f
procedures for, 98-102
Mass euthanasia, 163
Intravenous catheters,8, 21-22
Meat markets, 15
Intravenous injections, 80-89, 81t,
Medullary paralysis, 53
82f-85f
Metatarsal vein, 123f-124f
 in alpacas, 147f-148f
Mice, 59
in cattle, 141-44, 142f
 inhalant agents in, 110-11
difficult situations with, 87-88
noninhalants in, 117
in goats, 144
Mortality, 4f
in horses, 133-36, 134f-135f
MS-222, 126, 127f
in livestock,141-49, 142f-148f
in sheep, 144, 145f-146f
Needles
 in swine, 144
for heart injections, 90
Involuntary excitement, 52
for liver injections, 96-97
for noninhalant injections, 21
Jugular injection,134f, 142f
Neurons,74
Jugular vein, 125f
Noninhalant agents
Jugular venipuncture,147
in birds, 123f
in chinchillas, 117
Leopard gecko, 121f
equipment for, 21-22
Liquid solutions, 102
in ferrets, 115, 115f
Livestock
in fish, 124
 aftercare arrangements for, 178-81,
in gerbils, 117
180f
 in guinea pigs, 117
burial of, 178-79
in hamsters, 117
captive bolt use in, 17, 40,152, 153f
injectable
commercial operations using, 15
equipment for,23
euthanasia equipment used for, 39-41
in exotics, 115-24, 115f-124f
196
Index
Noninhalant agents (Continued)
terminal disease in, 14
types of, 33f
veterinary euthanasia of, 14-18, 16f
use of, 32-34
Pulmonary effusion, 93
for intravenous injections, 80-89, 81t,
82f-85f
Rabbits
in horses, 133-36, 134f-135f
heart of, 117f
in livestock, 141-49, 142f-148f
inhalants in, 110
in lizards, 118
noninhalants in, 116, 116f
in mice, 117
sedation of, 59, 63t-64t
in rabbits, 116, 116f
veterinary euthanasia of, 9-10, 9f
in rats, 117
Rapid freezing, 27
in reptiles, 117
Raptor Education Foundation, 172
 in sugar gliders, 117
Rats
cervical dislocation of, 129f
Opiates, 35t
inhalants in, 110-11, 112f
Oral administration, 102,103t, 104
noninhalants in, 117
Oral dosages, 103t
sedation of, 59
Overdoses, 31
Rendering, 174,179
Replacement value, 15
Pectoral muscles, 65f
 Reptiles, 8
Pentobarbital euthanasia, 18
heartbeats of, 118
Pet cemetery. 176f
inhalants in, 112
Phenobarbital sodium, 33f
noninhalants in, 117
Phenothiazines, 35t
sedation of, 59-60, 60f, 63t-64t
Physical condition, 77-78
Restraints
 Physical euthanasia
for cats, 45-46, 46f
of cats, 104
for cattle, 68, 70,143f,153f
of dogs, 104
for dogs, 45-46
of exotics, 22-27
equipment for, 45-46,46f
methods for, 22-27
for exotics, 46-47
Pigs. See Swine
gentle, 44f
 Pithing
head, 22
equipment for, 23, 26, 132f
for horses, 47
in livestock, 162
levels of, 45
procedure for,131,131f
for livestock,48-50,49f
Positioning
sedation as, 54-55
animal temperament and, 44
for sheep. 145f
frontal, 157f-158f
storage of, 45
for livestock euthanasia, 48, 49f
for swine, 49-50
for veterinary euthanasia, 43-44,
types of, 28, 45
44f
Rigor mortis,166f
Postmortem examination, 78
 Rope gauze or string. 19
Pre-euthanasia drugs. See aiso Sedation
Rubber gloves, 27
combinations of
Ruminants, small, 69t
in alpacas, 71t
in cattle, 68t
Saline, 21
in llamas, 71t
Saphenous vein, 81t, 83f-84f,116f,148f
in pigs, 70t
Scalpel blade, 23
in small ruminants, 69t
Scavenging,171-72, 179
common,34,35t, 55
Sedation. See aiso Pre-euthanasia drugs
considerations for, 52
of alpacas, 72
reasons for, 63t
assessment of, 56-57
types of, 63t
of birds, 60, 65-66, 65f
Pregnancy, 162-63
of cats, 57-58
Production animals
of cattle, 68,70
for meat market, 15
considerations for, 53-54
slaughter of,15
of dogs, 57-58,58f
Index  197
drawing sedative for, 54f
Terminal diseases, 14
of exotics, 58-66
Topical methods, 124-28,127f
of goats, 71-72
Tortoises
of guinea pigs, 59, 63t-64t
doplar location for, 120f
of horses, 66
doplar setup for, 119f
of livestock, 66
intramuscular injection in, 62f
of llamas, 72
Tourniquet, 21
of rabbits, 59, 63t-64t
Trauma
of rats, 59
blunt force, 108
of reptiles, 59-60, 60f, 63t-64t
in horses, 12
for restraint, 54-55
Trigger fire stunners, 41t
risks of, 54
Turtles, 131f
sedative types, 63t
of sheep, 71-72
Ulnar vein, 125f
of swine,72
Unconsciousness, 56-57
 Sharp necropsy knife, 23, 26
Sharps container, 21
Venous injection sites, 81t
Sheep
Veterinarians
captive bolt use in, 152-54, 154f,
compassion fatigue risks among, 184
156f-158f
questions addressed by. 5
intravenous injections in, 144,
Veterinary euthanasia
145f-146f
area equipment for, 29
restraints for, 145f
ASPCA statistics for, 6-7
sedation of, 71-72
of cats, 6-8
Signalment, 77-78,165-68, 166f-167f
children and, 5
Size,77,88-89
client considerations for, 1-3, 183
Slaughter plants
client questions about, 2-3
guidelines, 184
for companion animals, 3-6, 3f-4f,
for horses, 11
164-65
production animals suitable for,15
of dogs,6-8
Small extension set, 134f
drugs for, 29-31
Snakes, 118f, 120
environment for, 43
Solutions, for drugs, 76-77,102
equipment for, 19-29
Stethoscope,27
of exotics, 8-11, 9f
Stress, 10
future of,183
Stretcher, 27, 170f
at home, 6
Suffering
of horses, 11-13, 13f
definitions of, 1-2
lighting during, 44
terms of, 3-4
of livestock,13-14,14f
Sugar gliders, 59
location considerations for, 18
inhalants in, 110, 111f
methods of, 2
 noninhalants in, 117
 pets watching, 7-8
Swine
physical methods of, 22-27
gunshots in, 154-59, 158f-159f
positioning for, 43-44, 44f
intracardiac injections in, 146f
during pregnancy, 162-63
intravenous injections in, 144 
preparation for, 5-6
pre-euthanasia drug combinations in,
for production animals, 14-18, 16f
70t
of rabbits, 9-10, 9f
restraint of, 49-50
scope of, 1
sedation of,72
unacceptable methods of, 164-65
Syringes, 21
Voluntary excitement, 52
Tape, 21
Waste, medical, 171
Technique-specific equipment, 19-29
Weight,77
Temperaments, 44
Wing vein, 125f